==PAGE:1==
30 ECTS-point M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2 - In Silico and Ex-
perimental Investigations of ACT domain
Dimerization
Lisette Prehn Henriksen, s123903
Supervisor:
Günther H. J. Peters
Hans E. M. Christensen
Natalia T. Skawinska
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Chemistry
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark
Kemitorvet
Building 207
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.kemi.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) is the enzyme responsible for the serotonin balance in the peripheral
tissues and the central nervous system. TPH exists as two isoforms: tryptophan hydroxylase 1 (TPH1)
and tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (TPH2). Tidermand et al. have shown a monomer:dimer equilibrium
of TPH2 after truncation of the tetramerization domain. It has been found that L-Phenylalanine (L-
Phe) shifts the equilibrium towards the dimeric structure, resulting in a more stable protein. These
results indicate that TPH2 could undergo the same regulatory mechanism as phenylalanine hy-
droxylase (PAH), where L-Phe induces dimerization of two ACT domains, leading to activation of
the protein. This project deals with TPH2 and the dimerization properties of the ACT domain in the
protein. In silico and in vitro experiments were performed for investigation of the L-Phe-induced
dimerization.
Due to the poorly stability of the regulatory domain of human TPH2 (rhTPH2), no crystal structure of
this domain has been solved. In silico experiments have been performed with a homology model
of the truncated TPH2 variant N∆47-hTPH2, built on already solved structures of the tetrameric-
and catalytic domains of TPH2 (PDB-ID: 4V06) and the full-length PAH structure (PDB-ID: 5DEN).
By the online hinge predictor tool: HingeMaster, a hinge region (Glu149-Asp150) between the
regulatory- and catalytic domains of TPH2 was found. This hinge region was concluded to con-
tribute to domain motions of the regulatory domain, leading to ACT domains dimerization. By
normal mode analysis (NMA) and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, flexibility of the regula-
tory domain and the hinge region were observed, but no significant domain motions took place.
N∆47-hTPH2 and N∆47-rchTPH2 variants with four different point mutations (Lys76Ala, Lys98Pro,
Val106Tyr, and Ile108Phe) were investigated by in vitro experiments. In a previous docking study,
the point mutations have shown a higher affinity for L-Phe in the allosteric site of TPH2. By purifi-
cation, thermal inactivation-, and analytic gel filtration experiments, the mutated variant of TPH2
was found to be less stable than the wild type protein. Furthermore, the point mutations were
found to suppress the affinity of L-Phe, which resulted in lower level of ACT domains dimerization.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Tryptophanhydroxylase (TPH) er enzymet, som er ansvarlig for serotoninbalancen i det perifere
væv og centralnervesystemet. TPH eksisterer som to isoformer: tryptophanhydroxylase 1 (TPH1)
og tryptophanhydroxylase 2 (TPH2). Tidermand et al. har påvist en monomer:dimer ligevægt for
TPH2 efter fjernelse af tetrameriseringsdomænet. Det har vist sig, at L-Phe forskyder ligevægten
mod den dimeriske struktur, hvilket resulterer i et mere stabilt protein. Disse resultater indikerer,
at TPH2 muligvis gennemgår den samme reguleringsmekanisme som phenylalainehydroxylase
(PAH), hvor L-Phe inducerer dimerisering af to ACT-domæner, hvilket fører til aktivering af proteinet.
Dette projekt omhandler TPH2 og dimeriseringsegenskaberne af ACT-domænerne i proteinet. In
silico og in vitro eksperimenter blev udført for at undersøgelse L-Phe-induceret dimerisering.
På grund af den lave stabilitet af det regulatoriske domæne i human TPH2 (rhTPH2), er ingen
krystalstruktur af dette domæne blevet løst.
In silico eksperimenter er blevet udført med en
homologimodel af den trunkerede TPH2-variant N∆47-hTPH2, bygget på allerede kendte struk-
turer af tetramiserings- og katalytiske domæner af TPH2 (PDB-ID: 4V06) og phenylalaninhydrox-
ylasen (PAH) i fuld længde (PDB-ID: 5DEN). Med onlineværktøjet HingeMaster blev der fundet
en hængselregion (Glu149-Asp150) mellem de regulatoriske- og katalytiske domæner af TPH2.
Dette hængselområde blev konkluderet at medvirke i domænebevægelser af det regulatoriske
domæne, hvilket fører til dimerisering af ACT-domæner. Ved normal mode analyse og molekylære
dynamik simuleringer blev fleksibiliteten af det regulatoriske domæne og hængselområdet ob-
serveret, men ingen signifikante domænebevægelser fandt sted.
N∆47-hTPH2 og N∆47-rchTPH2 varianter med fire forskellige punktmutationer (Lys76Ala, Lys98Pro,
Val106Tyr og Ile108Phe) blev undersøgt ved hjælp af in vitro eksperimenter. I et tidligere docking
eksperiment har punktmutationerne vist en højere affinitet for L-Phe i det allosteriske center i TPH2.
Ved oprensning-, termiske inaktivering- og analytiske gelfiltreringsforsøg viste den muterede vari-
ant af TPH2 sig at være mindre stabil end vildtypeproteinet. Endvidere viste punktmutationerne at
undertrykke affiniteten af L-Phe, hvilket resulterede i lavere niveau af ACT-domæner dimerisering.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface and
Acknowledgements
This project, entitled ”In Silico and Experimental Investigations of Dimerization of Tryptophan Hy-
droxylase 2 ACT Domains” is a 30 ECTS points master thesis written by Lisette Prehn Henriksen. The
project was carried out at the Department of Chemistry at the Technical University of Denmark
under the supervision of Ph.D Natalia T. Skawinska, Associate Professor Günther H. J. Peters and
Associate Professor Hans E. M. Christensen.
First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Natalia T. Skawinska, Asso-
ciate Professor Günther H. J. Peters and Associate Professor Hans E. M. Christensen for their help,
guidance, and feedback during this project. Furthermore, I would like to thank the laboratory
technician David F. Nielsen for the assistance and guidance during the experimental work.
Kongens Lyngby,January 31, 2018
Lisette Prehn Henriksen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviation List
5-HT 5-hydroxytryptophan
5-HTP 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan
AAAH Aromatic Amino Acid Hydroxylase
AADC Aromatic L-Amino Acid Decarboxylase
AC Affinity Chromatography
ACT-motif Aspartate kinase - Chorismate mutase - TyrA - motif
BH4 Tetrahydrobiopterin
cggTPH1 Catalytic Domain of Chicken Tryptophan Hydroxylase 1
CIPP Capture, Intermediate, Purification, and Polishing
cthTPH2 Catalytic- and Tetramerization domains of human Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2
CV Column Volume
dof Degrees of Freedom
DQMAX Maximum Perturbation
DQMIN Minimum Perturbation
DTT DL-Dithiothreitol
ENM Elastic Network Model
FO FlexOracle
==PAGE:10==
viii
Abbreviation List
GF Gel Filtrering
HPLC High Performance Liqiud Chromatography
IEX Ion Exchange Chromotography
L-Phe L-Phenylalanine
MAOI Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
MBP Maltose Binding Protein
MD Simulations Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Molmovdb Macromolecular Movements Database
N∆47-hTPH2 human Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2 with deletion of residue 1 to 47
N∆47-rchTPH2 Regulatory- and Catalytic domains of human Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2 with dele-
tion of residue 1 to 47
N∆47-rhTPH2 Regulatory domain of human Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2 with deletion of residue 1
to 47
NMA Normal Mode Analysis
OPLS Optimized Potentials for Liquid Simulations
PAH Phenylalanine Hydroxylase
PDB Protein Data Bank
rchTPH2 Regulatory- Catalytic domains of human Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2
rhTPH2 Regulatory domain of human Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2
rhPAH Regulatory domain of human Phenylalanine Hydroxylase
RMSD Root Mean Square Distance
RTB Rotation-Translation-Block
SDS-PAGE Soduim Dodecyl Sulfate - Polycrylamide Gel Electropheresis
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviation List
ix
SEC Size Exclusion Chromatography
SH StoneHinge
SSRI Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor
TLSMD Translation/Libration/Screw Motion Determination
TPH Tryptophan Hydroxylase
TPH1 Tryptophan Hydroxylase Isoform 1
TPH2 Tryptophan Hydroxylase Isoform 2
TPH2 M1 mutant TPH2 with the point mutations Lys76Ala, Lys98Pro, Val106Tyr, and Ile108Phe
TYH Tyrosine Hydroxylase
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface and Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviation List
vii
Contents
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Outline of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2
3
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2 Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Project Background
11
3.1
Previous Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
In Silico Experimental Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
In Vitro Experimental Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Computational Methods
17
4.1
Homology Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Hinge Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Normal Mode Analysis - ElNemo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Experimental Methods
27
5.1
Purification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate - Polycrylamide Gel electropheresis
. . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Stabilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Kinetic Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Computational Procedures
35
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
6.1
Homology Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Hinge Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Normal Mode Analysis - ElNemo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.4
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7
Experimental Procedures
39
7.1
Purification of MBP-3CP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2
Purification of MBP-tagged N∆47-hTPH2 Variants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3
SDS-PAGE Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.4
Kinetic Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.5
Analytic Gel Filtrational . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8
Computational Results and Discussion
45
8.1
Homology Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.2
Hinge Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.3
Normal Mode Analysis - ElNemo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.4
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
9
Overall Discussion - In Silico and Future Work
73
10 Experimental Results and Discussion
75
10.1
Investigation of N∆47-hTPH2 Variants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
10.2
Investigation of N∆47-rchTPH2 Variants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
11 Overall Discussion - In Vitro and Future Work
91
12 Conclusion
93
Bibliography
95
A
AAAH Enzyme Crystal Structures
1
B
Expression Details
3
C
MBP-3CP Purification
5
D
Amino Acid Sequences
7
E
Secondary Structure Prediction - PSI-Pred
9
F
Sequence Alignment
13
G
Hinge Region Prediction
17
H
Distance Fluctuation Maps - Monomer
19
==PAGE:15==
Contents
xiii
I
Distance Fluctuation Maps - Dimer
25
J
MD Simulations - Dimer
29
K
Purification of the N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 mutant
31
L
Calibration Curve
33
==PAGE:16==
xiv
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
This project concerns the enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase that exists as two isoforms: tryptophan
hydroxylase 1 and tryptophan hydroxylase 2. TPH1 and TPH2 are responsibly for the initiating and
rate-limiting step in the serotonin bio synthesis in the peripheral tissues and the central nervous
system, respectively. TPH catalyzes the hydroxylation of tryptophan to 5-hydroxytryptophan that
are converted to serotonin by the enzyme aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC). In this
project, TPH2 was investigated.[1]
Serotonin is a neurotransmitter that regulates e.g. mood, sleep, sexual behavior, and appetite.
The regulation of the serotonin level is found to affect different physiological and psychiatric disor-
ders such as depression and schizophrenia.[2],[3] Psychiatric disorders are an increasing problem,
and according to ”Sundhedsstyrrelsen” 150,000 Danes suffer of depression.[4] Different pharma-
cological preparations for psychiatric disorders are available: such as ”selective serotonin reup-
take inhibitor” (SSRI) and ”monoamine oxidase inhibitors” (MAOI). SSRI and MAOI regulate the
concentration of serotonin in the brain, but cause various side effects.[3] As TPH regulates the
serotonergic system, TPH could be an important target in treatment of psychiatric disorders. Using
TPH as a pharmacological target, it requires knowledge about TPH’s regulation of serotonin. The
first step in the investigation of TPH is to solve the three-dimensional structures of the two isoforms.
Due to the instability and insolubility of TPH, only three-dimensional structures of the catalatic- and
tetramerization domains TPH2 have been solved.
TPH belongs to the family of aromatic amino acid hydroxylases (AAAH), also consisting of pheny-
lalanin hydroxylase (PAH) and tyrosine hydroxylase (TYH). AAAHs consist of a regulatory-, catalytic-
, and tetramerization domains. No three-dimensional structure of the regulatory domain of TPH
has been solved, and the regulatory mechanism is poorly understood.[5] A full-length structure
of PAH has been solved.[6] PAH is found to be stabilized and activated by L-Phe leading to dimer-
ization of two ACT domains in the full-length structure, see section 2.2.1.5.[7] In this project, the
described mechanism is mentioned as the regulatory mechanism of PAH, see section 2.2.1.5. It
will be investigated if the regulatory mechanism of TPH would be similar to the regulatory mech-
anism of PAH, and whether the allosteric site in TPH2 affects the dimerization ability of the protein.
The investigation consists of in silico experiments and in vitro experiments, see figure 1.1.
By in silico experiments, possible hinge regions leading to domain motions of the regulatory do-
main are analyzed and compared with already known hinge regions in PAH. Subsequently, the
protein dynamics around predicted hinge regions are investigated by further in silico studies.
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
By in vitro experiments, TPH2 variants with point mutations in the assumed allosteric site are an-
alyzed. The purification, stabilization, activity and dimerization ability of the TPH2 variants are
compared with the wild type protein.
Figure 1.1: Overall strategy of this project.
1.1
Outline of the Thesis
Chapters 2 to 4 of this thesis include theoretical background of TPH2 and the computational
and experimental techniques used in this project. Chapter 5 covers the project background by
previous work and experimental strategies. Chapters 6 to 7 describe the computational and ex-
perimental procedures of this project, and the results are described in discussed in chapter 8 and
10, respectively. Chapters 9 and 11 cover overall discussions and future work of the computa-
tional and experimental work, respectively. The conclusion of this project is presented in chapter
12.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER2
Tryptophan
Hydroxylase 2
2.1
Introduction
Tryptophan hydroxylase takes part in the two steps serotonin bio synthesis. The first and rate-limited
step involves TPH that catalyzes the conversion of tryptophan to 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan (5-HTP),
followed by production of serotonin/5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT). The serotonin production is cat-
alyzed by the aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase, as depicted in figure 2.1. TPH is responsible
for hydroxylation of the fifth position at the indole side chain.[1] TPH belongs to the family of aro-
matic amino acid hydroxylases,[5] which requires molecular oxygen O2, the co-substrate tetrahy-
drobiopterin (BH4) and an iron ion (Fe++) for catalysis.[8] More information about the AAAH family
is provided in section 2.2.1.
Figure 2.1: The serotonin biosynthesis catalyzed by tryptophan hydroxylase and aromatic L-amino
acid decarboxylase. TPH requires O2, the co-substrate tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) and
an iron ion (Fe++) to catalyze the production of 5-HTP[8].
Two isoforms of human tryptophan hydroxylase exist: tryptophan hydroxylase 1 and tryptophan
hydroxylase 2. TPH1 is mostly expressed in the periphery tissues and in lower concentration in the
central nervous system, while TPH2 is only expressed in the central nervous system as the predom-
inant isoform of TPH.[3] The two isoforms display 72% sequence homology within the catalytic
domain. The chromosomal location of hTPH1 takes place in chromosome 11, while hTPH2 is lo-
cated on chromosome 12.[9]
==PAGE:20==
4
2 Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2
2.1.1
Clinical Significance of Tryptophan Hydroxylase
The majority of the existing TPH2 studies are performed for an understanding of the crystal struc-
ture of the regulatory domain and the regulatory mechanisms of TPH2. The regulatory mechanism
is not yet fully understood and no crystal structure of the regulatory domain has been published,
while a crystal structure of the catalytic domain is known (PDB-ID: 4V06). TPH is associated with
various neuropsychiatric conditions, as serotonin has various roles in behavioral control such as
appetite and ingestion, sexual behaviors, mood and emotions, impulsivity, learning, memory,
social behavior, pain control, etc.[10] Imbalance of the serotonin amount is linked to different
neurological diseases like schizophrenia[11], depression and autism.[12] A schematic illustration
of disorders resulting from dysfunction of the different serotonergic systems associated with TPH1
and TPH2 can be seen in 2.2. TPH is expressed by different cells such as serotonin secreting cells
in the central nervous system, enterochromaffin cells located in the gastrointestinal mucosa and
mast cells in different connective tissues. High concentrations of serotonin in different tissues do
not always indicate large amount of TPH in these cells, when different cells are capable of absorb
5-HT from the blood stream. Most of the serotonin located in the blood stream are secreted by
the enterochromaffin cells.[8]
Figure 2.2: Schematic illustration of disorders related to the two serotonergic systems associated
with tryptophan hydroxylase 1 and tryptophan hydroxylase 2[13].
TPH was characterized in extract from rat and mouse tissues of peripheral origin for the first time
in 1965[14] and later on from brain tissues in 1967[15]. The differences in the kinetic parameters
and physiochemical properties of the two isoforms were investigated already in the 1980s, but the
differences in their amino acid sequences were first clearly understood in 2003 when the gene
for human TPH2 was found. The gene of TPH1 was well defined at this time.[16] DNA of the TPH
enzyme from a rabbit peripheral organ was cloned for the first time in 1987.[17] 1988, DNA was
cloned from the rat brain.[18] It has been difficult for scientists to purify and characterize TPH due
to instability.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2 Structure
5
2.2
Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2 Structure
The quaternary structure of wild type hTPH2 exists as a homotetramer like all other members of
the AAAH family.[5] Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) has shown a molecular mass of hTPH2
homotetramer of 236 kDa.[9] The sequence of hTPH2 (EC 1.14.16) contains 490 residues, as shown
in figure 2.3.[19] Members of the AAAH family contain tetramerization-, catalytic- and regulatory
domains in each monomer. The residue numbers of the three domains of human TPH2 are listed
in table 2.1. The tetramerization domain is located at the C-terminus, while the regulatory domain
is located at the N-terminus.[5]
Table 2.1: The residue numbers and functions of the regulatory-, catalytic-, and tetramerization
domains of hTPH2.
Overview of hTPH2 domains
Domain
Residue numbers
Functions
Regulatory
1-147
Ensures the allosteric control and catalytic function
of the enzyme.
ACT
66-142
Ensures the proposed allosteric control.
Catalytic
148-459
Ensures the catalytic effect of the enzyme. Trypto-
phan binds in the active site of this domain following
by converting to 5-HTP.
Tetramerization
460-490
Ensures the quaternary structure of the tetramer.
Figure 2.3: Amino acid seqeunce of human tryptophan hydroxylase 2 monomer[19].
==PAGE:22==
6
2 Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2
2.2.1
Aromatic Amino Acid Hydroxylases
Tryptophan hydroxylase belongs to the enzyme superfamily of aromatic amino acid hydroxylases
together with phenylalanine hydroxylase and tyrosine hydroxylase. All the enzymes in the super-
family catalyze the hydroxylation of their respective substrates and require tetrahydropterin for
catalysis. The hydroxylation takes place at the site chain of an aromatic amino acid.[5] The ex-
act reaction mechanism is not fully understood, but Hasegawa, et. al. have make a proposal.[8]
The AAAH enzymes are suggested to oxygenating their substrate with one oxygen atom, follow-
ing of cleavage of the double bond in O2 when two electrons are donated to O2 by BH4. One
of the oxygen atoms is inserted into the aromatic side chain, while the other oxygen atom is ac-
cepted by BH4. The product of the reaction is 4 a−hydroxy−BH4 that liberates a water molecule
and converts to BH2, which is reduced back to BH4. The redox reactions require iron ion.[8]
Figure 2.4: The full-length crystal structure of rat phenylalanine hydroxylase (PDB-ID: 5DEN). The
structure is colored by the chains/monomers. Iron ions are colored red.
Tyrosine hydroxylase exists in four different isoforms, while only one isoform of phenylalanine hy-
droxylase is found.[5] TYH takes part in the catecholamine biosynthesis that contains dopamine,
norepinephrine, and pinephrine. TYH catalyzes the initial and rate-limiting step.[20] A crystal struc-
ture of human TYH’s catalytic domain has been published (PDB-ID: 2XSN)[21], while the regulatory-
and tetramerization domains structure are published for rat TYH. Mammal PAH full-length crystal
structure has been published (PDB-ID: 5DEN). The crystal structure is a tetramer containing the
regulatory-, catalytic-, and tetramerization domains.[6] PAH catalyzes the hydroxylation of pheny-
lalanine to tyrosine, as the rate-limiting step in the metabolic pathway. Lack of PAH can causes
severe metabolic disorders.[22] The full-length structure is illustrated in figure 2.4. Based on a BLAST
search, the sequence identity between hTPH2 and hPAH was determined to be 56%. All available
structures of the AAAH family existing in the protein data bank are listed in appendix A.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2 Structure
7
2.2.1.1
The Tetramerization Domain
The tetramerization domain is located at the C-terminus of AAAHs. Interactions between the four
tetramerization domains cause the AAAHs quartenary structure. The tetramerization domains
consist of residues 461 to 490 (for TPH2) in an alpha-helix structure with a 4,3-hydrophobic repeat.
The hydrophobic repeats ensure a coiled-coil interactions to another tetramerization domain with
similar repeats.[23] The structure of the interactions are illustrated in figure 2.5.
90
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.5: (a) Crystal structure of rat phenylalanine hydroxylase tetramer with the tetramization
domains and their interactions highlighted in orange (PDB-ID: 5DEN). Left: side view,
right: top view. (b) Zoom-in.
2.2.1.2
The Catalytic Domain
The catalytic domain of tryptophan hydroxylase 2 is found to be more stable than the regulatory
domain, and a crystal structure of the catalytic domain has been published (PDB-ID: 4V06). In
the catalytic domain, the active site and thereby the binding site of tryptophan is located. A
structure of TPH with bound tryptophan is published for chicken TPH1 only. The iron ion is located
approximately 13 Å into the active site, where it is coordinated to His272, His277, Glu317, and
==PAGE:24==
8
2 Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2
three water molecules in a octahedral structure.[24] With substrate bonded, the iron ion is five-
coordinated to one water molecule, His272, His277, Glu317, and the substrate. Glu317 goes from
a monodentate coordination to a partial bidentate.[25]
2.2.1.3
The Regulatory Domain
As mentioned, no regulatory domain crystal structure is available for TPH, due to the difficulties
in obtaining stable enzymes. On the other hand, the regulatory domains of PAH and TYH are
found to contain an ACT-motif (aspartate kinase - chorismate mutase - TyrA - motif), which is a
characteristic protein fold found in different regulatory domains.[26] Sequence analysis indicates
that it is likely that this ACT-motif is present in TPH as well.
Beside the ACT domain, AAAHs contain a N-terminus which is shaped in an extended conforma-
tion that cover the binding site of the catalytic domain, which is reported as an autoregulatory
sequence.[27] The autoregulatory sequence is 46 residues longer for TPH2 than TPH1, and dele-
tion of those residues increases the stability of the enzyme. Furthermore, phosphorylation of Ser19
located in the N-terminus of THP2 is found to stabilizes and increases the activity of the enzyme.[28]
2.2.1.4
ACT Domain
As mentioned, AAAHs contain an ACT domain in the regulatory domain. The ACT domains are
located at the following residue numbers: TPH1: 18-94, TPH2: 66-142, PAH: 35-110, and TYH1: 78-
162. ACT-folds are defined from the ACT domain in phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PGDH),
which consists of a βαββαβ fold, and the fold is found in a number of different enzymes.[27]
ACT domains of PAH enzymes are found to be organized in a dimer-of-dimer conformation with
intermolecular interactions with one another, as shown in figure 2.6.[26]
Figure 2.6: ACT domain dimer of hPAH (PDB-ID: 5FII) with βαββαβ folds.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2 Structure
9
2.2.1.5
Regulatory Mechanism
The regulatory mechanism of PAH and TYH have been established to be different, while the mech-
anism of TPH is poorly understood. PAH is activated by its substrate phenylalanine and by phos-
phorylation of Ser16[29], while TYH is regulated by phosphorylation of Ser40[30]. Different studies
have shown that TPH, as TYH, is regulated by phosphorylation and not by its substrate.[31],[32]
Subsequently, a study has shown that presence of L-Trp and L-Phe changes the conformation of
hTPH2 in a concentration-depended monomer:dimer equilibrium in absence of the tetrameriza-
tion domain. In presence of L-Phe, the dimer of rchTPH2 displayed significantly increased half-life,
which resulted in significantly increased purification yield.[33] This results indicate that the allosteric
control of hTPH2 could be affected by L-Phe.
The allosteric control of PAH is found to take place when L-Phe is present, which leads to a reori-
entation of the catalytic- and regulatory domains. Important residues in hinge and loop regions
are involved in the activation of PAH. A crystal structure of PAH with bound L-Phe has been solved
(PDB-ID: 5FII), and the structure reveals that the binding site of L-Phe exists in the interface between
two ACT domains in a dimer structure. The proposed regulatory mechanism is shown in figure 2.7.
In inactive PAH, the N-terminus blocks the active site, while conformation changes remove the
N-terminus away from the active site and activate the enzyme.[7]
Figure 2.7: Illustration of proposed regulatory mechanism of PAH in presence of L-Phe. Inactive
structure: N-terminus blocks the active site that is shown as a star, while the ACT do-
mains exist as monomer-of-dimer. Active structure: L-Phe are bound in the allosteric
binding site. The N-terminus has moved away from the active site. The ACT domains
exist as a dimer-of-dimer[7].
The regulatory- and catalytic domains in mammalian PAH are proposed to be flexibly attached to
each other via a hinge region around amino acid Arg111, Asp112, Lys113, Lys114, Lys115, Asp116
and Thr117, illustrated in figure 2.8. The hinge region is proposed to be essential in the activation
of PAH.[34], [35] For comparison, PGDH (see section 2.2.1.4) contains at least three hinge regions.
One hinge region is between the binding site of the cofactor and the substrate binding site. The
second hinge region is between the regulatory- and catalytic domains. The third hinge region is
in the binding site for serine which is located in the allosteric site.[36]
==PAGE:26==
10
2 Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.8: (a) Crystal structure of rat phenylalanine hydroxylase chain A (PDB-ID: 5DEN). The pro-
posed hinge region is indicated with orange, the regulatory domain with gray, and
the catalytic and tetramization domain with light gray. The hinge region consists of
residue 111 to 117. (b) Zoom-in.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER3
Project Background
3.1
Previous Work
In the last decade, the Metalloprotein Chemistry and Engineerig Group at DTU has obtained a
lot of information about the two TPH isoforms. Through the years, the group has worked with hu-
man TPH1 and TPH2 and chicken TPH1. Different variants of TPH have been investigated, e.g.
various truncated TPH variants and various TPH mutations. It has been an aim to overcome the
challenges of purification caused by the poor solubility and stability.
In 2008, the group published a two-step method for purification of the catalytic domain of chicken
tryptophan hydroxylase 1 (cggTPH1). The enzyme was expressed in E. coli and purified by gel
filtration (GF) after an anion exchange.
This procedure made purification and crystallization
of cggTPH2 possible. A crystal structure was solved (PDB-ID: 3E2T).[37] Subsequently, the two-
step procedure results in successfully purification of chTPH2.[38] The high aggregation level of
the protein was found to be caused by the regulatory domain of TPH.[39] Later on, the purifi-
cation method has been optimized by including an affinity chromatography purification step
using maltose binding protein-tag (MBP-tag). Using the protease enzyme MBP-3CP, a success-
fully cleavage of the MBP-tag was found to occur. Furthermore, a high salt concentration (300
mM (NH4)2SO4) throughout the entire purification was found to stabilize the protein. The MBP-3CP
cleavage method was non-successful doing TPH2 purification, as rchTPH2 seems to dimerize. By
gel filtration, the protein was isolated.[40] In the group it was stated, that the purification yield of
TPH2 was increased when L-Phe was added to the purification buffer.
To overcome the instability of the regulatory domain, different truncated TPH2 variants have been
investigated.
The purification yield of TPH2 was found to increase significant when the 47-N-
terminus was removed.[41] Ph.D Kapser D. Tidemand has investigated the stability of different
truncated TPH2 variant, see figure 3.1. Figure 3.1 illustrates that the main cause of the instability
lies in the regulatory domain, but the stability increases when the 47-N-terminus is deleted. Further-
more, by examining the thermal inactivation of the enzyme, it was found that L-Phe does stabilize
the protein and the regulatory domain. The stabilizing effect of L-Phe is not seen for chTPH2.[33]
==PAGE:28==
12
3 Project Background
Figure 3.1: Heat inactivation of different hTPH2 variants with incubation temperature of 30 °C. Std:
standard purification buffer. Phe: purification buffer with L-Phe [33].
Figure 3.2: Size exclusion chromatography of N∆47-rchTPH2 with (orange line) and without (black
line) 3 mM L-Phe added. A: High loading protein concentration range. B: Low loading
protein concentration range[33].
After truncation of the tetramerization domain, rchTPH2 exists in a monomer:dimer equilibrium. As
the dimeric form is more stable, the purification of rchTPH2 is optimized by pushing the equilibrium
towards the dimer.[33] L-Phe is found to allosterically stabilizes and activates PAH by forming a
dimeric structure of PAH.[29] By analytical gel filtration, Tidemand and co-workers investigated
this stabilizing effect of L-Phe for N∆47-rchTPH2, see figure 3.2. Large amounts of monomeric
structure were represented when the protein concentration was low and no L-Phe was added.
The concentration of dimeric protein increased when the concentration of protein increased.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 In Silico Experimental Strategy
13
When L-Phe was added, a high concentration of dimeric protein was observed, and the amount
of monomeric protein was decreased. Those results gave evidence that L-Phe does stabilize TPH2
variants.[33]
3.2
In Silico Experimental Strategy
As L-Phe pushing the monomer:dimer equilibrium of N∆47-rchTPH2 towards the dimer, the hy-
pothesis is that L-Phe allosterically stabilizes and activates TPH2, as it is found for PAH. If the L-Phe
stabilization and activation of TPH2 are similar to the one found for PAH, it is possible that TPH2
undergoes the same regulatory mechanism as PAH.
As illustrated in figure 3.3, homologoy models of hTPH2 were built, as no three-dimensional struc-
ture of the full-length is solved. Homology models were built for a monomeric- and a tetrameric
form of TPH2. Possible hinge regions in the regulatory domain of TPH2 were investigated, as a
regulatory mechanism similar to the one for PAH will require domain motions around one or more
hinge regions. Before hinge region prediction could be performed, a sufficient tool for hinge pre-
diction should be chosen. During this project, the online tool HingeMaster was chosen to be the
most sufficient tool for investigation. It has not been possible to obtain any information about
the normal mode based prediction using the HingeMaster tools, see section 8.2. Although an-
other normal mode analysis tool - ElNemo was used. Predicted hinge regions were verified and
investigated through normal mode analysis and molecular dynamics simulations. NMA and MD
simulations were used for investigations of the protein dynamics associated with dimerization of
ACT domains. The overall in silico strategy and procedure are depicted in figure 3.3.
==PAGE:30==
14
3 Project Background
Figure 3.3: Overall strategy of in silico methods. The left side column shows the overall experiments
and the right column shows the used methods of the experiment.
3.3
In Vitro Experimental Strategy
Ida M. Vedel, a student from DTU, has investigated the allosteric site of TPH using in silico meth-
ods. Vedel has found four point mutations (Lys76Ala, Lys98Pro, Val106Tyr, and Ile108Phe) in rhTPH2
that probable increase the ability of L-Phe binding in the allosteric site of TPH2. Using the in silico
methods Docking, Vedel have found the point mutations with highest affinity for L-Phe.[42] The
mutated TPH2 variant will be mentioned as M1 mutant in the following. In this project, the capa-
bility of purifying the N∆47-hTPH2 M1 mutant and N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 mutant was analyzed.
The expression of proteins used in this project are partially performed by the laboratory technicians
David F. Nielsen, the ph.D student Natalia T. Skawinska and me. Purification of the N∆47-hTPH2
M1 mutant was performed by the standard procedure with L-Phe in the buffer, to test the amount
of protein yield. Subsequently, the stability of the mutated variant was compared with the wild
type protein. Stability was analyzed by a thermal inactivation assay.
Truncation of the tetramization domain was required, when the ability of dimerization was tested
by size exclusion chromatography. The N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 mutant was purified without L-Phe, so
the effect of L-Phe could be investigated later on. Based on purification yields, thermal inactivity
==PAGE:31==
3.3 In Vitro Experimental Strategy
15
assay, activity analyzes, and size exclusion chromatography, the stability, activity and dimeriza-
tion ability of the N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 mutant were analyzed. The overall strategy of the in vitro
experiments is shown in figure 3.4.
This project will not focus on expression of the different TPH2 variants, and the results of MBP-3CP
purification. The expression details can be seen in appendix B. The purification results for MBP-3CP
can be seen in appendix C.
Figure 3.4: Overall strategy of in vitro experiments. Used abbreviations: maltose binding protein
(MBP), Soduim Dodecyl Sulfate - Polycrylamide Gel Electropheresis (SDS-PAGE), affinity
chromatography (AC), and gel filtration (GF).
==PAGE:32==
16
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER4
Computational
Methods
To obtain information about the regulatory mechanism of tryptophan hydroxylase 2, in silico stud-
ies were used. Using the homology modelling program Prime in the Schrödinger suite, model
structures of TPH2 were build. Hinge regions of the model structures were predicted by the on-
line tool HingeMaster, and the online tool ElNemo was used for hinge region verification and
investigation of the protein dynamics. Furthermore, the Schrödinger suite Desmond was used for
molecular dynamics simulations of the structure models. The in silico methods used in this project,
are described in this chapter.
4.1
Homology Model
Homology modelling of proteins is a computational tool to predict and build models of the tertiary
protein structures. The model is constructed from the amino acid sequence of the target protein
and a crystal structure of a related homologous template protein. The accuracy and quality of
a homology model is related to the identity of the template- and query protein’s amino acid
sequences, as evolutionarly related proteins have similar amino acid sequences and high con-
served three-dimensional protein structures. The method of homology modelling can be divided
into four steps:[43],[44]
1. Identify homologue proteins with known crystal structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB).
2. Align the amino acid sequences of the query- and template protein.
3. Model building.
4. Structure and loop refinement of the homology model.
In the first step, a template structure was chosen. The template can be chosen by a database
search on the query sequences, that will results in an output list of existing structures with high
identify to the query sequence. The database search is performed by existing algorithms such
as protein-protein BLAST[45]. The structure of the highest identity, often provides the best homol-
ogy model. Next, the amino acid sequences are aligned to match the corresponding regions
to each other. The alignment is performed by alignment software, such as PSI-BLAST[45], Clustal
==PAGE:34==
18
4 Computational Methods
Omega[46], or Spdb-viewer[47].
In the next step, the model is built. First, conserved regions between the query- and template
sequences are modelled as structure conserved regions, followed by loops between the regions
and finally the side chains are modelled. If gaps in the alignment are present, loops are inserted,
either by knowledge-based method or energy-based method.
Knowledge-based method is
faster and modelling loops based on known structures in the databases, while energy-based
method uses an energy function to build loops with the lowest energy.[44]
4.2
Hinge Prediction
The knowledge of the function of an enzyme is much more than knowing the structure, as the
function also is linked to the enzyme motion. Motion of an enzyme can be classified to e.g. hinge
bending motions, that are the most frequent motion of an enzyme comprising 45%. The bending
motions class are further subdivided into domain hinge motion and fragment hinge motion.[48]
Domain hinge motions refer to relatively large conformation changes between covalent linked
domains, often associated with allosteric effects, while fragment hinge motions refer to move-
ment of small fragments, such as surface loops.[49] Domain hinge motions represent 31% of the
motions, while fragment hinge motions represent 13%. To understand domain and fragment mo-
tions, the logically first step is to predict the hinge region.[48]
A various numbering of tools to predict hinge regions are available. Some hinge predictors are
capable of analyze only one conformation of the structure, while other hinge predictors demand
two structure conformations. The prediction of hinge regions is easiest if two or more conforma-
tions for a given protein are available. Much more challenging problem arises when only one
conformation structure is available.[48]
4.2.1
Database of Macromolecular Movements
The macromolecular movements database (molmovdb.org) offers different services: morph server,
hinge analysis, and motion databases. The morph server is capable of producing 2D and 3D an-
imations of a plausible pathway between two structural conformations. For hinge analysis, a
number of tools are available: HingeMaster, RigidFinder, and TACE. HingeMaster is capable of
analyzing hinge regions in a single conformation structure, while RigidFinder and TACE require
two conformations of the protein. The HingeMaster server consists of a algorithm that combines
FlexOracle (FO), Translation/Libration/Screw motion determination (TLSMD), StoneHinge (SH), and
normal mode based hinge predictors for maximum accuracy. The protein motion server is a
database of thousands of known protein motions.[50]
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Hinge Prediction
19
4.2.1.1
HingeMaster
As mentioned, HingeMaster is a service consisting of FlexOracle, TLSMD, StoneHinge, normal
mode based hinge predictors.[50],[48] During this project, it was not possible to analyze normal
mode prediction using HingeMaster, when the calculation of the NMA was never completed.
For this reason, this section only focuses the three other predictors. The different predictors have
different strengths and weaknesses, see table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Overview of predictor strengths and weaknesses.
Hinge Predictors - Strengths and Weaknesses
Predictor
Strength
Weakness
StoneHinge
Good at finding hinge regions
Overestimates the hinge region
sizes
TLSMD
Predicts
hinge
region
residues
with a high accuracy
Makes a lot of incorrect predic-
tions
FlexOracle
Very precise
Limited to make predictions in
coil, turn, and loop regions
StoneHinge
StoneHinge is a hinge predictor that uses the rigidity theory. Hinge regions are recognized as
flexible regions between two large rigid domains (of at leach 20 residues). StoneHinge predicts
hinge based on consensus between StoneHingeD and StoneHingeP. StoneHingeP identifies hinge
regions defined by ProFlex constraint counting analysis of the protein’s covalent and noncovalent
bond network. StoneHingeD does the same for DomDecomp Gaussian network analyses.[49] In
the following StoneHingeP is described, as HingeMaster is based on StoneHingeP only.[51]
Constraint counting is implemented in the ProFlex, which is the basis for the hinge prediction of
StoneHingeP. ProFlex uses a 3D constraint counting algorithm to analyze the flexibility of a macro-
molecule. The constraint counting algorithm decomposes the molecule structure into rotatable
and non rotatable bonds. The bond rotation constraint analysis is based on analysis of cova-
lent and non covalent bonds in the molecule network.[49] The flexibility of a macromolecule is
determined by the independent internal degree of freedom (dof), which can be expressed by
equation 4.1.[52]
dof = 3 ∗N −6 −C
(4.1)
A 3D structure consisting of N atoms, has 3*N degrees of freedom, where 6 describe rigid body
motions. The independent internal degree of freedom. C is the constraints associated to cova-
lent bonds. When many constraints are present, the macromolecule is largely rigid.[52] Stone-
HingeP analyzes the ProFlex results to find energy at which the protein is decomposed into two
rigid structures/domains (at least 20 residues of each) connected by a flexible region/hinge.[49]
StoneHinge is good at finding hinge regions, but overestimation of the hinge size is a weakness of
SH.[48]
==PAGE:36==
20
4 Computational Methods
TLSMD
TLSMD analyzes flexibility in the crystal structure of a protein. The flexibility can be either local
or inter-domain motions. The protein chain is divided into multiple segments that are modelled
as rigid regions undergoing Translation/Libration/Screw (TLS) vibrational motion. HingeMaster is
designed to break the protein chain into N=2,3,4 and 5 segments where each analysis will lead
to different results. The break points of the segments are located in highly flexible regions, which
can indicate a hinge region. Studies of known protein movements have shown that TLSMD often
predicts residues that are exactly located in the already known hinge region or very closely. On
the other hand, TLSMD tends to make a lot other predictions which are incorrect.[48]
FlexOracle
FlexOracle predicts flexible hinges by identify stable domains. FlexOracle is built up by the argue
that the lowest energetic cost of separating and solvating takes place in a hinge region. The
protein is divided into two fragments: fragment 1 consists of residue 1 to i -1 and fragment 2
consists of residues i to N (N = number of residues in the protein). The energy difference between
the full length protein and the two fragments is calculated according to equation 4.2.[53]
∆E = Efrag1 + Efrag2 −Efull
(4.2)
∆E represents the energy cost of breaking the interactions between fragment 1 and fragment 2
followed by solvation. The hinge prediction can be done by either one cut- or two cuts prediction.
HingeMaster uses one cut prediction. FlexOracle is very precise, but is limited to only analyze
hinge regions in loops, coils, and/or turns, due to the one cut prediction.[53]
4.3
Normal Mode Analysis - ElNemo
Elastic Network model; ElNemo is an elastic network model (ENM)-based normal mode web
server for analysis of protein movements. In ENM, proteins are described as a set of particles
that are interconnected by a network of elastic springs. Normal mode analysis is a powerful tool
to predict and analyze possible macromolecule movements. Studies have shown, that half of the
known protein movements can be analyzed by only one or two low frequency normal modes.[54]
NMA applications make investigation of macromolecular movements possible in a wide area of
biology. NMA applications offer analysis of protein conformational changes upon ligand binding,
membran channel opening and closure, potential movements of ribosome.[54]
As mentioned, a protein chain of N atoms have 3*N - 6 degrees of freedom, which gives rise
to a lot of structural conformations. One normal mode represent a vibration state of the struc-
ture, and any vibrations can be described as combinations of many normal modes.[55] ElNemo
computes the 100 lowest frequency normal modes of a protein. NMA is based on a harmonic
approximation of the potential energy function around the equilibrium state (the minimum en-
ergy conformation). Diagonalization of a Hessian matrix of the potential energy yielding the
vibration and direction of protein motions, where the square frequencies occur as eigenvalues
and the eigenvectors are the normal mode.[54] The Hessian matrix H is a n*n matrix (where n is
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Molecular Dynamics Simulations
21
the number of degrees of freedom) and H = δ2V/δXiδXj, where V is the potential energy
and X the certain displacement coordinates.[56] Due to the large numbers of coordinates, the
normal modes are calculated using a simplified potential energy function; a Hookean potential,
illustrated in equation 4.3.[54]
V =
∑
d0
i j<Rc
= c(dij −d0
ij)2
(4.3)
d0
ij is the distance between the atoms i and j in the known 3D structure, and dij is the distance
between the atoms in the new conformation. c is a spring constant of the potential, known from
Hooke’s law, and is assumed to be the same for all interacting pairs. Rc is an arbitrary cutoff
parameter, beyond which interactions are not taking into account. The Hookean potential en-
tails the assumption that the input 3D structure corresponds to the minimum potential energy,
(V=0).[54]
For further simplifications, ElNemo uses a building block approximation, also called rotation-translation-
block (RTB). The RBT approximation combines several residues into single super-residues with a
coordinate set that replaces the certain coordinates.[54] A study has shown, that the RBT ap-
proximation has a very little influence on the normal modes.[57]
4.4
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Molecular dynamics simulations act as a bridge between theory and experiment. The theory
can be tested by conducting a simulation of a model system, and the model can be tested by
comparing with experimental results. Furthermore, MD simulations are used as alternative to diffi-
cult, impossible, or expensive experiments.[58]
MD simulations provide information about time-dependent motions in an atomic system. Atomic
motions in a system are simulated by step-by-step solution of Newton’s equation of motions, given
by equation 4.4.[58]
⃗Fi = d2⃗ri
dt2 mi
(4.4)
The forces are given by equation 4.5.
⃗Fi→j = −∇⃗riU(rij) = −δU(rij)
δ⃗ri
(4.5)
Fi describes the force acting on the atoms, which usually are derived from a potential energy
function U(rij) describing the potential energy in the complete set of 3*N atomic coordinates.
⃗ri and mi represent the position and mass of the ith atom, respectively. In MD simulations, the
position of each atom can be calculated as a function of time from the velocities and the accel-
eration.[58] The initial structures used in MD simulations are often a 3D PDB structure or a homology
==PAGE:38==
22
4 Computational Methods
model structure. Parameters as simulation time, time steps between trajectory, δt, solvent, tem-
perature, ions, pH, and pressure are user-defined. Solving Newton’s equation of motions, Verlet
algorithms for instance can be used. Verlet algorithm determining the velocity and position of
atoms in a given time. An illustration of trajectory generating is depicted in figure 4.1.[59]
Figure 4.1: General steps to perform MD simulations.
4.4.1
Force Field
Potential energy of an atomic system is generally calculated by the use of a force field. A force
field defines the energy functions exerted on each atom in the system during the simulations. The
energy is calculated as a function of the nuclear position and the electrons are ignored. Rela-
tively complex motions of an atomic system are possible to calculate by simple analytical models
of inter- and intra molecular interactions. Generally, an empirical force-field consists of terms that
model the nonbonding- and bonding interactions. The potential energies of bonding interac-
tions are composed of bonds, bond-angles, and dihedral angles. The total potential energy of
the system is defined as the sum of all the interactions, given by equation 4.6.[59]
Utotal = Unonbonded + Ubond + Uangle + Udihedral
(4.6)
In a classical force field, two types of nonbonded interactions need to be accounted: van der
Waals and Coulombic interactions, as depicted in figures 4.2 and 4.3.
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Molecular Dynamics Simulations
23
. Van der Waals interactions are described by the Lennard-Jones 12-6 function that has the form
given in equation 4.7. Furthermore, the Lennard-Jones 12-6 function is built up by repulsive forces
due to Pauli repulsion and attraction.[59]
ULJ =
∑
nonbondedpairs(ij)
4ϵij
[(σij
rij
)12
−
(σij
rij
)6]
(4.7)
Figure 4.2: Energy function of the Lennard-Jones 6-12 equation[60].
ϵij is the energy minimum between i and j, and σij is the collision diameter that describe the
distance between the center of i and j at which Uij is zero. rij is the distance between i and j.
Nonbonding interactions associated with electrostatic interactions are described by Coulomb’s
law. The electrostatic energy, Uq is given by equation 4.8.[43]
Uq =
∑
nonbondedpairs(ij)
qiqj
4πϵ0rij
(4.8)
Figure 4.3: Energy function of Coulomb’s law[60].
qi and qj are the charges of i and j, respectively. ϵ0 is the vacuum permittivity.
As mentioned, the bonded interactions consist of the energy functions of bond, bond-angles,
and dihedral angles. The definitions of the interactions are depicted in figures 4.4, 4.5, and 4.6.
==PAGE:40==
24
4 Computational Methods
A bond length which differs from the equilibrium distance between two atoms, will causes an
energetic penalty. The energy function for the bond bending interactions is a harmonic term,
and the expression of the bond length potential energy, Ul, is given by equation 4.9.[59]
Ul =
∑
bonds
kl
2 (r −r0)2
(4.9)
Figure 4.4: Energy function and definition of bond length[60].
kl is a force constant, that determines the strength of the bonds and depends on atoms and
bond types. r and r0 are the bond length and equilibrium bond length, respectively. When the
bond length deviates from the equilibrium bond length, the potential energy increases.[59]
The energical penalties associated with bond angle are expressed as a harmonic potential, as
well. The energy increases when the angle between three atoms deviates from its equilibrium
value. The angle potential energy function is expressed by equation 4.10.[59]
Ua =
∑
angles
kθ
2 (θ −θ0)2
(4.10)
Figure 4.5: Energy function and definition of angles[60].
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Molecular Dynamics Simulations
25
The force constant kθ depends on the atom types, and the angle and equilibrium angle are
denoted as θ and θ0, respectively.[59]
The dihedral angle, ψ, describes the rotation around a bond. The energetic penalties of rotation
are expressed as a cosine series. Optimized Potentials for Liquid Simulations (OPLS) force fields
define the potential energy of dihedral angles as denoted in equation 4.11.[59]
Uψ =
∑
dehedral
V1
2 [1+cos(ψ)]+ V2
2 [1−cos(ψ)]+ V3
2 [1+cos(ψ)]+ V4
2 [1−cos(ψ)] (4.11)
Figure 4.6: Energy function and definition of dihedral angles[60].
Vn are the force constants for each of the cosine terms (n=1..4), and ψ is the dihedral angle.
==PAGE:42==
26
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER5
Experimental Methods
To obtain information about different human TPH2 variants, different in vitro studies were pre-
formed. The human TPH2 variants were purified, followed by stabilization and dimerization analy-
sis. In this chapter, the used methods are described.
5.1
Purification
Chromotography is the most common method for protein purification and different chromotog-
raphy methods exist, such as gel filtration (GF), affinity chromatography (AC), and ion exchange
chromotography (IEX). A strategy to give the optimal values of resolution, capacity, speed, and
recovery is needed. Often, two or more chromotographical methods are combined to comple-
ment each other. In this project, AC and GF are used to ensure sufficiently high purity.[61]
5.1.1
Capture, Intermediate, Purification, and Polishing
Capture, Intermediate, Purification, and Polishing (CIPP) is a four-states strategy for protein purifi-
cation, that gives guidelines for combining purification methods to ensure a sufficient purity and
quantity. The steps of the CIPP strategy are shown in figure 5.1. Before protein purification can
take place, sample preparation has to be done to obtain a clarified extract of the target protein.
In the capture step, the target protein is isolated, concentrated, and stabilized. In the interme-
diate purification step, bulk impurities, such as other proteins, are removed. After this step, only
trace amounts or protein closely related to the target protein, and the target protein should be
present. In the polishing step, the remaining impurities are removed to achieve final high-level
purity.[61]
When the strategy for protein purification is planned, it is important to consider the four perfor-
mance parameters: resolution, capacity, speed, and recovery. The resolution depends in the
selectivity and efficiency of the column, sample, and conditions used. In practice, it is most likely
to take care of the resolution in the last purification stage, when the impurities and target protein
are likely to have very similar properties. Capacity refers to the sample size that can be loaded
onto the column. For AC, the capacity can be limited to the amount of target protein that can
be bound to the column, while GF can be limited to the volume of the column. Speed of the
purification is most important at the beginning of the purification, as enzymes, such as protease,
have to be removed fast. Optimizing one performance parameter will be at expense of other
==PAGE:44==
28
5 Experimental Methods
parameters, and a strategy should gave the most optimal values of any of the parameters.[61]
Figure 5.1: Different steps of the CIPP strategy.
To ensure sufficient capture, the purification method is selected and optimized for speed and
capacity. The method could be e.g. AC or IEX. At the intermediate purification step, capacity
and resolution are important, and can be obtained by e.g. IEX. The intermediate purification step
can be omitted, if the capture step was efficient enough. The last step, polishing, is selected for
high resolution to achieve final purity. The most common method is GF.[61]
5.1.2
HPLC
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is an expanded and computational controlled
version of the column techniques discussed in sections 5.1.3 and 5.1.5. The column material con-
sists of small particles (30-200 µm), which cause more interactions between column material and
the MBP-tagged protein. Since the column consists of smaller particles, pressure must be applied
to achieves sufficient flow rate. The HPLC system is equipped with a detector that measures the
absorbance of the elution fluid at a wavelength of 280 nm.[62]
5.1.3
Affinity Chromatography
Affinity chromatography offers a method that contains high selectivity. Proteins are separated
due to the interactions between the target protein and the column material, which consists of
specific ligands attached to a chromatography matrix. In many cases, the interactions are bio-
specific, such as protein-substrate interactions.[63]
The typical method for AC can be divided into five steps:
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Purification
29
1. Equilibration.
2. Adsorption of sample and removing of unbound material.
3. Washing to remove unbound material.
4. Elution of bound proteins.
5. Regeneration of media.
In the equilibration step, five column volume (CV) of binding buffer is introduced to the column,
and the affinity medium is allowed to reach equilibrium. In the next step, the sample is introduced
to the column followed by 5 CV binding buffer. At this point, the target protein should interact
with the column medium, and all unbound materials are washed through the column. The target
protein can be eluted either by buffer exchange, by change in conditions (e.g. pH, ionic strength)
that affect the interactions. Or by addition of substrates that compete the interactions of the
target protein and the column material. Furthermore, protease can be used for elution. After
elution, the column is regenerated.[63]
5.1.4
Affinity Chromatography with MBP-tagged Protein
Choosing ligand for affinity chromatography is an important step. The ligand affinity should be
so strong that the protein stays on the column, but the ligand-protein binding should not be irre-
versible so elution of the protein is impossible. Choosing ligand can be challenging, and affinity
tags are introduced to the protein. Affinity tags are an efficient tool in AC when no specific lig-
and is known. The tags can be used for any proteins where the affinity tag can be introduced.[64]
An affinity tag is a peptide chain that contains high affinity for a specific ligand. Many tags are
known, and can be divided into two main groups: purification tags and solubility tags. Purifica-
tion tags are used to ensure the affinity binding between protein and ligand. Solubility tags are
used to increase the solubility of the protein. Maltose binding protein tag (MBP-tag) is an example
of a tag which can act as a purification- and solubility tag.[65],[66]
Affinity chromatography with MBP-tagged protein, uses a column with a material consisting of
dextrins. Dextrins are similar to maltose, as it is a mixture of polymers of D-glucose units linked
by α-(1→4) or α-(1→6) glycosidic bonds. MBP-tagged proteins have a high affinity to dextrins.
Elution of the target protein can take place in two ways: by a cleavage step or by introducing
maltose to the column. The cleavage step requires protease that cleavages in a specific cleav-
age site between the target protein and the MBP-tag.[65],[66]
5.1.5
Gel Filtration
Gel filtration allows separation of materials with different molecule sizes under mild conditions.
GF can be used to protein purification e.g in a two steps purification in combination with AC. In
==PAGE:46==
30
5 Experimental Methods
contrast to AC, GF is a non-binding method where no interaction between column material and
sample components take place. The sample is applied at the top of the column that consists
of porous beads that are made of an insoluble but highly hydrated polymer, such as dextran
or agarose. The beads in the column are typically 100 µm in diameter. Small molecules can
penetrate the beads, whereas it is not possible for larger molecules. The small molecules that
penetrate the beads have a longer residence time in the column, whereas larger molecules
have a more direct path.[63],[67]
5.1.5.1
Analytical Gel Filtration
Size exclusion chromatography can be performed by analytical gel filtration.
Columns used
for analytical gel filtration consist of finer material leading to better chromatographic resolution,
compared with preparative gel filtration. This makes analytical GF sufficient for investigation of
oligomeric states of a protein.[67] As AC and preparative GF, the analytical gel filtration can
be performed with a HPLC system. Tidermand has performed a standard curve of the UV ab-
sorbance at 280 nm as function of the loading concentration of protein. The results showed a
linear relationship between absorbance and the protein concentration on a logarithmic scale.
According to this results, the absorbance peaks are associated with the concentration of each
oligomeric states.[68]
5.2
Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate - Polycrylamide Gel
electropheresis
Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate - Polycrylamide Gel electropheresis (SDS-PAGE) is an analytical tech-
nique for separating proteins by their molecular weights and is often used to track the contents
of protein in different purification steps. Samples from the different purification steps are treated
with heat (80 °C) and SDS. Upon heating, the tertiary structure of the protein is destroyed as hydro-
gen bond interactions are broken. SDS binds to the protein and mask the protein charges with a
constant ratio of 1.4 g SDS per g protein. The protein exists now as a more linear structure coated
with negatively charged SDS-groups. The proteins are separated when they move towards the
positive charged electrode.[69]
5.3
Stabilization
Investigation of TPH has been challenging due to the low stability of the protein, which seems to
be caused by the instability of the regulatory domain. The instability problem of TPH must be over-
come before it is possible to purify appropriate quantities of TPH and to investigate the full-length
structure.
The stability of a protein is associated with the free energy difference between the native and the
un-folded protein. If the free energy difference decreases, the stability of the protein decreases
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Stabilization
31
also. The free energy difference can be increased in different ways. In some cases, the free
energy differences are increased by adding ligands that bind the native structures, which will
results in a decrease of free energy in the native structure, making a larger free energy difference,
see figure 5.2. As ligands bind specific to enzymes, it can be challenging to find the right ligand
for this method. Another way to increase to free energy difference is to use additives that not
bind to the enzyme. Instead of binding to the protein, the additives will repel the protein surface
which results in an increase of the free energy. As the un-folding protein has the largest surface,
the free energy of the un-folded protein will increases more then the native structure.[70]
Figure 5.2: Free energy diagram of different protein states with (A and B) and without (middle) ad-
ditives. (A) The protein interacts with the ligands and (B), no binding occurs between
additives and protein [70].
5.3.1
Stabilization of hTPH2
Two different components (salts and aromatic amino acids) are found to stabilize hTPH2. In the
following, the stabilization with salts and aromatic amino acids will be described.
5.3.1.1
Salts
When proteins are presented in an aqueous solution, proteins exist in an equilibrium between
the native structure and a partially un-folded intermediate. By adding salts as additives, the
equilibrium of the structure conformations can be shifted towards the native form. The so-called
Hofmeister Series is an arrangement of salts which can be used as additives, see figure 5.3. The
kosmotropics stabilize the native structure, while the chaotropics denatured the protein.[71]
==PAGE:48==
32
5 Experimental Methods
Figure 5.3: The Hofmeister Series [71].
Previous purification attempts show that a high concentration of the kosmotoprics ammonium
sulfate in the purification buffer gives the best yields of TPH.[72] It is still not fully understood how
the salt stabilizes the protein.
5.3.1.2
Aromatic Amino Acids
As described in section 2.2.1.5, the aromatic amino acid L-Phe allosterically activates PAH. Fur-
thermore, it has been found, that L-Phe has a stabilizing effect on PAH.[73] The binding of L-Phe
in the allosteric site results in a stabilization of the protein. Likewise, a study has shown, that L-Phe
stabilizes hTPH2 during purification.[33]
5.4
Kinetic Characterization
Enzyme kinetic is a analysis of chemical reactions catalyzed by enzymes. The rate is measured
while varying the conditions of the reaction, and the effect is investigated. In year 1913, Michaelis
and Menten described a simple model of the enzyme reactions between the substrate (S) and
the enzyme (E). S and E form a complex (C) in a reversibly reaction. In an irreversible step, the
complex (C) breaks down to the product (P) and the enzyme (E). The Menchealis-Menten model
is expressed by equation 5.1.[74]
E + S ⇀
↽C →E + P
(5.1)
In enzyme kinetic, the initial rate of an reaction can be used to describe the activity of the en-
zyme.
5.4.1
Activity Assay
The activity assay of TPH2 is determined by fluorescence spectrophotometry.[75] Fluorescence
spectrophotometry is a type of electromagnetic spectrophotometry that analyzes the fluores-
cence of a sample after absorption of light. The electrons in the molecules are excited by a
light beam which will causes emissions of light. The activity of TPH2 is determined by continu-
ously monitoring the fluorescence of 5-hydroxytryptophan formed in the presence of substrates.
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Kinetic Characterization
33
The assay is based on the fact that tryptophan and 5-hydroxytryptophan have different spectral
characteristics. A shift to a higher wavelength of the UV-absorbance occurs after hydroxylation
of tryptophan, shown in figure 5.4. The wavelength for monitoring the product formation is 300
nm, since absorbance at 300 nm is almost exclusive for 5-hydroxytryptophan. Monitoring of the
emission was at 330 nm, since the wavelength of the fluorescence is usually longer than the wave-
length of absorption.[75]
Figure 5.4: Absorbance spectra of tryptophan and 5-hydroxytryptophan measured in 10 mM HCl
[68].
Different components are added to the assay to ensure continuous product formation.
(NH4)2Fe(II)(SO4)2 · 6 H2O is added to the assay, when TPH is only active when iron is in its ferrous
form. The iron complex ensures that TPH is loaded with Fe++, and (NH4)2(SO4)2 has been found to
stabilizes the enzyme. As illustrated in figure 2.1, BH4 is oxidized to qBH2 during the catalysis. Dithio-
threitol (DTT) is added to ensure a constant amount of BH4 by reducing qBH2 to BH4. Furthermore,
DTT maintains iron in its reduced form.[75]
==PAGE:50==
34
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER6
Computational
Procedures
In this chapter, the procedures of the in silico studies are described. The overall in silico strategy is
illustrated in figure 3.3.
6.1
Homology Modelling
Two different homology models were build:
• N∆47-hTPH2 monomer
• N∆47-hTPH2 tetramer
6.1.1
N∆47-hTPH2 Monomer
Using Prime in the Schrödinger Suites[44], a homology model of N∆47-hTPH2 was built. The appli-
cation Structure Prediction Wizard was used. Schrödinger’s Protein Preparation Wizard is designed
to help researchers ensure structural correctness.[44]
At first, the amino acid sequence of hTPH2 (see appendix D) was found on the web page uniprot[19].
The sequence was used to perform a BLAST search for similar amino acid sequences in the Protein
Data Bank (PDB). The web page NCBI[45] was used for BLAST search, and a regular BLAST search
was chosen over PSI-BLAST because of a high overall identity of the template was needed. A
query protein with high sequence identity was chosen, as this should offers the best template
structure for the modelling. The chosen query protein is described in section 8.1.1.
Before alignment of the amino acid sequences, the secondary structure of hTPH2 was predicted
by the online server PSIPRED - Protein Sequence Analysis.[76] The secondary prediction is shown
in appendix E. Since the identify between hTPH2 and the template structure of the regulatory
domain is low, the information of the secondary structure was used to ensure optimal sequence
alignment. The secondary structure prediction was imported to the work space of Prime as a
.psipass2 file, followed by an alignment between the amino acid sequences and the .psipass2
==PAGE:52==
36
6 Computational Procedures
file with the ClustalW method. The sequence alignment is shown in appendix F.
The structure model was built by chimera homology modelling. Chimera homology modelling
enables the use of two or more template structures for construction a model. By chimera mod-
elling, PSI-Pred predicted alpha-helices and beta-sheets of TPH2 were aligned to regions in the
template sequences with the same secondary structure. This was manually done. The sequence
alignment and the chimera modelling are shown in appendix F - figure F.3. Furthermore, it was
specified which regions which should be used for each templates. The model building was cho-
sen to build the homology model by the knowledge-based method.
Hydrogen atoms were added to the structure and missing side chains were filled in by Preprocess
in the application Protein Preparation Wizard. To refine the loops and structure of the protein, the
structure was minimized with a Force Field Minimization using the OPLS3 force field.
6.1.2
N∆47-hTPH2 Tetramer
The modelling procedure of hTPH2 tetramer was very similar to the procedure of N∆47hTPH2
monomer, see section 6.1.1. For alignment of hTPH2 tetramer, the 5DEN structure was chosen as
template structure only, as this is the only known full-length structure in the AAAH enzyme family.
In the building step, the knowledge-based method was chosen, and the multi-template model
type was chosen to be homo-multimer. Otherwise, the procedure was the same as described in
section 6.1.1.
6.2
Hinge Prediction
Using the online hinge predictor tool HingeMaster, possible hinge regions of TPH2 were predicted.
The predictions were performed at the homology model of hTPH2 monomer, see section 6.1.1.
The .pdb file of the monomer structure model was uploaded to the predictor. Before uploading
the .pdb file, one should be assure that the structure is minimized. Only one chain structures
were allowed in the hinge prediction.[51] HingeMaster does not offers a good interface for results
analysis. Some problems occurred, when the predictions based on normal mode analysis should
be analyzed. For this reason, only predictions made by TLSMD, FLexOracle, and StoneHinge were
used.
6.3
Normal Mode Analysis - ElNemo
For further investigations of the predicted hinge regions and the protein movements, different
variants of TPH2 were analyzed by the online tool ElNemo:
• N∆47-hTPH2 monomer
• N∆47-hTPH2 dimer (chain A and D of the tetramer)
==PAGE:53==
6.4 Molecular Dynamics Simulations
37
.pdb files of the model structures were uploaded. The number of low frequency normal modes
to be computed was chosen to be 25. DQMIN (minimum perturbation) and DQMAX (maximum
perturbation) were chosen to be -100 and 100, respectively. The step size of the perturbation was
set to 20, which leads to 11 steps in each normal mode. The ”Generate animated gif images” box
was clicked. The program was chosen to use the RTB approximation (see section 4.3) to ensure
short computational speed.
6.4
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
MD simulations were performed for different structures of human TPH2:
• N∆47-hTPH2 monomer
• N∆47-hTPH2 dimer
• N∆47-hTPH2 tetramer
• R100A-N∆47hTPH2 monomer
Before MD simulations were performed, all structures were preprocessed, optimized and mini-
mized using the application Protein Preparation Wizard in the Schrödinger suite.
Figure 6.1: Graphical illustration of the initial setup of the MD simulation.
The MD simulations were performed by the Desmond software in the Schrödinger Suites. Using
Desmond System Builder, the systems for the calculations were setup with TIP3P as solvent model
(see figure 6.1) and OPLS3-2005 as force field. The cell dimensions of the solvent model was set to
10 x 10 x 10 Å3. The systems were neutralized by adding Cl – or Na+ counter ions. The addition of
==PAGE:54==
38
6 Computational Procedures
counter ions differed for each structures.
Simulation time was set to 100 ns, recording time to 5 ps. The NTP ensemble was used; constant
number of atoms (N), pressure (P = 1.01325 bar) and temperature (T = 300 K). Isotropic pressure
regulation was applied using a barostat Martyna-Tobias-Klein method with relaxation time of 2 ps,
and isothermal regulation applied with the Nose-Hoover chain method. The Coulombic cutoff
radius was 9.0 Å for short range interaction, whereas long range coulombic interactions were
taken into account using smooth particle mesh Ewald. The Relax model system before simulation
box was checked and the simulations were run on a GPU.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER7
Experimental
Procedures
In this chapter, the procedures of the in vitro studies are described. The overall in vitro strategy is
illustrated in figure 3.4. During this project, expression of the different proteins were needed. As
expression is not a part of this project, the method is only described in appendix B.
7.1
Purification of MBP-3CP
The protease MBP-3CP was purified as it is needed in purification of different N∆47-hTPH2 variants.
The purification steps of MBP-3CP is described in figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: Overview of the steps in the MBP-3CP purification.
The first step for purification was buffer preparation. Each buffers and the compositions are listed
in table 7.1.
Table 7.1: Overview of buffers for MBP-3CP purification.
Buffer - MBP-3CP purification
Buffer
Composition
Binding buffer
20 mM Tris/H2SO4, 70 mM (NH4)2SO4, pH 8
Elution buffer
20 mM Tris/H2SO4, 70 mM (NH4)2SO4, 0.1 mM maltose, pH 8
Storage buffer
50 mM Tris/H2SO4, 50 mM (NH4)2SO4, 1 mM DTT, 10 mM EDTA,
20 % glycerol, pH 8
The second step was sample preparation. The E. coli cell culture was thawed on ice and re-
suspended in 40 mL binding buffer. The resuspended sample was lysed by sonication at 80 %
amplitude and 1 cycle for 3 x 30 sec with 1 minut between. The cell culture was kept on ice
==PAGE:56==
40
7 Experimental Procedures
while lysed. The sample was centrifuged at 4 °C and 12000 rpm for 2 x 20 min. Between the
first and second centrifugations, the pellet was removed from the supernatant. Afterwards, the
supernatant was filtered through a 0.45 µm filter.
A Dextrin Sapharose High Pressure MBP column was equilibrated with 5 CV binding buffer. The
sample solution was loaded to the column with a flow rate of 5 mL/min and the UV absorbance
was measured at 280 nm. Cell material was washed out with 5 CV of binding buffer, followed by
5 CV elution buffer that eluted the MBP-3CP enzyme. The fraction of MBP-3CP was ultra-filtrated
on an Amicon stirred cell to approximately 3 mL. The buffer exchange step was performed by
adding 30 mL of storage buffer to the Amicon stirred cell following by ultra-filtration. This step was
repeated 3 times. The protease was stored at -20°C.
7.2
Purification of MBP-tagged N∆47-hTPH2 Variants
The purification steps of N∆47-hTPH2 are depicted in figure 7.2. Different variants of N∆47hTPH2
were purified:
• N∆47-hTPH2 wild type
• N∆47-hTPH2 M1 mutant
• N∆47-rchTPH2 wild type
• N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 mutant
Figure 7.2: Overview of the steps in the N∆47-hTPH2 purification.
The step: sample preparation is similar to the step described in section 7.1. The buffer compositions
differ and are listed in table 7.2. Purification buffers of the N∆47-hTPH2 wild type- and N∆47-hTPH2
M1 mutant contained 3 mM L-Phe.
Table 7.2: Overview of buffers for N∆47-hTPH2 purification.
Buffer - N∆47-hTPH2 Purification
Buffer
Composition
Binding buffer
20 mM Hepes, 300 mM (NH4)2SO4, pH 7
Elution buffer
20 mM Hepes, 300 mM (NH4)2SO4, 1 mM maltose, pH 7
The MBP-3CP protease was prepared by diluting a stock solution with binding buffer to a volume
of 35 mL with a protein concentration of 2.2 µM. The protease solution was filtered through a 0.45
==PAGE:57==
7.3 SDS-PAGE Analysis
41
µm filter. The protease solution was loaded to the column, after 5 CV binding buffer has washed
nonbinding material through the column. After the protease was loaded to the column, the flow
rate was paused for 1 hour. After 1 hour, 5 CV binding buffer was run through the column to elute
the target protein. MBP, MBP-3CP, and MBP-TPH2 were eluted with elution buffer.
The eluted target protein was filtered through a 0.45 µm filter and loaded onto a HiLoad 26/60
Superdex 200 prep grade column. The flow rate of binding buffer was 2.5 mL/min and the UV ab-
sorption was measured at 280 nm. The concentration of the collected protein was measured by
UV absorption with a NanoDop-1000 spectrophotometer, and the protein was up concentrated
by a Amicon stirred cell. The protein was stored in fractions of 1 mL in polypropylene tubes. Using
liquid nitrogen, the fractions were frozen and stored at -80°C.
7.3
SDS-PAGE Analysis
Table 7.3: Overview of different SDS-PAGE samples collected in the purifications.
SDS-PAGE Samples
SDS-PAGE
sample
Description
R
Resuspended cells. Ensures presence of target protein in the cell
culture. The sample was collected after lysing of the cells.
P
Pellet. Ensures that the discarded pellet does not contain the target
protein. After centrifugation, 40 mL binding buffer was added to the
pellet and a sample was taken from the solution.
S
Supernantant. Ensures presence of target protein in the supernan-
tant. The sample was collected after the second centrifugation
step.
FT
Flow through. Ensures that the target protein has bind to the col-
umn matrix and not washed through the column. The sample was
collected at the FT peak.
TP
Target protein.
Ensures that the target protein was present after
cleavage with protease. The sample was collected from the frac-
tion after cleavage.
E
Elution. Ensures that the target protein was not eluted in this peak.
MBP and MBP-3CP should be eluted in this step. The sample was
collected at the elution peak.
G
Gel filtration. Ensures that the target protein was purified by gel fil-
tration. The sample was collected from the gel filtration fraction at
peak G.
SDS-PAGE analysis were preformed for each of the purifications. By SDS-PAGE analysis, the pro-
tein sizes were analyzed and the contents of proteins in each peaks of the chromatogram were
==PAGE:58==
42
7 Experimental Procedures
investigated. SDS-PAGE samples were collected in different steps of the purifications, indicated
in table 7.3.
Each SDS-PAGE samples were 20 µL. Samples R, P, S, and FT were diluted 10 times. 5 µL sample
buffer were added to each of the SDS-PAGE samples. The compositions of sample buffers are
listed in table 7.4. By adding 0.5 µL BIO-RAD SDS-PAGE standard low range, no. 161-0304 to 19.5
µL water and 5 µL sample buffer, a marker was prepared. The SDS-PAGE samples and the marker
were heated at 80°C (5-10 min).
Due to the size of target protein, MBP, and the protease, 7.5 % Mini-PROTEAN TGX gels from BIO-
Rad were used. Before electrophoresis, the comb and tape were removed from the gels, and
the gels were placed in holder placed in the electrophoresis cells. Running buffer (composition
described in table 7.4) was added to the holder. The samples were loaded to the gels by a 25
µL gel-loading pipette, after each wells were washed twice with running buffer. After sample
loading, running buffer was poured into the electrophoresis cell outside the holder.
The proteins were separated by applying 250 V for approximately 22-25 minutes in running buffer.
After the 22-25 min, the gels were placed in a container with fixative solution (30 min), staining
solution (1 hour), and destaining solution (overnight).
Table 7.4: Overview of different SDS-PAGE samples collected during the purifications.
SDS-PAGE buffer
Buffer
Composition
5 x Sample buffer
200 mM Tris/HCl pH 6.8, 2 % SDS, 40 % glycerol, 0.04 %
Coomassie Blue G-250. Before addition to samples, 28 μl
β-mercaptoethanol was mixed with 190 μl sample buffer.
Running buffer
25 mM Trismabase, 192 mM glycine, 0.1 % SDS.
Fixative solution
500 mL water, 400 mL 96 % ethanol, 100 mL glacial acetic
acid.
Staining solution
900 mL water, 100 mL glacial acetic acid, 0.25 g Coomassie
blue G-250.
Destaining solution
900 mL water, 100 mL glacial acetic acid.
7.4
Kinetic Characterization
Based on fluorescence spectrophotometry, the activity of the proteins was measured on a Var-
ian Cary Eclipse fluorescence spectrophotometer. The spectrophotometer was connected with
a water bath equipped with a temperature regulator. The water bath and the spectrophotome-
ter were turned on at 15 °C. Fresh solutions of DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) and (NH4)2Fe(II)(SO4)2 · 6 H2O
were prepared and stored in ice water. Buffer and miliQ water were stored in falcon tubes and
cool down in ice water as well. Frozen stocks of BH4, tryptophan, and catalase were thawed in
ice water, while a stock of TPH2 was thawed under cold running water. To remove precipitation
==PAGE:59==
7.5 Analytic Gel Filtrational
43
from the enzyme solution, the protein solution was centrifuged in a small centrifuge for 3 min and
the concentration was determined. The protein sample was diluted with gel filtration buffer to a
concentration of 7.8 µM.
After sample preparation, the program ”Kinetic” under ”Varian Cary Eclipse” on the desktop was
turned on. The spectrophotometer was set up to measure fluorescence at 330 nm after excitation
at 300 nm, for 2 min. To a 10*10*25 mm3 cuvette, the components listed in table 7.5 were added.
Only BH4 was added 24 sec after the activity measurement was started. Before measurement
was started, the sample was stirred and cooled down for 2 min in the spectrophotometer.
Table 7.5: Overwiev of stock solutions and assay composition.
Solutions used in activity measurement
Content
Concentration
in
stock solution
Volume added to
assay
Concentration
in
assay
HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.0
(NH4)2SO4
125mM
500mM
1000µL
50mM
200mM
Catalase (-20 °C)
1.25 g/L
50 µL
0.025 g/L
(NH4)2Fe(II)(SO4)2 · 6 H2O
(freshly prepared)
1.27 mM
50 µL
25 µM
DTT (freshly prepared)
175 Mm
100 µL
7 mM
Tryptophan (-20 °C)
3.0 mM
50 µL
60 µM
TPH2 diluted in purification
buffer
7.8 µM
400 µL
1.26 µM
MiliQ water
100 µL
BH4
15 mM
50 µL
300 µM
7.5
Analytic Gel Filtrational
The oligomeric state of the enzymes were analyzed by analytic gel filtration/size exclusion chro-
matography. For SEC, a Superdex 200 10/300 GL column was used. The column was equilibrated
with 2 CV of the purification buffer. Two different buffers were used during the experiment: 20
mM Hepes, 300 mM (NH4)2SO4, pH 7 and 20 mM Hepes, 300 mM (NH4)2SO4, 3mM L-Phe pH 7.
While equilibrating the column, samples for the experiment were prepared. N∆47-rchTPH2 wild
type and N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 mutant were thawed on ice and filtered through a 0.45 µm filter.
The concentrations were determined an a NanoDrop-1000 spectrophotometer, and diluted with
buffer to the concentrations used in the assay: 3µM, 6µM, and 10µM enzyme. For experiments
with L-Phe buffer, L-Phe was added to the protein sample 20 min before the samples were loaded
to the column. Sample loading was done with a 500 µL loop and the flow rate was set to 0.75
mL/min. The absorbance was measured at 280 nm. Between every measurements, the sample
loop was rinsed with 5 mL buffer.
==PAGE:60==
44
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER8
Computational Results
and Discussion
This chapter covers the results from the computational work. The goals of the experiments were
to identify hinge regions in TPH2 by available hinge predictors, verified the results of possible hinge
regions, and analyze the allosteric mechanism of domain movements. The strategy was based
on the available structures of PAH.
8.1
Homology Modelling
8.1.1
N∆47-hTPH2 Monomer
According to the methods described in section 6.1, a homology model of N∆47-hTPH2 monomer
was built. A BLAST search of the hTPH2 amino acid sequence returns the crystal structures of
ratPAH (PDB-ID:5DEN) and tchTPH2 (PDB-ID: 4V06). The identities of the sequences were deter-
mined to 30% and 100% of Clustal Omega. The alignments of the amino acid sequences are
presented in appendix F - figure F.1. The N∆47-hTPH2 homology model includes residues 48 to
490 and is depicted in figure 8.1(a). Areas that were not built on the template structure are marked
with red, while residues that differed from the template are colored cyan. Using Protein Prepara-
tion Wizard, the homology model was minimized with the force field OPLS3. Steric clashes were
assessed not to influence the structure areas of interest. The protein structure quality was ana-
lyzed by a Ramachandran plot, shown in figure 8.1(b). Gly204, Gly280, Gly371 (indicated with
triangles), and Ser53 are placed in the disallowed region of the Ramachandran plot. Glycine
has the flexibility to occur at phi-psi combinations that are not tolerated for other residues. Ser53
is located in the tail of the N-terminus, which was not an interesting area in any of the following
investigations.
==PAGE:62==
46
8 Computational Results and Discussion
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.1: (a) Homology model of hTPH2 monomer using 5DEN as the structural template of the
regulatory domain and 4V06 for the catalytic- and tetramerization domains. Areas
that not were built on the template structure are colored red. Residues that differed
from the template are colored cyan. (b) Ramachandran plot of the minimized homol-
ogy model.
==PAGE:63==
8.1 Homology Modelling
47
Using MD simulation, the stability of the structure was analyzed. For stabilization analysis, the root
mean square distance (RMSD) was calculated, based on Cα atoms. Generally, RMSD values of
1-3 Å are considered as acceptable for small globular proteins.[77] Figure 8.2 shows that the RMSD
time evolution reached a plateau (RMSD: 6-8 Å), indicating that the structure has equilibrated.
After ≃15 ns, the RMSD values increase significant due to a movement of the tetramerization
domain.
Figure 8.2: Evolution of RMSD values for TPH2 monomer in a 100 ns MD simulation. The RMSD values
were based on Cα atoms in the protein backbones. The reference structure was the
initial t0 structure.
Figure 8.3 illustrates RMSD evolutions of different parts of the structure. RMSD values of the full-
length protein were measured to be approximately 6-8 Å. Truncation of the tetramerization do-
main resulted in a decrease of the RMSD values to approximately 3 Å. The most rigid part of the
protein was located in the catalytic domain, while the regulatory- and tetramerization domains
were observed to be more flexible (RMSD: 4 Å). Due to the flexibility of the tetramerization domain,
a tetrameric structure of the protein has been modelled. It was analyzed whether the tetramer-
ization domain could be stabilized in a oligomeric structure.
==PAGE:64==
48
8 Computational Results and Discussion
Figure 8.3: Evolutions of RMSD in the different domains of TPH2 monomer for a 100 ns MD simula-
tion. Catalytic domain (resid: 148 to 459) - blue, regulatory domain (resid: 48 to 147)
- red, tetramerization domain (resid: 460 to 490) - yellow, catalytic and regulatory do-
mains (resid: 48 to 459) - green, catalytic and tetramerization domains (resid: 148 to
490) - purple.
8.1.2
N∆47-hTPH2 Tetramer
5DEN was chosen as template structure for the modelling of hTPH2 tetramer. The sequence align-
ment is shown in appendix F - figure F.2. The homology model includes residues 48 to 490, and
the 3D structure is depicted in figure 8.4(a). The protein structure quality was analyzed by a Ra-
machandran plot, shown in figure 8.4(b). Asn140B, Asn104C, Asn140D, Lys116D Ile141D, Trp142B,
Thr143A, Thr143C, Glu144D, Leu169B, Met170A, Ser173B, Ser173C, Leu175B, and Glu370D, corre-
sponding to approximately 4% of the entire protein, are located in the disallowed region.
==PAGE:65==
8.1 Homology Modelling
49
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.4: (a) Homology model of N∆47-hTPH2 tetramer with 5DEN as the structural template for
the entire model. Areas that were not built on the template structure are colored red.
Residues that differed from the template structure are colored cyan.(b) Ramachan-
dran plot of the minimized homology model.
==PAGE:66==
50
8 Computational Results and Discussion
The RMSD evolution of the full-length structure is depicted in figure 8.5. The tetrameric structure
of TPH2 reached equilibrium with RMSD values ≃4-5 Å. Figure 8.5 indicated that the RMSD val-
ues increase after approximately 10-15 ns and 35-40 ns. Visualization of the MD simulations has
shown, that the two increases in RMSD values are caused by displacement between the four
chains, and are not caused by structural changes in each chains. Compared to figure 8.2, the
tetrameric structure has lower RMSD values at equilibrium. The lower RMSD values were caused
by the stabilization of the tetramerization domains, as they interact with each other. Accord-
ing to figure 8.6, no significant distance changes between the tetramerization domains occur
during the MD simulation. The distance measurements are calculated at three different pairs
of hydrophobic residues located in tetramerization domians, as the hydrophobic residues forms
coiled-coil interactions. The minor fluctuations in distance indicated rigidity of the tetramerization
domains.
Figure 8.5: Evolution of RMSD for TPH2 tetramer in a 100 ns MD simulation. The RMSD values are
based on Cα atoms in the protein backbones. The reference structure is the initial t0
structure.
==PAGE:67==
8.1 Homology Modelling
51
Figure 8.6: Distance evolution. To the right is the interaction between two tetramerization domains
depicted with secondary structure in gray. The hydrophobic residue pairs: Leu467,
Leu474, and Leu481 are highlighted as sticks. The distance evolution over time, based
on Cα atoms, are depicted to the left. The graph shows only minor fluctuations in
distances.
==PAGE:68==
52
8 Computational Results and Discussion
8.2
Hinge Prediction
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8.7: (a) Cartoon illustration of the tetrameric structure of full-length rat PAH in the inactive
conformation (PDB-ID:5FGJ). The regulatory domain is colored blue, the catalytic do-
main is colored red, the tetramerization domain is colored yellow, and the iron ions
are depicted in green. (b) A subunit of the tetrameric structure. Note that the N-
terminus blocks the active site. (c) The positive and negative charged residues Arg71
and Asp415 are shown as sticks and the distance between the residues is measured
to be 4.48 Å.
The hypothesis was, that the regulatory mechanism of TPH2 could be similar to the regulatory
mechanism of PAH, see section 2.2.1.5. If this statement is correct, one or more hinge regions
must be present in TPH2 due to the domain motions of the regulatory mechanism. As depicted in
figures 8.7 and 8.8, two regulatory domains of a tetrameric structure should move closer to each
other for L-Phe activation of the protein. This movement will results in a binding pocket for L-Phe
==PAGE:69==
8.2 Hinge Prediction
53
between two ACT domains and the N-terminus will move away from the active site.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8.8: (a) Cartoon illustration of the tetrameric structure of full-length rat PAH in the active
conformation after binding L-Phe in the allosteric site. The structure is a theoretical
model from supporting information of reference [29]. The regulatory domain is col-
ored blue, the catalytic domain is colored red, the tetramerization domain is colored
yellow, and the iron ions are depicted in green. (b) A subunit of the tetrameric struc-
ture. Note that the N-terminus does not block the active site. (c) The positive and
negative charged residues Arg71 and Asp415 are shown as sticks, and the distance
between them is measured to be 32.25 Å.
As shown in figure 8.7(c), an ionic interaction between the positive and negative charged residues
==PAGE:70==
54
8 Computational Results and Discussion
Arg71 and Asp415 may occur in the inactive conformation of PAH. After activation, the distance
between Arg71 and Asp415 has increased from 4.48 Å to 32.25 Å, see figure 8.8(c). In the follow-
ing, similar protein dynamics are investigated for TPH2. TPH2 structures in the same conformation
as PAH - figure 8.7(b) are mentioned as inactivated structures/conformations, and TPH2 structures
in the same conformation as PAH - figure 8.8(b) are mentioned as activated structures/conforma-
tions.
8.2.1
HingeMaster
Motions play a significant role in the chemical and biological function of enzymes. Depending
on the time scale, protein motions are difficult to solve using available experimental techniques.
Instead, theoretical models and computational tools have been used for better understanding
of protein motions.[78] The first step of protein motion investigation is related to analysis of hinge
regions, due to the fact that 45% of enzyme motions are associated with hinge bending mo-
tions,[48] as described in section 4.2.
As mentioned in section 2.2.1.5, experiments indicate that TPH2 undergoes the same allosteric
mechanism as PAH, see figure 2.7. In silico methods have been used to investigate hinge re-
gions in TPH2. The computational experiments were based on a single conformation state, when
no model of TPH2 activated structure was available. The most interesting hinge regions of TPH2
monomer are listed in table 8.1, while figure 8.9 depicts predicted hinge regions as a graphical
illustration. The full list of predicted hinge regions is shown in appendix G. Three different hinge pre-
dictors have suggested 11 hinge regions, where only two regions are an output of two different
predictor tools. As described in section 4.2.1, StoneHinge, TLSMD, and FlexOracle have different
strengths and yield different results.
Table 8.1: Overview of predicted hinge regions in hTPH2 monomer.
Hinge Prediction
Residues
Secondary structure
Predictor
1
Glu105-Val106
β-sheet
TLSMD
2
Glu149-Asp150
loop
TLSMD and FlexOracle
3
Val168-Leu169
loop
StoneHinge
4
Ser173-Glu174
loop
StoneHinge
5
Ala177-Glu178
loop
StoneHinge
6
Lys183
loop
StoneHinge
7
Gly200-Tyr201
end of α-helix
StoneHinge
8
Gly204-Gln205
loop
StoneHinge and TLSMD
9
Ala328-Glu329
α-helix
TLSMD
10
Phe443-Ser444-Val445
loop
StoneHinge
11
Leu457-Lys458
loop
FlexOracle
==PAGE:71==
8.2 Hinge Prediction
55
Figure 8.9: Graphical illustration of possible hinge regions in TPH2 predicted by StoneHinge (blue),
TLMSD (red), and FlexOracle (yellow).
Flores, et al. have created a Hinge Atlas containing statistical experiments for residue types in
hinge regions.[79] The conclusion of the Hinge Atlas was that hinge regions tend to occur at the
surface and in coils and turns comprising small and hydrophilic residues. The amino acid glycine
and serine are the most represented amino acids in hinge regions, whereas phenylalanine, ala-
nine, valine, and leucine are less likely to occur. Furthermore, hinge regions are found to be non-
conserved in evolution.[79] As illustrated in table 8.1, hinge regions 1, 7, and 9 are not located in
a loop structure. An analysis of the 3D model structure indicated that all predicted hinge regions
are located at the surface of the protein. Hinge regions 1, 3, 5, 9, 10, and 11 consist of one or
more hydrophobic amino acids, whereas 2, 4, and 6 consist of hydrophilic residues only. Glycine
and serine are present in hinge region 4, 7, 8, and 10.
Meisburger, et al. reported a hinge region in the tetramerization domain of PAH consisting residues
422-427.[7] Similar hinge regions (hinge regions 10 and 11) have been predicted for TPH2, see
table 8.1. In this project, hinge regions around or close to the regulatory domain were of interest.
As described in section 2.2.1.5, such hinge regions have been suggested for PAH (residue 111-
117).[34],[35] A sequences alignment of hPAH and hTPH2 shows that the hinge region 111-117
(PAH) aligns with the residues 144-150 (TPH2). Hinge region 2 is located in this region. Hinge region
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 are located in the catalytic domain.
==PAGE:72==
56
8 Computational Results and Discussion
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.10: (a) Crystal structure model of rchTPH2 with hinge region 2 (residue 149-150) high-
lighted. Regulatory domain: blue, catalytic domain: red, and hinge region: yellow.
(b) Zoom-in.
Hinge region 2 is located in a loop which connects the regulatory- and catalytic domains, see fig-
ure 8.10. The hinge region has been predicted by TLSMD and FlexOracle. As mentioned in section
4.2.1, an experiment with TLSMD has shown that the tool predicts residues located in an already
known hinge region, and a lot of other predictions which are incorrect.[48] Figure 8.9 illustrates
that TLSMD did make a lot of predictions as expected. FlexOracle is found to be very precise
but limited to only analyze turns, loops, and coils. In this experiment, FlexOracle has predicted
two regions located in the area between two domains. According to the HingeMaster analysis,
a hinge region is located between the catalytic- and regulatory domains, which probable could
cause a conformational change.
As mentioned, hinge regions tend to occur in mobile regions as loops, coils, and turns. To an-
alyze the flexibility of different enzyme regions, B-factors can be used. The B-factors are deter-
mined when the crystal structure of the protein is resolved and represented in the PDB file for
each atom.[80] In figure 8.11, the structure model of hTPH2 monomer is depicted colored ac-
cording to the B-factor of each atom. Hydrogen atoms are not shown. Generally, B-factor of less
than 30 Å2 (red) signifies confidence in its position, while a B-factor of greater than 60 Å2 (blue)
signifies disorder.[80] Low disorder is observed in the regulatory- and catalytic domains, while the
==PAGE:73==
8.3 Normal Mode Analysis - ElNemo
57
tetramerization domain has greater disorder level. High B-factor values are observed in the region
consists of residues 145 to 150 - hinge region 2, see figure 8.11.
Figure 8.11: The structure model of N∆-hTPH2 colored by its B-factor values. The different do-
mains are highlighted by circles: catalytic domain (red), regulatory domain (blue),
tetramerization domain (yellow). The most mobile region (residues 145-150 - hinge
region 2) is highlighted in green.
8.3
Normal Mode Analysis - ElNemo
As mentioned in section 4.3, ElNemo computes low frequency normal modes of macromolecules,
which can be used to identify conformatal changes. The web-tool offers more advanced analysis
tools for studying protein motions than HingeMaster. ElNemo computes the 100 lowest frequency
normal modes and produces several parameters, such as the degree of collectivity of movement,
distance fluctuation maps, and B-factors. Animations of individual normal mode analysis were
generated and outputted as a .zip file containing 11 .pdb files, which illustrated the motion of
the enzyme in a given normal mode.[54] According to Krebs et al., only a small number of low
frequency modes should suffice for qualitative analysis of protein dynamics.[81] The results from
low frequency normal modes are discussed and analyzed in the following.
==PAGE:74==
58
8 Computational Results and Discussion
Two different homology models of hTPH2 were analyzed by ElNemo: hTPH2 monomer and hTPH2
dimer. Due to time cost of normal mode analysis calculations, the calculations were only done
on the dimeric structure instead of the tetrameric structure. For each structure, animations of
protein dynamics were generated for different low frequency normal modes. Mode 1 to 6 are
zero frequencies corresponding to the three overall rotations and the three overall translations of
the system.
8.3.0.1
N∆47-hTPH2 Monomer
The aim of the normal mode analysis was to investigate the domain motions associated with
the regulatory mechanism, and analyze the dynamics of the hinge region 2. The conformatal
changes caused by the normal mode analysis are illustrated in figures 8.12 and 8.13. Only the low
frequency normal modes 7 to 16 were analyzed, as higher frequency modes tend to affecting
the structural integrity.
According to figures 8.12 and 8.13, no significant domain motions of the regulatory domain were
observed. The most flexible area of the enzyme was observed to be the tetramerization domain.
For normal modes 10 to 16, some flexibility were observed in the catalytic- and regulatory do-
mains. The flexibility of the structures, presumably occurs due to the high frequency. The lack of
structural changes in mode 7 to 9 was indicated by the degree of collectivety, which increases
for higher frequency normal modes. The collectivity degree is a normalized factor. The collec-
tivity degree depends on the number of atoms, which locations are significant affected in the
normal mode.
More quantitative results of the structure changes were generated as distance fluctuation maps.
A distance fluctuation map illustrates relative movements between residues in a defined normal
mode. The distance measurements was based on the location of Cα atoms. In such maps, rigid
and flexible areas could be identified. The distance fluctuation maps of normal modes 7 to 16 are
shown in appendix H. The strongest 10% of distance changes between residues were depicted
in the fluctuation maps, and the distance changes were in a scale of 1 to 10 Å. In table 8.2, an
overview of the rigidity and flexibility in the different normal modes are listed.
==PAGE:75==
8.3 Normal Mode Analysis - ElNemo
59
Figure 8.12: The structure changes of TPH2 monomer, extracted from normal mode analysis. Mode 7 to 11 are illustrated. The structures
colored transparent indicate the DQMIN conformation while the opaque structures indicate DQMAX conformation. Color
code: blue: regulatory domain (residue number 1 to 147), red: catalytic domain (residue number 148 to 459), and yellow:
tetramerization domain (residue number 460 to 490).
==PAGE:76==
60
8 Computational Results and Discussion
Figure 8.13: The structure changes of TPH2 monomer, due to normal mode analysis. Mode 12 to 16 are illustrated. The structures colored
transparent indicate the DQMIN conformation while the opaque structures indicate DQMAX conformation. Color codes: blue:
regulatory domain (residue number 1 to 147), red: catalytic domain (residue number 148 to 459), and yellow: tetramerization
domain (residue number 460 to 490).
==PAGE:77==
8.3 Normal Mode Analysis - ElNemo
61
Table 8.2: Overview of the distance changes in the different normal modes. The analysis is based
on fluctuation maps from the NMA of N∆47-hTPH2 monomer.
Analysis of the fluctuation maps - normal modes 7 to 16
Normal
Mode
Observation
Fluctuation
map
7
Regulatory domain: Highly rigid.
Catalytic domain: Highly rigid.
Tetramerization domain: Highly flexible. The domain was ob-
served to increase the distance to the catalytic- and regulatory
domains, respectively.
Figure H.1
8
Regulatory domain: Highly rigid.
Catalytic domain: Highly rigid.
Tetramerization domain: Highly flexible. The domain was ob-
served to increase the distance to the catalytic- and regulatory
domains, respectively.
Figure H.2
9
Regulatory domain: Highly rigid. Flexibility was observed in few
residues.
Catalytic domain: Highly rigid.
Tetramerization domain: Highly flexible. The first part of the do-
main (approximately resid: 460-480) was observed to decrease
the distance to the catalytic- and regulatory domains, respec-
tively.
The remaining residues of the tetramerization domain
were observed to increase the distance.
Figure H.3
10
Regulatory domain: Distance to the catalytic domain was in-
creased.
No significant internal distance changes were ob-
served between the DQMIN and DQMAX conformations.
Catalytic domain: Distance to the regulatory domain was in-
creased. Otherwise, rigidity was observed.
Tetramerization domain: Highly flexible.
Figure H.4
11
Regulatory domain: Flexible. Internal distance changes were
observed.
Catalytic domain: Rigid.
Tetramerization domain: Flexible.
Figure H.5
12
Regulatory domain: Flexible.
Catalytic domain: Rigid.
Tetramerization domain: Flexible.
Figure H.6
13
Regulatory domain: Slightly flexible.
Catalytic domain: Highly rigid.
Tetramerization domain: Highly flexible.
Figure H.7
14
Regulatory domain: Flexible. Internal distance changes were
observed.
Catalytic domain: Highly rigid.
Tetramerization domain: Highly flexible.
Figure H.8
==PAGE:78==
62
8 Computational Results and Discussion
15
Regulatory domain: Highly rigid.
Catalytic domain: Highly rigid.
Tetramerization domain: Highly flexible.
Figure H.9
16
Regulatory domain: Flexible.
Catalytic domain: Flexible.
Tetramerization domain: Flexible.
Figure H.10
Overall, the NMA does not show domain motions of the regulatory domain in normal modes 7 to
16. According to table 8.2, internal distance changes of the regulatory domain were observed
in normal modes 11 and 14. The fluctuation maps of residues 49 to 149 are depicted for normal
mode 11 and 14 in figure 8.14.
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.14: Fluctuation maps of residues 49 to 149 in normal modes 11 (a) and 14 (b). The matri-
ces display the maximum distance fluctuations between all pairs of Cα atoms and
between the two extreme conformations (DQMIN and DQMAX). The strongest 10% of
distance changes between residues are colored blue (decrease) and red (increase).
White areas indicate structure rigidity. The green circles indicate flexibility in the hinge
region 2 (residues 149-150).
Figure 8.14 indicates that residues 49 to 65 were the most flexible part of the regulatory domain.
Mentioned residues appear in the N-terminal string. Furthermore, flexibility is presented in the
residue range 140 to 155, which contains predicted hinge region 2, see section 8.2.1. This results
give strong evidence of a hinge region in this area.
Normalized B-factors of the Cα atoms have been computed based on the first 100 normal modes
of the structure model, illustrated in figure 8.15. The B-factors were normalized with respect to the
==PAGE:79==
8.3 Normal Mode Analysis - ElNemo
63
highest B-factor value. Atoms with high B-factors belong to a flexible part of the structure, while
atoms with low B-factor belongs to a part of the structure that is well ordered.
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.15: (a) Normalized B-factors of Cα atoms in N∆47-hTPH2 monomer. The B-factors were
calculated in the normal mode analysis. The inserted numbers represent the residues
located in the peaks. (b) The structural locations of residues with high B-factors (86-
88, 100, 118, 134, and 150) are shown. Structural color codes are: blue: regulatory
domain, red: catalytic domain, and yellow: tetramerization domain.
==PAGE:80==
64
8 Computational Results and Discussion
In figure 8.15, significant B-factor peaks are indicated with residue numbers. Peaks consisting of
residue numbers higher than 150 are located in areas of the protein, which do not affect the
regulatory domain. According to the B-factors, residues 86 to 88 were the most flexible part of
the regulatory domain. Those residues are located in a loop at the end of an α-helix. Residue
100 was interesting due to the location close to the catalytic domain. Arg100 contains a posi-
tive charged side chain, that probably could interact with the negative charged Glu455. The
distance between the charged N2 atom of Arg100 and the Cδ atom of Glu455 is 4.20 Å accord-
ing to the homology model, see figure 8.18(b). Residue 110 and 134 are located in loops at the
regulatory domain, but does not seems to have any interaction to the catalytic domain. More
interesting is the peak at 150, which has been predicted to be the hinge region.
8.3.0.2
N∆47-hTPH2 Dimer
A dimeric form of the structure model has been investigated by low frequency normal mode
analysis, as well. As normal modes 7 to 15 were observed to be highly rigid, they are omitted in
the following analysis. Figure 8.16 illustrates the structural changes of normal modes 16 to 20. No
significant domain motion of the regulatory domains were observed, and no ACT domain dimer-
ization occurs. To gain more information about the flexibility of the protein, the fluctuation maps
were analyzed. The fluctuation maps are listed in appendix I, and table 8.3 shows an overview of
the analysis.
Table 8.3: Overview of the distance changes in the different normal modes. The analysis is based
on fluctuation maps from the NMA of N∆47-hTPH2 dimer.
Analysis of the fluctuation maps - normal modes 16 to 20
Normal
Mode
Observation
Fluctuation
map
16
Flexibility of chain A and rigidity of chain D. The regulatory do-
main of chain A has increases the distance to the regulatory
domain of chain D. Furthermore, the regulatory- and tetramer-
ization domains are more flexible than the catalytic domain of
chain A. A lot of flexibility occur in the hinge region (residue 149-
150).
Figure I.1
17
Chain D was observed to be flexible, while chain A was rigid.
The regulatory domain of chain D was observed to be highly
flexible, while the catalytic domain was rigid.
Figure I.2
18
Both chains have flexible regulatory domains and rigid catalytic
domains.
Figure I.3
19
Both chains have flexible regulatory domains and rigid catalytic
domains.
Figure I.4
20
Both chains have flexible regulatory domains and rigid catalytic
domains.
Figure I.5
==PAGE:81==
8.3 Normal Mode Analysis - ElNemo
65
Figure 8.16: The structure changes of TPH2 dimer, due to normal mode analysis. Mode 16 to 20 are illustrated. The structures colored trans-
parent indicate the DQMIN conformations while the opaque structures indicate DQMAX conformations. Color code: blue:
regulatory domain (residue number 48 to 147), red: catalytic domain (residue number 148 to 459), and yellow: tetramerization
domain (residue number 460 to 490).
==PAGE:82==
66
8 Computational Results and Discussion
Using normal mode analysis, flexibility of the regulatory domain was observed. Furthermore, flexi-
bility in the hinge region 2 occurred. No significant domain motion of the regulatory domain was
observed. Nevertheless, one should not concluded that ACT domain dimerization is not possible,
as highly flexibility in the regulatory domain was observed.
Figure 8.17 shows normalized B-factors of the TPH2 dimer structure model. Residues located in
a peak and in interesting areas of the structure are illustrated as 3D structure images. Residues
88-89 and 123 are located in loops of the ACT domain. Residue 146 is located in the same loop
as the predicted hinge region (residues 149-150). Ser347 is located approximately 6 Å from the
hinge region and is probable affected be the flexibility of the hinge region loop. Meisburger et
al. propose a hinge region in the tetramerization domain of PAH[7], where high B-factors of TPH2
were observed. No significant flexibility was observed for the hinge region 2.
To investigate whether TPH2 does not undergo the ACT domain dimerization, or the normal mode
analysis is not a sufficient tool to study the dimerization, a normal mode analysis has been per-
formed for PAH. As for TPH2, no low frequency normal mode analysis resulted in significant domain
motions of PAH. Flexibility occurs in the regulatory- and tetrameric domains of PAH in the majority
of the low frequency normal modes.
==PAGE:83==
8.3 Normal Mode Analysis - ElNemo
67
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.17: (a) Normalized B-factors of Cα atoms in N∆47-hTPH2 dimer. The B-factors were cal-
culated in the normal mode analysis. The inserted numbers represent the residues
located in the peaks. (b) The structural locations of residues with high B-factors (86-
88, 100, 118, 134, and 150) are shown. Structural color codes are: blue: regulatory
domain, red: catalytic domain, and yellow: tetramerization domain.
==PAGE:84==
68
8 Computational Results and Discussion
8.4
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
As for NMA, molecular dynamics simulations can be used to study protein dynamics. NMA is bet-
ter suited to study large structural rearrangements than MD simulations and much less demanding
in terms of CPU time.[82] In the other hand, MD simulations by Schrödinger suites offer more ad-
vanced settings, such as simulation time, pH-values, temperature values, and different force field
etc. Furthermore, MD simulations are affected by interactions between different atoms.
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.18: (a) Interaction between Arg100 and Glu455 residues in the structure model of N∆47-
rchTPH2 monomer. The catalytic domain is depicted in light grey and the regulatory
domain in dark grey. (b) Zoom-in: Arg100 and Glu455 are shown as sticks. The dis-
tance between the Arg100 N2 atom and the Glu455 Cδ atom is measured to be 4.20
Å.
Molecular dynamics simulations were used to investigate the protein dynamics around the hinge
region that are located between the catalytic- and regulatory domains. Investigation of hinge
region dynamics is challenging, when only the inactivated conformation has been available. As
mentioned in section 6.4, MD simulations are performed for monomeric-, dimeric- and tetrameric
structures of hTPH2 homology models. Likewise, MD simulations are performed for the monomeric
structure with a R100A mutation. The positive charged Arg100 residue is located in a distance of
4.20 Å to the negative charged Glu455 residue, according to the monomeric homology model
==PAGE:85==
8.4 Molecular Dynamics Simulations
69
of hTPH2, see figure 8.18. Glu455 is located in the catalytic domain and could probably affects
the location and dynamic of the regulatory domain by an Arg100-Glu455 interaction. The inter-
action are similar to the interaction found in PAH, see figures 8.7(c) and 8.8(c).
Figure 8.19: Evolution of RMSD in the wild type and the R100A mutation structure models of hTPH2.
The RMSD values was based on Cα atoms in the protein backbones.
The RMSD of Cα atoms has been measured over time to investigate the stabilization of the point
mutated monomeric structure of TPH2. Figure 8.19 indicates high flexibility in the full-length struc-
ture of the wild type structure model (7-8 Å), while the RMSD values of the R100A mutated structure
reaches a plateau at 3-4 Å. After truncation of the tetramerization domains, both structures reach
a plateau around 2-3 Å. The results show, that the tetramerization domain of both structures are
more flexible than the rest of the protein. Furthermore, the tetramerization domain of the wild type
protein is much more flexible than the tetramerization domain of the mutated structure. Another
conclusion could be, that other factors in the MD simulation caused the high flexibility of the wild
type tetramerization domain. This could be: no minimization of the residues in the tetrameriza-
tion domain or an unfavourable placement of the tetramerization domain in space at the start
of the MD simulation. At figure 8.20, the high flexibility of the tetramerization domain can be seen.
Figure 8.20 displays the structural different between the first and last frames in the MD simulation
of the wild type structure. No significant domain motions occur during the MD simulation. The
regulatory domain behaves more flexible compared to the catalytic domain. This result was ex-
==PAGE:86==
70
8 Computational Results and Discussion
pected, as literature have stated that the regulatory domain caused the instability of rchTPH2.[33]
Figure 8.20: Structural alignment of the first and last frames from the MD simulation of the wild
type structure. The first frame structure is coloured transparent, while the last frame
structure is coloured opaque. Color code: blue: regulatory domain, red: catalytic
domain, and yellow: tetrameric domain.
Structural activation can be quantitatively measured by distance determination between residues
100 and 455, as earlier stated. Figure 8.21 shows a graph of the mentioned distance as function
of the MD simulation time. The distances of the mutated structure are approximately 6-9 Å, while
the wild type structure has more constant distances around 4 Å. An ionic interaction between
residues 100 and 455 seems to occurs in the wild type structure. Though the interaction is elim-
inated in the mutated structure, no significant distance changes are observed. In comparison,
the distance between the interacting residues in PAH increases around 30 Å after L-Phe activa-
tion, see figure 8.8.
==PAGE:87==
8.4 Molecular Dynamics Simulations
71
Figure 8.21: Distance evolution between residues 100 and 455 in monomeric structure models of
TPH2 wild type (blue) and R100A-TPH2 (red).
Similar MD simulations was performed for a dimeric- and tetrameric structures of TPH2. No struc-
turally activation has been observed in neither of these simulations. In appendix J, structural
alignment of the first and last frames from MD simulation of the dimeric structure is shown.
==PAGE:88==
72
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER9
Overall Discussion - In
Silico and Future Work
As mentioned in section 3.1, rchTPH2 is found to be stabilized by L-Phe-induced dimerization. As
no such dimerization occurs after truncation of the regulatory domain,[40] the dimerization is
stated to take place between two regulatory domains. A three-dimensional structure of such
dimerization is known for the aromatic amino acis hydroxylase PAH (PDB-ID: 5FII) and forms a L-
Phe binding pocket between two ACT domains. The dimerization has not only shown stabilizing
effect but also regulatory effect in PAH, and a regulatory mechanism induced by L-Phe has been
suggested, see section 2.2.1.5.[7]
The aim of this computational part of the project was to investigate the possibility of TPH2 to un-
dergo the same regulatory mechanism as the one suggested for PAH. As the regulatory mecha-
nism requires large domain motions of the regulatory domains, one or more hinge regions must be
present in TPH2. As hinge predictor, the online tool HingeMaster was chosen. HingeMaster offers
hinge prediction when only one conformation is available. As the tool only accepts one chain
structures, the only calculation was performed at TPH2 as monomer. HingeMaster predicted dif-
ferent hinge regions by three different methods. At the end, it was chosen to look further at the
hinge region between the catalytic- and regulatory domains. Such hinge region has also been
predicted for PAH in a earlier study.[29] The hinge region was predicted by the TLSMD and FlexO-
racle method. The location of the hinge region seems realistic, as hinge regions tend to occur in
coils, turns, and loops. Furthermore, the hinge region consists of two hydrophilic residues: Glu149
and Asp150, which is preferable.
For future work, it could be interesting to investigate how point mutations of Glu149 and Asp150
affect the protein, either by in silico or in vitro studies. Using Schrödinger suites, the residues could
be mutated to more hydrophobic amino acids, followed by MD simulations. This would proba-
bly provides information about the changes in structure stability and protein dynamics. In vitro
studies of the mutated variant could provide information about protein solubility and stability. Fur-
thermore, the oligomeric states of the variant could be investigated.
To explore whether a hinge region was located between the catalytic- and regulatory domains
or not, normal mode analysis and MD simulations were used in this project. Furthermore, this
methods should indicates if the protein undergoes ACT domain dimerization. Using NMA and MD
==PAGE:90==
74
9 Overall Discussion - In Silico and Future Work
simulations, it was not possible to see any conformation changes around the hinge region that
lead to an ACT domain dimerization leading to a regulatory mechanism similar to the one for PAH.
This results indicate, that TPH2 does not undergo ACT domain dimerization caused by a domain
motion of the regulatory domain. Another conclusion could be that normal mode analysis and
MD simulations are not the optimal methods to test for such large domain motions.
The normal mode analysis was performed with a fixed amplitude minimum and maximum. The
amplitude was set as default settings (-100 and 100). Later on, normal mode analysis with ampli-
tude limits of -1000 and 1000 was performed. For high amplitude calculations, domain motions
were observed to occur in an increased level, but the protein was also observed to lose struc-
tural integrity. In future studies, normal mode calculations with different amplitudes should be
performed.
MD simulations were performed at 100 ns. The calculation time of 100 ns MD simulations varied
between two days and one week. Due to the time cost of calculations, no longer MD simulations
were performed. As future work, MD simulations of µs or ms could be calculated, as domain mo-
tions occur in this timescale.
According to the in silico methods, hTPH2 does not undergo ACT domain dimerization. In the other
hand, a previous study has shown that rchTPH2 was stabilized by L-Phe-induced dimerization.[33]
Either the NMA and MD simulations were not sufficient procedures for dimerization analysis, or the
conclusion could be that the tetramerization of TPH2 suppresses the ACT domains dimerization.
In the in vitro part of this project, the stabilizing effect of L-Phe was investigated for N∆47-hTPH2.
MD simulations have shown, that an ionic interaction between Arg100 and Glu455 occurs. These
amino acids are located in the regulatory- and catalytic domains, respectively. In this project,
it was found, that the interaction does not affected the domain motion significant. It could be
interesting to investigate, if other interaction does affect the domain motion.
Concerning the protein dynamics studies, it seems difficult to investigate hinge regions and do-
main motions when only one structure conformation is available. Different hinge predictors ca-
pable of analyze two conformations are available, and tend to make more precis predictions.
Availability of an activated conformation of hTPH2 would have made it possible to investigate
the behaviour of the hinge residues caused by conformation changes. As future work, a ho-
mology model of the activated structure should be built. Likewise, the homology model should
not be truncated in the N-terminus, as it could be interesting to investigate the location of the
N-terminus in the active- and inactive structure of hTPH2. Docking experiments of an activated
hTPH2 homology model with L-Phe followed by MD-simulations, would offer information about
L-Phe’s effect on the structure.
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER10
Experimental Results
and Discussion
This chapter covers the results of the experimental work. The goals of this part were to investigate
purification ability, stabilization, and dimerization ability of different hTPH2 variants. In the following,
the M1 mutant refers to TPH2 with the point mutations Lys76Ala, Lys98Pro, Val106Tyr, and Ile108Phe.
10.1
Investigation of N∆47-hTPH2 Variants
Using in silico methods, no significant ACT domain dimerization of N∆47-hTPH2 was observed. In
this part of the project, the capability of ACT domain dimerization for N∆47-hTPH2 was investi-
gated with in vitro methods. Either the results from the computational work should be verified or
rejected.
As L-Phe-induced dimerization should stabilizes the enzyme[33], the stability of different N∆47-
hTPH2 variants in present of L-Phe were investigated. Two variants of N∆47-hTPH2 (wild type and
M1 mutation) have been purified followed by stabilization analysis.
10.1.1
Purification - N∆47-hTPH2 Wild Type
The chromatograms for affinity chromatography and gel filtration of N∆47-hTPH2 wild type are
graphical illustrated in figures 10.1 and 10.2.
The first peak (FT) contained cell materials and proteins that did not bind the affinity column. The
collected peak (TP) appeared after MBP-3CP cleavage and contained the target protein which
was collected for gel filtration. The affinity column was introduced 5 column volume of L-Phe
purification buffer after the protease cleavage. Afterwards, L-Phe elution buffer was added to
the column and the third and last peak (E) was eluted. The contents of each peaks were analyzed
by SDS-PAGE, see figure 10.3.
==PAGE:92==
76
10 Experimental Results and Discussion
Figure 10.1: Chromatogram from affinity chromatography of MBP-N∆47-hTPH2, using L-Phe buffer
as the mobile phase. The blue line is the absorbance at 280 nm. The green dotted line
illustrates when the mobile phase was changed to elution buffer. The orange dotted
line illustrates the loading of MBP-3CP protease. The letters: FT, TP, and E indicates
peaks were samples for SDS-PAGE analysis were collected.
Approximately 38 mL of protein solution (FT) were collected during the affinity chromatography
and loaded on the Hiload 26/60 Superdex 200 column. The chromatogram of the gel filtration
is shown in figure 10.2. During the gel filtration, three peaks (G1, G2, and G3) were collected for
SDS-PAGE analysis. As illustrated in figure 10.3, G2 and G3 contained N∆47-hTPH2. The elution
volume at peak G2 and G3 (center of peaks at 145 mL and 172 mL, respectively) indicated that
N∆47-hTPH2 eluted as a octamer (G2) and a tetramer (G3). Void volume caused the G1 peak.
For further experiments, approximately 10 mL 8.2 µM G3 were collected.
==PAGE:93==
10.1 Investigation of N∆47-hTPH2 Variants
77
Figure 10.2: Chromatogram of the gel filtration on a Hiload 26/60 Superdex 200 column off the
collected sample (FT) from affinity chromatography of N∆47-hTPH2 wild type. L-Phe
buffer was used as purification buffer. The blue line is the absorption at 280 nm. G1,
G2, and G3 were collected and subjected to SDS-PAGE analysis.
Figure 10.3: SDS-PAGE results of collected peaks from purification of N∆47-hTPH2 wild type. The
used abbreviations are described in table 7.3.
==PAGE:94==
78
10 Experimental Results and Discussion
10.1.2
Purification - N∆47-hTPH2 M1 Mutant
The N∆47-hTPH2 M1 mutant has been purified using the same procedure as for the wild type pro-
tein, see section 10.1.1. The chromatograms of the affinity chromatography and the gel filtration
are shown in figures 10.4 and 10.5.
Figure 10.4: Chromatogram from affinity chromatography of N∆47-hTPH2 M1 mutant, using L-Phe
buffers as the mobile phase. The blue line is the absorption at 280 nm. The green
dotted line illustrates when the mobile phase was changed to elution buffer. The
orange dotted line illustrates the loading of MBP-3CP protease. The letters: FT, TP, and
E indicate peaks were samples for SDS-PAGE analysis were collected.
The peak (TP) was collected for further gel filtration. The affinity chromatogram indicated that the
absorption of the M1 mutant was lower compared to the wild type protein. The rather small peak
indicated that the M1 mutant was either poorly soluble, unstable or poorly expressed in the E. coli
cells. Furthermore, the results of SDS-PAGE indicated that the collected peak contained amounts
of MBP-3CP, see figure 10.6. According to the SDS-PAGE results, the MBP-3CP was separated from
the target protein during the gel filtration. As for affinity chromatography, low absorption of the
collected peaks was observed for gel filtration. The final yield of the protein was approximately 4
mL with a concentration of 7.8 µM.
==PAGE:95==
10.1 Investigation of N∆47-hTPH2 Variants
79
Figure 10.5: Chromatogram of the gel filtration on a Hiload 26/60 Superdex 200 column of the
collected sample (FT) from affinity chromatography of the N∆47-hTPH2 M1 mutant.
L-Phe buffer was used ad purification buffer. The blue line is the absorption at 280 nm.
G1 and G2 were collected and subjected to SDS-PAGE analysis.
Figure 10.6: SDS-PAGE results of collected peaks from purification of N∆47-hTPH2 M1 mutant. The
used abbreviations are described in table 7.3.
==PAGE:96==
80
10 Experimental Results and Discussion
10.1.3
Stability Measured by Activity Assay
Previous experiments have shown, that L-Phe has a stabilizing effect on the regulatory domain
of the wild type enzyme. Using a thermal inactivation assay, it was investigated if L-Phe had the
same effect on the M1 mutation. At first, the wild type protein was incubated at 20 °C, to inves-
tigate if this temperature affected the stabilization. The activity data can be seen in table 10.1,
and a graphical illustration in figure 10.7. Three measurements were performed for each incuba-
tion times to ensure accuracy.
Table 10.1: Activity data of N∆47-hTPH2 left at 20 °C with L-Phe in the purification buffer.
Activity assay - N∆47-hTPH2
Incubation
time at 20 °C
[min]
Exp.
1
[a.u./min]
Exp.
2
[a.u./min]
Exp.
3
[a.u./min]
Average activ-
ity [a.u./min]
Standard devi-
ation
0
2.5846
2.7032
2.6372
2.6
0.06
60
2.0674
2.7052
1.9854
2.3
0.4
90
2.9452
2.4879
2.6743
2.7
0.3
120
2.1056
2.1745
2.7936
2.4
0.4
Figure 10.7: Activity data of N∆47-hTPH2 left at 20 °C with L-Phe in the purification buffer. The
points were observed to lying on a straight line with a slope close to zero.
Figure 10.7 illustrates that the points were almost linear, with a slope close to zero. This results in-
dicated that the protein was fairly stable at 20 °C. As the thermal incubation experiments did
==PAGE:97==
10.1 Investigation of N∆47-hTPH2 Variants
81
not show any clear inactivation, the experiments were repeated at 30 °C for both N∆47-hTPH2
variants, illustrated in table 10.2 and figure 10.8.
Table 10.2: Activity data of the N∆47-hTPH2 variants left at 30 °C with L-Phe in the purification
buffer.
Activity assay - N∆47hTPH2
Incubation
time at 30 °C
[min]
Exp.
1
[a.u./min]
Exp.
2
[a.u./min]
Exp.
3
[a.u./min]
Average activ-
ity [a.u./min]
Standard devi-
ation
Wild type
0
2.3518
2.7044
1.7372
2.3
0.5
60
0.7697
0.6306
0.6246
0.7
0.08
90
0.3366
0.3878
0.2978
0.3
0.2
120
0.1181
0.4953
0.2012
0.3
0.2
Mutation
0
5.4847
5.8285
7.7637
6.4
1.2
60
3.0999
1.976
3.6525
2.9
0.9
90
0.1126
0.0449
0.0721
0.08
0.03
120
0.0032
0.0016
0.0086
0.005
0.004
Figure 10.8: Activity data of the N∆47-hTPH2 variants left at 30 °C with L-Phe in the purification
buffer. The points are connected by linear trend lines.
Figure 10.8 illustrates the thermal inactivation of the wild type- and M1 mutated protein. As some
==PAGE:98==
82
10 Experimental Results and Discussion
uncertainties of the start concentrations can occur, no conclusion about the internal activity will
be made. The interesting part of this experiment is the slope of the protein activity. Linear regres-
sions have shown a slope of -0.057 a.u/min2 (M1 mutant) and -0.0173 a.u/min2 (wild type). This
results indicated higher stability of the wild type protein.
As the wild type protein has a higher stability compared with the M1 mutation, it can be con-
cluded that the point mutations affected the stability of the enzyme. Different reasons can be
discussed. First, the point mutations could have resulted in a more unstable structure of the reg-
ulatory domain, leading to a less stable protein. Second, the point mutations have affected the
binding pocket of L-Phe, and no L-Phe-induced dimerization could take place. If the second
reason can be verified, it can be concluded that TPH2 contains a binding pocket for L-Phe in a
dimeric structure of ACT domains. To test the hypothesis, further experiments have been made
as discussed below.
10.2
Investigation of N∆47-rchTPH2 Variants
The dimerization properties of N∆47-rchTPH2 have been investigated by SEC experiments. As
oligomrarization only should be caused by the regulatory domains in this experiments, the tetramer-
ization domain was truncated. The stabilizing effect of L-Phe has been investigated, also.
10.2.1
Purification - N∆47-rchTPH2 Wild Type
As the stabilizing effect of L-Phe was investigated, the protein was purified without L-Phe added to
the purification buffer. Otherwise the purification procedure was the same as the previous one. In
figures 10.9 and 10.10 the chromatograms of affinity chromatography and gel filtration are shown.
Compared with the affinity chromatograms in figure 10.1 and figure 10.4, the absorption of the
N∆47-rchTPH2 wild type reached a higher value in the TP peak. The same trend was observed
for gel filtration, see figure 10.10. The protein was collected at an elution volume of approximately
195 mL during gel filtration. Using SDS-PAGE analysis, the contents of the fractions were analyzed,
see figure 10.11. The final protein yield was measured to be 15 mL of 17.8 µM N∆47-rchTPH2.
==PAGE:99==
10.2 Investigation of N∆47-rchTPH2 Variants
83
Figure 10.9: Chromatogram from affinity chromatography of N∆47-rchTPH2 wild type without L-
Phe in the purification buffers.
Figure 10.10: Chromatogram of the gel filtration of the N∆47-rchTPH2 wild type. No L-Phe was
added to the purification buffer. The enzyme was collected from peak G.
==PAGE:100==
84
10 Experimental Results and Discussion
Figure 10.11: SDS-PAGE results of N∆47-rchTPH2 wild type, without L-Phe in the purification buffers.
10.2.2
Purification - N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 Mutant
Purification of the N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 mutant was more challenging. Purification with the same
amount of cells as the standard procedure did not provide sufficient protein yield. The chro-
matogram of the purification with standard amount of cells, is shown in appendix K. A second
attempt of purification was performed with two times the cell amount, which resulted in a suffi-
cient protein yield of 10 mL 6.3 µL. Figures 10.12 and 10.13 illustrate lower absorption in the TP and
G peaks. Using SDS-PAGE analysis, the contents of the elution peaks were analyzed, and it was
concluded that the TP and G peaks contained the N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 mutant, see figure 10.14.
==PAGE:101==
10.2 Investigation of N∆47-rchTPH2 Variants
85
Figure 10.12: Chromatogram from affinity chromatography of N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 mutant without
L-Phe in the purification buffers.
Figure 10.13: Chromatogram of the gel filtration of the N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 mutant. No L-Phe was
added to the purification buffer. The enzyme was collected from peak G.
==PAGE:102==
86
10 Experimental Results and Discussion
Figure 10.14: SDS-PAGE results of N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 mutant, without L-Phe in the purification
buffers.
10.2.3
Stability Measured by Activity Assay
The fact that the wild type protein had a higher purification yield indicated that the M1 mutant
was less soluble, more unstable, or poorly expressed in the E. coli cells. A thermal inactivation
assay was performed to compare the L-Phe stabilization of the wild type and M1 mutant. The
activity data are shown in table 10.3 and figure 10.15.
In figure 10.15, the activity data are shown. The linear regressions can be seen in table 10.4, as the
slope of the plots were used to analyze the stability of the proteins. The results show that the slope
of the wild type protein without L-Phe was approximately 2.3 times the slope of the experiment
with L-Phe. This indicated that L-Phe had a stabilizing effect on the N∆47-rchTPH2. These results
were in conforming with the study of Tidemand, et. al.[33], see section 3.1.
Looking at the M1 mutant, no stabilization was observed in present of L-Phe. The slope of the
experiments with no L-Phe was observed to be more negative than the slope where L-Phe was
added. The different between the two slopes was not significant. According to this experiments,
L-Phe does stabilize the wild type protein, but not the M1 mutant. This results indicate, that the
point mutations have affected the L-Phe-induced dimerization leading to stabilization.
As mentioned, it was challenging to purified the N∆47-rchTPH2 M1 mutant. This experiment has
indicate that the mutant is pretty unstable, which can explain the poorly purification yield.
==PAGE:103==
10.2 Investigation of N∆47-rchTPH2 Variants
87
Table 10.3: Activity data of the N∆47-rchTPH2 variants left at 30 °C with and without L-Phe in the
activity buffer.
Activity assay - N∆47-rchTPH2
Incubation
time at 30 °C
[min]
Exp.
1
[a.u./min]
Exp.
2
[a.u./min]
Exp.
3
[a.u./min]
Average activ-
ity [a.u./min]
Standard devi-
ation
Wild type - no L-Phe
0
30.464
23.592
32.462
29.01
5.1
60
23.543
22.981
19.540
21.5
1.9
90
17.649
19.672
14.247
17.2
2.4
120
15.401
12.985
17.197
15.1
2.8
Wild type - L-Phe
0
20.1258
23.3023
19.7601
21.0
2.2
60
20.9683
21.1037
17.6712
20.0
2.2
90
17.7602
17.5612
19.9805
17.3
2.2
120
12.3986
15.9328
15.5935
14.7
1.6
Mutation - no L-Phe
0
25.783
27.375
21.359
25.0
1.2
60
15.451
17.446
14.333
15.8
2.8
90
7.0947
4.9646
6.5406
6.2
1.5
120
1.3234
1.8952
0.4879
1.2
0.7
Mutation - L-Phe
0
10.493
15.5723
15.502
13.8
2.9
60
0.0348
0.0023
0.4452
0.2
0.2
90
0.0008
0.0012
0.0004
0.0008
0.0004
120
-
-
-
-
-
==PAGE:104==
88
10 Experimental Results and Discussion
Figure 10.15: Activity data of the N∆47-rchTPH2 variants left at 30 °C with and without L-Phe buffer.
Table 10.4: Linear regression of activity data from table 10.3 and figure 10.15.
Linear regression of activity data
Variant
Linear regression
Wild type - no L-Phe
-0.12x + 28.8
Wild type - L-Phe
-0.0515x + 21.7
Mutation - no L-Phe
-0.203x + 25.8
Mutation - L-Phe
-0.228x + 13.9
==PAGE:105==
10.2 Investigation of N∆47-rchTPH2 Variants
89
10.2.4
Analytical Gel Filtration
Analytical gel filtration has been performed for investigation of the oligomeric states of the N∆47-
rchTPH2 variants. Two different buffers were used for analytical gel filtration: one without L-Phe
and one with 3 mM L-Phe added. The results of the SEC experiments are presented in figure 10.16.
L-Phe buffer experiments are presented with dark lines, while the experiments with standard buffer
are indicated with light lines. The N∆47-rchTPH2 wild type is presented as green, and the N∆47-
rchTPH2 M1 mutant as blue.
The experiments were performed for three different protein concentrations: figure 10.16(a) - 3 µM,
figure 10.16(b) - 6 µM, and figure 10.16(c) - 10 µM. For all protein concentrations, the intensities
of the peaks were observed to be more dominant for the wild type structure, which indicated
that the M1 mutant probably was degraded in a higher level during the experiment. For both
protein variants, a monomer:dimer equilibrium occur. For the wild type variant, a concentration-
depending monomer:dimer equilibrium was observed, as higher protein concentrations resulted
in an increased amounts of dimers. No such concentration-depending monomer:dimer equilib-
rium was observed for the M1 mutant, where only small amounts of dimers occur. As illustrated in
appendix L, an elution volume of ≃15 mL corresponds to the molecular weight of a monomer
(47.4 kDA) and 13 mL corresponds to a dimer (94.8 kDa).
Furthermore, a shift in the equilibrium towards the dimeric structure was observed for the wild type
protein, when L-Phe was added. For the M1 mutant, L-Phe-induced dimerization was observed
when the protein concentration was 3 µM. At higher protein concentration, no L-Phe-induced
dimerization occurred. At protein concentration of 3 µM, no dimerization effect of L-Phe was ob-
served for the wild type protein. According to Tidemand, L-Phe-induced dimerization of the wild
type protein should occur even at low protein concentration.[33] The results of these experiments
probably show that the monomer:dimer equilibrium was not reached before the analytical gel
filtration was started.
The results of the analytical gel filtration experiment indicate, that the point mutations affected
the L-Phe-induced dimerization at higher protein concentrations. According to this result, the
point mutations suppress the L-Phe binding, that now can be concluded to take places in a bind-
ing pocket between two ACT domains. Docking experiments performed by Vedel have shown,
that the point mutations should offer more binding affinity of L-Phe in the allosterical site.[42] This
hypothesis is rejected by the SEC experiment.
==PAGE:106==
90
10 Experimental Results and Discussion
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 10.16: Size exclusion chromatography of N∆47-rchTPH2 wild type (green) and N∆47-
rchTPH2 M1 mutant (blue) without L-Phe (light lines) and with L-Phe (dark lines). The
protein concentrations are (a) 3 µM, (b) 6 µM, and (c) 10 µM. The arrows indicate
the elution volume of (from left to right) a tetrameric-, a dimeric-, and a monomeric
structure of N∆47-rchTPH2, respectively.
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER11
Overall Discussion - In
Vitro and Future Work
Different variants of N∆47-hTPH2 were purified: the wild type protein and the M1 mutant, both
with and without truncation of the tetramerization domain. In both cases, the wild type protein
was purified with a higher purification yield than the M1 mutants. The low purification yield of the
M1 mutant indicated that the protein was either poorly soluble, unstable or poorly expressed in
the E. coli cells. Furthermore, it was observed that the truncated variant of the M1 mutant resulted
in a much lower purification yield than the non-truncated variant. Two times the cell amount of
the standard procedure were needed for obtaining satisfying purification yield. According to this
results, it seems that the tetramerization domain stabilizes the protein. Another explanation of the
low purification yield could be, that the point mutations affected the MBP-tag structure, resulting
in a decreased affinity of the dextrin material during the affinity chromatography.
Analytical gel filtration was performed to investigate the oligomeric states of the N∆47-rchTPH2
variants. The results indicated that the N∆47-hTPH2 wild type exists in a monomer:dimer equi-
librium. The equilibrium was observed to be concentration-depending, as higher protein con-
centrations shift the equilibrium towards the dimeric structure. Furthermore, the same trend was
observed when L-Phe was added, indicating that L-Phe induces dimerization. For the M1 variant,
the majority of the protein was observed as monomeric structure. The concentration-depending
eqiulibrium is observed in a much lower level compared to the N∆47-rchTPH2 wild type variant.
Furthermore, the L-Phe induced-dimerization was suppressed compared with the wild type struc-
ture. In silico methods from another DTU project[42] has indicated, that the M1 mutant should
offers higher affinity for L-Phe in the allosteric site. This hypothesis can be rejected according to
the SEC experiment results obtained in this study. On the other hand, it can be concluded that
L-Phe-induced dimerization takes place in the truncated wild type structure with a L-Phe binding
pocket between two ACT domains.
An activity assay was performed, to obtain information about the stability of each N∆47-hTPH2
variant. For the variants without the tetramerization domain, the stabilizing effect of L-Phe was
investigated. It was observed that L-Phe has a stabilizing effect on the wild type structure, but no
significant stabilization occurred for the M1 mutant. These results indicate, that the L-Phe-induced
dimerization and the L-Phe stabilizing effect probably are associated.
==PAGE:108==
92
11 Overall Discussion - In Vitro and Future Work
In this project, four point mutations were introduced to the protein. In future work, the point mu-
tations could be tested in four different protein structures, as four point mutations affected the
structure negatively.
According to the in silico methods, no ACT domain dimerization should occur when the protein ex-
ists as a tetramer stabilized by the tetramerization domain. This results were tested by experimental
work performing an activity assay. To ensure the best purification conditions for the N∆47-hTPH2
variants, the purifications were performed with L-Phe buffers, as no data of the M1 mutant’s purifi-
cation abilities were known at this point of the project. The activity assay indicated, that the wild
type structure in L-Phe buffer tends to be stabilized in a higher level than the M1 mutant. These
results could indicate, that the L-Phe buffer has a stabilizing effect on the wild type structure, and
only a minor effect on the M1 mutant. The L-Phe stabilizing effect was concluded to be associ-
ated with ACT domain dimerization. As the M1 mutant was observed to be more unstable during
this project, further experiments are needed to conclude that the wild type was stabilized by the
L-Phe buffer. In the future, N∆47-rchTPH2 should be purified using buffers without L-Phe added,
and the stability of this protein should be investigated.
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER12
Conclusion
During this project, the L-Phe-induced dimerization of TPH2 ACT domains has been investigated
through in silico- and in vitro methods. By computational hinge prediction, a hinge region (Glu149-
Asp150) between the catalytic- and regulatory domains of TPH2 was found. As the hinge region
consisted of hydrophilic residues located in a loop region in a flexible area of the protein, the
hinge prediction was concluded to be correct. Performing normal mode analysis, flexibility in the
regulatory domain and the hinge region were observed. No significant domain motions caused
by the hinge region were observed by NMA. Likewise, MD simulations did not offers information
about the domain motions.
It has been concluded, that normal mode analysis with a fixed amplitude and MD simulations of
100 ns were not sufficient to analyze domain motions in TPH2.
Purification of the N∆47-rchTPH2 and N∆47-hTPH2 showed higher purification yields than purifi-
cation of the complimentary M1 mutants. Thermal inactivation assays indicated, that the low
purification of the M1 mutants was caused by the low stability of the protein. By thermal inactiva-
tion, the stabilizing effect of L-Phe was investigated, as well. It was observed that L-Phe stabilized
the M1 mutants in a much lower level than the wild type proteins. To investigate the oligimeriza-
tion states of the M1 mutant analytical gel filtration was performed.
Analytical gel filtration showed a concentration depending monomer:dimer equilibrium for N∆47-
rchTPH2, where high protein concentration shifted the equilibrium towards the dimeric structure.
Same equilibrium shift was observed when L-Phe was added, indicating that L-Phe induced the
dimerization. L-Phe-induced dimerization of the M1 mutants was observed in a much lower level
than the wild type variant, which indicated that the point mutations in the L-Phe binding pocket
have suppress the affinity of L-Phe. During this project, it could be concluded that TPH2 protein
that undergoes L-Phe-induced dimerization was more stable than TPH2 protein with low affinity
for L-Phe binding in the allosteric site.
A previous docking study has indicated high that affinity of L-Phe binding in the allosteric site of the
TPH2 M1 mutant. During this project, it could be concluded that the TPH2 M1 mutant suppresses
the L-Phe binding. The point mutations: Lys76Ala, Lys98Pro, Val106Tyr, and Ile108Phe cause a more
unstable protein and suppress the dimerization effect of L-Phe.
==PAGE:110==
94
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[1]
Karen L. Murphy, Xiaodong Zhang, Raul R. Gainetdinov, Jean Martin Beaulieu, and Marc
G. Caron. “A Regulatory Domain in The N Terminus of Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2 Controls
Enzyme Expression”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 283 (2008), pages 13216–13224.
[2]
Ingeborg Winge, Jeffrey A. Mckinney, Ming Ying, Clive S. D’Santos, Rune Kleppe, Per M.
Knappskog, and Jan Haavik. “Activation and Stabilization of Human Tryptophan Hydroxy-
lase 2 by Phosphorylation and 14-3-3 Binding”. In: Biochem. J. 410 (2008), pages 195–204.
[3]
Ana C. Calvo, Tanja Scherer, Angel L. Pey, Ming Ying, Ingeborg Winge, Jeffrey McKinney,
Jan Haavik, Beat Thöny, and Aurora Martinez. “Effect of Pharmacological Chaperones on
Brain Turosine Hydroxylase and Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2”. In: Journal of Neurochemistry
114 (2010), pages 853–863.
[4]
Sundhedsstyrelsen. url: http://www.sst.dk.
[5]
Paul F. Fitzpatrick. “Mechanism of Aromatic Amino Acid Hydroxylation”. In: Biochemistry 42
(2003), pages 14083–14091.
[6]
Emilia C. Arturo, Kushol Gupta, Annie Héroux, Linda Stith, Penelope J. Cross, Emily J. Parker,
Patrick J. Loll, and Eileen K. Jaffe. “First Structure of Full-length Mammalian Phenylalanine
Hydroxylase Reveals the Architecture of an Autoinhibited Tetramer”. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 113 (2016), pages 2394–2399.
[7]
Steve P. Meisburger, Alexander B. Taylor, Crystal A. Khan, Shengnan Zhang, Paul F. Fitz-
patrick, and Nozomi Ando. “Domain Movements upon Activation of Phenylalanine Hydrox-
ylase Characterized by Crystallography and Chromatography-Coupled Small-Angle X-ray
Scattering”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 138 (2016), pages 6506–6516.
[8]
Hiroyuki Hasegawa and Kazuhiro Nakamura. “Tryptophan Hydroxylase and Serotonin Syn-
thesis Regulation”. In: Handbook of Behavioral Neuroscience 10 (2010), pages 183–202.
[9]
Nurgul Carkaci-Salli, John M. Flanagan, Matthew K. Martz, Ugur Salli, Diego J. Walther,
Micheal Bader, and Kent E. Vrana. “Functional Domains of Human Tryptophan Hydroxy-
lase 2 (hTPH2)”. In: The Journal of Biological Chemistry 281 (2006), pages 28105–28112.
[10]
Efrain C. Azmitia. “Evolution of Serotonin: Sunligth to Suicide”. In: Handbook of the behav-
ioral neurobiology of serotonin 1 (2010), pages 3–22.
[11]
Boris B. Quednow, Mark A. Geyer, and Adam L. Halberstadt. “Serotonin and Schizophrenia”.
In: Handbook of the behavioral neurobiology of serotonin 1 (2010), pages 585–620.
==PAGE:112==
96
Bibliography
[12]
Christine F. Hohmann and Mary E. Blue. “The Role of Serotonin in Cortical Development:
Implications for Autism Spectrum Disorder”. In: Handbook of the behavioral neurobiology
of serotonin 1 (2010), pages 637–665.
[13]
Diego J. Walther and Michael Bader. “An Unique Central Tryptophan Hydroxylase Isoform”.
In: Biochemical Pharmacology 66 (2003), pages 1673–1680.
[14]
Syun Hosoda and David Glick. “Biosynthesis of 5-hydroxytryptophan and 5-hydroxytryptamine
from Tryptophan by Neoplastic Mouse Mast Cells”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 3
(1965), pages 67–78.
[15]
David Grahame-Smith. “The Biosynthesis of 5-hydroxytryptamine in Brain”. In: Biochimical
journal 1 (1967), pages 351–360.
[16]
Francine Côté, Etienne Thévenot, Cécile Fligny, Yves Fromes, Michéle Darmon, Marie-Anne
Ripoche, Elisa Bayard, Naima Hanoun, Francoise Saurini, Philippe Lechat, Luisa Dandolo,
Michel Hamon, Jacques Mallet, and Guilan Vodjdani. “Disruption of the Nonneuronal TPH1
Gene Demonstrates the Importance of Peripheral Serotonin in Cardiac Function”. In: Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 100 (2003), pages 13525–13530.
[17]
Hernan E. Grenett, Fred D. Ledley, Lori L. Reed, and Savio L. C. Woo. “Full-length cDNA
for Rabbit Tryptophan Hydroxylase: Functional Domains and Evolution of Aromatic Amino
Acid Hydroxylase”. In: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 84 (1987), pages 5530–5534.
[18]
Michéle C. Darmon, Bernard Guibert, Vincent Leviel, Mireille Ehret, Michel Maitre, and
Jacques Mallet. “Sequence of two mRNAS Encoding Active Rat Tryptophan Hydroxylase”.
In: Journal of Neurochemistry 51 (1988), pages 312–316.
[19]
uniprot. url: www.uniprot.org/.
[20]
Mitchell A. Lazar, Ivan N. Mefford, and Jack D. Barchas. “Tyrosine Hydroxylase Activation”.
In: Biochemical Pharmacology 31 (1982), pages 2599–2607.
[21]
2XSN. url: https://www.rcsb.org/pdb/explore/explore.do?structureId=
2XSN.
[22]
L. M. Bloom and S. J. Benkovic. “Characterization of Phenylalanine Hydroxylase”. In: Bio-
chemistry 25 (1986), pages 4204–4210.
[23]
Xuan Liu and Kent E. Vrana. “Leucine Zippers and Coiled-Coils in the Aromatic Amino Acid
Hydroxylases”. In: Neurochem Int 18 (1991), pages 27–31.
[24]
L. Wang, J. Erlandsen, Haavik P. Knappskog, and R. C. Stevens. “Three-Dimensional Struc-
ture of Human Tryptophan Hydroxylase and its Implications for the Biosynthesis of the Neu-
rotransmitters Serotonine and Melatonin”. In: Biochemistry 41 (2002), pages 12569–12574.
[25]
M. S. Windahl, C. R. Petersen, H. E. M Christensen, and P. Harris. “Crystal Structure of Trypto-
phan Hydroxylase with Bound Amino Acid Substrate”. In: Biochemistry 47 (2008), pages 12087–
12094.
[26]
David M. Chipman and Boaz Shaanan. “The ACT Domain Family”. In: Current Opinion in
Structural Biology 11 (2001), pages 694–700.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
97
[27]
A. S. Liberles, M. Thórólfsson, and A. Martínez. “Allosteric Mechanisms in ACT Domain Con-
taining Enzymes Involved in Amino Acid Metabolism”. In: Amino Acids 28 (2005), pages 1–
12.
[28]
Karen L. Murphy, Xiaodong Zhang, Raul R. Gainetdinov, Jean-Martin Beaulieu, and Marc
G. Caron. “A Regulatory Domain in the N Terminus of Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2 Controls
Enzyme Expression ”. In: The Journal of Biological Chemistry 283 (2007), pages 13216–13224.
[29]
Eileen K. Jaffe, Linda Stith, Sarah H. Lawrence, Mark Andrake, and Roland L. Dunbrack. “A
New Model for Allosteric Regulation of Phenylalanine Hydroxylase: Implications for Disease
and Therapeutics”. In: Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics (2013), pages 73–82.
[30]
Colette S. Daubner, Tiffany Le, and Shanzhi Wang. “Tyrosine Hydroxylase and Regulation of
Dopamine Synthesis”. In: Arch Biochem Biophys 508 (2011), pages 1–12.
[31]
Aurora Martinez, Per M. Knappskog, and Jan Haavik. “A Structural Approach into Human
Tryptophan Hydroxylase and its Implications for the Regulatory of Serotonin Biosynthesis”.
In: Current Medicinal Chemistry 8 (2001), pages 1077–1091.
[32]
Paul F. Fitzpatrick. “The Aromatic Amino Acid Hydroxylases”. In: Adv in Enzymology and
Related Areas of Molecular Biology 74 (2000), pages 235–294.
[33]
Kasper D. Tidemand, Hans E.M. Christensen, Niclas Hoeck, Pernille Harris, Jane Boesen, and
Günther H. Peters. “Stabilization of Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2 by l-phenylalanine-induced
Dimerization”. In: FEBS Open Bio 6 (2016), pages 987–999.
[34]
Eileen K. Jaffe, Linda Stith, Sarah H. Lawrence, Mark Andrake, and Dunbrack Jr. L. Roland. “A
New Model for Allosteric Regulation of Phenylalanine Hydroxylase: Implications for Disease
and Therapeutics”. In: Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 530 (2012), pages 73–83.
[35]
Marte I. Flydal and Aurora Martinez. “Phenylalanine Hydroxylase: Function, Structure, and
Regulation”. In: IUBMB Life 65 (2013), pages 431–349.
[36]
Regina Al-Rabiee, Edward J. Lee, and Gregory A. Grant. “The Mechanisme of Velocity
Modulated Allosteric Regulation in D-3-Phosphoglycerate Dehydrogenase”. In: Journal of
Biological Chemistry 271 (1996), pages 13013–13017.
[37]
Michael S. Nielsen, Charlotte R. Petersen, Astrid Munch, Trine V. Vendelboe, Jane Boesen,
Pernille Harris, and Hans E.M. Christensen. “A Simple Two Step Procedure for Purification of
the Catalytic Domain of Chicken Tryptophan Hydroxylase 1 in a Form Suitable for Crystal-
lization”. In: Protein Expression and Purification 57 (2008), pages 116–126.
[38]
Michael S. Windahl, Jane Boesen, Pernille Harris, and Hans E.M. Christensen. “Expression, Pu-
rification and Enzymatic Characterization of the Catalytic Domains of Human Tryptophan
Hydroxylase Isoforms”. In: Protein Expression and Purification 28 (2009), pages 400–406.
[39]
Micheal S. Windahl. “Expression, Purification and Characterisation of Tryptophan Hydroxy-
lases”. In: Technical University of Denmark (2007).
[40]
Lærke T. Haahr. “Purification and Characterization of Tryptophan Hydroxylase”. In: Techni-
cal University of Denmark (2012).
==PAGE:114==
98
Bibliography
[41]
Kasper D. Tidemand and Niclas Hoeck. “Characterization and Stabilization of Human Tryp-
tophan Hydroxylase by Rational Protein Engineering”. In: Technical University of Denmark
(2014).
[42]
Ida M. Vedel. “Optimization of The ACT Domain in Tryptophan Hydroxylase”. In: Technical
University of Denmark (2017).
[43]
Melissa R. Pitman and Ian R. Menz. “Methods for Protein Homology Modelling” in ”Applied
Mycology and Biotechnology”. Elsevier, 2006.
[44]
Prime Software. url: http://www.schrodinger.com/Prime.
[45]
NCBI Blast. url: https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi.
[46]
Clustal Omega. url: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalo/.
[47]
spdb viewer. url: https://spdbv.vital-it.ch/.
[48]
Samuel C. Flores, Kevin S. Keating, Jay Painter, Faruck Morcos, Khang Nguyen, Ethan A.
Merritt, Leslie A. Kuhn, and Mark B. Gerstein. “HingeMaster: Normal Mode Hinge Prediction
Approach and Integration of Complementary Predictors”. In: Proteins 73 (2008), pages 299–
319.
[49]
Kevin S. Kaeting, Samuel C. Flores, Mark B. Gerstein, and Leslie A. Kuhn. “StoneHinge: Hinge
Prediction by Network Analysis of Individual Protein Structures”. In: Protein Sceince 18 (2009),
pages 359–371.
[50]
molmovdb. url: molmovdb.org.
[51]
HingeMaster. url: http://molmovdb.org/cgi-bin/submit-flexoracle.cgi.
[52]
Simone Fulle and Holger Gohlke. “Flexibility Analysis of Biomacromolecules with Application
to Computer-Aided Drug Design”. In: Computational Drug Discovery and Design 819 (2011),
pages 75–91.
[53]
Samuel C. Flores and Mark B. Gerstein. “FlexOracle: Predicting Flexible Hinges by Identifica-
tion of Stable Domains”. In: BMC Bioinformatics 8 (2007), pages 215–232.
[54]
Karsten Suhre and Yves-Henri Sanejouand. “ElNemo: a Normal Mode Web Server for Pro-
tein Movement Analysis and the Generation of Templates for Molecular Replacement”. In:
Nucleic Acids Research 32 (2004), pages 610–614.
[55]
Ivet Bahar, Timothy R. Lezon, Ahmet Bakan, and INdira H. Shrivastava. “Normal Mode Anal-
ysis of Biomolecular Structures: Functional Mechanisms of Membrane Proteins”. In: Chem
Rev 110 (2010), pages 1463–1497.
[56]
Liliane Mouawad and David Perahia. “Diagonalization in a Mixed Basis: A Method to Com-
pute Low-Frequency Normal Modes for Large Macromolecules”. In: Biopolymers 33 (1993),
pages 599–611.
[57]
Florance Tama, Florent X. Gadea, Osni Marques, and Yves-Henri Sanejound. “Building-Block
Approach for Determining Low-Frequency Normal Modes of Macromolecules”. In: Protein
- Structure, Function, Bioinformatic 41 (2000), pages 1–7.
[58]
Micheal P. Allen. “Introduction to Molecular Dynamics Simulation”. In: NIC Series 23 (2004),
pages 1–28.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
99
[59]
Chris Lorenz and Nikos Doltsinis. ”Molecular Dynamics Simulation: From “Ab Initio” to “Coarse
Grained”” in ”Handbook of Computational Chemistry”. Springer, 2012.
[60]
Christian Sørensen. “In Silico Investigation of Ligand Binding Sites in Dopamine β-Hydroxylase
Using Schrödinger Suites”. In: Technical University of Denmark (2017).
[61]
GE Healtheare. Strategies for Protein Purification. GE Heal. Handbook, 2010, pages 39–41.
[62]
HPLC. url: https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/analytical- chromatography/
hplc.html.
[63]
GE Healtheare. Strategies for Protein Purification. GE Heal. Handbook, 2010, pages 17–29.
[64]
GE Healtheare. Strategies for Protein Purification. GE Heal. Handbook, 2010, page 111.
[65]
José Arnau, Conni Lauritzen, Gitte E. Petersen, and John Pedersen. “Current Strategies for
the Use of Affinity Tags and Tag Removal for the Purification of Recombinant Proteins”. In:
Protein Expression Purification 48 (2006), pages 1–13.
[66]
Arun Malhotra. ”Tagging for Protein Expression”. Volume 463. Methods in Enzymology, 2009,
pages 239–258.
[67]
J. M. Berg, J. L Tymoczko, and L. Stryer. ”Gel Filtration” in ”Biochemistry”. Volume 7. Freeman
Palgrave Macmillam, 2013, pages 67–113.
[68]
Kasper D. Tidemand. “Characterization of the Human Tryptophan Hydroxylase Isoforms”. In:
Technical University of Denmark (2017).
[69]
SDS-PAGE. url: http://www.encorbio.com/protocols/SDS-PAGE.html.
[70]
T. Arakawa, K. Tsumoto, Y. Kita, B Chang, and D. Ejima. “Biotechnology Applications of
Amino Acids in Protein Purification and Formulations”. In: Amino Acids 33 (2007), pages 587–
605.
[71]
M. G. Cacace, E. M. Landau, and J. J. Ramsden. “The Hofmeister Series: Salt and Solvent
Effects on Interfacial Phenomena”. In: Q. Rev. Biophys. 30 (1997), pages 241–277.
[72]
Jane Boesen. “Cloning, Expression, Purification and Characterization of Tryptophan Hydrox-
ylase Variants”. In: Technical University of Denmark (2010).
[73]
Dipali Patel, Jolanta Kopec, Fiona Fitzpatrick, Thomas J. McCorvie, and Wyatt W. Yue.
“Structural Basis for Ligand-dependent Dimerization of Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Regula-
tory Domain”. In: Scientific Reports 6 (2016), pages 23748–23748.
[74]
Abdon Atangana. “Modeling the Enzyme Kinetic Reaction”. In: Acta Biotheor 63 (2015),
pages 239–256.
[75]
Graham R. Moran and Paul F. Fitzpatrick. “A Continuous Fluorescence Assay for Tryptophan
Hydroxylase”. In: Analytical Biochemistry 266 (1998), pages 148–152.
[76]
PSIPRED. url: http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/.
[77]
Schrödinger RMSD. url: http://content.schrodinger.com/Resources/SID/
3p6h_desmond_npt_10ns.pdf.
[78]
Rittika Shamsuddin, Milka Doktorova, Sheila Jaswal, Audrey L. John, and Kathryn McMeni-
men. “Computational Prediction of Hinge Axes in Proteins”. In: IEEE 3 (2013), pages 1–4.
==PAGE:116==
100
Bibliography
[79]
Samuel C. Flores, Lu J. Long, Julie Yang, Nicholas Carriero, and Mark B. Gerstein. “Hinge
Atlas: Relating Protein Sequence to Sites of Structural Flexibility”. In: BMC Bioinformatics 8
(2007), pages 1–20.
[80]
Maestro Tutorial. url: http://www.theochem.uni-duesseldorf.de/users/mk/
QCCC/maestro.pdf.
[81]
W. G. Krebs, Vadim Alexandrov, Cyrus A. Wilson, Nathaniel Echols, Haiyuan Yu, and Mark
Gerstein. “Normal Mode Analysis of Macromolecular Motions in a Database Framework:
Developing Mode Concentration as a Useful Classifying Statistic”. In: Protein Structure, Func-
tion, and Genetics 48 (2002), pages 682–695.
[82]
Lars Skjaerven, Siv M. Hollup, and Nathalie Reuter. “Normal Mode Analysis of Proteins”. In:
Journal of Molecular Structure: THEOCHEM 898 (2009), pages 42–48.
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIXA
AAAH Enzyme Crystal
Structures
Table A.1: All structures of AAAH enzymes in the Protein Data Bank. c: catalytic domain, r: reg-
ulatory domain, t: tetramization domain, Cv: Chromobacterium violaceum, Cp: Col-
wellia psychrerythraea, Lp: Legionella pneumophila.
Tryptophan hydroxylase 1
PDB-ID
Organism
Domain
Resolution
Comments
1MLW
Human
c 102-402
1.71 Å
Fe(III), BH2
3HF6
Human
c 104-393
1.8 Å
Fe(III), LP-521834
3HFB
Human
c 104-393
1.92 Å
Fe(III), LP-534193
3HF8
Human
c 104-393
1.85 Å
Fe(III), LP-533401
2E2T
Chicken
c 101-414
1.9Å
Fe(III), Trp, imidazole
Tryptophan hydroxylase 2
4V06
Human
ca 148-490
2.63 Å
Fe(III), imidazole
Tyrosine hydroxylase
1TOH
Rat
ct 156-498
2.3 Å
Fe(III)
2TOH
Rat
ct 160-498
2.3 Å
Fe(III), BH2
2MDA
Rat
r 65-159
Solution NMR
2XSN
Human
c 193-528
2.68 Å
Zn(II)
4J6S
Human
N-terminus
1-43
3.08 Å
Phenylalanine hydroxylase
1PHZ
Rat
rc 1-429
2.2 Å
Fe(III), phosphorylated
2PHM
Rat
rc 1-429
2.6 Å
Fe(III), dephosphorylated
5DEN
Rat
rct 1-453
2.9 Å
Fe(III)
5FII
Human
r 19-118
1.8 Å
Phe
1PAH
Human
c 117-424
2.0 Å
Fe(III)
==PAGE:118==
2
A AAAH Enzyme Crystal Structures
2PAH
Human
c 117-424
3.1 Å
Fe(III)
3PAH
Human
c 117-424
2.0 Å
Fe(III), adrenaline
4PAH
Human
c 117-424
2.0 Å
Fe(III), noradrenaline
5PAH
Human
c 117-424
2.1 Å
Fe(III), dopamine
6PAH
Human
c 117-424
2.15 Å
Fe(III), L-dopa
1J8T
Human
c 118-424
1.7 Å
Fe(II)
1J8U
Human
c 118-424
1.5 Å
Fe(II), BH4
1LRM
Human
c 118-424
2.1 Å
Fe(III), BH2
1DMW
Human
c 118-424
2.0 Å
Fe(III), BH2
1KW0
Human
c 118-424
2.5 Å
Fe(II), BH4,thienylalanine
1MMK
Human
c 117-424
2.0 Å
Fe(II), BH4, thienylalanine
1MMT
Human
c 117-424
2.0 Å
Fe(II), BH4, norleucibe
1TDW
Human
c 117-424
2.1 Å
Fe(III), A313T mutation
1TG2
Human
c 117-424
2.2 Å
Fe(III), BH2 A313T mutation
1LTU
Cv
2-285
1.74 Å
1LTV
Cv
9-283
2.0 Å
Fe(III)
1LTZ
Cv
7-283
1.4 Å
Fe(III), BH2
3TCY
Cv
7-283
1.55 Å
Co(II), Phe
3TK2
Cv
7-283
1.35 Å
Co(II), Phe
3TK4
Cv
7-283
1.5 Å
Co(II)
4ESM
Cv
8-283
1.35 Å
Co(II), Y155A mutation
4ETL
Cv
7-283
1.49 Å
Co(II), F258A mutation
4Q3Y
Cv
7-283
1.4 Å
Co(II), D139A mutation
4Q3W
Cv
7-283
1.4 Å
Co(II), D139E mutation
4Q3X
Cv
7-283
1.35 Å
Co(II), D139N mutation
4Q3Z
Cv
6-283
1.35 Å
Co(II), D139K mutation
4JPY
Cv
10-283
2.13 Å
Fe(III), Phe
4JPX
Cv
7-283
1.55 Å
Co(II), Phe, S203P muta-
tion
2V27
Cp
4-267
1.5 Å
Fe(III)
2V28
Cp
4-267
1.95 Å
4BPT
Lp
20-259
2.5 Å
PEG
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIXB
Expression Details
The expression was performed in a pET26 expression vector in a BL21(DE3) E. coli strain. The strain
was streaked on a LB ager plate containing 30 µg kanamycin sulfate/mL LB ager, as the cells
are resistant to kananmycin. The cells on the LB ager plate was incubated at 37 °C overnight.
One colony from the plate was inoculated in 50 mL LB/30 kan at 37 °C and 250 rpm until OD
reached 0.20-0.33. The culture was centrifuged in a 50 mL sterile polypropylene tube at 3000 rpm
for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and the pellet was resuspend in 50 mL LB/30
kan medium. 6*6.5 mL of the resuspend cells were added to 6*650 mL sterile LB/30 kan medium
in 2 L shaking flasks. The cells were incubated at 30 °C with 140 rpm. When OD reached 0.17-0.20,
325 µL of 200 mM IPTG and 650 µL of freshly prepared 0.2 M ammonium ferrosulfate were added
to each shaking flasks. The incubation was continued overnight. The cells were centrifuged at
3900 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was removed. The cells were resuspend in 50 mL
harvesting buffer a 50 mL polypropylene tubes and centrifuged 15 min at the same conditions
and the supernatant was discarded. The cells were stored at -80 °C.
==PAGE:120==
4
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIXC
MBP-3CP Purification
Figure C.1: Chromatogram from affinity chromatography of MBP-3CP, using L-Phe buffers as the
mobile phase. The blue line is the absorption at 280 nm. The green dotted line illus-
trates when the mobile phase was changed to elution buffer.
==PAGE:122==
6
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIXD
Amino Acid
Sequences
Color-codes:
MBP-N∆47-hTPH2
==PAGE:124==
8
D Amino Acid Sequences
MBP-N∆47-rchTPH2
MBP-3CP
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIXE
Secondary Structure
Prediction - PSI-Pred
==PAGE:126==
10
E Secondary Structure Prediction - PSI-Pred
==PAGE:127==
E Secondary Structure Prediction - PSI-Pred
11
==PAGE:128==
12
E Secondary Structure Prediction - PSI-Pred
Figure E.1: Secondary structure prediction performed by the online tool PSI-Pred. The pink cylinder
shape indicates helix structure, the yellow arrow indicates strands, and the black line
indicates coils.
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIXF
Sequence Alignment
Figure F.1: Clustal Omega alignment between the amino acid sequences of N∆47-hTPH2 in the
first row, cthTPH2 (PDB-ID: 4V06) in the second row, and ratPAH (PDB-ID:5DEN) in the
third row. The color code of the amino acids indicate identical residues. The color
codes are: purple: glycine, light pink: serine, green: hydrophobic side chain, dark blue:
positive charged side chain, red: negative charged side chain, light blue asparagine.
==PAGE:130==
14
F Sequence Alignment
Figure F.2: Clustal Omega alignment between the amino acid sequences of N∆47-hTPH2 in the first row, and ratPAH (PDB-ID:5DEN) in the
following rows. The color code of the amino acids indicate identical residues. The color codes are: purple: glycine, light pink:
serine, green: hydrophobic side chain, dark blue: positive charged side chain, red: negative charged side chain, light blue
asparagine.
==PAGE:131==
F Sequence Alignment
15
Figure F.3: Sequences alignment of N∆47-hTPH2 in the first row, PSI-Pred predicted structure in the second row, cthTPH2 (PDB-ID: 4V06) in
the third row, and ratPAH (PDB-ID:5DEN) in the fourth row. Green and pink indicate the parts of the N∆47-hTPH2 amino acid
sequence that are built on 4V06 and 5DEN, respectively.
==PAGE:132==
16
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIXG
Hinge Region
Prediction
Table G.1: Overview of StoneHingeP prediction of N∆47-TPH2 monomer.
StoneHingeP Prediction
Residues
Flexibility [kcal/mol]
1
168-169
-0.4
2
173-174
-0.4
3
177-178
-0.4
4
200-201
-0.4
5
204-205
-0.4
6
183
-0.385
7
199
-0.3775
8
439-441
-0.3325
9
443-445
-0.3325
10
206
-0.3125
11
208
-0.3125
12
180-181
-0.2525
13
194
-0.2125
14
196-197
-0.2125
15
170-172
-0.1175
16
176
-0.1175
17
184
-0.1175
18
202
-0.1175
19
210
-0.1175
==PAGE:134==
18
G Hinge Region Prediction
Table G.2: Overview of TLSMD hinge predictions of N∆47-TPH2 monomer.
TLSMD Hinge Prediction
Residues
2 TLS Groups
3 TLS Groups
4 TLS Groups
5 TLS Groups
1
105-106
x
x
2
149-150
x
x
x
3
204-205
x
4
328-329
x
x
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIXH
Distance Fluctuation
Maps - Monomer
Figure H.1: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 monomer, normal mode 7. The matrix dis-
plays the maximum distance fluctuations between all pairs of Cα atoms and between
the two extreme conformations (DQMIN and DQMAX). The strongest 10% of distance
changes between residues are colored blue (decrease) and red (increase). White
areas indicate structure rigidity.
==PAGE:136==
20
H Distance Fluctuation Maps - Monomer
Figure H.2: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 monomer, normal mode 8.
Figure H.3: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 monomer, normal mode 9.
==PAGE:137==
H Distance Fluctuation Maps - Monomer
21
Figure H.4: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 monomer, normal mode 10.
Figure H.5: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 monomer, normal mode 11.
==PAGE:138==
22
H Distance Fluctuation Maps - Monomer
Figure H.6: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 monomer, normal mode 12.
Figure H.7: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 monomer, normal mode 13.
==PAGE:139==
H Distance Fluctuation Maps - Monomer
23
Figure H.8: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 monomer, normal mode 14.
Figure H.9: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 monomer, normal mode 15.
==PAGE:140==
24
H Distance Fluctuation Maps - Monomer
Figure H.10: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 monomer, normal mode 16.
==PAGE:141==
APPENDIXI
Distance Fluctuation
Maps - Dimer
Figure I.1: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 dimer, normal mode 16.
The matrices dis-
play the maximum distance fluctuations between all pairs of Cα atoms and between
the two extreme conformations (DQMIN and DQMAX). The strongest 10% of distance
changes between residues are colored blue (decrease) and red (increase). White ar-
eas indicate structure rigidity.
==PAGE:142==
26
I Distance Fluctuation Maps - Dimer
Figure I.2: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 dimer, normal mode 17.
Figure I.3: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 dimer, normal mode 18.
==PAGE:143==
I Distance Fluctuation Maps - Dimer
27
Figure I.4: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 dimer, normal mode 19.
Figure I.5: Distance fluctuation map of N∆47-TPH2 dimer, normal mode 20.
==PAGE:144==
28
==PAGE:145==
APPENDIXJ
MD Simulations - Dimer
Figure J.1: Structural alignment of the first and last frame from the MD simulation of the N∆47-TPH2
dimer. The first frame structure is coloured transparent, while the last frame structure is
coloured opaque. Color code: blue: regulatory domain, red: catalytic domain, and
yellow: tetrameric domain.
==PAGE:146==
30
==PAGE:147==
APPENDIXK
Purification of the
N∆47-rchTPH2 M1
mutant
Figure K.1: Chromatogram from the first attempt of affinity chromatography of the N∆47-rchTPH2
M1 mutant. The blue line is the absorption at 280 nm. The orange dotted line illustrates
when MBP-3CP was loaded. The green dotted line illustrates when the mobile phase
was changed to elution buffer.
==PAGE:148==
32
==PAGE:149==
APPENDIXL
Calibration Curve
Table L.1: Data read from the column manual of Superdec 200 Increased 10/300 GL column.
Superdex 200 Increased 10/300 GL column
Molecular weigth (Mw) [Da]
Retention volume [mL]
669000
9.5
444000
10.8
158000
12.5
75000
14
44000
14.9
29000
16.5
13700
17.5
Figure L.1: Calibration curve for Uperdex 200 Increased 10/300 GL column.
