==PAGE:1==
Extending analytics for eye
tracking data linked to source
code based on iTrace
Dennis Bøgelund Olesen
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of the thesis is to create a tool for visualizing data gathered by the
gaze to source code mapping Eclipse plugin, iTrace. The solution covers the
steps necessary to analyze the data collected using iTrace. Starting with updat-
ing the iTrace interface connecting to the eye tracker to use the current state
of the art Tobii eye tracker software development kit. Followed by extending
the data storage of iTrace to support a database setup making several iTrace
sessions readily available for the analysis tools. A python library, iTraceAnal-
yser is created to convert the iTrace gaze data into ﬁxations while retaining the
source code information. Finally the thesis propose two visualization solutions.
The ﬁrst being simple data visualizations using bar plots to quickly view data
for single sessions. The second being a method of creating event logs making
comparison of several sessions available through existing process mining tools.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at bygge et værktøj for visualisering af data samlet
af Eclipse pluginnet iTrace som forbinder blikke til kildekode. Løsningen dækker
de nødvendige trin for at analysere dataen samlet ved brug af iTrace. Første
delmål er at opdatere interfacet mellem iTrace og eye trackeren således at iTrace
kan bruges med moderne Tobii eye tracker software development kits. Herefter
skal dataopbevaringen udvides så iTrace støtter en database opsætning. Dette vil
gøre ﬂere iTrace sessioner tilgængelige samtidig for analyse værktøjet. Et python
bibliotek, iTraceAnalyser, er implementeret for at konvertere iTrace blik data
til ﬁkseringer uden tab af kildekode information. Til sidst forslår afhandlingen
to visualiseringer til analyse af dataen. Den første visualisering bruger bar plots
til at skabe et hurtigt overblik over dataen for enkelte sessioner. Den anden
foreslåede løsning skaber event logs ud fra ﬁkseringerne og bruger dette til at
mine processen med eksisterende værktøjer.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering under the supervision
of Barbara Weber and assistant supervisor Andrea Burattin
The thesis deals with state of the art eye tracking data visualization and anal-
ysis using process mining on data collected using the gaze-aware Eclipse plugin
iTrace.
Lyngby, 14-January-2018
==PAGE:8==
vi
Dennis Bøgelund Olesen
==PAGE:9==
I would like to acknowledge the following people for their contributions:
Barbara Weber, my supervisor for providing meaningful input to the direction
of the project through regular meetings.
Andrea Burattin, assistant supervisor for providing input and ideas primarily
regarding the practical implementations.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Eye tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Fixations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
iTrace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Additional features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Process mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Business process models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
The three stages of process mining . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
Disco
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Method
15
3.1
The process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Producing gaze data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
Java native interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Exporting gaze data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.3.1
Solvers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.2
Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Converting gazes to ﬁxations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Analysing The Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5.1
Performing Static Source Code Entity Analysis . . . . . .
29
3.5.2
Performing Process Mining Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Evaluation
35
4.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.1
Fixations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.2
Bar Plots Fixation Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.3
Bar Plots Type Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.4
Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Discussion
69
5.1
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.1.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.1.2
Fixations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.2
Fixation Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.3
Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.4
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6
Conclusion
73
A Glossary
75
B Components installation
77
B.1
JNI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
B.2
Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
C JNI, New SDK
79
D iTraceAnalyser.py
95
E iTrace.sql
107
F SQLGazeExportSolver.java
109
G MagicSort.java
117
H iTraceAnalyserScript.py
123
Bibliography
125
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
With eye tracking becoming more commonplace and businesses using eye track-
ing to determine behaviours of users in examples such as advertising [JL] it
would make sense to look into using eye tracking for other purposes. One such
purpose was made visible with the release of an Eclipse plugin, iTrace [TRS15],
which couples eye tracking to source code. This presents information on not only
the coordinates where the user was looking but also of the underlying source.
Through this iTrace has provided a tool for gathering information on the be-
haviour of developers reading and attempting to understand code. However the
iTrace data anlysis performed by others are limited to static representations of
single sessions through visualizations such as heatmaps and gaze maps [BC17].
As such this thesis will attempt to provide ideas and solutions for how to transi-
tion from the data gathered using iTrace to an understanding of the process the
user has gone through while developing, primarily focusing on process mining
for data visualisation. The intention is for this to be used primarily in teaching
environments where it would be worth noting certain patterns in the way the
student works. In order to provide insight and provide assistance in the areas
where they are struggling.
In order to set up a system for performing an analysis of iTrace data a couple
of goals needs to be met.
First the interface connecting the eye tracker to
iTrace needs to be updated as the current implementation uses an old software
development kit which is no longer available. The rebuilding of this is going to
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
be covered in order to allow for actual eye tracking information and can be seen
as a prerequisite for the analysis.
Additionally the data storage was changed as iTrace stores the ﬁle separately
which makes comparison across sessions and users inconvenient.
As such a
database setup will be proposed and the remaining analysis will use the data
placed there. This also assists in providing additional insight into the structure
of iTrace.
Before the data can be used for comprehension purposes it will be necessary to
clean and structure the data into ﬁxations to determine which parts of the data
is relevant.
The data analysis will be split into two parts.
One part which focuses on
representing the values in static plots which provide information on the time
spent on diﬀerent elements of the source code and additional information of
that sort.
This helps provide a quick overview of a speciﬁc session without
going into a more in depth exploratory analysis.
The second part will involve treating the task of understanding the source code
as a process and consider each gaze as an activity where the user is trying to
understand the related code. As such the ﬁxation data will be converted into
event logs which can be read by process mining tools and thereby provides the
base for exploratory and comparison of several sessions. Doing this allow ﬁnding
users who work in ways that are outside the expected and the norm. Providing
a base for helping the person correct some of the issues and knowing where to
put in additional work for improvement.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Theory
This section will go over the theoretical knowledge which builds the founda-
tion of the thesis. There will be an overview of the information related to eye
tracking in Section 2.1, iTrace in Section 2.2 and process mining in Section 2.3
which is intended as relevant background knowledge for the systems created in
the method Chapter 3 and the evaluation of the systems along with analysis
performed with the systems at Chapter 4. The discussion of the systems and
their results in the Discussion Chapter 5. For a brief overview of the some of
the used terms see the glossary in Appendix A
2.1
Eye tracking
2.1.1
Introduction
Eye tracking[AS14] is the act of tracking the eye movement in relation what is
being observed, such as a computer screen, to determine where the person is
looking. Eye tracking is being developed for several devices such as computers
and wearable devices. This thesis will be focusing on eye tracking coupled to a
stationary computer screen using the Tobii eye tracker 4C[Tob17a].
==PAGE:16==
4
Theory
Eye tracking is the act of tracking eye movements and collecting gazes. Gazes
are the raw output collected from eye tracking. Each gaze is a point on the
screen with an X,Y coordinate set relating to the pixel position. A gaze may
be attributed more values depending on the tool. Most relevant for this thesis
are the recorded time for the gaze and the source code data related to the gaze
point especially the line attribute.
In order to collect the gazes it is necessary to track the eyes.
This can be
done in several ways [HC84]. Four methods mentioned by H.R Chennamma
are Electro-Oculography, Sceleral Search Coils, Infrared Oculography, Video
Oculography. The Electro-Oculography method uses sensors placed on the skin
around the eyes to estimate the position of the eye. The Sceleral Search Coils
method places wires on a contact lens which allows for tracking eye movement
very accurately. Infrared Oculography uses infrared light to calculate how the
eye moves based on the amount of light reﬂected. The last method is Video
Oculography which uses cameras and light to collect and process images of the
eye to estimate movement and gaze locations.
In the case of the Tobii eye trackers, the tracking is done using a near infrared
light along with a camera. The eye tracker then process the images taken of the
eyes and use the position of the reﬂected light to determine where on the screen
the subject is looking. a quick description of the setup can be seen in Figure 2.1
Figure 2.1: Eye tracking setup
As people’s eyes are slightly diﬀerent [RvdL] and the characteristics of the eyes
and the way the light reﬂects may vary it is typically necessary to perform a
calibration test [Tob17c] before starting any tracking session. These calibrations
typically use points on the screen which the user then will focus on for a few
seconds, to map out what the eyes look like when looking at diﬀerent areas, and
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Eye tracking
5
thereby changing the settings so the eye tracker is more accurate.
The procedure of determining where the user is looking is then performed as
fast as is allowed by the technology. For one of the newer models, the Tobii 4C
tracker by Tobii, this is at 90 Hz [Tob17b]. Each recording is then transformed
into data which is commonly referred to as a Gaze.
In a very simple setup
a gaze would just consist of the x and y coordinates relating to the screen in
pixels. However for analytic purposes gazes also include device time stamps as
well as information on pupil including dilation and position and a validation,
which indicates the correctness of the recorded gaze. Among other data. This
data allows us to not only detect where the person is looking, but sort out bad
gazes and use pupil information to perform additional analysis.
2.1.2
Fixations
Gazes are by themselves not particularly interesting, as it has been found that
a person only comprehends what is being looked at after ﬁxating on it for about
100 to 200ms [Wid84].
As such an important of step of cleaning the data is to transition from gazes
to ﬁxations. Fixations [AS14] are points where the user concentrates for an
extended time. As such a ﬁxation relates to gazes as ﬁxations can be considered
a cluster of gazes around the same point over an extended time. Fixation points
typically contains X and Y coordinates and a start time and an end time. This
can be done using grouping algorithms to group neighbouring gazes, which are
collected immediately after each other, and are suﬃciently close. These groups
can then be considered ﬁxations, and the transition from one ﬁxation to another
is considered a saccade. Saccades are the movement between ﬁxations. When
the areas are moving from one point of focus to another the gazes in between
are considered the saccade. An illustration of going from gazes to ﬁxations can
be seen on ﬁgure 4.2
==PAGE:18==
6
Theory
Figure 2.2: Gazes to ﬁxations
It is however worth considering how to group these ﬁxations as it can have a big
impact on the rest of the analysis. Some of the issues which may be expected
to arise if there is bad grouping are too few ﬁxations if the algorithm is being
too strict and too many ﬁxations if it is not strict enough. On top of this some
algorithms are more robust than others and handle issues such as ﬂuctuations
in the gazes better than others.
When looking at ﬁxation identiﬁcation algorithms [DDS00], which are the al-
gorithms used for identifying the ﬁxations in a group of gazes, it is possible
to use a taxonomy considering some of the important criteria . One proposed
way to deﬁne these criteria can be as accuracy, speed, robustness and ease of
implementation. Here one may consider accuracy by how good the algorithm is
in determining whether a gaze is part of the current ﬁxation or if it belongs to
a new ﬁxation or saccade. The speed deﬁnes how quickly the algorithm groups
the ﬁxations. this is primarily important in any analysis done online and when
large amounts of data are considered. Robustness is graded by how resistant the
algorithm is to wrongful ﬂuctuations in the data. The ease of implementation
is worth considering when deciding upon the right algorithm for your product,
as you may consider whether implementing a stronger algorithm is worth the
eﬀort depending on the precision and quality with which you collect your data.
Before deciding which ﬁxation identiﬁcation algorithm will be the right one
for an analysis it is worth looking into a few diﬀerent ones. This section will
be looking at a velocity based algorithm Velocity-Threshold identiﬁcation (I-
VT). A dispersion based algorithm, Dispersion-Threshold identiﬁcation (I-DT).
There are other alternatives such as a model using probabilistic methods, Hidden
Markov model identiﬁcation (I-HMM), however these are not covered in this
thesis. These models have slightly diﬀerent approaches to how to determine the
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Eye tracking
7
ﬁxations. However the basics of the algorithm remains the same and can be
described as the pseudo code shown in ﬁgure 2.3
Figure 2.3: Fixation identiﬁcation pseudo
Loop over the gazes and for each gaze.
decide whether the current gaze is
part of the same fixation as the previous gaze or gazes.
if a gaze is not part of the fixation:
Group the previous gazes as a fixation
and start over from the remaining data.
Remove fixation if duration is less than threshold
The challenge is then to decide whether the gazes are part of the same ﬁxation.
Additionally it may be worth mentioning as previously stated, a ﬁxation needs
to have a minimum length in order to avoid single gazes along a saccade to be
considered a ﬁxation. This also abides to the idea that a person only records
what is being looked at after a short time, this time is usually considered to be
around 100 to 200ms.[Wid84]
2.1.2.1
Velocity-Threshold ﬁxation identiﬁcation
The I-VT approach [DDS00] looks at the velocity between two gazes. This uses
the idea that a ﬁxation is steady within an area and as such it has only very small
movements in the eyes. Where as any saccade would involve rapid movement
from one point to another. Calculating this velocity can be done as the distance
in pixels over time, or using the movement of the eyes in degrees to achieve a
degrees/secon velocity. These values are then used to assess whether the gaze is
ﬁxated at a point near the previous gaze or if the movement can be considered
rapid.
It is generally considered suﬃcient to determine a static criteria for
the velocity thresholds. Deﬁning the threshold will depend whether you are
using the angular velocities or if you only know the point to point velocities.
If you are using the angular velocities previous research has approximated 20
deg/seconds to be a good threshold [TS84]. If these values are not available
andt he point to point velocities are being used, a suitable threshold may be
found using explorative analysis for the speciﬁc setup. The threshold may vary
depending on resolution and the screen size, as the pixels are closer together
==PAGE:20==
8
Theory
in high resolutions, as well as the ﬂuctuations in the recorded data. When the
velocity is known the algorithm can be described as seen on ﬁgure 2.4 [DDS00]
Figure 2.4: Velocity-Threshold identiﬁcation, Adopted from [DDS00]
Calculate point to point velocity for each gaze
Label velocities under threshold as a fixation point
Collapse consecutive fixation points into a fixation group
Remove saccades
For each fixation group,
determine the start time and the end time
find the centroid of the points
Return the fixations
2.1.2.2
Dispersion-Threshold ﬁxation identiﬁcation
The dispersion based identiﬁcation algorithm [DDS00] calculates the dispersion
between the points in order to determine whether they belong in the same
ﬁxation. This relies on the idea that any ﬁxation would consist of several gazes
clustered together, allowing us to group together nearby gazes. This diﬀers from
the I-VT as the dispersion is based on the maximum and minimum values for
all the gazes positions in the ﬁxation window rather than only comparing two
points at a time. However in the same manner as the I-VT in order to use the
I-DT it is necessary to determine the a suitable threshold. The dispersion itself
is calculated as (max(x) −min(x)) + (max(y) −min(y)).
The dispersion threshold can be found using exploratory analysis, seeing which
value provides you with the best data over several sets. This is necessary as it
may depend on resolution, screen size and the data ﬂuctuation as well as the
individual users ﬁxation characteristics [RvdL]. It is also considered that if you
can calculate the angle to the screen a dispersion of roughly 0.5 to 1 degree [P09]
can be used as a general threshold. Additionally to avoid describing saccades as
ﬁxations we make sure any ﬁxation is at least 100-200 ms long The algorithm
itself works as described in ﬁgure 2.5
==PAGE:21==
2.2 iTrace
9
Figure 2.5: Velocity-Threshold identiﬁcation, Adopted from [DDS00]
Loop over each gaze
Add points until the duration threshold is covered
If dispersion of window points <= threshold
Add next gazes until dispersion threshold > threshold
Calculate the centroid
Collapse into a fixation.
If dispersion of window points > threshold
remove first point in window.
2.2
iTrace
2.2.1
Introduction
iTrace [TRS15] is an Eclipse plugin by the Software Engineering Research and
Empirical Studies Lab, which enables eye tracking in a programming environ-
ment and allow the gazes within Eclipse to be linked to corresponding source
code entities, SCE. The SCEs are deﬁned as entities which are represented in
the Eclipse editor as styled text. This includes declarations, invocations, state-
ments, methods and comments.
The tool exclusively works for the Eclipse environment and as such it does not
oﬀer support for gaze tracking outside the Eclipse window. The data we receive
from iTrace provide information on both the gaze itself which includes data
about the eyes, time and positions as well as data about the corresponding area
in Eclipse. The Eclipse data includes information about the source code entity
in the area such as type and a unique name.
SCEs are parts of the source
code that can be categorized. These include highlighted words and comments.
Additionally it also provides us with the line and column which can be useful for
code sections that do not ﬁt on a regular screen and require scrolling. [TRS15]
==PAGE:22==
10
Theory
2.2.2
Structure
The structure of iTrace is segmented into parts handling the diﬀerent parts of
the process. The process consists of capturing a gaze using the eye tracker,
converting the recordings from the eye tracker into a gaze containing the base
data such as position, time and pupil information. Then iTrace need to handle
the data which makes the gaze into a gaze response which is a data type that
deﬁnes both the gaze and the corresponding part in the editor. This includes
lines as well as SCE depending on the type of gaze response. Once you have
the gaze response it will be passed to the solver which is responsible for out-
putting the gaze as readable data, by default XML and JSON. These diﬀerent
parts are split into the classes IGazeHandler, iGazeResponse and ISolver. The
IGazeHandler is the component of iTrace which is responsible for collecting the
data from the tracker and collecting further information about the connected
SCEs, line numbers and more. The IGazeResponse is the structured gaze data
which includes the information collected by the IGazeHandler. The ISolver is
the super class responsible for outputting the IGazeResponses to other external
sources such as XML and JSON. The actions of these classes are then done
in parallel in threads using gaze and gaze response queues to avoid waiting in
between them. As the solvers are writing the output every time they receive a
gaze response the data is gathered online. The process for a single gaze can be
described as seen on Figure 2.6. This process is repeated once the tracking is
started, and ends when the user presses the Stop tracking button in the iTrace
controller.
Figure 2.6: iTrace gaze handling process
==PAGE:23==
2.2 iTrace
11
In order to get the information that is at the gaze point iTrace opens Eclipse as
a plugin which gives them access to the widget class allowing them to segment
the Eclipse window as well as accessing information such as oﬀset and relative
positions. Additionally iTrace maintains an abstract syntax tree (AST) of the
content within the editor. This syntax tree allow for mapping absolute positions
in the widget to the content using the ASTParser. In relation to iTrace the
abstract syntax tree holds the structure for the source code in order to ﬁnd
information on the speciﬁc SCEs. The AST also allow for information about
the surrounding content.
The data outputted by the iTrace solvers are made available as JSON and XML
ﬁles in seperate folders for each session. Additionally a JSON description of the
session itself is created beside the gaze data.
In order to connect to the eye trackers an IEyeTracker class has been deﬁned
[TRS15] which deﬁnes the necessary functionality of the gaze collection and
calibration.
In the case of the Tobii eye trackers the SDKs are not directly
available for java implementation, and as such a java native interface, JNI, is
implemented for using the SDK in a diﬀerent language. JNI is a java library
used for calling C and C++ code in a java environment.
In this thesis the
term JNI or driver is used to describe the C++ module connecting to the eye
trackers software development kit (SDK). In this case the Tobii eye tracker is
implemented as a C++ driver using the old Tobii Analytics SDK . This SDK is
no longer available and a new or updated implementation will be needed prior
to use. The newest SDK is the Tobii Pro SDK.
2.2.3
Additional features
Besides capturing gazes and providing data iTrace include some additional fea-
tures which assist in making it friendly for use in a test environment. The ﬁrst
thing when beginning an experiment iTrace will ask you to deﬁne the session.
This session deﬁnition allow for intuitive separation of the data collected over
several individual experiments, or sessions. Additionally it provides the oppor-
tunity to deﬁne users, the purpose of the session and creates a unique session
id.
iTrace acknowledges that the precision of the eye tracking may vary depending
on the user, despite an initial calibration [TRS15]. To combat this issue it is
possible to manually change the X and Y position displacement drift. as well
as a marker on the screen where you are looking, which works to give you an
impression of the accuracy of the tracking
==PAGE:24==
12
Theory
2.2.4
Related Work
One of the modern proposals on how to analyse and visualize the data collected
with iTrace is the iTraceVis [BC17] solution. iTraceVis supports visualizations
of the gaze data within the Eclipse plugin and supports heatmaps of the source
code entities values in the editor, gaze maps which show how the user looked
around the ﬁle, a gaze skyline visualization showing which lines were viewed over
time. These visualizations were found to be useful for information regarding a
single user and session.
2.3
Process mining
2.3.1
Business process models
Business process models, BPMs,[dA11] are being used to provide a meaningful
way of describing the processes within many diﬀerent business applications and
work ﬂows. BPMs are a way of describing a process in such detail and structure
that it is often possible to recognize if there exists waste within the process.
It is often used in regards to automating and optimizing processes and rely on
deﬁning actions and the ﬂow with which these actions are done, in order to
know how an event is to be handled. Regular business process models can help
provide insight into the ﬂow of the process as well as provide a guide for those
who are part of the process.
2.3.2
The three stages of process mining
In some cases there is no detailed model that the users are aware of and as
such they do not necessarily follow a speciﬁc ﬂow. It is however still possible
that there may be similarities between the way the process is performed across
sessions. In these cases, if adequate log data exists process mining can be used
to get further insight into the process.
The use of process mining is often put in three categories. Discovery, confor-
mance and enhancement. These three categories can be used depending on the
goal of the task.
Discovery is the act of gathering log events and producing a graph showing
events and transitions explaining the behaviour.
This will present you with
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Process mining
13
model showing how the process have been performed and make available infor-
mation which can be investigated to acquire insight into the process.
Conformance is the act of comparing an existing BPM to an event log. This
will allow you to determine whether the actual performed process matches the
described model. This comparison can then be used in either direction, as it
may mean the existing BPM is missing something, or simply not in tune with
the real world. Or check if the event log represents a process which is wrong
either by choice, someone ﬁnding the process bad, or by mistake.
Finally when considering using process mining for enhancement it is often done
through the use of event logs to enhance the BPM. This can be used for repairing
the BPM by adding ﬂows that were missed in the creation but exists within the
event logs. Or adding additional information to the model, for instance by using
new information from the even logs, such as timings, to extend the quality of
the model.[dA11]
2.3.3
Disco
With the event log information available, there exists tools for visualizing the
ﬂow and provide process mining information. One of these tools, Disco [Flu17],
provide a platform for discovering the process behind the event logs. Disco allow
us to look at the individual cases as well as getting an overview of the process as
a combination of all events. It will allow us to get information of which events
have been performed the most times as well as the duration of these events.
==PAGE:26==
14
Theory
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Method
3.1
The process
In this chapter we are looking at the process of building the system with the
purpose of providing the tools for creating an extended analysis of the iTrace
data in a testing and teaching environment.
The goal of this section is to
understand how the system is built and how the diﬀerent components operate
together, this includes the process from start to ﬁnish as well as the interaction
and responsibility of each component and sub process in the created system. On
top of this we hope to understand the reasoning behind the decisions made in
regards to what is built, what is left out and why certain methods were chosen
over others.
A model for the process of main aspects of the system going from the start to
the end can be seen on ﬁgure 3.1.
The ﬁrst step of the system requires a re-write of the java native interface as
the Tobii SDK used in the oﬃcial release of iTrace is outdated.
The second step of the process includes an update to the data storage to
support future potential cross machine sharing and to centralize the data in one
collection rather than the previous separate ﬁle setup as this will make analysis
and comparison of several sessions more available.
==PAGE:28==
16
Method
The third step consists of having to clean the data by converting from gazes
to ﬁxations and removing saccades. This ensures that only the areas which the
user has focused on is passed along for analysis.
The fourth step is a simple analysis of the ﬁxation data created in step three,
intended to get a quick overview of the values of a single session.
Step ﬁve and six is a more in depth analysis using process mining as visual-
ization. The process mining tools are available however the data needs to be
structured as event logs in order to use existing tools such as Disco [Flu17].
Figure 3.1: Analysis process, start to end
As we can see on the model the process has to go through a number of steps.
It is worth noting that neither of these steps are readily available before this
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Producing gaze data
17
extension.
To produce gaze data using iTrace in step one we need to update the JNI with
the new SDK to allow use of the eye tracker. This sub process is described in
section 3.2.1.
To export the gaze data to database in step two it is necessary to set up a
database, as well as add a new solver which works with the database. This sub
process is described in section 3.3.2.
To perform step three we must implement a ﬁxation identiﬁcation algorithm
which maintains data of interest from the iTrace gaze responses.
This sub
process is described in section 3.4.
Performing the SCE analysis in step four requires presenting and structuring
the ﬁxation data, with respect to the source code entity attributes. This sub
process is described in section 3.5.1.
Converting ﬁxations to event logs in steps ﬁve require a deﬁnition of events, as
well as a conversion implementation. Performing the process mining on event
logs in step six can be done drawing conclusions from a process mining tool such
as disco. This sub process is described in section 3.5.2.
Each of these steps can be considered separately but in concession as they
depend on ﬁndings from previous steps in the way deﬁned in ﬁgure 3.1 .
For installing the implementation see Appendix B.
3.2
Producing gaze data
3.2.1
Java native interface
The basis of the project relies on using iTrace for the gaze tracking. The tools
provided in iTrace are by themselves complete for gathering the gazes as pre-
sented in section 2.2.
However as the company developing the eye trackers
continue to improve the development kits the drivers used in the current version
of iTrace, Tobii analytics 3.0, are out of date and are no longer freely available.
As such a rewrite of the java native interface is necessary to connect to the
newer tobii devices.
==PAGE:30==
18
Method
3.2.1.1
Java Native Interface Responsibilities
The JNI is responsible for all communication with the eye tracker both in regards
to data sent from the eye tracker to the plugin, as well as instructions sent from
the plugin to the eye tracker.
First it is necessary to understand what has changed since the previous version
of the SDK. The rework meant that the C++ libraries in Tobii Analytics 3.0
has been replaced by C libraries in the new Tobii Pro SDK.
This does however not prevent a reuse of the old JNI implementation, as with
minor changes to the SDK headers the C libraries are compatible with the C++
JNI implementation, however without the addition of an external c deﬁnition
in the C headers, the compilers will not read the function calls in the libraries.
Once the libraries are made compatible with the old JNI it is then possible to
rewrite the Tobii eye tracker JNI to function with newer Tobii trackers.
Using the eye trackers with the JNI requires a couple of steps. First iTrace
need to create a background thread for the eye tracker to run on. Afterwards
iTrace connects to the eye tracker. Once these two steps are completed it is
then possible to either start the tracking immediately, or set up a calibration.
The calibration requires setting the eye tracker in a calibration mode, and then
add points as the user is focusing on them. When enough points are added the
eye tracker leaves the calibration mode and computes the data gathered from
the points. At this point the calibration can be repeated or the tracking can be
started. At this point the eye tracker repeatedly handles each registered gaze,
and passes it along to the plugin.
The ﬂow of these steps, named by their corresponding function in the JNI im-
plementation can be seen in Figure 3.2
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Producing gaze data
19
Figure 3.2: iTrace JNI ﬂow
In order to update the old implementation with a new SDK it would not be
enough to rely on the method names alone as these have changed with the new
SDK and as such it is worth looking into the responsibilities of each method.
The jniTobiiMainLoop method is responsible for initializing the native data,
which holds information about the eye tracker and the eye tracking main loop
functionality. The mainloop and the jni function has the functionality which is
often seen in initialization functions.
The jniConnectTobiiTracker methods responsibility is to connect to the tobii
tracker. In order to do this it is required to ﬁnd which eye trackers are available
on the system. This is done using the library functionality of an eye tracking
browser which scans and waits for any information on any eye trackers plugged
into the system. Afterwards the eye tracker in the program is created using the
information from the browser.
==PAGE:32==
20
Method
The jniStartTracking method sets the eye tracker in tracking mode and main-
tains a listener responding to captured gazes. Every time a gaze is captured the
HandleGazeData method is called.
The HandleGazeData processes the gaze
and forwards a wrapped version of the gaze to the Eclipse plugin.
The jniStopTracking method leaves the tracking state and resets the tracking
data to clean up after the tracking session.
The calibration part consists of four methods, jniStartCalibration, jniStop-
Calibration, jniAddPoint and jniGetCalibration. The method jniStart-
Calibration enters the eye tracker into calibration mode and clears the current
calibration data, to free up for a new one. jniStopCalibration is responsible
for leaving the calibration mode and additionally it computes the calibration
data and applies the calibration on the eye tracker. In between these two it is
necessary to add calibration points during the calibration. The calibration is
done using points on the screen which the user is asked to focus on for a few
seconds. While the user is focusing on these points the method jniAddPoint is
called to collect the gaze position relative to the point they were supposed to
focus. The system has to collect enough of these points in order to compute
a proper calibration in the end. When the calibration is done iTrace can call
jniGetCalibration to get the calibrated points, for visualizing them as a result
to the user to provide an overview of how accurate the calibration were.
3.2.1.2
Updating the Java Native Interface
With the understanding of how the previous JNI implementation works it is
necessary looking into what has changed since this version of the SDK. As the
required tasks are the same as previously it is expected for the new SDK imple-
mentation to contain all the same functionality. The task is then to determine
which methods are changed, and what impact the structural changes have on
the implementation.
The major changes since the previous version is the change previously mentioned
transition from C++ to C. On top of this the old JNI uses a main loop to form
a frame around the eye tracking process.
This loop took control of the eye
tracking and was responsible for providing the browsing information used to
gather information on the eye tracker and create the eye tracker. As such the
mainloop structure played a large role in the old implementation. This has since
been removed and no immediate replacement exists. This appear to be due to
a change in the structure where they no longer rely on the mainloop class to
access the eye tracking information, but rather have them all available in C
methods, which in turn take eye tracking information as arguments rather than
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Producing gaze data
21
inheriting it from the mainloop class.
This change has a structural impact on the way we are storing calibration infor-
mation as well, as it used to all be kept within the classes, and calibration data
remained within the eye tracker class. The new implementation require keeping
the calibration data outside and passing them into the calibration computation
methods alongside the eye tracker class.
An example of this change can be seen in ﬁgure 3.3. From this it should be visible
that much of the data has been moved from the class structures to variables
outside the classes, as well as the methods are now called independent of a class
in addition to the name changes.
Figure 3.3: Calibration implementation example
//Original implementation
eye_tracker->computeCalibration();
eye_tracker->stopCalibration();
//New implementation
TobiiResearchStatus status =
tobii_research_screen_based_calibration_compute_and_apply(
eye_tracker, calibration_result);
tobii_research_screen_based_calibration_leave_calibration_mode(
eye_tracker);
Additionally some methods have had their functionality combined, an example
of this is the start tracking which used to consist of a method for entering
tracking mode, and setting up a listener which calls a helper function whenever
a gaze is recorded.
This has been moved into a single method, which takes
a callback method and while in the tracking state this will function like the
previous listener.
These changes were implemented in a new version of the tobiitracker.cpp ﬁle
with the structural and convention wise changes described and can be seen in
Appendix C.
==PAGE:34==
22
Method
3.3
Exporting gaze data
3.3.1
Solvers
Due to the segmented structure of iTrace the export of data is mainly performed
in the solver class as mentioned in section 2.2.2. The solver classes receive gaze
responses which allows for collecting all the information created in the process.
As such the solver is responsible for step ﬁve in ﬁgure 2.6 extracting the values
in the responses and structure and forward it to an output ﬁle or database.
The implementation from iTrace saves XML and JSON ﬁles with the data in a
folder named after the session id. As such accessing the data from several ses-
sions at once is not intuitive. Additionally this setup does not support having a
centralized data storage outside the computer where the eye tracking experiment
is performed.
To combat these issues a new solver supporting SQL has been implemented
and a database structure has been proposed. It is worth noting that for any
cross machine sharing a networking setup would be necessary, but this has been
deemed out of scope for this thesis. However as this provides the foundation
for the remaining data analysis the changes required should be limited. The
majority of the implementation resides within the solver class, where a gaze
response is passed. It is worth noting that iTrace implements several types of
gazes. Of these types the focus will only be on gazes on lines with no source code
entities, and styled text gazes which include information regarding the SCEs on
the line. This is done by readying a SQL statement for updating the database
with the new data, depending on the gaze type, and appending all the SCEs
afterwards and. At the same time the solver needs to connect to a database
which is currently hard coded within the solver.
For the solver to work it is not enough to build the new SQL solver.
The
program still needs the solver integrated with the rest of the system. By this
the gaze responses must be passed to an instance of the class, and additionally
the user should still be able to decide whether or not to have the SQL solver
toggled.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Exporting gaze data
23
Figure 3.4: iTrace gaze exportation
To integrate a new solver involves a couple of additions to the controlling classes
of iTrace. as seen on ﬁgure 3.4 it requires coupling the solver to the iTrace main
class. In iTrace.java along side the previous existing xmlSolver and jsonSolver
a new instance of the sqlSolver is needed. With the new sqlSolver instance it
is then possible to pass along the responses as they are made. As a change
from the XML and JSON solvers the sqlSolver requires a speciﬁc conﬁg call to
insert the session information in the database. The session information is the
developer user name and name along with the purpose of the session and the
session description. These are originally stored in a ﬁle separately from the XML
and JSON ﬁles and are as such not immediately available without speciﬁcally
adding an additional sql conﬁg method. The implementation can be seen in
Appendix F
The ControlView is responsible for adding new buttons to the console panel and
handles the user interface aspect of the implementation. It is in this UI the user
sets the sqlSolverEnabled variable which is used by iTrace.java to determine
whether or not to do the sql export. When these aspects are set up iTrace will
be able to export into the database. The next subsection will take a close look
at the database and the data being exported.
==PAGE:36==
24
Method
3.3.2
Database
Previously to the database implementation iTrace saved the data as either JSON
or XML ﬁles in separate folders for each session. By looking at a gaze from the
JSON data it can be seen that the data consists of the base gaze information
such as coordinates, pupil etc. Additionally it contains a variable amount of
source code entities. The full list and the structure can be seen in Figure 3.5
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Exporting gaze data
25
Figure 3.5: Example JSON data
"gazes": [
{
"name": "example.java",
"type": "java",
"x": 775,
"y": 452,
"left_validation": 0.75,
"right_validation": 0.75,
"left_pupil_diameter": 3.4242401123046875,
"right_pupil_diameter": 3.9959869384765625,
"timestamp": "2017-10-05T13:14:41.332+01:00",
"session_time": 973895205,
"tracker_time": 240730,
"system_time": 1507202081332,
"nano_time": 1709448837018574,
"path": "C:\\test\\src\\test\\example.java",
"line_height": 28,
"font_height": 18,
"line": 18,
"col": 13,
"line_base_x": 424,
"line_base_y": 449,
"sces": [
{
"name": "java.io.PrintStream.println(java.lang.String)",
"type": "METHOD",
"how": "USE",
"total_length": 30,
"start_line": 18,
"end_line": 18,
"start_col": 4,
"end_col": 34
},
{
The database structure were then created with the goals of being able to hold
several sessions with several diﬀerent users. As well as making sure the data
available in the previous XML and JSON implementation are still available in
the database implementation.
==PAGE:38==
26
Method
In the original iTrace structure there is also a separate ﬁle containing the sessions
information. The session information contains a unique session id. The session
purpose which is entered upon beginning a session. The session description.
The developer user name and the developer name.
The goal is then to combine these into a database.
By looking at the data
it resembles tables already as there is a session information ﬁle which all the
gazes belong to. Also for each gaze there are a group of SCEs with identical
attributes. These diﬀerent SCEs are the source code entity which the gaze is
located at and the surrounding SCEs in sorted order from nearest to furthest.
The surrounding SCEs are limited to the SCEs related to the entity gazed at.
In other words if looking at a statement in a loop within a class the SCEs would
cover the statement, the loop statement, the main declaration and the class
declaration. As such depending on the depth of the SCE any gaze needs to
contain a variable amount of SCEs. In order to keep the SCEs sorted and thus
keep the information about the depth of SCE an attribute has been added which
deﬁnes the depth of each SCE. As such if the user is interested in the tree like
SCE structure it can be recreated by sorting the depth attribute for SCEs with
the same ID. However if the analysis is done entirely on the object at the gaze
point all sces with a depth of one or higher can be discarded.
Figure 3.6: iTrace database schema
Figure 3.6 shows the database schema for the implemented solution. This solu-
tion reuses the unique session IDs created by iTrace to ensure the uniqueness of
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Converting gazes to ﬁxations
27
the individual sessions. In order to couple several source code entity entries to
an entry in the gaze table each gaze must have a unique primary key the SCE
table entries can use to relate to their parent gaze. In addition to this each gaze
belongs to a session and as such have been given the session ID as a foreign
key to ensure the relation. With this setup the three tables are related and the
data is ready to be cleaned and analysed. The iTrace.sql ﬁle for building the
database can be seen in Appendix E.
3.4
Converting gazes to ﬁxations
Before any valuable analysis can be done on the data it is necessary to determine
ﬁxations from the gaze data. To do this the algorithms discussed in section 2.1.2
can be used. From these the choice was reduced to either the velocity based
identiﬁcation algorithm or the dispersion based.
These were chosen as they
both scored well by Dario D. Salvucci and Joseph H. Goldberg [DDS00] as
they are both fast and robust while not requiring any unnecessarily complicated
implementations. From the velocity based algorithm and the dispersion based
algorithm the dispersion based identiﬁcation algorithm were arbitrarily chosen
as either would work for the data.
As seen in section 2.1.2.2 the dispersion based algorithm depends on deﬁning a
threshold for how large of a dispersion is allowed for gazes to be considered part
of the same ﬁxaton. To calculate this dispersion threshold needed to determine
whether gazes are part of a ﬁxation or a saccade this implementation relies
purely on the dispersion of pixels, as there is no static setup to ensure the
distance to user and the angle from user to tracker, which would allow us to use
angles instead of pixels. As such it also requires the user to pick a dispersion
threshold for the algorithm measured in pixels. This dispersion threshold may
have to vary between diﬀerent uses and tasks so the ability to change this has
been given to the user.
The algorithms were implemented in python from scratch in order to get full
control over which parts of the data are passed during the conversion. In order
to make the system usable for a user the ﬁxation gathering has been coupled
directly into a method which takes the database information as input and out-
puts a list of ﬁxations. Each of these ﬁxations contains a start time, end time,
x and y coordinates. Additionally it is implemented in such a way additional
data from the database can be added as well.
When the gazes are grouped as ﬁxations, each ﬁxation consists of a list of gazes.
This presents an issue with knowing which data to use if the ﬁxation is on the
==PAGE:40==
28
Method
edge of a line and as such consist information from diﬀerent lines. For example
at times some gazes would suggest the SCE type is a for statement and other
gazes suggest the line is a print statement. To combat this the current solution
picks the attributes repeated the most time.
Diﬀerent approaches could be
to determine it based on the line used the most times or basing it oﬀwhich
data values has the most milliseconds of view rather than number of gazes.
This happens in much the same way as the calculation of X and Y coordinate
centroids.
All of this is being done in the implemented library class iTraceAnalyser which
handles connecting to the data base, creating the ﬁxation and the event logs
discussed in section 3.5.2. The import is done by the user by calling the get
session function bringing along the database information and the unique session
id as seen in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: iTraceAnalyser Get Session
import iTraceAnalyser as IA
#Importing the test subjects data
iTrace1 = IA.get_session("localhost","root",
"1234","iTrace",'20171201T092946-0684+0100',15)
iTrace2 = IA.get_session("localhost","root"
,"1234","iTrace",'20171201T101056-0578+0100',15)
iTrace3 = IA.get_session("localhost","root"
,"1234","iTrace",'20171205T100741-0299+0100',15)
iTrace4 = IA.get_session("localhost","root"
,"1234","iTrace",'20171205T102737-0035+0100',15)
iTrace5 = IA.get_session("localhost","root"
,"1234","iTrace",'20171205T105857-0765+0100',15)
When this is called the variables iTrace1 to 5 are lists of ﬁxations that are ready
to be used in other methods. It is also possible to get the raw gazes with the
get_raw_gazes() method and the same arguments, if those are of interest.
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Analysing The Data
29
3.5
Analysing The Data
3.5.1
Performing Static Source Code Entity Analysis
Before looking into the process mining for comparison between several sessions,
a quick view of speciﬁc sessions and their data may be of interest. As such a
couple of methods were implemented to work with the ﬁxation data collected
in the previous section 3.4. These methods are intended to function as a quick
overview of the ﬁxations for a single session.
The main idea behind using this functionality over the process mining is not
the quality of the data shown, or it being more in depth than the process
mining data.
Rather most of what can be seen from these methods in the
iTraceAnalyser class seen in Appendix D can also be discovered using the process
mining suggested in section 3.5.2. The idea is to give quick access to certain
values and views that may be interesting before going into a more comprehensive
analysis.
To reach this goal the methods were designed to keep them generalized enough
that they will work for any attribute passed along with the ﬁxations acquired
in the get session methods seen in Section 3.4 Figure 3.7. This helps in case
further work is done on the iTraceAnalyser class where other attributes is being
placed in the ﬁxations.
The methods implemented covers bar plots of the following:
• number of ﬁxations.
• Total ﬁxation duration.
• Average ﬁxation duration.
• Maximum ﬁxation duration.
Additionally a method has been made for the total duration of the session in
seconds.
In Figure 3.8 the methods are called for creating the bar plots with the ﬁxations
created in Figure 3.7. These plots are used and shown and in section 4.2.2.1.
==PAGE:42==
30
Method
Figure 3.8: iTraceAnalyser, plots and duration
print IA.session_duration(iTrace1)
#Creating bar plots for Chapter 4 section 3.
IA.fixation_count_bar(iTrace1,"count_lines","line")
IA.fixation_count_bar(iTrace1,"count_types","sce_type")
IA.fixation_duration_bar(iTrace1,"dur_lines","line")
IA.fixation_duration_bar(iTrace1,"dur_types","sce_type")
IA.fixation_average_duration_bar(iTrace1,"avg_dur_lines","line")
IA.fixation_average_duration_bar(iTrace1,"avg_dur_types"
,"sce_type")
IA.fixation_max_duration_bar(iTrace1,"dur_max_lines","line")
IA.fixation_max_duration_bar(iTrace1,"dur_max_types","sce_type")
These methods were chosen as they provide insight into what areas the user has
been the most interested in four aspects. Where did the user spend the majority
of the time. Which area did the user repeatedly come back to and which areas
did the user on average spend the longest. Finally which location did the user
spend the longest single ﬁxation, as important areas may be re-visited many
times, which lowers the average duration of a ﬁxation at that area.
3.5.2
Performing Process Mining Analysis
This section covers the tools created to perform a proper process mining analysis
of the ﬁxation data. This part of the process consists of converting the ﬁxations
to events which can be read by the process mining tool Disco. Additionally it
will contain a few remarks about the tools Disco provides which can be used.
Process mining was chosen as the primary source of analysis for the data col-
lected using iTrace due to how eﬀectively it can present information regarding
how the users have behaved. Additionally it allows for much smoother compari-
son between several users than individual visualizations such as heatmaps would.
For longer sessions it is also less cluttered than would be expected from scan
path visualizations. The process mining provides strong tools for comparing the
events completed in each session.
==PAGE:43==
3.5 Analysing The Data
31
In order to perform the process mining analysis the data needs to exist in an
event log form. This form needs to include a unique identiﬁer which separates
the diﬀerent processes. In addition each entry needs to be considered as an
activity and as such needs an activity name. The activities are not necessar-
ily unique and typically represent one or more actions that are done together.
Finally it makes sense to have a start and end time for each event as they are
represented as ﬁxations. This presents knowledge about both the duration of
each event and it also let the user know the time in transition between events.
When working with this ﬁxation data the unique identiﬁer may very well be
the session ID as this has been brought along throughout the process and it
uniquely identiﬁes each session.
Which value to use as the event descriptor is more interesting as the analysis
changes depending on how the event is deﬁned. First thing to notice is that
events in this case can be considered to be ﬁxating on a point. The diﬀerence
then depend on what you decide to take from the ﬁxation.
One way could
be using the X and Y coordinates and create an event for each X Y ﬁxation
combination. This presents a couple of issues in regards to the readability of
the mined processes. It would not be trivial for the reader to couple screen
coordinates to the code viewed. This becomes increasingly diﬃcult when the
code is large enough that scrolling is involved and position X,Y is no longer
deterministic as the scrolling oﬀset is unknown.
3.5.2.1
Lines
To get around these issues each line could be considered an event. In this way
the oﬀset is no longer a problem and with having the code next to the diagram
the line can easily be coupled to a section on the screen. An example use of this
is if the user spent an extraordinary amount of time on a line, the reader can
look up the line in the code and judge if this makes sense. This allows for an
exploratory analysis of the session.
In order to make it easier to relate the activities seen in the process mined data
to the content of the lines in the source code the SCE types that have been
viewed on that ﬁxation point has been appended to each event. As such an
event would be named "34 - FORSTATEMENT" rather than just 34.
This
makes it easier to understand what exists on the line without changing the tree.
An example of the mapping from source code to the activities in the mined
process for the line wise method can be seen in Figure 3.9
==PAGE:44==
32
Method
Figure 3.9: Source code to Event log mapping, lines
The proposed solution works as a general implementation and requires no out-
side interference from the reader and provides a process which can be analyzed
and hopefully clarify diﬀerences in approaches and behaviour of the user. How-
ever an additional method is proposed to help alleviate a few issues. The ﬁrst
issue is when the eye tracking is not accurate enough to do pixel, or line, perfect
gaze capture. Secondly the more events, in this case lines, the process contains
the harder the analysis is to read. In addition the naming using lines requires a
lot of back and forth between the code and the process mined diagram.
3.5.2.2
Area of Interest
The alternative method allows the user to deﬁne areas of interest. The area
of interest, AOI, are then used as events. An example AOI could be line 1-10,
which may consist of an introduction to the ﬁle and could be named by this.
This would allow the user to deﬁne larger areas and name them in ways that
are easily relatable to the source code and lessen the need for looking up in the
source ﬁles. As for the accuracy issue as the areas are intended to be larger and
in some cases a slight padding can be added it prevents issues where accuracy
makes the user leave the AOI which he is actually looking at.
Figure 3.10 shows the area of the source code which is mapped to its matching
activity in the mined process. In this example the Sort method is deﬁned as an
activity. This makes the entire section a single activity in the process mining
diagram.
==PAGE:45==
3.5 Analysing The Data
33
Figure 3.10: Source code to Event log mapping
When creating these events a few decisions were made in regards to implementa-
tion. When two or more consecutive ﬁxations are on the same event, assuming
the transition is less than a second they are collapsed into one event. This may
happen due to spikes in data or moving from one point within the area to an-
other. This allows for longer events, while still allowing catching cases where
the user is looking away from the screen and then returns to the same area.
These solutions has been implemented as a python library, iTraceAnalyser Ap-
pendix D which handles collecting data from the db, converting it to ﬁxations
as well as creating event logs and bar plots of the ﬁxation data.
==PAGE:46==
34
Method
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Evaluation
4.1
Setup
When the data was collected a few goals were set with respect to the extent of the
report. It would not make sense to use example data as this does not provide any
real insight into what kind of results could be seen using the proposed analysis
process. As such one goal was to gather data from outside sources. At the same
time it was decided not to formalize the testing entirely and the test task was
kept small and relatively simple with only one ﬁle. The testing environment
was kept informal and was done using students around campus at the Technical
University of Denmark.
The physical setup consists of a laptop with a Tobii 4C tracker placed in the
section between screen and keyboard using adhesives to keep the tracker in place
facing towards the user. The users was also given a pen and some paper, in case
they needed to note down the list to be sorted.
To enhance the quality of the tracking each session began with the user looking
at a test ﬁle with a letter they were asked to focus on. Using the crosshair
in iTrace it was possible to determine how close it was to the letter.
Small
deviations could be solved using the drift tool in iTrace and larger deviations
ran the calibration.
==PAGE:48==
36
Evaluation
The test itself was done using an implementation of Insertion sort available from
and authored by Robert Sedgewick and Kevin Wayne [RS17]. Minor changes
was done to this ﬁle in order to make the test more extensive and can be seen in
Appendix G. First the name was changed to avoid the user immediately seeing
which sort is being used. The name was however not removed from the comment
ﬁelds. Additionally the sorting loop was made to begin the iterations from i=1
as opposed to the original i=0 as the ﬁrst iteration would otherwise do nothing.
The Insertion sort ﬁle consists of several methods. The ones to consider are
Sort with one argument is the sort method the user is asked to work on, this
sort takes only one argument.
Sort with multiple arguments is the sorts which take diﬀerent arguments.
The user is not supposed to look at these. It is however a large section covering
70 lines which means that several short ﬁxations within this area is expected.
Less is a method comparing two values. Less is called in the Sort method.
Exch is a method switching around the position of two values. Exchange is
called in the Sort method
isSorted is a method used in asserting that the list is sorted for a given interval.
isSorted is called in the Sort method. Show is a method printing the list.
Main is the main method calling Sort with one argument.
The test subjects were then asked to ﬁrst ﬁgure out which method was called as
the implementation consists of several sorts with diﬀerent amounts of arguments.
The sort is called by the main method using one argument containing the list
[4,2,1,3]. This question was used to ensure they all worked on the same method.
They were also asked what the array would look like after the ﬁrst iteration of
the outer loop. As the algorithm is insertion sort the ﬁrst iteration will compare
the ﬁrst two indexes and swap if the ﬁrst element is lower than the second
element. The sorting algorithm is written as seen in 4.1 and shows two other
functions, less and exch. These exists in other sections of the code.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Analysis
37
Figure 4.1: Insertion sort
public static void sort(Comparable[] a) {
int n = a.length;
for (int i = 1; i < n; i++) {
for (int j = i; j > 0 && less(a[j], a[j-1]); j--) {
exch(a, j, j-1);
}
assert isSorted(a, 0, i);
}
assert isSorted(a);
}
These questions were asked to ﬁve testers where four of them completed the
task.
4.2
Analysis
This analysis section goes over the data collected using the methods described
in the previous chapter and performs an analysis of what is seen at the results
in order to provide an example of the kind of analysis which can be done using
the system.
Results and analysis will be seen of the following parts of the system.
• Fixations, accuracy and choice of dispersion threshold. From Section 3.4
• Fixation data analysis with python plots. From Section 3.5.1
• Process Mined data of event logs. Both line by line analysis and User
Deﬁned area of interest analysis. From Section 3.5.2
4.2.1
Fixations
In the setup in Section 4.1 it was described how gaze data from ﬁve students
were gathered during a small test. With the collected gazes it can be of interest
==PAGE:50==
38
Evaluation
to determine how well the gazes are translated to ﬁxations. This also allows for
checking the output depending on a few diﬀerent dispersion threshold settings.
In Figure 4.2 a comparison of the raw gazes and the ﬁxations achieved can
be seen with a dispersion threshold of 15 pixels which appears to be a decent
value for the gazes collected as it covers the expected areas without creating
ﬁxations in the saccade areas. The gaze data used is not related to the test
setup mentioned in Section 4.1 as the coordinates do not take into account
scrolling and a smaller data section help provide a more clear image of the gaze
to ﬁxation transformation.
Figure 4.2: Gazes to ﬁxations
From the images seen in Figure 4.2 it is clear that a lot of gaze data is produced
when looking around the screen. As such the ﬁxation identiﬁcation algorithm
eﬀectively removes a lot of the noisy data and present a clearer image of which
areas were actually being focused at.
For this example the size of the dots
depend on the duration of the ﬁxation.
Besides the transformation it can also be seen how the choice of dispersion
threshold changes the results drastically. According to a study published by the
National Center for Biotechnology Information they found that
Quote: "there are considerable diﬀerences in the characteristics of ﬁxations not
only between these tasks, but also between individuals." [RvdL].
They point out that the eye movements diﬀer depending on the type of task and
from person to person. As seen on Figure 4.3 the ﬁxations vary greatly based
on the dispersion threshold and it should provide an idea of how the analysis
may change depending on the choice.
Here the dispersion threshold of 15 pixels were chosen as it covers the same
ﬁxational areas as the the others without creating additional ﬁxations such as
the 25 and 30 threshold.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Analysis
39
Figure 4.3: Gazes to ﬁxations
As previously stated the cut oﬀpoint for threshold between gazes is not trivially
found for all cases of the tracking and need to be considered for the individual
setup. As such a look is taken at the behaviour of the ﬁxation algorithm for
data gathered with the setup used throughout the experiments. The results of
these thresholds can be seen in Figure 4.3. From these it can be seen that the
gazes which are not clustered together, the saccaddes, are removed for all the
tested values. It is also seen that with thresholds between 15 and 30 the areas
remain the same while the number of ﬁxations identiﬁed diﬀers.
This gives
the impression that values between these would oﬀer decent results for further
analysis. It is however not immediately clear which value is the most accurate
without a more rigorous analysis.
==PAGE:52==
40
Evaluation
4.2.2
Bar Plots Fixation Data Analysis
4.2.2.1
Bar Plots Fixation Line Analysis
In this section we will look at the data for a single session. The user was a
masters student at the Computer Science and Engineering study line at DTU
and were put to the task deﬁned in Section 4.1. The goal here is to see if the
data can be used to get an impression of how the user worked. In particular it
is interesting to see if the user was able to determine the critical parts in the
source code for answering the questions.
To assist in reading the plots the methods and their lines are:
• The correct Sort method line 54 to 69.
• Other sort methods line 70 to 140.
• Less method line 141 to 160.
• Exchange method line 161 to 168.
• isSorted method line 169 to 192.
• Show method line 194 to 201.
• Main method line 202 to 214.
With these lines in mind the ﬁrst step in seeing how the user worked could be
to look at the total duration spent on each line. This can be seen in Figure 4.4
with added boxes to better see which lines belong to which methods.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Analysis
41
Figure 4.4: Total duration, lines
One thing to notice here is that this type of visualization is limited by the number
of the bars shown. It is clear that if the ﬁle had been larger or if the user had
ﬁxated on each line it would quickly become unreadable. An alternative is then
to use a histogram rather than a bar plot. This would provide readability at
the cost of precision. Information speciﬁc to each line would be lost using a
histogram.
For the speciﬁc case however it appears line 56 to 62 has been focused at a
lot.
These lines are part of the Sort method we expected the user to focus
on. Additionally line 141 to 173 stands out with a small peak compared to the
surrounding lines. These lines are within the Less and exchange method. Finally
there is another peak at line 206 to 210, which represents the main method, this
peak is signiﬁcantly more noticeable than the less and exchange peak.
From this it can be seen that over all the user was primarily interested in the
Sort method, the Less and to some extend the exchange method and noticibly
interested in the Main method with a very large peak around the sort method.
In order to get an idea of the ﬂow of the process it is worth looking at how many
ﬁxations were on each line. This can be seen in Figure 4.5
==PAGE:54==
42
Evaluation
Figure 4.5: Fixation Count, lines
From the ﬁxation counts the ﬁrst thing to notice is that it shows almost the
same picture as the total duration bars. It evens out the areas in between the
peaks but otherwise the same is shown. The peaks are still around the Sort
as the largest peak. The Less and exchange method as a peak area and the
main method having three lines that are visited a lot. This makes sense as the
Sort method is the method performing the logical operations and are as such
expected to be the most complex method. The main method must be viewed
in order to know which method is called and the values being sorted. Less and
exchange are both called from the Sort method, and speciﬁcally Less may be
interesting as its operations could be going both ways, in the sense of which
argument is less than which argument.
In order to get an idea of how long all the ﬁxations were on average at a place
we can compare to the average ﬁxation duration in Figure 4.6 to the number of
ﬁxations.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Analysis
43
Figure 4.6: Average Fixation Duration, lines
Looking at the average duration diagram it does not appear to present much
information about the process. It does however show that, not accounting for
the rare cases with large averages such as line 120, the ﬁxations were mostly
between 100 and 300 ms. with one line going up to 400 ms. These numbers
are within the expected range for ﬁxations. The values show little impact from
areas which were more complex than others. This is likely due to the complex
areas having a large number of ﬁxations which dilutes the maximum values.
Next a look will be taken at the maximum ﬁxation duration of each line in order
to see if the complexity of areas meant the user had longer ﬁxations on these
areas. The maximum duration for each line can be seen in Figure 4.7
==PAGE:56==
44
Evaluation
Figure 4.7: Maximum Fixation Duration, lines
Here it can be seen that line 60 and 58 have the longest ﬁxations. Where 60 are
the outer for-statement and 58 is the Sort method declaration. There are also
some slightly longer ﬁxations at the main method.
The ﬁxation of over two seconds at line 58 appear too long in comparison to
the remaining ﬁxations. However looking at the number of ﬁxations and the
average ﬁxation duration, the value at 58 appear to be out of the ordinary and
is not a typical occurrence as the average duration is not larger than other lines.
These values shows that the Sort method must have had a degree of complexity
as the user dwelled long within a short area. The length is however much longer
than expected of ﬁxations and may be due to small saccades that was not caught
by the threshold we used. On the rest of the data we see that the main method
has a peak as well.
4.2.3
Bar Plots Type Analysis
From the bar plots in Figure 4.8 it can be seen that despite method declarations
being the most viewed types in total time and number of ﬁxations, the for
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Analysis
45
statement type has the longest ﬁxations on average. This gives the impression
that the hardest to read parts of the code was happening within for statements
despite method statements being more common.
Figure 4.8: Bar plots For Source Code Entity Types
4.2.3.1
Bar Plots Analysis Conclusion
By simply looking at these data plots it seems likely that the user understood
the task and was able to ﬁnd the most important sections in the source code
which would assist in answering the questions. The analysis shows that the user
worked primarily on the Sort method, the Main method and to a lesser extend
the Less method, while there was no discernible peaks during the other sorts.
It shows that the Sort method was the most challenging of the three, with the
For statement being the line looked at the longest in one ﬁxation. The analysis
does however not provide any insight into the order of the ﬁxations apart from
the ﬁxation count which presents how many times the area was re-visited in the
sense of how many ﬁxations were at the area.
==PAGE:58==
46
Evaluation
4.2.4
Process Mining
Before looking at the process mined data for the ﬁve users we will take a look
at what the expected process looks like.
While it is very unlikely that the users will follow a speciﬁc process of reading
the source code, it can be expected in order for them to answer the questions, to
follow the process described in Figure 4.9 at some sub path of reading process.
This does not take into account anything visited while looking for the speciﬁc
methods, or any re-reading in case the user becomes unsure.
Figure 4.9: Insertion Sort reading sub process
To create the event logs the script in ﬁgure 4.10 was used along with the ﬁxations
created in Figure 3.7. The full script used to create plots and event logs can be
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Analysis
47
found in Appendix H
Figure 4.10: iTrace analysis script
IA.process_mining_data([iTrace1,iTrace2,iTrace3
,iTrace4,iTrace5],"test_sort_lines.csv",'lines')
IA.process_mining_data([iTrace1,iTrace2,iTrace3,iTrace4
,iTrace5],"test_sort_userdef.csv"
,'user_defined',"insertion.csv")
For all the ﬁgures in the analysis it is worth noting that all the Disco diagrams
shown section has had their activities and paths lowered, meaning that the least
visited areas and transition paths are removed. This is to avoid having upwards
of 200 nodes with an equal amount of paths going to them.
4.2.4.1
Disco Lines Analysis
In this part of the analysis a look will be taken at the event logs where each line
is considered an activity. As mentioned in 3.5.2. The lines have the SCE types
which exists on the line written as well as the line number. This is intended
to assist in readability to make the reader less dependent of having the source
code on the side. An overview of what methods are on which lines can be seen
in Section 4.2.2.1
Looking at Figure 4.11 it can be seen that similar information as we saw in
the bar plots can be gathered here. However Figure 4.11 represents all four
users who ﬁnished the task, and consecutive ﬁxations on the same line has been
aggregated. Looking at the diagram for the total duration spent on each activity
combined for all the users, it can be seen that lines 58 to 61 are the most visited
lines. This matches what we saw in the Bar plot analysis in Section 4.2.2. It is
also expected that the Main method, line 202 to 214, and the Less method, line
141 to 160, had signiﬁcant time spent on them.
It can be seen that line 209,206 and 208 each made it through the exclusion
made by Disco. While they have signiﬁcantly less time spent on them, as also
seen in the bar plot analysis, they still appear signiﬁcant.
On the left side in Figure 4.11 we see the lines 143,146,147 and 152 next to
each other. These are the important part of the Less method which contains
==PAGE:60==
48
Evaluation
the method declaration and the return statement.
It is also seen that the less statement is typically read in concession and is
thereby consecutive in the diagram. Whereas the Sort and main method are
split up in diﬀerent sections of the diagram as the Sort method is visited more
often from various sections of the code.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Analysis
49
Figure 4.11: Line wise, total duration
==PAGE:62==
50
Evaluation
Figure 4.12 shows how long the longest views within the lines were. This ﬁgure
shows that line 58 and 60 have the longest views. This is the same result as
seen in the Bar plot analysis, however here it is for all four users, providing even
more assurance that these lines take longer to understand than other lines in
the source code.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Analysis
51
Figure 4.12: Line wise, max duration
==PAGE:64==
52
Evaluation
Figure 4.13 shows the frequencies for each action.
The frequencies are the
number of times an action is performed. The ﬁgure shows the same results as
the previous two Disco diagrams in the sense that the activities with the most
time spent also tend to have been visited the most times.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Analysis
53
Figure 4.13: Line wise, frequencies
==PAGE:66==
54
Evaluation
Lastly we look at the disco diagram for all the users, including the user who
did not ﬁnish. This can be seen in Figure 4.14. It would make sense to look at
the user who did not ﬁnish the task by himself, however Disco does not remove
paths and activities if there is only one case. The user who did not ﬁnish ﬁxated
on 118 lines. In order to get an idea of the idea of the diﬀerence between the
the ﬁfth user and the remaining four, we will explore the statistics.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Analysis
55
Figure 4.14: Line wise, All users
==PAGE:68==
56
Evaluation
Some statistics to be seen on the diﬀerent users in the statistics part of Disco:
Number of activities, unique activities not including re visits and session dura-
tion.
• User 1: 76 Activities, Duration: 4m50s
• User 2: 65 Activities, Duration: 4m25s
• User 3: 76 Activities, Duration: 6m58s
• User 4: 68 Activities, Duration: 3m15s
• User 5: 118 Activities, Duration: 11m9s
As such it can be seen that the ﬁrst four user ﬁxated on 65 to 76 unique lines.
Additionally by looking at the total number of unique activities for the four
users who ﬁnished it can be seen that had a total of 114 unique lines in total.
This shows that the user who did not ﬁnish was signiﬁcantly more thorough in
reading most of the code than the users who ﬁnished were. This along with the
time spent gives the impression the user was trying to ﬁnd something in the
code for longer, resulting thorough scanning of most of the lines and thereby
more time spent.
4.2.4.2
Disco Lines Analysis Conclusion
The ﬁrst thing to notice was that the most common lines were represented in
the diagram, which presented the same image as we saw in Section 4.2.2. Which
is that the Main method, the less method and the Sort method were the three
most viewed sections in the source code. This holds true for the Disco analysis
and as such the same values were available. It was seen that the majority of the
time was spent on the Sort method, the lines in the Sort method was the most
frequently visited parts and had the longest single ﬁxations.
As for the process it was hard to get a full idea of how they worked due to the
large number of activities and paths as there were 114 activities for the four who
ﬁnished. This forced us to look at a very low number of paths and activities
which lost a lot of the context. It may be possible to look into these individually
however the complexity makes it undesirable.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Analysis
57
4.2.4.3
Disco User Deﬁned Area of Interests Analysis
To make the process less complex and provide a higher level analysis rather
than a line by line analysis the iTraceAnalyser was made to allow the user to
deﬁne areas of interest. On the same set of ﬁxations as the Line analysis was
conducted, an event log has been created with a set of user deﬁned activities
created for the speciﬁc experiment.
These activities are made to represent areas of interests, AoIs. The idea of an
AoI is to group together lines which represent the same section. The example
of sections used here is the methods we are interested in. The areas in between
these methods.
As seen in Figure 4.9 the areas we are interested in are the Main method, the
Sort method and the Less method. In addition to these it may be interest to
see if the users also looked at the Exchange method.
Thus in this analysis each AoI is considered an activity instead of considering
each line an activity. Figure 4.15 shows the .csv ﬁle used to deﬁned the AoIs.
Figure 4.15: Insertion.csv rules for areas of interest
Sort,54,69
Other sorts,70,140
Less,141,160
Exchange,161,168
isSorted,169,192
Show,194,201
Main,202,214
With these rules an event log with seven actions are created based on the meth-
ods described in 4.1.
Sort is the sort method the user is asked to work on.
Other sorts is the sorts which take diﬀerent arguments. The user is not sup-
posed to look at these. It is however a large section covering 70 lines which
means that several short ﬁxations within this area is expected.
Less is a method comparing two values. Less is called in the Sort method.
Exchange is a method switching around the position of two values
isSorted is a method used in asserting that the list is sorted for a given interval.
Show is a method printing the list.
==PAGE:70==
58
Evaluation
Main is the main method calling Sort.
Looking at Figure 4.16 it can be seen similarly to the Disco line analysis and the
Bar plot analysis, that the majority of the time was spent on the Sort method,
with the Main and Less methods also receiving some focus. The Show, exchange
and isSorted have all had less than 10 seconds of ﬁxations on average per user.
Due to the low number of activities the diagram can easily contain all the
activities without being cluttered. The complexity will still increase if all paths
were added so for this example it will be left at the lowest number of paths.
This should also help see which paths were the most general across the users.
This solution provides a clearer representation of the general process ﬂow. A
couple of observations to be seen:
• Sort transitions to Other sorts
• Other sorts transition to either Show or Exchange
• Show transitions to Main.
• Main transitions isSorted
• isSorted transitions to Less
• Exchange transitions to Sort
• isSorted transitions to Main
• Less transitions to Sort.
• Sort, Less and Main all transition to themselves.
The diagram as such essentially shows that Sort is the primary area the user
ﬁxations resides. From here it moves down to Main and Less and back up to
Sort. Alternately it moves from Other sorts down to Exchange and back up to
Sort again.
This reasonably matches the assumption of the user going to the Main method
to see which values are in the list, and then back to Sort until they decide to
check the Less method. As such this diagram gives the impression that the users
are following the ﬂow of the method calls. The sub process seen in 4.9 is also
seen in the movement of the process.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Analysis
59
The loop transitions in the Sort activity is most likely due to the user looking
away from the screen and then back. In this setup the users was allowed to use
paper and pencils which will have caused the long transitions where they look
at the Sort method followed by looking at the paper and then ﬁnally looking
back at the Sort method.
==PAGE:72==
60
Evaluation
Figure 4.16: User deﬁned, total duration
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Analysis
61
Figure 4.17 shows the graph depicting the maximum duration. Here it can be
seen that the Sort method has the longest single viewing. The values here diﬀers
from the longest view in the Line wise analysis. This is due to the collapsing
of consecutive ﬁxations on the same AoI within the same area with less than a
second between the ﬁxations. This is happening over a signiﬁcantly larger area
than it did in the line wise analysis. As mentioned in Section 3.5.2 this is made
due to an interest in knowing how long they focused within a speciﬁc area, and
the areas with this method may be large enough that you can change area of
ﬁxation and remain within the same area of interest.
==PAGE:74==
62
Evaluation
Figure 4.17: User deﬁned, max duration
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Analysis
63
Figure 4.18 shows the frequencies of each activity. The major take away here
which was not as visible in the previous analysis is how often the the user
transitioned within the Sort method. The ﬁgure also shows that less had almost
twice the revisits of the Main method, despite the duration of both only being
ﬁve seconds apart.
==PAGE:76==
64
Evaluation
Figure 4.18: User deﬁned, frequencies
==PAGE:77==
4.2 Analysis
65
Due to the low number of activities it is possible to look at the process for the
user who did not ﬁnish the task. This process can be seen in Figure 4.19. Here
it can be seen that including transitions the user spent four minutes inside the
Other sort section. Compared to the 77 seconds from the other four users in
total, this is a very signiﬁcant time. The user also spent almost a minute reading
the main method.
Connecting this with the number found in the line wise analysis where it was
seen that the user looked at more lines than the other four users in total. This
gives the idea that the user who did not complete may have attempted reading
the entire ﬁle before answering the question.
The process of moving from Sort to main and back to Sort is also seen here,
however the durations tell us that this process happend over a signiﬁcant time
compared to the other users.
==PAGE:78==
66
Evaluation
Figure 4.19: User deﬁned, Did not complete the task
4.2.4.4
Disco User Deﬁned Analysis Conclusion
The user deﬁned sections makes it easier to read the Disco results as it abstracts
away from the source code and provides a higher level analysis. While this so-
lution did not present any information about the individual source code entities
or lines, it made the overall process easier to read as the number of activities
==PAGE:79==
4.2 Analysis
67
and paths were signiﬁcantly reduced.
Additionally the analysis revealed how the user who did not ﬁnish, read the
code diﬀerent to the other users and did not appear to follow the ﬂow of the
code but rather read all the sort methods. Making it appear the user did not
immediately understand which sections of the ﬁle was necessary to answer the
questions.
==PAGE:80==
68
Evaluation
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
Data Preparation
5.1.1
Data Collection
The data collection mostly worked as expected in the test cases used with the
eye tracking working within a lines accuracy for all the users and for most users
the crosshair was close enough to the actual point which the user looked at that
there did not appear to be any issues with the accuracy of the tracking.
The export to the database also worked seamlessly and all were saved in the
ﬁrst try, that is to say no tests were discarded due to bad calibration, bad saves
or other crashes.
These results were as expected as the work was done with iTrace which already
presented itself as a working piece of software, and the implementation of the
new native interface was done in way matching the old implementation and
should not have any loss of functionality.
The number of tests and test subjects are very limited in that each session were
3-7 minutes. With the user who did not ﬁnish spending 11 minutes. As such
==PAGE:82==
70
Discussion
it was done in short sessions and on a low number of users. This means a lot
more work can be done on collecting and analyzing real world data. This thesis
does however provide some insight into what the analysis can look like. As well
as providing the tools for collecting and storing the data.
5.1.2
Fixations
Fixation identiﬁcation of the gaze data remains an important aspect of the
analysis as the data loses value and credibility if the user cannot trust that the
identiﬁed ﬁxations are the true ﬁxations. As such the implementation relied on
a trusted algorithm for the identiﬁcation of the ﬁxations.
In Section 2.1.2 we see an analysis of the implemented ﬁxation identiﬁcation al-
gorithm in use. While it is not clear which threshold provides the most accurate
results, it is clear that while the threshold is not set to an extreme such as 5
pixels, the ﬁxations are covering the same areas but with diﬀerent amounts and
duration of the ﬁxations.
So while further work can be done to ensure the most accurate results the
ﬁxations collected does to some extent match what is expected from seeing the
gaze clusters.
5.2
Fixation Data Analysis
The analysis of the ﬁxation data in Section 4.2.2.1 provides a quick view of some
statistics of the ﬁxation data. This serves the purpose giving quick access to
certain metrics of the data.
While it does allow the user to understand where the majority of the time and
ﬁxations were placed, as well as which areas required the most focus. This type
of analysis does not appear to provide the same degree of insight and possibilities
for further analysis as the process mining method. This may in part be due to
the size of the data and how the plots does not make it immediately relateable to
a source code editor. For this other visualizations should provide more useful,
and for this thesis the focus was then moved to considering the ﬁxations as
processes.
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Process Mining
71
5.3
Process Mining
The idea of using process mining as the primary visualization method for analyz-
ing the ﬁxation data of a source code reading session provided a very valid way
of seeing how the users approached the source code. By grouping neighbouring
ﬁxations at the same areas of interest it helps raise the level of abstraction to
a point where it is more immediately clear what the user was working on at a
given time in the process.
For the analysis in Section 4.2.4 two separate methods were used. The analysis
approach remains mostly the same with the major diﬀerence being in the way
the event logs are created.
Of the line wise events and the user deﬁned area of interest events both provide
insight and statistics on the cases. It is however clear that for analysis of larger
scale tests it may be a clear advantage to raise the abstraction to larger areas
and create more meaningful names to each area.
For smaller parts, such as understanding which part of a given source code area
the user spent the time and focus on, it may however be an advantage to see it
line by line. In some cases even SCE by SCE.
In this thesis the conformance and compliance checking was done very informally
with merely having an idea of what was expected to be seen, which four of the
users to a large extent lived up too and the ﬁfth user varying from the assumed
approach.
There may be a lot to gain by formalizing the compliance testing to ﬁnd if there
exists sub routines which conforms to the expected process.
This may have the potential for use in regards to using heuristics to score each
user and get immediate approximations of how well the user did before perform-
ing exploratory analysis on each user in detail.
5.4
Future Work
This thesis covered the proposed tools for and methods for creating an analysis
of code comprehension tasks by developers. The examples used in the evaluation
in Section 4, are limited in number of users and complexity of the task as well
as number of tasks. Larger scale testing would be necessary in order to be more
==PAGE:84==
72
Discussion
certain of the usefullness of the solution.
Additionally conformance testing and compliance checking could be used for
automating estimates of how well a user is doing. This along with the right
heuristics may make it possible to detect developers who had issues automati-
cally.
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This thesis presents a system for creating visualizations of eye tracking data
gathered using the gaze to source code mapping Eclipse plugin, iTrace. The
ﬁrst task of the thesis serves to update the native driver connecting to the eye
tracker to function with the current versions of the Tobii SDK. The second task
implements a solution which extends the iTrace system with a MySQL database
and the ability to transfer gaze data seamlessly into the local database. The
proposed system includes a two part python analysis library, iTraceAnalyser.
The tool loads a session from the database and converts the gazes into ﬁxations.
The analyzer provides an easy way of creating simple visualizations representing
the ﬁxation data in Bar plots for quick overview of single sessions. The primary
purpose of the tool is to convert the data gathered with iTrace into event logs
compatible with process mining tools such as Disco by Celonis. The evaluations
of the tool has shown that the event logs, which come as both a general line
wise activity deﬁnition and activities which can be deﬁned by the user, serves
as a good all around tool for analyzing and comparing several sessions at once.
The larger the areas of interests are the higher level of analysis can be done on
the processes by the users.
==PAGE:86==
74
Conclusion
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
Glossary
Abstract syntax tree. In relation to iTrace the abstract syntax tree holds the
structure for the source code in order to ﬁnd information on the speciﬁc SCEs.
Calibration. In eye tracking calibration is the act of updating the eye trackers
knowledge of the characteristics of the users eye, such as shape, light refraction
and reﬂection properties of parts of the eye. [Tob17c]
Eye tracker. The eye tracker is the hardware used for eye tracking and is a
camera with near infrared lights used to take images of the eyes for use in eye
tracking.
Eye tracking, using a camera to detect where on the screen the users eyes are
looking. It maps the position of the users eye to a position on the screen and
returns X and Y pixel coordinates.
Fixation. Fixations are points where the user concentrates for an extended
time. As such a ﬁxation relates to gazes as ﬁxations can be considered a cluster
of gazes around the same point over an extended time. Fixations at the very
minimum contains X and Y coordinates and a start time and an end time.
Gaze. Gazes are the raw outputs from the eye tracking. Each gaze is an X,Y
coordinate set relating to a pixel area on the screen. A gaze may be attributed
==PAGE:88==
76
Glossary
more values depending on the tool most relevant for this thesis among these
are the recorded time for the gaze and the source code data related to the gaze
point.
Saccades. Saccades are the movement between ﬁxations. When the areas are
moving from one point of focus to another the gazes in between are considered
the saccade.
Fixation identiﬁcation algorithms.
The algorithms used for converting
gazes into ﬁxations.
IGazeHandler is the component of iTrace which is responsible for collecting
the data from the tracker and collecting further information about the connected
SCEs, line numbers etc. Outputs the gaze data as an IGazeResponse
IGazeResponse is the structured gaze data which includes the information
collected by the IGazeHandler.
ISolver is the super class responsible for outputting the IGazeResponses to
other external sources such as XML and JSON.
iTrace. An Eclipse plugin which couples eye tracking gazes with the source
code entities in Eclipse.
Java native interface is a java library used for calling C and C++ code in a
java environment. In this thesis the term JNI or driver is used to describe the
C++ module connecting to the eye trackers software development kit (SDK).
Source code entity. SCEs are parts of the source code that can be categorized.
These include highlighted words and comments.
Tobii Analytics 3.0 is the old Tobii SDK which is no longer available since
the release of the Tobii Pro SDK.
Tobii Pro is the current SDK for Tobii eye trackers as of the composing of the
thesis.
==PAGE:89==
Appendix B
Components installation
B.1
JNI
If you download and install iTrace from their Github, you can just replace their
version of the ﬁle at iTrace-Archive/tree/master/jni/TobiiTracker With the one
in appendix C.
You will need to manually change the location of your license on line 209 to the
location of your license.:
license_success = apply_licenses_example(
native_data->eye_tracker,"C:/Users/Dennis/Desktop/Tobii_license");
Additionally when you have downloaded the SDK from
https://www.tobiipro.com/product-listing/tobii-pro-sdk/Download
(You must download 32bit C)
You need to add
==PAGE:90==
78
Components installation
#ifdef __cplusplus
extern "C" {
#endif
At the top of the each of the headers in the include folder before the code section.
And:
#ifdef __cplusplus
}
#endif __cplusplus
at the bottom of the ﬁle.
To install iTrace you can follow the guide on the readme at https://github.com/SERESLab/iTrace-
Archive Or build it in an IDE such as visual studio. (This will allow you to
explicitly tell the compiler where all the libraries are in case the makeﬁles have
trouble ﬁnding them)
As a checklist for installing it, make sure you have installed: - Ivy plugin for
Eclipse,
- Have the SDK somewhere your compiler can see it. If you choose to use a
compiler in something like Visual studio you can explicitly tell it where the
header and library ﬁles are. (With the extern C lines in the headers)
- An up-to-date Java development kit
- Also you need the JNI It should be installed along side the JDK. but not all ver-
sions have it. Mine was found in jdk1.8.014432whichineededtoexplicitlytellmyvisualstudiocompiler.
B.2
Database
To get the database working to use the python class iTraceAnalyser the following
is needed: MySQL, run the SQL ﬁle in Appendix E
Replace the Controlview.java and iTraceJava with the new versions of the ﬁles.
Add the SQLGazeExportSolver.java in Appendix F
==PAGE:91==
Appendix C
JNI, New SDK
edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker.cpp
Note. The lines commented out are parts of the old implementation left in for
comparison.
1
#define _CRT_SECURE_NO_DEPRECATE
2
#include <ctime>
3
#include <exception>
4
#include <tobii_research.h>
5
#include <tobii_research_calibration.h>
6
#include <tobii_research_eyetracker.h>
7
#include <tobii_research_streams.h>
8
#include <iostream>
9
10
/**include <tobii/sdk/cpp/MainLoop.hpp>
11
#include <tobii/sdk/cpp/EyeTracker.hpp>
12
#include <tobii/sdk/cpp/EyeTrackerInfo.hpp>
13
#include <tobii/sdk/cpp/EyeTrackerException.hpp>
14
#include <tobii/sdk/cpp/EyeTrackerBrowser.hpp>
15
#include <tobii/sdk/cpp/EyeTrackerBrowserFactory.hpp>
16
#include <tobii/sdk/cpp/EyeTrackerFactory.hpp>
17
#include <tobii/sdk/cpp/GazeDataItem.hpp>
18
**/
==PAGE:92==
80
JNI, New SDK
19
#include "edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker.h"
20
#include
"edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker_BackgroundThread.h"
,→
21
#include "edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker_Calibrator.h"
22
23
//using namespace tobii::sdk::cpp;
24
25
struct TobiiNativeData
26
{
27
JavaVM* jvm;
28
jobject j_tobii_tracker;
29
jobject j_background_thread;
30
TobiiResearchEyeTracker* eye_tracker;
31
TobiiResearchCalibrationData* calibration_data = NULL;
32
TobiiResearchCalibrationResult* calibration_result =
NULL;
,→
33
//MainLoop main_loop;
34
35
36
};
37
38
39
40
//Only one TobiiTracker can be active at one time.
41
bool g_already_initialised = false;
42
//Sort of ugly but necessary. When connecting to eye tracker,
this is used to
,→
43
//pass the tracker information to the main thread.
44
//EyeTrackerInfo::pointer_t g_et_info =
EyeTrackerInfo::pointer_t();
,→
45
//Also not very clean.
46
TobiiNativeData* g_native_data_current = NULL;
47
48
void throwJException(JNIEnv* env, const char* jclass_name, const
char* msg)
,→
49
{
50
jclass jclass = env->FindClass(jclass_name);
51
env->ThrowNew(jclass, msg);
52
env->DeleteLocalRef(jclass);
53
}
54
55
jfieldID getFieldID(JNIEnv* env, jobject obj, const char* name,
const char* sig)
,→
56
{
==PAGE:93==
81
57
jclass jclass = env->GetObjectClass(obj);
58
if (jclass == NULL)
59
return NULL;
60
jfieldID jfid = env->GetFieldID(jclass, name, sig);
61
if (jfid == NULL)
62
return NULL;
63
return jfid;
64
}
65
66
TobiiNativeData* getTobiiNativeData(JNIEnv* env, jobject obj)
67
{
68
jfieldID jfid_native_data = getFieldID(env, obj,
"native_data",
,→
69
"Ljava/nio/ByteBuffer;");
70
71
if (jfid_native_data == NULL)
72
{
73
return NULL;
74
}
75
76
jobject native_data_bb = env->GetObjectField(obj,
jfid_native_data);
,→
77
78
return (TobiiNativeData*)
env->GetDirectBufferAddress(native_data_bb);
,→
79
}
80
81
JNIEXPORT jboolean JNICALL
82
Java_edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker_00024BackgroundThread_
83
jniBeginTobiiMainloop
84
(JNIEnv* env, jobject obj)
85
{
86
87
//Initialise Tobii SDK if not yet initialised, else an
error condition has
,→
88
//occurred.
89
if (g_already_initialised)
90
return JNI_FALSE;
91
else
92
{
93
//tobii::sdk::cpp::Library::init();
94
g_already_initialised = true;
95
}
==PAGE:94==
82
JNI, New SDK
96
//Get native data ByteBuffer field in TobiiTracker
object.
,→
97
jfieldID jfid_parent = getFieldID(env, obj, "parent",
98
"Ledu/ysu/itrace/trackers/TobiiTracker;");
99
if (jfid_parent == NULL)
100
return JNI_FALSE;
101
jobject parent_tobii_tracker = env->GetObjectField(obj,
jfid_parent);
,→
102
jfieldID jfid_native_data = getFieldID(env,
parent_tobii_tracker,
,→
103
"native_data", "Ljava/nio/ByteBuffer;");
104
if (jfid_native_data == NULL)
105
return JNI_FALSE;
106
//Create structure to hold instance-specific data.
107
108
TobiiNativeData* native_data = new TobiiNativeData();
109
110
111
jobject native_data_bb = env->NewDirectByteBuffer((void*)
native_data,
,→
112
sizeof(TobiiNativeData));
113
//Set java virtual machine and BackgroundThread
reference.
,→
114
env->GetJavaVM(&native_data->jvm);
115
native_data->j_background_thread =
env->NewGlobalRef(obj);
,→
116
//Store structure reference in Java object.
117
env->SetObjectField(parent_tobii_tracker,
jfid_native_data, native_data_bb);
,→
118
119
120
//Run!
121
//native_data->main_loop.run();
122
123
//This code does not execute until the main loop has been
stopped.
,→
124
//delete native_data;
125
126
//return JNI_TRUE;
127
}
128
129
/**void handleBrowserEvent(EyeTrackerBrowser::event_type_t type,
130
EyeTrackerInfo::pointer_t et_info)
131
{
==PAGE:95==
83
132
if (type == EyeTrackerBrowser::TRACKER_FOUND)
133
g_et_info = et_info;
134
}**/
135
int apply_licenses_example(TobiiResearchEyeTracker* eyetracker,
const char* license_file_path) {
,→
136
#define NUM_OF_LICENSES 1
137
char* license_key_ring[NUM_OF_LICENSES];
138
FILE *license_file = fopen(license_file_path, "rb");
139
if (!license_file) {
140
printf("License not found!\n");
141
return 0;
142
}
143
fseek(license_file, 0, SEEK_END);
144
size_t file_size = (size_t)ftell(license_file);
145
rewind(license_file);
146
if (file_size <= 0) {
147
printf("License is empty!\n");
148
return 0;
149
}
150
license_key_ring[0] = (char*)malloc(file_size);
151
if (license_key_ring[0]) {
152
fread(license_key_ring[0], sizeof(char),
file_size, license_file);
,→
153
}
154
fclose(license_file);
155
printf("Applying license from %s.\n", license_file_path);
156
fflush(stdout);
157
TobiiResearchLicenseValidationResult validation_results;
158
TobiiResearchStatus retval =
tobii_research_apply_licenses(eyetracker, (const
void**)license_key_ring, &file_size,
&validation_results, NUM_OF_LICENSES);
,→
,→
,→
159
free(license_key_ring[0]);
160
if (retval == TOBII_RESEARCH_STATUS_OK &&
validation_results ==
TOBII_RESEARCH_LICENSE_VALIDATION_RESULT_OK) {
,→
,→
161
printf("Successfully applied license from list of
keys.\n");
,→
162
fflush(stdout);
163
return 1;
164
}
165
return 0;
166
}
167
JNIEXPORT jboolean JNICALL
==PAGE:96==
84
JNI, New SDK
168
Java_edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker_jniConnectTobiiTracker(
169
JNIEnv* env, jobject obj, jint timeout_seconds)
170
{
171
//Get native data from object.
172
173
TobiiNativeData* native_data = getTobiiNativeData(env,
obj);
,→
174
175
if (native_data == NULL)
176
{
177
return JNI_FALSE;
178
}
179
//Set TobiiTracker reference.
180
181
native_data->j_tobii_tracker = env->NewGlobalRef(obj);
182
//Find Tobii trackers.
183
/**EyeTrackerBrowser::pointer_t browser =
184
EyeTrackerBrowserFactory::createBrowser(native_data->main_loop);**/
185
/**browser->start();
186
browser->addEventListener(handleBrowserEvent);**/
187
time_t start_time = time(NULL);
188
//Wait until found or timeout occurs.
189
//Currently does not have this
190
while (0)//g_et_info == NULL)
191
{
192
if (time(NULL) > start_time + timeout_seconds)
193
{
194
//browser->stop();
195
return JNI_FALSE;
196
}
197
}
198
//EyeTrackerInfo::pointer_t et_info = g_et_info;
199
//browser->stop();
200
201
//Connect eye tracker
202
/**cker = et_info->getEyeTrackerFactory()->
203
createEyeTracker(native_data->main_loop); **/
204
TobiiResearchEyeTrackers* eyetrackers = NULL;
205
TobiiResearchStatus result =
tobii_research_find_all_eyetrackers(&eyetrackers);
,→
206
native_data->eye_tracker = eyetrackers->eyetrackers[0];
207
//Setting license
208
int license_success;
209
//HARD CODED. BAD
==PAGE:97==
85
210
license_success =
apply_licenses_example(native_data->eye_tracker,
"C:/Path/To/Tobii_license");
,→
,→
211
212
//Needs a check for whether eyetracker is found.
213
214
215
// int64_t system_time_stamp;
216
// TobiiResearchStatus status =
tobii_research_get_system_time_stamp(&system_time_stamp);
,→
217
218
return JNI_TRUE;
219
}
220
221
222
JNIEXPORT void JNICALL
Java_edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker_close
,→
223
(JNIEnv* env, jobject obj)
224
{
225
//Get native data from object.
226
TobiiNativeData* native_data = getTobiiNativeData(env,
obj);
,→
227
228
229
if (native_data == NULL)
230
{
231
throwJException(env,
"java/lang/RuntimeException",
,→
232
"Cannot find native data.");
233
return;
234
}
235
236
//Shut down main loop
237
//native_data->main_loop.quit();
238
}
239
240
void handleGazeData(TobiiResearchGazeData* gaze_data)
241
{
242
JNIEnv* env = NULL;
243
g_native_data_current->jvm->AttachCurrentThread((void**)
&env, NULL);
,→
244
jint rs = g_native_data_current->jvm->GetEnv((void**)
&env, JNI_VERSION_1_6);
,→
245
if (rs != JNI_OK || env == NULL) {
==PAGE:98==
86
JNI, New SDK
246
return;
247
}
248
jobject obj = g_native_data_current->j_tobii_tracker;
249
250
jclass tobii_tracker_class = env->GetObjectClass(obj);
251
if (tobii_tracker_class == NULL)
252
return;
253
jmethodID jmid_new_gaze_point =
env->GetMethodID(tobii_tracker_class,
,→
254
"newGazePoint", "(JDDDDIIDD)V");
255
//Just pretend nothing happened.
256
if (jmid_new_gaze_point == NULL)
257
return;
258
//Call newGazePoint.
259
env->CallVoidMethod(obj, jmid_new_gaze_point,
(jlong)gaze_data->device_time_stamp,
,→
260
gaze_data->left_eye.gaze_point.position_on_display_area.x,
gaze_data->right_eye.gaze_point.position_on_display_area.y,
,→
261
gaze_data->right_eye.gaze_point.position_on_display_area.x,
gaze_data->right_eye.gaze_point.position_on_display_area.y,
,→
262
gaze_data->left_eye.pupil_data.validity,
gaze_data->right_eye.pupil_data.validity,
,→
263
gaze_data->left_eye.pupil_data.diameter,
gaze_data->right_eye.pupil_data.diameter);
,→
264
265
/**env->CallVoidMethod(obj, jmid_new_gaze_point, (jlong)
gaze_data->time_stamp,
,→
266
gaze_data->leftGazePoint2d.x,
gaze_data->rightGazePoint2d.y,
,→
267
gaze_data->rightGazePoint2d.x,
gaze_data->rightGazePoint2d.y,
,→
268
gaze_data->leftValidity,
gaze_data->rightValidity,
,→
269
gaze_data->leftPupilDiameter,
gaze_data->rightPupilDiameter);**/
,→
270
}
271
272
void gaze_data_callback(TobiiResearchGazeData* gaze_data, void*
user_data) {
,→
273
handleGazeData(gaze_data);
274
//memcpy(user_data, gaze_data, sizeof(*gaze_data));
275
}
276
277
==PAGE:99==
87
278
JNIEXPORT void JNICALL
Java_edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker_startTracking
,→
279
(JNIEnv* env, jobject obj)
280
{
281
282
//Do not continue if already tracking
283
if (g_native_data_current != NULL)
284
{
285
throwJException(env, "java/io/IOException",
"Already tracking.");
,→
286
return;
287
}
288
289
290
//Get native data from object.
291
TobiiNativeData* native_data = getTobiiNativeData(env,
obj);
,→
292
if (native_data == NULL)
293
{
294
throwJException(env,
"java/lang/RuntimeException",
,→
295
"Cannot find native data.");
296
return;
297
}
298
//Set native data for current tracking TobiiTracker.
299
g_native_data_current = native_data;
300
//Setting gaze data
301
TobiiResearchGazeData gaze_data;
302
try
303
{
304
tobii_research_subscribe_to_gaze_data(native_data->eye_tracker,
gaze_data_callback, &gaze_data);
,→
305
//handleGazeData(&gaze_data);
306
//native_data->eye_tracker->startTracking();
307
//native_data->eye_tracker->addGazeDataReceivedListener(handleGaz
308
}
309
catch (const std::invalid_argument& e)
310
{
311
throwJException(env, "java/io/IOException",
e.what());
,→
312
return;
313
}
314
}
315
==PAGE:100==
88
JNI, New SDK
316
317
JNIEXPORT void JNICALL
Java_edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker_stopTracking
,→
318
(JNIEnv* env, jobject obj)
319
{
320
321
try
322
{
323
tobii_research_unsubscribe_from_gaze_data(g_native_data_current->eye_
gaze_data_callback);
,→
324
g_native_data_current = NULL;
325
}
326
catch (const std::invalid_argument& e)
327
{
328
throwJException(env, "java/io/IOException",
e.what());
,→
329
return;
330
}
331
}
332
333
JNIEXPORT void
334
JNICALL
Java_edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker_00024Calibrator_jniAddPoint
,→
335
(JNIEnv* env, jobject obj, jdouble x, jdouble y)
336
{
337
338
//Get native data from parent TobiiTracker
339
jfieldID jfid_parent = getFieldID(env, obj, "parent",
340
"Ledu/ysu/itrace/trackers/TobiiTracker;");
341
if (jfid_parent == NULL)
342
{
343
throwJException(env,
"java/lang/RuntimeException",
,→
344
"Parent TobiiTracker not found.");
345
return;
346
}
347
jobject parent_tobii_tracker = env->GetObjectField(obj,
jfid_parent);
,→
348
TobiiNativeData* native_data = getTobiiNativeData(env,
parent_tobii_tracker);
,→
349
350
try
351
{
352
TobiiResearchNormalizedPoint2D point[1] = {x,y};
==PAGE:101==
89
353
//Add new calibration point
354
tobii_research_screen_based_calibration_collect_data(native_data-
point->x, point->y);
,→
355
356
/**
if
(tobii_research_screen_based_calibration_collect_data(native_data->eye_tracke
point->x, point->y) != TOBII_RESEARCH_STATUS_OK) {
,→
,→
357
/* Try again if it didn't go well the
first time. */
,→
358
/* Not all eye tracker models will fail
at this point, but instead fail on
ComputeAndApply. */
,→
,→
359
//tobii_research_screen_based_calibration_collect_data(na
point->x, point->y);
,→
360
//}
361
362
363
//native_data->eye_tracker->addCalibrationPoint(Point2d(
364
//
(double) x, (double) y));
365
}
366
catch (const std::invalid_argument& e)
367
{
368
throwJException(env, "java/io/IOException",
e.what());
,→
369
return;
370
}
371
}
372
373
JNIEXPORT void JNICALL
374
Java_edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker_00024Calibrator_jniStartCalibra
375
(JNIEnv* env, jobject obj)
376
{
377
378
//Get native data from parent TobiiTracker
379
jfieldID jfid_parent = getFieldID(env, obj, "parent",
380
"Ledu/ysu/itrace/trackers/TobiiTracker;");
381
if (jfid_parent == NULL)
382
{
383
throwJException(env,
"java/lang/RuntimeException",
,→
384
"Parent TobiiTracker not found.");
385
return;
386
}
==PAGE:102==
90
JNI, New SDK
387
jobject parent_tobii_tracker = env->GetObjectField(obj,
jfid_parent);
,→
388
TobiiNativeData* native_data = getTobiiNativeData(env,
parent_tobii_tracker);
,→
389
try
390
{
391
//Start and clear
392
tobii_research_screen_based_calibration_enter_calibration_mode(native
393
//native_data->eye_tracker->startCalibration();
394
//native_data->eye_tracker->clearCalibration();
395
}
396
catch (const std::invalid_argument& e)
397
{
398
throwJException(env, "java/io/IOException",
e.what());
,→
399
return;
400
}
401
}
402
403
JNIEXPORT void JNICALL
404
Java_edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker_00024Calibrator_jniStopCalibration
405
(JNIEnv* env, jobject obj)
406
{
407
408
//Get native data from parent TobiiTracker
409
jfieldID jfid_parent = getFieldID(env, obj, "parent",
410
"Ledu/ysu/itrace/trackers/TobiiTracker;");
411
if (jfid_parent == NULL)
412
{
413
throwJException(env,
"java/lang/RuntimeException",
,→
414
"Parent TobiiTracker not found.");
415
return;
416
}
417
jobject parent_tobii_tracker = env->GetObjectField(obj,
jfid_parent);
,→
418
TobiiNativeData* native_data = getTobiiNativeData(env,
parent_tobii_tracker);
,→
419
420
try
421
{
422
//Compute and stop calibration
423
424
==PAGE:103==
91
425
TobiiResearchStatus status =
tobii_research_screen_based_calibration_compute_and_apply(nat
&native_data->calibration_result);
,→
,→
426
tobii_research_screen_based_calibration_leave_calibration_mode(na
427
//old
428
//native_data->eye_tracker->computeCalibration();
429
//native_data->eye_tracker->stopCalibration();
430
}
431
catch (const std::invalid_argument& e)
432
{
433
throwJException(env, "java/io/IOException",
e.what());
,→
434
return;
435
}
436
}
437
438
JNIEXPORT jdoubleArray JNICALL
439
Java_edu_ysu_itrace_trackers_TobiiTracker_00024Calibrator_jniGetCalibrati
440
(JNIEnv *env, jobject obj)
441
{
442
//Get native data from parent TobiiTracker
443
jfieldID jfid_parent = getFieldID(env, obj, "parent",
444
"Ledu/ysu/itrace/trackers/TobiiTracker;");
445
if (jfid_parent == NULL)
446
{
447
throwJException(env,
"java/lang/RuntimeException",
,→
448
"Parent TobiiTracker not found.");
449
return NULL;
450
}
451
jobject parent_tobii_tracker = env->GetObjectField(obj,
jfid_parent);
,→
452
TobiiNativeData* native_data = getTobiiNativeData(env,
parent_tobii_tracker);
,→
453
454
try
455
{
456
//Get calibration
457
//Calibration::pointer_t calibrationData =
458
//
native_data->eye_tracker->getCalibration();
459
//
Calibration::plot_data_vector_t
calibrationPlotData =
calibrationData->getPlotData();
,→
,→
==PAGE:104==
92
JNI, New SDK
460
//TobiiResearchCalibrationResult*
calibration_result = NULL;
,→
461
//status =
tobii_research_screen_based_calibration_compute_a
&calibration_result);
,→
,→
462
463
//int itemCount =
static_cast<int>(calibration_result->calibration_
,→
464
465
int itemCount =
static_cast<int>(native_data->calibration_result->calibration_poi
,→
466
jdoubleArray calibrationPoints =
env->NewDoubleArray(4 * itemCount);
//
allocate
,→
,→
467
468
if (NULL == calibrationPoints) return NULL;
469
470
jdouble *points =
env->GetDoubleArrayElements(calibrationPoints,
0);
,→
,→
471
472
TobiiResearchCalibrationPoint item;
473
//tobii_research_apply_calibration_data(native_data->eye_tracker,
calibration_data);
,→
474
475
//Writing data. for test
476
477
for(int i = 0; i < itemCount; i++)
478
{
479
480
item =
native_data->calibration_result->calibration_points[i];
,→
481
points[i] =
item.calibration_samples->left_eye.position_on_display_ar
,→
482
points[itemCount + i] =
item.calibration_samples->left_eye.position_on_display_ar
,→
483
points[2 * itemCount + i] =
item.calibration_samples->right_eye.position_on_display_a
,→
484
points[3*itemCount+i] =
item.calibration_samples->right_eye.position_on_display_a
,→
485
486
//points[i] = item.leftMapPosition.x;
487
//points[itemCount+i] =
item.leftMapPosition.y;
,→
==PAGE:105==
93
488
//points[2*itemCount+i] =
item.rightMapPosition.x;
,→
489
//points[3*itemCount+i] =
item.rightMapPosition.y;
,→
490
}
491
492
env->ReleaseDoubleArrayElements(calibrationPoints,
points, 0);
,→
493
return calibrationPoints;
494
}
495
catch (const std::invalid_argument& e)
496
{
497
throwJException(env, "java/io/IOException",
e.what());
,→
498
return NULL;
499
}
500
}
==PAGE:106==
94
JNI, New SDK
==PAGE:107==
Appendix D
iTraceAnalyser.py
1
import MySQLdb
2
import pandas
3
import matplotlib
4
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
5
import math
6
import csv
7
from matplotlib import rcParams
8
rcParams.update({'figure.autolayout': True})
9
10
#Returns a dictionary of Fixations
11
12
def get_session(host,user,passwd,db, session_id, threshold):
13
db = MySQLdb.connect(host=host,
14
user=user,
15
passwd=passwd,
16
db=db)
17
18
cursor = db.cursor()
19
session_info = cursor.execute("SELECT * FROM session_info
WHERE session_id='"+session_id+"'")
,→
==PAGE:108==
96
iTraceAnalyser.py
20
df = pandas.read_sql("SELECT * FROM (SELECT * FROM gazes
JOIN sces ON gazes.gaze_id=sces.sce_gaze_id) a WHERE
a.gaze_session_id='" + session_id + "';", db)
,→
,→
21
#df has all sces. dfu only has sce of depth 0.
22
dfu = df.drop_duplicates(subset="gaze_id")
23
24
# I-VT. let's find some fixations!
25
fixations = []
26
saccades = []
27
28
fix_list = []
29
fixation = []
30
prev_index = []
31
32
33
for index, row in dfu.iterrows():
34
curr_index = {'session_time' : row['session_time'],
35
'x':row['x'], 'y':row['y'],
'sce_name':row['sce_name'],
,→
36
'depth':row['depth'],
'gaze_name':row['gaze_name'],
'sce_type':row['sce_type'],
,→
,→
37
'gaze_session_id':row['gaze_session_id'],
38
'line':row['line']}
39
if not fixation:
40
fixation.append(curr_index)
41
#If time is less than 100
42
if (fixation[len(fixation)-1]['session_time']/1e6 -
fixation[0]['session_time']/1e6) < 100:
,→
43
fixation.append(curr_index)
44
#Ensure that while time is less than 100,
threshold is met.
,→
45
while get_dispersion(fixation) > threshold:
46
fixation.pop(0)
47
continue
48
#If time is over 100, but threshold is less than
threshold
,→
49
50
51
52
if get_dispersion(fixation) <= threshold:
53
fixation.append(curr_index)
54
55
if get_dispersion(fixation) > threshold:
==PAGE:109==
97
56
fixation.pop(len(fixation)-1)
57
#print "fixation dispersion " +
str(get_dispersion(fixation))
,→
58
fix_list.append(fixation)
59
fixation = [curr_index]
60
61
for fix in fix_list:
62
#Getting the x and y values, for centroid
63
x_list = []
64
y_list = []
65
sce_list = []
66
sce_type_list = []
67
line_list = []
68
id_list = []
69
for i in fix:
70
x_list.append(i['x'])
71
y_list.append(i['y'])
72
sce_list.append(i['sce_name'])
73
sce_type_list.append(i['sce_type'])
74
line_list.append(i['line'])
75
id_list.append(i['gaze_session_id'])
76
77
78
centroid_x = sum(x_list)/len(x_list)
79
centroid_y = sum(y_list)/len(y_list)
80
81
#startTime, endTime and duration in seconds.
82
startTime = fix[0]['session_time']/1e9
83
endTime = fix[len(fix)-1]['session_time']/1e9
84
duration = endTime - startTime
85
86
depth = 0 #Not supported, but some day, maybe?
87
88
fileName = fix[0]['gaze_name']
89
#Sce name, if two source code entities are very
close, we pick the one with the most gazes.
,→
90
sce_name =
max(set(sce_list), key=sce_list.count)
91
sce_type =
max(set(sce_type_list),
key=sce_type_list.count)
,→
92
line =
max(set(line_list), key=line_list.count)
93
gaze_session_id =
max(set(id_list),
key=id_list.count)
,→
94
95
==PAGE:110==
98
iTraceAnalyser.py
96
#Returns a dictionary of Fixations (startTime,
endTime, duration, X, Y, sceName, depth, file)
,→
97
fixations.append({'start_time':startTime,
98
'end_time':endTime,
'duration':duration,
,→
99
'x':centroid_x, 'y':centroid_y,
100
'sce_name':sce_name, 'depth':depth,
101
'file_name':fileName,
102
'sce_type':sce_type, 'line':line,
103
'gaze_session_id':gaze_session_id})
104
return fixations#, saccades
105
106
def get_dispersion(fixation):
107
#Finding distance between the points
108
min_x = 999999
109
max_x = 0;
110
max_y = 0;
111
min_y = 999999;
112
min_line = 999999;
113
max_line = 0
114
for i in fixation:
115
if i['x'] > max_x:
116
max_x = i['x']
117
if i['x'] < min_x:
118
min_x = i['x']
119
if i['y'] > max_y:
120
max_y = i['y']
121
if i['y'] < min_y:
122
min_y = i['y']
123
if i['line'] < min_line:
124
min_line = i['line']
125
if i['line'] > max_line:
126
max_line = i['line']
127
128
129
dispersion = (max_x-min_x) + (max_y-min_y)
130
if (max_line - min_line) > 2:
131
dispersion += 1000
132
return dispersion
133
134
135
136
def get_raw_gazes(host,user,passwd,db, session_id):
137
db = MySQLdb.connect(host=host,
==PAGE:111==
99
138
user=user,
139
passwd=passwd,
140
db=db)
141
cursor = db.cursor()
142
session_info = cursor.execute("SELECT * FROM
session_info WHERE
session_id='"+session_id+"'")
,→
,→
143
df = pandas.read_sql("SELECT * FROM (SELECT *
FROM gazes JOIN sces ON
gazes.gaze_id=sces.sce_gaze_id) a WHERE
a.gaze_session_id='" + session_id + "';", db)
,→
,→
,→
144
#df has all sces. dfu only has sce of depth 0.
145
dfu = df.drop_duplicates(subset="gaze_id")
146
return dfu
147
148
def fixation_scatter_plot(fixations, fig, title):
149
x_list = []
150
y_list = []
151
s_list = []
152
153
for point in fixations:
154
x_list.append(point['x'])
155
y_list.append(point['y'])
156
s_list.append(point['duration']*1000)
157
plt.xlim(200, 700)
158
plt.ylim(0, 600)
159
plt.title(title)
160
plt.gca().invert_yaxis()
161
plt.scatter(x_list,y_list, s=s_list)
162
#Uncomment for numbers in order.
163
#i = 0
164
#for x, y in zip(x_list, y_list):
165
#
plt.text(x, y, str(i), color="red", fontsize=12)
166
#
i += 1
167
plt.savefig(fig + ".png", format='png')
168
169
plt.show()
170
171
def gaze_scatter_plot(gazes, fig,title):
172
x_list = []
173
y_list = []
174
for index, point in gazes.iterrows():
175
x_list.append(point['x'])
176
y_list.append(point['y'])
==PAGE:112==
100
iTraceAnalyser.py
177
plt.xlim(200, 700)
178
plt.ylim(0, 600)
179
plt.title(title)
180
plt.gca().invert_yaxis()
181
plt.scatter(x_list,y_list)
182
plt.savefig(fig + ".png", format='png')
183
184
plt.show()
185
186
187
def process_mining_data(fixations_list, csv_name, aoi,
user_def='No'):
,→
188
#Make buckets, and define name of AoIs
189
if(aoi == 'lines'):
190
area = 'line'
191
192
if (aoi == 'sce_grouped'):
193
area = 'sce_type'
194
if (aoi == 'sce'):
195
area = 'sce_name'
196
197
if (aoi == 'user_defined'):
198
aoi_defs = []
199
with open(user_def, 'rb') as csvfile:
200
csv_reader = csv.reader(csvfile)
201
for line in csv_reader:
202
start = int(line[1])
203
end = int(line[2])
204
aoi_defs.append([line[0],[i for i in
range(start,end+1)]])
,→
205
206
207
with open(csv_name, 'w') as csvfile:
208
#initialising csv file
209
csv_writer = csv.writer(csvfile, delimiter=',')
210
csv_writer.writerow(["subject", "area of interest",
"start", "end"])
,→
211
212
#creating a name dictionary
213
if aoi == 'lines':
214
name_dict = {}
215
for fixations in fixations_list:
216
for fixation in fixations:
217
if fixation['line'] in name_dict:
==PAGE:113==
101
218
name_dict[fixation['line']] =
name_dict[fixation['line']] +
[fixation['sce_type']]
,→
,→
219
else:
220
name_dict[fixation['line']] =
[fixation['sce_type']]
,→
221
for fixations in fixations_list:
222
#go through fixations and see if it matches a bucket.
"empty" buckets whenever you find something from
a new bucket.
,→
,→
223
subject = ''
224
name_of_aoi = ''
225
start = 0
226
end = 0
227
aoi_list = []
228
area_of_interest = []
229
prev_fix = {}
230
prev_group = ""
231
fix_group = ""
232
inAoI = False
233
for fix in fixations:
234
if(aoi == 'user_defined'):
235
for aoi_index in aoi_defs:
236
if (fix['line'] in aoi_index[1]):
237
inAoI = True
238
if (inAoI == False):
239
if not(area_of_interest == []):
240
aoi_list.append(area_of_interest)
241
area_of_interest = []
242
prev_fix = {}
243
prev_group = ""
244
continue
245
246
247
if prev_fix == {}:
248
prev_fix = fix
249
if(aoi == 'user_defined'):
250
for aoi_index in aoi_defs:
251
if (prev_fix['line'] in
aoi_index[1]):
,→
252
prev_group = aoi_index[0]
253
continue
254
255
area_of_interest.append(prev_fix)
==PAGE:114==
102
iTraceAnalyser.py
256
257
if(aoi == 'user_defined'):
258
#if we don't set previous group (doesn't
belong in any AoI), we dont append it.
,→
259
#finding group for each fix
260
for aoi_index in aoi_defs:
261
if (fix['line'] in aoi_index[1]):
262
fix_group = aoi_index[0]
263
if (prev_group == fix_group and not
(prev_fix['end_time']+1 <
fix['start_time'])):
,→
,→
264
prev_fix = fix
265
prev_group = fix_group
266
267
else:
268
aoi_list.append(area_of_interest)
269
area_of_interest = []
270
prev_fix = fix
271
prev_group = fix_group
272
273
#Not user_defined
274
else:
275
if (prev_fix[area] == fix[area] and not
(prev_fix['end_time']+1 <
fix['start_time'])):
,→
,→
276
area_of_interest.append(prev_fix)
277
prev_fix = fix
278
279
else:
280
aoi_list.append(area_of_interest)
281
area_of_interest = []
282
prev_fix = fix
283
#special case for last
284
if (fix == fixations[len(fixations)-1]):
285
area_of_interest.append(fix)
286
aoi_list.append(area_of_interest)
287
288
for l in aoi_list:
289
name_of_aoi = ""
290
subject = l[0]['gaze_session_id']
291
start = l[0]['start_time']
292
end = l[len(l)-1]['end_time']
293
if (aoi == 'user_defined'):
294
for aoi_index in aoi_defs:
==PAGE:115==
103
295
if (l[0]['line'] in aoi_index[1]):
296
name_of_aoi = aoi_index[0]
297
#That special case, where the last fixation,
which we had to add
,→
298
if name_of_aoi == "":
299
continue
300
else:
301
#print
str(set(name_dict[l[0]['line']]))[5:-2].
,→
302
print
str(set(name_dict[l[0]['line']]))[5:-2].replace(",",
" ")
,→
,→
303
if aoi == 'lines':
304
name_of_aoi = str(l[0][area]) + " " +
str(set(name_dict[l[0]['line']]))[5:-2].replace(",",
" ")
,→
,→
305
else:
306
name_of_aoi = str(l[0][area])
307
308
csv_writer.writerow([subject,name_of_aoi,start,end])
,→
309
310
311
def fixation_average_duration_bar(fixations, filename,
attribute):
,→
312
x = []
313
y = []
314
x_ticks = []
315
#fixations = sorted(fixations, key=lambda k: k[attribute])
316
317
for i in fixations:
318
x_ticks.append(i[attribute])
319
320
x_ticks = sorted(list(set(x_ticks)))
321
print x_ticks
322
durr = 0
323
for ftype in x_ticks:
324
avg_counter = 0
325
for i in fixations:
326
if i[attribute] == ftype:
327
avg_counter += 1
328
durr += i['duration']
329
y.append(durr/avg_counter)
330
durr = 0
==PAGE:116==
104
iTraceAnalyser.py
331
x = [i for i in range(len(x_ticks))]
332
plt.xticks(x,x_ticks,rotation=90)
333
if(len(x) > 15):
334
plt.tick_params(axis='both', which='major', labelsize=5)
335
plt.title(attribute + ' average fixation duration, seconds')
336
#plt.tight_layout()
337
plt.xlabel(str(attribute))
338
plt.ylabel("seconds")
339
340
plt.bar(x,y)
341
plt.savefig(filename + ".png", format='png')
342
343
plt.show()
344
345
346
347
def fixation_duration_bar(fixations, filename, attribute):
348
x = []
349
y = []
350
x_ticks = []
351
for i in fixations:
352
x_ticks.append(i[attribute])
353
354
x_ticks = sorted(list(set(x_ticks)))
355
durr = 0
356
for ftype in x_ticks:
357
for i in fixations:
358
if i[attribute] == ftype:
359
durr += i['duration']
360
y.append(durr)
361
durr = 0
362
x = [i for i in range(len(x_ticks))]
363
plt.xticks(x,x_ticks,rotation=90)
364
if(len(x) > 15):
365
plt.tick_params(axis='both', which='major', labelsize=6)
366
plt.title( attribute + ' total fixation duration, seconds')
367
#plt.tight_layout()
368
plt.xlabel(str(attribute))
369
plt.ylabel("seconds")
370
371
372
plt.bar(x,y)
373
plt.savefig(filename + ".png", format='png')
374
==PAGE:117==
105
375
plt.show()
376
377
def fixation_max_duration_bar(fixations, filename, attribute):
378
x = []
379
y = []
380
x_ticks = []
381
for i in fixations:
382
x_ticks.append(i[attribute])
383
384
x_ticks = sorted(list(set(x_ticks)))
385
durr = 0
386
for ftype in x_ticks:
387
for i in fixations:
388
if i[attribute] == ftype:
389
if i['duration'] > durr:
390
durr = i['duration']
391
y.append(durr)
392
durr = 0
393
x = [i for i in range(len(x_ticks))]
394
plt.xticks(x,x_ticks,rotation=90)
395
if(len(x) > 15):
396
plt.tick_params(axis='both', which='major', labelsize=6)
397
plt.title( attribute + ' max fixation duration, seconds')
398
#plt.tight_layout()
399
plt.xlabel(str(attribute))
400
plt.ylabel("seconds")
401
402
403
plt.bar(x,y)
404
plt.savefig(filename + ".png", format='png')
405
406
plt.show()
407
408
409
410
def fixation_count_bar(fixations, filename, attribute):
411
x = []
412
y = []
413
x_ticks = []
414
for i in fixations:
415
x_ticks.append(i[attribute])
416
417
x_ticks = sorted(list(set(x_ticks)))
418
count = 0
==PAGE:118==
106
iTraceAnalyser.py
419
for ftype in x_ticks:
420
for i in fixations:
421
if i[attribute] == ftype:
422
count += 1
423
y.append(count)
424
count = 0
425
x = [i for i in range(len(x_ticks))]
426
plt.xticks(x,x_ticks,rotation=90)
427
if(len(x) > 15):
428
plt.tick_params(axis='both', which='major', labelsize=6)
429
plt.title(attribute + ' fixation count')
430
#plt.tight_layout()
431
plt.xlabel(str(attribute))
432
plt.ylabel("# of fixations")
433
434
435
436
plt.bar(x,y)
437
plt.savefig(filename + ".png", format='png')
438
plt.show()
439
440
def session_duration(fixations):
441
start = int(fixations[0]['start_time'])
442
end = int(fixations[len(fixations)-1]['end_time'])
==PAGE:119==
Appendix E
iTrace.sql
1
CREATE DATABASE iTrace;
2
3
CREATE TABLE session_info
4
(
5
session_ID varchar(255),
6
session_purpose varchar(255),
7
session_descrip varchar(255),
8
developer_username varchar(255),
9
developer_name varchar(255),
10
screen_width int,
11
screen_height int,
12
PRIMARY KEY (session_ID)
13
);
14
15
CREATE TABLE gazes
16
(
17
gaze_id int AUTO_INCREMENT,
18
gaze_session_id varchar(255),
19
name varchar(255),
20
type varchar(255),
21
x int,
22
y int,
==PAGE:120==
108
iTrace.sql
23
left_validation float,
24
right_validation float,
25
left_pupil_diameter float,
26
right_pupil_diameter float,
27
timestamp varchar(255),
28
session_time bigint,
29
tracker_time bigint,
30
system_time bigint,
31
nano_time bigint,
32
path varchar(255),
33
line_height int,
34
font_height int,
35
line int,
36
col int,
37
line_base_x int,
38
line_base_y int,
39
PRIMARY KEY (gaze_id),
40
FOREIGN KEY (gaze_session_id) REFERENCES
session_info(session_ID)
,→
41
42
);
43
44
CREATE TABLE sces
45
(
46
sce_gaze_id int,
47
name varchar(255),
48
type varchar(255),
49
how varchar(255),
50
total_length int,
51
start_line int,
52
end_line int,
53
start_col int,
54
end_col int,
55
depth int,
56
FOREIGN KEY (sce_gaze_id) REFERENCES gazes(gaze_id)
57
58
);
==PAGE:121==
Appendix F
SQLGazeExportSolver.java
package edu.ysu.itrace.solvers;
import java.awt.Dimension;
import java.awt.Toolkit;
import java.io.IOException;
import java.sql.Connection;
import java.sql.DriverManager;
import java.sql.ResultSet;
import java.sql.SQLException;
import java.sql.Statement;
import javax.activation.DataSource;
import javax.naming.Context;
import javax.naming.InitialContext;
import javax.naming.NamingException;
import javax.swing.UIManager;
import org.eclipse.e4.core.services.events.IEventBroker;
import org.eclipse.ui.PlatformUI;
import org.osgi.service.event.Event;
import org.osgi.service.event.EventHandler;
==PAGE:122==
110
SQLGazeExportSolver.java
import edu.ysu.itrace.Gaze;
import edu.ysu.itrace.AstManager.SourceCodeEntity;
import edu.ysu.itrace.gaze.IGazeResponse;
import edu.ysu.itrace.gaze.IStyledTextGazeResponse;
import java.sql.Connection;
import java.sql.DriverManager;
import java.sql.ResultSet;
import java.sql.SQLException;
public class SQLGazeExportSolver implements IFileExportSolver,
EventHandler {
,→
private Dimension screenRect;
private String sessionID;
private String sessionPurpose;
private String sessionDescrip;
private String devName;
private String devUsername;
private IEventBroker eventBroker;
private String outFile;
Connection conn;
public SQLGazeExportSolver() {
UIManager.put("swing.boldMetal", new Boolean(false)); //make
UI font plain
,→
eventBroker =
PlatformUI.getWorkbench().getService(IEventBroker.class);
,→
}
/**
* Any initialization work with side effects, such as opening
files. This
,→
* method should very probably be called before calling process
or dispose.
,→
*/
public void init() {
screenRect = Toolkit.getDefaultToolkit().getScreenSize();
outFile = "Set";
System.out.println("init is called HAHASDHASHDHASDHASDHASD");
}
public void setSessionInfo() {
==PAGE:123==
111
try {
System.out.println("Connecting to DB");
Class.forName("com.mysql.jdbc.Driver");
this.conn = DriverManager.getConnection(
"jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/iTrace","root","1234");
// Insert session info into db.
int rs;
System.out.println("WE ARE CONNECTED");
String statement = "INSERT INTO session_info"
+
"(session_ID,session_purpose,session_descrip,developer_username,
"
,→
,→
+ "developer_name) VALUES ( "
+ "'" + this.sessionID + "',"
+ "'" + this.sessionPurpose + "',"
+ "'" + this.sessionDescrip + "',"
+ "'" + this.devUsername + "',"
+ "'" + this.devName + "')";
//
+ "'" + String.format("%d",this.screenRect.getWidth())
+ ","
,→
//
+ "'" +
String.format("%d",this.screenRect.getHeight()) + ");";
,→
rs = conn.createStatement().executeUpdate(statement);
System.out.println(statement);
}
catch(SQLException e) {
e.printStackTrace();
} catch (ClassNotFoundException e) {
// TODO Auto-generated catch block
e.printStackTrace();
}
}
/**
* Called to process new gazes.
*/
public void process(IGazeResponse response) {
int screenX =
(int) (screenRect.width * response.getGaze().getX());
int screenY =
(int) (screenRect.height *
response.getGaze().getY());
,→
==PAGE:124==
112
SQLGazeExportSolver.java
Gaze gaze = response.getGaze();
String statementInsert = "INSERT INTO gazes (name, type,
gaze_session_id, x, y,"
,→
+ "left_validation, right_validation,
left_pupil_diameter,"
,→
+ "right_pupil_diameter, timestamp, session_time,
tracker_time,"
,→
+ "system_time, nano_time";
String statementValues = " VALUES ('"
+ response.getName() + "','"
+ response.getGazeType() + "','"
+ this.sessionID + "','"
+ screenX + "','"
+ screenY + "','"
+ gaze.getLeftValidity() + "','"
+ gaze.getRightValidity() + "','"
+ gaze.getLeftPupilDiameter() + "','"
+ gaze.getRightPupilDiameter() + "','"
+ gaze.getTimestamp() + "','"
+ gaze.getSessionTime() + "','"
+ gaze.getTrackerTime() + "','"
+ gaze.getSystemTime() + "','"
+ gaze.getNanoTime() + "'";
String nostyle = statementInsert + ")" + statementValues +
");";
,→
// gazes
if (response instanceof IStyledTextGazeResponse) {
IStyledTextGazeResponse styledResponse =
(IStyledTextGazeResponse) response;
statementInsert += ", path, line_height, font_height,
line,"
,→
+ "col, line_base_x, line_base_y";
statementValues += ",'" + styledResponse.getPath() + "','"
+ styledResponse.getLineHeight() + "','"
+ styledResponse.getFontHeight() + "','"
+ styledResponse.getLine() + "','"
+ styledResponse.getCol() + "','"
+ styledResponse.getLineBaseX() + "','"
+ styledResponse.getLineBaseY() + "'";
==PAGE:125==
113
String style = statementInsert + ")" + statementValues +
");";
,→
try {
System.out.println("style");
System.out.println(style);
this.conn.createStatement().executeUpdate(style);
} catch (SQLException e) {
// TODO Auto-generated catch block
e.printStackTrace();
}
// sces
int depth = 0;
String sce_gaze_id = "";
try {
ResultSet rs =
this.conn.createStatement().executeQuery("SELECT
max(gaze_id) FROM gazes WHERE gaze_session_id='" +
sessionID +"';");
,→
,→
,→
rs.next();
sce_gaze_id = rs.getString("max(gaze_id)");
System.out.println(sce_gaze_id);
} catch (SQLException e1) {
// TODO Auto-generated catch block
e1.printStackTrace();
}
for (SourceCodeEntity sce : styledResponse.getSCEs()) {
String statementSCE = "INSERT INTO sces (sce_gaze_id, "
+ "name, type, how, total_length,"
+ "start_line, end_line, start_col, end_col, depth)"
+ "VALUES ('" + sce_gaze_id + "','"
+ sce.getName() +"','"
+ sce.type.toString() + "','"
+ sce.how.toString() + "','"
+ sce.totalLength + "','"
+ sce.startLine + "','"
+ sce.endLine + "','"
+ sce.startCol + "','"
+ sce.endCol + "','"
+ depth + "');";
depth++;
==PAGE:126==
114
SQLGazeExportSolver.java
try {
this.conn.createStatement().executeUpdate(statementSCE);
} catch (SQLException e) {
// TODO Auto-generated catch block
e.printStackTrace();
}
}
}
else {
try {
System.out.println("nostyle");
System.out.println(nostyle);
this.conn.createStatement().executeUpdate(nostyle);
} catch (SQLException e) {
// TODO Auto-generated catch block
e.printStackTrace();
}
}
}
public String friendlyName() {
return "SQL Gaze export";
}
/**
* Configure the export filename.
*/
public void config(String sessionID, String devUsername) {
// TODO Auto-generated method stub
}
public void configSQL(String sessionID, String devUsername,
String devName, String sessionDescrip, String
sessionPurpose){
,→
this.sessionID = sessionID;
this.devUsername = devUsername;
this.devName = devName;
this.devUsername = devUsername;
==PAGE:127==
115
this.sessionDescrip = sessionDescrip;
this.sessionPurpose = sessionPurpose;
}
/**
* Launch dialog to display the export filename.
*/
public void displayExportFile() {
}
/**
* Frees any resources. It is very likely a bad idea to process
new data
,→
* after calling dispose. Not sure if we need this, either.
*/
public void dispose() {
this.conn = null;
}
@Override
public void handleEvent(Event event) {
// TODO Auto-generated method stub
if(outFile == null) this.init();
String[] propertyNames = event.getPropertyNames();
IGazeResponse response =
(IGazeResponse)event.getProperty(propertyNames[0]);
,→
this.process(response);
}
@Override
public String getFilename() {
// TODO Auto-generated method stub
return null;
}
}
==PAGE:128==
116
SQLGazeExportSolver.java
==PAGE:129==
Appendix G
MagicSort.java
import java.util.Comparator;
/**
*
The {@code Insertion} class provides static methods for
sorting an
,→
*
array using insertion sort.
*
<p>
*
This implementation makes ~ 1/2 n^2 compares and exchanges in
*
the worst case, so it is not suitable for sorting large
arbitrary arrays.
,→
*
More precisely, the number of exchanges is exactly equal to
the number
,→
*
of inversions. So, for example, it sorts a partially-sorted
array
,→
*
in linear time.
*
<p>
*
The sorting algorithm is stable and uses O(1) extra memory.
*
<p>
*
See <a
href="https://algs4.cs.princeton.edu/21elementary/InsertionPedantic.java.html
,→
*
for a version that eliminates the compiler warning.
*
<p>
==PAGE:130==
118
MagicSort.java
*
For additional documentation, see <a
href="https://algs4.cs.princeton.edu/21elementary">Section
2.1</a> of
,→
,→
*
<i>Algorithms, 4th Edition</i> by Robert Sedgewick and Kevin
Wayne.
,→
*
*
@author Robert Sedgewick
*
@author Kevin Wayne
*/
public class MagicSort {
// This class should not be instantiated.
private MagicSort() { }
/**
* Rearranges the array in ascending order, using the natural
order.
,→
* @param a the array to be sorted
*/
public static void sort(Comparable[] a) {
int n = a.length;
for (int i = 1; i < n; i++) {
for (int j = i; j > 0 && less(a[j], a[j-1]); j--) {
exch(a, j, j-1);
}
assert isSorted(a, 0, i);
}
assert isSorted(a);
}
/**
* Rearranges the subarray a[lo..hi) in ascending order,
using the natural order.
,→
* @param a the array to be sorted
* @param lo left endpoint (inclusive)
* @param hi right endpoint (exclusive)
*/
public static void sort(Comparable[] a, int lo, int hi) {
for (int i = lo; i < hi; i++) {
for (int j = i; j > lo && less(a[j], a[j-1]); j--) {
exch(a, j, j-1);
}
}
==PAGE:131==
119
assert isSorted(a, lo, hi);
}
/**
* Rearranges the array in ascending order, using a
comparator.
,→
* @param a the array
* @param comparator the comparator specifying the order
*/
public static void sort(Object[] a, Comparator comparator) {
int n = a.length;
for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
for (int j = i; j > 0 && less(a[j], a[j-1],
comparator); j--) {
,→
exch(a, j, j-1);
}
System.out.println(a);
assert isSorted(a, 0, i, comparator);
}
assert isSorted(a, comparator);
}
/**
* Rearranges the subarray a[lo..hi) in ascending order,
using a comparator.
,→
* @param a the array
* @param lo left endpoint (inclusive)
* @param hi right endpoint (exclusive)
* @param comparator the comparator specifying the order
*/
public static void sort(Object[] a, int lo, int hi,
Comparator comparator) {
,→
for (int i = lo; i < hi; i++) {
for (int j = i; j > lo && less(a[j], a[j-1],
comparator); j--) {
,→
exch(a, j, j-1);
}
System.out.println(a);
}
assert isSorted(a, lo, hi, comparator);
}
==PAGE:132==
120
MagicSort.java
// return a permutation that gives the elements in a[] in
ascending order
,→
// do not change the original array a[]
/**
* Returns a permutation that gives the elements in the array
in ascending order.
,→
* @param a the array
* @return a permutation {@code p[]} such that {@code
a[p[0]]}, {@code a[p[1]]},
,→
*
..., {@code a[p[n-1]]} are in ascending order
*/
public static int[] indexSort(Comparable[] a) {
int n = a.length;
int[] index = new int[n];
for (int i = 0; i < n; i++)
index[i] = i;
for (int i = 0; i < n; i++)
for (int j = i; j > 0 && less(a[index[j]],
a[index[j-1]]); j--)
,→
exch(index, j, j-1);
return index;
}
/***************************************************************************
,→
*
Helper sorting functions.
***************************************************************************/
,→
// is v < w ?
private static boolean less(Comparable v, Comparable w) {
return v.compareTo(w) < 0;
}
// is v < w ?
private static boolean less(Object v, Object w, Comparator
comparator) {
,→
return comparator.compare(v, w) < 0;
}
// exchange a[i] and a[j]
private static void exch(Object[] a, int i, int j) {
==PAGE:133==
121
Object swap = a[i];
a[i] = a[j];
a[j] = swap;
}
// exchange a[i] and a[j]
(for indirect sort)
private static void exch(int[] a, int i, int j) {
int swap = a[i];
a[i] = a[j];
a[j] = swap;
}
/*************************************************************************
,→
*
Check if array is sorted - useful for debugging.
***************************************************************************/
,→
private static boolean isSorted(Comparable[] a) {
return isSorted(a, 0, a.length);
}
// is the array a[lo..hi) sorted
private static boolean isSorted(Comparable[] a, int lo, int
hi) {
,→
for (int i = lo+1; i < hi; i++)
if (less(a[i], a[i-1])) return false;
return true;
}
private static boolean isSorted(Object[] a, Comparator
comparator) {
,→
return isSorted(a, 0, a.length, comparator);
}
// is the array a[lo..hi) sorted
private static boolean isSorted(Object[] a, int lo, int hi,
Comparator comparator) {
,→
for (int i = lo+1; i < hi; i++)
if (less(a[i], a[i-1], comparator)) return false;
return true;
}
// print array to standard output
private static void show(Comparable[] a) {
==PAGE:134==
122
MagicSort.java
for (int i = 0; i < a.length; i++) {
System.out.println(a[i]);
//StdOut.println(a[i]);
}
}
/**
* Reads in a sequence of strings from standard input;
insertion sorts them;
,→
* and prints them to standard output in ascending order.
*
* @param args the command-line arguments
*/
public static void main(String[] args) {
String[] a = {"4","2","1","3"}; //StdIn.readAllStrings();
MagicSort.sort(a);
//show(a);
}
}
==PAGE:135==
Appendix H
iTraceAnalyserScript.py
import iTraceAnalyser as IA
#Creating session fixation data for a specific user at different
sensitivities. For Chapter 4 section 2.
,→
rawGazes = IA.get_raw_gazes("localhost","root","1234"
,"iTrace",'20171219T095731-0417+0100')
fixations5 = IA.get_session("localhost","root","1234"
,"iTrace",'20171219T095731-0417+0100', 5)
fixations10 = IA.get_session("localhost","root","1234"
,"iTrace",'20171219T095731-0417+0100',10)
fixations15 = IA.get_session("localhost","root","1234"
,"iTrace",'20171219T095731-0417+0100',15)
fixations20 = IA.get_session("localhost","root","1234"
,"iTrace",'20171219T095731-0417+0100',20)
fixations25 = IA.get_session("localhost","root","1234"
,"iTrace",'20171219T095731-0417+0100',25)
fixations30 = IA.get_session("localhost","root","1234"
,"iTrace",'20171219T095731-0417+0100',30)
#Creating scatter plots for the fixation sesnsitivity analysis
Chapter 4 section 2.
,→
==PAGE:136==
124
iTraceAnalyserScript.py
IA.gaze_scatter_plot(rawGazes, "TestGaze", "Gazes")
IA.fixation_scatter_plot(fixations5,"TestFix5", "Fixations 5")
IA.fixation_scatter_plot(fixations10,"TestFix10", "Fixations 10")
IA.fixation_scatter_plot(fixations15,"TestFix15", "Fixations 15")
IA.fixation_scatter_plot(fixations20,"TestFix20", "Fixations 20")
IA.fixation_scatter_plot(fixations25,"TestFix25", "Fixations 25")
IA.fixation_scatter_plot(fixations30,"TestFix30", "Fixations 30")
#Importing the test subjects data
iTrace1 = IA.get_session("localhost","root","1234","iTrace"
,'20171201T092946-0684+0100',15)
iTrace2 = IA.get_session("localhost","root","1234","iTrace"
,'20171201T101056-0578+0100',15)
iTrace3 = IA.get_session("localhost","root","1234","iTrace"
,'20171205T100741-0299+0100',15)
iTrace4 = IA.get_session("localhost","root","1234","iTrace"
,'20171205T102737-0035+0100',15)
iTrace5 = IA.get_session("localhost","root","1234","iTrace"
,'20171205T105857-0765+0100',15)
#Creating bar plots for Chapter 4 section 3.
IA.fixation_count_bar(iTrace1,"count_lines","line")
IA.fixation_count_bar(iTrace1,"count_types","sce_type")
IA.fixation_duration_bar(iTrace1,"dur_lines","line")
IA.fixation_duration_bar(iTrace1,"dur_types","sce_type")
IA.fixation_average_duration_bar(iTrace1,"avg_dur_lines","line")
IA.fixation_average_duration_bar(iTrace1,"avg_dur_types","sce_type")
IA.fixation_max_duration_bar(iTrace1,"dur_max_lines","line")
IA.fixation_max_duration_bar(iTrace1,"dur_max_types","sce_type")
#creating event logs for chapter 4 section 4
IA.process_mining_data([iTrace1,iTrace2,iTrace3,iTrace4,iTrace5]
,"test_sort_lines.csv",'lines')
IA.process_mining_data([iTrace1,iTrace2,iTrace3,iTrace4,iTrace5]
,"test_sort_userdef.csv",'user_defined',"insertion.csv")
==PAGE:137==
Bibliography
[AS14]
Romano Bergstrom Andrew Schall, Jennifer. INTRODUCTION TO
EYE TRACKING. Elsevier Inc., 2014.
[BC17]
Bonita Sharif Benjamin Clark. iTraceVis: Visualizing Eye Movement
Data Within Eclipse. IEEE Working Conference on Software Visual-
ization, Cambridge, MA 02142 USA, 2017.
[dA11]
Wil M. P. Van der Aalst. Process mining Discovery, Conformance,
and Enhancement of business processes). Springer, 2011.
[DDS00] Joseph H. Goldberg Dario D. Salvucci. Identifying Fixations and Sac-
cades in Eye-Tracking Protocols). ACM press, Cambridge, MA 02142
USA, 2000.
[Flu17]
Fluxicon. Disco, product. Fluxicon, http://www.ﬂuxicon.com/disco/,
2017.
[HC84]
Xiaohui Yuan H.R. Chennamma.
A SURVEY ON EYE-GAZE
TRACKING TECHNIQUES.
Indian Journal of Computer Science
and Engineering (IJCSE)„ Department of MCA, Sri Jayachamarajen-
dra College of Engineering, Mysore, Karnataka, INDIA, 1984.
[JL]
Jae-Hyeon Ahn Joowon Lee.
Attention to Banner Ads and Their
Eﬀectiveness: An Eye-Tracking Approach. ResearchGate.
[P09]
Blignaut P. Fixation identiﬁcation: the optimum threshold for a dis-
persion algorithm.
National Center for Biotechnology Information,
2009.
[RS17]
Kevin Wayne Robert Sedgewick. Insertion.java. Princeton, 2017.
==PAGE:138==
126
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[RvdL]
Rik Pieters Ralf van der Lans, Michel Wedel. Deﬁning eye-ﬁxation se-
quences across individuals and tasks: the Binocular-Individual Thresh-
old (BIT) algorithm. National Center for Biotechnology Information.
[Tob17a] Tobii. How do Tobii Eye Trackers work. Tobii.com, 2017.
[Tob17b] Tobii. Speciﬁcations for the Tobii Eye Tracker 4C. Tobii.com, 2017.
[Tob17c] Tobii. What happens during the eye tracker calibration. Tobii.com,
2017.
[TRS15] Braden M. Walters Sebastian C. Müller Michael Falcone Bonita Sharif
Timothy R. Shaﬀer, Jenna L. Wise. iTrace: Enabling Eye Tracking
on Software Artifacts Within the IDE to Support Software Engineering
Tasks). University of Zurich, Switzerland Department of Informatics,
2015.
[TS84]
Ted Megaw Tayyar Sen. The Eﬀects of Task Variables and Prolonged
Performance on Saccadic Eye Movement Parameters. Elsevier Inc.,
1984.
[Wid84]
Heino Widdel. Operational Problems in Analysing Eye Movements.
Elsevier Science Publiahels B.V. (North-Holland)„ Forschungsinstitut
fur Anthropotechnik Wachtberg-Werthhoven FRG, 1984.
