==PAGE:1==
Modelling and synthesis for
railway networks
Sune Bartels
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of the thesis is to be able to model railway networks and use reacha-
bility games to create signaling plans. A signaling plan gives conﬁgurations to
railway points and signals, based on the positions and destinations of the trains
in the network. The goal with the signaling plans is to get the trains to their
destinations without crashes.
This thesis presents a model of railway networks. The model has some diﬀer-
ences from the real world, e.g. speed and length of the trains does not aﬀect
the model.
Based on the model and a general deﬁnition of reachability games, is railway
games deﬁned. Railway games consists of two players: The control system and
a train driver. The goal of the control system is to get all trains to their desti-
nation and the train driver wants to crash the trains. Reachability game makes
it so that the winner can be determined in the initial state, if both players play
perfectly.
To ﬁnd the winner, an algorithm that normally ﬁnds minimal ﬁxed points is
used. The algorithm has the advantage that it does not need to go through
the entire game graph, that is exponentially big based on the number of trains.
Based on the algorithm, four solvers are created. The ﬁrst solver generates the
entire game graph and use the existing techniques to reduce the game graph
size. The second solver generates the game graph On-The-Fly, that means it
only generates the part of the graph that is needed for solving. The third solver
precomputes the paths of the trains to their destination and limits their moves
in the paths. The last solver implements the same optimizations as the third
but uses heuristic search to choose the best paths.
The four solvers was tested in a series of experiments.
The result was that
On-The-Fly made improvements to running time and graph size in all but the
smallest graphs. Unfortunately it did not handle bigger graphs. If the paths
were precomputed ﬁrst, then it was possible to solve much bigger networks and
a lot faster. The solver with heuristic search was a little solver in medium net-
works but it got better signaling plans in the most complicated networks. It
would be interesting to further investigate the heuristic search solver.
==PAGE:4==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at kunne modellere jernbanenetværk og bruge
reachability spil til at skabe signalplaner. En signalplan giver konﬁgurationer
til sporskifter og signaler, ud fra positionerne og destinationerne for togene der
kører på netværket. Målet med signalplanerne er at få togene frem uden at der
sker uheld.
Afhandlingen kommer med en model af jernbanenetværk. Modellen har nogle
forskelligheder fra virkeligheden, bl.a. spiller længde og hastighed på togene in-
gen rolle.
Ud fra modellen og en general deﬁnition af reachability spil, bliver jernbanespil
deﬁneret. Jernbanespil består af to spillere: kontrolsystemet og togføreren. Må-
let for kontrolsystemet er at få togene til deres destinationer og togførereren vil
gerne have togene til at bryde ned. Reachability spil gør at vinderen af spillet
kan ﬁndes i et indledende stadie af spillet, hvis begge parter spiller perfekt.
Til at ﬁnde vinderen bruges en algoritme som normal kan ﬁnde minimal ﬁxed
points. Algoritmen har den fordel at den ikke behøver gennemlæse hele game
grafen, som ellers er exponentiel stor i forhold til antallet af toge. Ud fra algo-
ritmen bliver der lavet ﬁre løsere til jernbanespil. Den første generere hele spil
grafen og bruger eksisterende teknikker til holde størrelsen på grafen nede. Den
anden løser genererer game grafen On-The-Fly, dvs. kun den del af grafen der
skal bruges bliver genereret. Den tredje løser bruger også On-The-Fly men den
laver en liste af stier som togene kan følge og holder togene indenfor de stier. Den
sidste løser bruger de samme optimeringer som den tredje men bruger heuristic
search til at vælge de bedste stier.
De ﬁre løsere blev tested i en række eksperimenter. Resultatet var at, med und-
tagelse af de mindste netværk, gav On-The-Fly løsning klare forbedringer på
køretid men størrelsen af netværk der kunne løses blev ikke forbedret meget.
Hvis stierne blev beregnet først, var det muligt at løse meget større netværk
og meget hurtigere. Løseren med heuristic search var lidt langommere mellem-
store netværk men den havde nogle bedre signalplaner på de mest kompliceret
netværk. Det ville være interessant at forsætte med heuristic search på dette
problem.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with modelling railway networks and synthesis of signaling
plans. Reachability games will for this. Previous work have already shown that
this is possible, so this thesis draws from their ﬁndings and expand on that. The
thesis implements an algorithm used to ﬁnd minimal ﬁxed points to create the
signaling plans. All implementation is done in F# and thus the reader should
be familiar with a functional programming language like F#.
The thesis consists of railway game deﬁnition based on reachability games, a
railway model, four diﬀerent solvers that tries to extend the limit of what is
possible with this approach.
Lyngby, 01-Februar-2018
Sune Bartels
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis supervisor Michael Reichhardt Hansen for his
supervision and guidance for this project.
I would also like to acknowledge
Patrick Frederik Soelmark Kasting for his work on his thesis[1], which lays the
base for this project.
==PAGE:7==
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
ii
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Reachability Games
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Dependency Graphs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Railway Games
8
3.1
Simple Railway Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Railway Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.1
Network Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Railway Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3.1
Game Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
A Solver for Railway Games
15
4.1
The Solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Graph Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
An On-The-Fly Solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Limiting the Search Space
19
5.1
Solver 1 - Existing Optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Solver 2 - On-The-Fly Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Solver 3 - Precomputed Paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.4
Solver 4 - Heuristic Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
vii
6
Experiment Results and Evaluation
26
6.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.2
Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.4
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7
Conclusion
33
7.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
A Networks
35
A.1 Florence Station Drawing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
A.2 Simple.fs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
A.3 Fork.fs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
A.4 ManyPaths.fs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
A.5 Florence.fs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
B Source Code
42
Bibliography
43
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
A railway network is a network of tracks (rails) that is used to transport trains.
A train in a railway network must reach its destination without derailing or col-
liding with other trains. All trains follows the tracks. Points and signals guide
the trains in the network. Points act like switches and guide the trains to other
tracks. Signals tell trains when they have to stop and when they may move.
A control system uses the positions of the trains and the layout of the network
to create a conﬁguration for the signals and points in the network. A signaling
plan is a mapping from train positions to signal and point conﬁguration. A cor-
rect signaling plan guarantees that the trains in the network safely reach their
destinations.
The goal of this thesis is game-based signaling plan synthesis. Railway networks
will be modeled as a two-player reachability game where the winner can be de-
cided from the initial state of the game if both players play perfectly.
Humans can manually create signal plans but once the railway network becomes
bigger it is hard for humans to fast and reliably create a signaling plans without
crashes. The challenge for computers is that the state space grow exponentially
to the number of trains, signals and points in the network. In Patrick Frederik
Soelmark Kasting’s thesis [1] he already explored synthesis of signaling plans
with reachability games. It comes with a number of optimizations that reduce
the state space so that it is only growing exponential to the number of trains.
In this thesis further work is done to Patrick’s thesis as it tries to expand on his.
This thesis use a diﬀerent algorithm that does not need to explore the entire
state space to ﬁnd a solution. The new algorithm makes it possible to generate
the game graph On-The-Fly. On-The-Fly generation is meant to make solving
the games faster and more memory eﬃcient. The network model stays mostly
the same but the implementation is changed to a design that is better suited
for the new algorithm and has some optimizations built in.
==PAGE:11==
2
All implementation is done in F# and run in 32bit fsi, so that limits the mem-
ory usage to 2GB for the solvers. After implementing the On-The-Fly solver,
diﬀerent optimizations are applied to the solver to make it faster or get bet-
ter results. To test the diﬀerent solvers and optimizations, some of the same
networks from Patrick’s thesis are used but also new networks and expanded
networks are created.
Related Work
Patrick Frederik Soelmark Kasting’s thesis [1] take the same approach as this
thesis. He implemented a synthesis of signaling plans tool based on reachability
games just like we do. Many of the observations and the knowledge from that
thesis is used and expanded on.
Linh Hong Vu’s phD thesis [2] also works with railway networks.
It makes
formal models and veriﬁcation of control systems. Linh’s model is closer to real
life railway networks. However it does not try to solve the signaling plan as a
game.
Structure of the Thesis
In Chapter 2, the two major theoretical building stones for the thesis is pre-
sented. First it presents reachability games and then dependency graphs. It
shows an algorithm used to solve dependency graph which will later be used to
solve railway reachability games.
In Chapter 3, is railway networks presented and made into a model. The model
is used to implement railways in F#. In the end the chapter deﬁnes railway
games and shows some of the implementation.
In Chapter 4, is a solver using the algorithm from Chapter 2 presented. It talks
about generation of the game graph and in the end it deﬁnes the On-The-ﬂy
solver.
In Chapter 5, is the optimizations done in Patrick’s thesis[1] presented. Af-
ter that my own optimizations and their corresponding solvers deﬁned. These
solvers use a list of valid paths for the trains and try to prioritize better results.
The ﬁnal Chapter 6 presents the networks and system that are used in the
experiments with the solvers. Then it shows the results and ﬁnishes with an
evaluation.
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter introduces the general concepts that are used in the later chapters
to deﬁne railway games and solve them. First it will introduce turn-based games
and game graphs, and then expand the deﬁnition to reachability games. The
deﬁnition is based on a paper by Dietmar Berwanger from 2012 [3]. Reachability
games will later be used to deﬁne railway games.
Then the chapter will look at dependency graphs and an algorithm to solve
dependency graphs. Both deﬁnition and algorithm are from a paper by Xinxin
Liu and Scott A. Smolka [4]. The algorithm will later be used to solve railway
games
2.1
Reachability Games
In a turn-based game, the players take turns playing, meaning they cannot
perform actions simultaneously. The set of vertices V is the positions or states
of the game. In a two-player game the vertices can be partitioned into (V0, V1),
if a vertex v ∈V0, player 0 has the turn, if a vertex v ∈V1, player 1 has the
turn. All vertices belong to a player, V = V0 ∪V0 and no vertex is controlled
by both V0 ∩V1 = ∅.
The set E are the edges that connect the vertices. The edges is referred to, as
moves. For every vertex v ∈V , the set of successors is vE = {v′|(v, v′) ∈E}. It
is assumed that there is always a move from a vertex, i.e. vE ̸= ∅for all v ∈V .
With this the game graph for the two-player turn-based game is deﬁned as a
tuple:[3]
G = (V0, V1, E)
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Reachability Games
4
A play on a game graph, starts at a initial position. Then the players start
moving, if the current position vi ∈V0 then player 0 chooses a move from the
list of successors viE, else player 1 gets to choose. A play from initial position
v0 is an inﬁnite sequence of positions π = v0, v1, ... that describes a path in the
graph G.
A strategy for player 0 is a function σ0 : V ∗V0 →V , that with all previous
vertices in the play v0, v1, ..., vl, with vl ∈V0 being the last position, gives the
successor vl+1 ∈vlE. A strategy for player 1 is deﬁned in the same manner. If
a game is memoryless then there exists a function f : V0 →V so that f(vl) =
σ(v0, v1, ..., vl). A memoryless strategy only depends on the current vertex and
not all previous vertices in the game.
A winning condition in the game graph G is a set W of plays. Player 0 wins a
play π if π ∈W, else the winner is player 1. A strategy is winning for a player
if all of the plays act according to the strategy are winning.
A game consist of a game graph and a winning condition:[3]
G = (G, W)
A reachability game is a game where reachability conditions are determined. A
reachability condition is a set F ⊆V of target positions that a player can win
by reaching. The winning condition is deﬁned as:
{v0, v1, ... : vl ∈F for some l ≥0}
From the paper by Dietmar Berwanger[3] we have that:
Theorem 2.1 For every reachability game G = (V, V0, E, F), there exists a
partition W0 ∪W1 = V such that player 0 has a winning strategy from any
starting position v ∈W0 and player 1 has a winning strategy from any starting
position v ∈W1.
This tells us that in every reachability game there is a winning strategy for
one of the players from the initial vertex, since the initial vertex will also be
parted into either W0 or W1. Proof for the theorem can be found in [3]. In
every reachability game G, the partition W0 ∪W1 = V gives player 0 a uniform
memoryless winning strategy in all positions in W0 and player 1 a uniform
memoryless winning strategy in all positions in W1.
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Dependency Graphs
5
2.2
Dependency Graphs
A dependency graph is a tuple
D = (V, E)
where V is a set of vertices and E is a set of hyperedges. For every hyperedge
e ∈E in a dependency graph D we have that e = (v, S), where v is the source
and S is the set of successors from the source.
v0
v1
v3
v4
v2
1
3
3
2
Figure 2.1: Dependency graph example. The numbers on the edges symbolizes
what hyperedge the edge belong to.
A dependency graph could be like the one in Figure 2.1. In this ﬁgure we have
the dependency graph D0 = (V0, E0). It has the vertices V0 = v0, v1, v2, v3, v4
and the hyperedges E0 = [(v0, [v1]), (v0, [v2]), (v1, [v3, v4]).Note that there in this
example are two hyperedges with v0 as source, this property is used later when
railway games are deﬁned and solved.
A complete lattice U = {A, ≤}, when A ̸= ∅and ≤from a binary relation on
{0, 1}. This lattice is a partial order in A. Then by Knaster-Tarski’s theorem
we have: there is a unique minimal post-ﬁxed-point assignment that called F G
min
[5][6].
Let D = (V, E) be a dependency graph, then an assignment A is a function
V →{0, 1}. A post-ﬁxed-point assignment F of D is an assignment, so that if
it holds that F(s) = 1 for every s ∈S from all hyper edges (v, S) ∈E then
F(v) = 1 [4].
To ﬁnd F G
min in a reachability game, we look at a paper by Xinxin Liu and
Scott A. Smolka [4]. The paper presents two algorithms, a global and a local
algorithm, for ﬁnding minimal ﬁxed points in dependency graphs. The global
algorithm has a linear running time based on the graph size. The local algorithm
works mostly the same, except it is based around the concept that it is not
necessary to search the entire to ﬁnd a minimal ﬁxed point. The local algorithm
has a linear worst case running time based on the graph size but chances are
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Dependency Graphs
6
that it is faster. Other than that the two algorithms are very similar. The local
algorithm is chosen for this report. Algorithm 1 shows the local algorithm ina
depth ﬁrst version.
Algorithm 1 Local algorithm to ﬁnd minimal ﬁxed points in dependency
graphs from [4]
1: function LocalLiuSmolka(v0, V, E)
2:
for all i = 0 to V.length - 1 do A[i] ←null;
3:
A[v0] ←0; D[v0] ←∅; W ←Load([], E, v0);
4:
while W ̸= ∅do
5:
(k, l) ←hd(W);
6:
W ←tl(W);
7:
if A[k] = 0 then
8:
while A[hd(l)] = 1 && l ̸= null do l ←tl(l);
9:
match l with
10:
[] →
11: A[k] ←1;
W ←D[k]@W;
12:
x::xs when A[x] = 0 →
13: D[hd(l)] ←(k, tl(l))::D[hd(l)];
14:
x::xs when A[x] = null →
15: A[hd(l)] ←0;
D[hd(l)] ←(k, tl(l));
W ←Load(W, E, hd(l));
16:
end match
17:
18: function Load(W,E,k)
19:
l ←E[k]
20:
while l ̸= null do
21:
W ←(k, hd(l)) :: W;
l ←tl(l);
The algorithm can for example be used to solve the example in Figure 2.1.
Say that v2 is a ﬁxed point, so we mark A[v2] = 1 in the initial phase of the
algorithm.
Using the algorithm to solve this example, ﬁrst it creates a list A of length |V0|
and sets all elements to null. Then it sets A[v0] = 0, D[v0] = null and loads
all the hyperedges with v0 as source into the empty list W, in this case it is
(v0, [v1]) and (v0, [v2]). Now the ﬁrst WHILE loop starts because W is not empty.
In the loop it removes the ﬁrst element in W, (v0, [v1]) in the example, and
assigns the source to k and the list of destinations to l. Since the the A[v0] = 0,
the algorithm takes the ﬁrst element of the list l, which is v1. This element has
the value null in the A list. It matches on the element, sets the A value to 0. It
also adds an hyperedge with the v0 as source and an empty list as destination
to D[v1]. It also adds all of the hyperedges with v1 as source in front of W, here
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Dependency Graphs
7
it is (v1, [v3, v4]). Now we have W = [(v1, [v3, v4]), (v0, [v2])].
The algorithm starts the ﬁrst WHILE loop again, take the next element in W
picks k = v1 and l = [v3, v4]. The algorithm has A[v1] = 0 so it continues. The
ﬁrst element in l whose A value is not equals 1 is v3. When we match on v3, we
see that A[v3] = null, so we set A[v3] = 0, add (v1, [v4]) to D[v3] and load all
the hyperedges with v3 as source into W. Since there are no such hyperedges
W = [(v0, [v2])].
Going though the outer WHILE loop again, the next element in W is (v0, [v2])
picks k = v0 and l = [v2]. The algorithm has A[v0] = 0 so it continues.
The algorithm returns the list l after removing all elements that had A[i] = 1.
This is a empty list because A[v2] = 1. Since the empty list is matched on, it
will mark A[v0] = 1 and D[v0] is added to W. So W = [] and the algorithm
terminates.
Our result is that v0 and v2 are ﬁxed points. The vertex v0 is the minimal ﬁxed
point because it is the lowest ﬁxed point. The vertices v1 and v3 are not and
v4 is never looked at. The vertex v4 could have been a ﬁxed point but since v3
was not and they both were on the same hyperedge then v1 would never be a
ﬁxed point and it was not necessary to look at v4.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Railway Games
This chapter deﬁnes what a railway network is and gives an example of a simple
railway network. Based on the deﬁnition, a model is presented. The model is
based on a thesis by Patrcik Kastings [1] that is based on another thesis by
Linh Hong Vu [2]. In the end railway games are deﬁned based on the two-player
turn-based reachability game that was described in the previous chapter.
3.1
Simple Railway Network
On a railway network, operators wants to guide all trains to their destination
without any crashes.
A crash can either be two trains colliding or a train
being derailed. To control the trains’ movements and prevent crashes, points
(switches) are used to direct the trains on the tracks and signals are used to
control which trains may move.
Figure 3.1 shows a simple railway network, based on example from [1], consisting
of four sections s10, s11, s12 and s20. The sections s10, s12 and s20 are linear
sections and s11 is a point section. There are two trains in the ﬁgure, t1 and
t2. A train can move up or down on a section. The train t1 is moving up
(towards the right side), and t2 is moving down (towards the left side). Only
one train can be on a speciﬁc section at a time.
A point section can switch between plus and minus position. If the point s11
in ﬁgure 3.1 is in plus position it connects s20 and s12. If the point is in minus
position it connects s10 and s12. The end of the point that it always connect
to s12 is called the stem.
==PAGE:18==
3.2 Railway Model
9
Figure 3.1: A simple railway network, based on example from [7].
A signal is only visible in either up or down direction. The signal on s10 can
only be seen by train moving in the down direction and s20 can only be seen
by trains moving in the up direction. A signal can be either green or red. A red
signal tells a train that it is not allowed to drive and a green signal tells it that
it may move.
3.2
Railway Model
The railway model is based on the model from Patrick Kastings thesis [1], which
is a simpliﬁcation of [2]. This section ﬁrst describes the model and then creates
a speciﬁcation for the network using F#.
Time
In a single time unit, it is possible for one train to move, or it is possible for all
signals and points to set their conﬁguration. During the time unit they complete
their action and are not left in a half ﬁnished state.
Signals
Signals has two settings: green and red. A green signal means that a train is
allowed to move, while a red signal tells the trains that they are not allowed
to move. A signal on a section faces a certain direction and only trains going
in that direction on that section can see it. E.g on the Figure 3.1 the signal
on the linear section s10 in the up direction is only be visible to trains on s10
going in the up direction. Signals always change when the system tells them
to and they never break down. Signals changes immediately in a single time unit.
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Railway Model
10
Trains
Trains never defy red signals, but they can choose not to drive for a green signal.
Trains never derail except when it reaches the end of the track or if they move
over a point section that is conﬁgured so that the stem is not connected to the
section they are coming from, e.g. coming from plus section when the point has
a minus conﬁgration.
Trains never break down and never fail to obey a move command.
A train has no size and thus only need one section to stand on. This is to make
sure that the trains always ﬁt on the sections they stand on and thus only stand
on one section at a time.
Sections
Both linear sections and point sections has no length, this ensures that the game
strategy is correct without worrying about how fast the train has to move to
reach the next section in a single time unit.
Linear Sections
Linear section have only one connection up and one connection down.
A train must always end its turn on a linear section to prevent a point section
from changing setting while a train is standing on it.
Points
Point sections must have 3 unique connections to linear sections.
A point has 2 settings, PLUS and MINUS. When in the PLUS setting it con-
nects the stem and the plus section and when in the MINUS setting it connects
the stem and the minus section.
Points never break down and always change setting when the system tells it to.
A point changes conﬁguration in a single time unit.
Consistent Directions
A train can move either up or down on a section, but it cannot change direction.
Directions on sections must be consistent, the down end of a section must always
to a up end of another section, and vice versa.
No cycles are allowed in the network.
The direction rules ensures that a train never returns to its previous position
and thus reduces the number of states in the game.
==PAGE:20==
3.2 Railway Model
11
End sections
Something new in this report is that a railway network also has to deﬁne its end
sections. End sections are sections that have no connection in a given direction
in the model but possibly could go somewhere. This is used to automatically
generate mirrored version of a model and merging it with the original for a
double model.
It is possible to have sections with no connection in a given direction in the
model where it makes no sense to have them in them doubled up. These sections
could be resting space in the middle of the model and are not added to the end
sections. End sections have no function when a game is being solved, but could
be deﬁned to stop trains even if no signal is present.
3.2.1
Network Implementation
Listing 3.1: F# types for the network implementation
1
type Label = string
2
type Port =
3
| Line of Label
4
| Plus of Label * Label
5
| Minus of Label * Label
6
| Stem of Label * Label * Label
7
| Crash
The model was implemented in F#. In Listing 3.1, are the types used for the
model deﬁned. The Label type is used to name sections in the model so that
they can be referred. Every section is assumed to have its own unique label.
The Port type is used to deﬁne connections to other sections. if a train is on
a linear section that connects to another linear section, then the port will be a
Line of Label, where the label is the new position that train will have after
moving.
If the linear section connects to a Plus of Label * Label or a Minus of
Label * Label port, then the next section is a point section.
The ﬁrst la-
bel is the label for the point section and the second label is the linear section
that the train will move to if the point is set to plus for the Plus port or set to
minus for the Minus port. If the point is in the wrong position and the train
move over it, the train derails and crashes.
If the linear section connects to a Stem of Label * Label * Label port, then
the next section is also a point section but the trains comes from the stem. The
ﬁrst label is the label of the point section, the second label is the linear section
the train moves to, if the point is in the plus setting and the third label is the
linear section the train moves to if the point is in the minus setting. The train
cannot crash in a Stem port.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Railway Games
12
The last port type is Crash. It is only used if no section comes after the given
section. The train derails and crashes if it reaches a Crash port.
Listing 3.2: Abstract network class in F#
1
abstract member lines: Label list
2
abstract member points: Label list
3
4
abstract member consUp: Label -> Port
5
abstract member consDown: Label -> Port
6
7
abstract member signalsUp: Label list
8
abstract member signalsDown: Label list
In the Listing 3.2 are an abstract deﬁnition of a network made in F#. The
abstract variables lines and points are lists with the label for every linear
section and point section respectively. All sections should be in either one and
only one, so we have that "lines ∪points = All sections" and "lines ∩points =
∅".
The connections describe how sections ﬁt together.
Connections are always
symmetric, if a section s0 has a connection to section s1 in the up direction
then section s1 has a connection to section s0 in the down direction. Because of
the way a connection is made, then all points must be connected to three linear
section, one at each end.
A connections is a function that takes a label of a section and a direction and
returns a port. A port describes what type of section comes next and its labels.
Connections are split into two lists for faster and easier lookup. It helps the time
because it is possible to search one of two smaller list instead of one big list. It
is easier because the list does not need a direction argument in the search.
The abstract variables signalsUp and signalsDown are the list of all sections
with signals in the up and down directions. Signals can only be placed on linear
sections and a linear section can at most have two signals, one in the up direction
and one in the down direction. The signals are split into two lists for faster and
easier lookup, just like it is done with connections.
3.3
Railway Games
Based on the deﬁnition of reachability games from chapter 2.1, a deﬁnition of
railway games is made. The article [7] take a similar approach to deﬁne railway
games but the type deﬁnition is diﬀerent.
In our railway game we have two players: a "control system" (player 0 in the
==PAGE:22==
3.3 Railway Games
13
general deﬁnition) that controls the points and signals on the railway and a
"train driver" (player 1 in the general deﬁnition) that controls the movement
of all the trains on the railway. The vertices controlled by the control system is
in the set Vcon and the vertices controlled by the train driver is in the set Venv.
Railway games also have edges E to connect the vertices. The railway game
graph is
G = (Vcon, Venv, E)
The game has an initial state, that deﬁnes all the trains’ initial position and
direction. The winning condition for the control system is a single state that
has all the destination positions for the trains. The winning condition for the
train driver is any crash state.
3.3.1
Game Implementation
Listing 3.3: Simple types used by the railway game
1
type PointStatus =
2
| Minus
3
| Plus
4
type Direction =
5
| Up
6
| Down
In the f# implementation of the game some additional types are created, List-
ing 3.3 shows the simple types that are used in the game.
First there is
PointStatus, that can be either Minus or Plus, this is the diﬀerent settings
a point section can have and is used to identify how a train will move across a
point section.
Then there is Direction, that can be either Up or Down, this is used to identify
the direction of a train or a signal in the game.
Listing 3.4: State types used by the railway game
1
type ControlState = (Label list * Label list )
2
type EnvironState = (Label list * Label list * (Label * Direction) option *
PointStatus list)
3
4
type State =
5
| ControlState of ControlState
6
| EnvironState of EnvironState
7
| CrashState
Listing 3.4 shows how states of the game are implemented in F#. The railway
network model never changes only the state of the trains and the settings of the
points and signals. There are two kinds of states, ControlStates where the
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Railway Games
14
control system has the turn and EnvironmentStates where the train driver has
the turn. The control system can set all the points and signals in a single turn
so the previous settings does not matter, only the position of the trains.
The train driver on the other hand needs the point and signal conﬁguration to
decide on which train to move so EnvironmentStates needs that information.
In chapter 5 it is explained that at most one signal is green at a time to limit
the number of states and the rest is red. Therefore the EnvironmentStates
only shows if a signal green and which one and which direction, this is done by
(Label * Direction) option where the label is the position of the signal and
the direction is which direction the signal is pointing at. Point conﬁguration is
made for all points in all EnvironmentStates. Below is the type deﬁnition of
the diﬀerent states.
In both state deﬁnitions there are two Label list, these are the positions of
the train in Up and in Down direction.
The type State is used to collect both state types in a single type.
It also
implements a CrashState type which is used to indicate that a train has crashed
and no states follow this state.
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 4
A Solver for Railway Games
In this chapter, a solver, based on the algorithm from Chapter 2, is described
and then it is speciﬁed how the game graph is generated. This chapter describes
an on-the-ﬂy solver for railway games that only generates the vertices necessary
for solving the game instead of the entire graph.
4.1
The Solver
The algorithm presented in Section 2.2 is used to a ﬁnd minimal ﬁxed point in
a dependency graph. The algorithm will be used to solve railway games. To
show that this is possible, ﬁrst we will make sure that the railway game ﬁts into
a dependency graph and then show that the minimal ﬁxed point can be used to
determine whether the control system has a winning strategy from the initial
state or not.
In Section 2.2, a dependency graph is deﬁned as a tuple D = (V, E). In Section
3.3 a railway game graph is deﬁned as a tuple G = (Vcon, Venv, E). It is stated
that for vertices in a game graph that V = V0 ∪V0 and V0 ∩V1 = ∅, so the
vertices in a game graph can be combined into a single V like for a dependency
graph.
The E in the railway game is the set of edges and the E in dependency graphs
are hyperedges. The diﬀerence is that an edge only have a source and a suc-
cessor, where a hyperedge has a source and a set of successors. If in the game
graph, all edges are converted to hyperedges, then the algorithm should be able
to ﬁnd minimal ﬁxed points for railway games. The conversion from edges to
hyperedges is easy, as the edges with the same source can be combined into a
==PAGE:25==
4.2 Graph Generation
16
single hyperedge. This conversion is done immediately while the game graph is
generated.
The hyper-edges are generated along with the states. All successive ControlStates
after an EnvironState are in the same hyperedge and all sucessive EnvironState
after a ControlState are in individual hyperedges. This is because the algo-
rithm needs all successive vertices in a hyperedge to be a ﬁxed point before the
source can be a ﬁxed point. In a ControlState only one successor needs to lead
to the winning state because the control system freely can choose the next state.
All successive state in an EnvironState still needs to be in the same hyperedge
because the control system do not have the turn and cannot choose which state
comes next.
To use the algorithm to see if the control system has a winning strategy from
the initial state, ﬁrst the winning vertices are marked as ﬁxed points when the
algorithm starts. If the initial state is marked as a ﬁxed point, and therefore
the minimal ﬁxed point, then the control system has a winning strategy from
the initial state. If not, then the "train driver" has a winning strategy. Listing
4.1 shows the basic F# implementation of the algorithm.
Listing 4.1: F# solver
1
let rec while (W : (int * int list) list) =
2
if A.[0] = 1y then A %Return if initialstate is a fixed point
3
else
4
match W with
5
| [] -> A
6
| (k,_)::xs when A.[k] = 1y -> while xs
7
| (k,l)::xs
-> match List.skipWhile (fun x -> A.[x] = 1y) l with
8
| []
->
9
A.[k] <- 1y; while (D.[k]@xs)
10
| y::ys when A.[y] = 0y
->
11
D.[y] <- (k,ys)::D.[y]; while xs
12
| y::ys
->
13
A.[y] <- 0y; D.[y] <- [(k,ys)]; while (load y
toStates.[y] W)
4.2
Graph Generation
A full game will consist of multiple vertices and edges unless the starting po-
sitions are the destination. The entire game graph can be generated from the
initial state, and follows all paths until they either crash or reach the ﬁnal state.
Since the railway game is a turn-based game, all ControlStates will be fol-
lowed by EnvironStates or CrashStates. All EnvironStates will be followed
by ControlStates or CrashStates.
After a ControlState, it should be possible for at least one train to move. The
==PAGE:26==
4.3 An On-The-Fly Solver
17
control system should not block all trains.
If all trains are in front of a signal, then a new EnvironState is created for each
train, where the signal in front of it is set to green. If the control system only
sets one green light in each state then it has perfect control over which train
moves in the train drivers turn. If a train has a green light and is in front of a
point, then the control system should create a state for each position the point
can be in that does not result in a crash.
If one or more trains are not in front of a signal, then all signals should be red.
This minimizes the number of actions that are available to the train driver in
his turn. The control system should still set the points in front of the train with
no lights in all possible positions that does not result in a crash.
In an EnvironState the train driver should generate a state for each train that
is able to move. The state that follows an EnvironState is a CrashState if the
moving train collides with another train, derail by moving out of the network
or moves over apoint from plus or minus position while the point is set to the
opposite conﬁguration.
A CrashState will not have any hyperedges and will not generate additional
states.
Listing 4.2: Adding states in the graph generation
1
let toStates = new Dictionary<int,State>()
2
let toIndex = new Dictionary<State,int>()
3
4
let addState s =
5
if toIndex.ContainsKey s then toIndex.[s]
6
else v <- v + 1
7
toIndex.Add(s,v)
8
toStates.Add(v,s)
9
v
When the states are generated they are given an index.
To make sure that
there are no duplicates, two dictionaries are used. Listing 4.2 shows the two
dictionaries and the function that adds the states to them. If the state is already
in the dictionaries, the index is returned. The Dictionary type is from the
library FSharpX [8].
4.3
An On-The-Fly Solver
The solver created by Patrick Kastings[1] could successfully solve railway games
up to a certain size. It was limited by F# 32bit that cannot use more than
2GB. The size of the graph is exponential to the number of trains in the game,
so memory usage quickly rises with more trains. The algorithm used takes the
==PAGE:27==
4.3 An On-The-Fly Solver
18
entire graph but only searches the graph until it ﬁnds a solution.
The idea
is to use the algorithm, give it the initial state of the game graph and then
generate the successor vertices on-the-ﬂy as they are needed.
This will way
will have a much smaller initial graph and it will stop once a solution is found.
One disadvantage is that the algorithm will only ﬁnd one solution. There may
be cases with multiple solutions and some preferred over others that could be
found with a full graph. To counter this disadvantage, some prioritization is
experimented with in Chapter 5.
In the algorithm from [4] it would look at a vertex and a list of successors. If
all successors in a hyperedge were marked as a correct path then the vertex
was too. It will look at the successors and determine whether it had seen the
successor before or not and if it resulted in a correct path. If it had not seen
the successor before then it will load the successors of the successor to the list
of vertices to be searched. The successors of the successor is loaded from the
graph.
In the on-the-ﬂy solver, instead of loading the successors of the successor from
the graph, they are generated with the information of the successor. The new
vertices are generated like they would be in a normal graph generation, but
only when they are needed. The result will therefore be the same vertices and
hyperedges but the graph has the potential to be smaller if a solution is found
before the entire graph is searched.
From the same paper with the local algorithm [4] is a global algorithm which
searches the graph in O(n) time, with n being the size of the graph. The local
algorithm uses the same method has a worst case time of O(n), but potentially
smaller if a solution is found before.
The On-The-Fly solver has a worst case graph size of n, where n is the size of
the full graph but it can potentially be smaller and thus save memory.
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 5
Limiting the Search Space
One of the limits in solving the railway game is the memory used by the al-
gorithm. In previous works [1] memory limited how big the railway networks
could be. The F# 32bit process can only use 2GB of RAM in windows [9] so
it was not hardware limits. It is possible to exceed the limit by running F#
in 64bit mode but the original limit was kept for comparison. In the previous
chapter, an on-the-ﬂy solver is described which helps keeping the memory lower
and potentially speeds things up. This chapter lists four solver based on the
algorithm. The ﬁrst solver uses some optimizations done previously by Patrick
Kastings [1]. The remaining three implements new optimizations. The solvers
will be used in experiments in the next chapter.
5.1
Solver 1 - Existing Optimizations
The ﬁrst solver (S1) uses optimizations from Patricks thesis [1].
The solver
uses the local algorithm and does not use the On-The-Fly method described
earlier. The optimizations mainly focus on reducing the state space. Some of
the optimizations are already loosely described as a part of the model or graph
generation. More in depth and proofs in Patrick’s thesis.
Ignoring irrelevant ControlStates
When the control system has the turn, all point and signal conﬁgurations does
not matter, so these conﬁgurations are omitted in ControlStates. This reduces
the number of ControlStates and the entire graph. Without this optimization,
two ControlStates with the same train positions could be evaluated as diﬀerent
because of the signal or point conﬁguration.
==PAGE:29==
5.1 Solver 1 - Existing Optimizations
20
Figure 5.1: This ﬁgure shows the eﬀect of ignoring irrelevant ControlStates
Figure 5.1 shows this. From the ﬁrst EnvironmentStates v11 and v21, the train
can only move forward to s11 but it result in two diﬀerent ControlStates be-
cause of the signal on s12. The ControlStates v12 and v22 both have v13
and v23 as successors because they can change all signals. By ignoring the sig-
nals and points in ControlStates the same result is given but the number of
ControlStates is reduced.
Ignoring irrelevant points and signals
Signals and points have a default conﬁguration and may only be changed if they
would aﬀect a train in the next turn. This means that no additional states are
generated for signals and points that have no eﬀect on the train movement. This
makes the graph size dependent on the number of trains instead of number of
train, signals and points.
Figure 5.2: This ﬁgure shows the eﬀect of ignoring irrelevant points and signals
In ﬁgure 5.2 is the problem illustrated. From the EnvironState v11 there are
two successor states v12 and v22, the only diﬀerence between the two is the
signal on s12 which does not aﬀect any trains. This means that both states
have the same successor and the signal has no aﬀect. The vertex v12 can be
removed without aﬀecting the ﬁnal result of the graph.
==PAGE:30==
5.1 Solver 1 - Existing Optimizations
21
Removing redundant train driver moves
Remove redundant train driver moves by limiting the amount of options the
train driver has in a single state.
This is done by having the control system by at most making 1 signal green.
If all trains in the network is in front of a signal, then just a single signal
should be green in every following EnvironState. If there were multiple green
signals in every EnvironState then the train driver could perform the same
action in multiple EnvironStates and they would create the same successor
ControlState.
If there is at least one train that is not in front of a signal, let all signals be red.
This limits the number of moves that the train driver can perform to only the
trains that are not in front of a signal.
Figure 5.3: This ﬁgure shows the eﬀect of removing redundant train driver
moves
An example of this optimization is shown in 5.3. From the starting ControlState
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Solver 2 - On-The-Fly Generation
22
v11 there are three EnvironStates. The states v21 and v23 both have a single
green signal and v22 has two. The ControlStates that follow v21,v22 and v23
are v31 and v32. It can be seen that The states v21 and v23 have edges to v31
and v32 respectively while v22 has edges to both v31 and v32. If only one green
signal is allowed at a time then v22 can be removed and the resulting states v31
and v32 remain the same.
5.2
Solver 2 - On-The-Fly Generation
The second solver uses all the improvements from Patrick’s thesis and uses the
On-The-Fly solver described in 4.3. The idea is to compare this solver to the
one that ﬁrst generates the entire graph. The result should tell us if On-The-Fly
generation is worth it in railway games.
Solver 1 uses time to ﬁrst generate the graph and then solve the graph, where
this solver combines those two. The total running time of the On-The-Fly solver
is expected to be lower in most cases, because the graph can be smaller. In some
cases the total time of both solvers should be the same, if the entire graph is
generated. On the other hand, the On-The-Fly solver should be able to handle
bigger railway games in general, since one of the limitations for our railway game
is the memory usage by the graph.
5.3
Solver 3 - Precomputed Paths
The third solver that was implemented used all the improvements from the pre-
vious solvers and it tries to limit the number of states in the graph by computing
all possible paths to the destination for all trains. These paths are individual for
each train and are not based on the placement of the other trains in the game.
The idea behind this improvement is that if any train gets on a path that will
never reach the destination then it will eventually cause a CrashState and then
it is faster to call it a CrashState immediately.
This method also allows the solver to test if there are possible paths for all
trains. If there are no possible path for a train, then the game is impossible and
the solver can stop before trying to solve it.
In Figure 5.4 is an example.
Let the train be on s11, and let s13 be the
winning state. If the solver starts by computing that the train going up to s23
instead of s13 then it will let the train drive to s24, s25 and crash before trying
s13, because the algorithm is depth ﬁrst. If the path is precomputed, then the
==PAGE:32==
5.3 Solver 3 - Precomputed Paths
23
Figure 5.4: This ﬁgure is used to show the eﬀect of ignoring paths that never
lead to the destination
solver knows that s23 will never reach the destination and immediately makes
a CrashState. This way s24 and s25 is never explored. This saves the solver
time and memory by limiting the search space.
This improvement is expected to spend a little extra time precomputing the
paths, but the extra time should be insigniﬁcant compared to the memory and
time saving when compared to the previous 2 solvers. It should be much faster
computing all the path individually because the control system does not need
to worry about collisions and traﬃc. The improvement is gonna be bigger in
big games with more deceptive paths and possibly no improvement or slight
increase in time on the smallest games with fewer possible paths.
The deﬁnition of the path list is: If all sections that may eventually lead a train
to its destination in the future is in the set P and all section that will never lead
to the destination is not, then if a train move to a section si ̸∈P, then it will
eventually crash.
Arguments for the deﬁnition is: The list P of sections that leads to the destina-
tion is computed prior to solving the game. Assume that a train is on a section
si that is not in the list, then all following sections wont be in the list either
and eventually when there are no more sections, the train will derail.
On the other hand, if the control system follows a winning strategy then after
every play, all trains will be on a position in their path list P.
The path lists are generated for each train. Starting from the initial position of
the train and then making a tree with all possible paths. Path are computed
with ConsUp and ConsDown from the network deﬁnition. If a path ends at the
destination then all section visited will be added to the path list. Paths that
end in crashes are not added to the list.
==PAGE:33==
5.4 Solver 4 - Heuristic Search
24
5.4
Solver 4 - Heuristic Search
The fourth solver used the improvements from the three previous solvers and it
tries to search the shortest path ﬁrst. The previous solvers are all depth ﬁrst
and the choice of path is arbitrary. There is no guarantee that the path chosen
is the shortest. The fourth solver tries to solve this by applying heuristic search
to the algorithm. Every state accumulate the shortest distance for all trains to
the destination and the states with the shortest distance is chosen ﬁrst. The
calculated distance is not the actual distance, as some paths may be unavailable
because other trains are in the way but this technique will prioritize the shortest
paths.
To compute the he distances for each train in each valid position to the desti-
nation, the same path list is used as in the third solver. This solver simply save
the number of sections moves for each position for each train and reverse them
so the destination is distance 0. This way the distances can be computed with
the paths, with little time diﬀerence compared to the previous solver.
C
2
E
2
C
3
E
3
...
E
3
C
2
E
2
C
1
E
1
W
0
E
2
C
1
E
1
Figure 5.5: Vertices with "C" in them are ControlStates and vertices with
"E" in them are EnvironStates.
The vertex with "W" is the
winning vertex. The number under the letters are the minimum
distance for the trains to travel in from that position.
In this
ﬁgure there are two paths to the winning state (W), the blue path
is shorter than the red path. Solver 4 tries to always choose the
shortest path based on the accumulated distance of the trains to
their destinations. One problem is that EnvironStates have the
same distance as the parent ControlState.
The Figure 5.5 shows an example state space. Vertices with "C" in them are
ControlStates and vertices with "E" in them are EnvironStates. The vertex
with "W" is the winning vertex. The number under the letters are the minimum
distance for the trains to travel in from that position.
==PAGE:34==
5.4 Solver 4 - Heuristic Search
25
Starting from the ControlState to the far left, there is a estimated distance of 2
train moves to the destination. The blue path is the shortest but in the ﬁrst state
it can only choose between two EnvironStates, both with the distance 2. This
is because the trains only move after EnvironStates and thus EnvironStates
all have the same distance as their parent ControlState.
This problem is solved in this solver by always generating all the ControlStates
that follow an EnvironState and give the EnvironState the same distance as
the lowest following ControlState.
To not generate the same ControlStates twice, the edges after EnvironStates
are saved in an Dictionary. This means that this solver uses a bit more memory
than S3 but it prioritize shorter paths which may be an advantage in some
networks.
This solver is expected to be a little slower than S3 and use more memory in
most networks.
In more complicated networks it is expected to have better
paths and maybe generate fewer vertices in the graph.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 6
Experiment Results and
Evaluation
This chapter describes experiments using the solvers described in chapter 4
and chapter 5. First the test machine is described and the solvers are quickly
mentioned. Then the networks used in the tests are shown. Then the results
are presented. This chapter ﬁnishes with an evaluation of the results.
6.1
Setup
The Figure 6.1 show the speciﬁcation of the system that was used in the exper-
iments. The machine did have some background processes running, but these
were minimized to the best of the authors ability. It can be seen that F# is
running 32bit on a 64bit machine which limits the solvers to 2GB memory.
CPU Intel Core i7-6700k @ 4.00GHz
RAM 16GB DDR4 2666MHz
OS Windows 10 64bit
F# Version 4.1 32bit
Figure 6.1: Machine used to run the tests
==PAGE:36==
6.2 Networks
27
To test the networks, four diﬀerent solvers were used. Solver 1 (S1) generates
the entire graph before it solves it. Solver 2 (S2) uses On-The-Fly generation
of the game graph while solving. Solver 3 (S3) ﬁrst compute the paths for the
trains and uses these to limit the paths, it also uses On-The-Fly generation of
the graph. Solver 4 (S4) is the same as S3, except it tries to sort the hyperedges
on their shortest distance to the destination.
6.2
Networks
The solvers were run on a number of networks. Implementation of the networks
can be found in Appendix A. In the drawings, the red dots are signals in the up
direction and the blue dots are signals in the down direction.
s20
s10
s11
s12
(a) Simple
s30
s21
s20
s1121
s12
s11
s10
s9
s8
(b) Fork
Figure 6.2: Drawing of two networks used in the experiments
Simple
Simple is a very simple network with 3 linear sections and a point. It can be
seen in Figure 6.2a. This network was included to make sure that the solvers
in the test were working properly. It should be fast and easy for all the solvers.
The network is from [1].
Fork
Fork is another simple network. It has 2 points and 3 trains that all go in the
up direction. The network is drawn in Figure 6.2b. This network is so small
that it is fast for all the solvers but big enough to show a diﬀerence in number
of generated states. The network is from [1].
ManyPaths
ManyPaths is my own network. It has just one train, but the train can take
5 diﬀerent paths to the destination. The paths have diﬀerent lengths so it is
meant to test how good the results from the diﬀerent solvers are. Especially S4
was considered when this network was created. The network was designed so
==PAGE:37==
6.2 Networks
28
s11
s12
s13
s14
s15
s21
s22
s23
s24
s25
s31
s32
s33
s34
s35
s41
s42
s43
s44
s45
s51
Figure 6.3: Drawing of the ManyPaths network
that S2 and S3 always take the longest path. The network can be seen in Figure
6.3.
s63
s4
s38
s50 s78
s64
s5
s65
s6
s22
s23
s25
s24
s66
s67
s7
s36
s35
s37 s51
s82
s68
s8
s33
s34
s52
s83
s69
s9
s31
s32
s53
s84
s70
s10
s29
s30
s59
s85
s71
s11
s27
s28
s49
s48
s54
s86
s72 s12 s26
s47
s55
s87
s45
s44
s42
s43
s73
s41
s13
s74
s40
s39
s16
s75
s17
s76
s14
s77
s15
s88
s46
Figure 6.4: Drawing of the Florence network
Florence
The Florence network is modeled after roughly 1/4 of Florence Station.
A
drawing of the network can be seen in Figure 6.4 and a bigger drawing is included
in Appendix A. It is bigger than the previous networks and previous work was
==PAGE:38==
6.3 Results
29
limited to 4 trains in this network[1]. In this thesis Florence is tested with 4, 6,
7, 8 and 10 trains. The number of states generated by S1 and S2 is exponential
to the number of trains so this network is used to explore the limit of the
solvers. The number of states generated by S3 and S4 is worst case exponential
but they are expected to perform better. The network is taken from [1] and
implementation was provided by Michael Reichhardt Hansen.
2x Florence
The network 2x Florence uses the previous Florence network but merges it with
a mirrored version of itself. This results in a network in double size and more
paths for trains. In the old Florence network, there were only few paths to
choose from for each start and ﬁnish position but in the double version more
paths are present meaning that S4 may get an advantage here. This network is
tested with 8, 9 and 10 trains.
6.3
Results
This section presents the results of the experiments. Table 6.1 shows the result
from the networks Simple, Fork and ManyPaths. Table 6.2 shows the result
from all the single Florence networks. Table 6.3 shows the result from all the
2x Florence networks.
6.4
Evaluation
In this section, the results will be evaluated.
The ﬁrst network Simple was handled equally good with all the solvers. They
all had the same amount of vertices generated and the time was the same.
It is interesting that all of the solvers had exactly 0.015sec total time, this is
probably because of the garbage collection of F# which seems round up the
time to 0.015sec.
Already in the second network Fork, can a diﬀerence be seen in time used by
the system.
solver S2-S4 do not have any increase in time but the time to
generate the full graph is more than 10 times higher. Using the On-The-Fly
solver, it almost only create half the number of vertices that the full graph does
and with pathing the number of vertices is less than 1/4. Since the graph is the
biggest consumer of memory, the solvers that use On-The-Fly generation use
less memory.
==PAGE:39==
6.4 Evaluation
30
Simple
Fork
ManyPaths
S1
Graph generation
0.015
0.171
0.015
Solving
0.000
0.015
0.000
Total
0.015
0.186
0.015
Generated states
7
126
29
Result length
5
17
5
S2
Total
0.015
0.015
0.015
Generated states
7
69
21
Result length
5
17
17
S3
Path generation
0.000
0.000
0.000
Solving
0.015
0.015
0.015
Total
0.015
0.015
0.015
Generated states
7
27
21
Result length
5
17
17
S4
Path generation
0.000
0.000
0.000
Solving
0.015
0.015
0.015
Total
0.015
0.015
0.015
Generated states
7
28
7
Result length
5
17
5
Table 6.1: Result of experiments with the Simple, Fork and ManyPaths net-
works. All times are in seconds, and Generated states and Result
length is in number of vertices.
The third network was created to see if S4 could get a shorter path to the
destination if there were multiple paths. It can be seen that S4 has the shortest
path and fewest vertices generated. The solver S1 also have the shortest path,
that is because it chooses a diﬀerent random successor than the others. The
solver S1 still has the biggest graph.
The fourth network is Florence. Here there were a diﬀerent amount of trains.
The ﬁrst solver S1 has a big increase in the number of vertices when more trains
are added. It has 300,000 vertices with 6 trains and 1,100,000 with 7 trains.
The second solver S2 only has 170,000 for both 6 and 7 trains, so On-The-Fly
generation deﬁnitely improves the number of states.
Unfortunately both S1 and S2 runs out of memory with 8 trains, so it cannot
be seen if any of them can handle bigger games than the other, but it makes
sense that S2 would have fewer states.
The solvers S3 and S4 seem to be very equal in the Florence network and they
are much faster than S1 and S2, with 6 and 7 trains, S1 uses more than 300sec,
S2 uses 7-8sec and S3-S4 uses 0.046sec.
The solvers S3-S4 are also able to
handle 10 trains with ease. The solver S4 has a little increase in the number
==PAGE:40==
6.4 Evaluation
31
Florence4
Florence6
Florence7
Florence8
Florence10
S1
Graph generation
12.296
33.635
54.500
Solving
33.812
270.375
275.187
Total
46.108
304.010
329.687
Generated states
4798
300745
1,168,234
Result length
43
63
71
Out of
memory
Out of
memory
S2
Total
0.062
7.453
8.281
Generated states
1217
175725
172309
Result length
43
63
71
Out of
memory
Out of
memory
S3
Path generation
0.015
0.015
0.015
0.015
0.015
Solving
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.921
Total
0.046
0.046
0.046
0.046
0.936
Generated states
65
170
186
212
14724
Result length
43
63
71
81
107
S4
Path generation
0.015
0.015
0.015
0.015
0.015
Solving
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.031
1.046
Total
0.046
0.046
0.046
0.046
1.061
Generated states
71
186
208
248
14779
Result length
43
63
71
81
107
Table 6.2: Result of experiments with the Florence network with 4-10 trains.
All times are in seconds, and Generated states and Result length is
in number of vertices.
2x Florence8
2x Florence9
2x Florence10
S3
Path generation
0.078
0.125
0.109
Solving
1.375
841.734
872.109
Total
1.453
841.843
872.218
Generated states
3762
1,924,483
1,924,576
Result length
223
237
283
S4
Path generation
0.078
0.093
Solving
1.296
817.234
Total
1.374
817.327
Generated states
3626
1,876,469
Result length
207
221
Out of
memory
Table 6.3: Result of experiments with the 2x Florence with 8-10 trains. It
only shows the result for solver 3 and 4, because solver 1 and 2 both
ran out of memory on this. All times are in seconds, and Generated
states and Result length is in number of vertices.
==PAGE:41==
6.4 Evaluation
32
of vertices generated because it always generate the next ControlStates after
EnvironStates, and it seems to use a little more time.
In the the ﬁfth and ﬁnal network only the solvers S3 and S4 are listed because
the two other ran out of memory. This network is interesting because it has more
paths and thus S4 performs a little better than S3 with 8 and 9 trains. The
solver S4 has less generated states and a shorter result length, It also uses slightly
less time. Unfortunately it runs out of memory with 10 trains because of the
additional memory used to holds the hyperedges for the extra ControlStates
that are generated ahead of time. This could possibly be ﬁxed with a design
tailored for heuristic search.
The result is overall as expected. On-The-Fly generation seem to be better than
full graph generation for railway games as they always generate less states and
is considerably faster in the Florence network.
The solver that found the path beforehand was more eﬀective than ﬁrst imag-
ined. The reduction on the number of states was massive on the bigger networks
and allowed for even bigger networks. The time punishment for generating path
lists ﬁrst was very insigniﬁcant compared to the savings it resulted in.
The solver that prioritized shorter paths was indeed a little slower on networks
with few diﬀerent paths and it used a bit more memory which resulted in it not
being able to keep up with S3 in the last experiment, but it was able to ﬁnd
shorter paths and even do it in less time on the big networks with many paths.
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
I have successfully implemented railway networks and four diﬀerent solvers in
F#. While all the solvers were based around the same algorithm, they each
implement a number of optimizations that improves speed and memory usage.
All the solvers used the same time with the smallest railway networks but some
of the optimizations really improved solving time for bigger networks.
On-The-Fly generation of vertices reduced the number of vertices generated and
gave big improvements to time. Unfortunately it was not able to handle bigger
games for Florence Station.
Creating a list of valid paths for each train, and only letting trains move in
those paths, was an even bigger improvement. It kept the time below 1 sec for
all but the biggest games and the reduction of states generated could be seen in
all networks.
A solver that uses heuristic search based on train distances to destination was
implemented. It used more memory in all cases, and it used more time in cases
with few diﬀerent path for each train. In networks with many paths for each
train, the time and ﬁnal number of generated states were improved compared
to previous solver.
7.1
Future Work
In the future it would be interesting to experiment with more heuristic search
versions of the On-The-Fly algorithm. There are several ways to do this but it
would require more networks with many paths to see the real diﬀerence.
Giving diﬀerent weights to points and linear section may change result of the
==PAGE:43==
7.1 Future Work
34
heuristic search. It would also be interesting to sort the EnvironStates based
on average distance of succeeding ControlStates instead of the lowest.
Or
maybe try prioritize trains that just moved to get one train to its destination
at a time.
Creating the heuristic search solver that does not use extra memory could give
some fast, eﬃcient and good result. If I had more time, I would experiment
with changing the design and have the heuristic search on diﬀerent layers of the
solver. Currently the main sorting happens when the states are generated but
it could possibly also be done in the queue that holds the next hyperedges to
be explored by the algorithm.
It would also be interesting to try and expand the game to have more trains
move at a time.
Currently only one train will move, but if more trains are
allowed to move it would increase the state space but the best signal plan could
have fewer states depending on the game.
Another way to expand on the game, would be to modify the model to have
length for sections and trains, and give trains a speed. This would make the
model closer to real life but make the game more complicated.
The algorithm should be able to handle many other reachability games, and it
could be used to solved other problems. Other games may beneﬁt from other
optimizations.
==PAGE:44==
Appendix A
Networks
This chapter has all Implementation of the networks used in the experiments.
There is also a drawing of the Florence network in a bigger format.
In the
drawing, the red dots are signals in the up direction and the blue dots are
signals in the down direction.
Section A.1 is the drawing of the Florence network.
Section A.2 is the implementation of the Simple network.
Section A.3 is the implementation of the Fork network.
Section A.4 is the implementation of the ManyPaths network.
Section A.5 is the implementation of the Florence network with 4 trains. To see
Florence with more trains, go to source code in Appendix B.
A.1
Florence Station Drawing
==PAGE:45==
A.1 Florence Station Drawing
36
s63
s4
s38
s50
s78
s64
s5
s65
s6
s22
s23
s25
s24
s66
s67
s7
s36
s35
s37
s51
s82
s68
s8
s33
s34
s52
s83
s69
s9
s31
s32
s53
s84
s70
s10
s29
s30
s59
s85
s71
s11
s27
s28
s49
s48
s54
s86
s72
s12
s26
s47
s55
s87
s45
s44
s42
s43
s73
s41
s13
s74
s40
s39
s16
s75
s17
s76
s14
s77
s15
s88
s46
Figure A.1: Drawing of the Florence network
==PAGE:46==
A.2 Simple.fs
37
A.2
Simple.fs
Listing A.1: Implementation of the Simple network
1
override _this.lines = ["s10";"s12";"s20"]
2
override _this.points = ["s11"
3
override _this.consUpList = dict [("s10",Plus("s11","s12"));("s20",Minus("s11","
s12"))]
4
override _this.consDownList = dict [("s12",Stem("s11","s10","s20"))]
5
6
override _this.signalsUp = ["s20"]
7
override _this.signalsDown = ["s10"
8
override _this.endPointsUp = ["s20"]
9
override _this.endPointsDown = ["s10";"s12"]
10
11
override _this.S = ControlState(["s20"],["s12"])
12
override _this.F = ControlState(["s12"],["s10"])
A.3
Fork.fs
Listing A.2: Implementation of the Fork network
1
override _this.lines = ["s08";"s09";"s10";"s12";"s1121";"s21";"s30"]
2
override _this.points = ["s11";"s20"]
3
override _this.consUpList = dict [("s08",Line("s09"));
4
("s09",Line("s10"));
5
("s10",Stem("s11","s12","s1121"));
6
("s1121",Stem("s20","s30","s21"))]
7
override _this.consDownList = dict [
8
override _this.signalsUp = ["s08" ; "s09" ; "s10" ; "s12"; "s21" ; "s30"]
9
override _this.signalsDown = [
10
override _this.endPointsUp = ["s12";"s21";"s30"]
11
override _this.endPointsDown = []
12
13
override _this.S = ControlState(["s08";"s09";"s10"],[])
14
override _this.F = ControlState(["s12";"s21";"s30"],[])
A.4
ManyPaths.fs
Listing A.3: Implementation of the ManyPaths network
1
override _this.lines = ["s11";"s13";"s15";"s21";"s23";"s25";"s31";"s33";"s35";"
s41";"s43";"s45";"s51"]
2
override _this.points = ["s12";"s14";"s22";"s24";"s32";"s34";"s42";"s44"]
3
4
override _this.consUpList = dict [("s11",Stem("s12","s13","s21"));
==PAGE:47==
A.5 Florence.fs
38
5
("s21",Stem("s22","s23","s31"));
6
("s31",Stem("s32","s33","s41"));
7
("s41",Stem("s42","s43","s51"));
8
("s13",Plus("s14","s15"));
9
("s23",Plus("s24","s25"));
10
("s33",Plus("s34","s35"));
11
("s43",Plus("s44","s45"));
12
("s25",Minus("s14","s15"));
13
("s35",Minus("s24","s25"));
14
("s45",Minus("s34","s35"));
15
("s51",Minus("s44","s45"));]
16
override _this.consDownList = dict []
17
18
override _this.signalsUp = []
19
override _this.signalsDown = []
20
21
override _this.endPointsUp = ["s15"]
22
override _this.endPointsDown = ["s11"]
23
24
override _this.S = ControlState(["s11"],[])
25
override _this.F = ControlState(["s15"],[])
A.5
Florence.fs
Listing A.4: Implementation of the Florence network with 4 trains
1
override _this.lines = ["s63"; "s4"; "s50"; "s78"; "s64"; "s5";
2
"s65"; "s6"; "s2223"; "s24"; "s66"; "s2325";
3
"s67"; "s7"; "s36"; "s3537"; "s51"; "s82"; "s3738";
4
"s68";"s8"; "s3334"; "s52"; "s83"; "s3435"; "s69"; "s9";
5
"s3132";"s53"; "s84"; "s3233"; "s70"; "s10"; "s2930";
6
"s59";
"s85"; "s3031"; "s71"; "s11"; "s2728"; "s49";
7
"s54"; "s86"; "s2829"; "s72"; "s12";"s43";"s4244";
8
"s4445";"s4547"; "s55"; "s87";"s2627"; "s4748";
9
"s46"; "s88"; "s73"; "s13"; "s4142"; "s74"; "s16";
10
"s3940"; "s4041"; "s75"; "s17"; "s76"; "s14";
11
"s77"; "s15"]
12
override _this.points = ["s22"; "s23"; "s25";"s26"; "s27"; "s28";"s29"; "s30"; "
s31"; "s32";"s33";"s34";
13
"s35"; "s37";"s38"; "s39"; "s40"; "s41"; "s44";"s42"; "
s45";"s47"; "s48"]
14
override _this.consUpList = dict [
15
("s63",Line("s4") );
16
("s65",Line("s6") );
17
("s24",Line("s66"));
18
("s50",Line("s78"));
19
("s64",Line("s5") );
20
("s67",Line("s7") );
21
("s68",Line("s8") );
22
("s52",Line("s83"));
23
("s69",Line("s9") );
==PAGE:48==
A.5 Florence.fs
39
24
("s53",Line("s84"));
25
("s70",Line("s10"));
26
("s59",Line("s85"));
27
("s75",Line("s17"));
28
("s51",Line("s82"));
29
("s71",Line("s11"));
30
("s54",Line("s86"));
31
("s72",Line("s12"));
32
("s55",Line("s87"));
33
("s46",Line("s88"));
34
("s73",Line("s13"));
35
("s74",Line("s16"));
36
("s76",Line("s14"));
37
("s77",Line("s15"));
38
("s5",Minus("s22", "s2223")
);
39
("s6",Plus("s22",
"s2223")
);
40
("s2223",Stem("s23", "s24", "s2325") );
41
("s4",Plus("s38", "s50")
);
42
("s3738",Minus("s38", "s50")
);
43
("s2325",Minus("s25", "s36")
);
44
("s7",Plus("s25", "s36")
);
45
("s3435",Minus("s35", "s3537")
);
46
("s36",Plus("s35", "s3537")
);
47
("s3537",Stem("s37", "s51", "s3738") );
48
("s8",Plus("s33", "s3334")
);
49
("s3233",Minus("s33", "s3334")
);
50
("s3334",Stem("s34", "s52", "s3435") );
51
("s9",Plus("s31", "s3132")
);
52
("s3031",Minus("s31", "s3132")
);
53
("s2728",Stem("s28", "s49", "s2829") );
54
("s3132",Stem("s32", "s53", "s3233") );
55
("s10",Plus("s29", "s2930")
);
56
("s2829",Minus("s29", "s2930")
);
57
("s2930",Stem("s30", "s59", "s3031") );
58
("s11",Plus("s27", "s2728")
);
59
("s2627",Minus("s27", "2728")
);
60
("s12",Stem("s26", "s43", "s2627")
);
61
("s49",Plus("s48", "s54")
);
62
("s4748",Minus("s48", "s54")
);
63
("s43",Plus("s42", "s4244")
);
64
("s4142",Minus("s42", "s4244")
);
65
("s4244",Plus("s44", "s4445")
);
66
("s15",Minus("s44", "s4445")
);
67
("s4445",Stem("s45", "s4547", "s46") );
68
("s4547",Stem("s47", "s55", "s4748") );
69
("s13",Plus("s41", "s4142")
);
70
("s4041",Minus("s41", "s4142")
);
71
("s16",Plus("s39", "s3940")
);
72
("s17",Minus("s39", "s3940")
);
73
("s3940",Plus("s40", "s4041")
);
74
("s14",Minus("s40", "s4041")
)
75
76
override _this.consDownList = dict [
77
("s4",Line( "s63" ) );
78
("s6",Line( "s65" ) );
==PAGE:49==
A.5 Florence.fs
40
79
("s66",Line( "s24" ));
80
("s78",Line( "s50" ));
81
("s5",Line( "s64" ) );
82
("s7",Line( "s67" ) );
83
("s8",Line( "s68" ) );
84
("s83",Line( "s52" ));
85
("s9",Line("s69" )
);
86
("s84",Line( "s53" ));
87
("s10",Line( "s70" ));
88
("s85",Line( "s59" ));
89
("s17",Line( "s75" ));
90
("s82",Line( "s51" ));
91
("s11",Line( "s71" ));
92
("s86",Line( "s54" ));
93
("s12",Line( "s72" ));
94
("s87",Line( "s55" ));
95
("s88",Line( "s46" ));
96
("s13",Line( "s73" ));
97
("s16",Line( "s74" ));
98
("s14",Line( "s76" ));
99
("s15",Line( "s77" ));
100
("s2223",Stem("s22", "s6", "s5")
);
101
("s2325",Minus("s23", "s2223")
);
102
("s24",Plus("s23", "s2223")
);
103
("s50",Stem("s38", "s4", "s3738")
);
104
("s36",Stem("s25", "s7", "s2325")
);
105
("s3537",Stem("s35", "s36", "s3435"));
106
("s3738",Plus("s37", "s3537")
);
107
("s51",Minus("s37", "s3537")
);
108
("s3334",Stem("s33", "s8", "s3233") );
109
("s3435",Minus("s34", "s3334")
);
110
("s52",Plus("s34", "s3334")
);
111
("s3132",Stem("s31","s9", "s3031")
);
112
("s2829",Minus("s28", "s2728")
);
113
("s49",Plus("s28", "s2728")
);
114
("s3233",Minus("s32", "s3132")
);
115
("s53",Plus("s32", "s3132")
);
116
("s2930",Stem("s29", "s10", "s2829"));
117
("s3031",Minus("s30", "s2930")
);
118
("s59",Plus("s30", "s2930")
);
119
("s2728",Stem("s27", "s11", "s2627"));
120
("s2627",Minus("s26", "s12")
);
121
("s43",Plus("s26", "s12")
);
122
("s54",Stem("s48", "s49", "s4748")
);
123
("s4244",Stem("s42", "s43", "s4142"));
124
("s4445",Stem("s44", "s4244", "s15"));
125
("s46",Minus("s45", "s4445")
);
126
("s4547",Plus("s45", "s4445")
);
127
("s4748",Minus("s47", "s4547")
);
128
("s55",Plus("s47", "s4547")
);
129
("s4142",Stem("s41", "s13", "s4041"));
130
("s3940",Stem("s39", "s16", "s17")
);
131
("s4041",Stem("s40", "s3940", "s14"))
132
override _this.signalsUp = ["s63"; "s50"; "s64"; "s65"; "s24"; "s67"; "s51"; "s68
"; "s52"; "s69"; "s53"; "s70""s59";
==PAGE:50==
A.5 Florence.fs
41
133
"s71"; "s54"; "s72"; "s55"; "s46"; "s73"; "s74"; "s75
"; "s76"; "s77"]
134
override _this.signalsDown = ["s4"; "s78"; "s5"; "s6"; "s66"; "s7"; "s82"; "s8";
"s83"; "s9"; "s84"; "s10""s85";
135
"s11"; "s86"; "s12"; "s87"; "s88"; "s13"; "s16"; "
s17"; "s14"; "s15"
136
override _this.endPointsUp = ["s78";"s82";"s83";"s84";"s85";"s86";"s87"]
137
override _this.endPointsDown ["s63";"s64";"s65";"s67";"s68";"s69";"s70";"s71";"
s72";"s73";"s74";"s75";"s76";"s77"]
138
139
override _this.F = ControlState(["s50";"s24";"s46";"s54"],[])
140
override _this.S = ControlState(["s64";"s65";"s76";"s77"],[])
==PAGE:51==
Appendix B
Source Code
Source code can be found at: https://github.com/zunster/RailwaySolver.
git. It contains both implementation of railway games and implementation of
networks.
RailwayTypes.fs is the custom types used in the proejct.
PathFinder.fs is used to generate precomputed paths for solver 3 and 4.
GraphGenerator.fs is used to generate the game graph for solver 1.
Double.fs is used to make a mirrored copy of a network and merge it with the
original.
Game.fs deﬁnes networks in abstract types.
GraphSolver.fs is solver 1.
OnTheFlySolver.fs is solver 2.
PathSolver.fs is solver 3.
SortedSolver.fs is solver 4.
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
[1] Patrick Frederik Soelmark Kasting. System synthesis using parity games,
System syntese ved brug af parity games. 2016.
[2] Linh Hong Vu. Formal Development and Veriﬁcation of Railway Control
Systems - In the context of ERTMS/ETCS Level 2. Technical University of
Denmark (DTU), 2015.
[3] Dietmar Berwanger. Graph games with perfect information. preprint, 2013.
[4] Xinxin Liu and Scott A Smolka. Simple linear-time algorithms for minimal
ﬁxed points.
In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
Programming, pages 53–66. Springer, 1998.
[5] Alfred Tarski. A lattice-theoretical ﬁxpoint theorem and its applications.
Paciﬁc journal of Mathematics, 5(2):285–309, 1955.
[6] Jayadev Misra. Knaster-tarski theorem. 2014.
[7] Patrick Frederik Soelmark Kasting, Michael Reichhardt Hansen, and Steen
Vester. Synthesis of railway-signaling plans using reachability games. 28th
Symposium on the Implementation and Application of Functional Program-
ming Languages,, page 9, 2016.
[8] fsprojects. Fsharpx collections. http://fsprojects.github.io/FSharpx.
Collections/index.html. [Online; accessed 29-01-2018].
[9] Microsoft.
Memory
limits
for
windows
and
windows
server
re-
leases. https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/
aa366778(v=vs.85).aspx#memory_limits. [Online; accessed 29-01-2018].
