==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Andreas M. Axelsen
Tanja Gyde
s123336
s113199
Supervisor:
Dario Pacino
Technical University of Denmark
Management Engineering
1 February 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The container terminals play a key role in the maritime industry as they
facilitate the container ﬂow between land and sea. This thesis focuses on the
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment Problem in container termi-
nals. We develop an Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search (ALNS) heuris-
tic to achieve results of similar quality to the state-of-the-art heuristics but
in shorter computation time. The ALNS is adapted to APM Terminals -
Aarhus (APMT) to test its usability on a smaller real-life container termi-
nal. Our computational results show that the ALNS can improve many of
the best-known bounds and that we obtain results close to the results of the
current state-of-the-art heuristics while signiﬁcantly improving the runtime
for almost all instances. We also ﬁnd promising results for the APMT case
where the quayside operations can be improved.
3
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
AGV
Automated Guided Vehicle
ALNS
Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
APMT
APM Terminals - Aarhus
BACAP
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment Problem
BACASP
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Scheduling Problem
BAP
Berth Allocation Problem
CPLEX
Optimisation software package using Simplex
EFT
Expected Finishing Time
EST
Earliest Starting Time
ETA
Expected Time of Arrival
FCFS
First Come First Serve
GA
Genetic Algorithm
GRASP
Greedy Randomised Adaptive Search Procedure
HC
Hill Climber
IP
Integer Problem
LB
Lower Bound
LFT
Latest Finishing Time
LNS
Large Neighbourhood Search
MA
Memetic Algorithm
NP
Non-deterministic Polynomial-time
OR
Operational Research
QC
Quay Crane
QCAP
Quay Crane Assignment Problem
QCSP
Quay Crane Scheduling Problem
RCM
Required Crane Movements
SA
Simulated Annealing
Std. Dev.
Standard Deviation
SWO
Squeaky Wheel Optimisation
TEU
Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit
TS
Tabu Search
TSP
Travelling Salesman Problem
UB
Upper Bound
5
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
2
Abbreviations
4
1
Introduction
9
1.1
Maritime logistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2
Terminal logistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.1
The ship handling process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.2.2
Storage and stacking logistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.2.3
Transport optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Project Description
17
2.1
Main question of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Theory on Search Methods
19
3.1
Hill Climber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Simulated Annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Literature Review
29
5
Model Formulation
33
5.1
Example of a berthing plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Mathematical model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Example continued . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Solving the BACAP
41
6.1
Assignment lists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.1.1
Greedy assignments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.1.2
All assignments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.3
QC assignments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Construction heuristic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2.1
Best Insertion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
ALNS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3.1
Destroy and repair operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
==PAGE:8==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
6.3.2
Resetting the search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7
Computational Results
53
7.1
Literature instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.2
Development process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.4
APM Terminals - Aarhus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.4.1
Model adaptation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.4.2
APMT instances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8
Discussion
67
8.1
Complexity of ﬁnding good solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8.2
Applying the ALNS on real-life cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
9
Conclusions
77
9.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
9.1.1
Improvement of the ALNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
9.1.2
Further work on real-life cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
Bibliography
80
A Parameter settings
i
B Solution examples
iii
C APMT Solutions
ix
Page 8
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Since the industrial revolution started in the middle of the 18th century, small
businesses with a few employees and a small production have evolved into
large corporations with thousands of employees and mass production. With
growing competition, the importance of optimisation becomes more clear,
but the size and complexity of the companies make it diﬃcult to create an
overview and allocate limited resources. So to assist the decision makers,
mathematical models were developed. This discipline within mathematics is
called Operational Research (OR).
After World War II, OR becomes more and more integrated into organ-
isations, especially since many OR tools were developed in the late 1940s
and the 1950s. But it is not until computers become an everyday tool in the
1980s, that OR becomes an important decision-support tool. As the com-
puters get more and more powerful, it is possible to solve still more advanced
OR models.
OR play a vital role in the maritime industry. With increasing trade
due to globalisation, more goods are transported all over the world, and
about 90 % of the world trade is transported by ship [International Chamber
of Shipping, 2017]. This makes maritime transport a signiﬁcant player in
many industries, and ﬁerce competition creates a growing demand for eﬃcient
operations and reliable transport services.
1.1
Maritime logistics
The maritime industry spans over a large and complex system of ﬂeets and
goods shipped all over the world. This naturally makes optimisation of mar-
itime transport a diﬃcult discipline. It is hard to model such a complex
system, so the system is divided into sub-systems that are possible to model
and optimise. This thesis focuses on the transportation and handling of con-
tainers, which represents one of the most transported types of goods by sea.
The problems listed on the next page are primarily related to container ships,
but some may be adaptable to other areas of maritime shipping. These prob-
lems reﬂect multiple aspects of the challenges which the industry is facing.
9
==PAGE:10==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
• Service Design
• Fleet Size and Mix
• Fleet Deployment
• Vessel Repositioning
• Network Flow
• Empty Container Repositioning
• Speed Optimisation
• Bunker Fuel Optimisation
• Disruption Management
• Weather Routing
On a strategic level, Service Design helps decide the overall sailing sched-
ules for the shipping company. Fleet Size and Mix are also strategic planning
problems that investigate how many of each vessel type that is needed to ac-
commodate future demand. On a tactical level, Fleet Deployment and Vessel
Repositioning optimises the utilisation of the vessels already owned by the
shipping company by ﬁnding the best use of the ﬂeet in the network.
In daily management, on an operational level, problems such as Network
Flow and Empty Container Repositioning decides which vessels the contain-
ers are transported on. This is done by considering total transport time and
leftover capacity on the vessels. On this level, we also have Speed Optimisa-
tion and Bunker Fuel Optimisation (bunker fuel is a general term for vessel
fuel oil). The problems are about ﬁnding a speed that enables the vessels to
reach the port calls (the scheduled stop for a vessel) in time while using as
little bunker as possible. Bunker is the major operational cost of a container
ship. Hence it is essential to keep the bunker consumption as low as possible.
Using less bunker also makes the already eco-friendly transportation mode
of sailing even more eco-friendly. The Speed Optimisation is limited by the
port calls, so to be able to optimise the speed further, the time spent in
a terminal should be optimised as well. The green beneﬁts of an eﬀective
terminal are shown in ﬁgure 1.1. By leaving the port earlier, the vessel can
sail at a lower speed and consume less bunker.
Also, in daily management, there is a need for real-time optimisation such
as Disruption Management. Being able to handle disruptions enables the
vessel to overcome delays and get back on schedule after delays. Delays can
be caused by for example delays in a terminal or by bad weather conditions.
Weather Routing is also necessary to manage daily to avoid delays and to
save bunker by dodging bad weather and rough seas.
Page 10
==PAGE:11==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Figure 1.1: How less time in terminals can lead to a more eco-friendly voyage
[Pacino, 2016].
1.2
Terminal logistics
Terminals act as a link between land and sea. A terminal can be split into
three main areas. The quayside, which is the area of loading and unloading
berthed vessels. The landside, which is the area where the cargo is trans-
ferred to or from other transportation modes like trucks and trains, and the
yard, which is the area that holds the cargo until it is handled by quayside
or hinterland operations. See ﬁgure 1.2 for a conceptual ﬁgure of a container
terminal.
Container terminals facilitate the container ﬂow through the two inter-
faces of quay- and landside. The yard of a container terminal is also called
the stacking area because the containers are stored in stacks to save space.
The sheds are a place where containers are emptied, ﬁlled or repaired, and
the empty stock is where empty containers are stored. See [Steenken et al.,
2004] for a thorough description and literature review of problems related to
container terminals.
Page 11
==PAGE:12==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Figure 1.2: Operation areas of a seaport container terminal and ﬂow of trans-
ports [Steenken et al., 2004].
When a vessel arrives at the container terminal, it moors at the quay,
sometimes assisted by smaller tugboats. When the vessel is berthed, a num-
ber of quay cranes (QCs) begin the unloading and loading of containers from
and to the vessel. The containers are picked up on the quay by a transport
vehicle (e.g. AGV - Automated Guided Vehicle, a truck with trailer, a fork-
lift, a straddle carrier, a reach stacker) and is transported to a stack or a
shed. The straddle carriers, reach stackers and forklifts can place a container
in the stacks, while the AGVs and trucks need vertical transportation, for
example, a gantry crane, to stack the containers. The terminal equipment
also makes internal moves of the containers between the diﬀerent stocks and
sheds. The landside area is serviced by the same type of equipment to load
and unload trucks and trains. See ﬁgure 1.3 for pictures of the mentioned
equipment.
The growth in global trade is also aﬀecting the container terminals. The
more containers transported, the more containers the terminals have to han-
dle. As containerisation expands, the size of the vessels changes as a natural
eﬀect. The earliest container ships could carry up to 800 TEU (Twenty-foot
Equivalent Units) but today the Majestic Maersk can carry 18,000 TEU, and
the MSC Oscar can carry 19,224 TEU [Pacino and Psaraftis, 2017]. These
enormous vessels result in very complex problems for the container terminals,
which needs OR to obtain good solutions. See [Steenken et al., 2004] for an
elaborate classiﬁcation of diﬀerent container terminal operations. For the
terminals to provide good service and to maximise their proﬁt several opti-
misation problems arise. Like the container ships, the terminals face some
general problems which are described in the following [Steenken et al., 2004].
Page 12
==PAGE:13==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
(a) Quay cranes.
(b) A port.
(c) A container terminal
(d) A forklift.
(e) A container vessel and a
tugboat.
(f) An AGV.
(g) A reachstacker.
(h) A straddle carrier.
(i) Stacks of containers with
gantry cranes.
Figure 1.3: Pictures of diﬀerent terms.
(a):
http://www.chec.bj.cn/Portals/0/newimage/2%E5%85%A8%E8%87%AA%E5%8A%A8%E5%8F%8C%E5%B0%8F%E8%BD%A6%E5%B2%B8%E6%A1%A5%
E5%9C%A8%E5%BE%B7%E5%9B%BD%E6%B1%89%E5%A0%A1%E6%B8%AF.jpg,
(b): http://static1.businessinsider.com/image/582b99acba6eb637008b46fe-1067/aerial%20image.jpg,
(c): http://www.arabiansupplychain.com/pictures/Gulftainer.jpg,
(d): https://c1.staticflickr.com/1/588/21141013455_3e6ee1ddc5_h.jpg,
(e):
https://cnet3.cbsistatic.com/img/c3RSMLdLw9Pt_efdImWy7v7bcSU=/fit-in/970x0/2014/05/24/
9e7eeea3-ad3f-4de8-91ba-96a0c20046bb/tow-pulling-the-ship-full.jpg,
(f): https://www.hafen-hamburg.de/images/image_cache/images/0/fotos/news/hhla_cta_bagv.jpg,
(g): http://www.greenport.com/__data/assets/image/0021/90633/Hyster-enhances-Reach-Stacker-for-increasing-container-volumes.
jpg,
(h): https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f9/SISU_Valmet_44011_Straddle_carrier_p1.JPG,
(i): https://images.pond5.com/densely-packed-container-yard-zoom-footage-021048871_prevstill.jpeg
Page 13
==PAGE:14==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
1.2.1
The ship handling process
Berth allocation
The Berth Allocation Problem (BAP) is the problem of allocating a vessel to
a berth. The BAP is often characterised as a discrete or a continuous BAP.
The discrete version has the quay divided into berths in which a vessel can
be moored. The continuous version lets a vessel berth at any position on
the quay. However the quay will often be split up into integer points, say
for example every 10 metres, where the vessel can moor. Depending on the
layout of the terminal there can be various constraints to where certain types
of vessels can berth due to for example draught. A static version of the BAP
will have all vessels ready in the port, where a dynamic version have diﬀerent
arrival times for the vessels imposing a constraint to the problem. Vessels
can have a desired berthing location. This can be to minimise the distance
that the cargo has to travel from vessel to land and thereby the handling
time [Bierwirth and Meisel, 2015].
Crane split (scheduling)
Once a vessel has berthed, QCs must be assigned to the vessel to load and un-
load the cargo. This results in the Quay Crane Assignment Problem (QCAP),
which is the problem of assigning QCs to berthed vessels in certain time win-
dows. All vessels have a maximum number of QCs working on it at the same
time, but some vessels might also have to be assigned a minimum number of
QCs due to contractual terms.
When several QCs work simultaneous on the same vessel, they might in-
terfere with each other such that the eﬀective QC hours are not completely
proportional to the number of QCs assigned to the vessel. Some versions
of the QCAP are time-variant, such that the QCs can change position at
every time period. Others are time-invariant such that once a QC has been
assigned to a vessel, it must work at the vessel for the full duration until
the vessel is ready to leave the terminal. An expanded version of the QCAP
is the Quay Crane Scheduling Problem (QCSP). QCSP is the problem of
making schedules for the assigned QCs to handle a berthed vessel.
The BAP and the QCAP are obviously very interdependent. Depending
on when and where a vessel is moored, there might be a diﬀerent availability
of QCs, that can handle the vessel. Therefore the QCAP is often combined
with the BAP into the Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment Prob-
lem (BACAP). By combining the two problems, there is a bigger chance that
a feasible and good solution will be available to solve the QCSP. The BAP
Page 14
==PAGE:15==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
and the QCSP could also be combined into the Berth Allocation and Quay
Crane Scheduling Problem (BACASP), but it would be a much harder prob-
lem to solve than the BACAP, due to the increased complexity. The focus
of this thesis is the BACAP.
Stowage planning
Stowage planning is in the shipping lines interest. It is about stowing the
containers in the vessel to minimise crane moves at all the container terminals
on the vessels rotation. A good stowage plan can also increase the utilisation
of the vessel. The main constraint in stowage planning is that the vessel
can become unbalanced and ultimately tip over if the stowage plan does not
consider stability.
1.2.2
Storage and stacking logistics
Storage and stacking logistics is a problem that occurs in the yard. Many
containers have to be stored on a daily basis, and space is a limited resource.
Containers are usually placed in stacks to save space. Many containers are
therefore hard to reach if they are stacked below other containers. One big
problem is to ﬁnd the best spot for each container, such that reshuﬄes of the
containers are as few as possible.
1.2.3
Transport optimisation
The quayside transport
The quayside transport has to be planned in such a way that congestion
under the QCs is avoided.
Too much equipment and bad sequences can
delay the crane operations.
It is therefore important to synchronise the
crane operations with the yard transport. For the horizontal transportation
to be as eﬀective as possible, a plan that reduces transportation times is also
needed.
The landside transport
The landside transport is also about reducing transportation times. Better
utilisation of the vehicles can be obtained by planning for as little empty
transportation time as possible.
Page 15
==PAGE:16==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Crane transportation optimisation
The crane transport is about minimising the waiting time for the vehicle.
This is done by planning for job sequences by the gantry cranes, which are
working in the stacks.
Page 16
==PAGE:17==
2
Project Description
This master thesis aims at solving the BACAP as described by [Meisel and
Bierwirth, 2009]. We want to achieve a solution to the BACAP, that min-
imises operating costs of the quay cranes, as well as the cost imposed from
having to speed up a vessel in relation to early arrival or late departure. The
focus of this thesis is to develop a model, that can achieve similar solution
quality as current state-of-the-art models, with a shorter calculation time to
make the model more suitable for practical use. Instances reﬂecting reality
at APM Terminals - Aarhus will be generated to test the applicability of the
model on a real container terminal.
2.1
Main question of the thesis
Can a model be developed to solve the BACAP that obtains solutions of simi-
lar quality as known state-of-the-art results, but in a shorter calculation time
to increase usability, and can the same model be adapted to a real-world case
from APM Terminals - Aarhus to improve the eﬃciency of their quayside
operations?
17
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
3
Theory on Search Methods
In OR an optimisation problem is the problem of selecting the best solu-
tion from a set of solutions. The most simple optimisation problems are the
unconstrained optimisation problems, which only consists of one function.
This function is called the objective function, and the goal of an optimisation
problem is to either maximise or minimise this function. Most optimisation
problems are constrained. The constraints of a problem deﬁne limitations for
the decision variables in the problem. Depending on the problem, variables
can be both discrete and continuous. If a problem contains discrete variables,
it is called a combinatorial problem. Combinatorial problems are harder to
solve than continuous problems [Hillier and Lieberman, 2005].
Examples
of a combinatorial problem are planning, scheduling and resource allocation
problems [Hoos and St¨utzle, 2005].
Where a problem deﬁnes the objective and limitation on an abstract level,
an instance of a problem provides all the input data and thereby speciﬁes
the problem. A problem can have many instances, but not all instances have
a solution. A solution to an instance consists of a set of variable values, that
are all satisfying the constraints of a problem to where the given instance
belongs. Since many instances have more than one solution, the set of all
possible solutions to an instance is called the solution space. The quality of
a solution is measured based on the value of the objective function. If it can
be proved that a solution is the best solution within the total solution space
of an instance, the solution is considered optimal. For a minimisation prob-
lem, an optimal solution will have the lowest objective value of all feasible
solutions. An instance can have more than one optimal solution. To ﬁnd
solutions to an instance, diﬀerent search methods can be applied.
To prove that a found solution is optimal an exact method should be used
as search method. The primary reason that exact methods are not used for
all optimisation problems is that exact methods can be very time-consuming,
especially if the problem has many constraints and many variables, which is
often the case with real-life problems. Many optimisation problems are NP-
hard (non-deterministic polynomial-time). This means that the runtime of
the algorithm solving the optimisation problem grows rapidly when the com-
plexity of the problem increases. The complexity of an optimisation problem
can be explained by looking at the number of solutions that would have to
19
==PAGE:20==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
be evaluated if an enumeration of the entire solution space was attempted.
To understand how fast complexity can grow, we can look at the travelling
salesman problem, which is an integer problem (IP) and thereby a combina-
torial problem.
The travelling salesman problem (TSP) is a classic optimisation problem
where a salesman must visit a number of cities and then return home to his
starting city. A solution to this problem is a sequence of all the cities in
a given instance, starting and ending with the ﬁrst city. The objective is
to minimise the total distance travelled. The number of possible solutions
to the TSP can easily be calculated by (n −1)!, where n is the number of
cities. If the salesman must visit ten cities, the number of feasible solutions
is (10 −1)! = 362, 880. The fastest computers in the world (2014) can do
3.3 · 1016 operations per second, so calculating all solutions for ten cities
would be easy. But if the number of cities is increased to 50, the number of
solutions would be 6.08 · 1062. The age of the universe is 4 · 1017 seconds, so
even if the calculations were started at the same time as the Big Bang, only
a relatively small amount of the all feasible solutions would have been found
by now [Røpke, 2016].
A calculation time longer than the age of the Universe is impractical, so
enumerating all feasible solutions is not a good approach to solve optimi-
sation problems. Fortunately the exact methods do not need to investigate
all feasible solutions to verify optimality, but still, the veriﬁcation gets more
diﬃcult as the solution space grows.
Another problem that is proved to be NP-hard is the BAP [Lim, 1998].
As the BACAP is derived from the BAP, the BACAP is also NP-hard, which
makes the BACAP a very time-consuming problem to solve. The authors of
[Iris et al., 2017] attempts to solve the BACAP with 30 diﬀerent instances
with CPLEX in 10 hours, but due to the complexity of the problem only a
few of the instances are solved to optimality. To be able to solve the BACAP
in a reasonable time, we use a heuristic approach.
For heuristics, there is no guarantee that a found solution is optimal as
the search is not controlled by mathematical rules like the search of exact
methods but is more like qualiﬁed guesswork. The wide diﬀerence in the
nature of the heuristics makes it diﬃcult to classify them, but two important
methods of the heuristics are the construction methods and the local search
methods [Letchford, 2012]. Where the construction methods build a solu-
tion from scratch, the local search methods starts from an initial candidate
Page 20
==PAGE:21==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
solution and moves through the solution space by selecting a new candidate
from the neighbourhood of the current candidate solution until a termination
criterion is satisﬁed [Hoos and St¨utzle, 2005]. The neighbourhood is created
by a neighbourhood operator, which generates solutions by making changes
to the current candidate solution. An acceptance criterion determines which
of the solutions in the neighbourhood to proceed with. There are diﬀerent
strategies to create and select a neighbour and the neighbourhood operator
can be classiﬁed by the following criteria [Neri et al., 2011]:
Generation of neighbours
• Stochastic: The neighbour is generated randomly
• Deterministic: The neighbour is generated deterministically
Neighbourhood size
• Single neighbour: The neighbourhood operator only generates one
neighbour for a given solution
• Multiple neighbours: The neighbourhood operator generates several
neighbours for a given solution
Acceptance Criterion
• Steepest Descend: The neighbourhood operator generates a neigh-
bourhood and then decides which neighbour is the best to proceed with
based on the objective function. (Also called Best Improvement)
• Greedy: The neighbour operator generates neighbours and accepts
the ﬁrst neighbour that improves the solution based on the objective
function. (Also called First Improvement)
It is essential to be aware of the solution space when deﬁning a local
search. The search might get stuck such that no improving neighbours exist
in the neighbourhood. An example of a solution space for a maximisation
problem can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1.
Page 21
==PAGE:22==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Figure 3.1: Diﬀerent kinds of optima [Slideplayer, 2015]
Figure 3.1 shows diﬀerent kinds of optima in the solution space. A local
optimum is the best solution in a part of the solution space, while a global
optimum is the best possible solution in the entire solution space and is the
same as an optimal solution. A global optimum is also a local optimum,
mathematically speaking.
It is possible to ﬁnd a global optimum with a local search, but it is also
possible that the global optimum can never be reached. If the objective value
of the global optimum is not known, we can never be sure that it has been
reached. Even if the optimal solution or any other solution is known, it is
only possible to reach it with a neighbourhood operator that has the solution
in its neighbourhood. If that is not the case, the desired solution can never
be reached.
Figure 3.1 also shows a plateau and a shoulder. Both are characterised by
the ﬂat structure, created by several solutions with the same objective value.
The plateau is a local optimum. If the local search ﬁnds either a plateau or a
shoulder, the search can get stuck in the solution space. This happens if the
neighbourhood operator cannot reach new solutions outside of the shoulder
or plateau, and it might end up cycling through the same solutions over and
over again until it terminates.
Page 22
==PAGE:23==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
For a local search to terminate, a termination criterion must be met.
There are diﬀerent strategies to choose from. A local search can, for exam-
ple, terminate after a speciﬁc number of iterations, after a speciﬁc amount of
time, or if the objective value reaches an acceptable value. This value could
be set if a lower bound is known (minimisation problems). A lower bound is
found by relaxing the discrete decision variables in the exact model to make
them continuous. It is mathematically proved that the optimal value of a
relaxed optimisation problem is equal or lower than the optimal value of the
original problem [Hillier and Lieberman, 2005].
If the search is unable to ﬁnd improvements, it can either terminate right
away or terminate after a number of iterations where no improvements could
be made. A local search would often terminate or get stuck when reaching a
local optimum, so strategies to escape a local optimum are important. Such
strategies can be implemented by using a metaheuristic. Where a heuristic
normally is tailored for the individual optimisation problem, a metaheuristic
is a predeﬁned algorithm, that is implemented on top of a local search, and
where the local search guides the heuristic, the metaheuristic can help guiding
the local search [Hoos and St¨utzle, 2005]. A few diﬀerent search methods are
described below.
3.1
Hill Climber
One of the most basic local searches is the Hill Climber (HC) [Hoos and
St¨utzle, 2005]. The pseudo code of a HC with Steepest Descend can be seen
in algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Hill Climber
output: Solution x∗
1 x∗←Initial Solution
2 xt ←Temporary Solution
3 while Termination Criterion is not met do
4
N ←NeighbourhoodOperator(x∗)
5
for xt ∈N do
6
if Z(xt) ≤Z(x∗) then
7
x∗←xt
Page 23
==PAGE:24==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
The HC is very eﬃcient at ﬁnding a local optimum. A typical HC has
a neighbourhood operator that generates a neighbourhood of several neigh-
bours. The acceptance criterion of the typical HC accepts a solution that
improves the objective value, or is equally good as the objective value of the
current solution. This means that the HC always improves the solution until
it reaches a local optimum from which it will never be able to escape because
of its acceptance criterion. A consequence of this is that the HC can make
fast improvements to a solution, but also that it is not very eﬀective when
an instance has a large solution space. A HC that is run until it cannot ﬁnd
any improvements can guarantee that a local optimum has been reached. To
get a more thorough search, HC is often combined with metaheuristics to
escape local optimum to achieve better solutions.
3.2
Simulated Annealing
Simulated Annealing (SA) is a very popular metaheuristic with 1.77 million
hits on Google Scholar. The SA, shown in algorithm 2, is like many basic
metaheuristics implemented on top of the HC [Kendall and Burke, 2005].
Algorithm 2: Simulated Annealing
output: Solution x∗
1 x∗←Initial Solution
2 xt ←Temporary Solution
3 x ←x∗
4 T ←Temperaturestart
5 while Termination Criterion is not met do
6
Select xt from NeighbourhoodOperator(x)
7
P = e−Z(xt)−Z(x∗)
T
8
if Z(xt) ≤Z(x∗) then
9
x∗←xt
10
x ←xt
11
else if Z(xt) ≤Z(x) or Random(0, 1) ≤P then
12
x ←xt
13
T ←Cooling(T)
Page 24
==PAGE:25==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
The most important feature of SA is its ability to accept solutions that
do not improve the current solution and thereby enabling it to escape local
optima. SA accepts worse solutions with a probability based on theories on
cooling materials from thermodynamics. The calculation of the probability
is shown in equation 3.1
P = e−Z(xt)−Z(x∗)
T
(3.1)
, where Z(xt) is the objective value of the proposed solution, Z(x∗) is the
objective value of the best-found solution, and T is a temperature, which
decreases throughout the search. As equation 3.1 shows the probability of
accepting a proposed solution is high when the exponent is small.
This
means that the closer Z(xt) is to Z(x∗) or the higher the temperature is,
the higher the probability of accepting worse solutions becomes. Usually,
the temperature decreases with the number of iterations. This means that
the more iterations the algorithm has made, the less likely it is to accept
a non-improving solution. As the temperature becomes zero, the SA is the
same as the HC [Kendall and Burke, 2005]. When neighbours are generated
from a non-improving solution rather than the best solution, it can make
room for a change in the solution structure and thereby open up for parts of
the solution space, which can contain better solutions.
There are many ways to decide a starting temperature and a cooling
factor for SA. Some cooling schedules are shown below, where k is the step
count [Nourani and Andresen, 1998].
• Exponential
T(k) = T(0) · αk
α ∈[0, 1]
• Linear
T(k) = T(0) −η · k
η ∈[0, 1]
• Logarithmic
T(k) =
c
log(k+1)
c ∈R
• Geometric
T(k) = T(k −1) · α
α ∈[0, 1]
Page 25
==PAGE:26==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
3.3
Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search (ALNS) is a relative new metaheuris-
tic invented by [Ropke and Pisinger, 2006]. The pseudo code for a general
ALNS is shown in algorithm 3. ALNS is based on Large Neighbourhood
Search (LNS), which was ﬁrst introduced by [Shaw, 1998]. Where a local
search uses a neighbourhood, that makes small changes in a solution to gen-
erate neighbours, the LNS generates neighbours by ﬁrst destroying a part
of a solution with a destroy method and afterwards reassembling it with a
repair method. In this way, the LNS is capable of taking a much larger step
in the solution space than a local search. The ALNS uses the same strategy
but uses multiple destroy and repair methods, which can be combined in
various ways. The methods are chosen based on some probability. After a
repair and destroy method has been chosen and has changed the solution,
the new solution is evaluated. Depending on the impact the chosen methods
had on the solution quality, they are given a score. In this way, the ALNS
can adapt to diﬀerent instances of a problem, and always choose the best
suiting methods. The ALNS can like any other metaheuristic have diﬀerent
acceptance criteria, but the original ALNS proposed by [Ropke and Pisinger,
2006] uses the Simulated Annealing acceptance criterion.
Algorithm 3: Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
output: Solution x∗
1 x∗←Initial Solution
2 x ←x∗
3 ρ−←(1, .., 1)
4 ρ+ ←(1, .., 1)
5 while Termination Criterion is not met do
6
d ←ChooseDestroyMethod(ρ−)
7
r ←ChooseRepairMethod(ρ+)
8
xt ←r(d(x))
9
if Z(xt) ≤Z(x∗) then
10
x∗←xt
11
x ←xt
12
else if accept(x, xt) then
13
x ←xt
14
Update(ρ−, ρ+)
Page 26
==PAGE:27==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
The strategy of destroying and repairing a solution is diﬀerent from most
local searches as it does not fully explore an area in detail but rather samples
the solution space [Pisinger and Ropke, 2010]. This strategy uncovers more
of the solution space, but the algorithm is often more time-consuming than
a local search, due to the larger steps. Making small steps can be an advan-
tage for some optimisation problems but it can be a pitfall when dealing with
tightly constrained problems [Ropke and Pisinger, 2006]. The drawback of
the small steps can be that it takes many moves to change the structure of
a solution.
In tightly constrained problems, it can be diﬃcult to change the funda-
mental structure of a solution with small moves without violating constraints.
For a local search, a common strategy is to relax some of the hard constraints
such that they may be violated for a penalty cost. This opens up for many
more solutions (that are infeasible to the not relaxed problem), which can be
stepping stones to other areas of the solution space. The risk of this strat-
egy is, that the algorithm might have a hard time ﬁnding a feasible solution
again and that a lot of computational time is spent on searching through new
areas of infeasible solutions. To avoid this a LNS or an ALNS can be used to
sample the solution space to ﬁnd a good solution structure. As the solution
space is merely sampled when using LNS or ALNS, a local search can be
used to explore the area around the solution found by the main method.
Page 27
==PAGE:28==
==PAGE:29==
4
Literature Review
The BAP and the QCAP were ﬁrst combined into the BACAP by [Park and
Kim, 2003]. The BACAP was solved based on randomly generated instances,
using a Lagrangian relaxation heuristic. They used a desired berthing loca-
tion for each of the vessels. This means, that if a vessel deviates from the
desired berthing location, the handling time extends based on a deviation
factor. Another exact model was presented by [Turkogullari et al., 2014] to
solve the largest instances of the time-invariant BACAP to optimality. The
same method was used by [Turkogullari et al., 2016] to solve the time-variant
BACAP, but neither of them considered the increasing demand for QCs when
the desired berthing allocation is not fulﬁlled.
A tactical BACAP was solved by [Giallombardo et al., 2010] with a two-
stage heuristic combining exact methods with Tabu Search (TS). The model
was using QC proﬁles, which take in real-life requirements such as the fact
that QC movements only can be made at shift changes, and vessels have
priorities. A decomposition algorithm presented by [Vacca et al., 2013] also
solved this model. Furthermore, this formulation was used by [Lalla-Ruiz
et al., 2016].
They solved it with a Genetic Algorithm (GA). In general
heuristic approaches seem to be popular through the literature especially for
extended versions of the BACAP. For example, a BACAP considering en-
ergy consumption in the objective function was solved by [He, 2016] with a
Memetic Algorithm (MA).
A Biased Random-Key Genetic Algorithm with memetic characteristics
was used by [Correcher and Alvarez-Valdes, 2017] to solve a time-invariant
version of the BACAP. The goal of the paper was to be able to solve instances,
both small and large to a reasonable quality within short computation time.
The model created by [Correcher and Alvarez-Valdes, 2017] manage to solve
instances with up to 100 vessels to outperform the most eﬃcient exact meth-
ods to date.
Randomly generated instances of the BACASP was solved by [Rodriguez-
Molins et al., 2014] with a Greedy Randomised Adaptive Search Procedure
(GRASP). The authors compare mooring strategies and conclude that the
GRASP heuristic outperforms traditional methods like First Come First
Serve (FCFS).
29
==PAGE:30==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Another BACAP based on the model from [Park and Kim, 2003] was
invented by [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009]. They introduced an interference
factor, that takes the marginal productivity loss of QCs into consideration.
The problem was modelled as a dynamic, continuous BACAP. It was solved
using a construction heuristic with local reﬁnements, and afterwards, both
Squeaky Wheel Optimisation (SWO) and TS were used to optimise the prob-
lem further. Lower bounds were found by running CPLEX for 10 hours. All
results from the instances of [Park and Kim, 2003] were improved by [Meisel
and Bierwirth, 2009], and [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009] also created a new
suite of instances. SWO performed best regarding solution quality and speed
with an average gap to the lower bounds of less than 15 %.
The model presented by [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009] was also used by [Iris
et al., 2013]. They proposed a set partitioning model and diﬀerent variable
reductions. In order to compare results and validate their models, [Iris et al.,
2013] compared their results to the results of [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009].
The results showed an improvement of the known bounds to the benchmark-
ing instances proposed by [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009]. A thorough literature
review was made in [Iris et al., 2013] where the BACAP literature is surveyed.
The BACAP, BAP and QCAP properties are described along with the ob-
jective function properties of the BACAP. The exact and heuristic solution
techniques were also described. It concluded that GA is the most popular
heuristic. This algorithm was implemented by [Shang et al., 2016] along with
an insertion heuristic to solve a robust BACAP with real-world uncertain-
ties. To compare their results, [Shang et al., 2016] used the instances from
[Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009] as well as the best bounds found in [Iris et al.,
2013] and [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009]. They altered their model to have
the same model as [Iris et al., 2013] and [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009], and
the GA showed results worse than the heuristics from [Meisel and Bierwirth,
2009]. Concerning results with the robust model, they found near-optimal
values with their GA.
The results from [Shang et al., 2016] were used by [Iris et al., 2017] along
with the results from [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009] and [Iris et al., 2013].
They considered the time-variant BACAP introduced by [Meisel and Bier-
wirth, 2009]. To reﬁne the model [Iris et al., 2017] added some inequalities
and other improvements. Afterwards, they presented an ALNS algorithm
designed for the BACAP. The results showed that better upper bounds were
achieved with a warm start solution created by the ALNS method. Both
inequalities and the heuristic improves the results obtained by [Meisel and
Page 30
==PAGE:31==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Bierwirth, 2009], [Iris et al., 2013], and [Shang et al., 2016]. The exact model
improved the gaps compared to previous results. Though the exact model
could compete with both the solution method from [Meisel and Bierwirth,
2009] and [Iris et al., 2013], the computational time was considered too long
for practical use. The ALNS algorithm, on the other hand, provided quality
results with a gap of 3.1 % from the best known upper bounds and was on
average outperforming the state-of-art results presented by [Meisel and Bier-
wirth, 2009] and [Shang et al., 2016], especially on the larger instances. This
algorithm was also tested on new, larger benchmark instances. The speed of
the ALNS for even the largest instances made it possible to be applied for
practical use.
Our contribution to the BACAP will be to solve the BACAP with ALNS.
The ALNS is chosen because tightly constrained problems such as the BA-
CAP can, according to the inventors of the ALNS [Ropke and Pisinger, 2006],
beneﬁt from an algorithm that searches for a useful solution structure rather
than investigating all solutions to one structure. Instead of precalculating all
assignments, like [Iris et al., 2017] we will calculate the assignments on the go
to avoid ﬁnding unnecessary assignments for all the vessels. We hope to ﬁnd
solutions with much shorter calculation time, which are qualitatively com-
parable to the state-of-the-art results. We also make a practical approach to
solve the BACAP for a real-life container terminal, to test the application of
the model on a small container terminal.
Page 31
==PAGE:32==
==PAGE:33==
5
Model Formulation
This chapter provides a mathematical formulation of the BACAP, which will
be used to describe the objective function as well as the constraints that will
be used for modelling the metaheuristic. The mathematical model presented
was made by [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009].
The goal of the formulation is to solve the BACAP while minimising the
costs. A solution consists of a plan for when the handling starts and ends
for each vessel along with a berthing position and a number of QCs that are
handling the vessel for each time period the vessel is berthed. The BACAP
is modelled as a continuous dynamic time-variant BACAP. The instances
from [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009] provide a set of vessels that need to be
served. Each vessel has a length that is given as a number of 10 metres
segments. The vessel also has a desired berthing location. In this case, the
desired berthing location is set to minimise the total distance needed for the
container transport. In other cases, it can be based on various physical con-
straints such as draught or bends on the quay. Depending on the vessel a
number of QC hours is required to discharge the containers. This is done by
assigning QCs. Each vessel has a minimum and a maximum number of QCs
that can work on the vessel simultaneously. The maximum number of cranes
is limited by the length of the vessel, and the minimum number of cranes is
usually a part of the contract with the terminal.
Lastly, a vessel has an expected arrival time, an earliest starting time, an
expected ﬁnishing time, and a latest ﬁnishing time. The planning horizon
consists of planning periods, where each period is one hour. The quay is
divided into integer points such that a vessel can berth at a point for every
10 metres. There is a ﬁxed number of QCs on the quay, and there is an
hourly cost of having a working QC.
33
==PAGE:34==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
5.1
Example of a berthing plan
To provide an example, a feasible solution to a very small instance with six
vessels is shown in ﬁgure 5.1.
The ﬁgure shows the time periods on the
x-axis and the berth segments on the y-axis. Each red dot indicates a QC
assignment for a vessel in a time period, while the green lines indicate the
minimum and maximum number of QCs. Vessel 3 is present in the terminal
from time period 11 until time period 24, and it is berthed on the quay at
position 29. It has been assigned four QCs for four periods, six QCs for seven
periods, and ﬁve QCs for two periods.
Figure 5.1: Example of a berth plan.
To formalise the example and give a more general formulation, notation
and a mathematical model is described. After this, the example is elabo-
rated, concerning cost, duration and amount of QCs.
Page 34
==PAGE:35==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
5.2
Notation
Input data
V
The set of vessels that needs to be served in the port.
Q
The total number of QCs.
L
The number of 10 metres segments on the quay.
T
The set of one-hour periods.
H
The total number of periods, which is the planning time
horizon.
li
The length of vessel i ∈V .
b0
i
The preferred berthing location of vessel i ∈V .
mi
The required number of QC hours to discharge vessel i ∈V .
rmin
i
The minimum number of QCs that can be assigned in any
period to vessel i ∈V .
rmax
i
The maximum number of QCs that can be assigned in any
period to vessel i ∈V .
Ri
The feasible range of QCs that can be assigned to vessel
i ∈V where Ri = [rmin
i
, rmax
i
].
ETAi
Expected Time of Arrival of vessel i ∈V .
ESTi
Earliest Starting Time of vessel i ∈V .
EFTi
Expected Finishing Time of vessel i ∈V .
LFTi
Latest Finishing Time of vessel i ∈V .
c1
i
Speed up cost for arriving earlier than ETA for vessel i ∈V .
c2
i
Delay cost for staying after EFT for vessel i ∈V .
c3
i
Penalty cost for exceeding LFT for vessel i ∈V .
c4
i
Operation cost for each QC hour for vessel i ∈V .
α
The interference exponent.
β
The berth deviation factor.
M
A big positive number.
Page 35
==PAGE:36==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Decision variables
bi ∈Z+
Berthing position of vessel i ∈V .
si ∈Z+
Starting time of handling vessel i ∈V .
ei ∈Z+
Ending time of handling vessel i ∈V .
rit ∈B
 1
if QCs are assigned to vessel i ∈V at time t ∈T
0
otherwise
ritq ∈B
 1
if exactly q ∈Ri QCs are assigned to vessel i ∈V at time t ∈T
0
otherwise
∆bi ∈Z+
The deviation from the desired berthing location
∆bi = |b0
i −bi|, for vessel i ∈V .
∆ETAi ∈Z+
Earliness of vessel i ∈V where ∆ETAi = (ETAi −si)+.
∆EFTi ∈Z+
Tardiness of vessel i ∈V where ∆EFTi = (ei −EFTi)+.
ui ∈B
 1
if the handling of vessel i ∈V ends after LFTi
0
otherwise
yij ∈B



1
if vessel i ∈V is berthed below vessel j ∈V such that
bi + li ≤bj
0
otherwise
zij ∈B



1
if the handling of vessel i ∈V is done before the handling
of vessel j ∈V starts
0
otherwise
Page 36
==PAGE:37==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
5.3
Mathematical model
BACAP Formulation
Minimise
X
i∈V
(c1
i · ∆ETAi + c2
i · ∆EFTi + c3
i · ui + c4
i ·
X
t∈T
X
q∈Ri
q · ritq)
(5.1)
Subject to
X
t∈T
X
q∈Ri
qα · ritq ≥(1 + β · ∆bi) · mi
∀i ∈V
(5.2)
X
t∈T
X
q∈Ri
q · ritq ≤Q
∀t ∈T
(5.3)
X
q∈Ri
ritq = rit
∀i ∈V, ∀t ∈T
(5.4)
X
i∈V
rit = ei −si
∀i ∈V
(5.5)
(t + 1) · rit ≤ei
∀i ∈V, ∀t ∈T
(5.6)
t · rit + H · (1 −rit) ≥si
∀i ∈V, ∀t ∈T
(5.7)
∆bi ≥bi −b0
i
∀i ∈V
(5.8)
∆bi ≥b0
i −bi
∀i ∈V
(5.9)
∆ETAi ≥ETAi −si
∀i ∈V
(5.10)
∆EFTi ≥ei −EFTi
∀i ∈V
(5.11)
M · ui ≥ei −LFTi
∀i ∈V
(5.12)
bj + M · (1 −yij) ≥bi + li
∀i, j ∈V, i ̸= j
(5.13)
sj + M · (1 −zij) ≥ei
∀i, j ∈V, i ̸= j
(5.14)
yij + yji + zij + zji ≥1
∀i, j ∈V, i ̸= j
(5.15)
si, ei ∈{ESTi, .., H}
∀i ∈V
(5.16)
bi ∈{0, 1, .., L −li}
∀i ∈V
(5.17)
∆ETAi, ∆EFTi ∈Z+
∀i ∈V
(5.18)
ritq, rit, ui, yij, zij ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈V, ∀t ∈T, ∀q ∈Ri
(5.19)
Page 37
==PAGE:38==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
The objective function (5.1) is a combination of diﬀerent costs concerning
the arrival time and departure time of a vessel and a QC assignment cost. A
speed-up cost is imposed for each time period in which a vessel must speed
up, to arrive at the terminal before its Expected Time of Arrival (ETA). A
delay cost is imposed for each time period in which the vessel is present af-
ter its Expected Finishing Time (EFT). If the operations are not done after
the Latest Finishing Time (LFT) a one-time penalty is added to the cost.
Constraint (5.2) sets the number of QCs required when QC interference and
berth deviation is taken into consideration. Constraint (5.3) ensures that the
number of QCs working at the same time can never exceed the total num-
ber of QCs. Constraint (5.4) ensures that the two boolean variables are set.
Whenever a vessel is present in a time period, the constraint ensures that an
appropriate number of QCs from the range Ri is assigned. Constraint (5.5)
forces QCs to be allocated to each time period a vessel is berthed. Constraint
(5.6) forces the QC to only work on a vessel before the vessel has ended its
handling time. Constraint (5.7) ensures that no QCs work on a vessel before
the vessel has berthed. Constraints (5.8)-(5.9) set the correct value of the de-
sired berthing deviation. Constraints (5.10)-(5.11) set the correct values for
the earliness of the vessel and the tardiness of the vessel. Constraint (5.12)
sets ui to one if the Latest Finishing Time is exceeded. Constraint (5.13)
sets the yij variable to 1 if vessel i ∈V is completely below vessel j ∈V on
the berth. Constraint (5.14) sets the zij variable to one if vessel i ∈V is
handled before the handling starts for vessel j ∈V . Constraint (5.15) is a no
overlapping constraint. A vessel can not overlap with another vessel in both
time and berthing position. Constraint (5.16) ensures that the handling time
of a vessel can only start and end within its EST and the planning horizon.
Constraint (5.17) sets the boundaries for where a vessel can berth. The vessel
can only berth within the length of the quay. Constraints (5.18)-(5.19) are
variable declarations.
The big M value can be set to M = max{L, H}. This will be a suﬃciently
large number for M to maintain the inequality and to get a tight model. To
tighten further, diﬀerent big M values can be assigned depending on the
constraint. For constraints (5.12) and (5.14) M = H is suﬃcient, and for
constraints (5.13) M = L is suﬃcient.
Page 38
==PAGE:39==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
5.4
Example continued
The mathematical formulation allows us to continue the example from before,
and elaborate with data and calculations. The example instance has L = 100,
H = 50, Q = 10, β = 0.1, α = 0.9, and c4 = 0.1. Table 5.1 shows the instance
data related to vessel 3.
Vessel
EST
ETA
EFT
LFT
l
b0
m
rmin
rmax
c1
c2
c3
3
11
13
20
22
30
23
54
4
6
3
3
5
Table 5.1: Data for vessel 3.
The equation to calculate the required number of QC hours for a vessel
can be found on the right-hand side of constraint (5.2).
The number of
required QC hours increases with the number of segments that a vessels
berthing location deviates from its desired berthing location. The left-hand
side of constraint (5.2) calculates the QC productivity, which is aﬀected by α
such that the QC productivity is not linearly proportional with the number
of QCs working on a vessel in a time period. The two sides of the constraint
can be used to calculate the minimum berthing time of a vessel as a function
of the berthing position. Since it is the minimal berthing time, it is implied
that rmax
i
QCs are working on vessel i. The minimum duration of vessel
i ∈V :
dmin
i
=
(1 + β · ∆bi) · mi
(rmax
i
)α

(5.20)
The eﬀective QC hours for vessel i ∈V can be calculated as:
QCeff
i
=
X
t∈T
X
q∈Ri
qα · ritq
(5.21)
The required amount of QC hours is given by mi. However, if there is a
berth deviation more hours are required. The required amount of QC hours
can be calculated by:
QCreq
i
= (1 + β · ∆bi) · mi
(5.22)
Using equation 5.21 this gives 4 · 40.9 + 7 · 60.9 + 2 · 50.9 = 57.55 eﬀective
QC hours. This is much more than m3, but it is required due to the berth
deviation which is ∆b3 = 6. The berth deviation increases the needed QC
hours to QCreq
3
= 57.24, which is satisﬁed.
The cost of the vessel can be calculated from the objective function in
equation 5.1 by only summing over vessel 3. The cost of the vessel is 36.8.
Page 39
==PAGE:40==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
An overview of the cost components for vessel 3 can be seen in ﬁgure 5.2.
The vessel pays the speed up cost due to its early arrival, it pays for each
QC assigned for every time period, and it pays for every time period after
the EFT, and it pays a single cost after LFT.
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
4
4,5
5
5,5
6
6,5
7
7,5
8
8,5
9
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Cost
Time
QC Cost
Delay Penalty Cost
Delay Cost
Speed-Up Cost
Figure 5.2: Cost components of vessel 3.
Page 40
==PAGE:41==
6
Solving the BACAP
We have chosen to solve the BACAP with a heuristic approach which is
outlined in this chapter. The primary method is the ALNS which has already
been described in algorithm 3, section 3.3. However, we have added extra
features to the general ALNS to tailor it to solve the BACAP. In this chapter,
the methods for ﬁnding vessel assignments are described ﬁrst because these
are general methods that will be referred to throughout the chapter. Next,
the construction heuristic is outlined. Last, the ALNS will be presented, and
the diﬀerent parts of the algorithm will be described.
6.1
Assignment lists
When a solution is made or changed, it requires methods that can insert
vessels into the solution. Each vessel can be added to the solution in many
diﬀerent ways.
Finding every single possible assignment for a vessel can
be a very time-consuming task, so two diﬀerent methods for ﬁnding lists
of possible vessel assignments have been proposed.
The structure of the
algorithms to ﬁnd vessel assignments have been inspired by the insertion
method proposed in [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009]. Both of the methods ﬁnd
one possible QC assignment for each vessel assignment.
The method for
ﬁnding the QC assignment is also described in this section. Sometimes it
happens that a vessel assignment cannot be found. If this happens, a dummy
assignment with a high penalty cost is added to the assignment list, such that
solutions, where all vessels are not inserted, can be accepted.
6.1.1
Greedy assignments
This method uses a greedy approach to ﬁnding vessel assignments.
The
method is shown in algorithm 4. The algorithm ﬁnds a list of possible vessel
assignments A for a vessel v. In short, the algorithm only ﬁnds one assign-
ment per berthing position. When the algorithm calculates the ending time
for the vessel, it is always under the assumption that the assignment uses
the minimum duration time (equation 5.20).
41
==PAGE:42==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Algorithm 4: Greedy Assignment List
input : Vessel v
output: A list of assignments A
1 A ←empty list of assignments
2 dmin
v
←minimum duration
3 for s ←ESTv to H −dmin
v
do
4
bv ←b0
v
5
stop ←false
6
if size(A) > 0 ∧sv + dmin
v
> EFTv then
7
stop ←true
8
sv ←∞
9
while stop is false do
10
if v does not overlap then
11
if QCassignment(v, sv, bv) is feasible then
12
add vessel assignment to A
13
stop ←true
14
else
15
bv ←get new position
16
if new position not found then
17
stop ←true
The algorithm ﬁnds assignments by looking through possible starting
times for vessel v as seen in line 3. The latest starting time, H −dmin
v
, is
determined to ensure that the assignment of the vessel does not exceed the
time horizon.
When a starting time s has been chosen a berthing position bv is initialized
as b0
v in line 4. Line 6 to 8 stops the algorithm if at least one assignment
has been found and the ending time of the vessel incurs delay penalties.
Line 9 starts a while-loop that runs until a stopping criteria is met. Line
10 checks whether the current combination of s and bv results in an overlap
with other vessels in the current solution. The while loop is stopped if there
is an overlap, but if there is no overlap line 11 attempts to ﬁnd a feasible QC
assignment (described in section 6.1.3). If there is a way to assign QCs, the
QC assignment is applied to the vessel assignment, which is then added to
A and the for-loop proceeds to the next s.
Page 42
==PAGE:43==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
If the QC assignment was unsuccessful, a new berthing position is found
at line 15. The search for a new berthing position always tries to keep the
berth deviation, ∆bv, as small as possible. So after trying bv = b0
v, the search
will try b0
v + 1 and then b0
v −1 and so on. If no bv that satisﬁes the quay
boundaries can be found, the while loop is stopped, and the next s is chosen.
6.1.2
All assignments
The other method to ﬁnd vessel assignments is outlined in algorithm 5. The
algorithm follows the same structure as algorithm 4, but algorithm 5 checks
all berthing positions for each starting time. Also, algorithm 5 takes an input
aMax that determines how many assignments the algorithm needs to ﬁnd.
Algorithm 5: Assignment List
input : Vessel v, Maximum number of assignments aMax
output: A list of assignments A
1 A ←empty list of assignments
2 dmin
v
←minimum duration
3 for sv ←ESTv to H −dmin
v
do
4
bv ←b0
v
5
stop ←false
6
if size(A) > 0 ∧sv + dmin
v
> EFTv then
7
stop ←true
8
sv ←∞
9
while stop is false do
10
if v does not overlap then
11
if QCassignment(v, sv, bv) is feasible then
12
add vessel assignment to A
13
if size(A) > aMax then
14
stop ←true
15
sv ←∞
16
bv ←get new position
17
if new position not found then
18
stop ←true
Page 43
==PAGE:44==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
The only diﬀerences from algorithm 5 to algorithm 4 is seen in line 13-16.
Line 13 checks whether or not the appropriate amount of assignments have
been found and if enough assignments have been found the algorithm termi-
nates. Instead of moving on to a new starting time right after an assignment
have been found, the algorithm checks assignments for new berthing posi-
tions in line 16. Only when no more berthing positions for a starting time
can be found, the algorithm moves on to the next s.
6.1.3
QC assignments
The two assignment methods are supported by algorithm 6 to ﬁnd a feasible
QC plan for the entire handling time of a vessel assignment. This algorithm
is an essential part of the search for vessel assignments since it ensures that
the constraints involving the QCs are kept.
Algorithm 6 calculates the minimum duration time for the vessel assign-
ment and attempts to keep the duration as short as possible, as well as
attempting to assign the QCs as evenly over all the periods of the duration
as possible. This means that the algorithm tries to assign one QC per period
while evaluating if enough QCs have been assigned. If the algorithm deter-
mines that a given duration time is not enough to make a feasible QC plan,
another time period is added to the duration.
The algorithm starts by calculating the minimum duration of v with equa-
tion 5.20 using bv in line 2. Line 3 checks if sv + d exceeds the time horizon
H. If it does an infeasible QC assignment is returned. In line 6 the algorithm
enters a while-loop that terminates once the duration time exceeds the time
horizon. Line 7 adds rmin
v
QCs to each time period of the assignment. Line
8 checks if the QC assignment violates the maximum amount of QCs, Q, in
combination with all vessels already in the solution. If more than Q QCs
are assigned in one period, an infeasible QC assignment is returned. If there
are enough QCs available, a check is made in line 11 to see if the amount of
eﬀective QC hours (equation 5.21) is enough to satisfy the QC hour demand
(equation 5.22). If this is the case, the plan is feasible, and the algorithm
returns a QC assignment. At line 14 the algorithm enters a new while-loop,
which terminates if no time periods in the duration can hold more QCs. The
algorithm checks if a period has space for another QC in line 17, regarding
total available QCs, Q, and if the maximum amount of QCs for vessel v has
been reached. If the vessel has room for another QC, a QC is added and the
QC hours are evaluated once again in line 19. If it turns out that all periods
for the vessel’s duration has reached a maximum of QCs, the algorithm adds
Page 44
==PAGE:45==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
one period to the total duration of the assignment in line 23 and starts from
the top of the while-loop again. This happens until the QC plan becomes
feasible or is deemed infeasible.
Algorithm 6: QCassignment
input : Vessel v, Starting time sv, Berthing position bv
output: QC assignments for v, QCv
1 QCv ←empty assignments
2 d ←dmin
v
3 if sv + d > H then
4
QCv ←infeasible
5
return
6 while sv + d ≤H do
7
QCv(t) ←rmin
v
for all t ∈[sv; sv + d[
8
if Q for any t ∈[sv; sv + d[ is violated then
9
QCv ←infeasible
10
return
11
if QCeff
v
≥QCreq
v
then
12
return
13
noAvailableQCs ←0
14
while noAvailableQCs < d do
15
noAvailableQCs ←0
16
for t ∈[sv, sv + d[ do
17
if at least 1 QC is available at time t ∧QCv(t) < rmax
v
then
18
QCv(t) ←QCv(t) + 1
19
if QCeff
v
≥QCreq
v
then
20
return
21
else
22
noAvailableQCs ←noAvailableQCs + 1
23
d = d + 1
Now that the methods of ﬁnding assignments have been described, we
can move on to describe the rest of the algorithm.
Page 45
==PAGE:46==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
6.2
Construction heuristic
Like most heuristic approaches, this model starts out by ﬁnding an initial
solution using a construction heuristic. The initial solution found by the
construction heuristic is the best solution of n generated solutions to get a
good starting point for the ALNS. The algorithm is shown in algorithm 7.
Algorithm 7: Construction
output: An initial solution x∗
1 Z(x∗) ←∞
2 I ←List of all vessels
3 for n iterations do
4
x ←empty solution
5
I ←shuﬄe(I)
6
for v ∈I do
7
BestInsertion(v,x)
8
if Z(x) < Z(x∗) then
9
x∗←x
Line 3 starts a for-loop for all n iterations. An empty solution is ini-
tialised in line 4 and the list of vessels is shuﬄed in line 5 such that they are
always inserted in a random order. At line 7 all vessels are inserted into the
solution by using the Best Insertion method, which is described in section
6.2.1. Line 8 evaluates the cost of the solution, and if it is the best solution
so far, line 9 saves it as the best solution.
The cost function in the construction heuristic ignores the speed up cost,
such that all vessels can be assigned to their earliest possible starting times in
the solution. This approach is used to ensure that all vessels can be assigned
in the solution without exceeding the time horizon, which can be a problem
for instances containing many vessels.
6.2.1
Best Insertion
The Best Insertion method obtains a list of assignments from algorithm 4.
All assignments in the list are checked, and the cheapest of the assignments
are given to the vessel, which is then inserted into the solution.
Page 46
==PAGE:47==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
6.3
ALNS
The ALNS for solving the BACAP is outlined in algorithm 8. To achieve
a feasible solution to the BACAP as early in the iterations as possible the
speed up cost is ignored as described in section 6.2 until the ALNS returns
a feasible solution, where all vessels are inserted. Once a feasible solution is
achieved, the speed up cost is introduced, and the objective function will be
as stated in chapter 5.
Algorithm 8: Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search for BACAP
output: Solution x∗
1 x∗←Construction
2 x ←x∗
3 ρ−←(1, 1, 1)
4 ρ+ ←(1, 1)
5 T ←Tstart
6 while termination criteria is not met do
7
d ←ChooseDestroyMethod(ρ−)
8
r ←ChooseRepairMethod(ρ+)
9
xt ←r(d(x))
10
P = e−Z(xt)−Z(x∗)
T
11
if Z(xt) < Z(x∗) then
12
x∗←xt
13
x ←xt
14
else if Z(xt) < Z(x) ∨Random(0, 1) ≤P then
15
x ←xt
16
T ←T · c
17
Update(ρ−, ρ+)
18
if reset criteria met then
19
if HC criteria met then
20
HC(x∗)
21
Reset(T, ρ−, ρ+)
Algorithm 8 is provided with an initial solution from the construction
heuristic in line 1. This solution is accepted to be the best solution as it is
the only solution known so far. This solution is also accepted as the current
solution in line 2 from which the neighbourhood will be generated.
Page 47
==PAGE:48==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
The algorithm enters a while-loop in line 6. The while-loop and the algo-
rithm terminate when it has reached some θ iterations with no improvements
or a total of Θ iterations. This termination criterion is chosen to ensure a
reasonable runtime for the algorithm. The value of θ is chosen such that
there is a good balance between the results and the runtime of the model.
Inside the while-loop, the neighbourhood is generated in line 9 by the destroy
and repair operators selected in line 7 and 8. The operators are described in
section 6.3.1. Every new solution is evaluated by the acceptance criterion in
line 11 and 14.
The acceptance criterion for this model follows the general ALNS method-
ology by using the SA acceptance criterion, which is outlined in section 3.2.
This acceptance criterion is chosen such that the search can sometimes choose
non-improving solutions. In this model, equally good solutions are consid-
ered non-improving, such that they are not accepted as new solutions.
The temperature T for the acceptance criterion has a starting tempera-
ture Tstart, and it is cooled by a cooling factor c in line 16 with a geometric
cooling schedule outlined in section 3.2. The geometric cooling schedule is
chosen after we tested the cooling schedules described in section 3.2 with
diﬀerent cooling factors due to the tuning process outlined in section 7.2.
In line 18 some of the algorithm is reset as described in section 6.3.2. A
HC is called in line 20 as part of the resetting procedure.
6.3.1
Destroy and repair operators
The ALNS creates neighbours by using diﬀerent destroy and repair methods
as described in section 3.3. These methods are the main features in an ALNS
algorithm as they control the next step in the search. This particular ALNS
contains three destroy operators and two repair operators. Any destroy op-
erator can be matched with any repair operator. The operators are chosen
using a roulette wheel selection principle. The probabilities are calculated as
shown in equation 6.1, where wi is the weight given to the operator i out of
k operators.
ρj =
wj
Pk
i=1 wi
(6.1)
Page 48
==PAGE:49==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Destroy operators
The three destroy operators in this model all have in common that the solu-
tion is destroyed on the basis of one vessel. This vessel is picked in the same
way for all three operators. The method for choosing a vessel works in the
following way.
First, the vessels are sorted after cost in descending order. Next, a list of
size |V |
5 , containing the most expensive vessels, is made. Another list is ﬁlled
with the rest of the vessels. A vessel is selected randomly from one of the
two lists, but there is a higher probability ψ of choosing a vessel from the
expensive list rather than choosing one from the other list. The most expen-
sive vessels are usually the vessels that can be given better assignments, and
those can have the most signiﬁcant impact on the overall solution.
The ﬁrst destroy operator removes vessels that are close to the picked
vessel i regarding berthing position. This means that any vessel j that is
placed within a position interval of [bi −µ1; bi + li + µ1] is added to the de-
stroy list.
The second destroy operator is quite similar to the ﬁrst, but instead of
removing any vessel j that are close in space, vessels that are handled in the
same time periods of the picked vessel i, no matter the berthing position,
are added to the destroy list. This is if j covers any of the time intervals of
[si −µ2; ei + µ2].
The last operator combines the two ﬁrst methods by adding the vessels
that are close to the picked vessel in both time and space to the destroy list.
This is if any vessel j is within time interval [si −µ3; ei + µ3] and position
interval [bi −µ3; bi + li + µ3].
Two vessels that are not related regarding time periods or berth positions
are not very likely to improve the solution when removed and reinserted be-
cause they never interfere with each other in the plan. This is why only
vessels that are related to the picked vessel are chosen by the destroy opera-
tors.
The destroy list is checked by algorithm 9. The algorithm checks that
the destroy list is not so big that too much of the solution is destroyed at
once. If a too big part of the solution is destroyed, the overall structure of the
solution can be lost. The maximum size, n, of the destroy list is determined
Page 49
==PAGE:50==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
in line 2. Line 3 checks if the current destroy list exceeds the maximum size.
If not, the current list is kept, and all vessels from this list are removed from
the solution. Else the list is shuﬄed in line 6 and a new list is created in the
for-loop starting in line 7 by picking k vessels from the shuﬄed original list
and inserting them into the new list. All vessels in the updated destroy list
are removed from the solution.
Algorithm 9: Strainer
input : A destroy list D
output: A destroy list D∗
1 minSize ←2
2 k ←Random(2; |V |
φ )
3 if k ≥|D| then
4
D∗←D
5
return
6 D ←shuffle(D)
7 for i ∈[0, k[ do
8
D∗(i) ←D(i)
Repair operators
The two repair operators reinsert the removed vessels into the solution. The
ﬁrst repair operator uses the Best Insertion method as described in section
6.2.1. The other repair operator inserts all vessels into the solution in a ran-
dom order. A list of possible assignments for each vessel is obtained from
algorithm 5. The size of the assignment list is stochastically determined,
such that there is a chance of p that the list size is increased to two assign-
ments. If this is accepted there is a chance of p that the list size is increased
to three assignments, and so on. The vessel is inserted with the last found
assignment from the assignment list. This is done such that the algorithm
does not always pick the assignment that is best locally. The concept of not
picking the immediately best assignment is similar to the strategy of adding
noise to the objective function as in [Ropke and Pisinger, 2006].
Both repair operators only generate one neighbour from each destroyed
solution. Diﬀerent neighbours could be generated by inserting the vessels in
other sequences. This is not considered beneﬁcial as much more computation
time would be required to evaluate the neighbours. The extra computation
time is better spent on more iterations.
Page 50
==PAGE:51==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Adjusting weights
The ALNS uses probabilities based on weights to chose between the diﬀerent
destroy and repair methods. All operators start with the same weights such
that {w−, w+} = {{1, 1, 1}, {1, 1}}.
Adaptive weight adjustment happens every time an iteration has been
run. A score σi is added to the weight depending on the result of the iteration.
σ1 is added if the operator improved the best solution, σ2 is added if the
operator improved the current solution, and σ3 is added if the new solution
is accepted, even though it did not make any improvements. The weights are
updated such that
wi = wi · (1 −r) + r · σj
(6.2)
, where r is a reaction factor that makes sure that the weights evolve steadily
[Ropke and Pisinger, 2006]. The weight adjustment in [Ropke and Pisinger,
2006] only happens after a segment of iterations, but we have chosen to adjust
at every iteration because of the reset function.
6.3.2
Resetting the search
To avoid that the search gets stuck a reset function is added to the ALNS.
This feature does not restart the entire search as the current solution is not
replaced by a new initial solution from the construction method. Instead,
{T, w−, w+} are set to their initial values {Tstart, {1, 1, 1}, {1, 1}} after γ it-
erations with no improvements.
For every Υ restart a HC is called to do a local search on the best-found
solution. A basic HC is described in section 3.1. The HC does not consider
the entire solution, but only a part of it. The partial solution is a list of
vessels, which is generated by picking out a single vessel i as in section 6.3.1.
Any vessels j that is within the interval of time periods [si −Φ; ei + Φ] in
the solution are added to the list. Every time a vessel is added to the list,
all vessels in that vessels proximity are also added. This means that clusters
of vessels very close to each other in the plan are chosen and added to the
HC list.
With the HC list as input, the HC attempts to improve the solution by
removing two vessels, vi and vj, in the list from the solution. To reinsert
vi, all possible assignments, which are cheaper than its current assignment,
are found. All assignments in the list are tested in combination with vj,
being inserted with the Best Insertion method. The cheapest combination is
Page 51
==PAGE:52==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
accepted as a change if it improves the solution. This is done for all vessel
pairs in the list. If the solution is improved, all vessel pairs are tested again.
This enables a thorough local search on all the vessels in the list to ﬁnd a
local minimum.
Page 52
==PAGE:53==
7
Computational Results
In this chapter, we test our solution method and compare it to the results
obtained by [Iris et al., 2017]. We also use the best-known results obtained
using heuristics by [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009] and [Shang et al., 2016]. The
model is altered and tested on a real-life case from APM Terminals - Aarhus.
The ALNS is implemented in Java, and all computations are run on a 2x
Intel Xeon Processor 2660v3 (10 cores, 2.60GHz, 25MB L3 Cache), 128 GB
memory computer.
7.1
Literature instances
We test the model on instances generated by [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009].
There are three sets of 10 instances, each of the sets containing 20, 30 or
40 vessels. The number of vessels in an instance determines the size of the
instance.
Each instance holds three diﬀerent vessel classes; Feeder, Medium, and
Jumbo. The vessel classes have diﬀerent technical speciﬁcations regarding
vessel length, required QC working hours, a minimum number of QCs, max-
imum number of QCs, and diﬀerent cost rates. The unit of all costs is 103
USD. The values can be seen in table 7.1, where the denotation U[min, max]
is for a uniform distribution. Each instance has 60% Feeder vessels, 30%
Medium vessels, and 10% Jumbo vessels.
Class
li
mi
rmin
i
rmax
i
c1
i
c2
i
c3
i
Feeder
U[8, 21]
U[5, 15]
1
2
1
1
3
Medium
U[21, 30]
U[15, 50]
2
4
2
2
6
Jumbo
U[30, 40]
U[50, 65]
4
6
3
3
9
Table 7.1: Vessel speciﬁcations from [Meisel and Bierwirth, 2009].
53
==PAGE:54==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
The planning horizon of all instances is one week (168 hours), such that
H = 168. The ETA for each vessel is uniformly distributed over the planning
horizon. A vessel can speed up at most 10 % such that the EST becomes
EST = 0.9·ETA. The EFT of a vessel is calculated by adding its minimum
duration (equation 5.20) to the ETA, and the LFT is computed by adding
1.5 of the vessels minimum duration to the ETA.
All vessels have a preferred berthing location on the quay. In all instances,
the quay is set to 1 kilometre and divided into 10-meter berth segments such
that L = 100. The preferred berthing position of a vessel is U[0, L −li]. The
berth deviation factor is β = 0.01, which means that if a vessel deviates from
its preferred berthing position the handling eﬀort per segment deviation in-
creases by 1%, which means that extra QC hours are required. There are 10
QCs available, Q = 10 and the interference exponent is α = 0.9. Each QC
has a cost of c4 = 0.1 per QC hour.
A new set of larger benchmarking instances was proposed by [Iris et al.,
2017]. These were generated the same way as the instances from [Meisel and
Bierwirth, 2009]. The set contains two sets of 10 instances with respectively
60 and 80 vessels. The 60 vessels instances have 12 QCs available, and the
80 vessels instances have 16 QCs and a quay length of 150 segments.
7.2
Development process
The development of the ALNS has been a long iterative process of program-
ming, debugging, and testing. After we successfully had implemented our
ﬁrst simple version of the ALNS, we began to develop more complex methods
to search for better solutions. This process was mainly inspired by looking
at the best solutions we had obtained, compared to solutions calculated by
exact methods. But even though some of these complex methods were able
to ﬁnd better solutions than our ﬁrst model, the solutions still did not reach
the quality we were hoping for, and on top of that, the runtime was not
acceptable either. This resulted in an attempt to trim the runtime, which
led us to make fundamental changes to the algorithm, thus making it more
simple. A big change was to only test one neighbour per repair method, in-
stead of many. This change meant that we were able to obtain good results
at a highly improved runtime. During the development of the heuristic, new
parameters were introduced, and each was given a value that we thought was
best at the moment of its introduction. When the algorithm was completed,
a ﬁnal tuning of the parameters was conducted. All parameter values can be
Page 54
==PAGE:55==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
seen in appendix A.
The setting of the parameters is a key point when ﬁnishing an optimisa-
tion model [Kendall and Burke, 2005]. The parameters have a big inﬂuence
on the performance of the methods within a model; parameter tuning is,
therefore, an important part of the development process. However, a ﬁnal
tuning of the parameters can be a very complex and time-consuming task as
a model can contain several parameters that in theory can take an inﬁnite
amount of values of which all permutations need to be assessed to make a
thorough tuning. A way to make a good parameter tuning is to develop a
new optimisation model that ﬁnds optimal values for all parameters, but this
is not within the scope of this thesis.
To tune our parameters, we tested parameter combinations of related
parameters within reasonable value ranges. After a test, the best parameter
combinations were chosen, and new combinations of other parameters or
other values were tested.
The tuning of the decay parameter r resulted in very similar results for all
tested values. The best value chosen was quite low. A low decay parameter
value means the weights evolve very slowly, and that each score given has
a very low impact. The fact that r did not have a big impact on the solu-
tion quality could indicate that the diﬀerent destroy and repair operators are
equally important for obtaining good solutions to the BACAP throughout
the runtime of the ALNS.
The termination criterion was tuned as well to obtain a good trade-oﬀ
between calculation time and solution quality. Figure 7.1 shows the correla-
tion between the average runtime, the average objective, and the value of θ,
which is the number of iterations without improvement before termination.
The graphs show that there is a clear correlation between runtime, objective
value, and the value of θ. This means that the chosen value of θ should
reﬂect the weighting of the runtime and the objective value. The graphs
illustrate the tendency lines for the runtime and the objective, and while the
tendency line for the runtime is quite linear, the tendency line of objective
value ﬂattens out as θ grows. This is not unusual for a model like this, and
it just means that adding extra runtime gives improvements until a point
where the algorithm has a very hard time on improving the solution more.
We have chosen that θ = 60, 000. This choice is made since the overall
runtime is quite good, and we wanted to get close to the average state-of-
the-art objective value, so we weighted the objective value a little higher
than the runtime. The tendency line for the runtime is quite linear, but the
improvements to the objective value start to get smaller as θ grows.
Page 55
==PAGE:56==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
(a) Average objective and average runtime for instance 1-10
(b) Average objective and average runtime for instance 11-20
(c) Average objective and average runtime for instance 21-30
Figure 7.1: Correlation between objective, runtime, and θ.
Page 56
==PAGE:57==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
7.3
Results
All instances were solved 50 times each, and the average results are reported.
Table 7.2 shows the results obtained for the instances with 20, 30, and 40
vessels. Table 7.3 shows the results for the instances with 60 and 80 vessels.
An example of a solution for each size of instance can be seen in appendix
B.
The reported values from the literature are the best lower bounds (LB),
the best upper bounds (UB), and the best average. The upper bounds are
the best-reported values found by heuristics. The best average is the best
average objective found by one of the heuristics in the literature. An optimal
solution is marked by (*). The columns reported under ALNS are all values
found by our algorithm. We report the average cost, the best-found value,
the worst-found value, the standard deviation (Std. Dev.) of the results,
and the runtime in seconds (τ1). If a better upper bound has been found,
it is marked by (**). The average cost, the best cost, and the runtime (τ2)
obtained by [Iris et al., 2017] has also been reported.
Values that are bold are improvements to previous results. We report
the runtime improvement as ∆τ = τ1 −τ2. Avg G(%) is the gap between
our average cost and the average cost from literature in percent. All gaps
are calculated as shown in equation 7.1.
G = Z1 −Z2
Z1
(7.1)
, where Z1 is the value obtained by our algorithm and Z2 is the value in
comparison. Best G(%) is the gap between our best cost and the best cost
found by [Iris et al., 2017]. Avg LB and Avg UB are the gaps between our
average cost and the upper and lower bounds from the literature. Best UB
gap is the gap between our best cost and UB.
Page 57
==PAGE:58==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
From Literature
ALNS
[Iris et al., 2017]
Gaps
n
#
LB
UB
Best
Avg
Avg
Cost
Best
Cost
Worst
Cost
Std.
Dev.
τ1
Avg
Cost
Best
Cost
τ2
∆τ
Avg
G(%)
Best
G(%)
Avg LB
G(%)
Avg UB
G(%)
Best UB
G(%)
20
1
84.1*
84.1*
84.8
84.5
84.1*
86.1
0.55
9.8
84.8
84.1*
13.8
-4.0
-0.36
0.00
0.47
0.47
0.00
2
53.9*
53.9*
53.9*
53.9*
53.9*
54.0
0.01
6.5
53.9*
53.9*
2.5
4.0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3
76.3*
76.3*
77.4
78.2
77.4
78.6
0.43
12.5
78.2
77.4
30.1
-17.6
1.02
0.00
2.43
2.43
1.42
4
76.2*
76.2*
77.9
78.4
77.9
79.7
0.42
9.1
79.7
77.9
18.6
-9.5
0.64
0.00
2.81
2.81
2.18
5
56.8*
56.8*
56.8*
57.7
57.0
57.9
0.15
11.5
57.0
56.8*
8.9
2.6
1.56
0.35
1.56
1.56
0.35
6
57.6*
57.6*
57.6*
57.6*
57.6*
57.6*
0.00
10.5
57.6*
57.6*
2.0
8.5
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
7
68.0*
68.0*
68.9
70.4
68.9
71.3
0.75
10.1
69.0
68.3
6.1
4.0
2.13
0.87
3.41
3.41
1.31
8
56.1*
56.1*
56.1*
59.0
57.0
62.0
1.78
7.6
58.0
56.1*
6.8
0.8
4.92
1.58
4.92
4.92
1.58
9
75.1*
75.1*
75.3
75.7
75.1*
76.9
0.49
11.7
75.3
75.3
7.6
4.1
0.53
-0.27
0.79
0.79
0.00
10
89.1
89.3
92.2
92.1
90.1
94.6
1.21
12.5
92.2
90.1
13.9
-1.4
-0.11
0.00
3.26
3.04
0.89
Avg:
0.58
10.2
11.0
-0.8
1.03
0.25
1.96
1.94
0.77
30
11
139.6
139.8
146.6
143.0
141.3
144.1
0.49
29.2
146.6
143.3
68.6
-39.4
-2.52
-1.42
2.38
2.24
1.06
12
81.8*
81.8*
82.4
83.4
82.3
85.8
0.92
16.1
82.4
82.4
8.1
8.0
1.20
-0.12
1.92
1.92
0.61
13
102.4*
102.4*
104.5
105.9
105.5
107.5
0.58
15.8
105.4
104.7
14.1
1.7
1.32
0.76
3.31
3.31
2.94
14
99.1*
99.1*
102.8
105.5
103.2
106.5
0.94
23.6
104.1
103.3
47.5
-23.9
2.56
-0.10
6.07
6.07
3.97
15
149.5
150.4
154.2
156.9
154.7
160.3
1.03
23.2
154.2
152.4
45.8
-22.6
1.72
1.49
4.72
4.14
2.78
16
113.4
113.8
116.5
117.7
116.4
119.6
0.38
21.0
116.5
116.4
46.2
-25.2
1.02
0.00
3.65
3.31
2.23
17
102.6*
102.6*
104.0
104.0
103.6
105.6
0.61
24.0
104.0
103.5
24.5
-0.5
0.00
0.10
1.35
1.35
0.97
18
121.5
121.9
125.1
125.0
124.7
125.9
0.39
18.5
125.1
124.6
34.1
-15.6
-0.08
0.08
2.80
2.48
2.25
19
163.3
165.2
171.3
171.0
168.6
175.9
1.27
21.4
171.3
170.1
58.8
-37.4
-0.18
-0.89
4.50
3.39
2.02
20
131.1
131.5
135.2
135.1
133.5
137.8
1.07
25.5
136.2
135.3
48.7
-23.2
-0.07
-1.35
2.96
2.66
1.50
Avg:
0.77
21.8
39.6
-17.8
0.50
-0.15
3.36
3.09
2.03
40
21
181.3
201.9
208.6
212.9
205.9
220.6
3.08
49.3
208.6
204.6
133.6
-84.3
2.02
0.63
14.84
5.17
1.94
22
166.8
170.9
178.8
180.4
176.9
188.8
2.10
37.8
179.5
178.5
83.4
-45.6
0.89
-0.90
7.54
5.27
3.39
23
205.0
234.2
251.4
252.8
244.4
268.3
6.33
64.6
251.4
244.6
163.7
-99.1
0.55
-0.08
18.91
7.36
4.17
24
245.4
282.5
290.2
298.8
287.1
324.3
9.60
49.2
290.2
285.9
143.7
-94.5
2.88
0.42
17.87
5.46
1.60
25
143.4
148.1
154.8
156.9
154.6
160.3
1.38
41.3
154.8
152.9
87.1
-45.8
1.34
1.10
8.60
5.61
4.20
26
211.6
229.3
249.1
253.4
242.3
269.4
6.07
53.9
249.1
245.9
183.8
-129.9
1.70
-1.49
16.50
9.51
5.37
27
175.8
183.8
191.9
194.0
191.4
202.2
2.56
49.7
191.9
189.1
145.3
-95.6
1.08
1.20
9.38
5.26
3.97
28
218.9
260.9
272.9
273.5
255.6**
299.8
9.52
76.8
272.9
263.4
208.1
-131.3
0.22
-3.05
19.96
4.61
-2.07
29
194.9
207.0
215.5
219.5
209.7
224.5
4.81
41.6
215.5
209.9
71.3
-29.7
1.82
-0.10
11.21
5.69
1.29
30
179.5
185.1
202.0
229.0
208.6
244.2
9.36
50.7
202.0
194.9
128.0
-77.3
11.79
6.57
21.62
19.17
11.27
Avg:
5.48
51.5
134.8
-83.3
2.43
0.43
14.64
7.31
3.51
Table 7.2: Results for instance 1 to 30
Page 58
==PAGE:59==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
[Iris et al., 2017]
ALNS
Gaps
n
#
LB
UB
Avg
Cost
τ2
Avg
Cost
Best
Cost
Worst
Cost
Std.
Dev.
τ1
∆τ
Avg
G(%)
Avg LB
G(%)
Avg UB
G(%)
Best UB
G(%)
60
31
188.3
321.6
334.9
456.6
347.5
301.7**
428.3
26.11
173.7
-282.9
3.63
45.81
7.45
-6.60
32
203.4
349.2
365.7
347.1
378.1
348.3**
418.3
14.46
125.7
-221.4
3.28
46.20
7.64
-0.26
33
167.7
215.4
218.9
243.6
228.2
214.6**
248.2
7.62
100.5
-143.1
4.08
26.51
5.61
-0.37
34
217.9
318.4
329.5
413.2
337.1
309.0**
366.6
11.92
166.0
-247.2
2.25
35.36
5.55
-3.04
35
222.1
348.3
357.1
408.2
367.0
339.1**
408.4
15.95
161.1
-247.1
2.70
39.48
5.10
-2.71
36
214.3
542.3
572.3
612.4
584.7
504.6**
665.9
36.90
200.8
-411.6
2.12
63.35
7.25
-7.47
37
213.4
424.1
472.9
668.7
492.0
358.1**
650.7
67.96
199.1
-469.6
3.88
56.63
13.80
-18.43
38
171.7
295.1
336.6
452.1
329.2
261.7**
438.3
28.94
151.8
-300.3
-2.25
47.84
10.36
-12.76
39
142.2
185.2
191.0
458.5
197.7
184.7**
226.3
9.63
128.1
-330.4
3.39
28.07
6.32
-0.27
40
201.8
486.8
520.4
621.2
549.3
463.8**
663.4
47.52
200.4
-420.8
5.26
63.26
11.38
-4.96
Avg:
468.2
26.70
160.7
-307.4
2.83
45.25
8.05
-5.69
80
41
261.0
285.3
398.0
436.9
406.5
382.4
433.1
11.43
229.6
-207.3
2.09
35.79
29.82
25.39
42
201.8
295.2
299.6
952.8
314.7
295.2
348.0
11.83
511.0
-441.8
4.80
35.88
6.20
0.00
43
295.2
415.9
424.4
972.7
450.2
393.8**
524.6
22.21
376.6
-596.1
5.73
34.43
7.62
-5.61
44
202.3
322.5
344.5
739.9
357.0
327.1
416.2
18.84
370.0
-369.9
3.50
43.33
9.66
1.41
45
286.7
502.3
524.6
924.9
529.1
450.9**
609.6
36.11
354.3
-570.6
0.85
45.81
5.07
-11.40
46
236.2
368.9
376.4
606.1
398.7
371.4
450.2
18.47
293.5
-312.6
5.59
40.76
7.47
0.67
47
246.0
336.9
347.9
521.5
363.4
338.6
381.2
8.71
225.5
-296.0
4.27
32.31
7.29
0.50
48
277.9
346.1
352.5
332.3
361.8
347.6
375.4
6.76
187.6
-144.7
2.57
23.19
4.34
0.43
49
323.9
584.0
619.9
754.5
695.4
576.0**
849.4
75.34
312.1
-442.4
10.86
53.42
16.02
-1.39
50
297.5
744.7
792.2
888.4
798.6
712.3**
940.5
47.61
382.4
-506.0
0.80
62.75
6.75
-4.55
Avg:
713.0
25.73
324.3
-388.7
4.11
40.77
10.02
0.55
Table 7.3: Results for instance 31 to 50
Page 59
==PAGE:60==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
From table 7.2 it can be seen that we ﬁnd the optimal value for four in-
stances. Instance 6 is solved to optimality for every single run. An improve-
ment to the upper bound is found for instance 28. The standard deviations
for the 20 and 30 vessels instances are in average less than 1 which indicates
very stable results. The standard deviations are a bit larger for the 40 vessels
instances. The runtime is low for all instances, and the highest runtime is
only a little more than a minute. The costs, the standard deviations, and the
runtimes increase with the size of the instances, but there is a much bigger
increment from the 30 to 40 vessels instances than from the 20 to the 30
vessels instances.
When looking at the Avg LB gap, the Avg UB gap, and the Best UB gap,
it is clear that there are still some improvements to be made on the solution
quality in general. However, the Best UB gap shows that we are not far from
achieving state-of-the-art results.
In comparison to [Iris et al., 2017], we are very close to their reported re-
sults. We obtain a better average in nine instances compared to all heuristic
solutions, and we obtain a better best result in 11 instances. In the 20 and
30 vessel instances, we are on average within less than 0.77%. The average
gaps on the 40 vessels instances are also low, but the average is aﬀected by
the less good result on instance 30. Instance 30 is one of the harder instances
to solve, and it is the instance with the largest gaps and is amongst the
instances with the highest standard deviations. Instance 30 is discussed in
chapter 8.
For the best results, we achieve better solutions on 11 instances. Besides
achieving results that are almost of the same quality of [Iris et al., 2017] we
manage to solve instances much faster. Some runtimes are improved by more
than two minutes. The improvements on runtimes are biggest on the larger
instances.
Table 7.3 shows the results for the largest instances.
These instances
were generated by [Iris et al., 2017], so their best results are reported as the
upper bounds. We manage to improve the upper bound on all 60 vessels
instances by an average of 5.69%.
We also improve the upper bound on
four of the 80 vessels instances. The lower bounds are very bad, so the gap
between the bounds and our average is huge. Our gap to the average of
[Iris et al., 2017] is on average less than 4%.
All runtimes are improved
signiﬁcantly. The smallest improvement is more than two minutes, and the
largest improvement is almost 10 minutes.
Page 60
==PAGE:61==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
7.4
APM Terminals - Aarhus
APM Terminals is a huge global port and cargo inland service provider. They
serve 60 shipping lines, and they handled 37.3 million TEUs in 2016. APM
Terminals is present in 59 countries with 76 operating port facilities, 24 of the
port facilities are located in Europe [APM Terminals, 2017]. APM Terminals
- Aarhus, abbreviated APMT, is located in the Port of Aarhus [Aarhus Havn,
2017] and is among the most productive container facilities in Europe [APM
Terminals, 2017]. APMT is shown in ﬁgure 7.2.
Figure 7.2: APM Terminals - Aarhus [Google, 2017].
APMT operates ﬁve QCs which can be seen in ﬁgure 7.2 on a 1 km long
quay with bollards every 20 meters. The terminal primarily services feeder
vessels, but it also serves a Triple-E every Thursday. Triple-E is one of the
worlds largest container vessels that can carry more than 18,000 TEUs. As
all ﬁve QCs are assigned to the Triple-E when it is berthed, no other vessels
can be served that day. The rest of the week between 0 and 3 smaller feeder
vessels are served per day. The same vessels arrive at the terminal each week,
but it is only the Triple-E that always arrives at the same time and on the
same weekday. Depending on the load of the ship, a diﬀerent number of QC
moves are required for each vessel each week. The QC moves indicate how
many containers that must be moved when loading and unloading the ship.
The number of QC moves determine how many QCs APMT assigns to the
feeders. If a feeder vessel needs more than 250 moves, it gets 2 QCs; else it
gets 1 QC.
Usually, a vessel announces its arrival the day before, and this is when
the terminal books workers to handle the vessel. The terminal and the vessel
agrees on arrival time, and a number of QC moves. The vessel is always
Page 61
==PAGE:62==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
handled on the day of its arrival. A vessel is allocated to a berth based on
experience from earlier visits. Another way to allocate a berth could be to
make a distance calculation for the containers loaded on and oﬀthe vessel. If
the total distance the containers travels to and from the quay is minimised,
it may be possible to save some man-hours. APMTs main expenses are the
workers, who get paid by the hour. If a vessel is allocated to a berth that
deviates from its preferred berth it leads to longer transportation times of the
containers, which aﬀects the number of hours that must be used to service
a vessel. A good plan will minimise a cost function that combines a berth
deviation cost and a cost per QC hour. Both berth deviations and QC hours
implies workers.
With the BACAP model and heuristic, we will attempt to make a plan for
APMT to see if we can solve the BACAP cheaper without the QC assignment
policy. A better solution might also allow the terminal to serve more vessels
on Thursdays than just the Triple-E. This will lead to a potentially higher
proﬁt for APMT. The plan will be made for four weeks at a time, and it will be
the same vessels cycling through each week, but with diﬀerent arrival times,
preferred berths, and needed moves. The QCs have an average productivity
of Λ = 33.79 moves per hour per crane according to APMT, and they do not
interfere with each other while working.
7.4.1
Model adaptation
The model for APMT will be the same as the model described in chapter 5,
but with a diﬀerent cost function. The other diﬀerences between the litera-
ture model and the APMT model can be reﬂected in the instances.
The terminal takes no interest in whether or not a vessel is on time since
it is the shipping company that pays for any delays. A speed-up cost is not
necessary either since the crew is only available at the appointed arrival time.
The QCs are costly to operate as they require many workers. Therefore the
QC cost is kept in the objective function. The fact that a vessel has a pre-
ferred berthing position is also true for APMT. This fact is taken into the
objective function with a new cost c5. If a vessel deviates from its preferred
berthing position, it causes a longer travelling distance for the straddle car-
riers in the terminal, which also results in more working hours. The cost
function for APMT is introduced as equation 7.2, instead of equation 5.1.
Page 62
==PAGE:63==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Minimise
X
i∈V
(c4
i ·
X
t∈T
X
q∈Ri
q · ritq + c5 · ∆bi · RCMi)
(7.2)
The productivity of the QCs can be used to convert the required crane
moves, RCMi, into the number of required eﬀective QC hours. This is done
because APMT uses required QC moves, where the model relies on needed
QC hours.
mi = RCMi
Λ
(7.3)
The new objective function minimises the cost of each active QC and the
cost of a berth deviation counted for all container moves in the problem.
7.4.2
APMT instances
Unfortunately, we were not able to obtain data from APM Terminals -
Aarhus. Instead, we have generated instances that reﬂect the reality of the
terminal to the best of our knowledge. We have generated a set of 5 instances.
• Instance 1 has 12 feeder vessels per week, and one Triple-E vessel on
Thursdays. The minimum and maximum QCs per vessel follows the
APMT policy regarding QC assignment.
• Instance 2 is the same as instance 1. However instance 2 does not follow
the APMT policy.
• Instance 3, 4, and 5 are the same as instance 2, but respectively one,
two, and three feeder vessels are added to Thursday each week.
When one week of an instance is generated, all vessels from that week are
the same the following weeks. This means that the length of each vessel and
the amount of vessels does not change from week to week. All instances have
the following in common:
The planning horizon is 4 weeks and 2 days, which is a total of 30 days
lasting from 7:00 to 22:00 (15 hours). This adds up to H = 450. The ﬁrst
day starts at period 0, and the second day starts at period 15 and so on.
Vessels do not arrive in the last two days as they are just a buﬀer for the
model.
The quay is 1 km with bollards every 20 metres, where a vessel can berth
such that L = 50. APMT has 5 QCs at their disposal, Q = 5.
Page 63
==PAGE:64==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
For the cost function, only c4
i and c5 are needed. The other costs are
set to 0, c1
i = c2
i = c3
i = 0. The QC cost, c4
i , is the cost of assigning a QC
per hour. It is derived by assuming that 9 workers, earning 150 DKK/hour,
and one QC operator, earning 250 DKK/hour are working simultaneously
on operating a QC and transporting the containers. This adds up to a cost
of c4
i = 20(103) DKK per QC per hour. The berth deviation cost, c5 is de-
rived by assuming that each berth deviation requires 40 metres (one segment
of 20 metres, forth and back) extra transportation for all the required QC
moves, that the straddle carriers need to travel. Assuming that a straddle
carrier is driven by a worker with the salary of 150 DKK/hour with an av-
erage speed of 15 km/hour, the cost per container for each berth deviation
becomes c5 = 0.004(103) DKK.
The QCs are not interfering with each other so α = 1. The berth devia-
tions do not aﬀect the needed QC hours, hence β = 0.
All vessels pay for the scheduled time, so it is assumed that a vessel al-
ways arrives on time and that the terminal is also always on time. This
causes ESTi = ETAi.
The terminal does not pay any lateness fees, so
EFTi = LFTi and LFTi will always be the last hour of the same day as the
arrival is scheduled.
The feeder vessels are distributed on each day with U[1, 3], but always
such that the total number of vessels per week corresponds to the instance.
The vessel length, the required QC hours, and minimum and maximum QCs
follows the speciﬁcations from in table 7.1. Note that the lengths of the ves-
sels in table 7.1 are given in 10 m segments. To convert the lengths into 20
m segments the lengths from the table must be divided by 2.
Triple-E has the following attributes: li = 20, mi = N[39, 6], rmin
i
= 4,
rmax
i
= 5, where N is a normal distribution; N[mean,standard deviation].
Page 64
==PAGE:65==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
7.4.3
Results
The ALNS is adapted to the new cost function. If the model is not able to
insert all vessels into a solution, there is a penalty cost of 10,000 DKK per
vessel that has not been inserted. Table 7.4 contains the results from the
instances. There are two main categories in the table, one where the penalty
for not planning any vessel is 10,000 (”Normal penalty”), and one where an
even higher penalty for not planning the Triple-E is given (”Extra penalty”).
A real cost for the vessels that have been assigned is also reported, as this
is the actual cost in DKK for using that plan. The longest runtime of the
ALNS is less than 30 seconds for the largest instance. All solutions to the
APMT instances have been visualised and can be seen in appendix C.
Normal penalty
Extra penalty
#
Obj.
Cost
Triple-E
handled
Feeders
handled
Obj.
Cost
Triple-E
handled
Feeders
handled
1
12,740
12,740
4/4
48/48
12,740
12,740
4/4
48/48
2
12,260
12,260
4/4
48/48
12,260
12,260
4/4
48/48
3
22,100
12,100
3/4
52/52
22,700
12,700
4/4
51/52
4
22,960
12,960
3/4
56/56
23,380
13,380
4/4
55/56
5
51,680
11,680
0/4
60/60
53,880
13,880
4/4
56/60
Table 7.4: Results for APMT with and without extra penalty for removing
the Triple-E.
From table 7.4 in the Normal penalty columns it can be seen that In-
stance 1, with the APMT policy is more expensive than Instance 2, where
the APMT policy is not followed. It can also be seen that all vessels have
been inserted for both instances. This means that we can make an overall
cheaper plan by having a less restrictive QC policy that, according to the
solution, saves 480.000 DKK. The plan is cheaper because a QC can be re-
moved in the last period for almost every vessel. When more QCs can be
assigned in the same period, the vessels can have shorter durations. With
shorter durations, it is easier to ﬁt the vessels into the plan such that they
obtain better berthing positions.
Instance 3 has one extra vessel each Thursday, and only one vessel was
not able to be planned. This is reﬂected in the objective value, which is now
much larger than for Instance 1 and 2. When looking at the actual cost of
the planned vessels, it can be seen that even though more vessels have been
added to the plan, it is cheaper in total. This is because the Triple-E has
Page 65
==PAGE:66==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
been removed from the plan on the last Thursday of the full period to make
room for the added vessel on that day. The same happens in Instance 4,
where even more vessels can be ﬁtted into the plan. The only vessel left out
is one Triple-E. The cost for Instance 4 is higher than the cost of Instance 3
because more vessels need to be serviced.
Instance 5 has the highest objective value, but the lowest cost. The high
objective value caused by four vessels that could not be inserted, thus getting
the penalty. The cost is low because it is the Triple-E for all four weeks that
have been removed to make room for eight more vessels compared to instance
1 and 2. The Triple-E is more expensive to assign because it requires more
QC hours.
Since the algorithm does not consider proﬁt, it will ﬁrst try to ﬁt in as
many vessels as possible to avoid the penalty. If this is not possible, it will
try to insert the cheapest vessels, which are also the smallest, to fulﬁl its
purpose of minimising the objective function. When more vessels are added
to the Thursdays, the algorithm will always push out the Triple-E, if it can-
not ﬁt all vessels into the plan. Since the Triple-E vessel potentially yields a
much larger proﬁt, another test was made where removing the Triple-E was
even heavier penalised. The results can be seen in table 7.4 under the Extra
penalty columns.
Instance 1 and 2 are the same as without the penalty because all vessels
are inserted. Instance 3 can still ﬁt in the same amount of vessels but is
now more costly because a smaller vessel is replaced with the Triple-E. The
same tendency can be seen for instance 4 and 5. It is worth noting that
even though the Triple-E is now inserted every week the same amount of
vessels can still be inserted for all instances. This enables APMT to choose
whether they want to service cheap vessels or more expensive vessels with an
assumable higher proﬁt.
Page 66
==PAGE:67==
8
Discussion
This chapter contains a discussion of the complexity of ﬁnding solutions.
Also, the relevance of the application of the ALNS on real-life cases is dis-
cussed.
8.1
Complexity of ﬁnding good solutions
The BACAP is a very hard problem to solve due to its complexity. The
fact that the problem is very hard and time-consuming to solve with exact
methods underlines this. The complexity of the problem also makes it hard
to solve with heuristic methods. Every time a vessel is assigned to a new
berthing position the required QC hours changes, and this aﬀects the du-
ration time of the vessel assignment. When the duration time of a vessel
assignment changes, it can cause overlaps with other vessels or maybe open
up for new possible assignments for other vessels, so trying to predict the
best moves for a series of vessels is incredibly complicated due to the many
side eﬀects of moving just one vessel.
Initially, the ALNS only contained the best insertion method, section
6.2.1. The greedy nature of the method is very useful when it comes to ves-
sels that have little in common regarding EST, ETA, EFT, LFT, and b0
v.
When the vessels have little or nothing in common, it is easy to assign both
vessels to their best possible positions in a plan with a greedy method.
For two vessels with a lot in common, the best insertion is not very
practical. If two identical vessels were to be inserted with the best insertion
method, the ﬁrst vessel would be assigned to its optimal assignment, but the
other vessel would have to be placed next to the ﬁrst vessel. The ﬁrst vessel
assignment would be very cheap, while the other vessel assignment would be
more costly. Since it is often the cheapest to have such two vessels share the
optimal assignments we developed the noise insertion method, section 6.3.1.
This method enables both vessels to be inserted such that they share the
optimal position resulting in an overall cheaper solution. However, it can
require many iterations until both vessels have been placed optimally, as the
noise insertion relies on a stochastic method.
67
==PAGE:68==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
To see just how diﬃcult it is to ﬁnd the optimal solution, we will inves-
tigate a solution to instance 8. From the results in table 7.2, it can be seen
that we are never able to solve this instance to optimality. An almost optimal
solution to instance 8 is shown in ﬁgure 8.1. The lines in the ﬁgure indicate
possible divisions of the solution. The divisions make three sub-solutions,
which can also be made into three sub-instances; 8X, 8Y, and 8Z. Each of
the instances is assumed to be independent of the others because of the large
period gaps between the vessels from each sub-solution.
Figure 8.1: Instance 8 divided into three sub-solutions: 8X (left), 8Y (mid-
dle), and 8Z (right)
To ﬁnd the optimal solution to instance 8, we have solved each of the
sub-instances individually. While we can safely assume that the solution to
8Z is optimal due to the scattering of the vessels, such assumptions cannot be
made for the solutions to 8X and 8Y. This is because they are more congested
and contain clusters of vessels. Clusters of vessels are vessels that are placed
very close in the solution.
We solved instance 8X and 8Y with ALNS and with CPLEX (an opti-
misation software package using Simplex) to see the diﬀerences between our
solutions and a proven optimal solution. CPLEX can solve the very small
Page 68
==PAGE:69==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
instances very quickly.
The two solutions to 8Y can be seen in ﬁgure 8.2. The ﬁgure shows that
ALNS can solve instance 8Y to optimality as the objective value is equal
to the objective value obtained by CPLEX. Even though both solutions are
optimal, they are not identical. This indicates that several optimal solutions
can exist for the same instance. In these two solutions, every vessel except
for vessels 4 and 5 have the same position, but the QC assignment is diﬀerent
for vessel 3, 8, and 9.
(a) A solution for 8Y found with ALNS
(b) A solution for 8Y found with CPLEX
Figure 8.2: Solutions for 8Y
Figure 8.3 shows the two solutions for instance 8X. Here the heuristic
solution is not optimal as the objective value is 25.5 for the heuristic solution
and 24.6 for the CPLEX solution.
The heuristic places vessel 0, 2, and
5 optimally even though vessel 2 is not placed in the same berth as in the
CPLEX solution. From the results, we know that the ALNS has placed vessel
4 optimally, but this is not the optimal assignment for vessel 4 itself since
its preferred berth is 2 and not 0, where it is berthed. The berth deviation
results in one extra required QC hour. However, vessel 4 is placed optimally
as it would be in the way of placing vessel 3 if vessel 4 was given its preferred
berth. The preferred berth of vessel 3 is 23, so a compromise between vessel
3 and 4 has been made which is optimal according to the CPLEX solution.
Page 69
==PAGE:70==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
(a) A solution for 8X found with ALNS
(b) A solution for 8X found with CPLEX
Figure 8.3: Solutions for 8X
To understand why the heuristic was not able to ﬁnd the optimal solution
even though all vessels have been berthed optimally, we must look at the QC
assignments. The QC assignments for vessel 1 and 3 in the heuristic solution
are diﬀerent from the CPLEX solution and the arrival and departure times
are also slightly diﬀerent. If vessel 1 is inserted before vessel 3, the heuristic
will obtain the same solution as in ﬁgure 8.3(a). If vessel 3 is inserted ﬁrst,
it will arrive in period 12 and depart in period 24. The assignment of QCs
will be as described in algorithm 6, which means that the QCs will be ﬁlled
in from the starting period of the vessel resulting in an assignment of 6 QCs
in time period 12 to 19 and 5 QCs in time period 19 to 23. The periods in
which vessel 3 and 4 are both present there is now only one free QC out of
10. This means that vessel 1 can never obtain at least two QCs as required
if it is placed anywhere in time period 20 to 23, which will be necessary if
vessel 1 should keep the berthing position from ﬁgure 8.3(a). This results
in a very costly insertion of vessel 1 as shown in ﬁgure 8.4.
The costly
insertion of vessel 1 always results in the heuristic inserting vessel 1 ﬁrst.
This concludes that our QC assignment method prevents us from achieving
the optimal solution to instance 8, because changing the order of inserting
vessel 1 and 3 does not lead to the optimal solution.
Page 70
==PAGE:71==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Figure 8.4: Instance 8X where vessel 1 and 3 has been removed and rein-
serted.
To overcome the troubles of ﬁnding the optimal solution to instance 8,
we can reverse the direction of the QC insertion, meaning that we can assign
the QCs starting from the last period of the vessel assignment, instead of
starting from the ﬁrst period of the vessel assignment. This would enable us
to solve instance 8 to optimality because vessel 1 could be berthed without
being limited by the total amount of available QCs. A reversal of the QC
assignment method would in theory not be better or worse than the current
method because similar problems would occur for other instances. The best
ﬁx would be to develop a QC assignment method that can assign QCs more
liberally.
Assuming that such a method was developed, it would be able to as-
sign QCs as done by CPLEX in ﬁgure 8.2(b) and 8.3(b). Such a method
could result in even better solutions regarding objective value, but from a
practical perspective, it is not good to have fragmented QC assignments. A
fragmented QC assignment can be seen on vessel 1 in ﬁgure 8.3(b). The third
and sixth period of the vessel assignment only has two QCs, where all other
periods have four. In reality, the QCs would have to move to another vessel
to work for a single period at a time, or they would just be idle. Instead, it
is more practical to have consecutive QC assignments.
Page 71
==PAGE:72==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Instance 8 is one of the small instances, so it was relatively easy to iden-
tify improvement possibilities and to solve it with CPLEX. However, when it
comes to the larger instances, CPLEX does not have a chance to solve them
within a reasonable amount of time, and the more vessels make it almost
impossible to identify points of improvement. For instance 8 to be solved to
optimality it required that the right sequence of vessel insertions had been
undergone, with the right assignments from the noise insertion method. Even
then, the QC assignment method made it impossible to ﬁnd the optimal so-
lution.
The complexity of ﬁnding the right insertion sequences increases when
it comes to larger instances. Some large instances are harder to solve than
others. The ALNS struggles with instance 24 and 30, but it obtains good
results with instance 28. Solutions to all three instances are shown in ﬁgure
8.5. These instances contain more vessels than instance 8, which makes them
more congested in general. The congestion makes it harder to split up the
problem and sub-optimise, though all three solutions have outlying vessels in
the beginning and/or at the end of the time horizon, which can be assumed to
have cheap assignments. Instance 24 has two clusters of vessels which do not
seem interdependent. Instance 28 and 30 have almost all vessels combined
into one big cluster. The clusters are evidently not what deﬁnes a hard or an
easy problem as we obtain good results for instance 28, and not for instance
24. The solution to instance 28 shows that the cluster primarily contains the
larger vessels in the middle, and the smaller vessels to the sides, which means
that the cluster is more simple to rearrange. This is not true for instance 24
and 30 because small and big vessels are all mixed up in the clusters, making
the clusters much harder to rearrange because they contain more vessels.
Page 72
==PAGE:73==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
(a) A solution for instance 24
(b) A solution for instance 28
(c) A solution for instance 30
Figure 8.5: Examples of diﬀerent instance structures
Page 73
==PAGE:74==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
8.2
Applying the ALNS on real-life cases
We have already seen that exact solution methods are not able to solve real-
life cases unless the terminals are small.
The beneﬁts of using tools like
CPLEX is that they can solve problems to guaranteed optimality if they are
operated correctly. The downside to using such tools is that a CPLEX license
itself is costly, which can be an issue for the smaller terminals. All terminals
could beneﬁt from a heuristic. We have proved that our ALNS is able to
obtain good solutions to all sizes of container terminals quickly. This enables
the planners to obtain plans with little waiting time, that can challenge and
improve their manual work. The ALNS may also be used to quickly evalu-
ate plans and suggest improvements. The runtime of the ALNS also makes
it very suitable for overcoming disruptions, because many diﬀerent recovery
plans can be tested in a short amount of time. Lastly, the ALNS may be
used to evaluate the consequences of changes to the terminal. This could be
the eﬀects of buying a new QC or of extending the quay.
When applying the model to terminals in real-life, it is important to re-
member the limitations of a model. The model for the BACAP is made such
that it mirrors the reality of an average container terminal, where many prac-
tical aspects have been disregarded. The ALNS must be tailored for every
single real-life case to get the best results for the speciﬁc container terminal,
just as we did with the APMT case. A model that ﬂawlessly resembles re-
ality is impossible to create, as it would become way too complex. For this
reason, any solution method should not stand alone but should be used as
decision support for experienced planners.
To adapt the model to a speciﬁc container terminal, there are a few phys-
ical constraints, that should be considered. First of all the physical layout
of the container terminal is important as the depth of the water can vary,
which can make some berths too shallow for some vessels, depending on the
draught of the vessel.
Another issue is the ﬂexibility of both vessels and the QCs. The plan is
made such that one vessel can depart and another vessel can arrive at the
same berth in the same time period. The QCs are not considered as moving
objects on a track, but as resources that appears when needed. This problem
is directly addressed by the QCSP.
Page 74
==PAGE:75==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
The instances to the model deﬁne which vessels that are more expensive
to speed-up and delay, but the current mathematical model has no way of
solving instances where it is impossible to plan every vessel. This can be
done with the ALNS, where a penalty for not assigning a vessel is deﬁned.
Also, this can be used to prioritise vessels that are more important to the ter-
minal than others. The costs and the times can be set in the instances such
that speciﬁc vessels may never be delayed, or that they must always be given
an assignment. Just like the case with the Triple-E vessels in the APMT case.
From some of the solutions, it could be seen that the BACAP plans
were very congested. The congestion makes the solutions very sensitive to
disruptions. If one vessel does not arrive at the planned time, it will cause
every subsequent vessel to be delayed as well. With the ALNS being fast,
disruption management is possible, but it could also be changed to plan for
more robustness. The need for robust planning is diﬀerent from terminal to
terminal. APMT is not very sensitive to delays, and would not beneﬁt much
from a more robust plan. Robustness could be introduced by forcing some
buﬀer time between the vessels in the plan.
Page 75
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
9
Conclusions
In this thesis, we have presented the BACAP and reviewed the literature
concerning solution methods to the BACAP. Based on a mathematical for-
mulation, we developed an ALNS heuristic, and described the theory behind
it, to solve the BACAP with instances from the literature.
The purpose of the ALNS was to obtain solutions of state-of-the-art qual-
ity but with shorter computational time than what has been reported in the
literature. The results show that we were able to ﬁnd optimal solutions for
four instances and to improve the upper bounds for 15 instances. The av-
erage gap for the 20, 30, and 40 vessel instances from our results to the
state-of-the-art results of [Iris et al., 2017] is 0.98%. The average gap to the
state-of-the-art results for 60 and 80 vessel instances is 3.47 %. These results
are considered very close to state-of-the-art quality.
The runtime of the algorithm showed great results. We improve the aver-
age runtime of all 20, 30, and 40 vessel instances with 34 seconds compared
to the runtime of [Iris et al., 2017]. We are able to improve the runtime of
the 60 and 80 vessel instances by more than ﬁve minutes with the largest
improvement of almost 10 minutes. The improved runtime makes our ALNS
very suitable for practical use and it can easily be used to handle disruptions
and to test diﬀerent planning schemes.
The ALNS was tested on a real-life case for APM Terminals - Aarhus. We
wanted to investigate whether the ALNS could improve the BACAP plan to
handle additional feeder vessels on the same weekday as the Triple-E vessel
was handled. We were not able to obtain data from APMT, so we generated
instances based on the information we had. By relaxing the strict QC policy
of APMT, the ALNS showed great promise towards being used in real-life
cases as we were able to ﬁt eight more feeders into the plan.
Finally, to answer the main question we have developed a solution model
for the BACAP that ﬁnds results of similar quality as known state-of-the-
art results in signiﬁcantly shorter calculation time. This have increased the
usability of the model and it is now more suitable for disruption management
and testing of plans. The developed ALNS was also able to provide plans that
can reduce costs by improving the quayside operations of APM Terminals -
Aarhus.
77
==PAGE:78==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
9.1
Future work
This thesis was written in ﬁve months including the time it took to develop
and test the proposed ALNS heuristic. This section brieﬂy describes some
areas of the thesis that could be investigated further.
9.1.1
Improvement of the ALNS
The authors of this thesis do not have a background in computer science, so
some parts of the ALNS is possibly not written in the most eﬃcient style.
A thorough investigation of the programming may lead to a better runtime
of the ALNS. Also, a conversion of the algorithm into a faster programming
language such as C++ could improve the runtime. The solution quality will
beneﬁt from an improved runtime as more iterations can be carried out in less
time as more iterations improve the solution quality. Another improvement
may come from a more thorough parameter tuning. A parameter tuning
was made, but the ALNS could be tuned even more by simultaneously tune
all parameters with a wider range of values. The solution quality may also
beneﬁt from a more sophisticated QC assignment algorithm as the ALNS is
not always able to obtain optimal solutions due to its way of assigning QCs.
As discussed some instances can be split up into sub-instances, and some
vessels can easily obtain good assignments if they are not in crowded parts
of the solution. The ALNS could be adapted to ignore parts of the solution
with a high probability of being optimal such that the algorithm could spend
more time on improving the more complex parts of the solution. The ALNS
already has a higher possibility of destroying parts of the solution with costly
assignments as described in section 6.3.1 but this function could be improved.
9.1.2
Further work on real-life cases
The APMT case was based on a meeting with planners from APMT, but
we never received historical data to work with. To carry out the case, we
had to generate our data which is of course not ideal when the idea was
to see if we could improve the quayside operations for APMT. Our results
are promising, but the results only show theoretical improvements. The case
could be strengthened if real data could be obtained such that the benchmark
would be completely realistic. Also, the ALNS could be adapted to deal with
more speciﬁc constraints from APMT, if we could get more information from
Page 78
==PAGE:79==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
them. In general, it could be very interesting to try to apply the ALNS to
more container terminals and ultimately to make a planning software out of
it. Potential users of the model could beneﬁt from user-friendly interface to
the program.
Page 79
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
Aarhus Havn (2017). Containerterminal. https://www.aarhushavn.dk/dk/
terminaler/containerterminal/. accessed 10-November-2017.
Abramson, D., Krishnamoorthy, M., and Dang, H. (2015). Simulated an-
nealing cooling schedules for the school timetabling problem.
APM Terminals (2017). Company Information. http://www.apmterminals.
com/en/. accessed 10-November-2017.
Bierwirth, C. and Meisel, F. (2010). A survey of berth allocation and quay
crane scheduling problems in container terminals. European Journal of
Operational Research, 202(3):615–627.
Bierwirth, C. and Meisel, F. (2015).
A follow-up survey of berth alloca-
tion and quay crane scheduling problems in container terminals. European
Journal of Operational Research, 244(3):675–689.
Buhrkal, K. F., Zuglian, S., Røpke, S., Larsen, J., and Lusby, R. M. (2011).
Models for the discrete berth allocation problem: A computational com-
parison. Transportation Research. Part E: Logistics and Transportation
Review, 47(4):461–473.
Cavalcante, E., Oppen, J., Samer, P., and Urrutia, S. (2017). The matching
relaxation for a class of generalized set partitioning problems. page 29.
Chang, D., Jiang, Z., Yan, W., and He, J. (2010). Integrating berth allocation
and quay crane assignments. Transportation Research Part E-logistics and
Transportation Review, 46(6):975–990.
Cordeau, J., Laporte, G., Legato, P., and Moccia, L. (2005). Models and
tabu search heuristics for the berth-allocation problem. Transportation
Science, 39(4):526–538.
Correcher, J. F. and Alvarez-Valdes, R. (2017). A biased random-Key genetic
algorithm for the time-invariant berth allocation and quay crane assign-
ment problem. Expert Systems with Applications, 89:112–128.
Giallombardo, G., Moccia, L., Salani, M., and Vacca, I. (2010). Modeling
and solving the tactical berth allocation problem. Transportation Research
Part B-methodological, 44(2):232–245.
81
==PAGE:82==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Glover, F. and Kochenberger, G. A. (2003). Handbook of metaheuristics,
volume 57. Kluwer,.
Google (2017).
Google Maps.
http://maps.google.com.
accessed 06-
December-2017.
He, J. (2016). Berth allocation and quay crane assignment in a container
terminal for the trade-oﬀbetween time-saving and energy-saving. Advanced
Engineering Informatics, 30(3):390–405.
Hillier, F. and Lieberman, G. (2005). Introduction to operations research.
Graw-Hill,.
Hoos, H. H. and St¨utzle, T. (2005). Stochastic local search. Stochastic Local
Search.
Imai, A., Chen, H. C., Nishimura, E., and Papadimitriou, S. (2008). The
simultaneous berth and quay crane allocation problem.
Transportation
Research Part E-logistics and Transportation Review, 44(5):900–920.
Imai, A., Nishimura, E., Hattori, M., and Papadimitriou, S. (2007). Berth
allocation at indented berths for mega-containerships. European Journal
of Operational Research, 179(2):579–593.
International Chamber of Shipping (2017).
Shipping Facts.
http://
www.ics-shipping.org/shipping-facts/shipping-facts. accessed 13-
September-2017.
Iris, C., Pacino, D., and Røpke, S. (2017). Improved formulations and an
adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the integrated berth allo-
cation and quay crane assignment problem. Transportation Research. Part
E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 105:123–147.
Iris, C., Røpke, S., Pacino, D., and Larsen, A. (2013).
Integrated berth
allocation-quay crane assignment problem: Reformulations, improved con-
straints and computational results.
Kendall, G. and Burke, E. K. (2005).
Search Methodologies, SEARCH
METHODOLOGIES. Springer US.
Kim, K. and Moon, K. (2003). Berth scheduling by simulated annealing.
Transportation Research Part B-methodological, 37(6):541–560.
Kovac, N. (2017). Metaheuristic approaches for the berth allocation problem.
Yugoslav Journal of Operations Research, (00):1–1.
Page 82
==PAGE:83==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Lalla-Ruiz, E., Exposito-Izquierdo, C., Melian-Batista, B., and Marcos
Moreno-Vega, J. (2016).
A set-partitioning-based model for the berth
allocation problem under time-dependent limitations. European Journal
of Operational Research, 250(3):1001–1012.
Letchford, A. (2012).
The linear ordering problem: Exact and heuristic
methods in combinatorial optimization. Interfaces, 42(3):324–325.
Li, F., Sheu, J.-B., and Gao, Z.-Y. (2015). Solving the continuous berth
allocation and speciﬁc quay crane assignment problems with quay crane
coverage range. Transportation Science, 49(4):968–989.
Liang, C., Huang, Y., and Yang, Y. (2009). A quay crane dynamic scheduling
problem by hybrid evolutionary algorithm for berth allocation planning.
Computers and Industrial Engineering, 56(3):1021–1028.
Lim, A. (1998). The berth planning problem. Operations Research Letters,
22(2-3):105–110.
Liu, M., Lee, C.-Y., Zhang, Z., and Chu, C. (2016). Bi-objective optimization
for the container terminal integrated planning. Transportation Research
Part B-methodological, 93:720–749.
Meisel, F. and Bierwirth, C. (2009). Heuristics for the integration of crane
productivity in the berth allocation problem. Transportation Research Part
E-logistics and Transportation Review, 45(1):196–209.
Neri, F., Cotta, C., and Moscato, P. (2011). Handbook of Memetic Algo-
rithms. Studies in Computational Intelligence. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Nocedal, J. and Wright, S. J. (2006). Numerical Optimization. Springer New
York.
Nourani, Y. and Andresen, B. (1998). A comparison of simulated anneal-
ing cooling strategies. Journal of Physics A-mathematical and General,
31(41):8373–8385.
Pacino, D. (2016). Reducing time at port with stowage planning and collab-
orative models. Presentation from Danish Maritime Days 2016.
Pacino, D. and Psaraftis, H. N. (2017).
42885: Maritme logistic course.
Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
Park, Y. and Kim, K. (2003).
A scheduling method for berth and quay
cranes. Or Spectrum, 25(1):1–23.
Page 83
==PAGE:84==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Pisinger, D. and Ropke, S. (2010). Large neighborhood search.
Rodriguez-Molins, M., Salido, M. A., and Barber, F. (2014). A grasp-based
metaheuristic for the berth allocation problem and the quay crane as-
signment problem by managing vessel cargo holds. Applied Intelligence,
40(2):273–290.
Ropke, S. and Pisinger, D. (2006). An adaptive large neighborhood search
heuristic for the pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Trans-
portation Science, 40(4):455–472.
Røpke, S. (2016). The traveling salesman problem. Presentation from Vehicle
Routing and Distribution Planning 2016.
Shang, X. T., Cao, J. X., and Ren, J. (2016). A robust optimization ap-
proach to the integrated berth allocation and quay crane assignment prob-
lem. Transportation Research Part E-logistics and Transportation Review,
94:44–65.
Shaw, P. (1998).
Using Constraint Programming and Local Search Meth-
ods to Solve Vehicle Routing Problems, pages 417–431. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Slideplayer (2015).
Local search.
http:==images:slideplayer:com=15=
4858553=slides=slide_10:jpg. 2015.
Steenken, D., Voss, S., and Stahlbock, R. (2004). Container terminal oper-
ation and operations research - a classiﬁcation and literature review. Or
Spectrum, 26(1):3–49.
Turkogullari, Y. B., Taskin, Z. C., Aras, N., and Altinel, I. K. (2014). Optimal
berth allocation and time-invariant quay crane assignment in container
terminals. European Journal of Operational Research, 235(1):88–101.
Turkogullari, Y. B., Taskin, Z. C., Aras, N., and Altinel, I. K. (2016). Opti-
mal berth allocation, time-variant quay crane assignment and scheduling
with crane setups in container terminals. European Journal of Operational
Research, 254(3):985–1001.
UNCTAD (2016). Review of Maritime Transport 2016.
Ursavas, E. (2014). A decision support system for quayside operations in a
container terminal. Decision Support Systems, 59(1):312–324.
Page 84
==PAGE:85==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Vacca, I., Salani, M., and Bierlaire, M. (2013).
An exact algorithm for
the integrated planning of berth allocation and quay crane assignment.
Transportation Science, 47(2):148–161.
Page 85
==PAGE:86==
A
Parameter settings
Parameter
Method (section)
Value
p
Noise Insertion
(6.3.1)
0.6
n
Construction Heuristic
(6.2)
100
ψ
Destroy Operators
(6.3.1)
0.7
φ
Destroy Operators
(6.3.1)
5
µi
Destroy Operators
(6.3.1)
(4, 6, U[1, 10])
Tstart
Acceptance Criterion
(6.3)
70
c
Acceptance Criterion
(6.3)
0.997
σi
ALNS
(6.3.1)
(10, 5, 2)
r
ALNS
(6.3.1)
0.1
γ
Reset
(6.3.2)
2000
Υ
Reset
(6.3.2)
6
Φ
HC
(6.3.2)
10
θ
Termination Criterion
(6.3)
60000
Θ
Termination Criterion
(6.3)
240000
Infeasible Vessel Cost
1000
Table A.1: Final parameter settings for ALNS.
i
==PAGE:87==
==PAGE:88==
B
Solution examples
iii
==PAGE:89==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Figure B.1: Solution to instance 4 with cost 78.0.
Page iv
==PAGE:90==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Figure B.2: Solution to instance 11 with cost 141.3.
Page v
==PAGE:91==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Figure B.3: Solution to instance 28 with cost 271.6.
Page vi
==PAGE:92==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Figure B.4: Solution to instance 38 with cost 302.9.
Page vii
==PAGE:93==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Figure B.5: Solution to instance 41 with cost 398.5.
Page viii
==PAGE:94==
C
APMT Solutions
ix
==PAGE:95==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Figure C.1: Instance 1, normal penalty
Page x
==PAGE:96==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Figure C.2: Instance 2, normal penalty
Page xi
==PAGE:97==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Figure C.3: Instance 3, normal penalty
Page xii
==PAGE:98==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Figure C.4: Instance 4, normal penalty
Page xiii
==PAGE:99==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Figure C.5: Instance 5, normal penalty
Page xiv
==PAGE:100==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Figure C.6: Instance 1, extra penalty
Page xv
==PAGE:101==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Figure C.7: Instance 2, extra penalty
Page xvi
==PAGE:102==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Figure C.8: Instance 3, extra penalty
Page xvii
==PAGE:103==
DTU
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
Figure C.9: Instance 4, extra penalty
Page xviii
==PAGE:104==
Berth Allocation and Quay Crane Assignment
DTU
Figure C.10: Instance 5, extra penalty
Page xix
