==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of environmental engineering
Study of the methane oxidation in the
cover layer of Horsens Landﬁll
Troels Wengel Christoﬀersen
s123727
==PAGE:2==
1
Preface
The work reported within this master thesis entitled ´Study of the methane oxida-
tion in the cover layer of Horsens Landﬁll´ was conducted at the Technical University
of Denmark under the Department of Environmental Engineering. It was developed
under the supervision of professor Peter Kjeldsen and professor Charlotte Scheutz,
from the 1st of August 2017 to the 22nd of January 2018. The project was funded
by the Technical University of Denmark.
Acknowledgements
First of all a large thanks to Peter Kjeldsen and Charlotte Scheutz for providing
great supervision and guidance throughout the period of the study.
Thanks to Andreas Ole Urup Olesen for great help during ﬁeld work and input
to the approach of ﬁeld experiments. Also thanks to Lotte Fjeldsted, for providing
insight on batch test measurements and for helping prepare samples. Furthermore,
thanks to Anders Fredenslund for introducing the method of ﬂux measurement.
Finally, I would like to thank Malene Front and Jens Erik Kjeldtoft Frederiksen
from NIRAS. Malene for providing a great overview of data and observations at
Horsens landﬁll prior to this study, and for providing great feedback on my ﬁndings
and what steps to take next. Jens for providing a comprehensive introduction to the
Laser One instrument.
Troels Wengel Christoﬀersen
1
==PAGE:3==
2
Abstract
For many years global warming has been a discussed factor when considering the
global climate. Countries attempt to map out their carbon footprint by accounting
for a number of diﬀerent emissions. Methane (CH4) is a greenhouse gas with a global
warming potential 25 times higher than carbon dioxide (CO2). CH4 is, together
with CO2, the major component in gas produced in landﬁlls all over the world. This
landﬁll gas is produced under anaerobic conditions within the waste layer and over
time emitted into the atmosphere.
However, diﬀerent methods of mitigating the
CH4 emission has been developed, recently ﬁnding that a layer of soil or compost
containing methanotrophic bacteria can be used for oxidation of CH4, in what is
known as a biocover.
This master thesis aims to investigate the CH4 oxidation in the cover layer of Horsens
landﬁll, through a series of ﬁeld and laboratory tests. Finally, modelling of CH4 gas
production of the landﬁll area will be conducted, which is combined with oxidation
rates from batch tests into an estimated emission of the landﬁll. Horsens landﬁll
cover an area of 34 ha, with 14.5 of these being covered in a layer of top soil and a
layer of compost. In order to examine the potential oxidation in the compost layer,
measurements of gas composition and temperature in the layer was conducted at
selected measuring points. The measuring points were chosen by screening smaller
areas of the landﬁll, attempting to ﬁnd CH4 emission hot spots. During measure-
ments of gas and temperature, only minor fractions (0.2%) of CH4 were found at the
13 selected measuring points, but presence of CO2 was detected, implying that either
oxidation or respiration was taking place in the compost. Since these processes are
exothermic processes it was expected to measure an increasing temperature through
the layer.
However, only minor increase in temperatures was detected (up to 9
degrees Celsius). A series of ﬂux chamber measurements were conducted at nine
measuring points, with only a single point, A1, showing a noticeable CH4 ﬂux (10
gram per square meter per day). Signiﬁcant CO2 ﬂuxes was detected at all points,
varying from 100 to 1791 gram per square meter per day.
To ensure the presence of CH4 measurements on boreholes reaching into the waste
layer around three meters below surface was conducted.
Here, gas compositions
containing a CH4 concentration of up to 60 % was detected, proving that a landﬁll
gas production is still taking place. In order to investigate the activity of the compost
layer, a series of eleven soil samples were extracted. Of these, six were selected for
examination through gas chromatography. After a measuring period of up to seven
days on duplicate batch tests, average oxidation rates varying from zero to 30.26
microgram per gram dry weight per hour was found. It was discovered that the
deepest layers who had a gravel-like texture showed the lowest activity, with point
A4 showing no measurable activity.
Modelling of the landﬁll gas production was conducted using the Afvalzorg model,
utilising waste fraction data from 1967 to 2011. Production was modelled for two
scenarios; one for the covered area and one for the non covered area. It was found
that the top covered area produced 7.4 to 9.5 kilos per hour and the non covered and
thereby non mitigated area 12.2 to 15.0 kilos per hour. From the calculated produc-
tion rates and measured oxidation rates the mitigation eﬃciency of the compost layer
at point A4 and VI4, was calculated. This was done in two instances of assuming
a homogeneous compost layer. One with the composition found at point A4 and
2
==PAGE:4==
one with composition found at point VI4. It was discovered, that when considering
the oxidation, the emission of the covered area was between 3.21 and 5.25 kilos per
hour, with oxidation eﬃciencies being 45% to 57%. The corresponding emission for
the total landﬁll area was estimated to be between 16.92 and 21.82 kilos per hour,
giving eﬃciencies between 17% and 22%.
Overall it was not possible to prove oxidation within the compost layer on site,
due to not ﬁnding clear evidence of CH4 coming into contact with the oxidation
layer. However, an activity of the compost was found, proving that it is capable of
oxidising noticeable amounts of CH4. The estimated emission of CH4 were found to
be signiﬁcantly higher than values previously measured, but lower than what has been
estimated previously. The oxidation eﬃciencies were found to lie between proposed
oxidation fractions suggest by the Intercontinental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
3
==PAGE:5==
3
Dansk sammenfatning
I mange˚ar har global opvarmning været et af fokuspunkterne i diskussionen vedrørende
det globale klima. Derfor kortlægges landes carbon footprint ved at tage højde for
en række forskellige emissionsveje. Metan (CH4) er en drivhusgas med et globalt
opvarmnings potentiale 25 gange større end kuldioxid (CO2). CH4 er, sammen med
CO2 hovedkomponenten i deponigas produceret i aﬀaldsdeponier verden over. Denne
deponigas produceres i aﬀaldslaget under anaerobe forhold, og emitteres med tiden til
atmosfæren. I de seneste˚ar har øget bev˚agenhed p˚a omr˚adet resulteret i udviklingen
af forskellige metoder til reducering af CH4 emissioner. Senest er det blevet fundet,
at metanotroﬁske bakterier kan udnyttes til oxidering af CH4 i et s˚akaldt biocver.
I dette speciale forsøges det ved felt-og laboratorieforsøg at undersøge CH4 oxidation
i det øverst dækkende kompostlag p˚a Horsens aﬀaldsdeponi. Der vil ogs˚a blive fore-
taget en modellering af gasproduktionen fra deponiet som, kombineret med m˚alte
oxidationsrater, vil benyttes til en beregning af endelig CH4 udledning. Horsens af-
faldsdeponi dækker et omr˚ade p˚a 34 hektar, hvoraf 14.5 hektar er afdækket med et
lag af afdækningsjord og et lag af kompost. For at undersøge den potentielle CH4
oxidation, blev m˚alinger af temperatur-og gassammensætning udført i 13 udvalgte
m˚alepunkter. Disse punkter blev udvalgt ud fra en overﬂadescreening af CH4 kon-
centrationer, i et forsøg p˚a at ﬁnde punkter med særlig høj CH4 emission. Gennem
temperatur-og gasundersøgelserne blev kun mindre fraktioner (0.2%) af CH4 fundet,
mens ﬂere punkter viste stigende CO2 koncentrationer gennem laget, hvilket kan
indikere at oxidation eller respiration ﬁnder sted i kompostlaget. Da disse processer
er exotermiske processer, var det forventet at kunne m˚ale en temperaturstigning
gennem laget, men dette var ikke tilfældet, og kun mindre stigninger blev m˚alt (9
grader Celsius). En række af ﬂuxkammerm˚alinger blev foretaget ved ni forskellige
m˚alepunkter, men blot ´et punkt, A1, viste en betydelig udstrømning af CH4 (10
gram per kvadratmeter per dag). Væsentlig udstrømning af CO2, varierende fra 100
til 1791 gram per kvadratmeter per dag, blev m˚alt ved alle ni punkter.
For at eftervise tilstedeværelsen af CH4 blev der foretaget m˚alinger p˚a boringer
ned til aﬀaldslaget cirka tre meter under jordoverﬂaden. Ved disse m˚alinger blev
der fundet en CH4-koncentration op til 60%, hvilket viser at der stadig foreg˚ar en
gasproduktion nede i aﬀaldslaget. For at kunne undersøge aktiviteten i kompostlaget,
blev elleve jordprøver udtrukket. Af disse blev seks udvalgt til gasm˚alinger ved brug
af gaskromatograﬁ. Efter en m˚aleperiode p˚a syv dage, p˚a duplikater af jordprøverne,
blev gennemsnitlige oxidationsrater varierende fra nul til 30.26 mikrogram per gram
tørvægt per time fundet. M˚alingerne viste at de lavere liggende jordlag udviser en
mindre aktivitet.
S˚aledes blev det fundet at punkt A4 ikke udviste nogen CH4-
oxidation.
Modellering af deponigasproduktion blev foretaget med en ﬂerfaset model, udviklet
af Afvalzorg, og ved udnyttelse af data for deponeret aﬀald fra 1967 til 2011. To
modelleringer blev foretaget. En for den afdækkede del af deponiet, og en for omr˚adet
der stadig er aktivt. En produktion p˚a 7.4 til 9.5 kilo per time blev fundet for det
afdækkede omr˚ade, imens det aktive deponi viste en produktion p˚a 12.2 til 15.0 kilo
per time. Fra de modellerede produktionsrater og de m˚alte oxidationsrater, blev
en total emission, samt oxidationseﬀektivitet for kompost laget i punkt A4 og VI4,
udregnet. Ved antagelse af en kompost komposition tilsvarende punkt A4 og VI4
blev en gennemsnitlig udledning mellem 3.21 og 5.25 kilo per time fundet for det
4
==PAGE:6==
afdækkede lag, svarende til en oxidationseﬀektivitet mellem 45% og 57%. Ligeledes
blev en gennemsnitlig emission for hele deponiet p˚a 16.92 til 21.82 kilo per time,
svarende til oxidationseﬀektivitet p˚a 17% til 22% fundet.
Slutteligt blev det konkluderet at det ikke var muligt at p˚avise oxidation i kom-
postlaget, da der ikke blev fundet beviser for at CH4 kommer i kontakt med laget.
Dog blev det fundet at dele af komposten udviser en aktivitet, der p˚aviser at det
er i stand til oxidation af betydelige mængder CH4. Estimerede værdier for udledt
CH4 fundet i denne undersøgelse er væsentlig højere end de værdier der tidligere er
m˚alt, men lavere end tidligere estimerede værdier. Den fundne oxidationseﬀektivitet
ligger mellem de oxidationskoeﬃcienter der er foresl˚aet af IPCC og det amerikanske
miljøagentur.
5
==PAGE:7==
Content
4
Introduction
8
4.1
Aim and scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Theory
10
5.1
Mitigation of CH4 emissions from landﬁlls
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.2
Landﬁll gas production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.3
Gas migration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.4
CH4 oxidation rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.5
Technical description of landﬁlling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.5.1
Common features of a biocover system . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.6
Potential additions to biocover solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6
Site description
16
6.1
Description of Horsens landﬁll . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7
Method
23
7.1
Inﬂuential factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7.2
Screenings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7.3
Flux chamber measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7.4
Gas and temperature proﬁles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7.5
Batch experiment of oxidation and respiration rates . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.6
Determination of water content and organic matter . . . . . . . . . .
27
7.7
Modelling the total CH4 emission of the landﬁll using Afvalzorg
. . .
27
8
Results and discussion
28
8.1
Atmospheric pressure during campaigns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8.2
First campaign: Initial screening of CH4 and gas proﬁles of CO2, O2
and CH4 through the top cover
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8.3
Second campaign: Flux chamber measurements along with gas and
temperature proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8.3.1
Flux chamber measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8.4
Third campaign: Gas measurements at boreholes established in 2009
34
8.5
Estimation of oxidation rates through oxidation and respiration tests
37
8.6
CH4 emission estimation using Afvalzorg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
8.7
Final thoughts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
9
Conclusion
43
10 Appendices
49
10.1 Topographic map from baseline investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
10.2 Overview including old borehole locations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
10.3 Borehole proﬁles performed by Kr¨uger A/S in 1987 . . . . . . . . . .
51
10.4 Cross sectional images from NIRAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
10.5 Overview of measurements from gas data report 2009 . . . . . . . . .
59
10.6 Results from screening 2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
10.7 Graphs for oxidation and respiration batch tests . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
10.8 Batch weight measurements, including dry matter and organic content
61
10.9 Plantation surrounding borehole three
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1
Overview of Horsens landﬁll . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Conceptual model of the Horsens landﬁll . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Flux chamber setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
CH4 and O2 concentration through a landﬁll soil cover
. . . . . . . .
26
5
Atmospheric pressure during campaigns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Initial screening locations along with measured absolute CH4 emissions 29
7
Locations of measuring points within Horsens landﬁll . . . . . . . . .
30
8
Gas and temperature proﬁles during second campaign . . . . . . . . .
32
9
Gas ﬂux development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
10
Location of boreholes established in 2009 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
11
Location of discovered boreholes during third campaign . . . . . . . .
35
12
Gas composition development at point VI4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
13
Estimated CH4 production at covered stages, as modelled using Af-
valzorg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
14
Estimated CH4 production at non-mitigated stages, as modelled using
Afvalzorg
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
15
Topography of Horsens landﬁll . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
16
Overview of Horsens landﬁll . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
17
Cross section of Horsens landﬁll looking west . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
18
Cross section of Horsens landﬁll looking north . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
19
Measurements of CH4 at deep boreholes in 2009, by Sørensen (2009) .
59
20
NIRAS screening results from 2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
21
Gas development of oxidation batch tests over a seven day period . .
60
22
Gas development of respiration batch tests over a seven day period
.
60
23
Plantation surrounding borehole three
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
List of Tables
1
Area of individual cells at Horsens landﬁll
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2
Depth and gas composition during ﬁrst campaign . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3
Gas composition, temperature and depth during the second campaign
31
4
Overview over measured CO2 and CH4 ﬂux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Compilation of gas compositions measured in 2009, 2011 and 2017 . .
36
6
Average oxidation rates measured through batch tests . . . . . . . . .
38
7
CH4 emission of top covered area and total area . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
8
Batch weights and density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
9
Dry matter and organic content in soil samples
. . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7
==PAGE:9==
4
Introduction
In years it has been known that the emission of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere
can cause entrapment of energy from the sun, which can cause global warming af-
fecting the local and global climate (Field et al., 2012). Methane, CH4, is a common
greenhouse gas emitted through anthropogenic and natural processes. CH4 has a
global warming potential (GWP) which is 25 times higher than Carbon dioxide
(CO2) and in 2004 it constituted 14.3% of the global anthropogenic greenhouse gas
emissions (Bogner et al., 2007). Furthermore, the increased release of natural CH4 as
an eﬀect of increasing temperatures, has lead CH4 mitigation to be an area of major
interest. According to Bogner et al. (2008) landﬁll and wastewater CH4 accounts for
approximately 18% of the total anthropogenic CH4 emissions, where landﬁll carbon
gases constitutes over 50% of these emissions. From national statistics of landﬁll
reuse from reporting countries, extrapolation of data from non-reporting countries,
and data based on 2006 inventories, it has been estimated that the global carbon foot-
print of emitted CH4 through landﬁlling will increase from 795 Mt CO2 −equivalents
in 2015 to 2900 Mt CO2 −equivalents by 2050 (Bogner et al., 2007).
In Denmark it is required that landﬁll gas (LFG) must be mitigated through waste-
to-energy processes, ﬂaring or other methods and that the mitigation process is
monitored, in order to ensure a certain eﬃciency of the mitigation method and a
signiﬁcant reduction in the gas emitted (Kjeldsen and Scheutz, 2015). It is estimated
that most danish landﬁlls are designed with at least one mitigation method. Many
landﬁlls attempt to utilise the LFG by extraction directly from the waste layer. The
collected gas can be used for generating energy through combustion with supplement
gases. Other landﬁlls ﬂare the LFG directly at the site, without utilising the potential
energy reserve it contains. This is done if the LFG have a high CO2 content and
thereby a lower caloric value. Through the last 25 years a major eﬀort in the research
of biological oxidation of CH4 to CO2 using bacteria. Furthermore, studies of the
environmental factors such as atmospheric pressure, water content etc. and how they
aﬀect the oxidation in a landﬁll cover, has been conducted (Kjeldsen and Scheutz,
2016). The result has been a development of the biocover technology, where the
waste layer is covered with a gas distribution layer to ensure steady inﬂow of gas to
a soil layer. Within the soil layer, methanotrophic bacteria oxidises the CH4 through
this general exothermic reaction:
CH4 + 2O2 →CO2 + H2O + Heat
∆G = −780
kJ
mol CH4
(1)
Methanotrophic bacteria are bacteria capable of metabolising CH4 as a source of
energy. The highly anaerobic bacteria are only found in a narrow horizontal band
just below the surface. The depth of the methanotrophic band is limited by the
ability of the atmospheric air to diﬀuse into the soil layer, making properties such
as soil permeability important for the layers ability to oxidise CH4 (Scheutz et al.,
2009).
The biocover solution have become increasingly more popular and has been imple-
mented at multiple landﬁlls, such as Fakse and Klintholm landﬁll. At a landﬁll in
the municipality of Horsens located in eastern Jutland, there is no designed biocover.
However, studies of the site have shown that there is no signiﬁcant emission of CH4
(Front, 2016), which might be a sign of signiﬁcant oxidation. The areas of the landﬁll
that are no longer active have been covered with a layer of soil and a layer of compost
8
==PAGE:10==
to negate production of leachate. The cover as a method of mitigating gas emissions
was not a priority at the time of establishment.
4.1
Aim and scope
The aim of this thesis is to investigate and elaborate on previous ﬁndings at Horsens
landﬁll in Denmark. Due to a low CH4 emission found, this study aims to investigate
the potential CH4 oxidation taking place in the compost cover of Horsens landﬁll.
This will be investigated though a series of ﬁeld tests including a screening of CH4,
gas and temperature proﬁles at selected points of interest, and ﬂux chamber mea-
surements at aforementioned points. In order to validate and compare the presence
of CH4, gas composition measurements at boreholes established in 2009, reaching
into the waste layer will also be conducted. Additionally, a series of soil samples
will be extracted at points of interest and the oxidation and respiration rates of the
samples studied through gas chromatography. Collected data will be analysed and
oxidation rates will be compared through a review of data from literature. By using
existing data of waste composition, modelled production of CH4 will be conducted
and an estimation of CH4 emission will be calculated from found oxidation rates.
Finally the collected and reviewed data will be concluded upon in regards to the
potential oxidation of CH4 within the top compost layer of Horsens landﬁll. The
scope of the thesis includes an investigation of the CH4 oxidation in the top cover of
the landﬁll. Since the area is still a functioning landﬁll, some of the areas are still
active and not yet covered with a top cover and therefore the ﬁeld tests conducted
in this study will be restricted to cell II, VI and A. However, estimated emissions of
CH4 will be conducted for both the top covered area, and the total area. Due to the
period of measuring and statements from previous visitors, signiﬁcant plant growth
at the top covered area is to be expected. Therefore the study can be restricted by
inaccessibility on the cells.
9
==PAGE:11==
5
Theory
This section describes the theory behind biocovers and other methods that can be
used in combination with a biocover. Furthermore the thoery behind gas production
and migrationg is described in order to provide a basic understanding of the physical
processes occuring within a landﬁll cover.
5.1
Mitigation of CH4 emissions from landﬁlls
In 2015 the Danish Environmental Protection Agency (Miljøstyrelsen) granted a sub-
sidy for establishment of approximately 100 biocovers on closed danish landﬁlls, in
order to reduce the CH4 emissions from said landﬁlls (Kjeldsen and Scheutz, 2016).
The biocover technology aims to reduce the emissions of CH4 through a series of
designed soil layers.
The basic biocover consist of two diﬀerent layers. Firstly, a gas distribution layer,
often gravel, where a steady ﬂow of gas to the oxidation layer is established. Secondly
a compost or soil layer which supports the existence of methanotrophic bacteria. A
steady, well distributed gas ﬂow to the top layer is crucial for an optimised oxidation
eﬃciency of the biocover. Without the gas distribution layer, the gas can accumulate
and seep out in hot spots, where the oxidation capacity of the bacteria might not be
suﬃcient to oxidise the large amount of CH4. As a worst case scenario, the LFG with
its ﬂammable component, CH4, can spread by horizontal distribution to basements
of buildings in the vicinity of the landﬁll. Here residents or personnel without knowl-
edge of the presence of CH4 risk igniting the gas. The horizontal distribution can
be avoided by encapsulating the gas within the landﬁll using a highly impermeable
bottom lining layer and similarly impermeable soils on the banks of the landﬁll.
There are two diﬀerent methods of implementing a biocover on a landﬁll site. A fully
covering biocover or biocover windows. Whereas fully covering biocovers can become
costly when having to cover a large landﬁll area, the biocover windows are imple-
mented as small emission windows within the impermeable layer, covering the total
area. In comparison with a fully covering biocover, the smaller areas of oxidation in
a biocover window results in a lower residence time in the oxidation layer. Therefore
a biocover windows solution is more suitable at landﬁlls with low gas production
(Kjeldsen and Scheutz, 2016).
5.2
Landﬁll gas production
When organic material is deposited into a landﬁll and covered with soil, it allows
bacteria to degrade organic material into CH4 under anaerobic conditions. According
to Scheutz et al. (2009) the produced LFG consists of 55-60% CH4 and 40-45%
CO2, but the production amount is highly dependant on a number of factors. The
landﬁll volume, organic content of the waste fractions along with the degradability of
these fractions, and waste age are factors that directly inﬂuence the gas amount and
composition ratio of the produced LFG. Environmental factors such as temperature,
moisture content and nutrients are also known to aﬀect the LFG production (Scheutz
et al., 2009). LFG production can be modelled using various models, commonly
assuming ﬁrst order degradation and gas generation. This study utilises the Afvalzorg
Multi-phase model developed by the Dutch company Afvalzorg to estimate LFG
10
==PAGE:12==
production of Horsens landﬁll. The model requires data regarding waste amount,
waste age and waste composition in order to produce estimated LFG production
assuming exponential decay over time. The model along with explanatory documents
is available through Afvalzorg (2017).
5.3
Gas migration
In order to ensure an optimal oxidation of CH4 within the biocover it is important to
have an understanding of gas transport processes within the soil. The gas transport
is caused by two major processes: Diﬀusion and advection. The two processes diﬀer
but together they explain the concept of convection, which is the collective motion
of particles. Diﬀusion is the movement of molecules from areas with a high concen-
tration to areas with lower concentration. The transport of gas through diﬀusion,
the diﬀusive ﬂux, is described by Fick´s laws of diﬀusion. Fick´s ﬁrst law describes
the ﬂux of concentration during steady state. When considering the gas diﬀusion in
a soil environment Fick´s ﬁrst law can be written as such (Kjeldsen, 1996):
JD = −εa ∗Da ∗δC
δx
(2)
where JD is the diﬀusive ﬂux (g m−2 s−1), εa is the air-ﬁlled porosity (dimensionless),
D is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient (m2 s−1), C is the concentration (g m−3) and x is the
position (m). Millington and Quirk (1961) further explains the calculation of the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient as such:
D = D0 ∗τ
(3)
where D0 is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in air at a given temperature (m2 s−1) and τ is
the tortuosity which is given by:
τ = ϵ
7
3a
ϵ2
(4)
where ϵ is the total porosity. The diﬀusive ﬂux found from equation 2 indicates the
amount of gas that ﬂows through a given area over time. This is important when
evaluating if the covering oxidation layer has the capacity of oxidising the released
gas. The direction of movement by diﬀusion can be aﬀected by the varying air-ﬁlled
pores of the soil, which is aﬀected by precipitation and the soils permeability. The
water content of the soil and the settling of soil are also important factors in this
matter. Whereas diﬀusion considers the movement of a gas or liquid at a single
molecular level, advection describes the movement of a substance by bulk motion.
The advective ﬂux through a porous media is caused by a pressure gradient and is
expressed by Darcy´s law (Kjeldsen, 1996):
Ja = −C ∗ka
µ ∗δp
δx
(5)
where Ja is the advective ﬂux (g m−2 s−1), C is the concentration (g m−3), ka is
the gas permeability of the soil (m2), µ is the viscosity of the gas (N s m−2) and δp
δx
is the pressure gradient (Pa m−1 = N m−3). According to Kjeldsen (1996) the gas
permeability, ka, can be calculated from the following formula:
ka = k ∗ϵa
ϵ
(6)
11
==PAGE:13==
where k is the hydraulic conductivity (m−2). The pressure gradient, and thereby the
advective ﬂux, is aﬀected by the generation of LFG within a landﬁll. Furthermore
a change in the atmospheric pressure can have an impact as well, as a decreasing
atmospheric pressure will result in the LFG being ’pulled’ out of the landﬁll. An
increasing atmospheric pressure will result in the LFG being held in the landﬁll,
reducing emissions during this period. However, once the pressure settles at a steady
level, or is decreasing, the contained gas will be released as additional emission to
steady state.
5.4
CH4 oxidation rates
When considering the oxidation capacity of a biocover, a large variation in oxidation
rates for landﬁll cover soils has previously been determined. Scheutz et al. (2009)
provides a list of oxidation rates compiled through a literature review, along with
various information regarding variation in test conditions. Listed oxidation rates
from batch tests vary from under 0.01 µg CH4 g−1 h−1 to above 100 µg CH4 g−1 h−1
and have signiﬁcant variations within soil types. The variations can be the result
of test method variations such as temperature range and moisture range. The ma-
jority of the batch tests, compared by Scheutz et al. (2009) showed oxidation rates
within the range of 0.0024-48 µg CH4 g−1 h−1 with an average oxidation rate of 18.7
µg CH4 g−1 h−1. Some batch samples showed signiﬁcantly higher maximum oxida-
tion rates.
However, these will be considered as outliers for this study and the
measured oxidation rates in this study will be compared with an average oxidation
rate of 18.7 µg CH4 g−1 h−1. Additionally Scheutz et al. (2009) has compiled oxi-
dation rates found through column experiments, but these will not be considered in
this study. Most batch samples showed that the optimum oxidation rate was found
at temperatures above 20 degrees Celsius.
5.5
Technical description of landﬁlling
When considering the potential hazards and ways of mitigation of landﬁlls it is
important to keep in mind that every landﬁll is diﬀerent. The production of LFG
or leachate depends on the waste composition and the meteorological conditions of
the area. Open landﬁlls can act as a breeding ground for hazardous vectors such as
rats and insects, and because of the open exposure to the elements large amounts
of hazardous leachate can be produced. Leachate is also produced in engineered
landﬁlls, but it is possible to implement a leachate collection system which can
reduce leachate emission.
5.5.1
Common features of a biocover system
Landﬁll top covers and bottom lining
Once an area within the landﬁll site has reached its maximum capacity and the
decision of landﬁll closure has been made, the area is closed oﬀfrom the surrounding
environment using a top cover. The top cover, which is placed directly upon the
waste layer, will serve as a mitigator for the production of leachate and the release
of LFG. Additionally the top cover can ensure that the waste is not moved from
12
==PAGE:14==
the landﬁll area by e.g. wind. Furthermore, it minimises erosion and supports new
vegetation, so the area can act as a recreational area (Scheutz and Kjeldsen, 2011).
The top cover of a landﬁll will diﬀer depending on the solution of mitigating gas
and leachate. A landﬁll with a gas collection system will have a top cover which
can be made out of several diﬀerent layers, some which are similar to those found in
the bottom, lining explained further down in this section. According to Scheutz and
Kjeldsen (2011) the typical layers of a landﬁll top cover are:
• Surface layer: A layer of topsoil, natural subsoil or compost for supporting veg-
etation and prevent erosion. Vegetation will increase the evapotransportation
of the layer, thereby reducing the amount of water intruding the top layer.
• Protection layer: A layer of natural subsoil which act as a water storage, pre-
venting water to intrude too deep into the top cover. It also prevents roots and
animals from intruding into the deeper layers, which can diminish the strength
and eﬃciency of the top cover.
• Drainage layer: A permeable layer which drains percolating water and controls
the pore water pressure which improves soil stability. The drainage layer should
not have a hydraulic conductivity lower than 1 ∗10−2 cm s−1 (Koerner and
Daniel, 1997).
• Barrier layer: An impermeable layer which prevents the percolation of water
into the gas collection layer, but also prevents release of LFG to the atmo-
sphere. According to Koerner and Daniel (1997) the barrier layer should have
a hydraulic conductivity lower than 1 ∗10−7 cm s−1. Additionally it is men-
tioned that most geosynthetic clay liners have a hydraulic conductivity about
two magnitudes lower, at 1 ∗10−9 cm s−1 to 5 ∗10−9 cm s−1.
• Gas collection layer: A coarse-grained highly permeable layer which allows for
LFG to migrate to the gas control system. The layer can be constructed from
geosynthetics such as geotextiles or a geonet. When using natural materials
such as sand, horizontal perforated pipes are recommended to enhance the gas
transportation. A gas collection system can also be placed within the waste
layer, or within the leachate collection system.
• Foundation layer: A layer placed directly on the waste layer. The purpose of
this layer is to protect the top cover layers of the landﬁll when the waste layer
settles due to decomposition of organic waste.
The landﬁll top cover is placed, as previously mentioned, upon the waste layer which
can vary in depth and composition. From the waste layer leachate is emitted, but this
is reduced by placing a bottom liner beneath the waste layer. The bottom liners are
impermeable layers that prevents leachate from seeping into the soil layers beneath
the landﬁlled area. Bottom liners can be established in a number of ways and it can
be constructed with a leachate collection system in mind. Therefore the possibilities
of contruction are explained in the following paragraph
Leachate and gas collection systems
In order to minimise emissions of landﬁll gas and leachate, collection systems can
be implemented at diﬀerent layers of a landﬁll. Leachate collection systems is often
placed upon the bottom liner. The liner can be made out of soil or geosynthetic ma-
terial and is designed to contain the leachate within the area of the landﬁll. Natural
liners are often constructed out of low permeability soil such as clay with a total layer
13
==PAGE:15==
thickness of 0.5-1.5 meters (Christensen et al., 2011). From the leachate collection
layer, the leachate is either pumped out, or drained using gravity. Since the liner
will be covered in both waste and top soil, it is important to have a protective layer
above the leachate collection layer. This is meant to ensure the structural integrity
of the leachate collection layer even under high pressure from the overlying layers or
traﬃc above the liner. Therefore a protective layer of sand is often deployed before
depositing of waste is initiated (Christensen et al., 2011). Diﬀerent types of bottom
liners exist and the use of them depends on the underlying layers. A single liner
solution can be used if the underlying material have similar impermeable properties,
such as impermeable clayey soil or rocks. Additionally, single liners has been used on
sites where there are limited consequences from emitting the leachate, either because
of the leachate not being particularly hazardous or due to deep lying groundwater
tables. Single liners are not allowed in most countries, except for landﬁlls containing
inert contruction and demolition waste(Christensen et al., 2011). Composite liners
are single liners covered with a geomembrane. This structure provides a better abil-
ity to prevent leachate migration through the bottom liner and into the underlying
soil. According to Giroud (2005) the composite liner is two to four magnitudes more
eﬃcient than the single liner. A double liner can consist of either two single liners,
two composite liners or a combination of the two. A drainage layer is implemented
between the two liners in order to collect leachate going through the primary top
lying liner. The secondary bottom lying liner act as a security for any leachate that
might penetrate the primary liner. The high collection eﬃciency of the double liners
is the reason for it being used at hazardous waste landﬁlls and at some municipal
waste deposits. After collection of the leachate the leachate must be disposed of
properly. If the leachate composition is hazardous it should be send to a waste water
treatment facility. A list of eﬄuent limit values for treated leachate in Austria and
Germany is provided by Ehrig and Robinson (2011).
Landﬁll closure
Once an area of a landﬁll area has been marked for closure the common method of
closure is by top covering the area with soil and establishing some sort of vegetation
on the site. Furthermore, installations for mitigation or collection of LFG or leachate
should be secured in order to keep them intact and operational (Scharﬀ, 2010).
According to Scharﬀ(2010) settlement of soil within the landﬁll cell can occur even
10 years after closure and therefore a top cover cannot be established immediately
after closure, since soil settlements can eﬀect the integrity of the cover. Once a landﬁll
has been decommissioned and the emission of gas and leachate has been reduced to
acceptable levels, a plan for the ﬁnal use can be made. Old landﬁll areas are often
utilised for parks and recreational areas.
5.6
Potential additions to biocover solutions
Capillary barrier
A capillary barrier is a technology in which the principle of capillary forces is utilised,
to prevent precipitation from seeping into the waste layer and thereby generate
leachate. A layer of ﬁne material called the capillary layer is established on a layer of
coarse material known as the capillary block, which is established with a slope gra-
dient, allowing water to run oﬀ. The capillary forces, which is the greater attraction
of water molecules to a solid surface than other water molecules, causes the water
14
==PAGE:16==
to travel within the interface of two layers. If the gravitational forces exceeds the
capillary forces the water will pass through the interface and ﬂow into the capillary
block, thus counteracting the purpose of the barrier. This can occur if the slope
of the capillary barrier is too horizontal. In order to maintain performance of the
capillary barrier, it is crucial to keep the capillary layer from inﬁltrating the capillary
block. Therefore it is recommended to include a separator between the two layers,
such as a geotextile. Because of the potential failure of the cover during heavy down-
pour, it is suggested to combine this solution with a biocover (Scheutz and Kjeldsen,
2011)(Berger et al., 2005). The capillary block can act as a gas distribution layer,
while the capillary layer will be mitigating leachate formation.
Evapotranspiration landﬁll cover
An evapotranspiration landﬁll cover utilises the water holding capacity of soil to
minimise water inﬁltration into the waste layer. The soil is covered with grass and
does not have a barrier layer, allowing for roots to inﬁltrate the soil, creating an
upward gradient for transportation of water. The water reserve within the soil is
drained by evaporation of water from the soil, and transpiration of plants. Since the
evapostranspiration cover uses natural processes and have a low need for maintenance
it is a simple technology and a relative low-cost solution for mitigation of leachate
(Scheutz and Kjeldsen, 2011). The technology can be combined with a gas collection
system or a biocover to also mitigate the gas emissions of the system. This was done
in an experimental setup by Berger et al. (2005) which showed a oxidation eﬃciency
up to 95%. Since plant growth can be established naturally from surrounding ﬁelds
and areas it is common to have some plant growth at closed and top covered landﬁll
areas, adding to the evapotranspiration of most closed landﬁll cells
15
==PAGE:17==
6
Site description
6.1
Description of Horsens landﬁll
Waste generated in Horsens municipality has been ﬁlled into Horsens landﬁll, an area
east of Høegh Guldbergsgade, since 1933 (Horsens Municipality, 2014). The area has
since been ﬁlled with diﬀerent waste fractions and today the landﬁll makes up a total
area of approximately 34 ha (Horsens Municipality, 2014) east of the city reaching
into Horsens fjord (Front, 2016). During the lifetime of the landﬁll the accepted waste
fractions have diﬀered. Up until 1974 combustible, non-combustible and chemical
waste was deposited at the site. At 1974 it was regulated that combustible waste was
not accepted, and since 1976 the accepted waste has been purely non-combustible
waste (Horsens Municipality, 2014). A part of the area that was traditionally used as
landﬁll is now utilised as location of an industrial area, containing facilities such as a
wastewater treatment plant, composting facility and recycling station. The current
landﬁll area is split into seven diﬀerent stages, also known as landﬁll cells, where
three of these have been covered with a top cover and therefore does not accept new
waste.
Figure 1 shows an overview of Horsens landﬁll and its position within Horsens fjord.
Furthermore, the ﬁgure shows the diﬀerent landﬁll cells which the landﬁll is divided
into. Additionally, the location of the composting facility is marked, just to the east
of the landﬁll area. The wastewater treatment plant is situated north west of the
composting facility.
Figure 1: Overview of Horsens landﬁll. The area outlined in red represents the top
covered area a. Source: Front (2016).
As previously mentioned, three of the stages have been ﬁlled and covered with top
soil. The remaining stages are still being ﬁlled. Stage B, C and D accepts ordinary
waste whereas stage E has been dedicated to accept asbestos. The stage areas, along
with the stage status in 2014 and remaining capacity are shown in table 1.
16
==PAGE:18==
Table 1: Table showing the area of individual cells at Horsens landﬁll and the status as
of 2014. Note that since 2014 cell A has been covered with compost. Table translated
from Horsens Municipality (2014).
Stage
Total stage area
Estimated
area
of
land-
ﬁlled stage area
Status
Remaining capacity
II
65, 000 m2
65, 000 m2
Filled,
terrain
regulated,
covered with compost and
partially planted
0 m3
VI
50, 000 m2
50, 000 m2
Filled,
terrain
regulated,
covered with compost and
partially planted
0 m3
A
30, 000 m2
30, 000 m2
Filled,
terrain
regulated,
covered with compost and
partially planted
0 m3
B
60, 000 m2
20, 000 m2
Active
190, 800 m3 corresponding
to 110,000 tons
C
55, 000 m2
0 m2
Available
330, 000 m3 corresponding
to 220,000 tons
D
58, 000 m2
58, 000 m2
Active
326, 000 m3 corresponding
to 215,600 tons
E
22, 250 m2
22, 250 m2
Active
43, 900 m3
corresponding
to 58,300 tons
It should be noted from table 1 that the investigated area of stage II, VI and A
has a total area of 14.5 ha. After stage II, VI and A have been covered with soil
and compost, the areas have shown spontaneous plant growth. This has resulted in
an increasingly more dense plant growth with weeds, grass and in some areas, trees.
Specially areas in the north western part of cell II and western part of cell A contained
a lot of trees. Cell VI has more sparse tree growth, which seem to be mostly down
by Dagnæs stream. The dense tree and plant growth at the northwestern part of cell
II and western cell A meant that in 2015 it was not possible to conduct screening
measurements at these parts of the landﬁll area (Front, 2016). Since the eastern
part of cell A has been recently top covered it only have small signs of plant growth.
From overview pictures it appears that the active cells B, D, and E have some minor
plant growth, which was brieﬂy noticed during visits. This is probably due to only
minor areas of the cells being active at a time and a minor soil cover being spread
on the idle areas.
The waste in the top covered stages, II, VI and A, has initially been covered with
a 1-1.5 meter thick layer of clay, sand or mulch and then a 1-1.5 meters thick layer
of compost (Front, 2016). A conceptual model of Horsens landﬁll is shown in ﬁgure
2. The model represent a simpliﬁed image of the components and processes taking
place within the landﬁll.
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2: Conceptual model of the Horsens landﬁll. It is believed that a large part of
the produced CH4 is oxidised. However, a small part is still emitted.
According to Front (2016) some topographic modiﬁcations has been carried out at
the eastern part of stage A, where a hill up to 16 meters above sea level has been
established. This has been done by putting additional soil in between the waste
and compost layer. According to Horsens Municipality (2014) the waste layer has
been established upon the bottom of Horsens fjord. The bottom of the fjord consists
of a layer of clay, followed by a layer of sand with varying thickness (around one
meter) and ﬁnally a three meter layer of gyttja directly below the waste.
This
composition act as a natural membrane for reducing leachate amounts entering the
fjord. Furthermore, the amount of generated leachate is limited by having a soil
cover on closed stages. Due to these conditions there is no leachate collection system
implemented at Horsens landﬁll. However, it is stated that there is a small amount
of leachate emitted to the fjord, but there are no interest in extracting drinking
water from aquifers in the area. Therefore the small leachate release does not pose
an immediate problem. The groundwater ﬂow beneath the landﬁll site has a north
north-east direction towards Horsens fjord meaning there is no immediate risk of
contaminating drinking water extraction wells further inland (Horsens Municipality,
2014). From data regarding deposited waste composition it has been estimated that
Horsens landﬁll would generate approximately 60 Nm3 h−1 in 2012 (LFG Consult,
2012). However, in 2015 trace gas measurements have estimated that the actual
emission of CH4 was only 3.1 ± 0.9kg CH4 h−1 (Fredenslund et al., 2015).
This
could be a result of oxidation taking place in the compost layer, mitigating a large
part of the landﬁll´s CH4 emission. This is what will be investigated in this study.
Topography of the area
The total landﬁll area of 34 ha is accessible by the road Endelavevej which cuts
through the area from west to east, see ﬁgure 1. From Endelavevej, which lies at
approximately four meters above sea level, a steep slope goes up to around ten to
twelve meters above sea level when heading south. Stage II and A starts just south
of Endelavevej. From the top of the slope the terrain declines steadily down into
Dagnæs Bæk. At the time of the baseline investigation the area north and east of
Endelavevej had an elevation of three to seven meters above sea level. (Front, 2016)
with sporadic hills. However, this is bound to change with the depositing of new
18
==PAGE:20==
waste. A topographical map can be seen in appendix 10.1.
Studies of Horsens landﬁll and similar landﬁlls
Due to procedures of monitoring landﬁll development, a number of borehole proﬁles
has been conducted on two diﬀerent occasions. In 2007 a number of borehole proﬁles
were carried out by Franck Geoteknik. These were carried out at location B70, B70S,
B71 and B71S, refer to appendix 10.2. Since these proﬁles are located outside of the
investigated area they will not be considered for this study. Earlier borehole proﬁles
conducted in 1987 by Kr¨uger A/S in stage II and VI invstigated the composition
of the soil and waste layers. In most boreholes it was found that the top layer was
either sandy or of clay composition. The borehole proﬁles from Kr¨uger is included
in appendix 10.3.
Gas monitoring of LFG from Horsens landﬁll in 2009
In 2009 an investigation of the gas production at Horsens landﬁll was initiated by
Horsens municipality in order to estimate future possibility of gas recovery. The
measurements were carried out by DGE Group, an engineering consulting company,
and includes gas measurements at all stages of the landﬁll. The study includes 90
measuring points where it was possible to extract gas in 68 of them (Sørensen, 2009).
The measurements at stage II, VI and A was taken between 2.4 to 2.9 meters below
surface. and the rest at 0.7 to 1.2 meters below surface. Looking at cross sectional
images presented by Front (2016) this depth is just at the top of the waste layer.
The cross sectional images is also shown in appendix 10.4. Sørensen (2009) states
that it was not possible to extract gas samples from all extraction wells at stage B,
C and E because of too high water content. The result of the investigation showed
that there was CH4 present in all cells of the landﬁll. Some samples from stage A,
D, E, II and VI showed CH4 volumes above 50%. In stage B and C the CH4 volume
fraction was below 5%, but in general it was concluded that CH4 was present at the
landﬁll. The results found by Sørensen (2009) is shown in appendix 10.5
Feasibility study from 2012 concerning possible utilisation of landﬁll gas
from Horsens landﬁll.
Following the ﬁndings of CH4 by Sørensen (2009) a survey investigating the potential
for recovering and utilising the LFG was performed. Additionally the survey aimed
to estimate the potential reduction in greenhouse gas emission when implementing
a gas collection system (LFG Consult, 2012).
A gas and energy-potential of 60
Nm3 h−1 was found for the entire landﬁll area, where the top covered stages, II, VI
and A, constituted 66 % of this potential (40 Nm3 h−1). Two diﬀerent gas collection
technologies was discussed; Recovery through vertical wells and recovery through
horizontal gas extraction pipes. The estimated economical investment for the two
solutions was ﬁve mio. DKK and 4.5 mio. DKK respectively. Finally it was estimated
the a gas extraction solution would reduce the greenhouse gas emission by 2,200 tons
CO2 in 2012 and 24,000 tons over the following 20 years. However, with the reduction
in mind, the conclusion was that a gas collection system would not be proﬁtable from
an economical point of view (LFG Consult, 2012).
Data collection from 2014 and earlier
A collection of data is published by the municipality of Horsens every year. This
published document contains general information regarding the landﬁll and the en-
vironmental policy of the municipality. Each document evaluates the yearly goals
regarding emissions from landﬁll vehicles and emissions from the landﬁll to water
and soil. It also evaluates the progression of the annual work schedule concerning
19
==PAGE:21==
maintenance and closure of landﬁll stages. Additionally it reports the residual capac-
ity of landﬁll stages that still accept waste along with the composition of accepted
waste. In 2014 a total of 6,101 tons of waste was deposited at the active site (stage B,
C, D, E). The main constituents are non-combustible waste (59%), waste containing
asbestos (26%) and insulating material (9%) (Horsens Municipality, 2014).
Baseline investigation prior to potential establishment of a biocover at
Horsens landﬁll, 2015
In 2015 NIRAS performed a baseline investigation due to the possibility of applying
for a subsidy for establishing a biocover at Horsens landﬁll. A surface screening of
CH4 emissions from the top covered cells was carried out using a Flame Ionization
Detector (FID). Additionally, two monitoring wells along with ﬁve wells established
in 2009 were identiﬁed and these were screened as well. The screening showed that
the CH4 emissions have a tendency of being found in clusters. A single concentration
above 100 parts per million (ppm) was found on the northern slope of stage II. Other
notable concentrations are in the 10-50 ppm range. The emission concentration at the
wells was measured without removing any lids from the wells in order to investigate
potential gas leakages from the wells.
All of the results of the surface screening
performed by Front (2016) can be seen in appendix 10.6.
Total CH4 emission, 2015
In 2015 a measurement of the total CH4 emission was carried out by Fredenslund et al.
(2015). The total emissions was estimated using the dynamic trace gas dispersion
method. This method assumes that gases with long atmospheric residence time will
act alike regarding mixing and transport within the atmosphere. Therefore a known
amount of trace gas can be released at a CH4 source and the concentrations can be
measured at a given distance downwind from the release point. The total emission of
CH4 can be calculated from the concentration rate between CH4 and released trace
gas. The measured CH4 concentration downwind of the release points accounts for
any CH4 emitted in a wedge shape upwind from the measuring point. Along with
the trace gas dispersion survey, a screening along the roads on the landﬁll site was
carried out at two diﬀerent occasions. The highest concentration was measured at
the southern edge of stage A. Signiﬁcantly higher concentrations was measured at
the composting plant to the west of the landﬁll site. In order to diﬀerentiate between
emissions from the landﬁll, the composting plant and wastewater treatment plant it
was assessed that a new test with the wind coming from a northeast direction should
be carried out (Fredenslund et al., 2015). Due to the interference from the composting
plant on the total CH4 emission, the downwind trace and CH4 gas measurements were
carried out close to the landﬁll site, in order to be able to separate the measurements.
From an average of 14 traversals along the road south of the landﬁll. An average
total CH4 emission of 3.1 ± 0.9 kg CH4 h−1 was measured (Fredenslund et al., 2015).
This is below 6 kg CH4 h−1 which is set as a limit value for applying for subsidy
for a biocover, according to the Danish EPA (Miljøstyrelsen, 2016). Following the
ﬁndings of Fredenslund et al. (2015) and Front (2016) it was concluded that it would
not be cost-eﬀective to establish a biocover or biocover-window solution. Instead it
was recommended to close oﬀthe emission points that was found in the top cover
along with any wells found at the site in order to redirect emissions to the compost
layer.
Measurement of total CH4 emission from Horsens landﬁll
The 13th of march 2017 another measurement of the total CH4 emission was per-
20
==PAGE:22==
formed by the company Force Technology. The measurements were done using the
trace gas method, as in 2015. However, the wind was from a southern direction. A
total emission of 3.5 ± 0.9 kg CH4 h−1 was found (Mønster, 2017), corresponding
to the results found in 2015.
Mitigation of CH4 emissions from Fakse landﬁll
Fakse landﬁll is a landﬁll situated in southeastern Zealand. The landﬁlled area has
an approximate area of twelve ha and is divided into two sections, Section I and
Section II, with depositing of waste in Section I starting in 1981 and ending in 1997.
Since then most waste has been deposited in Section II (Scheutz et al., 2011b). The
area is underlined by a natural 15-20 m layer of clay, acting as a bottom liner.
Just above the bottom liner there is a 0.3 m draining layer connected to a leachate
collection system.
A series of biocover windows was established in 2007.
Each
window consist of a layer of compost with a thickness of one meter and an underlying
gas distribution layer made of gravel, approximately 15 cm thick. (Scheutz et al.,
2011b).
By measuring the total CH4 emission of the landﬁll and measuring the
oxidation capacity of the compost it was estimated that a total biowindow area of
5000 m2 was needed. This estimation was made assuming equal distribution of the
CH4 load (Scheutz et al., 2011b). It was decided to establish ten biowindows on the
landﬁll area. Measurements of total CH4 emissions following the installation of the
biowindows, showed various tendencies. Half of the measurements even showed an
increase in total emission. However, it was estimated that this was due to changing
conditions of atmospheric pressure. Total CH4 emission measured in December 2008
showed a 28% reduction in emitted CH4 compared to the baseline study.
Mitigation of CH4 emissions from Klintholm landﬁll
Klintholm landﬁll is situated on the western coast of the danish island Funen. The
landﬁll was established in 1978 and the original area known as Cell 0 was established
without any bottom liner or leachate collection system (Scheutz et al., 2014). Cell
0 has an approximate area of 4 ha and was active from 1980 until 1996 after which
it was covered in top soil. According to Scheutz et al. (2014) the top soil thickness
ranges between three and four meters, but with thinner layers at the slopes (around
30-100 cm). A surface screening during the baseline study showed that most CH4 hot
spots were situated along the slopes of the cell. The process of mitigating gas emis-
sions along the slopes included digging a series of trenches along all slopes, except
the eastern slope which is adjacent to cells with bottom liners, place on top of Cell 0.
This prevents CH4 from emitting through this particular slope. A gas collection pipe
running from top to bottom of the slope was placed in each trench in order to lead
the emitting gas up to a gas distribution layer beneath the biocover. Afterwards the
slopes were covered with new, low permeable soil. The top of the cell was covered in
a 70 cm compost layer acting as biocover. An overall average mitigation eﬃciency
of 80% of the total CH4 emission from the landﬁll was observed.
When comparing the Fakse and Klintholm landﬁlls with Horsens landﬁll it is im-
portant to keep in mind that Horsens landﬁll does not have an engineered biocover.
According to (Scheutz et al., 2014) Cell 0 at Klintholm landﬁll has a waste com-
position of 40-60% combustible waste, 5-15% sludge and 35-45% non-combustible
waste. According to (Fredenslund et al., 2007) the composition of waste depositted
at Section I at Fakse landﬁll contains 4% combustibles, 12% non-combustibles and
12% sludge. However, Fredenslund et al. (2007) has devided the waste into additional
waste types, which can explain the diﬀerence in the combustible and non-combustible
fraction. Other major waste types include soil ﬁll (26%), household refuse (23%) and
21
==PAGE:23==
mixed waste (21%). The waste composition at Horsens landﬁll is not is not speci-
ﬁed within the relevant stages (II, VI, A). According to Horsens Municipality (2014)
there has been no combustible waste deposited since 1974. According to Horsens
Municipality (2009) the deposited non-combustible waste in 2005, prior to the in-
junction of closure and aftercare of stage II, VI and A, amounted to approximately
68%, while sludge constituted around 5%. Looking at the waste compositions of the
landﬁlls, it is estimated that the waste composition of deposited waste at Klintholm,
Fakse and Horsens landﬁll are comparable. Therefore various results through this
study of Horsens landﬁll is compared with ﬁndings from Fakse and Klintholm.
22
==PAGE:24==
7
Method
This section explains the methods of measurement utilised in this study at Horsens
landﬁll site along with methods and software for analysing measured data . Further-
more it includes descriptions of inﬂuential factors that aﬀect methods used during
ﬁeld experiments.
7.1
Inﬂuential factors
When considering the establishment of a biocover system it is important to ensure a
set of optimal conditions for the methanotrophic bacteria that oxidises CH4. Ideally
the optimal conditions are present at all times through the lifetime of the biocover.
However, this can prove to be a diﬃcult task. Factors such as temperature, water
content, CH4 and O2 supply, present nutrients and pH can aﬀect the oxidation rate of
the cover. Additionally the oxidation layer, often compost, will experience an ageing
in which the layer will settle due to larger compost particles breaking into smaller
particles. This will aﬀect the layer´s gas diﬀusivity, gas conductivity and ability to
drain precipitation. These property changes will all have a negative eﬀect on the
oxidation eﬃciency of the layer (Kjeldsen and Scheutz, 2016). When considering
the gas emission from a landﬁll it is important to note the inﬂuential factors which
can eﬀect the gas migration within the landﬁll, but also the gas exchange between
the soil and atmosphere. The inﬂuential factors can be divided into three categories
(Kjeldsen and Scheutz, 2015), (Kjeldsen, 1996):
• Meteorological conditions, including atmospheric pressure, precipitation, tem-
perature and wind conditions.
• Properties and features of the top cover such as cracks and ﬁssures, diﬀusivity,
porosity, water content and organic matter content.
• Factors regarding waste type and the structure of the landﬁll. This may include
gas production rate, release of Volatile Organic compounds (VOCs), internal
barriers, gas vents and the lateral gas migration area.
Meteorological factors play a major part in the amount of gas emitted from a landﬁll.
Therefore landﬁlls have signiﬁcant emission variations during seasonal changes. It has
been found that changes in the atmospheric pressure can have signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on the amount of emitted gas, even within few hours (Kjeldsen and Scheutz, 2015).
During periods of increasing atmospheric pressure the LFG will be held within the
soil, due to the change in conditions of advective transport. On the other hand, when
there are periods of decreasing pressure, the pressure within the soil exceeds the
surrounding pressure, leading to increased gas emissions. Periods of stable pressure
are considered suitable for measurements of LFG emission (Front, 2016). Smaller
timeframe variations such as rainfall and changing wind conditions can inﬂuence the
emission rate as well. Heavy downpours can ﬁll up the porespaces in the top layer,
thus preventing gas from escaping. Additionally, it is stated by Kjeldsen (1996) that
changes in wind speed and temperature gradient can eﬀect the exchange of gas from
the soil cover to the surrounding atmosphere. Christophersen et al. (2001) has shown
that there is a higher CO2 emission in the summer period. It was also found that the
opposite was applicable, with CH4 emissions being generally higher during winter.
23
==PAGE:25==
This is caused by the lower soil temperatures during the winter period which will
decrease the oxidation rate of the compost or soil layer.
Another factor inﬂuencing the accuracy of ﬁeld measurements is the size of the
landﬁll area.
In this study the investigated area is 14.5 ha allowing for a large
variation in cell conditions, making it diﬃcult to locate representative measuring
points. Features such as cracks and ﬁssures can aﬀect the CH4 emission with a factor
of seven within a few meters (Kjeldsen and Scheutz, 2015), making the emission
through the horizontal plane very heterogeneous. In fact it has been found that the
majority of CH4 emissions from landﬁlls are in small hotspots, often on slopes, at
edges or around leachate collection wells. The speciﬁc study of Scheutz et al. (2011a)
found that 67% of the generated LFG was emitted through the leachate collection
system.
7.2
Screenings
In order to get an overview of potential hot spots of emission of CH4, a screening
using a Laser One CH4 detection unit has been conducted. The Laser One operates
by measuring CH4 concentrations just above ground level.
The device utilises a
measuring tube attached to a telescopic stick with a protective cap at the end. The
cap prevents wind from interfering with the measurements. However, strong winds
can still cause outside sources to aﬀect the measurements. The Laser One instrument
is capable of measuring concentrations down to one ppm and combine measurements
with GPS location. It is capable of measuring absolute concentration and relative
concentration, which deducts the background concentration which is approximately
1.8-2.0 ppm (Kjeldsen and Scheutz, 2015). In this study all screenings of CH4 was
measured in absolute concentration. The Laser One is connected to a tablet, allowing
for tracking of geographical movement on the tablet display. Furthermore the data
can be saved in various ﬁle formats allowing for combining raw data measurements
with a geographical overlay through software such as MapInfo. MapInfo allows for
combining measurements with GPS location and colour coding of measured data.
This allows for an easily presentable overview of potential hot spots throughout the
measured landﬁll area. In order to combine extracted GPS locations from the Laser
One instrument, an orthophoto from the free Web Map Service (WMS) server OWS
Terrestries (2017) was applied as an overlay.
7.3
Flux chamber measurements
At selected measuring points found during the ﬁrst campaign a series of gas ﬂux
chamber measurements was conducted, in order to investigate the CO2 and CH4
ﬂux. In this study a total of nine ﬂux chamber measurements was conducted. Five
at stage II and two at stage VI and A. Flux measurements are done using a ﬂux
chamber, measuring the ﬂow of gas from the compost cover out into the atmosphere.
The chamber is open at the bottom allowing for gas to pass from the top cover into
a closed known volume. The setup is shown in ﬁgure 3.
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3: Flux chamber setup. The ﬂux chamber is connected to a Innova gas mon-
itor. The Innova was adjusted to measure approximately once every minute.
The increase in e.g. CH4 concentration can be measured over a short period of time
using an Innova photoacoustic gas monitor (Fredenslund et al., 2010). The ﬂux,
which have a unit of mass per time per area, can be determined from the increase
in CH4 concentration, measuring time, chamber volume and surface area covered by
the chamber.
7.4
Gas and temperature proﬁles
In order to investigate the possibility of oxidation of CH4 within the compost cover,
the gas composition within the oxidation layer must be studied.
This was done
by gradually inserting ø10 mm a probe with grooves into the layer.
In order to
investigate the potential gradual process of oxidation from CH4 to CO2 at least three
depths should be measured, preferably ending at the bottom of the compost layer.
Once a decided depth has been reached an IR-instrument, capable of measuring
gas concentrations using infrared light technology, is connected. The IR-instrument
pumps up the gas and measures CO2, CH4 and O2 content. It is important to note,
that while the Laser One instrument measures CH4 levels in ppm the IR measures the
volumetric fraction of all components. During an optimal scenario the measurements
will show high CH4 levels at the bottom of the compost layer, decreasing when
moving up through the compost layer due to CH4 being oxidised through the layer
and atmospheric O2 penetrating into the permeable top layer, as seen in ﬁgure 4.
25
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4: CH4 and O2 concentration through a landﬁll soil cover as described by
Scheutz (2002).
Figure 4 shows a conceptual situation where the CH4 and O2 concentration proﬁles
intersects within the oxidation layer. Since the produced gas from the waste layer
contains CO2 the gas concentration proﬁle of CO2 would be steady until oxidation
of CH4 occurs. Hereafter the oxidation of CH4 into CO2 would result in an increas-
ing CO2 concentration. As previously mentioned the process of oxidising CH4 is a
exothermic process. Therefore a temperature proﬁle throughout the oxidation layer
was conducted in order to investigate the potential oxidation. The measurements are
conducted in the same manner as the gas concentration measurements, by gradually
inserting probes into the layer. An increase in temperature through the compost
layer would indicate that either oxidation or respiration is taking place and that
there is bacterial activity within the layer.
7.5
Batch experiment of oxidation and respiration rates
Preparation of samples
Before going into the laboratory the density of each of the samples was determined.
This was done by adding a volume of the sample to a beaker, compressing the sam-
ple to mimic natural settling and noting the weight. Some samples contained small
rocks, roots or wood chips. These were removed when spotted. Afterwards, each
batch, except for control batches was ﬁlled with approximately 50 g of material. In
some samples this was limited by a lack of extracted soil material, especially at the
top of each point. In order to activate the methanotrophic bacteria 150 mL of air
was extracted and 150 mL of CH4 was added to each oxidation batch. This was done
on Friday the 24th of November allowing for the methanotrophic bacteria to activate
during the weekend. This should reduce the lag phase of the experiment (Peder-
sen, 2010). Upon start-up during the 27th of November all batches was opened and
placed under a fuming hood, in order to reset for measuring. Measuring intervals
during testing was 1-15% CH4, 1-20% CO2 and 1-30% O2. In order to measure oxida-
tion rates, biocover conditions with presence of CH4 and O2 was simulated. To reach
starting concentrations of approximately 10% CH4 and 20% O2, 200 mL of headspace
26
==PAGE:28==
air was extracted. Then 150 mL of CH4 and 50 mL O2 was added to every oxidation
and control batch. No headspace volume was removed from the respiration batches
and nothing was added, allowing for atmospheric % O2 concentration. Measure-
ments of oxidation and respiration was initialised in week 48, beginning on the 27th
of November. Measurements were conducted on two Gas Chromatographic (GC)
instruments. Prior to each day of measuring, a series of standards was conducted
in order to ensure correct instrument calibration. These were to be repeated each
day. The O2 standards were carried out using standard gas containing 1%, 2.5%,
5%, 10%, 20% (atmospheric) and 100% O2. Standards for CH4 contained 1%, 5%,
10% and 40% CH4, while CO2 standards were made from 1%, 5%, 10% and 30% gas
mixtures. Measurements of batches were conducted by extracting 0.2 mL of gas from
the batch and injecting it into the GC. In order to get a well documented results the
batches were tested two to three times a day from the 27th of November to the 4th
of December. No measurements was conducted on Saturday the 2nd of December.
Over the total measuring period 15 data sets were extracted. The batches were kept
at room temperature and lighting during the period of measurement.
7.6
Determination of water content and organic matter
Following measurements of oxidation and respiration, the dry matter and organic
content at all depths of point VI4 and A4 were determined. Due to limited amounts
of soil at some depths, the soil of respiration tests was included for these tests.
The oxidation batches were not included in organic and dry matter tests, because it
was estimated that the activation and production of methanotrophic bacteria during
batch tests would aﬀect the dry and organic matter content. A single sample at each
point, from each depth was put into a crucible, weighed and placed in a 105 degrees
Celsius oven to dry for 24 hours. After drying, the samples were weighed and then
placed in a muﬄe furnace at 550 degrees Celsius in order to burn oﬀorganic content.
A processes lasting around two hours. Finally the weight of the dried and burned
samples was measured. From the weight information dry matter and organic content
was determined.
7.7
Modelling the total CH4 emission of the landﬁll using
Afvalzorg
Previous estimations of total LFG production was estimated to be 60 Nm3 h−1 (LFG
Consult, 2012), which is approximately 43 kg CH4 h−1 (at a density of 716 kg m−3 at
0 degrees, 1 atm). This amount diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the total emission of 3.1 ±
0.9 kg CH4 h−1 as measured by Fredenslund et al. (2015) and 3.5 ± 0.9 kg CH4 h−1
as measured by Mønster (2017). However, the method used for estimation by LFG
Consult (2012) is conﬁdential, so in order to investigate if the diﬀerence in emission
from theory and practice is that signiﬁcant, a new estimation of CH4 production was
carried out using Afvalzorg. Afvalzorg utilises data regarding waste type, age and
volume to determine CH4 emissions during a set period of time. Afvalzorg presents
an output of produced kg CH4 along with possible amount suitable for extraction.
Waste data gathered by LFG Consult (2012) was utilised during the estimation and
the result is presented in section 8.6.
27
==PAGE:29==
8
Results and discussion
In this section, results from ﬁeld tests carried out between the 28th of September
until the 15th of November is presented. A total of three campaigns at Horsens
landﬁll was conducted. Additionally, results from laboratory work performed from
the 27th of November to the 1st of December will be presented, along with results
of modelled gas production and CH4 emission for top covered stages and the overall
landﬁll.
8.1
Atmospheric pressure during campaigns
As mentioned in section 7.1 the atmospheric pressure is a very important factor when
attempting to measure gas emissions from a landﬁll. The atmospheric pressure prior
to and during campaigns from September through November is shown in ﬁgure 5.
Figure 5: Atmospheric pressure prior to and during campaigns at Horsens landﬁll.
The x-axis indicates a period of 8-9 days prior to a campaign. Days of visit are at
day 9-10. Data was gathered from Denmark´s Meteorological Institute (DMI).
As ﬁgure 5 shows there was a steady or declining atmospheric pressure during the ﬁrst
and second campaign, providing ﬁne conditions for measurement. During the third
campaign the pressure was increasing.
Measurements during the third campaign
were carried out at boreholes with lids, going down to a depth of 2.4-2.9 m below
surface thereby penetrating into the waste layer (Front, 2016). Due to the depth
and the fact that most boreholes had lids and do not contain soil to hinder the gas,
it is estimated that the increase atmospheric pressure would not have a signiﬁcant
impact on the gas emission measured at these points.
8.2
First campaign: Initial screening of CH4 and gas proﬁles
of CO2, O2 and CH4 through the top cover
The initial screening of CH4 was carried out on the 28th of September. Upon ar-
rival it was evident that stage II and VI was covered in tall grass, trees and other
dense plantation. The southeastern part of stage VI was covered in dense plantation
reaching a height around 160 centimetres, making it almost inaccessible. The gravel
road leading into stage II (see ﬁgure 1) has become partially overgrown making it
28
==PAGE:30==
diﬃcult to determine where it ends. Therefore the screening of CH4 was only carried
out in smaller areas within stage II and VI attempting to ﬁnd hot spots of CH4.
However, even when screening areas that were reasonably accessible the tall grass
made it diﬃcult to keep the Laser One measuring cap close to the ground. The route
of the initial screening along with measured CH4 emission values, in ppm, are shown
in ﬁgure 6.
Figure 6: Initial screening locations along with measured absolute CH4 emissions
displayed in ppm
Te eastern part of stage A was found to be very accessible, with only little plantation
being present at all. The western part however, was inaccessible, due to a trees and
dense plant growth. Therefore a quick screening around the inner edge of the area
was conducted. It was decided to have two points of measurement within this stage.
One at the southwest corner of the stage and one on the top of the hill in the area, at
16 meters of elevation. These points were chosen to attempt investigate the eﬀect of
the additional soil that has been distributed to construct the hill in the landscape as
explained by Front (2016). As seen in ﬁgure 6, no signiﬁcant hot spots were detected
on top of the landﬁll cells. However, a concentration of around 35 ppm CH4 was
detected on the edge of the road going south from Endelavevej. Since this point is
not within a top covered landﬁll area it was not included in temperature and gas
proﬁles. However, since no other hot spot was detected it was included in the ﬂux
chamber measurements in order to estimate the daily ﬂux emission at this point.
Because of the large amount of plantation it was not possible to have a clear grid
of measuring points. Therefore areas with limited plant growth, which can indicate
CH4 emission, were chosen as measuring points throughout stage II, VI and A. A
total of 14 points was selected for measuring. 13 on top of the landﬁll cover, along
with a ﬂux chamber measuring point at A1. Six points where chosen at stage II, four
at stage VI and four at stage A. The chosen measuring points can be seen in ﬁgure
7.
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 7: Locations of measuring points within Horsens landﬁll. Note that all points
are situated on top covered areas, except for A1.
Within the 13 points it was attempted to measure CO2, CH4 and O2 at three dif-
ferent depths. However, it was found that it was diﬃcult to penetrate deep into
the soil, especially at some parts of stage II and VI. The Deepest point that was
reached was at a depth of 70 cm at VI4. All measurements can be seen in table
2. No CH4 was found in any of the measuring points and only at two points did
the CO2 concentration show a signiﬁcant increase, exceeding 7 vol% concentration.
The highest concentration of CO2 was in the newly covered stage A (point A3 and
A4). The maximum depth along with CO2, O2 and CH4 concentration through the
compost layer can be seen in table 2.
Table 2: Table showing reached depths with corresponding CO2, O2 and CH4 con-
centration, during the ﬁrst campaign, the 28th of September 2017.
Point
Depth (cm)
CO2 (vol%)
O2 (vol%)
CH4 (vol%)
II1
0
0
21.2
0
10
0.3
20.9
0
18
0.3
20.9
0
II2
0-10
n.d
n.d
0
II3
0
0
21.2
0
10
0.2
21
0
30
0
21.2
0
II4
0
0
21.2
0
10
0.3
20.9
0
45
0.9
20.6
0
II5
0
0
21.2
0
10
0
21.2
0
II6
0
0
21.2
0
10
0.4
20.6
0
30
1.8
14.8
0
V I1
0-10
n.d
n.d
0
V I2
0
0
21.2
0
10
0.2
20.9
0
15
0.7
20.6
0
V I3
0
0
21.1
0
20
0
21.1
0
V I4
0
0
21.2
0
10
0.1
21.1
0
70
1.3
20.3
0
A2
0-10
n.d
n.d
0
A3
0
0
21.2
0
10
7.1
15.1
0
A4
0
0
21.2
0
10
3.4
18.6
0
20
7.7
14.8
0
n.d: No data
For II2, VI1 and A2 it was not possible to conducts measurements due to a very im-
permeable layer just below the surface. As seen in table 2 the increase in CO2 results
in a decrease in O2 content, corresponding to oxidation or respiration behaviour as
previously described in equation 1. However, since no CH4 was detected it was not
30
==PAGE:32==
possible to conclude that oxidation was taking place in the layer. Therefore a new
set of gas composition measurements was planned for the second campaign.
8.3
Second campaign: Flux chamber measurements along
with gas and temperature proﬁles
During the second campaign to Horsens landﬁll lasting from the 31st of October to
the 1st of November, ﬂux chamber measurements were conducted. Additionally, it
was attempted to reach greater depths for gas and temperature proﬁles using a spear
with a handle to prepare a hole, in which the gas probe could be inserted. In order to
prevent the atmospheric air to interfere with the measurements and to measure the
actual gas composition in the soil, the gas probe was pushed a bit further into the
compost. Since the new gas measurements were conducted in parallel with temper-
ature and ﬂux chamber measurements, the progress was slow. Therefore, the second
stage of measuring was reduced to eight points. These can be seen in table 3.
Table 3: Measurements of gas composition, temperature and depth during the second
campaign.
Point
Depth (cm)
CO2 (vol%)
O2 (vol%)
CH4 (vol%)
Temperature
II1
0
0
21.2
0
12.1
10
1
20.2
0
12.1
20
1.5
19.9
0
12.1
II2
0
0
21.2
0
12.6
10
0.2
20.8
0
11
18
0.7
20.8
0
10.2
II3
0
0
21.2
0
12.4
10
0.7
20.4
0
12.4
40
1.1
20
0
12.2
70
1.6
19.7
0
12
II4
0
0
21.2
0
11.7
10
0.4
20.7
0
11.9
50
1.7
19.8
0.2
12.4
80
2.9
18.6
0
12.7
95
0.5
0.3
0
13
II6
0
0
21.2
0
9.7
10
0.7
20.5
0
9.8
40
2.2
19.4
0
11.9
V I2
0
0
21.2
0
12
10
0.4
20.2
0
15
10.7
30
1.5
19.9
0
10.6
V I4
0
0
21.2
0
12.3
10
0.9
20.3
0
11
50
2.8
18.8
0
13
97
3.1
18.4
0
13.6
A4
0
0
21.2
0
9.2
10
3.8
17.9
0
11.1
50
16.5
7.6
0
16.7
55
6.3
15.9
0
17.2
75
4.5
17.2
0.2
18.1
As table 3 shows, minor concentrations of CH4 were detected at A4 and II4. While
the 0.2 vol% (2000 ppm) is signiﬁcant when comparing to a measured background
concentration of three ppm, it is orders of magnitude lower when comparing with
concentrations found at Fakse and Klintholm landﬁll. At Klintholm landﬁll concen-
trations up to approximately 25 vol% CH4 was detected (Scheutz et al., 2014) while
concentrations up to 50 vol% was detected at Fakse landﬁll (Scheutz et al., 2011b).
When comparing table 2 and 3 it should be noted that a greater depth was reached
at all measuring points and that the tendency of increasing CO2 concentration and
decreasing O2 concentrations also applied. However, a couple of odd observations
were made. At A4 a signiﬁcant increase of CO2 was detected down to a depth of
50 cm. However, at deeper depths the concentration decreased, which was not ex-
pected. This could be a result of atmospheric air mixing with the LFG within the
probe hole, during exchange of probe and borehole spear. It is also important to note
31
==PAGE:33==
that the deep lying soil sample which was extracted at this point showed that the soil
was of a gravel-like texture at depths of 65-70 cm. This indicates that the bottom
of the compost layer was reached. Finally it is possible that the heterogeneity of
the cover has formed a gas pocket at the point of the borehole, causing temporary
peaks in gas component measurements. Another point of interest is the composition
observed at point II4 at a depth of 95 cm. An almost complete depletion of CO2
and O2 was detected at the same time, without an increase in CH4. This is quite
irregular seeing as the total mixture of CO2 and O2 should be close to constant, in a
oxidation situation. The depth of 95 cm mean that the measurement was conducted
at the bottom of the active layer. However, the same tendency was not detected
at a similar depth at point VI4. This could indicate an error in measurement at
II4. Combined charts of gas and temperature proﬁles from measurements conducted
during the second campaign are shown in table 3 are shown in ﬁgure 8.
Figure 8: Gas and temperature proﬁles measured during second campaign.
32
==PAGE:34==
From table 3 and ﬁgure 8 it is not possible to deduce any clear evidence of presence or
oxidation of CH4. Firstly, only relatively small amounts of CH4 was found and only
at two measuring points. Secondly, no evidence of signiﬁcant heat development was
detected. At Klintholm landﬁll Scheutz et al. (2014) found a diﬀerence in compost
temperature and atmospheric temperature of around 30-40 degrees Celsius, whereas
the highest temperature diﬀerence measured at Horsens was nine degrees Celsius at
A4. Three points, II2, II3 and VI2, actually showed a decrease in temperature. This
decrease in temperature down through the soil could be caused by low temperatures
during the night. From the gas and temperature proﬁles it is not possible to deter-
mine oxidation of CH4, so the emission of CH4 and CO2 was further studied through
ﬂux chamber measurements, in order to investigate potential ﬂux emissions.
8.3.1
Flux chamber measurements
A total of nine ﬂux chamber measurements were conducted during the second cam-
paign. This includes all points included in table 3 and point A1 situated on the very
edge of stage A, where a signiﬁcant CH4 emission (up to around 35 ppm) was de-
tected during the initial screening (see ﬁgure 6). Flux measurements were conducted
over a ﬁve minute period with regular stirring. The development of gas concentration
is shown in ﬁgure 9.
Figure 9: Gas ﬂux development.
It is evident from ﬁgure 9 that no steady ﬂow of CH4 into the ﬂux chamber was
discovered on the landﬁll area. However, some points showed elevated CO2 levels
when comparing to ambient CO2 levels, which are around 400 ppm. It was found
that within stage A, which is the most recent covered stage, there is a higher emission
of CO2 compared to other cells, caused by respiration by the organic material. Only
smaller increases in CO2 concentration was detected at measuring points of stage II
and VI and these are close to the ambient concentration of CO2. Only A1 and A4
showed a increasing CO2 gas development. By using the ideal gas law, the change
in ppm measured in the ﬂux chamber by the Innova photoacoustic gas monitor, was
calculated into a change in mass. From the change in mass is was possible to calcu-
late the ﬂux of CO2 and CH4. Calculated ﬂuxes are shown in table 4.
33
==PAGE:35==
Table 4: Overview over measured CO2 and CH4 ﬂux. Small decreases in CH4 con-
centration was detected in all points but A1 and A4. Therefore the ﬂux is considered
invalid and not included.
Measuring point
CO2 ﬂux (g m−2 d−1)
CH4 ﬂux (g m−2 d−1)
II1
213
-
II2
218
-
II3
468
-
II4
100
-
II6
254
-
VI2
185
-
VI4
341
-
A1
1791
10.60
A4
608
0.18
At all measuring points besides A1 and A4, a minor decrease in CH4 concentration
was detected. Therefore the CH4 ﬂux at these points can be considered zero. The
lack of CH4 concentration increase could be caused by the diﬃculty of enclosing
the ﬂux chamber to the ground due to the dense grass layer.
This might have
caused air to enter the chamber, diluting the air inside.
However, the decreases
of CH4 are relatively small (below 15%) and therefore the CH4 concentrations are
estimated to be at a constant level. When considering the results of the gas and
temperature proﬁles, along with ﬂux chamber measurements, it is evident that no
CH4 hot spots have been identiﬁed within the landﬁll area through campaign one
and two. Previously, CH4 has been detected at the top of the waste layer, through
boreholes established in 2009.
Therefore gas composition measurements of these
deeper boreholes were conducted during the third campaign.
8.4
Third campaign: Gas measurements at boreholes estab-
lished in 2009
With the previous campaigns not showing signs of CH4, measurement of deeper
reaching boreholes would allow for comparison of changes in LFG production at the
top of the waste layer. The boreholes established in 2009 has a varying depth of 2.4-
2.9 meters below surface. This means that they penetrate through the top covering
compost layer and the underlying layer of clay, sand or mulch. A cross section of the
area from Endelavevej to Dagnæs bæk, showing the reach of the boreholes can be
seen in appendix 10.4. An overview of the location of the boreholes as provided by
Sørensen (2009) can be seen in ﬁgure 10.
34
==PAGE:36==
Figure 10: Location of boreholes established in 2009 in order to measure LFG through-
out Horsens landﬁll.
Image is slightly modiﬁed in order to only include relevant
landﬁll stages. Source: Sørensen (2009).
As seen on ﬁgure 10 the boreholes was established in a grid pattern with a distance of
around 50 m between each borehole (Sørensen, 2009). However, most of the borehole
pipes only protrude the soil about 20 cm, which made them hard to spot in the dense
plant growth. Still, a total of 15 boreholes was found. Once a borehole was found, a
brief screening of CH4 using the Laser One instrument was conducted in the vicinity
of the borehole. Figure 11 shows the location of identiﬁed boreholes, along with the
measured CH4 concentration provided by screening. The borehole labels represents
the borehole number as provided by Sørensen (2009).
Figure 11: Location of discovered boreholes during campaign three. Same numbering
as used by Sørensen (2009).
As ﬁgure 11 shows there was a signiﬁcant detection of CH4 measured at borehole
three. The area was covered with tall plants (Thistle or rushes), but some of the
plants seemed to be decomposing, having a dark colour and a mild smell of decaying
plants. Some images of the plants and undergrowth at borehole three are shown in
appendix 10.9. While this could be an indicator that the area is a hot spot of CH4
emissions, it is important to note, that no borehole lid was found on borehole three.
Therefore the CH4 produced below would most likely emit through the open borehole
due to the limited resistance of the open borehole. This means that the advective
35
==PAGE:37==
ﬂux is higher through the borehole, where presumably ϵa = ϵ (see equation 5 and 6),
which results in a higher gas permeability through the borehole. No elevated CH4
concentrations were detected at any of the other boreholes, however some areas were
found to have scorched looking plantation, which could indicate CH4 emission.
In order to measure the gas composition below the compost and soil layer, each bore-
hole was connected to a small 12V gas pump and pumped for a couple of minutes.
This was done to ensure that the measured gas was not stale gas from within the
pipe, but fresh gas pumped from the waste layer. Afterwards the IR instrument
was connected and gas composition was measured. Data measured during campaign
three along with previous data from 2009 (Sørensen, 2009) and 2011 (LFG Consult,
2012) is shown in table 5.
Table 5: Compilation of gas compositions measured in 2009, 2011 and 2017 at bore-
holes on stage A, II and VI established in 2009.
DGE (2009)
LFG (2011)
15-11-17
Point
Depth
CH4%
CO2%
O2%
CH4%
CO2%
O2%
CH4%
CO2%
O2%
Note
1
2.8
25.2
29.3
0.2
n.d
n.d
n.d
43.7
28.5
0.2
2
2.8
0.0
15.2
1.6
n.d
n.d
n.d
6.3
13.9
0.1
3
2.7
67.2
29.6
0.2
54.0
28.0
0.0
60.4
27
0.3
2017: No lid
4
2.8
40.5
31.7
0.2
59.0
35.0
0.0
56.1
32.5
0.3
5
2.4
7.5
25.9
0.3
1.6
8.0
10.0
4.1
21.5
1
6
2.9
10.2
26.3
0.4
49.0
33.0
0.0
38.6
29.9
0.2
7
2.4
51.7
26.3
0.1
61.0
28.0
0.0
51.3
27
0
8
2.9
0.5
7.0
4.6
0.0
1.0
16.3
n.d
n.d
n.d
9
2.6
26.3
12.3
2.0
63.0
27.0
0.0
43.7
23.2
2.7
10
2.9
59.9
36.2
0.1
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
11
2.8
52.1
27.8
0.3
0.0
20.0
1.2
n.d
n.d
n.d
LFG: 1 m deep
12
2.8
31.7
21.1
4.6
61.0
33.0
0.0
52.7
23.3
0.2
13
2.8
66.4
31.9
0.2
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
2017: Pipe on ground
14
2.9
64.2
31.7
0.1
0.0
0.0
18.0
0
0.1
20.6
LFG: 1 m deep
2017: 1 cm pipe
15
2.8
74.6
31.9
0.2
32.0
18.0
7.0
n.d
n.d
n.d
16
2.7
76.5
26.9
0.2
70.0
27.0
0.0
n.d
n.d
n.d
17
2.7
26.3
12.3
0.5
24.0
23.0
0.0
21
20.1
0
18
2.8
69.6
33.2
0.5
55.0
40.0
0.0
50.9
41.5
0.2
19
2.8
73.6
31.0
0.2
68.0
30.0
0.0
44
22
0.1
2017: No lid
20
2.7
79.7
14.3
0.1
42.0
9.0
6.0
0
0.1
20.8
21
2.8
32.3
10.4
0.5
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
22
2.4
73.2
26.2
0.3
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
23
2.9
16.7
3.6
7.1
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
24
2.4
32.7
14.3
0.2
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
25
2.9
32.7
14.3
0.2
25.0
15.0
10.0
n.d
n.d
n.d
26
2.6
22.5
0.6
3.9
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
27
2.9
4.2
1.6
6.4
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
28
2.8
53.0
3.0
3.7
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d
n.d: No data
As table 5 shows it is evident that there is a signiﬁcant amount of CH4 present in
the waste layer beneath the soil and compost cover. Some points in the compiled
results does not show a drop in CH4 concentration over the time period, as would be
expected. A signiﬁcant (up to 39%) increase in CH4 concentration was detected at
borehole 1, 4, 6, 9 and 12. This could prove that there is still a signiﬁcant production
of LFG within cell II and the parts of cell VI where these boreholes are situated. It
could also be the result of changing features of the cover. Other measuring points
such as Borehole 17, 18 and 19, which are all located at stage A, showed a steady
decrease in CH4 concentration during the eight year period. This means that there is
no general clear cut conclusion to draw of the development of LFG production within
the waste layer. However, it appears that a production is still taking place. Even at
point II3, which is located close to borehole twelve, where a CH4 concentration of
52.7% was found, no detection of CH4 in the compost layer was made. This indicates
that the penetration of CH4 through the soil cover is very low.
36
==PAGE:38==
8.5
Estimation of oxidation rates through oxidation and res-
piration tests
During the second campaign a series of soil samples were collected in order to con-
duct oxidation and respiration tests in a controlled environment. As mentioned in
section 7.5, batch tests were conducted on soil from stage A and VI. Results of gas
composition development can be seen in appendix 10.7. All batches, except for VI4
0-20 and VI4 55-75 was measured over a seven day period. Tests for VI4 0-20 and
VI4 55-75 were conducted over a ﬁve day period, because on the night of Friday the
1st of December, a 4% concentration of CH4 was observed. Therefore it was decided
to reset the two pair of batches, by ﬂushing and adding CH4 to the gas composition,
in order to ensure that CH4 would not deplete during Saturday, where no tests were
conducted. The process of resetting the two batch pairs was repeated on Sunday
morning, where the tests of all batches was resumed. However, the trend of signif-
icant CH4 oxidation within the batch paris was not recreated during tests Sunday
through Monday. This could be a result of relative short testing time (around 32
hours, from Sunday morning to Monday night.
It was found that the data gathered through GC testing was a bit inconsistent,
having CH4 levels decreasing at one point and then increasing at the next. This
is not what was expected. It could be caused by small inconsistencies in method
of measurement. In O2 standards for 100% O2 it was found diﬃcult to keep the
standard gas at a steady concentration. This could be due to small leaks in the gas
bag, or from the dilution that occurs under gas extraction. These inconsistent data
sets will aﬀect the accuracy of the linear trend of the oxidation. The soil at VI4
showed the highest oxidation at depth 0-20 cm and 55-75 cm. The gas development
along with a trend line for corresponding CH4 oxidation at these VI4 depths can be
seen in ﬁgure 12.
Figure 12: Gas composition development at VI4 at depth 0-20 cm and 55-75 cm.
Measurements for every point is shown in appendix 10.7.
While the coeﬃcient of determination is relatively low, a general trend of declining
CH4 and O2 concentration is observed. Similarly, CO2 concentrations are steadily
increasing. However it should be noted that any CO2 measurement under 1% is
below the calibration standard, meaning that measured CO2 concentrations below
1% are not accurate. At the end of the batch experiment the concentration of CH4
and CO2 was observed intersecting, for both VI4 0-20 and 55-75, along with a sig-
niﬁcant decrease in O2 levels. When comparing the O2 consumption of oxidation
with respiration batch tests, it becomes evident that the O2 depletion in batch VI
0-20 and 55-75 is signiﬁcantly larger in the oxidation batches. Therefore it can be
concluded that the O2 depletion in these batches is caused by oxidation. In batch
37
==PAGE:39==
A4 0-15 and 40-55 only a minor diﬀerence from oxidation to respiration O2 deple-
tion was detected. This could be due to the fact that this cover was established in
recent years. Thereby having increased depletion of O2 through respiration of the
small wood chips and other organic material in the soil sample, see appendix 10.7.
Therefore most of the depletion of O2 in the batch A4 0-15 and 40-55 pairs can be
contributed to respiration. From the measured gas concentrations, oxidation rates
were calculated by recalculating volumetric fractions into grams of CH4 using the
ideal gas law. Thereafter the slope of the linear regression of time and weight data
sets was divided by the dry matter content of the batch. Furthermore, data of N2
concentration in batches, which by standard is measured by the GC instrument, was
utilised to calculate the change in pressure in the batches, assuming that N2 does not
interact with any components of the batches. All calculations can be found in the
appended excel ﬁle. It proved diﬃcult to ﬁnd a section of data sets that was clearly
decreasing at A4 65-70. Therefore all data sets was included for the calculation of
oxidation rate at this speciﬁc measuring point. Oxidation rates for the individual
layers are shown in table 6.
Table 6: Average oxidation rates measured through batch tests. The negative values
are an expression of CH4 removal.CH4
Point and depth (cm)
Average oxidation rate (µg gdw−1 h−1)
VI4 0-20
-29.54
VI4 55-75
-30.26
VI4 90-97
-3.84
A4 0-15
-8.55
A4 40-55
-6.26
A4 65-70
0.00
Oxidation rates at lower depths showed the lowest values, which was expected due
to the samples being clayey or gravel-like, having low organic matter content (<
2%).
It was found that the deepest layer of point A4, had a positive oxidation
rate. This is due to the activity of this particular soil type being low, meaning that
uncertainties and inconsistencies in measuring have a larger impact on the linear
regression. Therefore, this oxidation rate was set to zero. Data of batch weights
and organic content is shown in appendix 10.8. The oxidation rates found at A4
were relatively low compared to the average oxidation value explained in section 5.4.
This is likely caused by the age of the compost, which contained wood chips. It is
estimated that a higher rate would be found once the layer has aged. However, rates
measured at VI4 show a signiﬁcant oxidation rate. It is important to note that the
batch tests was conducted at room temperature. As mentioned in section 5.4 the
optimal oxidation rates were found above 20 degrees Celsius. This combined with the
fact that the temperature proﬁles conducted in this study did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant
increase of temperature through the compost layer, suggests that oxidation rates at
site conditions might be lower. At least during cold periods. All data and calculations
can be seen in the appended excel ﬁle. Oxidation rates will be used to estimate the
mitigating eﬀect of the compost cover on modelled CH4 gas production and can be
seen in table 7 later in this section.
8.6
CH4 emission estimation using Afvalzorg
Previous estimates of produced LFG which was conducted by LFG Consult (2012)
estimates that the gas production for the soil covered part of Horsens landﬁll by
2017 would be around 21 kg h−1 (30 Nm3 h−1) assuming CH4 density of 0.716 g L−1
38
==PAGE:40==
at standard conditions (0 degrees Celsius and 1 atmosphere). Similarly around 43
kg h−1 (60 Nm3 h−1)) for the total landﬁll. LFG Consult (2012) describes the gas
prognosis as produced LFG, meaning that the gas would contain CH4 and CO2.
However, these values are referred to as purely emitted CH4 by Front (2016). It
is unclear if the gas production values modelled by LFG Consult (2012) are purely
CH4. It could be estimated that the CH4 constitutes 50% of the modelled LFG
values, bringing the estimated values down to 11 kg h−1 for the covered area, and 21
kg h−1 for the total area.
Since the estimations of LFG Consult (2012) was carried out using a conﬁdential
model, it was decided to do a similar estimation using Afvalzorg. Afvalzorg is a multi
phase model with transparent calculations, allowing for evaluation of the calculation
method. Data used for modelling of LFG production was provided by LFG Consult
(2012), but is also available in the appended excel ﬁle. As seen in the appendix, in
this study the waste fractions sludge, compost and garden waste was combined into
one fraction in order to ﬁt all waste fractions provided, into the Afvalzorg model.
This is a conservative assumption, as most gardening waste would in reality be
deposited at the composting facility. However, this provides a worst case scenario,
which should result in the highest modelled CH4 production, thereby preventing an
unwanted underestimation. The Afvalzorg model provides annual CH4 production
from deposited waste data. Figure 13 shows a graph of produced CH4 at stage II, VI
and A since the beginning of registration of deposited waste in 1967 and 100 years
forward.
Figure 13: Estimated CH4 production at covered stages, as modelled using Afvalzorg.
Minimum and maximum production in 2017 was found to be 7.4 kg h−1 to 9.5 kg h−1
respectively.
An estimate of potential extraction of usable LFG is also shown in
kg h−1, assuming a 50% CH4 extraction potential.
Looking at the results modelled using Afvalzorg it is evident that the produced gas
values of LFG Consult (2012) are approximately 15-30% (e.g 7.4 kg h−1 divided by
11 kg h−1) larger for the soil covered stages, compared to minimum and maximum
values found in this study. This is when assuming a 50% CH4 concentration in the
emission found by LFG Consult (2012). If the estimations provided by LFG Consult
(2012) are pure CH4, the modelled values through Afvalzorg would be 55-65% (e.g.
7.4 kg h−1 divided by 21 kg h−1) lower. The diﬀerence in production could be due
to the model of LFG Consult (2012) having a more speciﬁc setup of waste fractions,
along with diﬀerent coeﬃcients deﬁning the gas production. This can add up to
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in results.
A second modelling of CH4 production at the
39
==PAGE:41==
unmitigated cells B, C, D and E, was conducted. The data for unmitigated waste,
deposited in cell B, C, D and E was found by subtracting waste amounts deposited
at stage A, II and VI from the total waste composition. It was found that the still
active stages produce 12.2 to 15.0 kg CH4 h−1, as shown in ﬁgure 14.
Figure 14: Estimated CH4 production at non-mitigated stages, as modelled using
Afvalzorg. Minimum and maximum production in 2017 was found to be 12.2 kg h−1
to 15.0 kg h−1 respectively. An estimate of potential extraction of usable LFG is also
shown in kg h−1, assuming a 50% CH4 extraction potential.
The new gas production values found in this study for the top covered area and
the total area, provides reason to investigate the potential amount of oxidised CH4.
This was done by calculating a total CH4 emission, assuming a homogeneous com-
post cover. Therefore, two scenarios for emission from the covered area and total
emission were calculated. One assuming complete cover of VI4 compost composition
and one assuming complete A4 cover composition. Both scenarios assume suﬃcient
supply of O2 and a temperature around 20 degrees Celsius through the layer. Table
7 shows an overview of estimated CH4 emission assuming diﬀerent scenarios.
Table 7: CH4 emission of top covered area and total area in two scenarios. One
assuming complete cover of VI4 composition and one assuming A4 composition.
Assumed soil cover
Emitted at cell II, VI and A
% CH4 oxidised
Emitted at total landﬁll
% CH4 oxidised
VI4 min. production
0
100
12.08
38.37
VI4 max. production
1.98
79.17
16.98
30.70
A4 min. production
8.53
13.13
18.63
4.96
A4 max. production
6.43
10.23
23.53
3.97
Average
4.24
50.63
17.81
19.5
The emitted CH4 estimated in table 7 was calculated from soil sample density, dry
matter, soil oxidation rate, layer volume and soil covered area. The measured densi-
ties measured prior to laboratory tests, were found to be low, due to not packing the
sample properly before weighting. Calculating with low density results in a lower
amount of dry weight, meaning a low density is a worst case scenario. In order to
maintain the trend of best case scenario for oxidation of CH4, a brief sensitivity anal-
ysis of density was carried out, increasing density with 50%. The analysis showed
that especially emissions measured on the covered landﬁll stages were sensitive to
increased density, showing a change in emission of up to 57%. This is due to the rel-
atively low amount of CH4 remaining. A similar trend was observed on calculations
of the whole landﬁll, with largest sensitivity (up to 31%) in the VI4 cover scenario.
Table 7 shows that when assuming a homogeneous oxidation over stage II, VI and
A. The emitted CH4 from stage II, VI and A, is lower than the measured value by
40
==PAGE:42==
Fredenslund et al. (2015), reaching average oxidation eﬃciencies of 45 to 57% oxida-
tion in a best case scenario. Similarly average oxidation eﬃciencies between 17 and
22% of the gas production of the total landﬁll were found. However, it is important
to note that in reality the oxidation rate of the soil will be heterogeneous, which is
also evident from the found oxidation rates in this study. Areas of higher and lower
oxidation eﬃciency might be found throughout the top covered area. Furthermore
the thickness of the soil layer with potential for oxidation will vary throughout the
landﬁll area.
The situation of having areas that have not been examined through ﬁeld experiments
has led the IPCC to provide nations with a guideline oxidation fraction for calculating
CH4 emissions of landﬁlls. The IPCC suggest an oxidation fraction of 0.1 (IPCC,
2000), however in the case of Horsens landﬁll this could be considered a conservative
oxidation fraction since the average oxidised fractions in this study are higher. This
has lead to an discussion of the accuracy of the suggested oxidation fraction. A
literature review performed by Chanton et al. (2009) suggested that the fraction
of oxidised CH4 is greater than 10%. The United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) has suggested new oxidation fractions, determined from the soil cover
and CH4 ﬂux (United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2013). The largest
CH4 ﬂux found in this study was 10 g m−2 d−1, at A1.
If this is assumed as a
high ﬂux emission and if the soil cover is assumed to be thicker than 60 cm over the
ﬁlled area, the highest oxidation fraction of 0.35, suggested by the US EPA should be
applied. As the found CH4 oxidation fraction for the entire Horsens landﬁll is around
20%, the suggested fraction of 0.35 would provide an estimate of 16.5 kg CH4 h−1
emitted on the entire landﬁll. This is assuming a maximum total CH4 production
of 24.5 kg CH4 h−1. However, it is within the same order of magnitude as what
was estimated in this study. So while the newly suggested oxidation fractions might
propose a high fraction, the accuracy of the resulting emission and the applicability
of the new values, makes it seem a good alternative to the traditional oxidation
fractions suggested by IPCC.
8.7
Final thoughts
When considering the results previously presented in this section it is evident that
CH4 emissions estimates and measurements vary depending on method of calculation.
However, it can be deduced that estimations generally estimate higher emissions than
what is measured in practice. Where LFG Consult (2012) estimated an emission
of around 21 (assuming 50/50 LFG composition) kg CH4 h−1, this study found a
maximum emission to be 21.8 kg CH4 h−1, when including the potential oxidation
of the covered areas. Comparing this to the ﬁndings of Fredenslund et al. (2015)
and Mønster (2017), it is evident, that either the estimations conducted are over
estimations, or that the total emission measurements does does not account for
the total emission of the landﬁll. As explained by Fredenslund et al. (2015) the
points of trace gas release should be at points of CH4 emission, in order to get an
accurate ratio between trace and CH4 gas. However, the screenings carried out by
Fredenslund et al. (2015) was carried out on accessible roads and not on top of the
landﬁll stages, meaning that major points of CH4 emission could have been missed.
Furthermore, a total of two points were selected for trace gas release, which both
were east of most of stage II and VI. Areas where signiﬁcant hot spots along the
41
==PAGE:43==
road and minor hot spots on the soil cover were found. When considering the wind
direction during the trace gas measurements it is questionable if points of major
CH4 emission identiﬁed in this study (35 ppm) and from the complete screening,
conducted by Front (2016) (114 ppm), are within the measuring window examined by
Fredenslund et al. (2015). If these factors were to be included in a new total emission
measurement, it could result in a higher emission rate. However, the segregation of
emission from the landﬁll and the nearby composting plant, could prove diﬃcult.
A reoccurring uncertainty for estimations and emissions over a larger area, is the
heterogeneity of of the compost cover. The variation of the thickness of the permeable
compost layer and the oxidation rates found in this study, shows that there is a
signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the cover properties. As explained in section 5.4 the oxidation
rate of diﬀerent soil types can vary greatly. By having measurements of oxidation
rates from a larger set of points, spread throughout the investigated area, the result
would be more accurate to the actual scenario.
42
==PAGE:44==
9
Conclusion
In this study it has not been possible to ﬁnd evidence of signiﬁcant CH4 concen-
trations within the top covering compost layer of Horsens landﬁll.
Through two
campaigns of gas and temperature probe tests, CH4 concentrations up to 0.2% was
found at two of the selected measuring points. Same gas measurements showed an
increase in concentration of CO2, especially in the newly covered area of stage A,
where a concentration of 16.5% was detected, which could indicate oxidation or res-
piration. However, no sign of heat production caused by the exothermic processes
was detected. Since signiﬁcantly higher CH4 concentrations have previously been
detected at Horsens and similar landﬁlls, it was decided to conduct gas composition
measurements on borehole reaching into the waste layer, up to three meters below
surface. The results showed that CH4 concentrations up to 60% was found in the
top of the waste layer. Therefore it can be concluded that CH4 is present at the
landﬁll, but does not reach the compost layer in the examined points. This could
be caused by the clayey soil cover which covers the entire area of stage A, II and
VI. However, as discovered during the third campaign, some hardly accessible areas
around the deep boreholes had decaying vegetation, which could indicate emission of
CH4. This was particularly true for borehole three and could be for boreholes that
was not discovered during the third campaign. It has been planned by NIRAS to
close of all of the existing boreholes and therefore it would be interesting to return
to borehole three and conduct a new set of temperature and gas proﬁles, in order to
investigate the potential of CH4 in the compost layer.
Through soil samples gathered during the second campaign and batch tests of ox-
idation and respiration it was found that there was a signiﬁcant variation in the
oxidation rate, of the investigated layers at point A4 and VI4. A total of six soil
samples was tested through gas chromatography. It was found that the samples ex-
tracted at the bottom of each measuring point had a gravel-like texture, containing
minor rocks. This corresponds with the ﬁnding of organic content below 2%. In
comparison, organic content of top lying samples was 17.5% and 12.3% at A4 and
VI4 respectively. Judging from the texture and low organic content of the deep lying
samples, low oxidation rates was expected. The gas composition measured for A4
65-70 did not show a longer period with consistent decrease in CH4 concentration
and therefore the uncertainties of calculation and variation in measurements was
found to aﬀect the found oxidation rate. Therefore the oxidation rate for this batch
pair was set to 0 µg CH4 g−1 h−1. The average oxidation rates for the remaining
batch tests was found to be 8.6 µg CH4 g−1 h−1 at A4 0-15, 6.3 µg CH4 g−1 h−1 at
A4 40-55, 29.5 µg CH4 g−1 h−1 at VI4 0-20, 30.3 µg CH4 g−1 h−1 at VI4 55-75 and
ﬁnally 3.8 µg CH4 g−1 h−1 at VI4 90-97. During batch tests, the control batches
showed a standard deviation below 10% for CH4 and O2 concentrations, compared
to the average concentration. The deviation of CO2 measurements was signiﬁcantly
higher, due to not calibrating for CO2 concentrations below 1%. However, with the
uncertainty of CH4 and O2 in mind it is concluded that the control batch tests was
steady enough to conﬁrm the validity of the measurements found in this study.
From waste composition data the CH4 production was estimated using the Afvalzorg
model. It was found that production of CH4 at stage II, VI and A in 2017 would be
within a range of 7.4 and 9.5 kg CH4 h−1. Similarly a CH4 production of the still
active landﬁll area was modelled and a production for the still active site was found to
43
==PAGE:45==
be 12.2 to 15.0 kg CH4 h−1. From the CH4 production values it was calculated that
the average CH4 emission of the top covered area is between 3.2 and 5.3 kg CH4 h−1.
Calculations from the total area, with unmitigated waste at the active landﬁll site,
showed an emission of 16.9 and 21.8 kg CH4 h−1. Conducted scenarios assuming a
homogeneous compost layer, found that up between 45 and 57 % of produced CH4
at stage II, VI and A could be oxidised. Oxidation potential of the total landﬁll area
was found to be between 17 to 22 %.
These results are signiﬁcantly higher than the emission as measured by Fredenslund
et al. (2015) at 3.1±0.9 kg CH4 h−1 and total emission of 3.5±0.9 kg CH4 h−1 found
by Mønster (2017). However, it is similar to the 21 kg CH4 h−1 estimated by LFG
Consult (2012), if the prognosis proposed is a 50% CH4 composition. Therefore it
can be concluded that estimations made through modelling of gas production are
signiﬁcantly higher than what is measured with current technology. However, the
accuracy of the trace gas method can be questioned, as it is very susceptible of
changing wind conditions. In the speciﬁc case of Horsens landﬁll it seems likely that
a part of the CH4 emitted at the western part of the landﬁll area, is not covered by
the total emission measurements. This is due to the fact that it has been attempted
to diﬀerentiate the landﬁll emission from the emission of the composting facility
situated right beside the western border of the landﬁll. Therefore it is possible that
emission in the near vicinity of the compost facility has not been accounted for in
the total emission. Similarly, there are signiﬁcant uncertainties of estimated values,
such as method of calculation, assumptions of CH4 oxidation and cover properties.
Since the time of this study NIRAS has planned to close oﬀthe boreholes established
in 2009 and conduct a new screening of the landﬁll area. It will be interesting to
see if the closure of these boreholes, which can act as chimneys of emission, result in
new hot spots at the banks or on top of the landﬁll. Following the new screening, it
is recommended to perform a new trace gas measurement with these potential new
hot spots in mind. In the long run it is not recommended to cover the landﬁll stages
with impermeable clayey soil, if possible, at is appears to prevent the produced CH4
to migrate to the compost layer.
44
==PAGE:46==
References
Afvalzorg (2017). Afvalzorg home page.
URL: http://www.afvalzorg.nl/EN/Home.aspx
Berger, J., Forn´es, L. V., Ott, C., Jager, J., Wawra, B. and Zanke, U. (2005).
Methane oxidation in a landﬁll cover with capillary barrier, Waste Management
pp. 369–373.
Bogner, J., Abdelraﬁe Ahmed, M., Diaz, C., Faaij, A., Gao, Q., Hashimoto, S.,
Mareckova, K., Pipatti, R. and Zhang, T. (2007). Waste Management, In Cli-
mate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [B. Metz,
O.R. Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R. Dave, L.A. Meyer (eds)], Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, and New York, NY, USA .
Bogner, J., Pipatti, R., Hashimoto, S., Diaz, C., Mareckova, K., Diaz, L., Kjeldsen,
P., Monni, S., Faaij, A., Qingxian Gao, Tianzhu Zhang, Mohammed Abdelraﬁe
Ahmed, Sutamihardja, R. and Gregory, R. (2008). Mitigation of global greenhouse
gas emissions from waste: conclusions and strategies from the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment Report. Working Group III
(Mitigation).
Chanton, J. P., Powelson, D. K. and Green, R. B. (2009). Methane Oxidation in
Landﬁll Cover Soils, is a 10% Default Value Reasonable?, Journal of Environment
Quality 38: 654.
Christensen, T. H., Manfredi, S., Kjeldsen, P. and Wallace, R. B. (2011). Landﬁlling:
Bottom Lining and Leachate Collection, Solid Waste Technology & Management
pp. 800–829.
Christophersen, M., Kjeldsen, P., Holst, H. and Chanton, J. (2001). Lateral gas trans-
port in soil adjacent to an old landﬁll: factors governing emissions and methane
oxidation, Waste Management & Research pp. 595–612.
Ehrig, H. J. and Robinson, H. (2011). Landﬁlling: Leachate Treatment.
Field, C. B., Barros, V., Stocker, T. F., Qin, D., Dokken, D. J., Ebi, K. L., Mastran-
drea, M. D., Mach, K. J., Plattner, G.-K., Allen, S. K., Tignor, M. and Midgley,
P. M. (2012). Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance
Climate Change Adaptation, A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA, pp. 555–564.
Fredenslund, A. M., Delre, A. and Scheutz, C. (2015). M˚aling af den totale metane-
mission fra Horsens Deponeringsanlæg.
Fredenslund, A. M., Lemming, G., Scheutz, C. and Kjeldsen, P. (2007). Implementing
Biocover on Fakse Landﬁll: Landﬁll Characterization, Gas Production Modeling
and Mapping Spatial Variability in Emissions, Proceedings Sardinia Margherita di
Pula .
Fredenslund, A. M., Scheutz, C. and Kjeldsen, P. (2010). Tracer method to mea-
sure landﬁll gas emissions from leachate collection systems, Waste Management
pp. 2146–2152.
45
==PAGE:47==
Front, M. (2016). Baselineundersøgelse inden etablering af biocover.
Giroud, J. P. (2005).
The Mercer Lecture Contribution of Geosynthetics to the
Geotechnical Aspects of Waste Containment.
Horsens Municipality (2009). Grønt regnskab 2009 Horsens Deponeringsanlæg.
Horsens Municipality (2014). Grønt regnskab 2014 Horsens Deponeringsanlæg.
IPCC (2000). IPCC Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management in Na-
tional Greenhouse Gas Inventories, pp. 5.1 – 5.32.
Kjeldsen, P. (1996). Landﬁll migration in soil, Landﬁlling of waste: Biogas .
Kjeldsen, P. and Scheutz, C. (2015). H˚andbog i monitering af gasemission fra danske
aﬀaldsdeponier.
Kjeldsen, P. and Scheutz, C. (2016). Etablering og monitering af biocoversystemer
p˚a aﬀaldsdeponeringsanlæg.
Koerner, R. M. and Daniel, D. E. (1997). Final covers for solid waste landﬁlls and
abandoned dumps.
LFG Consult (2012). Forundersøgelse for indvinding og energiudnyttelse af deponigas
fra.
Miljøstyrelsen (2016). Bekendtgørelse om tilskud til etablering af biocover p˚a de-
poneringsanlæg og lossepladser.
Millington, R. J. and Quirk, J. P. (1961). Permeability of porous solids, Transactions
of the Faraday Society 57: 563–568.
Mønster, J. (2017). Horsens Deponi: M˚aling af metanemission, FORCE Technology
.
OWS Terrestries (2017). Open Geospatial Consortium Web Services.
URL: http://ows.terrestris.de/dienste.html#wms
Pedersen, G. B. (2010). Processes in a compost based landﬁll biocover; methane
emission, transport and oxidation.
Scharﬀ, H. (2010). Landﬁll Closure, Aftercare and Final Use, Solid Waste Technology
& Management pp. 932–947.
Scheutz, C. (2002). Attenuation of methane and trace organics in landﬁll soil covers,
pp. 1–25.
Scheutz, C., Fredenslund, A. M., Chanton, J., Pedersen, G. B. and Kjeldsen, P.
(2011b). Mitigation of methane emission from Fakse landﬁll using a biowindow
system, Waste Management pp. 1018–1028.
Scheutz, C., Fredenslund, A. M., Nedenskov, J., Samuelsson, J. and Kjeldsen, P.
(2011a).
Gas production, composition and emission at a modern disposal site
receiving waste with a low-organic content, Waste Management pp. 946–955.
Scheutz, C. and Kjeldsen, P. (2011). Landﬁll Top Covers, Solid Waste Technology &
Management pp. 830–840.
46
==PAGE:48==
Scheutz, C., Kjeldsen, P., Bogner, J. E., De Visscher, A., Gebert, J., Hilger, H. A.,
Huber-Humer, M. and Spokas, K. (2009). Microbial methane oxidation processes
and technologies for mitigation of landﬁll gas emissions, pp. 409–455.
Scheutz, C., Pedersen, R. B., Petersen, P. H., Jørgensen, J. H. B., Ucendo, I. M. B.,
Mønster, J. G., Samuelsson, J. and Kjeldsen, P. (2014). Mitigation of methane
emission from an old unlined landﬁll in Klintholm, Denmark using a passive bio-
cover system, Waste Management pp. 1179–1190.
Sørensen, O. P. (2009). Horsens Losseplads DGE datarapport 2009.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (2013). US EPA Oxidation eﬃcien-
cies, 78(126): 1–5.
47
==PAGE:49==
Troels Wengel Christoﬀersen
Signature
Date
48
==PAGE:50==
10
Appendices
10.1
Topographic map from baseline investigation
Figure 15: Topography of Horsens landﬁll. Source: Front (2016).
49
==PAGE:51==
10.2
Overview including old borehole locations
Figure 16: Overview of Horsens landﬁll. Yellow crossed circles represents monitoring
wells established in 2007. Source: Front (2016).
50
==PAGE:52==
10.3
Borehole proﬁles performed by Kr¨uger A/S in 1987
51
==PAGE:53==
52
==PAGE:54==
53
==PAGE:55==
54
==PAGE:56==
55
==PAGE:57==
56
==PAGE:58==
10.4
Cross sectional images from NIRAS
Figure 17: Cross section of Horsens landﬁll viewed in a western direction.
57
==PAGE:59==
Figure 18: Cross section of Horsens landﬁll viewed in a northern direction.
58
==PAGE:60==
10.5
Overview of measurements from gas data report 2009
Figure 19: Measurements of CH4 at deep boreholes in 2009, by Sørensen (2009).
10.6
Results from screening 2015
Figure 20: Screening results found in 2015 by NIRAS. Source: Front (2016).
59
==PAGE:61==
10.7
Graphs for oxidation and respiration batch tests
Figure 21: Gas development of oxidation batch tests over a seven day period. Note
that batches from point VI4 at depth 0-20 cm and 55-75 was only measured over a
ﬁve day period.
Figure 22: Gas development of respiration batch tests over a seven day period. Note
that batches from point VI4 at depth 0-20 cm and 55-75 was only measured over a
ﬁve day period.
60
==PAGE:62==
10.8
Batch weight measurements, including dry matter and
organic content
Table 8: Batch weights and density.
Point and depth (cm)
Oxidation batch (g)
Respiration batch (g)
V I4
A
B
A
B
Density (g/L)
0-20
46.83
43.44
46.15
29.12
405
55-75
47.09
48.75
48.49
47.20
565
90-97
54.71
60.09
61.63
66.36
893
A4
0-15
55.00
51.39
47.19
45.84
594
40-55
51.27
49.09
49.21
51.23
647
65-70
49.92
50.98
54.11
51.78
945
Table 9: Dry matter and organic content in soil samples.
Point and depth (cm)
VI4
Dry matter content (%)
Organic content (%)
0-20
67.23
12.27
55-75
66.46
11.03
90-97
88.97
1.85
A4
0-15
63.40
17.48
40-55
64.21
12.51
65-70
90.04
1.86
10.9
Plantation surrounding borehole three
Figure 23: Plantation surrounding borehole three.
61
