==PAGE:1==
SIMULATION OF THE INFLUENCE OF  
OCCUPANT BEHAVIOUR
ON INDOOR ENVIRONMENT AND ENERGY CONSUMPTION
BEFORE AND AFTER RENOVATION
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Cecilie Bæksted
s124041
28.01.2018
CO2
DTU Civil Engineering
International Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy
Supervisor: Rune Korsholm Andersen
==PAGE:2==
Simulation of the influence of occupant behaviour 
on indoor environment and energy consumption 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
 
Master Thesis 
Cecilie Bæksted  
s124041 
Kongens Lyngby, January 2018 
 
 
 
Supervisor: 
 
Senior Researcher 
DTU Civil Engineering, International Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy 
Rune Korsholm Andersen  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Preface  
This Master Thesis is written in order to fulfill the requirements obtaining a master's degree in 
Architectural Engineering focusing on occupants behaviour, energy consumptions and indoor 
environment. 
The project is carried out in collaboration with the International Centre for Indoor Environment and 
Energy (ICIEE), Department of Civil Engineering at Technical University of Denmark (DTU), as a 
part of a research project. 
 
This Master Thesis has a workload corresponding to 30 ECTS points and is conducted in  the period 
from 28. August 2017 to 28. January 2018. 
 
 
 
This thesis is addressed for readers with interest and knowledge in the field of indoor environment and 
energy. Additionally, basic knowledge about building simulations is an advantage in order for the 
reader to be able to fully understand the set up of the model described in this thesis. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgement 
First, I would like to thank ELFORSK for providing funding of theís research project. Without it, this 
project would never have been possible. 
  
A special thanks should be given to my supervisor Senior researcher Rune Korsholm Andersen, for 
allowing me to be a part of the research project, and for the help and encouragement during the entire 
project. I would like to thank him for the weekly guidance and interesting discussions, and for his 
expertise and knowledge in the field of occupants’ behaviour and simulations in IDA ICE. 
 
Thank you to DTU-student Jens Kristian for handing over the project and relevant measurement data 
in the beginning of this project. Thank you to Janne Dragsted from Department of Civil Engineering 
at DTU, for providing data from DTU Climate Station. 
 
I would like to thank Project Manager Jesper Ring from consulting engineers Dominia A/S for 
providing necessary information about the renovation of Korngården. In addition Jesper Rasmussen 
from Air-Tekniq ApS should be thanked, for providing diagrams and information about the 
ventilation system after renovation and for answering questions regarding the ventilation system.  
 
Thank you to Anthropologist Babette Peulicke Slott from Institute of Technology, for sharing 
achievements throughout interviews with residentials at Korngården, for including me in the 
interviews carried out in December 2017 and for allowing me to participate in residential meetings. It 
has been very helpful in the process of determining the “human factor”´and occupants’ perception of 
energy consumption and their behavioural patterns before and after renovation. Additionally Anne 
Kathrine Bang and Mohammed Ajaoui from Dansk Almennyttigt Boligselskab (DAB) should be 
thanked for their help with information about tenants occupation and energy consumption at 
Korngården. 
 
 
Enjoy the reading! 
 
 
Kongens Lyngby, 28. January 2018 
 
 
 
Cecilie Bæksted 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Abstract 
The energy consumption in the building industry has to be decreased due to strict requirements. The 
building industry holds a large potential for decreasing the energy consumption because of the amount 
of energy consumed by buildings corresponds to 40% of the total consumption in Denmark. 
 
Energy renovation of buildings is in Denmark an essential solution in lowering the energy 
consumption. Previous studies have indicated, that a difference between calculated and measured 
energy consumption occur, called rebound and prebound effect. Additionally, that occupants’ 
behaviour would change when a building was energy renovated. 
It has been argued widely, that occupants’ behaviour have a large influence on the energy 
consumption and indoor environment of buildings, and that occupants’ behaviour could be the reason 
why these differences is seen. 
 
The hypothesis was that occupants’ behaviour in similar apartments would influence the energy 
consumption and indoor environment, so that differences would occur. This was tested by simulating 
an apartment building before and after renovation, to see if occupants’ behaviour was changed. 
Additionally, comparing the simulations with theoretical calculations (predictions) of energy 
consumptions and with measured values.  
By doing so, it would reveal if, and how large an influence occupants’ behaviour has on the energy 
consumption and indoor environment.  
 
The results were analyzed by comparison of calculated, measured and simulated energy consumptions 
for the building before and after renovation.  
It was concluded that in different apartments with same properties and shape, the occupants’ 
behaviour clearly influenced the energy consumption for heat and electricity.  
In comparison of the building before and after renovation, no behavioural change was found. This 
means, that occupants behave the same way regardless of energy renovation of the building or not.  
 
==PAGE:6==
Table of Contents 
 
1 Introduction
7 
2 Background
9 
2.1 Measured and calculated energy consumption
9 
2.2 Energy consumption and indoor environment after renovation
13 
2.3 Renovation of Korngården
13 
Conclusion
15 
2.4 Energy Calculations
15 
3 Theory
19 
3.1 Occupant behaviour
19 
3.2 Indoor environment parameters
22 
3.2.1 Temperature
22 
3.2.2 Relative Humidity
23 
3.2.3 Ventilation
23 
4 Methodology
25 
4.1 Literature review
25 
4.2 Investigation of Korngården
25 
4.3 Measurements in Korngården
27 
4.4 Simulations using IDA ICE, the building after renovation
29 
4.4.1 Location and weather data
30 
4.4.2 Modelling the building
31 
4.4.3 Building envelope and properties
33 
4.4.4 Installations
34 
4.4.5 Equipment and lighting
38 
4.4.6 Occupants
41 
4.5 Simulations using IDA ICE, the building before renovation
42 
5 Results
44 
5.1 Interview regarding occupants’ behaviour and people’s perception of energy and indoor 
environment
44 
5.2 Measurements and simulation of energy consumption and indoor environment
45 
5.2.1 Energy consumption
45 
5.2.2 Heat consumption and indoor air temperature after renovation
46 
5.2.3 Electricity consumption and indoor air temperature after renovation
50 
5.2.4 Comparison of simulations before and after renovation
53 
5.3 Indoor environment
54 
6 Discussion
58 
1 
==PAGE:7==
Subsequent investigations
62 
7 Conclusion
63 
8 References
65 
10 Appendix
69 
Appendix A
69 
Appendix B
69 
Appendix C
69 
Appendix D
69 
Appendix E
69 
Appendix F
70 
Appendix G
70 
Appendix H
71 
Appendix I
75 
Appendix J
82 
 
 
 
 
2 
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures 
 
Figure 2-1: Illustration of the difference between the calculated and measured consumption found in 
the study in conjunction with energy labels. 
Figure 2-2: Visualisation of parameter sensitivity. 
Figure 2-3: The facade before renovation 
Figure 2-4: The facade after renovation 
Figure 2-5: Cost effective energy optimization. 
 
Figure 3-1: Activities throughout the day, from a time use survey conducted in Denmark in 2008. 
Figure 3-2: Average distribution of energy consumption in apartments. 
 
Figure 4-1:Floor plan of two 3 bedroom apartments before renovation 
Figure 4-2: Floor plan of two 3 bedroom apartments after renovation 
Figure 4-3: Timeline 
Figure 4-4: Floor plan of two apartments. 
Figure 4-5: Location set to be Copenhagen in IDA ICE 
Figure 4-6: Parametres that should be included in the IDA ICE climate file and the given unit 
Figure 4-7: The climate file 
Figure 4-8: The climate for Korngården 
Figure 4-9: Floor plan from IDA ICE, 3rd floor. 
Figure 4-10: Floor plan from IDA ICE, ground floor. 
Figure 4-11: Blok 3 modelled in IDA ICE 
Figure 4-12: 3- layer window type used in IDA ICE simulations for all windows in the model of 
Korngården 
Figure 4-13: The door type used in the modelling of Korngården. 
Figure 4-14: The figure illustrates the type of ventilation (CAV) with supply and return air for the 
system. 
Figure 4-15: Floor heating placed in the apartment, according to the bathroom 
Figure 4-16: The radiator placed on the south facing wall 
Figure 4-17: Input data to each water radiators in the building 
Figure 4-18: Macro controlling the heating from water radiators. 
Figure 4-19: Screenshot of .txt file with indoor air temperature that was formatted to .prn file 
Figure 4-20: Connecting source-file to P-controller. 
Figure 4-21: Creating an interface by connecting the selected parameters; 
Figure 4-22: Macro controlling the electricity consumption set up as a lightning signal 
Figure 4-23: Screenshot from .txt file with electricity consumption 
Figure 4-24: Connecting source-file to Adder 
3 
==PAGE:9==
Figure 4-25: Creating an interface by connecting the selected parameters 
Figure 4-26: Set up of converting kWh to W 
Figure 4-27: Schedule 1 for occupancy corresponding to an unemployed adult with a child 
Figure 4-28: Schedule 6 for occupancy corresponding to two employed adults. 
Figure 4-29: Floor plan in the building before renovation. 
Figure 4-30: Window type used in the building before renovation 
 
Figure 5-1: Measured and simulated heat consumption per year in all apartments 
Figure 5-2: Measured and simulated heat consumption per year in 2 bedroom apartment 
Figure 5-3: Measured and simulated heat consumption per year in 3 bedroom apartment 
Figure 5-4: Measured and simulated heat consumption per year in 4 bedroom apartment 
Figure 5-5: Measured and simulated indoor air temperature 
Figure 5-6: Deviation between average measured and simulated indoor air temperature (absolute 
value)  per year 
Figure 5-7: Simulated indoor air temperature on hourly [hours after new years]basis from 1. January 
2017 to 7. January 2017 in 3 apartments. 
Figure 5-8: Comparison of total electricity consumption for simulated and measured situation 
Figure 5-9: Percentage deviation between measured and simulated electricity consumption for a year 
Figure 5-10: Measured electricity consumption per year for 2 bedroom apartments 
Figure 5-11: Measured electricity consumption per year for 3 bedroom apartments 
Figure 5-12: Measured electricity consumption per year for 4 bedroom apartments 
Figure 5-13: Average indoor air temperature in all apartments for simulation before and after 
renovation.  
Figure 5-14: Average simulated air age per year 
Figure 5-15: Average simulated CO2 concentration per year 
Figure 5-16: Simulated average relative humidity per year 
Figure 5-17: Comparison of measured and simulated average relative humidity per year 
Figure 5-18: Percentage deviation between measured and simulated average relative humidity per year 
 
 
 
4 
==PAGE:10==
List of tables 
 
Table 2-1: Calculated energy and heat consumption carried out by consulting engineers. 
 
Table 3-1: Criteria for the temperature ranges for heating and cooling energy in three categories 
according to DS/EN 15251 
Table 3-2: Relative humidity range required by DS/EN 15251 
Table 3-3: The required air change in residential buildings for kitchen, bathrooms and utility 
Table 3-4: Ventilation rates for residentials 
Table 3-5: CO2 concentration above outdoor concentration in PPM 
 
Table 4-1: Tenants living in Korngården blok 3. Division of children and adults. 
Table 4-2: Tenants living in Korngården blok 3. Division of employment. 
Table 4-3: Type of tenant, occupancy and the schedule based on the occupants’ behavioural patterns 
according to their professional activity. 
 
Table 5-1: Calculated, measured and simulated energy, heat consumption and electricity consumption. 
 
 
 
5 
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations 
 
BES 
Building Energy Simulation 
BR 
Building regulation (Bygningsreglementet) 
DAB 
Dansk Almennyttigt Boligselskab 
HVAC Heat, Ventilation, Air condition, Control 
 
 
 
 
6 
==PAGE:12==
1 Introduction 
There is a political consensus that Denmark should be independent of fossil fuels by 2050 and this has 
lead to more strict requirements regarding lowering the total energy consumption in Denmark (Dansk 
Byggeri, 2017). The building industry hold a large potential for decreasing the energy consumption, 
since buildings consume nearly 40% of the total energy consumption (Energistyrelsen, 2014), and 
nearly 70% of the consumption is due to space heating (Santangelo, 2017). 
 
Close to 65% of buildings in Denmark were built before 1980 (Klima- Energi- og 
Bygningsministeriet, 2014), and because of the energy reduction potential and more strict 
requirements in the building industry, it is necessary to renovate buildings to become mere energy 
efficient.  
 
Gram-Hanssen and Hansen have pointed out, that a difference between the calculated and measured 
energy consumption in single-family houses occur in relation to how energy efficient the building is 
(Gram-Hanssen et al., 2016). This difference is called the rebound effect. 
La Fleur et al. argued, that the energy renovation might not be enough to obtain the full potential of 
the buildings’ efficiency (La Fleur et al, 2017).  
Not only the physical characteristic of the building and the efficiency of installations have an impact 
on the energy consumption. The occupants’ behaviour has a large influence and it is imperative to 
take this parameter into account. The energy consumption can vary in similar buildings because of 
occupants’ behaviour. It is different regulation behaviour and the different preferences of obtained 
indoor environment that result in an up to factor 20 difference in energy consumption (Andersen, 
2009; Andersen, 2012). 
 
This thesis determines the energy renovation of an apartment building called Korngården. Prior to 
renovation a calculation of the energy savings after renovation was conducted, but the calculation did 
not include occupants’ behaviour.  
Based on the assumption that occupants behaviour influence both energy consumption and the indoor 
environment, this thesis investigates how occupants’ behaviour before and after a large energy 
renovation of the residential building influence the energy consumption and indoor environment. 
 
Since the occupants’ behaviour was argued to have a major influence on the building performance but 
was not included in the calculation, occupants’ behaviour and type of tenants in all apartments was 
investigated, in order to include occupants’ behaviour as true to reality as possible in the simulations. 
 
After the renovation measurement equipment was installed in all apartments, which measured the 
actual energy consumption and delivers information about indoor environment. 
The simulation is based on measurements of indoor air temperature, energy consumption and air 
quality from inside apartments. Simulations in models representing the building before and after 
renovation were conducted. 
 
The simulated results could be compared to both calculated and measured values, in order to underline 
how occupants’ behaviour influence energy consumption including heat and electricity, and indoor 
environment. Additionally before and after renovation, to clarify if a behavioural change occured. 
 
7 
==PAGE:13==
2 Background 
This section gives an introduction to the background for why energy renovation in Denmark is 
necessary, what the energy gap is and how it is combined to energy consumption. The section gives an 
introduction to earlier studies and their findings regarding energy renovation, calculated and measured 
energy consumption, and how occupants’ behaviour influence this. This study was inspired from the 
finding of the significant differences between measured and calculated energy consumption, and the 
influence of occupants’ behaviour.  
Additionally, an introduction to Korngården and the energy renovation performed is given.  
2.1 Measured and calculated energy consumption 
The oil crisis in the 1970’s led to awareness of limited resources and also cost awareness. The lack of 
evercheap resources lead to increased attention towards energy consumption in the building industry. 
Since 1977 the Danish construction industry has been subject to increasingly strict requirements 
regarding energy and indoor environment. In order to develop the building industry toward a more 
energy oriented consciousness and in order to lower the energy consumption, the European Union has 
by law enforced the directive “Energy Performance of Building Directive (EPBD)” (Energistyrelsen, 
2014).  
In Denmark there is a political consensus that Denmark should be independent of fossil fuels by 2050 
(Dansk Byggeri, 2017; Klima-, Energi- og Bygningsministeriet, 2014). In order to be able to reach 
this goal, there is a need for more renewable energy to be produced and a reduce of the energy 
consumption. In 1961 the first Danish building regulation (Bygningsreglementet, shortened BR) was 
enforced, and in 1977 it also included requirements regarding energy consumption and indoor 
environment (Gram-Hanssen et al., 2016). The requirements in the Danish building regulation 
(Bygningsreglementet) has been increased over time for both renovated and new building in attempt 
to save energy. In 2010 the energy consumption had a maximum limit of 50 kWh/m​2​ and in 2015 this 
was decreased to 30 kWh/m​2​. By 2020 the maximum energy consumption will be 20 kWh/m​2​ (BR10, 
BR15, BR20). The building regulation sets the standard for new buildings, but only a small part of the 
total building mass is new buildings. Nearly 65% of all building in Denmark were built before 1980 
(Klima-, Energi- og Bygningsministeriet, 2014). 
In Denmark buildings consumes nearly 40% of the total energy consumption, which is why the 
building industry has a great potential to decrease the energy consumption by energy renovation of 
existing buildings and designing low or zero energy buildings (Energistyrelsen, 2014; Dansk Byggeri, 
2017; Klima-, Energi- og Bygningsministeriet, 2014).  
27% of the energy consumed by buildings is spent on heat, ventilation, air conditioning, control 
(HVAC) and lighting (Andersen, 2017). A large amount of the energy consumption is due to space 
heating, nearly 70% (Santangelo et al., 2017)​.  
 
Because of the increased requirements, in the Danish building regulation (Bygningsreglementet, 
shortened BR), regarding energy consumption, a great amount of research have been conducted. 
Earlier studies have been focusing on residential buildings since they are highly relevant when it 
comes to energy consumption.  
In a study carried out by Gram-Hanssen and Hansen (Gram-Hanssen et al., 2016) in Denmark focused 
on energy consumption for heating of one-family houses. The study carried out by Gram-Hanssen and 
8 
==PAGE:14==
Hansen, investigated the difference between measured and calculated energy consumption in 
one-family houses. In the investigation, energy labels in the period from 2006-2014 in 230.00 
one-family houses in Denmark were included. Additionally the study included the actual energy 
consumption measured from 135.000 one-family houses (Gram-Hanssen et al., 2016). 
 
An energy label is a document that contains information about a building’s energy consumption and 
energy efficiency without taking use of the building into account. An energy label is designated by a 
letter from A to G, where A is the best achievable with the lowest energy consumption and G is the 
worst achievable with the highest. The document is given by an external authority after inspection in a 
house or apartment, usually if the house and apartment is to be sold. In Denmark it is a legal 
requirement that an apartment or house should have an energy label if it is to be rented or sold. 
Further, all new and renovated buildings must have an energy label too. The calculated standardised 
energy consumption is based on type of windows, the form of heating, the exterior walls, the amount 
of insulation etc. (Energistyrelsen, 2016; Bolius, 2016). 
 
Gram-Hanssen et al. found, that houses with the best achievable energy labels (A, B, C) have a higher 
actual energy consumption than the theoretically calculated, and vice versa for the houses with the 
worst achievable labels (Gram-Hanssen et al., 2016). This finding is illustrated in figure 2-1, and is 
interesting in the perspective of renovation. If a house was to be renovated in order to optimize the 
energy efficiency, it could turn out not having the full intended effect. As an example, if a house was 
renovated from label D to B, the expected reduction would be 45%. From the study this is not the case 
though, the actual reduction would on average correspond to 30%. 
 
Figure 2-1: Illustration of the difference between the calculated and measured consumption found in the study 
in conjunction with energy labels (Gram-Hanssen et al., 2016). The study found, that houses with the best 
achievable energy labels had a higher measured energy consumption than the theoretic calculated and vice 
versa for houses with worst achievable energy labels (The figure was copied from Gram-Hanssen et al., 2016 
pp. 9).  
 
The discrepancies illustrated in figure 2-1 represents the concept of the rebound effect and prebound 
effect. The rebound effect relates to occupants using more energy than expected, in the context of 
9 
==PAGE:15==
energy consumption in buildings. While the prebound effect refers to the opposite, namely occupants 
using less energy than expected (Guerra-Santin et al., 2016). The rebound effect and prebound effect 
are main factors that can explain the performance gap, along with occupants’ interaction with the 
building and uncertainties of building performance simulation results (occurred from uncertain 
occupant behaviour model input) (Santangelo et al., 2017).  
 
SLa Fleur and de Wilde confirm the mismatch between predicted and measured energy consumption, 
called the energy gap, as Gram-Hanssen et al. accentuate (de Wilde, 2014; La Fleur, 2017). It is 
argued that it is crucial to bridge the gap between predicted and measured energy consumption, in 
order for buildings to be able to meet the restricted requirements and be able to reduce the energy 
consumption (de Wilde, 2014). The performance gap is widely argued to be caused by occupant 
behaviour, since the models do not take this parameter into account when calculating or simulating the 
energy performance of a building (La Fleur et al., 2017).  
 
If the energy consumption in single family houses should be reduced, the building regulations may not 
be enough. The occupants’ behaviour should be taken into consideration besides building good energy 
wise buildings. The energy gap illustrated in figure 2-1 is higher for buildings which achieved energy 
label A, B C. This tendency arise three problematics. If people expect they implicitly will obtain a 
reduction in the expenses to heating, they are to some extent deceived. This happens especially if they 
are not informed as to what specifically is needed in order to live up to the theoretical calculations. 
Another problem that arise is that energy renovation may not be as effective as intended. Finally, the 
goal of Denmark being independent of fossil fuel by 2050 is challenging to achieve, if the energy 
consumption in buildings is not significantly decreased. 
 
In general, the rebound effect is accepted widely, but the real question is identification of the size of 
the rebound effect. The rebound effect for residential heating was investigated in a large 
representative population of residents in the Netherlands (Aydin et al., 2013).  
It was found that the rebound effect varies depending on the type of residential housing. It was 
concluded, that the rebound effect was 27% for homeowners, and 41% for tenants. This implies that 
compared to what the theoretical calculated energy consumption was estimated to be, homeowners 
had a 27% higher energy consumption than estimated, whereas tenants had a 41% higher consumption 
than estimated. Additionally it was concluded that the rebound effect was higher when the 
consumption was already high. Governmental policies are focusing on the qualities of the building 
instead of focusing on the occupancy, behavioural patterns and the consumption patterns. The authors 
stated, that the governmental focus is more on increasing energy savings instead of energy efficient 
buildings (Brohus et al., 2013). 
 
The difference between calculated consumption and measured consumption has been investigated by 
Brohus et al. in a study conducted in eight similar, Danish single family houses. From this, it was 
concluded that occupants’ behaviour caused variations in consumptions. Figure 2-2 illustrates the 
most influential parameters and how large an impact each has. It was found, that set-point space 
heating represented the largest share. Occupant heat load and natural ventilation and infiltration were 
the second and third most influential shares.  
 
10 
==PAGE:16==
 
Figure 2-2: Visualisation of parameter sensitivity indicating the relative contribution of stochastic input parameters to total 
output (energy consumption) uncertainty. Based on the Spearman coefficient (SPEA) (Brohus et al., 2010) The figure is 
copied from Brohus et al., 2010 pp. 7. 
 
Brohus et al. concluded that occupants’ behaviour should be understood better and prioritized in the 
future, in order to improve energy calculations. Though the investigation were only carried out in 
eight houses and therefore a number of uncertainties implicitly exist, the tendency were the same as in 
other studies.  
 
The general consensus that occupants’ behaviour and the rebound effect are poorly understood points 
to the necessity for better understanding of these important factors in order to decrease the energy 
consumption. Because of the need for better understanding of occupants’ behaviour, it is not a 
straightforward conclusion that energy renovation and optimization of buildings ​alone​ provide the 
best achievable solution to lowering the energy consumption.  
The estimated energy consumption through codified calculations by consulting engineers could be 
argued to have a less important role. However because of individual behavioural patterns and energy 
consumptions it is difficult to make accurate predictions of the factual net energy consumption.  
 
Conclusion 
The codified standard regarding energy consumption for buildings presuppose that buildings meet 
these requirements. The energy label has the purpose of making it possible to determine a buildings 
energy consumption, and as such it is possible  to compare a buildings energy efficiency with other 
buildings. In order to obtain this, it is highly relevant that the assumptions made for the calculations 
are the same for all buildings of the same type and that they are as realistic as possible. The way 
calculations of the energy consumption is conducted today does not include information about 
occupants’ behaviour. 
Aydin et al. and Brohus et al. concluded, that the occupants’ behaviour have major impact in the 
energy consumption. Better understanding of the rebound effect and why it occurs and behavioural 
patterns are key in order to be able to decrease the energy consumption in the future.  
11 
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Energy consumption and indoor environment after renovation 
The purpose of renovation is to reduce the energy consumption and optimize the indoor environment 
according to the tightened requirements. Therefore, La Fleur et al. has carried out a study that 
examines measured and predicted energy use and indoor environment before and after a large 
renovation of an apartment building in Sweden (La Fleur et al, 2017). Renovation can reduce space 
heating demand and energy savings can be achieved by installing a ventilation system and improving 
the thermal envelope of the building.  
 
La Fleur argues, that building energy simulation (BES) is a strong tool for predicting the overall 
energy consumption and the effect of a renovation or other energy measures in relation to reducing the 
consumption. BES is used in the planning phase in both new construction and renovation of existing 
buildings. The simulations carried out can be used to prediction, but research has indicated that the 
energy consumption caused by occupancy is not included (La Fleur et al., 2017). 
La Fleur et al. take into account the realistic conditions under which the building is used and evaluates 
the technical aspects of a major renovation by a validation of a building energy simulation model. 
When simulating energy consumption and indoor environment, the results are often based on 
standardized assumptions about occupants’ behaviour. These assumptions might result in incorrect 
influence on energy consumption and indoor environment from occupants.  
 
This opens an opportunity to improve simulations. How could the simulations be stronger in 
prediction of the influence of energy consumption caused by occupants’ behaviour? Is it possible to 
improve the standardized assumptions about occupants’ behaviour? 
2.3 Renovation of Korngården 
Korngården consist of four apartment buildings (Blok 1, blok 2, blok 3, blok 4) and the four buildings 
have 248 apartments total. Korngården was built in 1961 and is located in Ballerup, north-west of 
Copenhagen. There are two types of 3 bedroom apartments, all the same device (Dominia A/S & 
Domus Architects, 2D floor plans, 2017).  
The buildings are renovated in the period from 2015-2019, based on projects prepared by consulting 
engineers Dominia A/S and Domus Architects in collaboration with Dansk Almennyttigt Boligselskab 
(DAB). The total cost of the renovation was estimated by the architects to be 320 million DKK, and 
the outcome would be 244 apartments of different sizes.  
 
Before the renovation was carried out, posters informed the tenants about how much the renovation 
would affect the energy consumption and the indoor environment. A 60% energy saving was 
forecasted (Dansk Almennyttigt Boligselskab, 2013). The renovation would cause rent increase, but 
the energy saving would compensate this, because the tenants would save money on energy. The 
energy saving was based solely on calculations of how good the building would be energy wise after 
renovation. The calculation did not include occupants’ behaviour, which Gram-Hanssen et al. 
(Gram-Hanssen et al., 2016) criticize in their article. They argue that the theoretical energy label is 
only based on the buildings performance and does not include occupant’s behaviour either. The 
calculations are therefore not a fully true guide on how much energy occupants expect to consume. 
The theoretic calculations are based on assumptions on, how occupants behave, as an example the 
indoor air temperature is a fixed value set to be 20℃.  
12 
==PAGE:18==
 
The increased rent, corresponding to 17% (DOMINIA, 2015), had to be accepted by the tenants living 
in common house buildings like Korngården. The tenants can influence how much increase in rent 
they agree to, and their participation is essential in order to make any changes. 
 
At the beginning, the buildings were investigated in order to develop a renovation plan and to clarify 
which parts of the building that needed renovation. It was found the the windows were leaking, heat 
loss in exhaust ducts and through the facade. Further, worn installations and lack of mechanical 
ventilation in the kitchens. Mould was found on the facades too (Dansk Almennyttigt Boligselskab et 
al., 2013).  
 
The consulting engineers and the architects were focusing on environmental and economic 
sustainability. In this case the environmental sustainability meant good indoor environment, use 
renewable energy and energy saving installations. Economic sustainability meant to reduce energy 
consumption, minimal maintenance and high quality building technology. The inspiration for the 
renovation came from the name ​Korngården​, and this is reflected in the design of the new facade, 
since the colouring is brown nuances as the Danish cereal. The transformation of the building from the 
outside is illustrated in figure 2-3 and 2-4 (Dansk Almennyttigt Boligselskab et al., 2013). 
 
 
 
Figure 2-3: The facade before renovation (photo from 
www.dabbolig.dk) 
Figure 2-4: The facade after renovation (Photo from 
http://www.domus.dk/node/192) 
 
 
When renovating an existing building the National Housing Fond and Danish Building Regulations 
require that accessibility for disabled are improved by categorizing them as accessible apartments 
(Landsbyggefonden, 2017; Bygningsreglementet, 2015). After the renovation in Korngården 56 
apartments are accessible. The remaining 188 apartments were divided into 2, 3 and 4 bedroom 
apartments. 
The renovation included relocating the new improved facade out to the roof overhang and adding 
balconies and bay windows. A small private garden were established for apartments located at ground 
floor. The windows were replaced with thermal windows and new entrances and front doors for each 
apartment. 
 
Both kitchen and bathroom were replaced with new equipment, new pipes and electricity, and the 
bathroom size was increased. The waste pipeline were replaced and domestic water installations. 
Additionally floor heating in bathrooms were established. The heating system was changed from 
single-string to two-string system with new radiators and thermostats placed at the facade. A new 
13 
==PAGE:19==
balanced mechanical ventilation system with supply was connected to the exhaust in bathrooms and 
the extractor in the kitchen, and was placed in the facade. The ventilation aggregates placed in the 
basement should handle each staircase. District heating stations were renovated along with the 
pipelines connecting them in each building block. All installations were insulated so that the heat loss 
decreases.  
 
The renovation included solar cells placed on the roof and the lighting in common spaces like the 
staircase, basement and outside areas was an energy saving solutions.  
A new approach was the green switch placed in the hall, that turn off power supply for all electronic 
equipment such as TV, computers, lighting and chargers, connected with the equivalent green sockets 
in each apartment. The device was meant as an approach in order to actively make tenant change their 
behaviour and lower the energy consumption. Since the energy consumed for standby mode will not 
eliminate standby power consumption. 
Another approach was digital information monitors from KeepFocus . The purpose of the information 
1
monitors is to keep tenants informed about their energy consumption in previous year, month or day, 
consisting of heat, water and electricity consumption. Additionally the monitor informs about the 
indoor air temperature and relative humidity in the apartment. 
 
Conclusion 
The renovation of Korngården is an opportunity to investigate if the calculated and measured energy 
consumption is comparable to the consumption of a simulated model. This is achieved by simulating 
the building and the energy consumption before and after the renovation with the respectively 
building properties, and including occupants’ behaviour in the simulations.  
The energy consumption before and after renovation will be compared to evaluate how much of an 
energy saving the renovation has resulted in and determine if the energy gap occurs in this case too.  
 
If a difference between measured and theoretical calculated energy consumption occurs, this initiates 
an opportunity to investigate why this difference happens. The simulations based on measured values, 
might be an opportunity to include explain occupants’ behaviour and its influence on the energy 
consumption.  
According to previous study by Aydin et al. occupants’ behaviour will turn out as different energy 
consumption for identic apartments, indoor air temperature and relative humidity. In this study, it will 
be investigated if this is the case for the simulation of Korngården before and after renovation. 
Additionally, an opportunity to determine if the simulations are correct and whether the simulation 
programme is able to calculate the energy performance and indoor environment that can be compared 
with the measured values, when occupants’ behaviour is included in the simulation. 
2.4 Energy Calculations 
When a building is significantly renovated, it is required by law that a calculation of the building’s 
energy frame is performed (Energistyrelsen, 2016). The energy frame calculation is required to ensure 
that the yearly calculated energy consumption does not exceed boundaries defined by authorities. The 
1 KeepFocus is a company that works to stop waste of resources. Measurement equipment, sensors and other components are 
equipped with electronics that enable data to be collected, we can validate and present data from, among other things, smoke 
sensors, temperature, CO2, moisture and O2 etc. and catch leaks within a short period of time (Copied directly from 
http://keepfocus.dk/da/fakta/). 
14 
==PAGE:20==
purpose is to secure that unnecessary energy consumption for heating, hot water, cooling, ventilation 
and lighting is avoided while achieving satisfactory conditions (Bygningsreglementet, 2015). 
When renovating, the building does not have to fulfill the regulations fully. This is a possibility since 
renovations can be complicated due to legal requirements to preservation or limitation of space. These 
relaxations regarding requirements express that the Danish government wish to support renovation on 
existing buildings while preserving them, instead of building new buildings. 
 
In Denmark an energy frame calculation is normally performed with BE10/BE15, a calculation 
program developed by Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut. The input information to the program is about 
the building envelope, floor area,  internal heat gains, the ventilation system, the heating system etc. 
With the input parameters, the programme calculates ​key values​, most importantly the annual energy 
consumption per m​2​. Each building component has requirements formulated in the Danish Building 
Regulation (Bygningsreglementet, 2015).  
Every five years the requirements in the Danish Building Regulation is reviewed and revised, in order 
to make sure the regulations are updated according to new building technologies. At the same time the 
energy calculation program is updated from BE10 in 2010 to BE15 in 2015.  
The planning of renovation in Korngården started in 2013-2014, therefore the building regulations of 
2010 were the current regulation which should be complied with.  
 
In order to comply with the energy frame and requirements in the Danish Building Regulative the 
planning of the renovation in Korngården had to be a cost effective energy optimization. Therefore 
different initiatives were considered, some were executed and others were disregarded. Figure 2-5 
illustrates all the considered initiatives, which were chosen to proceed with and the estimated savings 
in kWh/m​2 ​per year. A calculation of the energy saving and the magnitude of the effect on the existing 
building for each initiative was carried out and analysed. 
15 
==PAGE:21==
 
Figure 2-5: Cost effective energy optimization. Calculated energy savings per year for initiatives considered in the planning 
of the renovation in Korngården. Calculations were carried out by the consulting engineers. The initiatives marked with 
green were the ones approved and used in the overall renovation plan (DOMINIA A/S, 2013). The figure is created based on 
data from DOMINIA A/S and Domus Architects, 2013. 
 
The initiatives marked with blue are the ones which were disregarded. Green colouring represents the 
initiatives approved to be included in the renovation plan. The initiatives approved for the renovation 
plan represented energy savings up to 67.3 kWh/m​2​ pr. year.  
 
The energy savings were used in the planning phase and the consulting engineers argued that the 
yearly energy savings could pay for the 17 % rent increase. The renovation plan for Korngården was 
approved, but parts of the energy savings were phased out due to limitations in the overall budget. The 
initiatives realised during the project were included in the energy frame calculation and the key 
numbers from the calculations are seen in table 2-1. 
 
 
 
 
16 
==PAGE:22==
Table 2-1: Calculated energy and heat consumption carried out by consulting engineers. The numbers are key 
numbers from Be10 calculations before and after renovation (data from DOMINIA A/S, 2015).  
 
Before 
renovation 
After 
renovation 
Percentage 
saving 
Total Energy Consumption [kWh/m​2​ year] 
223,3 
58,8 
73,7 
Heat Consumption [kWh/m​2​ year] 
170,2 
38,0 
77,7 
 
The key numbers from Be10 reveals, that the energy consumption after renovation will be reduced 
considerably. BR10 requires, that the total energy consumption does not exceed the limit of ​52,5 
kWh/m² pr. year for new residential buildings. The​ calculated energy consumption did not meet the 
requirement. Though, this is not the requirement for renovation of buildings since it is possible to seek 
permission to deviate from the requirements, therefore it is rather a guidance that the  renovation 
should aim for. The building component should be optimized according to requirements specified in 
BR10 (Bygningsreglementet, 2010). 
 
From the calculation in table 2-1, it is concluded that a significant reduction in the energy 
consumption would happen after renovation. The total energy consumption would be reduced with 
73,7% after the renovation is completed. 
 
Occupants’ behaviour is not included in the calculations, therefore it is not possible to predict if the 
building after renovation will actually comply with the calculations. Because of this, it is interesting to 
compare the calculated energy consumption and the simulated consumption that include occupants 
differences, incl type of tenants, their professional occupancy and their behavioural patterns 
depending on work and spare time activity. 
 
 
 
17 
==PAGE:23==
3 Theory 
This section gives an introduction to the theoretical aspect of occupants’ behaviour and how it affect 
the energy consumption. Additionally, indoor environment parameters are introduced in according to 
DS/EN standard. 
3.1 Occupant behaviour 
People in Denmark typically spend 90-95 % of time indoors, which is why thermal comfort directly 
impact the energy consumption and indoor environment (Andersen, 2017).  
It is acknowledged that energy efficiency does not matter of technology alone, but is highly 
influenced by occupants’ behaviour. People consume energy, not the buildings (Santangelo et al., 
2017). Thus, occupants has a large role for achieving a reduced energy consumption. However the 
impact from occupants’ behaviour is poorly understood and quantified. 
 
The type of building does not determine the energy consumed alone, as the occupants ultimately 
determine the efficiency of energy consumption regardless of the building being a low- or high-energy 
performance building (Santangelo et al., 2017). Santangelo and Tondelli refer to research that has 
shown how large an impact occupants have on the energy consumption. Occupants’ behaviour can 
result in an energy consumption three times or more as much energy due to heating as their 
neighbours living in dwellings with similar characteristics (Santangelo et al., 2017). This inventory 
underlines how big an influence the occupant behaviour really is, and the importance of keeping 
occupants in mind when designing both renovation and new building. Naturally, people are individual 
and have different preferences regarding indoor temperature, which explains the outcome of the 
inventory. Occupant behaviour has a direct influence on the energy consumed. The higher the indoor 
temperature, the more energy has to be consumed for heating. 
 
Brohus et al. assert that several investigations performed reveal significant uncertainties regarding the 
estimation of energy consumptions in buildings. Occupants’ behaviour contribute substantially to the 
variance between the measured and theoretically calculated energy consumption (Brohus et al., 2010). 
Additionally they claim, that occupant behaviour is not well understood, which is a central parameter 
in order to be able to predict behaviour in the future.  
If occupants have the possibility of interacting with the building and are able to control their own 
indoor environment by controlling example heat, the impact on the energy consumption will vary 
because of significantly behavioural variations. It was found, that occupants behaviour in apartments 
had a significant influence on the energy consumption of the building (Andersen, 2012). Additionally, 
that different behaviour patterns would result in a ratio of more than 3 between lowest and highest 
impact on the energy consumption (Andersen, 2009). Occupants’ impact on the energy consumption 
both directly and indirectly through interaction with building energy systems. The interaction could be 
switching lights on and off or adjusting temperature set-points (Barthelmes et al., 2018). 
 
It is not simple to fully predict habits and routines, which is why occupant behaviour is an variable 
parameter that cannot have pre-determined fixed values (Yu et al., 2011). In order to obtain 
comfortable conditions, occupants make conscious or unconscious actions. These actions can either 
18 
==PAGE:24==
improve or restore their perceived comfort. Comfort is different from one person to another, which is 
why the occupants’ behavior vary significantly. 
 
The understanding of occupants’ behaviour in buildings have been investigated many times before. 
Three aspects influence the performance: occupants’ behaviour, occupants’ attitude toward 
sustainability and occupants’ requirements related to lifestyle and household composition 
(Guerra-Santin, 2016). The energy consumption is significantly influenced by household composition 
and socio-economic situation. 
 
Socio-economic variables such as background, education level, income and employment can influence 
the attitudes of households towards energy preservation, while household characteristics are important 
for heating demand because the presence of people at home and comfort preferences is determined.  
Guerra-Santin concluded, that heating patterns vary depending on the occupants’ employment status 
and age. It was found that households with people over 60 years old or unable to work turned the 
heating on earlier in the year, heated to higher temperatures and longer each day in comparison to 
households with younger people and those in employment.  
Another study found, that households over 65 years old usually spend the daytime hours at home and 
have a low overnight electricity consumption. In comparison young householders (<40) tend to have 
low daytime consumption and active evenings. Middle age households (50–65) usually with children 
at home, broader range of appliances and larger homes, have higher electricity consumption in the 
evenings (Guerra-Santin, 2016).  
 
Occupants’ behaviour is often based on assumptions rather than measured values when integrated in 
building simulations. This results in incorrect simulations and predictions of the energy consumption 
of the building, with many uncertainties. The uncertainties related to occupancy in buildings, can be 
decreased by representing occupants’ behaviour as standardized diversity factors and schedules 
(Guerra-Santin, 2016).  
 
Accurate occupant profiles describing occupancy and activity in Danish residential buildings have 
been established based on time use surveys (Barthelmes et al., 2018). The surveys were conducted in 
2008 and 17.707 individuals participated. The large amount of individuals validate the time surveys, 
and thus validates the occupant profiles based on the surveys. The activities were logged during the 
day, and the percentage of respondents doing each of the identified activities is illustrated in figure 
3-1. 
 
19 
==PAGE:25==
 
Figure 3-1: Activities throughout the day, from a time use survey conducted in Denmark in 2008. The percentage illustrated 
on the figure is based on the answers from 17.707 respondents. The respondents had different employment, ages and 
residents (copied directly from Barthelmes et al., 2018).  
 
Figure 3-1 does not take different seasonal variations into account, but illustrates the respondents’ 
activity pattern throughout the day. The occupancy and activity are crucial for simulations of 
occupants’ behaviour, since the occupants’ behaviour will be closer to reality when the inputs are 
based on reality. From this, overall occupancy and activity patterns are with approximation 
determined and can be applied in simulation programs.  
 
The average energy consumed by a family in an apartment is shown in figure 3-2 (Energistyrelsen, 
2017). From the figure it can be concluded, that the largest amount of energy is consumed for 
entertainment such as watching TV and computer. Cooking, lighting, refrigerator and freezer are 
about the same share. From this, it could be argued that these are “necessary” energy consumption, 
whereas entertainment are “pleasurable” consumption. 
This knowledge in connection with the figure of time use, inform about occupant behaviour. The 
energy consumption by activity could be useful for making correct and realistic assumptions about 
occupants behavior in the simulations.  
 
20 
==PAGE:26==
 
Figure 3-2: Average distribution of energy consumption in apartments. The figure divides the energy consumption in 
activities such as entertainment, laundry, refrigerator and freezer etcetera. The layout of the figure was created  by the 
author based on data from Energistyrelsen. (data modified from Energistyrelsen, 2017) 
3.2 Indoor environment parameters 
When renovating, the indoor environment is expected to be better than before the renovation. 
DS/EN 15251 states, that the energy consumption depends significantly on the criteria for the indoor 
environment (DS/EN 15251, 2007). In the renovation phase it is important to be aware of the indoor 
environment parameters and accommodate the values listed in DS/EN 15251. For this projects the 
parameters that is specified as the indoor environment includes air temperature and relative humidity. 
Additionally, the Danish building regulations specify limitations for the air supply. 
3.2.1 Temperature 
According to Table 3.A in DS/EN 15251 the recommended temperature ranges for calculation of 
heating and cooling energy for residential buildings, living spaces (bedroom, living room etc) and for 
kitchen and bathroom, storages etc. The temperature ranges are presented in table 3-1. (DS/EN 15251, 
2007, pp. 31) 
 
 
 
 
21 
==PAGE:27==
Table 3-1: Criteria for the temperature ranges for heating and cooling energy in three categories according to DS/EN 15251 
(data copied from DS/EN 15251 pp. 31). 
Type of building or space 
Category 
Temperature range for 
heating [℃] 
Temperature range for 
cooling [℃] 
Residential buildings, living spaces 
(bedrooms, living rooms etc.) 
 
Sedentary activity ~ 1,2 met 
I 
21,0-25,0 
23,0-25,5 
II 
20,0-25,0 
23,0-26,0 
III 
18,0-25,0 
22,0-27,0 
Residential buildings, living spaces 
(kitchen, storages etc.) 
 
Standing-walking activity ~ 1,5 met 
I 
18,0-25,0 
 
II 
16,0-25,0 
 
III 
14,0-25,0 
 
 
3.2.2 Relative Humidity 
According to DS/EN 15251 the relative humidity for residential buildings should be within the in 
table B.6 given range illustrated in table 3-2 (DS/EN 15251, 2007 pp. 38). 
 
Table 3-2: Relative humidity range required by DS/EN 15251 (data copied from DS/EN 15251, pp. 38) 
Type of 
building/space 
Category 
Design relative 
humidity for 
dehumidification, % 
Design relative 
humidity for 
humidification, % 
Spaces where 
humidity criteria are 
set by human 
occupancy. 
Special spaces 
(museums, churches 
etc.) may require other 
limits. 
I 
50 
30 
II 
60 
25 
III 
70 
20 
IV 
> 70 
< 20 
 
The relative humidity in residential buildings in Denmark should be lower during the winter period 
and higher during the summer period (Bolius, 2016). 
 
3.2.3 Ventilation 
According to BR2015 the air supply in residential buildings should be at least 0,3 l/s per m​2​ heated 
floor area, and kitchens should be equipped with an extractor (Bygningsreglementet, 2015, stk. 1-5).  
In addition, the air change in kitchen, bathrooms, utility rooms and similar rooms should be increased 
to at least the requirements presented in table 3-3. 
 
 
 
 
22 
==PAGE:28==
Table 3-3: The required air change in residential buildings for kitchen, bathrooms and utility, should be able to be increased 
to at least the values in this table according to BR2015 (data from Bygningsreglementet, 2015). 
Room type 
Extracted Volume flow [l/s] 
Kitchen 
20 
Bathroom 
15 
Utility room, basement etc. 
10 
 
According to DS/EN 15251 pp. 37 the ventilation air flows of a bedroom and living room for general 
ventilation in residentials should fulfill the following: 
-
air change per hour for each room and/or outside air supply to achieve a requirement in the 
main rooms. 
-
required exhaust rates (bathrooms, toilets and kitchens). 
Table 3-4 indicates ventilation rates for residentials as described in DE/EN 15251. 
 
Table 3-4: Ventilation rates for residentials (data copied from DS/EN 15251, 2007, pp. 37). 
Category 
Air change rate 
l/s, m​2 
ach 
I 
0,49 
0,7 
II 
0,42 
0,6 
III 
0,39 
0,5 
 
 
The CO​2​ concentration is closely related to ventilation. The recommended CO​2​ concentration in PPM 
above outdoor concentration used for energy calculations is specified in DS/EN 15251 as indicated in 
table 3-5. 
 
Table 3-5: CO​2​ concentration above outdoor concentration in PPM (data from DS/EN 15251, table B.4, pp. 35) 
Category 
Corresponding CO​2​ concentration above outdoor 
concentration for energy calculations [PPM] 
I 
350 
II 
500 
III 
800 
IV 
< 800 
 
 
23 
==PAGE:29==
4 Methodology 
This section introduces the methodology of this study. The study was divided in four parts, initially a 
literature review, then investigation of Korngården including an interview, then measurements in 
Korngården and last how the simulations in IDA ICE version 4.7.1  were setup.  
2
The purpose of this section is to introduce how information was gathered prior to the simulation set 
up, and how the building, and thus the energy consumption and indoor environment, was simulated. 
4.1 Literature review 
Initially, a literature review was carried out. This was done in order to be able to formulate the 
problem based on knowledge about occupants’ behaviour in general, previous studies of occupants’ 
behaviour and information about the case, Korngården. 
 
The literature review was divided in two main parts. First, a background study of occupants’ 
behaviour and previous studies. This included scientific articles and reports. The purpose of this part 
of the literature review was to gain insight to if there is a problem caused by occupants’ behaviour and 
energy consumption, and current research in this area. 
 
Secondly, a case study of Korngården was carried out. This included general reading about 
requirements for renovation, reading the actual renovation plan, contacting the consulting engineers 
and the architects and go through the project material such as floor plans, ventilation system, heating 
system, building envelope.  
4.2 Investigation of Korngården 
The investigation was conducted in order to be able to compare the energy consumption and indoor 
environment before and after renovation.  
Before renovation the apartments were divided in apartments of approximately the same size, while 
the apartments are divided in apartments of different sizes after the renovation.  
Figure 4-1 illustrates the floorplan before renovation and figure 4-2 illustrates the floorplan after 
renovation. 
2 ​IDA ICE is a simulation tool developed by EQUA. The license was provided by DTU Byg. The 
version used for simulations in this project was IDA ICE 4.7.1 
24 
==PAGE:30==
 
Figure 4-1 (left):Floor plan of two 3 bedroom apartments before renovation (Floor plan copied from Korngården 
Helhedsplan, 2013). 
Figure 4-2 (right): Floor plan of two 3 bedroom apartments after renovation. Illustrates the renovated facade and added 
balcony and additional floor area (Floor plan copied from Korngården Helhedsplan, 2013). 
 
Not only the physical configuration of the building influence the energy consumption, and therefore 
the investigation included determination of how many people are living in each apartment. Table 4-1 
illustrate the number of tenants in Korngården blok 3.  
The split between children and adults was made because of the different behavioural habits, that will 
influence the energy consumption differently.  
 
Table 4-1: Tenants living in Korngården blok 3. Division of children and adults. The information was obtained from an 
investigation conducted by DAB, December 2017.  
 
Number of tenants 
Percentage [%] 
Adults 
84 
71,2 
Children 
34 
28,8 
Total 
118 
100 
 
The impact on the energy consumption would vary depending on if an apartment has one tenant who 
is working 37 hours weekly, or if a similar apartment has a family with two adults and a child. Thus, 
the division of people in apartments and their employment are seen in table 4-2. Additional to the 
25 
==PAGE:31==
information in the table, children were assumed to be going to school, either primary school or high 
school. 
 
Table 4-2: Tenants living in Korngården blok 3. Division of employment. The information was obtained from an 
investigation conducted by DAB, December 2017.  
 
Number of tenants 
Percentage [%] 
Unemployed 
6 
9,5 
Employed 
35 
55,6 
Maternity Leave 
1 
1,5 
Retired 
15 
23,8 
Early Retirement 
3 
4,7 
Student 
3 
4,7 
 
The investigation at Korngården also included an interview with an anthropologist, who has 
interviewed people living at Korngården.  
 
Anthropological method is a part of the qualitative method (Institut for Kultur og Samfund, 2017), 
and is the overall term for a wide range of methods that cover the qualitative data collection 
anthropologists practice when embarking onto fieldwork. The fieldwork include amongst others 
observations and interviews (antropologisk.dk, 2018). 
The interview with anthropologist Babette Paulicke Slott was a semi-structured interview, where the 
interviewer (the author of this thesis) and the respondent (Babette) participated. The semi-structured 
interview allows the conversation to become more a conversation. This is possible because the 
semi-structured interview only has few questions and is open for a discussion, therefore the 
knowledge obtained can be very informative. Because of the few and open questions, it is possible for 
the interviewer to ask for clarification or further information, if an answer lead to new information. 
 
The purpose of this interview was to determine information about the general perception of energy 
consumption, indoor environment and behavioural patterns.  
 
4.3 Measurements in Korngården 
Prior to this study, measurements from inside the apartments in Korngården was conducted. This 
section presents the method used for measurements before and after renovation. The timeline in figure 
4-3 illustrates the progress, when and what kind of measurements were conducted. 
26 
==PAGE:32==
 
Figure 4-3: Timeline, illustrates when measurements from inside apartments in Korngården have been conducted, before 
and after renovation, in relation to this project. 
 
 
The total energy consumption and heating demand for the building before and after renovation was 
calculated, this calculation is called the energy frame. 
Additionally, the energy consumption and heating demand was measured before and after renovation. 
The measurements before renovation was performed in connection with the energy label for 
Korngården in 2004. The measurements after renovation came from measurements from inside all 
apartments.  
Simulated values of the energy consumption and heating demand before and after renovation was 
conducted based on the measurements from inside the apartments.  
 
After renovation of blok 3, measurements from inside the were conducted. All 63 apartments had a 
KeepFocus equipment installed, which measured energy consumption, temperature and relative 
humidity. The equipment was installed in the hall in all apartments as illustrated in figure 4-4. The 
blue marking represents the equipment. 
27 
==PAGE:33==
 
Figure 4-4: Floor plan of two apartments. The blue dot illustrates the placement of KeepFocus measuring equipment in the 
hall (floor plan was copied and  modified from renovation plan by DAB, Dominia A/S and Domus Architects, 2015).  
 
The measurements from KeepFocus have been used for simulations in IDA ICE in order to simulate, 
and determine how much energy was consumed.  
 
Information about the ventilation system installed at blok 3 at Korngården was collected from the 
craftsmen Air Tekniq ApS. From the information provided by Air-Tekniq ApS the supply air and 
exhaust for each apartment were determined. Additionally floor plans with the placement of the 
systems and the type of systems were investigated (Air-Tekniq, 2017).  
Measurements of extractor were conducted using a pressure equipment, and the pressure was found in 
Pa. The pressure was then found in the manufacturer’s table of the equipment, and from this the 
airflow was determined. The measurements for the extractor was determined both for basic operation 
and for forced operation. For the exhaust the same method was used, but the airflow was found using 
a funnel. This measurement was only carried out for basic operation. 
4.4 Simulations using IDA ICE, the building after renovation 
The purpose of the simulations were to simulate the energy consumption for the building for one year.  
The building simulation model were built in IDA ICE. In order to obtain as correct and precise 
simulations, the model had to be as realistic as possible. Thus, the building envelope consisting of 
exterior walls, roof, slabs and windows had to be the same materials as the actual building. Though 
the model should be close approximation of the actual building, the model is simplified. The 
simplification of the model have been made because the model should deliver overall tendencies 
regarding the energy consumption. 
28 
==PAGE:34==
 
4.4.1 Location and weather data 
The first step was to setup the location and weather data for the simulation. The location was chosen 
to Copenhagen, which is a default location in IDA ICE, as illustrated in figure 4-5. The location was 
acceptable because Ballerup is close enough to Copenhagen to eliminate possible distortions in from 
weather variations. 
 
 
Figure 4-5: Location set to be Copenhagen in IDA ICE. The location is default, loaded from the database (Screenshot from 
IDA ICE). 
 
The climate was setup as a climate file in IDA ICE. The weather data had to be in accordance with 
reality, which meant that the weather should be for the same period of time as the measured data from 
Korngården. The measurements from inside apartments were highly dependent on the outdoor 
temperature, and therefore this should be in accordance. First, weather data was collected from DTU 
Climate Station and from Copenhagen Airport Climate station.  
 
IDA ICE required the time step as “hours after new years” which meant that the the climate file 
should continue from hour 0 til hour 8784 which corresponds to 366 days.  
In this case, the measurements from KeepFocus was in the period from May 2016 to May 2017. Thus, 
the data had to be fitted to the climate file; first measurements from January 2017 to May 2017 
followed by May 2016 to December 2016. 
The climate file should include different parameters such as air temperature, relative humidity, wind 
speed in x-direction, wind speed in y-direction, radiation both direct and diffuse and SkyCover as 
illustrated in figure 4-6. Additionally, wind direction and velocity is required by IDA ICE (the user 
guide was not updated in accordance with IDA ICE 4.7.1 which has required wind direction and 
velocity).  
 
 
Figure 4-6: Parametres that should be included in the IDA ICE climate file and the given unit (Screenshot from IDA Ice 
4,7,1 User Guide).  
 
29 
==PAGE:35==
In order to create a climate file which could be loaded into IDA ICE, the collected data had to be 
adapted to fit the required time step and include the necessary parameters. 
The data from the two climate stations were necessary, since one station did not deliver the required 
information. Therefore the weather data were fitted into one collected spreadsheet. From DTU 
Climate Station The air temperature, relative humidity, wind speed, ​average wind direction, diffuse 
horizontal irradiance, shortwave and direct normal irradiance shortwave. The SkyCover were collected 
from Copenhagen Airport Climate Station.  
 
After the data were collected, the spreadsheet were saved as a .txt file, which were converted to a .prn 
format. An extract of the file is illustrated in figure 4-7 (see Appendix J). 
 
 
Figure 4-7: The climate file based on information collected from DTU Climate station and Copenhagen Airport Climate 
Station. The file contains outdoor air temperature, relative humidity, wind speed, wind direction, wind velocity, skycover and 
direct and diffuse radiation (Screenshot from .txt file) 
 
A new climate called Korngården was created and the .prn file was then loaded into IDA ICE. Figure 
4-8 illustrates the climate. 
 
 
Figure 4-8: The climate for Korngården. The climate file was loaded into IDA ICE by clicking on “Climate” and browsing 
(Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
4.4.2 Modelling the building  
Each apartment were modeled in the simulation as one zone from floor plans (Dominia & Domea, 
2017). The floor plans indicate, that 1st, 2nd and 3rd floor have the same arrangement of apartments, 
whereas ground floor leaves space for the outdoor passage through the building. The window and 
doors were placed according to the floor plans too. Floor plans of ground floor and 3rd floor modelled 
in IDA ICE are illustrated in figure 4-9 and figure 4-10.  
 
 
 
 
30 
==PAGE:36==
 
Figure 4-9: Floor plan from IDA ICE, 3rd floor. Each zone represents an apartment. The floorplan also illustrates 
placement of windows and doors. The floor plan illustrates the simplification of the apartments since the apartments have no 
interior walls (Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
 
 
Figure 4-10: Floor plan from IDA ICE, ground floor. Each zone represents an apartment. The floorplan also illustrates 
placement of windows and doors. The floor plan illustrates the simplification of the apartments since the apartments have no 
interior walls. Special for ground floor is, that a “tunnel” through the building was established during renovation 
(Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
 
Ground floor is different from the other floors in the building. A tunnel through the building was 
established throughout the renovation, with meant that the floor plan was changed. The tunnel was 
modelled as a zone without any occupancy or equipment. The north and south facing facades were 
modelled as large doors with “​always open​” schedule. This was done in order to obtain as close to 
outdoor climate inside the zone as possible, without solar radiation.  
 
This model was made from 2D floor plan drawings in IDA ICE. First the building and subsequently 
the zones were modelled. IDA ICE has limited modelling options, which implies that the building was 
modelled as an idealized rectangular box instead of taking account of the exact geometries of the 
balconies. Meaning that the balconies were inside the building when simulation, but outside the zone. 
This could have an impact on the total energy consumption, since the building then seem larger than it 
really is, but it was assessed that the influence were of less influence, so the building model was 
accepted. 
 
The floor plan was simplified. An apartment was modelled as one large zone without partition walls 
between rooms. This means, that there are no interior walls and interior doors in the model. The 
staircases were modelled as zones as well, without any building installations. The staircases are one 
tall zone from ground floor to roof, and there were not added any occupancy or equipment to the 
zones. Additionally, the staircases were simplified at ground floor, since the front door in the facade 
of the building does not lead directly to the staircase; the entrance area from outside the building to 
staircase at ground floor has been minimized in order to obtain a simple model. The entire building 
modelled in IDA ICE is illustrated in figure 4-11. 
 
31 
==PAGE:37==
 
Figure 4-11: Blok 3 modelled in IDA ICE; ground floor, 1st, 2nd and 3rd floor. Each apartment modelled as a zone and the 
staircases in the middle (Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
 
4.4.3 Building envelope and properties 
The building envelope has been improved during renovation, including more insulation in both the 
facade and the roof. The model in IDA ICE have the same properties as the actual building. Details 
about the exterior walls, roof and ceiling etc. are found in Appendix C.  
 
The 2-layer windows were replaced with new improved 3-layer argon windows. The window type 
used in the model is a IDA ICE standard that is consistent with the window type after renovation.  
Properties of the window (U-value, G-value) can be found in Appendix C. Figure 4-12 illustrates the 
windows which are used for simulations. 
 
 
Figure 4-12: 3- layer window type used in IDA ICE simulations for all windows in the model of Korngården (Screenshot 
from IDA ICE). 
 
As for the windows the exterior doors are IDA ICE standards in consistency with Korngården. The 
doors were modelled as default entrance doors as illustrated in figure 4-13. A schedule simulating 
door openings was set up and used on the front doors to the staircase and the doors to the balcony. The 
purpose of the schedule was to define, when the door was opened, since this could influence the 
energy consumption and indoor environment. 
 
 
Figure 4-13: The door type used in the modelling of Korngården. The type is a default entrance door in IDA ICE database 
(Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
 
32 
==PAGE:38==
In the schedule the doors opens 0.25 (corresponding to opening ¼ of the opening capacity) twice per 
day for 30 minutes. This was chosen since a door will open every time occupants leaves and arrive at 
the apartment. This could be many more times a day, but it was assumed that the door would not be 
open for more than a few minutes. 
 
The occupant was placed in the hall in the apartment at 0,6 m height. This was chosen because the 
equipment measuring in reality is placed in the hall (see figure 4-15). 
4.4.4 Installations 
The building installations were modelled in accordance with information collected from the contractor 
and the measurement from apartments. 
 
The ventilation system was a controlled system (CAV). The setpoint for supply air temperature was 
18 ℃. Each apartment has the balanced system, an exhaust in the bathroom and an extractor in the 
kitchen as part of the system. The supply and return air have been measured by the contractor, using a 
pressure measurement equipment and from this the airflow has been determined (data from 
Air-Tekniq ApS, 2017). Each apartment have individual supply and return air values. These were 
inserted in the IDA ICE model corresponding to the actual values. In appendix D all values can be 
found. The system simulated as illustrated in figure 4-14. 
For simplification of the ventilation system, the extractor was ignored in the modelling. This was 
chosen since it was assumed that it would only be used limited time each day, and the impact on the 
overall energy consumed for this would be limited.  
 
 
Figure 4-14: The figure illustrates the type of ventilation (CAV) with supply and return air for the system. The values came 
from measurements conducted by the contractor, Air-Tekniq ApS. The figure illustrates values from apartment 84, 1. tv., and 
the values vary from apartment to apartment (Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
 
 
The heating system consists of water radiators and floor heating. Each water radiator is moved to the 
facade, and floor heating is installed in the bathroom. The floor heating is simulated where the 
bathroom according to the floor plans are placed, illustrated in figure 4-15.  
 
33 
==PAGE:39==
 
Figure 4-15: Floor heating placed in the apartment, according to the bathroom (Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
 
The size of the floor heating corresponds to the size of the bathroom according to the floor plan. The 
floor heating were set up for air temperature and design power of 40 w/m​2l​ with PI control. The set up 
of floor heating was chosen to standard IDA ICE input, for the simplification of the building - it was 
not possible to set uu floor heating with the macro used for water radiators because the macro did not 
include cooling. 
 
The radiators installed after renovation were water radiators. Radiators were placed under windows 
after renovation. Thus, the radiators in the model were placed under each window. For simplification, 
one radiator was placed at one wall in the zone for 2 bedroom and 3 bedroom apartments, whereas 4 
bedroom apartments had two radiators, one on the south facing wall and on the north facing wall. The 
radiator in the zone should have the same area as the number of radiators combined in the actual 
building. The radiator in 98, 3th is illustrated in figure 4-16. 
 
 
Figure 4-16: The radiator placed on the south facing wall in apartment 98, 3. th. The size of the radiator corresponds to the 
area of all in the apartment (Screenshot from IDA ICE).  
 
34 
==PAGE:40==
The properties of the water radiators corresponds to the area that it should be able to heat. The 
properties of the radiators are illustrated in figure 4-17, the maximum power was 3800W which 
corresponds to heating ~ 70m​2​ floor area.  
 
 
Figure 4-17: Input data to each water radiators in the building (Screenshot from IDA ICE).  
 
The measurements from the apartments were air temperature, and for compliance with this the water 
radiators were setup with air temperature sensor.  
In order to obtain the measured values for air temperature a controller were configured. This was done 
with a macro, illustrated in figure 4-18. 
 
 
 
 
35 
==PAGE:41==
 
Figure 4-18: Macro controlling the heating from water radiators. The macro setup with P-controller where a sourcefile 
containing the measured values for air temperature and a constant -1 (Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
 
The purpose of the macro was to control the heating from water radiators. The following describes 
how the macro functions. A macro was setup for all apartments, in order to distinguish the measured 
values for each apartment. 
 
Step 1: Source-file and constant 
The source-file contained a .prn file that provided the measured values of air temperature and time 
step as hours after new year from 0 to 8786 as illustrated in figure 4-19. When loading the measured 
temperatures into IDA ICE, the file was loaded from the computer, and clicked ​“Take the list of 
variables from file”.  
 
 
Figure 4-19: Screenshot of .txt file that was formatted to .prn file. The file provided the measurement of indoor air 
temperature [℃] and time step [hours after new years] (Screenshot from .txt file). 
 
The constant represents a proportional band, which purpose was to decide if the controller was for 
heating or cooling; > 0 for heating and < 0 for heating. Since the macro was for heating, the 
proportional band was set to -1.  
 
Step 2: Connection to P-controller 
Temperature sensor signal was connected to the P-controller. The sensor registers the temperature in 
the zone and by connecting to the P-controller the temperature was compared to the other input 
parameters. 
36 
==PAGE:42==
The constant was connected to a P-controller, which let the controller know, that the control was for 
heating. The source-file, called ​Interface1​ was connected to the P-controller through ​SETPOINTLINK​, 
as illustrated in figure 4-20. 
 
  
Figure 4-20: Connecting source-file to P-controller. Interface1 is the source-file which was connected through 
SETPOINTLINK by clicking OK button (Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
 
Figure 4-21: Creating an interface by connecting the selected parameters; indoor air temperature TAIR with 
PSMOOTH2.SETPOINT, and clicking “Connect selected” button (Screenshot from IDA ICE).  
 
IDA ICE created an interface when the source-file with air temperature was connected to the 
SETPOINTLINK​, which was then connected to ​PSMOOTH2.SETPOINT​ via “​Connect selected​” 
button as illustrated in figure 4-21.  
 
Additionally, temperature sensor signal was connected to the P-controller. The temperature sensor 
delivered the temperature from inside the zone, and the P-controller then compared with the values 
from the source-file. After this comparison, the heating signal was the final output.  
4.4.5 Equipment and lighting 
Electric equipment such as refrigerator, lighting, TV or computer have an impact on the energy 
consumed (Energistyrelsen, 2017). Because of the impact it is highly relevant to simulate with this 
impact on the energy consumption. This is done by adding equipment in IDA ICE. 
37 
==PAGE:43==
After renovation, all the apartments had new kitchens installed which means, that the kitchens have 
the same refrigerator and oven. 
The total electricity consumption was measured in each apartment. These measurements were linked 
into the IDA ICE model by creating a macro. The macro is illustrated in figure 4-22. 
 
 
Figure 4-22: Macro controlling the electricity consumption set up as a lightning signal. The macro setup with an “adder”, 
where a sourcefile containing the measured values for electricity consumption and a constant 0 (Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
 
The purpose of the macro was to simulate the actual electricity consumption in apartments.  
 
Step 1: Source-file 
A source-file containing a .prn file supplying time in hours after new years and measured electricity 
consumption in kWh was created. Figure 4-23 illustrates a clipping of  the .txt file that was formatted 
to a .prn file. 
 
 
Figure 4-23: Screenshot from .txt file, illustrating time [hours after new years] and electricity consumption [kWh] 
 
Step 2: Adder and constant 
The source-file and a constant was connected to an adder. The purpose of the adder was to create an 
interface by connecting the source-file with ​INSIGNALLINK [1], ​illustrated in figure 4-24. After this 
connection, the variables ​CONSUMPTION​ and ​ADDER.INSIGNAL[1]​ was connected by the 
“​Connect selected​” button as illustrated in figure 4-25. 
38 
==PAGE:44==
 
Figure 4-24: Connecting source-file to Adder. Interface1 is the source-file which was connected through INSIGNALLINK[1] 
by clicking OK button (Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
 
 
 
Figure 4-25: Creating an interface by connecting the selected parameters; electricity consumption CONSUMPTION with 
ADDER.INSIGNAL[1], and clicking “Connect selected” button (Screenshot from IDA ICE).  
 
Additionally, the constant was connected to the adder through ​INSIGNALLINK[2].​ The adder now 
creates a value from the source-file and adds 0 (the constant) to it. This value was sent to the 
Lightning signal. 
 
The consumption was indicated in kW, whereas IDA ICE indicated in W. The conversion from kWh 
to W was done by indicating 1 as number of units and 1000 W as Rated input per unit in the set up 
window for electricity consumption. The set up is illustrated in figure 4-26. 
 
39 
==PAGE:45==
 
Figure 4-26: Set up of converting kWh to W. Number of units was set to 1 and Rated input per unit was set to 1000 W, which 
would be the same as multiplying the consumption value with 1000 (Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
4.4.6 Occupants 
The occupants’ load was setup as schedules based on assumptions and the earlier mentioned 
behavioural patterns. Additionally, the type of occupant determined were considered when setting up 
the occupant schedule. 
Since it was found that different types of families are living at Korngården, different schedules fit for 
the type of occupants living at Korngården. The type of occupants and schedule are found in table 4-3. 
 
Table 4-3: Type of tenant, occupancy and the schedule based on the occupants’ behavioural patterns according to their 
professional activity. 
Type of tenant 
Professional activity 
Schedule 
Single 
Unemployed/retired 
4 
Single 
Employed 
5 
Single, child(ren) 
Unemployed 
1 
Single, child(ren) 
Employed 
2 
Couple 
Employed 
6 
Couple, child(ren) 
Employed 
3 
 
The schedules were a simplification of the influencing factors, and were for example assuming that all 
occupants were sleeping all night. If the occupant were employed, it was assumed that there was no 
occupancy between 7.30 in the morning and 16.30, corresponding to a 37 hours working week. It was 
assumed, that if the occupant were unemployed, on maternity leave or retired, the tenant would spend 
most of the day at home with smaller periods of time with no occupancy as simulation of going 
shopping or going for a walk during the day. 
If the residents of an apartment included a child or children, it was assumed that the child or children 
would be off to school and after school activity on weekdays.  
For all schedules, it was assumed that weekends had more occupancy hours, since people do not have 
to go to work and tent to relax in their homes on weekends.  
Figure 4-27 and figure 4-28 illustrate schedules of occupancy.  
 
40 
==PAGE:46==
 
Figure 4-27: Schedule 1 for occupancy corresponding to an unemployed adult with a child. It was assumed that 
Monday-Friday the child go to school, and the adult spent time at home, only leaving the apartment shortly for bringing the 
child to school and going shopping. On the weekend the schedule was changed, since the child do not have to go to school.  
 
 
Figure 4-28: Schedule 6 for occupancy corresponding to two employed adults. It was assumed that the occupants are 
leaving home at 7.30 until 16.30 on weekdays. Additionally that one was going shopping and on was going to fitness or other 
activity at night time. On weekends the occupancy in the apartment change because the occupants do not have to go to work. 
It was assumed that they would spend time out during the weekend.  
 
The varying schedules for types of occupants are illustrated in Appendix G. The distribution of 
occupants’ schedules in the simulation model are found in appendix H. 
 
4.5 Simulations using IDA ICE, the building before renovation 
In order to evaluate whether the occupants changed their behaviour after the renovation of  the 
building, the non-renovated building was set up for simulation. 
The building before renovation had the same input as described in section 4.4 regarding occupancy, 
climate file, macros controlling heating from water radiators and electricity consumption, but the 
41 
==PAGE:47==
building properties was changed in accordance with the building before renovation.  
The following explains the changes. 
 
Before renovation two apartments and a staircase created a square, there was no balcony. All floors in 
the building were identical. Therefore the building was modelled as illustrated in figure 4-29. 
 
 
Figure 4-29: Floor plan in the building before renovation. All floors from ground floor to 3rd floor were identical, as were 
they modelled (Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
 
The building envelope was set up with the same properties as the building had before renovation (see 
Appendix C). 
The windows before renovation has an U-value of 2.6 according to Be10 calculations (see Appendix 
C). In the modelling windows were chosen from IDA ICE database with properties as close to the 
realistic as possible. The window type is illustrated in figure 4-30. 
 
 
Figure 4-30: Window type used in the building before renovation, chosen from IDA ICE database with properties close to 
reality (Screenshot from IDA ICE). 
 
Before renovation there was no mechanical ventilation installed in the building. The apartments were 
ventilated by occupants themselves.  
For the simulation, this meant the “No Central AHU” was chosen in IDA ICE. 
 
There was no floor heating in the apartments before renovation. 
The radiators were placed in the middle of the building before renovation an moved to the facade after 
renovation. In IDA ICE the indoor air temperature does not take into consideration where the radiator 
was placed, since the indoor air temperature is a setpoint when simulating. 
 
 
 
 
42 
==PAGE:48==
5 Results 
This section presents the results from interview, measurements and simulations. The results will be 
analyzed and compared.  
5.1 Interview regarding occupants’ behaviour and people’s perception of energy 
and indoor environment 
THe following presents the findings from interview with anthropologist (Appendix I).  
One problem accentuated was the trust in technology, that somehow lead people believe that 
“technology will make everything better and solve all our problems”. The general problem is, that it 
was a “promise” that if a building is renovated and technology is installed, the building will be 
certified a low energy building, but is not taken into account how the building is used; the occupants’ 
behaviour. This leads to people acting without thought of the consequences. Tenants living in 
Korngården did not have any relation to energy, they did not really know what it contains. Energy is 
“fluffy” to people.  
This lack of inclusion of occupants’ behaviour discovered through interviews with tenants underlines 
the overall problem stated in studies by Santangelo et al. and Brohus et al. mentioned in section X. 
The thought that a building will always be low energy if renovated, is problematic since this does not 
hold the full truth.. The influence of occupants’ behaviour must be taken into account, when certifying 
buildings, since the use of the building influence the performance significantly.  
 
The renovation of Korngården included approaches that should influence the occupants’ behaviour to 
become more conscious about energy consumption and indoor environment. The green switch is an 
example of an approach made in order to change occupants’ behavior. Though, the approach has not 
been successful since people have had doubt about it.  
People have been questioning which sockets are controlled by the green switch and they were afraid 
of plugging in a device that was not supposed to be plugged in there and turning off the green switch.  
 
Another issue was about the consumption. The first issue related to this was, that they do not have 
sufficient knowledge about units as kWh and m​3​, which lead to distance. The consumption was 
delivered to each apartment, but people did not show interest in it because it was not well explained if 
their consumption was high, low or acceptable.  
Another issue related to the consumption was the motivation to act. People needed motivation for, 
why they should change their behavior. The motivation could be political, environmental or 
something third - it does not matter, if the people would change their behaviour.  
Tenants have an interest in the energy consumption, but the motivation is not necessarily saving 
money. Since the price for energy in Denmark is stable people tent to think that “saving 100 DKK 
yearly is too small a profit for so much work”. The motivation should be something else than 
economic. 
 
After the renovation, tenants received “tips” regarding energy and indoor environment from the screen 
installed in hall after renovation. The tips was another approach in order to change the behavioural 
patterns and awareness of energy and indoor environment. A tip could be “Open a window while 
43 
==PAGE:49==
cooking or taking a bath, to prevent moist”. Though the intention with the tips is to motivate people to 
change their behaviour, it has not really succeeded yet.  
The overall conclusion from the interviews was, that energy itself is not enough. Energy and energy 
awareness is the final goal, but the route to there is not straightforward. What motivates people to 
change their behaviour and become more aware of the energy consumption?  
 
Generally, the statements and findings from the interview underlines the points from previous studies 
(see section X), that occupants’ behaviour influence the energy consumption and must be understood 
better in order to make a change.  
5.2 Measurements and simulation of energy consumption and indoor 
environment 
The simulations of the model of Korngården were performed in the period of 16th May 2016 to 15th 
May 2017. In IDA ICE the simulations were performed as two simulations due to technical issues 
with the simulation programme. First simulation period was from 15th March 2016 to 15th October 
2016, and second simulation period was from 15th October 2016 to 15 March 2017. The timestep for 
simulations was 1 hour. 
The following presents the results of the simulations regarding energy consumption, heating and 
electricity consumption.  
 
5.2.1 Energy consumption 
Table 5-1 indicates the calculated, measured and simulated energy consumption and heating demand 
before and after renovation. 
 
Table 5-1: Calculated, measured and simulated energy, heat consumption and electricity consumption. The 
calculated numbers are key numbers from Be10 calculations before and after renovation (DOMINIA A/S, 2015). 
The measured are from before and after renovation based on respectively energy label measurements from 2004 
and KeepFocus measurements from May 2016 to May 2017. The simulated values, marked with green, are the 
result from simulations conducted by the author of this thesis. 
 
Calculation 
Before 
renovation 
Calculation 
After 
renovation 
Measured 
Before 
renovation 
Measured 
After 
renovation 
Simulated 
Before 
renovation 
Simulated 
After 
renovation 
Total energy 
consumption 
[kWh/m​2​ year] 
223,3 
58,8 
96,7 
41,6 
54,6 
64,2 
Heat 
consumption 
[kWh/m​2​ year] 
170,2 
38,0 
88,8 
31,2 
42,8 
51,0 
Electricity 
consumption 
[kWh/m​2​ year] 
53,1 
20,8 
7,9 
10,4 
11,8 
13,2 
 
44 
==PAGE:50==
The key numbers from Be10 calculations reveals, that the energy consumption after renovation would 
be reduced considerably. BR10 requires that the total energy consumption does not exceed the limit of 
52,5 kWh/m² pr. year for new residential buildings. The​ calculated energy consumption for the 
renovation did not meet the requirement.  
Albeit this is not the requirement for renovation of buildings since it is possible to seek permission to 
deviate from the requirements, and therefore it is rather a guidance. The renovation should aim for the 
requirements, but there are no limit for total energy consumption. The building component should be 
optimized according to requirements specified in BR10 (Bygningsreglementet, 2010). 
 
The following is benchmarked against the ​measured​ consumption: 
●
Difference between total energy consumption after renovation and measured energy 
consumption after renovation: 31% 
●
Difference between simulated energy consumption after renovation and measured energy 
consumption after renovation: 36% 
●
Difference between calculated heat consumption after renovation and measured heating 
consumption after renovation: 19% 
●
Difference between simulated heat consumption after renovation and measured heat 
consumption after renovation: 40% 
●
Difference between electricity consumption and measured electricity consumption after 
Renovation: 100% 
●
Difference between simulated electricity consumption after renovation and measured 
electricity consumption after renovation: 21% 
●
The is huge differences between the calculated, measured and simulated consumptions.  
●
The simulation before renovation seem to be closer to the measured after renovation than the 
simulation after renovation is. 
 
From the calculation in table 5-1, it is concluded that a significant reduction in the energy 
consumption has occurred after renovation. The total calculated energy consumption would be 
reduced with 73,7% after the renovation is completed. 
For the measured and calculated consumption, prebound effect is seen. The measured values are much 
lower than the calculated, and referring to knowledge of occupants’ behavioural influence on energy 
consumption, this occupants’ consume less energy than expected. 
 
The measured consumption before renovation is based on the measurements conducted for an energy 
label conducted in 2004 (Energistyrelsen, 2005). The measurements after renovation are based on the 
data from KeepFocus, and data was converted from units to kWh/m​2​ year (KeepFocus, 2016-2017).  
5.2.2 Heat consumption and indoor air temperature after renovation 
The heat consumption is for water radiators controlled with a macro in the simulations. The measured 
and simulated heat consumption per year for all apartments is illustrated in figure 5-1. 
 
45 
==PAGE:51==
 
Figure 5-1: Measured and simulated heat consumption per year in all apartments in Korngården blok 3.  
 
The heat consumption vary significantly from apartment to apartment, and this is a general tendency 
for all apartments. Some have a very low consumption, less than 500 kWh per year while others have 
a high consumption above 5000 kWh. This tendency indicates, how large an influence occupants’ 
behavior has on the total energy consumption. Those with high heat consumption have a higher 
impact on the total energy consumption, than those with a lower heat consumption. The individuality 
is an expression for occupants’ behavioural patterns and comfort. 
 
Having a closer look at the individuality reveals that apartments at the same size and shape could have 
very different heat consumptions, as Aydin et al. pointed out in their study. The following can be 
extracted from the figure 5-2, figure 5-3 and figure 5-4 below: 
●
There is a very large variation between the selected apartments. There is a clear trend that in 
the apartment the heating consumption is considerably larger at ground floor and 3rd floor 
compared to 2nd and 1st floor. The simulation render the tendency but it may also be seen 
that there seemingly are quite large individual differences which most likely only can be 
assigned to occupants’ individual behavioural habits and demands. 
●
It would suggest that some apartments on 1st and 2nd floor hardly turn on the heating 
throughout the year. Again this only illustrates that the simulation does have some difficulties 
in capturing these differences. 
●
For the selected apartments a variation - some higher, some lower - between measured and 
simulated exemplifies that it can be really difficult to capture through simulation the 
seemingly very large difference in individual behaviour as to how much heat consumption is 
needed to fulfil personal wellbeing - thermal comfort - in the apartment. 
 
 
46 
==PAGE:52==
  
Figure 5-2: Measured and simulated heat consumption per year in 2 bedroom apartment, staircase 84. 
 
 
Figure 5-3: Measured and simulated heat consumption per year in 3 bedroom apartment, staircase 88.  
 
 
Figure 5-4: Measured and simulated heat consumption per year in 4 bedroom apartment, staircase 86. 
 
It is seen that differences between the measured and simulated heat consumption is not consistent; in 
some apartments the measured is lower than the simulated and opposite for other apartments. This 
indicates, that the simulation is not capable of adapting to the variation in measured consumption. 
However, the varying tendency of heat consumption is still clear if only looking at the measured heat 
47 
==PAGE:53==
consumption: occupants’ behaviour does influence the heat consumption, and variation in the total 
consumption occur.  
 
The heat consumption and indoor air temperature are closely connected. The measured and simulated 
indoor air temperature was compared in order to see if the simulations were able to obtain the 
measured values. The comparison of average values per year is illustrated in figure 5-5. 
 
 
Figure 5-5: Measured and simulated indoor air temperature in Korngården blok 3. The figure illustrates average values for 
all apartments per year. Differences between measured and simulated occur. 
 
Both measured and simulated indoor air temperature, are complying with the given design range in 
DS/EN 15251 Category II and III.  
It is illustrated, that differences between measured and simulated average indoor air temperature per 
year occur. Thus, it is interesting to look closer on the percentage difference, which is illustrated in 
figure 5-6.  
 
 
 
Figure 5-6: Deviation between average measured and simulated indoor air temperature (absolute value)  per year for all 
apartments in Korngården blok 3. Negative values represent when the measured indoor air temperature is higher than the 
simulated and the positive values represent when the simulated indoor air temperature is higher than the measured. 
 
The simulation has endeavoured to target that the deviation between the measured and the simulated 
averages in indoor air temperature in general is small. In doing so it is expected that the thermal 
comfort of the occupants - in average - throughout the year both in real life (measured) and and in the 
simulation is achieved.  
As it may be seen from figure 5-6 the individual  deviation typically is less than +/- 2℃ and on 
average of the population of apartments the deviation is zero. 
48 
==PAGE:54==
 
From table 5-1 it is evident that the simulation overestimates the total energy consumption quite 
substantially (54%). This was not in itself a result which was expect nor targeted.  
It is more a result of benchmarking that perception of thermal comfort of the occupants evidently is a 
governing parameter for individual adjustment of the energy consumed in the apartments. It is in all 
likelihood a matter of correlation of some of assumptions and parameters in the simulation tool. One 
topic could be the area of the radiators used in the simulation which may have been to high.  
The somehow biased overestimation of the total energy consumption does however not distort the 
overall picture of the occupants individual habits and behaviour and hence their direct influence on the 
deviations in total energy consumption.  
  
 
Figure 5-7: Simulated indoor air temperature on hourly [hours after new years] basis from 1. January 2017 to 7. January 
2017 in 3 apartments. 
 
Figure 5-7 illustrates the indoor air temperature in three 3 bedroom apartments in staircase 96 in the 
period from 1. January 2017 to 7. January 2017. The apartments have the same size, but the 
occupancy is different in two apartments. 3th has 2 occupants with schedule 1, 2th has 1 occupant 
with schedule 4 and 1th has 2 occupants with schedule 1 (see section 4.4.6 and appendix H for 
schedules). 
The figure illustrates that even though 96 3th and 96 1th have the same occupancy and professional 
activity, the indoor air temperature is 2℃ higher in 96 1th than in 96 3th. This difference underlines 
the theory pointed out by Aydin et al.  
 
5.2.3 Electricity consumption and indoor air temperature after renovation 
The electricity consumption (lighting only, i.e. excluding HVAC) for all apartments were simulated 
with the measured consumption as input. Figure 5-8 illustrates a compartment of the total simulated 
and measured electricity consumption for each apartment in Korngården blok 3 for a year (May 2016 
to May 2017). 
49 
==PAGE:55==
 
Figure 5-8: Comparison of total electricity consumption for simulated and measured situation. The comparison is illustrated 
for each apartment in Korngården blok 3. The electricity consumption has unit [kWh] and is the total for the apartment for a 
whole year from may 2016 to May 2017. 
 
The comparison illustrates that a deviation from the measured to the simulated consumption occur. 
The deviation happens for all apartments. The percentage deviation between measured and simulated 
consumption is illustrated in figure 5-9. 
 
 
Figure 5-9: Percentage deviation between measured and simulated electricity consumption for a year (May 2016 to May 
2017) at Korngården blok 3. Positive value indicates that the simulated values is larger than the measured, and negative 
value indicates that the measured value is larger than the simulated value. 
 
In figure 5-9 the positive value indicates that the simulated values are larger than the measured, and 
negative value indicates that the measured value is larger than the simulated value. The majority of the 
comparison have positive value which means that the overall tendency is that the simulated values are 
higher than the measured values.  
 
The vast majority of the apartments have a deviation under 10%, and only five have deviation above 
10%. The simple average difference, i.e. not accounting for difference in area of the apartments is 
+5%. This result indicates that the simulation and measurements are well correlated, thus the input 
and results from the simulation program represent a fairly true picture. 
50 
==PAGE:56==
 
A deviation between measured and simulated consumption (simulated greater) was expected based on 
the knowledge from previous studies. This is however in contradiction to result in the studie from 
Gram-Hanssen et al., where the measured consumption was higher than the calculated consumption. 
The results for electricity consumption means that the simulation would predict a higher amount of 
energy consumed than what would actually be consumed in reality.  
It also indicates that somewhere in the simulation, electricity must be added to the measured 
consumption, otherwise the deviation would have been 0. However, it seems prudent to assign a 
commentary to the total deviation in the total electricity consumption, i.e. the mentioned +27% in 
table 5-1. It would appear quite logical to assign the deviance to HVAC which aside electricity is the 
overriding remaining parameter in the total electricity consumption in the simulation program.  
 
A comparison of all apartments illustrates an overall tendency for the general electricity consumption; 
all apartments have individual and very varying values regardless of if it is measured or simulated 
consumption. To exemplify this observation figure 5-10, figure 5-11 and figure 5-12 illustrates how 
the electricity consumption varies for apartments at same size and shape, which underlines the 
findings in the study conducted by Santangelo et al., namely that there is a significant difference in the 
electricity consumptions through the occupants and their behaviour. 
 
 
Figure 5-10: Measured electricity consumption per year for 2 bedroom apartments located at different floors in stairway 84 
right side. 
 
Figure 5-11: Measured electricity consumption per year for 3 bedroom apartments located at different floors in stairway 88 
right side. 
 
51 
==PAGE:57==
 
Figure 5-12: Measured electricity consumption per year for 4 bedroom apartments located at different floors in stairway 86. 
 
The apartments represent 2 bedroom, 3 bedroom and 4 bedroom apartments at different floors in the 
building. The apartments were chosen randomly from the floor plan, but the tendency is general for all 
apartments.  
The difference between the consumed energy for electricity emphasize the findings from the study 
conducted by Aydin et al. The differences indicated how large an influence occupants’ behaviour and 
habits have on the buildings’ performance. The measurements from 2 bedroom  apartments illustrates 
significant differences where the consumption measured in 84 st th is 4 times, corresponding to 75%, 
higher than the consumption measured in 84 3th. The difference from 84 st th and 84 1th and 84 2th 
are 40% and 70%. 
 
5.2.4 Comparison of simulations before and after renovation 
The purpose of simulating before and after renovation was to determine whether occupants change 
their behaviour as Gram-Hanssen and Hansen argued based on their findings.  
By simulating the buildings as they were before and after renovation with the control macros for 
heating and electricity, the comparison would reveal if behavioural changes occur.  
 
The comparison of average indoor air temperature in all apartments is illustrated in  figure 5-13. 
 
 
Figure 5-13: Average indoor air temperature in all apartments for simulation before and after renovation.  
 
52 
==PAGE:58==
The average differences between the average indoor air temperature before and after renovation 
corresponds to 0,34 degree celsius.  
This means that the simulations are very close to the same indoor air temperatures. To be able to look 
determine whether the behaviour changed, the indoor air temperature is held up against the heat 
consumption. 
The measured heat consumptions was 42,8 kWh/m​2​ year for simulation before renovation and 51 
kWh/m​2​ year for simulation after renovation. From this, there are no identification of behavioural 
change, though it seem strange that the consumption was lower before than after. This could indicate 
that the simulation of before renovation might not be good enough. 
 
The electricity consumption however, is very close for before and after; 11,8 kWh/m​2​ year before 
renovation and 13,4 kWh/m​2​ year after renovation. This indicates that occupants did not change their 
behaviour from prior to renovation to post renovation.  
5.3 Indoor environment 
The indoor environment was forecast to be optimized after renovation of Korngården. The following 
presents the results found from simulations and measurements. The results will be compared and 
analyzed. 
 
Ventilation and air quality  
The measured values for ventilation, which were input to the simulated model. These values do not 
comply with the minimum requirements for ventilation rates in residentials in DS/EN 15251. This 
indicates that the ventilation system might not be able to deliver the expected better indoor 
environment. Though the values do not comply, they are close to Category III limit. As an example, 
90 2th has supply and return air for CAV 0,299 l/s per m​2​ and 92 2th has 0,289 l/s per m​2​.  
 
The indoor air quality include CO​2​ concentration and air age. The air age indicates, how old the air in 
the zone is. The air age was only simulated, but since the input for simulation is based on 
measurement the results could be used for identification of how well the ventilation system functions. 
The average air age for apartments is illustrated in figure 5-14. 
 
 
Figure 5-14: Average simulated air age per year for each apartment in Korngården blok 3. The air age indicates how old 
the air in the zone is before new air is supplied. 
 
53 
==PAGE:59==
The average air age does not exceed 1,2 hour. In 81 % of the apartments the air age is less than 1 hour, 
whereas in 50% of the apartments the air age is less than 0,6 hour. This means, that the air in the 
zones are not older than 1,2 hour before new air is supplied. Based on this, the ventilation system is 
able to maintain good indoor air quality. It is quite remarkable that the air age in apartments in ground 
floor and 3rd is only half of the air age in apartments in 1st and 2nd floor. 
 
The average CO​2​ concentration above outdoor concentration for all apartments in Korngården blok 3 
is illustrated in figure 5-15.  
 
Figure 5-15: Average simulated CO​2​ concentration per year for all apartments in Korngården blok 3. 
 
The average CO​2​ concentration lies within the range of 400 PPM and ca. 600 PPM.  75% of the 
apartments correspond to Category II and 25% of the apartments correspond 500 to Category III 
according to DS/EN 15251. 
 
It could be concluded from the results presented, that the air quality generally is good, and the indoor 
environment based on this would be good. The ventilation system is able to maintain good indoor air 
quality which comply with requirements from the Danish building regulations and DS/EN 15251 in 
all apartments because of the low average air age and average CO​2​ concentration. 
 
Relative humidity 
The simulated average relative humidity per year for all apartments in Korngården blok 3 is illustrated 
in figure 5-16. The average relative humidity does not illustrate the maximum values and minimum 
value or the fluctuations within these values, but gives an overall indication of how the relative 
humidity is. 
 
 
Figure 5-16: Simulated average relative humidity per year for all apartments in Korngården blok 3.  
 
54 
==PAGE:60==
The average relative humidity for apartments after renovation is above 20% which according to 
DS/EN 15251, and the given design ranges that relative humidity should be within, corresponds to 
Category III. 63,5% of the apartments have an average relative humidity above 25% corresponding to 
Category II. 
 
When comparing the simulated and measured relative humidity a difference occur which is illustrated 
in figure 5-17. 
 
Figure 5-17: Comparison of measured and simulated average relative humidity per year for all apartments in Korngården 
blok 3. The measured relative humidity is higher than the simulated. 
 
The measured relative humidity values are higher than the simulated, and hence most values are 
within 30-50% it corresponds to Category I. This means, that the simulation does not correlate fully 
with the measured. If the simulation has been used for prediction of the relative humidity after 
renovation, it would have resulted in a worse indoor environment and therefore maybe a worse 
evaluation of the building. 
 
Since the measured relative humidity generally is higher than the simulated, the percentage deviation 
between them is illustrated in figure 5-18. 
 
55 
==PAGE:61==
 
Figure 5-18: Percentage deviation between measured and simulated average relative humidity per year for all apartments in 
Korngården blok 3. The deviation is in most apartments 20% or above, which indicates that the simulation was not sufficient 
and true to reality. 
 
The deviation indicates, that the simulation was not sufficient and true to reality, since large 
deviations between measured and simulated relative humidity occur. For almost all apartments the 
deviation is higher than 20% and in some apartments the deviation is 30%, 40% and even 50%, which 
is a lot, since the perfect outcome would have been 0 or close to 0. 
This result emphasize the fact, that the simulation in the case of relative humidity does not comply 
with reality. 
 
 
 
 
56 
==PAGE:62==
6 Discussion 
Throughout the entire project, assumptions and choices have been made. These lead to some 
uncertainties and simplifications of the simulation model. The method and results are discussed in this 
section.  
 
Previous studies 
Previous studies indicated that there was a gap between the measured and theoretically calculated 
energy consumptions for single family buildings. Further, there was consensus that something needed 
to be done to enlighten on this gap. Some of the studies point at occupants’ behaviour as an important 
but an overlooked parameter in the calculations. The theoretical calculations does not take occupants’ 
behaviour into account, which might be the reason for the large energy gap that arise. It could be 
discussed whether the occupants’ behavior should be included and more importantly how?  
Occupants behaviour has been very difficult to define because of the individuality on many 
parameters. People do not live their lives the same way, and therefore it is hard to determines one way 
of including occupants behavior. One study has standardized the behaviour based on observations on 
when people perform different tasks such as sleeping, cooking etc. It could be discussed whether the 
standardized behavioural patterns are adequate in order to be able to determine occupants’ influence 
on the energy consumption and indoor environment. Since occupants’ behavioural patterns are 
varying due to employment, habits and family structures, maybe this should be taken into account in 
future calculations. 
 
Interview 
From the interview with the anthropologist information about occupants’ behaviour, the perception of 
energy and indoor environment and the approaches made in the renovation in order to motivate and 
change their behavior into being more aware of energy consumption and indoor environment. This 
knowledge about behavioural patterns and perception of energy and indoor environment was used to 
describing some of the aspects of the results. The interview performed by the anthropologist was short 
time after tenants had moved back to the renovated apartments. It could be discussed whether the 
findings from these preliminary interviews are still the current situation at Korngården, or whether 
people just had to have time to adjust to their new and more energy optimized home. 
It was found, that occupants are distanced from some aspects of the energy consumption and indoor 
environment. The interview further revealed that people are interested in energy, but the approaches 
have not fully been integrated yet. This arise questions about, how people would be answering if 
interviews were performed one year after moving back to their energy optimized homes.  
 
Simulations 
The building was simplified in the model, because it was only necessary to have the overall structure 
of the building in order to simulate the energy consumption and indoor environment. The 
simplification of the building implies that the apartments had no interior walls. This is unrealistic, and 
the interior walls would have an impact on the indoor environment and energy consumption. Interior 
walls have the purpose of separating rooms, which could cause varying temperatures inside rooms in 
an apartment. With the way the building was simulated in this project, the temperature in the whole 
apartment would be the same as what was measured in the actual building. In reality this might vary to 
a certain extent depending on the individual rooms.  
57 
==PAGE:63==
In connection to this, the placement of the measurement in the apartment should be taken into 
consideration. The measurements were conducted with a position of the temperature sensor in the 
hallway in the apartment. This is however not quite where people spend most of their time, compared 
to living room and bedroom. Thus, it could be questioned whether the measured temperatures are fully 
representable for the simulations because the simulation programme heated the entire zone to the set 
point temperature. A simple sensitivity test where the theoretical occupant´s position is shifted in the 
apartment show however only little variation in the estimated temperature and as such it is reasonable 
to conclude that the position of the sensor is reasonably representative. 
 
The modelling of water radiators and floor heating corresponds to information delivered by the 
contractor, but the set up properties was partly assumed. The placement of radiators under windows 
was assumed from this information. The floor heating in the bathroom was modelled as a square in the 
floor, modelled from the floor plan. Since there was no interior walls in the zones, the boundaries of 
the bathrooms were not established. This would affect the heating and electricity consumption, since 
the heating would spread to the whole zone.  
It could be questioned, how large an influence this would have on the total energy and electrical 
consumption for the whole simulation. In this simulation, the simplification was accepted, since it was 
assumed that the impact would be small since the area typically is small compared to the gross total 
area of the apartment. 
 
The ventilation system in the apartments were based on information from the contractor. The 
measured values from all apartment were set up in the model. The ventilation system was a CAV 
system including exhaust and an extractor. The simulation of this was simplified setting up three air 
handling units; the CAV system and two return air only, which should simulate the extractor. They 
were set with a measurement of the extractor in forced and unforced function.  
The method used were the best way in IDA ICE, but it does not correspond completely to reality. The 
measurement represent extremes of the exhaust, but it is not certain, that occupants use the extractor 
with highest possible performance. Though, this would impact the ventilation in the zone, the impact 
would not make the results unrealistic, since the extractor is only used during cooking. 
 
Schedules and occupancy 
The schedules in the model could be discussed as well. Schedules for occupancy and cooking were 
applied. Since the schedules were set up by the author, they were based on assumptions. These are 
appraised as realistic as possible, but still the schedules were standardized. It is not fully realistic that 
occupants would behave the same way every day for example in comparing working days with 
weekends and vacation periods are not captured either.  
Additionally, the occupancy schedules were based on type of occupant delivered by DAB and as such 
based on validated data. The assumptions made from these data would appear quite close to reality. 
Six different types of occupants were living at Korngården, which meant that six schedules were 
developed. The schedules distinguished between how many occupants were living in the apartment 
and their professional employment. Even though the types varies, the schedules in the zones were set 
up to be the same occupancy pattern for work days and weekends. Further, the occupancy schedules 
were standardized for the type of occupants, pertaining to if the occupant was unemployed, employed 
or retired. So all in all the schedules were based on justified assumptions and as such it is believed that 
the simulation represents a realistic behavioral pattern.  
 
58 
==PAGE:64==
Uncertainties handling data and results 
The measured data from the apartments delivered by KeepFocus included indoor air temperature, 
heating consumption and relative humidity per hour for a year for all apartments in blok 3. The data 
was manually split from one large spreadsheet to individual spreadsheets for each apartments with 
information about indoor air temperature, heat consumption and relative humidity. Handling that 
many data as delivered by KeepFocus was very time consuming.  
The climate file was created by the author from comparison of data from DTU Climate station and 
Copenhagen Airport Climate Station. The two dataset were compared and combined, which could 
lead to small variations due to location changes in the weather. However, the created climate file used 
in the simulations is more accurate than if a standard climate file was used. 
The data delivered from the simulation include an overall building performance and results for each 
apartment. The data was handled manually and presented as results. Besides the time consuming 
process this was, some uncertainties arise when data was exported from IDA ICE. 
 
Energy, heat and electricity consumption 
Electricity consumption for simulations was close to the measured consumption for both before and 
after renovation. The small deviations could be attributed for uncertainties in the simulation models 
such as the ventilation system for the renovated building. 
However, the simulations for energy and specially heat consumption was not consistent with the 
measured consumptions, neither before or after renovation.  
For simulation of the renovated building, the heat consumption was 40% which is a huge difference, 
even larger than between the calculated and measured. A theory could be that the ventilation system 
and heating system was not attuned properly in the model, which cause a higher heat consumption.  
For simulation of the non-renovated building the consumption was remarkably low compared to the 
measured. This problem could be attributed to the model. There could be some uncertainties that 
caused the low consumption.  
Though the consumptions were differential from reality, the tendencies when comparing heat 
consumption and indoor air temperature underlined the hypothesis, that occupants’ behaviour 
influence both energy consumption and indoor environment. 
The simulations could be questioned because of the remarkable results that are not in accordance with 
reality.  
 
Indoor air temperature 
The simulated indoor air temperature was found to be very close the measured. This indicates that the 
control macro for heating in water radiators were able to comply with the setpoint. The indoor air 
temperature was found to be within Category III and II according to DS/EN 15251, and it was found 
that three similar apartments had different temperatures varying 2℃. This underlined the fact, that 
occupants’ behaviour have a large influence in the energy consumption, because people focus on their 
own comfort in the apartment - some people like it warmer than others.  
The indoor air temperature was additionally used for comparison of simulations before and after 
renovation, and it was seen that the temperatures vary with only 0,3℃, which in connection with heat 
consumption and interview indicates that occupants did not on purpose change their behaviour after 
renovation of the building.  
The indoor air was compared as average values, and from the simulations there could be time where 
the temperature was lower or higher. Especially the model of the building before renovation had large 
fluctuations over time in some apartments. It could be discussed whether the average temperature is 
59 
==PAGE:65==
representative regarding thermal comfort, but for indicating and pointing out occupants’ behaviour it 
was concluded that the average value per year was enough. 
 
Rebound/prebound effect 
Based on knowledge from the literature study, rebound effect was expected when starting 
investigating the measurements from inside apartments and the simulated results. But from the energy 
and heat consumption for the measured values the opposite happens; prebound effect. Occupants 
consume less energy than expected, which does not confirm Gram-Hanssen and Hansen’s theories. 
This was surprising.  This arise questions whether Gram-Hanssen and Hansen’s theory does not 
comply with apartment buildings or only single family houses.  
 
Indoor air quality 
The average simulated CO​2​ concentration is within Category II and III. This indicates, that the 
ventilation system alone is able to keep up with the requirements. Though the results are satisfying, it 
could be discussed how accurate they are. The CO​2​ concentration is dependent on occupants’ 
behaviour. The occupants in the model were partly based on stereotype assumptions and therefore the 
results could look different in reality. Another aspect is, that the simulation does not take window 
openings into account. This aspect could influence the CO​2​ concentration highly. However, that 
results could be argued to be realistic, since the assumptions were true to reality. 
The air age after renovation has been improved, because of the ventilation system. Before renovation 
occupants had to open windows themselves, which could cause bad indoor air quality.  
It is remarkable, that apartments located at ground floor and 3rd floor have a lower air age than 
apartments located at 1st and 2nd floor, but the CO​2​ concentration is close to the same for all 
apartments. The lower air age would suggest that more energy is consumed in order for the ventilation 
system to supply new air, and to maintain the indoor air temperature.  
When comparing the heat consumption in figure 5-3, 5-4 and 5-5 with air age in figure 5-14 the 
connection between the suggestion described for lower air age and higher heat consumption could be 
argued to be underlined.  
 
Relative humidity 
Relative humidity is a factor that is very hard to predict, because it is highly influenced by the 
occupants. When cooking, taking showers and other activities that include water the relative humidity 
is consequently subject to variation. In the simulations the occupancy was based on assumptions that 
did not include activities such as taking a bath, and therefore the results from simulations are 
questionable. Though the assumptions was not fitted to reality, the results succeeded to fulfill the 
requirements in DS/EN 15251 Category III and II. The measurements from KeepFocus obtained 
Category I and II, which indicates that the ventilation system performs very well.  
Because of the difference between the measured and simulated relative humidity, it could be discussed 
how accurate the simulation tools is with regards to predicting relative humidity. The results from 
simulations would have lead to a worse evaluation of the building than the building would have 
received in reality. 
It could be argued that the lack of fully representative occupants’ behaviour in the model illustrates 
how the occupants’ behaviour impact the indoor environment. In this case occupants influence the 
indoor environment positively since the measured relative humidity corresponds to Category I og II. 
60 
==PAGE:66==
Subsequent investigations 
In continuation to this thesis, it could be interesting to investigate if the simulations could be 
improved. Both the energy and heat consumption were significant higher for the simulation than the 
calculated and measured consumptions.  
In this project the measured indoor air temperature fit the measured values, but the heat consumption 
did not. The overall tendency about occupants’ behaviour and the influence it has on the energy and 
heat consumption has been pointed out and described in this thesis. It would in any case be interesting 
if the simulated heat consumption could be fitted to the measured, since the tendency and conclusions 
about the influence of occupants’ behaviour on energy consumption then would be mere accurate. 
However, the energy consumption an especially the heat consumption could be investigated deeper to 
figure out why such large deviations between calculated, measured and simulated consumptions 
occur. 
Including hot water in the simulation could also b an aspect that could be interesting to investigate. In 
this project hot water was not considered, but it would have an impact on the energy consumption 
indeed. 
 
The understanding of occupants’ behaviour and occupants’ perception of energy and indoor 
environment could be investigated more detailed through interviews. The interview could give an 
honest and deeper understanding of how people behave, why they behave the way they do and most 
importantly if their behavior has changed after the renovation. 
It was planned that further interviews should have been conducted in this thesis, but due to technical 
issues at Korngården it was not possible for the anthropologist and the author of this thesis to conduct 
the interviews.  
 
Additionally, development of the simulation model including occupants behaviour and stochastic 
models for window opening would perhaps cause changes in the consumed energy. Peoples’ window 
opening habits underlines the theories about occupants’ influence on the energy consumption, which 
is why window opening could contribute to a even more realistic simulation. 
 
61 
==PAGE:67==
7 Conclusion 
Renovation project complying with the by law enforced Danish regulations have a very clear and 
positive impact on the energy effectiveness of buildings. This is very clearly seen from both 
calculated and monitored values for heat and electrical consumption. 
 
Occupants’ behaviour have a significant influence on particular the heat consumption but also on 
electrical consumption. This observation is also very distinct in both the monitored and the simulated 
values for heat and electrical consumption. 
 
The present study has, based on analyses of in the order of 1,100,000 measurements on indoor air 
temperature and electricity consumption from the 63 apartments in the renovation project of 
Korngården in Ballerup, through use of the simulations tool IDA ICE reached a conclusion that there 
are very significant differences in the heat - and to some extent electrical - consumption in the 
individual apartments. This is seemingly influenced very heavily by individual behaviour of  the 
occupants since the technical properties of the apartments by no means display such differences. On 
the contrary the apartments are very alike in the technical properties. Aside the many measurements 
from the apartments the simulation tool also make use of tailor made climate data also using hourly 
assessment of relevant weather (outdoor air temperature, relative humidity, wind speed and direction, 
skycover, direct normal radiation and diffuse radiation) to provided an as accurate as possible 
boundary condition for the simulations. 
 
From the present study it has also been observed that the difference in the tenants’ behaviour is quite 
difficult to assess the overall effect of. This said, for some apartment the simulations estimate a 
somewhat higher total energy consumption but also in some cases a lower consumption. 
 
Hence simulations using for example IDA ICE  may only partly be able to reveal the full achievable 
energy reduction in connection with for example renovation projects. 
 
Should a more complete understanding of the differences in the occupants’ influence on the energy 
effectiveness or overall consumption in an apartment, it is concluded that an in-depth and very 
structure mapping of the occupants’ behavioural patterns will be needed. This is envisaged to involved 
interviews and/or in other way meticulous surveys for each apartment. The surveys would then be 
used to ascertain and adapt “behavioural adjustment factors” to the current version of the simulations 
tool.  
 
Additionally it was concluded from both interview and comparison of simulations before and after 
renovation that occupants living in Korngård did not change their behaviour from prior renovation to 
post renovation. It was concluded from interviews, that one reason for the lack of behavioral change 
was the tenants lack of motivation for changing, and partly not understanding how to change.  
 
The present study has selected to use the simulations so that the indoor temperatures measured and the 
simulation tool are aligned. Seemingly this lead to an overestimations of particularly the heat 
consumptions. It is however appraised that this does not distort the overall finding that the personal 
62 
==PAGE:68==
habits and preferences of the occupants has a very significant role when estimating the total energy 
consumption. As such the present study concur to other recent relevant studies which indicates similar 
observations and conclusions. 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
==PAGE:69==
8 References 
 
Andersen, Rune Korsholm, ​“Occupant behavior with regard to control of the indoor environment”​, 
PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark, 2009.
 
 
Andersen, Rune Korsholm, ​“The influence of occupants’ behaviour on energy consumption 
investigated in 290 identical dwellings and in 35 apartments”, ​ Technical University of Denmark, 
Denmark, 2012. 
 
Andersen, Rune Korsholm, “​Occupant behaviour, Indoor environment and energy consumption”​, 
Lecture slides, 11222 Indoor Climate, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark, 2017. 
 
Antropologisk, 2018 
http://antropologisk.dk/antropologisk-metode/​ [visited january 2018] 
 
Aydin, Erdal; Brounen, Dirk; Kok, Nils, ​“The Rebound Effect in Residential Heating”​, Netherlands, 
2013. 
 
Bolius, ​“Energimærkning af boliger”​, 2006, updated 2016. 
https://www.bolius.dk/energimaerkning-af-boliger-17155/ 
 
Bolius, Kathrine Schmeichel​, “Hvor høj må luftfugtigheden være indendørs?”, ​2016 
 
BrancheFællesskabet for Arbejdsmiljø, Velfærd og Offentlig administration, 
www.indeklimaportalen.dk​ [visited January 2018]. 
 
Brohus, Henrik; Heiselberg, Per Kvols; Simonsen, Allan; Sørensen and Kim C., ​“Influence of 
Occupants’ Behaviour on the Energy Consumption of Domestic Buildings”​, Aalborg Universitet, 
Aalborg, 2010. 
 
Brohus, Henrik; Heiselberg, Per Kvols; Simonsen, A.; Sørensen, K.C., ​“Uncertainty of Energy 
Consumption Assessment of Domestic Buildings”​, Aalborg Universitet, in: Building Simulation 2009, 
pp. 1022-1029.  
 
Barthelmes, V. M.; Andersen, R. K.; Bahnfleth, W.; Corgnati, S. P. and Rode, C., ​“profiling 
Occupant Behaviour in Danish Dwellings using Time Use Survey Data - Part I: Data Description and 
Activity Profiling”,​ cobee 2018, Melbourne, Australia, 2018.  
 
Barthelmes, V. M.; Andersen, R. K.; Bahnfleth, W.; Corgnati, S. P. and Rode, C., ​“profiling 
Occupant Behaviour in Danish Dwellings using Time Use Survey Data - Part II: Time-related 
Factors and Occupancy”,​ cobee 2018, Melbourne, Australia, 2018.  
 
Copenhagen Airport Climate Station, Weather Underground  
https://www.wunderground.com/history/airport/EKCH​ [visited December 2017]. 
64 
==PAGE:70==
 
Dansk Almennyttigt Boligselskab (DAB), ​“Velkommen til Korngården”, updated 2017, ​[visited 
January 2018]. 
https://www.dabbolig.dk/ballerup-almennyttige-boligselskab/afdelingsoversigt/korngaarden/korngaar
den/ 
 
Dansk Almennyttigt Boligselskab (DAB), Dominia and Domus Arkitekter, ​”Korngården 
Helhedsplan”​, 2013. 
http://www.domus.dk/node/192 
http://www.dominia.dk/referencer/korngaarden/ 
 
Dansk Almennyttigt Boligselskab (DAB), Dominia A/S and Domus Arkitekter, ​“Korngården 
besluttende beboermøde 25/2/2013”​, 2013. 
 
Dansk Byggeri, ​“Byggeriets Energianalyse 2017”, ​2017. 
 
de Wilde, Pieter​ - “The gap between predicted and measured energy performance of buildings: A 
framework for investigation” - Plymouth University, UK, 2014. 
 
Dominia A/S; Domus Arkitekter, Plantegninger, Snit, Detaljetegninger og Opstalter. 
Udleveret af Projektleder Jesper Ring, September 2017. 
 
DS/EN 15251, ​“Input-parametre til indeklima ved design og bestemmelse af bygningers 
energimæssige ydeevne vedrørende indendørs luftkvalitet, termisk miljø, belysning og akustik”, ​Dansk 
Standard, 2007. 
 
DS/EN ISO 13790, ​“Bygningers energieffektivitet - Beregning af energiforbrug til rumopvarmning og 
-køling”​, 2nd edition, Dansk Standard, 2008. 
 
DTU Climate Station, Department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 
http://climatestationdata.byg.dtu.dk​, [visited 05.12.2017] 
 
Energistyrelsen, “​Energimærkning af Boliger”​, 2013 (updated 2016). 
http://sparenergi.dk/forbruger/boligen/energimaerkning-boliger​ [visited september 2017] 
 
Energistyrelsen,​ “Betydning af lavenergiklasserne for byggebranchen”​, 2014. 
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Energibesparelser/copenhagen_economics_2014_-_betydningen_af_la
venergiklasserne_7_november.pdf​ [visited 25.10.2017] 
 
Energistyrelsen, Energimærke 2006, version 3.05, 28.12.2005 
 
Energistyrelsen; SparEnergi.dk, Forbruger, El, Dit forbrug, ​“Sådan bruger du strømmen”, ​2012 
(updated 2017). 
https://sparenergi.dk/forbruger/el/dit-elforbrug​ [visited 22.11.2017] 
 
65 
==PAGE:71==
Energistyrelsen, SparEnergi.dk, Forbruger > El > Køl og frys, ​“Alt om køleskabe og frysere”​, 2012 
(updated 2017). 
https://sparenergi.dk/forbruger/el/koel-og-frys​ [visited 24.11.2017] 
 
Fleur, Lina La; Moshfegh, Bahram and Rohdin, Patrik, ​“Measured and predicted energy use and 
indoor climate before and after a major renovation of an apartment building in Sweden”​, Sweden, 
2016. 
 
Gram-Hanssen, Kirsten and Hansen, Anders Rhiger, ​“Forskelle mellem målt og beregnet 
energiforbrug til opvarmning af parcelhuse”, ​Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut, Aalborg Universitet 
København, 2016. 
 
Guerra-Santin, O.; Herrera, N. Romero; Cuerda, C.; Keyson, D., ​“Mixed methods approach to 
determine occupants’ behaviour – Analysis of two case studies”​, 2016. 
 
Guerra-Santin, Olivia; Itard, Laure​“Occupants' behaviour: determinants and effects on residential 
heating consumption”​, Building Research & Information​ ​pp. 318-338, 2010. 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09613211003661074?scroll=top&needAccess=true 
 
Institut for Kultur og Samfund, Aarhus Universitet, 2017. 
http://metodeguiden.au.dk/kvalitativ-metode/​ ​[visited January 2018]. 
 
Jensen, Ole Michael; Hansen, Anders Rhiger and Kragh, Jesper, ​“Market response to the public 
display of energy performance rating at property sales”​, København, Danmark, 2015. 
 
KeepFocus, measurements from apartments, 2016-2017. 
 
Klima-, Energi- og Bygningsministeriet, ​“Strategi for energirenovering af bygninger, Vejen til 
energieffektive bygninger i fremtidens Danmark”​, 2014. 
 
Landsbyggefonden; Bech-Danielsen, Claus; Christensen, Gunvor, ​“Boligområder i bevægelse: 
Fortællinger om fysiske og boligsociale indsatser i anledning af Landsbyggefondens 50 års 
jubilæum”, ​Kapitel 2; Tilgængelighed, 2017. 
 
Santangelo, Angela and Tondelli, Simona, ​“Occupant behaviour and building renovation of the social 
housing stock: Current and future challenges”, ​University of Bologna, Department of Architecture, 
Italy, 2017. 
 
strøm.dk - El-forbrug Prisberegner, 2017 [visited 24.11.2017]. 
 
Thomsen, Kirsten Egelund; Rose, Jørgen; Mørck, Ove; Jensen, Søren Østergaard; Østergaard, Iben; 
Knudsen, Henrik N. and Bergsøe, Niels C., ​“Energy consumption and indoor climate in a residential 
building before and after comprehensive energy retrofitting”, ​Danmark, 2015.
 
 
Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, “​Bygningsreglementet 2010”​, 2010. 
 
66 
==PAGE:72==
Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, “​Bygningsreglementet 2015”​, 2015. 
 
Yu, Zhang; Fung, Benjamin C. W.; Haghighat, Fariborz; Yoshino, Hiroshi and Morofsky, Edward, ​"A 
systematic procedure to study the influence of occupant behaviour on building energy consumption", 
Energy and Buildings, pp. 1409-1417, 2011.  
 
 
Photo of Korngården: 
https://www.dabbolig.dk/ballerup-almennyttige-boligselskab/afdelingsoversigt/korngaarden/korngaar
den/ 
 
http://www.domus.dk/node/192 
 
 
 
 
67 
==PAGE:73==
10 Appendix 
 
Appendix A 
IDA ICE model before renovation 
 
Full-Blok3-endelig.idm 
 
 
Appendix B 
IDA ICE model after renovation 
 
Full-Blok3-before-renovation.idm 
 
 
 
Appendix C 
 
Building properties before and after renovation 
 
Folder called “Appendix C_Building envelope before and after renovation” 
 
Be10 calculations from DOMINIA A/S 
 
 
Appendix D 
 
Measured ventilation values from Air-Tekniq ApS, 2017 
 
Excel file called “Appendix D_Ventilation after renovation 
 
 
Appendix E 
Input files for macro controlling heating 
Folder called “Appendix E_input file (prn and excel) indoor air temperature” 
 
Contains .xlsx and .prn files for all apartments in Korngården blok 3  
68 
==PAGE:74==
Used as source-file for macro controlling heating. 
 
 
Appendix F 
Input files for macro controlling heating 
Folder called “Appendix F_input file (prn, txt and excel) electricity consumption” 
 
Contains .xlsx, .txt and .prn files for all apartments in Korngården blok 3  
Used as source-file for macro controlling electricity consumption. 
 
 
Appendix G 
Folder called “Appendix G_Occupants” 
2 .xlsx files with number of occupants in blok 3 Korngården and professional activity 
(employed, retired etc.) 
 
Appendix G1_Beboertyper i lejlighed kopi 
Appendix G2_Beboertyper blok 3 kopi 
 
 
 
 
69 
==PAGE:75==
Appendix H 
Occupants schedules 
 
The following schedules were set up based on information about tenants living af 
Korngården and their professional activities. 
 
Schedule 1 
 
Single with one child, unemployed 
 
 
 
Schedule 2 
Single with one child, employed 
70 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
Schedule 3 
Couple with child(ren), both employed 
 
 
Schedule 4 
Single, retired/unemployed 
71 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
Schedule 5 
Single, employed 
 
 
Schedule 6 
Couple, employed 
72 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
 
 
 
73 
==PAGE:79==
Appendix I 
Interview with anthropologist Babette Paulicke Slott from Institute of Technology. 
The audio-file could be supplied by requesting the author. 
 
Interview, 07.11.2017 kl. 10.00 
 
Navn: Babette Peulicke Slott 
Firma: Teknologisk Institut 
Stilling: Konsulent, Energi-antropolog 
Interviewer: Cecilie Bæksted 
 
Transskribering: 
[Indledende samtale om kandidat afhandlingens fokus] 
 
Babette: Har du arbejdet med performance gap og rebound effect? 
 
Cecilie: Ja, præcis. 
 
Babette: Lige præcis. For det kan man sige er det første der falder en ind, og særligt i 
forhold til, altså jo mere energieffektive de var beregnet til at skulle være, jo dårligere, jo 
større forskel er der. 
 
Cecilie: Ja, lige præcis. 
 
Babette: … Og det er jo også lige præcis det du nævner, med de der A-mærkede bygninger, 
og det er både parcelhuse, men også hele vejen op til kæmpe kontorbygninger med 
tusindvis af kvadratmeter, ikk’. 
 
Cecilie: Jo. 
 
Babette: Jeg laver jo ret mange studier. Jeg har ret mange projekter kørende på samme tid 
lige nu, ikk’. Så det er meget “hele perspektivet”. Jeg har meget i forhold til store 
kontorbygninger og intelligente bygninger, og det giver også mening i forhold til Korngården. 
 
Cecilie: Ja … 
 
Babette: Når man begynder at automatisere en masse ting og man får en masse data, hvad 
gør det så? Jeg har jo ikke nogle konklusioner lige nu, for projekterne er stadig i gang. Men 
mine konklusioner er, at det mangler ligesom en forventningsafstemning, for den 
forventningsafstemning vi laver er ikke god nok i forhold til nye bygninger og at ting er 
intelligente og skal være energieffiktive. For jeg plejer at sige, at hvis nu (kommenterer på en 
flue der generer) at jeg siger, at denne her bil den kører 26 km på 1 liter brændstof. Så 
tænker du “det kommer an på hvordan jeg kører den”. Så langt er vi kommet, at det kommer 
an på sidder du i kø, kører du på motorvej, kører du på landevej, det har ligesom en 
74 
==PAGE:80==
indflydelse. Det har vi oparbejdet, at det jeg kommer ind i bilen, har betydning. Så nej, den 
kører ikke altid, hele tiden 26 km på en liter vel. Og det er som om, at den har vi ikke helt for 
bygninger. Man har sådan, den der … hvordan skal man sige det … enormt store tillid til 
teknologi. Vi får hele tiden at vide, at teknologi kan løse vores problemer, så vi får ligesom 
oparbejdet denne her forventning til teknologien, og så kan vi læne os tilbage og ikke røre en 
finger. Og som du siger så kan man jo bare have gulvvarme på hele året  
 
Cecilie: [ja, ja, hele året] 
 
Babette: Og det er der, at det ser ud som om at det går galt, rigtig meget. Man får ligesom 
lovet, at når først denne her bygning er blevet renoveret eller når først vi har bygget den, og 
først har installeret denne her teknologi, så er det lavenergi. Uden egentlig at få snakket om, 
at det kommer selvfølgelig an på, hvad du gør i den bygning. 
 
Cecilie: Ja 
 
Babette: Og så har folk bare en kæmpe fest, og skruer op, og har ikke den der forståelse for 
konsekvenserne. Og så er der jo også alt det her med indeklima. Vi plejer at koble indeklima 
op på energi, fordi… 
 
Cecilie: Ja, det hænger sammen 
 
Babette: Ja, og det er sådan noget som vækker genklang for folk. Det kan man forholde sig 
til, hvor energi, hvad er det? Det er så fluffy. 
 
Cecilie: Ja, det er en regning hvert år 
 
Babette: Præcis, og så tænker man ikke mere over det. Det giver super god mening. 
 
Babette: Hvad så, kan du se ud fra dit data, hvad der er menneskeskabt eller? 
 
Cecilie: Nej, det er der jeg tænker at jeg er nødt til at spørge nogle folk om, hvordan de 
oplever … altså, om de overhovedet tænker over det. Mange tror jeg egentlig bare læner sig 
tilbage og tænker “nu er det koldt, så tænder jeg da bare” helt mekanisk, at det gør man da 
bare. 
 
Babette: Og hvad havde du tænkt dig? Hvornår vil du snakke med nogen? 
 
[overlappende tale] 
 
Cecilie: Jeg talte med Rune, og han sagde netop at dem der bor i lejlighederne, de er blevet 
forstyrret nogle gange. Han har haft et projekt i foråret, et par bachelorstuderende som har 
stået på folks parkeringsplads for at få denne her måleenhed ind i lejligheder, og der var 4 
der meldte sig til ud af de 60, er der ikke 60 lejligheder? Det tror jeg. 
 
Babette: jo, det passer meget godt. 
75 
==PAGE:81==
 
Cecilie: Han sagde bare at det havde været en ret stor udfordring, selvom det havde virkelig 
været “ind, plug i, ud”. Det har forsøgt med at udlodde gavekort, men der har ikke været så 
mange der har bidt på, så han sagde at det kunne være en udfordring. Det er faktisk derfor 
jeg har taget kontakt til dig, fordi du netop har været inde og har haft kontakt. 
 
Babette: Ja, men altså det vi har nu, det er at vi har lavet nogle workshops, det har været 
mine kolleger der har lavet det, men vi har lavet nogle workshops for at få sådan noget 
start-input til det software visualisering. Så er de blevet præsenteret for det her. Jeg ved 
ikke, har du været derude? Er du med på, hvad der er og hvordan visualiseringen er? 
 
Cecilie: Ja, jeg har gennemlæst et masterprojekt fra her i foråret, hvor han skrev om det her 
med at få feedback via de her skærme. Men det er ikke noget jeg har sat mig dybt ind i. 
 
Babette: Kan du sende de der projekter til mig? Det kunne da være meget sjovt for mig at 
læse. 
 
Cecilie: Jeg kan spørge Rune 
 
Babette: Selvfølgelig ikke hvis de er hemmelige, men hvis de er offentlige så ville det være 
super for mig. Jo mere jo bedre. 
Nå, men så lavede vi denne her interview-runde. Nu kan jeg så ikke få teknologien til at 
virke, sådan lidt ironisk ikke, men øh … Så det bliver denne her, så du ved hvad vi har indtil 
videre. 
 
Cecilie: mmmhm 
 
Babette: Vi har haft nogle problemer med at skærmene ikke virkede. Og det må vi 
konstatere, at det er et kæmpe problem. Når folk skal opnå tillid til noget og de skal 
motiveres til at ændre adfærd. For hvis grundlaget ikke er der, hvor er motivationen så? Så 
det er virkelig en af de konklusioner man skal tage med videre. Hvis man skal lave noget 
med teknologi og adfærdsændringer, så skal det bare virker. Ellers har man nærmest tabt på 
forhånd. Nu er det kun pilot-opgangen, men det er en god konklusion at tage med i de næste 
bygninger. 
 
Cecilie: Jo 
 
Babette: Så har vi fundet ud af, at hele det her system med skærmen og sådan noget, det 
har folk taget meget som en naturlighed eller en selvfølge. For nu er hele lejligheden blevet 
renoveret, og det er ligesom en del af det. Og det er meget godt, for så er der ligesom et 
udgangspunkt for, at det bliver en samlet del af det de laver, og at det ikke bare er en eller 
anden ny dims. Alt er nyt, og denne her er også med. 
 
Cecilie: Ja 
 
76 
==PAGE:82==
Babette: Så har det været lidt forskelligt. Nogle har leget meget med den og har prøvet at 
klikke sig rundt og se hvad den kunne og sådan noget. Og er der nogle, især de ældre, har 
følt sig lidt udfordret. OG så er der noget med skærm-følsomhed, for eksempel synes de 
ældre, at det var svært at den reagerede så hurtigt, og de unge synes at det var ikke til at 
holde ud at trykke på en der var så langsom. Man er jo sensorisk forskellig. Så der er også 
noget der som er interessant, for hvilken målgruppe er det man arbejder med. Det med at 
snakke om, at ting skal være intuitivt. Det er det jo bare ikke rigtig. For eksempel, jeg har min 
egen telefon og min arbejdstelefon. Og min arbejdstelefon er en iPhone som jo er 
indbegrebet af intuitivt, men jeg er en kæmpe klovn når jeg bruger den, jeg kan ikke finde ud 
af noget, for jeg er vant til noget andet. Ting er først intuitivt når man kan det. 
Og det er det med, hvordan kan vi lave ting der er nemt at bruge, og ligesom få folk til at 
bruge det. 
 
Babette: Så havde vi sådan lidt med intuitionen med det. Det er ligesom nogle kort, kalder 
de det, og så kan man så trykke sig ind bag ved det i den menu. Der skal man finde ud af, 
hvordan vi får folk til at opdage at der er mere end det de ser på forsiden.  
 
Babette: Så er der den grønne kontakt. Den er sådan mere direkte relevant for det som du 
laver med energiadfærd. For der er sådan en grøn kontakt, som er koblet op på nogle 
forskellige kontakter rundt omkring i lejligheden. Så kan man slukke for den, og så slukker 
man for alle de der standby ting. Så kan man koble sit TV og anlæg på den, og så om natten 
måske slukker du det, og når du forlader lejligheden. Så kan man slukke for hele standby 
forbruget uden at skulle rundt og slukke for 17 forskellige kontakter. Og det er en ret fed idé, 
men folk har været lidt i tvivl om hvad det er for nogle kontakter og hvis man kobler 
køleskabet på den og så slukker. Så de har ikke turde bruge den, af frygt for at slukke for alt 
i hele lejligheden. Så der skal man ligesom så sagt “det er det her det handler om, og så kan 
man spare alt det her ligegyldige, som man ikke får noget ud af”. Så den er der ret meget 
potentiale i synes jeg. 
 
Babette: Så er der hele det her med at snakke om kWh og m3. For det ved folk ikke hvad er. 
Det er kun ingeniører som arbejder med energi som ved hvad kWh er. Så bliver folk 
distanceret fra det. Også i forhold til m3 - 10 m3 vand er det meget eller lidt? Så det er det 
her med at finde ud af, hvad vi skal opgive det i så det giver mening for folk. Og den er vi 
stadig i gang med. Altså, vi er jo i gang med det hele, det er kun midter-resultater. 
 
Cecilie: Ja, selvfølgelig… 
 
Babette: Så hvad så, skal man opgive det i kroner? OG hvad så hvis det ikke svarer til den 
varmeregning de har fået? Så bliver folk også forvirret. Skal det være i CO2? Og skal det så 
omregnes til svarer til ½ kg oksekød? Altså, hvad er det som giver mening for folk? 
Der skal jeg prøve at finde ud af, hvad er det for nogle motivationer de har? For folk kan 
have mange forskellige drivkrafter.  
Vores store formål er jo at vi skal spare på energien. Men om folk gør det af politiske, 
miljømæssige hensyn eller for at spare penge, det er jo sådan set ligegyldigt. Vi skal bare 
finde ud af, hvad det er og så hjælpe til med at få folk derhen. Det er det med det 
overordnede perspektiv. For Korngården har meget sammensat beboertype, der er både 
77 
==PAGE:83==
yngre og ældre - alt muligt forskelligt, og så bliver det sådan “hvordan kan vi rumme alle med 
en software? 
 
Cecilie: jo 
Babette: Så er der energitips, de kommer med. Dem skal vi finde ud af, hvordan vi får dem til 
at ramme, for man skal også passe på med at tale ned til folk. Hvis du nu får et energitip, 
hvor der står at “du skal huske at koge din pasta med låg på”, hvor man tænker at det ved 
jeg godt, jeg er ikke idiot, det lærte jeg for 10 år siden. Så bliver folk distanceret fra det, så 
det skal også give mening, og som er noget folk måske ikke har tænkt over. Måske “Husk at 
når du har været i bad eller lavet mad, så skal der luftes ud”.  
 
Cecilie: Ja 
 
Babette: For ellers er der gode betingelser for skimmelsvamp. Men det er noget med at finde 
ud af, hvad er det folk ved og ikke ved. Og hvad synes de er irriterende. 
 
Babette: Så er der det her med el ift. vand. Det er helt klart elforbruget folk synes er 
spændende. 
 
Cecilie: ja, det er vel også helt klart en motivator, for det er her folk kan spare penge? 
 
Babette: Jo. Hvis det er det der motiverer dem. Og det er nemlig det der er problemet, for 
det er jo ikke første gang at der bliver lavet visualiseringer. Det har man jo prøvet meget de 
sidste 5 år, der har det virkelig været et buzz-word. At man siger, at alting handler om 
økonomi, men det gør det bare langt fra. Og slet ikke i Danmark. Lige ift. denne målgruppe 
kunne det godt være, hvis der er nogle socialt udsatte. Men det er også den eneste gruppe i 
Danmark, hvor 100kr gør en forskel. Selv studerende gider at rykke noget som helst for 
100kr. Det skal være noget andet, noget der batter mere. 
“problemet” er, at vores energipriser ikke svinger nok. Når vi kommer frem til noget hvor vi 
får mere fluxuerende energipriser, så vil man fundere over hvor man skal lægge sig 
energiforbrug. Men lige nu, fordi prisen er så billig og folk kigger ikke på den elregning, og 
hvis de kunne have sparet 100kr, hva’ fanden?  
Vi skal finde ud af, hvad kan det så være? I Danmark er folk jo ret miljøbevidste, og lige 
økologi er et godt eksempel på det. Da økologi begyndte, der var ikke noget økonomisk 
argument for hvorfor man skulle gøre det, det var en politisk beslutning og så kom markedet. 
I Danmark er vi et af de lande der har flest økologiske varer. [pause] Man skal ikke 
undervurdere folk, for de har nogle ting der virkelig betyder noget for dem. Så det er det det 
handler om, at afklare hvad der kunne være årsag udover pengene.  
Det med vand var lidt svært at forholde sig til. El er mest det man tænker på når man tænker 
energikilde, hvor vand er lidt mere fluffy. Vi er mere ovre i noget bæredygtighed. Og så bliver 
det lidt mudret. 
 
Babette: Jeg har lige været på en konference i USA om energibesparelse og adfærd. Der er 
en kæmpe forskel på bæredygtigt og så energi og besparelser. Det er ikke integreret. Det er 
sjovt, for der kan man virkelig mærke at vi er dygtige til at tænke at det hele hænger 
sammen. 
78 
==PAGE:84==
 
Cecilie: Jo 
 
Babette: Jo, så er der det med indstillinger. Det kan man rode lidt med selv, hvis man har 
nogle præferencer. Det er der ikke så mange som egentlig har gjort eller har været 
opmærksomme på at man kunne. 
 
Babette: Så er der det her med sammenligninger. For vi har altid været meget med at vi skal 
sammenligne og så kan man opnå alting. Men det er bare ikke rigtigt i det her tilfælde. Man 
har sammenlignet dit forbrug med nogle andres, men folk er lidt skeptiske overfor det. 
Hvordan sammenligner I os? I min familie er vi unikke og I kan ikke bare sammenligne os 
med nogle andre. De går ud fra, at man sammenligner dem med en random lejlighed, men i 
virkeligheden er det baseret på at vi er 2 voksne og 2 teenagere f.eks. Men folk er stadig 
distancerede fra ideen om at blive sammenlignet, og tænke at “det er jo åndssvagt”, og så 
tager man det ikke ind. 
Så det vi prøver at overveje nu, det er om man skal sammenligne med sig selv. Som f.eks. 
“sidste år på denne her dag, der havde  I det her forbrug”, for så kan man ikke rigtig snige 
sig udenom den. Til gengæld mangler man lidt benchmarking og sammenligning med andre. 
For det kan jo stadig være for højt. 
 
Cecilie: Nej, for det kan jo også være at der har været en speciel årsag, det kunne være at 
det var lige den dag at man fejrede fødselsdag eller kobberbryllup i sin lejlighed. 
 
Babette: Lige præcis - så man mister lidt det der overordnede, jamen er mit så på et godt 
niveau eller et dårligt niveau. Så vi skal ligesom prøve at finde et eller andet lige der imellem 
her. 
 
Babette: Så er der noget med at de gerne ville kunne skrue ned for lyset på skærmen, og 
det de gerne ville kunne slukke for skærmen. For lige nu er der lang tid, hvor den er tændt 
selvom man ikke bruger den. Det giver også meget god mening når nu man prøver at lave 
energibesparelser, at den så ikke står og er tændt hele tiden. Den er ikke tændt hele tiden, 
men den er lang tid om at slukke.  
 
Babette: Det vi fandt ud af var, at energi i sig selv er ikke nok. Energi er ligesom målet, men 
vi skal derhen af en sidevej. Man kan ikke bare sætte en skærm op og så forvente at folk 
synes det er spændende. Forbrugsdata, det er ikke særlig spændende, det er ikke super 
sexet vel? 
 
Cecilie: Nej nej 
 
Babette: Vi skal finde ud af, hvordan får vi dem hen til skærmen? Når først de er der, så er 
der ligesom et vindue. Der kan man så bruge, nogle ting som de rent faktisk kan bruge. 
F.eks. vejret, rejseplanen, dørtelefonen. Så er der nogle naturlige funktioner, som er i 
skærmen og så kan de bruge den og er henne ved den, og så er det at vi får noget data vi 
kan bruge. I stedet for bare at tænke, at så sætter vi en skærm op og så kan de kigge på de 
tal. Det er ikke nok.  
79 
==PAGE:85==
 
Babette: Det er det som er her nu. Det der skal ske det er at jeg skal ud og lave næste 
interviewrunde i december, starten af december, men hende ejendomsmesteren derude hun 
har hjulpet med at udvælge 5 lejligheder. Vi skal så se om det er blevet bedre, hvordan har 
de det nu hvor de har brugt den i længere tid. 
Er der nogle ting som jeg skal spørge om når jeg er derude? 
 
Cecilie: Ja, altså… 
 
Babette: Du behøver ikke at svare lige nu.  
 
[mødet fortsætter med aftale omkring udveksling af data og planlægning af næste møde] 
 
 
 
80 
==PAGE:86==
Appendix J 
Climate file created by the author from information provided by DTU Climate station and 
Copenhagen Airport Climate Station. 
 
Folder called “Appendix J” containing 2 files. 
 
Korngaarden_endelig2.prn 
Korngaarden_endelig2 
81 
