==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Biomedical Engineering
Kongens Lyngby 2018
Hydrodynamic Deformability-based Classification of Fetal
and Adult Red Blood Cells Using Image Analysis and Machine
Learning
Lise Oppermann Aagesen
Supervisors:
Kirstine Berg-Sørensen
Rodolphe Marie
Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen
==PAGE:2==
DTU Physics
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark
Fysikvej
Building 311
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3344
www.fysik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Fetomaternal hemorrhage is often asymptomatic and therefore rarely detected.
Current
diagnostic tools are time-consuming or expensive and therefore not suitable for screening.
In this study, a microfluidic chip is used to investigate the possibility of differentiating fetal
and adult red blood cells for the purpose of creating a simple diagnostic screening tool
for fetomaternal hemorrhage. The differentiation is based on their size and behavior when
pumped through a microchannel with a constricted segment where they are deformed by
surface stresses from the channel wall. The shape and motions of the red blood cells are
tracked as they pass through the constriction using image analysis. Nine features relating
to these characteristics are extracted and combined in a feature vector for a total of 39422
red blood cells originating from 101 adult and 59 fetal blood samples. A logistic regression
classification model is trained and tested on these data, yielding a predictive performance of
96% accuracy. The result of the classification is questioned by a poor result of an additional
test on an independent blood sample that raises a suspicion of operator bias within the main
data set. It is concluded that the classifier may prove to offer a valuable screening method for
fetomaternal hemorrhage. However, the potential bias needs to be investigated and possibly
eliminated before a conclusive outlook of the potential of this classification approach can be
made.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Physics at the Technical University
of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a master’s degree in biomedical
engineering.
It was conducted in collaboration with DTU Compute and Blodbanken at
Rigshospitalet.
Kongens Lyngby, January 12, 2018
Lise Oppermann Aagesen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Kirstine Berg-Sørensen and Rodolphe Marie for making
this project possible and for offering it to me. Their guidance and supervision has been of
great support throughout the project.
I would also like to express my gratitude toward:
Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen for providing supervision on the image analysis part and for guiding
me in the process of preparing a technical thesis.
Thilde Marie Haspang for advising me in the statistical tasks of this project.
Kirstine Engell Sandager Nielsen for her part in the data acquisition and for assisting me in
the generation of additional data for this project.
Morten Dzieigiel for providing the idea of investigating these data and for his medical insight
relevant for this project.
I would finally like to acknowledge the work done by Tony Rungel and Henrik Thirstrup for
their theses. They have developed both data and software useful for this project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
AFM
atomic force microscopy
CCA
connected component analysis
CellStab
ID-CellStab
CVMSE
cross validated mean squarred error
FMH
fetomaternal hemorrhage
fps
frames per second
KSN
Kristine Sandager Nielsen
MPA
micropipette aspiration
RBC
red blood cell
Rh
rhesus
Rungel
Tony Rungel
SE
structuring element
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Mechanical phenotyping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Microfluidic techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Project outline and objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Red blood cells and fluid dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Setup and data
15
3.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Methods
21
4.1
Image analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
RBC classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Results
45
5.1
Data inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Model development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3
Model validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4
Spike sample experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Discussion
59
6.1
Experimental setup and conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2
Image analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.3
Within-class variance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
6.4
Perspective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7
Conclusion
63
A Fetal and adult blood volume calculation for spike samples
65
B Theoretical plots and definitions
67
B.1
Eccentricity definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
B.2
Unsupervised learning: k-means clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
B.3
Logit transformation of probability function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
C Data inspection
69
D Matlab and R code
71
D.1 CellSorter.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
D.2 FeatureVector.m
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
D.3 Logistic regression model training and validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
D.4 Spike sample experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Mechanical properties of human cells reflect their cellular composition and structure. The
cytoskeleton is a protein network that gives a cell its shape and provides mechanical resistance
to deformation.
It further serves as a pathway for intracellular transport and plays an
important role in mitosis. Mechanical properties of cells can be indicative of cytoskeletal
changes due to physiological or pathological conditions. Investigating these properties allows
for a way to quantify functional changes within cells [1].
Diseases like cancer and various blood disorders can cause cytoskeletal alterations [2, 3]. Can-
cerous cells are genetically mutated cells with a dis-regulation of cellular signaling paths that
leads to uncontrolled cell proliferation [4, 5]. Along with an increase in cell division and
decrease in cell death, cancer cells undergo changes to their cytoskeleton that affect their
mechanical properties and interaction with other cells [4]. Studies have shown that the cy-
toskeletal changes of cancer cells make them less stiff compared to their healthy counterparts,
which results in increased cell deformability [5]. It has further been shown that decrease in
cell stiffness is correlated with higher cancer malignancy and metastatic potential [6]. In
sickle cell disease, red blood cells undergo morphological transformations that lead to shape
changes and reduced deformability, increasing the risk of vaso-occlusions. These changes to
mechanical properties of cells serve as fingerprints for their respective diseases, and identi-
fying the changes is an essential part of research and is increasingly suggested as a possible
diagnostic tool [1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
1.1
Mechanical phenotyping
Characterizing cells based on their mechanical properties is called mechanical phenotyping.
Mechanical properties of cells have been studied for centuries [15]. In 1988, Elliot L. Elson
investigated variations in mechanical properties of cells in relation to cytoskeletal changes
[16]. Following his work, numerous methods for measuring mechanical properties of cells
have been explored [2, 17], and mechanical phenotyping has been recognized as a possible
tool for identifying pathological conditions.
Characterization of cells based solely on their mechanical fingerprint introduces a label-free
marker for cell identification. A cell marker is a characteristic that can be measured and
evaluated as an indicator of the presence of specific cell types [18]. Biochemical markers
such as hormones, enzymes, and antibodies are widely used as indicators of pathological
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
conditions.
Measurements of biochemical markers generally require labeling.
Labeling a
marker can, for instance, be accomplished through a staining of the implicated tissue or cell
population, where the marker binds with a compound that enhances visibility of the marker.
Labeling of biochemical markers requires time and special skills for sample preparation, and
the labeling operation might alter both the physical and chemical properties of cells. Label-
free cell identification enables analyses with no sample preparation, which makes it less
labor-intensive. Advantageously, mechanical phenotyping requires neither specially skilled
personnel nor alteration of cell properties, allowing it to be less time-consuming, less costly,
and more appropriate for studies of cell properties.
A number of methods have been developed for mechanical phenotyping. Bulk microfiltration
techniques have been widely used in studies of microcirculatory diseases, where changes
in flow rate of blood cell solutions are measured when passed through micropore filters
[12]. Bulk measurements have the disadvantage of yielding just one average endpoint for an
entire cell solution [9]. In cases where accurately detecting rare events or subpopulations
of different mechanical properties is important, single-cell deformability analysis tools are
essential. Detecting diseased cells that are few in number relative to the sample is an example
of a problem that is not solved by bulk analyses.
Classical techniques in single-cell mechanical measurements include micropipette aspiration
(MPA), atomic force microscopy (AFM), optical tweezers, and magnetic bead microrheom-
etry, that are all valuable tools for investigating intricate mechanical properties of single
cells and accurately determining deformability characteristics [9, 19]. Drawbacks of these
techniques are their need for pre-selection of cells of interest, costly equipment, and their low
throughput, limiting their potential for statistical analysis and automation [1, 20]. In both
clinical and research settings, high throughput is essential for development of diagnostic tools
and statistics. A more recent development within mechanical phenotyping is the application
of microfluidic techniques, allowing high-throughput single-cell deformability analyses with-
out the need for sample preparation or advanced equipment operation [1, 3, 9, 10, 12, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25]
1.2
Microfluidic techniques
The field of microfluidics deals with the manipulation of fluids in micrometer-sized geome-
tries like channels or chambers [26]. Flow control systems enable establishment of precise
pressure profiles throughout a well-defined space, allowing cells to be controllably deformed
in a hydrodynamic flow. The design of microfluidic devices allows for single-cell observations,
for instance through channels of a size that inhibits passage of more than one cell at a time.
The design further allows for studies of mechanical properties of cells through construction of
obstructions such as constrictions or branches. Passing cells can be observed in microscopes
and imaged with high-speed cameras, enabling digital image and data analysis. The combi-
nation of single-cell observations and high throughput offers a platform that enables detailed
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Project outline and objective
3
analysis of heterogeneous cell populations from small samples and with a great statistical
aspect.
Microfluidic techniques for mechanical phenotyping have frequently been explored since the
beginning of this century [1, 3, 9, 10, 12, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. Several studies demonstrate
attempts to classify cell groups based on their deformability.
A few studies apply their
techniques on clinically relevant cell groups for identification of diseased cells such as cancer
cells, inflammatory cells, and diseased blood cells.
However, no technique has yet been
implemented in the clinic for diagnostic or treatment planning purposes.
Most methods
measure a single or few values characteristic for the deformability of cells as they pass a
structure that induces cell deformation. Common characteristics are shape and passage time
or velocity.
1.3
Project outline and objective
In this project, a microfluidic setup is used to explore the hydrodynamic deformability of fetal
and adult red blood cells. Fetal red blood cells are expected to show different mechanical
behavior from their adult counterparts due to their larger size [27, 28]. Blood samples from
adult healthy donors and from umbilical cords are separately brought in suspension and
administered in a microfluidic chip connected to a microfluidic pump. Under hydrodynamic
flow generated by the pump, blood cells pass through a channel with a short constricted
segment, where they are deformed by surface stresses from the channel wall. The chip is
mounted in a microscope connected to a high-speed camera that records the passing cells
in the constricted area. The setup of flow and imaging frame rate allows the recordings to
capture every shape and orientation transition of a passing cell.
Subsequent image analysis is applied to extract information about shape, orientation, and
velocity of each passing cell throughout the passage. Besides two-dimensional shape and
position information, the pixel intensity profile of a cell is analyzed for a more complex
measure of its orientation and three-dimensional shape. Different features related to these
characteristics are evaluated for fetal and adult cells in a statistical manner for a comparison
of the two cell groups. The data are additionally divided into a training and a test data
set for the development of a classification model using supervised machine learning on the
extracted features.
The aim of this project is to explore the possibility of classifying fetal and adult red blood
cells based on their hydrodynamic deformability. An important scope of this project is the
potential of using this kind of cell classification to detect fetal red blood cells in the maternal
circulation. This is relevant in the diagnosis of fetomaternal hemorrhage (FMH), which is
characterized by a loss of fetal blood to the maternal circulation caused by a disruption of
the placental barrier [29, 30]. During pregnancies and deliveries, loss of fetal blood to the
maternal circulation is a common physiological event, and passage of low blood volumes are
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
clinically insignificant and rarely detected [30]. In around 0.3-0.4% of pregnancies, however,
a moderate to severe FMH occurs [29, 31].
Severe FMH, defined in literature by a bleeding larger than 20-30 mL/kg fetal weight [32,
33], can lead to life threatening fetal and neonatal anemia, causing cardiovascular distress,
neurological damages, or even stillbirth [29, 30]. Common symptoms of FMH-induced fetal
anemia are decreased fetal activity and abnormal heart rate. Both are very non-specific and
are, thus, not clear indicators of FMH [32]. Another potential consequence of FMH is that
rhesus(Rh)-negative women with a FMH of Rh-positive blood are at increased risk of Rh
immunization. Rh-negative women with a FMH of Rh-positive blood are at increased risk
of Rh immunization. Rh immunization causes a maternal development of antibodies that
may affect the health of later Rh-positive pregnancies [33]. In these cases, a prophylactic
medication can avert an Rh immunization.
Both in case of fetal anemia and potential Rh immunization, accurate quantification of fetal
red blood cells in the maternal circulation is imperative. Due to the non-specific nature
of the symptoms, an inexpensive and simple screening method is desirable. FMH is most
commonly diagnosed and quantified by the Kleihauer-Betke test (originally described in 1957
[34]), or the more recent method using flow cytometry [35]. Though the Kleihauer-Betke test
is inexpensive and requires no special equipment, it is prone to subjectivity and is imprecise
and time-consuming [36]. Flow cytometry is faster and more accurate as well as standardized
and, thus, offers a reliable test for FMH [37]. However, flow cytometry requires expensive
equipment and sample preparation as well as advanced instrumentation. This thesis explores
the option of using microfluidics for a simple, inexpensive, and reliable method for diagnosing
and screening for FMH.
In a broader sense, this method can be applied to other cell groups, and the analysis of pixel
intensities for shape recognition is a novel approach within this field and can potentially
improve mechanical phenotyping techniques.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter introduces some theoretical topics relevant for the work done in this project. A
state of the art section outlines previous demonstrations of single-cell mechanical phenotyping
using microfluidic techniques.
2.1
Red blood cells and fluid dynamics
Figure 2.1:
Illustration of
red blood cell shape. Illustra-
tion modified from [38].
Red blood cells (RBC) are the most abundant cell type of
human blood, accounting for 40-50% of its volume and being
approximately 700 times more numerous than white blood
cells and 17 times more numerous than platelets [39]. The
primary function of RBCs is transportation of oxygen from the
lungs to tissues of the body and the reversed transportation of
carbon dioxide. During this transportation, RBCs maneuver
through narrow vessels of the microvasculature with diameters
smaller than that of RBCs.
RBCs must, thus, be able to
deform to fit through these vessels without rupturing. Average
adult RBCs are shaped like ∼7.8x2.5 µm biconcave discs as
seen in figure 2.1 [39]. In addition to a greater surface area
for increased gas exchange, the biconcave disc shape facilitates
deformation of RBCs as compared to a more spherical shape.
Average adult RBCs live and circulate in human blood for
about 100-120 days [39].
2.1.1
Fetal red blood cells
Fetal RBCs differ from their adult counterparts in size, life span, and biochemical composition.
Studies have shown that the life span of fetal RBCs is about 60-80 days, which is only around
two thirds of that of average adult RBCs [28, 40]. This may be due to their size, which has
been shown to be significantly larger than that of average adult RBCs [28, 41]. Specifically,
the diameter of fetal RBCs has been shown to be ∼8.7 µm which is about 12% larger than that
of adult RBCs. Fetal RBCs further show a smaller sphericity, indicating a more flattened
and discocytic shape. Their biochemical composition differs by comprising a significantly
greater hemoglobin concentration [41].
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Background
Mechanical properties of RBCs have been studied in various ways resulting in different con-
clusions about the deformability of fetal RBCs. There is, however, a general agreement in
literature proposing that the deformability of fetal RBCs with regards to their mechanical
properties such as cytoplasmic and membrane viscosity and shear rigidity, that are not in-
fluenced by cell size, is comparable to that of adult RBCs [28, 41, 42]. Their larger size
and different shape and biochemical composition is nevertheless thought to influence their
behavior under deformation, making them less deformable, and this project is based on that
theory.
2.1.2
Poiseuille flow
The fluid dynamics relevant for this project concern Poiseuille flows. A Poiseuille flow is
characterized by a pressure-induced steady state laminar flow of an incompressible Newtonian
fluid through a straight and rigid closed channel with a constant cross-section and a length
much bigger than its cross-sectional dimensions [43]. Whether a flow is laminar or turbulent
depends on the ratio of inertial forces to viscous forces, which is expressed by the Reynolds
number:
Re = inertialforces
viscousforces = ρvd
η
(2.1)
where:
• ρ is the density of the fluid
• v is the velocity of the fluid
• d is the characteristic linear dimension of the channel (cross-section width)
• η is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid
An illustration of laminar and turbulent flow can be seen in figure 2.2. Laminar flows are
characterized by low Reynolds numbers and are accordingly linked to smaller velocities and
channel cross sections. Particles in a laminar flow travel in layered paths and do not shift
paths once the flow is stable. Objects traveling in stable laminar flows are, thus, confined
in a certain layer, which restricts their movement to one direction along with the flow. This
is useful for tracking objects in a flow, like RBCs in a microchannel. Poiseuille flows enable
experiments that require specific and constant flow velocities.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: Illustration of (a) laminar and (b) turbulent flow. Illustration modified
from [44].
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Red blood cells and fluid dynamics
7
The velocity profile of a Poiseuille flow in a cylindrical pipe can be derived from Newton’s
second law of motion for fluid particles, the Navier-Stokes equation, by making the following
assumptions [43]:
• The flow is steady
• There is no motion in the radial and angular direction
• The velocity does not depend on the angular position or change along the length of the
pipe
• The no-slip boundary condition in fluid dynamics states that particles of a viscous fluid
close to a solid surface do not follow an adjoining flow, which brings the velocity of the
fluid in contact with the surface down to zero.
The derivation results in the following velocity profile:
vx(r) = 1
4η
∆P
L (R2 −r2)
(2.2)
where:
• vx is the fluid velocity in the direction of the pipe length
• r is the radius at which the velocity is calculated
• ∆p is the total pressure drop along the pipe
• L is the length of the pipe
• R is the radius of the pipe
The velocity profile is parabolic as illustrated in figure 2.3.
Shear stress occurs at large
velocity gradients. There is, thus, high shear stresses near the channel edge and almost no
shear stress at the center, where the velocity profile flattens.
Figure 2.3: Parabolic velocity profile of Poiseuille flow in channel with circular
cross-section. Illustration modified from [45].
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Background
The microchannel used in this project has a rectangular cross-section instead of a circular
one. There is no analytical solution to the velocity profile of a Poiseuille flow in a channel of
rectangular cross-section, but it has been represented by a Fourier series [43]:
vx(y, z) = 4h2∆p
π3ηL
∞
∑
n,odd
1
n3
[
1 −cosh(nπ y
h)
cosh(nπ w
2h)
](sin(nπ z
h
)
(2.3)
where h is the channel height and w is the channel width. The velocity profile is illustrated
in figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: (a) Contour lines in steps of 10% of vmax for the velocity field vx(y, z)
of a Poiseuille flow in a rectangular channel. (b) A plot of vx(y, h/2). (c) A plot of
vx(0, z). Illustration modified from [43].
2.1.3
Red blood cells in Poiseuille flows
Figure 2.5: Parachute-like shape
of RBC under high shear stress in
Poiseuille flow.
Illustration bor-
rowed from [46].
RBCs traveling in a wide channel with a low velocity
Poiseuille flow tend to converge toward the center of the
channel due to the effect of inertial focusing [47], with
their major axis aligned with the flow direction [48]. In
wide channels, objects experience little to no shear stress
due to the small velocity gradient around the center of
the channel. In narrower channels or higher velocities,
RBCs experience a larger shear stress causing them to
turn and obtain a parachute-like shape as seen in figure
2.5.
Zeng and Ristenpart (2014) analyzed the mechanical re-
sponse of RBCs in a microchannel entering a constric-
tion with high shear stress from a main channel with low
shear stress [49]. The constriction was wide enough for
the RBCs to obtain any possible orientation but narrow
enough to induce noticeable shear stress on them. They found that approximately 85% of
RBCs undergo one of four distinct motions: stretching, tumbling, twisting, or rolling depend-
ing on their location in the main channel. They are defined as:
==PAGE:21==
2.2 State of the art
9
• Stretching: elongation in the direction of flow, without rotation
• Tumbling: rotation around the major axis perpendicular to the direction of flow
• Twisting: rotation around the major axis parallel to the flow direction
• Rolling: rotation around the minor axis perpendicular to the direction of flow
The chip design in this project does not allow for every of these motions inside the constriction.
This is elaborated in the Setup and data chapter.
2.2
State of the art
This section outlines previous demonstrations of single-cell mechanical phenotyping using
microfluidic techniques. There have been several setups based on microfluidic devices using
various deformation techniques.
2.2.1
Perpendicular pinch flows
Figure
2.6:
Illustration of
hydrodynamic deformation of
cells using pinch flows.
Cells
are delivered to a stretching ex-
tensional flow where they are
deformed as a result of the
stretching flow.
Illustration
borrowed from [9].
In 2012, Gossett et al. demonstrated an automated microflu-
idic technique for single-cell hydrodynamic deformability
analysis, where cells are delivered to a stretching extensional
flow and deformed at high strain rates with a throughput
of approximately 2000 cells/s [8, 9]. The principal of using
pinch flows for hydrodynamic deformation of single cells is
illustrated in figure 2.6.
The deformability value is calculated as the ratio between
the minor axis length by the major axis length at the point
of maximum deformation. This is illustrated in figure 2.7(a).
Using the initial diameter and the deformability as a predic-
tor for cell type showed promising results. The same group
later applied this technique to identify tumor cells in ma-
lignant pleural effusions. Their classification algorithm yielded good results suitable for a
prescreening role in the clinic [14]. Figure 2.7(b) shows an example of an analysis of two cell
populations.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Background
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.7: Deformability analysis using perpendicular pinch flows. (a) Left: Il-
lustration of deformation at stretching extensional flow caused by compressing (FC)
and shear forces (FS). Right: Deformability calculated as the ratio between the
minor and the major axis length at the point of maximum deformation. (b) Initial
cell diameter and deformability scatter plot for two cell populations. Illustrations
borrowed from [14].
2.2.2
Microfluidic optical stretching
In 2001, Guck et al. introduced the optical stretcher as a novel tool for single-cell deforma-
bility analysis [50]. Optical stretching works by trapping individual cells between two laser
beams at low laser power and subsequently stretching them by elevating the laser power.
See figure 2.8 for an illustration of the working principle of optical stretching. Here, the
deformability is again quantified by the ratio between the major and minor axis, but after a
specific amount of time.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.8: Optical stretching principle. (a) A cell is trapped between two coun-
terpropagating laser beams of low power. (b) Increased laser power stretches the
cell.
The dashed line indicates the contour of the trapped cell prior to stretch-
ing, and the solid line indicates the contour of the deformed cell after stretching.
Illustration borrowed from [24].
==PAGE:23==
2.2 State of the art
11
In 2005, Guck et al. combined optical stretching with microfluidic cell delivery for a higher
throughput analysis of optical deformability profiles in normal and malignantly transformed
cells [1]. They obtained a measurement rate of approximately 60 cells/h and demonstrated
significant difference in optical deformability between the cell groups. Lincoln et al. made
similar observations using microfluidic optical stretching in 2007 with a throughput of 50-100
cells/h [24]. Remmerbach et al. applied this method to investigate deformability of normal
and cancerous oral epithelial cells to evaluate the potential for detecting cancer cells from
the oral cavity [3]. Their method yielded the potential of enabling the development of a
simple screening method for oral cancer. The throughput of microfluidic optical stretching
is, however, limited by the necessity of stopping the flow every time a cell is being trapped
and deformed.
2.2.3
Hydrodynamic pipette aspiration
Micropipette aspiration is a technique that uses a suction pressure exerted on single cells to
study their mechanical properties. The classical form of this technique involves the complete
or partial suction of single cells into the orifice of a glass micropipette using a small negative
pressure generated by the displacement of a water reservoir. The deformation is observed
in an optical microscope, and mechanical properties of the cell can be measured based on
its deformation. The manual preparation of each cell in the pipette is a complicated and
time-consuming process, leading to a low throughput and a risk of errors.
By combining the principle of micropipette aspiration with a microfluidic device, Lee et
al.(2015) explored and compared the stiffness of healthy and cancerous breast cells with a
higher throughput and a more simple and automated setup than regular micropipette assays
[20]. Their device uses microfluidic channels and a pump to trap single cells in chambers
along a main channel. A pipette aspiration is then performed in each chamber, and the cell
deformation is observed in an optical microscope. Cell deformability is quantified by the
protrusion lengths of the cells. Micropipette aspiration yields precise measurements but is
limited by the time it takes to perform the aspiration.
2.2.4
Microfluidic channels with constrictions
This project deals with hydrodynamic deformation of cells in constricted microfluidic channels.
Previous applications of this technique are presented in the following.
Rosenbluth et al. presented in 2008 a microfluidic technique for measuring single-cell transit
times of various blood cell populations passing through a network of bifurcating microchan-
nels as seen in figure 2.9 [12]. Their analysis was based on mechanical alterations of blood
cells in hematologic diseases. Individual blood cells were imaged while traversing a microflu-
idic capillary network with channel dimension of 5.89×13.3×130 µm (h×w×l), and the effect
of cell deformability on cellular transit times were measured. They showed that by exposing
blood cells to inflammatory mediators or drugs that affect the cytoskeleton, transit times are
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Background
significantly altered. They concluded that this phenomenon could be of potential diagnostic
use in hematologic diseases.
Figure 2.9: Illustration of the setup used by Rosenbluth et al. to observe transit
times as a function of cell deformability of cells passing through a network of bifur-
cating microchannels with diameters smaller than the cell diameters. Illustration
borrowed from [12].
Byun et al. combined measurements of cell size and passage velocity in their 2013 study
of deformability and surface friction of cancer cells passing a single constricted segment of
a microchannel [21]. Through the constriction with dimensions of 16×5×50 µm (h×w×l),
spherical cells with a diameter of ∼10-20 µm were forced to squeeze upon entry and were
affected by hydrodynamic surface stresses from the channel walls. They found that a cell’s
passage time through a constricted segment of a microchannel is greatly correlated with its
size. By accounting for cell sizes, they demonstrated how deformability and surface friction
affect passage velocities in cells with manipulated alterations of their cytoskeleton. They
further showed that metastatic potentials of cancer cells have an impact on passage velocity,
introducing a new way of studying properties of cancer cells.
Figure 2.10: Cell
passing a constric-
tion in the setup
used by Lange et
al. to measure cell
stiffness.
White
squares mark the
region
used
for
measuring
entry
time.
Illustration
modified from [23].
Lange et al. (2015) measured stiffness of cultured spherical
cells with different cytoskeletal alterations in a multicon-
striction setup similar to the one used by Rosenbluth et
al., only with shorter constrictions (length < 10 µm and
(h, w) = (9, 5µm)) [23]. Here, the cell diameter is about 17
µm, forcing them to deform to pass the constriction. The
constrictions are displayed in figure 2.10. They obtained
quantitative estimates of stress and strain on cells from
their size and velocity and the driving pressure. The entry
time is calculated by monitoring brightness changes in the
==PAGE:25==
2.2 State of the art
13
white square in front of the constriction. The brightness increases and drops rapidly as a
cell passes, and the interval between these changes is extracted as the entry time. The cell
deformation is quantified by comparing the cell radius before entry to constriction width.
They quantified cell stiffness of various cell lines and compared their results with values from
previous studies using different techniques. Their results were in agreement with published
data, and their method, thus, introduced a simpler and faster way of analyzing cell stiffness
with a throughput of approximately 10,000 cells/h.
In January 2017, Ren et al.
used multiconstriction microfluidic channels to differentiate
a metastatic breast cancer cell line and a normal breast cell line at the single cell level
[25]. The system contains a delivery channel leading to three constriction channels with a
varying number of relaxation regions (see figure 2.11). All constrictions are 8×8 µm (h×w),
suitable for deforming spherical cells with diameters ranging from 11 to 19 µm. They divided
each channel into segments, and by including velocity measurements from each segment of all
constriction channels, they obtained a classification model that resulted in a >94% differential
ratio for both cancer and normal cells. Their setup deviates by letting cells pass more than
one constriction and thus by considering not only the deformation of cells but also their
recovery after deformation.
Around the same time, Golfier et al. used laminar flow in a microfluidic channel with a
constriction to detect deformation of suspended cells resulting from hydrodynamic surface
stresses in the constriction (a method they had already demonstrated in 2015 [11]) [22]. Cells
pass through a microfluidic channel with a constricted segment in which hydrodynamic forces
lead to deformations of the initially spherical cells (see figure 2.12). The deformation reaches
a steady state at the rear end of the channel where it is quantified based on the circularity
of each cell. The dimensions of the constricted channel is 20×20×300 µm (h×w×l), and
the diameter of observed cell line is about 12 µm. The cells are, thus, only deformed by
shear stress and not by a physical boundary. They investigated the effect of drug-induced
cytoskeletal alterations on cell deformability with a throughput of 1000 cells/s.
Figure 2.11: Illustration of the
multiconstriction channels used
by Ren et al.
to differenti-
ate healthy and cancerous breast
cancer cells based on their de-
formability.
Illustration bor-
rowed from [25].
Figure 2.12:
Illustration of
the constriction channel used by
Golfier et. al to detect deforma-
tion of cells resulting from hydro-
dynamic surface stresses.
Illus-
tration borrowed from [11].
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Background
The experimental setup in this project resembles several of the previous applications of mi-
crofluidic techniques for single-cell deformability analysis of cells. Considering the channel
and constriction design as well as the dimensions of the analyzed cells, the design used by
Rosenbluth et al. to analyze red blood cell deformability relates in many ways to this project.
The setup and data relevant for this project is presented in the following chapter.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Setup and data
This chapter describes the data as well as the experimental setup that was employed for the
data acquisition relevant for this project. A summary of the setup specifications is presented
in table 3.1. This protocol was established and tested by Tony Rungel (Rungel) in his master’s
thesis and is described and justified further in his thesis [51]. The data set that is used for the
classification problem in this project was generated partly by Rungel and partly by student
assistant Kirstine Sandager Nielsen (KSN). Additional data were acquired during this project
for a clinically relevant test of the developed classifier.
3.1
Experimental setup
A schematic of the experimental setup can be seen in figure 3.2.
A microfluidic chip is
mounted onto the stage of a microscope. It is connected to a microfluidic pressure pump
that is controlled by a computer. A high-speed camera is combined with the microscope.
3.1.1
Chip architecture
Figure 3.1: Microfluidic chip used
for acquiring the data handled in
this project. Borrowed from [52].
The microfluidic chip used for this data acquisition (seen
in figure 3.1) is fabricated from a cyclic olefin copoly-
mer, named TOPAS 5013, in a hydraulic injection mold-
ing machine.
A schematic of the chip can be seen in
figure 3.2. It is designed with 12 Luer-connected inlet-
s/outlets from where samples can be deposited and pres-
sures applied. Inlets are labelled 1B-4B and outlets 1-4.
The cross-sectional dimensions of all inlet channels are
30×30 µm (h×w) and their lengths vary. The constricted
segment of each inlet channel is 40 µm long and has the
same height as the main channel, but it has a trapeze-
shaped width starting at 6.5 µm and ending at 4 µm.
The constricted segment is the part of the channel that
is imaged as RBCs pass.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Setup and data
Figure 3.2: Experimental setup and chip architecture. The chip is mounted onto
the stage of a microscope and connected to a microfluidic pressure pump that is
controlled by a computer. A high-speed camera is combined with the microscope.
Inlet channels are labelled 1B-4B and outlet channels 1-4. Modified from [51] and
[52].
The constricted section of the channel is not wide enough for RBCs to obtain any orientation
as they pass. Consequently, the RBCs do not obtain the parachute-like shape despite the
higher shear rate.
3.1.2
Pressure pump
The flow through the microchannel is established using a Fluigent MFCS-EZ microfluidic
pump which is a pressure-driven flow controller for micro- and nanofluidic applications. The
pump is supplied with an air-pressure of up to 800 mbar through an input socket, and can
provide a pressure of up to 345 mbar in each of four different output sockets. The pump is
connected to and controlled by a computer. The pressure applied for the acquisition of the
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Experimental setup
17
data used in this project is 4 mbar, creating a laminar flow in both the main channel and
constriction.
The flow in the main channel induces little shear stress on the RBCs, making them turn to
align their major axis with the flow direction.
3.1.3
Microscope and camera
The microscope used for acquiring the data used in this project is the Zeiss Axiovert 200M
Inverted Microscope with a 100x magnification objective coated with a drop of oil. It is
connected to an AOS S-motion high-speed camera for recording of the experiments. In order
to obtain a frame rate high enough to capture an adequate sequence of images of the moving
cells, the resolution is set to 240×120 or 260×120 pixels (dimensions were changed to the
latter during the course of conducting the experiments), yielding a maximum frame rate of
2800 frames per second (fps). The shutter time is 30 µs and the brightness/contrast is set
to 8 bit mid.
The large magnification results in a small field of view. As a consequence, it is not possible
to capture both the constricted segment and a meaningful portion of the main channel in
front of and behind it. The 100× magnification further results in a narrow focal depth (less
than 1 µm [52]), and since the height of the channel is ∼4 times bigger than the diameter
of RBCs, they can easily maneuver through the constriction in different out-of-focus planes.
Consequently, numerous cells pass the constriction without being captured by the camera.
Both focus depth and field of view are manually adjusted for each experiment since the chip
is detached and remounted between each sample.
A summary of the specifications for the setup is presented in table 3.1.
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Setup and data
Microfluidic chip
Model
TOPAS 5013
Main channel dimensions
30×30 µm (h×w)
Constriction dimensions
30×(6.5 to 4)×40 µm (h×w×l)
Pressure pump
Model
Fluigent MFCS-EZ
Pressure
4 mbar
Microscope
Model
Zeiss Axiovert 200M
Magnification
100× oil coated
Camera
Model
AOS S-motion
Resolution
240×120 or 260×120 pixels
Frame rate
2800 fps
Shutter time
30 µs
Brightness/contrast
8 bit mid
Table 3.1: Summary of setup specifications.
3.2
Data
The data set handled in this project is generated from whole blood samples from 101 adult
and healthy donors and 59 samples from umbilical cords (fetal donors). The samples are
provided by Blodbanken at Rigshospitalet. Each sample is analyzed individually. Since the
ratio between red and white blood cells is approximately 700:1 [39], the whole blood samples
are regarded as a volume of red blood cells. Each sample is prepared (see section 3.2.1)
and administered in one of the microfluidic chip inlets individually and pumped through the
channel. The microscope is fixated at the constricted segment, and as cells begin to pass
at a constant frequency, the camera records 80,000 images, capturing around 300-600 cells
per sample. Cells pass from the left to the right (along the x axis) in all images. Figure 3.3
shows two examples of images obtained during an experiment. Since the chip is detached
and remounted between each experiment, field of view and focus depth vary from sample to
sample. A variation in field of view is demonstrated between the two examples in figure 3.3.
Moreover, the brightness is adjusted manually for each sample.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Data
19
Figure 3.3: Varying field of view between two samples.
3.2.1
Sample and chip preparation
The microfluidic chip is prepared according to the experimental protocol of Rungel’s master’s
thesis [51].
Experiments with blood from adult donors are mainly conducted by Rungel, while exper-
iments with fetal blood are conducted exclusively by KSN. Three experiments with adult
donors are conducted by KSN. Blood samples from adult donors are collected with the com-
mon EDTA additive as anticoagulant substance. Samples from umbilical chords are collected
with heparin as anticoagulant. All samples are stored in a fridge until administered for the
experiment and are brought to room temperature before use. Every experiment is conducted
within 24 hours from the collection of the relevant sample. For the experiments, the whole
blood is diluted in ID-CellStab (CellStab) stabilization solution. In the experiments con-
ducted by Rungel, 2.6 µL whole blood is diluted in 1000 µL CellStab, while the solutions
generated by KSN contain 5.2 µL in 1000 µL. This alters the frequency of cells passing the
constriction but is not expected to affect the outcome of subsequent analyses. The blood-
CellStab solution is gently mixed using a pipette before 25 µL of the solution is drawn and
administered in the microfluidic chip.
3.2.2
Spike samples
In addition to the main data provided by Rungel and KSN, consisting of recordings of RBCs
from known adult and fetal populations, a few extra experiments are conducted in this project
using spike samples. The experiments are assisted by KSN. The spike samples are solutions
containing both fetal and adult whole blood. These samples are analyzed in order to test the
classification algorithm on blood samples that resemble blood drawn from a pregnant woman
who suffers from FMH. The samples are generated by mixing fetal and adult blood into a
volume of known fetal to adult blood cell ratio. The mixed volume is kept at 5.2 µL as for the
experiments with fetal blood. The samples are made with three different fetal to adult blood
cell ratios and for two different fetal donors, giving a total of six spike samples. The added
volumes of fetal and adult blood in each sample are calculated from the cell concentration of
each donor. The calculations and results are given in appendix A.
==PAGE:32==
20
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
This chapter presents the methods within image analysis, statistics, and machine learning
employed to solve the problem of classifying fetal and adult RBCs from their passage through
the microchannel.
4.1
Image analysis
The end point of the image analysis is to create a feature vector representing various shape
and deformability parameters of every cell at specified locations of the microchannel. The
feature vector is created based on an overview of frame sequences representing passages of
individual cells including a segmentation of the cell in each frame. This section describes the
image processing and image analysis steps performed to achieve the end point, including a
description of some of the employed image analysis approaches and techniques. The image
analysis is performed using Matlab and is assembled in a script presented in appendix D.1.
For recollection, the cells pass from the left to the right (along the x axis) in all images.
Prior to analyzing a recording of a sample for feature extraction, a few values are manually
fed to the code to facilitate some calculations. These values are:
• x value of constriction inlet
• x value of constriction outlet
• y value representing the vertical center of the constriction
• threshold and structuring element for detection of channel edge
The x and y values locate the constriction in every recording. This is a necessity for the
feature extraction, where the cell’s position related to the inlet and outlet of the constriction
is essential. The threshold and structuring element are used to detect the channel edge, which
will be elaborated later.
4.1.1
Identification of cell-containing frames
Initially, frames are sorted into cell-containing frames and non-cell-containing (empty) frames.
This reduces the amount of images included in the analysis, and the empty frames are to
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Methods
be used for background estimations during the analysis. Frames are characterized as cell-
containing based on an image differencing. All frames are compared to the frame appearing
three frames earlier (their neighbor), and if no object appears or moves between frames, the
peak difference will be close to zero. Due to changes in lighting and physical disturbances,
small differences may occur between frames containing no cells. Thus, a threshold is set to
filter frames with low peak difference from frames with a higher peak difference thought to
contain cells. Peak differences for all frames (and their neighbor) are plotted in figure 4.1 for
an entire sample. It clearly shows a relatively fixed low level for a part of the frames. These
frames are categorized as empty and labeled with a red color in the plot. This sorting is
performed prior to this project using a code made by Henrik Thirstrup for his thesis [52].
Figure 4.1:
Peak pixel difference between each frame and its neighbor frame
for a whole sample recording. Blue bars represent frames that are categorized as
cell-containing and red bars empty frames.
4.1.2
Cell identification
In order to isolate the pixels showing a cell in an image, a background subtraction is performed.
The background is created from an average of the nearest empty frame appearing before and
after the frame in concern.
The background is selected that way to limit differences in
lighting and field of view from the cell-containing image and, thus, reduce the amount of
noise included in the resulting image. The resulting image is the absolute difference between
the background and the cell-containing image. A few examples of background subtractions
are shown in figure 4.2.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Image analysis
23
cell-containing image
selected background
absolute difference
Figure 4.2: Examples of background subtractions. The selected background is
subtracted from the cell-containing image, and the absolute difference works as an
extraction of the pixels showing the cell(s).
In addition to the background extraction, an attempt is made to remove any signal from
the area showing the channel edge around the constricted segment after the background
extraction. This is done to avoid that any changes in lighting will result in extraction of
parts of the channel edge that, due to proximity to the cells passing through, may be jointly
segmented with a passing cell. For most samples, this has been done by detecting the area
automatically through a binarization of the background with a simple threshold, when the
area has been clearly marked by, for instance, lower pixel intensities. Setting the pixel values
in the area to zero and the rest to one and then multiplying it by the image resulting from the
background extraction ensures that the channel edge is not influencing the subsequent cell
segmentations. For some samples, the brightness and focus depth cause the channel edge to
appear less clear, which prevents the automatic edge detection. In these cases, the edge has
been manually outlined, and the same zero-area is multiplied in every background extraction.
4.1.3
Cell segmentation
The segmentation of cells is performed using connected component analysis (CCA). CCA
is an image analysis tool for extracting and labeling regions of pixels that are defined as
connected by a specified principle. In this project, the CCA is performed on binary images
comprising the identified cells as the foreground pixels. A CCA is based on a connectivity
definition that determines whether two foreground pixels are connected or not. Two visual
examples of connectivity definitions are shown in figure 4.3. The center pixel of the structure
(blue in the figure) represents the pixel that is evaluated, and the surrounding (white) ones
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Methods
represent the neighboring pixels that are considered connected to it. Every foreground pixel
is evaluated and assigned a component label that associates it with its connected pixels. This
is illustrated by the green and red color of the pixels in figure 4.3. The extracted components
can subsequently be analyzed based on shape, size, and other features.
Figure 4.3: Example of a connected component analysis with two different connec-
tivity definitions. Foreground pixels are grouped into components where connected
pixels are assigned to the same component. Modified from [53].
The cell segmentation thus starts with a binarization of the images resulting from the back-
ground extraction. First, they are normalized in order to eliminate inter-sample pixel inten-
sity variations caused by differences in brightness etc. This enables a global threshold for
binarizing the images. The binarization is based on a simple pixel intensity threshold that
remains the same for all samples. The aim is to include as much of the cell shape as possible
without including too much noise.
As seen in figure 4.2, some areas of the cells have very similar intensities to the background and
do, thus, not appear clearly or at all in the background-subtracted images. A low threshold
will include the most, but it is important not to include any ”shadows” that may occur
adjacent to the cells due to scattering and dimming of light during the recordings. Including
these shadows will result in cell segmentations that are bigger and differently shaped than
the actual cells. Setting the threshold is a trade-off, but by performing some morphological
operations subsequent to the binarization, the threshold can be set relatively high without
omitting parts of the cells in the final segmentation. The threshold is set to 0.12 and a few
examples are shown in figure 4.4.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Image analysis
25
cell-containing image
post background subtraction
binarization
Figure 4.4:
Examples of binarization of background-subtracted images with
threshold = 0.12.
Next, a CCA is performed in order to discard connected components (objects) that are
thought to be noise. A threshold is set to remove objects with areas smaller than 20 pixels.
This removes dot-like noise (as seen in the middle example of figure 4.4) but maintains
disconnected parts of cells. This operation is shown in step (a) to (b) of figure 4.6.
Now, in order to connect disconnected parts of cells and specifically complete the outline
of cells, a morphological operation is performed. Morphological operations manipulate the
structure of image objects by employing a structuring element (SE) similar to the connectivity
structures seen in figure 4.3. The SE is imposed onto every foreground pixel of an image,
and the neighbor pixels, that are defined by the structuring element, or the pixel itself is
manipulated according to a specified operation. The SE could, for instance, be a 3x3 square
like the bottom one in figure 4.3. When performing a dilation using a 3x3 square SE, all
of the 8 neighboring pixels to any foreground pixel are converted to foreground pixels. If
performing an erosion, however, all foreground pixels that do not have foreground pixels
on all the 8 neighboring positions are converted to background pixels. Both operations are
illustrated in figure 4.5 with a 3x3 square SE.
SEs can be any shape and size, and there exist many morphological operations suitable for
different tasks. An operation suitable for connecting the cell parts is a morphological closing.
A closing is a dilation followed by an erosion. The result can be seen in figure 4.5. A closing
operation fills small holes or gaps in or between objects and smoothes object edges without
enlarging or shrinking them. Here, the operation is performed to make sure the cell outline
is connected all the way around without gaps or clefts. For this purpose, a disc-shaped SE
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Methods
with a radius of 4 pixels is employed. The disc shape helps maintain the circular shape of
the cells, and the radius of 4 pixels is big enough to fill out most gaps and clefts and small
enough to avoid merging cells that arrive almost simultaneously. An example can be seen in
step (b) to (c) of figure 4.6.
Figure 4.5: A morphological closing operation: a dilation followed by an erosion.
The structuring element is a 3x3 square. Modified from [54].
After the closing operation, the center part of some cells may still be excluded from the
foreground, since that generally is the area most similar to the background. To ensure that
this part is included as foreground in the binary images, a hole-filling operation is performed.
Background pixels that are completely surrounded by foreground pixels are converted to
foreground pixels. This is illustrated in step (c) to (d) in figure 4.6. The figure shows the
operations that are performed to achieve the best binary representation of the cells.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.6: Morphological operations on binary image (a) made from background
subtraction on cell-containing image.
(b) Result of area filtration that removes
objects smaller than 20 pixels. (c) Result of closing operation on (b). (d) Result of
hole filling on (c).
Finally, the objects of the binary representations are analyzed and filtered based on several
morphological characteristics intended to distinguish between objects thought to be single
cells and objects thought to be something else. The following properties are analyzed:
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Image analysis
27
• convex area
• major axis length
• solidity
Figure 4.7: Illustration of the con-
vex area (dashed) of a concave ob-
ject (blue).
The convex area (illustrated in figure 4.7) filtration is
meant to discard objects that are smaller or bigger than
a single cell.
Such objects could be small bubbles or
a fusion of two cells arriving simultaneously.
Instead
of considering the plain area, the convex area is used
to further exclude small fused cells that, in their plain
area, are not bigger than one big cell but exceed the maximum cell size in convex area. The
major axis length is another way of filtering the objects by size. If one cell follows another
into the constricted segment, and they are extracted as one object in the binary image, that
object will be longer than a single cell. Finally, the objects are filtered based on their solidity.
Solidity is measured as the area divided by the convex area (see figure 4.7). An object with a
large convex area consequently obtains a low solidity. Cells are not expected to exhibit deep
grooves in their shape. Objects with low solidities are, thus, discarded due to the assumption
that they are either segmented badly or fusions between several cells.
Figure 4.8 presents a few examples of extracted objects and corresponding size and shape val-
ues. The two top images display single cells of different size and orientation. Both extractions
are acceptable. The two bottom images display extractions that are not acceptable. One has
to be discarded because the object outlines more than one cell. The area of this object is
not a lot larger than the big cell on top, but its convex area and major axis length exceeds
the rest by a factor two, and its solidity is lower. The bottom object has to be discarded
due to a groove in the outline that results from a part of the cell not being extracted in the
binarization. The solidity of this object is consequently low. Table 4.1 lists the property
thresholds for acceptance of objects for the cell segmentation in this project.
Property
Accepted range
Minimum
Maximum
Convex area
200
1450
Major axis length
0
65
Solidity
0.87
1
Table 4.1: Thresholds for morphological filtering of CAA-detected objects images
from the recordings of the microfluidic experiments.
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Methods
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.8: Size and shape values of four different objects. (a) displays an ex-
traction of a large single cell with values lying within the range of accepted values.
(b) displays a smaller cell with values that are also within the range of acceptance.
(c) displays an object that outlines two adjoining cells and has a lower solidity
and larger major axis length than acceptable. (d) displays an object that is an
incomplete outline of a cell and has a solidity lower than acceptable.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Image analysis
29
In addition to the above mentioned operations, a further filtration is made. Objects that are
in contact with the image border are discarded so that no cell, that is not completely visible
in the image, is analyzed. A CCA is now performed and results in the final cell segmentation.
A few examples of the final segmentation are presented in figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Examples of final cell segmentation visualized by red dashed lines.
4.1.4
Cell passage registration
Every segmentation in each frame of a recording is associated with an individual cell passing
the constriction. This results in an overview of each cell’s total number of appearances and
the associated segmentations. Matlab’s built-in function regionprops extracts location, size,
and shape properties of objects detected by a CCA. It can be used to extract the centroid of an
object, calculated as the center of mass. In every frame, detected objects are evaluated based
on their centroid locations in relation to any objects detected in the preceding frame. If an
object is within a certain distance from an object in the preceding frame, they are associated
with the same cell number. If a previous object is not within the specified distance, the
present object is defined as a new appearing cell and is registered with a new cell number.
The registrations are subsequently filtered to discard cells that are not registered all the
way through the constricted channel. Cells that escape focus or are not registered because
they merge with other cells at some point throughout the passage are, thus, discarded. The
filtration preserves a cell if a) its front at its first registration is one or more pixels outside
the inlet of the constriction, and b) its front at its last registration has reached the outlet of
the constriction. The final number of registered cell amounts to about 60-70% of the total
number of visible cells passing the constriction. A majority of the non-registered cells are
left out because several cells arrive simultaneously and cannot be segmented individually.
Other cells are not registered because they are not extracted properly and end up with a
poor segmentation with low solidity due to the cell appearing weak and the threshold being
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Methods
too high to extract it all.
Ideally, this analysis would include information about the cells farther from both the inlet and
the outlet outside the constriction, so that the cells’ behavior before and after entering the
constriction could be taken into account and used for the classification task. However, due
to the limited and manually adjusted field of view in this data set, it has not been possible
to include information about the cells farther from the inlet or outlet.
Table 4.2 illustrates the structure of the cell identification and registration analysis output.
Each cell (labeled by ”Cell no.”) appears in a certain amount of frames. Cell no. 1 appears,
for instance, in 69 frames. In each frame, the pixel location, centroid, and bounding box of
every segmented cell is given along with a number of morphology and deformation features
that are used for subsequent analyses. These features are introduced and described in the
following section.
Cell no.
Frame no.
Centroid
Bounding box
Outline
Feature1
Feature2
Feature...
1
1x69
1x69
1x69
1x69
1x69
1x69
1x69
2
1x83
1x83
1x83
1x83
1x83
1x83
1x83
3
1x77
1x77
1x77
1x77
1x77
1x77
1x77
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Table 4.2: Structure of cell registration. Each cell appears in a number of frames
during its passage, and for each frame, its centroid, bounding box, and pixel outline
are registered along with values of various morphology and deformation features.
4.1.5
Feature extraction
Various features are extracted for each cell relating to their morphology and deformation
when passing the channel.
Some features are based on their simple outline at specified
positions. These features are entirely based on the CCA of the binary version of each frame.
Additional features are based on the pixel intensity profiles of the cells, aiming at relating
their two-dimensional representation to a three-dimensional shape. Finally, the velocity of
the cells at specified parts of the channel are calculated and included as a feature. This
section describes the characteristic of each feature and then presents the final feature vector
with an overview of the specified positions at which different features are extracted.
4.1.5.1
Features extracted from simple cell outlines
The vertical position of the cell related to the constriction is extracted using the computed cell
centroid and the channel center reference. This feature is meant to relate the cell’s position
in the main channel to its behavior when entering the constriction. However, since the field
of view does not allow for information farther than 1 pixel from the inlet, this feature may
not reveal any relations like that.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Image analysis
31
The morphological features extracted from the binary representations are obtained using
Matlab’s regionprops. The following features are included:
• circularity
• eccentricity
• major axis length
The circularity of the cell is used as an indication of the cell’s orientation arriving at the
constriction. The value is calculated by:
4π · area
perimeter2
giving a value between 0 and 1, where 1 is a perfectly round circle. A high value corresponds
to a cell orientation like the one seen in figure 4.10(a). This feature is included to account
for correlations between orientation and the time it takes for a cell to enter the constriction.
An orientation like the one seen in figure 4.10(a) forces the cell to either turn or fold to enter
the constriction, whereas cells with an orientation like the one seen in figure 4.10(b), with
a lower circularity, can enter as they are. Due to the varying field of view between samples,
it has not been possible to extract the circularity of cells farther than one pixel from the
constriction. At that location, the cells have already begun changing their orientation.
(a) circularity = 0.9692
(b) circularity = 0.7529
Figure 4.10: Circularity of two segmented cells.
The eccentricity is measured to distinguish between cell shapes inside the constricted seg-
ment. Using Matlab’s built-in function regionprops, an ellipse is fitted to the object, and the
eccentricity is given by the ratio of the distance between the foci of the ellipse and its major
axis length (see appendix B.1 for a clarification). A low eccentricity reflects a circular shape
while a high eccentricity reflects a more elliptic shape. The eccentricity is meant to reflect
whether the two-dimensional outline of a cell is shortened due to the cell folding across the y
or z axis. Such a fold would result in a shortening of the cell along the x axis and possibly an
increased height along the y axis and, consequently, a smaller eccentricity. It has later been
discovered that no cells fold across the y or z axis, but the feature is still included, since it
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Methods
may reflect size or proportion differences between fetal and adult RBCs. Moreover, the ratio
between the eccentricity from one position to another inside the constriction may reflect a
stretch of the cell.
The major axis length is extracted to get an estimate of the cell diameter.
As with the
eccentricity, an ellipse is fitted to the object and its major axis length is extracted. The
two-dimensional representation of a cell is generally elliptic making this a good estimate of
the diameter irrespective of the orientation of the cell. This measurement is made outside the
constriction to limit the effect of shear stress on the cell diameter. An additional diameter
measurement is made where the cell reaches the outlet of the constriction, in order to see if
the ratio between them is significant for the RBC classes. Fetal RBCs may undergo a higher
shear stress within the constriction since their larger size brings them closer to the channel
wall and consequently the highest velocity gradient. This increase in shear stress may stretch
the diameter of the cells as proposed by Zeng and Ristenpart [49].
The major axis length is measured in pixels. It is converted to µm by multiplying it by the
pixel size, which is defined by dividing the actual length of the constriction (40 µm) by the
horizontal distance in pixels between the inlet and outlet in every recording. Figure 4.11
demonstrates a few examples of cell segmentations and the corresponding major axes.
Figure 4.11: Cell segmentations (red dashed line) and corresponding major axes
(blue line) as calculated from a fitted ellipse by Matlab’s built-in function region-
props.
An additional feature that is based on the binary cell extraction is a velocity estimation.
Over two specified stretches of the channel, the duration of every cell’s passage is measured
as an indication of its deformability. The stretches are explained and illustrated in figure
4.12. One is referred to as the inlet time (t1). It is defined as the time it takes for the cell
to get from point A to point B, where point A marks the position at which the cell’s front
reaches the inlet of the constricted segment of the channel, and point B marks the position at
which the cell’s rear end crosses the inlet. The duration is divided by the distance along the
x axis between the cell’s centroid at both positions to take account of variations in cell size.
This operation converts the measurement into an average velocity (v1). The other duration
(t2) is measured between point B and C, where point C is defined as the position at which
the cell’s rear end reaches the outlet of the constricted segment of the channel. Again, the
measurement is divided by the distance, making it an average velocity (v2). The velocities
are given in pixels/frame since the values are not meaningful themselves.
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Image analysis
33
Figure 4.12: Generation of velocity features. v1: The time it takes for a cell
to travel from position A to position B (t1) divided by the distance along the x
axis between the cell’s centroid at both positions. v2: The time it takes for a cell
to travel from position B to position C divided by the distance along the x axis
between the cell’s centroid at both positions.
Due to bubbles being trapped inside the microchannel, the flow velocity may vary between
experiments although settings are held constant. Varying flow velocities will consequently
affect the cell velocity measurements, possibly preventing the possibility of affiliating cell
velocity with RBC type. Thus, a third feature is generated to eliminate the effect of flow
velocity by calculating the ratio between the two cell velocities: vratio = v2
v1.
4.1.5.2
Features extracted from pixel intensities of the cell body
For further shape analysis, the pixel intensities of the cell bodies are examined. The aim is to
evaluate the three-dimensional shape of a cell based on its pixel intensity profile in the two-
dimensional representation. The shapes are analyzed inside the constriction. The presented
approaches are aiming at differentiating shapes that are assumed to represent folded cells
from other shapes.
Throughout these investigations, it was found that the three-dimensional shapes are com-
plicated to predict from the images of this data set. Examining cell passages intensively, a
majority of the cells appear to turn upon entering the constriction, while the rest are dif-
ficult to categorize. It is concluded that none of the shapes can positively be related to a
folded cell, which prevents pixel intensity profiles from being related specifically to a folded
or unfolded shape. The following analyses may still be useful for other setups or after fur-
ther three-dimensional shape analysis. They are included in the classification task of this
project despite the above mentioned challenge, since they may be useful for predicting some
unexplained difference between the two RBC classes.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Methods
The initial approach is based on differentiating shape 1 from shape 2-4 in figure 4.13. These
shapes are good representations of the possible shapes for cells inside the constriction in these
experiments. Shape 1 is, in this approach, assumed to be the only shape that is not folded
in any way.
(a) shape 1
(b) shape 2
(c) shape 3
(d) shape 4
Figure 4.13: Representation of cell shapes found in this data set.
The differentiation is based on intensity gradients of the cell image. Shapes 2-4 appear to
exhibit more intensity changes throughout their bodies than shape 1. The gradients are quan-
tified by an edge detection that results in a binary representation that contains foreground
pixels where the image exhibits the largest intensity gradients. This is demonstrated for two
cells in figure 4.14. The edge detection is performed using the edge function in Matlab with
the ’Canny’ method, that calculates gradients from the derivative of a Gaussian filter. The
resulting binary image is then analyzed for a quantification of edges crossing the cell body.
The quantification is based on a count of foreground pixels in a defined region of the cell.
The region encompasses the row of pixels above and below the centroid on the y axis and is
outlined by a blue line in figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: ’Canny’ edge detection of two different cells.
The count of fore-
ground pixels within the region outlined by a blue line is used for a quantification
of gradients across the cell body.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Image analysis
35
A few cells and associated gradient quantification scores are presented in figure 4.15. It is
clear that cells of shape 1 obtain lower scores than the rest.
score = 27
score = 5
score = 22
score = 5
score = 21
score = 19
score = 17
score = 10
Figure 4.15: Gradient quantification score for eight different cells.
After further inspection, only shapes 3 and 4 are assumed folded. To distinguish shapes 3
and 4 from the two others, a symmetry analysis is performed. The two shapes distinguish
themselves by being asymmetrical about the y axis. The symmetry is quantified by extracting
a region around the centroid of the cell, flipping it vertically, and extracting it from the
original. The region is defined by a 23 pixel wide and 5 pixel tall box centered around the
cell centroid, and its pixel intensities are normalized for the analysis. It is illustrated in figure
4.16 by the red outline in the top image. The bottom images display the extracted region
along with the associated symmetry axis. The sum of the absolute pixel differences is divided
by the cell diameter, since the cell area contains more differences than the background. The
result is the final symmetry score, where high scores indicate asymmetry. A few more cells
and associated symmetry scores are presented in figure 4.17.
score = 0.86
score = 2.17
score = 0.60
Figure 4.16: Symmetry score about the y axis. The score is based on an extraction
of a 23x5 pixel region centered around the cell centroid, which is shown by the red
outline in top images and the whole image in the bottom row. The red line on
the bottom images shows the axis about which the symmetry is evaluated. The
symmetry is quantified by flipping the region vertically and subtracting it from the
original, then summing up the absolute pixel differences and dividing the sum by
the cell diameter.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Methods
score = 1.45
score = 0.85
score = 2.06
score = 1.61
score = 1.63
score = 0.60
score = 2.17
score = 0.86
Figure 4.17: Symmetry scores for eight different cells.
4.1.5.3
Final features
An overview of the final extracted features used for the RBC classification is presented in
table 4.3. Figure 4.18 demonstrates the location of the cell when each feature is extracted.
The cell is visualized at four specified positions of the channel that are defined as (from left
to right):
1. where the front of the cell reaches the inlet
2. where the rear end of the cell has passed the inlet
3. where the centroid of the cell is 70 pixels to the right of the inlet
4. where the front of the cell reaches the outlet
Figure 4.18: Overview of final extracted features used for RBC classification.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 RBC classification
37
In addition to features that are extracted directly from one of the four specified positions
(demonstrated in figure 4.18), table 4.3 includes features that are ratios of other features.
Feature names
Feature
position 1
position 2
position 3
position 4
ratio
Circularity
circ
Eccentricity
ecc3∗
ecc4
eccratio = ecc4
ecc3
Cell diameter
dia
dia4∗
dratio = dia4
dia
Vertical position
vp
Gradient score
gradient
Symmetry score
symmetry
Velocity
v1 ∗∗
v2 ∗∗
vratio = v2
v1
Table 4.3:
Overview of final features used for cell classification.
Features are
labeled based on the position of the cell when they were extracted. *Features not
included as a feature in the RBC classification itself. **Features are not included
in the classification due to the correlation with flow velocity but are inspected
independently in the result section.
The final features are extracted from the cell registration output using the Matlab script
FeatureVector presented in appendix D.2.
4.2
RBC classification
Classification is the task of predicting to which of a set of categories (classes) an observation
belongs. An observation comprises one or more input variables (features) of either contin-
uous or categorical origin. The values of an observation’s features determine the outcome
(response) of the categorization. The response variable of a classification is categorical, mean-
ing that it takes one of a limited number of possible values representing the classes. The
algorithm that implements a classification is called a classifier. There exist many types of
classifiers that are all suitable for different data sets and problems. The objective of a classi-
fier is to identify a set of rules or functions, also known as decision boundaries, that, based
on the features of a data set, can separate data points into given classes.
4.2.1
Supervised machine learning
Supervised machine learning (supervised learning) is the task of learning the mapping func-
tion between a number of features and a response variable from a data set with a known
response to every set of feature observations [55]. The learning process is referred to as train-
ing a prediction algorithm or model on a training data set. Trained models are subsequently
validated on an unseen test data set for an assessment of its predictive performance.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Methods
For classification problems, the purpose of machine learning is to identify decision boundaries
for the best possible separation of classes. The resulting prediction model can be used for
classifying new observations whose class is unknown. Supervised learning has many benefits
over unsupervised learning, where the relation between features and classes are not known.
Without the ability to identify a mapping algorithm, observations of unknown class can be
grouped through unsupervised learning such as a cluster analysis. In a cluster analysis, a
set of observations are divided into groups such that observations within the same group are
more similar than observations from different groups. K-means clustering, a type of cluster
analysis, is described in appendix B.2.
When using supervised learning to train a prediction model, it is critical that the training data
set is representative. Small training sets may contain observations with limited variability and
are further more sensitive to outliers. Moreover, small data sets may result in classification
models that are too complex if the ratio of features to training observations is high. With
a large amount of features but few observations to train on, the model is at risk of fitting
to noise and outliers instead of learning the true patterns of the data. This is referred to as
over-fitting a model. Fitting a model is a trade-off between learning enough about the data
structure and learning too much by simply remembering every observation of the training
data. Figure 4.19 shows an under- and over-fitted model along with a more appropriate one.
(a) Under-fitting
(b) Appropriate
(c) Over-fitting
Figure 4.19: Illustration of (a) under- and (b) over-fitting of a model to the same
training data. (c) shows an appropriate model. Modified from [56].
A model is evaluated on a test data set to assess its predictive performance on unseen data.
With a large data set, both training and test sets are likely to represent the population
variance.
With scarce data, however, it can be challenging to achieve an adequate data
partition that allows for both adequate training and testing.
As mentioned earlier, the
training set must be representative.
The same goes for the test set, since the estimated
predictive performance may be misleading if the test set only represents a limited variation
within the entire population.
The test may yield a false large error if the test data are
unusually noisy or comprise many outliers. Equivalently, the test may yield a false low error
if the test data comprise only average ”easy to predict” observations. Scarce data can be
==PAGE:51==
4.2 RBC classification
39
handled in a different way for better performance assessment.
By using cross validation,
every observation in the data set is used for both training and testing [55]. One type of cross
validation is called k-fold cross validation and is illustrated in figure 4.20.
Figure 4.20: K-fold cross validation with k=5. The data set is split into k parts
and each of them is used for testing once, while the model is trained on the remaining
k-1 parts. The predictive performance of the model is estimated as the average of
the k performances.
A simple model is evidently desired for good predictive performance on unseen data. When
fitting a model to a training set, there are several techniques to avoid over-fitting. A com-
monly used technique is regularization. When applying regularization in model training, a
regularization function is added to the loss function [57] and the regularized loss is then
minimized for model selection:
argmin
f
n
∑
i=1
loss(f(xi), yi) + λR(f)
(4.1)
where n is the number of training observations, f is the model, xi are observed feature
values, yi are observed responses, and R is the regularization function. The regularization
function favors less complex models as it increases for models that vary too much over small
regions in feature space [57]. The extent of regularization is controlled by the λ parameter.
Regularization can further be used for feature selection in model development, which is
elaborated in section 4.2.3.
4.2.2
Classifier
Choosing the right type of classifier is imperative for a successful classification. The per-
formance of a classifier depends on the structure of both the feature data and the response
variable. The number of features and classes as well as the amount of training data are essen-
tial parameters in the choice of a classifier. Some classification problems can be successfully
solved using functions based on linear combinations of the features to separate data classes.
Other data sets require non-linear transformations of their feature spaces for acceptable clas-
sification results [57]. The purpose of a non-linear transformation of the feature space is to
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Methods
find a representation of the data that allows for linear functions to separate classes. When
a decision boundary is transformed back to the original features space it appears as a non-
linear decision boundary. Figure 4.21 shows an example of a linear and a non-linear decision
boundary for a two-class data set in a two-dimensional feature space. The non-linear trans-
formation clearly results in a data representation (x3 = x2
1 + x2
2) in which the two classes are
easily separated by a linear function.
(a) Linear decision boundary for
non-transformed data
(b) Non-linear data transformation and decision boundary
Figure 4.21: Decision boundaries for two different two-class data sets in a two-
dimensional feature space. (a) Linear decision boundary for non-transformed data.
(b) Left: Data representation in non-transformed feature space. The green line
shows the non-linear decision boundary that is identified in the non-linear transfor-
mation of the feature space. Right: Data representation in the non-linear transfor-
mation of the feature space. Green hyper-plane shows the linear decision boundary
that is only identifiable in the transformed space. (a) modified from [58] and (b)
from [59].
Some classifiers can only identify linear decision boundaries, while other more complex clas-
sifiers can identify both linear and non-linear decision boundaries. Non-linear classifications
may be superior in solving certain tasks, but they are also more complicated to implement
and have the potential of over fitting a model to the training data. If sufficient, a linear
classification is thus preferred.
In this project, the objective is to categorize RBCs as either belonging to a fetal or adult class.
This is a two-class or binomial classification problem, meaning that the response variable can
take one of two fixed values. Binomial classifications can be performed using various methods.
A common linear classifier for binomial classification called logistic regression is employed in
this project. In logistic regression, the classification is based on modeling the probability of
the response variable assuming one rather than the other. Typically, the classes are denoted
”0” and ”1” and the modeling is based on predicting the probability of observations belonging
to class ”1”. The probability is a continuous value which relates the classification to a general
linear regression problem and justifies the term logistic regression. Since the probability has
to be positive but cannot exceed 1, it may be modeled appropriately with a standard logistic
==PAGE:53==
4.2 RBC classification
41
function given by:
f(t) =
1
1 + e−t
(4.2)
where t is a linear combination of features. Figure 4.22 shows an example of a simple logistic
function modeling the probability of response variable y being class ”1” given one feature x.
β denotes the coefficient of x.
Figure 4.22: Example of a simple logistic function modeling the probability of
response variable y being of class ”1” given one feature x. Modified from [60].
A logit transformation of the logistic probability function results in a model that links the
linear combination of features and the log-odds of the response being of class ”1” [57]. The
logit transformation of the logistic function shown in figure 4.22 gives:
ln
(
P(y = 1|x)
1 −P(y = 1|x)
)
= α + βx
(4.3)
where
P(y = 1|x)
1 −P(y = 1|x)
is the odds of the response being class ”1” rather than ”0”. A visual example of a logit
function from a logistic regression is given in appendix B.3 along with the logistic function
for modeling probabilities. In logistic regression, the logit function is the algorithm that
is trained to fit a training set and results in a model for classification. The output of the
model itself is a log-odds value, so for classification, the response is transformed back from
the log-odds to a probability. The probability is then evaluated based on a cut-off value and
a classification is made. Typically, the cut-off value is 0.5 so that:
class =



1
if P(y = 1) ≥0.5
0
if P(y = 1) < 0.5
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Methods
4.2.3
Model coefficients
Model coefficients determine the effect of each feature on the response. They can be estimated
using supervised learning on a training data set with observations of known class. In linear
regression, the model parameters are usually estimated by the least sum of squares method
that works by minimizing the distance between each data point and the regression line.
Estimating model parameters in logistic regression is more complex. It is done using the
iterative method of maximizing the likelihood function, where the set of parameters for which
the probability of the observed data is greatest is identified [57]. The likelihood function for
a two-class logistic regression is given by:
L(⃗β) =
n
∏
i=1
p(xi)yi(1 −p(xi))1−yi
(4.4)
where n is the number of observations in the training set and ⃗β is the coefficient vector
with a length corresponding to the number of features. For computational convenience, the
log-likelihood function is most often minimized instead.
An estimated model can be investigated in order to understand the role of the individual
features in the classification. Coefficient estimations can be evaluated to analyze the effect
of each individual feature on the response. Coefficients in a logistic regression model express
an effect on a log-odds scale. If they are exponentiated, however, they express an effect on
an odds scale. The exponentiated value of a coefficient expresses the change of the odds
of an observation belonging to class ”1” if the feature is increased by one unit while all
others are held constant. If, for instance, an initial log-odds related coefficient of a feature,
that expresses a weight in kg, is estimated to be 0.45, then the exponentiated value of the
coefficient is 1.57 which implies that a 1 kg increase in weight leads to 57% higher odds of the
observation belonging to class ”1”, as long as the remaining features are held constant. The
significance of features are expressed by a p-value indicating the probability of each feature
not having an effect on the response. A low p-value suggests that a feature is significant in
modeling the response.
As described in section 4.2.1, a simple model is typically preferred to obtain a robust classifier
that is not over-fitted to its training data. A model can be simplified manually by eliminating
one or more features. One way to do this is to eliminate the least significant feature, fit a new
model without it, and, in the new model, evaluate remaining features, possibly eliminating
a second insignificant feature, and so on. For a big model, this can be time-consuming, and
if no features are insignificant, it may not be feasible to simplify it in such manner. Another
way to simplify a model is by applying a regularization as introduced in section 4.2.1. One
type is the Lasso regularization, where the ℓ1 norm of the feature coefficients is added to the
loss function as the regularization term [57]:
λ R(f) = λ ||⃗β||1 = λ
n
∑
i=1
|βi|
(4.5)
==PAGE:55==
4.2 RBC classification
43
The value of λ reflects the restriction put on the coefficients to obtain a value lower than a
specified limit. A large λ corresponds to the specified limit being low. With Lasso regular-
ization, the restriction often leads to one or more coefficients being set to zero. This is how
Lasso regularization is applied for feature selection.
For the classification problem of this project, the data set is split into a training and a test set
twice using two different approaches. Split 1 is generated by randomly sampling 20% of the
observations into a test set. Split 2 is generated by extracting all observations from a number
of fetal and adult donors corresponding to about 20% of the data and in the same fetal-to-
adult observation ratio as the entire data set. One observation corresponds to one analyzed
cell, and information about specific donors are disregarded. A split validation is considered
appropriate for this data set due to its large amount of observations. The following model
development and validation are performed using both splits for comparison.
A logistic regression model including the nine features presented in table 4.3 is trained with
and without Lasso regularization using the statistical computing software R. The employed
functions are glm and glm.net for unregularized and regularized model development respec-
tively. The R script for model development and validation is presented in appendix D.3.
With glm.net, a default Lasso regularization is performed for 100 values of λ, and the es-
timated models are then compared by assessing each model’s predictive performance in a
10-fold cross validation and comparing the performances.
The feature coefficients and p values of both models are presented and evaluated in the result
chapter. Both models are conclusively tested on the test set to evaluate their performance
on independent data. With a data set this large, the regularization is not expected to cause
a noteworthy improvement on the performance.
==PAGE:56==
44
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Results
A total of 39422 cells are registered and analyzed in the experiments with the 101 adult
and 59 fetal samples. The ratio of fetal to adult cells is 10823:28599. A rough estimate
suggests that approximately 60% of the cells that appear on the recordings are registered
and analyzed, while the remaining cells are not segmented properly. This chapter provides
an overview of relevant statistics and results regarding the analysis and RBC classification.
5.1
Data inspection
The following data inspection will focus on the six features that show the most dissimilarity
between fetal and adult RBCs in the full data set. The features are (for definition, see table
4.3): dia, ecc4, eccratio, v1, v2, and vratio.
Figures 5.1 and 5.2 display the box plots and histograms for the distributions of the six
features. The plots for the remaining features are displayed in appendix C. In general, the
plots reflect a data set with numerous outliers. This may reflect instability of the experimental
setup/procedure. It may also indicate that the cell segmentation or feature extraction needs
to be improved. Aside from the outliers, the plots reflect a data set with noticeable differences
between the two RBC classes.
The first thing worth noticing about the distributions of these features is the estimated cell
diameters. As expected, the diameter of fetal cells are measured to be larger. The means of
the two classes are estimated not to be equal with a confidence level of 99%, according to a
two-sample t-test. The class sample means are 11.81 and 13.12 µm for adult and fetal RBCs,
respectively. These values are ∼51% higher than values found in literature (7.8 and 8.7 µm).
This indicates that the earlier mentioned ”shadows” around the cells are in fact included to
some degree. The ratio, however, indicates that the diameter of fetal RBCs are 11.09% larger
than that of adult RBCs, which is roughly in agreement with the result of 11.54% published
by Park et al. in 2015 [41]. This suggests that the cell segmentation algorithm overestimates
the extent of the RBCs by approximately the same in all images.
The eccentricity of the adult RBCs at the end of the constriction (ecc4) is measured to be
greater than that of fetal RBCs. This may be explained by a higher deformability of fetal
RBCs, making them more susceptible to the shear stress inside the constriction. It may,
however, alternatively be due to the natural difference in shape between the two classes,
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Results
which is mentioned in chapter 2. Since the initial eccentricity is not measured here, this will
remain unanswered. The ratio that is calculated between the cell eccentricity in the middle
and the end of the constriction is higher for the adult RBCs as well. This value does not
depend on the initial eccentricity of RBCs and may thus be interpreted as a deformability
characteristic. A high ecc4 : ecc3 ratio reflects a stretching of the cell in the flow direction,
corresponding to the effect of shear stress caused by surface stresses from the channel walls.
The higher eccratio of adult RBCs, thus, indicates a higher deformability of adult RBCs.
The velocity measurements, v1 and v2, are not included in the classification since they are
affected by unstable flow velocities, but they are inspected for the sake of qualitative dis-
cussion of differences between the two RBC classes. The velocities indicate that fetal RBCs
travel faster both across the inlet of the constriction and through the constricted channel
than adult RBCs. Disregarding the potential influence by flow variation, these results seem
to contradict the believe that fetal RBCs are less deformable than their adult counterparts.
Another potential cause of these results is the possibility of having two different flow profiles
in the experiments with fetal and adult samples, respectively. Since the experiments with
fetal and adult samples, for the most part, are not conducted by the same person, this is a
potential error.
The velocity ratio reflects the RBCs’ ability to enter the constriction versus their ability to
pass it. Fetal RBCs obtain a higher velocity ratio and thus appear to take more time entering
the constriction than passing, compared to adult RBCs. Entering the constriction, the cells
may have to turn or undergo a deformation, so this result suggests that fetal RBCs are less
deformable than adult RBCs.
The gradient and symmetry scores calculated from the pixel intensity profiles of the cells
do not show much between-class variance.
Their distributions are shown in appendix C.
Nevertheless, the symmetry about the vertical axis is clearly distributed in two clusters. The
clusters may reflect the two types of shapes that the feature is meant to separate. Although
not meaningful for this experiment, since the two-dimensional shapes are difficult to relate
to specific three-dimensional shapes and no cells are thought to be folded, this approach may
be valuable for other experiments, where the pixel intensity profiles of cells can be related to
specific three-dimensional shapes like folds.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Data inspection
47
Figure 5.1: Box plots showing the distribution of experimental observations of
six features for fetal and adult RBCs, respectively. These features show the most
between-class variation out of the 11 extracted features. The distributions reflect
the entire data set. The box represents the first and third quartile with the median
in between, making up interquartile range (IQR). The whiskers extend to Q3+IQR
and Q1-IQR, and data points beyond the whiskers are defined as outliers.
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Results
Figure 5.2: Histograms showing the distribution of experimental observations of
six features for fetal and adult RBCs, respectively. These features show the most
between-class variation out of the 11 extracted features. The distributions reflect
the entire data set.
Figure 5.3 shows the distribution of fetal and adult observations, respectively, in four of
the two-dimensional feature spaces. The distributions are shown with contour lines due to
the large amount of data points. The distributions emphasize the between-class differences
displayed in figures 5.1 and 5.2.
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Data inspection
49
Figure 5.3: Distribution of fetal and adult observations in four two-dimensional
feature spaces.
In figure 5.4, all observations are displayed with scatter plots in eight two-dimensional feature
spaces for an inspection of correlation between features. The cell diameter appears to only
be correlated with ecc4. This correlation may be explained by RBCs not varying as much in
thickness as in diameter, meaning that a cell with a larger than average diameter may not
necessarily have a larger thickness, making it more elliptic.
The vertical position of cells before entering the constriction is somewhat correlated with
their entry velocity. Both high and low values reflect cells that are positioned away from the
center of the channel, and the entry velocity seems to be lower for these values. Thus, for
study of entry times, the vertical position of cells may be important to take into account. The
interpretation of these measurements is, however, limited by the fact that they are obtained
just one pixel outside the inlet of the constriction.
The circularity of the cell outside the constriction appears to have the same effect on the
entry velocity as the vertical position. Low circularities reflect cells with an orientation that
matches the orientation inside the constriction, which leads to an expectation that low circu-
larity leads to a higher entry velocity since the cell can enter the constriction without turning.
The somewhat positive correlation between circularity and entry velocity is conflicting with
that theory. Again, since the measurements are obtained just one pixel from the inlet, they
may be irrelevant due to little actual difference between cell orientation that close to the
constriction.
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Results
Figure 5.4: Scatter plot of entire data set for inspection of correlation between
eight feature pairs.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Model development
51
Figure 5.5 shows the distribution of mean experimental observations of the 160 donors for
the same six features that are inspected in figures 5.1 and 5.2. The means show that some
donors vary from other donors of the same class in their overall values of some features. These
discrepancies may cause the large number of outliers that are seen in figure 5.1 and 5.2.
Figure 5.5: Histograms showing the distribution of mean experimental observa-
tions of the 160 donors for six features. The distributions show that the mean value
of a feature for some donors vary significantly from the means of the rest of the
donors in the same class.
5.2
Model development
A logistic regression model is trained and tested on each of the splits with and without Lasso
regularization. The models trained on split 1 are inspected in the following.
The model coefficients and corresponding p-values of the unregularized model are presented
in table 5.1. The p-values test the null hypothesis that a coefficient is equal to zero, i.e.
the feature has no effect on the response. P-values lower than 0.01 reflect features that are
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Results
statistically significant on a significance level of 99%. It is clear from the table that all other
features than circ and gradient are correlated with RBC class.
Coefficient
P-value
(Intercept)
-45.8318
0.0000
vp
-0.0672
0.0000
circ
0.0309
0.9411
dia
-2.2032
0.0000
eccratio
6.2265
0.0000
ecc4
96.7861
0.0000
vratio
-16.0652
0.0000
dratio
-11.6472
0.0000
gradient
0.0923
0.2364
symmetry
0.0302
0.0000
Table 5.1: Coefficients and p-values of the logistic regression model trained on
80% of the data.
Figures 5.6 and 5.7 show the steps of the regression with Lasso regularization (see section
4.2.3 for theoretical elaboration).
First, a model is trained for 100 different values of λ,
which gives the coefficient dynamics shown in figure 5.6. The maximum value of λ results
in a regularization so strong that all coefficients are set to zero (left end of the plot). As λ
decreases, the coefficients increase and more and more features are included in the model.
Subsequently, the performance of the 100 models are assessed by 10-fold cross validation.
The average performance of each model is plotted against its λ value in figure 5.7 where the
number of included features is shown along the top axis. The two dashed lines indicate the λ
values that (1) minimize the cross validated mean squared error (CVMSE) and (2) induce the
greatest regularization and still obtain a CVMSE within one standard error of the minimum.
Typically, a model with a λ value within that range is selected as a final classifier. Here, the
model of λ value (2) is chosen as the classifier. This model includes seven features. Table 5.2
presents the model coefficients, and as expected from inspecting the coefficients of the first
model, circ and gradient are eliminated.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Model development
53
Coefficient
(Intercept)
-41.93634182
vp
-0.05455649
circ
dia
-1.98781587
eccratio
5.14436183
ecc4
86.89633906
vratio
-14.67932870
dratio
-8.77541061
gradient
symmetry
0.02114692
Table 5.2: Coefficients and p-values of the Lasso-regularized logistic regression
model trained on 80% of the data. Features circ and gradient are eliminated by
the regularization.
Figure 5.6:
Lasso regularization with 100 values of λ.
Model coefficients are
plotted for each λ.
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Results
Figure 5.7: Mean-squared error from 10-fold cross validation plotted against λ
for each of 100 Lasso-regularized models.
5.3
Model validation
The predictive performance of the logistic regression classifier trained on two different splits
with and without regularization is presented in tables 5.3-5.6. As expected, neither the split
of the data nor the Lasso regularization appears to affect the predictive performance of the
logistic regression classification on this data set. The accuracies of the four tests lie within a
range of 95.71-96.02%.
Split 1
Unregularized
Predicted class
fetal
adult
True class
fetal
1940
164
adult
171
5625
Accuracy:
95.76%
Table 5.3:
Predictive perfor-
mance of the unregularized logis-
tic regression classifier trained
and tested on split 1.
Regularized
Predicted class
fetal
adult
True class
fetal
1934
162
adult
177
5627
Accuracy:
95.71%
Table 5.4:
Predictive perfor-
mance of the Lasso-regularized
logistic
regression
classifier
trained and tested on split 1.
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Spike sample experiment
55
Split 2
Unregularized
Predicted class
fetal
adult
True class
fetal
3690
130
adult
264
5544
Accuracy:
95.91%
Table 5.5:
Predictive perfor-
mance of the unregularized logis-
tic regression classifier trained
and tested on split 2.
Regularized
Predicted class
fetal
adult
True class
fetal
3682
111
adult
272
5563
Accuracy:
96.02%
Table 5.6:
Predictive perfor-
mance of the Lasso-regularized
logistic
regression
classifier
trained and tested on split 2.
5.4
Spike sample experiment
For the spike sample experiment, a Lasso-regularized model trained on the whole data set is
used. λ is selected by the same principle as with the split data sets. The R script is presented
in appendix D.4. Table 5.7 displays the results of the six classifications. The results are not
in agreement with the true fetal-to-adult RBC ratio of the samples.
True ratio (fetal:adult)
Predicted ratio
fetal donor 1
fetal donor 2
1.00
47:23
=
2.04
196:4
=
49.0
0.20
200:24
=
8.33
159:84
=
1.89
0.10
203:69
=
2.94
172:44
=
3.91
Table 5.7: Results of the spike sample experiments. A regularized logistic regres-
sion model trained on the entire data is used for the classification.
There are two aspects of these poor ratio predictions. First of all, the result may be affected
by the fact that not all cells are registered and analyzed. It has not been investigated whether
the cells are dispersed randomly in the sample and microfluidic channel, which means that
the registered cells, by coincidence, may have a different fetal-to-adult RBC ratio than the
whole sample.
A second and important aspect of these results is RBC classification inaccuracy.
When
analyzing the adult donor sample individually, the classifier predicts a total of 88.5% fetal
cells in the adult population. As discussed earlier, some donors vary significantly from the
general fetal or adult population in this data set. The adult donor in the spike experiment
seems to be of that category. It is handled by KSN as opposed to the majority of the adult
samples used for the main data set which are handled by Rungel, and which the classifier is
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Results
trained on. The classifications of the fetal samples yield >90% accuracy. These samples are
handled by KSN like the fetal samples of the main data set that the classifier is trained on.
These findings suggest a deviation in the experimental setup or procedure between KSN and
Rungel that has an effect on the experiment or the subsequent image analysis relating to the
cell velocity and eccentricity measurements. I.e., the data set of this project is subject to
potential operator bias. It is not possible to statistically demonstrate an operator bias for
this data set, since the operators have only handled data from different donors.
For a qualitative discussion, the feature distributions of the adult samples handled by Rungel
and KSN, respectively, are investigated. The distributions are displayed in figure 5.8. KSN
conducted 4 experiments with adult samples while Rungel conducted 98. Three of KSN’s
experiments are part of the main data set (included in the histograms of figure 5.5) while the
last one is the experiment with the adult donor used for the spike samples.
==PAGE:69==
5.4 Spike sample experiment
57
Figure 5.8: Distributions of adult donor features compared for experiments con-
ducted by Rungel and KSN, respectively. KSN conducted 4 experiments and Rungel
98.
Both velocity features are on average higher for KSN experiments, which indicates a variation
in flow. The velocity ratio is, however, not affected by this as desired. The distribution of the
ecc4 and eccratio features vary significantly between KSN and Rungel’s experiments. The
mean values of the features for KSN’s experiments are lower than for Rungel’s experiments,
and by inspecting the histograms in figure 5.5, it is clear that the ecc4 and eccratio values
for KSN’s experiments reflect the outliers in the total adult donor population. The values
are furthermore on the far side of the fetal population, creating a risk of these donors’ RBCs
being classified as fetal. The three additional adult samples handled by KSN are classified
poorly like the one used in the spike sample.
==PAGE:70==
58
5 Results
Alternatively, the deviance of these donors from the mean of the main data set may be
caused by random variance in the general adult population rather than variation between
the experiment procedures. As emphasized earlier, the cause of the between-donor variance
should be investigated further.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
This chapter discusses potentials and limitations of the experiments, methods, and results of
this project.
6.1
Experimental setup and conditions
The experimental setup can be improved in several manners. The field of view when record-
ing should preferably comprise a larger part of the main channel in front of and after the
constriction. This would enable an analysis of cells’ recovery after deformation. It would
also enable further investigation of the relation between a cell’s position and orientation in
front of the inlet and its behavior when entering the constriction. The setup can further
be improved by applying a microfluidic chip with channel dimensions more suitable for this
specific experiment. The depth of the channel allows cells to escape or avoid the focus plane
of the microscope. For the task of detecting fetal cells in adult blood, which is the clinical
aspect of this project, all cells must be registered and analyzed.
A considerable limitation of this setup is the need for manual adjustments that every ex-
periment is subject to. The variations in field of view, brightness, and focus depth impose
challenges that may compromise the validity of subsequent analyses. The variation in field of
view between samples causes an unwanted necessity of marking channel structures on the im-
ages. With a fixed field of view, it would be possible to define a permanent region of interest
for an automatic exclusion of the unwanted channel edge. The approach taken for excluding
the channel edge in this data set is somewhat unstable which may have an unidentified effect
on the cell segmentation. The varying brightness and focus depth may cause alterations of
the cell segmentations that cannot be detected by the naked eye but are significant for the
resulting extracted features.
A critical shortcoming of the data set handled in this project is the potential operator bias.
Due to the various manual adjustments of the experimental setup, the approaches of KSN
and Rungel to setting up and adjusting the experimental device may be different. This in-
troduces a potential unwanted between-class variance of the RBCs that is not explained by
actual differences in RBC properties but affects the extracted features like the eccentricity
measurements. An examination of operator bias is not possible since that would require a
substantial amount of experiments on the same RBC population conducted by each individ-
ual.
==PAGE:72==
60
6 Discussion
This potential between-class variation caused by something other than cell properties limits
the conclusions that can be drawn from the results of this project. The ability of the classifier
to distinguish between fetal and adult RBCs within this data set may be strongly correlated
with differences in experimental conduction rather than differences between properties of
fetal and adult RBCs. If this is true, the classifier may not be able to distinguish between
fetal and adult RBCs under other circumstances. This is one potential explanation of the
poor results of the spike sample experiment.
To further investigate the use of this technique as an option to detect fetal RBCs in adult
blood, new experiments should be conducted with more focus on limiting variations of the
experimental setup and procedure and applying a more random approach to the generation
of the data sets for fetal and adult RBCs, respectively.
6.2
Image analysis
The automatic subtraction of the channel edge may be prone to unwanted variations caused
by differences in brightness and focus between experiments. The subtraction is based on
a threshold that is adjusted for each sample, but the extent of the subtracted region may
nevertheless alter due to the brightness and focus variations. The extent of the subtracted
region may affect size and shape features of cells inside the constriction if it reached into the
channel area.
The velocity measurements are based on cell movements that cover a greater distance for
larger cells. The cell positions that define the movement to be measured may be redefined
such that the velocity always reflects an average over the same distance. By using the cell
centroid to define the movement instead of front and back end, the cell size is disregarded.
The inability to register all cells is partly caused by the image analysis. The discarding of
cells that are not segmented to satisfaction is intended to ensure segmentations that can be
used for an analysis of the pixel intensity profile of cells. In case a successful classification of
RBCs can be performed without considering the intensity profiles, the segmentation criteria
for registration may be altered to include all cells since the remaining features are unaffected
by grooves in the cell segmentation boundaries. Alternatively, the background subtraction
for extracting cells should be substituted with different method. An alternative could be
applying a gradient filtration to detect cell edges.
A potential improvement of the classification is the application of deep learning for feature
extraction. Deep learning may replace parts of the image processing and analysis by simply
learning features directly from the raw images. A combination of image analysis and deep
learning may be applied such that cell segmentations and sequence information are extracted
using image analysis and fed to a deep learning algorithm.
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Within-class variance
61
6.3
Within-class variance
The large data set is compromised by the relatively small amount of donors representing it.
There is a risk that the data set comprising 101 adult and 59 fetal donors is not representative
for general adult or fetal RBC populations. If the true within-class variance is significantly
larger than observed for these data, the performance of the classifier may be estimated too
high.
6.4
Perspective
The perspective of the results of this project has two aspects. If the performance of the
classifier is affected by an operator bias, there may be no potential for using this technique
to differentiate between fetal and adult RBCs. An elimination of this bias is necessary for
further conclusions.
If, however, the 96% accuracy reflects an actual difference between properties of the RBC
classes, this classifier yields a potential for facilitating the diagnosis for FMH. In this case,
the algorithm should be tested further for its ability to detect fetal RBCs in individual adult
populations like the spike sample and, thus, tested for its accuracy on more data from more
donors, making it more representative.
If the accuracy is not maintained when testing on larger amounts of unseen data, additional
features or alternative classification methods may be relevant to consider. It may be benefi-
cial to include more features to improve the classifier’s decision boundary and consequently
increase the extent of feature combinations that result in confident classifications. It may,
for instance, be valuable to include information about cell recovery after deformation, in case
this feature enables an identification of adult cells that resemble fetal RBCs in size.
If the accuracy of 96% is valid, the classification may be used as a screening tool for FMH.
If it is assumed that the 4% inaccuracy represents RBCs that come from donors with RBC
populations that generally are difficult to classify, then the accuracy may be related to an
FMH screening process as follows: If all pregnant women are screened using this classification
method, 96% of them will be correctly diagnosed, while 4% of the diagnoses will be either
false negative or false positive. False negative cases will ultimately be discovered in case
of symptoms, like all cases are discovered today, and can then be retested using one of the
current methods. The false and true positive cases can be medicated if needed to prevent Rh
immunization or tested further by one of the current methods before initiating medication.
The benefit of such a screening tool is an increase in diagnoses of asymptomatic cases.
Thus, the potential of this classification algorithm needs to be validated on a data set of
which the experimental conditions are equal for fetal and adult samples. The setup and
image analysis should further be adjusted to make sure every cell of a sample is registered
==PAGE:74==
62
6 Discussion
and analyzed, in order to make this method suitable for FMH diagnosis.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
A microfluidic chip was used to investigate the possibility of differentiating fetal and adult
RBCs based on their size and behavior when pumped through a microchannel with a con-
stricted segment where they are deformed by surface stresses from the channel wall. The
shape and motions of RBCs were tracked as they passed the constriction using image analy-
sis.
Nine features related to the shape and motion of the RBCs were selected and combined in
a feature vector for a total of 39422 RBCs originating from 101 adult and 59 fetal blood
samples.
Inspection of these data revealed that the average estimated diameter of fetal
RBCs were larger than that of adult RBCs which is in agreement with literature. Eccentricity
measurements of the cells inside the constriction yielded significantly different results between
fetal and adult RBCs, as was the case for the ratio between the cell velocity when entering
the constriction and when traveling from the inlet to the outlet. A total of seven of the nine
features were shown to be significant for a prediction of RBC class. Data inspections revealed
significant between-donor variance of both adult and fetal RBCs.
A logistic regression classification model was trained and tested on these data, yielding a
predictive performance of 96% accuracy. The model was further tested on six independent
spike samples comprising varying ratios of fetal and adult RBCs. The samples were generated
by mixing blood from one adult donor with blood from two fetal donors, respectively, in three
known RBC ratios. Both the adult, fetal, and spike samples were analyzed and classified.
The classifier performed poorly on these data predicting too few adult RBCs overall.
It was revealed that some of the feature values of the adult donor deviated significantly from
the adult population of the main data set, causing most of its cells to be classified as fetal.
The reason for this deviance was assumed to be caused by either of two phenomenons. The
deviance could be caused by a natural between-donor variance that is not explained by the
classifier. Alternatively, the deviance could be caused by an operator bias.
The suspicion of an operator bias arose from the fact that, in the main data set, experiments
with adult samples were conducted by a different individual than the one who conducted the
experiments with fetal samples. Furthermore, the experiment with the independent adult
sample that is classified poorly was conducted by the person who, in the main data set,
conducted the experiments with fetal samples. This suggested that the classifier more or less
was trained to differentiate between observations created by the two operators rather than
==PAGE:76==
64
7 Conclusion
observations that distinguish fetal and adult RBCs by their properties. Three additional
adult samples, also handled by this individual, were classified and were all predicted to
comprise mainly fetal RBCs as well.
It was discussed that the classifier, in the case that it truly has an accuracy of 96%, may offer
a valuable screening tool for FMH. An FMH screening will allow asymptomatic cases to be
diagnosed as opposed to today’s protocol, where FMH is only diagnosed if symptomatic.
An elimination of the manual adjustments of the experimental device, required between
every experiment, was recommended for a facilitation and improvement of the image analysis
approaches. It was further discussed that the classification may be improved by including
more features and, importantly, information about the RBCs’ recovery from deformation
after exiting the constriction. Deep learning for feature extraction and alternative classifier
types were discussed as a potential improvement of the classification.
In summary, the predictive performance of the classifier cannot be evaluated until the poor
predictive performance on the additional independent data are investigated further. Specif-
ically, it was concluded that the potential operator bias must be examined and possibly
eliminated to obtain a conclusive outlook of the potentials of this classification. It was fur-
ther concluded that the experimental setup and some image analysis approaches may need
to be altered to be suitable for FMH screening, so that all RBCs are registered and analyzed.
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Fetal and adult blood volume
calculation for spike samples
For the spike samples, the volume of both fetal and adult blood to be added to the CellStab
must be calculated. The combined volume should be 5.2 µm, and the concentration of blood
cells is known for all samples. The ratio of fetal to adult RBCs should be 1:1, 1:5, and 1:10,
respectively. There are two fetal donors resulting in a total of six spike samples. Table A.1
displays the quantities and values used to calculate the volumes in each spike sample.
Quantity
Unit
Symbol
Value
Concentration of fetal blood
mol
L
Cf
[3.78
5.15]
Concentration of adult blood
mol
L
Ca
4.6
Volume of blood mix
µL
Vtotal
5.2
Volume of fetal blood
µL
Vf
?
Volume of adult blood
µL
Va
?
Ratio of fetal to adult RBCs
r
[1
0.2
0.1]
Table A.1
Equation A.1 describes the quantity of RBCs wanted in the spike sample. Equation A.2
describes that the sum of the fetal and adult blood volume is the total volume of blood we
want (5.2 µm). We are interested in calculating the fetal and adult blood volumes. Equation
A.1 and A.2 gives us two equations with two unknowns, that can be solved for fetal and
adult blood volumes for the three ratios and two fetal donors. Equation A.3-A.5 shows the
procedure.
Cf · Vf = r · Ca · Va
(A.1)
Vf + Va = Vtotal
(A.2)
Vf is isolated in A.2:
Vf = Vtotal −Va
(A.3)
==PAGE:78==
66
A Fetal and adult blood volume calculation for spike samples
The right hand side of A.3 is inserted for Vf in A.1 and Va is isolated:
Cf · (Vtotal −Va) = r · Ca · Va ⇔
(A.4)
Va = Cf · Vtotal
r · Ca + Cf
(A.5)
The result is inserted in A.2 for Va, giving the resulting Vf. The calculated volumes for the
six spike samples are given in table A.2 and A.3.
fetal donor 1 (C = 3.78 mol
L )
RBC ratio (fetal:adult)
adult blood volume
fetal blood volume
1:1
2.3 µL
2.9 µL
1:5
4.2 µL
1.0 µL
1:10
4.6 µL
0.6 µL
Table A.2
fetal donor 2 (C = 5.15 mol
L )
RBC ratio (fetal:adult)
adult blood volume
fetal blood volume
1:1
2.7 µL
2.5 µL
1:5
4.4 µL
0.8 µL
1:10
4.8 µL
0.4 µL
Table A.3
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX B
Theoretical plots and
definitions
B.1
Eccentricity definition
The eccentricity of an ellipse is defined as the ratio of the distance between the foci of the
ellipse and its major axis length. The eccentricity of the ellipse in figure B.1 is thus given by
c
a
where
c2 = a2 −b2
Figure B.1: Ellipse. Borrowed from [61].
B.2
Unsupervised learning: k-means
clustering
K-means clustering divides observations into k clusters through an iterative process that is
illustrated for k = 2 and four iterations in figure B.2. First, k cluster centroids are placed
randomly and the data points are assigned to the nearest one. Then, new cluster centroids
are calculated (white triangles) from the current clusters. The process starts over in the next
iteration, where the data points are assigned to the nearest of the new cluster centroids. The
process is terminated when the clustering fulfills a defined requirement or does not improve
with more iterations. The final clustering can be used for classification of new observations.
==PAGE:80==
68
B Theoretical plots and definitions
Figure B.2:
Unsupervised learning: illustration of a k-means cluster analysis
of four iterations (a)-(d) aiming at dividing the observations into k = 2 groups.
First iteration begins with a random placement of cluster centroids after which the
data points are assigned to the nearest one and new centroids are calculated from
these clusters. Next iteration starts over by assigning the data points to the newly
calculated centroids. Modified from [62].
B.3
Logit transformation of probability
function
Figure B.3: Example of a logistic function for predicting probability of response
given a feature (right) and its logit transformation (left) that depends linearly on
the feature. Borrowed from [63].
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX C
Data inspection
Figure C.1
==PAGE:82==
70
C Data inspection
Figure C.2
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX D
Matlab and R code
D.1
CellSorter.m
% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
% This
s c r i p t
i s
created by Lise Aagesen
for
her M.Sc.
t h e s i s
in
the
f a l l
% of 2017 .
It
i s
intended
for
r e g i s t r a t i o n and feature
extraction
of RBC
% recordings
for a subsequent RBC c l a s s i f i c a t i o n
( f e t a l
vs adult ) .
% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
%% Prepare
l i s t s
of
discarded and accepted frames
donor = 'D1 ' ;
mkdir
'D1 '
% image
location :
path1a = 'F:\ Lise Aagesen master
t h e s i s \RBCdata\AdultDonors ' ;
path1b = '\AllDonorsDay1\AllDonorsDay1\081116D1 ' ;
path1 = strcat ( path1a , path1b ) ;
path2 = strcat ( path1 , '\Img ' , donor ) ;
path3 = strcat ( path1 , '\RBCs ' ) ; % for
storing
r e s u l t s
path4 = strcat ( donor , '\RBCs ' ) ; % for
storing
r e s u l t s
addpath ( path1 , path2 ) ;
f i l e 1 = strcat ( 'Img ' , donor , ' _Accepted.txt ' ) ;
pics = fopen ( f i l e 1 ) ;
acc1 = textscan ( pics , '%s ' ) ;
acc = acc1 {1 ,1};
f i l e 2 = strcat ( 'Img ' , donor , ' _Discarded.txt ' ) ;
pics = fopen ( f i l e 2 ) ;
dis1 = textscan ( pics , '%s ' ) ;
dis = dis1 {1 ,1};
% l i s t
of
pure frame numbers
frameno_acc = str2doubles ( extractBetween ( acc ,”_” ,” . ” ) ) ;
frameno_dis = str2doubles ( extractBetween ( dis ,”_” ,” . ” ) ) ;
%% Manual inputs
i n l e t = 80;
% bottom corner
of
constriction
i n l e t
outlet = 210;
% bottom corner
of
constriction
outlet
yref = 63;
% v e r t i c a l
center
of
i n l e t
edge_thres = 0 .272 ;
% threshold
for
extracting
channel edge
se_edge = s t r e l ( ' rectangle ' ,[1
3 0 ] ) ;% SE for
extracting
channel edge
cellNum = 0;
% used
for
c e l l
r e g i s t r a t i o n
==PAGE:84==
72
D Matlab and R code
tracker = [ ] ;
% used
for
c e l l
r e g i s t r a t i o n
% struct
for
storing
features
of RBCs
RBCs = struct ( ' i n l e t ' , [ ] , ' outlet ' , [ ] , ' yref ' , [ ] , ' label ' , ' ' ,
. . .
' frame ' , [ ] , ' centroid ' ,{{}} , 'box ' ,{{}} , ' p i x e l l i s t ' ,{{}} ,
. . .
' c i r c u l a r i t y ' , [ ] , 'symmetry ' , [ ] , ' gradient ' , [ ] , ' e c c e n t r i c i t y ' , . . .
[ ] , ' majoraxis ' , [ ] ) ;
%% Cell
r e g i s t r a t i o n
for
i = 1: s i z e ( acc , 1)
% loop through accepted frames
% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
% subtract background from
intensity
image
% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
% s e l e c t
background
% i f
f i r s t
frame ,
only one background
i f
frameno_acc ( i ) < min( frameno_dis )
| |
frameno_acc ( i ) > . . .
max( frameno_dis )
[ ￿, index ] = min( abs ( frameno_dis - frameno_acc ( i ) ) ) ;
bg = rgb2gray ( im2double ( imread ( dis {index } ) ) ) ;
% e l s e an average
of
the two c l o s e s t
e l s e
frameno_dis_before = frameno_dis ( frameno_dis<frameno_acc ( i ) ) ;
dis_before = dis ( frameno_dis<frameno_acc ( i ) ) ;
frameno_dis_after = frameno_dis ( frameno_dis>frameno_acc ( i ) ) ;
dis_after = dis ( frameno_dis>frameno_acc ( i ) ) ;
[ ￿, index1 ] = min( abs ( frameno_dis_before - frameno_acc ( i ) ) ) ;
[ ￿, index2 ] = min( abs ( frameno_dis_after - frameno_acc ( i ) ) ) ;
bg1 = rgb2gray ( im2double ( imread ( dis_before {index1 } ) ) ) ;
bg2 = rgb2gray ( im2double ( imread ( dis_after {index2 } ) ) ) ;
bg = ( bg1+bg2 )/2;
end
% subtract background and edge
im = rgb2gray ( im2double ( imread ( acc{ i } ) ) ) ;
d i f f = imabsdiff (im , bg ) ;
bg_edge = bg < edge_thres ;
bg_edge = imclose (bg_edge , se_edge ) ;
bg_edge ( : , inlet -10: i n l e t +10) = 0;
bg_edge = bwareaopen (bg_edge , 1 0 0 ) ;
bg_edge = imcomplement(bg_edge ) ;
d i f f = d i f f . ∗bg_edge ;
% normalize
norm_diff = ( d i f f - min( d i f f ( : ) ) ) / (max( d i f f ( : ) ) - min( d i f f ( : ) ) ) ;
% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
% c e l l
segmentation through
binarization and morphological
operations
% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
bw = imbinarize ( norm_diff ,0 .12 ) ;
==PAGE:85==
D.1 CellSorter.m
73
bw = bwareaopen (bw, 2 0 ) ;
se = s t r e l ( ' disk ' , 4 ) ;
bw = imclose (bw, se ) ;
bw = i m f i l l (bw, ' holes ' ) ;
bw = bwpropfilt (bw, 'ConvexArea ' ,[200
1450]);
bw = bwpropfilt (bw, ' MajorAxisLength ' ,[0
6 5 ] ) ;
bw1 = bw;
cc = bwconncomp(bw1 ) ;
stats = regionprops ( cc , ' Centroid ' , ' Sol idi ty ' ) ;
centroids = cat (1 ,
stats.Centroid ) ;
s o l s = cat (1 ,
s t a t s . S o l i d i t y ) ;
for
j = 1: s i z e ( stats ,1)
i f
centroids ( j ,1)< inlet -20
| |
centroids ( j ,1)> i n l e t +20
i f
s o l s ( j ) < 0 .87
bw1( cc.PixelIdxList { j }) = 0;
end
end
end
bw = imclearborder (bw1 ) ;
% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
% Cell
i d e n t i f i c a t i o n
and sorting
through connected component analysis
% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
cc = bwconncomp(bw,
8);
celldata = regionprops ( cc , ' Centroid ' , 'BoundingBox ' , ' PixelIdxList ' , . . .
' Eccentricity ' , ' MajorAxisLength ' , ' Perimeter ' , ' Area ' ) ;
% Go to next frame
i f
no
c e l l s
are
present
i f
cc.NumObjects < 1
continue
end
% I f
there
are
c e l l s :
% BLOB c i r c u l a r i t y
areas = cat (1 ,
celldata.Area ) ;
perimeters = cat (1 ,
celldata.Perimeter ) ;
c i r c = (4∗pi ∗areas )
. / ( perimeters. ^2);
for k = 1: cc.NumObjects
% loop
over
detected BLOBs
i f
round ( celldata (k) .Centroid (2) -5 .5 ) > 0 && . . .
round ( celldata (k) .Centroid (2)+5 .5 ) < s i z e (im , 1 ) && . . .
round ( celldata (k) .Centroid (1) -22 .5 ) > 0 && . . .
round ( celldata (k) .Centroid (1)+22 .5 ) < s i z e (im , 2 )
% gradient
score
im2 = im( round ( celldata (k) .Centroid (2) -5 .5 ) :
. . .
round ( celldata (k) .Centroid (2)+5 .5 ) ,
. . .
round ( celldata (k) .Centroid (1) -22 .5 ) :
. . .
round ( celldata (k) .Centroid (1)+22 .5 ) ) ;
ime = edge (im2 , 'Canny ' ) ;
==PAGE:86==
74
D Matlab and R code
ime = ime ( 6 : 7 , : ) ;
s1 = sum(ime ( : ) ) ;
% symmetry about
v e r t i c a l
axis
im3 = im( round ( celldata (k) .Centroid (2) -4 .5 ) :
. . .
round ( celldata (k) .Centroid (2)+4 .5 ) ,
. . .
round ( celldata (k) .Centroid (1) -22 .5 ) :
. . .
round ( celldata (k) .Centroid (1)+22 .5 ) ) ;
im3 = (im3 - min(im3 ( : ) ) ) / (max(im3 ( : ) ) - min(im3 ( : ) ) ) ;
d1 = imabsdiff (im3 , f l i p l r (im3 ) ) ;
s2 = sum(d1 ( : ) ) / celldata (k) .MajorAxisLength ;
e l s e
s1 = 0;
s2 = 0;
end
% I f
f i r s t
detected
c e l l
for
this
donor ,
this
i s
a new c e l l
i f
cellNum == 0
newcell = 1;
% i f
not
f i r s t
c e l l :
e l s e
% find
frame number of
previous
detected
c e l l
idx = find ( tracker ( : , 3 ) == i - 1 ) ;
% i f
no
c e l l
i s
found in
the
previous frame
this
i s
a new c e l l
i f
isempty ( idx ) == 1
newcell = 1;
% i f
not a new c e l l :
e l s e
% dist
from
this
c e l l
to one ( s ) found in
previous frame
dist = celldata (k) .Centroid (1)
-
tracker ( idx , 1 ) ;
dist ( dist < -10) = 100;
% i f
more than one
c e l l
in
previous frame ,
find
nearest
i f
length ( dist ) > 1
[ dist ,
idx1 ] = min( dist ) ;
idx = idx ( idx1 ) ;
end
% define
distance
threshold :
i f
celldata (k) .Centroid (1) <= inlet -5 % before
i n l e t
dist_thres = 5;
e l s e % a f t e r
i n l e t
dist_thres = 20;
end
% determine
i f
same
c e l l
or new c e l l
based on dist
thres
i f
dist <= dist_thres
newcell = 0; % same
c e l l
e l s e
==PAGE:87==
D.1 CellSorter.m
75
newcell = 1; % new c e l l
end
end
end
% feature
r e g i s t r a t i o n
( cases : same or new c e l l )
switch
newcell
case 1
cellNum =
cellNum + 1;
RBCs( cellNum ) . i n l e t = i n l e t ;
RBCs( cellNum ) . o u t l e t = outlet ;
RBCs( cellNum ) . y r e f = yref ;
RBCs( cellNum ) . l a b e l = num2str ( cellNum ) ;
RBCs( cellNum ) .frame = i ;
RBCs( cellNum ) .centroid = { celldata (k) .Centroid };
RBCs( cellNum ) .box = { celldata (k) .BoundingBox };
RBCs( cellNum ) . p i x e l l i s t = { celldata (k) .PixelIdxList };
RBCs( cellNum ) .majoraxis = celldata (k) .MajorAxisLength ;
RBCs( cellNum ) . e c c e n t r i c i t y = celldata (k) . E c c e n t r i c i t y ;
RBCs( cellNum ) . c i r c u l a r i t y = c i r c (k ) ;
RBCs( cellNum ) .symmetry = s1 ;
RBCs( cellNum ) .gradient = s2 ;
tracker = [ tracker ;
celldata (k) .Centroid (1) , cellNum ,
i ] ;
case 0
same_cell = tracker ( idx , 2 ) ;
RBCs( same_cell ) .frame = [RBCs( same_cell ) .frame
i ] ;
RBCs( same_cell ) .centroid = [RBCs( same_cell ) .centroid
. . .
celldata (k) .Centroid ] ;
RBCs( same_cell ) .box = [RBCs( same_cell ) .box
. . .
celldata (k) .BoundingBox ] ;
RBCs( same_cell ) . p i x e l l i s t = [RBCs( same_cell ) . p i x e l l i s t . . .
celldata (k) .PixelIdxList ] ;
RBCs( same_cell ) .majoraxis = [RBCs( same_cell ) .majoraxis . . .
celldata (k) .MajorAxisLength ] ;
RBCs( same_cell ) . e c c e n t r i c i t y = . . .
[RBCs( same_cell ) . e c c e n t r i c i t y
. . .
celldata (k) .Ec ce nt ri ci t y ] ;
RBCs( same_cell ) . c i r c u l a r i t y = . . .
[RBCs( same_cell ) . c i r c u l a r i t y
c i r c (k ) ] ;
RBCs( same_cell ) .symmetry = . . .
[RBCs( same_cell ) .symmetry s1 ] ;
RBCs( same_cell ) .gradient = . . .
[RBCs( same_cell ) .gradient
s2 ] ;
tracker = [ tracker ;
celldata (k) .Centroid (1) , . . .
same_cell ,
i ] ;
end
end
end
% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
% Discard
c e l l s
that don ' t go
a l l
the way through
==PAGE:88==
76
D Matlab and R code
% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
remove = [ ] ;
for k1 = 1: s i z e (RBCs,2)
bb = vec2mat ( cell2mat (RBCs(k1) .box ) , 4 ) ;
i f
min(bb(: ,1)+bb ( : , 3 ) ) > inlet -1
| | max(bb(: ,1)+bb ( : , 3 ) ) < outlet
remove = [ remove k1 ] ;
end
end
RBCs( remove ) = [ ] ;
RBCs=rmfield (RBCs, ' label ' ) ;
% store
the RBCs struct
save ( path3 , 'RBCs ' )
save ( path4 , 'RBCs ' )
D.2
FeatureVector.m
% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
% This
s c r i p t
i s
created by Lise Aagesen
for
her M.Sc.
t h e s i s
in
the
f a l l
% of 2017 .
It
i s
intended
for
extraction
of
f i n a l
features
for
% RBC c l a s s i f i c a t i o n
( f e t a l
vs adult ) from a
c e l l
r e g i s t r a t i o n
structure
% called
”RBCs” that
i s
generated
in
the
s c r i p t
called
Ce l l So r t er .
% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
%% Find RBCs f i l e s
F = 'RBCs.mat ' ;
% name of
the
f i l e
D = ' . ' ;
S = dir ( f u l l f i l e (D, 'D∗' ) ) ;
% name of
f o l d e r
to
search
in
X = [ S . i s d i r ] & ￿ismember ({S.name} ,{ ' . ' , ' . . ' }) ;
N = {S(X) .name };
%% I n i t i a l i z a t i o n
FV = [ ] ;
% Feature Matrix
donor = 1;
% 0/1 -> f e t a l /voksen
%% Loop through
f o l d e r s
with an RBCs f i l e
in them
for k = 1: numel(N)
T = f u l l f i l e (D,N{k} ,F) ;
load (T)
% RBCs struct
i s
loaded
i n l e t = RBCs(1) . i n l e t ;
outlet = RBCs(1) . o u t l e t ;
yref = RBCs(1) . y r e f ;
p i x e l s i z e = 40/( outlet - i n l e t ) ;
%microns/ pixel
% loop through RBCs struct
( rows = c e l l s )
for
i = 1: s i z e (RBCs, 2)
bb = vec2mat ( cell2mat (RBCs( i ) .box ) , 4 ) ;
==PAGE:89==
D.2 FeatureVector.m
77
cc = vec2mat ( cell2mat (RBCs( i ) .centroid ) , 2 ) ;
[ ￿
,
idx1 ] = min( abs (bb(: ,1)+bb ( : , 3 ) - i n l e t ) ) ;
cy = cc ( idx1 , 2 ) ;
vp = cy - yref ;
ecc1 = RBCs( i ) . e c c e n t r i c i t y ( idx1 ) ;
c i r c = RBCs( i ) . c i r c u l a r i t y ( idx1 ) ;
dia = (RBCs( i ) .majoraxis ( idx1 ))∗p i x e l s i z e ;
f1 = RBCs( i ) .frame ( idx1 ) ;
x1 = bb( idx1 , 1 ) ;
[ ￿
,
idx2 ] = min( abs ( cc ( : , 1 ) - ( i n l e t +70)));
ecc2 = RBCs( i ) . e c c e n t r i c i t y ( idx2 ) ;
symmetry = RBCs( i ) .symmetry ( idx2 ) ;
gradient = RBCs( i ) .gradient ( idx2 ) ;
[ ￿
,
idx3 ] = min( abs (bb(: ,1)+bb ( : , 3 ) - outlet ) ) ;
ecc3 = RBCs( i ) . e c c e n t r i c i t y ( idx3 ) ;
f3 = RBCs( i ) .frame ( idx3 ) ;
x3 = bb( idx3 , 1 ) ;
dia3 = (RBCs( i ) .majoraxis ( idx3 ))∗p i x e l s i z e ;
dratio = dia3/dia ;
eccratio = ecc3/ecc2 ;
[ ￿
,
idx4 ] = min( abs (bb ( : , 1 ) - i n l e t ) ) ;
f4 = RBCs( i ) .frame ( idx4 ) ;
x4 = bb( idx4 , 1 ) ;
v1 = ( f4 - f1 )/( x4 - x1 ) ;
v2 = ( f3 - f4 )/( x3 - x4 ) ;
vratio = v2/v1 ;
FV = [FV;
donor vp c i r c
dia
eccratio
ecc3 v1 v2 vratio
. . .
dratio symmetry gradient ] ;
end
end
==PAGE:90==
78
D Matlab and R code
D.3
Logistic regression model training and
validation
# - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
# This
s c r i p t
i s
created by Lise Aagesen
for
her M.Sc.
t h e s i s
# in
the
f a l l
of 2017 .
Intended
for
training and validation
# of
l o g i s t i c
regression
c l a s s i f i e r
with and without
# Lasso
r e g u l a r i z a t i o n .
# - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
## REQUIRED PACKAGES
li br a ry ( devtools )
li br a ry ( glmnetUtils )
li br a ry ( glmnet )
li br a ry ( plotmo )
li br a ry (ROCR)
li br a ry ( caret )
setwd (” ￿/R”)
## DATA
RBCs <- read.csv (”FV_random.txt” , header=TRUE)
RBCs <- RBCs[ , - 7 : - 8 ]
# remove v1 and v2
test <- RBCs[ 1 : 7 9 0 0 , ]
train <- RBCs[7901:NROW(RBCs) , ]
train$donor <- factor ( train$donor )
trainp <- RBCs[7901:NROW(RBCs) , ]
train_data <- as.matrix ( trainp )
test_data <- as.matrix ( test )
## UNREGULARIZED LOGISTIC REGRESSION
model <- glm( donor ￿.
, family=binomial ( link=' l o g i t ' ) , data=train )
f i t t e d . r e s u l t s
<- predict (model , newdata=subset ( test ,
s e l e c t=c (2:NCOL( test ) ) ) , type=' response ' )
f i t t e d . r e s u l t s
<-
i f e l s e ( f i t t e d . r e s u l t s > 0.5 ,1 ,0)
misClasificError <- mean( f i t t e d . r e s u l t s
!= test$donor )
acc1 <- 1 - misClasificError
## LASSO-REGULARIZED LOGISTIC REGRESSION
model_pen <- glmnet ( train_data [ , 2 :NCOL( train_data ) ] ,
train_data [ , 1 ] , family=”binomial ” , alpha=1)
cv.out <- cv.glmnet ( train_data [ , 2 :NCOL( train_data ) ] , train_data [ , 1 ] ,
alpha=1, family=”binomial ” , type.measure = ”mse”)
lambda_1se <- cv.out$lambda.1se
lasso_prob <- predict ( cv.out , newx = test_data [ , 2 :NCOL( train_data ) ] ,
s=lambda_1se , type=”response ”)
lasso_predict <- rep (0 , nrow( test_data ))
lasso_predict [ lasso_prob>.5 ] <- 1
acc2 <- mean( lasso_predict==test$donor )
==PAGE:91==
D.3 Logistic regression model training and validation
79
coef ( cv.out , s=lambda_1se)
## SHOW RESULTS
table ( pred=f i t t e d . r e s u l t s , true=test$donor )
table ( pred=lasso_predict , true=test$donor )
print ( paste ( ' Unregularized
accuracy ' , acc1 ))
print ( paste ( ' Regularized
accuracy ' , acc2 ))
==PAGE:92==
80
D Matlab and R code
D.4
Spike sample experiment
# - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
# This
s c r i p t
i s
created by Lise Aagesen
for
her M.Sc.
t h e s i s
# in
the
f a l l
of 2017 .
Intended
for
training and validation
# of
l o g i s t i c
regression
c l a s s i f i e r
with and without
# Lasso
r e g u l a r i z a t i o n .
# - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
setwd (” ￿/R”)
## DATA
RBCs <- read.csv (”FV_random.txt” , header=TRUE)
RBCs <- RBCs[ , - 7 : - 8 ] # remove v1 and v2
RBCs <- as.matrix (RBCs)
test <- read.csv (” FVspiked61_1_1.txt ” , header=TRUE)
test <- test [ , - 6 : - 7 ] # remove v1 and v2
test <- as.matrix ( test )
## LASSO-REGULARIZED LOGISTIC REGRESSION
cv.out <- cv.glmnet (RBCs[ , 2 :NCOL(RBCs) ] ,RBCs[ , 1 ] , alpha=1,
family=”binomial ” , type.measure = ”mse”)
lambda_1se <- cv.out$lambda.1se
lasso_prob <- predict ( cv.out , newx = test , s=lambda_1se ,
type=”response ”)
lasso_predict <- rep (0 , nrow( test ))
lasso_predict [ lasso_prob>.5 ] <- 1
as.data.frame ( table ( lasso_predict ))
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
Jochen Guck et al. “Optical deformability as an inherent cell marker for testing malig-
nant transformation and metastatic competence”. In: Biophysical journal 88.5 (2005),
pp. 3689–3698.
[2]
Monica Diez-Silva et al. “Shape and biomechanical characteristics of human red blood
cells in health and disease”. In: MRS bulletin 35.5 (2010), pp. 382–388.
[3]
Torsten W Remmerbach et al. “Oral cancer diagnosis by mechanical phenotyping”. In:
Cancer research 69.5 (2009), pp. 1728–1732.
[4]
Parag Katira, Roger T Bonnecaze, and Muhammad H Zaman. “Modeling the mechanics
of cancer: effect of changes in cellular and extra-cellular mechanical properties”. In:
Frontiers in oncology 3 (2013).
[5]
Subra Suresh. “Biomechanics and biophysics of cancer cells”. In: Acta Materialia 55.12
(2007), pp. 3989–4014.
[6]
Vinay Swaminathan et al. “Mechanical stiffness grades metastatic potential in patient
tumor cells and in cancer cell lines”. In: Cancer research 71.15 (2011), pp. 5075–5080.
[7]
Marco Danova, Martina Torchio, and Giuliano Mazzini. “Isolation of rare circulating
tumor cells in cancer patients: technical aspects and clinical implications”. In: Expert
review of molecular diagnostics 11.5 (2011), pp. 473–485.
[8]
Jaideep S Dudani et al. “Pinched-flow hydrodynamic stretching of single-cells”. In: Lab
on a Chip 13.18 (2013), pp. 3728–3734.
[9]
Daniel R Gossett et al. “Hydrodynamic stretching of single cells for large population
mechanical phenotyping”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109.20
(2012), pp. 7630–7635.
[10]
A Karimi, S Yazdi, and AM Ardekani. “Hydrodynamic mechanisms of cell and particle
trapping in microfluidics”. In: Biomicrofluidics 7.2 (2013), p. 021501.
[11]
Oliver Otto et al. “Real-time deformability cytometry: on-the-fly cell mechanical phe-
notyping”. In: Nature methods 12.3 (2015), pp. 199–202.
[12]
Michael J Rosenbluth, Wilbur A Lam, and Daniel A Fletcher. “Analyzing cell mechanics
in hematologic diseases with microfluidic biophysical flow cytometry”. In: Lab on a Chip
8.7 (2008), pp. 1062–1070.
==PAGE:94==
82
Bibliography
[13]
Xiaomi Tong and Karin D Caldwell. “Separation and characterization of red blood cells
with different membrane deformability using steric field-flow fractionation”. In: Journal
of Chromatography B: Biomedical Sciences and Applications 674.1 (1995), pp. 39–47.
[14]
Henry T. K. Tse et al. “Quantitative diagnosis of malignant pleural effusions by single-
cell mechanophenotyping”. In: Science translational medicine 5.212 (2013), 212ra163–
212ra163.
[15]
Andrew E Pelling and Michael A Horton. “An historical perspective on cell mechanics”.
In: Pflügers Archiv-European Journal of Physiology 456.1 (2008), pp. 3–12.
[16]
Elliott L Elson. “Cellular mechanics as an indicator of cytoskeletal structure and func-
tion”. In: Annual review of biophysics and biophysical chemistry 17.1 (1988), pp. 397–
430.
[17]
M Musielak. “Red blood cell-deformability measurement: review of techniques”. In:
Clinical hemorheology and microcirculation 42.1 (2009), pp. 47–64.
[18]
Kyle Strimbu and Jorge A Tavel. “What are biomarkers?” In: Current Opinion in HIV
and AIDS 5.6 (2010), p. 463.
[19]
Deok-Ho Kim et al. “Microengineered platforms for cell mechanobiology”. In: Annual
review of biomedical engineering 11 (2009), pp. 203–233.
[20]
Lap Man Lee and Allen P Liu. “A microfluidic pipette array for mechanophenotyping
of cancer cells and mechanical gating of mechanosensitive channels”. In: Lab on a Chip
15.1 (2015), pp. 264–273.
[21]
Sangwon Byun et al. “Characterizing deformability and surface friction of cancer cells”.
In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110.19 (2013), pp. 7580–7585.
[22]
Stefan Golfier et al. “High-throughput cell mechanical phenotyping for label-free titra-
tion assays of cytoskeletal modifications”. In: Cytoskeleton (2017).
[23]
Janina R Lange et al. “Microconstriction arrays for high-throughput quantitative mea-
surements of cell mechanical properties”. In: Biophysical journal 109.1 (2015), pp. 26–
34.
[24]
Bryan Lincoln et al. “High-Throughput Rheological Measurements with an Optical
Stretcher”. In: Methods in cell biology 83 (2007), pp. 397–423.
[25]
Xiang Ren et al. “Single-Cell Mechanical Characteristics Analyzed by Multiconstriction
Microfluidic Channels”. In: ACS Sensors 2.2 (2017), pp. 290–299.
[26]
Drew M Titmarsh et al. “Concise review: Microfluidic technology platforms: poised to
accelerate development and translation of stem cell-derived therapies”. In: Stem cells
translational medicine 3.1 (2014), pp. 81–90.
[27]
Esther Guetta et al. “Analysis of fetal blood cells in the maternal circulation: challenges,
ongoing efforts, and potential solutions”. In: Stem cells and development 13.1 (2004),
pp. 93–99.
[28]
Otwin Linderkamp et al. “Deformability and intrinsic material properties of neonatal
red blood cells”. In: Blood 67.5 (1986), pp. 1244–1250.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
83
[29]
Masood Ahmed and Mohammad Abdullatif. “Fetomaternal transfusion as a cause of
severe fetal anemia causing early neonatal death: a case report”. In: Oman medical
journal 26.6 (2011), p. 444.
[30]
Josefine Theresia Maier et al. “Fetomaternal hemorrhage (FMH), an update: review
of literature and an illustrative case”. In: Archives of gynecology and obstetrics 292.3
(2015), pp. 595–602.
[31]
Blair J Wylie and Mary E D’alton. “Fetomaternal hemorrhage”. In: Obstetrics & Gy-
necology 115.5 (2010), pp. 1039–1051.
[32]
Pia Jennes Foli-Andersen et al. “Neonatal anæmi på grund af føtomaternel blødning
diagnosticeret ved flowcytometri: a fast method to detect foetomaternal haemorrhage”.
In: Ugeskrift for Læger [online] 177.10 (2015).
[33]
ES Sebring and HF Polesky. “Fetomaternal hemorrhage: incidence, risk factors, time
of occurrence, and clinical effects”. In: Transfusion 30.4 (1990), pp. 344–357.
[34]
E Kleihauer, H Braun, and K Betke. “Demonstration of fetal hemoglobin in erythro-
cytes of a blood smear.” In: Klinische Wochenschrift 35.12 (1957), pp. 637–638.
[35]
BH Davis et al. “Detection of fetal red cells in fetomaternal hemorrhage using a fe-
tal hemoglobin monoclonal antibody by flow cytometry”. In: Transfusion 38.8 (1998),
pp. 749–756.
[36]
Yeowon A Kim and Robert S Makar. “Detection of fetomaternal hemorrhage”. In: Amer-
ican journal of hematology 87.4 (2012), pp. 417–423.
[37]
Morten Hanefeld Dziegiel, Leif Kofoed Nielsen, and Adela Berkowicz. “Detecting fe-
tomaternal hemorrhage by flow cytometry”. In: Current opinion in hematology 13.6
(2006), pp. 490–495.
[38]
Antranik.org. Blood Components, Hemoglobin, Type/Rh Factor, Agglutination. url:
http://antranik.org/blood-components-hemoglobin-typerh-factor-agglutination/
(visited on 11/08/2017).
[39]
Rod R Seeley et al. Seeley’s anatomy & physiology. McGraw-Hill, 2011.
[40]
Howard A Pearson. “Life-span of the fetal red blood cell”. In: The Journal of pediatrics
70.2 (1967), pp. 166–171.
[41]
HyunJoo Park et al. “Three-dimensional refractive index tomograms and deformability
of individual human red blood cells from cord blood of newborn infants and maternal
blood”. In: Journal of biomedical optics 20.11 (2015), pp. 111208–111208.
[42]
Katsuto Eguchi, Tomoko Sawai, and Yasushi Mizutani. “Erythrocyte deformability of
nonpregnant, pregnant, and fetal blood”. In: Journal of Perinatal Medicine-Official
Journal of the WAPM 23.4 (1995), pp. 301–306.
[43]
Henrik Bruus. Theoretical microfluidics. Oxford university press Oxford, 2007.
[44]
CFD support. Laminar vs. turbulent flow. url: https : / / www . cfdsupport . com /
OpenFOAM-Training-by-CFD-Support/node275.html (visited on 12/12/2017).
==PAGE:96==
84
Bibliography
[45]
psu.edu. Accesibility. url: http://accessibility.psu.edu/images/longdescription
(visited on 12/12/2017).
[46]
V Chivukula et al. “Micro-scale blood particulate dynamics using a non-uniform ra-
tional B-spline-based isogeometric analysis”. In: International journal for numerical
methods in biomedical engineering 30.12 (2014), pp. 1437–1459.
[47]
Dino Di Carlo et al. “Continuous inertial focusing, ordering, and separation of particles
in microchannels”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104.48 (2007),
pp. 18892–18897.
[48]
Hiroshi Noguchi and Gerhard Gompper. “Shape transitions of fluid vesicles and red
blood cells in capillary flows”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 102.40 (2005), pp. 14159–14164.
[49]
Nancy F Zeng and William D Ristenpart. “Mechanical response of red blood cells
entering a constriction”. In: Biomicrofluidics 8.6 (2014), p. 064123.
[50]
Jochen Guck et al. “The optical stretcher: a novel laser tool to micromanipulate cells”.
In: Biophysical journal 81.2 (2001), pp. 767–784.
[51]
Tony Rungling. “Blood Cell Analysis by Microfluidic Means”. In: (2017).
[52]
Henrik Thirstrup. “Development of Methods for Determining Red Blood Cell Deforma-
bility”. In: (2016).
[53]
BLOB Analysis. url: http : / / what - when - how . com / introduction - to - video -
and- image- processing/blob- analysis- introduction- to- video- and- image-
processing-part-1/ (visited on 12/27/2017).
[54]
Morphology. url: http://what- when- how.com/introduction- to- video- and-
image-processing/morphology-introduction-to-video-and-image-processing-
part-2/ (visited on 12/27/2017).
[55]
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding machine learning: From the-
ory to algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2014.
[56]
A Review of Machine Learning. url: https://www.safaribooksonline.com/library/
view/deep-learning/9781491924570/ch01.html (visited on 01/06/2018).
[57]
Jerome Friedman, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. The elements of statistical
learning. Vol. 1. Springer series in statistics New York, 2001.
[58]
Linear and quadratic discriminant analysis. url: http://scikit-learn.org/stable/
modules/lda_qda.html (visited on 01/06/2018).
[59]
Support vector machines. url: http://www.bogotobogo.com/python/scikit-learn/
scikit _ machine _ learning _ Support _ Vector _ Machines _ SVM _ 2 . php (visited on
01/06/2018).
[60]
Statistical Methods (2) Logistic Regression, Poisson Regression. url: https://onlinecourses.
science.psu.edu/stat507/node/18 (visited on 01/07/2018).
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
85
[61]
Finding the foci of an ellipse. url: http://www.softschools.com/math/calculus/
finding_the_foci_of_an_ellipse/ (visited on 12/31/2017).
[62]
K-means clustering: how it works. url: https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v =
_aWzGGNrcic (visited on 01/06/2018).
[63]
Interpreting Logistic Equations. url: http://www.restore.ac.uk/srme/www/fac/
soc/wie/research-new/srme/modules/mod4/5/index.html (visited on 01/07/2018).
==PAGE:98==
