==PAGE:1==
Accessing Cognitive Load Using
Low-Cost Eye Tracking
Zhong Yuan Wang
M.Sc.Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering (Digital Media Engineering)
February 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 30 31
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Eye tracking addresses what we look at, how we are looking at it, and more interest-
ingly, our mental activities by observing eye movements. Since the 1950s, a number
of studies have shown that our pupil responses are not just affected by light conditions,
but they are also inﬂuenced by cognition such as memory, language processing, and
emotions. Back then, eye tracking studies were often performed using highly intru-
sive eye tracking procedures or cumbersome eye tracking devices. However, in recent
years, the eye tracking technology has undergone an evolution. Modern eye trackers
are much smaller, cheaper, and less intrusive. But where are we in the evolution of the
technology? How accurate are the cheapest eye trackers? Is it possible to use a webcam
or smartphone as an eye tracker?
The focus of this thesis is to examine cognitive processing load in relation to pupillary
response using low-cost eye tracking devices. The eye tracking devices that are used
in this thesis consists of an Eye Tribe tracker, iPhone 7’s built-in cameras (front and
back), and a Dell laptop integrated webcam. Task-evoked pupillary response (TEPR)
is used as the primary measure of the cognitive load. For the purpose of the TEPR,
this thesis presents ﬁve experiments that focus on measuring pupillary response that is
inﬂuenced by visual material, complex sentences, auditory stimuli, speech perception
in noise, and pupillary response using webcam and smartphone. It is shown that it is
possible for an Eye Tribe tracker and an iPhone 7, with 1080p in resolution, to observe
cognitive related pupillary response.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé (Dansk)
Eye tracking som analyseværktøj bliver ofte brugt i sammenhæng med, hvor vi ret-
ter vores blik hen, hvorfor vi kigger på det, og vigtigere endnu, hvad der foregår i
vores hjerne. Siden 1950 har mange studier vist, at vores pupil bevæger sig i takt med
aktiviteter i kognitive funktioner, såsom hukommelse, sprog og sansning. Hidtil har
udstyret været besværligt, upræcist og kostbart at fremstille. Men i de seneste ti år har
eye tracking teknologien været igennem en revolution, som gør at dagens eye tracking
teknologi er billigere, mindre og nemmere at integrere med andre analyseværktøjer.
Men hvor langt er vi med teknologien i dag? Hvor præcis er den billigste eye tracker
i forhold til målinger i pupilstørrelsen? Er det muligt at bruge et webcam eller en
smartphone til at se ændringer i pupilstørrelsen?
Formålet med denne afhandling er, at undersøge kognitivt relaterede funktioner i forhold
til ændringer i pupilstørrelsen ved hjælp af billige eye tracking teknologi. Eye tracking
teknologi, som bliver brugt i denne afhandling, består af en Eye Tribe eye tracker, en
iPhone 7 og et webcam fra en Dell bærbar. Teknikken, som bliver brugt til at fremkalde
kognitiv relateret ændringer i pupilstørrelsen i denne afhandling, er Task-evoked pupil-
lary response (TEPR). Ved brug af TEPR vil der blive præsenteret fem eksperimenter
i forhold til måling af ændringer i pupilstørrelsen, der påvirkes af visuelle materialer,
komplekse sætninger, auditiv stimulering, tale og forståelse i støj og pupil målinger ved
brug af webcam og smartphone. Resultaterne i denne afhandling viser, at det er muligt
at måle ændringer i pupilstørrelsen i takt med kognitive aktiviteter ved brug af en Eye
Tribe eye tracker og en iPhone med 1080p i videoopløsning.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Cognitive System section of DTU Compute in fulﬁlment
of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering, under the supervision of
Associate Professor Per Bækgaard.
The thesis deals with aspects of accessing cognitive load using eye tracking. The work
has been carried out in the period of August 2017 to February 2018.
01-February-2018
Zhong Yuan Wang
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deep gratitude to my supervisor Per Bækgaard for his patient
guidance, valuable knowledge, enthusiastic encouragement and useful critiques during
the period of this thesis.
My grateful thanks are also extended to my parents, who have encouraged and sup-
ported me throughout my life and my studies.
I must also thank Thea, Line, Niels, Frederikke, Mathis, and John who gave excellent
inputs on improvements to this thesis.
Finally, I would also like to extend my thanks to my close friends, neighbours, and to
the volunteers who offered their time and support throughout the period of this thesis.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
AE
Auto Exposure
AF
Auto Focus
LPSz
Left Pupil Estimate Size
FPS
Frame Per Second
PC
Personal Computer
RMS
Root Mean Square
SD
Standard Deviation
SEM
Standard Error of the Mean
TEPR
Task-evoked Pupillary Response
SNR
Signal Noise Ratio
SRT
Speech Reception Threshold
RPSz
Right Pupil Estimate Size
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Table of Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé (Dansk)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Abbreviations
ix
Table of Contents
xii
1
Introduction
1
2
State of the Art
5
2.1
A Cognitive Related Pupil Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Eye Tracking Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Speech Perception in Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Pilot Projects
11
3.1
Pupillary Response and Visual Material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Pupillary Response and Complex Sentences . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Pupillary Response and Auditory Stimuli in Noise
19
4.1
Methods and Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Discussion and Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:14==
xii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
5
Speech Perception in Noise
29
5.1
Methods and Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Discussion and Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Pupillary Response Using Webcam and Smartphone
41
6.1
Methods and Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Discussion and Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7
Future Work
49
7.1
Future Software Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2
Future Hardware Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8
Conclusion
53
A Appendix - Figures and Tables
55
B
Appendix - Hardware and Software
65
B.1
List of Hardware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
B.2
List of Software Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
C Appendix - Overview of Experiment Solutions
69
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The science of eye tracking was ﬁrst developed in the late 1800s. Back then, scientists
had to track eye movements by letting the evaluator watch the eye movements in direct
observations. It was through eye tracking that a French ophthalmologist named Louis
Emile Javal discovered that reading is not about sweeping ﬂuently along the text, but
rather to produce a series of quick movements (saccade) and short pauses (ﬁxation)
over the text [1]. However, as his studies were based on naked-eye observations, the
quality of his ﬁndings were questioned.
In 1908, a psychologist named Edmund Huey further developed Javal’s approach [2].
Huey built an eye tracker using a contact lens with holes and aluminum pointers con-
nected to the contact lens, which enabled him to follow a subject’s eye movements. He
observed that while people were reading, theirs eyes had a series of quick stops while
reading, which further conﬁrmed Javal’s ﬁndings. Hereafter, an educational psychol-
ogist named Guy Thomas Buswell [3] used the same approach. Using the ﬁrst non-
intrusive (uninterrupted) eye tracker allowed him to capture details frame-by-frame.
He analyzed eye movements of subjects while they were reading and found that vari-
ous components of eye movement e.g. number of ﬁxations per line, average duration
of ﬁxations, and number of regressive movements per line, all contribute to the reading
efﬁciency.
As eye trackers became less intrusive and provided more accurate data, the research of
human eyes thrived after the 1950s. Researchers started to see a correlation between
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
pupil size and mental activities. Two of the most referenced psychologist in the ﬁeld
are Eckhard H. Hess and James M. Polt, and their study of the relationship between
pupillary response and problem-solving have provided more evidence, which later have
led them to this conclusion:
“the pupil response will prove to be a valuable tool in the study of
problem-solving and other mental processes. [4]”
A great amount of research indicates that there is a correlation between the pupillary re-
sponse and the cognitive processing load, suggesting that the pupils’ response changes
with correlation to the complexity of a particular task. Therefore, the focus of this the-
sis is to examine cognitive processing in relation to pupillary response using low-cost
eye tracking devices. The eye tracking devices that are used in this thesis consists of
an Eye Tribe tracker, iPhone 7’s built-in cameras (front and back), and a Dell laptop
integrated webcam, see Appendix B.1 for more details. The software solutions that
are used in this thesis consists of PeyeTribe, Psychopy, Anaconda Distribution, Python
2.7, Audacity, Video to JPG Converter, see Appendix B.2 for more details. The pupil
diameter will be expressed in an arbitrary unit (pixels).
This thesis will include an overview of various studies in relation to pupillary response
and cognitive processing load. A description of the deﬁnition of a cognitive related
pupillary response and a description of how scientists have examined the pupillary
response will be given. As various studies examine different categories of cognitive
load it is impossible to cover all aspects in one project. Therefore, a description of a
prior study will be presented and used to examine the pupillary response in relation to
cognitive load of the listening effort (Chapter 2).
Following the state of the art chapter, two pilot experiments using the Eye Tribe tracker
will be presented. The focus of the experiments is to understand the technology behind
the Eye Tribe tracker and the structure of the data output (Chapter 3).
Next, an experiment using the Eye Tribe tracker and auditory stimuli will be presented.
The focus of the experiment is to narrow down the research, to investigate whether it is
possible to observe pupil response that might be related to the listening effort (Chapter
4).
Furthermore, Chapter 5 presents an experiment with speech perception in noise. The
results are compared to a prior study that is described in the state of the art, Chapter
2. The purpose of this experiment is to see whether it is possible to observe the same
pupillary response compared to an advanced eye tracker. Furthermore, a similar ex-
periment will be presented, using two alternative video cameras; an iPhone 7s built-in
camera, and a Dell laptop integrated webcam. The focus is to examine the pupillary
response between the alternative cameras and the Eye Tribe tracker (Chapter 6).
==PAGE:17==
3
Finally, this thesis will include a discussion of potential future work in relation to using
smartphones and applications to utilize cognitive related pupillary response (Chapter
7). Additional ﬁgures and tables can be found in Appendix A. An general overview of
the development processes of each experiment can be found in Appendix C and in the
zip ﬁle.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
State of the Art
The purpose of this chapter is to understand the deﬁnition of a cognitive related pupil-
lary response. The chapter will discuss answers to questions such as: what is a pupillary
response? How does cognitive load affect the pupil? How have scientists attempted
to measure cognitive load using eye tracking? Which experimental design approach
should be used for the purpose in this thesis?
Though the pupillary response is known to be affected by the light exposure to the eyes,
this aspect is not the focus of the present study, which is why it will not be described
in great detail. However, the effect of luminance (intensity of light) on the pupillary
responses will be brieﬂy described.
2.1
A Cognitive Related Pupil Response
A pupillary response is a physical change in the size of the pupil which consists of either
a constriction response (narrowing) or a dilation response (widening). The deﬁnition of
a cognitive related pupil response is characterized by two aspects: tonic pupil diameter
and phasic pupil response.
Tonic pupil diameter reﬂects the size of the pupil at a relatively stable state and is not
inﬂuenced by any speciﬁc kind of stimulus. A change in tonic pupil diameter happens
==PAGE:20==
6
State of the Art
slowly over the duration of the stimulus. The tonic pupil diameter is less sensitive to
momentary events. For instance, when your eyes are adapting to the light condition
in a dark room, the pupil dilates until an optimal dilation is reached, where the pupil
diameter then remains at a consistent level. This sustained pupil diameter is often
referred to as the absolute pupil diameter or the baseline diameter.
Phasic pupil response reﬂects a short-termed response that can be caused by a behavior
or an event. The duration of a phasic pupil response is in the range of 1-20 seconds
[5] and it is characterized by a relative increase of the pupil diameter, followed by a
decrease of the pupil diameter. Shortly after, the pupil diameter returns to the initial
baseline diameter. A phasic response is not just inﬂuenced by a momentary event, but
also by the size of the tonic diameter. A recent study has shown that a larger tonic pupil
response implies a smaller phasic response [6]. This means that the initial baseline
diameter can overshadow the phasic response.
A pupillary response can be inﬂuenced by light conditions [3], however, recent studies
have also shown that there is a strong correlation between pupillary response and the
cognitive load of the brain [7, 8]. Additionally, the subject of cognitive related pupil
response has been heavily studied since the 1960s and it is expressed as Task-evoked
Pupillary Response (TEPR) [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
The idea of the TEPR is to observe a cognitive related pupillary response, when some-
one for instance is solving a problem regarding a speciﬁc task. As the person is en-
gaging in the task, the mental effort increases and the pupil size increases accordingly.
The pupil reaches a maximum level of dilation as the performance tops. As the task
approaches the end, the pupil diameter decreases and reaches baseline level, see Figure
2.1 for illustration.
Figure 2.1: A pupillary response in relation to the performance of a task. Picture la-
beled for non-commercial use obtained from: https://cdn.imotions.com
This phenomenon has led Kahneman to propose that TEPR should be the primary mea-
sure of cognitive processing load. In order to draw connections between the pupillary
responses and cognitive processing load a task must fulﬁl three criteria [9]:
• It should be sensitive to within-task variations in task demands produced by
==PAGE:21==
2.1 A Cognitive Related Pupil Response
7
changes in task parameters.
• It should reﬂect between-task differences in processing load elicited by qualita-
tively different cognitive operations.
• It should capture individual differences in processing load as individuals of dif-
ferent abilities perform a ﬁxed set of cognitive operations.
In 1982, Jackson Beatty reviewed various TEPR researches that conﬁrmed the three
listed criteria [10]. This section describes some of his ﬁndings.
Using a working memory task of remembering 3 to 7 digits and then reporting them
after a break, Kahneman and Beatty showed that the pupillary diameter increases with
the presentation of each digit, reaching a maximum point before the reporting phase
[15].
During the reporting phase, the pupil size is reduced with each reported digit, until
reaching baseline level after the ﬁnal digit. The number of digits have been shown to
inﬂuence the magnitude of the peak pupillary dilation, which indicates that the pupil-
lary response is determined by the difﬁculty of the task. Additionally, this conﬁrms that
the pupillary response is sensitive to within-task variations, see Figure 2.2 a. Similar
pattern was also observed by Ahern and Beatty [16], see Figure 2.2 b.
Due to the fact that a mental demanding task yielded larger pupillary dilation and less
demanding tasks yielded smaller pupillary dilation, this has led Beatty to conclude that
TEPR fulﬁlled Kahneman’s second criteria.
The last of Kahneman’s criteria suggested that a measure of processing load should
capture differences between subjects within a ﬁxed domain. In Beatty’s review, he pre-
sented a study that fulﬁlled Kahneman’s last criteria. In that study [16], two groups (low
and high intelligence) of university undergraduates were selected based on Scholastic
Aptitude Test scores (SAT), either under 950 or above 1350, for the low and high intelli-
gence groups, respectively. These two groups were presented with four cognitive tasks.
The results showed that for three of the four tasks, signiﬁcant differences in pupillary
response were observed between these two groups. The low intelligence group showed
a larger pupillary response compared to the high intelligence group and in each task
the high intelligence group had fewer errors.
It seems that a cognitive related pupillary response is not just caused by emotions, but
it also depends on a wide range of tasks (e.g., memory encoding, language processing,
speech perception, and other tasks) [10, 17, 13]. Hence, Beatty and Lucero-Wagoner
[18] suggested three measurement systems to evaluate each pupillary response:
==PAGE:22==
8
State of the Art
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: TEPR in working memory tasks of 3-7 digits (a). TEPR in multiplication
tasks, ranging from multiplying a pair of one-digit numbers to multiplying
a pair of two-digit numbers (b). Both graphs are from Beatty’s review of
Task-evoked pupillary responses, processing load and structure of process-
ing resources [10].
• Baseline Diameter. The average pupil diameter prior to affected by a stimulus or
task.
• Mean Pupil Dilation. The Mean pupil dilation is found by subtracting the mean
diameter in baseline period.
• Peak Dilation. A maximum dilation value subtracting the mean diameter in base-
line. A pupillary response that is caused by the cognitive process is approxi-
mately less than 0.5 millimeter in diameter [18]. The pupil diameter varies from
2 to 8 millimeter in diameter depending on the light conditions [19].
• Latency to Peak. The amount of time elapsed between start to maximum dilation
value. The peak dilation amplitude normally occurs within 0.7 to 1.5 sec after a
target stimulus onset [20].
TEPR is a reliable indicator of processing load. TEPR provides valuable information
to understand cognitive processing within tasks, between task variations and between
individuals.
When capturing pupillary responses, other psychological responses can affect the mea-
surements (i.e. eye blinking). An eye blink happens when we close both our eyelids for
a short period of time. Generally, there are three types of blinks; reﬂex blinks, spon-
taneous blinks, and voluntary blinks. Reﬂex blinks are protective responses, which
occurs to external stimuli, for example a loud noise, a tap to the forehead or being ex-
posed to an unexpected stimulus. Spontaneous blinks occur in the absence of external
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Eye Tracking Systems
9
stimuli or internal effort. Lastly, voluntary blinks are similar to reﬂex blinks, but last
longer.
Eye blinking can heavily bias the data if preprocessing of the data is not conducted.
This problem has also been addressed by other studies [21, 22]. In this thesis, the eye
blinks data are not discarded from the experiments. Instead, a method for processing
outlier data was implemented. This method helps to neutralize the blink data and will
be further described in Chapter 4.
2.2
Eye Tracking Systems
Eye tracking can be classiﬁed into three categories: active eye tracking, passive eye
tracking and adaptive eye tracking. Active eye tracking is when the system adapts to
the users eye movements. This system is particularly well-known in cases where a user
controls an object on a screen based on the motion of the eyes.
In passive eye tracking, the system automatically determines the eye movements in
real-time. The obtained data is often generated without the subject being aware of
the presence of the eye tracking system. Most of the earliest ﬁndings were based on
passive eye tracking systems. Lastly, adaptive eye tracking is about how the system
reacts, based on the eye tracking data. This system can be used in studies of detecting
and understanding human behavior, for instance falling asleep behind the wheels [23].
For the purpose of this thesis, it was decided that the passive eye tracking system is
best suited.
2.3
Speech Perception in Noise
For the purpose of examining the pupillary responses using eye tracking devices, it was
decided to use the research approach that was conducted by Ariana A. Zekveld, Sophia
E. Kramer, and Joost M. Festen in 2010 [24].
The aim of this research was to evaluate the inﬂuence of sentence intelligibility on
the pupillary responses when listening to short sentences. The choice of experimental
method was based on a number subjective effort-measure studies, which have shown
that listening is often more effortful for hearing-impaired people compared to people
with normal-hearing. However, a subjective effort-measure cannot determine whether
the effort was affected by the availability or affected by the demand of mental process-
ing effort. Therefore, Zekveld et al. proposed an application of pupillometry to study
==PAGE:24==
10
State of the Art
listening efforts. They expected that the listening effort would be reﬂected by the pupil
dilation and that the pupil size increases as the function of intelligibility decreases.
38 normal-hearing students participated in this experiment. The participants performed
three speech reception threshold (SRT) tests, where they listened to sentences in combi-
nation with stationary noise (white noise). The signal and noise ratio (SNR) was adap-
tively estimated based on an accuracy when reproducing the sentences. For instance,
in condition of SRT50%, the participants were able to reproduce 50% of the sentences
without error, and same procedure was applied for SRT71% and SRT84%. They used 45
short Dutch everyday sentences as stimulus. The mean duration of the sentences was
1.8 seconds and contained 8 to 9 syllables. The grammatical and syntactical structure
were relatively simple.
Each sentence presentation consisted of 3 seconds noise before the sentence onset,
followed by a sentence, an after-sentence presentation, and an answer prompt was pre-
sented where the participant repeated the sentence aloud. Each answer response was
also rated by the participant using a 5-scale rating system. During the experiment,
each pupillary response was measured based on the peak dilation amplitude relative
to baseline, the latency of the peak dilation and the mean pupil dilation relative to the
baseline.
The results showed that as the noise level systematically increased, the peak dilation
amplitude, mean pupil dilation, and peak latency increases. This indicated that it re-
quires more cognitive effort to process the information compared to sentences in less
noise level. The results additionally showed that the pupil responses were larger for
incorrectly repeated sentences compared to correctly repeated sentences. This led the
authors to conclude that the value of pupillometry can be used as a measure of listening
effort during speech perception.
In the following chapter, two pilot experiments will be presented. The aim is to de-
termine the limitations of the Eye Tribe tracking device and to get familiar with the
paradigm of TEPR.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Pilot Projects
This chapter describes two pilot experiments that were performed in the beginning of
this thesis work. The ﬁrst experiment was inspired by the ﬁndings that were observed
by Hess and Polt [25]. Using visual materials, they found a correlation between the
pupillary response and visual materials. The second experiment was inspired by a study
that was conducted by Michael Schluraff. In his study, he observed that the pupillary
response was related to the complexity in sentences [26].
3.1
Pupillary Response and Visual Material
This experiment was performed with the purpose of investigating whether it was pos-
sible to observe the pupillary responses while a subject was exposed to two different
types of visual stimuli. Instead of using images, two movie trailers were used as visual
stimuli (a horror movie trailer and a nature documentary movie trailer).
3.1.1
Methods and Materials
Participant
One person participated in this experiment. The participant was a 28 year old un-
==PAGE:26==
12
Pilot Projects
dergraduate student with normal vision who did not have any history of neurological
diseases. The subject did not wear glasses or contact lenses during the experiment.
Materials and Stimuli
The stimuli consisted of two movie trailers, a horror movie trailer and a documentary
movie trailer (Annabelle 2 and Planet Earth 2). The length of the trailers were respec-
tively 205 seconds and 207 seconds. The eye data was captured using the Eye Tribe
device, a stationary PC, a PC 27-inch monitor (resolution 2560 x 1440), and a pair of
headsets (Logitech G633 Artemis Spectrum 7.1 Surround Sound), see Appendix B for
more details.
Procedure
To obtain accurate pupillary measurements over a long period of time, the subject was
seated in a comfortable position, approximately 55-60 centimeter (cm) away from the
PC monitor and 45-50 cm away from the Eye Tribe device, as illustrated on ﬁgure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the experiment setup. User sits in front of an eye tracker
and a PC monitor. Picture labelled for non-commercial use obtained from:
www.theeyetribe.com.
Before the recording, a calibration1 of the eyes was performed (approximately 20 sec-
onds). The subject was ﬁrst exposed to the Annabelle 2 trailer and then the Planet Earth
2 trailer. Each movie trailer was viewed only once and in full screen format. The ex-
periment was conducted in a quiet room with constant luminance level. Including the
calibration process, the duration of the entire test was 10 minutes. Pupillary diameter
was recorded during the presentation of each stimulus. Pupillometry data was sampled
1A person has different eye characteristics.
To have the most optimal measurement results, an ini-
tial calibration needs to be done. The calibration procedure was followed a standard guide. It can be
found here: http://theeyetribe.com/dev.theeyetribe.com/dev.theeyetribe.com/
general/index.html
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Pupillary Response and Visual Material
13
with a sample rate of 30 frames per second. The estimated pupil size was based on two
variables, left pupil size estimate (LPSz) and right pupil size estimate (RPSz).
3.1.2
Results
From the data, it was possible to observe that there were variations in pupillary re-
sponses between these two stimuli. The mean pupil size while watching Annabelle 2
was 28.72 pixels, with a standard deviation of 5.4 pixels. For the Planet Earth 2 movie
trailer, the mean pupil size was 19.99 pixels, with a standard deviation of 2.46 pixels.
Descriptive statistics
Quartiles
Stimulus
Mean
SD
25%
50%
75%
Annabelle 2
(pixels)
28.72
5.4
25.88
29.93
32.50
Planet Earth 2
(pixels)
19.99
2.46
18.48
19.92
21.50
Table 3.1: Mean pupil response while viewing Annabelle 2 and Planet Earth 2 trailers.
Using a median, the pupil traces were divided into quartiles. Compared to
the quartile values, the Annabelle 2 trailer still yielded more varied pupillary
response than the Planet Earth 2 trailer.
The average pupil size while watching Annabelle 2 trailer was 43.75% larger than the
average pupil size while watching Planet Earth 2 trailer, see Table 3.1.
Figure 3.2 represents the pupil diameter across each viewing interval. It can be seen
that the ﬁrst stimulus yielded larger pupillary dilation than the second stimulus.
3.1.3
Discussion and Conclusion
The results showed difference in pupillary responses while viewing two different types
of visual stimuli. The pupil size was larger when the participant viewed the ﬁrst video
stimulus, Annabelle 2 trailer, compared to the second video stimulus, Planet Earth 2
trailer. These data also support the earlier consensus suggesting that emotional arousal
is a key element in pupillary responses and therefore can be used as a readout of fear-
related processes [25, 27, 28].
Nevertheless, the data can be affected by the design of this experiment. The pupillary
response was not inﬂuenced by the light condition in the room, as the experiment was
conducted in a room with relatively stable luminance. However, the brightness of the
monitor between the stimuli was different, and could have an inﬂuence on the pupil-
lary response. The horror movie trailer was mostly displayed in a darker background
and the documentary trailer was generally in a green background, because most of the
==PAGE:28==
14
Pilot Projects
Figure 3.2: Pupil size over time. Blue line represents the pupillary response while
watching Annabelle 2 and orange line represents the pupillary response
while watching Planet Earth 2 trailer. Y-axis represents the pupil size in
pixels and X-axis represents the number of data points over duration of
each trailer.
scenes were in nature. The inﬂuence of the monitor’s brightness has an impact on the
pupillary response, as conﬁrmed by Edwin S. Dalmaijer’s research [29] and in a study
by Peysakhovich et al. [6].
The credibility of the results was also inﬂuenced by the sample size of the experiment.
Therefore, the sample size and the number of visual stimuli must be increased, and
should also include more subjects. Furthermore, the presentation of stimuli needs to be
randomized, preventing the subject from getting too excited beforehand.
In conclusion, despite the design faults, the results indicated that the pupillary response
was correlated with different types of visual stimuli, and it was possible to observe
pupillary response using Eye Tribe tracker, but the credibility of the results can be
questioned.
3.2
Pupillary Response and Complex Sentences
The ﬁrst pilot experiment demonstrated a simple way of observing pupillary responses
using visual stimuli. However, the inﬂuence of the background colors made it hard
to tell whether the pupillary responses were affected by the stimuli itself or by the
luminance of the monitor. Therefore, the following experiment was conducted for three
purposes. First, to capture pupillary responses with more controlled light conditions of
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Pupillary Response and Complex Sentences
15
the monitor. Second, to generate multiple types of stimuli and test it with a group of
people. And third, to conduct an experiment that could examine the mental effort for
language processing.
As this was a pilot project, it was decided to create a simpler version of this experiment.
Instead of listening, the subjects had to read the presented sentences, and instead of
rating the comprehensibility of each sentence, the subjects were asked to remember
and repeat the sentence after a short break.
3.2.1
Methods and Materials
Participants
Five participants (three men and ﬁve women) volunteered in this experiment. Their
ages ranged from 20 to 28 years, with a mean of 24 years (SD = 2.88 years). One of
the participants had <5% hearing loss on one ear. One participant was diagnosed with
dyslexia and one participant used contact lenses during the experiment. None of the
participants reported history of neurological diseases. A verbal consent was presented
to the participants which they agreed to if their data was used anonymously.
Materials and Stimuli
The eye data was captured using the Eye Tribe device, a stationary PC, and a PC 27-
inch monitor (resolution 2560 x 1440). Three types of sentences were constructed. One
sentence without syntactic and semantic structure, one sentence with syntactic structure
but lack of semantic, and a third normal sentence, see Table 3.2.
Sentence Structure
Sentence
1. No syntactic or
semantic structure
Dinner, Beautifully, Gram, Seal, Park.
2. Syntactic, but no
semantic structure
Cows ﬂew beautifully, egg sank
into the ocean.
3. Normal sentence
Dawn and Brown had lunch together.
Table 3.2: Sentences that were used for the purpose of this experiment.
Experimental Procedure
Each subject was seated approximately 55-60 cm away from the PC monitor and 45-50
cm away from the Eye Tribe device. For every subject, a calibration of the eyes was
performed with the Eye Tribe tracker2. A minimum score of ‘perfect’ in calibration
was obtained before the start of the experiment. The experiment consisted of an intro-
duction and three repetitions. Each repetition consisted of three routines: a stimulus
onset, a small break, and an answer response. The introduction routine displayed the
2The Eye Tribes own calibration procedure. http://theeyetribe.com/dev.theeyetribe.
com/dev.theeyetribe.com/general/index.html
==PAGE:30==
16
Pilot Projects
rules of the experiment. When a subject was ready, the subject could initiate the ex-
periment by pressing the space button. Hereafter, the ﬁrst sentence was displayed for
5 seconds, followed by a 6 second break, and then an answer was given by the subject
within the following 7 seconds. Each test lasted approximately 1 minute. Figure 3.3
demonstrates the workﬂow of the experiment.
Figure 3.3: The test procedure pilot project 2. Each test begins with an explanation of
the experiment. Then, each sentence stimulus was being presented to the
subject for 5 seconds, followed by a 6 seconds break and a 7 second repeat
phase, where the subject was asked to repeat the sentence out loud.
Data Acquisition
Pupil size was recorded with 30 frames per second. Each recording started at the begin-
ning of the response routine and lasted until the response routine ﬁnished. The mean
pupil diameter was obtained and compared between each complexity level.
3.2.2
Results
When the participants were repeating the sentence without syntactic and semantic
structure, the average pupillary response of both eyes was 24.11 pixels. For the sen-
tence with syntactic but without semantic structure the average of the pupillary re-
sponse yielded 23.72 pixels. The normal sentence yielded 23.18 pixels. The results
across sentence types are compared in Figure 3.4.
3.2.3
Discussion and Conclusion
Looking at the results, as the grammatical complexity of the sentences decreases, the
smaller the observed pupil dilation was. The results yielded a similar pattern as what
was discovered by Schluraff. However, there is a chance that the results were affected
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Pupillary Response and Complex Sentences
17
Figure 3.4: The mean pupil dilation for three levels of sentence complexity. The x-axis
represents the order in which the sentences were presented. The y-axis
reﬂects the pupil size in pixels. Sentence without syntactic and semantic
structure (1), sentence with syntactic but without semantic structure (2),
and a normal sentence (3)
by the eye blinks when calculating the mean dilation. If people blink during the last
sentence, it automatically pulls down the average of the pupil size. Therefore, a more
sophisticated algorithm is needed to handle the eye blink data. Furthermore, the base-
line diameter was not subtracted from the mean pupil diameter, therefore the results
were likely to be affected by the initial pupil diameter before the presentation of each
sentence. The instructor had also revealed to the subjects that a complex sentence
would be presented at ﬁrst, and then followed by less and less complex sentences. This
could have had an impact on the baseline pupil size. Hence, presenting sentences in a
randomized order could have revealed better results.
In conclusion, the second pilot experiment showed that it was possible to capture a
speciﬁc movement of pupillary responses within a timed interval. The pupil dilation
should have been calculated by subtracting the baseline size. An algorithm is needed
for processing and to eliminate the inﬂuence of outliers. Also, randomization of the
order in which the stimuli is presented should be implemented.
==PAGE:32==
18
Pilot Projects
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Pupillary Response and
Auditory Stimuli in Noise
We have seen in the previous chapter that by using some simple techniques, it was
possible to observe pupillary responses while the subject was viewing different types
of visual stimuli, movie trailer and English sentences. However, based on the ﬁrst
experiment’s design, it was difﬁcult to determine whether the outcome was inﬂuenced
by the stimuli or by chance. Hence, a more ﬂexible experiment design was needed. In
the second pilot experiment, the results could easily be biased by the ﬁxed sequence of
the presentation of each sentence, which made it difﬁcult to tell whether the pupillary
responses were associated by the stimuli or by the experiment design. Therefore, a
randomization was implemented for the experiment in this chapter.
The purpose of this experiment was to examine each pupillary response, more precisely,
to use different techniques to determine the timing of each stimulus and to capture the
pupillary response that was related to each stimulus. The aim of this experiment was
to see the relationship between pupillary response and auditory stimuli in two different
noise conditions. The general idea was to present the subjects a beep sound in two
different sound environments, one in noise and one without noise.
==PAGE:34==
20
Pupillary Response and Auditory Stimuli in Noise
4.1
Methods and Materials
Participants
Eight participants (three men and ﬁve women) volunteered for this experiment. Their
ages ranged from 20 to 28 years, with a mean of 24 years (SD of 1.66 years). Two
of the participants claimed that they had <5% hearing loss on one ear. One partici-
pant was diagnosed with dyslexia and two participants used contact lenses during the
experiment. None of the participants reported history of neurological diseases. A ver-
bal consent was presented to the participants which they agreed to their data was used
anonymously.
Materials
The eye data was captured using the Eye Tribe tracker, a stationary PC, a standard
alphanumeric keyboard, and a PC 27-inch monitor (resolution 2560 x 1440). All the
auditory stimuli were presented through a Logitech G633 headset, see Appendix B for
more detail.
Stimuli
The auditory stimuli consisted of two types of stimulus: a beep sound and a beep
sound in trafﬁc background noise. The original audio ﬁles of the beep sound and the
trafﬁc background noise were downloaded from YouTube1 and then processed using
Audacity.
When creating the stimuli with trafﬁc background noise, in order to uphold a certain
signal to noise ratio (SRN), a Root Mean Squared (RMS) value of the total sound
waveform was used to determine the average sound pressure of an audio signal2.
In this experiment the RMS value is measured in decibel (dB). The auditory stimuli
with just a beep sound had a RMS value of -15.9 dB (negative value means that the
average value of the incoming sound is decreased with 15.9 dB) and the stimulus with
beep sound in noise had a RMS value of -11 dB. The two types of auditory stimuli
lasted 0.5 seconds each.
Additionally, the panning or balance settings of each auditory stimulus was adjusted,
so it could be heard either in the left ear or in the right ear. See Figure 4.1 for demon-
stration.
To avoid confusion, the stimuli that consisted of just a beep sound is referred to as
stimuliwithout noise and the stimuli that consisted of a beep sound in noise is referred to
1Legal issues regarding property rights were not consolidated with the owners of the videos.
2http://clas.mq.edu.au/speech/acoustics/basic_acoustics/basic_
acoustics.html
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Methods and Materials
21
as stimuliwith noise.
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the presentation of the auditory stimuli types. A1 (top box)
shows the conditions in which of the ears the beep sound can be heard. A2
(bottom left) shows how much a stimulus is sent to the left and right ears
(panning in percentage). B1 (Second top box) and B2 (bottom right) shows
panning values of and conditions of each stimulus with noise. Pictures
labeled for non-commercial use obtained from: https://visualpharm.com.
Experimental Procedure
The experiment was carried out in a 14 square meter room with uncontrolled lighting
conditions. Each participant was seated approximately 50-60 cm away from the PC
monitor, and approximately 40-50 cm away from the Eye Tribe tracker. Before start, an
initial calibration was performed3. To ensure the quality of the pupillary measurements,
3The Eye Tribes own calibration procedure. http://theeyetribe.com/dev.theeyetribe.
==PAGE:36==
22
Pupillary Response and Auditory Stimuli in Noise
a minimum score of ‘perfect’ was obtained before the start of the experiment. The
experiment took approximately 20-25 minutes in total to complete.
The main task for participants was to listen to each auditory stimulus and then provide
a keyboard response (left arrow key or right arrow key), which indicated the ear that
the stimulus was registered.
Due to the duration of the entire experiment, it was decided to divide the experiment
into two parts with a 5 minute break in between. In the ﬁrst part of the experiment the
participants only listened to the stimuliwithout noise. In the second part, the participants
only listened to the stimuliwith noise.
The experiment was constructed in PsychoPy and consisted of ﬁve routines. The ex-
periment sequence can be seen on Figure 4.2. The ﬁrst routine served as a brief in-
troduction to the experiment and then followed by a one second routine, where the
baseline diameter was measured. The next routine presented the stimuli and captured
the user’s key response. The last routine notiﬁed the user that the experiment was com-
pleted. Each part of the experiment consisted of three rounds of two (left, right) x three
conditioned hearing sets, a total of 36 rounds.
At the start of each trial, a ﬁxation dash appeared for one second. Hereafter, the user
was presented with a stimulus. Each stimulus lasted 0.5 seconds, followed by a 3.5
seconds delay, where the user was prompted for a left or right response.
Figure 4.2: The test procedure of the experiment Pupil Response and Auditory Stim-
uli. Each round begins with an explanation of the procedure (Introduction).
Each round starts with a delay of 1 second (Baseline), followed by a pre-
sentation of a stimulus and a keyboard respond capturing phase (Target
Onset & Response). The target onset & response phase lasted 4 seconds
in total. The pupillary response was captured for each round of the test,
starting at beginning of the baseline phase and ended after target onset &
response phase.
Data Acquisition
For processing outliers, a mean and standard deviation method, with a threshold of 3,
was applied onto the dataset. To reduce the inﬂuence of possible outliers, each pupil
com/dev.theeyetribe.com/general/index.html
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Results
23
trace was down sampled with an interval of 100 milliseconds. The output data con-
sisted of two separated groups, pupillary responses and subjects’ keyboard responses.
Furthermore, an analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied in relation to the subject’s
reaction time and performance in response phase.
4.2
Results
Table 4.1 shows the measurements of the pupillary response that was inﬂuenced by the
stimuliwithout noise and stimuliwith noise. The average pupillary response in the ﬁrst second,
before stimuli onset, was used as baseline diameter. The baseline diameter in the ﬁrst
part of the experiment was average 24.91 pixels. The baseline diameter was average 26
pixels in the second part of the experiment. The average latency of peak dilation was
longer while the participants listened to the stimuliwith noise, 1.44 seconds, compared to
when the participants listened to stimuliwithout noise, 1.18 seconds. The peak dilation that
was inﬂuenced by the stimuliwithout noise and stimuliwith noise were average 2.27 pixels
and average 2.57 pixels, respectively. The differences in pupillary response can also be
seen on Figure 4.3.
Stimuliwithout noise
stimuliwith noise
M
SD
M
SD
Baseline (pixels)
24.91
5.10
26.00
5.40
Mean Dilation (pixels)
0.38
1.70
0.57
1.85
Peak Dilation (pixels)
2.27
1.89
2.57
1.85
Latency of Peak Dilation (sec)
1.44
0.85
1.18
0.74
Table 4.1: Descriptive statistics of the pupil measure of all participants. Mean dilation
and Peak dilation calculated relative to the mean baseline diameter of each
stimuli condition across all participants. Latency of the peak dilation was
calculated relative to the start of each round.
Based on the average reaction time (from the ﬁnish of each stimulus to the registration
of a key input), the results indicated that the mean reaction time across the stimuli types
was 0.29 seconds longer when the participants listened to the stimuliwith noise compared
to when the participants listened to the stimuliwithout noise, see Figure 4.4.
A two-way ANOVA was conducted on a sample of eight participants. Based on the
data, there was a signiﬁcant interaction between the effects of different stimuli types
and the reaction time, which yieled F(2, 36) = 55.55; p < 0.05, se Table 4.2. An-
other ANOVA model was conducted, where the noise conditions were compared with
the subject’s performance, whether they had answered correctly or incorrectly, which
yielded F(2, 356) = 18.35; p < 0.05, se Table 4.3. In both ANOVAs, it was observed
==PAGE:38==
24
Pupillary Response and Auditory Stimuli in Noise
Figure 4.3: Mean pupillary response in relation to the auditory stimuli and noise con-
ditions (pink is stimuliwithout noise and blue is stimuliwith noise). The Y-axis
represents the normalized pupil size from 0 (smallest) to 1 (largest). The
X-axis represents the duration of each pupil trace, starts at the beginning
of the baseline phase and ends at the end of target onset and respond phase.
Green line indicates the start of each stimulus, red line indicates the end of
each stimulus. The shaded area represents the standard error of the mean.
that the effect of which ear a stimulus was registered and the panning values were not
statistically signiﬁcant.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Discussion and Conclusion
25
Figure 4.4: Mean reaction time when responding to the two types of stimuli. Blue
represents the mean reaction time when a wrong key response was made.
Green represents the mean reaction time when a correct key response was
made.
Dependent Variable:
Reaction Time
Source
Type II
Sum of Squares
Degree of
Freedom
F
Sig.
Auditory Stimuli
(with noise or without noise)
16.70
2
55.55
1.00e-21
Stimuli Output Ear
(left or right)
0.020
1
0.138
0.711
Audio Balance
0.12
1
0.81
0.37
Residual
53.52
356
NaN
NaN
Table 4.2: The actual results of the two-way ANOVA to determine the main effect and
the interaction effect is statistically signiﬁcant. A p-value of 0.05 was con-
sidered signiﬁcant. The dependent variable is the reaction time (duration of
a user’s key response) and the independent variables are the stimuli types
(Auditory Stimuli), which ear the stimuli was presented (Stimuli Output
Ear) and the Audio Panning value (Audio Balance). There is no statisti-
cally signiﬁcant difference in reaction time between stimuli output ear (p
=0.71) and in between the panning values (p=0.369). There is a statistically
signiﬁcant difference in reaction time between the auditory stimuli types
(p<0.05).
4.3
Discussion and Conclusion
The results of this experiment indicated that when the quality of auditory signals was
reduced, the listening effort increased. Similar to other studies [24, 13], when the
==PAGE:40==
26
Pupillary Response and Auditory Stimuli in Noise
Dependent Variable:
Performance
Source
Type II
Sum of Squares
Degree of
Freedom
F
Sig.
Auditory Stimuli
(with noise or without noise)
18.35
2
72.22
4.75e-27
Stimuli Output Ear
(left or right)
0.003
1
0.02
0.88
Audio Balance
0.40
1
3.17
0.08
Residual
45.234
356
NaN
NaN
Table 4.3: The actual results of the two-way ANOVA to determine the main effect and
the interaction effect is statistically signiﬁcant. A p-value of 0.05 was con-
sidered signiﬁcant. The dependent variable is the user performance (accu-
racy of the user’s key response) and the independent variables are the stim-
uli types (Auditory Stimuli), which ear the stimuli was presented (Stimuli
Output Ear) and the Audio Panning value (Audio Balance). There is no sta-
tistically signiﬁcant difference in reaction time between stimuli output ear
(p =0.88) and in between the panning values (p=0.08). There is a statis-
tically signiﬁcant difference in reaction time between the auditory stimuli
types (p<0.05).
participants listened to the stimuliwith noise, the pupillary response was larger compared
to when participants listened to the stimuliwithout noise. The results also indicated that the
subjects’ performance were also affected by the stimuli type, as it took longer time for
the subjects to decide and at the same time, the accuracy also decreased, see Figure 4.5.
Furthermore, in a study, conducted by Sarampalis et al. [30], they conﬁrmed that noise
reduction algorithms also reduce the listening effort.
Figure 4.5: Number of miss vs. correct key responses across stimuli types.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Discussion and Conclusion
27
In this experiment a trafﬁc noise was used to produce the stimuliwith noise. A white
noise could have been a better choice, as the white noise has a more constant intensity
compared to the trafﬁc noise example. Depending on the duration of the stimuli, if
the noise intensity varied within each stimulus, it could have affected the listening
experience differently and led to different pupillary responses. However, since each
stimulus lasted only 0.5 sec, the difference between using white noise and trafﬁc noise
was at minimal. Future measurement needs to be done in relation to stimuli in white
noise.
Compared to the experiments in Chapter 3, a randomization was implemented within
each part of the experiment (part 1 and part 2). This might have had an inﬂuence on
the initial baseline diameter differences, as it was observed that the baseline diameter
during the test with stimuliwithout noise was 1.09 pixels larger compared to the baseline
in the test with stimuliwithout noise. An experiment can be redesigned by implementing a
randomization between the two types of stimuli.
During the test, it was also observed that the users sometimes pressed the arrow buttons
while a stimulus was being played (within 0.5 seconds). This have resulted in missing
data in keyboard responses, which could have had an inﬂuence on the accuracy. In
future experiments, it can be considered to remove boundary, and allow subjects to
provide a keyboard input at the beginning when they hear the stimuli.
Based on the knowledge that was gained from the ﬁrst two pilot experiments, the third
experiment was conducted for the purpose of observing pupillary response in relation
to auditory stimuli in noise. The experiment successfully demonstrated a correlation
between the pupillary response and the variation of task complexity.
==PAGE:42==
28
Pupillary Response and Auditory Stimuli in Noise
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Speech Perception in Noise
The experiment presented in chapter 4 showed that using Eye Tribe eye tracker, there is
a strong correlation between the cognitive effort and pupillary responses. Despite of the
minor design issues in each experiment, the used techniques have laid the groundwork
for the experiment that will be presented in this chapter.
This experiment is based on the research produced by Zekveld et al. [24]. When
designing the experiment, it was realized that due to limitations in time and resources,
it was not possible to reproduce the exact experiment performed by Zekveld et al.
Therefore, the method was adjusted to ﬁt this project.
Besides the differences in use of eye tracker, the stimuli in this experiment were not
created in the same way as in Zekveld et al. Instead, it was decided to create the stimuli
by calculating the RMS value of each stimuli, and then based on a range of deﬁned
SNR, a white noise was matched with each stimulus. In this experiment, the RMS
value is measured in decibel (dB) and a LIX Readability Formula [31] was used to
uphold the complexity of the sentences.
The aim of this chapter is to investigate the inﬂuence of sentence intelligibility on the
pupillary responses during listening using the Eye Tribe tracker. It is assumed that
when the function of intelligibility decreases, an increase in pupil diameter will be
observed.
==PAGE:44==
30
Speech Perception in Noise
5.1
Methods and Materials
Participant
Thirteen participants (six women and seven men) volunteered in this experiment. Their
ages ranged from 22 to 28 years, with a mean of 25 years (SD = 2.3 years). All partic-
ipants were native Danish speakers and have English as second language. Five of the
participants claimed that they had <5% hearing loss on one ear, however, none of them
had medical records supporting the hearing loss. One participant was diagnosed with
dyslexia and three participants used contact lenses during the experiment. None of the
participants reported history of neurological diseases. A verbal consent was presented
to the participants which they agreed to if their data was used anonymously.
Materials The eye data was captured using the Eye Tribe device, a PC-based system,
a PC 27-inch monitor (resolution 2560 x 1440), and a pair of headsets (Logitech G633
Artemis Spectrum 7.1 Surround Sound), see Appendix B in more detail.
In order to increase the movability of the experiment, the Eye Tribe tracker was attached
to a laptop using a couple of rubber bands, see Figure A.8 in more detail.
Stimuli
A total of 48 English sentences were extracted from podcasts that were published by
Manythings.org. The length of the sentences ranged from 5-15 words with an aver-
age of 9 words (SD = 2.4 words). Their grammatical and syntactical structure were
relatively simple. The average complexity score (LIX) was 23.8 (SD=8.3). The mean
duration of the sentences was 4.4 seconds, ranged 3 to 6 seconds. 28 of the sentences
were spoken by a female and 20 of the sentences were spoken by a male. Examples of
the sentences are shown below:
• Calories are a measure of energy in food
• There are about two hundred different viruses that cause the common cold
• A major tsunami happens only once every ten years
Sentence in Noise
There were used twelve sentences without noise (neutral) and four times each SNR
ratio of sentences with additional white noise. Then the sentences were classiﬁed into
four noise conditions: neutral, easy, medium, and hard, see Table 5.1.
There were two main steps to obtain the deﬁned SNRs. First step, Audacity was used
to measure the RMS value of each sentence. See Table A.1 for each of the sentence’s
RMS measurement. Second step, based on the RMS value of the given sentence, a
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Methods and Materials
31
Neutral
Easy
Medium
Hard
Original Condition
0dB
-1dB
-2dB
-5dB
-6dB
-7dB
-9dB
-10dB
-11dB
Table 5.1: Represents the number of sentences, that were created for this experiment,
divided into four noise conditions; twelve sentences in original condition
(neutral), twelve sentences with low level of noise (easy), twelve sentences
with medium level of noise (medium), and twelve sentences in high level of
noise (hard).
white noise was applied onto the waveform to match each deﬁned SNRs. For each
sentence, the silent periods before and after each sentence waveform were discarded,
but the silent period in between words were kept in the measurement. See Figure A.4
and A.5.
Performance Rating
After each trial, the participant’s performance was evaluated based on two factors, their
own performance rating of the preceding trial and the number of words that were re-
peated correctly. The personal rating scale ranged from 1 to 3, where 1 was poor
performance, 2 was okay performance, and 3 was perfect performance. The accuracy
rating ranged from 1 to 3, where 1 was 0-33% accuracy, 2 was 34-66% accuracy and 3
was 67-100% accuracy. The ﬁnal performance score was based on the average of the
given two factors.
Failed
Accepted
Good
Very Good
Perfect
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Table 5.2: Performance score scale
Experimental Procedure
The experiment was performed in a quiet room, with a consistent luminance level.
Each participant was asked to sit approximately 30-40 cm away from the laptop and
the distance from eyes to the Eye Tribe tracker was approximately 50-60 cm. Before
start, an initial calibration was performed, where a minimum score of ‘perfect’ was
obtained1.
The experiment consisted of a total of 48 trials (48 sentences). At each trial start, a
ﬁxation star appeared in the center of the screen and following a 3 second delay the
participant was presented with a sentence stimulus. 7 seconds later, the participant
was asked to orally reproduce the sentence within the next 7 seconds. Immediately
1The Eye Tribes own calibration procedure. http://theeyetribe.com/dev.theeyetribe.
com/dev.theeyetribe.com/general/index.html
==PAGE:46==
32
Speech Perception in Noise
after, the participant was then instructed to rate his/her performance. Then the next
trial procedure was initiated. Between sentences, the participant was able to pause
the experiment if a small break was needed. The experiment was developed using
PsychoPy and the work-ﬂow can be seen in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Speech perception in noise experiment procedure. Each trial started with
a 3 second ﬁxation phase where baseline diameter was captured. Seven
seconds after the ﬁxation phase a sentence was presented (in either one
of the noise conditions (top ﬁgure)). Hereafter, the user’s response was
captured during the response phase, followed by the user’s score input. The
icons used in the ﬁgure were labeled for non-commercial use and obtained
from: www.thenounproject.com.
Due to the length of the experiment and to ensure the quality of the dataset, it was
decided to divide the experiment into four sub sessions. Each part consisted of 12
trials, which contained four sentences of each condition. The sequence of the trials
was randomly combined. A sub session lasted approximately 17-25 min.
Data Acquisition
To capture the pupillary responses, a simple recording procedure was used.
Each
recording started at the beginning of the ﬁxation phase and ended after the response
phase. The total length of each recording was 17 seconds, which corresponds to ap-
proximately 510 data points. For processing outliers, a mean and standard deviation
method, with a threshold of 3, was applied onto the dataset. Each pupil trace was
averaged with an interval of 100 milliseconds.
To calculate the pupil dilation responses each dataset was divided into three main
phases, baseline, stimulus, and response. The baseline phase consisted of the ﬁrst
three seconds of the trial. The stimulus phase was the following seven seconds of the
trial. The response phase consisted of the ﬁnal seven seconds of each trial. The relative
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Results
33
pupillary changes in stimulus and response phases were compared to the mean of the
baseline pupil diameter. Furthermore, a two-way ANOVA analysis was conducted to
examine the effects of noise level, pupillary response, subject performance, and eye
blinks.
5.2
Results
Neutral
Easy
Medium
Hard
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
Baseline Pupil
diameter (pixels)
25.19
5.76
25.05
6.16
25.34
5.74
25.26
5.43
A
Mean dilation
(pixels)
0.81
1.60
1.84
2.26
1.69
2.17
2.08
2.23
Peak Dilation
(pixels)
3.09
2.83
4.18
3.63
3.96
2.57
4.32
2.40
Latency of Peak
Dilation (sec)
7.36
3.61
7.22
3.66
6.87
3.82
6.78
3.62
B
Mean dilation
(pixels)
0.80
2.64
1.89
2.84
1.39
2.39
1.48
2.32
Peak Dilation
(pixels)
3.49
2.56
4.61
3.38
3.99
3.05
4.12
2.63
Latency of Peak
Dilation (sec)
4.02
2.96
5.17
3.7
4.71
2.85
4.87
2.56
Table 5.3: Descriptive statistics of the pupil measure. The results are divided into two
parts; listening to sentences (A) and repeating the sentences (B). Mean dila-
tion and peak dilation were calculated relative to the baseline diameter. La-
tency of peak dilation was relative to the duration of the Fixation phase. The
pupil measures are grouped by noise conditions (Neutral, Easy, Medium,
Hard).
Table 5.3 shows the descriptive statistics of the experiment. The baseline diameters
are categorized based on the four noise conditions; Neutral, Easy, Medium and Hard.
The average baseline diameter across all noise conditions was 25.21 pixels (SD = 0.12
pixels). The pupillary responses were calculated within each noise condition and then
grouped by A or B phases. The A phase was the interval where the subjects were
listening to the speeches in different noise conditions and the B phase consisted of the
interval where the subjects reported the answer.
In phase A the mean pupil dilation was largest when subjects listened to speeches
under the noisiest condition (hard). The smallest mean pupil dilation was observed
when subjects listened to speeches under neutral condition (without noise). In phase B,
it was observed that the mean pupil dilation was largest, 1.89 pixels (SD = 2.84 pixels),
==PAGE:48==
34
Speech Perception in Noise
when subjects responded to speeches under easy noise condition. The smallest pupil
dilation was observed when subjects responded to speeches under neutral condition,
0.80 pixels (SD = 2.63 pixels).
The pupillary responses under each condition are reported in Figure 5.2 where each
solid line represents the average of the pupillary response of each noise condition.
Each line was plotted by subtracting the average baseline diameter of each condition,
which is why each line starts at 0 - the start of each speech.
Figure 5.2: Average subjective performance score grouped by noise conditions; Neu-
tral (grey), Easy (green), Medium (orange), and Hard (red).
The conducted ANOVAs indicated signiﬁcant effects of noise condition on the total
pupil response, in both phase A and B, and on the subjects’ performances and number
of eye blinks, see Table 5.4, Table 5.5 and Table 5.6. The subjects’ performances
differed between noise conditions, this can be seen in Figure 5.2.
The effect on the pupillary response was statistically signiﬁcant F[4, 553] = 3.19; p
=0.013. The effect on subjects’ performances was F[4, 554] = 176.27; p = 2.70e-97 and
the effect on eye blinks was F[4,553]= 200.83; p = 4.0e-6. Additionally, it was found
that the word count had an effect on the total pupillary responses, yielding F[1,553]=
30.32; p = 0.006, however, compared to subjects’ performances and eye blinks, the
effects were statistically insigniﬁcant, F[1,554]= 0.46; p> 0.1 and F[1,553]=4.34; p
>0.1, respectively.
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Discussion and Conclusion
35
Dependent variable:
Total Pupillary response
Source
Type II Sum of Squares
Degree of freedom
F
Sig.
Noise Level
51.11
4
3.19
0.01
Performance score
29.11
1
7.27
0.01
LIX Score
0.11
1
0.03
0.87
Words Count
30.32
1
7.58
0.01
Residual
2132.92
553.0
Table 5.4: A two-way ANOVA, a p-value of 0.05 was considered signiﬁcant. The de-
pendent variable is the total pupillary response (during listening and repeat-
ing phase) and the independent variables are the speeches in different noise
level, the subjective performance rating (performance score), the complex-
ity of each sentence (LIX score), number of words in each sentence (word
counts). There is no statistically signiﬁcant difference in pupillary response
between the complexity of the sentences (p =0.87). There is a statistically
signiﬁcant difference in reaction time between the noise levels (p<0.01), be-
tween the number of word counts (p=0.01), and between the performance
score (p=0.01).
5.3
Discussion and Conclusion
To avoid confusion in this section, noise condition neutral (without additional noise) is
refereed as noise conditionneutral, easy (SNR: 0, -1, -2) is refereed as noise conditioneasy,
medium (SNR: -5, -6, -7) is refereed as noise conditionmedium, and hard (SNR: -9, -10,
-11) is refereed as noise conditionhard.
Listening Testing Phase A
Similar to Zekveld et al. and Kramer et al. studies [24, 32], the results from this
experiment indicated that the pupil dilation was largest while subjects were listen-
ing to speeches in the most challenging environment, noise conditionhard, and was
smallest when subjects were listening to speeches in the easiest environment, noise
conditionneutral. However, the pupil response between noise conditionneutral and noise
conditioneasy did not differ from each other. It seemed that the subjects were able
to hear the speeches almost equally well in both conditions, conditionneutral and noise
conditioneasy. This means that the pupillary response did not systematically increase as
the function of speech intelligibility decreased.
During the listening phase, some minor technical issues were observed, and could have
had a minor effect on the performance. Out of 48 speeches, two or three were played
with a higher pitch voice, as all of the subjects have reported.
Memory Testing Phase B
==PAGE:50==
36
Speech Perception in Noise
Dependent variable:
Performance Score
Source
Type II Sum of Squares
Degree of Freedom
F
Sig.
Noise Level
232.57
4
176.27
2.70e-97
LIX Score
0.09
1
0.27
0.60
Words Count
0.46
1
1.39
0.23
Residual
182.74
554
NaN
NaN
Table 5.5: A two-way ANOVA, a p-value of 0.05 was considered signiﬁcant. The de-
pendent variable is the performance score and the independent variables are
the speeches in different noise level, the complexity of each sentence (LIX
score), and the number of words in each sentence (word counts). There is
no statistically signiﬁcant difference in performance score between the com-
plexity of the sentences (p =0.87) and between the word counts (p=0.23).
There is a statistically signiﬁcant difference in performance score between
the noise levels (p<0.01).
Based on the results, each subject’s sentence intelligibility was heavily affected by the
noise conditions, and this is a critical fact, especially when testing subjects’ capability
in working memory. Some subjects have additionally reported that they could not hear
anything in noise conditionhard or in noise conditionmedium, which could have led to an
earlier decline in pupil diameter. They may just have given up too quickly.
Furthermore, the results were biased by the number of words in each speech and the
LIX score of each sentence. Based on the results, the pupil dilation was largest when
subjects were reproducing speeches of noise conditioneasy, and the smallest pupil dila-
tion was when subjects were reproducing speeches of noise conditionneutral. Despite the
inﬂuence in noise conditions, in noise conditioneasy the average word count was 9.25
(SD = 2.07) and in noise conditionneutral the average words count was 7.25 (SD=1.41).
The average LIX score of noise conditioneasy and noise conditionneutral were 26.41 (SD
= 9.36) and 25.16 (SD = 6.41) respectively. These results support the ﬁndings in
Beatty’s TEPR review [10] and align with the theory of “the magical number seven
plus or minus two”[33], which was also recognized among the test subjects.
Experiment Design
Generally, there are still improvements that could be implemented in this experiment.
The performance rating system was based on a subjective and not an objective measure.
Due to the time pressure when collecting data, the objective measurement was not
calculated based on the accuracy scale, as suggested in method section. Instead each
speech response should have been recorded and reviewed afterwards. This means that
an additional hour, approximately, will be needed to process the performance score
in future experiments. Some subjects reported that they might have a minor hearing
loss on one ear. This could also have had an impact on the pupillary response in noise
conditions. This can be avoided by performing a hearing test for each subject, to make
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Discussion and Conclusion
37
Dependent variable:
Eye Blinks
Source
Type II Sum of Squares
Degree of Freedom
F
Sig.
Noise Level
200.84
4
7.80
4.01e-6
Performance Score
29.55
1
4.59
0.03
LIX Score
1.84
1
0.29
0.59
Words Count
4.34
1
0.67
0.41
Residual
3559.20
553
Table 5.6: A two-way ANOVA, a p-value of 0.05 was considered signiﬁcant. The de-
pendent variable is the number of eye blinks and the independent variables
are noise level, LIX score, performance score, and word counts. There is no
statistically signiﬁcant difference in number of eye blinks between the com-
plexity of the sentences (p =0.59) and between the word counts (p=0.41).
There is a statistically signiﬁcant difference in performance score between
the noise levels (p<0.01) and between the performance score (p=0.03).
sure their hearing loss would not affect the data. Large standard deviations between
pupils can be caused by minor head or body movements. Therefore, a chin rest are seen
to be used to minimize the inﬂuence of head movements. Also, there can be conducted
other statistical analysis of the results. Here are some of the statistical analysis that
were conducted by Zekveld et al. [24]:
• The inﬂuence of order of the test, from part 1 to part 4.
• Subject’s listening effort vs performance score.
• Baseline inﬂuenced by the noise conditions.
• Measurement of the pupillary response when listening only to white noise.
• Comparison of the pupillary responses for the correct and incorrect repeated
speeches.
• The RMS values of speeches without noise varied in this experiment (mean =
-25.75 dB, SD= 1.7 dB). In future, it could be more ideal to have a ﬁxed RMS
value across all speeches.
Also, there are many scientists that have used a chinrest in attempt to minimize the in-
ﬂuence of head movements. This should be strongly considered in future experiments.
However, the ﬁndings are still valuable compared to research conducted in-the-wild.
In that case, the user might not have a chinrest or at least not have the same kind of a
chinrest, and then the results will also be affected by unpredicted variables rather than
just the head movements.
==PAGE:52==
38
Speech Perception in Noise
In conclusion, this experiment indicated that the pupillary response did not systemati-
cally increase as the function of speech intelligibility decreased. But the noise condi-
tions did have an inﬂuence on the pupillary responses. Furthermore, a correlation was
found between the pupillary responses and the performance of repeating the speeches.
This experiment is suited for further research with other eye tracking devices.
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Discussion and Conclusion
39
Figure 5.3: Mean pupil response in relation to sentences in different noise conditions
(Neutral (grey), Easy (green), Medium (orange), Hard (red)). The Y-axis
represents the normalized pupil size from 0 to 1. The X-axis represents
the duration of each pupil trace, starts at the start of the sentence and ends
after the repeating phase. The shaded area represents the standard error of
the mean.
==PAGE:54==
40
Speech Perception in Noise
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
Pupillary Response Using
Webcam and Smartphone
In chapter 5, the speech perception in noise experiment demonstrated the correlation
between pupillary responses and speech intelligibility. In the noisiest condition, the
largest pupil dilation was observed, and when the subject listened to sentences with-
out noise, the smallest dilation was observed. In this experiment, the purpose was to
investigate whether it was possible to observe similar pupillary responses using an al-
ternative eye tracking device, such as a webcam or a smartphone (iPhone 7) under the
same conditions as presented in the speech perception in noise experiment.
6.1
Methods and Materials
Participant
One person participated this experiment. The participant was a 28 years old undergrad-
uate student with normal vision who did not have any history of neurological diseases.
The subject did not wear glasses or contact lenses during the experiment.
Materials
The experiment was performed in four different video resolutions using two video de-
vices, iPhone 7 and a laptop integrated webcam. Figure 6.1 shows the video resolutions
==PAGE:56==
42
Pupillary Response Using Webcam and Smartphone
that were performed in this experiment. All four videos were recorded with a frame
rate of 30 frames per second (FPS). In addition, a selﬁe stick was used to hold the
smartphone. The experiment was performed from a stationary PC and a PC monitor
with 2560x1440 in resolution. A desk lamp, max. 40 watt, was used to increase the
visibility of the eye pupil. See Appendix B in more detail.
Figure 6.1: A list of resolutions that was used to capture pupillary responses. The
selected webcam had a resolution of 640x480. The selected smartphone,
iPhone 7, was used to capture videos in 3 different resolutions, 720p (back
camera), 1080p (front camera), and 4K (back camera).
Stimulus
One of the stimuli from the speech perception in the noise experiment was re-used
in this experiment, for more detailed description of the stimulus design method see
chapter 5. Table 6.1 shows the stimulus that was used in this experiment. The stimulus
represents one of the speech sentence of noise conditionhard.
Stimulus
SNR (RMS)
Word count
LIX Score
Duration (sec)
This may be more trouble
than many people want
-11 dB
9
20
4
Table 6.1: Sentence was borrowed from the previous experiment, with a SNR of -
11dB. The sentence consisted of 9 words, with LIX score of 20 and was 4
secs long in duration.
Experimental Procedure
The experiment was performed in a quiet room, with a consistent luminance level. At
the start, a calibration of the Eye Tribe tracker was performed. The participant was sit-
ting approximately 45-50 cm away from the PC monitor, and the approximate distance
between eyes to Eye Tribe tracker was 50-55 cm. The distance between the eyes and
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Methods and Materials
43
webcam or smartphone were approximately 20 cm. Figure 6.2 and 6.3 illustrate the
basic setup. The webcam and the smartphone were held in a position, where it did not
interfere with the view of the Eye Tribe tracker. Due to reﬂections of the light bulb, it
was not ideal to place the lamp in front of the participant. The most ideal position for
the lamp was to the left or right side of the participant.
Figure 6.2: Illustration of how pupillary
response was captured simul-
taneously with the Eye Tribe
tracker and the webcam.
Figure 6.3: Illustration of how pupillary
response was captured simul-
taneously with the Eye Tribe
tracker and the smartphone.
Each recording consisted of a single recycle of the stimulus, a 3 seconds delay, fol-
lowed by the speech, see Figure 6.4. The recordings were performed simultaneously
between the Eye Tribe tracker, the webcam, and between the Eye Tribe tracker and the
iPhone 7. The selected stimulus was used four times, once in each of the four recording
resolutions.
Figure 6.4: The test procedure of experiment speech perception in noise using web-
cam and smartphone. It begins with a 3 seconds baseline capturing phase
and followed by a presentation of a sentence. The total duration was 10
seconds.
Data Acquisition
For every video recording, every third frame was extracted for measurement of the
pupil diameter. Every recording consisted of 100 pupillary images. Each image was
then examined by using a red, green, and blue color model (RGB), a built-in feature of
==PAGE:58==
44
Pupillary Response Using Webcam and Smartphone
Paint.net. Varying the image color increased the visibility of the pupil size, which made
it easier to measure the diameter of the pupil. The pupil size was obtained by applying
an eclipse shaded ﬁgure onto the pupil. Figure A.3 demonstrates the pupillary images
before and after RGB was changed.
To compare the pupillary responses between the Eye Tribe tracker and the selected eye
tracking devices, a Pearson Correlation Coefﬁcient was calculated based on normalized
measurements between the Eye Tribe, the webcam, and the smartphone.
Figure 6.5: Example of how each pupil diameter was measured after the color of each
picture was modiﬁed. The blue line is the horizontal diameter of the pupil,
the white line is the vertical diameter of the pupil.
6.2
Results
In this experiment, the pupillary data from Eye Tribe tracker was not resampled to 100
milliseconds (an average pupil size of three frames), but instead, the pupil size was
based on the readings of every third image. This process was additionally applied to
the pupil readings from using the webcam and the smartphone.
Compared to the results from the webcam and iPhone 7, the baseline diameter varied
between recordings, which was mostly inﬂuenced by the recording resolutions and the
distance between the camera and the eyes which can therefore not be compared across
devices.
The Pearson Correlation Coefﬁcients across eye tracking devices showed the largest
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Results
45
Pearson Correlation Coefﬁcients
Eye Tribe
r=-0.39, p=6.19e-5
Webcam 0.3KP
Eye Tribe
r=0.59, p=4.20e-11
iPhone 720p
Eye Tribe
r=0.81, p =4.38e-24
iPhone 1080p
Eye Tribe
r= 0.74, p=1.41e-18
iPhone 4k
Table 6.2: Pearson correlation Coefﬁcient was calculated across devices within each
group.
positive correlation between the data that were simultaneously recorded by the Eye
Tribe tracker and the recording with the iPhone 7 with a resolution of 1080p, see Table
6.2. Figure 6.6 shows the mean pupil response extracted from the Eye Tribe Tracker
and iPhone with 1080p.
Figure 6.6: Figure illustrates the normalized pupil trace of the speech perception in
noise using Eye Tribe tracker (blue) and iPhone 7 1080p (orange). X-
axis represents the duration of each pupil trace and Y-axis represents the
normalized pupil size. Pearson Correlation Coefﬁcient between the two
pupillary response (r= 0.81, p =4.38e-24).
A negative, weak correlation was found between the pupillary measure between Eye
Tribe Tracker and the webcam. Figure 6.7 shows the mean pupil response extracted
from the Eye Tribe Tracker and the webcam.
==PAGE:60==
46
Pupillary Response Using Webcam and Smartphone
Figure 6.7: Figure illustrates the normalized pupil trace of the speech perception in
noise using Eye Tribe tracker(blue) and webcam (orange). X-axis repre-
sents the duration of each pupil trace and Y-axis represents the normalized
pupil size. Pearson Correlation Coefﬁcient between the two pupillary re-
sponse (r=-0.39, p =6.19e-5).
6.3
Discussion and Conclusion
The Pearson correlation coefﬁcient across recording resolutions indicated, as the record-
ing resolution increased, the more similar the pupil readings were to the Eye Tribe
tracker. However, the recording with 4K resolution had a smaller correlation value
compared to the lower resolution recording, 1080p. This outcome was not as expected.
Recording phase
During the recording phases, neither the webcam nor the smartphone was ﬁxed at a
stable position, which could have been affected by minor body movements or small vi-
brations with the selﬁe stick. Such movements are critical to the quality of the pupillary
readings, especially when measuring differences in millimeters. Therefore, a chinrest
and more stable smartphone stick are strongly recommended for future researches like
this. When processing the pupillary images, it was observed that the 10 to 15 images
varied in brightness and sharpness compared to the rest of the images. This was largely
caused by the autofocus (AF) and autoe xposure (AE) feature. The inﬂuence of the
AF/AE feature could have been avoided by a single tap on the screen, but this was not
considered before the recordings were ﬁnished. This feature can be simply controlled
by a single tap on the screen before the recordings.
Image processing
When processing the pupillary images, the RGB values were changed to enhance the
visibility of the pupils across recordings. The main reason was that different record-
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Discussion and Conclusion
47
ings yielded different brightness, color, and sharpness of the images. Furthermore, the
image editing software, Paint.net, did not have the option allowing for saving the se-
lected RGB preferences for future reuse, which made it difﬁcult to reproduce the RGB
settings. The measurement of the pupillary response varied within each recording (we-
bcam and smartphone). The process of manually detecting and measuring the pupils
were biased by a subjective judgement. When changing the RGB value preferences on
each image, the contrasts between the pupil and the iris became unclear, which made it
hard to determine the border between the pupil and the iris. Therefore, the pupillary re-
sponse was inﬂuenced by the actual size and the measurement. In the future, the pupil
measurement should be based on a ﬁxed color value, making it easier to determine the
borderline between the pupil and the iris.
In conclusion, this experiment demonstrated how to measure the listening effort during
speech perception in noise. As the recording resolution increased, the Pearson Corre-
lation Coefﬁcient between the pupillary data of the Eye Tribe tracker and the iPhone
7 also increased positively. This indicates that it is possible to observe cognitive re-
lated pupillary response using an iPhone 7 (1080p). This also suggests that it is pos-
sible to obverse the same pupillary results using other smartphones or video cameras
with 1080p in resolution. These ﬁndings provide new opportunities in future TEPR
researches using other smartphones or video cameras.
==PAGE:62==
48
Pupillary Response Using Webcam and Smartphone
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7
Future Work
The experiment in the previous chapter showed promising results for using smart-
phones, with relatively large resolution, to measure cognitive related pupillary re-
sponse. However, there are still many aspects that could have a negative inﬂuence
on the quality of the results. The purpose of this chapter is to identify the potential
improvements for using smartphones as eye tracking device in measuring cognitive
load. The chapter is divided into two main sections: future software improvements and
future hardware technology.
7.1
Future Software Improvements
The results of the previous experiments indicate that improvements can be imple-
mented in future experiments to increase the efﬁciency in measuring pupil diameter
using smartphones. Instead of measuring the pupil diameter manually, a circle detec-
tion algorithm to process the pupillary images should be implemented. This solution
is particularly interesting, as it can cut down the image processing time from 1 hour
to just a few minutes. Applying this method would allow the evaluators to spend less
time on measuring the pupil size and therefore allow them to spend more time on data
analysis.
In the process of implementing the experiment of speech perception in noise using
==PAGE:64==
50
Future Work
webcam and smartphone, an open-source software (TrackEye v2.0) was examined in
relation to image processing.
However, the software failed to run, see Figure A.7, and the software seems to be
outdated. Nevertheless, one particularly interesting algorithm that should be considered
in the future is the Hough Circle Transform method1. This method uses gradient (i.e.
a vector-valued function) information to detect circle edges. Alternatively, the method
can be implemented in python, making it possible to use the method to further develop
experiments like those conducted in this thesis.
Another issue that inﬂuenced the pupillary results was the outlier processing algorithm.
It was found that measurements were affected by eye blinks, even though an outlier
algorithm was applied, see Figure A.9. This indicates that there is still room for im-
provements in relation to the method that deals with outliers.
7.2
Future Hardware Technology
The Eye Tribe tracker costs around ($200)2, which is a reasonable price compared
to other devices that were used in this thesis: an iPhone 7 ($549)3 and Dell Latitude
E7470 with integrated webcam (from $1439)4. This allows more scientists to conduct
research within a relative reasonable budget. However, compared to the popularity
of the smartphones and laptops, which almost everyone possesses today, these two
devices have huge advantage in terms of conducting eye tracking experiments with a
large number of subjects, especially in different locations. Therefore, this opportunity
should be explored further in the future.
In the previous experiments, the results indicated that a video recording resolution of
1080p had the strongest correlation to Eye Tribe tracker’s measurements. Therefore, it
is also believed that a cheaper eye tracker device can be built with some simple compo-
nents. For instance, using a SainSmart Surveillance Infrared Camera (from $21.99)5,
which supports 1080p in resolution at 30 FPS, in combination with an Arduino r3 board
Kit ($30,86)6 or a Raspberry Pi 3 Model B, 1GB Ram ($50)7. Since the Eye Tribe
tracker is based on a high-resolution infrared LED technology, similar to the camera
1http://opencv-python-tutroals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
2https://techcrunch.com/2016/01/14/the-eye-tribe-tracker-pro-offers-affordable-eye-tracking-for-199/
3https://www.apple.com/shop/buy-iphone/iphone-7
4https://www.laptopmag.com/reviews/laptops/dell-latitude-e7470
5https://www.sainsmart.com/products/infrared-night-vision-surveillance-camera-2-pcs-infrared-lights-
for-raspberry-pi
6https://www.miniinthebox.com/da/?prm=2.3.176.0
7https://raspberrypi.dk/produkt/raspberry-pi-3-model-b-1gb-ram/?src=raspberrypi
==PAGE:65==
7.2 Future Hardware Technology
51
by SainSmart, it is strongly believed that a SainSmart Surveillance Infrared Camera
could be a candidate for further research.
==PAGE:66==
52
Future Work
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The focus of this thesis was to examine cognitive load in relation to pupillary response
using an Eye Tribe tracker, an iPhone 7, and a laptop integrated webcam. Based on the
knowledge that was obtained from the literature review chapter, a total of ﬁve experi-
ments were planned and executed successfully.
The pilot experiments presented in Chapter 3 conﬁrmed the initial hypothesis that the
pupillary response was correlated to different types of visual stimuli. The experiments
contributed to identifying the technical limitations of the Eye Tribe tracker, as well
as experimental design process. Furthermore, the results from the experiments have
shown that it was possible to observe pupillary response in relation to working memory.
Based on the knowledge obtained from the two pilot experiments presented in Chapter
3, the experiment was conducted to observe pupillary response in relation to auditory
stimuli in noise. The experiment successfully demonstrated that there is a correlation
between the pupillary response and the variation of task complexity, and more impor-
tantly, it was possible to observe pupillary response differences using the Eye Tribe
tracker.
In the speech perception in noise experiment (Chapter 5), the results indicated that the
pupillary response did not systematically increase as the function of decreasing speech
intelligibility. Nevertheless, a correlation between the noise conditions, the pupillary
responses and subject’s performance was discovered.
==PAGE:68==
54
Conclusion
Based on the knowledge that was gained from Chapter 5, the last experiment success-
fully highlighted the potential of using other eye tracking devices, such as iPhone 7
(1080p), other smartphones and video cameras with 1080p in resolution, to observe
cognitive related pupillary response. However, to completely rely on smartphones or
other video cameras as eye trackers in an non-intrusive way, there is still a long way to
go.
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
Appendix - Figures and
Tables
Figure A.1: Figure illustrates the normalized pupil trace of the speech perception in
noise using Eye Tribe tracker (blue) and iPhone 7 720p (orange). X-axis
represents the duration of each pupil trace and Y-axis represents the nor-
malized pupil size. The two traces have a Pearson coefﬁcient (r=0.59,
p=4.20e-11)
==PAGE:70==
56
Appendix - Figures and Tables
Figure A.2: Figure illustrates the normalized pupil trace of the speech perception in
noise using Eye Tribe tracker (blue) and iPhone 7 4K (orange). X-axis
represents the duration of each pupil trace and Y-axis represents the nor-
malized pupil size. The two traces have a Pearson coefﬁcient (r= 0.74,
p=1.41e-18).
Figure A.3: Illustrates the pupillary images before and after RGB was changed in dif-
ferent resolutions. Each pupillary image is 250x150 px in size. Changing
the color of each image made it easier to measure the pupil diameter.
==PAGE:71==
57
Figure A.4: RMS measurement of sentences
Figure A.5: RMS Measurement of noise level
==PAGE:72==
58
Appendix - Figures and Tables
Figure A.6: Implementation error (a)
Figure A.7: Implementation error (b)
==PAGE:73==
59
Figure A.8: The Eye Tribe tracker was attached to a laptop to increase the movability
when conducting experiments with participants.
==PAGE:74==
60
Appendix - Figures and Tables
Figure A.9: A dataset of the puillary diameter in pixel. Left ﬁgure is before processed
by outlier algorithm (A). Right ﬁgure is after processed by outlier algo-
rithm (B). Marked values (red box) are the values that were still inﬂuenced
by a eye blink.
==PAGE:75==
61
Table A.1: List of Sentences for experiment speech perception in noise (Chapter 5).
Sentences
Signal
RMS
(dB)
Noise
RMS
(dB)
SNR
(dB)
SNR
Category
Words
Count
LIX
Readability
Score
Adults generally get two to three colds a year.
-24.5
-24.5
0
easy
9
20
Bats eat huge numbers of insects including kinds that damage crops.
-26.4
-26.4
0
easy
11
38
Bats have also proved useful in the medical industry.
-26
-26
0
easy
9
31
Calories are a measure of energy in food.
-26.5
-26.5
0
easy
8
33
Carters face became very white, his entire body began shaking.
-23.7
-22.7
-1
easy
10
25
Some gardeners train tomato plants.
-23.1
-22.1
-1
easy
5
25
Exercise helps to reduce the risk of some diseases.
-25
-24
-1
easy
9
31
Experts say there is no single diet plan that works best for everyone.
-26.7
-25.7
-1
easy
13
28
He found his wife sick with fever and confusion.
-27.9
-25.9
-2
easy
9
20
He told his father about his decision one morning at breakfast.
-24
-22
-2
easy
11
38
His little log house had a single door.
-28.5
-26.5
-2
easy
8
8
you can pick the tomatoes when they are ﬁrm.
-25.9
-23.9
-2
easy
9
20
Is it bad to drink milk when you have a cold.
-24.4
-19.4
-5
medium
11
11
Many of us gain weight because of inactivity during the winter.
-25.4
-20.4
-5
medium
11
29
Many people think bats are blind but this is not true.
-27.7
-22.7
-5
medium
11
12
Most bats come out of their shelters only at nightfall.
-25.3
-20.3
-5
medium
10
30
Most bats eat insects but many feed on fruit or nectar from ﬂowers.
-28.6
-22.6
-6
medium
13
28
never to feed honey to babies less than one year old.
-26.7
-20.7
-6
medium
11
11
One kind of weight loss surgery reduces the size of the stomach.
-24.1
-18.1
-6
medium
12
37
Please dont tell your mother about your decision.
-25.6
-19.6
-6
medium
8
21
She was looking out the window and counting.
-26.1
-19.1
-7
medium
8
33
Some people are unable to lose weight through diet and exercise.
-26
-19
-7
medium
11
29
Tomatoes are good for you.
-25.2
-18.2
-7
medium
5
25
==PAGE:76==
62
Appendix - Figures and Tables
Table A.1: List of Sentences for experiment speech perception in noise (Chapter 5).
Sentences
Signal
RMS
(dB)
Noise
RMS
(dB)
SNR
(dB)
SNR
Category
Words
Count
LIX
Readability
Score
The smallest bat in the world is from Southeast Asia.
-27.1
-20.1
-7
medium
10
30
if something sounds ﬁshy it may not be true.
-20.7
-11.7
-9
hard
9
20
There are about two hundred different viruses that
cause the common cold.
-24.9
-15.9
-9
hard
12
37
Do not save plastic bags of food.
-24
-15
-9
hard
7
21
Solar water heating is used around the world.
-26.1
-17.1
-9
hard
8
20
there is never a lack of ideas about how to lose weight.
-23.7
-13.7
-10
hard
12
12
There is still no cure for the common cold.
-22.5
-12.5
-10
hard
9
9
These creatures can be found in many parts of the world.
-26.3
-16.3
-10
hard
11
20
They also help people feel more happy and peaceful.
-24.6
-14.6
-10
hard
9
20
They loved each other and were happy.
-28.8
-17.8
-11
hard
7
7
This may be more trouble than many people want.
-25.2
-14.2
-11
hard
9
20
to lose weight you must use or burn off more calories than you take in.
-26.2
-15.2
-11
hard
15
22
you must burn more calories than you take in no matter what you eat.
-25.4
-14.4
-11
hard
14
21
We cannot conﬁrm those ideas.
-26.6
none
5
25
They need a warm climate.
-27.7
none
5
25
Make sure they get a good amount of light and water.
-25.9
none
11
11
play cat and mouse with someone.
-23.3
none
6
21
where does one get started.
-24.9
none
5
25
how much exercise do you need to do.
-27.5
none
8
21
Experts say it is easier than you think.
-28.1
none
8
21
some activity is better than none.
-25.2
none
6
21
people need to exercise thirty minutes each day.
-28
none
8
33
experts say people should choose physical activities.
-27.9
none
7
38
==PAGE:77==
63
Table A.1: List of Sentences for experiment speech perception in noise (Chapter 5).
Sentences
Signal
RMS
(dB)
Noise
RMS
(dB)
SNR
(dB)
SNR
Category
Words
Count
LIX
Readability
Score
a major tsunami happens only once every ten years.
-26.1
none
9
31
some move at over eight hundred kilometers an hour.
-26.1
none
9
30
==PAGE:78==
64
Appendix - Figures and Tables
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX B
Appendix - Hardware and
Software
B.1
List of Hardware
Eye Tribe Tracker
Connection: USB 3.0 Superspeed
Sampling rate: 30 Hz and 60 Hz mode
Operating range: 45 cm – 75 cm
Tripod
Software development kit: TheEyeTribeSDK-0.9.77-x86.exe
http://theeyetribe.com/theeyetribe.com/about/index.html
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Eye_Tribe
Dell Laptop
Laptop model: Dell Latitude E7470
Processor: Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-6300U CPU @ 2.40GHz, 2501 Mhz, 2 Core(s), 4
Logical Processor(s)
Memory: 8.00 GB
Storage: 256 GB (Intel SSDSCKKF256H6 SATA 256GB)
Display: Intel(R) HD Graphics 520
==PAGE:80==
66
Appendix - Hardware and Software
Resolution: 1920 x 1080 x 60 hertz
Bits/Pixel: 32
OS name: Microsoft Windows 10 Pro
Integrated Webcam Hardware ID: USB VID 0BDA PID 57C3 REV 5806 MI00
Desktop
Processor: Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-4690 CPU @ 3.5GHz, 3501Mhz, 4 Core(s)
Memory: 8.00 GB
System type: 64-bit operating system, x64-based processor
OS: Windows 10 Pro version 10.0.16299 Build 16299
Graphic: NAVIDA GeForce GTX 780
Storage: 256GB SSD
Dell Ultrasharp monitor - 27"
Widescreen 16:9
Resolution: 2560x1440, 60 Hz
Dimension: 61.27cm x 20.5 cm x 40.99cm
iPhone 7
Capacity: 32 GB
Screen: 4.7” Retina HD display, 1334x750 pixel resolution at 326ppi
Chip: A10 Fusion Chip with 64-bit architecture, Embedded M10 motion coprocessor
Camera: 12 MP, digital zoom up to 5x
Video Recording:
4K video at 30 fps
1080p HD at 30 fps
1080p HD at 60 fps
720p HD at 30 fps
FaceTime camera (front camera): 7MP, 1080p HD video recording.
OS: 11.1.2 (15B202)
Logitech G633 Artemis Spectrum RGB 7.1 Surround
USB Protocol: USB 2.0
Sensitivity: 107dB SPL/mW
Frequency Response: 20 Hz to 20 kHz
==PAGE:81==
B.2 List of Software Solutions
67
B.2
List of Software Solutions
PeyeTribe
GitHub repository:https://github.com/baekgaard/peyetribe
Bækgaard, P. “Simple python interface to the Eye Tribe eye tracker" 2014
Python 2.7
Version release: 2.7.13
Development tool: Spyder 3.1.4
Libraries: matplotlib, statsmodels, glob, pandas, scipy, numpy, csv, cv2, psychopy,
time, peyetribe.
Anaconda
Version release: 5.0.1
https://www.anaconda.com/download/
PsychoPy
Version release: 1.85.4
http://www.psychopy.org/
Audacity
Version release: 2.2.1
https://www.audacityteam.org/
Paint.NET
Version release: 4.0.21
https://www.getpaint.net/
Free Video to JPG Converter
Version release: 5.0.101.201
https://www.dvdvideosoft.com/products/dvd/Free-Video-to-JPG-Converter.
htm
==PAGE:82==
68
Appendix - Hardware and Software
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX C
Appendix - Overview of
Experiment Solutions
Figure C.1: Experiment 1. The experiment can be run from script ﬁle "optag.py". The
data statistics can be exported from ﬁle "statistics of data.py".
==PAGE:84==
70
Appendix - Overview of Experiment Solutions
Figure C.2: Experiment 2. The experiment can be run from script ﬁle "LangExp.py".
The data analysis can be run from ﬁle "statsv4.py"
Figure C.3: Experiment 3. The experiment can be run from script ﬁles "exp2.9.1.py"
for part 1 and "exp2.9.2.py for part 2".
The data analysis can be
run from ﬁles "2.9.0_Anova.py", "2.9.0_error_vs_reactiontime.py", and
"2.9_Noise_vs_noNoise.py".
==PAGE:85==
71
Figure C.4: Experiment 4.
The experiment can be run from script ﬁles "v3.7.0
exp.py". The data analysis can be run from ﬁles "v3.7.0 Statistics.py",
"v3.7.0 Anova.py", and "v3.7.0 calculate pupil sizes vs category.py".
Figure C.5: Experiment 5. The experiment can be run from script ﬁles "expv4.py".
The data analysis can be run from ﬁles "plots v4.0.py".
==PAGE:86==
72
Appendix - Overview of Experiment Solutions
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1] Nicholas J. Wade. Pioneers of eye movement research. I-perception, 1(2):33–68,
2010.
[2] Jeffrey J. Walczyk, Talar Tcholakian, Frank Igou, and Alexa P. Dixon. One hun-
dred years of reading research: Successes and missteps of edmund burke huey
and other pioneers. Reading Psychology, 35(7):601–621, 2014.
[3] E. H. Cameron. An experimental study of the eye-voice span in reading. guy
thomas buswell. Elementary School Journal, 21(10):792–793, 1921.
[4] E. H. Hess and J. M. Polt. Pupil size in relation to mental activity during simple
problem-solving. Science, 143(3611):1190–1192, 1964.
[5] The Neuropsychology of Attention. Springer US, 2014.
[6] Vsevolod Peysakhovich, Francois Vachon, and Frederic Dehais. The impact of
luminance on tonic and phasic pupillary responses to sustained cognitive load.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 112:40–45, 2017.
[7] J. Rajkowski, P. Kubiak, and G. Aston, Jones.
Correlations between locus
coeruleus (lc) neural activity, pupil diameter and behavior in monkey support
a role of lc in attention. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts, 19(1-3):974, 974,
1993.
[8] Mark S. Gilzenrat, Sander Nieuwenhuis, Marieke Jepma, and Jonathan D. Co-
hen. Pupil diameter tracks changes in control state predicted by the adaptive gain
theory of locus coeruleus function. Cognitive Affective and Behavioral Neuro-
science, 10(2):252–269, 2010.
==PAGE:88==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] H EGETH. Attention and effort - kahneman,d. American Journal of Psychology,
88(2):339–340, 1975.
[10] Jackson Beatty. Task-evoked pupillary responses, processing load, and the struc-
ture of processing resources. Psychological Bulletin, 91(2):276–292, 1982.
[11] SR STEINHAUER and G HAKEREM. The pupillary response in cognitive psy-
chophysiology and schizophrenia. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,
658:182–204, 1992.
[12] R F STANNERS, M COULTER, A W SWEET, and P MURPHY. The pupil-
lary response as an indicator of arousal and cognition. Motivation and Emotion,
3(4):319–340, 319–340, 1979.
[13] A. A. Zekveld, Sophia E. Kramer, and Joost M. Festen. Cognitive load during
speech perception in noise: The inﬂuence of age, hearing loss, and cognition on
the pupil response. Ear and Hearing, 32(4):498–510, 2011.
[14] Per Bækgaard, Michael Kai Petersen, and Jakob Eg Larsen. Assessing levels of
attention using low cost eye tracking. page 12, 2016.
[15] Jackson Beatty and Daniel Kahneman. Pupillary changes in two memory tasks.
Psychonomic Science, 5(10):371–372, 1966.
[16] S. Ahern and J. Beatty. Pupillary responses during information processing vary
with scholastic aptitude test scores. Science, 205(4412):1289–92, 1289–1292,
1979.
[17] Scott C. Fish and Eric Granholm. Easier tasks can have higher processing loads:
Task difﬁculty and cognitive resource limitations in schizophrenia. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 117(2):355–363, 2008.
[18] Jackson Beatty and Brennis Lucero-Wagoner. The pupillary system, chapter 6.
Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[19] James A. Kruse. Clinical methods: The history, physical, and laboratory exami-
nations. Jama: the Journal of the American Medical Association, 264(21):2808,
1990.
[20] SP Verney, E Granholm, and SP Marshall.
Pupillary responses on the visual
backward masking task reﬂect general cognitive ability. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 52(1):23–36, 2004.
[21] Minora Nakayama. Inﬂuence of blink on pupillary indices. Ieee 2006 Biomedi-
cal Circuits and Systems Conference Healthcare Technology, Biocas 2006, pages
4600300, 29–32, 2006.
[22] Minoru Nakayama and Yasutaka Shimizu. Frequency analysis of task evoked
pupillary response and eye-movement. pages 71–76, 2004.
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
[23] Zhang Guang-yuan, Cheng Bo, Feng Rui-jia, and Zhang Xi-bo.
A real-time
adaptive learning method for driver eye detection. Proceedings - Digital Image
Computing: Techniques and Applications, Dicta 2008, pages 4700035, 300–304,
2008.
[24] Adriana A. Zekveld, Sophia E. Kramer, and Joost M. Festen. Pupil response as
an indication of effortful listening: The inﬂuence of sentence intelligibility. Ear
and Hearing, 31(4):480–490, 2010.
[25] E. H. Hess and J. M. Polt. Pupil size as related to interest value of visual stimuli.
Science, 132(3423):349–350, 1960.
[26] M SCHLUROFF. Pupil responses to grammatical complexity of sentences. Brain
and Language, 17(1):133–145, 1982.
[27] T Partala and V Surakka. Pupil size variation as an indication of affective process-
ing. International Journal of Human-computer Studies, 59(1-2):185–198, 2003.
[28] Laura Leuchs, Max Schneider, Michael Czisch, and Victor I. Spoormaker. Neural
correlates of pupil dilation during human fear learning. Neuroimage, 147:186–
197, 2017.
[29] Edwin S. Dalmaijer A. Using eyetribe trackers for research 1 is the low-cost
eyetribe eye tracker any good for research? 2016.
[30] Anastasios Sarampalis, Sridhar Kalluri, Brent Edwards, and Ervin Hafter. Objec-
tive measures of listening effort: Effects of background noise and noise reduction.
Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 52(5):1230–1240, 2009.
[31] C. H. Björnsson. Readability of newspapers in 11 languages. Reading Research
Quarterly, 18(4):480–497, 1983.
[32] Sophia E. Kramer, Theo S. Kapteyn, Joost M. Festen, and Dirk J. Kuik. Assessing
aspect of auditory handicap by means of pupil dilatation. Audiology (london),
36(3):155–164, 155–164, 1997.
[33] George A. Miller. The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some limits
on our capacity for processing information. Psychological Review, 63(2):81–97,
1956.
