==PAGE:1==
Detecting Causality in Oscillatory
Systems
Małgorzata Anna Tyczyńska
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Many physiological processes among living organisms, such as arousal, tempera-
ture regulation or digestion, occur with a circadian rhythm (with period of 24 h).
In mammals, these rhythms are generated in Suprachiasamatic Nucleus (SCN),
a tiny region in brain containing approx. 20000 neurons. Each of them displays
circadian rhythm in response to known molecular mechanism. The periods of
individual SCN cells diﬀer, but once an intercellular coupling is formed, the
rhythms synchronize thereby producing information interpreted as time. This
signal is then spread across the body and helps to maintain a numerous phys-
iological functions. In this complex mechanism, the unknown element is the
structure of neural network in SCN. This thesis focuses on solving it by using
mathematics.
Recent progress in neuroscience allows to conduct a crucial experiment for this
work. Its design is based on fact, that the synchronized network can be chem-
ically interrupted by applying Tetrodotoxin (TTX), and when the toxin is re-
moved, the structure restores. All this happens while recording the biolumi-
nescence activity of cells. These recordings constitute an experimental sets of
time series reﬂecting diﬀerent dynamical states of synchronized neural network.
However, to correctly identify a set of cells forming this architecture, a method
to detect causality between oscillatory time series is needed.
Therefore, the
goal of this thesis is to identify such method among possible candidates. For
this, diﬀerent approaches are examined on data from TTX experiment like on
simulation of such recordings.
A previous attempt to infer the network structure in SCN used Maximal In-
formation Coeﬃcient (MIC) - a method to detect connectivity, not causality
==PAGE:4==
ii
between time series. The performance of this approach is compared with ex-
amination of two diﬀerent methods to detect causality under discussed circum-
stances: information transfer (LC) and Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM). In
this thesis, the latter method had been carefully studied and showed that slight
modiﬁcation of original procedure, produces a new, statistical approach and
additional estimate to measure causality in oscillatory systems. Moreover, the
new estimate identiﬁed the set of coupled cells more accurately than remaining
method did - but unfortunately, it had also produced a bias to phase-shift. Fur-
thermore, the results had suggested that to correctly infer the network structure,
no application of TTX is needed. In future work, the bias present in the new
method is going to be corrected. If the corresponding results still perform well,
then this new approach may solve problems of determining causality or network
structure in oscillatory systems, where experimental perturbation of conditions
is expensive, dangerous or simply impossible.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Mange fysiologiske processer i levende organismer, som vågenhed, temperatur-
og fordøjelsesregulering, foregår med en døgnrytme (“en circadian rytme” med
ca. 24h-perioden). For pattedyr, disse rytmer genereres i Nucleus Suprachiasma-
ticus (SCN), som er en lille region i hjerne med ca. 20000 neuroner. Hver eneste
af dem udfører en døgnrytme i respons til en kendt molekylær mekanisme. Pe-
riodiciteten af cellerne er varierende, men når en intercellulær kobling formeres,
synkroniseres rytmerne og producerer en information tolket som tid. Det signal
er videreført til andre kropsdele og bidrager til at fastholde en sund fysiologi.
I denne biologiske mekanisme er det ukendte element strukturen af det neurale
netværk i SCN. Denne specialeafhandling fokuserer på at løse det problem med
analyse af tidsserier.
Den seneste fremgang indenfor neurobiologi har skabt muligheder for at desig-
ne et eksperiment med Tetrodotoxin (TTX): det integrerede netværk kan bli-
ve kemisk afkoblet med toksinet, men koblingerne genoprettes når TTX bliver
fjernet. Under denne process, sporene af bioluminescence til afspejling af cel-
lulære aktiviteter under forskellige dynamiske tilstande er samlet; disse danner
en sæt af tidsrække data. For en korrekt identiﬁkation af hvilke celler, der dan-
ner netværket, en metode til at ﬁnde kausalitet mellem de oscillerende data er
påkrævet - dette er målet for denne kandidatafhandling. Herunder er nogle for-
skellige fremgangsmåder sammenlignet, afprøvet og vurderet på eksperimentelle
og simulerede data.
Tidligere forsøg til at forklare netværksstrukturen i SCN brugte Maximal In-
formation Coeﬃcient (MIC), hvilket anvendes til at ﬁnde sammenhæng mellem
tidsrækker, men ikke kausalitet. Metodens resultater er sammenlignet med un-
==PAGE:6==
iv
dersøgelserne af to måder til at detektere kausalitet: information transfer (LC)
og Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM). Den sidstnævnte metode er blevet grun-
digt undersøgt, og viste, at en lille ændring dannede en ny, statistisk-orienteret
metode og et nyt estimat for at måle kausalitet. Desuden har det nye estimat
identiﬁceret sættet af koblede celler med større nøjagtighed end de øvrige meto-
der – dog med en bias til faseforskydning. I fremtiden en korrektur for den bias
er planlagt. Hvis dette producerer resultater, som gentager den tidligere success,
så er den nye metode en lovende kandidat til løsning af mange problemer drejet
mod at ﬁnde kausalitet.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at two institutes: DTU Compute and Department of
Mathematical Sciences at KAIST. It was done in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring M.Sc. in Engineering and Science from both DTU and KAIST
respectively.
The subject of this thesis was the determination of method to detect causal links
between circadian cells in mammalian Suprachiasmatic Nucleus. This problem
from mathematical biology integrated the various topics from of dynamical sys-
tems, time series analysis, neurobiology, statistics and even diﬀerential geom-
etry. Speciﬁcally, these ﬁelds cooperated in study of mathematical methods,
simulation and analysis of numerical recordings.
This thesis had furthermore integrated something beyond science - the work
between a pair of institutions located on two diﬀerent continents. The author
herself is very grateful for this opportunity and hopes for continued cooperation
in the future.
Kongens Lyngby, 4-January-2017
Małgorzata Anna Tyczyńska
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Summary - research statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
I
Methods
7
2
State Space Reconstruction (SSR) and its role in detecting
causality
9
2.1
Introduction: when chaos turns to order . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Taken’s Theorem for State Space Reconstruction . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
CCM as a method to reﬂect biological oscillators . . . . .
17
2.3.2
Interpretation of CCM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Alternative CCM method: Singularity of Cross Mapping (SoCM)
19
2.4.1
Construction of the alternative approach . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4.2
Technical considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Other Methods
25
3.1
Maximal Information Coeﬃcient (MIC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Liang Information Transfer (LC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Protein Sequestration Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Gillespie Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
II
Results
33
4
Data & Software
35
4.1
Simulated Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Experimental Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Software for computation of scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Simulation Results
39
5.1
CCM interpretation results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Score distribution: all methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Accuracy of network detection given method and dynamical state
42
5.4
Simulated vs. experimental data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Experimental Data: Results
47
6.1
Criteria to measure method accuracy with network structures . .
47
6.1.1
Computational procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2
Accuracy of similarity between diﬀerent network structures
. . .
49
7
Method Sensitivity
53
7.1
Results of sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.1.1
Number of cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.1.2
Amplitude . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.1.3
Phase-shifts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.1.4
Stochasticity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.1.5
Embedding Dimension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.2
Summary of sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
III
Discussions and Conclusions
61
8
Discussion and future work
63
8.1
Reliability of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.1.1
Diﬀerences between simulated and experimental data . . .
63
8.1.2
Consistency and validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8.1.3
Another combinations of simulated data . . . . . . . . . .
65
8.2
Critique of CCM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8.3
Possibilities of application: empirical experiments without per-
turbation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8.4
Possible improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8.4.1
Other oscillatory systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8.4.2
Choice of time lag τ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8.4.3
Moments of causality measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8.4.4
Beyond AUC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8.5
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
9
Conclusion
71
A Appendix
75
A.1 Order Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.2 Algorithm to calculate SoCM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.3 Takens’ Theorem: original statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.3.1
Method to detect unidirectional coupling (Ye, 2016)
. . .
77
A.3.2
Other applications of Takens’ theorem . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.3.3
Further perspectives of Takens’ Theorem: the multivari-
ate and multiview embedding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.4 Example: Stoichiometry matrix and propensity vector for protein
sequestration model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A.5 Additional ﬁgures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.6 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
Bibliography
93
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Rhythm. This word characterizes a great part of processes aﬀecting all living
organisms. Heart beats in regular pattern to provide oxygen for every cell, legs
follow a certain arrangement causing movement and ﬁnally, falling asleep and
awakening occurs at some speciﬁc time of a day. The last example of rhythm
has attracted interest of many scientists, who began to ask: "Why so many
organisms act like they have a clock telling them «it’s time to eat» or «it’s time
to sleep»?. These questions lead to the whole new ﬁeld of science: the study of
circadian rhythms.
Circadian (from Latin: circa = "about", diem = "day") rhythm is an oscillation
with period of approximately 24 hours.
The sleep-wake cycle named before
is one illustration of the concept, however, circadian rhythms are also linked
with regulation of digestion, hormone production, body temperature and blood
pressure [17],[51]; furthermore, circadian oscillators are found in cells throughout
whole body, even in lungs or nose [17], [31]. The daily rhythm can be disrupted
e.g. by performing shift-work [51] or food intake at wrong time [6]; furthermore,
it can lead to as serious consequences as obesity [6], cardiovascular diseases [51]
or cancer [27], [51].
How the rhythms are generated, maintained or disrupted is another question,
and the answer varies on the type of organism. Recent progress has revealed
that in mammalian brain, a small region called Suprachiasmatic Nucleus (SCN)
acts similarly to a conductor leading the orchestra made of peripheral (located
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
elsewhere than SCN) circadian oscillators [17], [59], [14]. Located just behind
the optical tract, this region of approx. 20000, densely packed neurons receives
cyclic signals from outside, integrates them and produces an output information
which is sent to the peripheral cells. The Zeitgebers, i.e. the signals delivered
to SCN, contain messages about light intensity, arousal, physical activity etc.
and therefore, the output signal informs about the relative time of a day. Zeit-
gebers are delivered to SCN through diﬀerent tracts and the information about
time is processed to various brain regions; for summary see [17]. For an exam-
ple summarizing the known elements about processing information about light
intensity, see ﬁg. A.2.
The molecular pathway producing circadian rhythm in response to Zeitgebers
has been studied extensively and the relevant part is provided later in this
chapter. However, the mechanism integrating the received signals is much less
clear.
Eﬃcient integration requires that the individual SCN neurons form a
certain neural network by synchronization to produce the output signal. The
structure of this network remains unknown and hard to infer because:
1. The system and corresponding dynamics are complex. The network within
SCN contains a large number of coupled oscillators located in regions with
distinct functions [4].
2. Empirical tests are diﬃcult. Because SCN is located in brain, it is natu-
rally diﬃcult to access, requires speciﬁc equipment and is harmful for the
organisms if any mistakes are made.
3. Analysis of coupled oscillator in SCN requires an adequate tool. How to
quantify that some cells are coupled and some are not?
These problems serve a baseline for this thesis and the remaining part of this
chapter introduces them in more detail.
Basic physiology of SCN
In response to Zetigebers, each of 20000 neurons
displays a circadian rhythm. Cells, however, are not identical and the individ-
ual oscillators produce a wide range of rhythmicity ([47], [67]). Under presence
of intercellular coupling, the period of oscillators is aligned and therefore, the
synchronized network display smaller variation of indivudal rhythms. An exper-
imental evidence for this behavior can be found in [47] and [67]. For example
of concept [47] reports the length of period to fall in range of [19.8, 25.6] h and
[22.3, 24.3] h under absence and presence of coupling respectively. This impor-
tant property is characterizing synchrony of neurons in SCN and has served in
design of other experiments [55], [68] as well as some mathematical models [36].
==PAGE:15==
3
The molecular mechanism that generates individual oscillations follow a transcription-
translation loop mediated by proteins BMAL1, CLOCK, E-BOX, PER and
CRY1 [17], [51], [68]. This loop-mechanism is a negative-feedback loop (often
modeled by Goodwin model [36],[26]); it is provided and explained in ﬁgure A.1.
Bioluminescence Recordings
Tracking and monitoring the activity of in-
dividual cells within SCN is possible by recording the bioluminescence. Specif-
ically, enzyme LUCIFERASE (LUC) is applied to circadian cells forming a
complex PER2:LUC with PER2. [46] This allows a gene transcription while
producing a light-emitting component, luciferin and how much light is visible
depends on PER2 transcription rate. Consequently, the cells seem to display
light at the time of PER2 transcription2. With brain kept in dark incubator,
microscopes and light-sensitive cameras, the images of SCN can be taken and
linked with transcription time and cell position, thus, providing a set of numer-
ical data [18]. For practical details regarding data collection, see [3],[63],[18].
Network synchronization - intercellular coupling
Synchronization of in-
dividual rhythms occurs by coupling where the neurotransmitter VIP (Vasoac-
tive Intensial Peptide) has been recognized as a major contributor [4].
The
release of VIP follows with of transcription-translation loop; and the neurons
do not synchronize at all when the activity of VIP is blocked. However, there
is no one, unique way that deﬁnes the mechanism of intercellular coupling [4]
and connectivity through synaptic transmission and another neurotransmitters
is also possible [59], [4].
Perturbation of intercellular coupling by Tetrodotoxin (TTX)
As VIP
mediates a great part of synchronization, a sudden inhibition of its production
should decouple the existing network. This is the main hypothesis tested in the
experiment involving Tetrodotoxin (TTX) [55], [68] and sketched on ﬁg. 1.1.
If this hypothesis is true, then four distinct states of network dynamics (ﬁg.
1.1.A) are expected to be observed: synchronized state before TTX application,
desynchronized state as a cause of TTX application, early resynchronization
state, where the connections begin to re-form after TTX has been removed, and,
ﬁnally, a late resynchronized state, at which the network has almost completely
been restored. The restored structure is not likely to be exactly same (some
of the weaker connections are likely to be lost or changed [68]), but the main
1PER is a common name for PERIOD; additionally, there exist PER1, PER2 and PER3,
but because they interact directly with each other they are often called as PER. CRY, a
short name for CRYPTOCHRONE and with components CRY1 and CRY2 follows same
explanation.
2also called "expression"
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
patterns are expected to reappear providing correct connectivity with other
parts of the brain [59]3.
These four dynamical states are clearly visible on the average bioluminescence
recordings from [3] and, additionally to this work, we conﬁrm the existence of
these distinct states by calculating order parameters [9],[22]. Order parameters
are deﬁned as ratio between the variance of signal over time and variance among
individual signals. When the oscillators are synchronized (desynchronized), the
order parameters are expected to be close to unity (close to 0). A brief discussion
about them is provided in sec. A.1. As seen on ﬁg. 1.1.B, the majority of order
parameters match the hypothetical values of diﬀerent dynamical states, thereby
conﬁrming the success of laboratory experiments in [3].
From biology to mathematical data analysis
The bioluminescence record-
ings may serve as data to detect pattern of synchrony formation. Previously,
some work has been done in attempt to do that: Abel et al. in [3] and Taylor et
al. in [63] assume that the reappearing of couplings and tracking the connections
between cells can be detected during resynchronization of network after TTX
washout. Despite same hypothesis and similar datasets, the applied method to
analysis of bioluminescence recordings had result in diﬀerent conclusions: [3]
suggest that the majority of hubs are located in central parts of SCN and [63]
implies that cells from Ventral Cord inﬂuences neurons in the Dorsal Shell to
cause synchronization (the regions of Ventral Cord and Dorsal Shell are sketched
on ﬁg. A.2).
To serve a unique answer to the problem of network structure an adequate
method to analyze the data must be chosen. Note, that correlation (which is
widely used method in computational neuroscience [59]) is not suitable in this
problem: ﬁrst, it can vary among diﬀerent parts of the same dataset (phe-
nomenon of "mirage correlations", reported in [60]). Second, it detects the de-
gree of relationship between two variables, not which are aﬀecting each others
dynamics. This inﬂuence, the causality between cells, is a target to be deter-
mined: cells in SCN must interact dynamically with each other to maintain
same period over time. Consequently, this task is rather stated as a problem of
detecting causality between circadian oscillators present in SCN.
In general, the causality is hard to detect. The majority of past research about
causality detection can be applied to cases with available repetitive observations
3This argument is based rather on the biological principles of neural design than the con-
clusion from time series observations [59]. The neural circuits are designed to put the least
possible eﬀort required to transfer information with needed degree of accuracy. Any changes
in such optimized design may lead to miscommunication, energy loss, injuries or death. There-
fore, it is more likely than the neurons maintain same pattern as before perturbation, rather
than ﬁnding a completely new way to communicate.
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Summary - research statement
5
(as for [49]), long time series data (for transfer entropy methods, which addition-
ally, are computationally expensive [54],[52]) and stationary, purely stochastic,
separable data like for Granger causality [28],[60],[41] - none of these assump-
tions are applicable to our problem. Fortunately, some brand new methods had
been developed, and are specially dedicated to cases when causally linked vari-
ables are dynamically evolving. These are Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM)
[60] and Liang’s Information Transfer (LC) [41] where the former, CCM, is of
major focus throughout this thesis. The next part analyses both methods and
their reliability to detect network in SCN, together with explanation of how the
method reliability can be conﬁrmed by simulations.
1.1
Summary - research statement
Despite recent progress in circadian physiology, the structure of neural network
in SCN remains unresolved although it regulates circadian rhythmicity - the
necessary component of healthy physiology. In aim to recognize it, an experi-
ment had been designed to track bioluminescence recordings of circadian gene
expressions over time; furthermore, the experiment involved the application of
TTX, which allows to capture diﬀerent dynamical states of a network. However,
the analysis of these recordings to propose the network structure is diﬃcult: this
task involves detection of causality in complex, dynamical system. Without an
appropriate method, the architecture of SCN network cannot be determined
reliably.
Based on the above considerations, the goal of this thesis is set to ﬁnd the
method to capture the causality in large network of oscillatory cells. For this,
the candidates of methods are presented and their performance is carefully ex-
amined. This analysis focuses on both experimental data and the simulated
activities of SCN neurons. The validity of candidates is tested by Receiver Op-
erating Characteristics, which is well-suited for this type of assessment. For sim-
ulations, the trajectories are simulated with Gillespie algorithm, as this method
had been recognized as a successful approach to simulate chemical reactions.
Finally, the mathematical model of protein sequestration is used for simulation
due to its ability of reﬂecting dynamics of circadian cells.
As the method of Convergent Cross Mapping seems as the most promising
candidate, but nothing is a priori known about its performance on oscillatory
series, the in-depth analysis of this approach is provided by studying both the
theoretical formulation and the method sensitivity. A brief summary of other
approaches - Information Transfer (Liang Causality) and a recently applied ap-
proach of MIC - is provided as well, for completeness.
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
a: Synchronized
b: Desynchronized
c: Resynchronized 
(early stage)
Time (h)
START
TTX IN
TTX OUT
END
Bioluminescence 
(AU)
Order parameter scores (R)
SCN 1
0.90
0.09
0.65
0.78
SCN 2
0.87
0.08
0.71
0.72
SCN 3
0.61
0.10
0.86
0.70
SCN 4
0.73
0.39
0.64
0.62
SCN 5
0.91
0.61
0.64
0.83
a
b
c
d
d: Resynchronized 
(late stage)
A
B
Figure 1.1: Synchronization and perturbation of main network in mam-
malian SCN during TTX experiment.
A. Up: Sketch of four diﬀerent dynamical states of network within SCN.
Circles with green waves symbolize individual oscillators, red lines - in-
tercellular couplings. The neural network change from being in complete
synchronization (a) to state of desynchronization (b), where all inter-
cellular couplings are lost due to presence of TTX. After the toxine is
washed out, the resynchronization of network begins (c) and reaches the
late stage at which the major elements of network architecture are re-
stored (d). Down: Average PER2 gene expression proﬁles of 483 cells
from the ﬁrst of ﬁve SCNs over 18 days and regions of 24h representing
four diﬀerent dynamical states a −d; data are provided by Abel et al
[3]. B. Order parameter scores for all ﬁve SCN (rows) are computed to
conﬁrm the existence of diﬀerent dynamical states a −d (columns); see
sec. A.1 for technical details. To provide representative characterization
of network dynamics for each SCN, the order parameters are calculated
on the following regions of time series: ﬁrst subset of ﬁrst 24h for (a),
last 24h of perturbation with TTX for (b), ﬁrst 24h after delay of 12h
after washing the toxin out (c) and last 24h of recorded trajectories (d).
==PAGE:19==
Part I
Methods
==PAGE:20==
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
State Space Reconstruction
(SSR) and its role in
detecting causality
This section introduces the techniques of State Space Reconstruction (SSR),
which aims to track information about the possible states of a dynamical sys-
tem based on recordings of corresponding variables. The cornerstone of SSR
methods is Taken’s theorem [62]; the goal of this chapter is to introduce (sec.
2.1) and state this theorem (sec. 2.2) thereby motivating the algorithm - Con-
vergent Cross Mapping (CCM) [60] which is used to detect causality in complex
dynamical systems (sec.2.3). Very little is known about the CCM method and
some diﬀerent aspects of it are discussed in sections 2.3.2, 2.3.1. The last sec-
tion 2.4 provides an modiﬁcation of the original method, Singularity of Cross
Mapping (SoCM) which introduces a pair of estimates for causality between
variables.
==PAGE:22==
10
State Space Reconstruction (SSR) and its role in detecting causality
2.1
Introduction: when chaos turns to order
The real world systems are non-linear, complex and of many interacting species
- this is why analyzing time series of empirical recordings can be considered as
an art. To detect accurately the law that had governed a certain data set one
needs (among others) to have an appropriate analysis method, know system di-
mensionality and type of law: if it is deterministic, stochastic or combined, with
stochastic component treated as noise. In many situations these components
may be misinterpreted, consequently leading to incorrect results.
For motivational example, consider two purely deterministic systems: logistic
map for one (X) and two species (X and Y ) given by (2.1):
X(t + 1) = X(t)[rx −rxX(t)] and
X(t + 1)
Y (t + 1) = X(t)[rx −rxX(t) −βxyY (t)]
Y (t)[ry −ryY (t) −βyxY (t)]
(2.1)
The rx, ry, are constant growth rates and βxy, βyx stand for interaction strength
between X and Y species; X and Y are restricted to non-negative domain. De-
spite the rather simple formulation, both maps are chaotic with strange attractor
[42], [60]. The plot on ﬁg.2.1.A compares these ﬁrst-return maps with Gaussian
noise, and shows that a) single-species time series are indistinguishable from the
two-species and b) all deterministic return maps are very similar to the noise
sequence.
The consequence? Given time series recordings of deterministic, chaotic maps
with strange attractor, the task of understanding the law governing the observed
dynamics seems impossible.
But it is not.
Consider time series of X(t) from the two-species logistic model. The observa-
tion at current time x(t) is governed by deterministic law. In another words,
it did not "come out of nowhere" - it evolved from x(t −1), which evolved
from x(t −2) - and so on. Therefore, if one plots the values of current time
against the past, one can expect a regular pattern. Indeed, in ﬁg. 2.1.B, the
plot of X(t) against X(t −1) seems much more regular than the corresponding
plot of Gaussian noise sequence. Random sequence does not follow any rule,
and therefore the irregularity is expected in this present-vs-past plot (ﬁg.2.1.B,
right). This serves as a background for technique to distinguish chaotic time
series from observational noise in [61]. However, the goal of next sections is
diﬀerent - explaining the appearing regularity in present-vs-past plots form ﬁg.
2.1.B.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Taken’s Theorem for State Space Reconstruction
11
A
Single species logistic model
Two species logistic model: X(t)
Two species logistic model: Y(t)
Gaussian Noise
Time
50
10
50
10
Time
0.8
0.3
0.8
0.3
50
10
Time
0.8
0.3
40
0
Time
0.8
0.3
X: Two species logistic model
S: Gaussian Noise
S(t)
S(t-1)
X(t-1)
X(t)
B
Figure 2.1: Comparison of logistic maps and Gaussian noise plotted over
time and past history
A: Graphs of single species (black) and two species (red and green) lo-
gistic model from (2.1) look similar to Gaussian noise sequence (blue).
All graphs show the number of individuals (y-axes) vs. time (x-axes).
B. X and time series from two species logistic model (red) and Gaussian
noise sequence (blue) plotted against their recent history. Because X is
deterministic, it displays a regular pattern, but Gaussian noise sequence
S does not. For single specie, rx = 3.8, X(0) = 0.9. For two species,
(rx, ry)=(3.7, 3.8), (X(0), Y (0) = (0.9, 0.2), (βxy, βyx) = (0.375, 0.378).
For Gaussian noise the mean is 0.6, and standard deviation 0.15.
2.2
Taken’s Theorem for State Space Reconstruc-
tion
The regularity appearing in present-vs-past plots of chaotic series from in pre-
vious section was ﬁrst observed by Jim Crutchﬁeld (1978) and formalized by
Floris Takens in 1980 [23]. Takens had shown in [62] that this pattern reﬂects
the possible states of system attractor governing the dynamics. The following
version of Takens’ theorem is "user-friendly" and not exactly as stated in the
==PAGE:24==
12
State Space Reconstruction (SSR) and its role in detecting causality
original text [62] (for the original formulation, please refer to A.1); this is due
to fact that a) the aim here is to provide a general understanding without in-
troducing deﬁnitions from topology and dynamical systems b) this formulation
is most commonly used in the ﬁeld of state space reconstruction [60], [71] [12].
Theorem 2.1 (Takens, 1980) Suppose that X is an observation variable
from dynamical system with some d-dimensional, smooth manifold M, and
X(t) = [x(t), x(t−1), ..., x(1)] is the time series corresponding to X. The system
attractor is embedded in E-dimensional space. For all times t, the combination
of exactly E lags of X(t) collected by every τ steps deﬁnes a shadow manifold1
of X: MX = [x(t), x(t −τ), x(t −2τ), ..., x(t −(E −1)τ)]. The MX and M are
diﬀeomorphic at every point2.
For the reader unfamiliar with this topic, even the simpliﬁed Takens’ statement
may seem odd. The list below provides main consequences and remarks of this
theorem:
1. Diﬀeomorphism is a diﬀerentiable mapping between manifolds with diﬀer-
entiable inverse [66]. Because diﬀerentiability implies continuity [37], Tak-
ens’ theorem also states that a continuity between true attractor manifold
and the shadow manifold exist.
2. An attractor manifold can intuitively be interpreted as a set of states
(state space) that are most commonly observed for the system. Therefore
the shadow manifold reﬂects main properties of system dynamics (which
additionally explains the name "State Space Reconstruction").
3. The essential components for construction of shadow manifold are E: em-
bedding dimension and τ: the time-lag.
None of them are easy to ﬁnd. For E, G. Sugihara and R. May in had de-
veloped a separate algorithm based on simplex projection (see sec. A.3.2.1
which is based on [61]), other methods e.g. detection by using false nearest
neighbors [35] are also possible.
For τ, the situation is more complicated and no eﬃcient method to ﬁnd
its optimal value exist [58]: If it is chosen too large, some part of dynamics
may be overseen; if it is too tiny, the reconstructed manifold may produce
too complicated geometry to understand; furthermore, note that τ may
not be integer-valued.
1In literature, "shadow manifold" is also called as "reconstructed manifold" or "lagged-
coordinate embedding"; all these forms are used.
2By saying that two manifold are diﬀeomorphic to each other, one means that between
them there exist a diﬀeomorphic mapping
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Taken’s Theorem for State Space Reconstruction
13
4. Even if the system from which X is observed is not one-dimensional, the
MX still reﬂects a whole system attractor - this is perhaps the most im-
portant result of Takens’ theorem.
5. Furthermore, embedding dimension E approximates the number of in-
teracting species and it is bounded by Whitney’s embedding theorem
(E ≤2d + 1). [60]. In case of strange attractors the true value of E may
not be an integer [42], but as it is computationally impossible to create a
MX of non-integer dimension, the non-integer cases of E are ignored.
In summary, Takens’ theorem is a powerful tool to investigate deterministic
dynamical systems.
A remark about applicability in the cases of oscillatory
variables is done below. In next section, we explore an important application of
it - Convergent Cross Mapping.
Remark 1 Takens’ Theorem applied to complex oscillatory systems
Takens theorem was developed to understand complex, chaotic, deterministic
systems with strange attractors [62]. The system of interest in this thesis is
the synchronized network of oscillatory cells within SCN. It is clearly complex
and deterministic3 , but for existence of chaos, the question is hard: the syn-
chronization of network in system of coupled oscillators alone requires a careful
study (eg. [7],[34],[21]) and could possibly ﬁll another master thesis. Therefore,
the topic of chaos in such systems, is not included in this work.
Even though the dimensionality of an embedded attractor for this synchronized
network is diﬃcult to determine theoretically, we assume that the synchronized
attractor has geometry of two-dimensional limit cycle - and thus, E = 2, imply-
ing the following: the synchronized network is considered as a single oscillator.
Without loss of generality, it may be assumed that corresponding period is ap-
proximately equal to the mean among all cell in under synchronization, as in
this case, the network rhythm displays only a small variance from mean (see
sec. 1).
For time time lag τ, our assumption exactly as in [60], [61], [72]: τ = 1 is chosen
to capture the immediate changes in the system. As a ﬁnal remark: very little
is known about Takens’ theorem applied to synchronized oscillatory systems,
and further investigations on this topic are necessary.
3This is because cells response to some certain, biochemical mechanisms. Random ﬂuctu-
ations may, of course, happen, but the generated oscillatory pattern is assumed to be not due
to stochastic processes only.
==PAGE:26==
14
State Space Reconstruction (SSR) and its role in detecting causality
2.3
Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM)
Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM), created by George Sugihara in 2012 aims
to detect causality between two dynamical variables [60] and is based on the
direct consequence of Takens’ theorem, stated as following corollary:
Corollary 1 (Sugihara, 2012)
Suppose that X and Y are observational variables from the same dynamical sys-
tem. The corresponding shadow manifolds MX and MY are both diﬀeomorphic
to the true attractor M and to each other under one condition: X causes dynam-
ics of Y and vice versa (X ↔Y ). [16], [60], [61]. If the directional symmetry is
broken so X causes Y (X →Y ) but not the opposite, the diﬀerentiable mapping
exist only from MY to MX; ﬁnally, when neither X inﬂuences Y and vice versa
(X ↮Y ), no diﬀeomorphism between shadow manifolds of these variables exist.
[60],[16]
By deﬁnition of diﬀeomorphic mapping (see sec. 2.2), the corollary 1, is still
valid the word "diﬀeomorphism" is replaced with "continuity". Therefore, the
task of creating an algorithm to detect causality between a pair of dynamical
variables is simpliﬁed to create an algorithm to detect continuity between shadow
manifolds of two dynamical variables.
This is exactly what CCM does. The procedure iteratively predicts points on
X using small neighborhoods from shadow manifolds of Y . After all values of
X-series are predicted, the correlation4 ρ between them and observed record-
ings of X is computed.
As the predictions are calculated across two series,
this technique is called cross mapping. With increasing length of series, the
reconstructed manifold of Y becomes denser, the predictive ability rises and the
correlation estimates converge to some value ρ∗which reﬂects the existence of
causal inﬂuence. If it is high (low), then the causality is present (absent) from
predicted series X to the recordings used for forecasts, Y . Therefore the method
name is convergent cross mapping.
The remaining parts of this section are dedicated to explore the strength and
weaknesses of CCM method. A detailed description of algorithm and compu-
tation of CCM scores for X →Y direction is provided in the algorithm 1 and
illustrated in ﬁg. 2.2 (causality detection from Y →X is deﬁned in analogous
manner). A detailed explanation of how does CCM scores reﬂect the main prop-
erties of SCN oscillators in SCN is follows in section 2.3.1.Finally, interpretation
of output from the algorithm with its relation to causal linkage is described in
2.3.2.
4Throughout this theis, by correlation we mean Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM)
15
Algorithm 1 Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM) to detect X →Y
Input: X(t) and Y (t) - time series of equal length L for X and Y variables.
Step 0 Initialization: Choose the library ˜L ∈[E + 2, L] and time index t∗. The
library is a set of points in Y that is available to make single prediction
of the point X(t∗), t∗∈1, ..., ˜L (ﬁg. 2.2.A).
Step 1 Embedding: Choose E = 2 and τ = 1 to create shadow manifold corre-
sponding to oscillatory variable Y the MY (ﬁg. 2.2.B). 5
Note the notation: MY = [Y (t), Y (t−1)] ∀t ∈{2, .., L}, so a point on MY
is deﬁned as y(t) = [y(t), y(t −1)].
Step 2 Simplex Projection [61]:
a) Find point y(t∗) of MY and corresponding E + 1 = 3 nearest neigh-
bors y(t1), y(t2) and y(t3).
b) Calculate the numbers ui = exp
 −d(y(t∗),y(ti))
d(y(t∗),y(t1))

, ∀i = 1, .., E + 1.
(ﬁg. 2.2.B)
c) Using time indexes from a), ﬁnd points x(t1), x(t2) and x(t3) on X(t)
and calculate weights wi = ui
  PE+1
j=1 uj
−1.
d) Make a prediction: ˆx(t∗)|MY = PE+1
i=1 wix(ti). (ﬁg. 2.2.C, top)
e) Choose the next t∗= t∗+1 and repeat steps 1 and 2 until all ˆx(t∗)|MY
for all t∗= 1, .., ˜L are predicted. Let ˆX(t)|MY denote the set of all
forecasts.
Step 3 Prediction skill: Calculate correlation between the true and predicted
X: ρ(X, ˆX|MY ) (ﬁg. 2.2.C, bottom). The closer to one, the better pre-
diction has been obtained and the bigger the likelihood that continuity
between MY and MX exist.
Step 4 Repetition: Unless ˜L = L (the maximal library length as presented on
ﬁg.
2.2), keep increasing the library ˜L and repeating the steps 1-3 to
obtain ρ(X, ˆX|MY ) for each ˜L.
Output A sequence of ρ(X, ˆX|MY ) calculated for each ˜L.
end
5Note that MX is not necessary for prediction of X →Y . The graph of MX in ﬁg. 2.2 is
provided for understanding purposes as CCM is a method to detect continuity exactly between
MY and MX.
==PAGE:28==
16
State Space Reconstruction (SSR) and its role in detecting causality
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
𝑌𝑡= [𝑦𝑡, 𝑦𝑡−1 , …, 𝑦1 ]
𝑦(𝑡∗)
𝑋𝑡= [𝑥𝑡, 𝑥𝑡−1 , …,𝑥1 ]
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
𝑥(𝑡∗)
A
B
𝒚(𝑡∗)
𝑀5 = [𝑌𝑡,𝑌𝑡−1 ]
𝒚(𝑡6)
𝒚(𝑡7)
𝒚(𝑡8)
Observed 𝑥
C
Predicted 𝑥D|𝑀5
ρ(X,𝑋H|𝑀5) ≈1
𝑀J = [𝑋𝑡,𝑋𝑡−1 ]
𝒙(𝑡∗)
𝒙L	  (𝑡∗)|𝑀5
𝒙(𝑡6)
𝒙(𝑡8)
𝒙(𝑡7)
𝑥	  L(𝑡∗)|𝑀5
𝑥(𝑡∗)
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
𝑋𝑡
𝑥(𝑡7)
𝑥(𝑡6)
𝑥(𝑡8)
Figure 2.2: Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM) for oscillatory systems
The graphs A-C illustrate how to detect causality from X to Y by set
of individual predictions across the series.
A: The sample-trajectories of X (black) and Y (red) with points y(t∗)
and x(t∗) used for individual predictions (pink);
B - Simplex projection: The two-dimensional shadow manifold MY , em-
bedded point y(t)∗and its 3 nearest neighbors y(t1), y(t2), y(t3) (green
squares); On X-series points with time index equivalent to nearest-
neighbors indexes on MY , namely x(t1), x(t2) and x(t3) (green triangles)
are found and used for prediction of x(t∗), the ˆx(t∗)|MY (red). As CCM
aims to detect continuity between MY and MX, the shadow manifold
MX with projected points x(t1), x(t2), x(t3) (green squares) is shown
for comparison; the point ˆx(t∗)|MY remains close to the target x(t∗).
C: The plot of the target points x(t∗) vs. predicted x(t∗)|MY for step
B applied for all possible t∗. High correlation between these sets is an
indicator of causality.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM)
17
2.3.1
CCM as a method to reﬂect biological oscillators
The section 2.3.2 provides a guidelines to interpret CCM scores based on [60].
Another problem is if the CCM scores reﬂect diﬀerent coupling oscillators present
in SCN. From the biology of SCN, (see sec. 1) one expects that the coupled (un-
coupled) oscillators have the same (diﬀerent) period. Fortunately, these prop-
erties are reﬂected in the CCM scores, which makes the method an attractive
candidate to infer the structure of synchronization. The argument is provided
below and illustrated on ﬁg. 2.3.
x
𝑋↔𝑌	  
𝑋↮𝑌	  
𝑌𝑡
𝑋𝑡
𝒚(𝑡∗)
𝒙(𝑡∗)
𝒙,	  (𝑡∗)|𝑀/
𝒚(𝑡∗)
𝒙,	  (𝑡∗)|𝑀/
𝒙(𝑡∗)
𝑋→𝑌	  
𝑋→𝑌	  
A
B
C
D
Figure 2.3: CCM reﬂects the dynamics of coupled and uncoupled oscilla-
tors.
A, B: Pairs of trajectories for bidirectionally coupled (A), uncoupled cells
(B), and points deﬁning the individual predictions (pink).
C, D: Shadow manifolds corresponding to X and Y with all points re-
quired to perform simplex projection (colors and symbols same as for
2.2). On C, the nearest neighbors of MX are close to the target x(t∗)
because X causes (dynamically inﬂuences) Y ; if this is repeated for all
t∗, then the resulting correlation between observed and predicted time
series is high. On D, the nearest neighbors are far away which causes
large prediction error. Repetitive computation for all t∗results in small
correlation, correctly indicating the lack of causality from X to Y .
==PAGE:30==
18
State Space Reconstruction (SSR) and its role in detecting causality
2.3.1.1
Bidirectional and Uncoupled pairs
Consider the CCM correlation under bidirectional causality X ↔Y . High score
indicates the presence of causal link X ↔Y , meaning that during simplex
projection step (step 2 in 1), the nearest neighbors from MY are mapped to
small regions on MX, and vice versa for Y ↔X. If the X and Y have the
same period (ﬁg. 2.3.A), the points in small neighbors MX and MY have equal
time indexing. Therefore, the continuity between MX and MY is preserved for
all times t (ﬁg. 2.3.C), X ←Y is correctly detected and the score reﬂects the
behavior of SCN oscillators. For the uncoupled oscillators, phases of X and Y
are not identical (ﬁg. 2.3.B). Hence, in the simplex projection of the points from
MY , the time indexes of nearest neighbors may be located over whole manifold
MX. As consequence, the predictions are bad and correlation score is low.
Based on these conclusions, one can expect that in the presence of trending of
X and Y , the conclusions remain unchanged as long as the trending must occur
with the same rate - otherwise, the manifolds have diﬀerent shapes, resulting
in large prediction errors. Some trending patterns may lead to conclusion of
unidirectional coupling discussed below.
2.3.1.2
Unidirectional pairs
When Y (t) shows a large trending, or the amplitude greatly increases/decays
while X(t) does not show any of these patterns (and vice versa), the CCM
recognizes this situation as an unidirectional coupling. In such conﬁgurations,
the large error is produced when MX is used from prediction but forecasts with
MY remain close to the target points.
Consequently, X →Y and Y ↛X
are concluded. The question about if these patterns are reﬂected the true SCN
oscillators is unresolved.
The true unidirectional forcing may be hard to detect. First, as noted in [60], if
the forcing from X to Y is so strong that the dynamics of Y becomes so similar
to X that their shadow manifolds become indistinguishable6. Ye in [71] has
proposed a solution to this problem, however it is diﬃcult to interpret for the
oscillatory case - a brief description of his method and argument is provided in
A.3.1.
Finally, the case of unidirectional coupling between oscillators turned out to be
very diﬃcult to tackle and remains unresolved throughout this thesis (see 5.2).
6This is also understood in terms of synchrony [34], but to avoid confusion with synchrony
of the network, the term "synchrony" is avoided when working with CCM.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Alternative CCM method: Singularity of Cross Mapping (SoCM)
19
2.3.2
Interpretation of CCM
The classical criterion for causality proposed in [60] states that the correlation
must converge with the length of time series segments (˜L) to some asymptotic,
high value of ρ∗. This is usually done by by-hand analysis and comparison of
graphs for ρ(Y, ˆY |MX) and ρ(X, ˆX|MY ) over ˜L, see ﬁg. 5.1. Although this
approach has reported a successful detection of causalities from e.g. ecology
[60], it raises a concern when causal link must be determined among system of
many species. If n is the number of variables in the system, then the amount of
possible causal links is n(n −1). The bioluminescence recordings of SCN cells
from [3] contain on average 292 cells, which gives 84972/2 = 42486 graphs to
investigate!
This problem may be solved by investigating a single correlation value - as
correlation estimates increase in precision with ˜L, it is expected that CCM
performed with the maximum library length provides a reliable indicator of
causality (see again ﬁg. 5.1).
But is it really trustworthy? The laws governing system dynamics and reﬂected
in embedding of time series are aﬀected by various factors from real, noisy and
imperfect world.
Additionally, the correlation estimates may be aﬀected by
available length of recordings, or - in case of oscillatory data - the number of
present cycles. A single correlation value may estimate if the causality is present
or not, but does not provide any measure of certainty about such existence.
Fortunately, the method presented in next section does.
2.4
Alternative CCM method: Singularity of Cross
Mapping (SoCM)
To address the issue regarding the reliability of CCM scores, a modiﬁed CCM
method has been developed by author of this thesis. It allows to obtain two
diﬀerent estimates to determine causality between a pair of variables. Addition-
ally, the modiﬁed method inherits the ability to distinguish between coupled
and uncoupled cells from the classical CCM method by Sugihara.
==PAGE:32==
20
State Space Reconstruction (SSR) and its role in detecting causality
2.4.1
Construction of the alternative approach
Consider the causality X →Y and corresponding correlation score calculated
by using the whole time series (the classical approach). The new libraries for
X and Y can be constructed by removal of a single, randomly chosen points
x(˜t) and y(˜t); as removal was random, this may be considered as the i’th of N
iterations of such constructions (ﬁg. 2.4.A.).
For this i’th pair of created libraries, the corresponding shadow manifolds MX
and MY can be obtained. Performing cross mapping to detect X →Y results
in new estimate of ρ: the predictions using simplex projection now diﬀer in
comparison to those obtained with classical approach: the removed point on
MY cannot be identiﬁed as the nearest neighbors exactly E + 1 times, and x(˜t)
cannot be predicted (ﬁg. 2.4.B.). Consequently, computing ρ for N possible
manifolds results in N diﬀerent correlation values. (ﬁg. 2.4.C.). If N is large, the
distribution for ρ can be obtained ﬁg. 2.4.D, allowing to estimate the (sample)
mean correlation ⟨ρ⟩and (sample) standard deviation of these estimates σρ. It
is expected that ⟨ρ⟩is close to the ρ obtained by the classical CCM method
with maximum library due to central limit theorem.
The construction of single-point removal in the alternative CCM approach, im-
plies that a single discontinuity in shadow manifolds appears. This gives a new
light to CCM - the method does no longer measure the continuity between
traces from a pair of smooth manifolds, but quantiﬁes how well the smoothness
is preserved in case of a singularity. Therefore, the method can be called Sin-
gularity of Cross Mapping (SoCM). This interpretation allows to consider
⟨ρ⟩as the amount of preserved continuity between the manifolds under these
new conditions, and σrho as the variation caused by discontinuity; in general,
the smaller σrho, the larger chance of causality.
To check the importance of SoCM, some initial tests on simulated pair of coupled
and uncoupled cells were performed (more about simulations in section 4.1). It
may happen that X →Y (and Y →X, not shown for visibility) may have very
similar, high mean correlation, but the corresponding σρ diﬀer ﬁg. 2.4.E. Note
that the 1 −σρ is used in ﬁg. 2.4.E.: this is for ease of understanding, as with
it, when ⟨ρ⟩is high, the 1 −σρ is also high.
This observation encourages the further study of σ, its applicability and the
comparison to ⟨ρ⟩.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Alternative CCM method: Singularity of Cross Mapping (SoCM)
21
X
𝑡∗
𝑡̃$
𝒚(𝑡∗)
X
𝒚(𝑡̃$)
X
𝒙(𝑡∗)
𝒙)	  (𝑡∗)|𝑀-
𝒙(𝑡̃$)
𝒚(𝑡∗)
X
𝒚(𝑡̃.)
X
𝒙(𝑡∗)
𝒙)	  (𝑡∗)|𝑀-
𝒙(𝑡̃.)
X
𝒚(𝑡∗)
𝒙(𝑡∗)
𝒙)	  (𝑡∗) |𝑀-
X
X
X
𝑡∗
𝑡̃.
…
…
𝜌0 = 𝜌(𝑋,(𝑋4|𝑀-)0)
𝜌. = 𝜌(𝑋, (𝑋4|𝑀-).)
𝜌$ = 𝜌(𝑋,(𝑋4|𝑀-)$)
…
A
B
C
𝒚(𝑡̃0)
𝒙(𝑡̃0)
< 𝜌>
𝜎8
D
E
< 𝜌>
𝜎8
Uncoupled
Coupled
Uncoupled
Coupled
0.913
0.917
0.216
0.015
𝑡∗
𝑡̃0
XX
𝑌𝑡
𝑋𝑡
X
X
𝜌
Figure 2.4: A new estimate of causality (SoCM) is obtained by a modiﬁcation of the original CCM method
A: The ﬁrst, second and N’th pair of X, Y trajectories from which points with random time index ˜t1, ˜t2,..., ˜tN (cyan
cross) had been removed, resulting in diﬀerent libraries.
B: Simplex projection step on pairs from A; the predictions change because y(˜t1) and y(˜tN) do not exist (same for
points with index ˜t2, ..., ˜tN).
C: Each of correlation estimates ρ1,...,ρN diﬀer as a consequence of the above approach.
D: Because the removed points from the library are chosen randomly, the correlation estimates ρ1,...,ρN are random
variables. For large N, the distribution can be approximated, thus allowing to estimate the mean value ⟨ρ⟩and
standard deviation 1 −σρ. The ⟨ρ⟩is approximately same as ρ (pink) obtained by classical CCM approach from [60].
E: An example of ⟨ρ⟩and σρ scores on two pairs of simulated trajectories (see sec. 5); the ﬁrst pair (blue) corresponds
to strongly, bidirectionally coupled cells, the second (yellow) to uncoupled variables. The corresponding trajectories
can be found on ﬁg. A.4.
==PAGE:34==
22
State Space Reconstruction (SSR) and its role in detecting causality
2.4.2
Technical considerations
As ⟨ρ⟩is similar to ρ from the classical method, the following conclusions about
existence of causal relationship can be made by using table 2.1.
For σ it is
diﬀerent.
The coupled cells are expected to have small σ, i.e. the discontinuity caused by
absence of one point is negligible. During simplex projection, the absent point
can be replaced with another that lies nearby - and because the trajectories
oscillate with same speed, the time indexes of MY and MX match, and the
prediction changes only a little. Conversely, large σ is expected in the case of
uncoupled cells because the cross mapping between the embedded manifold MY
and MX is a priori discontinuous - the absent point on MY is be replaced by
one that on MX may or may not be away from the target, causing the ρ to vary.
The majority of technical details are revealed by simulations and provided in
sec. 5.2. However, it is observed that the typical value of σρ ranges in [0, 0.1],
thus smaller than for ⟨ρ⟩which is in [0, 1]. Another important observation is
that the modiﬁed CCM method is much faster than the classical CCM that uses
the convergence as criterion for causality (see ﬁg. A.11).
The algorithm for SoCM, in the same style as 1 can be found in sec. A.2.
Summary
Many important concepts were introduced throughout this chapter. The ﬁrst
one, Takens’ theorem (sec.
2.2) allows to recognize and understand dynam-
ics of a system by creating lagged-coordinate embeddings from the time series
of single system variable. At the same time, application of this statement to
oscillatory systems had been argued to be valid under certain circumstances.
Another consequence of Takens’ theorem is the Convergence Cross Mapping
(CCM) [60] sec. 2.3; the method detects continuity between two reconstructed
manifolds corresponding to two diﬀerent time series by using simplex projection
[61]. The following section 2.3.1 argues that, theoretically, CCM reﬂects the bi-
ological conditions present among oscillators in SCN. However, sec. 2.3.2 casts
a shadow on the interpretation of CCM scores when many interacting variables
are present. To address this concern, the alternative CCM interpretation, Sin-
gularity of Cross Mapping (SoCM) had been proposed. For ﬁnal remark, the
table 2.1 brieﬂy summarizes the link between causality type, methods and the
output scores.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Alternative CCM method: Singularity of Cross Mapping (SoCM)
23
Prediction type
Method types
X ↔Y
X →Y
X ↮Y
ˆX|MY
ρ, ⟨ρ⟩, 1 −σρ
High
High
Low
ˆY |MX
ρ, ⟨ρ⟩, 1 −σρ
High
Low
Low
Table 2.1: The theoretical scores from diﬀerent CCM methods applied to diﬀerent
types of coupling. Column to the left presents what prediction had been
made, next to the right - what approaches had been used.
Here ρ is
the classical CCM approach [60], ⟨ρ⟩is the SoCM mean correlation and
σρ the standard deviation of ρ SoCM estimates. The remaining columns
indicate scores corresponding to causality type of interest.
In general:
High (correlation) ≈1 and Low ≪1.
==PAGE:36==
24
State Space Reconstruction (SSR) and its role in detecting causality
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Other Methods
This chapter provides a summary of other methods and approaches that are
necessary to infer network structure in SCN. Section 3.1 revises the approach
from Abel et al. [3], where the Maximal Information Coeﬃcient [50] was used to
propose one network architecture. Then, another method to measure causality
between dynamic variables is reported in 3.2: the Liangs Information Transfer
(or Liang Causality) by X. San Liang [41]. There are other proposed approaches
to detect causality (e.g. Transfer Entropy [54], Granger Causality [29], Pearl’s
causality algorithms [49] or many under-construction methods created through-
out DREAM challenges [11]. Comparing them all is a great topic for future
research, but not in this thesis due to time constraints1. The last two sections
of this chapter focus on simulation of network of cells in SCN. Section 3.3 sum-
marizes the model (Protein Sequestration model [36]) used for simulations; these
were performed by Gillespie algorithm [24], brieﬂy introduced in sec. 3.4.
1There were some attempts to do that, e.g. [45]. However, conclusions from this article
are not always reliable; for example, the performance of CCM was reported based on some
misinterpretations of the method (see further in sec. 8.2).
==PAGE:38==
26
Other Methods
3.1
Maximal Information Coeﬃcient (MIC)
The Maximal Information Coeﬃcient [50] is a measure to detect the amount of
shared information between two variables. This method was previously used to
postulate a network structure of SCN [3] and it is included here for compari-
son. Like CCM, MIC is a non-parametric method; however, it is not related to
causality, but to infer connectivity. A brief description is provided below, but
for details and proofs we refer to the supplementary material of [50].
Assume that for pair of time series, X(t), Y (t), a set D exist, such that the X(t)
represents the projection of D to x-axis and Y (t) projection to y-axis. Further-
more, consider the scatter plot of D and a grid G over it. If any relationship
between X and Y exist, then D|G (distribution of D given grid G) must be
maximized for a speciﬁc subset of G (see ﬁg. A.3 for illustration of grid con-
struction for MIC using simulated data). The mutual information I(D|G) [15]
to infer the distribution over the grid subsets is calculated, and the maximal
one I∗(D, x, y) = max I(D|G) is chosen. However many diﬀerent grid construc-
tions are possible which implies various I∗(D, x, y). To address this issue, the
characteristic matrix M(D)x,y with entries of normalized values
I∗(D,x,y)
log min{x,y} is
constructed, and the maximal element of the characteristic matrix deﬁnes MIC:
the maximal possible mutual information shared between two variables.
The MIC values are symmetric: (X(t), Y (t)) and (Y (t), X(t)) have the same
MIC value; the score range is [0, 1] where 1 indicates that identical information
is shared in a pair of data, and therefore, a perfect connectivity. Abel et al in
[3] had analyzed sensitivity of MIC applied to simulated SCN oscillators: the
MIC seems invariant to changes in aplitude, sampling rate and added noise, but
it is sensitive to phase-shift. To avoid the possible bias caused by this property,
the time-series data are shifted in 1 h increments from -12 to 24 h (real data
are sampled every hour sec. 4.2), and the maximum score among them is taken.
We refer to this maximum score as the corrected MIC score. Note that in this
thesis we only use the corrected MIC scores to prevent any bias.
3.2
Liang Information Transfer (LC)
Liang Causality (LC) or Liang Information Transfer is a measure of causality
between a pair of dynamical variables[41], [39], [53]. The approach is diﬀerent
when compared to CCM: instead of non-parametric analysis of two, embedded
time series, the LC serves to model the information ﬂow between two variables
involved in the system. A summary of the model derivation, basic assumptions
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Liang Information Transfer (LC)
27
and formula measuring causality are provided as follows (for details, see [41]):
Consider the two-dimensional system X = (X1, X2) with stochastic diﬀerential
equation given by:
dX = F(X, θ) + B(X, θ)dW
(3.1)
Here, F := [F1(x1, x2), F2(x1, x2)] stands for the ﬂow of the information - the
deterministic evolution of X. θ stands for the set of model parameters, B =
b11
b12
b21
b22

is a diﬀusion matrix and W is a standard Wiener process.
A quantity related to (3.1) is the information transfer from X2 to X1, T2→1;
this measures causality X1 →X2 and is deﬁned as:
T2→1 = −E
 1
q1
∂(F1q1)
∂x1

+ 1
2E
 1
q1
∂2(b2
11 + b2
12)
∂x2
1

(3.2)
Here, q1 stands for marginal density of X1 and E is the expectation operator.
The complete derivation of (3.2) can be found in [39].
Intuitively, no information transfer means that there is no link between system
variables - and thus F1(x1, x2) must be independent of x2. Thus, T2→1 = 0 is a
criteria for no causal relation from X2 to X1 meaning that
E
 1
q1
∂(F1q1)
∂x1

= 0 and E
 1
q1
∂2(b2
11 + b2
12)
∂x2
1

= 0
(3.3)
The formula (3.2) is very elegant, but is not concrete: the functions F1, q1 and
diﬀusion coeﬃcients b11, b12 are unknown. To solve this issue, an appropriate
model for F must be chosen, and here:
• Information ﬂow F is assumed to be linear: F = f + AX, where f is
constant vector and A =

a11
a12
a21
a22

is a constant matrix.2
• Diﬀusion matrix is assumed to be diagonal and constant: this diagonal
form implies no co-interation between noise aﬀecting X1 and X2, i.e. noise
from X2 does not directly aﬀect X1 and vice versa.
• (X1, X2) are initially bivariate Gaussian; therefore, under the linearity of
F and simple diﬀusion described above, the density remains Gaussian for
all times t.
2There is no information in [41], which is the main text presenting the method, if elements
of A are R or C.
==PAGE:40==
28
Other Methods
• Each of X1, X2 is a Markov process.
These assumptions allow to obtain the diﬀerential equations for the mean m=(m1, m2)
and covariance C =
C11
C12
C21
C22

of X. Using them, the equation (3.2) becomes
simply:
T2→1 = a12
C12
C2
11
(3.4)
With enough observations of X1 and X2, the covariance C12 and variance C2
11
are supposed to be well-approximated by the sample-covariances
Cij = (Xi −Xi)(Xj −Xj)
i, j ∈{1, 2}
where¯denotes sample mean. Therefore, the remaining problem is to estimate
a12: From this step, the maximum likelihood estimation, and method of least
squares are applied to get:
a12 =

−C12C1,d1 + C11C2,d1

[det C]−1
and Ci,dj = (Xi −Xi)( ˙Xj −˙Xj),
i, j ∈{1, 2}
where · stands for time derivative, and therefore:
T2→1 = C11C12C2,d1 −C12C2,d1
C2
11C22 −C11C2
12
(3.5)
The information transfer T1→2 is deﬁned analogously.
A main advantage of LC is the closed-formula (3.5): this allows a simple im-
plementation and fast computation time (see ﬁg. A.11). On the other hand, a
practical usage of this method is questionable due to the assumptions. For in-
stance, how much one can rely on linearity assumption? Many systems in nature
are nonlinear thus the full network of SCN is expected to be non-linear; ﬁnally,
the linear systems serve only as a local approximation to non-linear dynamics
(due to Hartmann-Grobmann theorem, see [42]). To study validity of linearity
and remaining assumptions is a large topic for itself. Another drawback of the
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Protein Sequestration Model
29
method is the unboundedness of scores: there is no lower limit nor upper limit of
T1→2 and T2→1. As T2→1 = 0 means that there is no causal inﬂuence from X2
to X1, one can measure the absolute information transfer |T1→2| and |T2→1|,
but the range is [0, ∞), and thus unbounded. For practical analysis, the LC
scores may be normalized by scaling them all with the largest possible element.
Nevertheless, the Liang Causality is tested on simulated SCN cells together with
MIC and CCM in 5.2.
3.3
Protein Sequestration Model
Protein sequestration model [36] developed by Kim et al. describes the negative-
feedback loop mechanism in SCN neurons that produces circadian rhythm (see
ﬁg. A.1) and intercellular coupling mediated by VIP (see sec. 1). The model
contains a set of ordinary diﬀerential equations for molecular concentrations in
the time-dimensionless form and with normalized reaction rates. For any i’th
cell it can be formulated as:
dMi
dt
= f(Ri) −Mi + µ
N
N
X
i=1
Vi
dRc,i
dt
= Mi −Rc,i
(3.6)
dRi
dt = Rc,i −Ri
dVi
dt = ˜τ(f(Ri) −Vi)
where the components are:
• M: the mRNA concentration of genes to be expressed (PER or CRY) in
nucleus.
• Rc: the repressor (PER and CRY complex) concentration in the cyto-
plasm.
• R: the repressor concentration i nucleus
• f(R) =
(A−R−Kd)+√
(A−R−Kd)2+4AKd
2A
: the protein sequestration mecha-
nism to repress gene transcription thereby regulating the coupled period.
A stands for the concentration of free activators to promote binding of R
==PAGE:42==
30
Other Methods
to E-BOX. Kd is a dissociate constant between A and E-BOX; to eﬀec-
tively repress the activators, Kd is small. Without loss of generality, the
concentration of A is assumed constant and the aﬃnity (binding strength)
between R and A is assumed to be very high.
• V : the VIP concentration.
The parameter ˜τ stands for time-scale parameter3 and is assumed to be ˜τ ≫1.
To provide the intercellular coupling throughout SCN, the signaling with VIP
must occur faster than on a day-scale, which characterizes other processes. This
released VIP has been observed to be proportional with the concentration of re-
pressor [36] [56], [32]. Additionally N cells promote formation of intercellular
coupling with the i’th one; the contribution of all N cells is assumed to be
weighted uniformly, providing one parameter of coupling strength µ. This ex-
plains the last term in the equation for M. To model a system with diﬀerent
types of coupling, this can be changed to weighted average of Vi, that is:
dMi
dt
= f(Ri) −Mi + 1
˜N
N
X
i=1
µiVi
Where ˜N = N −M is the number of cells that are eﬀectively coupled; thus
M < N is the number of uncoupled cells (µi = 0).
The other components in (3.6) are of Goodwin-type [26]: Translation (thus
decay in concentration) of M increases the concentration of Rc, repressor in
cytoplasm; it decreases once Rc enters the nucleus, thereby rising concentration
of R. Then, the activated repressor, f(R) blocks gene expression of M. Due to
stepwise-function shape of f, when concentration of R exceeds some threshold,
the repressor is deactivated, allowing genes to be expressed again. See evt. ﬁg.
A.1.
Finally, in the real biological system neurons are not identical. To ensure het-
erogeneity between cells, for each i the equations for Mi, Rc,i, Ri, and Vi are
multiplied by random number sampled from normal distribution with mean 1
and standard deviation 0.15 [36].
Protein sequestration model reﬂects the synchronization of period in the pres-
ence of coupling between cells (ﬁg. 4 in [36]), and therefore serves as a reliable
tool for simulations to validate methods of causality detection
3Although in [36] the τ is used without tilde, here it is introduced to avoid confusion with
τ appearing in formulation of Takens’ theorem.
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Gillespie Algorithm
31
3.4
Gillespie Algorithm
Gillespie algorithm [24], also known as Stochastic Simulation Algorithm or ki-
netic Monte Carlo algorithm is a well-known tool to simulate the solution to
chemical master equation (CME)[57] [25]. Because of its popularity in system
biology ﬁeld, only a brief description of the algorithm is provided; for details,
we refer to [24] or [57].
Consider the current state (number of molecules) of species X. The state can
change only if a reaction involving X species happens. The Gillespie algorithm
is a tool to simulate the set of states at simulated, random reaction times simul-
taneously for all species in reaction.
Main assumptions behind the algorithm are (i) the species follow Markov prop-
erty - the evolution is only dependent on their recent history - and (ii) the
reaction time t is exponentially distributed with parameter λ corresponding to
accumulated reaction rate. Three major components are needed to deﬁne a spe-
ciﬁc reaction: the vector of propensity function (probability that j’th reaction
happens during small time interval), stochiometry matrix (the net change in the
i’th species caused by j’th reaction). The example of stoichiometric matrix and
propensity functions for protein sequestration model are provided in sec. A.4.
The last important component is a volume Ω, sometimes called for "system size"
because it gives a rough idea about the total number of molecules involved in
the system. Speciﬁcally, it describes the stochasticity of the system: the lower,
the more random is the reaction. Additionally, to run the algorithm, a set of
initial states and maximal simulation time must be given.
Gillespie algorithm has one disadvantage: it is computationally expensive for
large Ω, as every single state is recorded when a new reaction happens - and
many reactions happen for such large system size. Nevertheless, this algorithm
is used throughout this thesis; the less-expensive, reliable method to simulate
chemical reactions is not known.
==PAGE:44==
32
Other Methods
==PAGE:45==
Part II
Results
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
Data & Software
Data used in this thesis are divided into two parts: the ﬁrst set contains sim-
ulated data and second - experimental data, presented in sec. 4.1 and 4.2 re-
spectively. This chapter presents them both, followed by short comment about
software used for computation of all scores (sec. 4.3).
4.1
Simulated Data
To reﬂect behavior of cellular oscillators in SCN under various types of dynam-
ics and coupling, the trajectories of gene expressions were simulated by using
protein sequestration model described in sec. 3.3. Computations were done with
Gillespie algorithm sec. 3.4 and all diﬀerent output combinations (i.e. recorded
data) are illustrated in ﬁg. 4.1. The parameters required in the model follow
suggestions from [36]: ˜τ = 20, Kd = 10−5, and A = 0.00659.
==PAGE:48==
36
Data & Software
𝜇= 0
𝜇= 0.225
𝜇= 0.4
↮
→↔
→
↔
500 pairs
2 ⨉500 pairs
2 ⨉500 pairs
SYNCHRONIZED
DURING RESYNCHRONIZATION
6 cycles (144 points)
8 cycles (192 points)
4 cycles (96 points)
Figure 4.1: Visual representation of simulated data
Possible combinations of data obtained from simulations are two groups
of pairwise time series (red and black) simulated at diﬀerent dynamical
sates. Each set contains 500 pairs of 5 diﬀerent simulation conditions
(marked with connected circles) that allow various magnitudes and di-
rectionality of coupling.
Simulated trajectories contain 8 cycles (gray
rectangle symbolizing the subset of trajectories), but can be scaled to
contain 6 cycles (purple) or 4 cycles (blue).
Two states of oscillators were considered for simulation: synchronized state and
state of resynchronization after network perturbation (see evt.ﬁg. 1.1). During
synchronized state, the measured is the cellular activity after transient state
dies out (where, by "cellular activity" the Mi from protein sequestration model
sec. 3.3). After some time passes by (approx. 6 cycles as in [3]), the coupling
with same strength and directionality as during synchronization state is induced
again and corresponds to cellular activity during resynchronization.
For each state, ﬁve sets of time series containing 500 points of 8 cycles were
simulated. Each of these sets is uniquely characterized by the choice of cou-
pling type ("uncoupled", "unidirectional" and "bidirectional") and - if coupled
- of coupling strength (µ = 0.225 and µ = 0.4 characterizing weak and strong
coupling respectively).
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Experimental Data
37
By comparison with bioluminescence recordings from [3] (see sec.
4.2), the
volume required to Gillespie algorithm was chosen to Ω= 10000. Unfortunately,
we were not able to synchronize any larger network than a pair of cells. This
is due to lack of memory to allocate the output, because Gillespie algorithm
simulates every single reaction happening (see sec. 3.4). Instead, we repetitively
simulated 500 pairs for each condition considered before - thus, 3000 pairs in
total.
Time indexes are uniformly sampled, allowing to form various smaller subsets to
test the method accuracy under diﬀerent circumstances. To match experimental
conditions, a rate of 24 points per cycle is chosen and methods were tested on
8, 6 and 4 cycles from each state.
Finally, the cells during resynchronization were simulated separately from the
synchronized sets; therefore, they are not a part of the same phase space and
are not comparable.
4.2
Experimental Data
The experimental data from Abel et al (which can be found on the website [2])
represents raw bioluminescence recordings from a set of SCN cells taken from
5 mice. Recordings were taken during experiment involving TTX, described in
sec. 1. Data are given as an adjacency matrix. Additionally to bioluminescence
recordings, the location coordinates of are provided. All details regarding the
experiment (such as animal conditions or laboratory equipment) are provided
in [3].
For each SCN, the number of cells diﬀers in the range of 228-383. Sampling
is conducted every hour for all SCN, however, the length of each experiment
diﬀers. All such numbers are provided in table 4.1.
==PAGE:50==
38
Data & Software
SCN
#Cells
Pre-TTX
During TTX
Post-TTX
SCN 1
383
90 (3.5)
144 (6.0)
192 (8.0)
SCN 2
264
109 (4.5)
143 (6.0)
241 (10.0)
SCN 3
304
82 (3.4)
142 (5.9)
244 (10.2)
SCN 4
281
107 (4.5)
133 (5.5)
278 (11.6)
SCN 5
228
113 (4.7)
129 (5.4)
205 (8.5)
Mean
292
100.2 (4.2)
138.2 (5.8)
232 (9.7)
Table 4.1: Summary of bioluminescence recordings from ﬁve diﬀerent SCN (1st col-
umn from left) with corresponding mean among all SCNs. The provided
are number of cells (2nd) and time series length before (3rd), during (4th)
and after TTX application (5th). The length of time series is given in
hours and in (days).
4.3
Software for computation of scores
No method used in this thesis was implemented by the author. Instead, diﬀerent
software listed below were used. Examples of codes are shown in sec. A.6.
1. To compute CCM/SoCM: package rEDM in R-programming language1 [69].
2. To compute MIC: Package minerva in R [20]. Note that MIC scores are
corrected from possible bias as described in sec. 3.1, [3].
3. To compute LC: Software developed by author himself (X.San Liang), in
MATLAB [40]
4. Stochastic simulation (Gillespie algorithm): software developed in MATLAB
[1]
Furthermore, note that all methods require that time series data must be of
equal length.
1All R-packages are from CRAN-repository.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Simulation Results
In this chapter the results from simulations of cellular trajectories reﬂecting
conditions in SCN are provided. The ﬁrst section is dedicated to method of the
major focus of this thesis - CCM and its alternatives. The method has been
interpreted in various ways (sec. 2.3.2, 2.4) illustrated by results in sec. 5.1.
Afterwards, the focus is changed to methods tested on all simulated data. The
Cumulative Distribution Functions (CDFs) are compared in sec. 5.2 to provide
the ﬁrst insight about the ability of method to detect of diﬀerent coupling type.
Because such analysis is in general not easy, the study of this topic is continued
by applying Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) in sec. 5.3. The last
section 5.4 compares CDF from simulated and experimental bioluminescence
recordings.
Note the notation and terminology: we call cells being causally linked as "cou-
pled", because causality is understood as a dynamical forcing of one variable on
another (see sec. 1). Furthermore, note that the average correlation estimate
from SoCM (sec. 2.4) is denoted by ρ and standard deviation of correlation
estimates (after transformation) is 1 −σ.
Because ρ is approximately equal
to correlation value obtained by CCM with maximal library length, it can be
interpreted as a score from classical CCM method.
==PAGE:52==
40
Simulation Results
5.1
CCM interpretation results
0
1
4
95
𝜌
𝐿#
Uncoupled 1
0.8
1
0
1
4
95
𝜌
𝐿#
Coupled
0.8
1
90
95
90
95
0
1
4
95
𝜌
𝐿#
Uncoupled 
2
90
95
0
0.2
●●	  𝜌≔	  < 𝜌>
|  |	  	  𝜎≔𝜎)
Figure 5.1: Diﬀerent interpretations of CCM scores
Pairwise scores for selected simulated cells. Each cell pair used for simu-
lation contains 4 cycles with sampling rate of 24 points per cycle. Black
graph: X →Y direction, red: Y →X direction. The set of scores con-
tains a pair of coupled (bidirectionally coupled cells with µ = 0.4) and
two pairs of uncoupled cells. Left: Sugihara’s convergence criterion [60].
Right: The alternative CCM method 2.4. The number of required itera-
tions is 100. The example of coupled and ﬁrst uncoupled pair is same as
for ﬁgure 2.4.E. Time series applied to produce graph in this ﬁgure are
visualized in ﬁg. A.4
In section 2.3.2 diﬀerent approaches to interpret scores from CCM were pre-
sented. These are summarized on ﬁg. 5.1 and, as observed, the convergence
criterion of CCM does not always work when data are oscillatory. To conclude
this, consider the left panel from ﬁg. 5.1, showing results from diﬀerent methods
applied to simulated data of coupled (µ = 0.4 and bidirectional coupling) and
two uncoupled pairs of scores.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Score distribution: all methods
41
For the coupled and ﬁrst uncoupled pair, the correlation increases in magnitude
with library length ˜L up to some very high score at ˜L = 95, thus, the classical
CCM method does not work in for this example. The other uncoupled pair
of scores remain low for all possible library lengths, indicating the success of
classical CCM. On the right panel of ﬁg.
5.1 the alternative CCM method
shows that the mean correlation estimate leads to the same conclusion as for
the classical method. However, the standard deviation of correlation estimates
σ, seems to capture the uncertainty of existence of causal link: it is very low in
when causal link is present and high for both examples with absent coupling.
5.2
Score distribution: all methods
To compare performance of the candidates to infer synchronized network, we
ﬁrst investigate the distributions of ρ (mean SoCM correlation/CCM correla-
tion), σ (standard deviation of correlation estimates), LC (Liang’s information
transfer) and MIC (Maximal Information Coeﬃcient). For LC, the scores had
been scaled with the largest element among all values in the set with same dy-
namical set and same time series length (due to unboundedness of scores, see
sec. 3.2). For standard deviation, a simple transformation 1 −σ is applied and
used onwards.
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
Empirical CDF
Score
X ↔Y
1-σ
ρ
LC
MIC
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
X →	  Y
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
X ↮Y
Figure 5.2: Sample cumulative distribution of scores obtained by applying
the ρ, 1 −σ, LC and MIC
Three graphs showing the cumulative distributions (CDF) are shown.
Left graph: CDF for scores obtained with bidirectionally coupled cells.
Middle: unidirectional. Right: uncoupled. For ρ, 1 −σ, and LC, which
discriminate directionality of calculation, the solid line stands for X →Y
direction and dashed for Y →X.
The time series used comes from
the synchronized region with 96 points (see 4.1).
For both uni- and
bidirectional coupling µ = 0.4 (µ = 0.225 is shown in appendix) 5.3
==PAGE:54==
42
Simulation Results
The sample cumulative distributions of scores for uncoupled, unidirectionally
and bidirectionally coupled cells are computed and shown in ﬁg.
5.2.
The
technical details regarding the samples (e.g. number of cycles used for test) are
provided in the ﬁgure legend. Conclusions and remarks listed below apply to
other tested combinations of simulated series as well. These are:
• CDFs follow the expectation when the datasets are changed: the more
interaction between cells is introduced, the more skewed are graphs to the
right.
• The approximate ranges are [0, 1] for ρ, [0.85, 1] for 1 −σ, [0, 1] for LC
(due to normalization) and [0, 1] for MIC (which is known A priori from
[3] [50]).
• LC is the only distribution skewed to the left.
This interesting phe-
nomenon is discussed by the end of this chapter.
• Unidirectional causation is not detected. The expectation from [60] and
[41], it is that the case of one-way forcing X →Y , the scores from one
direction must be high, and other must be low (except for MIC which is
symmetric). This is not observed in the middle graph of 5.2 - testing each
direction results to almost identical CDFs.
Interestingly, the CDFs from testing unidirectionality diﬀer from those of
bidirectional and uncoupled pairs. This is also observed in ﬁg. A.5, where
CDFs are plotted for diﬀerent dynamical states.
Importantly, the latter remark does not mean that conclusions from [60] and
[41] are wrong regarding detection of unidirectional link - none of these methods
were tested on oscillatory systems. The output indicates that in such cases, a
completely diﬀerent approach must be applied to investigate existence of uni-
directional forcing. Because the unidirectionality has not been revealed by the
proposed approach, it is not further investigated in this thesis. Our attention is
set on distinguishing coupled cells (bidirectional causation) from uncoupled (no
causation) cells.
5.3
Accuracy of network detection given method
and dynamical state
How do scores reﬂect that some cells are coupled or uncoupled? There exist no
clear boundary that provides "Coupled" and "Uncoupled" categorization with
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Accuracy of network detection given method and dynamical state
43
100% certainty - however, some methods may classify scores more accurately
than others.
This issue can be resolved by obtaining and comparing Receiver Operating Char-
acteristics (ROC) for diﬀerent methods [30], [48]. ROC measures the ability of
correct classiﬁcation (also called "discrimination quality" or "performance eval-
uation") that can be obtained by a certain method; it is explained in following
steps:
1) A random output score from tested method can be classiﬁed to cate-
gory "coupled" ("uncoupled") if the score is above (below) some threshold
value. The categorization may be correct or not depending on the true
answer. For example, if the score corresponding to the coupled pair of cell
is below the threshold, the cell is incorrectly classiﬁed as an uncoupled
one.
2) If 1) is repeated for all available scores, then the four values can be com-
puted: (TP) True Positives, (FP) False Positives, (FN) False Negatives
and (TN) True Negatives; these stand for the number of coupled cells
correctly classiﬁed as coupled, uncoupled classiﬁed as coupled - and so
on. The ratios TP/(TP+FN) and FP/(FP+TN), called for True Positive
Rate (TPR) and False Positive Rate (FPR) respectively, are computed.
3) If one repeats the above calculations varying threshold, then a set of TPR
and FPR values can be obtained. The ROC presents performance of TPR
against FPR. It can be visualized as a curve (ROC curve); the more dom-
inant is the TPR over FPR (that is, the closer to the upper-left corner of
a graph), the better the classiﬁcation.
4) The Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) denotes the a single-value mea-
sure of method ability to correctly discriminate the scores: the closer to
1, the better is the performance.
Additionally, valid scores must have
AUC> 0.5 - else TPR<FPR for all tested thresholds, indicating incorrect
classiﬁcation.
To test the methods discrimination ability, 500 pairs of scores corresponding to
uncoupled pairs of cells are mixed with 500 coupled pairs (strongly and bidirec-
tionally coupled cells). The request is that both scores in a pair must be above
threshold to be classiﬁed as "coupled". In another words, if S is a score operator
(ρ, 1−σ etc.) and th is a threshold value, then S(X →Y ) > th∧S(Y →X) > th
classiﬁes the pair of cells X and Y coupled.
The thresholds applied to this test diﬀer in values, but follow the same proce-
dure: ﬁrst, a range for th is estimated as 1 and 99% quantile among the scores
==PAGE:56==
44
Simulation Results
from all tested pairs; then, 100 uniformly distributed quantiles are chosen among
this range to represent the threshold values.
FPR
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
TPR
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
FPR
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
TPR
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
B
FPR
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
TPR
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
1-σ
ρ
LC MIC
1
1
0
0
Synchronized State 
(S) 
Late Resynchronizing State
(L)
Whole Resynchronizing State
(W)
C
Uncoupled & Coupled
1
0.5
AUC
W
L
S
1-σ
ρ
LC MIC
A
Figure 5.3: Method performance on simulated data
A: Three diﬀerent dynamical states are inspected from time course data
from simulation: synchronized (S), whole resynchronizing (W) and late
resynchronizing state (L).
B: The ROC curves from testing the method classiﬁcation on (S), (W)
and (L); tested methods were ρ (red), 1 −σ (green), LC (orange) and
MIC (blue); the dashed line corresponds to lower bound for accepting
the method.
C: The AUC scores corresponding to ROC curves from B.
The ROC curves tested on simulated cells are provided in ﬁgure 5.3.B and corre-
sponding AUC scores are given on part C. Part A provides an visual description
of what parts of all simulated series are used to infer method performance with
ROC. However, there is a lack of explanation of why exactly these regions are
used.
Recall Takens’ theorem (2.1): it provides a tool to reconstruct system attractor
given single time series. The attractor is a dynamical pattern of cells that had
not experienced perturbation with TTX (synchronized cells). Therefore, the
two methods based on Takens’ theorem - ρ and 1 −σ - are expected to have the
best performance on the synchronized region (S), next best on the late resyn-
chronizing state (L; see sec. 1 or ﬁg. 1.1) and, ﬁnally, the worst performance of
whole resynchronization series (W).
For LC it is more diﬃcult to predict what state is expected to be most suc-
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Simulated vs. experimental data
45
cessful. However, the observed resynchronization of network is very likely to be
a non-linear process, which violates the assumptions in sec. 3.2; thus, a bad
performance is expected in region W.
Not much is known about expectation of classiﬁcation quality for MIC, as the
method does not rely on any assumptions about dynamics sec. 3.1. Abel and
his team in [3] were measuring MIC scores during resynchronization of network,
and their argument was that the monitoring of resynchronization provides the
functional connectivity in SCN.
As observed from ﬁg. 5.3.B. and C, the 1 −σ has clearly the best performance
among all methods: the AUC computed during synchronization and late resyn-
chronization are higher than all other scores. The AUC values of 1−σ computed
on whole resynchronizing state is approx. equal to the one for ρ, which, overall,
shows the second best performance. Note that AUC scores for 1 −σ, ρ and LC
follow the expectations. MIC shows the overall worst performance. All methods
provide valid classiﬁcation as all computed AUC values are above 0.5.
Even though LC does not show a bad performance, there is a question that
remains unresolved: what causes such big skew of score CDF to the left? How
much one can rely on all these assumptions behind construction of the method
(sec. 3.2)? Answering these questions requires a careful analysis and at this
point, one does not know anything about reliability of LC. To avoid misleading
conclusions, our choice is to not focus on this approach onwards.
Finally, note that the great performance in the region of synchronization implies,
that no perturbation with toxin TTX is needed to infer the network structure.
This interesting result is further discusses in sec. 8.3.
5.4
Simulated vs. experimental data
All tests on simulated data were conducted to provide an expectation about
output from analysis of the true data from SCN. Clearly, the more is known
about the scores, the more accurately the discrimination of the set of coupled
cells. Compare ﬁg. A.5, showing CDFs of scores from simulated data with ﬁg.
5.4 presenting CDF of scores from ﬁrst SCN.
==PAGE:58==
46
Simulation Results
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
Empirical CDF
Score
1-σ
ρ
MIC
SCN 1
Figure 5.4: Cumulative distribution of ρ (red), 1−σ (green) and MIC scores
(blue) from bioluminescence recordings of the ﬁrst SCN.
The analyzed data on ﬁg. A.5 contains exactly 96 points and are sampled from
regions without any perturbation (see chapt. 4). Therefore it is expected that
their CDFs are very similar - but they are not.
The minimum scores from
experimental data are remarkably higher, even when compared to the scores
from bidirectionally coupled cells. As the shapes of CDFs for all methods remain
similar (they are all skewed to the right, see histograms of coupled and data in
ﬁg. A.6) and time series have comparable trajectories (ﬁg. A.4 and A.7), the
question is what causes such diﬀerence between simulated and experimental
score sample distributions. This is discussed in chapter 8.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 6
Experimental Data: Results
In section 5.4 it was observed that simulated data do not reﬂect all properties
of experimental data. Therefore, at the ﬁrst sight it may seem very hard to
investigate method eﬃciency and network structure without solid expectations
about output. Fortunately, in this chapter, the objective is to present how two
important features - the prevalence of small-world network structures in nature
and Takens’ theorem - can help to estimate criteria validating the existence
of coupling between cells. These criteria are presented in sec. 6.1 and results
obtained by using them are presented in sec.
6.2.
Note, that the notion of
"network structure" is related to concept of detecting sets of couplings between
cells in SCN. Such sets is identiﬁed from the set of scores using threshold, see
sec. 5.4.
6.1
Criteria to measure method accuracy with
network structures
As stated in sec. 1, the synchronized networks before TTX application and some
certain time after its removal, display almost same circadian rhythm; also, the
strongest couplings are expected to remain invariant. This leads to conclusion
that the main elements of network architecture must be same before and during
==PAGE:60==
48
Experimental Data: Results
the late resynchronization region - and this is the ﬁrst criterion: consistency
of network structure.
For the second criterion, observe that [3], [65], [8] point out that the small-world
networks are very common in nature. Using MIC on series during resynchro-
nization, Abel et al. in [3] had established a small-world network architecture
with hubs located in the central parts of SCN. If this network structure is true,
then the major parts should be recognized in the synchronized region as well, re-
gardless the choice of method - and therefore, the second criterion is validation
of network structure. Note that in [3], diﬀerent thresholds of uncorrected
MIC had been used to classify cells as coupled/uncoupled1. As in our approach
we use corrected MIC to prevent bias caused by phase-shift, the thresholds may
be diﬀerent. Therefore in validation we rather use a set of diﬀerent networks
than a single one.
Both criteria require a procedure to quantify the similarity between network
structures. It is stated below and code is provided in algorithm 2.
6.1.1
Computational procedure
Given a set of scores Set1 and some threshold value th ∈Th,1, one network struc-
ture is established. This particular architecture is assigned to another set Set2,
written Set1 ⇒Set2. How well the structure from Set1 is reﬂected on Set2 can be
determined by accuracy of network similarity - the AUC value corresponding to
ROC on Set2 varying thresholds Th,2 (see sec. 5.3). In another words, the abil-
ity of network recognition on Set2 is tested with AUC value given the network
structure from Set1 and conditioned on the choice of threshold th ∈Th,1. How-
ever, another architecture from Set1 can be obtained with diﬀerent th ∈Th,1. If
this procedure is repeated several times varying threshold, then a set of AUC
values can be obtained.
Now, recall from sec. 5.3 that all thresholds are chosen as values correspond-
ing to 100 quantiles between 1% and 99% of all scores; using terminology from
network science, these %-values correspond to fractions of edges which are clas-
siﬁed as uncoupled. It is unlikely that threshold values chosen below 25% or
above 75% of all scores determine the reliable network structure. Therefore, the
focus is set on Th,1 restricted to 25 −75% interval and on the corresponding
AUC values. The normalized, approximate integral of AUC over this restricted
domain corresponds to AUC∗- the degree of network similarity given diﬀerent
1These thresholds are [0.949, 0.935, 0.9895, 0.968, 0.969] which states that only 5% among
all edges are are functionally connected [3].
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Accuracy of similarity between diﬀerent network structures
49
dynamical states.
The pseudo code for above algorithm is stated in algorithm 2 below. Finally,
note that a pairwise score is classiﬁed with the condition as for simulated data
(5.3): both values must be greater than threshold to be classiﬁed as "coupled".
Algorithm 2 Quantifying network similarity
Input: Set1, Th,1, Set2, Th,2
for i ∈length(Th,1) do
Assign th = Th,1(i)
Find & assign: C := Set1(Set1 > th) and U := Set1(Set1 ≤th)
Find IC and IU: sets of connected edges and unconnected edges.
Compute AUC(th) = AUC of ROC curve for Set2 using:
- Th,2
- Set2(IC) (coupled cells)
- Set2(IU) (uncoupled cells)
end for
Compute AUC∗≈
R
Th,1[0.25,0.75] AUC(th)dth (e.g. using trapezoidal rule)
Output: AUC∗
end
6.2
Accuracy of similarity between diﬀerent net-
work structures
Exactly as on ﬁg. 5.3, the bioluminescence recordings can be divided into S, W
and L regions, see the left graph from ﬁg. 6.1.A which corresponds to series of
SCN 1. To check consistency, the algorithm 2 must be applied twice: the network
from resynchronized attractor must be similar to the one before perturbation
(L ⇒S) and vice versa (S ⇒L). Then, for validation, the algorithm 2 must
be applied with L ⇒W. Last three subﬁgures of 6.1.A present the graphs of
AUC(th) and the corresponding AUC∗values. Testing consistency reveals that
1−σ is most accurate method; the corresponding AUC∗are as high as 0.92. For
validation, 1 −σ and ρ have same performance with AUC∗= 0.61. In general,
the CCM methods ρ and 1 −σ have much better performance than MIC, which
for all tested criteria remains close to AUC∗= 0.50 (the lower bound of method
acceptance).
==PAGE:62==
50
Experimental Data: Results
Similar conclusions can be withdrawn from tests on remaining set of SCN data.
As the physiology of each mouse is unique, the patterns of bioluminescence
recording vary from SCN to SCN - see ﬁg. 6.1.B representing the average proﬁle
for all experiments. The corresponding AUC∗scores are shown on ﬁg. 6.1.C.
For half of the consistency cases, the 1 −σ shows the best performance among
other methods. For second half, the accuracy of 1 −σ and ρ are similarly high.
The test of validation again shows that 1−σ and ρ seem similar; also, validation
seems to perform slightly worse than consistency scores. This less successful test
score is not surprising - by Takens’ theorem, both methods should have the best
performance far from perturbation region. MIC in only two cases (among all
15) seems to have similar performance to ρ and in all other cases its much lower.
Sometimes, the MIC is even invalid as for consistency S ⇒L in SCN 4, where
AUC∗≈0.25. Comparing SCN 4 results with corresponding bioluminescence
recordings, this does not seem surprising, because MIC is a technique to an-
alyze the graphs, not given dynamical system, and the synchronized and late
resynchronization regions seem very diﬀerent.
Summary
To summarize the results discussed in this chapter, the tests of consistency and
validation show the success of 1 −σ among tests of other methods. Notably,
the second best performance is obtained with ρ indicating the proﬁtable usage
of causality methods based on Takens’ theorem. MIC closes the list of tested
approaches on experimental data with general low performance.
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Accuracy of similarity between diﬀerent network structures
51
L
S
W
90
234
1
338 426
0.06
0
L ⇒S
S ⇒L
W ⇒S
AUC
AUC
AUC
Fraction of edges
Fraction of edges
Fraction of edges
0.68 0.81 0.49
0.77 0.85 0.53
0.61 0.61 0.52
SCN 1
1
109
252
398 493
0.09
0
SCN 2
1
82
224
373
468
0.03
0
SCN 3
1
107
240
423 518
0
0.002
SCN 4
1
113
242
352
447
0
0.07
SCN 5
𝜌
1 −𝜎
MIC
SCN 2
L ⇒S
S ⇒L
W ⇒S
AUC*
1
0
SCN 3
L ⇒S
S ⇒L
W ⇒S
AUC*
1
0
L ⇒S
S ⇒L
W ⇒S
AUC*
SCN 4
1
0
SCN 5
AUC*
L ⇒S
S ⇒L
W ⇒S
1
0
A
B
C
0.25
0.75 1
1
0
0
Figure 6.1: 1 −σ accurately detect the SCN network structure from the synchronized data set
A: Left: The average over cells of bioluminescence recordings from the ﬁrst SCN; the marked regions are synchronized S
(yellow), W whole perturbed (blue) and late resynchronization states L (purple). Right: Results of test for consistency
(L ⇒S and S ⇒L) and validation (W ⇒S) conducted by applying method as in algorithm 2. The AUC is plotted
over threshold values corresponding to fractions representing pairwise scores. Solid line represents the quantile-interval
of 25 −75% where realistic threshold values needed for correct classiﬁcation of cells occur. The numbers correspond
to AUC∗values - the normalized area under the solid segment of graphs. The investigated methods are ρ (red), 1 −σ
(green) and MIC (blue). B: Bioluminescence recordings averaged over cells for remaining sets of SCNs. C: The AUC∗
values obtained by the same method as represented in A. AUC∗are plotted over conducted tests: two for consistency
and one for validation.
==PAGE:64==
52
Experimental Data: Results
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 7
Method Sensitivity
Section 6.2 shows that 1−σ and ρ have ﬁne performance when both consistency
and validation are tested. The question is, however, how trustworthy are the
results? No study had examined the sensitivity of these methods to parameters
such as amplitude change or phase-shift, and therefore one must ﬁrst examine
these to truly state how well each method performs. This chapter is dedicated
to this analysis (sec. 7.1) which is summarized in form of ﬁgure 7.1.
7.1
Results of sensitivity analysis
The analysis presented in this section is done in the same style as in [3] - that is,
two sets of 50 pairs containing coupled and uncoupled trajectories are selected
from simulated data as described in 4.1.
Again coupled means bidirectional
causality with µ = 0.4.
One may ask about validity of this analysis: in sec. 5.4, we reported that simu-
lated data had not reﬂected precisely the distributions of experimental record-
ings. However, as noticed in same section, the graphs of ρ and 1 −σ on ﬁg. 5.4
seem as a scaled version of ﬁg. 5.2. Therefore, our expectation is that results
presented on ﬁg. 7.1 behave similarly in nature. Unless anything else is empha-
==PAGE:66==
54
Method Sensitivity
1
2
3
4
0
0.5
1
1
2
3
4
0.9
0.95
1
Volume (Ω)
Volume (Ω)
500
1000 5000 10000
500
1000 5000 10000
1
0.9
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0.5
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0.9
0.95
1
Embedding Dimension (E)
Embedding Dimension (E)
1
5
9
3
7
1
5
9
3
7
1
0
1
0.9
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
0
0.5
1
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
0.9
0.95
1
Amplitude scaling factor
Amplitude scaling factor
10-1 100 101 102 103
10-2
10-1 100 101 102 103
10-2
1
0.9
1
0
1
7
13
19
25
0
0.5
1
+ 12 h
0
- 12 h
+ 6 h
- 6 h
1
0
+ 12 h
+ 6 h
No shift
- 6 h
- 12 h
0.9
0.95
1
+ 12 h
0
- 12 h
+ 6 h
- 6 h
1
0.9
Phase shift
Phase shift
10
8
6
4
2
0
0.5
1
1
2
3
4
5
0.9
0.95
1
10
6
2
8
4
10
6
2
8
4
1
0
1
0.9
ρ
1-σ
A
B
C
Coupled
Uncoupled
Coupled
Uncoupled
D
E
F
4
6
8
1
0
4
8
6
1
0.9
Number of cycles (fixed sampling)
Number of cycles (fixed sampling)
Number of cycles (varied sampling) Number of cycles (varied sampling)
ρ
1-σ
Figure 7.1: Sensitivity of ρ and 1 −σ to diﬀerent parameters.
On each plot: Scores from ρ (left) and 1 −σ (right) corresponding to X →Y direction. The presented are mean test
scores with corresponding standard error. Solid lines represents results from coupled 50 pairs of cells, dashed - 50
pairs of uncoupled cells. A: Dependency on number of cycles. Tested series consists of 10, 8, 6, 4 and 2 cycles. The
number of used points is ﬁxed to contain 96 points, thus the sampling rate varies among x-axes. B: Same as A but
with ﬁxed sampling rate to 24 points per cycle (or sampling every hour), resulting in series with 4, 6 and 8 cycles (96,
144, 192 points respectively). C: Dependency on amplitude scaling with factor 10i, i ∈{−2, −1, .., 3}. D: Sensitivity
of methods on phase shifting time series in range [+12; −12]h by 1 h. E: Dependency on noise level: Ωin Gillespie
takes values 500, 100, 5000 and 10000. The noise level is reduced with increasing magnitude. F: Sensitivity on choice
of embedding dimension. Tested E are changed by one from 1 to 10 by 1.
==PAGE:67==
7.1 Results of sensitivity analysis
55
sized, the applied default settings are Ω= 10000, 4 cycles with sampling rate
24 points per cycle, E = 2 (see sec. 4.1); furthermore, data used to analysis
come from synchronized region to prevent any bias caused by perturbation. The
showed are scores in X →Y direction only (i.e. no Y →X) to avoid misleading
conclusions.
7.1.1
Number of cycles
Consider ﬁg. 7.1.A. A large variation among ρ is observed, but 1 −σ varies
only a little. The analyzed trajectories contain a ﬁxed amount of points (96
points) but the varying number of cycles which decrease from 10 to 2 by 2.
Diﬀerences between ρ scores for coupled and uncoupled scores shrink with the
reduced number of cycles, however, 1 −σ does not display this problem.
The ﬁgure 7.1.B. investigates another aspect of variation in number of cycles:
with ﬁxed sampling rate (every 1h), the number of cycles changes from 4 to 6 -
and then to 8. Interestingly, 1−σ does not change, but ρ does: the discrimination
between coupled and uncoupled cells is much clearer with increased number of
cycles.
These two results suggest, that the accuracy of ρ (see sec. 6.2) can be improved
by recording data with larger number of cycles regardless of choice of sampling
rate; this result could be expected as it is known that CCM correlation estimates
increase in precision with time series length (see sec. 2.3). 1−σ seems invariant
to number of cycles present in trajectory, with or without changed sampling
rate. This suggests that 1 −σ may be a good estimate of causality in case when
the recordings are short and sparse.
7.1.2
Amplitude
Now, consider ﬁg. 7.1.C. Neither ρ nor 1−σ show any dependency on amplitude
alternations. This experiment was done by keeping the ﬁrst trajectory in the
pair unchanged while multiplying the second trajectory by a scalar which causes
shrinkage/expansion of amplitude.
Thus, no normalization of trajectories is
needed when applying CCM methods to analyze causality.
==PAGE:68==
56
Method Sensitivity
7.1.3
Phase-shifts
For this part, consider ﬁg.
7.1.D where each generated pair of oscillators is
phase-shifted in increments from -12 to 12h by 1h. For 1−σ this eﬀect is strong
and may aﬀect the conclusions about presence of coupling; for ρ the eﬀect is
still present, but less dramatic.
To perform phase-shift, the following was done: in the ﬁrst trajectory of a
pair, the ﬁrst p = 1..12 points were removed from the start while p points were
removed from the end of second trajectory - these are shifts of [+1, +12]h. Then,
the process was repeated in the reverse order to get shifts in range [−12, −1]h.
The case of no phase-shift (of 0h) corresponds to the phase-locked case.
At the phase-locked case, the desired, clear division between coupled and uncou-
pled cells occurs due to equal parametrization in the simulation model. With
non-zero shifts, the computed ρ and 1 −σ test scores vary. For 1 −σ a change
in score classiﬁcation occurs around -6h, indicating that some phase-correction
must be done to provide a valid network structure. Furthermore, the change
with shift is not symmetrical among the 0h: as example, the values from cou-
pled scores at −6h are lower than for +6h.
Because the graph of Y →X
displays the asymmetry in another direction A.10, the directionality of scores is
not negligible.
7.1.4
Stochasticity
Another situation is presented on ﬁg. 7.1, which investigates the sensitivity of
CCM to the level of noise in the data set. Both ρ and 1 −σ display similar pat-
terns: when too much noise in data is present, the scores from tests on coupled
and uncoupled cells are equally low. Here, new sets of 50 pairs containing cou-
pled/uncoupled cells were obtained by simulations exactly as in sec. 4.1 except
from one parameter: the value of Ω(volume) has been reduced causing increase
in system stochasticity.
7.1.5
Embedding Dimension
The last illustration is 7.1.E. which investigates the performance of ρ and 1 −
σ on choice of Embedding Dimension.
As stated in 2.2, our choice of E =
2 throughout whole analysis was based on assumption that the attractor of
synchronized network is a limit cycle. Although this seems realistic (because we
==PAGE:69==
7.2 Summary of sensitivity analysis
57
do observe oscillation in circadian gene expressions, see sec. 1), this is still an
assumption - what if it is wrong?
To address this issue, the analysis of trajectories is conducted with varying E
from 1 to 10. With increasing embedding dimension, the scores of coupled and
uncoupled tests of both methods increase in value. Additionally, the diﬀerences
between them shrinks.
The higher dimensionality of reconstructed attractor
means that the larger number of points is used to estimate the nearest neighbors
in simplex projection algorithm; consequently, the error is averaged out causing
the high values of ρ and 1 −σ for large embedding dimension. Also, note that
the choice E = 1 is invalid, although it produces ﬁne results. Therefore, the
previously assumption about E = 2 seems reasonable, as the coupled connection
can easily be discriminated from the uncoupled.
7.2
Summary of sensitivity analysis
Whereas ρ displays a large sensitivity to number of cycles in oscillatory data,
1 −σ remains fairly insensitive to this variation. Both methods are sensitive
to phase shift, but the larger eﬀect is present for 1 −σ. ρ and 1 −σ display
same invariance to amplitude change, same pattern for the noise level (too much
noise is eﬀectively lowering the scores) and similar pattern on varying embedding
dimension (if high, the error is averaged out resulting in very high value of scores
regardless presence of coupling).
==PAGE:70==
58
Method Sensitivity
==PAGE:71==
Summary of the chapter
Although the tests of methods tested on simulated and experimental data re-
vealed that they diﬀer (the ranges of output scores diﬀers, see sec. 5.4), there
are some similarities between them. First, 1 −σ had been recognized as the
most successful method to detect the network structure: the measured accuracy
was high throughout all tests. Another common feature was the general good
performance of both 1 −σ and ρ - in almost all tests they were more accurate
than MIC. This shows that applying causality approach to detect network struc-
ture produces more proﬁtable results. Furthermore, on simulated dataset the
LC method were less successful than the approach based on Takens’ theorem.
This result might be showing that the non-parametric approaches are favored
to detect causalities from time series data - but more is needed to know about
both methods. All methods seem to have worst performance on the whole per-
turbed regions; the best occurs when the network is synchronized. This suggest
that the application of TTX is unnecessary to get information about network
structure from experimental recordings.
All in all, the 1 −σ may serve as a better criterion to detect causality and
network structure than the classical correlation criterion, ρ.
However, since
both approaches are phase-sensitive, the good performance must be validated
by correcting 1 −σ and ρ for this bias.
==PAGE:72==
60
Method Sensitivity
==PAGE:73==
Part III
Discussions and Conclusions
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 8
Discussion and future work
8.1
Reliability of results
8.1.1
Diﬀerences between simulated and experimental data
As observed in sec. 5.4, the scores obtained with tests on simulated data diﬀer
form those on experimental recordings. Here, the possible reason of this behavior
are discussed.
First, observe that simulated conditions - 500 pairs with diﬀerent coupling
strength, type and dynamical state (see sec.
4.1) - are diﬀerent from those
from experiments, were one large network from SCN is provided. It may be
possible that many interacting cells (i.e. with similar period) produces higher
scores than under the presence of sparser networks - but it does not explain the
absence of ρ ≤0.5, 1 −σ ≤0.925 or MIC ≤0.77 (for this, see ﬁg. A.6 which
compares histograms between scores from SCN 1 and the most similar simula-
tion results - those with µ = 0.4 and bidirectional coupling). Unfortunately, due
to limited time and memory, the networks of more than two cells could not been
simulated. This (clearly technical) problem can be possibly solved in the future,
e.g. by applying some big-data algorithms and/or performing simulations in a
language that does not require preallocation of memory (e.g. C). Also, one al-
==PAGE:76==
64
Discussion and future work
ternative solution is to simulate the system of ODEs for protein sequestration
model and add noise afterwards and observe how classical CCM, ρ and 1 −σ
perform on that.
Another reason causing the discrepancy in distribution range may be due to
incorrect parametrization in the protein sequestration model, eq. (3.6), partic-
ularly regarding the choice of coupling strength - the strongest simulated cases
have µ = 0.4 by following suggestions from ﬁg. 4 in [36]. The µ may be higher,
but it is expected to be less than unity [5]. Similar issue is observed regarding
the time scale parameter ˜τ: the choice of ˜τ = 20 follows from [36], but it may
be higher.
Finally, the protein sequestration model provides a very useful insight to the
mechanism of period regulation and the contribution of VIP to formation of
intercellular coupling. But "All models are wrong, but some of them are useful"
(George Box, 1976, Journal of the American Statistical Association) and the
model of protein sequestration is still a model - it ignores some elements that
present in real SCN: the high density of cells in nuclei [59] [4] or the chance of
making synaptic connections [59].
8.1.2
Consistency and validation
The results from the tests of consistency and validation of network structures
in sec. 6.2 show that 1 −σ is more successful than ρ and MIC. However, the
results from sec. 7 cast a shadow on this conclusion, as it has been showed that
1 −σ and is phase sensitive (so is ρ, but the eﬀect is smaller). Therefore, the
whole analysis using phase correction of 1 −σ and ρ must be repeated again. A
way to perform this correction is same as for MIC (recall from sec. 3.1 that MIC
scores are also phase-sensitive [3] and that only the phase-corrected trajectories
are used in this thesis).
If the phase-corrected scores from 1 −σ still result in best consistency and
validation among other approaches, then the importance of this result is diﬃcult
to be ignored: the method would be able to detect network structure with
oscillatory components of as few cycles as four!
As shown in chapt.
7 ρ should also be phase-corrected.
Furthermore, if by
any chance the data of synchronized network were containing larger number
of cycles, one could apply ρ to obtain the more reliable results. It would be
interesting to compare those with the 1 −σ scores still from tests with four
cycles to see if the network structures are the same.
==PAGE:77==
8.2 Critique of CCM
65
8.1.3
Another combinations of simulated data
Even though the simulations do not entirely reﬂect the empirical data and
the corresponding scores require correction for phase-shift, some useful insights
about method performance may be obtained by analyzing various sets of simu-
lated cells. The ROC and AUC graphs similar to those in ﬁg. 5.3.B and 5.3.C.
were obtained with diﬀerent combinations of data, and are presented in ﬁg. A.8
and A.9.
In general ﬁg. A.8 shows that the classiﬁcation behaves in accordance to intu-
ition: less accuracy is obtained by testing unidirectionality than bidirectionality
- because the more interaction is present between cells, the larger chance to
correct identiﬁcation of connection. Furthermore, presence of weak interaction
considered as the uncoupled cells for the purpose of ROC analysis, lowers the
accuracy as well. This is because the weakly coupled scores are higher than
the uncoupled ones (ﬁg. 5.2), resulting in less separable sample distributions
(that is, the corresponding histograms cover more common area). Note that
this case illustrates the assumption of indirect coupling between all cells in SCN
(for example because of high density of SCN, see sec. 8.1.1). On the other
hand, observe that all methods perform less or equally accurate than when they
are applied to synchronized region; this is exactly as following the expectations
from 5.3. Finally, the accuracy of MIC and ρ increases greatly with cycle length,
as indicated by ﬁg. A.9; for 1 −σ and LC only slight increment in accuracy
is observed. Note that this behavior of ρ and 1 −σ follows expectation from
sensitivity analysis, chapt. 7.
8.2
Critique of CCM
Unfortunately, CCM has a bad reputation among other causality methods -
mainly due to misinterpretation. The problem may lie in fact that CCM is not
just an algorithm: it is a mathematical method based on Takens’ theorem about
attractor reconstruction. Attractors for diﬀerent systems are diﬀerent and some
of their properties may be used to correct application of CCM. For example,
in this thesis, the embedding dimension E = 2 was used by assuming limit-
cycle attractor for the whole synchronized network - this provided (relatively)
ﬁne results regarding detection of bidirectional and uncoupled cells. Further-
more the CCM assumes that the interactions between species are following some
mechanism - thus the method is not applicable for stochastic interactions.
These facts cast a doubt on the work by [13] regarding detection of causal links
among infectious diseases: the simulated times series (stochastic SIR model)
==PAGE:78==
66
Discussion and future work
display oscillatory patterns (ﬁg. 2 and 5 in [13]), but no considerations about
attractor shape were made. Furthermore, some time series of recorded diseases
used to validation (e.g varicella, commonly known as chicken pox) are not appli-
cable for analysis, as they had already been recognized as a stochastic outbreak
by [61].
Also the conclusions from [43] are questionable. The authors attempt to investi-
gate the sensitivity of CCM applied to two-species logistic model (see eq. (2.1)),
but do not take in count the attractor shapes. For some choices of parameters,
the reconstructed attractors are not smooth, but are separable sets with very
densely packed points 1. In such cases CCM produces falsely high results.
However, there is one step in CCM algorithm that is questionable: As the aim
is to measure continuity between two shadow manifolds, then why the algorithm
uses a reconstructed attractor to predict time series - not another manifold? By
taking this correction in count for alternative construction of algorithm 1, one
expects a negligible diﬀerence, because the points used under simplex projection
have the same time indexes (for incorrect choice of embedding dimension the
predictability of the next future time index is approximately same as for the
correct choice of E; it decreases with larger time indexes, see [61]).
8.3
Possibilities of application: empirical experi-
ments without perturbation
The data used in this thesis were directly provided from [2], and the author
of this thesis had no inﬂuence on conducting the experiment. Recall from sec.
1 that this experiment involved application of Tetrodotoxin to ﬁve laboratory
mice. However, the question is, if the perturbation with TTX is really necessary
to infer the network structure in SCN? Based on the analysis in sec. 5.3 and
6.2, the suggested answer is no: 1 −σ and ρ have always displayed the best
performance on regions of synchronization on simulated data and the consistency
criterion had worked as followed by expectations from Takens’ theorem.
If 1 −σ or ρ perform well on the results of synchronized region after correcting
for the phase-bias (see sec. 8.1.2), then this observation turns to be of great
importance: it shows, that withdrawing information about causality from sys-
tems of coupled oscillators does not require any perturbation of synchrony. This
1This was observation done by author herself and corresponding code is available upon
request. As this thesis does not consider other attractor shapes than limit cycles it is not
included here.
==PAGE:79==
8.4 Possible improvements
67
consequence can ﬁnd many applications in science and engineering, as examples
of synchronizing networks can be found everywhere, from neuroscience to ma-
terial science [10]. The discussed approach may be especially beneﬁcial in cases
where experimental perturbation of conditions is expensive, dangerous or simply
impossible.
8.4
Possible improvements
Here, a short list with motivation for improvements and approaches to try is
provided.
8.4.1
Other oscillatory systems
The aim of this thesis was to report a tool to detect the network structure of
oscillatory cells in SCN. Therefore, only one type of oscillators was applied for
simulations (see. sec. 3.3), but there are others commonly used in mathematical
biology - Kuramoto oscillators [38], Van Der Pol [64], FitzHugh–Nagumo [33]...
It is interesting to see if CCM and SoCM have equal performance among them
all.
8.4.2
Choice of time lag τ
Recall from remark 1 that two important parameters E (embedding dimension)
and τ (time-lag) are needed to apply Takens’ theorem correctly, thereby pro-
ducing valid output from CCM and SoCM. As the choice of E = 2 is motivated
by limit-cycle attractor for the network of synchronized oscillators, there is no
real clue about τ - expect from fact, that this is the most commonly applied
choice. Choosing diﬀerent values to the algorithms results in other manifold
shapes and therefore diﬀerent scores. A particularly interesting choices of τ to
try would be τ = 6, τ = 12 and τ = 24 to match (approximately) a quarter,
half and full circadian period.
8.4.3
Moments of causality measure
The SoCM is a statistical approach to detect causality based on analysis of
deterministic systems. The computed statistics are ρ - mean correlation, σ the
==PAGE:80==
68
Discussion and future work
standard deviation of correlation estimates (particularly transformed to 1−σ for
ease of interpretation) - these corresponds to ﬁrst and (square root of) second
moment respectively.
As at this point the ρ and 1 −σ fail to detect unidirectional coupling, one
may want to consider diﬀerent approaches to quantify such forcing. For exam-
ple, skewness, the third moment, may be useful. Because it is a measure of
how skewed is the distribution, it might detect diﬀerences between directional
scores. This and possible other statistical methods might be helpful to detect
unidirectional causalities in the future.
8.4.4
Beyond AUC
In sections 5.3 and 6.1 the concept of measuring accuracy of correct classiﬁcation
by AUC of ROC curve was introduced. This measure is based on calculation of
TP, FN, FP and TN for given set of scores of method testings (True Positives,
False Negatives - and so on). If one combines these measures diﬀerently, other
values may examine the method successfulness. Some of the interesting examples
are the accuracy (understood as the measure of statistical bias) and precision,
given as
T P +F N
T P +T N+F P +F N and
T P
F P +T P respectively [19].
==PAGE:81==
8.5 Future work
69
8.5
Future work
1. Apply phase-correction to 1 −σ and ρ: A number-one thing is to
perform corrections as discussed in section 8.1.2. At this point, the results
from this thesis are not reliable due to fact that the only phase-corrected
method was MIC.
2. Experiment with proposed improvements from sec. 8.4 As 1 −σ
and ρ had not detected the unidirectional link, any of the suggested ap-
proaches may be helpful to determine a more precise approach of causality
detection.
3. Network structure of SCN A natural next step is to investigate what
is the network structure detected by 1 −σ and/or ρ and where the central
hubs are located.
4. Attractor experiments In the classical approach, the CCM was applied
to investigate chaotic systems with strange attractors, here - to oscillatory
series with limit cycles.
There are, however, other types of attractors
happening in nature - how does CCM apply to those?
5. Other experiments Many processes in nature happen on diﬀerent time
scales.
Therefore, it would be interesting to investigate how well does
Takens’ theorem and methods based on it perform in such cases.
For
instance, simplex project may be applied to distinguish chaotic dynamics
from noise (see sec. A.3.2.1) - but does it apply when a coupled chaotic
system have variables evolving with diﬀerent scales?
==PAGE:82==
70
Discussion and future work
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
Approximately 20000 cells in mammalian Suprachiasmatic Nucleus (SCN) os-
cillate with circadian (approx.
24 h) rhythm.
The individual periods vary
in length, but under the presence of intercellular coupling, the rhythms syn-
chronize. This synchronization provides signals to cells located in whole body,
thereby maintaining daily rhythmicity and healthy physiology. One element re-
mains unsolved in this important biological system: the structure of the neural
network following rhythm synchronization. To address this problem, inferring
the connectivity is not enough: due to oscillatory behavior of components in the
network, this task rather corresponds to detecting causal relationships between
cells in SCN.
Many approaches to ﬁnd causality between components of a dynamical system
had recently been proposed, but nothing is known about their performances
in application to networks of oscillatory elements. This motivates the goal of
this thesis: to ﬁnd a suitable method of detecting causal relationships between
large number of oscillatory cells. Such method should provide an answer based
on numerical recordings from an empirical experiment of cells in SCN. Data to
satisfy this requirement are obtained by tracking bioluminescence traces of cir-
cadian gene expressions over time. Moreover, by applying Tetrodotoxin (TTX),
four diﬀerent dynamical states of this network had been observed: synchro-
nization, desynchronization, early- and late states of synchronization. These
data, together with a set of simulated cells aiming to reﬂect the experimental
==PAGE:84==
72
Conclusion
conditions, had served to examine the ability of accurate detection of coupling
between neurons for each of tested methods.
Especially, one of the methods had got a lot of attention throughout this thesis:
Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM), a mathematical method to detect causal-
ity, which had never been applied to complex oscillatory systems. The study
revealed that slight modiﬁcation in computation of CCM leads to a new, sta-
tistical approach to examine causality: Singularity of Cross Mapping (SoCM).
It oﬀers an additional estimator of causality 1 −σ to the one, ρ, obtained by
the classical CCM approach. In the light of SoCM, the ρ and 1 −σ may be in-
terpreted as the estimates of expected causality and the certainty of observable
causal relationship.
Although the simulations failed to reﬂect the exact conditions present in the
true SCN network, they served to compare all methods of interest: 1 −σ, ρ, in-
formation transfer LC and Maximal Information Coeﬃcient MIC; the latter has
been previously applied to infer the network structure in SCN, despite it is not
a method to detect causality. Despite the failure of detecting the unidirectional
links between simulated cells, the remaining tests had revealed the successful-
ness of 1 −σ, next ﬁnest performance of ρ, and relatively poor output from
MIC. The results of LC method had odd behavior and since this approach was
based on some unrealistic assumptions (such a linearity of the inferred system),
the choice was to disqualify it from further investigations.
Two test analyzed experimental data. The ﬁrst examines consistency of network
structure on regions of synchronization and late resynchronization after TTX
perturbation; the networks there are expected to have very similar dynamics.
The second tests validity of network structure postulated by Abel et al. in [3] and
obtained by MIC. These tests had conﬁrmed conclusions about the performances
of 1 −σ, ρ and MIC from simulations. Unfortunately, the sensitivity analysis
had revealed that the approach with most successful performance, 1−σ, shows a
bias to phase-shift. Notably, the results suggests that no chemical perturbation
is needed to infer the network structure in SCN.
If in the future 1 −σ and ρ are going to be corrected for the bias caused by
phase-shift and the performance of 1 −σ remains successful, then this method
may be considered as very promising candidate to detect causality in networks of
coupled oscillatory components: it performs well on time series of few cycles and
does not require to interrupt the pattern of synchronization. Therefore, it may
be applied to situations where data recording is time limited, or experimental
perturbation of coupled structure is dangerous or impossible. Examples of such
conditions are numerous, thereby highlighting the importance of this research.
==PAGE:85==
Acknowledgments
This thesis originated almost accidentally in December 2016; the study of re-
quired ﬁelds and introductory investigations were done from January-June 2017,
fully focused research was conducted during July and September-November (end
of). The manuscript was written during December and January 2018. As this
long time was passing by, many people had contributed to this project with
helpful conversations and ideas, thereby deserving a place in this section.
The ﬁrst supervisor of this thesis from Department of Mathematical Sciences
at KAIST, prof.
Jae Kyoung Kim provided more than excellent laboratory
conditions and controlling the research progress: his mentoring, eﬀort, care and
dedicated time are priceless to me.
Another acknowledgments are addressed to prof.
Lasse Engbo Christiansen
from DTU Compute, for his guidance, time, ﬂexibility and understanding the
my position as a dual degree student.
This thesis would not be possible to made without dual degree program; there-
fore, I would like to thank prof. Ole Christensen for his dedicated time, care
and _endless amount of bureaucratic work that he needed to do.
I would like to thank two external contributors of this work: prof. Krešimir Josić
from University of Houston for his valuable comments and suggestions regarding
measuring the consistency of network structures and prof. Marty Golubitsky
from Ohio State University for helpful discussion regarding embeddings of time
series.
==PAGE:86==
74
Conclusion
Two notable people had contributed with suggestions to numerical analysis of
results: dr. Hao Ye regarding practical usage of rEDM package and John H.
Abel for his help with correction of MIC results.
Furthermore I would like to thank Paweł G. Drozdowski for his suggestions to
manuscript and help with correction and Mikkel Stoltenberg Bruun for correct-
ing my awful danish translation of the summary. Also, I would like to thank
Daewook Kim and Euimin Jeong for being the most kind, helpful and friendly
labmates I could imagine to meet. Finally, I would like to thank my parents for
their love care - and a lot of patience.
The history of this thesis is a bizarre plot of stories from South Korea, Denmark
and somewhere in between. Such combination made this project being probably
the dearest one to the author, regardless the judgment from a reader.
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Order Parameters
Here, a remark is made on order parameters [9],[22] used in ﬁg. 1.1 to measure
the synchrony between time series.
This method aims to calculate a scalar R between 0 and 1, where 1 (0) denotes
the cells being completely synchronized (desynchronized). The computation is
provided by a formula (A.1):
R = ⟨X2⟩−⟨X⟩2
[⟨x2
i ⟩−⟨xi⟩2]
(A.1)
In (A.1), the xi denotes an individual signal (here: time series of bioluminescence
recordings) and X the average signal among a set of variables (here: cells) at
time t. Because ⟨·⟩and [·] denote an average among some time interval and cells
respectively, the formula A.1 stands for the ratio between temporal variance
among cells and variance among individual oscillators.
==PAGE:88==
76
Appendix
A.2
Algorithm to calculate SoCM
Algorithm 3 Singularity of Cross Mapping (SoCM), X →Y
Input: X(t) and Y (t) - time series of equal length L for X and Y variables.
Step 0 Initialization: Consider the library ˜L = L\˜t and time index t∗. The ˜t is
the point removed from the library
Step 1 Embedding: Choose E = 2, τ = 1 to create shadow manifold MY .corresponding
to Y restricted to ˜L.
Step 2 Simplex Projection [61]:
a) Find point y(t∗) of MY and corresponding E + 1 = 3 nearest neigh-
bors y(t1), y(t2) and y(t3).
b) Calculate the numbers ui = exp
 −d(y(t∗),y(ti))
d(y(t∗),y(t1))

, ∀i = 1, .., E + 1.
c) Using time indexes from a), ﬁnd points x(t1), x(t2) and x(t3) on X(t)
and calculate weights wi = ui
  PE+1
j=1 uj
−1.
d) Make a prediction: ˆx(t∗)|MY = PE+1
i=1 wix(ti).
e) Choose the next t∗= t∗+1 and repeat steps 1 and 2 until all ˆx(t∗)|MY
for all t∗= 1, .., ˜L are predicted. Let ˆX(t)|MY denote the set of all
forecasts.
Step 3 Prediction skill: Calculate correlation between the true and predicted
X: ρ(X, ˆX|MY ). The closer to one, the better prediction has been ob-
tained and the bigger the likelihood that continuity between MY and MX
exist.
Step 4 Repetition: Select new random ˜t and repeat steps 1-3 N times.
Output A sequence of ρ(X, ˆX|MY ) calculated by using each N random libraries.
end
==PAGE:89==
A.3 Takens’ Theorem: original statement
77
A.3
Takens’ Theorem: original statement
This section provides the original formulation of Takens’ theorem as promised
in sec. 2.2:
Theorem A.1 (Takens, 1980) Let M be a compact manifold of dimen-
sion d. For pairs (φ, X), where the ﬂow φ : M →M is a smooth diﬀeomorphism
and X : M →R a smooth function, it is a generic property that the (2d + 1)-
delay observation map Φ(φ,X)(t) = [X(t), X(φ(t)), X(φ2(t)), ..., X(φ2d+1(t))] is
an embedding.
A.3.1
Method to detect unidirectional coupling (Ye, 2016)
Hao Ye in [71] proposes a method to detect unidirectionl forcing. His solution
focuses on calculating correlation estimates using past and future observations;
for example, to detect X →Y , predictions of X(t) are made by using Y (t −T),
where T is in some ﬁxed interval of Z. The motivation behind it is as following:
If X →Y but not reverse, the correlation ρ(Y, ˆY |MX) is maximized with past
lags of X. On the other hand, present states of X do not have any information
from Y , thus the correlation ρ(X, ˆX|MY ) is maximized when using future states
of Y . For bidirectional coupling (uncoupled), both of the maximum correlations
occurs at past (future) time lags. This approach is not applicable for oscillatory
series because the data are periodic: the lag that maximizes the correlation is
not unique but approx. 24-periodic. Even if the interval of time lags is restricted
to [−12, 12], the conclusion is hard to withdraw. Therefore, this result - very
useful in other systems - is not investigated further in this thesis.
A.3.2
Other applications of Takens’ theorem
In the main part of this thesis Takens’ theorem 2.1 has been presented as a tool
to detect causality. However, there are some other applications of the theorem
which are worth a remark. These techniques are known as parts of Empirical
Dynamical Modeling (EDM) and some of them are summarized below; for
details, we refer to [61], [72], [16], [12].
==PAGE:90==
78
Appendix
A.3.2.1
Applications of simplex projection
The simplex projection deﬁned by Sugihara and May in [61], also stated in
step 2 of algorithm 1 can be applied to a single dataset to perform forecasts.
Speciﬁcally, the simplex projection is applied as following: Given the series of
X and most recent point x(t), the aim is to predict the unknown, future value
x(t + p), p ∈N (p is called prediction horizon). Applying Takens’ theorem to
create shadow manifold MX the E + 1 nearest neighbors to x(t) can be found -
call them {x(ti)}E+1
i=1 , and allow to predict x(t + p) by calculating the weighted
average of {x(ti + p)}E+1
i=1 .
By applying this method with p = 1 repetitively, one can forecast whole future
time series. Therefore, the simplex projection can be used for future
predictions.
Assume now that time series can be divided into half s.t. the ﬁrst half is used as
a library to forecast the second half by simplex projection. Then, the predicted
values can be compared withe the true values by correlation.
If time series was collected from a system representing the chaotic, deterministic
dynamics, then the prediction p time steps in the future correlation should
decrease from a value close to 1 (due to chaotic dynamics, which is sensitive to
the changes in states of variables).
If, however, the time series is collected from purely stochastic system, then the
accuracy is expected to be equally low for any choice of prediction horizon (due
to randomness).
Finally, if the series represents the combination of chaos and noise, the accuracy
is neither high or low for p = 1, but it still decreases with p.
These criteria were reported in [61] and serve as test to identify deterministic
dynamics.
The quality of prediction does not only depend on choice of p. It also depends
on embedding dimension E: as a consequence of Takens’ theorem, the future
predictions are maximized with the choice of E that is most likely to reﬂect the
true dimensionality of embedded attractor [61]. Therefore, applying simplex
projections for diﬀerent choice of E and comparing the output correlations,
should reveal the correct choice of embedding dimension.
The statements above are all presented for the case of chaotic dynamics. When
time series represents oscillatory pattern, then detecting the optimal E becomes
redundant - the assumed attractor is a limit cycle for any number of coupled
oscillators (see remark 1). The same conclusion follows with predictability of
future values and dependency on prediction horizon - due to periodicity the
values are highly predictable for all choices of p.
Nevertheless the fact that
==PAGE:91==
A.3 Takens’ Theorem: original statement
79
these methods does not seems useful for applications to oscillators, they serve
as an important tool for chaotic dynamical systems.
A.3.3
Further perspectives of Takens’ Theorem: the mul-
tivariate and multiview embedding
The very ﬁrst version of Takens’ theorem provided in th. A.1 and [62] considers
the univariate attractor reconstructions: the shadow manifolds are constructed
by using lags of single time series, e.g. MX = [X(t), X(t−τ), ..., X(t−(E−1)τ)]
for X(t). However, if the number of coupled variables is large and some of them
have more inﬂuence on the system behavior, then - intuitively - a set of combined
constructed manifolds should reﬂect the attractor more accurately than others.
Based on these considerations, in 2011 E. Deyle and G. Sugihara had con-
ducted studies reported in [16] that prove a success of attractor reconstruction
by combining diﬀerent variables; such reconstruction is called for multivariate
embedding. For example, given a system from which series of X(t), Y (t) and
Z(t) were recorded, some valid multivariate embeddings (with E = 2) can be
M 1
XZ = [X(t), Z(t)]. M 2
XZ = [X(t), Z(t −1)],.., etc.
There is no a priori information about what combination of n variables and
at which time lags l and for what embedding dimension E should be used for
attractor reconstruction; the choice is even harder since the number of possible
reconstructions grows combinatorially: m =
nl
E

−
n(l −1)
E

[72]
This issue can be solved by multiview embedding (MVE) [72]:
1. For each possible combination of variables at diﬀerent time lags and chosen
embedding dimension, perform simplex projection. Similarly with univari-
ate attractor reconstruction, the simplex projection uses the ﬁrst half of
time series to predict the second part; therefore, the output is a correlation
value.
2. The k = √m combinations are chosen correspondingly to k highest corre-
lation values and following k shadow manifolds are constructed.
3. The predictions are made as a simple average og single nearest neighbors
from k’th reconstructed attractor.
The predictions made with MVE has been shown to have best performance when
compared to single multivariate embedding [70],[12].
This result encourages
==PAGE:92==
80
Appendix
future study of MVE and its applications to explain more mysteries appearing
in nature.
A.4
Example: Stoichiometry matrix and propen-
sity vector for protein sequestration model
This short example aims to show how two important elements of Gillespie algo-
rithm, stoichiometry matrix (A.2) and propensity functions, are constructed for
in protein sequestration model. Here, the unidirectional forcing between cell1
and cell2 is considered, where cell1 →cell2.
The stoichiometry matrix Γ is:
M1
Rc,1
R1
V1
M2
Rc,2
R2
V2
Γ =


1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0


(A.2)
In (A.2), all 8 species are marked above the representative columns. The rows
correspond to reactants that cause a change in number of molecules in corre-
sponding species. These reactants are directly related to propensity function
==PAGE:93==
A.4 Example: Stoichiometry matrix and propensity vector for protein
sequestration model
81
vector η given as:
η =


Ωf(R1, AΩ, KdΩ)
M1
Rc,1
R1
˜τΩf(R1, AΩ, KdΩ)
˜τV1
Ωf(R2, AΩ, KdΩ)
M2
Rc,2
R2
˜τΩf(R2, AΩ, KdΩ)
˜τV2
µ
2 V1
µ
2 V2


(A.3)
Note the presence of Ωfor f, the activator A and Kd: this is done to ensure same
units among the simulation - Protein Sequestration model (3.6) is developed in
concentration unit, but now, everything is measured in the number of molecules.
Therefore A (concentration of activator, assumed constant concentration) must
be multiplied by Ω, Kd (dissociation constant, which also have a concentration
unit) must by multiplied by Ω, and, ﬁnally, the complex of f with E-BOX
concentration of unity must also be multiplied by Ω.
The linear form of (A.2) and (A.3), makes the implementation of Gillespie al-
gorithm easy to understand: a matrix multiplication of η and Γ corresponds to
reaction which happening at random, exponentially distributed time.
==PAGE:94==
82
Appendix
A.5
Additional ﬁgures
Figure A.1: Simpliﬁed transcription-translation
negative feedback loop
generating individual circadian rhythms in mammalian SCN
cells
Each of 20000 neurons within SCN responses to Zeitgebers through
a transcription-translation loop involving proteins BMAL1, E-BOX,
CLOCK, PER and CRY. BMAL1 and CLOCK bind together in nucleus
in response to Zeitgebers during daytime and is mediated by E-Box to
promote transcription and translation of PER and CRY genes. Trans-
lated genes interact with each other in cytoplasm to form a complex
that returns to nucleus, blocks the activation of BMAL1-CLOCK and,
as consequence, PER and CRY repress their own transcription during
the night. With the new day, BMAL1 and CLOCK are activated again,
the transcription of PER/CRY is promoted and the whole process is
repeated. Thus, the measured activity of PER1 (for example) over time
has oscillatory behavior with period close to 24 hours.
The ﬁgure is
adopted from [44].
==PAGE:95==
A.5 Additional ﬁgures
83
Suprachiasmatic  
Nucleus  (SCN)
Hypothalamus
Ventral  Cord
Dorsal  Shell
Light
Retina
Figure A.2: Sketch of SCN anatomy and known components of response
to light information
SCN serves as an intersection of two sub-nuclei, left and right. Each of
them is subdivided to ventral Cord and Dorsal Shell and play diﬀerent
role in transport of information to upper brain levels. As an example of
response to light, Ventral Cord receives information through retinoplas-
miatic tract (RHT). Dorsal Shell transports the message about proxy
time of the day to Hypothalamus. This message is an output informa-
tion of synchronization that occurs in SCN - the major, unknown part
in the process.
==PAGE:96==
84
Appendix
𝑋𝑡, 𝑌(𝑡)
𝑦
𝑥
𝐷
Figure A.3: Construction of grid used to compute MIC scores
Two oscillatory time series are chosen to represent x and y projections of
set D. The graph of D can be divided into gird of many combinations,
for instance the two indicated by red and yellow squares. Therefore, the
point distribution of D depends on choice of grid.
==PAGE:97==
A.5 Additional ﬁgures
85
Coupled
Uncoupled 1
Uncoupled 2
time
Number of molecules (M: mRNA)
Figure A.4: Time series corresponding to examples in ﬁg. 2.4 and 5.1
==PAGE:98==
86
Appendix
-0.4
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
𝜌
Empirical CDF
Score
Empirical CDF
0
0.5
1
0.9
0.87
0.95
1
1 −𝜎
Score
LC
0
0.25
1
Score
0
0.5
1
Empirical CDF
MIC
0
0.25
1
Score
0
0.5
1
Empirical CDF
0.9
0.87
0.95
1
Score
Empirical CDF
0
0.5
1
Empirical CDF
0
0.5
1
0
0.25
1
Score
Empirical CDF
0
0.5
1
0
0.25
1
Score
0.9
0.87
0.95
1
Score
Empirical CDF
0
0.5
1
-0.4
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
Empirical CDF
Score
-0.4
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
Empirical CDF
Score
Empirical CDF
0
0.5
1
0
0.25
1
Score
Empirical CDF
0
0.5
1
0
0.25
1
Score
S
L
W
Figure A.5: Sample cumulative distributions for diﬀerent dynamical states introduced on ﬁg 5.3
The colors indicate type of data used for simulations. Green: uncoupled, blue: unidirectionally coupled and red:
bidirectionally coupled cells. For ρ, 1 −σ, and LC, which discriminate directionality of calculation, the solid line
stands for X →Y direction and dashed for Y →X. This ﬁgure is an extension of 5.2.
==PAGE:99==
A.5 Additional ﬁgures
87
0
0.5
1
Frequency
0
100
200
;: simulated ($, 7=0.4)
X ! Y
Y ! X
0
0.5
1
Frequency
#104
0
1.5
3
;: experimental (SCN 1)
X ! Y
Y ! X
0.85
0.925
1
0
100
200
(1-<): simulated ($, 7=0.4)
X ! Y
Y ! X
0.85
0.925
1
#104
0
1.5
3
(1-<): experimental (SCN 1)
X ! Y
Y ! X
0
0.5
1
0
100
200
MIC: simulated ($, 7=0.4)
0
0.5
1
#104
0
1.5
3
MIC: simulated ($, 7=0.4)
Number of pairs: 500
Number of pairs: 73153
Figure A.6: Histograms for simulated and experimental data
Histograms for ρ (up), 1 −σ (middle) and MIC (down).
Figures to
the left show scores obtained by testing 500 pairs of simulated cells
(bidirectionally coupled with µ = 0.4; all other parameters as described
in 4.1), to the right: from SCN 1. As SCN 1 contains 383 cells, the
number of unique pairs is 383(383−1) = 73153. Except from MIC, which
is symmetric, histograms show distribution of scores in each direction
(X →Y and Y →X).
==PAGE:100==
88
Appendix
Figure A.7: First ﬁve trajectories (bioluminescence recordings) from SCN 1
==PAGE:101==
A.5 Additional ﬁgures
89
1
0.5
W
L
S
AUC
↮, 𝜇= 0
&
↔, 𝜇= 0.225
W
L
S
1
0.5
AUC
W
L
S
1
0.5
AUC
W
L
S
1
0.5
AUC
FPR
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
TPR
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
False Positive Rate
FPR
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
TPR
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
FPR
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
TPR
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
1
0.5
AUC
W
L
S
A
B
C
↮, 𝜇= 0
&
→,𝜇= 0.225
↔, →,𝜇= 0.225
&
↔, 𝜇= 0.4
↔, →,𝜇= 0.225
&
→,𝜇= 0.4
L
S
W
↮, 𝜇= 0
&
→,𝜇= 0.4
↮, 𝜇= 0
&
→,𝜇= 0.4
I
II
III
IV
Figure A.8: ROC and AUC scores for various combinations of simulated
data
A: AUC over diﬀerent dynamical regions. The graphs are obtained with
the same method as for ﬁg. 5.3.C, however, the datasets used for ROC
validation diﬀer. Each of four ﬁgures have a title: the upper symbol
stand for the cells are identiﬁed as "truly uncoupled" and the lower -
what are "truly coupled". For example, the graph III means that all
simulated cells with µ = 0.225 are considered as uncoupled, whereas
strongly bidirectionally coupled cells are the coupled ones. Colors, leg-
ends and labels follow ﬁg. 5.3.C. B: The ROC curves as for ﬁg. 5.3.B;
the only diﬀerence is the choice of unidirectionally coupled cells as the
"coupled ones".C: The AUC-graph corresponding to B.
==PAGE:102==
90
Appendix
FPR
0
1
TPR
0
1
CCM: ; || AUC = 0.8473
CCM: 1-< || AUC = 0.9211
MIC || AUC = 0.7690
LC || AUC = 0.8163
FPR
0
1
TPR
0
1
CCM: ; || AUC = 0.8962
CCM: 1-< || AUC = 0.9346
MIC || AUC = 0.8429
LC || AUC = 0.8485
FPR
0
1
TPR
0
1
CCM: ; || AUC = 0.9321
CCM: 1-< || AUC = 0.9435
MIC || AUC = 0.8922
LC || AUC = 0.8755
4 cycles 
6 cycles 
8 cycles 
Figure A.9: ROC and AUC from scores obtained with 4, 6 and 8 cycles
The data are same as for ﬁg. 5.3.B and C, except from the number of
analyzed cycles (4 up, 6 middle and 8 bottom). The plotted are ROC
curves for ρ, 1 −σ, LC and MIC.
==PAGE:103==
A.5 Additional ﬁgures
91
+ 12 h
+ 6 h
No shift
- 6 h
- 12 h
0.9
0.95
1
+ 12 h
+ 6 h
No shift
- 6 h
- 12 h
0
0.5
1
Figure A.10: The Y →X direction for testing phase shift (addition to ﬁg.
7.1.D)
0
40
80
120
Classical 
CCM
SoCM
MIC 
(corrected)
LC
Computational time (s)
Figure A.11: Computational time of diﬀerent approaches The execution time
for four diﬀerent methods was recorded during calculation of scores
for 50 cells of 96 points (4 cycles with sampling every hour).
The
presented methods are classical CCM formulation by Sugihara [60]
(with 1-by-1 increments in library lengths), the authors’ approach of
SoCM (with 100 iterations), phase-corrected MIC and LC. As stated in
2.4, the SoCM is faster than the classical CCM approach. Because LC
is parametric method using a priori optimized algorithms, it is clearly
the fastest among others. Finally, the time needed to correct for the
phase-bias is 25 times larger than as for the uncorrected computation.
This is because the phase-correction performs phase shifts from −12 h
to 12 h with increments of 1h.
==PAGE:104==
92
Appendix
A.6
Code
For clarity of reading, all codes used for this thesis can be found in a separable
ﬁle.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[1] N.
Abdennur,
Gillespie
stochastic
simulation
algorithm.
https://se.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/
34707-gillespie-stochastic-simulation-algorithm, 2015.
[2] J. H. Abel, K. Meeker, D. Granados-Fuentes, P. C. St. John,
T. J. Wang, B. B. Bales, F. J. Doyle, E. D. Herzog, and L. R.
Petzold, Bioluminescence recordings. https://github.com/JohnAbel/
scn-resynchronization-data-2016, 2016.
[3] J. H. Abel, K. Meeker, D. Granados-Fuentes, P. C. St. John,
T. J. Wang, B. B. Bales, F. J. Doyle, E. D. Herzog, and L. R.
Petzold, Functional network inference of the suprachiasmatic nucleus,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113 (2016), pp. 4512–
4517.
[4] H. E. Albers, J. C. Walton, K. L. Gamble, J. K. McNeill, and
D. L. Hummer, The dynamics of GABA signaling: Revelations from the
circadian pacemaker in the suprachiasmatic nucleus, Frontiers in Neuroen-
docrinology, 44 (2017), pp. 35–82.
[5] S. An, R. P. Irwin, C. N. Allen, C. Tsai, and E. D. Herzog, Va-
soactive intestinal polypeptide requires parallel changes in adenylate cyclase
and phospholipase c to entrain circadian rhythms to a predictable phase,
Journal of Neurophysiology, 105 (2011), pp. 2289–2296.
[6] D. M. Arble, J. Bass, A. D. Laposky, M. H. Vitaterna, and F. W.
Turek, Circadian timing of food intake contributes to weight gain, Obesity,
17 (2009), pp. 2100–2102.
==PAGE:106==
94
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[7] A. Arenas, A. Díaz-Guilera, J. Kurths, Y. Moreno, and C. Zhou,
Synchronization in complex networks, Physics reports, 469 (2008), pp. 93–
153.
[8] A.-L. Barabási, NETWORK SCIENCE. 3.Random networks, Network
Science, (2015), pp. 1–48.
[9] S. Bernard, D. Gonze, B. Čajavec, H. Herzel, and A. Kramer,
Synchronization-induced
rhythmicity
of
circadian
oscillators
in
the
suprachiasmatic nucleus, PLoS Computational Biology, 3 (2007), pp. 667–
679.
[10] C. Bonnell, Kuramoto oscillators, (2011).
[11] D. challenge, Dream challenges powered by sage networks - homepage.
http://dreamchallenges.org, 2017.
[12] C.-W. Chang, M. Ushio, and C.-h. Hsieh, Empirical dynamic modeling
for beginners, Ecological Research, 32 (2017), pp. 785–796.
[13] S. Cobey and E. B. Baskerville, Limits to causal inference with state-
space reconstruction for infectious disease, PLoS ONE, 11 (2016), pp. 1–32.
[14] R. A. Cohen and E. H. Albers, Disruption of human circadian and
cognitive regulation following a discrete hypothalamic lesion: a case study,
Neurology, 41 (1991), pp. 726–729.
[15] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Information theory and statistics,
Elements of information theory, 1 (1991), pp. 279–335.
[16] E. R. Deyle and G. Sugihara, Generalized theorems for nonlinear state
space reconstruction, PLoS ONE, 6 (2011).
[17] C. Dibner, U. Schibler, and U. Albrecht, The mammalian circa-
dian timing system: organization and coordination of central and peripheral
clocks, Annual review of physiology, 72 (2010), pp. 517–549.
[18] V.
N.
H.
M.
P.
G.
D.
S.
C.
Dr.
Takako
Noguchi,
Omar Romero, Luciferase Reporters in Circadian Research:
Mam-
mals.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Ub9s4oLQ7Y&list=
PLF8wy35uu-7_cBTg9HMncm6IP6Je6fIWK&index=2,
2016.
[UC
San
Diego The BioClock Studio].
[19] T. Fawcett, An introduction to roc analysis, Pattern recognition letters,
27 (2006), pp. 861–874.
[20] M. Filosi, minerva:
Maximal information-based nonparametric explo-
ration for variable analysis.
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=
minerva, 2017.
==PAGE:107==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
95
[21] D. B. Forger, Biological Clocks, Rhythms, and Oscillations: The Theory
of Biological Timekeeping, MIT Press, 2017.
[22] J. Garcia-Ojalvo, M. B. Elowitz, and S. H. Strogatz, Modeling
a synthetic multicellular clock: repressilators coupled by quorum sensing.,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 101 (2004), pp. 10955–60.
[23] C. A. George Sugihara, Simplex portal. http://deepeco.ucsd.edu/
simplex/index.html#intro, unknown.
[24] D. T. Gillespie, Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions,
The journal of physical chemistry, 81 (1977), pp. 2340–2361.
[25]
, A rigorous derivation of the chemical master equation, Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 188 (1992), pp. 404–425.
[26] D. Gonze and W. Abou-Jaoudé, The goodwin model: behind the hill
function, PloS one, 8 (2013), p. e69573.
[27] T. Gotoh, J. K. Kim, J. Liu, M. Vila-Caballer, P. E. Stauffer,
J. J. Tyson, and C. V. Finkielstein, Model-driven experimental ap-
proach reveals the complex regulatory distribution of p53 by the circadian
factor period 2, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113
(2016), pp. 13516–13521.
[28] C. W. Granger, Investigating causal relations by econometric models and
cross-spectral methods, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society,
(1969), pp. 424–438.
[29]
, Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-
spectral methods, Econometrica:
Journal of the Econometric Society,
(1969), pp. 424–438.
[30] J. A. Hanley and B. J. McNeil, The meaning and use of the area un-
der a receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve., Radiology, 143 (1982),
pp. 29–36.
[31] R. S. Herz, E. Van Reen, D. H. Barker, C. J. Hilditch, A. L.
Bartz, and M. A. Carskadon, The inﬂuence of circadian timing on
olfactory sensitivity, Chemical Senses.
[32] S. Honma, Y. Katsuno, Y. Tanahashi, H. Abe, and K. Honma, Cir-
cadian rhythms of arginine vasopressin and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
do not depend on cytoarchitecture of dispersed cell culture of rat suprachi-
asmatic nucleus, Neuroscience, 86 (1998), pp. 967–976.
==PAGE:108==
96
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[33] E. M. Izhikevich and R. FitzHugh, Fitzhugh-nagumo model, Scholar-
pedia, 1 (2006), p. 1349.
[34] K. Josic, Synchronization of chaotic systems and invariant manifolds,
Nonlinearity, 13 (2000), pp. 1321–1336.
[35] M. B. Kennel, R. Brown, and H. D. Abarbanel, Determining em-
bedding dimension for phase-space reconstruction using a geometrical con-
struction, Physical review A, 45 (1992), p. 3403.
[36] J. K. Kim, Z. P. Kilpatrick, M. R. Bennett, and K. Josić, Molecular
mechanisms that regulate the coupled period of the mammalian circadian
clock, Biophysical Journal, 106 (2014), pp. 2071–2081.
[37] E. Kreyszig, Introductory functional analysis with applications, vol. 1,
wiley New York, 1989.
[38] Y. Kuramoto, Chemical oscillations, waves, and turbulence, vol. 19,
Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[39] X. S. Liang, Information ﬂow within stochastic dynamical systems, Phys-
ical Review E - Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics, 78 (2008),
pp. 1–5.
[40] X. S. Liang, Implemented Software for Causality Analysis. http://www.
ncoads.org/article/show/67.aspx, 2014.
[41] X. S. Liang, Unraveling the cause-eﬀect relation between time series, Phys-
ical Review E - Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics, 90 (2014),
pp. 1–20.
[42] J. D. Meiss, Diﬀerential dynamical systems, SIAM, 2007.
[43] D. Mønster, R. Fusaroli, K. Tylén, A. Roepstorff, and J. F.
Sherson, Inferring causality from noisy time series data, (2016), pp. 48–
56.
[44] F. C. S. B. L. Naef, Simpliﬁed transcription-translation loop of mam-
malian circadian clock. https://naef-lab.epfl.ch, 2017. [Online; ac-
cessed 8-December-2017].
[45] J. L. Natale, D. Hofmann, D. G. Hernández, and I. Nemenman,
Reverse-engineering biological networks from large data sets, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1705.06370, (2017).
[46] H.
M.
P.
G.
D.
S.
C.
Omar
Romero,
Victoriah
Nudell,
Luciferase
Reporters
in
Circadian
Research:
A
tutorial.
https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=7qtrB-Puwhs&list=PLF8wy35uu-7_
cBTg9HMncm6IP6Je6fIWK&index=1&t=1s,
2016.
[UC San Diego The
BioClock Studio].
==PAGE:109==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
97
[47] D. Ono, S. Honma, and K.-i. Honma, Cryptochromes are critical for the
development of coherent circadian rhythms in the mouse suprachiasmatic
nucleus, Nature communications, 4 (2013), p. 1666.
[48] S. H. Park, J. M. Goo, and C.-H. Jo, Receiver operating characteristic
(roc) curve: practical review for radiologists, Korean Journal of Radiology,
5 (2004), pp. 11–18.
[49] J. Pearl, Causal Inference in Statistics: A Gentle Introduction, Technical
Report, 33 (2001), pp. 1–20.
[50] D. Reshef, Y. Reshef, H. Finucane, S. Grossman, G. Mcvean,
P. Turnbaugh, E. Lander, M. Mitzenmacher, and P. Sabeti, in
Large Data Sets, Science Translational Medicine, 334 (2011), pp. 1518–
1524.
[51] T. Roenneberg and M. Merrow, The circadian clock and human health,
Current Biology, 26 (2016), pp. R432–R443.
[52] J. Runge, J. Heitzig, N. Marwan, and J. Kurths, Quantifying causal
coupling strength: A lag-speciﬁc measure for multivariate time series related
to transfer entropy, Physical Review E - Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft
Matter Physics, 86 (2012), pp. 1–15.
[53] X. San Liang, Information ﬂow and causality as rigorous notions ab initio,
Physical Review E, 94 (2016), p. 052201.
[54] T. Schreiber, Measuring information transfer, Physical Review Letters,
85 (2000), pp. 461–464.
[55] W. J. Schwartz, R. A. Gross, and M. T. Morton, The suprachi-
asmatic nuclei contain a tetrodotoxin-resistant circadian pacemaker., Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of Amer-
ica, 84 (1987), pp. 1694–8.
[56] K. Shinohara, S. Honma, Y. Katsuno, H. Abe, and K. Honma, Two
distinct oscillators in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus in vitro, Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 92 (1995), pp. 7396–7400.
[57] E.
Sontag,
Lecture
Notes
on
Mathematical
Systems
Biology.
http://sites.math.rutgers.edu/~sontag/FTPDIR/systems_biology_
notes.pdf, 2015.
[58] J. Stark, "Nonlinear dynamics II, III - Analysis of time series. http://
www.ucl.ac.uk/CNDA/courses/coursework/, 1994. [Lecture notes, MSc
in Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos, University College London ].
==PAGE:110==
98
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[59] P. Sterling and S. Laughlin, Principles of neural design, MIT Press,
2015.
[60] G. Sugihara, R. May, H. Ye, C.-h. Hsieh, E. Deyle, M. Foga-
rty, and S. Munch, Detecting Causality in Complex Ecosystems, Science,
(2012).
[61] G. Sugihara and R. M. May, Nonlinear forecasting as a way of dis-
tinguishing chaos from, Nonlinear Physics for Beginners: Fractals, Chaos,
Solitons, Pattern Formation, Cellular Automata and Complex Systems,
(1990), p. 118.
[62] F. Takens, Detecting strange attractors in turbulence, Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1981, pp. 366–381.
[63] S. R. Taylor, T. J. Wang, D. Granados-Fuentes, and E. D. Her-
zog, Resynchronization Dynamics Reveal that the Ventral Entrains the
Dorsal Suprachiasmatic Nucleus, Journal of Biological Rhythms, 32 (2017),
pp. 35–47.
[64] B. Van der Pol, Lxxxviii. on ?relaxation-oscillations?, The London, Ed-
inburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 2
(1926), pp. 978–992.
[65] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, Collective dynamics of ?small-
world?networks, nature, 393 (1998), pp. 440–442.
[66] E. W. Weisstein, "Diﬀeomorphism". http://mathworld.wolfram.com/
Diffeomorphism.html, 2017.
[From MathWorld-A Wolfram Web Re-
source].
[67] D. K. Welsh, J. S. Takahashi, and S. A. Kay, Suprachiasmatic nu-
cleus: cell autonomy and network properties, Annual review of physiology,
72 (2010), pp. 551–577.
[68] S. Yamaguchi, Synchronization of Cellular Clocks in the Suprachiasmatic
Nucleus, Science, 302 (2003), pp. 1408–1412.
[69] H. Ye, redm: Applications of empirical dynamic modeling from time series.
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=rEDM, 2017.
[70] H. Ye, A. Clark, and E. Deyle, Package ’rEDM’, (2016).
[71] H. Ye, E. R. Deyle, L. J. Gilarranz, and G. Sugihara, Distin-
guishing time-delayed causal interactions using convergent cross mapping,
Scientiﬁc Reports, 5 (2015), p. 14750.
[72] H. Ye and G. Sugihara, Information leverage in interconnected ecosys-
tems: Overcoming the curse of dimensionality, Science, 353 (2016), pp. 922–
925.
