==PAGE:1==
 
 
Designing microstructure of “native” fiber-
rich, fat-continuous dispersions for texture 
enhancement in liquid/semi-solid matrices 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2018  
Master thesis 30 ECTS 
Nestle Research Center Lausanne, Switzerland  
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Lyngby, Denmark  
 
Bozhidar Bahchevanski: student/ trainee (Food Technology program, Master student)  
Isabel Fernandez: Company supervisor (Hydrocolloids specialist, Carbohydrates Department)  
Deniz Gunes: Company co-supervisor, scientific advisor (Senior Specialist Soft Matter Science, Materials 
Modelling) 
Charlotte Jacobsen: School supervisor (Lipid specialist, Research group leader) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
1 | P a g e  
 
Summary  
 
Business and technical impact  
The project (CARBA) stream focuses on potentiating healthful carbohydrates sources. Dietary fibres in 
their naturally occurring structure are typically added to products as ‘crude fibres’, that is, for health claim 
purposes but no textural benefit. Key requirements for efficient use of these ingredients are: a) 
understanding and building knowledge about the mechanisms underlying material properties of a given 
microstructure; b) ability to rationalize this and guide structure creation using models. This knowledge 
can lead to competitive advantage via innovative uses of these underutilized ingredients. Business interest 
shown for innovation in healthier confectionery fillings. 
Objective of the project  
This project aims at provide scientific foundation for developing carbohydrates-oil blends to increase 
product’s nutritional value while maintaining consumer preference. The objective of this work is to 
develop techniques to allow the addition of nutritionally significant amounts of ‘native’ fibres from non-
cereal sources to products while controlling textural properties.  
Objective of the work  
This work is carried out as a part of the CARBA project stream. The main objective is to allow the 
incorporation of dietary fibres in fat-based systems (e.g. confectionery fillings) while optimizing 
rheological properties which has a positive impact on both palatability and processing. In order to achieve 
this, the aim is to create a new fibre-based particle structure using ingredients already present in fat-
based filling applications such as sugar and protein. This new particle structure would reduce total surface 
area while increasing degree of sphericity of the initial fibres which would in turn lead to a reduction of 
viscosity compared to having the ingredients added separately. Furthermore, having a sugar coating layer 
at fibre surface rather than as crystal particle in the filling could potentially allow for sugar reduction while 
keeping similar sweetness perception. 
Methodology and Trails 
Jet milled pea cell wall (PCW), pea hull (PH), psyllium (PS) and wheat fibre (WF) were used in fluidized bed 
reactor and spray drying process for investigating their potential for creating coated fibre-based 
structures. Different formulations were used and process steps were established. The fibre based powders 
obtained were then characterized on particle size distribution using Camsizer, density using pycnometer 
and water activity using Novasina and 4TEV. Imaging analysis was also carried out using a range of 
techniques: Optical Axioplan, Scannin electron microspore, Embedding, Confocal laser scanning 
microscope. The rheological properties of the coated fibres in high oleic sunflower oil were then assessed 
against the non-coated fibre counterparts. 
Results and Conclusion 
Fluidized bed reactor (FBR) and spray draying (SD) were used to investigate the production of sugar and 
protein coated fibres. FBR lead to significant particle agglomeration in relation to coating effect. Due to 
wet bridging formation between fibre particles. The resulting particle  morphology obtained with FBR is 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
2 | P a g e  
 
irregular with relatively low sphericity compared to fibre particles obtained with SD  . The advantage of 
FBR process is that yields are 70 to 90% and it is relatively simple process. Four fibres with different 
soluble/insoluble ratio were used for SD lab scale. Fibres with high soluble/insoluble ratio resulted in 
processing issues (i.e. blockage nozzle due to increased thickness),. For pilot plant scale SD, fibres with 
low soluble/insoluble ratio were selected and used for experimental trials. Due to the increase in volume 
by fibre swellability in water, particle size reduction followed by sieving was applied to avoid nozzle 
blockage (nozzle outlet diameter 700µm). SD process yield 50 to 65%, producing smooth surface particles 
with an ellipse to round particle morphology.  
FBR gave a wider particle size distribution due to: fibres not being sieved and  agglomerating phenomena. 
FBR powders have on average D50=45µm and D90=200 µm while SD powders have much narrower 
distribution. With D50=40 µm and D90=80 µm. SD powders are less dense than the FBR ones with values 
reaching 1.28 g/cm3, most likely due to increased porosity. Products obtained from both FBR and SD were 
below 0.25 of water activity.   
Microscopic analysis was carried out and prove of concept was established. Fibers were appearing inside 
of the cross section of particles. However most of the fibers would not be centered and will be on the side 
of particles. This might be due to low viscosity issue in combination of spray drying spinning particle 
trajectory. 
The rheological behaviour of the sugar-protein coated fibres in oil dispersions was measured and 
compared with the mixture of the separate ingredients at equivalent concentration. Results showed that 
the sugar-protein coated fibres exhibit more flowing behaviour. Volume fraction was then compared and 
it was shown that coated fibres would occupy 0.61 compared to sucrose mix with 0.65 and iced sugar with 
0.62. The reference mixture with fibres, sucrose and protein was not stable suspension and significant 
oiling out effects were observed compared to the coated fibre in oil dispersion. Rheometry measurements 
could not be carried out for this system due to the large sucrose particles. The increased flowability of the 
coated fibre in oil dispersion relates to the reduction of total surface area, with sugar/protein and fibres 
are structured in a desired way.  
Acknowledgments  
 
The author would like to thank, first and foremost, Isabel Fernandez and Deniz Gunes for all the guidance, 
meetings, advices, knowledge exchange and for providing the opportunity of cooperation by sharing the 
idea. Thank you to Charlotte Jacobsen for supporting the cooperation idea between DTU and Nestle, for 
guidance, advices and support. Further, thank to Drying and Agglomeration Network team knowledge 
exchange: Alessandro Gianfrancesco. To Prototyping group team: Laurent Crosset-Perrotin for booking 
and organizing all the pilot plant trials. Beat Gerber for supervising and contributing to the trials with 
experience and know how. To Audrey Vissières for her work on jet milling fibres. In addition, thanks also 
to Julien Hugo for organizing the ingredients needed. Thank to extensive work of imaging team in the face 
of Céline Loussert, Bertrand Schmitt, Christine Mettraux, and Carine Morgenegg for SEM, CLSM and 
Embedding. Thank to Particle system team, Jean-Christophe Andrieux and Delphine Pasche for all the tips 
and help in characterizing powders. Thank to Materials Modeling, Cindy Pelloux, and Hélène Deyber for 
all the effort and help in the lab during rheology analysis. Thanks to Lennart Fries, Laurent Forny, Marina 
Dupas-Langlet for fruitful discussions. TAHNK YOU! 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
3 | P a g e  
 
 
Table of Contents 
Summary ....................................................................................................................................................... 1 
Acknowledgments ......................................................................................................................................... 2 
1. 
Introduction and theoretical background ............................................................................................. 5 
2. 
Methodology and Trials ...................................................................................................................... 12 
3. 
Results and Discussion ........................................................................................................................ 17 
Conclusions ................................................................................................................................................. 41 
References .................................................................................................................................................. 43 
Appendices 1 FBR trials ............................................................................................................................... 45 
Appendices 2 SD trials ................................................................................................................................. 46 
Appendices 3 Microscopy images ............................................................................................................... 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
4 | P a g e  
 
Nomenclature  
g/cm3 
 
 
 
Density units  
cm3 
 
 
 
Average volume  
◦C 
 
 
 
Temperature in degrees Celsius 
aw  
 
 
 
Water activity  
wt.% 
 
 
 
Concertation on weight for weight basis  
γ 
 
 
 
Shear rate  
ρ  
 
 
 
Density  
η 
 
 
 
Apparent Viscosity  
φ 
 
 
 
Solid volume fraction  
W 
 
 
 
Amount of work  
V 
 
 
 
Volume of material  
Tg 
 
 
 
Glass transition temperature  
 
 
 
 
  
Abbreviations  
FBR  
 
 
 
Fluidized Bed Reactor  
SD  
 
 
 
Spray Drying  
PCW 
 
 
 
Pea cell wall fibres  
PHF 
 
 
 
Pea hull fibres  
PS 
 
 
 
Psyllium fibre 
WF  
 
 
 
Wheat fibre  
RH  
 
 
 
Relative Humidity  
pH  
 
 
 
Potential of hydrogen numeral scale  
SEM 
 
 
 
Scanning electron microscopy  
CLSM 
 
 
 
Confocal laser scanning microscopy  
TS 
 
 
 
Total solids 
CF 
 
 
 
Coated fibres 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
5 | P a g e  
 
1. Introduction and theoretical background  
 
1.1 Introduction  
Addition of fibres in fat based fillings for confectionary products under control manner is a main aim in 
this research work. Processing issues with fat based fillings occur (mixing, pumping, filing), when fibres 
are added.  
In addition, when sugar is reduced, the overall quality of the product might change. As an ingredient sugar 
has an important role in the product: adding physical properties (moisture, colour, density, bulk, etc.), it 
contributes to the production, taste, appearance and structure of the confectionary goods (e.g. candies, 
chocolates, cereals). Reducing sugar amount will eventually change the mentioned above properties [1].  
Further, when sugar is completely or partially replaced by fibres, the rheological properties of fat based 
confectionary changes significantly [2].  
The approach for reaching the goal of the project is to re-arrange present confectionary ingredients in 
combination with fibres, in a way such that total surface area is reduced, smoothen the surface of the 
fibre particles and reducing its size. Achieving this should result in reducing viscosity. For total surface area 
reduction of the solid ingredients, it is proposed to coat fibres with sugar and protein, which are commonly 
used ingredients in the fat-based confectionery products. Coating the fibres should also contribute to 
smoother surface and more spherical like shapes.  
Solving processing issue and practically removing sugar by fibres are the main benefits. Furthermore, this 
approach could contribute to masking certain off flavours that are intrinsic in fibres. Keeping the structure 
of the confectionary by controlling the morphology (more spherical like). This will result in controlling 
volume fraction of ingredients in fillings, which will yield in controlling the viscosity in a wanted region.      
1.2 Theoretical background  
Coating mostly consist of a particle or droplet with uniform wall around it. The structure of the 
encapsulated particle, under different shapes, is consisting of core or fill (material that is coated) and wall, 
carrier or coating the material that is covering the core [4]. Coating particles, also known as 
microencapsulation or englobing, techniques consists from couple of variants of methods and 
technologies such as in the table below [3] [10]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A number of technologies can be used for coating/micro encapsulation of particles such as spray drying, 
fluidized bed, supercritical micronization [4] [5] [6]. Each of the above methods has particular use and 
Process 
Method 
Spray drying 
Phase separation 
Spray cooling chilling  
Solvent separation 
Spinning rotating disk 
Coacervation 
Fluidized bed (drying, granulation, coating) 
Interfacial polymerization 
Extrusion 
Liposome 
Molecular encapsulation 
Nano encapsulation 
Table 1:  methods used for microencapsulation and coating of fine particles. Source [3]. 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
6 | P a g e  
 
properties of the end particles. In food production, the most common techniques for coating are spray 
draying (SD) and fluidized bed reactor (FBR) [13].  
Certain physical properties (e.g. shape, size and coating layer thickens) of the coated particles would be 
favored.  More details are listed in the table below (Table 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Issues with achieving reproducible particles with such properties (Table 2) might occur and vary from 
process to process.  
1.2.1 Reduction of viscosity in confectionary fillings 
It is well know that particle shape and volume fraction are related to the rheological properties and more 
specifically to viscosity. Einstein-Jeffery coefficient is one, which describes the initial slope of the relative-
viscosity versus solids volume fraction in the dilute limit, hence the expression:  
 
 
 
where φ is the solids volume fraction and ηr =η, η0 the relative (or reduced) viscosity, defined as the ratio 
of the effective viscosity of the suspension η to the viscosity of the dispersing medium η0 [15] . 
Theoretically there are three system arrangements when apparent viscosity in relation of volume fraction 
is considered (ηr(ϕ)). Dilute systems, where φ≤ 0.01 (Newtonian behaviour), semi-dilute where φ≤ 0.025 
and a concentrated system where φ≥0.25 (rapid growth in apparent viscosity and potentially shear 
thinning behaviour) [16]. Taking into account the objective of this work, the targeted spherical particles 
would be used in fat based confectionary fillings in concentrated system where φ is most likely to be 
≥0.25. Target is not necessarily spherical particles, but low enough aspect ratio and roughness to obtain 
lower dispersion viscosity in comparison to the non-coated reference of same composition. 
As a definition, volume fraction (φ) is given by the following equation: 
 
 
, where particle volume fraction (ɸ) corresponds to the volume occupied by the particles (P) over the total 
volume (Tv) and is used to assess the volume fraction of powder in liquid (solid suspensions system). 
Parameters  
Boundaries  
Shape  
Spherical, oval, ellipse  
Coating/fiber ratio  
Coating layer low in sugar  
Particle size  
≤ 100µm 
Water activity (Aw) 
≤ 0.5 
Surface condition 
Smooth 
Table 2: the parameters in favor and the desired physical property limits.    
[η] = 𝑙𝑖𝑚𝜑→0
η𝑟−1
𝜑
 
Equation 1 
𝜑= 𝑃
𝑇𝑣
 
Equation 2 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
7 | P a g e  
 
Equation 2 will give understating of how high the volume of particles with certain morphology will occupy 
within the liquid.  
 Further during processing the fat blends fillings are “stirred” (process mixing, pumping, filling) and 
therefore shear is applied to them. Primarily the choice of the type of fats used, but also the choice of 
processing parameters, which will influence crystallization, can impact the final texture of  the filling. The 
focus of this work is provide means to avoid processing issues (pump cavitation, impeller clogs etc.) that 
can be caused by too high average viscosity of the filling under factory conditions, based on a better 
control of particle size and morphology. 
In case of processing issues, which commonly happen in factory production when ingredients (sugar, fats, 
potentially fibres and milk powders etc.) are added at a high volume fraction, the amount of work that 
needs to be incorporated is increasing.  It is shown [17] that the work [W] that is needed to shear a certain 
volume of material [V] can be related to the apparent viscosity η. This is given by the following equation:  
 
 
Further if the material, in this case coated fibres are packed and spherical, suspended in a fluid (oil or fat 
blends) the total work is equal to the sum of the rate of work that is needed the shear the equivalent 
volume of fluid that has no particles [Wf]. The addition of the extra work due to the presence of the 
particles [Wp]. The suspensions apparent viscosity can be described by a re arranging of Equation 3 in a 
way to include Wf  and Wp. 
 
 
 
It is proven [16] [18] in research work where measurements were performed on suspensions of particles with 
five different geometries using suspension in silicone oil, and compared to theory predictions, that the 
heat dissipation in a shearing fluid is depended on a local strain rate. When spherical particles with smooth 
surface area are packed in a fluid, small gaps between the particles would have strain rate higher than the 
bulk strain rate. This leads potentially to higher effective volume occupied. In correlation to the higher 
viscosity issue, there may be heat dissipation issues in process: diffusion of the heat out of the packed 
fluid can reach insufficient levels and hence to induce rise of temperature in too high viscosity suspensions 
due to the decreasing gap between the suspended particles. Further, when under shear the particles 
passing close to each other would eventually lubricate the small distances between and would lead to 
decrease in viscosity of the liquid in the gap. [18]. Hence, the spherical and smooth surface of the coated 
fibres as a physical property are highly desired for achieving viscosity control, which is the main objective 
in this work.   
1.2.2 Spherical particles and process 
 Main objective of this work is to reduce the total surface area of the ingredients by re arranging them in 
more spherical like morphology. As mentioned above, the reduction of viscosity in fat based confectionary 
fillings is a key objective.  In number of studies, where morphology of particles produced by different 
𝑊= η𝛾2𝑉  
Equation 3 
η = 𝑊𝑓
𝛾2𝑉+ 𝑊𝑝
𝛾2𝑉 
Equation 4 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
8 | P a g e  
 
techniques were examined, was found that FBR and SD [18] [19] [20] [8] [12] have the highest potential of 
delivering spherical like particles. Fibres have different physio-chemical properties; soluble, insoluble in 
aqueous solution, different swellable ratios and macro ingredients.  The fibres in this research project are 
highly swellable upon water contact by nature.  
1.2.2.1 Spray drying (SD) 
 Englobing/coating by SD is mainly done by: spray drying emulsions where the oil is encapsulated and by 
solid particles suspensions, where thin layer of film/coating is formed upon SD around the solid particle. 
For this reason the solid particle, in this case fibres should be insoluble suspended in the coating and spray 
dried.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
Using spray drying, certain physical imperfections might appear. In cited study, where different type of  
carotenoids were coated with number of different materials (including whey protein isolate, gum arabic, 
maltodextrin and others), is discussed that shape of particles is depending on the processing parameters 
(e.g. inlet temperature, flow speed, rotator speed etc.). Possible wrinkles and dents can be seen on 
spherical particles. Inlet temperature and flow speed are related significantly with water evaporation rate 
and therefore imperfections of the final coated particles [21]. Higher flow speed and inlet air temperature 
is correlated with rapid evaporation and bigger particle shrinkage.  
Particles can be observed at a deformed spherical shape, with cracks and dents depending on the total 
solids concertation and the type of carrier used [6]. In consensus with work done on vitamin c englobing in 
whey protein, the particle size is related to operational conditions of the atomization [7].  
Furthermore, the properties of the solid suspension are discussed as viscosity has major effect on the 
drying rates and therefore the particle shapes. It is shown that high solid content of the particle 
suspension would increase the moisture holding capacity (when aqueous solutions is used). This would 
result in time reduction required for semipermeable membrane formation at the drying surface of the 
droplet. Hence, possible late drying rates in combination with high-infeed viscosity will results in late 
formation of coating and therefore low-coated particle yields [24].  
Produced particles have ranged from 2 to 30 µm with mostly spherical morphology, another study have 
shown [24]. Astaxanthin (keto-carotenoid, xanthophyll) coated by blends of milk protein and fibres under 
range of SD inlet temperature (160, 170, 180 ◦C) confirms smooth surface of formulations containing whey 
Figure 1 shows the morphology of particles produced by spray drying process. Source [4]. 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
 
9 | P a g e  
 
protein compared to those containing fibres in the coating. Most particles are spherical with smooth 
surface (depending on the ingredients used); however, dents due to the drying rate can be observed. 
Smaller particles seems to be more prone to dents on the surface. This indicated that there is an optimum 
size of the particles in order to obtain the desired structure. Further smaller particles will have higher 
drying rates. This results in rapid wall solidification, hence cracks and possible wall breakage [8]. High 
solubility of the shell (coating) material combined with moderate viscosity at high solid content is 
important for good microencapsulation. Loss and degradation of the particles can occur due to the high 
drying temperatures [4]. Additionally, general rules when spray drying can be applied. The viscosity of the 
infeed marital should be low enough to prevent trapped air. High viscosity will interfere with the process 
by creating larger droplets and therefore large particle size. Too low air inlet will result in low evaporation 
rates. This would cause encapsulation membrane with high density, high water content and eventually to 
agglomeration. On the contrary, high inlet temperatures will form cracks [4]. 
It is shown in the literature that changes of particle size and morphology are related to process conditions 
and moisture content, which affects the drying rates. Careful design of process parameters and product 
properties should be into account in order to achieve the objective of this work.   
1.2.2.2 Fluidized Bed Reactor (FBR) 
Applications of fluidized bed can be introduction of sustained, delayed, burs or enteric release properties, 
reduction of undesired flavors, improving homogeneity [9]. The limitations of this technique is the 
formation of irregularly shape particles and agglomeration. In some studies, where coating capability of 
FBR was tested using aluminum spheres (d= 1.3mm) and lactose and aqueous suspensions of hydrated 
lime as a coating [19] was shown that particles from FBR can be rough and agglomerated or smooth and 
spherical, depending on the process conditions. Although the perfect conditions and physical properties 
of the coated particles, agglomerates were present. Thereof spray coating by FBR can results in two 
different mechanism: coating by means of layering and agglomeration by means of wet bridges and 
cohesive forces.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In spray coating by FBR, the fundamental methodology step is coating and granulation process. It is 
consisting of wetting the fluidized particles by the atomized coating and created collision of the particles 
due to the fluidization. Essentially deposit of coating builds upon the particle and drying rates in 
combination with atomization pressure would determine the growth of the coating in spherical shape or 
agglomeration between particles [13].  
Figure 2 shows possible coating mechanisms using FBR. Source [19]. 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
10 | P a g e  
 
In another study where cornstarch mass media (15 µm) was coated with 5% aqueous solution of 
hydroxypropylecellulose, was shown that if viscous coating is used, it has been observed that larger 
amount of air is required for the particles to flout in the fluidized bed. Although in this study a rotary FBR 
was used, the essentials of the technique stay the same. It is discussed that more air results in higher 
shear force and prevention of agglomeration between particles [5]. Furthermore, it is observed that the 
uniformity and increase of thinness of the coating layer is related with high spray rates. Coated particles 
were smooth and well defined as presented by the study’s SEM investigation. 
As observed in previously cited studies, where sodium chloride particle with size of 395µm (D-90) were 
coated by maltodextrine aqueous solution (2% wt.), the usage of aqueous solution as coating will increase 
the humidity in the tank and will slow the drying. However increasing humidity is not necessary, negative 
factor, as discussed, the more humidity the more wetting of the particles surface. This will then lead to 
better droplet coalescence on the microstructure surface [12].  However, jet milled fibres used in this work, 
have size with a large distribution curve (D50=200µm, D90= 400µm for PH). The size and shape of fibres 
are irregular and much more stretched compared to salt. Therefore, possible differences in the expected 
structure of coated particles, simple due to shape differences might be expected.  
FBR processing has the capabilities to deliver coated particles with uniform quality and morphology. A 
smooth particle can be depended on the state of the droplet (viscosity of coating, atomized pressure, 
nozzle type etc). It is shown in multiple studies that droplet formation, contact, coalescence and as 
mention above evaporation rate, all occur simultaneously during the FBR process [13].This shows the 
complicity of achieving the objective of this work by FBR.  
For simplicity of trials, reproducibility, sustainable use of raw materials and due to time table restrictions, 
choice of right techniques and correct approach is preferred. Furthermore, potential scale up possibilities 
in combination with running cots, SD and FBR are used to investigate the work in this project. 
1.2.3 Ingredients characteristics 
As discussed the Introduction chapter, main objective of this investigation is to introduce fibres in the 
confectionary fillings and controlling the viscosity while production. The approach consists of taking into 
account ingredients, which are present in the confectionary filling and re arranging them in order to 
decrease the total surface area (by creating structure) when fibres are added. One tentative solution 
targeted here, as mentioned before, is to coat fibres with sugar and protein. As shown above SD and FBR 
will be the main potential processes for this purpose. However, certain issues with sugar rich aqueous 
suspension of fibres can occur when spray drying and drying in FBR process.   
In an overview article [4] of main process issues and parameters of SD techniques, it is discussed that 
carbohydrates (sugar, glucose, starch etc.) as wall material will result in low product yield and potentially 
bad morphology of the particles. Clogging of the nozzle can be caused due to the caramelization 
properties of the sugar and adherence to the surface of the spray dryer. It is concluded that the glassy 
state of the investigated trehalose (disaccharide) is suitable for wall material. However to avoid the 
clogging of the nozzle, combination of polymers, mixtures of carbohydrates and salt to modify the kinetics 
of sugar crystallization [4]. Avoiding stickiness often relates to the ability of the drying process to bring the 
system below the glass transition temperature (Tg) most rapidly, before particles agglomerate irreversibly. 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
 
11 | P a g e  
 
As an index upon which the processing conditions can be determined, glass transition temperature gives 
an indication of the stickiness, and stability of the materials in use (during and after the processing). 
Materials can become sticky, when the temperature of the particles rises above the sticky point 
temperature: the particle change from glassy state to liquid like rubbery and stickiness will occur. This  
sticky rubbery state phenomena occurs 10 to 20◦C above the Tg [22]. Particle, which becomes sticky will 
form agglomerates upon spraying and will affect negatively the flowing conditions of the spray dryer. 
These arguments show that the stickiness of the sugar can be avoided and limited if the drying conditions 
temperature inlet is between the sticky point and the Tg of the particles.  
Furthermore, the discussed above is in consensus with Nissim G. (Book, 2012) [23], where the limitation of 
sugar-rich core materials SD encapsulation is discussed. Although the theoretical discussion is on sugar-
rich core materials (honey, polyphenol fruit extracts etc.) the Tg arguments are valid for the sugar-rich 
coatings as well. It is stated the Tg of low molecular sugars will be too low to operate in usual factory 
conditions, therefore causing stickiness, due to considerably high temperatures in the spray drier. 
Material adhesion and particle cohesion will again form on the walls of the equipment delivering low 
yields and bad morphology. It suggested that glassy states carriers, in case of sugar-rich cores, should be 
added. Further, possible method for reduction of stickiness and adjustment of Tg is to adjust the amount 
of proteins (1% or higher wt.%).  Protein appears to have prudential migration to the water/air interface 
and forming a film property that overcomes stickiness. Therefore, for spray drying encapsulation of sugar 
rich core materials, proteins or protein/carbohydrates combination are recommended as carrier 
materials.  
1.2.4 Water Activity  
Water activity (aw) is an important thermodynamic parameter for controlling the quality of given food. 
By keeping water activity bellow certain value, risks of microbiological food spoilage are eliminated and 
shelf life of the food is extended. Aw is the ratio of the vapor pressure of water in a material (food) to the 
vapor pressure of pure water at the same temperature. For example if water activity of given food is equal 
to 0.60, that means that the water vapor pressure is 60 percent of pure water under the same 
temperature conditions. Aw is expressed ether by a decimal or by equilibrium relative humidity and it 
chances with temperature [25].  
 
 
 
Replacing sugar by coated fibres could affect the water uptake or the drying kinetics. This might result in 
different characteristics, including Aw. As a target value, the Aw of the filling after addition of the newly 
invented ingredient should be kept below the recommended value for the reasons mentions above. When 
the research work and characterization of the coated fibres behavior in fat and oil fillings systems is carried 
out, Aw of the fillings should be controlled as well.  Further it is expected powders to be under Aw of 0.2 
– 0.3. Higher water activity of powders might contribute to higher viscosity of fillings on later stage.  
Products  
Moisture 
Aw  
Soft coatings 
3 – 6% 
0.4 – 0.65 
Hard coatings 
0 – 1% 
0.4 – 0.75  
Creams 
10 – 18%  
0.65 – 0.8  
Nougat 
5 – 10% 
0.4 – 0.65 
Table 3 shows examples of moisture and water activity of fat based confectionary products. Source [26]. 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
12 | P a g e  
 
However, there is not much work done on water activity in oil, methodology and analyses. As mentioned 
above this would be a crucial step characterizing the invented ingredient and assuring future product 
quality. Due to the non-significant water content in oil, water activity of fat based confectionaries is 
measured only if there are other ingredients added to the product. However, a hypothesis is developed 
where it is assumed that the water activity of coated fibres (powder ingredient) will be the same after 
addition in oil matrices. Hence the Aw of the powder becomes the Aw of the filling. The hypothesis will 
be investigated and experiments on this will be carried out.   
 
2. Methodology and Trials  
 
2.1 Materials  
Pea cell wall fibres (Swelite, Cosucra), Pea Hull fibres (Exafine 250, Cosucra), Psyllium fibres (P 95, 
VITACEL), Wheat fiber (VITACEL) High oleic sunflower oil (Florin), Palm fat TC50 Fraction (York Research 
Center), Mill-Q deionized water, Sucrose (Schweizer Zucker AG) and Iced Sugar (Pistor SA), Whey protein 
(95 Low Lactose, BIPRO, Davisco Foods International). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2 Methods 
2.2.1 Jet-milling  
Particle size reduction was carried out using dry, jet-milling technique. The fibres were passed once 
through the Jet-mill (Tecnologica Meccanica 2525) at constant pressure of 10 Bars and a feeding rate 
0.5kg/h. Particles may vary between the different fibres in use (e.g. PCW – D50=25µm, D90=500µm; PHF 
– D50=210µm ,D90=420µm)  
2.2.2 Particle size 
Particle size of fibres and coated fibres were measured in dry condition using particle analyzer (CAMSIZER 
XT). Jet air at 120kPa is blasting the particles for de-agglomeration, after which the particles pass in front 
of two optical cameras (zoom and basic camera) for wide particle distribution measurement. Cap width 
Fiber/Starch/Protein (%) 
Particle 
size [µm] 
Density 
[g/cm3] 
soluble/insoluble ratio 
dietetic fiber 
Pea Cell 
Wall 
50/40/10 
D50= 25.6 
D90= 562.3 
1.5927 
3.6/55.1 
Pea Hull 
85/7/8 
D50= 210.2 
D90= 428.6 
1.5293 
6.4/82.7 
Wheat fiber 
80/13/7 
D50= 44 
D90= 139.9 
1.5529 
6.8/32.3 
Psyllium 
75/18/7 
D50= 82.6 
D90= 230.5 
1.5177 
22.9/82.7 
Table 4:  the physical properties of fibres that were investigated. Soluble/insoluble ratios on dietetic fibre. 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
 
13 | P a g e  
 
at 4mm and size classes at 0 – 3mm, 300 classes.  The particles were flowing through the cameras for 2 
minutes. The measurement was stopped after approximately 18000 – 20000 pictures were obtained. 
2.2.3 Microscopy 
2.2.3.1 Optical microscopy 
The coated fibres powder were examined with optical microspore Zeinss Axioplan A41912, equipped with 
digital camera. Magnification of 10x and 20x in combination with polarized light were used. Small quantity 
of powder was placed directly onto the glass slide and evenly distributed across. Pictures were taken in 
both black/white and polarized light.  
2.2.3.2 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) 
Detailed observation of the coated particles was carried out using Scanning Electron Microscope (Oxford 
Instruments, X-Max). Each powder was glued onto a metallic specimen stub equipped with a double-sided 
conductive tape. The stub was shaken to allow good spreading of the powder. The sample were coated 
with 5 nm gold layer using a Leica SCD500 sputter coater and were subsequently imaged in low vacuum 
mode at 6kV using a Quanta F200 Scanning Electron Microscopy.  
2.2.3.3 Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM)  
Powders were infiltrated in Medium grade LR White embedding resin (London Resin Company, Berkshire, 
England) overnight at room temperature under agitation. After infiltration, the resin was polymerized at 
60°C for 48 hours. The surface of the block was trimmed away by ultrathin sectioning to reach the 
particles. The block was glued onto a carbon tape and installed inside the microscope. The block face 
Imaging was done with a LSM 710 confocal microscope upgraded with an Airyscan detector (zeiss, 
Oberkochen, Germany). Acquisition and image treatments were done using the Zen 2.1 software. 
Autofluorescence: Excitation wavelength: 405 nm; Emission: LP=410 nm 
2.2.4 Rheology 
2.2.4.1 Rheology on coatings and suspensions  
Rheology analysis was carried out with stressed controlled Anton Paar Physica MCR501 rheometer using 
Rheoplus software. Different formulation that were used for the trials (see Appendices 2 for SD) were 
analyzed on viscosity values for both coating water liquid mixture sugar and protein) and the particulate 
suspension (sugar/protein, fibres). This was done with the following method: 1) Geometry in use was cup 
and cone (C-CC27/T200/SS, smooth surface). 2) Temperature was chosen to be 70◦C (to mimic the coating 
temperature right after entering in the Spray dry chamber). 3) The measurement starts with 5 min step 
of sample relaxation and temperature equilibration. 4) Ramp up was carried out from γ 0.1 1/s until 100 
1/s (ramp log profile). 5) Ramp down was carried out from γ 0.1 1/s until 100 1/s (ramp log profile). 
Measuring points set at 30sec, interval length at 300sec. Mineral oil was used to cover the sample in order 
to avoid evaporation.  
For viscosity of the suspensions, the process of preparation was the same as for trails (see 2.3.2 Spray 
drying)  
2.2.4.2 Rheology on fat based fillings 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
14 | P a g e  
 
Rheology analysis was carried out with stressed controlled Anton Paar Physica MCR501 rheometer using 
Rheoplus software. Sunflower oil in combination with ingredients (sugar, whey protein and fibres) were 
analyzed with small amplitude oscillation measurements for shear loss and storage modulus, G’ and G” 
respectively. This was done with the following method established: 1) Impeller attached to electrical 
model was used to mix the ingredients and the oil. 2) Geometry in use was plate/plate (PP25S with rough 
surface). 3) Temperature was chosen to start at 20◦C, then was decreased  to 10◦C at a rate of 1°C/min, 
followed by an increase until 40◦C. 4) The measurement starts with mixing step done by the rheometer 
for 5 min at shear rate 0.1 /s. 5) All measurements included oscillation mode characterization (γ=0.01% at 
frequency 1Hz) for the temperatures stages mentions in step 3). 5) The measurement is finished by a ramp 
up from 0.1 /s until 100 1/s (ramp log profile) at 20◦C.  
By definition stored energy which is released per cycle of deformation per unit volume is measured in G’. 
G’ also refers to deformation modes that have elastic nature property. G” on the other hand give 
information about deformation modes with dissipative properties: G’’ is the energy dissipated as heat per 
cycle of deformation per unit volume. Both G’ and G” form the complex modules G*, which can be related 
in the following expression [33]:   
 
 
2.2.5 Aw 
The aw was measured in continuous mode using the aw-meter Aqualab (Series 4TE). The coated fibres 
were measured at 25◦C. The measurement was stopped after 1.5, 2 hours at which equilibrium for 
powders is obtained within accuracy of ±0.005. The analysis was done in duplicate. Same equipment and 
conditions (temperature and time) were used for analysis on aw in oil. Fat based filling from the Rheology 
analysis (see 2.2.4.2) were used for Aw in oil.  
2.2.6 Sieving 
Particle size of the jet-milled fibres were further selectively 
sieved. Due to size of the spray-draying nozzle, sieving is 
necessary to avoid nozzle clogs caused by swelled fiber particles.   
Apparatus air jet sieve Retsch As200 equipped with sieve 40µm 
was sued. Due to the low density of the fiber particles, the set up 
was modified with second larger cyclone (see picture on the 
right). This allows avoiding the loss of fiber particles into the 
vacuum unit and obtaining higher yield of sieved product. The 
second cyclone was borrowed from the Niro Spray drier unit (as 
it was a spare). Amount of fibres were added and sieved until all particles bellow 40µm were collected in 
from the cyclone units. This was repeated until the needed amount for Spray drying trial was obtained.  
2.2.7 Density of powders 
True Density of powders measured by means of pycnometer AccuPyc 1330. Fibres as raw ingredients and 
coated fibres as final product were analyzed making use of 10 and 35 cm3 cell respectively for small and 
high available quantity. Beforehand measuring, the powders were weighted out in the chosen cell and the 
𝐺∗= √𝐺′2 + 𝐺"2 
Equation 5 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
 
15 | P a g e  
 
apparatus was set at the appropriate cell in use. Density values are needed for powder characterization 
and further rheometry analysis.  
2.2.8 pH of solid suspension  
The pH of the total mixture prepared before trial was measured. Instrument pH meter VWR PH1000H 
equipped with pH probe Metrohm (6.0133.100; pH 0-14, T◦C 0-80). The probe was submerged in the 
suspension until a stable reading was recorded.  
2.3 Trials  
From literature review, two main technique with potential characteristics for obtaining coated fibres were 
selected: Fluidized bed and Spray drying were chosen for experimental trials.  
2.3.1 Fluidized bed reactor with side spray  
Jet milled fibres (not sieved) are added to the reactor and hot air fluidization is let to stabilize. The bottom 
metal grid of the fluidized bed reactor was replaced by cloth 25µm air filter. By doing this, the smallest 
fibres are held in the reactor and flow of fluidization air is not restricted.  
Preparation of the coating was carried out as follows: Sugar and whey protein were mixed and gradually 
added to water under high shear mixing using Polython at 8000-10000rpm. Mixing was applied until 
completely dispersed. The coating is then applied through a spray nozzle on the side of the FBR.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HR was monitored before the spraying of the coating begins, during spraying and during drying. After 
achieving HR bellow the desired value, the product was collected.  
2.3.2 Spray drying 
The following procedure was used for preparation of trials premix for both lab scale (Buchi Spray drier 
B290) and pilot plant scale (Niro Minor spray drier MM-PSR): sugar and whey protein were mixed by hand. 
The mixture was gradually added to water under high shear mixing using Polython at 8000-10000rpm.until 
completely dispersed. The previously sieved fiber (bellow 40µm, to avoid nozzle blockage) particles were 
gradually added to the coating (sugar-whey-water mixture) under high shear. The total blend was mixed 
until homogeneity.  
 
 
Volume air in [m3/h] 
70 
T ◦C air in 
60 
Nozzle pressure 1 [bar] 
1.5 
Nozzle pressure 2 [bar] 
0.5 
Pump speed manual only [RPM] 
10 
HR during spraying [%] 
20-10 
HR after spraying [%] 
10-5 
Filter cleaning interval [sec] 
10-15 
Table 5:   process parameters during the FBR spraying.  
==PAGE:17==
 
 
 
16 | P a g e  
 
2.3.2.1 Buchi mini spray drier B290 
The following process conditions were applied in all the trials done on Buchi spray drier: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Air pressure was set at height 30mm, 357L/h, which corresponds to pressure drop of 0.23bar and Actual 
volume flow 439L/h. Spray nozzle was used with outlet diameter of 0.7mm in diameter and cleaning 
option integrated. Magnetic stirrer was used for preventing sedimentation of fibres. Due to slow drying 
rates of the fibres, pump speed was kept at low percentage. An average processing time for 300ml batch 
was approximately between 2.5 and 4h.  
   
2.3.2.2 Pilot plant NIRO spray drier 
The parameters in Table 7 below are the optimum conditions:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The pump was generally used on manual mode. The RPMs of the pump were adjusted in relation of the 
RH% monitored in the certain boundaries. Spray nozzle was used with outlet diameter of 1mm in diameter 
(no cleaning option is available). Height level of the spray nozzle is marked to be on the nozzle with black 
line which sits at 150.5mm from the tip of the nozzle. Magnetic stirrer was used into the suspension 
mixture for preventing sedimentation of fibres. An average processing time for 600ml batch was 
approximately 2.5 to 4h.  
 
 
 
 
Aspirator [%] 
100 
T ◦C air in 
100 
T ◦C air out 
75 
Nozzle cleaning [sec] 
5 
Pump speed [%] 
10 
Table 6: process parameters during the spray draying.  
Aspirator [%] 
100 
T ◦C air in 
115 
T ◦C air out 
65-75 
Nozzle pressure [bar]  
1.1-1.5 
Pump speed when manual [RPM] 
40-60 
RH [%] after cyclone 
8-11 
Table 7:  process parameters during the spray draying.  
==PAGE:18==
 
 
 
17 | P a g e  
 
3. Results and Discussion  
 
3.1 Processing  
3.1.1 Coated fibres by Fluidized Bed Reactor (FBR)  
A number of trials were carried out (see Appendix 1) using different formulations, under different process 
conditions. The experiments purpose was to examine the type of particles could be obtained using the 
FBR equipment with atomized coating. Images of particles in Figure 3 and 4 are result of trials conditions 
in Table 5.  
The equipment in use is designed for larger particles size to be fluidized, hence the modification of the 
bottom of the fluidized bed with finer grid. The particles achieved from FBR are irregularly shaped with 
relatively high surface area. As discussed in the Chapter 1, the FBR method has potential of layering 
coating and agglomerating. It is clear that the observed particles are with random shape formed under 
agglomeration. The process parameters were changed multiple times combining, different atomization 
pressure with drying rates of the fluidized inlet air.  
In trial with the following parameters: 60m3/h volume air, inlet temperature of 70◦C, nozzle pressure 1 
and 2 were 3.0 bar and 1.0 bar respectively, was observed a fluidization disruption. Upon closer 
examination appeared that drying rates were to low and big agglomerate of particles were formed, 
therefore the fluidized inlet air was disturbed. As discussed, the FBR has to operate at bigger particle 
(above 1000µm) as an initial fluidization feed. Further, a decreased fluidized particles size will potentially 
result in increased mass fraction of agglomerates. Which contributes to liquid bridges formation between 
solid particles (enhanced cohesive forces) [20]. Hence, relatively large agglomerate were formed. At high 
liquid contents, the bed of wet particles tends to contract and particle agglomerates begin to predominate 
even at high gas flow rates. Further, intermolecular attractive forces, Van der Waals forces, and 
electrostatic forces also play an initial role of wetting fibres and particle formation [20].  
 
Figure 3:  Images of FBR trials with the following concertation on wet basis wt.%: fibres 35.7%, water 28.5%, sugar 28.5% 
and protein 7.1%. On the lift black/white picture and on the right polarized lithe picture. Magnification 10x.  
==PAGE:19==
 
 
 
18 | P a g e  
 
It is suggested usage of more spherical particles in order to decrease the agglomeration effect. It is 
assumed that more sphericity will result in less attraction between the particles and therefore less 
agglomerates [27]. 
Further issues that might costs avoidance of layering process might be due to the liquid droplets (atomized 
coating) are too large with respect to the fluidized fibres. This could result in uneven liquid distribution 
and the wet quenching phenomenon appearance. Thus, the bridges between the particles become too 
strong to be fragmented and too large to be fluidized.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The growth is then governed by agglomeration. If the size of agglomerates formed is too large to be 
fluidized by fluidizing gas (U<Umf), segregation followed by bed quenching takes place [27]. Visual 
appearance of the end product appears as mixture of fibre and coating rather than coated fibres.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Images of FBR trials with the following concertation on wet basis wt.%: fibres 25%, water 41.67%, sugar 
16.7% and protein 16.7%. On the lift black/white picture and on the right polarized lithe picture. Magnification 10x.   
 
Figure 5: schematic representation of the agglomerating particles formation under cohesive forces.  
==PAGE:20==
 
 
 
19 | P a g e  
 
3.1.2 Coated fibres by Spray Drying (SD) 
A number of trials were carried out with different formulation and process parameters (see Appendices 
2).  Experiments objective was to investigated the powder characterization (e.g. particle morhplogy) 
carried out by SD. Lab scale trials were carried out with process conditions described in Table 6 and pilot 
plant scale in Table 7.  Powders appear fine, without agglomerated particles. During lab spray drying 
carried out on Buchi mini spray dryer it was observed really low yield and a layering of particles on the 
wall of the drying chamber. The nozzle of Buchi mini pray drier has 700µm outlet and 1000µm for NIRO 
minor SD. However equipped with nozzle cleaner option, which will pulsate at certain time. This feature 
in combination with smaller drying chamber geometry affect the yield by disturbing the spray pattern of 
the nozzle. However, Buchi SD was used as first tests and no yield was recorded and were characterized 
by optical microscope only (Trial 1 was also analyzed with SEM). Upon first examination, particles from 
Buchi SD appeared much rounder, almost spherical, smoother surface and no agglomerates compared to 
FBR.  
Trials with all four fibres (PCW, PH, WF, and PS) were carried out in lab scale spray draying. It was observed 
that fibres with lower soluble percentage (fibres that keep the structure when submerged to water) would 
result in lower processing issues. Fibres with high soluble percentage (good solubility in water) lead to 
more processing issues i.e. blockage of the nozzle, high viscosity of suspension compared to fibres with 
lower soluble percentage. Due to that the percentage present on wt.% basis of soluble fibres were too 
low (2% fibre). Proper assessment with optical analysis is not possible as well as the 2% is under the 
desired 10% and potentially above objective. Hence, further spray drying trials were carried out with fibres 
having greater insoluble fibres. 
 
 
Figure 6: Images of SD BUCHI trials with the following concertation on wet basis wt.%: PCW 14.3%, water 57.14%, 
sugar 22.86% and protein 5.71%. On the lift black/white picture and on the right polarized lithe picture. 
Magnification 10x.   
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
20 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Further, the SD trials were carried with Spray dryer NIRO Minor on pilot plant scale.  During all the trials 
carried on SD Niro, it was observed particles layering around the atomization nozzle (Figure 8). After the 
particles are sprayed out of the nozzle, two stages of the drying takes place. At first contact with the hot 
air, there is sufficient amount of moisture in the droplet, which feeds the evaporation rates at the surface. 
It is accepted that this occurs at constant evaporation rate. After certain time, stage two, the moisture is 
evaporated from the droplet and a solid particle is being formed. In ideal conditions, this causes a dry shell 
to form at the surface. Within the perfect conditions it is almost instantaneously, with poor conditions 
anywhere between 5 to 15sec [4].  The thickness increases and the evaporation of moisture depends on 
diffusion though the carrier [31].  In this work, the fibres that are being coated are highly swellable in water 
(as provide by supplier, water retention capacity of 10g/g). It is possible that time required of the fibres 
to release the moisture completely is longer compared to spray draying of non-swellable ingredients. In 
addition, it is suggested that due to this, the time needed for drying would be prolonged (when particles 
are under instant evaporation, in contact with the hot air). A chance of layering of partly wet particles 
onto the nozzle is possible and therefore the nozzle blockage by particle layering observed problem is 
confirmed. To minimize the effect of fibres swelling, the fibres are added to the suspension after the sugar 
and whey protein have been mixed at minimum water content. It is suggested that in this case fibres will 
require longer time for swelling as well most of water will be up taken by high amount of soluble solids.  
As mentioned, dealing with highly swellable fibre suspended in aqueous solution leads to particles 
layering on the nozzle. After certain time, the particles on the nozzle would disturb the atomization 
pattern of the infeed liquid. In order to continue the processing, spraying and atomization were stopped 
and the nozzle was cleaned manually. After which the processing was continued.  
Figure 7:  picture of lab scale spray drier after trial done with psyllium fiber with higher soluble ration.   
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
21 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When protein was added to sugar/protein ratio 1/1 some processing issues appear. The mixing of the 
ingredients with polytron was more difficult due to the low molecular weight and high solubility of whey 
protein which increase the volume faction of protein in the suspension. This increased the viscosity of the 
total suspension and the SD nozzle appeared stuck at the tip during processing. The process in trial 8 was 
stopped multiple times to clear the tip of the nozzle and therefor it can be seen the yield is slightly lower 
(60% at the cyclone) than expected for this amount of protein (discussed further at Graph 1). Due to that 
reason, the material remain at the collection pipe at the bottom of the SD NIRO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overall yield of the SD process was examined by weighing out the product powder at the end of the 
process and comparing the number of the total solids in the wet basis formulation. The yield is then 
expressed in percentage of the initial total solids weight. Powders from only the cyclone are considered 
as yield.  
Figure 8:  particles layering on the tip of the nozzle in SD trials.  
Figure 9:  pictures of nozzle stuck at the tip when on the left. Collecting pipe on the right. Trial 8 SD Niro was 
carried out.  
==PAGE:23==
 
 
 
22 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trails 2, 3, 4 with 50%, 55% and 65% yield respectively were processed under inlet temperature 130°C and 
outlet 80°C. Trials 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 (80%, 70%, 65%, 60%, and 70% respectively) were processed under inlet 
temperature of 115°C and outlet of 70°C. Powders with whey protein above 4% wt.% (on wet basis), on 
average, have higher yield. In general practices of spray drying a yield of 50% (at cyclone) and above is 
considered as efficient. Wherein the work by Adhikari.B, the addition of protein to spray drying 
amorphous sugar is investigated[29]. In this work, it is showen that as higher as the percentage of sugar, as 
lower the yield is. For example if pure sugar is sprayed dried, the total yield is approximately 20%.  When 
whey protein is added (0.5 and 1%) yield increases dramaticly up to 65% in cyclone powder. This effect 
can be seen in this work as well.  
3.2 Powder characterization  
3.2.2 Particle size and distribution  
Particle size of the coated fibres were analyzed with camziser equipment. The particle size of FBR powders 
was between D50= 45µm until D90=200 µm. As mentioned in Chapter 2, the fibres were not sieved and 
directly used in the reactor. This automatically will affect the particle size distribution due to the larger 
fiber particles included. It can be seen that particle size can be related to the amount of water and sugar 
wt.% in the premix of the coating. More water will result in longer spray time. Longer spray time means, 
particles have higher chance of forming wet sticky bridges between each other, therefore forming bigger 
agglomerates. Trials 1, 2 and 3 have monomodal distributions. Trial 4, however, appears to have bimodal 
distribution. This might be due to the mentioned above observation that powder appear more as mixture 
of sugar/whey and PH fibres.  
 
50
55
65
80
70
65
60
70
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Sugar
14.5%/Whey
3.64
Sugar 14%/Whey
4%
Sugar
11.5%/Whey
3.3%
Sugar
14.1%/Whey
4.72%
Sugar
29.6%/Whey
7.41%
Sugar
38.1%/Whey
9.52%
Sugar
19.7%/Whey
19.7%
Sugar 17%/Whey
17%
Yield of SD NIRO [%]
Graph 1: yield at cyclone of final product for different trials from SD NIRO. Expressed in % of TS in dry matter.  
Trial 2 
Trial 3 
Trial 4 
Trial 5 
Trial 6 
Trial 7 
Trial 8 
Trial 9 
% 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
 
23 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For spray drying trials, particle size of jet milled fibres are sieved (screened of) with 40µm sieve. This is 
done in order not to block the 1000µm outlet of the atomization nozzle (in case of swelled fibres). In this 
case, particle distribution is not comparable with the FBR particle size due to initial narrower distribution 
of the sieved fibres. The wide distributions on Graph 2 compline with the cited studies [8] and literature [30] 
where Particles appear as from D10=2 µm to D50=25µm. Value for spray dried encapsulated solid core 
powders has wide range between D50=5µm and 150 µm. 
Powders produced by SD Niro have a D50 ranging from 24µm until 60µm, with the majority of trials in the 
range of D50=40µm. The higher the viscosity of coating, larger the particle size whereas the higher the 
atomization pressure, lower the particle size is expected [4]. Further details on the rheology of the coatings 
will be given in the following section. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Majority of trials appear with monomodal distribution, which might be an effect of the pre-sieving of the 
fiber particles. However, trials 2 and 7 have bimodal distribution. This might be due to higher apparent 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
volume density [%]
Particle size [µm]
FBR trials particle size 
Trial 4
Trial 1
Trial 2
Tiral 3
Graph 2:  the particle size distribution from all the FBR trials.  
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Volume density %
Particle size[µm]
SD Niro trials particle size
Trial
9
Trial
8
Trial
4
Graph 3: the particle size distribution from some key SD Niro trials. 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
24 | P a g e  
 
viscosity of the solid suspension (Trial 2 = 0.232 Pa.s  and trail 7 = 0.154Pa.s at 100 1/s) and relatively lower 
nozzle pressure ( trail 2 = 0.9bars and trial 7 = 1.1 bars).  
3.2.3 Water activity (Aw) 
Water activity of coated fibres was analysed after production. As discussed in Chapter 1, the water activity 
value as objective is under 0.2-0.3 due to stability during storage and avoidance of viscosity increase in 
oil. After analysis coated fibres powders were found to have Aw anywhere between 0.07 until 0.240. 
As shown in the table below,   there is no correlation between the water content of the wet basis 
formulation and inlet temperature of the powders. Powders with higher water content (on wet basis) 
(trial 4) exhibit lower Aw value of 0.07 compared to powders with lower water content (on wet basis) 
(trial 1) with aw of 0.144 for FBR, even though the average drying time were similar.  
  Sprayed dried powders gave the same results with aw ranging from  0.08 to 0.23. 
 
 
 
 
Similar aw were reported in a similar work on spray drying of watermelon fibres [28]. The work was carried 
with addition of maltodextrin and at higher inlet temperatures (145 - 175◦C) compared to this study. 
FBR 
Trial № 
Inlet air T [◦C] 
Volume air [m3/h] 
 
Water content [%]  
wet basis formulation 
 
Aw 
 
1 
60 
50 
 
18.1 
 
0.144 
2 
75 
60 
 
14.3 
 
0.091 
3 
75 
60 
 
28.6 
 
0.204 
4 
60 
70 
 
41.7 
 
0.07 
 
Table 8: relation between the process inlet air and temperature with water wt. % of wet basis formulation and water Aw. 
Lab SD 
Trial № 
Inlet air T [◦C] 
 
Water content [wt.%] 
wet basis formulation 
Aw 
1 
100 
 
57.1 
0.134 
2 
 
66.6 
0.168 
3 
 
78.4 
0.137 
4 
110 
 
57.1 
0.111 
Table 9: relation between the process inlet air and temperature with water wt. % of wet basis formulation and water Aw. 
Note: Aspirator was operated at 100% for all trials. 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
 
25 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spray drying studies on maximizing the yield of amorphous sugar with addition of whey protein [29] 
reported optimal inlet temperature of 160◦C. The aw values ranges between 0.187 and 0.240, depending 
on the type of protein it is used (Sodium caseinate and whey protein isolate). 
It can be observed that generally the FBR powders exhibit lower aw compared to SD powders. The reason 
might be that fibres are pre-dried while being fluidized hence decreased aw. Although the powder from 
FBR have generally lower aw, agglomerates are much more present in the final product, including trial 
case with de-fluidization agglomerates.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pilot 
plant SD 
Trial № 
Inlet air T [◦C] 
Water content [wt.%] 
 wet basis formulation 
Aw 
1 
130 
67.3 
0.189 
2 
72.7 
0.232 
3 
68 
0.234 
4 
74 
0.169 
5 
110 
75 
0.186 
6 
115 
59.2 
0.155 
7 
47.6 
0.143 
8 
56.7 
0.108 
9 
62.6 
0.081 
Table 10: process inlet air and temperature with water wt.% of wet basis formulation and water Aw. Note: Aspirator was 
operated at 100% for all trials. 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
 
26 | P a g e  
 
3.2.4 Water activity (aw) in oil  
As mentioned in Chapter 1, the assumption is that water activity of the ingredient added into the oil is 
similar to the water activity of the total mixture (oil/fibres mixture). The following experiments were 
carried out to assess aw of the coated fibres in relation to rheological properties: samples from rheology 
investigations with different wt% fat and wt% coated fibres were mixed by impeller. Results show that 
the water activity of 30(SFO)/70(CF) wt% is detected much faster (equilibrium reached) compared to oil 
only. Aw of coated fibres can be seen the previous sub chapter (Table 10) and aw of coated fibres in oil 
can be seen bellow (Graph 4 and 5), and that are not the same however still under the acctepted value 
for this work of bellow 0.25-0.3 (e.g. trial 6, aw=0.155 and trial 6 in oil aw=0.240). This might be because 
investigated powders were used for Aw in oil after time has passed from production and possible moisture 
uptake could have occurred. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.23
0.24
0.25
0.26
0.27
0.28
0.29
0.3
0
50
100
150
Aw
Time [min]
30% SFO, 70% Coated fibres Trial 6 SD
an1
an2
Graph 4: aw of mixture (30% SFO and 70% coated fibres (trial 6) for 2h period. 
 
0.23
0.25
0.27
0.29
0.31
0.33
0
50
100
150
200
Aw
Time [min]
50% SFO, 30% Sugar, 10% Whey, 10% Fibres  
an1
an2
Graph 5: aw of mixture (30% SFO, 30% sugar, 10% Whey protein and 10% Pea hull fiber) for 2h period. 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
 
27 | P a g e  
 
3.2.5 Density of powders  
 Overall, the densities of the SD and FBR powders are of similar magnitude. The larger initial fiber size in 
the FBR should be taken into account. In true density measurements with picnometry, as used in this 
work, the nitrogen cannot enter the closed pores, hence explaining why SD powders were lighter particles 
due to air incorporation during sprayed drying process. (Table 11) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The significant lower density of SD trials 8 (wet wt%: PH 3.94, sugar 19.7, whey 19.7) and 9 (wet wt%: PH 
3.4, sugar 17, whey 17) might be due to the whey protein and sugar ration which was 1:1. The low 
molecular weight and high volume (bulky) of the whey protein added in higher wt% in this trails, can be 
the reason of lowered density.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Trial № 
Density [g/cm3] 
FBR 
1 
1.5975 
2 
1.5065 
3 
1.543 
4 
1.4174 
SD NIRO 
1 
1.5120 
2 
1.4381 
3 
1.5171 
4 
1.5096 
5 
1.4386 
6 
1.3862 
7 
1.4057 
8 
1.2807 
9 
1.2873 
Table 11: densities of powders from trials by FBR and SD Niro.  
==PAGE:29==
 
 
 
28 | P a g e  
 
3.2.6 Imaging analysis (Optical microscope, SEM & CLSM) 
 Fibres alone were initially imaged using  optical microscopy. for assessing overall morphology and 
polarization behavior. It can be seen that both PCW and PH fibres are reflecting under polarized light 
(Figure 10).  
Due to particle morphology, only spray drying trials were extensively examined by different type of 
microscopy. Spray dried coated fibres were analyzed with optical microscopy after production. This would 
give an initial indication of particle shape, size and distribution.  As mentioned before spray dried powders 
appear smooth, with relatively round shape, as imaged by optical microscopy (Figure 11). 
Particles of some SD trials are  less mosth and less spherical thsan other trials. The lower the wt.% of water 
in the formulation, to the  higher  viscosty (increased total solids contecnt), which in turn leads to higher 
particle size.  
As it can be seen in the pictures above, suspensions with higher fibre wt.% (Trial 7 wet wt.%: PH 4.8, sugar 
38.1, whey 9.52) result in rougher surface. It can be also seen (Figure 12), in the polarized picture on the 
right side, group of fibres arranged one round particle together. Observed only by optical microscope, it 
can be speculated that the fibres are held packed by sugar/whey coating and therefor making a structure 
Figure 11: optical microscopy images of SD NIRO trials 7. On the left black/white picture and on the right polarized 
lithe picture. Magnification 10x.   
 
Figure 10: optical microcopy images of PCW fiber (left) and PH fiber (right). Under polarized lithe picture. 
Magnification 10x.   
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
29 | P a g e  
 
of coated fibres. Also can be concluded that particles are polydispersed and have non-uniform particle 
size.  
Due to the limitations related to the two dimensional characteristics of optical microscope, SEM analysis 
was carried out. It is confirm the polydispersity of the particle size. However, as seen before particle size 
distribution is rather narrow (Graph 3). Trials BUCHI 0.1 (wet wt%: PCW 14.3, sugar 22.3, whey 5.7) and 
0.2 (wet wt%: PH 11.1, sugar 17.8, whey 4.4) were also examined. It gave an overview of feasibility of the 
lab scale spray drying. The surface or the Trial 0.1 Buchi appears smother compared to trial 0.2. 
 This might be due to the initially rougher fiber surface of PH fibres which is richer on cellulose compared 
to the other fibres tested.  
Trials 6 (wet wt.%: PH 3.7, sugar 29.6, whey 7.4) and 7 (wet wt.%: PH 4.8, sugar 38.1, whey 9.52)  of SD 
Niro were also  analysed by SEM. The major difference of the trials was 10% increase of water and 10% 
increase of sugar. It can be confirmed that practices are indeed polydispersed. The smaller particles might 
Figure 12: images of SD NIRO trials 4, rougher particles. On the lift black/white picture and on the right polarized 
lithe picture. Magnification 10x.   
 
 
Figure 13: SEM images of trials Buchi. On the left PCW trial 0.1 and on the right PH trial 0.2.  
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
30 | P a g e  
 
be assumed to be starch granules however this is not supported with the initial starch composition in the 
fibre (PH) ingredients which is rather low (Table 4). 
PCW and PH coated fibres, when analysed using confocal auto-fluorescence microscopy, exhibit 
significant fluorescence response (Figure 15).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14: SEM images s of SD NIRO trials. Trial 6 on the left and Trial 7 on the right.  
Figure 15: confocal auto-fluorescence pictures of SD NIRO trials. Trial 6 on the left and Trial 7 on the right.  
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
31 | P a g e  
 
It was observed in most of the trials that air is present and trapped during spray drying process, creating 
porous particle structures. In the optical microspore, air is observed as a perfectly round circle and a cross 
shape around the circle. During spray drying, particles can be deformed and form cup shape effect, which 
can give an illusion of entrapped air upon imaging [35].  In order to investigate whether the air is entrapped 
as well as to observe the cross section area of the particles, embedding was carried out. In addition, this 
was carried out to assess whether fibres are inside of the particle structure, the thickness of the coating 
layer and the amount of fibres that are encapsulated. 
Embedding in pure resin (LR white) with low viscosity and not reflecting autofluorescence was used. The 
particles were then cut with razor blade (25µm). SEM was then carried out.  
 
 
Figure 16: images of air observed on the optical microspore.  SD NIRO trials 7 on the left and SD NIRO trial6 on the 
right. Polarized light. Magnification 10x.   
 
 
Figure 17: SEM images of SD NIRO trials. Trial 6 on the left and Trial 7 on the right.  
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
32 | P a g e  
 
 
During cutting of the embedded particles, the coating layer was broken during cutting with the razor blade 
due to brittleness of the particle certain issues arise. It was noticed that particles were brittle and cutting 
with the razor blade would destroy the coating wall. This suggest possible work that needs to be done in 
this direction with laser cutting technique. For the particles that were successfully cut, perfectly round 
holes can be seen. This confirms that particle are highly porous and air is entrapped during spray drying. 
In addition, this might be due to the higher then recommended viscosity under which the solid suspension 
is prepared. Although systematically study has to be carried out to determine the foaming effect on 
particle morphology. Fine foam is formed during mixing step and the air is then sprayed dried. Further it 
can be seen (Figure 18) in some particle that thin, supposable sucrose membrane is formed and small 
particles are present inside. 
When particle were cut and embedded the low viscosity resin covered all the cross section. This restricted 
interfered with the observation of the particle internal structure. Most of the particles shapes can be seen 
round and resin can be seen on the inside (Figure 19). 
Due to the low viscosity resin, the embedded particles with resin in the inner structure were imaged with 
confocal autofluorescence. The It would be expected that fibres appear under the fluorescence with color 
previously observed and proving that fibres are coated. It is clear that under fluorescence fibres are inside 
of the cross section area.  However, in majority of particles, fibres are on one of the side of the inner 
particle (Figure 20).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 18: SEM images of SD NIRO trials. Trial 6 on the left and Trial 7 on the right.  
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
33 | P a g e  
 
 
 More microscopic images can be seen in Appendices 3. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 20: confocal auto-fluorescence images of embedded particles with resin in the cross section. SD NIRO 
trials 7.  
 
Figure 19: SEM images of embedded particles with resin in the cross section. SD NIRO trials 7.  
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
34 | P a g e  
 
3.3 Rheology  
3.3.1 Rheology of the coating  
Coatings appear in shear thinning behavior (Graph 6 and 7), regardless of the water content, nor the 
sugar/whey ratio. As water content is increased or decreased, viscosity appear higher or lower 
respectively. As can be seen in the previous chapter, fibres appear on the inside close to the wall of the 
particle. Some of the fibres are also separate from the coating. It is hypothesized that upon atomization 
particles would have spinning trajectory. If solid particles such of fibres are in the droplet upon the 
atomization and carry on a spinning trajectory, this might spin the whole droplet structure (solid particle 
in the middle and liquid on the outside).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When spray dried, the solid fiber is in the middle of the liquid droplet (Figure 21). The droplet will then be 
up taken in a specific pattern and spinning trajectory. 
Figure 21: schematic representation of suggested solid suspension droplet after atomization and spinning 
trajectory.  
 
1.29
2.22
1.78
9.23
5.98
2
1
11
0.1
1
10
100
η [mPa.s]
Shear Rate [1/s]
Trial 1
Trial 7
Graph 6: coating apparent viscosity (at 70DegC) on a log scale of trail 1 and trail 7 from SD Niro. 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
 
35 | P a g e  
 
 If viscosity appear lower then possible spinning around the solid fiber can appear. In combination with 
drying happening in parallel, fibres might occur on the side of the particle due to the inertia that the 
droplet is carrying. It can be seen in Graph 6, above, that the two trials with different viscosities are 
compared.  
Both of the coatings have low apparent η; however, trial 1 (wet wt%: PCW 12.4, sugar 16, whey 4.14) has 
lower viscosity. This in combination with Figure 22, that shows picture of the both powders after spray 
drying, adds to the hypothesis of possible fiber-coating separation through the trajectory after 
atomization. When fibres were observed non-coated, viscosities of trials were adjusted respectively.  
However, in an overview article [4] it is suggested that the emulsion (in this case suspension) has to have 
certain viscosity properties for achieving spherical like shape and smooth surface. Premix suspension 
viscosity has to be low enough to avoid air incorporation and to be pumpable, without causing nozzle 
blockage and backpressure. However as it is observed in the above shown results, viscosities of coatings 
that are too low can result in non-coated fibres. On the contrary, higher η, would affect the formation of 
spherical particles (more elongated) due to atomization disruption.  It was observed that when whey is 
added to match the Sugar/Whey ratio (to achieve higher yield and to decrease sugar content) in the 
coating (trial 8) to 1/1 the viscosity increases dramatically and therefor processing issues appear (Figure 
9). This might be due to the low molecular weight of the whey protein. Therefore, to avoid the higher 
viscosity of the extra protein added, the coating solution was diluted until it matched the viscosity values 
of trial 7 (due to successfully executed trial with low processing issues). Trail 9 was identical by added total 
solids in the suspension as trial 8 however more water was added to match trial 7 coating viscosity. It was 
observed that indeed procesability wise issues were decreased. However, it can be seen that nozzle 
layering particles were still observed.  
 
Figure 22:  images of trail 1 on the left and trial 7 on the right. Under polarized light, magnification 20x. 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
36 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3.2 Rheology of fibre-based aqueous suspensions  
Trials, which are matched on coating viscosity, appear different on solid suspension viscosity. Presented 
trials (7, 8 and 9) have same amount of fibres, however protein and sugar ration is different. Most 
specifically trail 7 and 9 appear different on solid suspending mixture. Trials 7 and 9 have matched coating 
viscosity as well as formulation wt%. Different sugar/protein rations might be the reason behind of 
viscosity increase of 81mPas at 100 1/s and 800mPas at 0.1 1/s.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graph 7:  apparent viscosity (at 70DegC) on a log scale of  coatings of Trial 7 and 8. Where Trial 8 is higher due to 
added whey protein. Coating of Trial 9 viscosity matched to Trial 7 coating.  
 
9.…
5.98
2
8.8
6.46
2.14
14.3
14.3
38.6
1
11
0.1
1
10
100
η [mPa.s]
Shear Rate [1/s]
Coating Trial 7 ex1 1
Coating Trial 9 ex1 1
Coating Trial 8 ex1 1
 
2150
181
2610
7200
356
9020
1270
108
1840
100
1100
0.1
1
10
100
η [mPa.s]
Shear Rate [1/s]
Trial 7  1.1
Trial 8 1.1
Trial 9 1.1
Graph 8: apparent viscosity (at 70DegC) of solid suspensions for trials 7, 8 and 9 before SD.  
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
37 | P a g e  
 
 
Making use of equation 2 and taking into account density values measured on solids content only (see 
table below) volume fraction was calculated for the solid suspension.   
It appears that when whey protein is added to sugar/whey ration 1:1 the volume fraction of solids in the 
solid suspensions is increased regardless the amount of water added to match the coating viscosity. This 
could be due to the molecular weight of protein and the volume it occupies in the solid suspension when 
mixed with water.  
In article study where solid suspension rheological behaviors with number of different properties are 
studied, it is discussed that viscosity of suspension would depend on a number of factors [32]. These factors 
are found to be: type of suspended particle (in this case low molecular weight protein, sugar, and high 
molecular weight fibres), volume solid fraction of the particles, shear rate (γ) behavior and the media 
liquid used for making of the suspension ( most often Newtonian liquid e.g. water)[32] It is shown that 
suspensions with different φ and particle sizes are well represented by power law Ostwald-de Waele 
model and show that viscosity indeed depends on the mentioned above. It is shown that suspensions with 
different φ and particle sizes are well represented by power law Ostwald-de Waele model and show that 
viscosity indeed depends on the mentioned above factors [32]. Taking in consideration the higher volume 
fraction of sugar/whey ratio 1:1 compared to the ratio 4:1 it can be hypothesized that viscosity increase 
of solid suspension is a result of a combination of factors i.e. differences of particle size of the sugar, whey 
and fibres added, differences in molecular weight and soluble and insoluble properties.  
3.3.3 Coated fibres in fat blends fillings  
Once coated fibres concept was proven, and desired morphology achieved, powders were added to oil. 
This was done in order to mimic fat based confectionary fillings. However due to short time frame only a 
simple representation of fat based fillings was created with sunflower oil and ingredients mixed by 
impeller.  
 
 
 
Trial № 
Sugar/Whey 
ratio 
Total solids 
content 
[wt.%] 
Water 
content 
[wt.%] 
Density 
[g/cm3] 
φ solids content in solid 
suspension before SD 
Trial 7 
4:1 
52 
48 
1.4692 
0.41 
Trial 9 
1:1 
37 
63 
1.2873 
0.47 
Table 12: volume fraction of solids calculated for the solid suspension before SD in relation with wt.% formulation. 
Density measured on mixture of solid ingredients corresponding to the formulation wt.%,, weighted out in the 
pycnometer chamber.  
Total solids powder mix [%] 
Type of powder 
φ TS in oil 
72% Sucrose, Whey 18%, PH 9% 
CF 
0.61 
72% Sucrose, Whey 18%, PH 9% 
Ingredients mix 
0.65 
72% Iced sugar, Whey 18%, PH 9% 
0.62 
Table 13: TS of powder formulation that was mixed with 30% of SFO and the corresponded volume fraction 
based on analyzed density.  
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
38 | P a g e  
 
 
 
As it can be seen from the Table 13, coated fibres with this formulation (trial 6 and 7 was used in this 
experiment) were compared to ingredients mixture that corresponds to the same TS formulation. The 
powders were mixed with 30 wt.% sunflower oil. The amount of TS was adjusted to match in order to 
observe only effects of morphology of the particles on elasticity and brittleness of the experimental filling. 
Due to the big particle size of the sucrose compared to the coated fibres, iced sugar was used in additional 
comparisons.  Samples were prepared in triplicates in order to observe possible effect on marginal error 
during sample preparation.  
It was observed that trail 6 would form non-flowing mixture. Trial 7 formed smooth flowing mixture. This 
might be due to a processing issue. Upon investigation, it was clear that trial 6 was under automatic pump 
operation, (flow rate is controlled with certain value for HR% set at the cyclone). The suspension was 
pumped for approximately 45min. This would not allow the particles to try fast enough as well as forming 
rougher surface and morphology.   
Using equation 2, the volume fraction of the particles was calculated. Knowing the morphology from the 
microscopic analysis, this gives an indication how the particles are packed and how much volume it is 
occupied. This behavior might be due to the reduction of total surface area of the particles in combination 
with adjusting the morphology towards more round and smooth particles. As suggested in chapter 1, 
possible lubrication and slippage between small particles might occur and therefore the shown behavior 
is observed [18].  
The Samples were thesn analyzed with rheometer for certain time, under temperature frame of 10 to 
40◦C. As mentioned in Chapter 2, oscillation was monitored and storage modules G’ and loss modulus G” 
points were recorded (Graph 9).  
 
 
Figure 23: behavior of mixed 30/70 SFO/CF on the left and same wt.% formulation but Sucrose, Whey and PH on the right. 
Clear difference in elastic and brittle behavior.  
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
39 | P a g e  
 
  
It can be seen that G’ and G” for CF is higher compared to the sucrose ingredients mix. However, this 
cannot be concluded due to non-trustworthy analysis of sucrose ingredients mix (due to big particle 
ingredients and oil leakage during the analysis).    Further, it is clear that although only SFO is present (non 
crystalized fat in the temperature range used here) there are changed when temperature cycle is 
performed. These changes are better expressed in CF samples. Both G’ and G” are increasing when 
temperature is dropping (from 20 to 10◦C). It would be expected that when temperature increase the G’ 
and G” would increase as well, however the values for CF decrease even further. Only when temperature 
continues climbing beyond 30◦C the G’ and G” for CF start to increase.  
It is observed that both of G’ and G” are changing with temperature. This would generally increase G* 
(Equation 5) and could be related to material stiffening. Taking into account of the definition of the G’ and 
G” it is hypothesized that the increase might be explained with various changes on the microstructure of 
the mixture [33] [34].   
Further, the visual observations can be linked to the variations of G’ and G” for sucrose ingredient mixture. 
It can be seen that the sucrose mixture appear more brittle like, rather than elastic. As it can be seen G’ is 
lower than G” for the sucrose mix. This can suggest that, upon visual observation, sucrose appears more 
viscous and less elastic, therefore it drips in big chunks, rather than flowing compared to CF mixture.  
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1
10
100
1000
10000
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Pa
Time [sec]
Sucrose G"
Sucosre G'
CF G"
CF G'
Temperature
deg C
Graph 9: rheology data on G’ and G” (log scale) for CF in oil and sucrose ingredients mix in oil for different temperature frame.  
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
40 | P a g e  
 
However, it is recommended more measurements to be carried out. Although the analysis were done in 
duplicates, there is a clear need for more data. Furthermore, it was observed oil leakage from the plate-
plate geometry while running experiment on sucrose ingredients mix sample. This led the plate surface 
to touch only big sucrose particles. It is clear that the sucrose ingredients mix it is much rougher and the 
mixture sediments after time (see figure 24 below).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 24: picture of oil and powders mix 30/70wt%. Within the pictures on the left sucrose, protein and fiber mixture 
ingredients. On the right CF in oil at the same TS wt%. Picture of compared sample on the left after 5h. Picture of 
compared samples on the right after 5 days. 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
41 | P a g e  
 
Conclusions 
 
Through the research, fluidized bed reactor was modified to accommodate the small fiber particles with 
small pore (25µm) under bed sieve. Solid suspension was the approach for spray drying. It was concluded 
thought experimental trials that sieving of the fiber particles was needed to avoid nozzle blockage. 
Powders were examined and characterized in a number of analysis, including optical and scanning 
electron microspore, water activity and particle size distribution. Through the timeframe of research the 
main objective was the creation of coated fibres particles. Due to short time frame and formulations which 
differ in ingredients in order to avoid processing issue there are not enough significant replicated data for 
statistical relation between process parameters, formulations and particle characteristics. However it is 
suggested for further work, one formulation to be taken into systematical approach in the SD Niro. 
Meaning that effects of process parameters e.g. nozzle pressure, on particle size distribution can be 
investigated. 
After examining the powders from both processes, it can be concluded that fluidized bed particles are 
more agglomerated rather than coated. Due to non-sieving step FBR, powders also have larger particle 
size and wider distributions. FBR delivers higher yield however, the products appears as a mixture 
between fibres and sugar/protein, rather than coated fibres. Due to the results discussed the FBR 
morphology of particles does not fit the objective of this work and spray draying was carried out as a main 
process. Particles from spray drying appear oval/spherical and with much smoother surface. Yield, 
however is lower (50 to 60% at cyclone) and extra particle size reduction is needed. Since the fibres were 
already jet milled, sieving was applied in order to size down the particle distribution and to avoid nozzle 
blockage. It was proven through imaging analysis (optical microspore, SEM, CLSM and embedding)   and 
combination of methods that powders have coated fibres present. Through the spray drying there are 
some processing issues that need to be addressed in future trials i.e. particles layering around the nozzle 
and possible yield increase. 
When coated fibres were added to sunflower oil under (30/70 and 50/50 wt.%) differences in appearance 
of the mixtures were observed. The coated fibres would make the oil mixture much smoother and well 
flowing behavior compared to sucrose mixture ingredients. Small amplitude oscillation measurements 
was carried out on both CF and sucrose oil mixtures. It was observed that G’ and G” were higher for CF 
mixture. However due to high sucrose particles and oil leakage, the rheometry experiment could be 
potentially none trusted. To avoid the large sucrose particles and to eliminate particle size differences 
iced sugar mixture was prepared as well. It was observed that oil mixture would not flow and would 
appear with solid like behavior. Upon initial observations, it can be concluded that previously formed 
hypothesis of total surface area reduction with more spherical morphology of particles proven valid. 
Produced particles have successfully decreased viscosity in oil mixture. However experiments with 
different formulations of oil/CF are needed as well as thorough rheological analysis should be carried out 
for better understanding.  
Further specific characterizations of coated fiber powders should be carried out. Investigation on how 
much of the fibres are actually coated should be carried out. Furthermore, it is obvious by SEM pictures 
that particle re porous; however percentage of air entrapped is not clear. Reduction of sugar is another 
major future work objective. Current values stand at approximately 70wt% sugar, 20wt% protein and 
10wt% on dry basis. If this formulation is added in 50% oil confectionary filling will result in 5% sugar 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
42 | P a g e  
 
decrease, which might be considered as a significant amount. However, it is proposed if the protein 
percentage is increased would result in decrease of sugar and increase of yield.  
Although there is a prove of concept thought number of optical analysis, there is a need of reproducible, 
method that can show every time coated fibres in the particles. This could be achieved only after the 
decrease of sugar and increase of fibres is handled.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
43 | P a g e  
 
References  
 
[1]: General Mills INC (2013). Sweetener particle, sweetener particle compositions, and related methods of 
preparation and use. WO2015/009786AI. 
[2]: Bonarius, G., Vieira, J., van der Goot, A. and Bodnár, I. (2014). Rheological behaviour of fibre-rich plant materials 
in fat-based food systems. Food Hydrocolloids, 40, pp.254-261. 
[3]: Gaonkar, A. (2014). Microencapsulation in the food industry. 1st ed. Amsterdam, [etc.]: Elsevier Academic Press, 
pp.8-10. 
[4]: Gharsallaoui, A., Roudaut, G., Chambin, O., Voilley, A. and Saurel, R. (2007). Applications of spray-drying in 
microencapsulation of food ingredients: An overview. Food Research International, [online] 40(9), pp.1107-1121.  
[5]: Watano, S., Nakamura, H., Hamada, K., Wakamatsu, Y., Tanabe, Y., Dave, R. and Pfeffer, R. (2004). Fine particle 
coating by a novel rotating fluidized bed coater. Powder Technology, [online] 141(3), pp.172-176.  
[6]: Janiszewska-Turak, E. (2017). Carotenoids microencapsulation by spray drying method and supercritical 
micronization. Food 
Research 
International. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0963996917300522 [Accessed 10 Aug. 2017]. 
[7]: Rajabi, H., Ghorbani, M., Jafari, S., Sadeghi Mahoonak, A. and Rajabzadeh, G. (2015). Retention of saffron 
bioactive components by spray drying encapsulation using maltodextrin, gum Arabic and gelatin as wall 
materials. Food Hydrocolloids, [online] 51, pp.327-337.  
[8]: Shen, Q. and Quek, S. (2014). Microencapsulation of astaxanthin with blends of milk protein and fiber by spray 
drying. Journal of Food Engineering, [online] 123, pp.165-171.  
[9]: Frey, C. (2014). Fluid Bed Coating-Based Microencapsulation. Microencapsulation in the Food Industry, [online] 
1, pp.65-79.  
[10]: Nazzaro, F., Orlando, P., Fratianni, F. and Coppola, R. (2012). Microencapsulation in food science and 
biotechnology. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, [online] 23(2), pp.182-186.  
[11]: Nesterenko, A., Alric, I., Silvestre, F. and Durrieu, V. (2013). Vegetable proteins in microencapsulation: A review 
of recent interventions and their effectiveness. Industrial Crops and Products, [online] 42, pp.469-479.  
[12]: van Kampen, A. and Kohlus, R. (2017). Systematic process optimization of fluid bed coating. Powder Technology, 
[online] 305, pp.426-432.  
[13]:  Dewettinck, K. and Huyghebaert, A. (1999). Fluidized bed coating in food technology. Trends in Food Science & 
Technology, 10(4-5), pp.163-168. 
[15]: GREGOROVÁ, E. (2017). INFLUENCE OF PARTICLE SHAPE ON THE VISCOSITY OF KAOLIN SUSPENSIONS. [online] 
1(1), pp.1-9.  
[16]: Mueller, S., Llewellin, E. and Mader, H. (2009). The rheology of suspensions of solid particles. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 466(2116), pp.1201-1228. 
[17]: Happel, J. (1957). Viscosity of Suspensions of Uniform Spheres. Journal of Applied Physics, 28(11), pp.1288-1292. 
[18]: Frankel, N. and Acrivos, A. (1967). On the viscosity of a concentrated suspension of solid spheres. Chemical 
Engineering Science, 22(6), pp.847-853. 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
44 | P a g e  
 
[19]: Christoph Link, K. and Schlünder, E. (1997). Fluidized bed spray granulation. Chemical Engineering and 
Processing: Process Intensification, 36(6), pp.443-457. 
[20]: Hemati, M., Cherif, R., Saleh, K. and Pont, V. (2003). Fluidized bed coating and granulation: influence of process-
related variables and physicochemical properties on the growth kinetics. Powder Technology, 130(1-3), pp.18-34. 
[21]: Iskandar, F., Gradon, L. and Okuyama, K. (2003). Control of the morphology of nanostructured particles 
prepared by the spray drying of a nanoparticle sol. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 265(2), pp.296-303. 
[22]: Huang, H., Hao, S., Li, L., Yang, X., Cen, J., Lin, W. and Wei, Y. (2012). Influence of emulsion composition and 
spray-drying conditions on microencapsulation of tilapia oil. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 51(9), pp.2148-
2154. 
[23]: Garti, N. and McClements, D. (2012). Encapsulation technologies and delivery systems for food ingredients and 
nutraceuticals. 1st ed. Oxford: WP Woodhead Publishing, pp.74-92. 
[24]: RATNAKAR TANDALE, S. (2007). MICROENCAPSULATION OF VITAMIN C AND GALLIC ACID IN WHEY PROTEIN 
CONCENTRATE BY SPRAY AND FREEZE DRYING - CHARACTERIZATION AND DEGRADATION KINETICS. Thesis Submitted 
to the Graduate Faculty of The University of Georgia in Partial Fulfillment, [online] pp.30-45.  
[25]: 
Fda.gov. 
(2018). Water 
Activity 
(aw) 
in 
Foods. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
https://www.fda.gov/iceci/inspections/inspectionguides/inspectiontechnicalguides/ucm072916.htm [Accessed 7 
Jan. 2018]. 
[26]: J Fontana, A. (2005). WATER ACTIVITY FOR CONFECTIONERY QUALITY AND SHELF-LIFE. Senior Research Scientist 
Decagon Devices, Inc., [online] 1(1), pp.3-8.  
[27]: Passos, M. and Mujumdar, A. (2000). Effect of cohesive forces on fluidized and spouted beds of wet 
particles. Powder Technology, 110(3), pp.222-238. 
[28]: Quek, S., Chok, N. and Swedlund, P. (2007). The physicochemical properties of spray-dried watermelon 
powders. Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process Intensification, [online] 46(5), pp.386-392.  
[29]: Adhikari, B., Howes, T., Bhandari, B. and Langrish, T. (2009). Effect of addition of proteins on the production of 
amorphous sucrose powder through spray drying. Journal of Food Engineering, [online] 94(2), pp.144-153.  
[30]: Silva, P., Fries, L., Menezes, C., Holkem, A., Schwan, C., Wigmann, É., Bastos, J. and Silva, C. 
(2018). Microencapsulation: concepts, mechanisms, methods and some applications in food technology. [online]  
[31]: Patel, R. and Suthar, A. (2018). Spray drying technology: an overview. Spray drying technology: an overview, 
[online] 2(10), pp.1-4.  
[32]: Konijn, B., Sanderink, O. and Kruyt, N. (2014). Experimental study of the viscosity of suspensions: Effect of solid 
fraction, particle size and suspending liquid. Powder Technology, [online] 266, pp.61-69.  
[33]: Gunasekaran, S. and Mehmet, M. (2000). Dynamic oscillatory shear testing of foods - selected 
applications. Trends in Food Science & Technology 11, 11, pp.116-120. 
[34]: Bommakanti, A., Roy, S. and Suwas, S. (2016). Effect of hypoeutectic boron modification on the dynamic 
properties of Ti-6Al-4V alloy. Journal of Materials Research, [online] 31(18), pp.2804-2816.  
[35]: Lintingre, É., Ducouret, G., Lequeux, F., Olanier, L., Périé, T. and Talini, L. (2015). Controlling the buckling 
instability of drying droplets of suspensions through colloidal interactions. Soft Matter, 11(18), pp.3660-3665. 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
45 | P a g e  
 
Appendices 1 FBR trials  
 
Trial 1  
 
Volume air: 50m3/h 
T ◦C air in: 60 ◦C  
Filter cleaning: 60 sec 
Nozzle bar: 1.0 bar  
Nozzle bar 2: 0.5 bar 
Humidity at start: 50% 
Humidity after drying: 25%  
Sieve at bed bottom modified with 25µm filter. 
pump rmp=50 70 
Fiber  PCW gr 
700 
 Fiber PCW % 63.64 
Water gr 
200 
water % 
18.18 
Sugar gr 
120 
Sugar % 
10.91 
Protein gr 
80 
Protein % 
7.27 
Total: 
1100 
Trial 2 
 
Volume air: 60m3/h 
T ◦C air in: 75 ◦C  
Filter cleaning: 50 sec 
Nozzle bar: 1.5 bar  
Nozzle bar 2: 0.5 bar 
Humidity at start: 50% 
Humidity after drying: 15%  
Sieve at bed bottom modified with 25µm filter. 
 pump rpm=50 70  
Fiber PCW gr 
800 
Fiber PCW % 
76.19 
Water gr 
150 
water % 
14.29 
Sugar gr 
60 
Sugar % 
5.71 
Protein gr 
40 
Protein % 
3.81 
Total: 
1050 
Trial 3 
 
Volume air: 60m3/h 
T ◦C air in: 75 ◦C  
Filter cleaning: 10 sec 
Nozzle bar: 3.0 bar  
Nozzle bar 2: 1.0 bar 
Humidity at start: 50% 
Humidity before spraying: 14.5% 
Humidity after drying: 12% 
pump rpm=50 70  
Fiber PCW gr 
500 
Fiber PCW % 
35.71 
Water gr 
400 
water % 
28.57 
Sugar gr 
400 
Sugar % 
28.57 
Protein gr 
100 
Protein % 
7.14 
Total: 
1400 
Trial 4 
 
Volume air: 70m3/h 
T ◦C air in: 60 ◦C  
Filter cleaning: 115 sec 
Nozzle bar: 1.5 bar  
Nozzle bar 2: 0.5 bar 
Humidity at start: NA 
Humidity before spraying: NA 
Humidity after drying: NA 
pump rpm=10 
Fiber  PH gr 
300 
Fiber PH % 
25.00 
Water gr 
500 
water % 
41.67 
Sugar gr 
200 
Sugar % 
16.67 
Protein gr 
200 
Protein % 
16.67 
Total: 
1200 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
46 | P a g e  
 
Appendices 2 SD trials 
 
SD NIRO Plot plant scale  
Trial 1 (07.11.17) SD NIRO 
Yield: NA 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 130 ◦C  
T◦C air out: appro. 67 - 72◦C  
Nozzle bar: 1.3 
Humidity at start: Na 
Humidity at endproduct:  12% set up therefore  
 Pump speed= automatic  
Time for spraying 3h 
Fiber PCW gr 
75 
Fiber PCW % 
12.42 
Water gr 
407 
water % 
67.38 
Sugar gr 
97 
Sugar % 
16.06 
Protein gr 
25 
Protein % 
4.14 
Total: 
604 
Trial 2 (08.11.17) SD NIRO 
Yield: 45% 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 130 ◦C  
T◦C air out: appro. 79.2◦C  
Nozzle bar: 0.9 
Humidity at start: Na 
Humidity at endproduct:  11% set up therefor  
 Pump speed= automatic  
Time for spraying 40min 
Fiber PH gr 
50 
Fiber PH % 
9.09 
Water gr 
400 
water % 
72.73 
Sugar gr 
80 
Sugar % 
14.55 
Protein gr 
20 
Protein % 
3.64 
Total: 
550 
Trial 3 (09.11.17) SD NIRO 
Yield: 55% 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 130 ◦C  
T◦C air out: appro. 81◦C  
Nozzle bar: 1.3 
Humidity at start: Na 
Humidity at end product:  11% set up therefor  
 Pump speed= automatic  
Time for spraying 45min 
Fiber PCW gr 
70 
Fiber PCW % 
14.00 
Water gr 
340 
water % 
68.00 
Sugar gr 
70 
Sugar % 
14.00 
Protein gr 
20 
Protein % 
4.00 
Total: 
500 
Trial 4 (09.11.17) SD NIRO 
Yield: 60% 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 130 ◦C  
T◦C air out: appro. 81◦C  
Nozzle bar: 1.3 
Humidity at start: Na 
Humidity at end product:  10%- 7 to 8%  
 Pump speed= manual 5% or 50rpm 
Time for spraying 40min 
Fiber PH gr 
70 
Fiber PH % 
11.53 
Water gr 
447 
water % 
73.64 
Sugar gr 
70 
Sugar % 
11.53 
Protein gr 
20 
Protein % 
3.29 
Total: 
607 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
47 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
Trial 5 (10.11.17) SD NIRO 
Yield: 80% TS 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 110 ◦C  
T◦C air out: appro. 65- 70◦C  
Nozzle bar: 1 
Humidity at start: Na 
Humidity at end product:  12% 
 Pump speed=  automatic 
Time for spraying 60min 
Fiber PH gr 
30 
Fiber PH % 
5.66 
Water gr 
400 
water % 
75.47 
Sugar gr 
75 
Sugar % 
14.15 
Protein gr 
25 
Protein % 
4.72 
Total: 
530 
Trial 6 (17.11.17) SD NIRO 
Yield: 70% TS 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 115 ◦C  
T◦C air out: appro. 65- 70◦C  
Nozzle bar: 1.1 
Humidity at start: Na 
Humidity at end product:  11% 
 Pump speed=  automatic 
Time for spraying 65min 
Fiber PH gr 
20 
Fiber PH % 
3.70 
Water gr 
320 
water % 
59.26 
Sugar gr 
160 
Sugar % 
29.63 
Protein gr 
40 
Protein % 
7.41 
Total: 
540 
Trial 7 (24.11.17) SD NIRO 
Yield: 65% TS 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 115 ◦C  
T◦C air out: appro. 65- 70◦C  
Nozzle bar: 1.1 
Humidity at start: Na 
Humidity at end product:  11% 
 Pump speed=  manual 40-50 RPM 
Time for spraying 2.5 h 
Fiber PH gr 
25 
Fiber PH % 
4.76 
Water gr 
250 
water % 
47.62 
Sugar gr 
200 
Sugar % 
38.10 
Protein gr 
50 
Protein % 
9.52 
Total: 
525 
Trial 8 (01.12.17) SD NIRO 
Yield: 60% TS 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 115 ◦C  
T◦C air out: appro. 65- 70◦C  
Nozzle bar: 1.1 
Humidity at start: Na 
Humidity at end product:  10% 
 Pump speed=  manual 40-50 RPM 
Time for spraying 3.5 h 
Fiber  PH gr 
25 
Fiber PH % 
3.94 
Water gr 
360 
water % 
56.69 
Sugar gr 
125 
Sugar % 
19.69 
Protein gr 
125 
Protein % 
19.69 
Total: 
635 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
 
48 | P a g e  
 
 
 
SD BUCHI Lab scale  
 
 
Trial 9 (21.12.17) SD NIRO 
Yield: 70% TS 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 115 ◦C  
T◦C air out: appro. 65- 70◦C  
Nozzle bar: 1.1 -1.3 
Humidity at start: Na 
Humidity at end product: 7 - 10% 
 Pump speed=  manual 40-50 RPM 
Time for spraying 2.5 h 
Fiber PH gr 
25 
Fiber PH % 
3.40 
Water gr 
460 
water % 
62.59 
Sugar gr 
125 
Sugar % 
17.01 
Protein gr 
125 
Protein % 
17.01 
Total: 
735 
Trial 0.0 (12.10.2017) SD FBR without fluidization 
solid suspension 
Yield: NA 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 100 ◦C  
T◦C air out: 75  
Nozzle cleaning: 5 level  
Nozzle bar: approx. 1.1 
Humidity at start: NA 
pump speed= 10% 
Fiber PCW gr 
100 
Fiber PCW % 
14.29 
Water gr 
400 
water % 
57.14 
Sugar gr 
160 
Sugar % 
22.86 
Protein gr 
40 
Protein % 
5.71 
Total: 
700 
Trial 0.1 (16.10.2017) SD BUCHI lab 
Yield: NA 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 100 ◦C  
T◦C air out: 75  
Nozzle cleaning: 5 level  
Nozzle bar: approx. 1.1 bar 
Humidity at start: NA 
pump speed= 10% 
 
Fiber PCW gr 
50 
Fiber PCW % 
14.29 
Water gr 
200 
water % 
57.14 
Sugar gr 
80 
Sugar % 
22.86 
Protein gr 
20 
Protein % 
5.71 
Total: 
350 
Trial 0.2 (20.10.2017) SD BUCHI lab 
Yield: NA 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 100 ◦C  
T◦C air out: 73 
Nozzle cleaning: 5 level  
Nozzle bar: approx. 1.1 
Humidity at start: NA 
pump speed= 10% 
Fiber PH gr 
50 
Fiber PH % 
11.11 
Water gr 
300 
water % 
66.67 
Sugar gr 
80 
Sugar % 
17.78 
Protein gr 
20 
Protein % 
4.44 
Total: 
450 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
49 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trial 0.3 (24.10.2017) SD BUCHI lab 
Yield: NA 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 100 ◦C  
T◦C air out: 67 
Nozzle cleaning: 5 level  
Nozzle bar: approx. 1.1 
Humidity at start: NA 
 pump speed= 10% 
 
Fiber PS gr 
10 
Fiber PS% 
1.96 
Water gr 
400 
water % 
78.43 
Sugar gr 
80 
Sugar % 
15.69 
Protein gr 
20 
Protein % 
3.92 
Total: 
510 
Trial 0.4 (01.11.2017) SD BUCHI lab 
Yield: NA 
Aspirator %: 100 
T ◦C air in: 110 ◦C  
T◦C air out: 75 
Nozzle cleaning: 5 level  
Nozzle bar: approx. 1.1 
Humidity at start: NA 
pump speed= 10% 
 
Fiber WF gr 
50 
Fiber WF% 
14.29 
Water gr 
200 
water % 
57.14 
Sugar gr 
80 
Sugar % 
22.86 
Protein gr 
20 
Protein % 
5.71 
Total: 
350 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
 
50 | P a g e  
 
Appendices 3 Microscopy images 
 
Optical microscope  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 25:  images of trail 0.1 Buchi (wet wt%. PCW 14.3, sugar 22.8, protein 5.71). Under polarized light on 
right, magnification 20 x. 
 
Figure 26: images of trail 0.1 Buchi (wet wt%. PCW 14.3, sugar 22.8, protein 5.71). Under polarized light on 
right, magnification 20 x. 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
 
51 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 27: images of trail 0.2 Buchi (wet wt%. PH11.11, sugar 17.8, protein 4.44). Under polarized light on 
right, magnification 20 x. 
 
Figure 28:  images of trail 0.2 Buchi (wet wt%. PH11.11, sugar 17.8, protein 4.44). Under polarized light on 
right, magnification 10 x. 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
 
52 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 29: images of trail 0.3 Buchi (wet wt%. PS 1.96, sugar 15.7, protein 3.9). Under polarized light on right, 
magnification 20x. 
 
Figure 30: images of trail 0.4 Buchi (wet wt%. WF 14.3, sugar 22.8, protein 5.7). Under polarized light on 
right, magnification 20x. 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
 
53 | P a g e  
 
 
SEM microscope  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 31: images of trail 6 Niro (wet wt%. PH 3.75, sugar 29.6, protein 7.4). Magnification 4000x. 
 
 
Figure 32: images of trail 7 Niro (wet wt%. PH 4.7, sugar38.1, protein 9.52). Magnification 500x. 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
54 | P a g e  
 
CLSM microscope  
 
 
 
Figure 34: embedded cross section images of trail 0.2 Buchi (wet wt%. PH11.11, sugar 17.8, protein 4.44). 
Under auto-fluorescence. 
Figure 33:  images of trail 0.2 Buchi (wet wt%. PH11.11, sugar 17.8, protein 4.44). Under auto-fluorescence. 
