==PAGE:1==
Real-time BCI control using
auditory spatial attention
Søren Vørnle Nielsen
Supervisors:
Jens Hjortkjær
Søren Fuglsang
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Hearing Systems, Department of Electrical Engineering
Ørsteds Plads, building 352,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3950
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
http://www.hea.elektro.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
People suﬀering from hearing impairment often ﬁnd it challenging to follow a
conversation in multi-talker environments. Modern hearing aids can partially
restore audibility in such environments via ampliﬁcation, but they cannot selec-
tively amplify the speech source that the user is currently attending to. One ap-
proach is to incorporate electroencephalography (EEG) electrodes in the hearing
aid such that neural activity measured from the brain can be used to "steer" the
sound ampliﬁcation. Recent studies have shown that selective representations
of speech envelopes from an attended talker can be decoded from single-trial
EEG, but this approach is only successful in a BCI context when the listener
can already segregate the attended speech source to some degree. In the current
study, a real-time Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) pipeline was designed with
the purpose of decoding the spatial direction of attention from single-trial EEG
recordings of a test person attending to one of two spatially separated talkers.
Diﬀerences in the distribution of EEG alpha power (8-12 Hz) over scalp elec-
trodes were observed when test subjects attended to speech sources positioned
either to the left or the right of the listener. A spatial ﬁltering algorithm, Com-
mon Spatial Patterns (CSP), was applied to the data to maximize the diﬀerence
in band power between the two attention conditions. Epoched segments of CSP-
ﬁltered EEG band power was fed to an SVM classiﬁer to decode which of two
directions a subject was attending to. Data were recorded and analyzed for 40
test subjects. The decoding results showed a mean accuracy of 67% on epoched
windows of 5 seconds. The spread in decoding accuracy between subjects was
found to be considerable, and it was observed that the alpha power lateralization
was more pronounced for the best performing subjects. A substantial portion
of the subjects (40%) achieved decoding accuracies between 70 and 98%. The
eﬀect of window size was investigated, and it was found that decoding accuracy
only decreased slightly when decreasing window size, which translated to the
==PAGE:4==
ii
information transfer rate being highest at window lengths of 1.5 seconds. The
results from this report suggest that auditory spatial attention can be decoded
on single-trial EEG data, but also that additional improvements are needed to
make a real-time system more robust to noise artifacts in the EEG.
==PAGE:5==
Resume
Personer, der lider af nedsat hørelse, ﬁnder det ofte udfordrende at følge en sam-
tale i omgivelser hvor folk taler i munden på hinanden. Moderne høreapparater
kan delvis genoprette hørbarheden i sådanne omgivelser via lyd-forstærkning,
men de kan ikke selektivt forstærke den talekilde, som brugeren fokuserer ak-
tivt på. En tilgang til at løse dette problem er at inkorporere elektroencefalograﬁ
(EEG) elektroder i høreapparatet, således at neural aktivitet målt fra hjernen
kan bruges til at styre lydforstærkningen. Nylige undersøgelser har vist, at selek-
tive repræsentationer af tale-envelopes fra en testperson kan afkodes fra single-
trial EEG, men denne tilgang er kun succesfuld i en BCI-kontekst, når lytteren
allerede til en vis grad kan adskille den talekilde der fokuseres på. I dette projekt
blev et realtids Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) system designet med det formål
at afkode den rumlige retning af opmærksomhed fra single-trial EEG-optagelser
af en testperson, der fokuserede på en af to rumligt adskilte talere. Forskelle i
fordelingen af EEG alpha power (8-12 Hz) over skalp-elektroder blev observeret,
når forsøgspersoner fokuserede på talekilder placeret enten til venstre eller højre
for lytteren. En rumlig ﬁltreringsalgoritme, Common Spatial Patterns (CSP),
blev ﬁltreret med data for at maksimere forskellen i bånd-power mellem de to
opmærksomhedsbetingelser. Segmenter af CSP-ﬁltreret EEG bånd-power blev
indført til en SVM-classiﬁer til afkodning af hvilke af to retninger testpersonen
fokuserede på. Data blev optaget og analyseret for 40 forsøgspersoner. Afkod-
ningsresultaterne viste en gennemsnitlig nøjagtighed på 67% på tidsvinduer a
5 sekunder. Spredningen i afkodningsnøjagtigheden mellem testpersoner viste
sig at være betydelig, og det blev observeret, at alpha power lateralisering var
mere udtalt for de testpersoner med højest afkodningsnøjagtighed. En væsent-
lig del af testpersonerne (40%) opnåede afkodningsnøjagtigheder mellem 70 og
98%. Eﬀekten af vinduestørrelse blev undersøgt, og det blev fundet, at afkod-
ningsnøjagtigheden kun faldt lidt, når vinduestørrelsen blev sænket, hvilket re-
==PAGE:6==
iv
sulterede i, at informationsoverførselshastigheden var højest ved vinduelængder
på 1.5 sekunder. Resultaterne fra denne rapport tyder på, at auditorisk rumlig
opmærksomhed kan afkodes fra single-trial EEG-data, men også at yderligere
forbedringer er nødvendige for at gøre realtidssystemet mere robust over for støj
og artefakter i EEG.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at Hearing Systems, DTU Elektro in fulﬁllment of
the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering. The project is a 35
ECTS Master’s thesis within the ﬁeld of Biomedical Engineering. It was made
in collaboration with the EU funded project COgnitive COntrol of a Hearing
Aid (COCOHA, https://cocoha.org/), where Daniel D.E. Wong has served as
an external supervisor for this project.
Lyngby, 01-February-2018
Søren Vørnle Nielsen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resume
iii
Preface
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
5
2.1
Alpha oscillations and spatial attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Brain-computer interface systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Spatial ﬁltering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Common Spatial Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Regularized CSP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Support Vector Machines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methods
15
3.1
Real-time processing pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
EEG acquisition and preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
EEG acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.2
EEG Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.3
CSP ﬁltering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.4
Epoching and classiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Test setup and hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.1
Test subjects and experimental task . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.2
Test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.3
Experimental procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Results
25
4.1
EEG band power analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.1
Topographic distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Decoding results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.1
Common Spatial Patterns ﬁlter and regularization . . . .
27
4.2.2
Filter bandwidth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.3
Information transfer rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.4
Comparison of best and worst subject . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Real-time feedback results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Discussion
37
5.1
EEG band power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Decoding accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Information Transfer Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4
Real-time system with feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.5
Implementation in a hearing aid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Summary and conclusions
43
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A Appendix
47
A.1 Band power topographies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.1.1
Alpha power topography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.1.2
Theta power topography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.1.3
Beta power topography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A.1.4
Alpha power topography in 1-sec segments
. . . . . . . .
52
List of ﬁgures
53
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
On a global scale, hearing impairment aﬀects approximately 10% of the popu-
lation [Oishi and Schacht, 2011], and it occurs more frequently in elderly people
suﬀering from age-related hearing loss. One of the most fundamental challenges
for hearing-impaired listeners is that they often have trouble following speech
in noisy multi-talker environments. While modern hearing aids can partially
restore audibility via sound ampliﬁcation, they cannot fully restore the ability
to solve this so-called cocktail party problem. Despite wearing hearing aids, the
hearing impaired often ﬁnd it extremely challenging to parse complex auditory
scenes and direct attention to the sound source of interest, which has been found
to lead to an increase in listening eﬀort and reliance on compensatory cognitive
processes [Peelle and Wingﬁeld, 2016].
A proposed solution to this problem is to incorporate electroencephalography
(EEG) into the hearing aids, and let the users cognitively steer the sound ampli-
ﬁcation in the direction of the attended sound source via neural activity picked
up by the EEG electrodes. Recent studies have demonstrated that multi-channel
scalp EEG can be used to decode the attentional selection of listeners on single-
trial data [O’Sullivan et al., 2015, Fuglsang et al., 2017]. These studies have
relied on stimulus-response models that model the relationship between sound
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
envelope ﬂuctuations and EEG responses regardless of the position of the sound
sources. A drawback to this method is that the listener must be capable of
segregating the attended speech source to some extent for this approach to be
successful in a BCI context.
In the present work, an alternative EEG decoding strategy relying on auditory
spatial attention is investigated. Rather than decoding on a selective neural
enhancement of the speech envelope of the attended talker, the current ap-
proach investigates the possibility of decoding the spatial direction of attention.
Previous work has suggested that the distribution of EEG alpha band power
over electrodes on the scalp may vary depending on where in space a listener
directs attention [Händel et al., 2011, Gould et al., 2011]. EEG signatures of
spatial attention have been demonstrated by averaging data over many stimulus
repetitions and many subjects due to the inherent noisy nature of EEG signals.
To date, it remains unknown whether the auditory spatial attention of listeners
can be reliably decoded with short unaveraged segments of EEG data that
can be implemented in a Brain-Computer Interface (BCI). The current work
explores techniques to reliably decode spatial attention with single-trial EEG
in real-time. Succesful real-time decoding of auditory spatial attention would
allow the signal to be used in a hearing device, e.g., by selectively amplifying
sounds originating from the spatial direction that the listener attends to.
1.2
Project goals
The goals of the project are divided into two main areas:
• Develop a real-time EEG analysis pipeline to decode whether a listener is
focusing spatial attention to the left or the right hemiﬁeld. The decoding
pipeline will be evaluated based on scalp EEG data recorded from listeners
presented with two concurrent and spatially separated speech streams and
asked to attend either the left or right talker.
• Implement the decoding pipeline in a real-time BCI system with auditory
feedback that selectively ampliﬁes the talker that the listener is attending
to based on the EEG signal.
For real-time analysis pipeline, the spatiospectral EEG correlates of auditory
spatial attention were investigated.
One of the techniques investigated was
a spatial ﬁltering algorithm called Common Spatial Patterns (CSP). The CSP
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Project goals
3
ﬁlter is a procedure to learn a set of spatial ﬁlters that maximizes signal variance
between EEG data from two experimental conditions (i.e., directing attention
to the left vs right). CSP ﬁlters were here used to optimize discrimination of
multi-channel EEG band power between the two conditions in order to facilitate
classiﬁcation of the attended direction.
Based on this investigation, a proposed attentional classiﬁcation pipeline was
designed. The decoding accuracy rate was investigated for each subject, and
many diﬀerent parameters were tested to optimize and increase the classiﬁcation
accuracy.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter brieﬂy reviews previous ﬁndings related to spatial auditory atten-
tion and describes the EEG analysis techniques used in the present work.
2.1
Alpha oscillations and spatial attention
Alpha oscillations (or alpha waves) are neural oscillations in the frequency range
of 8-13 Hz that can be measured with EEG electrodes [Ishikawa et al., 2012].
A peak in alpha power dominates the spectrum of the EEG recorded at rest,
and the prominent alpha waves were the ﬁrst EEG signal component to be ob-
served. With closing eyes, an increase in alpha waves measured from posterior
scalp electrodes is typically so prominent that it can be seen directly in the
raw EEG [Tomioka and Lemm, 2008]. Recent visual MEG/EEG studies have
demonstrated that alpha band power is enhanced at occipital-parietal sites ipsi-
lateral to the attended target and suppressed in the contralateral region [Händel
et al., 2011, Gould et al., 2011]. Similar ﬁndings have been observed in auditory
studies [Kerlin et al., 2010]. This has been speculated to reﬂect a "functional
inhibition" of task-irrelevant regions to gate information ﬂow to the relevant sen-
sory regions [Jensen and Mazaheri, 2010]. It is thus likely that the lateralization
of alpha power to one hemisphere is a signature of spatial attention.
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
Auditory spatial attention plays an important role in our ability segregate sound
mixtures and direct attention to a sound source with a speciﬁc location in space.
It helps us select relevant information in an environment with noise and many
competing sound sources. For example, people with normal hearing are capable
of selectively attending and recognizing a single speaker in a cocktail party
environment [Cherry, 1953], and one of the major cues that the brain utilizes
is suggested to be the spatial location of the sound source [Haykin and Chen,
2005]. It has been reported that the lateralization of alpha power can be used
to recover spatially selective neural responses from topographies of the alpha
band oscillations during spatial attention [Samaha et al., 2016], and this report
investigates whether these topographical diﬀerences can be detected on single-
trial data and thus utilized in a BCI system.
2.2
Brain-computer interface systems
A brain-computer interface (BCI) can provide a communication pathway be-
tween a device that monitors brain activity (e.g., EEG electrodes) and an ex-
ternal device. For such a system to function robustly, it has to infer or "decode"
relevant information from the signals picked up by the brain-monitoring device.
The information decoded from the BCI system is then used to perform or control
a given task or application.
A BCI system can be divided into two phases: The calibration phase, and the
feedback phase. In the calibration phase, a test subject is asked to perform
given tasks while EEG data is recorded in short segments (trials) and labeled
according to the task. The labeled trials are then used to train parameters of
a classiﬁcation system so that it will be capable of inferring which task new
segments of EEG belongs to. This could, e.g., be classiﬁers trained to decode
the cognitive state of listeners based on EEG activity. In the feedback phase,
the user is now capable of transferring information through the brain to control
a given task or application.
This could be achieved by transmitting sliding
windows of recorded EEG activity to the classiﬁer and use the classiﬁer output
to control the task or application. See ﬁgure 2.1 for an example of a simple BCI
system.
In the current work, a BCI system was used to implement and evaluate proce-
dures for decoding spatial attention from EEG data in real time. The system
was trained on segments of data where a test subject was attending either one
of two spatially separated sound sources. Thus, the BCI system decodes on the
spatial position of the attended talker, and the output from the spatial atten-
tion decoder was used as a feedback signal to control the gain of the two speech
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Spatial ﬁltering
7
streams.
Figure 2.1: Example of a BCI system, where multi-channel EEG data is recorded
from a subject that is performing an imaginary motor task. Based on labeled training
data a classiﬁer is trained (calibration phase, top box). The trained classiﬁer is then
applied in the feedback phase (bottom box) where it classiﬁes the imagined hand
movement based on sliding windows of EEG input in real time. The continuous output
of the classiﬁer is used to control a visual feedback. Taken from [Tomioka and Lemm,
2008].
2.3
Spatial ﬁltering
EEG data recorded from scalp electrodes have a very high temporal resolution,
but also low spatial resolution [Burle et al., 2015]. The primary causes of the
low spatial resolution are the relatively low number of EEG electrodes, and
volume conduction. Volume conduction refers to the complex eﬀects of recording
electrical potentials from nerve cell populations with electrodes distant from the
neural sources [Blum and Rutkove, 2007]. Since (noninvasive) EEG electrodes
are not placed directly on the neurons generating the measured signal, volume
conduction plays an important role in reducing the spatial resolution.
In a
simulation study by [Nunez et al., 1997], it was estimated that only 50% of
the contribution to each scalp electrode came from a source within a radius of
3 cm of the electrode. This is a particular problem if the signals of interest
are very weak or have similar spectral characteristics as non-neuronal artifacts
(such as muscle or eye movements) which produce strong interfering signals
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
[Tomioka and Lemm, 2008]. This problem is exacerbated in BCI systems that
rely on single-trial EEG, in contrast to more conventional approaches where
EEG responses are averaged over a large number of trials.
One way to reduce the impact of volume conduction and increase the signal-to-
noise ratio is via spatial ﬁlters that integrate information linearly over a set of
spatially separated electrodes. In multi-electrode EEG recordings, the spatial
ﬁlter is typically a set of weights with one weight assigned to each electrode.
However, the signal-to-improvement that can be achieved by spatial ﬁlters de-
pends on how the ﬁlter coeﬃcients are derived. One approach is to calibrate
and optimize a system individually for each subject. In these cases, data-driven
strategies to calculate ﬁlters which are unique to each subject has been found
powerful [Tomioka and Lemm, 2008]. One such type of ﬁlter is the common
spatial pattern algorithm.
2.3.1
Common Spatial Patterns
The common spatial pattern (CSP) technique is a supervised algorithm to derive
spatial ﬁlters by constraining the ﬁlters to optimize a discrimination problem
[Dong et al., 2015]. Here we discuss the CSP algorithm in the context of discrim-
inating between two classes that will correspond to EEG data from a listener
attending one of two spatial directions. The procedure learns a set of spatial
ﬁlters for one subject that maximizes the signal variance between data recorded
in two experimental conditions. Since the variance of a signal is the sum of
the total averaged power, this algorithm serves to enhance the expected band
power lateralization between attending the two spatial directions. Thus, the
separation of variances between the two conditions will improve classiﬁcation of
the two classes at the output of the CSP ﬁlter. The following section is adapted
from [Nielsen, 2017].
Let XA and XB denote the recorded EEG trials from class A and B respectively,
with dimension ch×T where T is the number of samples in the time series, and ch
is the number of channels (EEG electrodes) [Dong et al., 2015]. The covariance
matrices for each trial can be estimated as
CA =
XAXT
A
trace(XAXT
A)
(2.1)
CB =
XBXT
B
trace(XBXT
B)
(2.2)
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Spatial ﬁltering
9
The covariance matrix of the mix of class A and B is calculated as
C = CA + CB
(2.3)
C can be factored as
C = UCΣU T
C ,
(2.4)
where Σ is the diagonal matrix containing the eigenvalues and UC is the matrix
of the corresponding eigenvectors. For the rest of the section, it is assumed that
the eigenvalues are sorted in a descending order.
Using the whitening transformation
P =
√
Σ−1U T
C
(2.5)
to equalize the variances spanned in the space by UC, resulting in all eigenvalues
of PCP T equal one.
The spatial covariances CA and CB can then be transformed as
SA = PCAP T
(2.6)
SB = PCBP T
(2.7)
Then, SA and SB share the same eigenvectors U, i.e., SA = UΣAU T and SB =
UΣBU T . The sum of ΣA and ΣB will then be the identity matrix
ΣA + ΣB = I
(2.8)
This implies that the sum of two corresponding eigenvalues are always one.
Following this, the eigenvector in U with the largest eigenvalue for SA will
have the smallest eigenvalue for SB and vice versa. This property makes the
eigenvectors U useful for discriminating between the two classes. Due to the
ordering of Σ, the optimal eigenvectors in U for discriminating between class A
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
and B will be the ﬁrst and last eigenvectors as they correspond to the largest
eigenvalues of ΣA and ΣB. Subsequently, when projecting whitened EEG onto
the ﬁrst and last eigenvectors in U, the output will give the optimal feature
vectors for discriminating between class A and B. The projection matrix can be
written as
W = U T P,
(2.9)
where W is named as the spatial ﬁlters, and the columns of W −1 are the common
spatial patterns. The mapping of an EEG trial X is then given as
Z = WX
(2.10)
The signals in Z that maximize the diﬀerence in variance between class A and
class B are the ones associated with the largest ΣA and ΣB, which are the ﬁrst
and last rows of Z due to the calculation of W. For many applications, the
number of rows used for discrimination between two classes are often around
six (i.e., the 3 ﬁrst and 3 last rows) [Ramoser et al., 2000]. These rows of Z can
then be used as feature vectors for a classiﬁer after computing the logarithm of
the variance of the signals. The logarithm-transformation serves to approximate
a normal distribution of the data. The eﬀect of CSP ﬁltering is illustrated in
ﬁgure 2.2 for a two-dimensional problem.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Spatial ﬁltering
11
-20
0
20
var1
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
var2
Before CSP filtering
-10
0
10
csp1
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
csp2
After CSP filtering
Figure 2.2: Example of CSP ﬁltering in 2D. Samples drawn from two normal dis-
tributions are shown in red and blue, and surrounded by a 95% conﬁdence ellipse.
Note how, after the ﬁltering, the variance of the blue distribution is largest for csp
component 2 and smallest for csp component 1, while the exact opposite if the case
for the red distribution.
2.3.2
Regularized CSP
The signals of interest in BCI research are often very weak, especially compared
to noise sources and artifacts. A common preprocessing step is the whitening
transformation of the time series (performed in equation 2.5) so that it has unit
variance and are uncorrelated, which is generally beneﬁcial to suppress artifacts
[Roijendijk et al., 2016]. However, the strength of the signal of interest relative
to the artifacts may vary. The whitening transformation may be beneﬁcial for
increasing the relative strength of the signal of interest, but it might also cause
weak noise sources to be ampliﬁed at the same time. Ideally, it is desired to
keep the beneﬁts of the whitening transformation on artifact suppression while
discarding the weak noise ampliﬁcation. One way to achieve this is to regularize
the whitening transformation to prevent the ampliﬁcation of small eigenvalues
in Σ which might be irrelevant for the BCI system.
The regularization can
be achieved by simply reducing the rank of the covariance matrix by discarding
the smallest eigenvalues in Σ before computing the whitening matrix in equation
2.5. The more eigenvalues discarded, the higher the regularization. The eﬀect
of regularizing the CSP ﬁlter on decoding performance is investigated in the
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
results-section.
2.4
Support Vector Machines
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) are supervised learning models that con-
struct a set of hyper-planes in a multi-dimensional space to optimally separate
a dataset into two classes [Vapnik, 2006, Smola and Schölkopf, 2004]. The SVM
is given a set of training examples, which in the case of this report is a set of p
log-variance features labeled with either belonging to class A or class B. Using
the training examples, the SVM algorithm then builds a model that assigns fu-
ture examples to one of the two classes. A training dataset of n points is given
as
(⃗x1, y1), ..., (⃗xn, yn),
(2.11)
where each ⃗xi is a p-dimensional vector, and yi are either −1 or 1 to indicate if
the points in ⃗xi belong to class A or class B, respectively. The goal is then to
ﬁnd the hyper-plane which maximizes the margin that separates the group of
points ⃗xi where yi = 1 from the group of points where yi = −1. This "maximum
margin hyper plane" is deﬁned as the hyper plane where the distance between
the nearest point in ⃗xi from each class is maximal.
If the two classes are linearly separable, there are many lines that could be
chosen to separate the two classes. Any such hyperplane can be written as
⃗w · ⃗x −b = 0,
(2.12)
where ⃗w is a vector of weights normal to the hyper plane and ⃗x are the training
data points, and b is a bias scalar. Two parallel hyper planes can be deﬁned so
that the distance between them is the largest possible. The region within these
two lines is the maximal margin, and the hyper plane lying halfway between the
two lines is deﬁned as the maximum margin hyper plane. These two lines are
the so-called support vectors and can be deﬁned as
⃗w · ⃗x −b = 1
(2.13)
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Support Vector Machines
13
and
⃗w · ⃗x −b = −1
(2.14)
See ﬁgure 2.3 for an example of a 2-dimensional problem where the two classes
are separated by the hyperplane with the maximal margin. The two dashed
lines are the "support vectors" of the hyperplane.
Figure 2.3: Two-dimensional SVM showing the maximal hyperplane between the
two classes. The two dashed lines are the support vectors for the hyper plane. The
length between the two support vectors is given as
2
||⃗w||. Adapted from [Wikimedia
Commons, 2008].
The distance between the two support vectors is given as
2
||⃗w||, and it is therefore
desired to minimize ||⃗w|| to maximize the margin, while still preventing that any
points in ⃗xi fall within the margin. Thus, the maximization of the margin is a
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
constrained optimization problem that can be written as
”Minimize ||⃗w||, subject to yi(⃗w · ⃗xi −b) ≥1 for i = 1, ..., n”
(2.15)
It is often the case that the two classes are not linearly separable, and for these
cases, a hinge loss function is introduced as
max(0, 1 −yi(⃗w · ⃗xi −b))
(2.16)
The function equals zero if the constraint from equation 2.15 satisﬁed, and the
point ⃗xi is on the correct side of the margin. However, if a point ⃗xi lies on the
wrong side of the margin, the hinge loss function equals a value proportional to
the distance from the margin. It is now desired to minimize
[
1
n
n
∑
i=1
max(0, 1 −yi(⃗w · ⃗xi −b))
]
+ λ||⃗w||2,
(2.17)
where λ is a parameter determining the tradeoﬀbetween increasing margin size
and the number of points ⃗xi on the wrong side of the margin. This type of SVM
is also called the soft-margin SVM.
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Methods
In this project, a real-time system was designed and implemented with the goal
to decode which spatial direction a subject is attending to by exploiting the
relationship between spatial attention and EEG band power lateralization. In
the project, we primarily evaluate the performance of the system based on pre-
recorded single-trial EEG data of listeners attending to one of two simultaneous
and spatially separated talkers. The signal processing was implemented in a real-
time system that allowed the decoded EEG signals to control auditory feedback
to the listener. In the following sections, the diﬀerent data processing steps in
the real-time system are explained.
3.1
Real-time processing pipeline
The analysis pipeline was implemented in both Matlab and the OpenViBE soft-
ware platform for real-time EEG signal processing [Renard et al., 2010]. The
EEG input to the system are trials recorded from a subject attending either the
talker to the left or right of the listener. An overview of the data processing
pipeline is shown in ﬁgure 3.1.
==PAGE:26==
16
Methods
Input EEG from BioSemi
Select scalp and 
mastoid channels
Select EOG 
channels
Highpass 0.1 Hz
Highpass 0.1 Hz
Common average 
reference
Create bipolar 
EOG channel
DSS Denoising using 
EOG channel
Select scalp EEG 
channels
Bandpass
alpha-band
Bandpass 
beta-band
Bandpass 
theta-band
CSP filter 
alpha-band
CSP filter 
beta-band
CSP filter 
theta-band
Time based 
epoching
Compute log-
variance of epochs
SVM decoder
Anti-alias & 
Resample 64 Hz
Classification 
left/right
1.
2.
3.
Figure 3.1: Overview of the OpenViBE pipeline. The system can be split into three
phases: 1. EEG acquisition and preprocessing , 2. CSP ﬁltering, and 3. Epoching and
classiﬁcation.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 EEG acquisition and preprocessing
17
The system can be split into three phases as indicated by the three colored areas
in ﬁgure 3.1:
1. EEG acquisition and preprocessing
EEG acquisition and preprocessing of the data to remove artifacts (ﬁgure
3.1, blue).
2. CSP ﬁltering
The EEG data is band-pass ﬁltered and then spatially ﬁltered using the
CSP algorithm to maximize the variance between attend left and attend
right trials (ﬁgure 3.1, yellow).
3. Epoching and classiﬁcation
The the output features from the CSP ﬁltering are epoched and fed to a
classiﬁer to decode the attended talker (ﬁgure 3.1, green).
It is important to distinguish between the training phase and the test phase. In
the training phase, an EEG training dataset is fed through the same pipeline as
shown in ﬁgure 3.1, and is used to train the CSP ﬁlters and the SVM decoder
and identify the individualized band pass ﬁlters. In the test phase, the ﬁlters
and decoders from the training phase are applied in the pipeline and used on
unseen test data of which it was not trained on, from the same test subject.
When the pipeline is explained in the following three sections, it is assumed
that the ﬁlters and decoder have already been trained on a training dataset.
3.2
EEG acquisition and preprocessing
3.2.1
EEG acquisition
For measuring of the EEG, a BioSemi Active Two system was used in a 64+8
conﬁguration. A cap with 64 electrodes (plus 8 external electrodes) was placed
on a test subject’s head, and the recorded EEG from the electrodes was trans-
mitted to the Biosemi AD-box ampliﬁer. The AD-box samples the data from
the electrodes at 2048 Hz. The output of the AD-box was sent to the BioSemi
USB receiver via an optical connection. The USB receiver acted as an inter-
face to a PC, where the EEG data was recorded. In addition to the 64 scalp
electrodes, 8 external (EXG) electrodes were used in the setup. The two ﬁrst
external electrodes (EXG 1 and 2) were placed behind the ears on the left and
right mastoid. These electrodes were later used when referencing the data. The
remaining six external electrodes (EXG 3 to 8) were placed around the eyes and
==PAGE:28==
18
Methods
were used to record the eye movements, and eye blinks in the EEG recordings.
These channels are referred to as electrooculographic (EOG) channels.
The
positioning of the 64 scalp electrodes is shown in ﬁgure 3.2.
Figure 3.2:
BioSemi 64 electrode layout.
Adapted from the BioSemi webpage
(https://www.biosemi.com/headcap.htm). [Modiﬁed]
3.2.2
EEG Preprocessing
Preprocessing of the recorded EEG data is crucial. An inherent problem with
EEG data is the interference arising from noise and artifacts. To improve the
signal-to-noise ratio so that a decoder is capable of distinguishing between diﬀer-
ent classes, the noise sources and artifacts must ﬁrst be controlled and removed
from the data to the extent possible. The most signiﬁcant physiological artifacts
found in EEG are eye movements, eye blinks, and muscle activity [Kappel et al.,
2017].
==PAGE:29==
3.2 EEG acquisition and preprocessing
19
First, the EEG data were anti-alias ﬁltered and re-sampled to a sampling fre-
quency of 64 Hz, and an initial highpass ﬁltering with cutoﬀfrequency 0.1 Hz
and detrending was performed. The data was then referenced to the average
of all electrodes, including the two electrodes EXG1 and EXG2 placed on the
mastoids behind each ear.
To clean the data from line noise, eye movement and muscle artifacts, a denoising
source separation (DSS) algorithm [Särelä and Valpola, 2005] was performed on
the data (DSS threshold = 0.6). For the eye-blink artifact removal, the bipolar
VEOG (vertical EOG) channel was bandpass ﬁltered, and a z-score threshold
was performed. All segments in the data that exceeded a z-score threshold of
4 were marked as eye-blinks and used to generate the correlation matrix used
by the DSS algorithm. After the denoising, the EXG and EOG channels were
excluded, and thus, only the 64 scalp electrode channels were used from here
on.
3.2.3
CSP ﬁltering
Before the CSP ﬁltering, the data was bandpass ﬁltered to the frequency band
where the lateralization was expected to be present. The band pass range is
a parameter which has a big inﬂuence on the classiﬁcation accuracy. For this
project, many diﬀerent bands have been evaluated on the data to test what
frequency ranges performed the best. For some iterations of the experiment,
only one band was used, but it was found that the decoding performance was
highest when three separate bands were used before the CSP ﬁltering. Therefore,
the pipeline is explained using three bands.
The 64 scalp EEG channels were split into three separate signal paths, each
of them containing all 64 channels.
Each of the three signals was bandpass
ﬁltered in a unique band; theta-band, alpha-band, and beta-band, respectively.
The theta and beta bands were chosen to investigate whether there was also a
lateralization present in these frequency ranges, which could be used for spatial
attention decoding. In addition to the theta and beta band, the alpha band was
also chosen, as it has been shown to carry the majority of the spatial attention
information [Samaha et al., 2016].
The oscillations in the alpha band are some of the most prominent signals in the
adult human brain that can be measured by EEG in terms of power. The alpha
oscillations are manifested by a "peak" frequency, deﬁned as the frequency with
the maximum power in the 8-13 Hz range. The alpha peak can be used to deﬁne
the bandwidth of the alpha oscillations, by serving as the center frequency in
the band. However, the alpha peak frequency has been shown to vary between
==PAGE:30==
20
Methods
subjects. Many factors can contribute to the placement of the individual alpha
peak frequency (IAPF), including age and genetic factors [Bodenmann et al.,
2009, Aurlien et al., 2004]. It was therefore desired to identify the IAPF for each
subject so that the subjects’ data could be ﬁltered individually. The amplitude
of the alpha band is at its maximum when the subject is in a resting state with
closed eyes [Christie et al., 2017], and that is, therefore, the easiest and most
precise time to measure the IAPF. For each subject, a trial of closed-eyes rested
state EEG was recorded to be used to identify the IAPF. The peak was found
by ﬁrst ﬁltering the EEG data to 8-13 Hz, and then ﬁnding the channel with the
highest alpha power. The spectral content of that channel was computed, and
the frequency with the maximal power was identiﬁed and deﬁned as the IAPF.
The IAPF for each subject was saved and used for deﬁning the individual theta,
alpha and beta bands used to ﬁlter the EEG from the subjects before CSP
ﬁltering and decoding. The three bands were deﬁned in the following way:
• Alpha band: Lower band: IAPF - 2 Hz. Upper band: IAPF + 2 Hz.
• Theta band: Lower band: 4 Hz. Upper band: Lower alpha band.
• Beta band: Lower band: Upper alpha band: Upper band: 30 Hz.
The signals were then CSP ﬁltered with their corresponding ﬁlters trained on
the training dataset (see section 2.3.1 for the deﬁnition of the CSP ﬁlters). For
each of the three signals, only the six strongest CSP components to maximize
the variance between the two classes were chosen. See ﬁgure 3.3 for an overview
of the bandpass and CSP ﬁltering stage.
CSP W1
X1
Z1
Theta 
band
CSP W2
X2
Z2
Alpha 
band
CSP W3
X3
Z3
Beta 
band
Ztot
Figure 3.3: Schematic of the bandpass- and CSP ﬁltering. The 64 EEG channels
bandpass ﬁltered in the theta, alpha and beta band are CSP ﬁltered with 6 components
each.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 EEG acquisition and preprocessing
21
The input signal to each of the 3 CSP ﬁlters was a bandpass ﬁltered EEG signal
Xi (ch × T), i = 1..3, where ch is the number of channels (64) an T are the
number of time samples. The CSP ﬁlters are deﬁned as Wi (comp×ch), i = 1..3,
where comp is the number of components (6) and ch is the number of channels
(64). Thus, each row in Zi corresponds to a so-called spatial ﬁlter.
The output of the ﬁlters were computed as Zi = WiXi, and the dimension of Zi
is comp × T. Thus, the output from each of the 3 CSP ﬁlters was a component
stream Zi, i = 1..3, with dimension 6 × T. When combining the three streams,
we get Ztot with dimension 18 × T.
3.2.4
Epoching and classiﬁcation
The merged component stream Ztot is a matrix containing 18 component chan-
nels. The logarithm of the variance was then computed in sliding windows in
each of the 18 components as a measure of the band power. These features were
the input to the SVM decoder which was trained on the training data oﬄine.
The output of the classiﬁcation is a prediction of which of the two audio streams
the subject is attending. See ﬁgure 3.4 for an overview.
Log-Variance
Log-Variance
Log-Variance
Log-Variance
.
.
.
1.
2.
18.
SVM
Figure 3.4: Overview of the log-variance computation in sliding windows in each of
the 18 component channels. The log-variance windows from the 18 components are
the input features to the SVM decoder.
==PAGE:32==
22
Methods
3.3
Test setup and hardware
3.3.1
Test subjects and experimental task
Data from 20 normal hearing (NH) and 20 hearing impaired (HI) subjects (8
left-handed) were used to evaluate the performance of the attention decod-
ing pipeline. Recording of the data and test setup was performed by Jonatan
Marcher-Rørsted, Research Assistant at DTU Hearing Systems. As no signif-
icant diﬀerences in terms of decoding performance were observed between the
HI and NH listeners (two-sample t-test: t(38) = −0.17, p = 0.86), the data will
from now on be mentioned as one group of 40 subjects.
In the designed experiment, the participants were presented with two simultane-
ous talkers (one male talker and one female talker) and cued to focus attention
on one of them in trials of 50 seconds, while EEG was recorded. The speech
signals consisted of segments of continuous audiobook material and were pre-
sented over insert earphones. The two talkers were presented at the same level
and separated at +/ −90◦relative to the listener using head-related transfer
functions.
In addition to the evaluation of the real-time system on pre-recorded EEG from
the 40 subjects, a real-time system with auditory feedback that selectively am-
pliﬁes the attended talker was implemented in OpenViBE. As this setup was
ﬁnalized close to the ﬁnal deadline of this project, it has been run as an ex-
ploratory pilot test with one normal hearing test subject. For this system, the
audio was presented to the listener over two loudspeaker units.
3.3.2
Test setup
An overview of the test setup is shown in ﬁgure 3.5. The modules within the
dashed lines show the closed-loop feedback section, which is only a part of the
real-time system with auditory feedback implemented in OpenViBE.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Test setup and hardware
23
PC
LSL
Control signal
EEG
Listener
LSL
Mixed audio stream
Sound card
Real-time audio control
Figure 3.5: Overview of the test setup. A test subject was cued to focus on the
speech stream from one of the two speaker units in turns, while EEG was recorded.
For the real-time system with feedback, the gain of the two speakers was controlled
by the output of the spatial attention decoder.
For the real-time experiment with feedback, the auditory attention was decoded
in real-time, and the classiﬁer output was used to control the gain of the two
audio sources (see modules within the dashed lines in ﬁgure 3.5), by using a
protocol called Lab Streaming Layer (LSL) [Kothe, 2014]. LSL is a protocol that
allows synchronized streaming of data across devices. The output of the decoder
is an LSL control signal which controls the gain of the two audio channels. This
results in the audio stream that the decoder predicts the subject is attending
was gained while the other stream was attenuated. See ﬁgure 3.6 for a photo of
the actual setup of the real-time feedback experiment.
==PAGE:34==
24
Methods
Figure 3.6: Real-time spatial decoding with auditory feedback. The gain of the two
speakers is controlled by the output from the classiﬁer decoding on spatial attention
in real-time.
3.3.3
Experimental procedure
The pre-recorded EEG consisted of 32 trials of 50 seconds of two-talker data
recorded for each subject, with 16 trials for each class (attend left or attend right
speaker). At the beginning of each trial, the subject was instructed whether to
attend to the male or female talker. The sound of the target talker was presented
alone for 4 seconds before the onset of the competing talker to make it easier
for subjects to identify the target.
For the real-time experiment with feedback, training data was ﬁrst recorded in
approximately 25 minutes from the test subject to train the CSP ﬁlters and
decoder. After this, the ﬁlters and decoder were implemented in OpenViBE,
and the system was run in real-time with control of the two audio streams.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Results
In this chapter, the results from the real-time system evaluated on pre-recorded
EEG are presented.
In addition, the preliminary experiments with auditory
feedback are also presented. The chapter is divided into three parts:
1. Data visualization and band power analysis:
A group-level analysis of electrophysiological correlates of spatial atten-
tion.
2. Decoding results:
Decoding classiﬁcation analysis of real-time system on pre-recorded EEG
data.
3. Real-time feedback results:
Preliminary performance and classiﬁcation results obtained from the real-
time system with feedback implemented in OpenViBE.
4.1
EEG band power analysis
In this project, one of the goals was to classify multi-channel EEG data based on
band-speciﬁc low-frequency activity. Therefore, it was ﬁrst investigated whether
==PAGE:36==
26
Results
diﬀerences (on a group-level) in EEG band power between the attend left and
attend right conditions could be observed.
In partricular, in was examined
whether diﬀerences in alpha power lateralization as reported in previous studies
could be found.
4.1.1
Topographic distributions
The topographic distributions of the EEG band power can give an idea of how
the brain activity is spatially distributed over the recorded scalp electrodes. As
explained in chapter 3, the test subjects were asked to focus on one of two
spatially separated simultaneous sound sources. Due to the separation in sound
location, it was expected to see correlates of spatial attention in the spectral
properties of the EEG. The deployment of attention to either the left or the right
side is associated with a hemispheric lateralization of the oscillatory powers in
diﬀerent frequency bands, with the alpha band (8-13 Hz) being the strongest
contributor [Horton et al., 2014]. To investigate this, the power between all
attend right and attend left trials for all subjects in a given frequency band was
calculated and shown in ﬁgure 4.1 for the theta, alpha, and beta band (to see the
individual topographies for a representative subset of the subjects, see appendix
A.1). The three individualized bands were deﬁned as described in section 3.2.3.
For the 40 subjects, the mean IAPF was found to be 9.77 Hz with a standard
deviation of 1.30 Hz which is consistent with other studies [Doppelmayr et al.,
1998, Christie et al., 2017].
Theta
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
(a)
Alpha
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
(b)
Beta
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
(c)
Figure 4.1:
Grand mean of the relative theta (a), alpha (b) and beta (c) power
between left and right trials. Here, the power of the attend left trials are subtracted
from the attend right trials.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Decoding results
27
In the alpha band (ﬁgure 4.1b), a lateralization is observed, with maximal dif-
ferences in the parietal and occipital regions, which are the areas thought to
be associated with spatial attention [Thorpe et al., 2012]. As explained in sec-
tion 2.1, the alpha power has been hypothesized to play a role in functional
inhibition of irrelevant information [Jensen and Mazaheri, 2010]. Attending to
the left hemisphere is expected to be accompanied by an ipselateral increase in
alpha and contralateral decrease due to the suppressing of information in the
task-irrelevant hemisphere. However, the lateralization pattern observed here
appears reversed when comparing to previous reports [Kerlin et al., 2010], i.e.
that the increase in alpha power is in the contralateral hemisphere and the de-
crease is in the ipsilateral hemisphere. Reasons for this are discussed further in
section 5.1.
For the theta (ﬁgure 4.1a) and beta (ﬁgure 4.1c) band, a similar pattern is
observed with maximal diﬀerences in the left and right frontal electrodes. In
these areas, however, the high power is observed over the ipsilateral frontal
region and the low power from the contralateral region. What is important to
notice, is that some form of lateralization is present in all three bands. This
suggests that all three bands contain information relevant to the spatial decoding
to discriminate between the two classes (left/right).
4.2
Decoding results
In this section, the data from the 40 subjects was processed through the proposed
analysis pipeline to evaluate single-trial decoding performance. CSP ﬁlters and
decoders were trained for each subject and validated using cross-validation meth-
ods. The eﬀect of diﬀerent parameters on decoding performance was investi-
gated.
4.2.1
Common Spatial Patterns ﬁlter and regularization
One of the parameters that can be tuned and individualized is the CSP regu-
larization, obtained by discarding a number of the smallest eigenvalues before
the whitening transformation, as explained in section 2.3.2. The eﬀect of this
regularization on the CSP ﬁlter patterns is shown in ﬁgure 4.2.
==PAGE:38==
28
Results
64 Eigenvalues
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
(a)
30 Eigenvalues
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
(b)
6 Eigenvalues
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
(c)
Figure 4.2: The eﬀect of increasing regularization on CSP ﬁlters. Here, the same
CSP ﬁlter for one subject is shown with diﬀerent numbers of eiganvalues kept from
the covariance matrix.
Eigenvalues kept: (all) 64 (a), 30 (b) and 6 (c).
As the
regularization increases (by decreasing the number of eigenvalues kept), the patterns
get more spatially smooth.
It is seen that the spatial CSP ﬁlters obtained with diﬀerent levels of regulariza-
tion look diﬀerent. When all (64) eigenvalues are kept (ﬁgure 4.2a), there is no
regularization, and the patterns observed are very speciﬁc, and single scalp elec-
trodes are assigned to more extreme weights. This could potentially mean that
the ﬁlter is overﬁtting to random patterns of high variance. When the number
of eigenvalues kept is decreased (ﬁgure 4.2b and 4.2c) and the regularization
is higher, the patterns become more spatially smooth and broad and start to
look more like individual alpha power topographies like shown in appendix A.1.
However, the high regularization could also have the opposite eﬀect and cause
over-regularization due to the ﬁlters getting too smooth.
In ﬁgure 4.3, the decoding accuracy is shown as a function of the regularization
for a cross-validation scheme with 8 inner folds and 4 outer folds, and sliding
windows of 5 seconds.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Decoding results
29
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Eigenvalues kept
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Decoding accuracy
Figure 4.3: Decoding accuracy as a function of regularization for 5-second windows,
for a cross-validation scheme with 8 inner and 4 outer folds. The red line shows the
group average. The lower the number of eigenvalues kept, the stronger the regular-
ization. The spread in accuracy between subjects is very large, where some subjects
are performing around chance-level, while others are above 90%. The highest group
average is found at a regularization value of 23 with an accuracy of 67 %. The eﬀect
of regularization on a group level seems to be small.
It is seen that the eﬀect of regularization on the decoding accuracies is low,
but across subjects, the highest accuracy is found at a regularization value of
23 and an accuracy of around 67%. What is also obvious is a large spread in
accuracy across subjects. The decoding accuracies is around chance-level for
some subjects (0.5), while others are above 90% correct classiﬁcations.
4.2.2
Filter bandwidth
Another parameter investigated was the bandwidth of the data ﬁltering before
the CSP training, and also the number of frequency bands to ﬁlter the data
with. Three diﬀerent ﬁltering strategies have been investigated:
• Multiple bands: Multiband CSP with three individualized bands: Theta,
==PAGE:40==
30
Results
alpha and beta. The deﬁnition of the individualized bands is explained in
section 3.2.3.
• Alpha band: CSP using one band: Individualized alpha band.
• Broadband: CSP using one band: A broad band from 4-30 Hz.
For the multiband CSP, three separate CSP ﬁlters were trained, and for each
of them, the 6 strongest ("strongest" refers to the spatial ﬁlters that maximally
separates the variance between the two classes as explained in section 2.3.1)
components are selected, giving a total of 18 features as an input to the SVM
classiﬁer. For the two other cases, the data was only ﬁltered in one band and
thus giving 6 features each.
The mean results of the three ﬁltering strategies are shown in ﬁgure 4.4. Here,
the regularization value with the highest decoding accuracy for each subject was
identiﬁed by an 8-fold cross-validation, and then tested on a set of held-out data
four times for each subject. The sliding window length was 5 seconds.
Multiband
Alpha
Broadband
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Figure 4.4: Decoding accuracy for three types of ﬁltering strategies: three individ-
ualized bands, alpha band and a broadband. The crosses show the mean decoding
accuracy for each subject over the four outer folds.
Again, the spread of the accuracy between subjects is very large.
But it is
also seen how the choice of ﬁltering strategy has a signiﬁcant impact on the
average decoding accuracy (ANOVA: F = 5.87, p < 0.003). Out of the three,
the multiband ﬁltering performed the best, with a median decoding accuracy of
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Decoding results
31
around 66%. This corresponds well with the topographic power plots in ﬁgure
4.1, where a lateralization was observed in all three bands.
However, even though the broadband ﬁlter covers the same frequency range
as the ﬁlters of the multiband classiﬁer, its classiﬁcation performance is worse.
This could be caused by some of the eﬀects in the theta, alpha, and beta range
might mask or cancel each other out. It could also be caused by the fact that
the SVM classiﬁer has more features available to classify on for the multiband
strategy.
4.2.3
Information transfer rate
For a BCI system like this to be applicable in a real-time setting with feedback, it
is important that the decoder is capable of classifying on short window segments.
The longer the windows, the longer delay between the subject performing a
task (e.g. switching attention) and the associated change in the feedback. In
the above, the performance of the decoder was measured in percent correctly
classiﬁed EEG segments, but what is also important to look at is how fast the
system can transmit information, which can be estimated by the information
transfer rate (ITR) in bits/min, as proposed by [Wolpaw et al., 1998]:
ITR =
# of decisions
duration in minutes ·
(
plog2(p) + (1 −p)log2
1 −p
N −1 + log2(N)
)
,
(4.1)
where p is the decoding accuracy of the subject making decisions between N
classes (N = 2 for this experiment). Thus, the ITR takes not only the accuracy
into account but also the number of classes N and the number of decisions made
per minute [Tomioka and Lemm, 2008].
The ITR and decoding accuracy as a function of window length is shown in
ﬁgure 4.5, where the individualized multiband CSP was used.
==PAGE:42==
32
Results
1.5
3
4.5
6
7.5
9
10.5
Window length [s]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Decoding accuracy
Decoding Accuracy
(a)
1.5
3
4.5
6
7.5
9
10.5
Window length [s]
0
2
4
6
8
ITR [bit/min]
Information Transfer Rate
(b)
Figure 4.5: ITR and decoding accuracy as a function of window length. The decoding
accuracy (a) increase by a small margin when the window length is increased. For the
ITR (b), the bit/min decreases rapidly when window length is increased.
It is seen that an increase in window length has a small eﬀect on the decoding
accuracy (ﬁgure 4.5a). This also implies that the windows can go down to very
small lengths without losing much accuracy. This translates to the ITR (ﬁgure
4.5b) being at its absolute highest at a window length of 1.5 seconds with a
transfer rate of around 3 bit per minute. This suggests that the decoded signal
is robust and is still present in the data for small time windows, and if means
are found to boost the overall performance, it is likely that the performance also
will be increased for short window lengths.
4.2.4
Comparison of best and worst subject
One of the most noticeable ﬁndings is the large spread in decoding accuracy
across subjects. To investigate this further, the best performing subject with
respect to decoding accuracy was compared to one of the subjects performing
at chance-level. For the two subjects, the z-scored alpha power lateralization
(attend right minus attend left trials) topographies were computed, and the CSP
ﬁlters were trained on the EEG data in the alpha range. The CSP ﬁlter most
reminiscent of the alpha power lateralization was found as an indication of how
well the CSP ﬁlter could identify the topographical areas of the brain where
the lateralization was maximal. In addition to this, a "lateralization-index" was
introduced as a tool to investigate how easily separable the attend right and
attend left trials are for one subject. First, the alpha power topography was used
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Decoding results
33
to identify the two channels with maximal (channel a) and minimal (channel b)
power between the attend left and attend right trials. The lateralization index
is then given as:
lindex = Pa −Pb
Pa + Pb
,
(4.2)
where Pa is the power in channel a and Pb is the power in channel b.
The
lateralization index was then calculated for attend right and attend left trials
for one subject over sliding windows. The result is a measure normalized to the
total power in the two channels ranging between −1 and 1. The normalization
allows for easy comparison of the lateralization between subjects. It was hy-
pothesized that the alpha lateralization carried the information that the CSP
ﬁlter utilized to separate the two experimental conditions. Thus, if the power
of the lateralization between attend left and attend right trials is strong, it is
expected that lateralization index for the two sides will be non-overlapping and
easy to separate (resulting in high decoding accuracy), and the opposite would
be the case if the lateralization was weak.
In ﬁgure 4.6a the alpha power lateralization for the best performing subject
shows the maximal and minimal power to be in the frontal region. This is not the
area where the auditory spatial attention lateralization has been hypothesized
to be maximal, and the possible reasons as for why this is the case is discussed
in section 5.1. The laterization is so strong that it is picked up by the CSP ﬁlter
in ﬁgure 4.6b, where minimal and maximal weights are applied to the frontal
regions. When looking at the lateralization index, there is a good separation
between the two groups, and the optimal line for separating the two classes
has an accuracy of 86%. This corresponds well to this subject being the best
performing in terms of decoding accuracy - because the power of the attend right
and attend left are so spatially separated, it makes it easier decode on.
==PAGE:44==
34
Results
Alpha power
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
(a)
CSP filter
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
(b)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Window nr.
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Decoding accuracy
Best subject. Acc: 0.86
Attend left
Attend right
Optimal separation
(c)
Figure 4.6: Best performing subject in the alpha range. (a) shows the alpha power
lateralization, with a maximal diﬀerence in the electrodes in the frontal region. (b)
shows a CSP ﬁlter trained on EEG data ﬁltered to the alpha range (8-13 Hz) and
shows a similar pattern where maximal and minimal weight values are assigned to the
frontal electrodes. (c) shows the lateralization index computed in sliding time windows
of 5 seconds. The values for attend left and attend right are separated by the black
line with an accuracy of 86%.
In ﬁgure 4.7a the alpha power lateralization for a subject performing on chance
level is shown. Here, the spatial pattern looks more diﬀuse, and it is also noted
that the span between the minimum value (−0.02) and the maximum value
(0.04) is almost a factor 10 lower than in ﬁgure 4.6a. This suggests that the
lateralization is much vaguer, and thus harder for the CSP ﬁlter to pick up,
which is seen in ﬁgure 4.7b where the CSP ﬁlter does not seem to resemble the
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Decoding results
35
alpha topography i ﬁgure 4.7a. What further conﬁrms this is the lateralization
index where the two groups are inseparable.
Alpha power
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
(a)
CSP filer
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
(b)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Threshold
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Decoding accuracy
Worst subject. Acc: 0.57
Attend left
Attend right
Optimal separation
(c)
Figure 4.7: Subject performing at chance-level in the alpha range. (a) shows the
alpha power lateralization. Note how the scale between the highest and lowest values
is very small (-0.02 to 0.04). (b) shows a CSP ﬁlter trained on EEG data ﬁltered to
the alpha range (8-13 Hz), and the patterns from the alpha lateralization is not picked
up by the CSP. (c) shows the lateralization index computed in sliding time windows
of 5 seconds. The values for attend left and attend right are almost inseparable, and
the optimal separation accuracy shown by the black is only 57%.
Why the lateralization is weaker for some subjects could be could be the result
of many diﬀerent mechanisms which are discussed further in section 5.2.
==PAGE:46==
36
Results
4.3
Real-time feedback results
An exploratory test of the real-time closed loop setup was conducted on one
normal hearing subject, and the results are reported in this section. First, the
decoder and CSP ﬁlters were trained on a training set of approximately 25
minutes of attend left and attend right trials. The alpha lateralization is shown
in ﬁgure 4.8. The system was tested in real-time with auditory feedback for
approximately 10 minutes with a resulting decoding accuracy of around 56%.
After the experiment was ﬁnished and the data was analyzed oﬄine, it was
discovered that 3-4 of the EEG channels were very noisy and that the real-time
setup was not capable of minimizing this noise substantially. It was observed
that the variance in these channels was higher than the channels functioning
properly. This is visible in the alpha power lateralization (ﬁgure 4.8) where
some single isolated channels have extreme values, and this was also picked up
by the CSP ﬁlter. This biased the CSP ﬁlter towards the noisy channels instead
of the mechanisms of the spatial attention, and this could be one of the reasons
why the decoding accuracy is at chance-level.
Alpha power
-0.1
0
0.1
Figure 4.8: Alpha power topography (attend right - attend left trials) for the test
subject from the real-time feedback experiment.
Two noisy channels in the right
hemiﬁeld accounts for the maximum and minimum value.
Due to the chance-level performance in decoding accuracy, it was not possible
to measure whether the feedback had an eﬀect on the ability to decode auditory
spatial attention and on the ability to comprehend the target speech material.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
EEG band power
When looking at the grand average lateralization in the band power topographies
in ﬁgure 4.1, it is seen that a lateralization for all the bands (theta, alpha, and
beta) is present. For the alpha band (ﬁgure 4.1b) maximal diﬀerence between
attend left and attend right trials was at the occipital and parietal electrodes,
as expected. However, the lateralization looked reversed compared to what has
been reported in the literature [Kerlin et al., 2010]. There are reasons which
could explain this: 8 of the 40 subjects were left-handed. Asymmetries have been
observed in alpha topographies for left-handed people compared to right-handed
people [Propper et al., 2012], and this could have a considerable eﬀect on the
grand mean. Another reason could be the length of the trials. In this project,
the length of the trials was 50 seconds, and the band power was estimated
using the entire length of the trials. This notably longer than in a number of
previous MEG/EEG studies, where the average trial duration was shorter than
5 seconds, and the alpha lateralization index was estimated based on a large
number of trial averages [Händel et al., 2011, Gould et al., 2011, Kerlin et al.,
2010]. If we were to only use the ﬁrst second of each trial with the data available
in this project, only 32 seconds of data would be used to create the alpha power
topographies per subject. This was found to be not enough data to replicate the
lateralization ﬁndings from other studies (see appendix A.1.4 for alpha power
==PAGE:48==
38
Discussion
topographies on small time segments).
5.2
Decoding accuracy
Large diﬀerences in decoding accuracy was observed between subjects (ﬁgure
4.4 and 4.3).
Some subjects showed chance level decoding accuracies, while
some were above 90% even down to window lengths of 1.5 seconds. The grand
mean accuracy for all subjets was found to be around 67% for 5-second windows.
This is promising, as it indicates that it is possible to decode spatial auditory
attention reliably and fast in some subjects.
The results also indicate that the lateralization between attending spatially
separated sound sources can be used to decode spatial attention.
Whether
this lateralization is primarily driven by auditory spatial attention can not be
concluded on the basis of the results in this report - it was for instance found
that the overall decoding accuracy was highest when the CSP ﬁlters were not
only trained on the alpha range, but also the theta and beta (ﬁgure 4.4) which
is not normally associated with auditory spatial attention [Kerlin et al., 2010].
Subsequently, as the lateralization observed in the band-power topographies
vary between subjects (see appendix A.1) it could suggest that the system for
some subjects also decodes on other cues such as:
• Visual spatial attention: Has been observed to "overlap" with audi-
tory spatial attention by also inducing lateralized changes in the occipital
alpha-band activity [Banerjee et al., 2011].
• Muscle movements: Moving speciﬁc parts of the body when attending
one or the other sound source. Changes in beta power has been observed
during planning or execution of movements [Baker, 2007].
It is important to note that for these cues to be decodable, they should be
systematic; for instance by looking to the right when attending only the sound
source from the right, and vice versa for the left sound source. Such a cue could
be what is seen in the lateralization topography for the best performing subject
in ﬁgure 4.6a, as the frontal electrodes normally not are associated with auditory
spatial attention in the alpha range. On the other hand, if these cues occur
randomly in the attend left and attend right trials this could potentially mask
the signal of interest (auditory attention) and reduce the decoding accuracy.
This could result in a topography like the one shown in ﬁgure 4.7a for a subject
performing at chance level where the lateralization is seemingly random and
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Information Transfer Rate
39
also very vague, and thus, it is almost impossible to distinguish between attend
left and attend right trials in the lateralization index (ﬁgure 4.7c). Some of the
subjects performing at chance-level could also be a result of the co-called "BCI
illiteracy" phenomenon, which refers to the problem that BCI control systems
simply does not work for a non-negligible portion of test subjects (estimated 15
to 30 %) [Dickhaus et al., 2009].
Another important aspect which could have an impact on the decoding accuracy
is the preprocessing pipeline of the EEG. If some artifacts are not ﬁltered out
eﬀectively before the decoding, the results could be that the CSP ﬁlter picks up
that noise and thus masks the signals from the auditory spatial attention. One
parameter to investigate further in the preprocessing pipeline is the frequency
band(s) to ﬁlter the EEG data in before the CSP ﬁltering. As seen in ﬁgure
4.4, the number, and range of the frequency bands had an impact on the overall
decoding accuracy, and it would be interesting to investigate if this parameter
could be optimized even further.
5.3
Information Transfer Rate
It was found that the overall decoding accuracy did not decrease drastically
when the window length was decreased (ﬁgure 4.5a). For time windows of 1.5
seconds, 38% of the subjects still showed a decoding accuracy above 70% which
translates to extremely high ITR values (ﬁgure 4.5b). For a BCI-perspective,
this is positive, as it is desired to decode on as small time windows as possible
to make it viable in a real-time setting. On an average of all subjects, the ITR
was also highest at 1.5 seconds (ﬁgure 4.5b). What is also interesting, is to look
at the subjects performing at chance level; even for high window lengths, there
was no improvement in decoding accuracy which suggests that the system in its
current state simply is not capable of discriminating between attending the left
and right sound source for these subjects.
5.4
Real-time system with feedback
Due to the real-time system with feedback being completed close to the deadline
of this report, it was only tested in a very preliminary and exploratory manner.
The results from the test subject shown in ﬁgure 4.8 showed a chance-level
decoding accuracy. Two causes could explain these results:
==PAGE:50==
40
Discussion
1. Small lateralization between attend left and attend right trials
Like for the results from the pre-recorded EEG, the decoding accuracy for
some subjects were at chance level, which was caused by a small lateral-
ization between attend left and attend right trials. This could be the case
for this subject as well.
2. Noise sources were not controlled eﬃciently
As shown in ﬁgure 4.8, some channels were very noisy, and this could cause
the decoding accuracy to decrease.
The real-time feedback system in OpenVibe was designed to implement the
same decoding pipeline as developed in Matlab for analysis of the pre-recorded
data. Some of the blocks in the real-time system are built-in OpenViBE blocks
(e.g., band-pass ﬁltering, referencing, etc.), and these might perform slightly
diﬀerent than the Matlab functions due to their implementation, even though
the parameters are set to the same values. These diﬀerences in implementation
could cause variations in performance between the two systems.
It should also be noted that noise sources are more diﬃcult to handle in real-
time. In the analysis of recorded data, parameters in the pipeline can be op-
timized to eliminate speciﬁc noise sources, whereas this is not possible for the
real-time system. Due to the lack of performance accuracy of the test subject,
the eﬀect of the audio feedback on decoding accuracy is yet to be investigated.
5.5
Implementation in a hearing aid
Since the long-term objective of this project is to integrate this type of BCI
system in a hearing aid, it is worth discussing which obstacles must be overcome
for this to succeed.
Number and placement of EEG electrodes
For this project, an EEG cap with 64 electrodes distributed across the scalp
has been used. This is not a viable solution for a hearing-impaired person. A
more sensible solution is to incorporate 2-3 EEG electrodes into each hearing aid
device. The electrodes could be placed inside the ear canal around the receiver.
This reduction of available EEG electrodes will reduce the spatial resolution even
further, which could decrease the decoding accuracy. However, alpha power is
one of the strongest EEG signals, and it has been reported that the alpha power
can be reliably measured from ear EEG [Mikkelsen et al., 2015]. It is therefore
plausible that alpha lateralization can be measured from only a few electrodes
from the ear EEG.
==PAGE:51==
5.5 Implementation in a hearing aid
41
Quality of the EEG electrode recordings
The EEG electrodes used in this report are so-called "wet" electrodes, meaning
that they require a conductive gel to be applied between the scalp and the
electrode to reduce the skin-impedance. If these types of electrodes were to
be used in a hearing aid, two problems could occur: (a) due to the proximity
of the EEG electrodes in the ear canal, the gel from the electrodes may leak
out and cause a short-circuit between two or more electrodes.
(b) it is an
inconvenience for a hearing-impaired person to have to apply gel, and it might
also be uncomfortable or even block the ear canal. Thus, "dry" electrodes that
do not require conductive gel could be a solution, but the signal quality for
these types of electrodes have been found to be lower than the wet electrodes
[Pinegger et al., 2016].
Decoding accuracy
As the results of this report have shown, the decoding accuracy varies greatly
between subjects.
For this solution to be practical in a real product like a
hearing aid, it would be desired to make the decoding accuracy across subjects
more stable. It is also important that the decoder can operate on very small
window segments, to make the system viable in a real-time scenario.
Sound source separation
In this project, there is access to the clean audio sources which can be gained
individually. In a real-life scenario, the hearing aid should be capable of sepa-
rating the sound sources so that the attended source can be gained (or at least
the direction of attention), and is therefore very important that the hearing aid
can perform this task reliably.
As the above points suggest, there is still a long way to go before the technology
is mature and robust enough to be considered to be implemented in a hearing
aid. However, signiﬁcant progress is being made in this ﬁeld of research, and
given the results in this report and similar work, the future looks promising.
==PAGE:52==
42
Discussion
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Summary and conclusions
A real-time auditory spatial attention decoding pipeline was designed and eval-
uated on EEG data from 40 test subjects. The major objective of this report
was to investigate whether it was possible to decode auditory spatial attention
based on short segments of single-trial EEG data so that it could be integrated
into a BCI system. A lateralization was observed between EEG data where the
subjects attended a sound source to the right or the left. In the alpha band,
which has been hypothesized to reﬂect signatures of spatial attention, a lateral-
ization was observed on a grand mean over all subjects in the occipital-parietal
regions of the brain. Furthermore, a lateralization was also observed in the theta
and beta band at frontal electrodes, which suggested that all three bands could
be used in a spatial attention decoder.
To enhance the topographical diﬀerences between attend left and attend right
trials, a CSP ﬁlter was trained on data from both classes, in order to maximize
the diﬀerence in variance between them. It was found that regularization of the
CSP ﬁlter had a weak eﬀect on decoding accuracy. An SVM classiﬁer was used
to classify on windows of the CSP ﬁltered log-power EEG data segments. The
decoding accuracy on a grand mean-level was found to be highest when a multi-
band CSP method was used, and three CSP ﬁlters were trained on bandpass
ﬁltered data from the theta, alpha, and beta band, respectively. A grand mean
decoding accuracy of 67% was found on when tested on 5-second windows. The
spread in decoding accuracy between subjects was found to be very large, with
==PAGE:54==
44
Summary and conclusions
some subjects showed chance-level accuracy, while others were above 90%. For
the chance-level subjects, it was found that the lateralization between attend
left and attend right trials was very weak, and thus harder for the CSP ﬁlter
to separate and for the decoder to classify correctly on as the two classes were
almost indistinguishable. The weak lateralization for some subjects could be
caused by a range of diﬀerent parameters, including noise sources, movements
during EEG recordings or simply because this lateralization is weak in some
subjects.
The eﬀect of window size on the decoding accuracy was investigated, and it
was found that the mean decoding accuracy only decreased slightly when using
small windows down to 1.5 seconds. This translated to the highest information
transfer rate to be found on the smallest window of 1.5 seconds. This suggests
that the alpha lateralization is a strong enough signal (for some subjects) to be
used for decoding in a real-time setting using very small time windows.
6.1
Future work
This report has touched upon the subject of BCI decoding of auditory spa-
tial attention, and many aspects of the project could be expanded or explored
further.
One of the most relevant aspects to look into is not only how to increase the
decoding accuracy but also to decrease the spread in accuracy between subjects.
A more thorough investigation on why some subjects perform at chance-level
would be relevant. This could lead to new ideas on how to process the data to
increase the decoding accuracy.
The real-time signal processing implemented in OpenViBE could also be im-
proved. Diﬀerent modules could be optimized to make the system more robust
and stable. Furthermore, more systematic tests on multiple subjects would be
desired as this could give an idea of whether the system performs similarly to the
oﬄine system. The eﬀect of auditory feedback on decoding accuracy is an im-
portant aspect of the real-time system, and it would be interesting to investigate
further if feedback increases or decreases the decoding accuracy.
The data recorded and analyzed in this report consisted of relatively long trials of
50 seconds. Many things can happen over these 50 seconds trials. Subjects may
lose concentration, become drowsy and other types of artifacts could alter the
measured brain activity, and mask the signals of interest. Since it is essentially
desired to decode on a subject switching attention between two sound sources,
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Future work
45
it would be interesting to see if the decoding accuracy could be increased by
training the CSP ﬁlter and the decoder on shorter trials, but with a higher
number of trials. This way it would be trained on more "switch attention" data,
and the classiﬁer would be less susceptible to artifacts occurring over long trials.
Stimulus-response modeling in auditory attention decoding is an active research
area, and the method has shown promising results. However, it still relies on
relatively long time windows to decode accurately (at least around 10 seconds)
[Fuglsang et al., 2017]. This method could be combined with the spatial atten-
tion decoding, such that a classiﬁer bases its decision on both decoding schemes.
It would be very interesting to investigate, whether this aﬀected decoding accu-
racy and the window size.
==PAGE:56==
46
Summary and conclusions
==PAGE:57==
Appendix A
Appendix
==PAGE:58==
48
Appendix
==PAGE:59==
A.1 Band power topographies
49
A.1
Band power topographies
A.1.1
Alpha power topography
AM
0.1
0.2
0.3
LJ
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
AMi
-0.06-0.04-0.02
0
0.02
JA
-0.1
0
0.1
BL
-0.15 -0.1 -0.05
0
0.05
SN
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
CE
-0.02
0
0.02
CO
-0.2
0
0.2
LS
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
Figure A.1: Individualized Z-scored alpha power topographies for 9 subjects. Here,
right −left trials is shown.
==PAGE:60==
50
Appendix
A.1.2
Theta power topography
AM
-0.2
0
0.2
LJ
-0.05
0
0.05
AMi
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
JA
-0.1
0
0.1
BL
-0.2
-0.1
0
SN
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
CE
-0.02
0
0.02
CO
-0.2
0
0.2
LS
0
0.04
0.08
Figure A.2: Individualized Z-scored theta power topographies for 9 subjects. Here,
right −left trials is shown.
==PAGE:61==
A.1 Band power topographies
51
A.1.3
Beta power topography
Figure A.3: Individualized Z-scored beta power topographies for 9 subjects. Here,
right −left trials is shown.
==PAGE:62==
52
Appendix
A.1.4
Alpha power topography in 1-sec segments
0 to 1 sec
-0.05
0
0.05
1 to 2 sec
-0.1
-0.05
0
2 to 3 sec
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
3 to 4 sec
-0.04 -0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
4 to 5 sec
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
5 to 6 sec
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Figure A.4: Grand mean alpha topographies in 1-second segments. The numbers
indicate the number of seconds after two-talker stimulus onset. Here, right −left
trials is shown.
==PAGE:63==
List of Figures
2.1
Example of a BCI system, where multi-channel EEG data is
recorded from a subject that is performing an imaginary motor
task. Based on labeled training data a classiﬁer is trained (cali-
bration phase, top box). The trained classiﬁer is then applied in
the feedback phase (bottom box) where it classiﬁes the imagined
hand movement based on sliding windows of EEG input in real
time. The continuous output of the classiﬁer is used to control a
visual feedback. Taken from [Tomioka and Lemm, 2008]. . . . . .
7
2.2
Example of CSP ﬁltering in 2D. Samples drawn from two normal
distributions are shown in red and blue, and surrounded by a 95%
conﬁdence ellipse. Note how, after the ﬁltering, the variance of
the blue distribution is largest for csp component 2 and smallest
for csp component 1, while the exact opposite if the case for the
red distribution.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Two-dimensional SVM showing the maximal hyperplane between
the two classes. The two dashed lines are the support vectors for
the hyper plane. The length between the two support vectors is
given as
2
||⃗w||. Adapted from [Wikimedia Commons, 2008].
. . .
13
3.1
Overview of the OpenViBE pipeline. The system can be split
into three phases: 1.
EEG acquisition and preprocessing , 2.
CSP ﬁltering, and 3. Epoching and classiﬁcation. . . . . . . . . .
16
==PAGE:64==
54
LIST OF FIGURES
3.2
BioSemi 64 electrode layout. Adapted from the BioSemi webpage
(https://www.biosemi.com/headcap.htm). [Modiﬁed] . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Schematic of the bandpass- and CSP ﬁltering. The 64 EEG chan-
nels bandpass ﬁltered in the theta, alpha and beta band are CSP
ﬁltered with 6 components each.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Overview of the log-variance computation in sliding windows in
each of the 18 component channels. The log-variance windows
from the 18 components are the input features to the SVM decoder. 21
3.5
Overview of the test setup.
A test subject was cued to focus
on the speech stream from one of the two speaker units in turns,
while EEG was recorded. For the real-time system with feedback,
the gain of the two speakers was controlled by the output of the
spatial attention decoder.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
Real-time spatial decoding with auditory feedback. The gain of
the two speakers is controlled by the output from the classiﬁer
decoding on spatial attention in real-time. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1
Grand mean of the relative theta (a), alpha (b) and beta (c)
power between left and right trials. Here, the power of the attend
left trials are subtracted from the attend right trials. . . . . . . .
26
4.2
The eﬀect of increasing regularization on CSP ﬁlters. Here, the
same CSP ﬁlter for one subject is shown with diﬀerent numbers
of eiganvalues kept from the covariance matrix. Eigenvalues kept:
(all) 64 (a), 30 (b) and 6 (c). As the regularization increases (by
decreasing the number of eigenvalues kept), the patterns get more
spatially smooth. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Decoding accuracy as a function of regularization for 5-second
windows, for a cross-validation scheme with 8 inner and 4 outer
folds.
The red line shows the group average.
The lower the
number of eigenvalues kept, the stronger the regularization. The
spread in accuracy between subjects is very large, where some
subjects are performing around chance-level, while others are
above 90%. The highest group average is found at a regularization
value of 23 with an accuracy of 67 %. The eﬀect of regularization
on a group level seems to be small. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:65==
LIST OF FIGURES
55
4.4
Decoding accuracy for three types of ﬁltering strategies: three
individualized bands, alpha band and a broadband. The crosses
show the mean decoding accuracy for each subject over the four
outer folds.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
ITR and decoding accuracy as a function of window length. The
decoding accuracy (a) increase by a small margin when the win-
dow length is increased. For the ITR (b), the bit/min decreases
rapidly when window length is increased.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6
Best performing subject in the alpha range. (a) shows the alpha
power lateralization, with a maximal diﬀerence in the electrodes
in the frontal region. (b) shows a CSP ﬁlter trained on EEG data
ﬁltered to the alpha range (8-13 Hz) and shows a similar pattern
where maximal and minimal weight values are assigned to the
frontal electrodes. (c) shows the lateralization index computed
in sliding time windows of 5 seconds. The values for attend left
and attend right are separated by the black line with an accuracy
of 86%.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7
Subject performing at chance-level in the alpha range. (a) shows
the alpha power lateralization. Note how the scale between the
highest and lowest values is very small (-0.02 to 0.04). (b) shows
a CSP ﬁlter trained on EEG data ﬁltered to the alpha range (8-13
Hz), and the patterns from the alpha lateralization is not picked
up by the CSP. (c) shows the lateralization index computed in
sliding time windows of 5 seconds. The values for attend left and
attend right are almost inseparable, and the optimal separation
accuracy shown by the black is only 57%. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.8
Alpha power topography (attend right - attend left trials) for the
test subject from the real-time feedback experiment. Two noisy
channels in the right hemiﬁeld accounts for the maximum and
minimum value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
A.1 Individualized Z-scored alpha power topographies for 9 subjects.
Here, right −left trials is shown. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2 Individualized Z-scored theta power topographies for 9 subjects.
Here, right −left trials is shown. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.3 Individualized Z-scored beta power topographies for 9 subjects.
Here, right −left trials is shown. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:66==
56
LIST OF FIGURES
A.4 Grand mean alpha topographies in 1-second segments. The num-
bers indicate the number of seconds after two-talker stimulus on-
set. Here, right −left trials is shown. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[Aurlien et al., 2004] Aurlien, H., Gjerde, I. O., Aarseth, J. H., Eldøen, G.,
Karlsen, B., Skeidsvoll, H., and Gilhus, N. E. (2004). EEG background ac-
tivity described by a large computerized database. Clinical Neurophysiology,
115(3):665–673.
[Baker, 2007] Baker, S. N. (2007). Oscillatory interactions between sensorimotor
cortex and the periphery. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 17(6):649–655.
[Banerjee et al., 2011] Banerjee, S., Snyder, A. C., Molholm, S., and Foxe,
J. J. (2011).
Oscillatory Alpha-Band Mechanisms and the Deployment of
Spatial Attention to Anticipated Auditory and Visual Target Locations:
Supramodal or Sensory-Speciﬁc Control Mechanisms?
Journal of Neuro-
science, 31(27):9923–9932.
[Blum and Rutkove, 2007] Blum, A. S. and Rutkove, S. B. (2007). The clinical
neurophysiology primer.
[Bodenmann et al., 2009] Bodenmann, S., Rusterholz, T., Durr, R., Stoll, C.,
Bachmann, V., Geissler, E., Jaggi-Schwarz, K., and Landolt, H.-P. (2009).
The Functional Val158Met Polymorphism of COMT Predicts Interindividual
Diﬀerences in Brain ă Oscillations in Young Men. Journal of Neuroscience,
29(35):10855–10862.
[Burle et al., 2015] Burle, B., Spieser, L., Roger, C., Casini, L., Hasbroucq, T.,
and Vidal, F. (2015). Spatial and temporal resolutions of EEG: Is it really
black and white?
A scalp current density view.
International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 97(3):210–220.
==PAGE:68==
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Cherry, 1953] Cherry, E. C. (1953). Some Experiments on the Recognition of
Speech, with One and with Two Ears. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 975(25).
[Christie et al., 2017] Christie, S., di Fronso, S., Bertollo, M., and Werthner, P.
(2017). Individual alpha peak frequency in ice hockey shooting performance.
Frontiers in Psychology, 8(MAY):1–8.
[Dickhaus et al., 2009] Dickhaus, T., Sannelli, C., Müller, K.-R., Curio, G., and
Blankertz, B. (2009). Predicting BCI performance to study BCI illiteracy.
BMC Neuroscience, 10(Suppl 1):P84.
[Dong et al., 2015] Dong, E., Li, L., and Chen, C. (2015). Improved common
spatial pattern for brain-computer interfacing. 2015 IEEE International Con-
ference on Mechatronics and Automation, ICMA 2015, pages 2112–2116.
[Doppelmayr et al., 1998] Doppelmayr, M., Klimesch, W., Pachinger, T., and
Ripper, B. (1998). Individual diﬀerences in brain dynamics: important impli-
cations for the calculation of event-related band power. Biological Cybernetics,
79(1):49–57.
[Fuglsang et al., 2017] Fuglsang, S. A., Dau, T., and Hjortkjær, J. (2017).
Noise-robust cortical tracking of attended speech in real-world acoustic scenes.
NeuroImage, 156(December 2016):435–444.
[Gould et al., 2011] Gould, I. C., Rushworth, M. F., and Nobre, A. C. (2011).
Indexing the graded allocation of visuospatial attention using anticipatory
alpha oscillations. Journal of Neurophysiology, 105(3):1318–1326.
[Händel et al., 2011] Händel, B. F., Haarmeier, T., and Jensen, O. (2011). Al-
pha Oscillations Correlate with the Successful Inhibition of Unattended Stim-
uli. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(9):2494–2502.
[Haykin and Chen, 2005] Haykin, S. and Chen, Z. (2005). The cocktail party
problem. Neural Computation, 17(9):1875–1902.
[Horton et al., 2014] Horton, C., Srinivasan, R., and D’Zmura, M. (2014). En-
velope responses in single-trial EEG indicate attended speaker in a ’cocktail
party’. Journal of neural engineering, 11(4):046015.
[Ishikawa et al., 2012] Ishikawa, Y., Takata, M., and Joe, K. (2012). Consti-
tution and phase analysis of alpha waves. 5th 2012 Biomedical Engineering
International Conference, BMEiCON 2012.
[Jensen and Mazaheri, 2010] Jensen, O. and Mazaheri, A. (2010).
Shaping
Functional Architecture by Oscillatory Alpha Activity: Gating by Inhibition.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 4(November):1–8.
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[Kappel et al., 2017] Kappel, S. L., Looney, D., Mandic, D. P., and Kidmose,
P. (2017). Physiological artifacts in scalp EEG and ear-EEG. BioMedical
Engineering OnLine, 16(1):103.
[Kerlin et al., 2010] Kerlin, J. R., Shahin, A. J., and Miller, L. M. (2010). Atten-
tional Gain Control of Ongoing Cortical Speech Representations in a "Cocktail
Party". Journal of Neuroscience, 30(2):620–628.
[Kothe, 2014] Kothe, C. (2014). https://github.com/sccn/labstreaminglayer.
[Mikkelsen et al., 2015] Mikkelsen, K. B., Kappel, S. L., Mandic, D. P., and
Kidmose, P. (2015). EEG recorded from the ear: Characterizing the Ear-
EEG Method. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 9(NOV):1–8.
[Nielsen, 2017] Nielsen, S. V. (2017). Auditory BCI control using spatial atten-
tion (special course). Unpublished report.
[Nunez et al., 1997] Nunez, P. L., Srinivasan, R., Westdorp, A. F., Wijesinghe,
R. S., Tucker, D. M., Silberstein, R. B., and Cadusch, P. J. (1997). EEG
coherency I: Statistics, reference electrode, volume conduction, Laplacians,
cortical imaging, and interpretation at multiple scales. Electroencephalography
and Clinical Neurophysiology, 103(5):499–515.
[Oishi and Schacht, 2011] Oishi, N. and Schacht, J. (2011).
Emerging treat-
ments for noise-induced hearing loss. Expert Opinion on Emerging Drugs,
16(2):235–245.
[O’Sullivan et al., 2015] O’Sullivan, J. A., Power, A. J., Mesgarani, N., Ra-
jaram, S., Foxe, J. J., Shinn-Cunningham, B. G., Slaney, M., Shamma, S. A.,
and Lalor, E. C. (2015). Attentional Selection in a Cocktail Party Environ-
ment Can Be Decoded from Single-Trial EEG. Cerebral Cortex, 25(7):1697–
1706.
[Peelle and Wingﬁeld, 2016] Peelle, J. E. and Wingﬁeld, A. (2016). The Neu-
ral Consequences of Age-Related Hearing Loss.
Trends in Neurosciences,
39(7):486–497.
[Pinegger et al., 2016] Pinegger, A., Wriessnegger, S. C., Faller, J., and Müller-
Putz, G. R. (2016). Evaluation of diﬀerent EEG acquisition systems concern-
ing their suitability for building a brain-computer interface: Case studies.
Frontiers in Neuroscience, 10(SEP):1–11.
[Propper et al., 2012] Propper, R. E., Pierce, J., Geisler, M. W., Christman,
S. D., and Bellorado, N. (2012).
Asymmetry in Resting Alpha Activity:
Eﬀects of Handedness. Open Journal of Medical Psychology, 1(October):86–
90.
==PAGE:70==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Ramoser et al., 2000] Ramoser, H., Müller-Gerking, J., and Pfurtscheller, G.
(2000). Optimal spatial ﬁltering of single trial EEG during imagined hand
movement. IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering, 8(4):441–446.
[Renard et al., 2010] Renard, Y., Lotte, F., Gibert, G., Congedo, M., Maby, E.,
Delannoy, V., Bertrand, O., and Lécuyer, A. (2010). OpenViBE: An Open-
Source Software Platform to Design, Test, and Use Brain-Computer Inter-
faces in Real and Virtual Environments. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments, 19(1):35–53.
[Roijendijk et al., 2016] Roijendijk, L., Gielen, S., and Farquhar, J. (2016).
Classifying Regularized Sensor Covariance Matrices:
An Alternative to
CSP. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineer-
ing, 24(8):893–900.
[Samaha et al., 2016] Samaha, J., Sprague, T., and Postle, B. R. (2016). Decod-
ing and Reconstructing the Focus of Spatial Attention from the Topography
of Alpha-band Oscillations. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 28(8):1090–
1097.
[Särelä and Valpola, 2005] Särelä, J. and Valpola, H. (2005). Denoising source
separation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6:233–272.
[Smola and Schölkopf, 2004] Smola, A. J. and Schölkopf, B. (2004). A tutorial
on support vector regression. Statistics and Computing, 14(3):199–222.
[Thorpe et al., 2012] Thorpe, S., D’Zmura, M., and Srinivasan, R. (2012). Lat-
eralization of frequency-speciﬁc networks for covert spatial attention to audi-
tory stimuli. Brain Topography, 25(1):39–54.
[Tomioka and Lemm, 2008] Tomioka, R. and Lemm, S. (2008). Optimizing Spa-
tial Filters for Robust EEG Single-Trial Analysis. IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, (January 2008):41–56.
[Vapnik, 2006] Vapnik, V. (2006). Estimation of Dependences Based on Empir-
ical Data.
[Wikimedia Commons, 2008] Wikimedia
Commons
(2008).
https://goo.gl/WGaano 2018-01-29.
[Wolpaw et al., 1998] Wolpaw, J. R., Ramoser, H., McFarland, D. J., and
Pfurtscheller, G. (1998).
EEG-based communication: Improved accuracy
by response veriﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering,
6(3):326–333.
