==PAGE:1==
Clustering Analysis for
Neurotransmitter Response
Proﬁles of Dynamic Positron
Emission Tomography Data
Rasa Misiunaite
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Title Page
Master thesis by:
Rasa Misiunaite (s127713)
Education:
Master of Science in Engineering (Biomedical Engineering)
ECTS credits:
32.5 ECTS
Project period:
14th July 2017 – 21st January 2018
Supervisors:
Professor Lars Kai Hansen
Professor Steven Meikle
Dr. Georgios Angelis
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 321
2800 Kgs.Lyngby
Brain and Mind Center
Faculty of Health Sciences
The University of Sydney
Sydney, NSW 2050, Australia
Signature:
Rasa Misiunaite (s127713)
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Neurotransmitters are important regulators of brain processes. During brain
processes just a small amount of neurotransmitters is released. Thus for de-
tecting the changes in transmissions, Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
based techniques are used due to their relatively higher sensitivity compare
other imaging tools. This techniques are based on competition between ligand
and endogenously released neurotransmitters, where radiogland concentration
is measured using PET. In this project, we focused on the dopaminergic system
and in particular on detecting small transient changes in post-synaptic dopamine
levels. Kinetic modelling with linear parametric neurotransmitter PET model
(lp-ntPET) is used to model the dynamic PET data. The project aim is to
maximize speciﬁcity in the obtained data by using clustering techniques like
widely used K-means algorithm and Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) before
kinetic modeling due to their ability to classify data into groups with similar
characteristics in terms of variance in the data. The generated 1D and 2D data
are sets of Time Activity Curves (TACs) corresponding to [11C]raclopride. We
investigated parameters, which could impact the performance of the clustering
approach such as the activation magnitude, the level of noise in the TAC and
==PAGE:6==
iv
Abstract
the ratio between the activated and non-activated voxels. For statistical pur-
pose, the sensitivity and speciﬁcity has been used to compare clustering-based
classiﬁcation (K-means and GMM) with single-voxel modeling. Results show
that clustering applied before the kinetic modeling helps to minimize the false
positive rate. The number of TACs, the higher activation magnitude and the
higher ratio between active and non-active voxels results in higher sensitivity
and speciﬁcity.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master thesis has been made in collaboration with Brain and Mind Centre,
Faculty of Health Science at The University of Sydney, Australia and Depart-
ment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at Technical University of
Denmark, Denmark. During this project an abstract, a poster and a conference
paper for 2017 IEEE Medical Imaging Conference has been produced.
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank my supervisor Professor Steven Meikle, my su-
pervisor at Brain and Mind Centre, The University of Sydney, for giving me
the opportunity to join the project. He is very supportive and motivated me
to continue on this research project with the regular progress supervisions. I
would like to thank the Dr. Georgios Angelis, my supervisor at Brain and Mind
Centre, The University of Sydney ,who let me contribute to his project. I am
very grateful to his hard work, regular supervisions every week and for all his
help with submission to IEEE MIC 2017, Matlab and patience explaining me
all the theory. He supported me through the whole project time and motivated
me many time to continue on this research project. I also would like to thank
Professor Lars Kai Hansen, my supervisor at DTU for approving my project,
support, ﬂexibility and understanding.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Title Page
i
Abstract
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Human Nervous System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Neurotransmitters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Dopaminergic system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
Dopaminergic Neurotransmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4.1
Principle of PET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Application of PET in Neuroimaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.6
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.7
Aims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.8
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.9
Limitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
1.10 Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Theory
17
2.1
Tracer Kinetic Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.1
Types of clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
K-means Clustering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.4.1
Expectation-Maximization (EM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4.2
Akaike Information Criterion (AIC)
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.5
Principal Component Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Methodology
29
3.1
1D Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
2D Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
Model Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Results
35
4.1
1D Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.1
K-means Clustering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.2
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2
Gaussian Mixture Model VS K-means . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.3
2D Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.3.1
K-means Clustering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3.2
Gaussiam Mixture Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5
Discussion and Conclution
67
5.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A K-means 2D plots
71
B GMM 2D plots
87
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
C MIC Poster
101
D MIC Conference Paper
103
Bibliography
109
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Neurotransmitters are important in conducting brain processes and there is on-
going research trying to understand their exact mechanism. The main research
focuses on humans, because there is no clear understanding if functions in ani-
mal and human brains are processed in the same way. However there have been
done many validated research on reward function in animals, which includes
dopamine as a neurotransmitter [10].
This thesis is based on a project, which is conducted at Brain and Mind Centre,
The University of Sydney.
The research group focus on parametric imaging
of the brain activity in awake animals(rats).
The purpose of this project is
to investigate - clustering approach for reducing false positiv results during
the processing of acquired data. This is a proof-of-principle study, where we
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
wanted to investigate the proposed methodologies using simpliﬁed and controlled
datasets, with the ultimate aim to apply them to real animal data.
1.1
Human Nervous System
The human nervous system is a complex network of nerves and cells that trans-
mits messages to and from the brain and spinal cord to diﬀerent parts of the
body. The human brain is the most intricate organ and command centre of the
human body. Structural and functional analysis of the human brain is the key
to understand the cognitive process and diﬀerent neurological disorders [77],
[64]. Anatomical studies of the brain are also crucial for the development of
neurocomputational models and drugs treatment to the nervous system [14],
[36].
Neural networks consist of neurons of the nerve cells, which vary in size and
shape and carry electrical impulses. Each nerve cell consists of a cell body, den-
drites and an axon (see ﬁgure 1.1) [29]. Neurons pass the signal from one neuron
to another through synapses. These signals are picked up by the dendrites of
other nerve cells, and further pass to the cell body. Such communication be-
tween the neurons occurs in one direction.
Neurotransmitters, which act as
endogenous chemical messengers are released into the synaptic cleft and bind to
the receptors on the receiving neuron and thus pass the signal to next neuron
or the target cell (see ﬁgure 1.2).
The normal function of the nervous system depends upon the communication
between and within the neurons.
In the last few decades extensive research
has been done on the nervous system in order to understand the molecular,
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Neurotransmitters
3
Figure 1.1: The structure of a typical neuron includes four main components-
dendrites, cell body (or soma), axon, and axon terminal. Source: [1].
cellular and systematic signalling pathways causing neurogenesis, addiction, and
pathophysiology [75], [71], [60].
1.2
Neurotransmitters
All neurotransmitters are classiﬁed into three major categories:
• Amino acids - These include mainly aspartic acid, glycine, glutamic
acid and Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid (GABA). The primary "workhorse"
neurotransmitters of the brain are glutamic acid (=glutamate) and GABA.
• Peptides - Vasopressin, somatostatin, neurotensin, etc., are peptide neu-
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.2: Structure of typical chemical synapse.Source: [2].
rotransmitters. They perform specialized functions in the hypothalamus
or act as co-factors elsewhere in the brain.
• Monoamines and acetylcholine - Neurotransmitters such as norepinephrine
(noradrenaline; NE, NA), epinephrine (adrenaline), serotonin (SER, 5-
HT) and dopamine (DA) serve as neuromodulators and involved in the
regulation of behavioural and physiological functions.
Neurotransmission of monoamines plays a direct role in the regulation of move-
ment, activity levels, mood, and sleep, maintenance of vascular tone, blood ﬂow,
and modulation of pain mechanisms [56], [34]. Disturbances in monoamine neu-
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Dopaminergic system
5
rotransmission will lead to neurological symptoms. The understanding of these
pathways is crucial for the treatment of these disorders [56].
The noradrenergic neural system involves the synthesis, storage, and release of
NE. The sympathetic nervous system releases adrenalin; it aﬀects cardiovascular
function, glucose metabolism, gastrointestinal motility, etc. It is also associated
with several brain functions like sleep, certain types of memories, emotions [76].
The noradrenergic system is quite active in the awaken state and is essential for
focused attention [17],[18].
1.3
Dopaminergic system
Various psychiatric disorders like Parkinson disease, Huntington disease, de-
pression, schizophrenia, and behavioural (or chemical) addiction are linked with
dopamine abnormalities. Therefore, the dopaminergic system is the primary
target for the drugs to treat these neurological disorders. Dopamine is a pre-
cursor to norepinephrine synthesis and has its signalling properties [22]. Bertler
and Rosengren [18] aﬃrmed that dopamine is the dominant part of basal ganglia
in the brain. Dopamine enriched brain regions were mapped and reported to
have distinct pathways of dopamine signalling [74], [30], [18].
Four major dopaminergic pathways include tuberoinfundibular, nigrostriatal,
mesocortical, and mesolimbic pathways. The tuberoinfundibular system projects
from the hypothalamus to the pituitary. The nigrostriatal pathway consist of
neurons that originate in the substantia nigra and terminate in the dorsal stria-
tum. Degeneration of these projections causes Parkinson’s disease marked by
abnormal movement [12]. In the mesocortical pathway, dopaminergic neurons
==PAGE:20==
6
Introduction
Figure 1.3: Dopaminergic pathway. Source: [3].
project from the ventral tegmental area the prefrontal cortex and are involved in
cognition and emotion. The mesolimbic neurons also originate from tegmental
area and projects in the ventral striatum (see ﬁgure 1.3).
1.3.1
Dopaminergic Neurotransmission
Dopaminergic neurotransmission depends upon the several factors such as -
the amount of DA synthesized and released, the number of DA receptors at
the synapse and DA binding to these receptors [63]. After the synthesis, DA
is enclosed into the synaptic vesicles by a Vesicular Monoamine Transporter
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Dopaminergic system
7
(VMAT), and it is released at nerve terminals into the synapse upon stimulation.
Dopamine transporter (DAT) transport the released DA back to presynaptic
neuron to be recycled [33]. The level of extracellular dopamine is modulated
by phasic and tonic transmission mechanism. Phasic dopamine gets released in
the nervous system and driven directly by the action potential, whereas in tonic
dopamine transmission, small amounts of dopamine are released without being
preceded by a presynaptic action potential [59].
DA signalling receptors belong to the family of G-protein-coupled receptors,
which are classiﬁed into two groups namely D1-like receptors (comprise the
D1 and D5 receptors) and D2-like receptors (comprise the D2, D3, and D4
receptors). D1 and D5 are coupled to G proteins that stimulate adenylyl cyclase
to increase the concentration of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). D2,
D3, and D4 are coupled to Gi/o proteins is responsible for the inhibitation of
adenylyl cyclase as well as the suppressing of cAMP production [42], [69].
Termination of DA neurotransmission is also necessary for maintainings proper
dopaminergic tone.
DA is degraded enzymatically by monoamine oxidase B
(MAOB) and catechol-o-methyl transferase (COMT) DAT regulates inactiva-
tion of DA neurotransmission. It allows the withdrawal of synaptic DA back
into the presynaptic bouton [32]. The studies conducted on DAT knockout mice
showed that DA remains in the synapse for an extended time in comparison to
wild-type mice [31], [33].
DAT inﬂuences several components of dopaminergic synapse and directly reg-
ulate DA signalling. Loss of proper function and regulation of these transport
are reported in schizophrenic patients, clinical depression, and obese individ-
uals [44], [47].Genetic polymorphisms in the DAT coding region is associated
with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder and eating disorders [65].
DAT
==PAGE:22==
8
Introduction
also plays a vital role in several neurological disorders and addiction [33].
Neuroscientists attempt to understand the process of brain development that
controls other mechanism of the body. Several animal models have been created
to identify the genetic, molecular, cellular, circuit-level and neurophysiological
mechanisms underlying the brain activity [8], [13].
Several non-invasive technologies have been used to analyze human brain struc-
ture and neural responses to complex behaviours. The widely endeavoured ones
include functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), magnetoencephalogra-
phy (MEG), electroencephalography (EEG) and positron emission tomography
(PET) [8], [15], [35], [46], [68].
1.4
Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) is an in vivo medical imaging modal-
ity which provides quantitative estimates of neurotransmitter release and other
metabolic processes. In an individual, physiological functions of diﬀerent organs
are monitored using radioactive compounds, in tracer quantities, tagged with
positron emitters [50].
These radiotracers circulate through the whole body
within blood stream and accumulate at speciﬁc sites or receptors depending
upon their binding characteristics [61].
PET can provide quantitative measurements of the spatial distribution of the
tracer, as well as it’s temporal changes over time, by reconstructing a series
of 3D images collected at diﬀerent time points. Regions of interest (ROI) and
time activity curves (TACs) of a speciﬁc organ or tissue are extracted from
==PAGE:23==
1.4 Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
9
3D dynamic images to estimate binding of the radiotracer on receptors kinetic
parameters, because PET data contains ligand concentration of both speciﬁc and
nonspeciﬁc binding, thus using receptor kinetic models can enable the separation
of speciﬁc binding from nonspeciﬁc [10], [51].
1.4.1
Principle of PET
Figure 1.4: Diagrammatic representation of PET (Adapted from: [15])
PET relies on the principle of nuclear decay of radiotracers or radionuclides
which emit a positron (β +), a neutron and a neutrino. Positrons are positively
charged particles with a mass equal to an electron. In surrounding tissues or
organs these positrons collide with electrons.
Electrons involved during this
process are the part of any molecular structure of any local tissue. In repeated
collisions with electrons, positively charged positrons rapidly lose energy and
eventually, each positron is annihilated with an electron.
==PAGE:24==
10
Introduction
According to the equation,
E = mc2
mass (m) of these particles converts into energy (E), c denotes the speed of light.
Two high-energy gamma-photons (511 keV) are released and travel in opposite
directions from the site of annihilation. Thus it is important to capture these
gamma rays, because they carry important information - the emission of the
positron happened somewhere along the coincidence line.
There are multiple rings of scintillation crystals surrounding the object. These
detectors are interconnected and detect gamma rays in time intervals of (2ns
or 6ns). There are several kinds of events detected: such as random events,
from other annihilation event, scatter events of the same annihilation, but one
or both gamma rays have been scattered before detection and multiple events,
where gamma rays of more than one annihilation events are detected and raw
data is transmitted to the computers for tomographic image reconstruction.
Several coincidences of annihilation are collected for a particular period ranging
from few seconds to several minutes [23].
Data acquired in PET scans is a collection of measurements about the tracer
distribution in a region or single voxel at diﬀerent time points.
This set of
dynamic measurements can provide useful information, such as metabolically
active areas [66], [53].
The concentration of radioactivity in tissues (e.g., Bq/ml) is plotted against time
to generate time-activity-curves (TACs).
The concentration of radioactivity
in a given tissue region at a particular time after injection primarily depends
upon two factors, which include the local tissue physiology (the blood ﬂow or
metabolism in that region) and the input function, i.e., the time-course of tracer
concentration in the blood or plasma. A TAC provides information about the
==PAGE:25==
1.5 Application of PET in Neuroimaging
11
kinetics of the radiotracer in the speciﬁc tissue and at the same time gives insight
about the rate of tracer in and out ﬂux and amount/rate of tracer accumulation
[72].
1.5
Application of PET in Neuroimaging
It has been established that the neurotransmitters are vital regulators of cogni-
tion and behaviour. Several neuroimaging tools like functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging (fMRI), event-related potential (ERP), magnetoencephalography
(MEG), are used to understand the human brain and behaviour by localizing
areas involved in the processing and in establishing temporal sequence of acti-
vation. Further, to study the human brain, several attempts have been made,
either by MRI or PET [58].
PET-based techniques have high sensitivity for the detection of task-induced
neurotransmitters [9]. In clinical neurology, PET has been used in healthy pop-
ulations and patient populations suﬀering from diﬀerent psychiatric disorders
to understand disease pathogenesis, diagnosis and response to treatment [9],
[11]. Presynaptic and post-synaptic biological markers of diﬀerent psychiatric
disorders due to defect in the dopaminergic system have been studied in detail
[11].PET also assist in the early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease for the patients
with characteristic temporoparietal glucose hypometabolism [62]. Due to neural
cell loss and reduction in synaptic activity, the decrease in the rate of glucose
metabolism correlates to the severity of the disease [50].
==PAGE:26==
12
Introduction
1.6
Literature Review
In neuroscience, the study of brain activity is a complex and computationally
intensive task. Clustering has been extensively used in medical imaging domain
to diﬀerentiate between diﬀerent tissues and blood samples [54].
Functional and biological information of relevance is extracted from these 3D
parametric PET images. Since high noise levels limit the accuracy and/or pre-
cision of the estimated kinetic model parameters, setting a big voxel size can
help to reduce the noise. But tissue heterogeneity restricts it further as it may
mask the physiological characteristics of the tissue of interest. Clustering based
methods could eﬃciently overcome the noise challenges in processing dynamic
PET data. TACs can be clustered and the estimated kinetic model parameters
can be improved using cluster analysis. These approaches segment the PET
data into diﬀerent clusters in such a way so that the TACs of all voxels have a
similar shape [39].
O’Sullivan [71] used cluster analysis strategy and proposed two diﬀerent meth-
ods for analysis of dynamic PET data. The ﬁrst method includes the parame-
ters optimization for each pixel considered as the separate regions of interest’s
(ROI). The second approach comprises mixture model technique which exam-
ines the pixel-wise TACs comprise homogeneous tissue and provides quantitative
parametric images. Wong [78] showed the relevance of cluster analysis before
applying modelling techniques to estimate the functional and physiological pa-
rameters with TACs having distinct kinetics.
Interpretation of the series of dynamic PET data experiments requires analy-
sis of complex, multivariate data. A massive surge has been observed in using
supervised and unsupervised machine learning techniques to yield improved in-
==PAGE:27==
1.6 Literature Review
13
ferences from the dynamic PET data. Diﬀerent authors have applied cluster
analysis to neuroimaging to analyze the MRI or PET data.
Filzmoser [27]
provided a model-free fMRI analysis approach for identifying anatomical and
functional details of the brain.
Liptrot [4] used hierarchical K-means clustering on TACs to extract a cere-
bral vasculature ROI from dynamic PET scans.
Harikumar [48] applied K-
means clustering in classifying the risk level epilepsy of epileptic patients. They
achieved a high-performance index with a false alarm rate of zero percent.
Ma’sum [49] have used K-means to classify the genes expressed in colorectal
carcinoma. These clusters of genes were then used to analyze the correlation of
genes with clinical metastasis.
Li [45] proposed Gaussian mixture model (GMM) and model selection to identify
discriminative brain metabolism patterns for PET data. The proposed method
was applied to the control PET images to extract features of a PET image in
the presence of Alzheimer’s in an early clinical stage. Górriz [6] used GMM for
choosing ROIs in 3D functional brain images to identify the pattern in the images
of the subjects diagnosed with the brain diseases. Merisaari [7] applied GMM
clustering for segmentation of Magnetic Resonance images of a premature infant
brain which receive lower signal to noise due to short scanning times. Neumann
[55] presented a method based on Activation Likelihood Estimation using GMM
clustering in the meta-analysis of functional imaging data for identiﬁcation of
functional regions in the brain. Brahim [20] highlighted the use of GMM in
DatSCAN brain images for normalization of intensity levels for the development
of computer-aided diagnosis system for Parkinson’s detection.
GMM based
techniques have also been applied in cancer biology. Singh & Pawar [67] used
GMM based clustering in mammographic images to reduce the noise and proper
segmentation of benign, malignant and normal images.
==PAGE:28==
14
Introduction
1.7
Aims
The aim of this project is to investigate if classifying voxel-wise TACs according
to their kinetic characteristics prior to model ﬁtting will result in improved
speciﬁcity in the dynamic PET data on neurotransmitter responses.
Numerical methods, such as the linear parametric neurotransmitter PET model
(lp-ntPET) [57], have been developed to estimate and quantify stimulus-induced
dopamine ﬂuctuations in the living brain. This is done by including time-varying
terms to describe the transient ﬂuctuations of the model parameters during an
activation or ligand-displacement study. Conventionally, such kinetic models are
applied to regional TACs, which are often deﬁned based on uniform structural
regions [57].
The target neurotransmitter is dopamine and the analysis of speciﬁc receptor
binding is based on reference region. As in cerebellum, there is zero or close to
zero receptors, that dopamine binds to, it is identiﬁed as reference region. The
other hand dopamine can be detected in the regions in the brain that contain
D2/D3 receptors. However, the striatum has high density of such receptors.
Thus this study is chose striatum as activation region.
However, regional kinetic analysis cannot adequately characterise functional het-
erogeneity and may mask the physiological response of interest. Although ap-
plication of these models to each voxel of the dynamic image is preferred, the
high levels of noise in the voxel-wise TACs may lead to a large false positive
rate, reducing the speciﬁcity of these methods [43].
==PAGE:29==
1.8 Approach
15
1.8
Approach
Previous studies have considered the use of statistical analyses (e.g. F-tests and
cluster-size thresholds) to reduce the likelihood of false positive ﬁndings [43].
In this project, the clustering approach is used, like the widely-used k-means
algorithm [73] and Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM) [37]. In order to organize
a series of dynamic PET data into groups whose members are similar in some
way (e.g. they contain a similar activation response).
In this preliminary study, we used simple 1D and 2D simulations, represent-
ing the kinetics of [11C]raclopride in the striatum, to improve classiﬁcation for
diﬀerent magnitudes of activation responses, as well as diﬀerent levels of noise.
1.9
Limitation
Algorithms and toolboxes already implemented for the project used.
There
is no focus on optimization of each method.
All implementations made in
Matlab_R2015b.
The analysis performed on simulated data, which could be a limitation when
applying suggested methods to the real data, because of the various neural
functions happening at the same time in the brain as the data is collected.
The main research group focus is on the neurotransmitter’s response curve [57],
but we focused on applying the clustering approach to the data before kinetic
==PAGE:30==
16
Introduction
modeling. This could be seen as an advantage to group data before applying
to to the kinetic modeling. However it might be false clustering and the wrong
formed groups would be transferred to the kinetic model.
1.10
Thesis Overview
The thesis consists of four main parts besides the introductory part:
• Theory, Chapters 2. The theory of the diﬀerent methods used in the
thesis
• Methodology, Chapters 3. The methodology of the study.
• Results, Chapters 4. Results of the project.
• Discussion and Conclusion, Chapters 4. Discussion of the results, con-
clusion, future work opportunities.
• Appendix. It contains: K-means 2D plots, GMM 2D plots, Poster and
Conference Paper of 2017 IEEE Medical Imaging Conference.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Tracer Kinetic Modeling
Dynamic PET data provide quantitative physiological measurements about the
tissue of interest or system. There measurements are modelled or described via
multiple diﬀerential equations that describe how the tracer moves between com-
partment. For example, two characteristic parameters, i.e., “volume of distri-
bution” and “binding potential” provide physiologically relevant data for tracer
retention in a tissue [40]. Input functions are also necessary to drive the tracer
kinetic modelling procedures [24]. A full model can predict the time-course of
radioactivity concentration in a tissue region by taking local tissue physiology
==PAGE:32==
18
Theory
Figure 2.1: General three-compartment model (Source: [51])
and input function.
PET tracer kinetic data can be described by model-driven methods. Model-
driven methods include compartmental modelling how the tracer moves between
compartments. All those models describe the rate of ligand entering and leav-
ing the regions in the brain. Most kinetic models assume that there are three
compartments the plasma compartment, where the ligand is in the blood; non
speciﬁc binding compartment, which includes binding to other substances than
receptor and speciﬁc binding, which refers to the binding to the receptor of
interest (see Figure 2.1). As we have discussed in the past, diﬀerent compart-
ments can be either a diﬀerent biochemical state of the injected radioligand (eg
free or bound) or diﬀerent tissues/locations in the brain (eg plasma, receptors).
The tracer is free to move between these biochemical or physical states - which
ultimately gives the dynamics that you measure with PET. A kinetic model
describe exactly this movement between diﬀerent compartments [51], [10].
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Clustering
19
Models transform the data in such a way (i.e. integral) that noise aﬀects more
or less the parameter estimation. Several models have been developed to deter-
mine the kinetics of neurotransmitter release from dynamic PET data. Morris
[52] developed the ntPET model to estimate the time-varying concentration
of neurotransmitters. It was extended by Normandin [57]into a more eﬃcient
linear parametric neurotransmitter model (lp-ntPET). It’s the similar model,
but Normandin [57] used a basis function approach to linearise the model and
make it more computationally eﬃcient. This method is non-invasive and reﬂects
intrasynaptic neurotransmitter activation. The regional kinetic study cannot
appropriately characterize functional heterogeneity and may mask the physio-
logical response of interest. According to Kim [43], high level of noise in the
voxel-wise TAC’s may lead to high false positive rate even after using these
diﬀerent models [43].
2.2
Clustering
The pattern identiﬁcation in data begins with its classiﬁcation into a set of
categories or clusters. In classiﬁcation, an object is compared with other objects
by speciﬁc criteria. Classiﬁcation systems are either supervised or unsupervised,
depending on whether the "categories" of data are known in advance or not.
In supervised classiﬁcation, new input (data point) is assigned to one of the
existing ﬁnite numbers of discrete categories; whereas unsupervised techniques
attempt to ﬁnd appropriate "categories" on own [5].
Clustering is one of the unsupervised learning technique in exploratory data
analysis that groups similar data points. It divides unlabelled data objects into
diﬀerent groups based on a similarity measure. For a valuable partitioning of
==PAGE:34==
20
Theory
Figure 2.2: An illustration of a typical clustering process (Adapted from [79].
data points, the similarity measure ought to be maximized for the data objects
of the same group and minimized for data points of diﬀerent groups (see Fig-
ure 2.2). Clustering techniques have been successfully employed in the diverse
ﬁeld of science and technology including bio-informatics, pattern recognition,
machine learning, and biochemistry [16].
2.2.1
Types of clustering
Diﬀerent clustering algorithms have been developed depending on the properties
of data. The paragraph these techniques according to the underlying nature of
clustering approach [25].
• Partitioning: This approach requires the ﬁxed number of clusters a pri-
ori. It is an iterative process to optimize cluster centers and the number
of clusters.
• Hierarchical: This is a static approach and does not permit reassign-
ment of a data point to a diﬀerent cluster. In this method, new clusters
==PAGE:35==
2.3 K-means Clustering
21
are formed from the existing old clusters. It can use a bottom-up (agglom-
erative) or top-down (divisive) strategies.
• Density-based: A cluster a dense component of points which can grow
in an arbitrary direction and separated by the low-density regions. This
variation is useful when the clusters are irregular, and outliers are present.
• Grid-based: The whole space of data points is divided into a ﬁnite num-
ber of cells to form a grid. Subsequent iterative steps calculate cell density
for each cell, sorting of cells based on densities and identiﬁcation of cluster
centers.
• Model-based: This method considers that data is generated by the dis-
tribution that is a mixture of two or more clusters.
It uses a ﬂexible
assignment with a probabilistic membership of a data point to clusters.
Due to the functional pattern matching capability, the clustering tech-
niques have found widespread applications in diverse areas of science and
technology, ranging from social sciences to medicine.
Figure 2.3 shows the classiﬁcation of clustering methods. This study uses two
unsupervised clustering algorithms, K-means and GMMs to improve the classi-
ﬁcation of TACs between active and nonactive states.
2.3
K-means Clustering
K-means is one of the widely used unsupervised learning technique used with
the data without pre-deﬁned categories (groups). It classiﬁes the data points
==PAGE:36==
22
Theory
Figure 2.3: A taxonomy of clustering techniques (Adapted from: [25]).
into a certain number of clusters (groups) represented by the variable K. This
technique works iteratively to ﬁnd appropriate cluster for a data point out of K
possibilities, based on the similarities of features provided [41].
==PAGE:37==
2.3 K-means Clustering
23
Figure 2.4: Execution ﬂow of K-means algorithm.(Adapted from: [25]).
Following are the steps involved in K-means clustering algorithm and Figure 2.4
further elucidates the execution ﬂow:
i. Deﬁne the number of clusters K: There are no rigid rules to ﬁnd the optimal
number of clusters. However, a simple approach is to take the best value
obtained in the multiple executions of the algorithm with diﬀerent values
of K.
==PAGE:38==
24
Theory
ii. Initialize the centroids of K clusters: These centroids should be placed as
much as possible far away from each other.
iii. Assign each data point to the closest cluster (nearest centroid).
iv. Recalculate the centroid of each cluster as the mean of all data points
associated with that cluster.
v. Repeat steps in (iii) and (iv) until convergence.
K-means clustering has some limitations like it makes hard assignments of data
points to clusters, i.e., membership of a data point to a cluster is Boolean. There
is no provision of soft or fractional assignment of a data point. Further, K-means
doesn’t work with non-round shaped or overlapped clusters [41].
2.4
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM) clustering is referred to regularly as “soft”
clustering method, where k-means is referred to as “hard”, because k-means
strictly assign one data point to one cluster, where GMM allows some data points
belong to the multiple clusters. When the function is a Gaussian distribution,
then it is referred as a Gaussian mixture model. A Gaussian distribution is
bell-shaped (see Figure 2.5) normal distribution, which is
N(x : µ, σ2)
Each cluster is described in Gaussian density and has its own independent mean
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
25
Figure 2.5: Gaussian Distribution Curve characterized by two parameters -
mean and variance of the distribution
and covariance. In GMM, distributions are randomly chosen,where each data
point has a probability of belonging to one of the distributions. The clusters are
identiﬁed by maximizing the probability of the data points belonging to one of
the distributions [38], [70].
Clustering through GMM, indeed refers to the identiﬁcation of the parame-
ters of Gaussian, i.e., weight, mean and covariance matrix, that explain the
data in the best manner. Alternatively, parameters that maximize the likeli-
hood of observing these data points are determined. GMM uses expectation-
maximization(EM) algorithm to ﬁnd these parameters [28].
2.4.1
Expectation-Maximization (EM)
EM works in two phases that is expectation and maximization [19].
In the
expectation phase, the probability of each data point being generated by each
of the K Gaussian is determined. This step is similar to assigning each data
==PAGE:40==
26
Theory
point to a cluster in K-means algorithm.
In the maximization phase, parameters values are updated according to follow-
ing criteria:
1. Updating of weight parameter: calculate the sum of probabilities of
each point being generated by a particular Gaussian (Gaussian j) and
divide this value by the total number of data points.
2.
Updating of the mean parameter: compute the mean of all points
weighted by the probability of that point being generated by a particular
Gaussian j.
3. Updating of covariance parameter: determine the covariance of all
points weighted by the probability of that point being generated by the
Gaussian j.
However, GMM is a probabilistic approach to clustering and addresses short-
comings of K-means, where the K-means performs better with the similar size
clusters. It is a model-based approach of clustering problems, which uses mod-
els for clusters, followed by the optimization of ﬁt between the model and data
points. Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC) is used for assesing GMM, where
the most accurate model has the smallest AIC value.
2.4.2
Akaike Information Criterion (AIC)
The Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) is an aid to select a model between
competing models,as the performance measurement metric. AIC provides an
==PAGE:41==
2.5 Principal Component Analysis
27
estimate of the information loss if a particular model were to be used. Therefore,
AIC balances the trade-oﬀs between the complexity of a model and its goodness
of ﬁt. It is estimated as follows: AIC = −2log+2K ,where K= number of model
parameters and Log-likelihood is a measure of goodness of ﬁt for the model.
It is imperative to mention that AIC does not provide a test of a model in an
absolute sense, it relatively tests the quality of the models.
2.5
Principal Component Analysis
Principal component analysis (PCA) is practiced for dimensionality reduction of
a data set consisting of correlated variables while preserving the variation present
in the dataset to the extent possible. It transforms the variables into a new set of
variables, which are referred as the principal components (PCs). Alternatively,
in high-dimensional data, PCA identiﬁes the directions of maximum variance
and project it onto a subspace of smaller dimension without much loss of original
information [21].
These PCs are orthogonal because they are the eigenvectors of a covariance
matrix.
PCA has been widely used in dynamic PET data to identify brain
patterns in healthy controls and neurodegenerative diseases with the signiﬁcant
diﬀerences [21].
Though, PCA is a mathematically rigorous approach to comprehend, following
is the bird-eye view of its functioning:
(i) Estimate the eigenvectors and eigenvalues from the covariance matrix after
==PAGE:42==
28
Theory
standardizing the data.
(ii) Arrange eigenvalues in the descending order.
(iii) Select K eigenvectors with K largest eigenvalues where K is the number
of dimensions of the new feature subspace.
(iv) Create the projection matrix from the selected K eigenvectors.
(v) Transform the original dataset via projection matrix to obtain a feature
subspace of K dimensions.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3
Methodology
The study used simple 1D and 2D simulations representing the kinetics of
[11C]raclopride in the striatum, in order to evaluate the suitability of the method.
3.1
1D Data
For 1D simulated data, the noiseless target (i.e. striatum) and reference (i.e.
cerebellum) TACs were generated using the complete ntPET model [52] and an
analytical blood input function using Feng’s model [26]. The stimulus-induced
==PAGE:44==
30
Methodology
increase in neurotransmitter concentration in striatum was modelled using a
gamma-variate function:
F(t) = Basal + γ(t −td)↵exp−β(t−td)
where ↵deﬁnes the steepness of the function, γ deﬁnes activation magnitude
and td is the activation time.
For these 1D simulations, the F(t) functions
parameters were: td = 20 min (take-oﬀtime), tp = 25 min (peak time) ),↵= 1
(sharpeness parameter), baseline release Basal = 100 nM (Basal dopamine
releas).
The dynamic data consisted of 60 frames of 1 min each and the rate constants for
both TACs were obtained from literature [43]. In addition, three versions of tar-
get TACs for 1D were generated to represent diﬀerent magnitudes of activation
responses (from endogenous to drug-induced responses) with peak dopamine
levels at 50%, 100% and 200% increase over the baseline.
Figure 3.1 represents the noiseless activation curves over the time. The baseline
represents activation curve without activation. The curves with 50%, 100%,
200% magnitudes corresponds to the increased activation respectively.
For each activation magnitude, a noiseless TAC based on [11C]raclopride kinet-
ics was generated, as it is represented in ﬁgure 3.1. Then Poisson noise was
introduced to generate a set of 2000 TACs. In total, 20 noise levels were gen-
erated ranging from high voxel-level noise (1k counts) to low region-level noise
(1M counts).
Figures 3.2 and 3.3 reveled, that diﬀerent level of noise has impact on detection
==PAGE:45==
3.1 1D Data
31
Figure 3.1: Representative noiseless TACs of base line, 50% magnitude, 100%
magnitude, 200% magnitude
of activation in TACs.
For each activation magnitude and every noise level there were generated 1D
data sets of 2000 TACs with with diﬀerent ratios of active and non-active voxels.
The ratio ranged from 0.1 to 0.9. The greater diﬀerence between the amount of
activate and non-active voxels, the more diﬃcult for these clustering methods
to cluster data in appropriate clusters.
==PAGE:46==
32
Methodology
Figure 3.2: Representative TACs of base line and 100% magnitude of activation
responses for low level of noise
Figure 3.3: Representative TACs of base line and 100% magnitude of activation
responses for moderate-high level of noise
==PAGE:47==
3.2 2D Data
33
3.2
2D Data
For 2D simulations a digital rat brain phantom (see Fig.3.4) was used with
activity concentrations being represented based on [11C]raclopride kinetics.
Figure 3.4: Digital Rat Brain Phantom. The colours represents the regions in
the brain.
The 2D Data were simulated the same way as 1D. TACs were modelled us-
ing the complete ntPET model for the whole striatum and for stimulus-induced
increase in neurotransmitter concentration, the dopaminergic pathway was mod-
elled using gamma-variate function [52]. The simulation assumed activation of
dopamine pathway only in the caudate nucleus in striatum (region 8 - yellow
colour in Fig.ﬁgure 3.4), where no activation is assumed for the rest of striatum
(region 7 - yellow/orange colour) (see ﬁgure 3.4). All other regions in the brain
==PAGE:48==
34
Methodology
were simulated assuming steady-state kinetics, where cerebellum is chosen as a
reference region in these data.
The take-oﬀtime was modelled at 20 min and it reached the peak 5 min later.
The simulated endogenous dopmaine release is relatively small with a 50% in-
crease over the basal dopamine level.
3.3
Model Selection
In this work for both 1D and 2D data, prior to applying each clustering algo-
rithms (k-means and GMM) we performed principal component analysis (PCA)
on the TACs to identify major sources of variance, mainly due to diﬀerences
in physiology. In this study Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC) was used for
assesing GMM, where the most accurate model has the smallest AIC value.
Once the dynamic data were grouped in two clusters, each cluster was classiﬁed
as ‘activation’ or ‘non-activation’ by ﬁtting the averaged TAC within each cluster
with the lp-ntPET model [57] and comparing the magnitude of the activation
parameter.
After classiﬁcation, the sensitivity (i.e.
true positive rate) and
speciﬁcity (i.e. true negative rate) was calculated, where true positive is the
TACs with activation, and true negative is the TACs without activation.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Results
In this section results of k-means and GMM clustering of 1D and 2D data
are presented. The results will be presented in subsections of 1D and 2D. In
both cases the clustering results of TACs with diﬀerent activation magnitude,
diﬀerent noise level and diﬀerent ratio between active and non-active voxels will
be demonstrated.
==PAGE:50==
36
Results
4.1
1D Data
As mentioned in the Methodology chapter, 2000 replicates of TACs with and
without activation were generated.
Figure 4.1 represented a typical example of an activation proﬁle. In the left
of Figure 4.1, there are in total 2000 TACs: 1000 TACs with 50% activation
magnitude and 1000 TACs representing baseline with low level of noise, where in
right of the Figure 4.1, the same TACs just with high levels of noise are shown.
Figure 4.2 demonstrates the activation proﬁle of activation response of 200%
magnitude from the baseline with noise levels: low - 120k counts (left Figure)
and high - 6k counts (right Figure).
Figure 4.1: Right: 2000 TACs, where 1000 TACs of 50% magnitude and 1000
TACs of none-activation with noise level of 120k counts.
Left: 2000 TACs,
where 1000 TACs of 50% magnitude, 1000 TACs of none-activation with noise
level of 6k counts
==PAGE:51==
4.1 1D Data
37
Figure 4.2: Right: 2000 TACs, from which 1000 TACs of 200% magnitude and
1000 TACs of none-activation with 120k counts. Left: 2000 TACs, where 1000
TACs of 200%magnitude, 1000 TACs of none-activation with 6k counts.
As it could be seen from the ﬁgures 4.1 and ?? the noise levels have an impact
on the data. The noisier are data more diﬃcult it is to distinguish the activation
proﬁle from the baseline. The aim is to decrease false positive rate, since if data
are noisy, noise could be identiﬁed as an activation. In order to reduce the false
positive rate, clustering approach has been applied.
Before clustering, PCA on the TACs was performed to identify major sources
of variance, mainly due to diﬀerences in physiology. The bar chart of the ﬁrst
10 coeﬃcients is demonstrated in Figure 4.3.
Since the ﬁrst two principal components were suﬃcient to describe most of the
variance in the TACs, the coeﬃcients of the ﬁrst two principal eigenvectors
were used for clustering. The ﬁrst two coeﬃcients covered more than 90% of
the variance in all the cases with activation magnitude of 50%, 100% and 200%
==PAGE:52==
38
Results
Figure 4.3: Bar chart of the ﬁrst 10 coeﬃcient of TACs with 50% magnitude,
high noise level- 3K Counts and 0.5 ratio between active and non-active TACs.
(see the table in Figure 4.4) .
Figure 4.4: Percentage of the variance covered of ﬁrst 10 coeﬃcients of TACs
with 50%, 100% and 200% magnitude, moderate-high noise level- 13K Counts
and 0.5 ratio between active and non-active TACs.
==PAGE:53==
4.1 1D Data
39
4.1.1
K-means Clustering
After performing PCA on the TACs, the clustering has been applied to ﬁrst two
principal coeﬃcients. For k-means clustering it is important to determine the
number of clusters. Since the simulated date were divided into active voxels and
none-active, the two has been chosen for this studies.
Figure 4.5: K-means clusters. Ratio of 0.5. The magnitude of activation was
set at 50% .
As mentioned in the methodology, there are three diﬀerent activation magni-
tudes investigated 50% (see Figure 4.5), 100% (see Figure 4.7) and 200% (see
Figure 4.9), and with twenty diﬀerent noise levels from high noise (1k counts)
to low noise (1M counts).
The k-means clustering results as a function of noise in simulated in TACs for
a ratio of 0.5 between TACs with activation and without activation are shown
in Fig. 4.5,4.7,4.9. The point clouds created by PCA, where each point in the
cloud corresponds to the ﬁrst two principal components for each TAC and each
==PAGE:54==
40
Results
Figure 4.6: Sensitivity (left) and speciﬁcity (right). Ratios of 0.5
Figure 4.7: K-means clusters. Ratio of 0.5. The magnitude of activation was
set at 200%.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 1D Data
41
Figure 4.8: Sensitivity (left) and speciﬁcity (right).Ratio of 0.5 between acti-
vated (magnitude 100%) and non-activated TACs.
colour represents the identiﬁcation of diﬀerent clusters.
In this case, the ratio between active and non-active voxels was 0.5. At the
same level of noise, the higher activation clusters appeared more compact and
better separated compared to the 50% clusters.
This is mainly because the
variability due to diﬀerent physiology between clusters containing active and
non-active TACs is more pronounced, which makes classiﬁcation easier.
For
high levels of noise (top row in each of the Figures 4.5,4.7,4.9 ) classiﬁcation is
almost random, due to k-means initialization of the centroids and data points
assignation according to Euclidian distance.
Figures 4.6,4.8 and 4.10 show the sensitivity and speciﬁcity for each activation
magnitude as a function of level of noise. The twenty diﬀerent noise levels are
represented in the range from 1k Counts (high noise level) to 1M Counts (low
noise level). The ﬁgures 4.6,4.8 and ?? illustrates, that higher noise makes it
==PAGE:56==
42
Results
Figure 4.9: K-means clusters. Ratio of 0.5. The magnitude of activation was
set at 200%.
more diﬃcult for the k-means to cluster the data and sensitivity and speciﬁcity
are lower compared to the moderate and low noise levels.
Figure 4.11 displays sensitivity and speciﬁcity of all the three activation mag-
nitudes: 50%, 100% and 200%, as a function of noise level. Higher activation
magnitude enabled a higher sensitivity and speciﬁcity. At the same time, the
lower noise level the better identiﬁcation of true positives and true negatives.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 1D Data
43
Figure 4.10: Sensitivity (left) and speciﬁcity (right). Ratio of 0.5 between acti-
vated (magnitude 200%) and non-activated TACs.
Figure 4.11: Sensitivity (left) and speciﬁcity (right).
Ratios of 0.5 between
activated (magnitudes 50%, 100% and 200%) and non-activated TACs.
==PAGE:58==
44
Results
4.1.1.1
Magnitude Ratio
In this study magnitude ratio from 0.1 to 0.9 was investigated. Figure 4.13
represents the ratio 0.2 between active and non-active voxels in diﬀerent noise
levels (from high level noise to low level noise), where Figure 4.12 shows the
same noise level but ratio 0.5 between activation and non-activation. Since k-
means seperates clusters better when they are in similar sizes, clusters in Figure
4.12 were more condense and less scattered.
Figure 4.12: K-means clustering as a function of noise in the simulated TACs
for a ratio of 0.5 between TACs with activation and without activation. The
magnitude of activation was set at 50% (top row) and 100% above baseline
(bottom row).
Figure 4.14 shows the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the k-means clustering algo-
rithm as a function of the ratio between active and non-active TACs for three
levels of activation magnitudes (50%, 100% and 200% above baseline) and two
levels of noise in the simulated TACs. Less noisy data lead to higher speci-
ﬁcity and sensitivity, because of k-means random initialization it is harder to
group noisy data into appropriate clusters. The ratio between active and non-
==PAGE:59==
4.1 1D Data
45
Figure 4.13: K-means clustering as a function of noise in the simulated TACs
for a ratio of 0.2 between TACs with activation and without activation. The
magnitude of activation was set at 50% (top row) and 100% above baseline
(bottom row).
active voxels increasing from 0.1 to 0.6 represents rise in speciﬁcity (Fig.6).
When the activated TACs outweigh the non-activated TACs (e.g. ratio>0.7)
speciﬁcity seems to drop, most likely because any misclassiﬁcation error, where
non-activated voxels assumed to be activated. It will have a greater impact on
the estimated speciﬁcity value.
==PAGE:60==
46
Results
Figure 4.14: Sensitivity (left) and speciﬁcity (right) estimates as a function
of the ratio between TACs with neurotransmitter activation and without for
diﬀerent levels of activation magnitudes (50%, 100% and 200% above baseline)
and two levels of noise in the simulated TACs. The high-noise level is 4k counts
(solid lines) and the moderate noise level is 57k counts.
4.1.1.2
K-means VS Single-Voxel Modelling
To evaluate the method eﬃciency, the comparison of k-means clustering wit
single voxel modelling has been performed. At high noise levels k-means clus-
tering leads to better sensitivity, but less speciﬁcity than single-voxel modelling
(Fig.4.15,4.16), because of noise being identiﬁed as activation. Less noisy data
and higher ratio between TACs with neurotransmitter activation and without
for higher levels of activation magnitudes ensure higher sensitivity comparing
with noisier data and lower levels of activation magnitudes. K-means assures
higher speciﬁcity at lower level of noise, while single-voxel modelling gives higher
speciﬁcity at high noise level (Fig.4.15,4.16).
==PAGE:61==
4.1 1D Data
47
Figure 4.15: K-means clustering (solid lines) vs. conventional single-voxel ki-
netic modeling (dotted lines). Sensitivity (left) and speciﬁcity (right) estimates
as a function of noise in the simulated dynamic data for ratios of 0.2 between
activated and non-activated TACs
This was mainly because at high levels of noise clusters are not easily separable
and k-means groups TAC into clusters almost randomly, thus substantially re-
ducing the speciﬁcity of the method. On the other hand, single-TAC modelling
was not aﬀected by the seemingly random grouping and estimates the neuro-
transmitter activation independently for each TAC, thus leading to improved
speciﬁcity.
==PAGE:62==
48
Results
Figure 4.16: K-means clustering (solid lines) vs. conventional single-voxel ki-
netic modeling (dotted lines). Sensitivity (left) and speciﬁcity (right) estimates
as a function of noise in the simulated dynamic data for ratios of 0.5 between
activated and non-activated TACs
4.1.2
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
Another clustering algorithm investigated in this study was Gaussian Mixture
Model. As for k-means the after performing PCA on the TACs, the clustering
has been applied to ﬁrst two principal coeﬃcients. For GMM as well, there has
to be predeﬁned number of clusters. In this case we used two clusters, because
we had TACs with activation and without activation, where number of activated
and non-activated TACs depens on the ratio. Algorithm converges to a solution
due to regularization. In this case regularization value was set to 0.00000001.
For every the GMM case, there were 10 GMM models generated and the one
with the lowest AIC value was selected.
==PAGE:63==
4.1 1D Data
49
Figure 4.17: GMM clusters. The magnitude of activation was set at 50%
Figure 4.17 show the point clouds, where each of the colour represents a diﬀerent
cluster estimated by the GMM algorithm as a function of noise with diﬀerent
ratios between TACs with and without activation.The GMM clustering is rep-
resented as a function of noise in the simulated TACs for a ratio of 0.5 between
TACs with activation and without activation. The magnitude of activation was
set at 50%. The twenty diﬀerent noise levels, which diﬀer from very high to
low, were presented. Algorithm performs better at lower noise level, where the
clusters are more condense and well separated.
Figure 4.18 shows sensitivity and speciﬁcity of GMM clustering as a function of
noise in the simulated TACs for a ratio of 0.5 between TACs with activation and
without activation. The magnitude of activation was set at 50%. The sensitivity
and speciﬁcity improves with the decrease of the noise.
The clusters in Figure 4.19 demonstrates the GMM clustering as a function of
noise in the simulated TACs for a ratio of 0.5 between active and non-active
voxels. The magnitude of activation was set at 100%. The clusters are better
==PAGE:64==
50
Results
Figure 4.18: Sensitivity (left) and Speciﬁcity (right) of GMM clustering. The
magnitude of activation was set at 50%
Figure 4.19: GMM cluster. The magnitude of activation was set at 100%
separated compared with the ﬁgure 4.17. The higher activation magnitude, the
easier for the algorithm to identify activation.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 1D Data
51
Figure 4.20: Sensitivity (left) and Speciﬁcity (right) of GMM. The magnitude
of activation was set at 100%
Figure 4.21: GMM clusters. The magnitude of activation was set at 200%
As shown in Figure 4.20 the sensitivity and speciﬁcity curves are smoother com-
pared with the results in Figure 4.18. The doubled activation magnitude im-
==PAGE:66==
52
Results
proved GMM algorithm results. The speciﬁcity and sensitivity is higher medium
noise level than in the Figure 4.18.
Figure 4.22: Sensitivity (left) and Speciﬁcity (right) of GMM. The magnitude
of activation was set at 200%
Figure 4.21 demonstrates GMM clusters with activation magnitude of 200%.
Clusters are clear separated at the high level of noise. Figure 4.22 represents
curves of sensitivity and speciﬁcity as a function of noise. The speciﬁcity graph
is smooth and both sensitivity and speciﬁcity have great values even for high-
moderate level of noise.
All three magnitudes are shown in Figure 4.23. With very noisy data GMM
clustering algorithm does not perform with any activation magnitude, because
of random initialization it is harder to separate the clusters at high level of noise.
However the greater activation magnitude the easier algorithm deals with the
noise distortion and able to create clearer clusters.
With low level of noise
algorithm is able to separate data with all activation magnitudes.
==PAGE:67==
4.1 1D Data
53
Figure 4.23: GMM clustering. Sensitivity (left) and Speciﬁcity (right) estimates
as a function of noise in the simulated dynamic data for a ratio of 0.5 between
activated and non-activated TACs
4.1.2.1
Magnitude Ratio
As mentioned in the Methodology section, this study investigated simulated
data with diﬀerent ratios between active and non-active voxels. The magnitude
ratios studied were from 0.1 to 0.9. In the ﬁgures 4.24 and 4.25 ratios of 0.5 and
0.2 between TACs with activation and without activation are analyzed parallel
with each other with the same level of noise and activation magnitudes 50% and
100%, because magnitude of 200% is not that sensitive to noise levels as 50%
and 100%.
The higher ratio between active and non-active voxels gives smoother results of
GMM clustering approach. The clusters in Fig.4.24 and Fig. 4.25 represent the
same noise levels as in the k-means section.
==PAGE:68==
54
Results
Figure 4.24: GMM clusters. Ratio of 0.5. The magnitude of activation was set
at 50% (top row) and 100% above baseline (bottom row).
Figure 4.25: GMM clusters. Ratio of 0.2. The magnitude of activation was set
at 50% (top row) and 100% above baseline (bottom row).
Sensitivity and speciﬁcity estimated as a function of the ratio between TACs
with neurotransmitter activation and without for diﬀerent levels of activation
magnitudes (50%, 100% and 200% above baseline) and two levels of noise in
the simulated TACs in ﬁgure 4.26. The high-noise level is 4k counts and the
moderate noise level is 57k counts.
The curves of sensitivity and speciﬁcity
==PAGE:69==
4.1 1D Data
55
Figure 4.26: Sensitivity (left) and speciﬁcity (right).
Activation magnitudes
(50%, 100% and 200%). The high-noise level is 4k counts (solid lines) and the
moderate noise level is 57k counts.
for activation magnitude 50% and high noise level are ﬂuctuated. The GMM
as algorithm is sensitive to the initial conditions. With the high level of noise
and the low activation magnitude the initialization is almost random, which
leads to the results presented in Figure 4.26. However the double increase in
the activation improves sensitivity and speciﬁcity in the greater value and more
constant change moving from one ratio to another. Sensitivity and speciﬁcity
with the activation magnitude of 200% has high values and consistency through
the both noise levels presented. The algorithm performs the best with the ratio,
which is the closest to the equal number of TACs with activation and without.
==PAGE:70==
56
Results
4.2
Gaussian Mixture Model VS K-means
Figures 4.27 and 4.28 demonstrates k-means clustering (dotted lines) and GMM
(solid lines). Sensitivity and speciﬁcity estimated as a function of noise in the
simulated dynamic data for ratios of 0.2 (Fig.4.27) and 0.5 (Fig. 4.28) between
activated and non-activated TACs. To compare Gaussian Mixture Model with
K-means algorithm The higher ratio between active and non-active voxels gives
smoother results of both K-means and GMM clustering approaches. The poor
separation of clusters leads to non-consistent curves of sensitivity and speciﬁcity
as seen in the examples above.
Figure 4.27: . K-means clustering (dotted lines) vs. GMM (solid lines). Sensi-
tivity (left) and speciﬁcity (right). Ratios of 0.2.
==PAGE:71==
4.3 2D Data
57
Figure 4.28: . K-means clustering (dotted lines) vs. GMM (solid lines). Sensi-
tivity (left) and speciﬁcity (right). Ratios of 0.2.
4.3
2D Data
As mentioned in the Methodology section, this study applied the clustering
methods such as k-means and GMM for 2D simulations. The location of the
activation could be displayed and speciﬁed in these simulations. To be speciﬁc
only in the caudate nucleus in striatum (region 8) there was an activation of
dopamine pathway. Where no activation is assumed for the rest of striatum
(region 7) and the rest of the brain (See phantom 3.4).
Before applying clustering algorithms PCA was performed on the 2D data. Fig-
ure 4.29 bar chart represents coeﬃcient and what percentage of variance are
they possessing.
For this study ﬁrst two coeﬃents used for all the analysis,
because they covered the most information of data.
Figure 4.30 shows parametric maps (component coeﬃcients) of ﬁrst four prin-
==PAGE:72==
58
Results
Figure 4.29: Bar chart of coeﬃcients from PCA with the percentage of the
variance
cipal components. The most information represented by ﬁrst and second coef-
ﬁcient compared with the third and forth coeﬃcient. Thus for this study only
ﬁrst two coeﬃcients were used.
4.3.1
K-means Clustering
Using ﬁrst two principal components to represent data k-means clustering is
performed. Before clustering it is important to deﬁne the number of clusters. For
2D data Matlab_R2015b function evalclusters was used to identify the optimal
number of clusters. For these simulations optimal number of cluster is 6. Figure
4.31 shows all the six clusters after applying k-means clustering.
==PAGE:73==
4.3 2D Data
59
Figure 4.30: Parametric maps of ﬁrst four principal components. 1st Princi-
pal Coeﬃcient (top left), 2nd Principal Coeﬃcient (top right), 3rd Principal
Coeﬃcient (bottom left), 4th Principal Coeﬃcient (bottom right),
After clustering there are six diﬀerent clusters with six indexes from 1 to 6.
The parametric map of indexes is represented in Figure 4.32. There diﬀerent
indexes represents diﬀerent regions in the brain. The index two was identiﬁed as
activation accordingly to the parametric map, because of the location of caudate
nucleus in striatum (region 8 in the phantom 3.4)
The ﬁgure 4.33 shows the parameters obtained after lp-ntPET modelling. Mod-
elling was performed to identify, which of the indexes show activation.
==PAGE:74==
60
Results
Figure 4.31: Clusters after k-means clustering. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis -
coeﬃcient (2).
There have been ten diﬀerent data sets analysed. The all plots of 10 samples can
be found in Appendix. The sensitivity was calculated accordingly to the how
many data points were identiﬁed as activation only in the caudate nucleus in
striatum (region 8). Figure 4.34 illustrates the sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Sensi-
tivity many times have been zero, because in some samples activation region was
identiﬁed all striatum. If there are no active indexes identiﬁed in the caucate
nucleus, the sensitivity is equal to zero. However the speciﬁcity has been rela-
tively high through the all samples. Hence k-means identiﬁes non-active voxels
relatively well.
4.3.2
Gaussiam Mixture Model
For the same 2D data GMM was applied. The Regularization Value was set
as 0.0000001. And there have been 10 diﬀerent iterations and the best ﬁtted
==PAGE:75==
4.3 2D Data
61
Figure 4.32: Parametric map of k-means clustering indexes.
GMM model selected for further analysis.
The best ﬁtted model has lowest
AIC value as mentioned in Methodology part. For GMM same as for k-means
initial number of clusters is important. For these data Matlab_R2015b function
evalclusters was used to identify the optimal number of clusters. The number
of cluster most of the time was identiﬁed as six (see Fig. 4.35.
Figure 4.36 shows the parametric map pf indexes. The speciﬁc activation region
caudate nucleus in striatum (region 8) on phantom 3.4.
In Figure 4.36 the
caudate nucleus was identiﬁed as index three.
In order to access which of the indexes actually represented the activation, the
lp-ntPET modelling [57] was used. Figure 4.37 shows the activation proﬁles of
==PAGE:76==
62
Results
Figure 4.33: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
Figure 4.34: Sensitivity of diﬀerent samples (left). Speciﬁcity of diﬀerent sam-
ples (right).
the clusters and the magnitudes. Using this information activation is assigned
to one of the clusters.
==PAGE:77==
4.3 2D Data
63
Figure 4.35: Clusters after GMM. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis - coeﬃcient
(2).
Since activation was assigned to one of the clusters, using phantom 3.4 and the
identiﬁed activation cluster, the true positives and true negatives were calcu-
lated. True positive are those data points, which were in caucade nucleis and
were identiﬁed as active. True negatives are those data point, which belong to
the rest of the brain and are identiﬁed as non-active. There has been 10 samples
examined to determine the sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Each sample plot results
represented in Appendix.
As it could be seen from Fig. 4.38, the sensitivity and speciﬁcity ﬂuctuated a lot.
In some cases, the whole striatum or some neighboring regions were identiﬁed
as activation, which eleborated into very low sensitivity. The example sample,
which were represented here is number 10. Thus it is clear, that in parametric
map 4.37 the caucade nucleis was well identiﬁed and the sensitivity is high for
the sample number 10. Speciﬁcity ﬂuctuated a lot too. However the values were
higher, thus the GMM identiﬁed non-active voxels better than the active.
==PAGE:78==
64
Results
Figure 4.36: Parametric map of GMM clustering indexes.
.
==PAGE:79==
4.3 2D Data
65
Figure 4.37: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
Figure 4.38: Sensitivity of diﬀerent samples (left). Speciﬁcity of diﬀerent sam-
ples (right).
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 5
Discussion and Conclution
In this work was presented results on the performance of two popular clustering
algorithms (k-means and GMM) to improve the speciﬁcity of the lp-ntPET
model. The method investigated 1D and 2D data.
The ﬁndings in 1D data indicate that using clustering before kinetic model ﬁtting
improves classiﬁcation of TACs between activation and no-activation states for
moderate and low levels of noise, where single-voxel modelling performs better
than clustering at high-level noise. The accuracy and performance of algorithms
depend on activation magnitude, level of noise and ratio between active and non-
active voxels: the higher noise leads to poorer sensitivity and speciﬁcity; the
higher magnitude the easier it is to detect the activation; the smaller diﬀerence
==PAGE:82==
68
Discussion and Conclution
between number of activated and non-activated voxels, the higher clustering
algorithms performance.
In practice, such a clustering approach can be used before kinetic modelling to
identify clusters of TACs with signiﬁcant activation and ﬁt each TAC with the
lp-ntPET model, while clusters of TACs identiﬁed with insubstantial activation
could be ﬁtted with conventional models, which do not include an activation
term, such as the multilinear reference tissue model [43].
The ﬁnding in 2D data shows that K-means and GMM clustering helps to
identify the activate and non-active regions. The sensitivity highly depends if
the algorithm is able to identify the activated region correctly. The algorithms
detected the activation in neighbour voxels or the whole striatum, which lead
to low sensitivity and poorer speciﬁcity. Thus the algorithm should be more
precise in detecting the activation region, then better results can be achieved.
Both clustering methods are sensitive to initial conditions. More customized
initialization of clustering methods could help to improve the results.
5.1
Future Work
In future work the aim is to extend and modify the k-means and GMM algo-
rithms to include prior information based on anatomical or structural regions,
which will encourage TACs to belong in the same clusters and alleviate the
problems of initialization and increased noise in the data.
The experiments will be conducted with the developed clustering methodologies
==PAGE:83==
5.1 Future Work
69
on real dynamic PET data from animal ligand-displacement studies aiming to
detect a pharmacological or endogenous induced dopamine release.
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
Appendix A
K-means 2D plots
==PAGE:86==
72
K-means 2D plots
Figure A.1: Clusters after k-means clustering. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis -
coeﬃcient (2).
Figure A.2: Parametric map of k-means clustering indexes.
==PAGE:87==
73
Figure A.3: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
Figure A.4: Clusters after k-means clustering. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis -
coeﬃcient (2).
==PAGE:88==
74
K-means 2D plots
Figure A.5: Parametric map of k-means clustering indexes.
Figure A.6: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
==PAGE:89==
75
Figure A.7: Clusters after k-means clustering. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis -
coeﬃcient (2).
Figure A.8: Parametric map of k-means clustering indexes.
==PAGE:90==
76
K-means 2D plots
Figure A.9: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
Figure A.10: Clusters after k-means clustering. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis
- coeﬃcient (2).
==PAGE:91==
77
Figure A.11: Parametric map of k-means clustering indexes.
Figure A.12: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
==PAGE:92==
78
K-means 2D plots
Figure A.13: Clusters after k-means clustering. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis
- coeﬃcient (2).
Figure A.14: Parametric map of k-means clustering indexes.
==PAGE:93==
79
Figure A.15: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
Figure A.16: Clusters after k-means clustering. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis
- coeﬃcient (2).
==PAGE:94==
80
K-means 2D plots
Figure A.17: Parametric map of k-means clustering indexes.
Figure A.18: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
==PAGE:95==
81
Figure A.19: Clusters after k-means clustering. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis
- coeﬃcient (2).
Figure A.20: Parametric map of k-means clustering indexes.
==PAGE:96==
82
K-means 2D plots
Figure A.21: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
Figure A.22: Clusters after k-means clustering. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis
- coeﬃcient (2).
==PAGE:97==
83
Figure A.23: Parametric map of k-means clustering indexes.
Figure A.24: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
==PAGE:98==
84
K-means 2D plots
Figure A.25: Clusters after k-means clustering. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis
- coeﬃcient (2).
Figure A.26: Parametric map of k-means clustering indexes.
==PAGE:99==
85
Figure A.27: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
Figure A.28: Clusters after k-means clustering. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis
- coeﬃcient (2).
==PAGE:100==
86
K-means 2D plots
Figure A.29: Parametric map of k-means clustering indexes.
Figure A.30: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
==PAGE:101==
Appendix B
GMM 2D plots
Figure B.1: Clusters after GMM. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis - coeﬃcient (2).
==PAGE:102==
88
GMM 2D plots
Figure B.2: Parametric map of GMM clustering indexes.
Figure B.3: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
==PAGE:103==
89
Figure B.4: Clusters after GMM. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis - coeﬃcient (2).
Figure B.5: Parametric map of GMM clustering indexes.
==PAGE:104==
90
GMM 2D plots
Figure B.6: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
Figure B.7: Clusters after GMM. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis - coeﬃcient (2).
==PAGE:105==
91
Figure B.8: Parametric map of GMM clustering indexes.
Figure B.9: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
==PAGE:106==
92
GMM 2D plots
Figure B.10: Clusters after GMM. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis - coeﬃcient
(2).
Figure B.11: Parametric map of GMM clustering indexes.
==PAGE:107==
93
Figure B.12: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
Figure B.13: Clusters after GMM. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis - coeﬃcient
(2).
==PAGE:108==
94
GMM 2D plots
Figure B.14: Parametric map of GMM clustering indexes.
Figure B.15: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
==PAGE:109==
95
Figure B.16: Clusters after GMM. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis - coeﬃcient
(2).
Figure B.17: Parametric map of GMM clustering indexes.
==PAGE:110==
96
GMM 2D plots
Figure B.18: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
Figure B.19: Clusters after GMM. X axis - coeﬃcient (1);Y axis - coeﬃcient
(2).
==PAGE:111==
97
Figure B.20: Parametric map of GMM clustering indexes.
Figure B.21: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
==PAGE:112==
98
GMM 2D plots
Figure B.22: Clusters after GMM. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis - coeﬃcient
(2).
Figure B.23: Parametric map of GMM clustering indexes.
==PAGE:113==
99
Figure B.24: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
Figure B.25: Clusters after GMM. X axis - coeﬃcient (1); Y axis - coeﬃcient
(2).
==PAGE:114==
100
GMM 2D plots
Figure B.26: Parametric map of GMM clustering indexes.
Figure B.27: Parameters of data after lp-ntPET modelling [57]. The activation
proﬁle of the clustered data (left). The magnitude of clusters (right).
==PAGE:115==
Appendix C
MIC Poster
==PAGE:116==
102
MIC Poster
==PAGE:117==
Appendix D
MIC Conference Paper
==PAGE:118==
104
MIC Conference Paper
==PAGE:119==
105
==PAGE:120==
106
MIC Conference Paper
==PAGE:121==
107
==PAGE:122==
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
[1] http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Neuron.
[2] https://neupsykey.com/synaptic-transmission/.
[3] http://www.benbest.com/science/anatmind/anatmd10.html.
[4]
[5] A survey on clustering algorithms for wireless sensor networks. Computer
Communications, 30(14-15):2826–2841, 2007.
[6] Automatic selection of ROIs in functional imaging using Gaussian mixture
models. Neuroscience Letters, 460(2):108–111, 2009.
[7] Gaussian mixture model-based segmentation of MR images taken from pre-
mature infant brains. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 182(1):110–122,
2009.
[8] Nazan
Aydin,
Dilcan
Kotan,
Sadullah
Keles,
Osman
Ondas,
Mehmet Dumlu Aydin, Orhan Baykal, and Betul Gundogdu.
An ex-
==PAGE:124==
110
BIBLIOGRAPHY
perimental study of the neurophysical mechanisms of photophobia induced
by subarachnoid hemorrhage. Neuroscience letters, 630:93–100, 2016.
[9] Rajendra D Badgaiyan. Detection of dopamine neurotransmission in âreal
timeâ. Frontiers in neuroscience, 7, 2013.
[10] Rajendra D. Badgaiyan. Chapter 7 - imaging dopamine neurotransmission
in live human brain. In Marco Diana, Gaetano Di Chiara, and Pierfranco
Spano, editors, Dopamine, volume 211 of Progress in Brain Research, pages
165 – 182. Elsevier, 2014.
[11] Rajendra D Badgaiyan. Imaging dopamine neurotransmission in live human
brain. Progress in brain research, 211:165, 2014.
[12] Andre Barbeau. The pathogenesis of parkinson’s disease: a new hypothesis.
Canadian Medical Association Journal, 87(15):802, 1962.
[13] Allan I Basbaum, Diana M Bautista, Grégory Scherrer, and David Julius.
Cellular and molecular mechanisms of pain. Cell, 139(2):267–284, 2009.
[14] Suzanna Becker. A computational principle for hippocampal learning and
neurogenesis. Hippocampus, 15(6):722–738, 2005.
[15] Abi Berger.
How does it work?: Positron emission tomography.
BMJ:
British Medical Journal, 326(7404):1449, 2003.
[16] Pavel Berkhin et al. A survey of clustering data mining techniques. Group-
ing multidimensional data, 25:71, 2006.
[17] Craig W Berridge, Brooke E Schmeichel, and Rodrigo A España.
No-
radrenergic modulation of wakefulness/arousal.
Sleep medicine reviews,
16(2):187–97, Apr 2012.
[18] Aring Bertler and E Rosengren. Occurrence and distribution of catechol
amines in brain. Acta Physiologica Scandinavica, 47:350, 1959.
==PAGE:125==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
111
[19] Christophe Biernacki, Gilles Celeux, and Gérard Govaert. Choosing start-
ing values for the em algorithm for getting the highest likelihood in multi-
variate gaussian mixture models. Computational Statistics & Data Analy-
sis, 41(3):561–575, 2003.
[20] A Brahim, J Ramírez, J M Górriz, and L Khedher. Applications of Gaussian
mixture models and mean squared error within DatSCAN SPECT imaging.
In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pages
3617–3621, 2014.
[21] Fx Breu, S Guggenbichler, and Jc Wollmann. PCA how to. Vasa, 2008.
[22] Richard E Carson. Tracer kinetic modeling in pet. In Positron Emission
Tomography, pages 127–159. Springer, 2005.
[23] Simon R Cherry and Magnus Dahlbom. Pet: physics, instrumentation, and
scanners. In PET, pages 1–117. Springer, 2006.
[24] Anders N Christensen, Michala H Reichkendler, Rasmus Larsen, Pernille
Auerbach, Liselotte H, Henning B Nielsen, Thorkil Ploug, Bente Stal-
lknecht, and SHolm. Calibrated image-derived input functions for the deter-
mination of the metabolic uptake rate of glucose with [18f]-fdg pet. Nuclear
medicine communications, 35(4):353, 2014.
[25] Adil Fahad, Najlaa Alshatri, Zahir Tari, Abdullah Alamri, Ibrahim Khalil,
Albert Y Zomaya, Sebti Foufou, and Abdelaziz Bouras. A survey of clus-
tering algorithms for big data: Taxonomy and empirical analysis. IEEE
transactions on emerging topics in computing, 2(3):267–279, 2014.
[26] D Feng, K P Wong, C M Wu, and W C Siu. A technique for extracting
physiological parameters and the required input function simultaneously
from PET image measurements: theory and simulation study. IEEE trans-
actions on information technology in biomedicine : a publication of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 1(4):243–254, 1997.
==PAGE:126==
112
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[27] P Filzmoser, R Baumgartner, and E Moser.
A hierarchical clustering
method for analyzing functional MR images. Magnetic Resonance Imaging,
17(6):817–826, 1999.
[28] Chris Fraley and Adrian E Raftery. How many clusters? which clustering
method? answers via model-based cluster analysis. The computer journal,
41(8):578–588, 1998.
[29] Ann Fullick. Edexcel as biology. Essex, Pearson Education, 2008.
[30] Kjell Fuxe. Evidence for the existence of monoamine neurons in the central
nervous system. Cell and Tissue Research, 65(4):573–596, 1965.
[31] Raul R Gainetdinov, William C Wetsel, Sara R Jones, Edward D Levin,
Mohamed Jaber, and Marc G Caron.
Role of serotonin in the para-
doxical calming eﬀect of psychostimulants on hyperactivity.
science,
283(5400):397–401, 1999.
[32] Bruno Giros and Marc G Caron.
Molecular characterization of the
dopamine transporter.
Trends in pharmacological sciences, 14(2):43–49,
1993.
[33] Bruno Giros,
Mohamed Jaber,
Sara R Jones,
R Mark Wightman,
and Marc G Caron.
Hyperlocomotion and indiﬀerence to cocaine
and amphetamine in mice lacking the dopamine transporter.
Nature,
379(6566):606–612, 1996.
[34] David S Goldstein. Catecholamines in the periphery. Advances in Phar-
macology, 42:529–539, 1997.
[35] John C Gore. Principles and practice of functional mri of the human brain.
Journal of Clinical Investigation, 112(1):4, 2003.
==PAGE:127==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
113
[36] Michael F Green. Stimulating the development of drug treatments to im-
prove cognition in schizophrenia. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol., 3:159–180,
2007.
[37] Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Elements of
Statistical Learning. Elements, 1:337–387, 2009.
[38] Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Elements of
Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction, Second Edi-
tion (Springer Series in Statistics) (9780387848570): Trevor Hastie, Robert
Tibshirani, Jerome Friedman: Books. In The elements of statistical learn-
ing: dta mining, inference, and prediction, pages 501–520. 2011.
[39] Xinrui Huang, Yun Zhou, Shangliang Bao, and Sung Cheng Huang.
Clustering-based linear least square ﬁtting method for generation of para-
metric images in dynamic FDG PET studies.
International Journal of
Biomedical Imaging, 2007, 2007.
[40] Robert B Innis, Vincent J Cunningham, Jacques Delforge, Masahiro Fujita,
Albert Gjedde, Roger N Gunn, James Holden, Sylvain Houle, Sung-Cheng
Huang, Masanori Ichise, et al. Consensus nomenclature for in vivo imaging
of reversibly binding radioligands. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow
Metabolism, 27(9):1533–1539, 2007.
[41] Anil K Jain. Data clustering: 50 years beyond k-means. Pattern recognition
letters, 31(8):651–666, 2010.
[42] John W Kebabian, Donald B Calne, et al. Multiple receptors for dopamine.
Nature, 277(5692):93–96, 1979.
[43] Su Jin Kim, Jenna M Sullivan, Shuo Wang, Kelly P Cosgrove, and Evan D
Morris. Voxelwise lp-ntpet for detecting localized, transient dopamine re-
lease of unknown timing: Sensitivity analysis and application to cigarette
smoking in the pet scanner. Human brain mapping, 35(9):4876–4891, 2014.
==PAGE:128==
114
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[44] Jyrki T Kuikka and Aapo K Ahonen. Toxic eﬀect of mdma on brain sero-
tonin neurons. The Lancet, 353(9160):1269, 1999.
[45] Rui Li, Robert Perneczky, Igor Yakushev, Stefan Foerster, Alexander Kurz,
Alexander Drzezga, Stefan Kramer, Alzheimerâs Disease Neuroimaging Ini-
tiative, et al. Gaussian mixture models and model selection for [18f] ﬂuo-
rodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography classiﬁcation in alzheimerâs
disease. PloS one, 10(4):e0122731, 2015.
[46] Gregory A Light, Lisa E Williams, Falk Minow, Joyce Sprock, Anthony
Rissling, Richard Sharp, Neal R Swerdlow, and David L Braﬀ. Electroen-
cephalography (eeg) and event-related potentials (erps) with human par-
ticipants. Current protocols in neuroscience, pages 6–25, 2010.
[47] Francisco Lomeña and Marina Soler. Clinical application of pet. Brazilian
Archives of Biology and Technology, 48(SPE2):179–183, 2005.
[48] M Manjusha and R Harikumar. Performance analysis of knn classiﬁer and
k-means clustering for robust classiﬁcation of epilepsy from eeg signals. In
Wireless Communications, Signal Processing and Networking (WiSPNET),
International Conference on, pages 2412–2416. IEEE, 2016.
[49] M. Anwar Ma’Sum, Ito Wasito, and Adi Nurhadiyatna.
Intelligent K-
Means clustering for expressed genes identiﬁcation linked to malignancy of
human colorectal carcinoma. In 2013 International Conference on Advanced
Computer Science and Information Systems, ICACSIS 2013, pages 437–
443, 2013.
[50] John C Mazziotta, Richard SJ Frackowiak, and Michael E Phelps. The use
of positron emission tomography in the clinical assessment of dementia. In
Seminars in nuclear medicine, volume 22, pages 233–246. Elsevier, 1992.
[51] EVAN D. MORRIS, CHRISTOPHER J. ENDRES, KATHLEEN C.
SCHMIDT, BRADLEY T. CHRISTIAN, RAYMOND F. MUZIC JR., and
==PAGE:129==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
115
RONALD E. FISHER.
{CHAPTER} 23 - kinetic modeling in positron
emission tomography. In Miles N. Wernick and John N. Aarsvold, editors,
Emission Tomography, pages 499 – 540. Academic Press, San Diego, 2004.
[52] Evan D Morris, Karmen K Yoder, Chunzhi Wang, Marc D Normandin, Qi-
Huang Zheng, Bruce Mock, F Muzic Raymond Jr, and Janice C Froehlich.
ntpet: a new application of pet imaging for characterizing the kinetics of
endogenous neurotransmitter release. Molecular imaging, 4(4):7290–2005,
2005.
[53] Mark Muzi, Finbarr O’Sullivan, David A Mankoﬀ, Robert K Doot, Larry A
Pierce, Brenda F Kurland, Hannah M Linden, and Paul E Kinahan. Quanti-
tative assessment of dynamic pet imaging data in cancer imaging. Magnetic
resonance imaging, 30(9):1203–1215, 2012.
[54] D Neha and BM Vidyavathi. A survey on applications of data mining us-
ing clustering techniques. International Journal of Computer Applications,
126(2), 2015.
[55] Jane Neumann, D. Yves Von Cramon, and Gabriele Lohmann.
Model-
based clustering of meta-analytic functional imaging data. Human Brain
Mapping, 29(2):177–192, 2008.
[56] J Ng, SJR Heales, and MA Kurian. Clinical features and pharmacother-
apy of childhood monoamine neurotransmitter disorders. Pediatric Drugs,
16(4):275–291, 2014.
[57] Marc D Normandin, Wynne K Schiﬀer, and Evan D Morris. A linear model
for estimation of neurotransmitter response proﬁles from dynamic pet data.
Neuroimage, 59(3):2689–2699, 2012.
[58] S Pappata, S Dehaene, JB Poline, MC Gregoire, A Jobert, J Delforge,
V Frouin, M Bottlaender, F Dolle, L Di Giamberardino, et al.
In vivo
==PAGE:130==
116
BIBLIOGRAPHY
detection of striatal dopamine release during reward: a pet study with [11
c] raclopride and a single dynamic scan approach. Neuroimage, 16(4):1015–
1027, 2002.
[59] Margaret E Rice, Jyoti C Patel, and Stephanie J Cragg. Dopamine release
in the basal ganglia. Neuroscience, 198:112–137, 2011.
[60] Scott J Russo, David M Dietz, Dani Dumitriu, John H Morrison, Robert C
Malenka, and Eric J Nestler. The addicted synapse: mechanisms of synaptic
and structural plasticity in nucleus accumbens. Trends in neurosciences,
33(6):267–276, 2010.
[61] Gopal B Saha. Basics of pet imaging: Physics. Chemistry, and Regulations,
Springer, 2010.
[62] Eric Salmon, MC Gregoire, Guy Delﬁore, Christian Lemaire, Christian
Degueldre, Georges Franck, and D Comar. Combined study of cerebral glu-
cose metabolism and [11c] methionine accumulation in probable alzheimer’s
disease using positron emission tomography. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow
Metabolism, 16(3):399–408, 1996.
[63] Philip Seeman. Historical overview: introduction to the dopamine recep-
tors. In The Dopamine Receptors, pages 1–21. Springer, 2010.
[64] Jorge Sepulcre, Mert R Sabuncu, and Keith A Johnson. Network assemblies
in the functional brain. Current opinion in neurology, 25(4):384, 2012.
[65] Hao-wei Shen, Yoko Hagino, Hideaki Kobayashi, Keiko Shinohara-Tanaka,
Kazutaka Ikeda, Hideko Yamamoto, Toshifumi Yamamoto, Klaus-Peter
Lesch, Dennis L Murphy, F Scott Hall, et al. Regional diﬀerences in extra-
cellular dopamine and serotonin assessed by in vivo microdialysis in mice
lacking dopamine and/or serotonin transporters. Neuropsychopharmacol-
ogy, 29(10):1790–1799, 2004.
==PAGE:131==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
117
[66] Tony Shepherd and Rikard Owenius. Gaussian process models of dynamic
pet for functional volume deﬁnition in radiation oncology. IEEE transac-
tions on medical imaging, 31(8):1542–1556, 2012.
[67] M.M. Singh, M.A.S. Pawar. Segmentation of breast images using gaussian
mixture models.
International Journal of Advance Research, Ideas and
Innovation in Technology, 3, 2017.
[68] Sanjay P Singh.
Magnetoencephalography: basic principles.
Annals of
Indian Academy of Neurology, 17(Suppl 1):S107, 2014.
[69] JC Stoof and JW Kebabian. Opposing roles for d-1 and d-2 dopamine re-
ceptors in eﬄux of cyclic amp from rat neostriatum. Nature, 294(5839):366–
368, 1981.
[70] Ting Su and Jg Dy. In search of deterministic methods for initializing K-
means and Gaussian mixture clustering. Intelligent Data Analysis, 11:1–42,
2007.
[71] Aideen M Sullivan. Neuronal signaling: an introduction, 2017.
[72] Daniela Thorwarth, Susanne-Martina Eschmann, Jutta Scheiderbauer,
Frank Paulsen, and Markus Alber.
Kinetic analysis of dynamic 18 f-
ﬂuoromisonidazole pet correlates with radiation treatment outcome in
head-and-neck cancer. BMC cancer, 5(1):152, 2005.
[73] Grigorios F Tzortzis and Aristidis C Likas.
The global kernel k-means
algorithm for clustering in feature space.
IEEE transactions on neural
networks / a publication of the IEEE Neural Networks Council, 20(7):1181–
1194, 2009.
[74] Urban Ungerstedt. Postsynaptic supersensitivity after 6-hydroxy-dopamine
induced degeneration of the nigro-striatal dopamine system. Acta Physio-
logica, 82(S367):69–93, 1971.
==PAGE:132==
118
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[75] Noelia Urbán and FranGuillemot. Neurogenesis in the embryonic and adult
brain: same regulators, diﬀerent roles. Frontiers in cellular neuroscience,
8, 2014.
[76] M Viljoen and A Panzer. The central noradrenergic system: an overview.
African journal of psychiatry, 10(3):135–141, 2007.
[77] Thomas V Wiecki and Michael J Frank. Neurocomputational models of mo-
tor and cognitive deﬁcits in parkinsonâs disease. Progress in brain research,
183:275–297, 2010.
[78] Koon-Pong Wong, Dagan Feng, Steven R Meikle, and Michael J Fulham.
Segmentation of dynamic pet images using cluster analysis. IEEE Trans-
actions on nuclear science, 49(1):200–207, 2002.
[79] Rui Xu and Donald Wunsch. Survey of clustering algorithms. IEEE Trans-
actions on neural networks, 16(3):645–678, 2005.
