==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations 
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
Niels Skak Bossen
January 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Hybrid Particle-Mesh
Vortex Method Simulations
of
Bump Vortex Instability in
Three Dimensions
by
Niels Skak Bossen
s123964
A master dissertation performed
at the Department of Mechanical Engineering
at Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Title
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
Titel (Danish)
Hybrid partikel-mesh hvirvelmetode simuleringer
af bump hvirvel ustabilitet i tre dimensioner
Author
Niels Skak Bossen
Study Number
s123964
Field of Study
Computational Fluid Dynamics
Project Type
Master Project
Period
1st of August 2017 - 22th of January 2018
Scope
30 ECTS point
Language
English
Supervisor
Jens Honor´e Walther
Professor at the Department of Mechanical Engineering
Co-Supervisor
Henrik Spietz
Ph.d. student at the Department of Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
s123964
Niels Skak Bossen
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This report serves as the dissertation of a master thesis performed at the Department
of Mechanical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The overall
goal with the project is to identify physical instabilities that occur in vortex dynamics.
The tool for investigation is done by vortex particle simulations, which is a sub ﬁeld of
Computional Fluid Dynamics (CFD).
The report is split into 8 chapters; Chapter 1 is an introduction to the project where a
brief description of the overall problem statement and the method are given. Chapter 2
describes the theory regarding vortex dynamics, the mathematical initial setups, instabil-
ity theory and ﬂow diagnostics. Chapter 3 decribes the numerical method. Chapter 4 is
the ﬁrst chapter of results, that covers the numerical setup and accuracy of the structure
of a vortex ring. Chapter 5 is the second chapter of results, that covers the simulation
of a vortex roller. Chapter 6 is the last chapter of results, that investigates the physical
instability of a vortex ring. Chapter 7 is a discussion that critically relates to results and
contexts, as well as suggestions for further work. Chapter 8 states the overall conclusions
of the project.
Simulations of vortex rings and vortex rollers are performed with a hybrid particle-mesh
vortex method, pmlib, developed at DTU. The simulations are done using a parallel HPC
source. The Niﬂheim Linux supercomputer cluster of 11248 CPU cores with a total peak
performance of more than 225 teraFLOPS is used, and I send my thanks to the Depart-
ment of Physics at DTU and to Ole Holm Nielsen for his helpful support.
I also wish to thank Senior Researcher, N´estor Ramos Garc´ıa, for sharing his FORTRAN
subroutine with high order Finite Diﬀerence schemes, which in this project, have been
implemented in the existing pmlib.
Last, I want to send by biggest gratitude to my co-supervisor Henrik Juul Spietz and
my supervisor Jens Honor´e Walther. Their engagement, encouragement, patience and
availability, regardless time of day and night, have been highly appreciated and have been
a core part of the fulﬁlment of this project!
Niels Skak Bossen
DTU, Kgs. Lyngby, DK
22 nd of January, 2018
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Vortex rings and straight vortex rollers are simulated with a hybrid particle-mesh vortex
method. The aim is to identify the physical instabilities, that occur in which wavy vor-
tex modes occur, that eventually lead to the breakdown of the vortex structure. Vortex
rings are seen in real life, but is also a well prototype to turbulence, as convection, insta-
bility and breakdown of vortex cores are present. Investigating the instability improves
the knowledge of the transition to turbulence,s which is a highly complex and unsolved
problem. In this project the instability is to be compared to a Couette instability, in
which the ﬂow between rotating cylinders becomes unstable and produce visual vortex
modes which are also seen for vortex rings. The vortex core in this project is initialized
by a bump function, where the distibution of vorticity yields an initial total circulation of
zero, meaning that the vortex ring, in theory, will be non-propagating. This is seen to be
increasingly true, for increasing accuracy of the numerical method. The accuracy is also
governed by the vortex core radius, which converge towards a solution to the governing
Navier-Stokes equations for decreasing vortex core radii. The vortex instability forms
are present independently of the numerical setup. The investigations are based on two
Couette stability criterions, i.e. theories based on an inviscid and a viscous ﬂow. For
the inviscid ﬂow, Raleigh derived the critical criterion stating that the if the circulation
decreases radially, the ﬂow is unstable. For the viscous ﬂow, a critical wave number at
k ≈π is always present in Couette ﬂows at the onset to instability. From experiments,
the critical wave number is independent of the Reynolds number, and the simulations are
primarely run as inviscid. The analysis is primarely perfomed on straight vortex rollers,
due to their simple structure compared to the vortex ring.
Theoretical Raleigh criterions are derived for a bump- and a Gaussian initial setup, which
show that the bump setup is unstable while the Gaussian setup is stable. This is also seen
when simulating these vortex structures, both when investigating the temporal lifetime
and for varying vortex core radii.
This is also seen, when the vortex structures are
given wave perturbations of linear Kelvin waves, that develop into a spectral turbulence
stage for the bump vortex and vanishes for the Gaussian stage, which compares well
with instability theory.
The critical wave number does not match with theory.
For
simulations without wave perturbations, the critical wave number is sensitive to high
frequent wave numbers, dependent on the mesh resolution. If wave perturbations are
given, the critical wave number becomes equal to the highest perturbation wave number.
For further investigations, a LES model may change the sensitivity to high wave numbers.
Also, bump perturbation equations are derived, where the unsolved eigenvalue problem
to the solution form would be the critical wave number.
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Resum´e
Hvirvelringe og rette hvirvelruller simuleres med en hybrid partikel-mesh hvirvelmetode.
M˚alet er at identiﬁcere de fysiske ustabiliteter, der opst˚ar, hvor bølgede hvirveltilstande
forekommer, hvilket i sidste ende fører til nedbrydning af hvirvelstrukturen. Hvirvelringe
ses i virkeligheden, men er ogs˚a en god prototype til turbulens, da konvektion, ustabilitet
og nedbrydning af hvirvelkerner er til stede. Undersøgelse af ustabiliteten forbedrer kend-
skabet til overgangen til turbulens, hvilket er et meget komplekst og uløst problem. I
dette projekt sammenlignes ustabiliteten med en Couette-ustabilitet, hvor strømningen
mellem roterende cylindre bliver ustabil og producerer visuelle hvirveltilstande, som ogs˚a
ses for hvirvelringene. Hvirvelkernen i dette projekt initialiseres af en bumpfunktion, hvor
fordelingen af vorticitet giver en indledende total cirkulation p˚a nul, hvilket betyder at
hvirvelringen, i teorien, vil være stillest˚aende. Dette ses, som mere og mere sandt, n˚ar
nøjagtigheden af den numeriske metode øges. Nøjagtigheden styres ogs˚a af hvirvelker-
nens radius, som konvergerer mod en løsning til de styrende Navier-Stokes ligninger ved
at reducere hvirvelkernestørrelserne. Hvirvelinstabilitetsformerne er til stede uafhængigt
af den numeriske opsætning. Undersøgelserne er baseret p˚a to Couette stabilitetskriterier,
dvs. teorier baseret p˚a en ikke-viskøs og viskøs strømning. For den ikke-viskøse strømning
aﬂedte Raleigh det kritiske kriterium, som udtrykker, at hvis cirkulationen falder radialt,
er strømningen ustabil. For den viskøse strømning er et kritisk bølgetal ved k ≈π altid
til stede i Couette-strømninger ved overgangen til ustabilitet. Fra eksperimenter er det
kritiske bølgetal uafhængigt af Reynoldstallet, og derfor kørers simuleringerne primært
som ikke-viskøse. Analysen udføres primært p˚a rette hvirvelruller p˚a grund af deres enkle
struktur i forhold til hvirvelringen.
Teoretiske Raleigh-kriterier er aﬂedt for en bump- og en gaussisk startopsætning, som
viser, at bumpopsætningen er ustabil, mens den gaussiske opsætning er stabil. Dette ses
ogs˚a, n˚ar man simulerer disse hvirvelstrukturer, b˚ade n˚ar man undersøger den tidsmæs-
sige levetid og for varierende hvirvelkernestørrelser. Dette ses ogs˚a, n˚ar hvirvelstruktur-
erne f˚ar bølgeforstyrrelser af lineære Kelvin-bølger, der udvikler sig til et spektral turbu-
lensstadie for bump-hvirvlen og forsvinder for den gaussiske opsætning, hvilket er i god
overensstemmelse med ustabilitetsteori. Det kritiske bølgetal stemmer ikke overens med
teorien. For simuleringer uden bølgeforstyrrelser er det kritiske bølgetal følsomt over for
høje bølgetal, afhængigt af netopløsningen. Hvis bølgeforstyrrelser gives, bliver det kri-
tiske bølgetal lig med det højeste forstyrrelsesbølgetal. For yderligere undersøgelser kan
en LES-model muligvis ændre følsomheden over for høje bølgeantal. Derudover er bump-
perturbationsligninger udledt, hvor det uløste egenværdiproblem til løsningsformen, ville
resultere i det kritiske bølgetal.
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
Greek Symbols
αp
Mesh cube size
γ
Euler constant
Γ
Circulation
Γ0
Normalized circulation
Γ1
Inner circulation
Γ2
Outer circulation
Γp
Particle strength
δ
Dirac’s delta function
ϵ
Regularisation radius
ε
Perturbation
ζ
Smooth
approximation
to
Dirac’s delta function
ζϵ
Radially-symmetric
ﬁlter
function
θ
Toroidal frame of reference
ϑ
Divergence
ϑε
Divergence threshold
ι = √−1
Imaginary unit
κ
Nondimensional wave number
λ
Wave length
λcrit
Critical wave length
µ
Dynamic viscosity
ν
Kinematic viscosity
νE
Eﬀective viscosity
eν
Numerical diﬀusion
ξ
Relative distance
Ξm, Ξp
Mesh-
particle
quantities
ρ
Fluid density
ϱ
Nondimensional regu-
larisation radius
σ
Vortex core radius
σµ
Standard deviation
P
p
Linear
superposition
of particles
ς
Temporal growth rate
ςi
Random perturbation
phase
τ
Bump support domain
Υ = (Υx, Υy, Υz)
Cartesian perturbated
bump velocity
Υ = (Υr, Υϕ, Υz)
Cylindrical
pertur-
bated bump velocity
φ
Scalar potential
Φ
Bump function
ϕ
Poloidal
frame
of
reference
ψ
Solenoidal
vector
potential
ψϵ
Smooth
vector
potential
ω = (ωx, ωy, ωz)
3D Cartesian vorticity
ﬁeld
ω = (ωr, ωθ, ωx)
3D Cylindrical vortic-
ity ﬁeld
ωϵ
Smooth vorticity ﬁeld
ix
==PAGE:12==
ωp
Discrete
vortex
particles
ω
Background
state
vorticity
ω1
Inner vorticity
ω2
Outer vorticity
ω+
Positive vorticity
ω−
Negative vorticity
Ω
Angular velocity
Ω1
Inner angular velocity
Ω2
Outer angular velocity
Ω= (Ωx, Ωy, Ωz)
Cartesian perturbated
bump vorticity
Ω= (Ωr, Ωϕ, Ωz)
Cylindrical
pertur-
bated bump vorticity
Latin Symbols
a
Perturbation
ampli-
tude, Vortex diameter
by Widnall
b
Distance between vor-
tex ﬁlaments
A
Area parameter
A = (Ax, Ay, Az)
Angular impulse
A
Bounded surface
c
Arbitrary
bump
parameter
cς
Complex phase speed
of disturbance
C1
CFL number
C2
Fourier number
C∞
Inﬁnite derivatives
C
Closed curve
d
Distance
between
cylinder radii
dt
Time step size
eθ
Azimuthal normal vector
eK
Normalized disturbance
wave number vector
E
Kinetic Energy
Einitial
Kinetic
energy
before
interchange
Eﬁnal
Kinetic
energy
after
interchange
E1
Exponential integral
∆E
Change in kinetic energy
E
Enstrophy
Ez
Transverse enstrophy
erf
Error function
f
Arbitrary function
g = (0, 0, g)
Gravity
G
Green’s
integration
kernel
Gm
Semi
periodic-
unbounded
integration
kernel
G2D
m
2D
Semi
periodic-
unbounded
integration
kernel
Gϵ
Smooth
integration
kernel
h
Grid spacing
H
Helicity
i
Index notation
j
Number
of
spatial
dimensionas
J0
Bessel function
k
Wave number
ks
Nyqvist wave number
kcrit
Critical wave number
k = (kx, ky, kz)
Wave number vector
K0
Modiﬁed Bessel function
of second kind
x
==PAGE:13==
K
Green’s velocity kernel
K = (k, m, 0)
Disturbance wave num-
ber vector
L
Cartesian length scale
Lz
Transverse length scale
L = (Lx, Ly, Lz)
Linear impulse
M2
2nd order interpolation
kernel
M ′
4
3rd order interpolation
kernel
M ∗
6
4th ordr interpolation
kernel
M
Cartesian mesh
n
Normal vector
N
Number of particles
O
Order
p
Pressure
q
Number of ﬁnite diﬀer-
ence stencils
Q
Surface ﬂux
Q10
10th order polynomium
in 2D
r1
Inner radius
r2
Outer radius
R
Vortex ring radius
RE
Ring Radius from ﬁrst
moment of enstrophy
R10
10th order polynomium
in 3D
R
Unbounded domain
Rn
Euclidean space
Re
Reynolds number
ReΓ
Circulation
based
Reynolds number
Ri
Richardsen number
s = (sx, sy, sz)
Nondimensional
regularisation
wave
number
S
Curve parameter
t
Time
Ta
Taylor number
Tacrit
Critical
Taylor
number
uϕ
Azimuthal velocity
u = (u, v, w)
3D Cartesian veloc-
ity ﬁeld
u = (ur, uθ, uz)
Toroidal
velocity
ﬁeld
u
Background
state
velocity
U
Propagational
velocity
U
Perturbation veloc-
ity in Couette ﬂows
U∞
Freestream velocity
|u|∞
CFL velocity
|∇u|∞
Strain time scale
V
Volume
V
Closed volume
W = (Wx, Wy, Wz)
Interpolation kernel
x = (x, y, z)
Cartesian
coordinates
xp
Discrete
particle
position
x′
Discrete space point
XE
Centroid
position
from ﬁrst moment
of enstrophy
xi
==PAGE:14==
Mathematical Operators
∇= ( ∂
∂x, ∂
∂y, ∂
∂z)
Nabla/gradient
operator
∇·
Divergence operator
∇×
Curl operator
∇2
Laplace operator
∇2
xy
2D Laplace operator
∇h
Discrete
nabla/gradient
operator
∇2
h
Discrete
Laplace
operator
∂
∂t
Eulerian
time
derivative
D
Dt = ∂
∂t + (u · ∇)
Lagrangian
time
derivative
0 = (0, 0, 0)
Zero vector
x×
Cartesian rotation
◦
Linear Convolution
Sub- and Superscripts
()E
Enstrophy dependent variables
()ϵ
Smoothed ﬁelds
()p
Vortex particle forms
()m
Modal quantities
()∗
Nondimensional quantity
()
Background state ﬁelds
b()
Fourier coeﬃcient
b()
∗
Conjugated Fourier coeﬃcent
e()
Fields with non-zero divergence
xii
==PAGE:15==
Contents
Preface
iii
Abstract
iv
Resum´e
v
Nomenclature
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Vorticity and Vortex Dynamics
3
2.1
Vorticity-Velocity Navier-Stokes Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The Poisson Equation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Circulation and Vortex Theorems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Vortex Rings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4.1
Compact Vortex Bump Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.1.1
3D Torus Vector Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1.2
3D Scalar Distribution: Semi-Periodic Vortex Roller
. . .
14
2.4.2
Normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.3
Perturbating the Centerline for Semi-Periodic Domains . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Flow Instability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5.1
Vortex Instability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.2
Centrifugal Instability Criterions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Unbounded Flow Diagnostics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6.1
Conserved Quantities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.6.2
Enstrophy and Numerical Diﬀusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Numerical Method
27
3.1
Hybrid Vortex-In-Cell Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.1
Interpolation Kernel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.2
Unbounded Solution to the Poisson Equation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.3
High Order Regularisation with Gaussian Smoothing . . . . . . . .
32
3.1.4
Semi Periodic-Unbounded Solver
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1.5
Finite Diﬀerence Schemes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.6
Re-Projecting the Vorticity Field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
pmlib Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
xiii
==PAGE:16==
4
Numerical Inﬂuence on the Vortex Ring Instability
37
4.1
Numerical Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.1
Initial Core Distribution of Vorticity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.2
Spatial Resolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.3
Finite Diﬀerence Order for the Particle Derivatives
. . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Conserved Diagnostics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Simulation of Vortex Roller Instability at Re = ∞
51
5.1
Radial Instability Criterions for Bump and Gaussian Initial Distributions .
52
5.2
Numerical Setup and Instability without Wave Perturbations . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.1
Cut-OﬀTolerance for Re-mesh, Re-patch and Divergence . . . . . .
60
5.2.2
Dependency of c for Inviscid and Slightly Viscous Flows
. . . . . .
61
5.2.3
Stability Analysis with Gaussian Initial Distribution . . . . . . . . .
67
5.3
Investigation of Instability with Azimuthal Wave perturbations . . . . . . .
72
5.3.1
Derivation of Bump Perturbation Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.3.2
Dependency of c for Inviscid and Slightly Viscous Flows
. . . . . .
74
5.3.3
Dependency of the Perturbation Mode Amplitude . . . . . . . . . .
80
5.3.4
Instability Dependency of the Number of Perturbation Phases . . .
81
5.3.5
Gaussian Perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
5.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6
Investigation of the Instability of Bump Vortex Rings
89
6.1
3D Bump Perturbation Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
6.2
Dependency of c . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
6.2.1
Stability Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
6.2.2
Investigation of the Critical Wave Number . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
6.3
Dependency of Slightly Viscous Damping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
6.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7
Discussion
97
7.1
Centrifugal Instability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
7.2
Critical Wave Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
7.3
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
8
Conclusions
103
Bibliography
104
Appendices
111
A Derivation of the Bump Perturbation Equations
113
B pmlib Outline
119
C Flow Visualizations
125
D FORTRAN Subroutines
143
xiv
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:17==
1
Introduction
The transition from the laminar to turbulent regime is one of the most complex and un-
solved problems in modern physics. At the transition, instability onsets become present,
where the initial stable ﬂows are subjected to small disturbances. For a stable ﬂow, the
disturbances will die out, where for an unstable ﬂow, these disturbances will grow to ﬁnite
amplitudes, which will become unstable to new disturbances, and eventually, the ﬂow be-
comes turbulent. Unstable ﬂows are characterised to critical thresholds for the governing
ﬂow case [9, 20]. As examples, the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability occurs in shear ﬂows be-
tween two ﬂuids, which form ocean wave-like patterns at the interface. This instability is
dependent on a critical Richardsen number, Ri. Other ﬂows, such as viscous ﬂows where
turbulent regimes become present, are dependent on the Reynolds number, Re.
Vortex rings are classiﬁed unbounded ﬂows, which are seen in real life as smoke rings,
mushroom clouds etc. These are torus/toroidal shaped vortex ﬁlaments with azimuthal
rotation around an imaginary circular axis, known as the vortex core [44]. The cross-
sectional ﬂow of vortex ring may thus by seen as counter rotating vortex pairs which
induce an axial velocity of the vortex ring, based on the circulation. Numerous authors
[3, 4, 27, 45] investigated the propagation and breakdown of vortex rings with Gaussian
distributed vortex cores. The propagation of a vortex ring is based on a non-zero total
circulation. In this project, a ”bump” distributed vortex core is used as initial condition,
which has a total circulation of zero. That means that the vortex ring is non-propagating.
Understanding the complex vortex dynamics of the vortex rings are important as the tran-
sition from the laminar to the turbulent stage covers convection of the centroid, diﬀusion
of the vortex core and, eventually, the breakdown due to instability [45]. The vortex ring
hence, serves as a prototype of turbulence. Therefore, identifying the cause of instability
for a vortex ring, improves the knowledge of the transition to turbulence [28].
Vortex rings are always unstable to the ﬁrst two critical wave modes induced on the
toroidal. For helical vortex ﬁlaments, three modes of instability are present; a very short-
wave mode, a long-wave mode unstable by a local induction and a mutural-inductance
mode [54, 55]. These modes have been possible to reproduce by direct numerical simula-
tions for ﬁnite Reynolds numbers [52]. Small disturbances on the vortex ring induced to
a critical wave number, form dipoles on the azimuthal. As they wrap around the vortex
core, strong streamwise toroidal wave modes are shedding hairpin vortices into the wake
of the vortex ring. New vortex structures eventually lead to turbulence, that destroys the
ring. Widnall [54, 55] investigated asymptotic theories with experiments and found good
agreement and similarities between vortex rings and helical vortex ﬁlaments.
1
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Multiple authors [1, 2, 16, 43, 50, 53] investigated the instability modes in a Couette sys-
tem, which is a ﬂow ﬁeld between rotating cylinders. Experiments have shown to produce
transverse wave modes, which are to be compared with the wavy modes seen on toroidal
of vortex rings and along the trailing edge vortices of aircraft wakes. Lord Raleigh inves-
tigated the inviscid ﬂow instability to be the unstable arrangement of angular momentum
between the interchange of ﬂuid, and is caused by a critical velocity. From the rate of
change of kinetic energy, the inviscid ﬂow is unstable when the circulation squared is de-
creasing radially. From this, the Raleigh stability criterion is deﬁned as the rate of radial
change in the circulation squared, which should be positive for a stable ﬂow.
Taylor further developed the viscous instability analysis by perturbating the governing
equations in a Couette system. This yields the governing perturbation equations with
a periodic solution form of the normal modes of the unknown coeﬃcients. Solving the
eigenvalue problem of these equations results in the critical wave number, which was found
by Taylor to be k ≈π with a corresponding wave length of twice the diﬀerence in radii
of the cylinders. This is commonly known as the Taylor-Couette instability [33]. The
aim of this project is to identify the instability of the vortex ring by comparing to the
Taylor-Couette instability. Due to the complexity of the vortex ring, qualitative simula-
tions on a vortex roller, which is a periodically extended circular vorticity patch, are used
for investigations. The analysis is based on the critical Raleigh criterion, the critical wave
number- and length, and by ﬂow visualisations.
The ﬂow is solved numerically using a hybrid particle-mesh vortex method, commonly
known as the Vortex-In-Cell algorithm, which allows for an explicit measure of the ma-
terial derivative of vorticity. The concept is that a Cartesian mesh is generated based on
the given spatial resolution of the computional domain [14, 15, 17]. The discrete vortex
particles are interpolated from the mesh and the particle position is calculated from the
velocity ﬁeld using a Runge-Kutta integration scheme [58]. The new particle position
is then interpolated to a new Cartesian mesh, which is called re-meshing. The Poisson
equation is then solved in spectral space to calculate the velocity ﬁeld from the vorticity
ﬁeld. The particle derivative of the vorticity, i.e. the discrete Lagrangian form of the
Navier-Stokes equation is solved on the mesh, before interpolating back to particles. The
cost scales as O(N log(N)), which is a signiﬁcant reduction for large number of particles,
N, compared to conventional vortex methods [13] scaling O(N 2).
As computional methods become increasingly eﬀective, this is a popular choise for inves-
tigations. Physical experiments are expensive and many ﬂows are diﬀucult to produce.
Additionally, the bump vortex is hypothetical and may not be possible to generate in
experiments. The computional methods have the limitations, that they need target data
for validation. Numerical simulations of vortex rings with non-zero circulation are often
compared to data from experiments [54, 56]. Another tool of investigation is a mathemat-
ical approach where the instability may be solved as a bifurcation, where the instability
may be analysed by diﬀerential equations as small changes to the systems, that cause
qualitative changes to the system [20]. As the bump vortex is hypothetical, this may be a
tool for validation. The bump vortex perturbation equations are hence derived, but not
solved, in this project. Gaussian distributed vortex rollers are used for comparison.
2
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:19==
2
Vorticity and Vortex
Dynamics
The material derivative form of the 3D incompressible Navier-Stokes equations is pre-
sented as the Lagrangian based vorticity equation, from the procedure of Kundu and
Cohen [33] and Wu, Ma and Zhou [61]. The Poisson equation, linking either the vector
potential or the velocity to the vorticity, and their Green’s function solutions, are pre-
sented. The governing theory regarding vortex rings and vortex ﬁlaments are described
in detail, and the initial conditions for the vorticity for varying ﬂowcases are derived from
a compact bump function. The theory of ﬂow instability, regarding to vortex dynam-
ics and centrifugal instability, such as the instabilities in Couette ﬂows is described, and
the criterions for investigation of the instabilities are presented in detail. Last, the ﬂow
diagnostics, for varifying the quality of the simulations are presented.
2.1
Vorticity-Velocity Navier-Stokes Equations
The 3D incompressible ﬂow is governed by the Navier-Stokes equations, including the
continuity equation
∇· u = 0
(2.1.1)
where u = (u, v, w), i.e. the 3D velocity vector and where ∇=

∂
∂x, ∂
∂y, ∂
∂z

is the nabla
operator.
Together with continuity, the Navier-Stokes equations include the velocity-
pressure momentum equations
∂u
∂t + u · ∇u = g −1
ρ∇p + ν∇2u
(2.1.2)
where ∂u
∂t is the Eulerian time derivative, u · ∇u is the nonlinear advective term of ﬂuid
transportation, g = (0, 0, g) is the gravity, which obviously only has a non-zero component
in the vertical z-direction, p is the pressure, and ν = µ
ρ is the kinematic viscosity of the
ﬂuid, where µ is the dynamic viscosity of the ﬂuid and ρ is the density of the ﬂuid. The
last term, ν∇2u is the diﬀusive term, where the Laplace operator is deﬁned as
∇2 =


∂2
∂x2
∂2
∂x∂y
∂2
∂x∂z
∂2
∂y∂x
∂2
∂y2
∂2
∂y∂z
∂2
∂z∂x
∂2
∂z∂y
∂2
∂z2


(2.1.3)
3
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
The vorticity is formulated as the curl of the velocity ﬁeld
ω ≡∇× u
(2.1.4)
and describes the local rotation in a continuum, where ω = (ωx, ωy, ωz).
Combining
Equation (2.1.1) and 2.1.4 yields the continuity equation of the vorticity as
∇· (∇× u) = 0
⇒
∇· ω = 0
(2.1.5)
where the vorticity is also divergence free, by deﬁnition, using vector identity.
Next
the vorticity-velocity form of the 3D incompressible momentum equations are derived by
taking the curl of Equation (2.1.2) as
∇×
∂u
∂t + u · ∇u = g −1
ρ∇p + ν∇2u

(2.1.6)
As the gravity is a body force, working in the center of gravity, it does not produce any
rotation, therefore neither no change of vorticity. Hence the term vanishes. Due to vector
identity, ∇× (∇p) = 0, and therefore the pressure also vanishes. The new formulation
now becomes
∂ω
∂t + ∇× (ω × u) = ν∇2ω
(2.1.7)
where the right-hand-side is now only a diﬀusion problem. However, a decomposion of
the left-hand-side can be made as
∇× (ω × u) = (u · ∇) ω −(ω · ∇) u
(2.1.8)
and thus the Eulerian form of the vorticity-velocity momentum equations becomes
∂ω
∂t + (u · ∇) ω = (ω · ∇) u + ν∇2ω
(2.1.9)
where the term ∂ω
∂t is the Eulerican temporal change of vorticity, (u · ∇) ω is the nonlinear
advective term, (ω · ∇) u is the term of vorticity stretching and tilting, and ν∇2ω is
the diﬀusion term due to vorticity and viscosity.
Contrastly to the velocity-pressure
formulation, the vorticity stretching and tilting is a new term for the vorticity-velocity
formulation. However, the velocity-pressure formulation consists of 4 equations ((2.1.1)
and (2.1.2)) with 4 unknowns (u, v, w, p), where the vorticity-velocity form has removen
the pressure, and there is a kinematic relation between the velocity and the vorticity. The
particle form, i.e. the Lagrangian form of the vorticity-velocity form can thus be deﬁned
as a vorticity stretching and tilting, and a diﬀusion problem only as
Dω
Dt = (ω · ∇) u + ν∇2ω
(2.1.10)
where the advective term is removed. This equation is the starting point of 3D vortex
methods, as they are based on particles in a Lagrangian frame of reference. In chapter 3,
Equation (2.1.10) is discretized in time and space for the hybrid particle-mesh simulations.
The governing equations are non-dimensionalized in order to handle very small and big
numbers, which may lead to numerical troubles. The continuity equation then becomes
4
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
∇∗· ω∗= 0
(2.1.11)
and the momentum equations, when non-dimensionalized become
Dω∗
Dt∗= (ω∗· ∇∗) u∗+
1
ReΓ
∇∗2ω∗
(2.1.12)
where ()∗denotes non-dimensional quantities. For simplicity, these superscrips are not
shown for the remainder of this thesis. The diﬀusive term is inverse proportional to the
Reynolds number, which for non-zero circulation-based ﬂows may be deﬁned as
ReΓ = Γ
ν
(2.1.13)
meaning that inviscid ﬂows i.e. high Reynolds numbers yield
Dω
Dt ≈(ω · ∇) u
for
ReΓ →∞
(2.1.14)
This should for an inviscid incompressible simulation be true, as the diﬀusive term should
vanish. However, due to numerical diﬀusion, described later in this chapter, viscosity
eﬀects may still be present, which are not physical. Therefore inviscid simulations are
well suited to analyse the numerical quality with regard to the numerical diﬀusion. The
rate of diﬀusion for simulations are initialized using the Reynolds number, instead of the
viscosity.
2.2
The Poisson Equation
No continous analytical solution exists to the Navier-Stokes equations. The aim is to
determine approximate values of the velocity and/or the vorticity. For that, the velocity
is deﬁned from the solenoidal vector potential , ψ, and the scalar potential, φ, as
u ≡∇× ψ + ∇φ
(2.2.1)
where the vector potential by the deﬁnition
∇· ψ = 0
(2.2.2)
ensures a divergence free velocity ﬁeld. If Equation (2.2.1) is substituted into Equation
(2.1.4), this yields a Poisson equation
∇2ψ = −ω
(2.2.3)
which relates the vector potential to the vorticity. A Poisson equation relating the velocity
to the vorticity may also be derived by taking the curl of Equation (2.1.4).
∇2u = −∇× ω
(2.2.4)
In an unbounded domain R, the Poisson equations are solved using convolutions of Green’s
functions (See Chapter 3).
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
5
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
2.3
Circulation and Vortex Theorems
The circulation of the vorticity ﬁeld is deﬁned as
Γ =
I
C
u · dS =
Z
A
ω · ndA
(2.3.1)
where C is a closed curve, A is a surface bounded area and n is the normal vector. It
states that the circulation is the line integral of the velocity ﬁeld around a closed curve.
This may, through Stokes theorem be expressed as the ﬂux through a surface A closed by
C. A vortex line is a curve of ﬂuid, which is always tangent to the local vorticity vector.
A vortex line does not have to be linear, as it may be curved. In analogy, a vortex line is
related to the vorticity ﬁeld, corresponding to a streamline is related to the velocity vector.
A region of vortex lines through a closed curve, is called a vortex tube. This cylinder
shaped form is, again, related to a stream tube of streamlines through a closed surface.
The strength of a streamtube is deﬁned as the ﬂux, Q, through the surface, calculated as
an areal integral of the velocity through the the area. The strength of a vortex tube is
deﬁned as the circulation, Γ, which may be computed from Equation (2.3.1). The analogy
between the streamtube and the vortex tube may be seen in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Analogy between a streamtube and a vortex tube. Lines are tangent to velocity
ﬁelds and vorticity ﬁelds, respectively. The strengths are the ﬂux, Q, and the circulation, Γ,
respectively [33].
Last, a vortex ﬁlament or a vortex sheet is where there is a discontinuity in the ﬂuid
region. This may be seen as if the sorrounding ﬂuid of the vortex tube is irrotational.
Kelvin’s circulation theorem states that the circulation around a closed curve moving
with the ﬂow, remains constant in time, in a non-rotating frame of reference, if the ﬂow
is inviscid and barotropic with conservative body forces. This may be expressed as
DΓ
Dt = 0
(2.3.2)
6
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
Due to this statement, this theorem may only be violated if viscous diﬀusion applies or
if the ﬂuid is to interact with a solid boundary. The vortex ring is simulated as an un-
bounded ﬂow, so therefore no solid boundary is present in this project. Viscous diﬀusion
is only present if viscosity eﬀects are included in the simulation. However, due to numer-
ical diﬀusion (see later in this chapter), Kelvin’s theorem may be violated. Gravity and
pressure are neglected since the governing momentum equations have been deﬁned on the
Lagrangian form.
From Kelvin’s vortex theorem, the Helmholtz’s vortex theorems are deﬁned for vortex
motion as
1. Vortex lines move with the ﬂuid
2. The strength of a vortex tube (its circulation) is constant along its length
3. A vortex tube cannot end within the ﬂuid. It must either
(a) end at a solid boundary, or
(b) form a closed loop - a vortex ring, or
(c) extend to ±∞
4. The strength of a vortex tube remains constant in time
The theorems state that ﬂuid particles that at any time are coherent with a vortex line,
always remain coherent to that same vortex line.
2.4
Vortex Rings
Vortex rings are torus/toroidal shaped vortex ﬁlaments, where the ﬂuid mostly circulate
an imaginary circular axis, known as the vortex core. Two rotating frames are present
for the torus shape, where the primary motion is poloidal, and the secondary is toroidal.
The reference frames may be seen in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Rotating frames of the vortex ring, showing the dominant azimuthal ﬂow as the
poloidal, ϕ, and the normal to azimuthal frame as toroidal, θ.
The circulation around the vortex core induces a velocity which translates perpendicular
to the plane of the vortex ring. The inner edge of the vortex core moves faster than the
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
7
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
outer edge of the core, meaning that the velocity is almost constant at the outer edge
of the core. The inner core has increased angular velocity due to higher concentration
of vorticity. Therefore, most of the energy dissipation, will happen in this region, due
to increased enstrophy, which will be presented later in this section. Within the vortex
core, the vorticity may be approximated as a vortex line, with a strength equal to the
total circulation. Further, it is assumed that the sorrounding volume of ﬂuid is ideal, and
hence irrotational. Thus the cross-sectional velocity may be simpliﬁed as the interaction
of two counter rotating vortices of equal magnitude of vorticity as
U ≈
Γ
4πR
(2.4.1)
where R is the vortex ring radius and Γ may be computed using Equation (2.3.1). The
cross-section of the vortex ring and the induced velocity from counter rotating vortices
may be seen in Figure 2.3.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3: (a) Vortex ring dimensions in the xr-plane, sketching the vortex ring radius, R,
the vortex ring core, σ, and the circulation, Γ. The ring propagetes in the positive x-direction.
(b) Induced velocity, perpendicular to ring radius, from the interaction of counter rotating vor-
tices of equal magnitude of circulation
The vortex ring is initially axisymmetric in the yz-plane, which is a circular cross sec-
tion. The vortex ring propagates in the positive x-direction. The vortex ring radius is
measured from the centroid of the ring to the center of the vortex core. The vortex core ra-
dius, σ, is measured from the center of the vortex core to the outer edge of the vortex core.
8
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
Vortex rings are seen in nature for turbulent ﬂows, but are rarely noticed on their own.
Examples of the physical visualization of vortex rings may be seen from smoke rings,
mushroom clouds and microbursts. They are also seen as more complex knotted vortices
in plasmas, which is investigated by Kleckner and Irvine [30].
Due to their existance for turbulent ﬂows, they are suitable prototypes of particle based
simulations of turbulence as their development from the laminar to a turbulent regime
cover ﬁelds as convection, diﬀusion and ﬂow instability, which eventually lead to their
breakdown [3, 44]. The instability of the vortex ring may be seen on the transition from
the laminar to the turbulent stage. The physical instability of the ring may be seen as
azimuthal wave perturbations on the outer edge of the vortex core, which by time will
transfer to the the vicinity of the inner edge of the vortex core. Archer [3] discovered
these instabilities already in the laminar regime. Vortex rings with Gaussian distributed
vortex cores are studied by numerous authors, etc. [3, 4], where the ring structure tends
to be skewed in the transition as well as the vortex core goes from an initial Gaussian
state to a non-Gaussian state that causes shedding of vortex ﬁlaments in the wake of the
vortex ring [45].
2.4.1
Compact Vortex Bump Function
From the Poisson equation (2.2.3), it follows that the vorticity is solenoidal and compact
only if the vector potential is [40]. The compact state of the vortex ring is saught af-
ter, to ensure minimum truncation and ensure conservation of the vorticity in the vortex
core. Therefore the mathematical distribution of the vector potential is deﬁned in order
to distribute the corresponding vorticity ﬁeld. As mentioned, numerous authors used the
Gaussian distribution to describe the vorticity distribution. However, that entails a singu-
larity in the origin of the corresponding vorticity ﬁeld, which leads to a decay of vorticity,
that entails discontinuity of the diﬀerential operator. Hence the vector potential has a
ﬁnite number of derivatives, which weakness the convergence [40].
Instead the mathematical formulation of the vector potential is governed by a ”bump”
function, which is a smooth function in Euclidean space Rn. The smoothness is deﬁned as
it has inﬁnite number of derivatives, C∞, is ﬁnite valued and has compact support of the
vortex core [25, 26, 40]. The mathematical formulation of the bump function is deﬁned
as
Φ(τ) =
(
exp

−
c
1−τ2

for |τ|< 1
0
for |τ|≥1
(2.4.2)
where τ is the support domain of the smooth vector potential and c is an arbitrary bump
constant. This parameter, c, governs the vortex core radius, as the vortex core descreases
for increasing c. Also it has been seen that for a c = 400, minimum amount of laminar
sheddings of vortex ﬁlaments were spotted from the transition between the laminar and
the tubulent regime [6].
To generate the bump vortex ring, the mathematical distribution of the torus ring must
be deﬁned, where the torus core radius distribution may be inserted in τ.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
9
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
The aim is ﬁrst to use the mathemtical formulation of the torus ring as the input function
of the bump function. Later, that torus ring will be ”unfolded” to generate a cylinder
shaped vortex roller. This is done to investigate if the same instabilities occur for both
vortex structures. Referring to the Helmholtz’s theorems the vortex tube must be closed,
which is easily seen for the vortex ring as it forms a closed loop. The boundary conditions
in the z-direction of the vortex roller must therefore extend to ±∞, which is achieved by
imposing semi periodic-unbounded conditions, which is described in the Chapter 3. The
analogy between the vortex ring and the vortex roller is seen in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Analogy between the vortex ring and the vortex roller in Cartesian coordinates. The
vortex ring and the vortex roller have propagational x-direction. The vortex roller is periodic in
the z-direction to fulﬁl the Helmholtz vortex theorem
The vector potentials are to be generated for the structures, and by the use of the Pois-
son equation the 3D vorticity ﬁelds and the corresponding velocity ﬁelds for the initial
conditions are deﬁned.
2.4.1.1
3D Torus Vector Distribution
The mathematical formulation of a 3D torus ring (see Figure 2.3) is deﬁned as
(r −R)2 + x2 = σ2
⇒
σ =
q
(r −R)2 + x2
(2.4.3)
where the core, σ, is to be used for the compact vector potential.
The distribution
is formulated in its natural cylindrical coordinates (r, θ, x), where r =
p
y2 + z2 and
10
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
θ = arctan

z
y

. The formulation is normalized with the vortex ring radius, R, as is
inserted in the bump function (2.4.2) to produce the 3D vector potential as
ψ = Φ


q
(r −R)2 + x2
R

eθ
⇒
ψ = exp
 
−
c
1 −R2−2Rr+r2+x2
R2
!
(2.4.4)
where eθ is the normal to the azimuth.
This vector potential is hence deﬁned along
the closed loop in the toroidal axis. The vector potential is deﬁned in vector form ψ =
(ψr, ψθ, ψx), where the vector components become
ψr = 0
(2.4.5)
ψθ = exp
 
−
c
1 −R2−2Rr+r2+x2
R2
!
(2.4.6)
ψx = 0
(2.4.7)
The core distribution of the vector potential is shown on the radial axis in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: The normalized vector potential ψθ/max(ψθ) through the radial plane for c = 100
(
), c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
). Deﬁned vortex ring radius, R, is at
r = 0.5
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
11
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
The vorticity ﬁeld ω = (ωr, ωθ, ωx) is then calculated from the Poisson equation (2.2.3)
as
ωr = 0
(2.4.8)
ωθ = −
1
(2Rr −r2 −x2)4r2(4c2x2R4r2 −8r3cR5 + 8r4cR4 −6r5cR3 + 4r2c2R6
−8r3c2R5 + 4r4c2R4 + 2r6cR2 + 32R3r3x2 −48R2r4x2 −24R2r2x4 + 24Rr5x2
+ 24Rr3x4 + 8Rrx6 + 2rcR3x4 −4r3cR3x2 + 2r2cR2x4 + 4cx2R2r4 −r8 −x8
−16R4r4 + 32R3r5 −24R2r6 + 8Rr7 −4r6x2 −6r4x4 −4r2x6) exp

−
cR2
2Rr −r2 −x2

(2.4.9)
ωx = 0
(2.4.10)
The azimuthal vorticity in the radial axis in seen in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: The normalized vorticity distribution ωθ/max(ωθ) through half the radial plane for
c = 100 (
), c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
). Deﬁned vortex ring radius, R,
is at r = 0.5
Only the half axis is shown. The vorticity through the entire radial axis may be seen
in Appendix C. The vorticity has opposite sign on |r| as the vortex ring in principle is
12
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
induced by counter rotating vortices, through the plane section. Hence the vorticity and
the rotation has opposite sign away from the origin of the vortex ring. Also, the outer
edge of the vortex core (in r > 0) has negative vorticity where the inner part vorticity
is positive. Obviously, the opposite conditions apply in r < 0, where the outer edge be-
comes positive and the inner edge becomes negative. The maximum vorticity occurs at
the center of the vortex core. The vorticity of the vortex core throughout the r-axis is
distributed such that the circulation of the vortex ring is zero. The vortex core radius is
decreasing for increasing c.
The velocity ﬁeld in cylindrical coordinates, u = (ur, uθ, ux), are calculated by Equation
(2.2.1) as
ur =
2cxR2 exp

−
cR2
2Rr−r2−x2

(2Rr −r2 −x2)2
(2.4.11)
uθ = 0
(2.4.12)
ux =
1
r (2Rr −r2 −x2)2(4R2r2 −4Rr3 −4Rrx2 + r4 + 2r2x2
+ x4 + 2rcR3 −2r2cR2) exp

−
cR2
2Rr −r2 −x2

(2.4.13)
The radial velocity is non-zero as the azimuthal velocity in the poloidal axis, uϕ, lies
partially in the radial plane. As the vorticity ﬁeld is distributed on the Cartesian mesh,
the latter velocity may then be transformed into cartesian coordinates, u = (ux, uy, uz),
as
ux =
1
r (2Rr −r2 −x2)2(4R2r2 −4Rr3 −4Rrx2 + r4 + 2r2x2
+ x4 + 2rcR3 −2r2cR2) exp

−
cR2
2Rr −r2 −x2

(2.4.14)
uy =
2cxR2 exp

−
cR2
2Rr−r2−x2

(2Rr −r2 −x2)2
sin(θ)
(2.4.15)
uz =
2cxR2 exp

−
cR2
2Rr−r2−x2

(2Rr −r2 −x2)2
cos(θ)
(2.4.16)
where the progation velocity, ux, is similar in both coordinate systems. Also the velocity
components, uy and uz, are non-zero, which again is due to the axes are partially within
the azimuthal axis. The velocity in the progational axis may be seen in Figure 2.7.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
13
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
Figure 2.7: The normalized velocity distribution uϕ/max(uϕ) through half the radial plane for
c = 100 (
), c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
). Deﬁned vortex ring radius, R,
is at r = 0.5
Only the half axis is shown. The velocity through the entire radial axis may be seen in
Appendix C. The velocity induced in the core is increasingly symmetrical around the core
center, meaning that the velocity in the core in theory will be zero. Also the centroid
velocity is zero. That means that, in theory, the bump vortex ring should be frozen in
space while spinning.
2.4.1.2
3D Scalar Distribution: Semi-Periodic Vortex Roller
For the case of a rotating vortex roller, the Helmholtz theorem is satisﬁed by making one
axis periodic. By this, the vorticity ﬁeld of a vortex roller may be deﬁned as a 2D vorticity
patch, x2 + y2 = σ2, or in r2 = σ2 in cylindrical coordinates, which is extended in the
periodic z-direction, to synthesize a 3D vorticity ﬁeld. The vector potential of the bump
vortex roller, uses the bump function (2.4.2) with the normalized 2D vorticity patch as
input, and is extended periodically as
ψ = Φ
 r
R

⇒
ψ = exp
 
−
c
−r2
R2 + 1
!
(2.4.17)
The vorticity ﬁeld and velocity ﬁeld in cylindrical coordinates are calculated from Equa-
tion (2.2.3) and (2.2.1), respectively, as
14
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
ωz =
2cR2 exp

−
r2c
(R−r)(R+r)

(R4 −2r2(c −1)R2 −r4)
(R2 −r2)4
(2.4.18)
uϕ =
2rcR2 exp

−
r2c
(R−r)(R+r)

(R2 −r2)2
(2.4.19)
The vorticity ﬁeld may be calculated, in Cartesian coordinates, ω = (ωx, ωy, ωz), from the
Poisson equation (2.2.3) as
ωz =
4 exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

cR2 
R4 −c (x2 + y2) R2 −(x2 + y2)2
(R2 −x2 −y2)4
(2.4.20)
The velocity ﬁeld, in Cartesian coordinates, may be calculated from Equation (2.2.1) as
ux =
−2ycR2 exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

(R2 −x2 −y2)2
(2.4.21)
uy =
2xcR2 exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

(R2 −x2 −y2)2
(2.4.22)
The vector potential, vorticity and the velocity over the core of the vortex roller, may be
seen in Figure 2.8. The inﬂuence of c is discussed in Chapter 5.
Figure 2.8: The normalized vector potential ψz/max(ψz) of the vortex roller through the vortex
core (
), the normalized vorticity ωz/max(ωz) of the vortex roller through the core (
), and
the normalized velocity uϕ/max(uϕ) of the vortex roller through the core (
)
The distribution over the core of the vortex roller is much similar to the distribution
over one core of the vortex ring. The spatial point of the maximum velocity is shifted
compared to the vorticity.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
15
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
2.4.2
Normalization
The initial condition for the ﬂow simulation is based on the vorticity ﬁeld just derived.
More precisely, the initial condition takes in the magnitude of vorticity
|ω|=
q
ω2
x + ω2
y + ω2
z
(2.4.23)
The ﬂuid domain is then set up using existing ghost cells from the core distribution
domain, recall Equation (2.4.3)
σ =
q
(r −R)2 + x2
The condition then reads the statement if σ < R0, the initial condition are distributed on
a Cartesian mesh, which is described in details in the Chapter 3. If the core distribution
is outside the ring radius, the ghost cells are equal to zero. The cartesian vorticity com-
ponents are then projected from the magnitude of vorticity.
As the total circulation of the bump vortex ring is zero, normalizing with the circulation
would yield singularities of the simulations, which are to be avoided. Therefore a cor-
rection of the circulation is to be done, using the absolute values of the vorticity. Recall
Figure 2.6, it was seen, that for r > 0, the vorticity is negative in the outer edge of the
vortex core, and positive in the inner edge of the core. The cross section of the vortex
core through the y-axis may be seen in Figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: Concecptual sketch of the areal distribution of vorticity in the vortex core. The
positive vorticity ω+ in area (
) and the negative vorticity ω−in area (
).
An if statement is used for the initial condition after the vorticity components are de-
stributed, which splits negative and positive values of vorticity. Then the absolute circu-
lation, Γ0, is calculated through the area using Equation (2.3.1), with the new statement
as
Γ0 =
R
A ω+dxdz +
R
A ω−dxdz
2
(2.4.24)
16
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
The initial vorticity ﬁeld is then normalized with this new correction of the circulation.
To ensure the proper correction, the correction of the initial vorticity ﬁeld is done again,
to ensure that this new correction would be Γ0 = 1.0.
2.4.3
Perturbating the Centerline for Semi-Periodic Domains
For the case of a 2D vorticity patch, extended to a pseudo 3D vortex roller, the nonlinear
term of the Navier-Stokes equations vanishes. Further, the diﬀusion term is zero if the
ﬂow is inviscid.
Thus, a perturbation may be necessary to onset an instability.
The
perturbations are added by a ﬁnite number of initial waves extended in the z-direction.
The length scale of the perturbation, Lz, is governed by the computational domain in the
periodic direction, and random phases, ςi. The perturbation is then given as
ε(z) = a sin
2πz
Lz
+ ςi

(2.4.25)
where a is an arbitrary perturbation amplitude.
The perturbations are added to the
centerline along the x-axis in the initial distribution of the vorticity in Equation (2.4.20).
Finally the vorticity is normalized by the maximum velocity from Equations (2.4.21) and
(2.4.22)
2.5
Flow Instability
Flow phenomena, that completely satisfy the conservation laws, are seldom observed in
reality, as these become unstable when subjected to small disturbances, which are invari-
ably present in any ﬂow [33]. In viscous ﬂows, the ﬂow is only stable to small disturbances,
when certain conditions are satisﬁed. That being the Reynolds number to be below a cer-
tain limit or the Richardsen number, Ri, in shear ﬂows, to be above a certain limit etc.
As a consequence of the critical stability limits are avoided, inﬁnitesimal disturbances
may grow in the ﬂow ﬁeld and change the initial state of the ﬂow to an entirely new and
increasingly complex ﬂow. That being, that the disturbances grow to ﬁnite amplitudes,
and the new state may also become unstable to new disturbances, which also induce new
instability modes. Maxwell deﬁned the stable and unstable nature of ﬂows as:
”When the state of things is such that an inﬁnitely small variation of the
present state will alter only by an inﬁnitely small quantity the state at some
future time, the condition of the system, whether at rest or in motion, is
said to be stable; but when an inﬁnitely small variation in the present state
may bring about a ﬁnite diﬀerence in the state of the system in a ﬁnite
time, the condition of the system is said to be unstable [20].”
As the unstable ﬂows evolve, these ﬂows are characterized as the superposition of all
interacting disturbances. This produces nearly random phases and a highly chaotic state,
that induces a turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld. Therefore, investigating the ﬂow instabilities gives
better understanding of
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
17
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
• The transition from the laminar to turbulent regimes
• Predicting the onset to the transition
When analysing the instability onset to ﬂuid ﬂows, the disturbances in the ﬂow is intro-
duced by small perturbations which are small enough, such that linearization is possible
when neglecting high order pertubation terms. That also means, that the initial state,
known as the background state, is not subjected to visuable disturbances. For an unstable
background state ﬂow, the perturbations introduced, will tend to grow and produce sec-
ondary and higher order ﬂows [9]. As a consequence, at least one mode of disturbance is
present, which distorts the ﬂow from the background state [10]. Opposite, the perturba-
tions will decay and vanish for a stable ﬂow [9]. However, linearization may only predict
the onset to instability, but not necessary the transition to turbulence. The linearization
is however very well documented for the Taylor-Couette ﬂow instability within rotating
cylinders, in which the secondary wavy ﬂows are induced, and conﬁrmed by experiments
by multiple authors. The criterions of this instability are investigated later in this section.
Mathematically, the instability may be investigated based on the method of normal modes
[33], in which the instability is considered as a wave mode along an axis in the ﬂow
ω(x, y, z, t) = bω(z) exp (ιkx + ιmy + ςt) = bω(z) exp (ι|K|(eK · x −cςt))
(2.5.1)
where b() denotes a Fourier coeﬃcient, ι = √−1 is the imaginary unit, K = (k, m, 0) is the
distubance wave number, ς is the temporal growth rate, cς is the complex phase speed of
disturbances and eK = K/|K|. The Fourier componets of such a stationary and travelling
wave form is known as the normal mode, and is exponentially varying in space and time,
based on the spatial dimension and a temporal growth rate. If two directions of the ﬂow
ﬁeld are unbounded [37], the wave number components in the bounded direction, must
be real and positive. An arbitrary disturbance may be decomposed into a set of normal
modes, where the linearization of the problem implies, that the modes do not interact.
Therefore the critical wave numbers are found as the eigenvalue problem of the solution
form to the perturbations in Equation (2.5.1).
2.5.1
Vortex Instability
The instability of vortex rings was investigated by Widnall in [56, 57]. She found that
vortex rings are always unstable to the ﬁrst two critical wave modes induced on the
toroidal. Widnall also investigated the instability of helical vortex ﬁlaments, that being
vortex rings and aircraft wake structures, that three modes of instability are present; a
very short-wave mode, a long-wave mode unstable by a local induction and a mutural-
inductance mode. The tiny disturbances on the vortex ring induced by a critical wave
number, form dipoles on the azimute of the vortex ring. As they wrap around the vortex
core, strong streamwise toroidal wave modes are shedding hairpin vortices into the wake
of the vortex ring. New vortex structures eventually lead to turbulence, that destroys the
ring.
The asymptotic analysis was presented to predict induced vortex ﬁlaments of small cross-
sections. As a requirement, the wave length of the perturbations along the vortex ﬁlament,
18
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
should be large compared to the radius of the vortex core. However, the length of the
vortex ring instability would not fulﬁl this requirement. Still, the features of the instabil-
ity, the number of waves and ampliﬁcaton rate showed good agreement between theory
and experiments.
Widnall [54, 55] developed the instability analysis on straight vortex ﬁlaments which are
much less complex before applying the theory to vortex rings, see Figure 2.10.
Figure 2.10: The counter-rotating vortex pairs (left) and the vortex ring (right) exposed to
azimuthal perturbations, by Widnall [56]. a denotes the core diameter, which is equal to 2σ. b
is the distance between the vortex pairs
The instability of vortex pairs to bending wave perturbations, may be investigated from
the velocities, which is a combination of the velocity that stems from the perturbations,
the velocity induced by the displacement of the other ﬁlament of the pair, and the self-
induced circulation of the sinusoidally perturbated vortex ﬁlament. The vortex instability
to a perturbation wave number, kcrit, occur whenever the induced azimuthal velocity at the
ﬁlament by the presence and perturbations of the other ﬁlament, balanced the circulation
of the ﬁlament itself. As a consequence, this yields singularities at the perturbation points,
where the amplitude increases as the ﬁlaments diverges [56]. However, the investiations
were made by the initialization of radial- and centrifugal velocities ﬁelds from a non-zero
circulation, which diﬀer from the setup of the bump vortex structures, presented in this
chapter, with a total circulation of zero. Therefore, the general physical tendencies of
the instability may be compared, such as the divergent points on the vortex ring, but the
critical wave numbers are expected to diﬀer.
2.5.2
Centrifugal Instability Criterions
A possible instability of a vortex ring, may be similar to a Taylor-Coutte ﬂow in which an
instability happens between rotating cylinders, due to unstable arrangement of angular
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
19
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
momentum. The ﬂow between the cylinders, where one is stationary and the other is ro-
tating, becomes centrifugally unstable, as the rotational speed reaches a critical value, in
which toroidal Taylor vortices are induced [43]. In viscous ﬂows, vortex ﬂow regimes are
dependent on the cylindrical Reynolds number and the radii between cylinders. Experi-
ments [2] have hence shown states that include Taylor vortices, wavy vortices, modulated
wavy vortices, vortices with wavy outﬂow boundaries, vortices with wavy inﬂow bound-
aries, vortices with ﬂat boundaries and internal waves, laminar spirals, interpenetrating
spirals, waves on interpenetrating spirals, spiral turbulence, intermittent spots, turbulent
Taylor vortices, turbulence with no large-scale features etc. The concept of the Taylor-
Couette instability is seen in Figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11: Concept of the Taylor-Couette instability in cylindrical coordinates [1]
Due to the vortical motion, the azimuthal momentum is transported radially and the axial
exchange of ﬂuids in vortices transports the azimuthal momentum axially. This tendency
increases for increasing Reynolds number [1]. The azimuthal velocity in cylindrical coor-
dinates shows that the waviness is related to a jet-like azimuthal velocity proﬁle rather
than a radial outﬂow jet. Hence for increasing Reynolds numbers, the axial vortex motion
decreases. The exchange of ﬂuid between neighbouring vortices happen in a cyclic fash-
ion, resulting in that one vortex increases in size while the two adjent vortices decrease
in size. Due to the azimuthal of the background ﬂow, ﬂuid will wrap around the induced
vortices, that correspond the the axial deformantion of the wavy vortex tube [53]. In
generel, these wrap around eﬀects and growing dipoles of vortices are comparable to the
instability regimes investigated on a vortex ring.
For axisymmetric ﬂows, the instability occur as axisymmetric disturbances. Lord Raleigh
investigated the inviscid source of instability as the angular-directed velocity, uϕ, in the
20
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
r-ϕ plane.
uϕ(r) may be any function trough the radial plane, however only certain
distributions are stable for inviscid ﬂows. For two ﬂuid rings at radial distances r1 and
r2(> r1), respectively, that are interchanged, the circulation, Γ = 2πruϕ proportional
to the angular momentum, ruϕ, is constant according to Kelvin’s theorem [33]. That
means, that after the interchange, the circulation at outer radii, r2, becomes equal to the
circulation at the inner before the interchange, Γ1. And therefore the circulation at the
inner radii, r1, becomes equal to the circulation at the outer radii before the interchange,
Γ2.
As a consequence of the circulation conservation at the interchange, the kinetic
energy E = u2
ϕ/2 = Γ2/8π2r2 is changing. Thus, the kinetic energy before and after the
interchange, Einitial and Eﬁnal respectively, yield the change in kinetic energy as
Einitial =
1
8π2
Γ2
1
r2
1
+ Γ2
2
r2
2

(2.5.2)
Eﬁnal =
1
8π2
Γ2
2
r2
1
+ Γ2
1
r2
2

(2.5.3)
∆E = Eﬁnal −Einitial =
1
8π2
 Γ2
2 −Γ2
1
  1
r2
1
−1
r2
2

(2.5.4)
As r2 > r1 the ﬂow is stable if ∆E is positive when a velocity distribution yields Γ2 > Γ1.
That means that an external source of energy should be added to perform the interchange
of ﬂuid. From that, the system may only be stable if Γ2 increases radially. The ﬂow is
unstable when Γ2 decreases radially [7, 31, 33], which results in a release of energy due to
the interchange of ﬂuids. For the unstable ﬂow, the centrifugal forcing in the outwardly
radii exceeds the radially inward pressure gradient force [33]. Hence the inviscid Raleigh
stability criterion in a Couette ﬂow is deﬁned as
d
drΓ2 ≥0
(2.5.5)
For Couette ﬂows in which the outer radii is stationary and the inner radii is rotating, this
ﬂow will hence be unstable, and produce wavy vortex regimes. Taylor modiﬁed the inviscid
Raleigh criterion as viscous, by re-writing the velocity-pressure form of the Navier-Stokes
equations in polar coordinates, and decomposed the variables into a background state
plus a perturbation as u = u + U. The background state used, is for a Taylor-Couette
ﬂow with inner and outer angular velocities Ω1, Ω2, and radii R1, R2, respectively. By
deﬁnition, ω ≡2Ω, the vorticity and the angular velocity have the same unit [1/s], which
gives reason to believe in similar behavious for vortex rings. By decomposing the Navier-
Stokes equations and removing the background state, Taylor derived the normal mode
perturbation equations [33] as
 d2
dR2 −k2 −ς
  d2
dR2 −k2

buR =

1 +
Ω2
Ω1
−1
 R −R1
d

buθ
(2.5.6)
 d2
dR2 −k2 −ς

buθ = −k2TabuR
(2.5.7)
where d = R2 −R1 is the gab between outer and inner radii, and thus corresponds to the
vortex core diameter. ς = 0 by assumption. Ta is the Taylor number
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
21
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
Ta ≡4
Ω1R2
1 −Ω2R2
2
R2
2 −R2
1
 Ω1d4
ν2
(2.5.8)
which is the ratio between centrifugal an viscous forces. From experiments, Taylor found
the critical Taylor number, in which the ﬂow becomes unstable to
Tacrit =
3416
1 + Ω2/Ω1
(2.5.9)
The unstable ﬂow develops for increasing Ta, as seen in Figure 2.12.
Figure 2.12: Instability regimes in a Taylor-Couette ﬂow for increasing Ta. Regimes go from
the onset to instability with toroidal sinusoidal waves, which later induce azimuthal wave modes
and become turbulent [16].
22
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
As seen, the Taylor-Couette ﬂow is unstable, which was ﬁrst based from Raleigh and later
by Taylor. At the critical Taylor number, the onset to instability induces wave modes as
periodic rolls, that do not vary with the azimuthal. By increasing the Taylor number, the
wave modes vary spatially on the azimuthal as well. The wave length of the wave mode
depends on the Taylor number, i.e. the radii. When increasing the Taylor number, the
ﬂow regime eventually becomes fully turbulent.
From the experiments, Taylor found that the critical wave number at the instability onset
was kcrit = 3.12 which corresponds to a critical wave length of λcrit = 2πd/kcrit ≈2d. The
agreement between the experiments and the perturbation equations by Taylor has been
a prime veriﬁcation of the governing Navier-Stokes equations [2]. The Taylor-Couette
instability may be seen as counter-rotating vortices on the toroidal, which is known as
Taylor vortices [2, 43]. The streamlines in the ﬂow include helical ﬂows, in which the
vortices wrap around the center, which induce new vortices. The rates of these are in-
creasing for increasing Taylor numbers. The higher order wave modes eventually leads to
the turbulent regime.
Recktenwald [41] found by experiments, that varying the cylindrical Reynolds number
from 68.2 to 260.9 only varied the critical wave number from kcrit = 3.16 to kcrit = 3.13,
which give reason to believe that the inviscid approach may be reasonable for simulating
the ﬂow. Further, as seen from the results from Widnall [54, 55, 56], the vortex regimes
in the Taylor-Couette instability show similar behaviour compared to the instability in
vortex rings and ﬁlaments. Also, both the vortex ring- and pairs are centrifugal ﬂows,
and it makes sense to compare with known centrifugal ﬂows, such as the Taylor-Couette
ﬂow. As the critical wave length for the Taylor-Couette ﬂow becomes λcrit ≈2d, this may
be translated to the vortex ring as λcrit ≈4σ, where σ in this chapter is deﬁned as the
vortex core radius.
The Raleigh criterion is used for investigations of the bump vortex instability in Chap-
ter 5 on a simple vortex roller, to ﬁgure if the initial setup is stable or unstable. As
the simulations are primarely inviscid, investigations with the Taylor number would yield
Ta →∞. Therefore, as the critical wave number is almost independent on the Reynolds
number [41], the critical wave numbers and wave lengths from the simulations are to be
compared with the ones from the Taylor-Couette theory in Chapter 5 and 6. The latter
instability forms are possible instability forms to be compared with the vortex ring insta-
bility form. However, multiple other instabilities are known for centrifugal instabilities,
which stems from much more complex ﬂows, where the simple assumptions for the above
Taylor-Couette instability are not valid. These instabilities and other hydrodynamic in-
stability forms, which are not centrifugal will be perspectives and discussed in Chapter 7,
as well.
2.6
Unbounded Flow Diagnostics
For the investigation of the ﬂow development, some ﬂow diagnostics relevant for the
unbounded ﬂow are presented, based on the velocity- and the vorticity ﬁelds calculated.
These are used for the analysis of the accuracy of the simulations as well as indicators of
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
23
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
the present ﬂow regimes [48].
2.6.1
Conserved Quantities
Some quantities should be conserved for the ﬂow development, if the ﬂow is inviscid and
no energy input is present. The invariants of these ﬂow characteristics are deﬁned in a
closed volume, V, where the integral through this volume denotes the conserved quantity.
The ﬁrst quantity has already been deﬁned as the circulation, which was computeted
from the velocity ﬁeld over a closed curve, C, or by using Stokes theorem as the the ﬂux
through a surface, A. Recall
Γ =
I
C
u · dS =
Z
A
ω · ndA
The circulation is based on the zeroth moment of vorticity, ω. The rate of the change of
the zeroth moment is zero. This implies that the total circulation may be linked to the
zeroth moment of vorticity as
Γ =
Z
V
ωdV = 0
(2.6.1)
where the volume integrated vorticity ﬁeld yields the zero vector, 0. The linear impulse
L = (Lx, Ly, Lz) is deﬁned from the ﬁrst moment of vorticity, x × ω, as
L = 1
2
Z
V
x × ωdV
(2.6.2)
which equals the total force required to instantaneously generate a given ﬂow from rest.
For an unbounded incompressible ﬂow, the momentum,
R
udx, is indeterminate as the
integral is not fully convergent [42]. Hence the ﬁrst moment of vorticity oﬀers a more
convergent of the forcing with the impulse as for the momentum. The angular impulse,
A = (Ax, Ay, Az), is deﬁned from the second moment of vorticity, x × x × ω, as
A = 1
3
Z
V
x × (x × ω) dV
(2.6.3)
which, in analogy to classical mechanics, is the associated moment to the forcing of the
ﬂow passing through the closed volume, V. The last conserved quantity is the helicity
H =
Z
V
u · ωdV
(2.6.4)
which is an invariant of the inviscid Euler equations. This is a measure of the linkage of the
vorticity ﬁeld to the velocity ﬁeld. The physical interpretation is how the vortex lines are
convected with the ﬂow. The helicity is conserved, as the vortex lines are frozen in space
for an unbounded ﬂow domain. It is not conserved in viscous ﬂows due to reconnection
of vortex lines [60]. The global conservation theorems governed by the vorticity and the
circulation impose strong constaints for the high Reynolds number ﬂow [55].
24
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
2.6.2
Enstrophy and Numerical Diﬀusion
Another important diagnostic for the unbounded ﬂow is the kinetic energy. However,
some quantities are not conserved, such as the enstrophy
E =
Z
V
ω · ωdV
(2.6.5)
which is a measure of the rotational kinetic energy. That is a measure of the energy
dissipation due to vorticity [19]. The enstrophy is measured in a non-conserved volume.
Compared to the helicity, the enstrophy is neither conserved for viscous nor inviscid ﬂows,
due to the stretching of vortex lines in 3D [60]. It is directly linked to the kinetic energy,
which may be deﬁned directly from the velocity ﬁeld as E =
R
V u · udV , where the
analogy between the kinetic energy and the rotational kinetic energy (enstrophy) is seen
from the deﬁnition of the vorticity in Equation (2.1.4). Similar to the linear impulse, the
convergence is ensured by using the ﬁrst moment of vorticity when computing the kinetic
energy. Therefore the integral is given as
E =
Z
V
u · (x × ω) dV
(2.6.6)
The rate of change in kinetic energy is non-zero as the enstrophy will be non-zero for a
vortical ﬂow. The energy dissipation is, as mentioned, governed by the enstrophy, and
the rate of change of kinetic energy may then be deﬁned as
dE
dt = −νE
(2.6.7)
where ν is the viscosity. For an inviscid ﬂow, the kinematic viscosity is non-present, i.e.
(ν = 0). However, the viscosity may still be non-zero, when estimating from Equation
(2.6.7), yielding
νE = −1
E
dE
dt
(2.6.8)
where νE is the eﬀective viscosity, which measures the total viscosity in the ﬂuid domain.
If the ﬂow is inviscid, the eﬀective viscosity is then a measure of the numerical diﬀusion,
which deﬁnes the computational accuracy of the simulation. Thereby, increasing accuracy
is seen for decreasing eﬀective viscosity. In case of the 3D psuedo ﬂow of 2D extended
vortex rollers, the transverse enstrophy is calculated as
Ez =
Z
V
ω2
x + ω2
ydV
(2.6.9)
and is used to identify the three dimensional eﬀects in these types of ﬂows.
The modal kinetic energy and the modal enstrophy among wave numbers are calculated,
respectively, as
E(k) =
Z 1
2

b
ψ · bω∗+ bω · b
ψ∗
dA
(2.6.10)
E(k) =
Z
bω · bω∗dA
(2.6.11)
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
25
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 2. VORTICITY AND VORTEX DYNAMICS
where (b)∗is the complex conjugate. In 3D, the modal energy and enstrophy are calculated
in spectral space using polar coordinates, and in pseudo 3D (2D vorticity patch) the cal-
culation is done in cartesian coordinates with wave number, kz, in the periodic direction.
The structure and dimensions of the vortex ring, may also be calculated from the vorticity
ﬁeld. That is, the centroid velocity, ring radius and core radius. The centroid of the vortex
ring is calculated from the ﬁrst moment of enstrophy, ω · ω, as
XE = 1
E
Z
V
x (ω · ω) dV
(2.6.12)
which is normalized with the enstrophy. The centroid measures the position of the center
of the vortex ring in the propagational axis, x. The vortex ring radius is, similar to the
centroid, calculated from the ﬁrst moment of enstrophy as
RE = 1
E
Z
V
r (ω · ω) dV
(2.6.13)
which is also normalized by the enstrophy. The only diﬀerence from the centroid is the
integration over of radial axis, instead of the propagational axis. For Gaussian vortex
rings, in the laminar regime, the ring is axisymmetric, and the core radius may be ex-
tracted from the ﬁrst and second radial moments of the azimuthal vorticity, which are
normalized by the circulation. The ﬁrst radial moment may be interpreted as the radial
average weight of the azimuthal vorticity, and the core radius, σ, is its spread. The present
procedure was used by Archer, Thomas and Coleman [3] for estimation of the core radius
of a Gaussian vortex ring as the assumption of an axisymmetric core in the laminar stage
was reasonable. However, as the bump vortex ring has a integrated circulation equal to
zero, this procedure may not not be used, and instead the vortex core radius is measured
at the spatial point through core, in which the magnitude of vorticity equals |ω|= 10−5.
26
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:43==
3
Numerical Method
Vortex Methods are characterised by the use of the vorticity-velocity form of the Navier-
Stokes equations and by the Lagrangian discretization of the vorticity. The Lagrangian
form of the vorticity-velocity form of the Navier-Stokes equations was derived in Chapter
2. Advantages in using the vorticity variables instead of the Eulerian velocity-pressure
form, are that the pressure term must be solved seperately by an elliptic function, and the
convection term has severe time step limits for stability. The explicit discretization of the
convective term of the Navier-Stokes equations and the associated stabibility constraints,
are avoided by the use of the Lagrangian formulation [18]. The stability criterions for
the methods are described in this section. Vortex methods have, as mentioned, removed
the pressure and does naturally satisfy the continuity criterion, which simpliﬁes the the
numerical methods for solving the equations. If the viscous diﬀusion is low, the volume
of ﬂuid, with signiﬁcant magnitude of vorticity, is a small fraction os the total ﬂuid vol-
ume, which results in a more compact formulation with vorticity than by the velocity [48].
Conventional vortex methods are purely Lagrangian, as they only use discrete particle
formulatins, where the ﬂow is governed by the particle-particle interaction. This however,
shows to be computationally costly for large number of particles, as the N-body problem
scales O(N 2). Furthermore, the method becomes inaccurate when the particles become
odd located and the convervation laws are to some extend avoided [13].
The problems are solved, by introducing a hybrid particle-mesh vortex method, where the
discrete particles, for every time step, is interpolated onto a Cartesian mesh, M, where
the Poisson equations (2.2.3) and (2.2.4) are solved, and then interpolated back to the
advection of particles for the next time step [14, 15, 17]. The hybrid particle-mesh vortex
method scales O(N log N) with the N-body problem, which speeds up the calculation
process. Re-meshing for every time step, the consistency and accuracy are ensured for
this method.
This chapter introduces the discretization and steps of the hybrid particle-mesh vortex
method. The interpolation kernel used for the particle-mesh mesh-particle interpolation
is presented and discussed. A high order regularisation method for solving the Poisson
equations with Gaussian smoothing is brieﬂy described, and so is a method to solve
the Poisson equation in a semi periodic-unbounded domain. Finite diﬀerence schemes of
varying order, are derived for the diﬀerential operators of the discrete form of the vorticity.
A method for re-projecting the vorticity ﬁeld is also presented for the ensurance of the
divergence free vorticity formulation, which was seen in Equation (2.1.5).
27
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 3. NUMERICAL METHOD
3.1
Hybrid Vortex-In-Cell Method
The hybrid particle-mesh vortex method is called the Vortex-In-Cell method and will for
the remainer be referred to as VIC. Particles are initialized with particle strength, Γp,
which by the VIC are interpolated to underlying, uniform Cartesian mesh, to compute
the mesh vector potential and further the velocity ﬁeld. The eﬃcient method uses vortex
particles which are deﬁned from the the continious vorticity ﬁeld by the convolution
ω(xp) =
Z ∞
−∞
ω(x)δ (xp −x) dx
(3.1.1)
where xp is the discrete particle position and δ is the convolution kernel, deﬁned as the
Dirac’s delta function.
The linear superposition of vortex particles using the particle
strengh yields the approximated vortex particle ﬁeld
ω(x, t) ≈
X
p
Γpζ (x −xp)
(3.1.2)
where ζ is the smooth approximation form of the convolution kernel δ described later
in this chapter. Combining the discrete vorticity ﬁeld from Equation (3.1.2), with the
Lagrangian form of the vorticity-velocity form of the Navier-Stokes equations, (2.1.10),
yields a set of ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODE’s) for the Lagrangian particle position
and the rate of change of circulation as
Dxp
Dt = u(xp, t)
(3.1.3)
DΓp
Dt = αp (ω · ∇h) u +
1
ReΓ
∇2
hΓp
(3.1.4)
where αp = h3 and h is an uniform spacing. The particle strength vector may be deﬁned
as Γp = αpω = h3ω, and the discrete Lagrangian rate of change of vorticity thus becomes
Dωp
Dt = (ω · ∇h) u +
1
ReΓ
∇2
hωp
(3.1.5)
The velocity and vorticity ﬁelds are solved in Fourier space on the Cartesian mesh, which
scales O(N log N) with the number of particles or mesh cells used. The integral of the
particle derivatives in Equation (3.1.3) and (3.1.5) are solved explicitely using a third
order low storage Runge-Kutta scheme [58]. Vortex methods do not fulful the usual CFL
condition of the convection for the stability constaint of explicit mesh-based methods as
∆t|u|∞
h
< O(1)
(3.1.6)
The stability constaints are governed from the crossing of particle trajectories, and does
not include the mesh resolution. The time step is governed by the strain time scale as
∆t|∇u|∞< C1
(3.1.7)
where C1 is a constant that depends on the integration scheme [40]. The viscous diﬀusion
introduces a Fourier stability critetia, which is governed by the explicit discretization,
where the critetia becomes
28
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. NUMERICAL METHOD
∆t ν
h2 < C2
(3.1.8)
The stability criteria for the diﬀusion may be combined with Equation (3.1.7) to deﬁne
the particle Reynolds number condition [11] as
|∇u|∞
h2
ν < C2
(3.1.9)
The integration dependent convection constant C1 is of order O(1) and the diﬀusion
constant, C2 = 1
4 for forward Euler time stepping.
3.1.1
Interpolation Kernel
The convergence and accuracy in conventional vortex methods are weakened due to in-
homogeneous particle distribution. The adaptivity is ensured by remeshing after each
time step of the simulation. The particles are distributed onto the uniform Cartesian
mesh, M, using an interpolation kernel, where the Poisson equations are solved on the
grid nodes of mesh. The order of the interpolation kernel determines the accuracy of the
interpolation between the particle and the Cartesian mesh. Once the velocity ﬁeld and
the vorticity ﬁeld are calculated in Fourier space and re-deﬁned in physical quantities, the
particle derivatives are remeshed from the mesh by the interpolation. The particle-mesh
interpolation is given as
Ξm =
X
p
ΞpW (ξ) ,
Ξp =
X
p
ΞmW (ξ)
(3.1.10)
where Ξp and Ξm are quantities on the particle- and mesh form, respectively. W (ξ) =
(W(ξx), W(ξy), W(ξz)) is the 3D interpolation kernel, where
ξ = |xp −xm|
h
= |xm −xp|
h
(3.1.11)
The schematic interpolation may be seen in Figure 3.1.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: (a) The concept domain of the VIC algorithm with Lagrangian particles, marked
with red dots, and the Cartesian mesh (
). Particle-to-Mesh interpolation shown with arrow
(
) and Mesh-to-Particle interpolation shown with arrow (
). Figure from [40]. (b) Close-
up to one mesh cell with interpolated particle on mesh node, marked with solid dots, and the
advected particles, marked with hollow circles. Figure from [38].
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
29
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 3. NUMERICAL METHOD
The order of the kernel is governed by the point support of the mesh. The most simple
kernel is the O(h2) accuracy M2 kernel, that corresponds to linear interpolation [46]. This
is also called the Cloud-in-Cell (CIC) [48]. The M2 kernel is given as
M2(ξ) =
(
0
if |ξ|> 1
1 −|ξ|
if |ξ|≤1
(3.1.12)
The second kernel, which has been used in the work of Rasmussen [40] and Rees et. al.
[51], is the O(h3) accuracy M ′
4 kernel, which uses four-point support. The M ′
4 kernel is
given as
M ′
4(ξ) =





0
if |ξ|> 2
1
2 (2 −|ξ|)2 (1 −|ξ|)
if 1 < |ξ|≤2
1 −5|ξ|2
2
+ 3|ξ|3
2
if |ξ|≤1
(3.1.13)
The last kernel, which is the main choise of this project, is the O(h4) accuracy M ∗
6 kernel,
which uses six-point support [51]. The M ∗
6 kernel is given as
M ∗
6(ξ) =









0
if |ξ|> 3
−1
24 (|ξ|−2) (|ξ|−3)3 (5|ξ|−8)
if 2 < |ξ|≤3
1
24 (|ξ|−1) (|ξ|−2) (25|ξ|3−114|ξ|2+153|ξ|−48)
if 1 < |ξ|≤2
−1
12 (|ξ|−1) (25|ξ|4−38|ξ|3−3|ξ|2+12|ξ|+12)
if |ξ|≤1
(3.1.14)
The three interpolation kernels are plotted in 1D in Figure 3.2.
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 3.2: The O(h2) M2 kernel (
), the O(h3) M′
4 kernel (
), and the O(h4) M∗
6 kernel
(
) for the particle-mesh- and the mesh-particle interpolation
If ξ = 0, the interpolation is exact for all kernels, as W (0) = 1.
30
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3. NUMERICAL METHOD
3.1.2
Unbounded Solution to the Poisson Equation
The convolution to the Poisson equation (2.2.3) is given as
ψ(x) =
Z
R
G (x −x′) ω(x′)dx′
(3.1.15)
where x and x′ are two points in space. The convolution for the Poisson Equation (2.2.4)
is given as
u(x) =
Z
R
K (x −x′) ω(x′)dx′ + U∞
(3.1.16)
which stems from a Biot-Savart relation and U∞is the freestream velocity vector [25, 40].
The convolution for the Green’s functions are deﬁned for the vector potential relation as
G(x) =
(
−1
2π log|x|
in 2D
1
4π|x|
in 3D
(3.1.17)
and for the velocity relation as K(x) = ∇G(x)× yielding the velocity kernel
K(x) =
(
−
1
2π|x|2x×
in 2D,
−
1
4π|x|3x×
in 3D,
where
x× =


0
−z
y
z
0
−x
−y
x
0


(3.1.18)
As stated, no continous solutions exist, meaning that the convolutions are solved dis-
cretely. The integral convolutions are solved from the vorticity ﬁeld for the vector poten-
tial and for the velocity through a Biot-Savart relation as
ψ = G ◦ω
(3.1.19)
u = K ◦ω
⇒
u = K ◦ω + U∞
(3.1.20)
where ◦denotes the discrete linear convoluion [25, 40]. The convolution is done using
Fourier Transforms yielding vector-products of Equation (3.1.19) and (3.1.20) in Fourier
space as
b
ψ = bGbω
(3.1.21)
bu = c
K bω
(3.1.22)
where b() denotes a quantity in Fourier space. Hence one entails periodicity of the Green’s
functions as well as ψ and ω.
It is convinient to use the G kernel and use spectral
diﬀerentation as it is a scalar and requires less storage than the K kernel. Therefore the
K kernel is not used. Thus the velocity ﬁeld may be related to the vector potential as
bu = ιk × b
ψ
(3.1.23)
where ι is the imaganary unit and k = (kx, ky, kz) is the wave number vector associated
to the Fourier coeﬃcients [25, 26]. Then bu should be inverse Fourier transformed to the
physical velocity ﬁeld. The solution technique, as well as a high order regularised Poisson
solver and a semi periodic-unbounded Poisson solver are all presented in this chapter.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
31
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 3. NUMERICAL METHOD
3.1.3
High Order Regularisation with Gaussian Smoothing
The analytical continous Green’s functions are singular at the origin’s, which make them
hard to calculate numerically [29]. Therefore, smoothing regularisation is implemtented,
to introduce a smooth discrete formulation of the Green’s functions to synthesize a con-
tinous solution to the Poisson equations. The contionous Green’s function integral con-
volution is given as
∇2G(x) = −δ (x −x′)
(3.1.24)
where the smooth form of the impulse response equation is given as
∇2G(x −x′) = −ζ (x −x′)
(3.1.25)
where the analogy between the Dirac’s delta function and it’s smooth form is −δ (x −x′) =
−ζ (x −x′). The smoothened form of the discrete vorticity ﬁeld is given by the convolu-
tion
ωϵ = ζϵ ◦ω
(3.1.26)
where ζϵ is a radially-symmetric ﬁlter function with a regularisation radius ϵ [25]. In order
to ensure the conservation of the simulation, the zeroth moment of the ﬁlter function is
deﬁned as
Z
Rj ζϵ(x)dx = 1
(3.1.27)
where j is the number of spatial dimensions. The smooth discrete integration kernel, Gϵ,
for solving the Poisson equation (2.2.3) is hence deﬁned as
∇2Gϵ(x −x′) = −ζϵ (x −x′)
(3.1.28)
The smooth discrete vector potential, deﬁned by the discrete convolution in Equation
(3.1.19) may then be calculated by convolutions as
ψϵ = G ◦(ζϵ ◦ω) = (G ◦ζϵ) ◦ω
⇒
ψϵ = Gϵ ◦ω
(3.1.29)
The smoothing function is a function of the nondimensional radius
ϱ = r
ϵ
(3.1.30)
and the regularisation is done with Gaussian smoothing from the smoothing function
ζϵ(r) = 1
ϵj ζ
r
ϵ

(3.1.31)
The Gaussian regularisation kernels are derived in details in [24, 25, 26], and extended to
reach a high order convergence. The O(ϱ10) regularised integration kernel may be seen in
Appendix B.
The regularised integration kernel in 3D is plotted in Figure 3.3.
32
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. NUMERICAL METHOD
-5
0
5
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Figure 3.3: The 3D integration kernel regularised with Gaussian smoothing, with regularisation
radius, ϵ = 1.5, (
), and the non-regularised kernel from Equation (3.1.17) (
).
The regularised kernel is now converged towards a ﬁnite value at x = 0 and towards the
non-regularised kernels for x →±∞.
The Poisson equation is solved in Fourier space using Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT) by
zero padding the domain, i.e. doubling the spatial ghost cells with zeros to avoid periodic
images. Next the equations are solved in their spectral wave number space. The spectral
domain is bounded by k ∈[−ks/2, .., ks/2], where ks is the sampling wave number corre-
sponding to the Nyqvist condition.
3.1.4
Semi Periodic-Unbounded Solver
For the simulation of rotating vortex rollers, the Helmholtz theorem is only satisﬁed if
the domain is extended to ±∞, i.e.
periodic boundary conditions.
In this case, the
Laplace operator in the Poisson equation (2.2.3), is splitted into unbounded directions
and periodic directions [12]. In this project, the periodicity is in the z-direction, which
yields a Helmholtz equation
∇2
xyψ + ∂2ψ
∂z2 = −ω
(3.1.32)
This may be Fourier transformed in the periodic z-direction, which yields the spectral
Helmholtz equation as
∇2
xy b
ψ −kz b
ψ = −bω
(3.1.33)
where b
ψ(x, y, kz) and bω(x, y, kz). The Green’s function solutions are derived by Hejlesen
[24] and are shown in Appendix B. Whether or not kz is periodic, the spectral Green’s
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
33
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. NUMERICAL METHOD
function, given by the 2D radial inverse Fourier transform, may hence be deﬁned as
bG(r, kz) =
(
1
2π log (r)
if
kz = 0
1
2πK0 (r|kz|)
if
kz ̸= 0
(3.1.34)
where K0 is the modiﬁed Bessel function of second kind. Chatelain and Koumoutsakos
[12] proposed that the singularity at the origin is dealt with by averaging the cell values.
This was later shown by Rasmussen [40] to have a pure convergence rate at O(h2). To
reach a high order convergence for the semi periodic-unbounded solver, the regularisation
method of the fully unbounded domain may be applied in same fasion as in [24, 47]. The
regularised Green’s function in spectral space with two unbounded xy-directions, and one
periodic z-direction is given by its radial inverse Fourier transform in Appendix B.
3.1.5
Finite Diﬀerence Schemes
The diﬀerential operators, i.e. the nabla operator, ∇, and the laplace operator, ∇2, for
the calculation of the particle derivatives in Equation (3.1.5), are approximated using
Finite Diﬀerence schemes of varying order. The schemes are constructed as Central Dif-
ference schemes (CDS), which use the ith stencil as the center point and then use evenly
distributed stencils around the center stencil to deﬁne the order. The number of stencils
needed to achieve the order is q = a + b + 1, where a is the Upwind stencils and b is
the the Downwind stencils [5]. In the present pmlib, the O(h2) and O(h4) schemes are
implemented. Higher order schemes i.e. O(h6) and O(h8) are used in [39]. These schemes
are to be implemented in the present pmlib. The derivation is done following the method-
ologies in [5, 22]. The Finite Diﬀerence coeﬃcient associated to the ith stencil for the ﬁrst
derivative is by deﬁnition zero, and therefore not shown. The schemes are isotropic in all
directions, and are given by some arbitrary function f. The topology of ghost cells has
been extended to include enough mesh cells for the O(h6) and O(h8) schemes. The Finite
Diﬀerence schmes of varying order may be seen in Appendix B.
3.1.6
Re-Projecting the Vorticity Field
As has already been deﬁned in Chapter 2, the divergence of the expression of vortic-
ity, Equation (2.1.4), yielded the divergence free expression in Equation (2.1.5).
The
solenoidal vector potential for describing the velocity was deﬁned in Equation (2.2.1),
where adding a scalar potential, φ, yields the Helmholtz decomposition. Equation (2.1.5)
and (2.2.1) are for convinience repeated as
∇· ω = ∇· (∇× u) ,
u = ∇× ψ + ∇φ
The decomposition replaces the velocity ﬁeld with the vector potential vector and the
scalar potential [27]. For this, the divergence of the vector potential is zero. Due to
the ﬂow is rotational and divergence free, the scalar potential is neglected as ∇φ = 0.
Therefore the Helmholtz decomposition in Equation (2.2.1), combined with the expression
of the vorticity in Equation (2.1.4), yields the Poisson equation (2.2.3). The divergence
of the vorticity may hence be deﬁned as function of the solenoidal vector potential as
∇· ω = −∇2 (∇· ψ)
(3.1.35)
34
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. NUMERICAL METHOD
As mentioned, this will in theory be zero, due to the deﬁnation of the divergence free vector
potential . However, the particle trajectories, which are governed by the vector potential,
are solved numerically, where a ﬁnite order of accuracy must be deﬁned. This causes
numerical errors in the particle-mesh interpolation, the solving of the Poisson equation,
the Finite Diﬀerence etc. As a consequence, these errors will produce a vorticity ﬁeld, eω,
that is not entirely divergence free [27, 40]. Therefore the vorticity ﬁeld must be corrected
as
ω = eω + ∇

∇· e
ψ

(3.1.36)
where ∇· e
ψ ̸= 0 is the divergence of the non-corrected vector potential. The correction is
done in the Poisson solver, described earlier in this chapter. For each step, the divergence
of the error vorticity ﬁeld, is calculated from the non-corrected vector potential in the
Poisson solver as
ϑ = ∇· eω = −∇2 
∇· e
ψ

(3.1.37)
The correction is done to a set threshold, ϑε, that deﬁnes the tolerence of divergence in
the simulation.
3.2
pmlib Outline
The outline of the Vortex-In-Cell algorithm is seen in Appendix B.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
35
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 3. NUMERICAL METHOD
36
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:53==
4
Numerical Inﬂuence on the
Vortex Ring Instability
In this chapter, the inﬂuence of the numerical setup, on the vortex ring instability, is
invested. The aim is to ﬁgure out whether the onset to instability can be moved in time,
or whether the lifetime of the vortex ring will avoid the instability, due to the numerical
setup. If the vortex ring instability is indeed independent of the numerical setup, it is
also of interest to ﬁnd the most accurate numerical setup within a computational limit,
to further investigate the physical instabilities.
It should be noted, that the aim of this chapter is not to identify which physical stability,
that may be present. This is discussed in the remaining chapters.
The most important conclusions from the earlier work in [6] are repeated with respect to
the arbitrary c-bump parameter, and it’s inﬂuence of the initial setup and onset to the
instability. The spatial resolution are to be increased to 512 cells over one dimension of
the initial mesh. The eﬀects of increasing the spatial resolution are invested with respect
to the adaptive time step and the accuracy of the simulation. The higher order Finite Dif-
ference schemes, O(h6) and O(h8) to calculate the particle derivatives are tested both on
an inviscid and a slightly viscous, Re = 1 · 107, ﬂow. Hejlesen [24, 25, 26] investigated the
regularisation kernels to solve the Poisson equation, and an arbitrary order regularisation
could be reached. Therefore, the inﬂuence of the regularisation order is not investigated
further.
Varying diagnostics from Chapter 2 are used to investigate the numerical setup. These are
also used for investigation of the onset to instabilities which are compared to isocontours
of the vorticity at the instability onset time step.
4.1
Numerical Setup
The simulations are set up in a Cartesian domain with spatial dimensions x = [−0.5; 0.5],
y = [−1.0; 1.0] and z = [−1.0; 1.0], where the mesh cell size is governed by the spatial
resolution. For the vortex ring simulation, the domain is unbounded. The initial time step
size is dt = 0.01, the CFL number is 0.5 and the Fourier number is 0.5. It has been proved
by multiple authors, that the O(h4) M ∗
6 interpolation kernel increases the convergence
rate and the accuracy of the particle-mesh mesh-particle interpolation compared to the
O(h2) M2 Vortex-In-Cloud and the O(h3) M
′
4 kernels, and therefore only the M ∗
6 kernel
is used for the particle-mesh mesh-particle interpolation. Re-meshing is done for each
37
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
time step for the ensurence of the convergence in the simulation with a tolerence of 10−5,
and re-patching is done for every 10th time step with a tolerence of 10−6. A maximum
tolerence of the divergence in the simulation is set to 0.01. The regularisation radius is
ﬁxed at ϵ = 1.5. As mentioned the order of regularisation is not changed, but ﬁxed at
O(h10). The time integration for each time step is calculated using a O(dt3) Runge-Kutta
integration scheme. The simulations are primarely inviscid with the exception of the test
of the Finite Diﬀerence schemes, where the Reynolds number is varied from Re = ∞to
Re = 1 · 107.
4.1.1
Initial Core Distribution of Vorticity
The initial core distribution of vorticity is governed by the arbitrary c-bump parameter.
From Equation (2.4.4), it can be seen, that by increasing c, the kurtosis of the bump
stream function is also increasing. As a result, most of the vorticity is distributed in the
center of the vortex core, and the vorticity is rapidly decreasing radially from the vortex
core center. Therefore, by increasing the c value, the vortex core radius is decreasing.
A convergence study of the initial vortex core radius, normalised with the vortex ring
diameter, is seen in Figure 4.1.
0
100
200
300
400
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Figure 4.1: Initial core radius as function of the arbitrary bump c-parameter. σ is estimated
where |ω|= 10−5 spatially.
The value of c is varied as 10, 100, 200, 300 and 400. It is seen that the vortex core radius
is converging towards approximately σ = 0.05. By increasing c, and hence decreasing the
vortex core radius, the computational cost is also reduced as far less vortex particles are
needed for the simulation. Also, for low values of c, the vortex ring tends to shed laminar
vortex ﬁlaments in the wake, even before becoming unstable. By increasing the c value,
the size of the shedded ﬁlaments becomes much smaller, and also the time of shedding is
moved to a later time. The aim is to keep the vortex ring smooth and intact until the
38
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
instability onset, in which azimuthal waves develop along the toroidal axis of the ring.
In Figure 4.2, the initial vortex ring is seen from the side for varying values of c. The
laminar vortex ﬁlaments in the wake are also seen.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.2: Isosurfaces of the vortex ring in the xy-plane. (a) Initial vorticity distribution with
c = 10. (b) Vorticity distribution with shedded laminar vortex ﬁlaments in the wake at c = 10.
(c) Initial vorticity distribution with c = 400. (d) Vorticity distribution with small amounts of
shedded laminar vortex ﬁlaments in the wake at c = 400
Only c = 10 and c = 400 are shown. The ring is propagating in the posive x-direction
if the circulation becomes non-zero. The bump vortex ring has, as mentioned, an initial
zero circulation, and the non-zero circulation may be caused by numerical eﬀects. The
core radius inﬂuence of c is clearly seen. The view is not normalised in time, as the vortex
ring diameter is decreasing in time, which can not be seen in these ﬁgures. Also, it should
be noticed, that the two setups are diﬀerent and hence the adaptivity of the time step,
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
39
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
is not similar. Therefore the time of the laminar sheddings in the wake are diﬀerent.
However, it is clearly seen that large laminar vortex ﬁlaments are seen in the wake of the
c = 10 ring, where almost none is seen for the c = 400 ring. At the next time step for the
c = 400 ring, which can be seen in Figure 4.3, the instability onset is present, meaning
that the laminar shedding, which can barely be seen in time step 275, may inﬂuence the
onset to the instability. This is investigated further in Chapter 6. It can also be seen that
the vortex ring has propagated longer in space for the c = 10 as the velocity induction is
inﬂuenced by the vortex core.
For the c = 10 ring, the azimuthal magnitude of vorticity is not symmetric. This is not
clearly seen in the initial time step, and therefore must be caused to the azimuthal ve-
locities and the propagation of the ring. For Gaussian initial distributions, only vortex
rings of inﬁnite thin cores are solutions to the Navier Stokes equations [3, 4, 45]. For
simulations with Gaussian initial distribution of vorticity, the transition from the sym-
metric Gaussian distribution to the non-Gaussian equilibrium state, causes the sheddings
of laminar vortex ﬁlaments in the wake. Hence the behaviour in the early stages of the
bump vortex ring, tends to be similar to the Gaussian initial distributed vortex rings.
Therefore, the shedding point can be used as a starting point for which it is believed, that
the vortex ring has reached an equilibrium state. The asymmetry seen for the c = 10 vor-
tex ring, may also be seen for the c = 400 vortex ring, but the asymmetry is much smaller,
as this initial distribution of vorticity is closer to a solution to the Navier Stokes equations.
The onset to the instability, seen in the zy-plane is seen for the c = 400 vortex ring
in Figure 4.3a. In Figure 4.3b the associated energy spectrum among wave numbers is
plotted for the time t∗≈20, in which the instability occurs.
(a)
10 0
10 1
10 2
10 -25
10 -20
10 -15
10 -10
10 -5
(b)
Figure 4.3: (a) The vortex ring at c = 400 at the onset to instability and (b) the Energy
spectrum at the onset to instability.
The visualisations of the c = 100, c = 200 and c = 300 rings are seen in the xy-plane and
the zy-plane, respectively, in Appendix C. For the c = 400, no sheddings in the wake are
seen in the instability time. For the case of c = 100, a laminar shedded ﬁlament is seen
in the wake at the time t∗≈42 where the instability occurs. For the cases of c = 200
40
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
and c = 300, much smaller sheddings are seen in the instability time t∗≈30 and t∗≈24,
respectively. In these cases the sheddings are still attached to the initial state. It is also
seen that the instability time happens earlier in time, if the c value is increased. This is
due to the adaptivity of the time step, which is mesh dependent, and hence dependent
on c. The instability happens close to time step number 300 for all vortex rings. As
the vortex ring with c = 400 sheds a very small vortex ﬁlament and the instability onset
happens around the same time step, this ring proves to be more stable, visually.
On the energy spectrum, it is seen that every 4th mode has signaﬁcantly more energy
associated, compared to the other modes.
This is also seen on the isosurfaces of the
vortex ring, as the instability occur in four nodes around the toroidal axis. If the vortex
ring is simulated later in time, new modes, dividable by 4, will continue to occur on the
toroidal axis, and the circular stage will converge towards a squared stage [6]. At wave
number k = 4, the energy is increased, and the associated wave length may be calcu-
lated as λ = 2π
4 = π
2, which may also be seen in Figure 4.3a. The reason for the critical
wave numbers being distributed in modes dividable by 4, may be due to the Cartesian
mesh-grid setup. It is seen to be independent of the numerical setup for vortex rings
in this thesis. Also, the modes associated to high wave numbers k = 176 and k = 228
have the most amount of energy. For typical wave instabilities [1, 9, 10, 16, 33], the wave
modes associated to low wave numbers have the most energy. Hence, this give indications,
that the wave numbers of the smallest numerical perturbation scales tend to be signiﬁcant.
The maximum vorticity as function of the c-parameter and the temporal variation of the
maximum vorticity can be seen in Figure 4.4.
0
100
200
300
400
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(a)
0
10
20
30
40
0
5
10
15
20
25
(b)
Figure 4.4:
(a) Initial maximum magnitude of vorticity as function of the arbritrary c-
parameter and (b) the temporal variation in the maximum magnitude of vorticity for varying
c = 10 (
), c = 100 (
), c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
)
The maximum vorticity at the initial setup is slowly converging for increasing values of
c, where the maximum vorticity at c = 400 is |ω|≈7.6. This has already been seen
from the bump function, where the vorticity distribution in Equation (2.4.9) has lower
kurtosis for lower values of c. This means that the vorticity is more evenly distributed
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
41
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
in the vortex core for c = 10, and therefore the maximum vorticity decreases. For the
temporal variations of the maximum vorticity, it is seen that the magnitudes decrease
in time, which is the simulation time until the equilibrium time. The points in time, in
which the maximum vorticity rapidly increases, corresponds to the onset to instability.
The temporal cut-oﬀfor Figure 4.4b is at the onset to instability for the c = 100 vortex
ring. The c = 10 vortex does not become unstable within the computational limit set for
the simulations. The centroid position in the propagation x-direction and the vortex ring
radius for varying values of c are shown in Figure 4.5.
0
10
20
30
40
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
(a)
0
10
20
30
40
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(b)
Figure 4.5: Temporal variation of vortex ring radius (a) and centroid position (b) for varying
c = 10 (
), c = 100 (
), c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
)
The ring radius is at the initial stage equal to the setup of RE/(2R0) ≈R0 for the
c = 100, 200, 300, 400 vortex rings. The initial radius for the c = 10 vortex ring is ≈0.52.
The reason for this, is the asymmetry of the vortex core, which is a consequence moves
the core center radially from the centroid position in the vortex ring. The behaviour of
all rings are similar, as the vortex ring radius is immediately increasing to a maximum
point, and then decreases in time. The reason for the decrease in the late stages is that
new wavy modes occur, that extracts energy from the initial ring. The decrease in the
early stages is caused by the non-equilibrium stage.
As seen from Equation (2.4.14), the centroid velocity is initially zero for all rings, which is
indeed true for the simulated cases, as the centroid position in the x-direction is also zero.
The centroid position changes rapidly for the c = 10 as the large asymmetry of vorticity
in the vortex core induces a larger velocity gradient. The centroid position is close to zero
for the higher values of c in the early stages. The rate of change in the centroid position
increases towards the onset to instability. The centroid position in time, i.e. the centroid
velocity is decreasing for increasing c, which again indicates, that high valued c-rings are
closer to a solution to the Navier-Stokes equations, because the circulation is approaching
zero. The vortex ring radius and the centroid position is calculated from the enstrophy,
which relates to the eﬀective viscosity, which may be seen in Figure 4.6 for varying values
of c.
42
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
0
10
20
30
40
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
(a)
0
10
20
30
40
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10 -9
(b)
Figure 4.6: Temporal variation of (a) the enstrophy and (b) the eﬀective viscosity for varying
c = 100 (
), c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
)
The kinetic energy (not shown) is conerserved in the early stages for all setups, and the
initial kinetic energy is converging towards the kinetic energy associated to the c = 400
vortex ring. As the vortex core radius in much larger for the c = 10 vortex ring, the
kinetic energy is higher. The kinetic energy decreases at a small rate in the early stages,
as the enstrophy is increasing due to instability. The behaviour of the enstrophy is clearly
close connected to the vortex ring radius as the vorticity is distributed in the radial axis.
Even though the centroid position is calculated much similar to the vortex ring radius, it
diﬀers in the sense that the vorticity is zero in the propagational axis, and therefore the
behaviour with respect to the enstrophy is not trivial.
As the simulations are inviscid, the eﬀective viscosity is purely caused by numerical diﬀu-
sion and is in good relation to the enstrophy, as the dissipation only occur due to numerical
eﬀects. As very large numerical diﬀusion is seen in the late stages, the eﬀective viscosity
is only shown from νE = O(10−9), where the simulation is stable for positive eﬀective
viscosity. The results are only of interest until the point in which the numerical diﬀusion
becomes negative.
The eﬀective viscosity for the c = 10 ring is not shown as it provides very large numer-
ical diﬀusion. At the time t∗≈4 the simulation is instantaniously unstable, which was
also seen from the divergence of vorticity (not shown). However, the simulation is stable
thereafter. The instability limits spotted on the isosurfaces for the diﬀerent vortex rings,
correspond well to the numerical diﬀusion. The large numerical instabilities seen at the
times in which the vortex ring instability occur, are due to the three-dimensional eﬀects
of the governing equations become signiﬁcant, and many new small computational scales
become present.
It is once again seen, that the accuracy is increasing for increasing c, which also makes
the instability occur earlier in time, which reduces the simulation time. The circulation
is seen for varying c in Figure 4.7.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
43
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
10 -6
Figure 4.7: Temporal variation of circulation for varying c = 10 (
), c = 100 (
), c = 200
(
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
)
For the bump vortex ring, the initial distribution of vorticity ensures the value of zero
circulation. As the simulation approaches the onset to instability, the circulation becomes
negative before rapid ﬂuctuations at the instability time step. The c = 10 vortex ring
is negative already after one time step, where the circulation is zero until the instability
onset for high values of c. The time in which the circulation becomes non-zero is where
the laminar sheddings occur, and the ring starts to propagate. The magnitude of the
circulation governs the size of the laminar sheddings. This is in very good agreement with
the visualizations of the vortex rings in Figure 4.2 and Figures C.3, C.4, C.5 in Appendix
C.
4.1.2
Spatial Resolution
The spatial resolution should be high enough to capture all modes that are present in the
transition from the initial to the instability stage. The spatial resolution was increased
from h/L = 256 in [6] to h/L = 512 for the c-bump validations in this project. Here h
is the uniform grid spacing for one Cartesian cell and L is the domain length. A higher
spatial resolution will increase the accuracy, but also increase the computational cost,
as the time step will decrease and more particles are needed. The spatial resolution is
investigated from a very coarse mesh resolution of h/L = 32 and doubling the resolution
up to h/L = 512. If h/L = 1024, the computational cost exceeds the assigned 96 CPU
cores, and is therefore not investated. The amount of vortex particles and the adaptive
time step for varying spatial resolution are seen in Figure B.1 in Appendix B.
As the vortex particles are interpolated from the mesh, the amount of particles are in-
creasing for increasing spatial resolution. The initial number of particles is not exactly
equal to (h/L)3. This may be due do the ﬁnite order of truncation for the mesh-particle
interpolation. At the onset to instability, the amount of vortex particles is increasing due
44
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
to the ﬂow becomes more complex, and more particles are needed to capture the wave
modes. The time step is dependent on the mesh resolution to stabilize the simulation.
Due to a coarse spatial resolution, the time step size for h/L = 32 becomes very large. It
is also seen, that the rate of change in the adaptive time step is large for the coarse mesh
resolution compared to the ﬁner meshes, h/L = 256 and h/L = 512. Even though the
amount of particles is much increased from h/L = 256 to h/L = 512, the time step size
is only increased at an O(12%). Thus the computational cost with regard to time, is not
too high. The eﬀective viscosity in Figure 4.8.
0
10
20
30
40
10 -12
10 -10
10 -8
10 -6
10 -4
10 -2
Figure 4.8:
Temporal variation of the eﬀective viscosity for varying spatial resolution: 32
(
), 64 (
), 128 (
), 256 (
) and 512 (
)
As the logarithmic scales are shown, the negative values are neglected. The eﬀective vis-
cosity for h/L = 256 becomes negative multiple times within t∗0 to t∗≈10, meaning that
it is not accurate enough. Also the order of accuracy is increasing by an approximate
O(100) each of the tested mesh resolutions.
Based on the divergence of vorticity (not shown), the spatial resolution for h/L = 32
captures way to few ﬂuctuations, which is also to be expected. The resoluton of h/L = 64
is very unstable in the beginning, but is stable in the later stages. However, the mesh
resolution for h/L = 128 exceeds the threshold even before becoming unstable. Therefore,
the mesh resolution should be at least h/L = 256 with respect to the tolerence in the
divergence The temporal variation of the enstrophy and the ﬁrst 5 enstrophy modes are
seen in Figure 4.9.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
45
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
0
10
20
30
40
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
10 -40
10 -30
10 -20
10 -10
10 0
(b)
Figure 4.9: (a) Temporal variation of enstrophy for varying spatial resolution: 32 (
), 128
(
), 256 (
) and 512 (
). (b) Temporal variation of the enstrophy modes: 0th (solid), 1st
(dashed), 4th (asterix) and 128th (circle) for spatial resolution h/L = 256 (
) and temporal
variation of the enstrophy modes: 0th (solid), 1st (dashed), 4th (asterix) and 228th (circle) for
spatial resolution h/L = 512 (
)
As the h/L = 64 resolution mesh is very unstable in the early stages, it is not shown
on the enstrophy. The rate of the change in the decrease of enstrophy for h/L = 128
is large compared to the higher resolution meshes. The behaviour is however similar for
h/L = 128 to h/L = 512 as the enstrophy is decreasing until the onset to instability and
then increasing at the onset, and then decreasing for later stages. Therefore h/L = 256
and h/L = 512 mesh resolution simulations are shown for the enstrophy modes. The ﬁrst
mode, the 4th mode and the high wave number associated to highest energy i.e. k = 128
and k = 228 for h/L = 256 and h/L = 512, respectively, are shown. The ﬁrst mode
initially increases and then becomes constant until the onset to instability, where new
wave modes exstact energy from the 0th mode. Again it is seen, that the enstrophy is
much higher for the 4th mode, than the ﬁrst mode, and the high wave numbers have even
higher associated energy. For a coarse mesh, the enstrophy modes are also decreasing as
it does not capture lower enstrophy modes. This is not shown.
4.1.3
Finite Diﬀerence Order for the Particle Derivatives
In the existing pmlib the O(h2) and the O(h4) Finite Diﬀerence schemes are implemented
to calculate the particle derivatives in Equation (2.1.10). By using more stencils, the
accuracy could be increased by the implemented O(h6) and O(h8) schemes. As already
stated, the central diﬀerence schemes require one more stencil than the order of the
scheme, as the implicit point stencil is the actual particle location. In the ﬁrst time steps,
the amount of ghost points downwind to the ith stencil are extended. That means that
the amount of ghost points is extended 3 stencils downwind for the O(h6) scheme and
4 stencils downwind for the O(h8) scheme. In Appendix C, the isosurfaces are seen for
vortex rings simulated with Re = ∞and Re = 1 · 107 using the O(h6) and the O(h8)
schemes. These are shown at the onset to instability, where no signiﬁcant diﬀerence is
seen between the Finite Diﬀerence schemes. The divergence of vorticity and the eﬀective
46
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
viscosity are seen for all Finite Diﬀerence schemes with Re = ∞in Figure 4.10.
0
10
20
30
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
(a)
0
10
20
30
10 -12
10 -10
10 -8
10 -6
(b)
Figure 4.10: (a) Temporal variation of divergence of vorticity and (b) eﬀective viscosity (neg-
ative data neglected), for varying Finite Diﬀerence order: O(h2) (
), O(h4) (
), O(h6)
(
) and O(h8) (
) at Re = ∞
A divergence free ﬂow is ensured to the tolerence for all Finite Diﬀerence orders, but is
clearly much higher for the O(h2) scheme, which includes too few stencils. This can also
be seen on the eﬀective viscosity (negative data neglected), as it becomes negative in the
early stages. The O(h6) scheme shows very good agreement to the O(h4) scheme with a
small improvement in accuracy. However the O(h8) diﬀeres much in behaviour compared
to the lower order schemes, and the instability limit is moved in time.
The reason for the large diﬀerence between the O(h6) and the O(h8) schemes may be
investigated by introducing a slightly viscous ﬂow with Re = 1 · 107, and the divergence
of vorticity and the eﬀective viscosity for this ﬂowcase may be seen in Figure 4.11.
0
10
20
30
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10 -7
(b)
Figure 4.11: (a) Temporal variation of divergence of vorticity and (b) eﬀective viscosity, for
varying Finite Diﬀerence order: O(h2) (
), O(h4) (
), O(h6) (
) and O(h8) (
) at
Re = 1 · 107
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
47
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
By introducing the Re = 1 · 107 ﬂowcase, viscous damping is applied to the simulation,
which may be seen from the divergence of vorticity the threshold values at t∗≈4 becomes
smoothened and less discontinuous. However, the behaviour of the O(h8) scheme is still
varying. The error may be seen on the eﬀective viscosity. As Re = 1 · 107, the viscosity
is 1 · 10−7, which is added to the eﬀective viscosity caused by numerical diﬀusion, eν, as
νE = ν + eν
(4.1.1)
One may notice, that this is only the case of the ﬁrst 3 schemes, but not for the O(h8)
scheme. Hence the bug may be caused by the diﬀusion term ν∇2ω. This is not investi-
gated further, and the O(h6) scheme is used for further investigations.
4.2
Conserved Diagnostics
The conserved diagnostics are to be validated for the numerical setup, which is based
on the linear- and angular impulses and the helicity, due to the ﬂow is inviscid. The
invariants are shown in Figure 4.12.
0
5
10
15
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10 -8
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
10 -13
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10 -13
(c)
0
5
10
15
20
-1
0
1
2
3
4
10 -13
(d)
Figure 4.12: (a) The linear impulse in the x-direction, (b) the linear impulse in the y-direction
(
) and z-direction (
), (c) the angular impulse in the y-direction (
) and z-direction
(
) and (d) the helicity
48
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
The diagnostics are shown for the setup of c = 400, spatial resolution of h/L = 512,
the O(h6) Finite Diﬀerence and the O(h10) regularisation kernel. The linear impulse in
the propagational x-direction is not conserved, which is avoided at the ﬁrst time step.
This is propably due to the asymmetry of the initial setup and the truncation until
the equlibrium. At the equalibrium state, which for this vortex ring, is at the onset to
instability, the linear impulse rapidly increases. The angular impulse in the x-direction
(not shown) is conserved to machine precision. The linear- and angular impulses in the y-
and z-directions are conserved to machine precision. The early indications of truncation
may be seen as ﬂuctuations with increasing amplitudes. The same behaviour is seen for
the helicity.
4.3
Summary
The vortex rings were simulated using the O(h4) M ∗
6 interpolation kernel in a Cartesian
domain. The c-bump parameter was seen to inﬂuence the distribution of vorticity in the
vortex core, and hence the vortex core radius. The initial core radius was converging
towards σ ≈0.05 for increasing c, where c = 400 was chosen as an optimum vortex ring
setup, based on smallest and latest sheddings of laminar vortex ﬁlaments in the wake.
These sheddings are proved to be caused by the non-equilibrium stages for Gaussian rings,
where similar behavious are seen for a bump ring. The critical wave modes are seen on the
toroidal axis at θ ∈[0, π
2, π, 3π
2 ] which is independent of the numerical setup. The time in
which the instability occurs depends on the number of particles which is governed by the
vortex core size and the mesh resolution. An optimum spatial mesh resolution is seen for
h/L = 512, which is suitable to capture all wave modes. The accuracy could be slightly
improven by applying the O(h6) Finite Diﬀerence schemes. The O(h8) Finite Diﬀerence
scheme was seen to diﬀer much in the diagnostics for the inviscid vortex ring. The error
was seen again when introducing physical viscosity to the simulation, which the scheme
was not able to capture. Hence the O(h6) scheme is chosen for further investigations.
For the numerical setup, only the linear impulse in the propagational x-direction was not
completely conserved, due to the truncation of the initial vortex ring setup, which is not
a true solution to the Navier-Stokes equations. The linear impulses in the yz-directions,
the angular impulses and the helicity were all conserved to machine precision.
The setup for the simulations in this chapter and the investigated wave numbers are
discussed with respect to the physical instability in remaining chapters.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
49
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 4. NUMERICAL INFLUENCE ON THE VORTEX RING INSTABILITY
50
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:67==
5
Simulation of Vortex Roller
Instability at Re = ∞
In this chapter, the instability of a 3D vortex roller, generated from periodic extended 2D
circular vorticity patches, is investigated. The Lagrangian material form of the vorticity
equation was shown in Equation (2.1.10) and is repeated for convenience as
Dω
Dt = (ω · ∇) u + ν∇2ω
For the 2D vorticity patch, extended to a pseudo 3D vortex roller by periodicity in the
z-direction, the vorticity ﬁeld becomes ω = (0, 0, ωz). As a consequence, the vorticity
stretching term, (ω · ∇) u, vanishes, and the rate of change of vorticity thus becomes
Dω
Dt = ν∇2ω
(5.0.1)
This means that the rate of change of vorticity in 2D becomes a pure diﬀusion problem.
For an inviscid ﬂow, the viscous eﬀects are neglected, and the rate of change of vorticity
can only be non-zero due to instabilities or numerical diﬀusion.
The advantage of this vortex structure is that the nonlinear eﬀects may be neglected and
theoretical instability criterions may be derived for the vortex core as seen in Equation
(2.5.5). This is done both for the bump vortex ring with zero initial circulation and for a
Gaussian distributed vortex ring with non-zero initial circulation. The eﬀects of numerical
cut-oﬀfor the re-mesh, re-patching and the divergence threshold is discussed using the
same numerical setup, which was found to be the optimum in chapter 4. The instability
criterions are investigated for varying c-values for the bump vortex roller and for varying
Gaussian standard deviation, σµ, for the Gaussian vortex roller, where the core radius
should be comparable between the two initial distributions. The investigations are done
both as inviscid and viscous simulations with Re = 1 · 107 for both type of vortex rollers.
Due to neglectable 3D eﬀects for this roller, azimuthal and transverse wave modes may
not be generated even if the vortex roller is unstable. Therefore wave perturbations are
added to the background state to initialize Kelvin waves. This is done by adding sinu-
soidal waves associated to random phases with a ﬁnite amplitude along the center line of
the vortex core.
Bump perturbation equations are derived by perturbating the vorticity and the velocity
and adding these to the background state in the vorticity-velocity form of the 3D Navier-
Stokes equations. The bump perturbation equations may then be found by subtract-
ing the background state equations from the latter equations and neglecting nonlinear
51
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
perturbation terms. The solution form of these perturbation equations is discussed as
exponential-periodic solutions based on the amplitude of the vorticity- and velocity com-
ponents. Simulations are done for the perturbated vortex rollers as inviscid and viscous
using the same c- and σµ-values, respectively, as for the non-perturbated simulations.
Physical instability forms such as the Taylor-Coutte instability and results from Widnall
[54, 56, 57] are investigated.
5.1
Radial Instability Criterions for Bump and Gaus-
sian Initial Distributions
As mentioned, the advantage of simulating the vortex rollers is that the nonlinear eﬀects of
the Navier-Stokes equations may be neglected if no perturbations are added, and therefore
analytical instability criterias may be derived and compared to the simulations. Thus one
may additionally compare these results to physical instabilities.
By using the bump
function, the core distribution of the streamfunction, the vorticity and the azimuthal
velocity were derived in Equations (2.4.17), (2.4.20) and (2.4.21). The normalized core
distributions may be seen in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Normalized bump vortex core distributions of the vector potential ψ (
), the
vorticity ωz (
) and the tangential velocity uϕ (
) for c = 400
The maximum value of the vector potential and the vorticity is located similarily in the
center of the vorticity core, where the maximum magnitude of the velocity is shifted in
52
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
space. Due to the rotational motion, the sign of the velocity is opposite at x = ±0.
The vorticity becomes negativ at the spatially location in which the rate of change of the
velocity shifts sign. Also it should be emphasized, that no asymmetry of the velocity is
present for the vortex roller, which was seen for for the vortex ring due to the natural
curvature.
The Gaussian core distribution is initialized for the vorticity as
ω =
Γ
πσ2
µ
exp
 
−
 r
σµ
2!
(5.1.1)
where the circulation is initialized at Γ = 1.0 and the standard deviation σµ determines
the core thickness. The velocity for a Gaussian vortex roller may be calculated as
u = 1
r
Z
rωdr = −Γ
2πr exp
 
−
 r
σµ
2!
(5.1.2)
A signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the bump and Gaussian initial distribution is that the
Gaussian function has spatial limits at ±∞and hence the function never becomes zero.
For the bump function in Equation (2.4.2), which is a piecewise function, it becomes zero.
The Gaussian function is therefore unnaturally truncated spatially to deﬁne the limits.
For these simulations, the computational domain of the Gaussian vortex rollers is 2.1σµ.
The spatial distribution of the vorticity for the bump- and the Gaussian initial vortex
rollers are seen in Figure 5.2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2: Magnitude of vorticity for (a) the Bump initial distribution with c = 100 (
),
c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
) and (b) the Gaussian initial distribution with
σµ = 0.06 (
), σµ = 0.05 (
), σµ = 0.04 (
) and σµ = 0.03 (
)
As it has already been mentioned, the vorticity switches sign, spatially, when using the
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
53
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
bump function. This is seen for varying bump functions when varying c as c = 100,
c = 200, c = 300 and c = 400. Similar to the vortex ring, the vortex core diameter
is decreasing for increasing c for the bump vortex roller. The diameter is chosen from
the point of the maximum vorticity at the center of the vortex core until it reaches the
re-meshing tolerence at |ω|= 10−5. The bump vortex core radius hence becomes σ ≈0.12
for c = 100 and σ ≈0.06 for c = 400. Therefore, the maximum vorticity is increasing for
decreasing core radius. This is also seen for the Gaussian initial disbribution, where the
smallest radius is seen for σµ = 0.03 and the largest for σµ = 0.06. The vortex core radius
is almost identically for the bump and the Gaussian setup. However, the main diﬀerence
on the vorticity, is that the Gaussian distribution initializes positive vorticity at all points
troughout the vortex core. This phenomenon is described further when investigating the
stability of the setups. The azimuthal velocity, uϕ, may be seen for the bump and the
Gaussian distributions in Figure 5.3.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3: Azimuthal velocity for (a) the Bump initial distribution with c = 100 (
), c = 200
(
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
) and (b) the Gaussian initial distribution with σµ = 0.06
(
), σµ = 0.05 (
), σµ = 0.04 (
) and σµ = 0.03 (
)
For both setups, the azimuthal velocity is zero at the center of the vortex core, and in-
creases spatially and then decreases towards the outer edge of the vortex core. As the
bump function is deﬁned as zero at the outer edge, the velocity is also zero, where the
velocity is non-zero at the outher edge for the Gaussian setup. For the Gaussian distribu-
tion, the standard deviation has signiﬁcance at the vicinity of the core center and further
troughout the vortex core. However at the outer edge, all setups converge towards the
same azimuthal velocity.
As mentioned in Chapter 2, the inviscid stability criterion, the Raleigh stability criterion,
is dependent on the spatial variation of the circulation, which is dependent on the az-
imuthal velocity. Therefore, the spatial point in which an instability is present, may be
54
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
comparable to a critical velocity. The Raleigh stability criterions for the bump and the
Gaussian initial distributions, calculated from Equation (2.5.5), may be seen in Figure
5.4.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4: Centrifugal Raleigh stability criterions for (a) the Bump initial distribution with
c = 100 (
), c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
) and (b) the Gaussian initial
distribution with σµ = 0.06 (
), σµ = 0.05 (
), σµ = 0.04 (
) and σµ = 0.03 (
)
The Raleigh stability criterion is deﬁned such as the ﬂow is stable when
d
drΓ2 ≥0. Thus it
can be seen, that in theory, the bump vortex roller is stable from the center of the vortex
core thoughout to approximately half of the core radius, where the criterion becomes
negative. This behaviour is independent of the core radius governed by the c-parameter.
For all setups of c, the ﬂow is unstable at approximately half trough the vortex core. The
spatial point in which the ﬂow becomes unstable is close related to the point just after the
maximum azimuthal velocity, where the velocity gradient is large. The point of instability
is also close related to the the point in which the vorticity has the lowest negative value.
Opposite, it may be seen that the Gaussian setup is stable throughout the entire vortex
core.
5.2
Numerical Setup and Instability without Wave
Perturbations
In this section, simulations of the bump- and the Gaussian vortex rollers are performed
and analysed. The numerical setup for the bump vortex roller is ﬁrst ﬁxed toward the
c = 400 vortex roller. The dependency of c on the instability is investigated both for
inviscid simulations and for slightly viscous simulations. Both the initial instability and
the late stage instabilities are investigated. The simulations are ﬁrst performed without
wave perturbations, to investigate whether the present bump vortex instabilities produce
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
55
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
transverse waves in the z-direction, which is seen for Taylor-Couette ﬂows [2, 43, 53]. As
mentioned in Chapter 2, the Taylor-Couette instability is deﬁned in a viscous ﬂow, where
the transition to turbulence is initialized at the critical wave number kcrit to a critical wave
length λcrit, which from viscous experiments [50] are found to kcrit ≈π and λcrit ≈2d,
where d is the diﬀerence in radii between cylinders. The critical wave number is almost
unchanged for varying Reynolds numbers, which gives reason to investigate the instability
as inviscid, and comparing to a slightly viscous ﬂow. The enstrophy and the transverse
enstrophy in the periodic z-direction are seen, for an inviscid simulation with c = 400, in
Figure 5.5.
0
2
4
6
8
10
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
(b)
Figure 5.5:
(a) Temporal variation of the enstrophy and (b) the temporal variation of the
transverse enstrophy
One may notice, that the ﬂow is primarely 2D, as the transverse enstrophy is zero through
the entire simulation, while the ”full” enstrophy is E ≈178 at the initial condition, and
then drops to between E ≈173 and E ≈174. The maximum vorticity and the numerical
diﬀusion are shown in Figure 5.6.
0
2
4
6
8
10
414
415
416
417
418
419
420
421
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
10 -8
(b)
Figure 5.6: (a) Temporal variation of the maximum vorticity and (b) the temporal variation
of the eﬀective viscosity
56
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
As the enstrophy is calculated from the vorticity, it is also seen that the maximum vorticity
initially is very high and then drops. As the vorticity reaches its minimum of |ω|≈414.6
at t∗≈1, it increases in a stable manner until t∗≈5, where oscillations are seen, which
could be an instability. However, as seen from the transverse enstrophy, this instability
is only 2D. The numerical diﬀusion is also of order O(h−8) at the initial condition and
decreases to and order O(h−9). The numerical diﬀusion increases and oscillates in the
same rate as the vorticity, but is still positive, which was not the case of the instability of
the bump vortex ring in Chapter 3, where the numerical diﬀusion becomes negative when
the simulation becomes unstable. Hence, the simulation of the bump vortex roller is still
numerially stable, while an unstable behaviour is present. The temporal iso countour of
the vorticity for the bump vortex roller simulation may be seen in Figure 5.7.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.7:
The vorticity ﬁeld seen in the xy-plane for the c = 400 vortex roller without
perturbations at (a) t∗= 0, (b) t∗≈1.21, (c) t∗≈7.21 and (d) t∗≈8.41. Initial vorticity
shown as ωz ≈−76 (
), ωz ≈62 (
), ωz ≈201 (
), ωz ≈340 (
) and ωz ≈479 (
)
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
57
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
Time frames from 0th time step to the 8000th time step may be seen in Appendix C. At
the initial stage, one may notice a ”noisy” region half trough the vortex core radius, which
correspond well with the bump vortex roller being unstable at this point. At a later stage
at t∗≈1.21, the vortex core looks more stable, as it has probably found an equlibrium
state. This is also seen from the maximum vorticity and the numerical diﬀusion in Figure
5.6. However, 2D wavy modes are still seen at the outer edge of the core. At the late
stages at t∗≈7.21 and t∗≈8.40, unstable states are seen as two vortex dipoles are formed
at the point in which the vortex core is unstable. This is also seen at the vicinity of the
vortex core center, which becomes asymmetricly strained. This behaviour is periodic, but
does not produce 3D waves. The azimuthal velocity ﬁeld in xy-plane is seen at the same
time frames as the vorticity, in Figure 5.8.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.8:
The velocity ﬁeld seen in the xy-plane for the c = 400 vortex roller without
perturbations at (a) t∗= 0, (b) t∗≈1.21, (c) t∗≈7.21 and (d) t∗≈8.41. Initial velocity shown
as uϕ ≈0 (
), uϕ = 0.584 (
), uϕ = 1.175 (
), uϕ = 1.762 (
) and uϕ = 2.350 (
)
58
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
A longer time series is seen in Appendix C. As it was seen from the theoretical distribution
of the velocity, the maximum value is shifted spatially as compared to the vorticity. The
instability is not seen clearly in the ﬁrst two time frames at t∗= 0 and t∗≈1.21, but is
seen in the last two shown time frames, where the velocity ﬁeld is strained throughout the
entire vortex core. It may also be seen the two eliptic vortex structures of low velocity is
forming at the periodic instability stage. The temporal changes of the vorticity and the
velocity, throughout the vortex core may also be seen in Figure 5.9.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
(b)
Figure 5.9: Temporal variations at t∗= 0 (
) , t∗≈1.21 (
), t∗≈7.21 (
) and
t∗≈8.41 (
) for (a) the spatial vorticity distribution and (b) the spatial velocity distribution
As mentioned, the initial distribution of the vorticity yields high numerical diﬀusion,
which may be due to that the setup is not a true solution to the Navier-Stokes equations.
At the time frames at t∗≈1.21, t∗≈7.21 and t∗≈8.41 the simulation has reached an
equilibrium state. The lowest value of the vorticity for the initial condition is seen to be
weakly resoluted, which may be solved for by increasing the spatial resolution or changing
the cut-oﬀtolerences. Last, the circulation and the calculated Raleigh instability criterion
for the four time frames may be seen in Figure 5.10.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
(b)
Figure 5.10: Temporal variations at t∗= 0 (
) , t∗≈1.21 (
), t∗≈7.21 (
) and
t∗≈8.41 (
) for (a) the spatial circulation distribution and (b) the Raleigh criterion
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
59
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
The simulated stability criterions show good agreement with the theoretical values, stating
that the bump vortex roller distribution is unstable, which is true for all time frames. The
spatial point in which the instability becomes present, is unchanged at all times, which
is approximately half trough the vortex core radius, which was also seen from Figure
5.7. Therefore, the instability should indeed be a physical behaviour and not numerical.
The cut-oﬀtolerences are changed in the next sections, to show the independence of the
numerical setup.
5.2.1
Cut-OﬀTolerance for Re-mesh, Re-patch and Divergence
As mentioned in Chapter 3, the hybrid Vortex-In-Cell algorithm is set to re-mesh after
each time step after the particle-mesh mesh-particle interpolation to ensure the conver-
gence of the simulation and to avoid odd displacement of particles. The simulation also
uses re-patching for every 10th time step to ensure the adaptivity of the time step. Last,
in reality, the ﬂow is divergence free, when using the Lagrangian frame of reference. How-
ever, a ﬁnite truncation of the divergence needs to be deﬁned when solving the continuous
ﬁeld as discrete vortex particles, which causes errors and hence divergence of the ﬂow.
So far, the cut-oﬀtolerence has been set to 10−5 for the re-meshing has 10−6 for the
re-patching. The threshold of the divergence in the ﬂow has been set to 0.01. This setup
may be the target for varying the tolerences. The tolerences has been changed to 10−9
for both re-meshing and re-patching and the divergence threshold has been changed to
10−5. The maximum vorticity and the numerical diﬀusion using the new tolerences may
be seen in Figure 5.11.
0
2
4
6
8
10
414
415
416
417
418
419
420
421
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
10 -8
(b)
Figure 5.11: (a) Temporal variation of the maximum vorticity and (b) the temporal variation of
the eﬀective viscosity for varying cut-oﬀtolerences from the initial tolerences for re-mesh 10−5,
re-patch 10−6 and re-projection 10−3. Variations shown for divergence 10−5 (
), re-patch
10−9 (
) and re-mesh 10−9 (
)
It is seen, that decreasing the tolerences increase the computional cost for the re-meshing.
The computional cost of the diverence is unchanged as the ﬂow is divergence free for the
vortex roller in 2D. The same instabilities are seen for these diagnostics as for the target
tolerences.
60
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
5.2.2
Dependency of c for Inviscid and Slightly Viscous Flows
The core distribution of the vorticity is tested similar to the vortex ring by varying the
c-value from c = 100, c = 200, c = 300 and c = 400 for inviscid and slightly viscous ﬂows.
In Appendix C, the isocontour of the vorticity in the xz-plane is seen for the four bump
vortex rollers, where it is seen that for c = 100, c = 200 and c = 300, the rollers are able
to become unstable and produce wave modes in the periodic z-direction. The c = 400
vortex roller may be able to become unstable and produce wave modes, but this comes
at a high computational cost, and therefore, the wave modes are only investigated for the
c = 100 vortex roller. The ﬂow diagnostics i.e. the maximum vorticity, the kinetic energy,
the enstrophy and the transverse enstrophy are shown, in the full simulation time, for the
four vortex rollers, in Figure 5.12.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
(b)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
170
172
174
176
178
180
182
(c)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10 -6
(d)
Figure 5.12: Temporal variation of (a) the maximum vorticity, (b) the kinetic energy, (c) the
enstrophy and (d) the transverse enstrophy. Inviscid simulations are shown for c = 100 (
)
, c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
) and associated viscous simulations with
Re = 1 · 107 (
)
The dashed lines, at the vicinity of a graph, mark the associated slightly viscous ﬂow
with the same c-value. For all values of c, periodic instabilities occur in 2D at the late
stages. Also it may be seen for the maximum vorticity, that the initial condition yields a
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
61
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
higher value compared to the early stages of the simulation. The viscosity is not diﬀering
signiﬁcantly in the early stages, and for c = 100 and c = 200, the late stages are not
inﬂuenced signiﬁcantly neither. In the late stages of the c = 300 and c = 400, the viscous
simulations are diﬀering for the maximum vorticity, because of the additional damping
to the simulations. At the late stages of t∗≈8, t∗≈9 and t∗≈10, the simulations for
c = 100, c = 200 and c = 300 diverge. The kinetic energy are conserved for the inviscid
and viscous simulations for all values of c, until the simulations diverge in the late stages.
As mentioned from the isocontours, the simulations are primarely 2D before the simula-
tions diverge, which are seen from the transverse enstrophy which are zero in the early
stages. The inﬂuence of the physical viscosity is seen on the enstrophy, which decrease in
linear rates with time, as the viscosity produces physical dissipation. The divergence and
the numerical diﬀusion are seen in Figure 5.28.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.5
1
1.5
10 -8
(b)
Figure 5.13: Temporal variation of (a) the divergence of vorticity and (b) the numerical dif-
fusion. Inviscid simulations are shown for c = 100 (
) , c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and
c = 400 (
) and associated viscous simulations with Re = 1 · 107 (
)
The divergence is zero, until the points where the simulations diverge. The numerical
diﬀusion is calculated for the viscous simulations by subtracting the physical viscosity.
It is seen, that the numerical method is very suitable for the inviscid simulations until
the diverging points. Noticeable is, that for the vortex rings, increasing c-values would
increase the accuracy and the instability would occur earlier in time. For the bump vortex
rollers, the instability also occur ealier in time for increasing c-values, but the numerical
diﬀusion is also increased, which is opposite behaviour compared to the vortex rings. The
reason for this, may be due to the decreased circumfence of the vortex core, which yields
increased rate of change in the curvature, and hence increased gradients of vorticity, which
are hard to capture for the simulation on the given resolution. The spatial distribution
of the vorticity in the initial setup is seen in Figure 5.14.
62
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
(b)
Figure 5.14: Spatial variation of the vorticity for (a) Re = ∞and (b) Re = 1 · 107. c = 100
(
) , c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
)
For the c = 300 and c = 400 vortex rollers, an unresolved, ”noisy” region is seen a the
point of the minimum vorticity, which may be caused by the higher gradients of vorticity,
which has just been described from the numerical diﬀusion. For the c = 100 vortex roller,
the unresolved region is seen at the vicinity of the vortex core center i.e. the maximum
vorticity. These signify, that the initial condition is not a full solution to the Navier-
Stokes equations, but still shows good agreement with the theoretical distribution. The
2D isocontour of the initial vorticity ﬁelds are seen in Figure 5.15.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
63
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.15: Iso contour of the vorticity of the initial bump vortex roller setup for (a) c = 100,
(b) c = 200, (c) c = 300 and (d) c = 400
Only the inviscid simulation are shown, as no visual diﬀerences are present for the viscous
simulations. The decreased vortex core radius for increased c-value is clearly seen. One
may also notice, that the noisy regions, which were seen from the 1D variation are very
clear half through the vortex core radius for c = 200, c = 300 and c = 400. For c = 100,
this region is still visuable to some extend, but clearly reduced compared to the other
vortex rollers. The normalized spatial variation of the velocity and the circulation for the
inviscid and viscous simulations are shown in Figure 5.16.
64
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
(b)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(c)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(d)
Figure 5.16: Spatial variation of (a) the tangential velocity at Re = ∞, (b) the tangential
velocity at Re = 1 · 107, (c) the cirlation at Re = ∞and (d) the circulation at Re = 1 · 107.
c = 100 (
) , c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
)
Again, no visual impacts from the physical viscosity are seen. The circulation is propor-
tional to the azimuthal velocity as
Γ = 2πruϕ
where the maximum value of the circulation is shifted in space compared to the velocity,
due to the proportionality to the radii, as well. Hence the maximum value of the circula-
tion increases for increasing core radius. However, for the bump function, the circulation
is opposite signed at −r, and yields zero at the outer edge of the vortex core, meaning that
the integrated circulation becomes zero and the vortex roller is ﬁxed and non-propagating
in space.
The Raleigh instability criterion for varying c-values for inviscid and viscous simulations
are shown in Figure 5.17.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
65
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
(b)
Figure 5.17:
Spatial variation of the Raleigh stability criterion for (a) Re = ∞and (b)
Re = 1 · 107. c = 100 (
) , c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
)
It is seen, that the bump vortex rollers are unstable, independent of the c-value, for both
inviscid and viscous simulations. The spatial point in which the rollers become unstable
are all in good agreement with the unresolved regions of low vorticity, which were seen
in Figure 5.15. As it was investigated for the c = 400 vortex roller, the setup is unstable
at all times. This is also true for the vortex rollers with lower c-values, which is not
shown. If the instability should be avoided in this region, one may add a correction to
the vorticity-velocity ﬁeld while still yielding a circulation equal to zero. This may not
be possible, and is not investigated further. As mentioned, the c = 400 vortex roller is
unable to produce transverse wave modes within the computional limit, and therefore the
late stage instabilities of the c = 100 vortex roller is investigated. In Figure 5.18, the
energy spectrum at the 3500th time step, and the temporal variation of the ﬁrst 4 wave
modes are seen.
10 0
10 1
10 2
10 -20
10 -15
10 -10
10 -5
10 0
(a)
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
10 -40
10 -30
10 -20
10 -10
10 0
(b)
Figure 5.18: (a) The energy spectrum at the 3500th time step for c = 100 (
) (b) Temporal
energy modes for the 0th mode (
), 1st mode (
), 4th mode (
)and the 124th mode (
)
From the energy spectrum, the same behaviour as seen from the vortex ring is seen, where
66
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
modes associated to wave numbers diviable to 4 have increased energy. That being wave
numbers k = 4, 8, 12, ..., 512, as the spatial resolution is h/L = 512. Wave modes are thus
deﬁned, such that the lowest wave length is equal to the cell size. Though the energy is
low and the modes are not clearly visuable on the isocontour seen in Appendix C. The
lowest wave number associated to high energy, i.e. k = 4 is equal to a wave length of
λ = 0.5, which again is not clearly visuable. The mode associated to the wave number
k = 124 has the highest amount of energy in the early stages of the three-dimensional
eﬀects, and decreases in the late stages. Hence, the cause of these wave numbers may
be due to the numerical setup as a sensitivity to small scales. This is not investigated
further. The temporal variation of the energy modes, are only shown after the instability
occurs. The 0th mode and the ﬁrst 4 modes are shown, where the mode associated to the
k = 4 has increased energy. At the late stages, the wave modes converge towards the 0th
mode while energy is extracted from the 0th mode which should not be physical as no
physical viscosity is present. The behaviour of the growth rate is similar to Winckelmans
trailing wave vortices [59].
5.2.3
Stability Analysis with Gaussian Initial Distribution
The vortex rollers are also initialized using a Gaussian distribution for the setup of the
vorticity ﬁeld. Opposite to the bump function, the Gaussian is directly deﬁned from the
vorticity, whereas the bump function is governed from the vector potential, which is a
derived part of the vorticity. The Gaussian initial distribution has non-zero circulation
and non-zero azimuthal velocity at the outer edge of the vortex core. As mentioned,
the Gaussian setup has limits at ±∞and is hence unnaturally truncated at 2.1σµ. The
purpose of using the Gaussian is to verify the instability of the bump function, which
yielded unstable Raleigh instabilities both in theory and for the simulated cases. Hence,
it is expected, that the non-perturbated Gaussian vortex rollers should become stable all
the way trough the vortex core, to match the theoretical Raleigh stability criterion. The
maximum vorticity and the kinetic energy are shown in Figure 5.19.
0
5
10
15
20
25
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
0.42
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.5
0.52
0.54
(b)
Figure 5.19: Temporal variation of (a) the maximum vorticity and (b) the kinetic energy.
Inviscid simulations are shown for σµ = 0.06 (
) , σµ = 0.05 (
), σµ = 0.04 (
) and
σµ = 0.03 (
) and associated viscous simulations with Re = 1 · 107 (
)
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
67
==PAGE:84==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
Similar to the bump vortex, the Gaussian vortices are simulated both as inviscid and
viscous while varying σµ as σµ = 0.06, σµ = 0.05, σµ = 0.04 and σµ = 0.03 to achieve
similar vortex core radii as for the bump vortices. The maximum vorticity is highest
again for the vortex ring with lowest core radius, being for σµ = 0.03, while the energy
is increasing for decreasing core radius, which is opposite for the bump case. The is also
the case for the enstrophy which is seen in Figure 5.20.
0
5
10
15
20
25
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
(b)
Figure 5.20: Temporal variation of (a) the enstrophy and (b) the transverse enstrophy. Inviscid
simulations are shown for σµ = 0.06 (
) , σµ = 0.05 (
), σµ = 0.04 (
) and σµ = 0.03
(
) and associated viscous simulations with Re = 1 · 107 (
)
No signiﬁcant discrepancies are seen between the invicscid and the viscous simulations,
which were clearly seen from the bump setup. This may be due to the instability of the
bump vortex setup. Also, once again, the simulations are primarely 2D for all Gaussian
simulations, as the transverse enstrophy become zero. The numerical diﬀusion are plotted
in Figure 5.21.
0
5
10
15
20
25
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10 -7
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
10 -7
(b)
Figure 5.21: Temporal variation of (a) the inviscid numerical diﬀusion and (b) the viscous
numerical diﬀusion. Simulations are shown for σµ = 0.06 (
) , σµ = 0.05 (
), σµ = 0.04
(
) and σµ = 0.03 (
)
68
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
It is seen, that the Gaussian numerical diﬀusion becomes of order O(10−8) which is an
increase of a factor 10 compared to the bump simulations. Also, the numerical diﬀusion
is oscilliting between positive and negative values, which earlier has been considered as
an unstable and non-physical state of the simulation. Compared to the bump numerical
diﬀusion, the inviscid simulations diﬀer more from the viscous simulations for the Gaussian
case. The absolute value of the numerical diﬀusion may be seen on the isocontours of
vorticity of the 4 Gaussian vortex rollers, in Figure 5.22.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.22: Magnitude of vorticity in the xy-plane for (a) σµ = 0.06, (b) σµ = 0.05, (c)
σµ = 0.04 and (d) σµ = 0.03
At the outer edge of the vortex core, a small wavy structure may be seen, which could
be due to the setup is not a true solution to the Navier-Stokes equations.
However,
compared to the bump vortex setup, no unresolved regions are seen through the vortex
core of Gaussian setup.
So far, this is in good agreement, as the vorticity is always
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
69
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
positive for the Gaussian vortex core, whereas the bump becomes negative through the
core. This means that the Gaussian vortex core is visually stable. The spatial variation
of the vorticity, azimuthal velocity, circulation and Raleigh instability criterions are seen,
for the inviscid simulations, in Figure 5.23.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
(b)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
(c)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
5
10
15
20
(d)
Figure 5.23: Gaussian distribution of (a) the vorticity (b) the velocity (c) the circulation and
(d) the Raleigh stability criterion. Simulations showns for σµ = 0.06 (
), σµ = 0.05 (
),
σµ = 0.04 (
) and σµ = 0.03 (
)
Even though the decreased standard deviation, and hence the decreased core radius,
initially yields increased numerical diﬀusion, the center of the vortex core looks more
resolved for, with respect to the vorticity. The velocity distributions of the initial condition
are in good agreement with the theoretical values derived earlier in this chapter. The non-
zero circulation of the Gaussian setup is seen, as all vortex rollers converge towards a ﬁnite
normalized circulation of Γ ≈0.7. For all Gaussian simulations, the Raleigh instability
criterion becomes positive through the vortex core, meaning that the ﬂow is stable for
the Gaussian setup.
One may notice, that the criterion is dropping to a value close
to zero and then becomes constant in a discontinous manner. This is due to a rough
truncation of the Gaussian distribution of vorticity. The reason of the stability for the
Gaussian distribution may be seen directly from the circulation. As stated in [33], the
70
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
instability throughout the vortex core happens due to unstable arrangement of angular
momomentum, and is dependent of the rate of change of kinetic energy between inner
and outer radii. For this, the ﬂow is only stable if Γ2 increases radially, which is true for
the Gaussian vortex roller. As seen for the bump distribution of circulation in Figure 5.16
and the bump Raleigh criterion in Figure 5.17, the ﬂow is stable as long as the circulation
increases radially, and then becomes unstable when the circulation decreases radially. To
verify that the non-perturbated Gaussian distribution is always stable, the isocontour of
the vorticity ﬁeld is seen at the initial condition and at the 8000th timestep at t∗≈11.34,
in Figure 5.24. The Raleigh stability criterion is shown for σµ = 0.03 and σµ = 0.06 at
the initial condition and the 3000th time step in Figure 5.25.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.24: Magnitude of vorticity in the xy-plane for σµ = 0.03 for (a) the initial condition
and (b) 8000th time step
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
5
10
15
20
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
5
10
15
20
(b)
Figure 5.25: Raleigh stability criterion at (a) the initial condition and (b) the 3000th time
step. Simulations shown for σµ = 0.06 (
) and σµ = 0.03 (
)
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
71
==PAGE:88==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
It is again seen, that the Gaussian vortex rollers are stable both at the initial condition
and in the the stage. It may be concluded that for non-perturbated vortex rollers, the
bump setups yield unstable ﬂows while the Gaussian setup yield stable ﬂows. However,
no physical wave modes are present, since the ﬂows are primarely 2D, and the 3D wave
modes occur when the ﬂow diverges. Therefore, perturbations may be necessary to induce
physical wave modes to compare with the Taylor-Couette instability wave numbers.
5.3
Investigation of Instability with Azimuthal Wave
perturbations
To induce transverse wave modes for the psuedo 3D vortex roller, the centerline of the
vortex core is perturbated by introducing white noise by linear Kelvin waves, deﬁned in
Equation (2.4.25). The wave perturbations are given a ﬁnite amplitude of a = 10−7, and
initially 24 random phases are generated to induce the perturbations. The perturbations
should be able to induce three-dimensional eﬀects of the simulation, while still maintain-
ing a numerical stability.
First, bump perturbation equations are derived using the Eulerian form of the vorticity-
velocity form of the Navier-Stokes equations.
This is done both in Cartesian and in
cylindrical coordinates. The theoretical solutions to these equations are assumed to be a
periodicity of the perturbation parameters of the vorticity and the velocity.
The same simulations done for the non-perturbated vortex rollers are done by varying
the c-value for the bump vortex rollers, and varying the standard deviation, σµ, for the
Gaussian vortex rollers. The eﬀects of slightly viscous ﬂows are also considered. The
inﬂuence of the perturbation amplitude and the number of random phases are investigated,
by analysing the critical wave numbers and wave lengths. The Raleigh stability criterion
is used to verify if the simulation is unstable compared to the non-perturbated vortex
rollers.
5.3.1
Derivation of Bump Perturbation Equations
The Raleigh criterion is derived for inviscid ﬂows. Taylor modiﬁed the Raleigh criterion
as viscous, by perturbating the velocity-pressure form of the Navier-Stokes equations in
a Couette system between rotating cylinders. The procedure, described by Kundu in [33]
is used to derive the bump vortex perturbation equations using the Eulerian form of the
vorticity-velocity equations from Equation (2.1.9), which is repeated for convenience as
∂ω
∂t + (u · ∇) ω = (ω · ∇) u + ν∇2ω
The velocity ﬁeld and the vorticity ﬁeld may then be decomposed into the sum of the
background state and a perturbation. The decomposed velocity ﬁeld then becomes u =
u+Υ, where the background state is deﬁned from the bump functions as u = (ux, uy, uz),
and the perturbation ﬁeld becomes Υ = (Υx, Υy, Υz). The decomposed vorticity ﬁeld
becomes ω = ω + Ω, where the background state is deﬁned from the bump functions as
72
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
ω = (ωx, ωy, ωz), and the perturbation ﬁeld becomes Ω= (Ωx, Ωy, Ωz). Thus, 6 unknown
parameters are introduced when perturbating the Navier-Stokes equations. Substituting
the perturbations into the Eulerian vorticity-velocity form of the Navier-Stokes equations
in Equation (2.1.9) yields
∂(ω + Ω)
∂t
+ ((u + Υ) · ∇) (ω + Ω) = ((ω + Ω) · ∇) (u + Υ) + ν∇2 (ω + Ω)
(5.3.1)
Expanding the latter equation, the time derivatives, the nonlinear convection and stretcing
terms and the diﬀusion terms stand alone as
∂ω
∂t + ∂Ω
∂t + (u · ∇) ω + (u · ∇) Ω+ (Υ · ∇) ω + (Υ · ∇) Ω=
(ω · ∇) u + (ω · ∇) Υ + (Ω· ∇) u + (Ω· ∇) Υ + ν∇2ω + ν∇2Ω
(5.3.2)
Subracting the background state in Equation (2.1.9) from Equation (5.3.2) and removing
nonlinear teams, only dependent on the perturbations (Ω· ∇) Υ ≈0 and (Υ · ∇) Ω≈0,
the vector form of the vorticity-velocity perturbation equations becomes
∂Ω
∂t + (u · ∇) Ω+ (Υ · ∇) ω = (ω · ∇) Υ + (Ω· ∇) u + ν∇2Ω
(5.3.3)
Thus, the time derivative and the diﬀusion term are only dependent on the perturbated
vorticity ﬁeld, while the nonlinear convection and stretching terms are dependent on the
background velocity- and vorticity ﬁelds. Equation (5.3.3), is available for 2D and 3D,
meaning that the equations should apply both the vortex roller and the vortex rings.
In this chapter, the perturbation equation of the 2D bump vortex roller is derived both
in Cartesian and cylindrical coordinates. The perturbated bump equations are seen in
Appendix A.
The coeﬃcients in the cylindrical bump vortex perturbation equations depend on the
radial component, r and ϕ, and hence the equations admit solutions, which are exponen-
tially dependent on z and t [33]. Therefore, the solution form is considered as normal
modes of the coeﬃcients as
(Υr, Υϕ, Υz, Ωr, Ωϕ, Ωz) =

bΥr, bΥϕ, bΥz, bΩr, bΩϕ, bΩz

exp (ιkz + ςt)
(5.3.4)
where z →±∞is the required bounded domain, due to the Helmholtz criterion. This is
only valid if the wave numbers, k, are real and not imaginary. Hence, the critical wave
numbers may be found by solving the eigenvalue problem when substituting the solution
form in Equation (5.3.4) into the perturbation Equations (A.0.24), (A.0.25) and (A.0.26).
As mentioned, Taylor found the critical wave number for his perturbation equations in a
Couette ﬂow, by experiments to become kcrit ≈π. Solving the eigenvalue problem of the
bump vortex perturbation equations is considered as future work, and is not continued in
this project.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
73
==PAGE:90==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
5.3.2
Dependency of c for Inviscid and Slightly Viscous Flows
Similar to the simulations without perturbations, the perturbated bump vortex rollers
are simulated for varying c = 100, c = 200, c = 300 and c = 400 both as inviscid and
slightly viscous. In Figure 5.26, the velocity- and vorticity distribution are shown for
the background state and the perturbated state, to varify that six new compenents are
induced.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
(a)
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
(b)
Figure 5.26: (a) Spatial variation of the velocity and (b) the spatial variation of the vorticity.
Components shown as x (
), y (
) and z (
). Solid lines mark the background state and
dashed lines mark the perturbated at a developed state.
It is clearly seen that by perturbating the centerline of the vortex roller, the velocity in
z-direction and the vorticity in the x-y-directions all become non-zero, and hence three-
dimensional eﬀects are now present. The perturbations also show to eﬀect the components,
which are non-zero for the background state as well.
Widnall [54] investigted the stability of helical vortex ﬁlaments with arbitrary core dis-
tribution of vorticity, and found three modes of instability; a very short-wave instability
which probably exist on all curved ﬁlaments, a long-wave mode which is found to be
unstable by a local induction model and a mutural-inductance mode which appears as
the pitch of the helix decreases, and neighbouring turns of the ﬁlament interact strongly.
For a straight vortex roller, only the long-wave mode should be present. Widnall found,
that by increasing the core radius, i.e. decreasing c for the bump vortex, is reducing the
ampliﬁcation rate of the long-wave instability.
The maximum vorticity, the kinetic energy, the enstrophy and the transverse enstrophy
are shown in Figure 5.27.
74
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
(a)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
(b)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
172
174
176
178
180
182
(c)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10 -6
(d)
Figure 5.27: Temporal variation of (a) the maximum vorticity, (b) the kinetic energy, (c) the
enstrophy and (d) the transverse enstrophy. Inviscid simulations are shown for c = 100 (
)
, c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
) and associated viscous simulations with
Re = 1 · 107 (
)
The maximum vorticity is alsmost unchanged for as long as the simulation is numerically
stable. The simulation becomes unstable, when it diverges at the late stages. The kinetic
energy is also conserved until the simulations diverge. The enstrophy has a rapid increase
shortly after the initial condition, and then drops to an almost constant state. For the
non-perturbated vortex rollers, the initial setup provided increased enstrophy compared
to the perturbated. The wave modes induced, may reduce the enstrophy initially. The
transverse enstrophy is clearly increasing in an exponential rate, which again is due to
the ﬂow has become three-dimensional. One may notice, that the inviscid and the viscous
simulations are more identical for the perturbated vortex rollers compared to the non-
perturbated. The divergence and the numerical diﬀusion are shown in Figure 5.28.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
75
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
(a)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
0.5
1
1.5
10 -8
(b)
Figure 5.28: Temporal variation of (a) the divergence of vorticity and (b) the numerical dif-
fusion. Inviscid simulations are shown for c = 100 (
) , c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and
c = 400 (
) and associated viscous simulations with Re = 1 · 107 (
)
The divergence has also become non-zero, as the ﬂow has become three-dimensional.
Compared to the vortex ring in Chapter 4, The simulations are able to stay below the
threshold of ϑϵ = 0.01 until the point in which the simulations diverge. This was not the
case for the vortex ring in the early stages, where the simulations were kept stable by
re-projecting the vorticity ﬁeld. The order of the numerical diﬀusion is unchanged for the
perturbated simulations, however, a transient zone is initially seen, until the simulation
ﬁnds an equilibrium state. The Raleigh criterions are shown for the inviscid simulations
in Figure 5.29. The criterions are shown at the initial condition and at late stages, where
the numerical diﬀusion is oscillating.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
(b)
Figure 5.29: Spatial variation of the Raleigh stability criterion for (a) the initial condition and
(b) 300th time step at developed instability stage. Simulations are shown for c = 100 (
) ,
c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
)
Once again, the bump vortex rollers are seen to be unstable at all times. As the criterions
are captured for all simulations at the 300th time step, the vortex rollers with increased
76
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
radii are more developed. Hence, the vortex roller with c = 100 has become highly un-
stable at this point in time.
In Appendix C, the temporal development of the core distribution of vorticity in the
xz- and the xy-plane is seen for c = 400. As the ampliﬁcation is of order O(h−7), no
wave formations are seen at the initial condition. At the 200th time step at t∗≈0.25
small sinusoidal wave modes become present at the spatial point of instability, which is
approximately half through the vortex core radius, where Γ2 decreases. The ampliﬁcation
of this sinusoidal wave mode increases in time while the wave number is unchanged. By
time, this instability leads to the breakup of the of the background state. The state at
the 300th time step is seen for varying c-values in Figure 5.30.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.30: Magnitude of vorticity in xz-plane for perturbated vortex rollers at 300th time
step for (a) c = 100, (b) c = 200, (c) c = 300 (d) c = 400
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
77
==PAGE:94==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
The corresponding slightly viscous simulations are shown in Appendix C. It is seen, that
increasing the core size, also increases the amplitude of the sinusoidal wave. However,
it is also noticed, that the wave number if constant and hence independent of the core
radius. This is clearly paradoxically to the Taylor-Couette theory, stating the the critical
wave length should be twice the vortex core diameter. Therefore, this gives indications,
that either the Taylor-Couette theory is not to be compared with the instability of the
vortex roller or else, the wave number is initialized in the numerical setup. This is further
investigated using the energy spectrum and the temporal variation of energy modes for
the 4 c-values in Figure 5.31.
10 0
10 1
10 2
10 -25
10 -20
10 -15
10 -10
10 -5
10 0
(a)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
10 -15
10 -10
10 -5
10 0
(b)
Figure 5.31: (a) Energy spectrum at developed instability stage with Kolmogorov −5/3-law
shown (
) and (b) temporal variation of the energy modes for the 0th mode (solid), 1st mode
(dashed), 2nd mode (asterix), 3rd mode (circle), 4th mode (square) and 24th mode (tringle).
Simulations are shown for c = 100 (
) , c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
)
The Kolmogorov −5/3 law [49] has been plotted, to verify that a developed state has
been reached for all simulations. It should be noted, that this is not a physical turbulence
spectrum, as no viscous eﬀects are present. Therefore, the low energy associated to high
wave numbers are solely based on noise for length scales down to the cell size. It is clearly
seen, that the wave number associated to the ﬁrst mode of increased energy is identical
for all c-values. This is in very good agreement with the isocontours in Figure 5.30. The
wave number associated to this mode is k = 24, which is comparable with the highest
random phase, given to the perturbation wave number. The next three wave numbers
associated to modes of increased energy may be seen in Table 5.1.
Mode
1
2
3
4
k
24
46
70
93
Table 5.1: First 4 wave numbers to modes of increased energy
It may be noted that k = 46, 70, 93 are all close become dividable by 24 as integers. That
being if k = 48, 72, 96. This also may give an indication, the the critical wave numbers
are initialized from the highest given wave number to the perubation, and hence to lowest
78
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
wave length given. From the temporal variation of energy modes, the 0th mode has been
shown as a reference, which is increasing in energy for increasing core radius, due to the
increased wave amplitude. The ﬁrst four modes are almost identical with respect to the
energy, and are signiﬁcantly lower in the early stages, compared to the 24th mode. This
again, is most likely due to the given perturbation wave number. At the late stages, the
energy of the ﬁrst 4 modes are converging towards the 24th mode, as the short-wave modes
are extracting energy of the long waves modes which is also seen by Widnall in [56, 57].
This phenomenon eventually leads to the the extraction of energy of the background state
at the 0th mode, which leads to the breakdown of the vortex structure. The ﬁrst 12 wave
numbers to modes of increased energy are extracted, and the corresponding wave lengths,
λcrit, are shown amoung wave numbers in Figure 5.32.
0
100
200
300
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Figure 5.32: Critical wave lengths to associated wave numbers
As the wave numbers are independent of the vortex core radius, and the same computa-
tional domain is used, the wave lengths also become identical. The wave length associated
to the ﬁrst wave number, k = 24, is in good agreement with the visual wave length seen
in Figure 5.30, at λcrit ≈0.088. The critical wave lengths are then converging towards
a length scale equal to the cell size of dx = 2/512 = 1/256 ≈0.0039. Once again, the
obtained wave numbers are not comparable with the critical Taylor-Couette wave number
of kcrit ≈π and the associated wave length of 4σ.
Widnall [56, 57] also investigated the critical wave numbers for vortex rings with constant
vorticity, i.e.
same vorticity distribution.
She found, that the vortex ring is always
unstable for at least to two lowest critical wave numbers. That being the non-dimensional
wave number with the core radius
κ = kσ
(5.3.5)
where κ = 2.5 and κ = 4.35, are the ﬁrst two critical wave numbers, respectively. The
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
79
==PAGE:96==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
ﬁrst mode was found to be the second radial mode at ω = 0. The analysis by Widnall
was derived using straight vortex ﬁlaments, with a very short core radius, which showed
good agreements for vortex rings. However, the critical wave numbers κ, do not match
well with the perturbated bump vortex rollers. To verify if the wave modes are dependent
on the perturbation setup, the amplitude and the number of phases are varied next.
5.3.3
Dependency of the Perturbation Mode Amplitude
The amplitude of the Kelvin wave, which is used for the perturbation of the centerline, has
to be small enough, to keep the simulation stable for some time, to investigate the induced
wave modes. Also, the amplitude should be small enough, such that no visual impacts
of the perturbation may be clearly seen at the initial condition. For the non-perturbated
rollers, the computational time is very high, because the eﬀects of on the vortex roller
is almost zero. Therefore, the amplitude may neither be too small. The vortex roller
with c = 400 is tested using a perturbation amplitude of a = 10−7 and a = 10−10, where
neither perturbation may be seen on the initial condition. The maximum vorticity, the
divergence, the numerical diﬀusion and the energy spectra of the simulations are seen in
Figure 5.33.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
415
415.5
416
416.5
417
417.5
418
418.5
419
(a)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
(b)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
7.65
7.7
7.75
7.8
7.85
7.9
7.95
10 -9
(c)
10 0
10 1
10 2
10 -30
10 -20
10 -10
10 0
(d)
Figure 5.33: (a) Maximum vorticity, (b) the divergence, (c) the numerical diﬀusion and (d)
the energy spectra for perturbation amplitude a = 10−7 (
) and a = 10−10 (
)
80
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
Initially, the simulations are equal, as the the simulation of the background state is con-
verging towards an equilibrium state. The order of the divergence and the numerical
diﬀusion is similar, and one may notice, that the decreased amplitude increases the com-
putational time. The amplitude does not eﬀect the critical wave number which again is
kcrit = 24. However, the amplitude of the critical wave number is clearly diﬀering. Hence,
it is clear, that that the initial perturbation wave is eﬀecting the instability.
5.3.4
Instability Dependency of the Number of Perturbation
Phases
As the critical wave number of kcrit is in good agreement with the highest wave number
given to the perturbation, which is based on the number of random phases, the number
of phases is varied as ςi = 12, 16, 24, 32, 36, 64. The dependency of the perturbation wave
number given by the phases may be analysed from the energy spectra which are shown
in Figure 5.34.
10 0
10 1
10 2
10 -40
10 -30
10 -20
10 -10
10 0
(a)
10 0
10 1
10 2
10 -30
10 -25
10 -20
10 -15
10 -10
10 -5
(b)
Figure 5.34: (a) Energy spectra with 12 phases (
), 24 phases (
) and 36 phases (
)
and (b) Energy spectra with 16 phases (
), 32 phases (
) and 64 phases (
)
It is clearly seen, that the number of random phases inﬂuences the critical wave number
of the simulations, as the peak of maximum energy is shifting amoung wave numbers.
The critical wave numbers associated to the number of random phases may then by read
from the spectra, and the associated critical wave lengths are calculated as
Number of phases
12
16
24
32
36
64
kcrit
12
16
24
32
36
64
λcrit
0.167
0.125
0.083
0.063
0.056
0.031
where it can be concluded that the critical wave number is indeed initialized by the
numerical setup of the perturbation, as the perturbation tends to be done for the highest
wave given wave number i.e. the smallest wave length. In theory, it may be possible to give
the perturbation a wave number, which will induce a critical wave number comparable
to the Taylor-Couette ﬂow. The isocontour of the vorticity ﬁelds at states of the critical
wave modes are seen in Figure 5.35.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
81
==PAGE:98==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.35: Transverse wave modes for (a) 12 phases, (b) 16 phases, (c) 24 phases, (d) 32
phases, (e) 36 phases and (f) 64 phases
82
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
The critical wave number is easy to spot for most of the vortex rollers as sinusoidal wave
modes. Also the wave length is decreasing for increasing number of random of phases,
because the critical wave number is similarly increasing.
The critical wave length is
measured visually, to match the calculated wave lengths from the energy spectra. It is seen
that if only 12 and 16 phases are used, the sinusoidal wave modes are dispersing. Especially
for 12 random phases, the modes are almost non-present. This may be caused because
the critical wave length becomes too large an covers too many computional cells, which
may not be resolved properly. Therefore, one may not be able to synthesize the critical
wave number of the Taylor-Couette ﬂow of kcrit ≈π. Another problem in synthesizing the
Taylor-Couette wave number, is that the random phases are given in terms of integers.
Indeed, as the computional domain in the z-direction has a ﬁnite length of Lz = 2 meshed
by a spatial resolution of h/L = 512, the possible critical wave lengths may then be seen
in Figure 5.36.
10 0
10 1
10 2
10 -3
10 -2
10 -1
10 0
10 1
Figure 5.36: Wave length as function of given wave numbers
This means that critical wave lengths, in theory may be induced in length scales of the
entire domain and down the the cell size, depending on the wave number given to the
perturbation.
5.3.5
Gaussian Perturbations
It has now been concluded, that the bump vortex rollers are always unstable both for
non-perturbated and perturbated centerlines. Also it is seen, that transverse wave modes
may be induced when perturbating the vortex rollers, but that the critical wave lengths
are initialized from the wave numbers given to the perturbations.
It has earlier been concluded, the the Gaussian vortex rollers are stable through the
entire vortex core when not subjected to wave perturbations. The Gaussian vortex rollers
are also subjected to wave perturbations of the centerline, similar to the bump vortex
rollers. This is done to verify, if the Gaussian initial setup is stable as default, or if an
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
83
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
instability may be forced. The maximum vorticity, the kinetic energy, the enstrophy and
the transverse enstrophy are seen for invisvid and slightly viscous ﬂows in Figure 5.37.
0
1
2
3
4
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
0.42
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.5
0.52
0.54
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
(c)
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
10 -7
(d)
Figure 5.37: Temporal variation of (a) the maximum vorticity, (b) the kinetic energy, (c) the
enstrophy and (d) the transverse enstrophy. Inviscid simulations are shown for σµ = 0.06 (
)
, σµ = 0.05 (
), σµ = 0.04 (
) and σµ = 0.03 (
) and associated viscous simulations
with Re = 1 · 107 (
)
As seen for the non-perturbated Gaussian vortex rollers, the maximum vorticity is almost
constant, and the slightly viscous eﬀects do not diﬀer from the inviscid. The kinetic en-
ergy is conserved, as so is the enstrophy down to a very low order of dissipation. The
transverse enstrophy exposed to the perturbation are seen to increase for some time, and
then decrease to a state before increasing again. This is seen to be at order O(10−7)
corresponding the amplitude of the perturbation. The transverse enstrophy is increas-
ing for decreasing standard deviation , i.e. decreasing core radius, due to the increased
vorticity gradients on the curvature of the vortex roller. As the transverse enstrophy is
non-zero, the Gaussian perturbations are able to induce slightly three-dimensional eﬀects
as seen for the bump vortex. However, the eﬀects on the Gaussian vortex, are at the same
order of the perturbations, which give indications, that the Gaussian setup is resistant
to transverse instability modes. The divergence and the numerical diﬀusion are seen in
84
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
Figure 5.38.
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
10 -4
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
-10
-5
0
5
10 -8
(b)
Figure 5.38: Temporal variation of (a) the divergence of vorticity and (b) the numerical dif-
fusion. Inviscid simulations are shown for σµ = 0.06 (
) , σµ = 0.05 (
), σµ = 0.04 (
)
and σµ = 0.03 (
) and associated viscous simulations with Re = 1 · 107 (
)
As seen from the transverse enstrophy, the simulations are numerically unstable at the
very early stages, as the perturbations on the Gaussian setup, may prove to be a bad
solution to the Navier-Stokes equations. The simulations become stable in the late stages
as the divergence converge towards zero and the numerical diﬀusion converge towards an
order of O(h−9). The isocontour of the vorticity ﬁeld is seen at the initial condition and
at a late stage in Figure 5.39.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.39: Magnitude of vorticity in the xz-plane for the Gaussian vortex roller with σµ =
0.03 and Re = ∞at (a) the initial condition and (b) the 400th time step
The above ﬁgure is shown for σµ = 0.03, while the ﬁelds for σµ = 0.04, σµ = 0.05
and σµ = 0.06 are shown in Appendix C.
As mentioned, the enstrophy is of order
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
85
==PAGE:102==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
corresponding to the perturbations, signifying that the Gaussian setup may be unable
to induce wave modes, which is clearly seen from the isocontours. To verify, that the
Gaussian vortex rollers are stable, the Raleigh critetion is seen at the initial condition
and at the late stage in Figure 5.40.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
5
10
15
20
(a)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
5
10
15
20
(b)
Figure 5.40: Spatial variation of the Raleigh stability criterion for inviscid Gaussian vortex
rollers for (a) the initial condition and (b) 400th time step. Simulations are shown for σµ = 0.06
(
) , σµ = 0.05 (
), σµ = 0.04 (
) and σµ = 0.03 (
)
As expected, the Raleigh criterions are positive through the entire vortex core for all
times for the Gaussian vortex rollers, meaning the this setup is stable independent of
perturbations. The enstrophy spectra and the temporal variation of enstrophy modes are
seen in Figure 5.41.
10 0
10 1
10 2
10 -16
10 -14
10 -12
10 -10
10 -8
10 -6
(a)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
10 -15
10 -10
10 -5
10 0
10 5
(b)
Figure 5.41: (a) Enstrophy spectrum for inviscid Gaussian vortex rollers and (b) temporal
variation of the 0th mode (solid), 1st mode (dashed), 2nd mode (asterix) and 24th mode (circle).
Shown for σµ = 0.06 (
) , σµ = 0.05 (
), σµ = 0.04 (
) and σµ = 0.03 (
)
The wave modes are non-zero because of the perturbations and the peak seen on the
spectrum is at k = 24 where the energy is of order of the perturbation amplitude.
86
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
5.4
Summary
In this chapter, straight vortex rollers given initial bump- and Gaussian distributions, are
investigated. The theoretical vorticity and velocity ﬁelds were derived, which were further
used to derive the theoretical distributions of the circulation and the Raleigh stability cri-
terions. From these it could be seen, that in theory, the bump initial setup is unstable
because of a decrease in spatial circulation through the vortex core. The Gaussian initial
setup was in contrast shown to be stable through the entire vortex core due to the in-
crease of spatial circulation. The same numerical setup was used as for the vortex rings in
Chapter 4, and the tolerences of re-mesh, re-patch and divergence did not show to have
importance.
For the non-perturbated bump vortex roller, 2D instabilities were seen on the isocontours
of the vorticity ﬁeld, which occured approximately half trough the vortex core, which were
seen for all core radii. The calculated Raleigh stability criterions showed very good agree-
ment with the theoretical and the visual instabilities, which were present for all times.
The non-perturbated bump vortex rollers were not able to induce three-dimensional wave
modes until the simulation became unstable, caused by pertubations of the smallest com-
putational scales. The non-perturbated Gaussian vortex rollers showed to be stable for
all times, both visually and by verifying the Raleigh stability criterions, which again was
in good agreement with the theorical criterion.
As the bump vortex roller was unstable, but not able to induce three-dimensional wave
modes, the centerline of the vortex core was given wave perturbations initialized by a ﬁnite
amount of wave numbers from random phases. Theoretical bump perturbation equations
were derived in Cartesian and cylindrical coordinates by decomposing the vorticity- and
the velocity ﬁelds with a known background state and a perturbated state. The equa-
tions were then derived by expanding the Navier-Stokes equations and subtracting the
background state and nonlinear perturbation terms. The solution form was thought to
be periodically and the eigenvalues would be the critical wave numbers of the perturbation.
When simulating the perturbated bump vortex rollers for varying c, wave modes were
clearly seen in the z-direction.
These however, were not in good agreement with the
Taylor-Couette theory as the wave length was non changing for varying core size. Neither
did the wave numbers compare to the critical wave numbers found by Widnall in [56, 57].
By varying the number of random phases, and hence the highest wave number given to
the perturbation, this wave number was seen to be governing for the critical wave number.
Hence length scales may in theory be generated by the given perturbation from the length
of the transverse computional domain down to the cell size.
Last it was seen, that wave modes may be added to the Gaussian vortex rollers by per-
turbating the centerlines.
However the wave modes are of order of the perturbation
amplitude and therefore the Gaussian rollers are not able to induce waves. The Gaussian
vortex rollers were further seen to be stable by verifying the Raleigh stability criterion
when the rollers are perturbated.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
87
==PAGE:104==
CHAPTER 5. SIMULATION OF VORTEX ROLLER INSTABILITY AT RE = ∞
88
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:105==
6
Investigation of the Instability
of Bump Vortex Rings
So far, it has been concluded in Chapter 4, that the vortex ring has an unsteady region in
the early stage as it has not found an equilibrium to satisfy the governing Navier-Stokes
equations. As a consequence, the vortex ring sheds laminar vortex ﬁlaments into the
wake. Thereafter the vortex ring becomes unstable and develops wave modes that wrap
around the vortex core.
In Chapter 5, it was seen, that bump vortex rollers are always unstable, while Gaussian
vortex rollers are stable. Wave modes were only generated for the bump vortex when the
simulation became numerically unstable. Sinusoidal wave modes could be generated by
perturbating the centerline of the vortex core. However, these wave modes did not match
any theoretical wave number or lengths as the wave modes were primarely dependent on
the perturbation wave number. In this chapter, the instability seen on the vortex ring is
compared to the wave quantities from theory.
6.1
3D Bump Perturbation Equations
The 3D perturbation equations derived in Chapter 5 are derived as
∂Ωx
∂t +

ux
∂Ωx
∂x + uy
∂Ωx
∂y + uz
∂Ωx
∂z

+

Υx
∂ωx
∂x + Υy
∂ωx
∂y + Υz
∂ωx
∂z

=

ωx
∂Υx
∂x + ωy
∂Υx
∂y + ωz
∂Υx
∂z

+

Ωx
∂ux
∂x + Ωy
∂ux
∂y + Ωz
∂ux
∂z

+ ν∇2Ωx
(6.1.1)
∂Ωy
∂t +

ux
∂Ωy
∂x + uy
∂Ωy
∂y + uz
∂Ωy
∂z

+

Υx
∂ωy
∂x + Υy
∂ωy
∂y + Υz
∂ωy
∂z

=

ωx
∂Υy
∂x + ωy
∂Υy
∂y + ωz
∂Υy
∂z

+

Ωx
∂uy
∂x + Ωy
∂uy
∂y + Ωz
∂uy
∂z

+ ν∇2Ωy
(6.1.2)
∂Ωz
∂t +

ux
∂Ωz
∂x + uy
∂Ωz
∂y + uz
∂Ωz
∂z

+

Υx
∂ωz
∂x + Υy
∂ωz
∂y + Υz
∂ωz
∂z

=

ωx
∂Υz
∂x + ωy
∂Υz
∂y + ωz
∂Υz
∂z

+

Ωx
∂uz
∂x + Ωy
∂uz
∂y + Ωz
∂uz
∂z

+ ν∇2Ωz
(6.1.3)
89
==PAGE:106==
CHAPTER 6. INVESTIGATION OF THE INSTABILITY OF BUMP VORTEX
RINGS
The full form of the 3D bump vortex ring perturbation equations may be derived by
inserting the theoretical bump vortex ring velocity- and vorticity ﬁelds into the latter
equations which yield highly complex equations which are dependent on x, y and z. The
solution form of the perturbation equations is therefore not as trivial as for the bump
vortex roller, and is not investigated further.
6.2
Dependency of c
Even though the vortex ring is the most accurate for high values of c, the instability
onset is to be investigated for c = 100, c = 200, c = 300 and c = 400. The initial core
distribution velocity is seen in Figure 6.1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.1: The initial velocity distribution of the vortex core at (a) c = 100, (b) c = 200, (c)
c = 300 and (d) c = 400
90
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:107==
CHAPTER 6. INVESTIGATION OF THE INSTABILITY OF BUMP VORTEX
RINGS
The initial core distribution of the vorticity is seen in Appendix C. As mentioned, the
core distribution of the velocity- and vorticty is increasingly asymmetric for decreasing
c-values, i.e. increasing core radii. This may be seen to enhance the instability of the
setup, which is already seen to be unstable for the core, as seen in Chapter 5.
6.2.1
Stability Analysis
As the initial setup is not an equilibrium solution, this is not of great interest when
investigating the instability. It was seen in Chapter 4, that the instability occured just
after the laminar shedding of vortex ﬁlaments. The wave modes are seen to be present at
approximately the 300th time step of the 4 simulations. The late stage onset to instability
is seen on the xy-plane of the vorticity ﬁeld in Figure 6.2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.2: The core vorticity ﬁeld at the onset to instability at (a) c = 100, (b) c = 200, (c)
c = 300 and (d) c = 400
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
91
==PAGE:108==
CHAPTER 6. INVESTIGATION OF THE INSTABILITY OF BUMP VORTEX
RINGS
For the c = 100 vortex ring, the core is increasingly dissipated compared to the other
vortex rings. The shedding of the laminar ﬁlaments is also more developed at this stage.
It should be mentioned, that the numerical diﬀusion is increased for this ring, even though
the vorticity gradients are higher for the vortex rings with high c-values.
6.2.2
Investigation of the Critical Wave Number
The critical wave number of the Taylor-Couette instability was found by Taylor to be
approximately kcrit = π.
This was seen to be dependent on the Taylor number, Ta,
relating the centrifugal forces with the viscous forces in a Couette ﬂow. The critical wave
number was seen, though, to be almost independent of the viscosity, meaning that the
inviscid simulations with Ta = ∞should be suitable for comparison. The critical wave
length, estimated from the critical wave number was seen to be twice the diﬀerence in
radii, which may be seen in Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: Theoretical concept of the critical wave length of the Taylor-Couette instability [30]
The critical wave in this system, is hence covering two counter-rotating vortices. Widnall
[56, 57] further investigated, that the vortex rings are always unstable to the ﬁrst two
critical wave numbers of κ = 2.5 and κ = 4.45 where κ = kσ. This was seen only to be
true if σ ≪R which is increasingly true for increasing c of the bump vortex ring. The
wave modes present at the instability onset for the varying c-values are seen in Figure 6.4.
92
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER 6. INVESTIGATION OF THE INSTABILITY OF BUMP VORTEX
RINGS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.4: The critical wave on the toroidal at the onset to instability at (a) c = 100, (b)
c = 200, (c) c = 300 and (d) c = 400
As mentioned, the reason for the critical waves being initialized on the 4 nodes of the
vortex ring, may be due to numerical eﬀects. One may notice, that multiple small waves
are seen on the toroidal of the vortex rings. However, one may also consider the entire
range of small waves in one node as one wave length. If the toroidal point at θ = π/2 is
considered, the small waves expands in opposite directions of the node to a ﬁnite length,
where no waves a present. This is to some extend a similar behaviour to the Taylor-
Couette theory in Figure 6.3, where two opposite direction vortices induce the critical
wave. Thus, the cricital wave of the vortex ring may be the length of all the waves at
one note. For c = 400, this long wave length is in fact very close to twice the vortex core
diameter, which correspond to the Taylor-Couette theory. However, this is in paradox to
the increasing vortex core radii for the ramainding vortex rings. If the Taylor-Couette
theory should be present, the critical wave lengths on the toroidals should be increasing
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
93
==PAGE:110==
CHAPTER 6. INVESTIGATION OF THE INSTABILITY OF BUMP VORTEX
RINGS
for increasing core radii. However, as the vortex ring with c = 400 is the most numerical
stable ring, the theory may be in good agreement. If the vortex ring with c = 400 actually
does represent the critical wave length of the Taylor-Couette instability, it may be due to
the small gradient of the curvature of the toroidal. For increasing c, the wave length of
the inner and the outer radii is converging towards the same length, due to the decrease
of the curvature gradient. The critical wave modes to associated wave numbers and the
development of the ﬁrst 4 wave modes are seen in Figure 6.5.
10 0
10 1
10 2
10 -25
10 -20
10 -15
10 -10
10 -5
10 0
(a)
0
100
200
300
400
10 -40
10 -30
10 -20
10 -10
10 0
(b)
Figure 6.5: (a) the energy spectrum the a late stage and (b) the temporal energy modes with
the 0th mode (solid), 1st mode (dashed), 2nd mode (asterix), 3rd mode (circle) and 4th mode
(square). Simlations shown for c = 100 (
), c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
)
The Taylor-Couette does not match well the with critical wave numbers simulated. In
theory the wave number should be kcrit ≈π. Only wave numbers diviable by 4 are seen
to be signiﬁcant, and the energy is almost of same order. The energy is increasing for
increasing c-value of the background state, but is almost constant for all c-values at the
critical wave numbers.
As mentioned, Widnall [54] investigated three modes of instability in helical vortex ﬁla-
ment ﬂows; a very short-wave instability which probably exists on all curved ﬁlaments,
a long-wave mode found to be unstable by the local-local inducion model and a mutual-
inductance mode which apprears as the pitch of the helix decreases and the neighbouring
turns of the ﬁlament begin to interact strongly. One may argue that the short-wave and
the long-wave modes are present on the vortex ring, if the entire range of small waves of
one node is one wave length. This is diﬃcult to verify, as the cause of the critical waves
being onset on the 4 nodes is still unknown.
6.3
Dependency of Slightly Viscous Damping
As the Taylor-Couette theory is based on the critical Taylor number, dependent on the
viscosity, it may be necessary to introduce a physical viscosity to the simulations. As seen
in [6], the vortex ring does not become unstable if Re < 1 · 107, and hence this Reynolds
94
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:111==
CHAPTER 6. INVESTIGATION OF THE INSTABILITY OF BUMP VORTEX
RINGS
number is used, similar to the simulations of the vortex rollers in Chapter 5. The vorticity
ﬁeld in the vortex core at the onset to instability is seen for c = 400 at Re = ∞and
Re = 1 · 107 in Figure 6.6.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.6: The core vorticity ﬁeld at the onset to instability for c = 400 for (a) Re = ∞and
(b) Re = 1 · 107
Tiny eﬀects are seen on the vorticity ﬁeld, as the vorticity is slightly decreased to the
viscous damping. The viscosity does not make visually changes on the critical wave length,
which is not shown. The energy spectrum and temporal variation of energy modes are
seen in Figure 6.7
10 0
10 1
10 2
10 -20
10 -15
10 -10
10 -5
10 0
(a)
0
100
200
300
400
10 -40
10 -30
10 -20
10 -10
10 0
(b)
Figure 6.7: (a) the energy spectrum the a late stage and (b) the temporal energy modes with
the 0th mode (solid), 1st mode (dashed), 2nd mode (asterix), 3rd mode (circle) and 4th mode
(square). Simlations shown for Re = ∞(
) and Re = 1 · 107 (
)
It is again seen, that the modes dividable by 4 have increased energy, and that the energy
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
95
==PAGE:112==
CHAPTER 6. INVESTIGATION OF THE INSTABILITY OF BUMP VORTEX
RINGS
of the viscous vortex ring has decreased compared to the inviscid vortex ring, due to the
viscous damping.
6.4
Summary
The wave modes of the instability stage have been discussed and compared to the Taylor-
Couette theory and to the results of Widnall [54, 56, 57].
The 3D bump vortex ring perturbation equations derived in Chapter 5 were presented.
The complexity of the vortex ring ﬂow make the solution form hard to identify.
By increasing the c-value, the vortex core radius is decreasing, which has been seen mul-
tiple times in this project. The non-equilibrium stages have higher imporatance of the
numerical diﬀusion of the low valued c-rings.
At the onset to instability, wave modes are seen on the toroidal at 4 nodes on the vortex
ring. If the length of the opposite directions small wave domains is considered as one
long wave length, this critical wave length correspond well with the critical wave length
of the Taylor-Couette instability for c = 400. As the reason for the critical waves being
located at the 4 nodes is unknown, the match between wave lengths may be a coincidence.
If the nodes in fact consist of multiple small waves and one long wave, this is in good
agreement with the results from Widnall [54], who identiﬁed both short-wave and long-
wave instabilities on curved vortex ﬁlaments.
Last it was seen, that slightly viscous eﬀects do not make an visual impact on the wave
modes at the instability stage.
96
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:113==
7
Discussion
It has been seen, that the bump vortex rollers are unstable from the Raleigh criterion.
This was also seen by Raleigh to be the case for the Couette ﬂow, between cylinders
where the inner cylinder is rotating and the outer cylinder is stationary. The cause for
this behaviour is that Γ2 decreases radially. The bump setup of the vorticity, and hence
the velocity, is able to produce such a distribution which initially is unstable. As earlier
stated, if the ﬂow is unstable, the given perturbations to a system is growing, while the
perturbations are reducing and vanishing for a stable system, which was seen for the
Gaussian setup.
However, the Taylor-Couette theory does not match with respect to the critical wave
numbers of the bump vortex rollers. The wave numbers calculated from the given wave
perturbations showed be to dependent on the highest wave number given by the num-
ber of random phases. From the simulations of bump vortex rollers without given wave
perturbations, the wave numbers with highest associated energy are very high, where the
highest wave number is k = 124. This clearly diﬀer from the Taylor-Couette theory where
kcrit ≈π. The behaviour of this, again shows that the highest perturbations given to a
system, whether it is sinusoidal Kelvin waves or numerical perturbations, become the
most signiﬁcant.
The critical wave numbers found by Widnall [56, 57] do not match well with the simu-
lated bump vortex rings. The assymptotic solution found by Widnall, is based on a setup
of a vortex ring, where the circulation is non-zero, which was in good agreement with
results optained by experiments. The bump vortex ring may be non-physical because a
distribution with a total circulation of zero is hypothetical. The distribution of the bump
vortex ring and vortex roller is done with the smooth bump function, which has inﬁnite
number of derivatives. As seen, the sign of the vorticity changes troughout the vortex
core. Such a distribution may not be possible to generate by experiments.
On the other hand, a Gaussian distributed vortex core is seen to be stable throughout
the entire vortex core with respect to the Raleigh criterion, for the vortex roller. This is
further validated, as no wave modes are induced by time, and if wave perturbations are
given, these vanish by time, which is also stated in [9] for a stable ﬂow. A Gaussian distri-
bution has, similar to the setups by Widnall, a non-zero circulation. For vortex rings, the
Gaussian setup becomes unstable by time due to the asymmetry of the core distribution
[3, 4]. This is conﬁrmed by direct numerical simulations (DNS), similar to this project,
and is validated by experiments. However, for the vortex roller, the Gaussian setup does
97
==PAGE:114==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
not match well with the Taylor-Couette ﬂow, because the Taylor-Couette ﬂow becomes
unstable in a similar manner to the bump distributed vortex setup. As the cylinders are
ﬁxed in space, this corresponds well with the bump vortex setup with zero circulation.
Referring to Equations (2.5.6) and (2.5.7) the perturbation equations derived by Taylor,
are only dependent on the radial variation and is periodic in the z-direction. This may
give indications, that the Taylor-Couette ﬂow is more suitable for comparison to the bump
vortex rollers, rather than the bump vortex rings.
Further it has been seen, that when three-dimensional eﬀects occur for both the vortex
roller and the vortex ring, the energy spectra have increased energy at every mode di-
vidable by 4, to become an integer number. The cause for this does not seem physical,
but is most likely due to the numerical setup. By varying the arbitrary c-value and hence
the vortex core size does not eﬀect this behaviour. Also, the behaviour is not changed
when varying the spatial resolution, ﬁnite diﬀerence order and the regularisation order
(not shown). The Cartesian mesh for the particle-mesh mesh-particle interpolation may
be the cause. However, a O(h4) interpolation kernel, M ∗
6, is used which has proven to be
much accurate by multiple authors.
As mentioned, the critical wave numbers seen on the spectrum for the vortex ring are
every modes diviable by 4. The energy is not increasing nor decreasing for high and low
wave numbers within these modes divable by 4. Therefore, the critical wave length, which
may be calculated from the spectrum, is hard to identify on the toroidal of the vortex
ring. At the onset to instability, all wave modes are seen on 4 nodes i.e. θ ∈[0, π
2, π, 3π
2 ].
The length of the entire wave domain at such note is approximately twice the vortex
core diameter of the c = 400 vortex, which has been seen to be the most accurate and
numerical stable vortex ring in Chapter 4. This is in principle in good agreement with the
critical wave length from the Taylor-Couette theory, but is not consistant, if the vortex
core diameter is varied. Therefore this may be a coincidence. Also, it is hard to verify, if
this length on the toroidal is an actual wave length, or a numerical behaviour, based on
the hybrid vortex method.
7.1
Centrifugal Instability
Some assumptions are done regarding to investigating the bump vortex instabilities as a
Taylor-Couette instability, which may compromise the actual physics, which is present.
First, the Taylor-Couette instability is dependent on the Taylor number, relating the cen-
trifugal forces to viscous forces. The critical Taylor number which yielded the critical
wave number k ≈π, is dependent solely on the angular velocities on the inner and outer
cylinders in the Couette ﬂow, and hence not directly dependent on the viscosity. This
led to the assumption that inviscid simulations would apply, and the critical limit for the
bump vortex could become dependent on the vorticity destribution. The assumption of
neglectable viscous eﬀects was further done based on the experiments by [41] as the crit-
ical wave number was almost independent on the Reynolds number. The critical Taylor
number is given as function of the inner and outer angular velocities, and is hence always
unstable, which is in good agreement with the bump vortex roller, as mentioned.
98
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:115==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
The Taylor number given in Equation (2.5.8), implies that for inviscid simulations, the
Taylor number becomes Ta →∞. For the critical Taylor number in Equation (2.5.9),
this implies that the fraction between outher and inner angular velocities Ω2/Ω1 →−1.
As vorticity, by deﬁnition, is equal to twice the angular velocity, this may be deﬁned as
ω2/ω1 →−1. As the bump vorticity distribution shifts from positive to negative through
the vortex core, the negative sign makes sense. However, the actual magnitude is not
equal to 1, because of the deﬁnitions of the bump vortex radius. For the Taylor-Couette
ﬂow, the negative fraction between the angular velocities may be seen as counter-rotating
cylinders. As the vorticity distribution of the Gaussian setup is positive troughout the
entire vortex core, the critical Taylor number is not possible to deﬁne for this case, and
the ﬂow is stable.
The Taylor number should be reduced to the limits for which experimental results could
be matched. However, reducing the Taylor number of the bump vortices, would mean to
introduce very high kinematic viscosities. For bump vortex rings, reducing the Reynolds
number to Re = 1 · 107, similar results compared to the inviscid simulations are seen, but
decreasing the Reynolds number further, would yield simulations in which no instability
occur. This is also the case for the bump vortex rollers, when reducing the Reynolds
number to Re = 1 · 105 (not shown). This obviously shows a diﬀerence in between the
simulations and the theory from experiments.
The Reynolds number is also diﬃcult to deﬁne for the bump vortices, as the circulation
is zero, meaning that the circulation-based Reynolds number, which is a common choise
for the investment of cylindrical ﬂows, would yield zero, even if it is Reynolds number for
the simulation is deﬁned as inﬁnity. Also, due to the circulation is zero, the propagational
velocity of the vortex ring and roller, also becomes zero.
Experiments have been performed by multiple authors to produce many diﬀerent Couette
ﬂows. A Couette ﬂow is also present if the cylinders are rotating at same angular velocity,
and if the inner cylinder is ﬁxed while the outer is rotating. Also the Couette ﬂow is both
for cylinders rotating in same directions and by counter-rotating cylinders. In general the
Couette ﬂow is quantiﬁed by the relative velocity between the cylinders, which governs the
velocity distribution. The Taylor-Couette instability was deﬁned as the outward centrifu-
gal force is exceeding the inward pressure gradient force. This is seen on the bump vortex
roller where Γ2 is decreasing some point radially, in which the ﬂow becomes unstable.
This correspond to the case of Couette ﬂows in which the inner cylinder is rotating and
the outer is stationary. From the critical Taylor number, all Couette ﬂows become unsta-
ble, and the order of instability perturbations are governed by the fraction between the
angular velocities at inner and outer radii. Finding a bump vortex distribution for describ-
ing other types of Couette ﬂows may not be possible, and hence, the bump vortex roller
instability may only be comparable to one type (if any) of the Taylor-Couette instabilities.
One may also consider whether the Taylor-Couette theory by itself is a unique solution to
the Navier-Stokes equations. The vortices seen in the Taylor-Couette ﬂow are known as
Taylor vortices. Vortices of such, that occur in centrifugal ﬂows are known as secondary
ﬂows, as they are superimposed on the primary ﬂow [33]. However, other types of sec-
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
99
==PAGE:116==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
ondary ﬂow in addition to the Taylor vortices are commonly seen in cylindrical ﬂows. In
these types of ﬂows, the curved streamlines and the viscosity, induce centrifugal forces.
The one ﬂow is a pressure gradient driven ﬂow through a curved channel and the other
ﬂow is the so called G¨ortler vortices seen at the boundary layer of a concave wall [33]. As
more than one secondary ﬂow may be present, this shows that the governing Navier-Stokes
equations may be nonunique, as more than one steady solution is present for the same
boundary conditions. Taylor derived the Taylor-Couette theory on the base that only one
secondary ﬂow is present by the assumption that the radial and transverse velocities in
a cylinder is neglectable. This however, showed to be a good assumption as experiments
showed good agreements to his derived perturbation equations.
From the bump perturbation equations derived in this project, it is seen, that an az-
imuthal variation of the perturbated vorticity components,
uϕ
r
∂Ωi
∂ϕ , is present. For the
bump vortex setup to be similar to the Taylor-Couette theory, this component needs to
be very close to zero, otherwise more than one secondary ﬂow may be present for the
bump vortex roller, in which the bump perturbation equations would be a nonunique
solution to the Navier-Stokes equations.
In general, the vortex ring and the Couette ﬂow diﬀer in coordinates. Referring to the
poloidal- and toroidal coordinates in Figure 2.2, the azimuthal for both the Couette ﬂow
and the vortex ring is poloidal. The normal to this direction is the tranverse z-direction
for the cylindrical Couette ﬂow, while the normal is the toroidal axis for the vortex ring.
Therefore, if the vortex ring is to be compared to the Couette ﬂow, the criterion for the
vortex core radius and ring radius, σ/R ≪1 must be fulﬁlled, such that a small toroidal
segment of the vortex ring may be considered as a cylinder. Another complication of the
vortex ring, is that if the velocity distribution of a Couette ﬂow is identical to the vortex
core distribution, it only covers half of a vortex core, see Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: Rotating frames of the Couette ﬂow and the vortex ring. Azimuthal rotating is
into the plane. Only half the cross-sections are shown
The sketch shows half the radial cross section of the ﬂuid domain in the Coutte ﬂow
100
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:117==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
and the vortex ring. The dashed lines in the radial axis, r, mark the axis of rotation.
The azimuthals are into the plane.
The cross section of the Couette ﬂow is rotating
around the origin of the two cylinders, where the vortex ring is rotating around its own
imaginary axis, and hence not the centroid of the vortex ring. This again conﬁrms that
the bump vortex roller is more similar to a Couette ﬂow rather than the bump vortex ring.
The vorticity distribution has by numerous authors [21, 31] been seen to have inﬂuence
on the stability. Linear stability are seen for circular vorticity patches with uniformly
distributed vorticity through the vortex core . Further the symmetry of the vortex core
has been seen to have inﬂuence of the stability, where a rotating Kirchhoﬀvortex elliptical
vortex becomes unstable. As the uniformly distributed vorticity vortex core may not
represent a Coeutte type ﬂow, it makes sense that the uniform distribution is stable
while the Coeutte distribution is unstable. For an elliptical distribution, in which radius
varies with the azimuthal, the ﬂow becomes unstable even for Gaussian distributions.
Last barotropic instabilities have also been investigated by numerous authors were small
perturbations on axisymmetric vortices lead to high order multipoles of the 2D vortex
structure [7, 8, 23], which can be compared to the bump vortex.
7.2
Critical Wave Numbers
The instabilities observed for the bump vortex roller were primarely based on the Raleigh
criterion, which is based on the inviscid assumption. Taylor derived the analysis for the
critical wave numbers, in which the instability occur, based on viscous ﬂows. As men-
tioned, it was later seen, that viscous eﬀects had little inﬂuence.
This has also been
veriﬁed in this project. If the Reynolds number is kept below Re = 1 · 103, the critical
wave numbers of the energy spectra still is dependent on the given perturbations.
As it has been noticed from the simulations, the critical wave number of the perturbated
vortex rollers is directly dependent on the given amount of random perturbation phases.
For the case of simulations without given wave perturbations, the critical wave numbers
from the spectrum are seen to be for the high wave numbers, that depends on the spatial
resolution, where the wave number is approximately a fouth fraction of the spatial reso-
lution. Liftschitz [34], also investigated for invisid standing wave instabilities in rotating
ﬂows to be dependent on high wave numbers, where the amplitude increases for decreasing
spatial scales. These instabilities are probably the same as the 2D bump instabilities.
There may be physical ﬂows which are sensitive to high wave numbers regarding to the
instability onset, such as plasma physics and other types of shear ﬂows. However, the
physics of these ﬂows are not well comparable to the cylindrical ﬂow of the vortex ring
and vortex roller, and is hence not investigated. The tendency in which the critical wave
numbers is also seen in a study on a bypass transition [36], where the spanwise oscillations
in a boundary layer at the transition to turbulence, are investigated. In this analysis,
the visualizations showed that the high-amplitude forcing parameters are the result of a
substantial weakening of the low-frequency boundary layer streaks. But at high forcing
amplitudes are associated to new high frequency instabilities in the pre-transitional ﬂow.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
101
==PAGE:118==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
7.3
Further Work
As the critical wave number is hard to qualify in this project, as it for given wave pertur-
bations become equal to the given wave number based on the number of random phases.
On the other hand, the critical wave number seems to be dependent on the smallest com-
putational scales of the mesh if no wave perturbations are given, which may not represent
a physical ﬂow. It could be necessary to introduce a subgrid scale model in form of a
Large-Eddy Simulation (LES) model. The concept of this model is to explicitly solve
for the the large eddies in ﬂow and implicitly model the smallest scales of the ﬂow with
subgrid-scale model. The scales to be solved explicitly for, is spatially averaged with re-
spect to a given minimum size scale. That means that scales below this scale are modeled.
The purpose of using a LES model instead the direct numerical simulations (DNS) in this
project, is to remove the resolved small scales, which governs the critical wave numbers
for the simulations without perturbations. In [35], a Lagrangian LES scheme was seen
to capture experimentally observed results of vortex rings, including the turbulent break-
down on small-scale structures.
Next, in this project, the approach has been entirely based on numerical simulations. This
is a developing tool within science, because physical experiments are expensive, and many
physical aspects, such as turbulence are diﬃcult to produce. Also the computational tools
for simulations are increasingly developing, which removes many limitations for simula-
tions. However, to test the validity of the simulations, targets are needed for comparison.
This is often done from experiments, which has been seen for some vortex rings. The
bump vortex ring is hypothetical, and hence physical experiments may not be possible.
Thus a proper validation tool may be by an analytical mathametical approach, where to
solve the bump perturbation equations, which are derived in this project. As mentioned,
the solution form to this problem is based on the normal modes of the perturbation com-
ponets which is spatially periodic. Hence by solving the eigenvalue problem, one would
get the theoretical critical wave numbers, which can be compared to the observed wave
modes at the instability onset.
Last, it may be necessary to investigate other types of vortex instibilities. In this project,
the primary target has been on the similarities between the bump vortex ﬂows and the
Taylor-Couette ﬂow. The reason for this was that the Taylor-Couette instability occur as a
centrifugal instability, and show many similar behaviours to the bump vortex instabilities.
In aerodynamics, another instability, which is often spotted behind aircraft wakes, is the
Crow instability. In such instability, the tip vortices in the wake interact with the contrails
of the engines. The instability occur as counter-rotating vortices disturbe each other and
induce small sinusoidal disturbances. Hence, these grow in a similar manner as investiaged
by Widnall [54], and form a chain of vortex rings. This instability is probably not present
for the bump case, as no axial velocity in present for the initial setup. Last, one may
also analyse the distribution of the initial vorticity in the vortex core. Multiple authors
[21, 32] investigated the presence of an elliptical distributed vortex core, where the radii
change with the azimuthal. The instablity that occured for these initial Gaussian setups
is much similar the instability seen for the bump vortex roller in Figure 5.7. Elliptical-
and barotropic instabilities should therefore also be considered.
102
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:119==
8
Conclusions
Bump vortex instabilities are simulated and investigated in order to qualitatively under-
stand the complex transition from the laminar to turbulent regime in ﬂows. The simu-
lations are done on vortex rings and straight vortex rollers of circular vorticity patches.
The instabilities are seen as small wave disturbances on the systems parameters, that
grows and form new disturbances, that eventually leads to turbulence. The simulations
are primarely run as inviscid, and hence do not represent a physical turbulence ﬁeld.
The vortex ring and vortex roller were initialised with a radial ”bump” distribution of
vorticity through the vortex core. The bump function is a compact, inﬁnite diﬀerentiable,
function within a supported domain and is hence not unnaturally truncated as compared
to a Gaussian distribution. The bump vortex has a total initial circulation of zero, mean-
ing the the vortex is non-propagating. The instability forms seen on the bump vortex
structures show visual similarities to the Taylor-Couette instability, which occur in ﬂuid
domains within rotating cylinders. In such ﬂows, the instability occur due to unstable
arrangement of angular momentum and develop wavy modes which are ﬁrst transverse,
then develop to azimuthal waves and eventually become turbulent. The aim of the anal-
yses, was to investigate the bump vortices as a Taylor-Couette instability.
The vortex rings and vortex rollers were simulated with a hybrid particle-mesh vortex
method using a O(h4) interpolation kernel. A high spatial resolution of 512 cells over
one computional direction was used, together with a O(h10) regularisation kernel for solv-
ing the Poisson equation and a O(h6) ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme for calculating the particle
derivatives.
The arbitrary c-parameter of the bump function was governing the vortex core radius,
and the core was descreasing for increasing c, and further converges towards a solution to
the Navier-Stokes equations. This was seen as minimum amount of laminar sheddings of
ﬁlaments in the wake, caused by non-equilibriums of the setup. This was veriﬁed as the
circulation becomes non-zero. The vortex ring with least sheddings was chosed as c = 400.
This was also chosen for the vortex roller for comparison. For the vortex ring, the critical
wave modes were seen on the toroidal axis at θ ∈[0, π
2, π, 3π
2 ]. Modes associated to wave
numbers diviable by 4, all have signiﬁcant increased amount of energy on the spectra. The
highest energy was associated to high wave numbers, which vary with the mesh resolution.
For c = 400, the toroidal domain of wave modes was approximately twice the length of the
vortex core diameter. This was in principle in agreement with the viscous Taylor-Couette
theory, but was most likely a coincidence, due to inconsistence with varying c-values.
103
==PAGE:120==
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSIONS
From an inviscid ﬂow, Taylor derived the Raleigh criterion of a Couette ﬂow, which states
that the ﬂow is unstable if the circulation squared decreases radially.
From this, the
mathematical distribution of a bump- and a Gaussian vortex roller yields, that the bump
vortex roller is initially unstable while the Gaussian roller is stable. Simulations of bump-
and Gaussian distributed vortex rollers, without added perturbations, conﬁrmed this the-
ory, and showed to be independent of the core radius and time. The spatial point of the
critical Raleigh criterion in which the ﬂow is 2D unstable showed good agreement with
isocontours, where a noisy region approximately half through the core was spotted. At
the late stages, asymmetric vortex structues were spotted, which are also seen for elliptic
vortex structures, simulated by multiple authors. This behaviour was not investigated
further in this project. At the very late stages the ﬂow induced 3D wave modes, which
had similar behaviour to the vortex ring, where high wave numbers, based on the mesh
resolution, were signiﬁcant.
The bump perturbation equations were derived mathematically in 2D and 3D, by decom-
posing the components of the governing Navier-Stokes equations into a background state
and perturbation. The solution form to the equations is expected to be a periodicity of
the normal modes of the perturbation compenents, where solving the eigenvalue problem
would yield the critical wave numbers. This is considered as further work.
The viscous Taylor-Couette theory states that the onset to instability occur at a critical
wave number of kcrit ≈π. The simulations were kept inviscid and slightly viscous, as
experiments have shown that the critical wave number is almost indepent of the Reynolds
number. To induce Kelvin waves, seen in Taylor-Couette ﬂows, the center line of the
vortex structure was given perturbations based on a ﬁnite number of random phases. For
the bump vortex simulations, this proved to induce transverse wave modes in the periodic
z-direction. The wave modes were initially not seen, but developed by time, and eventu-
ally the vortex broke down, which compared well to ﬂow instability analysis. However,
the critical wave number, showed to be dependent on the highest given perturbation wave
number, dependent on the number of random phases. In theory the wave length may vary
from the transverse domain length down to the mesh cell size. From ﬂow diagnostics, the
perturbations could be seen, initially, for the Gaussian vortex rollers, but then vanished
by time, which was in good agreement with theory of ﬂow stability.
From the inviscid Raleigh criterion, the bump vortex roller is unstable while the Gaus-
sian roller is stable. The instability of the bump vortex roller is comparable with the
Taylor-Couette ﬂow, which is always unstable. The simulated critical wave number is
dependent to the highest given pertubations. For simulations without added perturba-
tions, the system is sensitive to high wave numbers that vary with the mesh resolution. If
perturbations are given, the system is sensitive to the highest perturbation wave number,
given by the number of random phases.
For further investigations, one may need to include a LES model, that model the smallest
scales in the simulations and only solves the largest scales. Also, a mathematical approach
could be necessary, by solving the bump perturbation equations with respect to the wave
number. Last, it may be necessary to investigate for asymmetry and elliptic instabilities.
104
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
[1] Alp Akonur and Richard M. Lueptow. Three-dimensional velocity ﬁeld for wavy ﬂow.
Phyics of Fluids, 15(947), 2003.
[2] C. David Anderick, S. S. Liu, and Harry L. Swinney. Flows regimes in a circular
couette system with independently rotating cylinders. Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
164:155–183, 1986.
[3] P. J. Archer, T. G. Thomas, and G. N. Coleman. Direct numerical simulation of
vortex ring evolution from the laminar to the early turbulent regime. Journal of
Fluid Mechanics, 598:201–226, 2008.
[4] Michael Bergdof, Petros Koumoutsakos, and Anthony Leonard. Direct numerical
simulations of vortex rings at reΓ = 7500. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 581:495–505,
2007.
[5] Harry B. Bingham, Poul S. Larsen, and V. Allan Barker. Computional ﬂuid dynam-
ics. DTU Mekanik. Institut for Mekanisk Teknologi, 2015. Lecture Notes.
[6] Niels Skak Bossen. Numerical simulation of vortex rings. DTU Mekanik. Institut for
Mekanisk Teknologi, 2017. Individual course report.
[7] C. F. Carnevale, R. C. Kloosterziel, and P. Orlandi. Equilibrium of centrifugally
unstable vortices: A review. European Journal of Mechanics B/Fluids, 55:246–258,
2016.
[8] X. J. Carton and X. J. McWilliams. Barotropic and baroclinic instabilities of ax-
isymmetric vortices in a quasigeostrophic model. National Center for Atmosperic
Reseach, Boulder., pages 225–244, 1989.
[9] Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar. Hydrodynamic and hydromagnetic stability. Dover,
ISBN 0-486-64071-X, 1961.
[10] F. Charru.
Hydrodynamic instabilities.
Cambridge University Press, ISBN
1139500546, 2011.
[11] Philippe Chatelain, Alessandro Curioni, Michael Bergdof, Diego Rossinelli, Wanda
Andreoni, and Petros Koumoutsakos. Billion vortex particle direct numerical simu-
lations of aircraft wakes. Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering,
197:1296–1304, 2008.
105
==PAGE:122==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[12] Philippe Chatelain and Petros Koumoutsakos.
A fourier-based elliptic solver for
vortical ﬂows with periodic and unbounded directions. Journal of Computational
Physics, 229:2425–2431, 2010.
[13] Alexandre Joel Chorin. Numerical study of slightly viscous ﬂow. Journal of Fluid
Mechanics, 57(4):785–796, 1973.
[14] J. P. Christiansen. Numerical simulation of hydrodynamics by the method of point
vortices. Journal of Computational Physics, 135:189–197, 1997.
[15] Roger Cocle, Gr´egoire Winckelmans, and Go´eric Daeninck. Combining the vortex-
in-cell and parallel fast multipole methods for eﬃcient domain decomposition simu-
lations. Journal of Computational Physics, 227:9091–9120, 2008.
[16] Donald Coles. Transition in circular couette ﬂow. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 21:385–
425, 1965.
[17] Georges-Henri Cottet and Petros Koumoutsakos. Vortex methods: Theory and prac-
tice. Cambridge University Press, ISBN 9780521621861, 2000.
[18] Georges-Henri Cottet, Petros Koumoutsakos, and Mohamed Lemine Ould Salihi.
Vortex methods with spatially varying cores.
Journal of Computational Physics,
162:164–185, 2000.
[19] D. A. Donzis, P. K. Yeung, and K. R. Sreenivasan. Dissipation and enstrophy in
isotropic turbulence: Resolution eﬀects and scaling in direct numerical simulations.
Physics of Fluids, 20(045108), 2008.
[20] Philip Drazin. Introduction to hydrodynamic stability. Cambridge University Press,
ISBN 0-521-00965-0, 2002.
[21] David G. Dritschel. The nonlinear evolution of rotating conﬁgurations of uniform
vorticity. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 172:157–182, 1986.
[22] J. H. Ferziger and M Peri´c. Computional methods for ﬂuid dynamics. Springer, 3rd
edition, 2001.
[23] Glenn R. Frierl. On the instability of geostrophic vortices. Journal of Fluid Mechan-
ics, 197:349–388, 1988.
[24] Mads Mølholm Hejlesen. A high order regularisation method for solving the poisson
equation and selected applications using vortex methods.
Section for Fluid Me-
chanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, ISBN
978-87-7475-444-2, 2016.
[25] Mads Mølholm Hejlesen, Johannes Tophøj Rasmussen, Philippe Chatelain, and
Jens Honor´e Walther.
A high order solver for the unbounded poisson equation.
Journal of Computational Physics, 252:458–467, 2013.
[26] Mads Mølholm Hejlesen, Johannes Tophøj Rasmussen, Philippe Chatelain, and
Jens Honor´e Walther.
High order poisson solver for unbounded ﬂows.
Procedia
IUTAM, 18:56–65, 2015.
106
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:123==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[27] Mads Mølholm Hejlesen and Jens Honor´e Spietz, Henrik J. Walther. Simulations
of a single vortex ring using an unbounded, regularized particle-mesh based vortex
method. Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Vortex Flows and Vortex
Models, 2014.
[28] Mads Mølholm Hejlesen and Jens Honor´e Walther. Simulations of a single turbulent
vortex ring using a regularized particle-mesh based vortex method. WCCM XI ECCM
V ECFD VI, 2014.
[29] Mads Mølholm Hejlesen, Gr´egoire Winckelmans, and Jens Honor´e Walther. Non-
singular green’s functions for the unbounded poisson equation in 2d and 3d derived
using spectral cut-oﬀregularization. arXiv, 2017.
[30] Dustin Kleckner and William T. M. Irvine. Creation and dynamics of knotted vor-
tices. Nature physics, 9, 2017.
[31] R. C. Kloosterziel and G. F. Carnevale. Formal stability of circular vortices. Journal
of Fluid Mechanics, 242:249–278, 1992.
[32] Petros Koumoutsakos. Inviscid axisymmetrization of an elliptical vortex. Journal of
Computational Physics, 138:821–857, 1997.
[33] Pijush K. Kundu, Ira M. Cohen, and David R. Dowling. Fluid mechanics. ISBN
978-0-12-382100-3. Fifth edition, 2014.
[34] Alexander Liftschitz and Bruce Fabijonas. A new class of instabilities of rotating
ﬂuids. American Institute of Physics, 1996.
[35] John R. Mansﬁeld, Omar M. Knio, and Charles Meneveau. Dynamic les of colliding
vortex rings using a 3d vortex method. Journal of Computational Physics, 152:305–
345, 1999.
[36] Xuerui Mao, Tamer Zaki, Spencer Sherwin, and Hugh Blackburn. Bypass transition
induced by free-stream noise in ﬂow past a blade cascade. International Symposium
on Transport Phenomena and Dynamics of Rotating Machinery, 2016.
[37] Ren´e Moreau. Unbounded ﬂows. Magnetohydrodynamics. Part of the Fluid Mechan-
ics and it’s Applications book series, 3:165–197, 1990.
[38] Rajesh Ramaswamy, George Bourantas, and Frank J¨ulicher.
A hybrid particle-
mesh method for incompressible active polar viscous gels. Journal of Computational
Physics, 291:334–361, 2015.
[39] N´estor Ramos-Garc´ıa,
Mads Mølholm Hejlesen,
Jens Nørkær Sørensen,
and
Jens Honor´e Walther. Hybrid vortex simulations of wind turbines using a three-
dimensional viscous-inviscid panel method. Wind Energy, 2017.
[40] Johannes Tophøj Rasmussen. Particle methods in bluﬀbody aerodynamics. DTU
Mechanical Engineering. DCAMM Special Report No S146, 2011.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
107
==PAGE:124==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[41] A. Recktenwald, M. L¨ucke, and H. W. M¨uller.
Taylor vortex formation in axial
through-ﬂow: Linear and weakly nonlinear analysis. Physics Review of Engineering,
48:4444–4454, 1993.
[42] P. G. Saﬀman. Vortex dynamics. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics,
36(2):293–297, 1994.
[43] Eric Serre, Michael A. Sprague, and Richard M. Luephow. Stability of taylor-couette
ﬂow in a ﬁnite-length cavity with radial throughﬂow. Physics of Fluids, 20(034106),
2008.
[44] Karim Shariﬀ. Vortex rings. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 24:235–279, 1992.
[45] Henrik Spietz.
Numerical simulation of vortex rings.
Department of Mechanical
Engineering at DTU, 2014.
[46] Henrik Spietz. Iterative brinkman penalization in vortex methods. Master thesis.
Department of Mechanical Engineering at DTU, 2015.
[47] Henrik Spietz, Mads Mølholm Hejlesen, and Jens Honor´e Walther. A regularization
method for solving the poisson equation for mixed unbounded-periodic domains.
Journal of Computational Physics, 2017.
[48] Mark J. Stock. Summary of vortex methods literture (a living document rife with
opinion). 2007.
[49] B. Mutlu Sumer. Lecture notes on turbulence. DTU Mekanik, Section for Fluid
Mechanics, Coastal & Maritime Engineering, 2013.
[50] Yasushi Takeda.
Quasi-periodic state and transition to turbulence in a rotating
couette system. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 389:81–99, 1998.
[51] Wim M. van Rees, Anthony Leonard, D. I. Pullin, and Petros Koumoutsakos. A
comparison of vortex and pseudo-spectral methods for the simulation of periodic
ﬂows at high reynolds numbers. Journal of Computational physics, 230:2794–2805,
2011.
[52] Jens Honor´e Walther, Marc Gu´enot, Ewan Machefaux, Johannes Tophøj Rasmussen,
Philippe Chatelain, Valery L. Okulov, Jens Nørkær Sørensen, Michael Bergdof, and
Petros Koumoutsakos. A numerical study of the stability of helical vortices using
vortex methods. Journal of Physics, 75(012034), 2007.
[53] Steven T. Werely and Richard M. Lueptow. Spatio-temporal character of non-wavy
and wavy taylor-couette ﬂow. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 364:59–80, 1998.
[54] Sheila E. Widnall. The stability of a helical vortex ﬁlament. Journal of Fluid Me-
chanics, 54(4):641–663, 1972.
[55] Sheila E. Widnall. The structure and dynamics of vortex ﬁlaments. Annual Review
of Fluid Mechanics, 7:141–165, 1975.
108
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:125==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[56] Sheila E. Widnall, Donald B. Bliss, and Chon-Yin Tsai. The instability of short
waves on a vortex ring. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 66(1):35–47, 1974.
[57] Sheila E. Widnall and Chon-Yin Tsai. The instability of the thin vortex ring of
constant vorticity. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series
A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 287(1344):273–305, 1977.
[58] J. H. Williamson.
Low-storage runge-kutta schemes.
Journal of Computational
Physics, 35:48–56, 1980.
[59] Gr´egoire Winckelmans, Roger Cocle, Louis Dufresne, and Rapha¨el Capart. Vortex
methods and their application fo trailing wake vortex simulations. Comptes Rendus
Physique, 6:467–486, 2005.
[60] Gr´egoire S. Winckelmans and Anthony Leonard. Contributions to vortex particle
methods for the computation of three-dimensional incompressible unsteady ﬂows.
Journal of Computational Physics, 109:247–273, 1993.
[61] Jie-Zhi Wu, Hui-Yang Ma, and Ming-De Zhou.
Vorticity and vortex dynamics.
Springer, ISBN 9783540290278, 2006.
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
109
==PAGE:126==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
110
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:127==
Appendices
111
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
A
Derivation of the Bump
Perturbation Equations
A.0.0.1
Cartesian Coordinates
In Cartesian coordinates, Equation (5.3.3) may be written in vector coordinates as


∂Ωx
∂t
∂Ωy
∂t
∂Ωz
∂t

+




ux
uy
uz

·


∂
∂x
∂
∂y
∂
∂z






Ωx
Ωy
Ωz

+




Υx
Υy
Υz

·


∂
∂x
∂
∂y
∂
∂z






ωx
ωy
ωz

=




ωx
ωy
ωz

·


∂
∂x
∂
∂y
∂
∂z






Υx
Υy
Υz

+




Ωx
Ωy
Ωz

·


∂
∂x
∂
∂y
∂
∂z






ux
uy
uz

+ ν


∂2
∂x2
∂2
∂x∂y
∂2
∂x∂z
∂2
∂y∂x
∂2
∂y2
∂2
∂y∂z
∂2
∂z∂x
∂2
∂z∂y
∂2
∂z2




Ωx
Ωy
Ωz


(A.0.1)
Considering the convection and stretching terms, the x-,y-,z- coordinate terms become
x-term

Conv,Stretch =

ux
∂
∂x + uy
∂
∂y + uz
∂
∂z

Ωx +

Υx
∂
∂x + Υy
∂
∂y + Υz
∂
∂z

ωx =

ωx
∂
∂x + ωy
∂
∂y + ωz
∂
∂z

Υx +

Ωx
∂
∂x + Ωy
∂
∂y + Ωz
∂
∂z

ux
(A.0.2)
y-term

Conv,Stretch =

ux
∂
∂x + uy
∂
∂y + uz
∂
∂z

Ωy +

Υx
∂
∂x + Υy
∂
∂y + Υz
∂
∂z

ωy =

ωx
∂
∂x + ωy
∂
∂y + ωz
∂
∂z

Υy +

Ωx
∂
∂x + Ωy
∂
∂y + Ωz
∂
∂z

uy
(A.0.3)
z-term

Conv,Stretch =

ux
∂
∂x + uy
∂
∂y + uz
∂
∂z

Ωz +

Υx
∂
∂x + Υy
∂
∂y + Υz
∂
∂z

ωz =

ωx
∂
∂x + ωy
∂
∂y + ωz
∂
∂z

Υz +

Ωx
∂
∂x + Ωy
∂
∂y + Ωz
∂
∂z

uz
(A.0.4)
Multiplying the components outside the parenthesis into the paranthesis yield
x-term

Conv,Stretch =

ux
∂Ωx
∂x + uy
∂Ωx
∂y + uz
∂Ωx
∂z

+

Υx
∂ωx
∂x + Υy
∂ωx
∂y + Υz
∂ωx
∂z

=

ωx
∂Υx
∂x + ωy
∂Υx
∂y + ωz
∂Υx
∂z

+

Ωx
∂ux
∂x + Ωy
∂ux
∂y + Ωz
∂ux
∂z

(A.0.5)
113
==PAGE:130==
APPENDIX A. DERIVATION OF THE BUMP PERTURBATION EQUATIONS
y-term

Conv,Stretch =

ux
∂Ωy
∂x + uy
∂Ωy
∂y + uz
∂Ωy
∂z

+

Υx
∂ωy
∂x + Υy
∂ωy
∂y + Υz
∂ωy
∂z

=

ωx
∂Υy
∂x + ωy
∂Υy
∂y + ωz
∂Υy
∂z

+

Ωx
∂uy
∂x + Ωy
∂uy
∂y + Ωz
∂uy
∂z

(A.0.6)
z-term

Conv,Stretch =

ux
∂Ωz
∂x + uy
∂Ωz
∂y + uz
∂Ωz
∂z

+

Υx
∂ωz
∂x + Υy
∂ωz
∂y + Υz
∂ωz
∂z

=

ωx
∂Υz
∂x + ωy
∂Υz
∂y + ωz
∂Υz
∂z

+

Ωx
∂uz
∂x + Ωy
∂uz
∂y + Ωz
∂uz
∂z

(A.0.7)
Combining the x-,y-,z- terms of the convection and stretching terms with the time deriva-
tive of the perturbated vorticity ﬁeld and the diﬀusion term, one gets the 3D vorticity-
velocity perturbation equations. In 2D, the vorticity ﬁeld is by deﬁnition ω = (0, 0, ωz)
and the velocity ﬁeld is by deﬁnition u = (ux, yz, 0). Hence, the 2D vorticity-velocity
perturbation equations may be deﬁned as
∂Ωx
∂t +ux
∂Ωx
∂x +uy
∂Ωx
∂y = ωz
∂Υx
∂x +Ωx
∂ux
∂x +Ωy
∂ux
∂y +ν
∂2Ωx
∂x2 + ∂2Ωy
∂x∂y + ∂2Ωz
∂x∂z

(A.0.8)
∂Ωy
∂t +ux
∂Ωy
∂x +uy
∂Ωy
∂y = ωz
∂Υy
∂x +Ωx
∂uy
∂x +Ωy
∂uy
∂y +ν
∂2Ωx
∂y∂x + ∂2Ωy
∂y2 + ∂2Ωz
∂y∂z

(A.0.9)
∂Ωz
∂t +ux
∂Ωz
∂x +uy
∂Ωz
∂y +Υx
∂ωz
∂x +Υy
∂ωz
∂y = ωz
∂Υz
∂z +ν
∂2Ωx
∂z∂x + ∂2Ωy
∂z∂y + ∂2Ωz
∂z2

(A.0.10)
The background state values, which are present in the nonlinear tearms, i.e. ux, uy and
ωz are deﬁned for the bump vortex roller in Equation (2.4.21), (2.4.22) and (2.4.20),
respectively. Substituting these into Equation (A.0.8), (A.0.9) and (A.0.10), the bump
vortex roller perturbation equations are derived, and the x-momentum equation becomes
114
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX A. DERIVATION OF THE BUMP PERTURBATION EQUATIONS
∂Ωx
∂t +


−2ycR2 exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

(R2 −x2 −y2)2

∂Ωx
∂x +


2xcR2 exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

(R2 −x2 −y2)2

∂Ωx
∂y =


4 exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

cR2 
R4 −c (x2 + y2) R2 −(x2 + y2)2
(R2 −x2 −y2)4

∂Υx
∂z +
Ωx


4R2xcy exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

((c −2) R2 + 2x2 + 2y2)
(R2 −x2 −y2)4

+
Ωy

−
2R2c (R4 + ((−2c + 2) y2 −2x2) R2 + x4 −2x2y2 −3y4) exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

(R2 −x2 −y2)4

+
ν
∂2Ωx
∂x2 + ∂2Ωy
∂x∂y + ∂2Ωz
∂x∂z

(A.0.11)
the y-momentum equation becomes
∂Ωy
∂t +


−2ycR2 exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

(R2 −x2 −y2)2

∂Ωy
∂x +


2xcR2 exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

(R2 −x2 −y2)2

∂Ωy
∂y =


4 exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

cR2 
R4 −c (x2 + y2) R2 −(x2 + y2)2
(R2 −x2 −y2)4

∂Υy
∂z +
Ωx


2R2c (R4 + ((−2c + 2) x2 −2y2) R2 + y4 −2x2y2 −3x4) exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

(R2 −x2 −y2)4

+
Ωy


−4R2xcy exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

((c −2) R2 + 2x2 + 2y2)
(R2 −x2 −y2)4

+
ν
∂2Ωx
∂y∂x + ∂2Ωy
∂y2 + ∂2Ωz
∂y∂z

(A.0.12)
and the z-momentum equation becomes
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
115
==PAGE:132==
APPENDIX A. DERIVATION OF THE BUMP PERTURBATION EQUATIONS
∂Ωz
∂t +


−2ycR2 exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

(R2 −x2 −y2)2

∂Ωz
∂x +


2xcR2 exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

(R2 −x2 −y2)2

∂Ωz
∂y +
Υx



−
16xR2

(c −2) R6 −(x2+y2)(c2−2c−6)R4
2
−2c (x2 + y2)2 R2 −(x2 + y2)3

exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

(R2 −x2 −y2)6



+
Υy



−
16yR2

(c −2) R6 −(x2+y2)(c2−2c−6)R4
2
−2c (x2 + y2)2 R2 −(x2 + y2)3

exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

(R2 −x2 −y2)6



=


4 exp

−
cR2
R2−x2−y2

cR2 
R4 −c (x2 + y2) R2 −(x2 + y2)2
(R2 −x2 −y2)4

∂Υz
∂z +ν
∂2Ωx
∂z∂x + ∂2Ωy
∂z∂y + ∂2Ωz
∂z2

(A.0.13)
The solution form of these Cartesian bump vortex roller perturbation equations is not
trivial, as the unknown depend both of x and y.
As seen from the non-perturbated
equations, the vorticity- and velocity ﬁelds depend on the radial component, r, only, and
therefore the perturbation equations are also to be derived in cylindrical coordinates.
A.0.0.2
Cylindrical Coordinates
In cylindrical coordinates, Equation (5.3.3) may be written in vector coordinates as


∂Ωr
∂t
∂Ωϕ
∂t
∂Ωz
∂t

+




ur
uϕ
uz

·


∂
∂r
1
r
∂
∂ϕ
∂
∂z






Ωr
Ωϕ
Ωz

+




Υr
Υϕ
Υz

·


∂
∂r
1
r
∂
∂ϕ
∂
∂z






ωr
ωϕ
ωz

=




ωr
ωϕ
ωz

·


∂
∂r
1
r
∂
∂ϕ
∂
∂z






Υr
Υϕ
Υz

+




Ωr
Ωϕ
Ωz

·


∂
∂r
1
r
∂
∂ϕ
∂
∂z






ur
uϕ
uz

+ ν


∂2
∂r2
∂2
∂r∂ϕ
∂2
∂r∂z
∂2
∂ϕ∂r
∂2
∂ϕ2
∂2
∂ϕ∂z
∂2
∂z∂r
∂2
∂z∂ϕ
∂2
∂z2




Ωr
Ωϕ
Ωz


(A.0.14)
Considering only the nonlinear convection and stretching terms, the r-,ϕ-,z- coordinate
terms become
r-term

Conv,Stretch =

ur
∂
∂r + uϕ
r
∂
∂ϕ + uz
∂
∂z

Ωr +

Υr
∂
∂r + Υϕ
r
∂
∂ϕ + Υz
∂
∂z

ωr =

ωr
∂
∂r + ωϕ
r
∂
∂ϕ + ωz
∂
∂z

Υr +

Ωr
∂
∂r + Ωϕ
r
∂
∂ϕ + Ωz
∂
∂z

ur
(A.0.15)
116
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX A. DERIVATION OF THE BUMP PERTURBATION EQUATIONS
ϕ-term

Conv,Stretch =

ur
∂
∂r + uϕ
r
∂
∂ϕ + uz
∂
∂z

Ωϕ +

Υr
∂
∂r + Υϕ
r
∂
∂ϕ + Υz
∂
∂z

ωϕ =

ωr
∂
∂r + ωϕ
r
∂
∂ϕ + ωz
∂
∂z

Υϕ +

Ωr
∂
∂r + Ωϕ
r
∂
∂ϕ + Ωz
∂
∂z

uϕ
(A.0.16)
z-term

Conv,Stretch =

ur
∂
∂r + uϕ
r
∂
∂ϕ + uz
∂
∂z

Ωz +

Υr
∂
∂r + Υϕ
r
∂
∂ϕ + Υz
∂
∂z

ωz =

ωr
∂
∂r + ωϕ
r
∂
∂ϕ + ωz
∂
∂z

Υz +

Ωr
∂
∂r + Ωϕ
r
∂
∂ϕ + Ωz
∂
∂z

uz
(A.0.17)
The terms are then expanded by multiplying the coordinates outside the paranthesis into
the paranthesis, which yield the 3D vorticity-velocity perturbation equations in cylindrical
coordinates
r-term

Conv,Stretch =

ur
∂Ωr
∂r + uϕ
r
∂Ωr
∂ϕ + uz
∂Ωr
∂z

+

Υr
∂ωr
∂r + Υϕ
r
∂ωr
∂ϕ + Υz
∂ωr
∂z

=

ωr
∂Υr
∂r + ωϕ
r
∂Υr
∂ϕ + ωz
∂Υr
∂z

Υr +

Ωr
∂ur
∂r + Ωϕ
r
∂ur
∂ϕ + Ωz
∂ur
∂z

(A.0.18)
ϕ-term

Conv,Stretch =

ur
∂Ωϕ
∂r + uϕ
r
∂Ωϕ
∂ϕ + uz
∂Ωϕ
∂z

+

Υr
∂ωϕ
∂r + Υϕ
r
∂ωϕ
∂ϕ + Υz
∂ωϕ
∂z

=

ωr
∂Υϕ
∂r + ωϕ
r
∂Υϕ
∂ϕ + ωz
∂Υϕ
∂z

+

Ωr
∂uϕ
∂r + Ωϕ
r
∂uϕ
∂ϕ + Ωz
∂uϕ
∂z

(A.0.19)
z-term

Conv,Stretch =

ur
∂Ωz
∂r + uϕ
r
∂Ωz
∂ϕ + uz
∂Ωz
∂z

+

Υr
∂ωz
∂r + Υϕ
r
∂ωz
∂ϕ + Υz
∂ωz
∂z

=

ωr
∂Υz
∂r + ωϕ
r
∂Υz
∂ϕ + ωz
∂Υz
∂z

+

Ωr
∂uz
∂r + Ωϕ
r
∂uz
∂ϕ + Ωz
∂uz
∂z

(A.0.20)
The 2D vorticity-velocity perturbation equations in cylindrical coordinates become
∂Ωr
∂t + uϕ
r
∂Ωr
∂ϕ = ωz
∂Υr
∂r + ν
1
r
∂
∂r

r∂Ωr
∂r

+ 1
r2
∂2Ωr
∂ϕ2 + ∂2Ωr
∂z2 −Ωr
r2 −2
r2
∂Ωϕ
∂ϕ

(A.0.21)
∂Ωϕ
∂t +uϕ
r
∂Ωϕ
∂ϕ = ωz
∂Υϕ
∂r +Ωr
∂uϕ
∂r +ν
1
r
∂
∂r

r∂Ωϕ
∂r

+ 1
r2
∂2Ωϕ
∂ϕ2 + ∂2Ωϕ
∂z2 + 2
r2
∂Ωr
∂ϕ −Ωϕ
r2

(A.0.22)
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
117
==PAGE:134==
APPENDIX A. DERIVATION OF THE BUMP PERTURBATION EQUATIONS
∂Ωz
∂t + uϕ
r
∂Ωz
∂ϕ + Υr
∂ωz
∂r = ωz
∂Υz
∂r + ν
1
r
∂
∂r

r∂Ωz
∂r

+ 1
r2
∂2Ωz
∂ϕ2 + ∂2Ωz
∂z2

(A.0.23)
Coordinate transforming the bump background state components from Cartersian to
cylindrical yield (ux, uy, ωz) →(uϕ, ωz). The r-momentum equation becomes
∂Ωr
∂t +


2cr2R2 exp

−
r2c
(R−r)(R+r)

(R2 −r2)2

∂Ωr
∂ϕ =


2R2c exp

−
r2c
(R−r)(R+r)

(R4 −2r2(c −1)R2 −3r4)
(R2 −r2)4

∂Υr
∂r +
ν
1
r
∂
∂r

r∂Ωr
∂r

+ 1
r2
∂2Ωr
∂ϕ2 + ∂2Ωr
∂z2 −Ωr
r2 −2
r2
∂Ωϕ
∂ϕ

(A.0.24)
the ϕ-momentum equation becomes
∂Ωϕ
∂t +


2cr2R2 exp

−
r2c
(R−r)(R+r)

(R2 −r2)2

∂Ωϕ
∂ϕ =


2R2c exp

−
r2c
(R−r)(R+r)

(R4 −2r2(c −1)R2 −3r4)
(R2 −r2)4

∂Υϕ
∂r +
Ωr


2R2c exp

−
r2c
(R−r)(R+r)

(R4 −2r2(c −1)R2 −3r4)
(R −r)4 (R + r)4

+
ν
1
r
∂
∂r

r∂Ωϕ
∂r

+ 1
r2
∂2Ωϕ
∂ϕ2 + ∂2Ωϕ
∂z2 + 2
r2
∂Ωr
∂ϕ −Ωϕ
r2

(A.0.25)
and the z-momentum equation becomes
∂Ωz
∂t +


2cr2R2 exp

−
r2c
(R−r)(R+r)

(R2 −r2)2

∂Ωz
∂ϕ +
Υr



−
12rR2

(c −2)R6 −
2r2(c2−3c−3)R4
3
−3
 c −2
3

r4R2 −2r6

c exp

−
r2c
(R−r)(R+r)

(R2 −r2)6



=


2R2c exp

−
r2c
(R−r)(R+r)

(R4 −2r2(c −1)R2 −3r4)
(R2 −r2)4

∂Υz
∂r +
ν
1
r
∂
∂r

r∂Ωz
∂r

+ 1
r2
∂2Ωz
∂ϕ2 + ∂2Ωz
∂z2

(A.0.26)
118
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:135==
B
pmlib Outline
Regularised Integration Kernel for 3D Unbounded Do-
mains
The regularised Green’s function integration kernel, derived in [24, 25, 26] becomes
Gϵ(x) =



−1
2π

log(|x|) −Q10

|x|
ϵ

exp

−|x|2
2ϵ2

+ 1
2E1

|x|2
2ϵ2

in 2D
1
4π|x|

1
√
2πR10

|x|
ϵ

exp

−|x|2
2ϵ2

+ erf

|x|
√
2ϵ

in 3D
(B.0.1)
where the exponential integral
E1(z) =
Z ∞
1
exp (−zq)
q
dq
(B.0.2)
is a function in the complex plane and is deﬁned as the ratio between the exponential
function and it’s argument. The error function is deﬁned as
erf(z) =
2
√π
Z z
0
exp
 −q2
dq
(B.0.3)
where both of the integrals (B.0.2) and (B.0.3) are integrated over the nondimensional
radius. The 10th order polynomials to reach the order O(ϱ10) for solving the Poisson
equation (2.2.3) with regularisation are given as
QGϵ,10(ϱ) = 25
24 −23
48ϱ2 + 13
192ϱ4 −
1
384ϱ6
(B.0.4)
RGϵ,10(ϱ) = 187
64 ϱ −233
192ϱ3 + 29
192ϱ5 −
1
192ϱ7
(B.0.5)
Lower order polynomials are also given in [24, 25, 26], which are not used. It is further
seen, that by increasing the order, this does not improve the convergence [25].
The
10th order regularisation is used for this project. The singularity at the origin for the
integration kernel is avoided as
Gϵ(0) = lim
x→0(Gϵ) =
(
1
2π
  γ
2 −log
 √
2ϵ

+ 25
24

in 2D
315
512
√
2
π3/2ϵ
in 3D
(B.0.6)
where γ = 0.5772156649 is the Euler constant.
119
==PAGE:136==
APPENDIX B. PMLIB OUTLINE
Regularised Integration Kernel for Semi Periodic Un-
bounded Domains
The Green’s function is presented in their spectral form using the wave number, k, where
k2 =





k2
x
in 1D
k2
x + k2
y
in 2D
k2
x + k2
y + k2
z
in 3D
(B.0.7)
This notation becomes useful for the radial Fourier transform in 2D and 3D. The Green’s
function in 2D with one periodic boundary conditions in the y-direction is given as
G(x, y) = 1
2π
Z ks/2
−ks/2
 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
1
k2
x + k2
y
exp (ιkxx) dkx

exp (ιkyy) dky
(B.0.8)
which is within the spectral zero-padded domain. By Fourier transforming the above
Green’s function, the spectral integral form becomes
bG(x, ky) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
1
k2
x + k2
y
exp (ιkxx) dkx
(B.0.9)
The 2D spectral Green’s function with mixed boundary conditions may then be extended
to 3D with two unbounded directions, x and y, and periodic in the z-direction, as
bG(x, y, kz) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
1
k2
x + k2
y + k2
z
exp (ιkxx) dkx

exp (ιkyy) dky
(B.0.10)
which can be switched into a 2D radial inverse Fourier transform, as r =
p
x2 + y2 and
k = pk2
x + k2
y. Physically this may be seen as a 2D vorticity patch, which makes a pseudo
3D ﬁeld by periodically extending in the z-direction. This is given as
bG(r, kz) = 1
2π
Z ∞
0
k
k2 + k2
z
J0(kr)dk = 1
2πK0 (r|kz|)
(B.0.11)
where K0 is the modiﬁed Bessel function of second kind, which is closely related to the
modiﬁed Bessel function of ﬁrst kind and the Hankel function of ﬁrst kind [12]. Whether
or not kz is periodic, the spectral Green’s function may hence be deﬁned as
bG(r, kz) =
(
1
2π log (r)
if
kz = 0
1
2πK0 (r|kz|)
if
kz ̸= 0
(B.0.12)
Chatelain and Koumoutsakos [12] proposed that the singularity at the origin is dealt
with by averaging the cell values. This was later shown by Rasmussen [40] to have a
pure convergence rate at O(h2). To reach a high order convergence for the semi periodic-
unbounded solver, the regularisation method of the fully unbounded domain may be
applied in same fasion as in [24, 47]. The regularised Green’s function in spectral space
with two unbounded directions, x and y, and one periodic z-direction is given by its radial
inverser Fourier transform as
120
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX B. PMLIB OUTLINE
bGm(ϱ, sz) = 1
2π
Z ∞
0
bζm (s2 + s2
z)
s2 + s2
z
J0(sϱ)dz
(B.0.13)
where s2 = s2
x + s2
y and ϱ2 = ϱ2
x + ϱ2
y. The spectral form of the Poisson solver is proven
in [47] to be suﬃcient to compute the Poisson equation in this case, as the closed form of
Equation (B.0.13) is not trivial. In the case of periodicity, Equation (B.0.13) is used as
it is given, while the spectral form of the unbounded 2D solution may be used otherwise
bGm(s, sz) =



bG2D
m (s) exp

−s2
z
2

for
sz = 0
bζm(s2+s2
z)
s2+s2z
for
sz ̸= 0
(B.0.14)
Inverse Fourier transforming the 2D spectral form of the unbounded solver yields the
radial form of Equation (B.0.1)
G2D
m (ϱ) = −1
2π

log(ϵϱ) −Qm(ϱ) exp

−ϱ2
2

+ 1
2E1
ϱ2
2

(B.0.15)
where the 10th order polynomium, Q10, was given in Equation (B.0.4).
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
121
==PAGE:138==
APPENDIX B. PMLIB OUTLINE
Finite Diﬀerence Schemes for Calculation of Particle
Derivatives
The ﬁrst and second order CDS schemes of second order, using stencils i + j, j ∈[−1 : 1],
are derived as
∂(1)f
∂x(1) ≈−f(xi−1) + f(xi+1)
2h
+ O(h2)
(B.0.16)
∂(2)f
∂x(2) ≈f(xi−1) −2f(xi) + f(xi+1)
h2
+ O(h2)
(B.0.17)
The ﬁrst and second order CDS schemes of fourth order, using stencils i + j, j ∈[−2 : 2],
are derived as
∂(1)f
∂x(1) ≈f(xi−2) −8f(xi−1) + 8f(xi+1) −f(xi+2)
12h
+ O(h4)
(B.0.18)
∂(2)f
∂x(2) ≈−f(xi−2) + 16f(xi−1) −30f(xi) + 16f(xi+1) −f(xi+2)
12h2
+ O(h4)
(B.0.19)
The ﬁrst and second order CDS schemes of sixth order, using stencils i + j, j ∈[−3 : 3],
are derived as
∂(1)f
∂x(1) ≈−f(xi−3) + 9f(xi−2) −45f(xi−1)
60h
+
45f(xi+1) −9f(xi+2) + f(xi+3)
60h
+ O(h6)
(B.0.20)
∂(2)f
∂x(2) ≈2f(xi−3) −27f(x−2) + 270f(xi−1) −490f(xi)
180h2
+
270f(xi+1) −27f(xi+2) + 2f(xi+3)
180h2
+ O(h6)
(B.0.21)
The ﬁrst and second order CDS schemes of eighth order, using stencils i + j, j ∈[−4 : 4],
are derived as
∂(1)f
∂x(1) ≈3f(xi−4) −32f(xi−3) + 168f(xi−2) −672f(xi−1)
840h
+
672f(xi+1) −168f(xi+2) + 32f(xi+3) −3f(xi+4)
840h
+ O(h8)
(B.0.22)
∂(2)f
∂x(2) ≈−9f(xi−4) + 128f(xi−3) −1008f(xi−2) + 8064f(xi−1) −14350f(xi)
5040h2
+
8064f(xi+1) −1008f(xi+2) + 128f(xi+3) −9f(xi+4)
5040h2
+ O(h8)
(B.0.23)
122
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:139==
APPENDIX B. PMLIB OUTLINE
Spatial Resolution: Number of Particles and Adaptiv-
ity
0
10
20
30
40
10 5
10 6
10 7
10 8
(a)
0
10
20
30
40
10 -3
10 -2
10 -1
10 0
(b)
Figure B.1: Temporal variation of number of particles (a) and adaptivity of the time step (b)
for varying spatial resolution: 32 (
), 64 (
), 128 (
), 256 (
) and 512 (
)
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
123
==PAGE:140==
APPENDIX B. PMLIB OUTLINE
Vortex-In-Cell Outline
124
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:141==
C
Flow Visualizations
Analytical Vortex Ring Distribution of Vorticity and
Velocity
Figure C.1: The analytical distribution of vorticity through the vortex ring core for c = 100
(
), c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
)
125
==PAGE:142==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
Figure C.2: The analytical distribution of azimuthal velocity through the vortex ring core for
c = 100 (
), c = 200 (
), c = 300 (
) and c = 400 (
)
126
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:143==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
Isosurfaces for varying c-parameter
(a)
(b)
Figure C.3: Vortex ring at the onset of instability for c = 100, seen in (a) the xy-plane and
(b) the zy-plane
(a)
(b)
Figure C.4: Vortex ring at the onset of instability for c = 200, seen in (a) the xy-plane and
(b) the zy-plane
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
127
==PAGE:144==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
(a)
(b)
Figure C.5: Vortex ring at the onset of instability for c = 300, seen in (a) the xy-plane and
(b) the zy-plane
128
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:145==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
Isosurfaces for varying Finite Diﬀerence Order
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.6: Isosurface of the vortex ring at the onset to instability at (a) Finite Diﬀerence
order O(h6) and Re = ∞, (b) Finite Diﬀerence order O(h6) and Re = 1 · 107, (c) Finite
Diﬀerence order O(h8) and Re = ∞and (d) Finite Diﬀerence order O(h8) and Re = 1 · 107
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
129
==PAGE:146==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
Contour of ωz for Bump Vortex Roller without per-
turbation
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure C.7: Spatio-temporal variation of the vortex core vorticity of the bump vortex roller at
c = 400 without perturbations
130
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:147==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
Contour of the Velocity Field for Bump Vortex Roller
without perturbation
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure C.8: Spatio-temporal variation of the vortex core velocity of the bump vortex roller at
c = 400 without perturbations
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
131
==PAGE:148==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
Contour of the Vorticity for Bump Vortex Roller in
the xz-plane
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.9: Late stage instability ﬂow for the bump vortex roller in the xz-plane at (a) c = 100,
(b) c = 200, (c) c = 300 and (d) c400
132
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:149==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
Contour of the Velocity Field for Bump Vortex Roller
in the xy-plane
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.10: Iso contour of the azimuthal velocity of the initial bump vortex roller setup for
(a) c = 100, (b) c = 200, (c) c = 300 and (d) c = 400
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
133
==PAGE:150==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
Vorticity Magnitude for perturbated Bump Vortex Roller
at c = 400
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.11: Spatio-temporal variations of the vorticity for the bump vortex roller with wave
perturbations in the xz-plane for (a) t∗= 0, (b) t∗≈0.25, (c) t∗≈0.37 and (d) t∗≈0.46
134
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:151==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.12: Spatio-temporal variations of the vorticity for the bump vortex roller with wave
perturbations in the xy-plane for (a) t∗= 0, (b) t∗≈0.25, (c) t∗≈0.37 and (d) t∗≈0.46
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
135
==PAGE:152==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.13: Magnitude of vorticity for Re = 1 · 107 in xz-plane for perturbated vortex rollers
at 300th time step for (a) c = 100, (b) c = 200, (c) c = 300 (d) c = 400
136
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:153==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
Vorticity Magnitude for perturbated Gaussian Vortex
Roller at c = 400
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.14: Magnitude of vorticity in the xz-plane for the Gaussian vortex roller with σµ =
0.03 at (a) the initial condition with Re = ∞, (b) the 400th time step with Re = ∞, (c) the
initial condition with Re = 1 · 107, (d) the 400th time step with Re = 1 · 107
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
137
==PAGE:154==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.15: Magnitude of vorticity in the xz-plane for the Gaussian vortex roller with σµ =
0.04 at (a) the initial condition with Re = ∞, (b) the 400th time step with Re = ∞, (c) the
initial condition with Re = 1 · 107, (b) the 400th time step with Re = 1 · 107
138
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:155==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.16: Magnitude of vorticity in the xz-plane for the Gaussian vortex roller with σµ =
0.05 at (a) the initial condition with Re = ∞, (b) the 400th time step with Re = ∞, (c) the
initial condition with Re = 1 · 107, (b) the 400th time step with Re = 1 · 107
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
139
==PAGE:156==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.17: Magnitude of vorticity in the xz-plane for the Gaussian vortex roller with σµ =
0.06 at (a) the initial condition with Re = ∞, (b) the 400th time step with Re = ∞, (c) the
initial condition with Re = 1 · 107, (b) the 400th time step with Re = 1 · 107
140
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:157==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
Initial Vorticity Magnitude for Vortex Ring with Vary-
ing c
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.18: The initial vorticity distribution of the vortex core at (a) c = 100, (b) c = 200,
(c) c = 300 and (d) c = 400
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
141
==PAGE:158==
APPENDIX C. FLOW VISUALIZATIONS
142
Hybrid Particle-Mesh Vortex Method Simulations
of Bump Vortex Instability in Three Dimensions
==PAGE:159==
D
FORTRAN Subroutines
Multiple FORTRAN subroutines of the existing pmlib software have been modiﬁed in
this project. Further, some additional subroutines are programmed. Some subroutines,
which have been a main part of this project, are shown below in this chapter as:
• flowcases_bump_ring.f
The bump vortex ring setup with the correction of the circulation for normalization.
• flowcases_bump_roller.f
The bump vortex roller setup with an added wave perturbation along the centerline.
• flowcases_gaussian_roller.f
The Gaussian vortex roller setup with an added wave perturbation along the cen-
terline.
• part_deriv_vorticity.f
The added O(h6) and O(h8) Finite Diﬀerence schemes for the calculation of the
particle derivatives in the discretized vorticity equation
143
==PAGE:160==
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! flowcases_bump_ring.f
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! <<HEADER>>
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Initializes vorticity field as a "bump" vortex ring
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
SUBROUTINE flowcases_bump_ring(topo,mesh,ierr)
USE pmlib_mod_topology
USE pmlib_mod_mesh
IMPLICIT NONE
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Arguments
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  TYPE(class_topology),DIMENSION(:),POINTER    :: topo
  TYPE(class_mesh)                             :: mesh
  INTEGER, INTENT(OUT)                         :: ierr
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Local variables
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  CHARACTER(LEN=18)                            :: caller='flowcase_bump_ring'
  REAL(MK)                                     :: PI
  INTEGER                                      :: i,j,k
  REAL(MK)                                     :: px,py,pz
  REAL(MK),DIMENSION(ndim)                     :: xmin, dx
  INTEGER,DIMENSION(ndim)                      :: ncell
  INTEGER,DIMENSION(2*ndim)                    :: nghost
  REAL(MK)                                     :: max_vort
  REAL(MK)                                     :: r,r0
  REAL(MK)                                     :: rho, phi, theta
  REAL(MK)                                     :: sigma0, sigma
  REAL(MK)                                     :: vort_mag
  REAL(MK)                                     :: Gamma_Cor 
  REAL(MK)                                     :: circulation_pos, circulation_neg
  REAL(MK)                                     :: sum_circ1, sum_circ2
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Initiate subroutine
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  ierr = 0
  PI = ACOS(-1.0_MK)
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Setup initial vorticity field for calculation Gamma correction
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  r0       = 0.5_MK
==PAGE:161==
  vort_max = 1.0_MK
  sum_circ1 = 0.0_MK
  sum_circ2 = 0.0_MK
  dx     = topo(rank)%dx
  xmin   = topo(rank)%xmin
  ncell  = topo(rank)%ncell
  nghost = topo(rank)%nghost
  mesh%vort = 0.0_MK
  mesh%vel = 0.0_MK
  
  DO k = 1-nghost(5),ncell(3)+nghost(6)
     pz = xmin(3) + (REAL(k - 1,MK) + 0.5_MK) *dx(3)
     DO j = 1-nghost(3),ncell(2)+nghost(4)
        py = xmin(2) + (REAL(j - 1,MK) + 0.5_MK) *dx(2)
        DO i = 1-nghost(1),ncell(1)+nghost(2)
           px = xmin(1) + (REAL(i - 1,MK) + 0.5_MK) *dx(1)
           rho   = SQRT(pz*pz + py*py)
           phi   = SQRT((rho - r0)**2 + px**2)
           theta = ATAN2(pz,py)
           IF ( phi .LT. r0) THEN
              vort_mag = ( -EXP(- c_bump*r0**2/(2.0_MK*r0*rho - rho**2 - px**2)) * &
                   & ( 4.0_MK*c_bump**2*r0**4*px**2*rho**2 &
                   & - 16.0_MK*r0**4*rho**4 &
                   & + 32.0_MK*r0**3*rho**5 &
                   & - 24.0_MK*r0**2*rho**6 &
                   & + 8.0_MK*r0*rho**7 & 
                   & - 4.0_MK*rho**6*px**2 &
                   & - 6.0_MK*rho**4*px**4 & 
                   & - 4.0_MK*rho**2*px**6 &
                   & - 8.0_MK*c_bump*r0**5*rho**3 &
                   & + 8.0_MK*c_bump*r0**4*rho**4 &
                   & - 6.0_MK*c_bump*r0**3*rho**5 & 
                   & + 4.0_MK*c_bump**2*r0**6*rho**2 &
                   & - 8.0_MK*c_bump**2*r0**5*rho**3 & 
                   & + 4.0_MK*c_bump**2*r0**4*rho**4 & 
                   & + 2.0_MK*c_bump*r0**2*rho**6 &
                   & + 32.0_MK*r0**3*rho**3*px**2 &
                   & - 48.0_MK*r0**2*rho**4*px**2 &
                   & - 24.0_MK*r0**2*rho**2*px**4 & 
                   & + 24.0_MK*r0*rho**5*px**2 &
                   & + 24.0_MK*r0*rho**3*px**4 & 
                   & + 8.0_MK*r0*rho*px**6 & 
                   & + 2.0_MK*c_bump*r0**3*rho*px**4 &
                   & + 2.0_MK*c_bump*r0**2*rho**2*px**4 &
==PAGE:162==
                   & - 4.0_MK*c_bump*r0**3*rho**3*px**2 & 
                   & + 4.0_MK*c_bump*r0**2*rho**4*px**2 & 
                   & - rho**8 - px**8) & 
                   & * (2.0_MK*r0*rho - rho**2 - px**2)**(-4)*rho**(-2) &
                   & / ( EXP(-c_bump)*(4.0_MK*c_bump + 1.0_MK)/r0**2 ))
              mesh%vort(1,i,j,k) =   0.0_MK 
              mesh%vort(2,i,j,k) = - SIN(theta)*vort_mag
              mesh%vort(3,i,j,k) =   COS(theta)*vort_mag
              ! Calculate initial circulation
              
              IF (mesh%vort(3,i,j,k)*dx(1)*dx(3) .GT. 0.0_MK) THEN
                sum_circ1 = sum_circ1 + SIGN(1.0_MK, py)*mesh%vort(3,i,j,k)*dx(1)*dx(3)
              ELSEIF (mesh%vort(3,i,j,k)*dx(1)*dx(3) .LT. 0.0_MK) THEN
                sum_circ2 = sum_circ2 + SIGN(1.0_MK, py)*mesh%vort(3,i,j,k)*dx(1)*dx(3)
              ENDIF
           ELSE
              mesh%vort(1,i,j,k) = 0.0_MK
              mesh%vort(2,i,j,k) = 0.0_MK
              mesh%vort(3,i,j,k) = 0.0_MK
           ENDIF
        END DO !i
     END DO !j
  END DO !k
  PRINT *, 'sum_circ1 b_Corr:', sum_circ1
  PRINT *, 'sum_circ2 b_Corr:' ,sum_circ2 
  
  CALL MPI_ALLREDUCE(sum_circ1, circulation_pos, 1,mpi_prec_real,MPI_SUM,0,comm,ierr)
  CALL MPI_ALLREDUCE(sum_circ2, circulation_neg, 1,mpi_prec_real,MPI_SUM,0,comm,ierr)
  PRINT *, 'circulation_pos b_Corr', circulation_pos
  PRINT *, 'circulation_neg b_Corr', circulation_neg
   
  Gamma_Cor = (circulation_pos+circulation_neg)/2.0_MK
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Setup initial vorticity field normalized with Gamma_Cor
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  r0       = 0.5_MK
  vort_max = 1.0_MK
  sum_circ1 = 0.0_MK
  sum_circ2 = 0.0_MK
  dx     = topo(rank)%dx
  xmin   = topo(rank)%xmin
==PAGE:163==
  ncell  = topo(rank)%ncell
  nghost = topo(rank)%nghost
  mesh%vort = 0.0_MK
  mesh%vel = 0.0_MK
  
  DO k = 1-nghost(5),ncell(3)+nghost(6)
     pz = xmin(3) + (REAL(k - 1,MK) + 0.5_MK) *dx(3)
     DO j = 1-nghost(3),ncell(2)+nghost(4)
        py = xmin(2) + (REAL(j - 1,MK) + 0.5_MK) *dx(2)
        DO i = 1-nghost(1),ncell(1)+nghost(2)
           px = xmin(1) + (REAL(i - 1,MK) + 0.5_MK) *dx(1)
           rho   = SQRT(pz*pz + py*py)
           phi   = SQRT((rho - r0)**2 + px**2)
           theta = ATAN2(pz,py)
           IF ( phi .LT. r0) THEN
              vort_mag = 1.0_MK/Gamma_Cor*( -EXP(- c_bump*r0**2/(2.0_MK*r0*rho - rho**2 - 
px**2)) * &
                   & ( 4.0_MK*c_bump**2*r0**4*px**2*rho**2 &
                   & - 16.0_MK*r0**4*rho**4 &
                   & + 32.0_MK*r0**3*rho**5 &
                   & - 24.0_MK*r0**2*rho**6 &
                   & + 8.0_MK*r0*rho**7 & 
                   & - 4.0_MK*rho**6*px**2 &
                   & - 6.0_MK*rho**4*px**4 & 
                   & - 4.0_MK*rho**2*px**6 &
                   & - 8.0_MK*c_bump*r0**5*rho**3 &
                   & + 8.0_MK*c_bump*r0**4*rho**4 &
                   & - 6.0_MK*c_bump*r0**3*rho**5 & 
                   & + 4.0_MK*c_bump**2*r0**6*rho**2 &
                   & - 8.0_MK*c_bump**2*r0**5*rho**3 & 
                   & + 4.0_MK*c_bump**2*r0**4*rho**4 & 
                   & + 2.0_MK*c_bump*r0**2*rho**6 &
                   & + 32.0_MK*r0**3*rho**3*px**2 &
                   & - 48.0_MK*r0**2*rho**4*px**2 &
                   & - 24.0_MK*r0**2*rho**2*px**4 & 
                   & + 24.0_MK*r0*rho**5*px**2 &
                   & + 24.0_MK*r0*rho**3*px**4 & 
                   & + 8.0_MK*r0*rho*px**6 & 
                   & + 2.0_MK*c_bump*r0**3*rho*px**4 &
                   & + 2.0_MK*c_bump*r0**2*rho**2*px**4 &
                   & - 4.0_MK*c_bump*r0**3*rho**3*px**2 & 
                   & + 4.0_MK*c_bump*r0**2*rho**4*px**2 & 
                   & - rho**8 - px**8) & 
                   & * (2.0_MK*r0*rho - rho**2 - px**2)**(-4)*rho**(-2) &
                   & / ( EXP(-c_bump)*(4.0_MK*c_bump + 1.0_MK)/r0**2 ))
==PAGE:164==
              mesh%vort(1,i,j,k) =   0.0_MK 
              mesh%vort(2,i,j,k) = - SIN(theta)*vort_mag
              mesh%vort(3,i,j,k) =   COS(theta)*vort_mag
              ! Calculate initial circulation
              
              IF (mesh%vort(3,i,j,k)*dx(1)*dx(3) .GT. 0.0_MK) THEN
                sum_circ1 = sum_circ1 + SIGN(1.0_MK, py)*mesh%vort(3,i,j,k)*dx(1)*dx(3)
              ELSEIF (mesh%vort(3,i,j,k)*dx(1)*dx(3) .LT. 0.0_MK) THEN
                sum_circ2 = sum_circ2 + SIGN(1.0_MK, py)*mesh%vort(3,i,j,k)*dx(1)*dx(3)
              ENDIF
           ELSE
              mesh%vort(1,i,j,k) = 0.0_MK
              mesh%vort(2,i,j,k) = 0.0_MK
              mesh%vort(3,i,j,k) = 0.0_MK
           ENDIF
        END DO !i
     END DO !j
  END DO !k
  PRINT *, 'sum_circ1: a_Corr', sum_circ1
  PRINT *, 'sum_circ2: a_Corr' ,sum_circ2 
  
  CALL MPI_ALLREDUCE(sum_circ1, circulation_pos, 1,mpi_prec_real,MPI_SUM,0,comm,ierr)
  CALL MPI_ALLREDUCE(sum_circ2, circulation_neg, 1,mpi_prec_real,MPI_SUM,0,comm,ierr)
  PRINT *, 'circulation_pos a_Corr', circulation_pos
  PRINT *, 'circulation_neg a_Corr', circulation_neg  
  
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Return
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
 9999 CONTINUE
RETURN
END SUBROUTINE flowcases_bump_ring
==PAGE:165==
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! flowcases_bump_roller.f
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! <<HEADER>>
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
SUBROUTINE flowcases_bump_roller_pertubation(patch,topo,mesh,ierr)
  
  USE pmlib_mod_topology
  USE pmlib_mod_patch
  USE pmlib_mod_mesh
  IMPLICIT NONE
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Arguments
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  TYPE(class_patch)                            :: patch
!  TYPE(class_topology)                         :: topo
  TYPE(class_mesh)                             :: mesh
  INTEGER, INTENT(OUT)                         :: ierr
TYPE(class_topology),DIMENSION(:),POINTER    :: topo
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Local variables
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  CHARACTER(LEN=20)                            :: caller='flowcases_bump_roller_pertubation'
  REAL(MK)                                     :: t0
  
  INTEGER                                      :: i,j,k,n
  REAL(MK)                                     :: px,py,pz
  REAL(MK)                                     :: PI
  REAL(MK),DIMENSION(ndim)                     :: xmin, dx
  INTEGER,DIMENSION(ndim)                      :: ncell
  INTEGER,DIMENSION(2*ndim)                    :: nghost
  REAL(MK)                                     :: vort_z, max_vort, sum_vort_z, max_vel
  REAL(MK)                                     :: rho,r0
  REAL(MK)                                     :: pertube_amplitude = 1.0E-7_MK
  INTEGER,PARAMETER                            :: pertube_num_modes = 64
  REAL(MK), DIMENSION(pertube_num_modes)       :: pertube_phases
  REAL(MK)                                     :: pertubation
  REAL(MK)                                     :: randmin, randmax, Lz
  
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Initiate subroutine
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  CALL substart(caller,t0,ierr)
!!! Determine length of domain in z-dir
  Lz    = patch%xmax(3)-patch%xmin(3)
==PAGE:166==
  PI = ACOS(-1.0_MK)
 PRINT *, 'Lz Initial:', Lz
 
!!! Generate random phases
  randmin = 0.0_MK
  randmax = 2.0_MK*PI
  CALL RANDOM_NUMBER(pertube_phases) 
  pertube_phases = randmin + (randmax-randmin)*pertube_phases
  
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Setup initial vorticity field
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  r0     = 0.5_MK
  dx     = topo(rank)%dx
  xmin   = topo(rank)%xmin
  ncell  = topo(rank)%ncell
  nghost = topo(rank)%nghost
  !dx     = topo%sub(rank)%dx
  !xmin   = topo%sub(rank)%xmin
  !ncell  = topo%sub(rank)%ncell
  !nghost = topo%sub(rank)%nghost
  mesh%vort = 0.0_MK
  mesh%vel = 0.0_MK
  max_vel = -0.2D1 / 0.3D1 / (-(-c_bump / 0.3D1 + 0.1D1 / 0.3D1 + sqrt(c_bump ** 2 &
       - 0.2D1 * c_bump + 0.4D1) / 0.3D1) / R0 ** 2 + 0.1D1) ** 2 * sqrt(0.3D1 &
       + 0.3D1 * sqrt(c_bump ** 2 - 0.2D1 * c_bump + 0.4D1) - 0.3D1 * c_bump) / R0 ** 2 &
       * c_bump * exp((0.1D1 - 0.1D1 / (-(-c_bump / 0.3D1 + 0.1D1 / 0.3D1 + sqrt(c_bump ** 2 &
       - 0.2D1 * c_bump + 0.4D1) / 0.3D1) / R0 ** 2 + 0.1D1)) * c_bump)
  sum_vort_z = 0.0_MK
  max_vort   = 0.0_MK
  DO k = 1-nghost(5),ncell(3)+nghost(6)
     pz = xmin(3) + (REAL(k - 1,MK) + 0.5_MK) *dx(3)
     ! determine a pertubation
     pertubation = 0
     DO n = 1,pertube_num_modes
        pertubation = pertubation + SIN(n*2.0_MK*PI/Lz*pz+pertube_phases(n)) 
     END DO
     
     DO j = 1-nghost(3),ncell(2)+nghost(4)
        py = xmin(2) + (REAL(j - 1,MK) + 0.5_MK) *dx(2)
        DO i = 1-nghost(1),ncell(1)+nghost(2)
           px = xmin(1) + (REAL(i - 1,MK) + 0.5_MK) *dx(1)
           ! pertube centerline along x-axis
           px = px + pertube_amplitude*pertubation
           
           rho = SQRT(py*py + px*px) / R0
==PAGE:167==
           IF ( rho .LT. 1.0) THEN
             
              vort_z = 0.4D1 * (R0 ** 4 - (px ** 2 + py ** 2) * c_bump * R0 ** 2 &
                   & - (px ** 2 + py ** 2) ** 2) * R0 ** 2 &
                   & * exp(-(px ** 2 + py ** 2) * c_bump &
                   & / (R0 ** 2 - px ** 2 - py ** 2)) &
                   & * c_bump / (R0 ** 2 - px ** 2 - py ** 2) ** 4
              
           ELSE
              vort_z = 0.0_MK
           ENDIF
           ! scale
           vort_z = vort_z / abs(max_vel)
           
           mesh%vort(1,i,j,k) = 0.0_MK
           mesh%vort(2,i,j,k) = 0.0_MK
           mesh%vort(3,i,j,k) = vort_z
           ! find maximum vorticity
           max_vort = max( abs(vort_z) , max_vort)
           
        END DO !i
     END DO !j
  END DO !k
CALL MPI_ALLREDUCE( max_vort,vort_max,1,mpi_prec_real,MPI_MAX,comm,ierr  )
CALL chkierr(ierr,rank,caller,'Failed in MPI_ALLREDUCE', *9999)
  write(*,*) max_vel, vort_max
! sum_vort_z = sum_vort_z / ncell(3)
! CALL MPI_ALLREDUCE( sum_vort_z,circ0,1,mpi_prec_real,MPI_SUM,comm,ierr  )
! CALL chkierr(ierr,rank,caller,'Failed in MPI_ALLREDUCE', *9999)
! write(*,*) circ0
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Return
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
9999 CONTINUE
  CALL substop(caller,t0,ierr)
END SUBROUTINE flowcases_bump_roller_pertubation
==PAGE:168==
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! flowcases_bump_roller.f
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! <<HEADER>>
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
SUBROUTINE flowcases_gaussian_roller_pertubation(patch,topo,mesh,ierr)
  
  USE pmlib_mod_topology
  USE pmlib_mod_patch
  USE pmlib_mod_mesh
  IMPLICIT NONE
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Arguments
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  TYPE(class_topology),DIMENSION(:),POINTER    :: topo
  TYPE(class_mesh)                             :: mesh
  INTEGER, INTENT(OUT)                         :: ierr
  TYPE(class_patch)                            :: patch
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Local variables
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  CHARACTER(LEN=20)                            :: caller='flowcase_gaussian_roller'
  REAL(MK)                                     :: t0
  REAL(MK)                                     :: PI
  INTEGER                                      :: i,j,k,n
  REAL(MK)                                     :: px,py,pz
  REAL(MK),DIMENSION(ndim)                     :: xmin, dx
  INTEGER,DIMENSION(ndim)                      :: ncell
  INTEGER,DIMENSION(2*ndim)                    :: nghost
  REAL(MK)                                     :: vort_z, max_vort, sum_vort_z, max_vel
  REAL(MK)                                     :: rho,r0
  REAL(MK)                                     :: Gamma_Gaussian , sigma
  REAL(MK)                                     :: pertube_amplitude = 1.0E-7_MK
  INTEGER, PARAMETER                           :: pertube_num_modes = 24
  REAL(MK),DIMENSION(pertube_num_modes)        :: pertube_phases
  REAL(MK)                                     :: pertubation
  REAL(MK)                                     :: randmin, randmax, Lz
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Initiate subroutine
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  CALL substart(caller,t0,ierr)
   PI = ACOS(-1.0_MK)
   Lz = patch%xmax(3)-patch%xmin(3)
==PAGE:169==
   randmin = 0.0_MK
   randmax = 2.0_MK*PI
   CALL RANDOM_NUMBER(pertube_phases)
   pertube_phases = randmin + (randmax-randmin)*pertube_phases
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Setup initial vorticity field
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
 ! r0       = 0.5_MK
  Gamma_Gaussian = 1.0_MK
  !sigma    = ring_core_size
  sigma = 0.06_MK
  R0     = 2.1_MK*sigma  
  dx     = topo(rank)%dx
  xmin   = topo(rank)%xmin
  ncell  = topo(rank)%ncell
  nghost = topo(rank)%nghost
  mesh%vort = 0.0_MK
  mesh%vel = 0.0_MK
  sum_vort_z = 0.0_MK
  max_vort   = 0.0_MK
  DO k = 1-nghost(5),ncell(3)+nghost(6)
     pz = xmin(3) + (REAL(k - 1,MK) + 0.5_MK) *dx(3)
     pertubation = 0
     DO n = 1,pertube_num_modes
        pertubation = pertubation + SIN(n*2.0_MK*PI/Lz*pz+pertube_phases(n))
     END DO
     DO j = 1-nghost(3),ncell(2)+nghost(4)
        py = xmin(2) + (REAL(j - 1,MK) + 0.5_MK) *dx(2)
        DO i = 1-nghost(1),ncell(1)+nghost(2)
           px = xmin(1) + (REAL(i - 1,MK) + 0.5_MK) *dx(1)
           
           px = px + pertube_amplitude*pertubation
           rho = SQRT(py*py + px*px) / R0
           IF ( rho .LT. 1.0) THEN
             
              vort_z = Gamma_Gaussian / (PI*sigma**2)*EXP(-(px**2+py**2)/sigma**2)
           ELSE
              vort_z = 0.0_MK
==PAGE:170==
           ENDIF
          
           mesh%vort(1,i,j,k) = 0.0_MK
           mesh%vort(2,i,j,k) = 0.0_MK
           mesh%vort(3,i,j,k) = vort_z
           ! find maximum vorticity
           max_vort = max( abs(vort_z) , max_vort)
           
        END DO !i
     END DO !j
  END DO !k
CALL MPI_ALLREDUCE( max_vort,vort_max,1,mpi_prec_real,MPI_MAX,comm,ierr  )
CALL chkierr(ierr,rank,caller,'Failed in MPI_ALLREDUCE', *9999)
  write(*,*) max_vel, vort_max
! sum_vort_z = sum_vort_z / ncell(3)
! CALL MPI_ALLREDUCE( sum_vort_z,circ0,1,mpi_prec_real,MPI_SUM,comm,ierr  )
! CALL chkierr(ierr,rank,caller,'Failed in MPI_ALLREDUCE', *9999)
! write(*,*) circ0
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! Return
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
9999 CONTINUE
  CALL substop(caller,t0,ierr)
END SUBROUTINE flowcases_gaussian_roller_pertubation
==PAGE:171==
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! part_deriv_vorticity.f
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
! This routines computes and increments the vorticity equation
! Dω/Dt = (ω
)u + ν ²ω (stretching + molecular diffusion )
⋅∇
∇
! NOTE: ghosts of field (DωDt) IS mapped
!---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
SUBROUTINE part_deriv_vorticity(patch,topo_all,mesh,ierr,clear)
  USE pmlib_mod_topology
  USE pmlib_mod_mesh
  USE pmlib_mod_communication
  USE mod_penalisation    ! for clearence within solid
  IMPLICIT NONE
  !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  ! Arguments
  !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  TYPE(class_patch),DIMENSION(:,:),POINTER,INTENT(IN)         :: patch
  TYPE(class_topology_all),DIMENSION(:,:),POINTER,INTENT(IN)  :: topo_all
  TYPE(class_mesh),DIMENSION(:,:),POINTER,INTENT(INOUT)       :: mesh
  INTEGER, INTENT(OUT)                                        :: ierr
  LOGICAL, INTENT(IN), OPTIONAL                               :: clear
  
  !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  ! Local variables
  !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  CHARACTER(LEN=20)
                       :: caller='part_deriv_vorticity'
  INTEGER                                      :: i,j,k,l
  INTEGER                                      :: ilevel,ipatch
  REAL(MK),DIMENSION(ndim)                     :: dx
  INTEGER,DIMENSION(ndim)                      :: ncell
  REAL(MK)                                     :: w1, w2, w3
  REAL(MK)                                     :: ddwdx, ddwdy, ddwdz
  REAL(MK),DIMENSION(ndim,ndim)                :: dudx
  REAL(MK)                                     :: c_1_dx2, c_1_2dx
  REAL(MK)                                     :: c_1_dy2, c_1_2dy
  REAL(MK)                                     :: c_1_dz2, c_1_2dz
  REAL(MK)                                     :: c1, c2, c3, c4, c5
  REAL(MK)                                     :: c6, c7, c8, c9
  !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  ! Initiate subroutine
  !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  ierr = 0
==PAGE:172==
  !---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ! Clear mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%dvort - default is TRUE
  !---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  IF( ( PRESENT(clear) .AND. clear ) .OR. ( .NOT. PRESENT(clear)) ) THEN
     DO ilevel = 1,pmlib_nlevel
        DO ipatch = 1,pmlib_npatch(ilevel)
           mesh(ilevel, ipatch)%dvort = 0.0_MK
        END DO
     END DO
  END IF
  !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  ! Calculate right-hand-side of the vorticity equation
  !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  DO ilevel = 1,pmlib_nlevel
     DO ipatch = 1,pmlib_npatch(ilevel)
        ncell  = topo_all(ilevel,ipatch)%cuboid(rank)%ncell
        dx     = topo_all(ilevel,ipatch)%cuboid(rank)%dx
     !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
     ! 6th order FD
     !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  ELSE IF (pmlib_fd_order .EQ. 6) THEN
  
     !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
     ! Setup irrationel coefficients for the finite difference stencils
     !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
     c_1_dx2 = 1.0_MK/(dx(1)**2)
     c_1_dy2 = 1.0_MK/(dx(2)**2)
     c_1_dz2 = 1.0_MK/(dx(3)**2)
  
     c_1_2dx = 1.0_MK/(2.0_MK*dx(1))
     c_1_2dy = 1.0_MK/(2.0_MK*dx(2))
     c_1_2dz = 1.0_MK/(2.0_MK*dx(3))
  
 ! second derivative coeff.
     c1 =     2.0_MK/180.0_MK
     c2 = -  27.0_MK/180.0_MK
 c3 =   270.0_MK/180.0_MK
     c4 = - 490.0_MK/180.0_MK
 
 ! first derivative coeff.
     c5 = -   1.0_MK/30.0_MK
     c6 =     9.0_MK/30.0_MK
     c7 = -  45.0_MK/30.0_MK
 
     !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
     ! Calculate the particle derivative
     !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
     DO k = 1,ncell(3)
        DO j = 1,ncell(2)
           DO i = 1,ncell(1)
==PAGE:173==
  
             !w1 = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(1,i,j,k)
             !w2 = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(2,i,j,k)
             !w3 = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(3,i,j,k)
              ! use large scale vorticity (calculated in poisson solver) for stretching
              w1 = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(1,i,j,k)
              w2 = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(2,i,j,k)
              w3 = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(3,i,j,k)
 ! PRINT *, 'k - n+3',i,j,k,mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(1,i,j,ncell(3)+3),ncell(3)  
 ! PRINT *, 'k - n+3',i,j,k,mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel (1,i,j,ncell(3)+3),ncell(3)  
              DO l = 1,pmlib_ndim
                 ! x-derivative
                 ddwdx     = (c1 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i-3,j,k) &
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i-2,j,k) &
                      & +     c3 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i-1,j,k) &
                      & +     c4 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i  ,j,k) &
                      & +     c3 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i+1,j,k) &
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i+2,j,k) &
                      & +     c1 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i+3,j,k) &  
                      & ) * c_1_dx2
                 dudx(l,1) = (c5 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i-3,j,k) &
                      & +     c6 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i-2,j,k) & 
                      & +     c7 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i-1,j,k) & 
                      & -     c7 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i+1,j,k) & 
                      & -     c6 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i+2,j,k) & 
                      & -     c5 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i+3,j,k) & 
                      & ) * c_1_2dx
                 ! y-derivative
                 ddwdy     = (c1 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j-3,k) &
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j-2,k) &
                      & +     c3 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j-1,k) &
                      & +     c4 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j  ,k) &
                      & +     c3 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j+1,k) &
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j+2,k) &
                      & +     c1 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j+3,k) &  
                      & ) * c_1_dy2
                 dudx(l,2) = (c5 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j-3,k) &
                      & +     c6 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j-2,k) & 
                      & +     c7 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j-1,k) & 
                      & -     c7 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j+1,k) & 
                      & -     c6 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j+2,k) & 
                      & -     c5 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j+3,k) & 
                      & ) * c_1_2dy
                 ! z-derivative
                 ddwdz     = (c1 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k-3) &
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k-2) &
                      & +     c3 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k-1) &
                      & +     c4 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k  ) &
                      & +     c3 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k+1) &
==PAGE:174==
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k+2) &
                      & +     c1 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k+3) &
                      & ) * c_1_dz2
                 dudx(l,3) = (c5 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k-3) &
                      & +     c6 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k-2) & 
                      & +     c7 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k-1) & 
                      & -     c7 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k+1) & 
                      & -     c6 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k+2) & 
                      & -     c5 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k+3) & 
                      & ) * c_1_2dz
  
                 ! The 3D vorticity equation
                 mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%dvort(l,i,j,k) = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%dvort(l,i,j,k) &
                      & + visc * (ddwdx + ddwdy + ddwdz) &
                      & + w1*dudx(l,1) + w2*dudx(l,2) + w3*dudx(l,3)
              END DO
  
           END DO
        END DO
     END DO
     !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
     ! 8th order FD
     !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  ELSE IF (pmlib_fd_order .EQ. 8) THEN
  
     !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
     ! Setup irrationel coefficients for the finite difference stencils
     !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
     c_1_dx2 = 1.0_MK/(dx(1)**2)
     c_1_dy2 = 1.0_MK/(dx(2)**2)
     c_1_dz2 = 1.0_MK/(dx(3)**2)
  
     c_1_2dx = 1.0_MK/(2.0_MK*dx(1))
     c_1_2dy = 1.0_MK/(2.0_MK*dx(2))
     c_1_2dz = 1.0_MK/(2.0_MK*dx(3))
  
     ! second derivative coeff.
     c1 = -     9.0_MK/5040.0_MK
     c2 =     128.0_MK/5040.0_MK
 c3 = -  1008.0_MK/5040.0_MK
     c4 =    8064.0_MK/5040.0_MK
 c5 = - 14350.0_MK/5040.0_MK
 
 ! first derivative coeff.
     c6 =     3.0_MK/420.0_MK
     c7 = -  32.0_MK/420.0_MK
 c8 =   168.0_MK/420.0_MK
 c9 = - 672.0_MK/420.0_MK
 
     !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
     ! Calculate the particle derivative
==PAGE:175==
     !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
     DO k = 1,ncell(3)
        DO j = 1,ncell(2)
           DO i = 1,ncell(1)
  
             !w1 = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(1,i,j,k)
             !w2 = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(2,i,j,k)
             !w3 = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(3,i,j,k)
              ! use large scale vorticity (calculated in poisson solver) for stretching
              w1 = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(1,i,j,k)
              w2 = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(2,i,j,k)
              w3 = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(3,i,j,k)
  
              DO l = 1,pmlib_ndim
                 ! x-derivative
                 ddwdx     = (c1 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i-4,j,k) &
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i-3,j,k) &
                      & +     c3 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i-2,j,k) &
                      & +     c4 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i-1,j,k) &
                      & +     c5 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i  ,j,k) &
                      & +     c4 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i+1,j,k) &
                      & +     c3 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i+2,j,k) &
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i+3,j,k) &  
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i+4,j,k) &  
                      & ) * c_1_dx2
                 dudx(l,1) = (c6 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i-4,j,k) &
                      & +     c7 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i-3,j,k) & 
                      & +     c8 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i-2,j,k) & 
                      & +     c9 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i-1,j,k) & 
                      & -     c9 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i+1,j,k) & 
                      & -     c8 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i+2,j,k) & 
                      & -     c7 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i+3,j,k) & 
                      & -     c6 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i+4,j,k) & 
                      & ) * c_1_2dx
                 ! y-derivative
                 ddwdy     = (c1 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j-4,k) &
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j-3,k) &
                      & +     c3 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j-2,k) &
                      & +     c4 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j-1,k) &
                      & +     c5 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j  ,k) &
                      & +     c4 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j+1,k) &
                      & +     c3 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j+2,k) &
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j+3,k) &
                      & +     c1 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j+4,k) &  
                      & ) * c_1_dy2
                 dudx(l,2) = (c6 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j-4,k) &
                      & +     c7 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j-3,k) & 
                      & +     c8 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j-2,k) & 
                      & +     c9 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j-1,k) & 
                      & -     c9 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j+1,k) & 
                      & -     c8 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j+2,k) & 
==PAGE:176==
                      & -     c7 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j+3,k) & 
                      & -     c6 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j+4,k) & 
                      & ) * c_1_2dy
                 ! z-derivative
                 ddwdz     = (c1 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k-4) &
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k-3) &
                      & +     c3 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k-2) &
                      & +     c4 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k-1) &
                      & +     c5 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k  ) &
                      & +     c4 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k+1) &
                      & +     c3 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k+2) &
                      & +     c2 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k+3) &
                      & +     c1 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vort(l,i,j,k+4) &
                      & ) * c_1_dz2
                 dudx(l,3) = (c6 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k-4) &
                      & +     c7 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k-3) & 
                      & +     c8 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k-2) & 
                      & +     c9 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k-1) & 
                      & -     c9 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k+1) & 
                      & -     c8 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k+2) & 
                      & -     c7 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k+3) & 
                      & -     c6 * mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%vel(l,i,j,k+4) & 
                      & ) * c_1_2dz
  
                 ! The 3D vorticity equation
                 mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%dvort(l,i,j,k) = mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%dvort(l,i,j,k) &
                      & + visc * (ddwdx + ddwdy + ddwdz) &
                      & + w1*dudx(l,1) + w2*dudx(l,2) + w3*dudx(l,3)
              END DO
  
           END DO
        END DO
     END DO
 
  ENDIF
  
        !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
        ! Map ghost cells
        !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
        DO i = 1,ndim
           CALL pmlib_mesh_map_ghost(topo_all(ilevel,ipatch)%cuboid, &
                & i,nvort,ierr,incl_edges = .FALSE.)
           CALL chkierr(ierr,rank,caller,'Failed to map ghosts.', *9999)
           CALL pmlib_comm_pack(mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%dvort,ierr)
           CALL chkierr(ierr,rank,caller,'Failed to pack ghosts.', *9999)
           CALL pmlib_comm_send(ierr)
           CALL chkierr(ierr,rank,caller,'Failed to send ghosts.', *9999)
           CALL pmlib_comm_unpack(topo_all(ilevel,ipatch)%cuboid, &
                & mesh(ilevel,ipatch)%dvort,0,ierr,clear=.FALSE.)
           CALL chkierr(ierr,rank,caller,'Failed to unpack ghosts.', *9999)
           CALL pmlib_comm_finalise(ierr)
==PAGE:177==
           CALL chkierr(ierr,rank,caller,'Failed to to finalize comm. of ghosts.', *9999)
        END DO
     END DO ! ilevel
  END DO ! i patch
  !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
  ! Return
  !---------------------------------------------------------------------------------!
9999 CONTINUE
  RETURN
END SUBROUTINE part_deriv_vorticity
==PAGE:178==
==PAGE:179==
==PAGE:180==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 1360
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
