==PAGE:1==
Developing a concept using visioning
David Michael Bonde, s123800
Cecilie Hvidt Grønborg, s120623
Supervisor: Jaap Daalhuizen, Assistant Professor, DTU Management Engineering
30 ECTS Master thesis
Design & Innovation, DTU Management Engineering
January 2018
REFRAMING LIGHT THERAPY 
FOR EVERYDAY LIFE
==PAGE:2==
ii
Preface
==PAGE:3==
iii
PREFACE
English title: Reframing light therapy for everyday life
Danish title: Tilpasning af lysterapi til hverdagen
Master Thesis in M.Sc. Design & Innovation
Technical University of Denmark
28.08.2017 -  28.01.2018
30 ECTS Points
122 pages
Supervisor: 
Jaap Daalhuizen, Assistant Professor, Management Engineering

Collaborative partner:
Niels Stengaard Hansen, Nilotech 
Diplomvej 381, 
DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark 
This master thesis report documents a development project carried out at the Technical University of 
Denmark (DTU) in the department of Management Engineering. 
The project was conducted by Cecilie Hvidt Grønborg and David Bonde in collaboration with the 
company, Nilotech. 
The project was initiated August 2017 and ended January 2018. 
The thesis displays a reframing of light therapy for everyday life, using visioning in developing an 
innovative concept.
Cecilie Hvidt Grønborg, s120623
Stud.MSc.Eng. Design & Innovation
DTU Management Engineering
David Michael Bonde, s123800
Stud.MSc.Eng. Design & Innovation 
DTU Management Engineering
Preface
==PAGE:4==
iv
Preface
ABSTRACT
Many people are affected by mood downs and a lack of energy in winters due to light depletion. 
Although there are several solutions on the market for counteracting this with artificial bright light, 
none have hit mass market leaving potential for a solution. 
Using the tool of Vision in Design, this thesis sets to investigate future possibilities by 2021 and 
develop a vision as well as a solution concept based on this vision. Factors important for the envisioned 
future were gathered and synthesised in an extensive process of in-depth research and involvement 
of multiple relevant stakeholders. This led to two fundamental findings: 1) Modern work-life leaves 
very little space for daylight in winters 2) Few seem to know that bright light is a fundamental 
physiological need the body requires daily to ensure a synchronized biological clock. 
As no current solution exists for easily incorporating bright light in everyday life, we set a vision of 
enabling people in doing so – while letting them explore and reconnect to natural daylight. 
For this, an interaction and vision-driven concept, the Reconnect has been formed enabling users to 
combine artificial and natural light in reaching their minimum daily dose of bright light. Reconnect 
is an intelligent lamp system based on smart technology for people to comfortably introduce bright 
light at the workplace and supportively guide users in getting, exploring and understanding light.  
==PAGE:5==
v
MOTIVATION FOR PROJECT
Having followed the full design engineering bachelor and master programme at Design and Innovation, 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), both authors behind this thesis have been schooled in an 
innovation-driven, user-centric problem-solving design methodology.
The majority of development projects, within the academic frame of Design and Innovation at DTU, 
have been shaped from the Double Diamond-approach (Design Council, 2018), where a problem 
space is explored, a problem defined, the solution space explored and a final concept delivered. Our 
master thesis project was seen as an opportunity for us to learn to master a different way of conducting 
a development project, and we were presented to the reframing method Vision in Design, where 
designing is to create a vision for the future, rather than linear . We were interested in testing how 
applying this method to a real project could benefit our project. Therefore, a part of this project has been 
to focus on mastering the Vision in Design process, and reflecting on the qualities and limitations of 
this method. Being motivated by the field of health care, we saw a project of the company Nilotech as 
a possibility to try to make a difference for sufferers of winter depression. Identifying the incremental 
steps of the venture so far as an unsuccessful approach, we saw a fit between the market of bright light 
therapy and the, to us, novel reframing method; Vision in Design (ViP). 
==PAGE:6==
vi
Preface
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
··
Study and summarize the areas of seasonal affective disorder and light therapy using relevant 
scientific literature
··
Set a theoretical framework for the master thesis project by identifying, selecting and discussing 
relevant methodology, theory and tools
··
Develop a concept providing value for the collaborative partner, Nilotech, on the basis of a design 
engineering profile. 
··
Show the capacity to take a holistic view of and delimit a complex issue, see it in a broader 
academic and societal perspective and, on this basis, design a vision for the future situation. 
··
Communicate and mediate process and results in writing, visually and orally. 
··
Master technical problem-solving at a high level through project work and demonstrate project 
management skills, by planning, managing and executing all phases of the master thesis project 
using the Vision in Design method.
··
Dynamically adjust staging in relation to current project status and obtained results.
··
Be able to reflect on own learning and the design process carried out in the project. 
==PAGE:7==
vii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to express our gratitude to the people, who contributed in the development of this 
thesis.
First, we would like to thank our supervisor Assistant Professor Jaap Daalhuizen, DTU Management 
Engineering, for his great investment of time and commitment in providing invaluable guidance and 
support throughout this thesis and for introducing us to Vision in Design.
Second, we would like to thank Niels Stengaard Hansen, Nilotech, for his engagement and feedback.
We would like to thank all the people, who shared their knowledge within the areas of light, circadian 
rhythm, SAD and light therapy. We are grateful to; 
Kasper Tingkær, The Danish Depression Association, for helping us reach the right group of people for 
user studies, and promoting our project in Balance, the members’ journal of The Danish Depression 
Association.
Jakob Hildebrandt Andersen, DTU Photonics, for passing on his extensive knowledge on circadian 
rhythms and light in relation to the effects on human health and performance. 
Mai Nguyen, UC Berkeley, for important inputs on human physiology, circadian rhythms, light and 
hormones. 
Christina Catharina Friis Blach Petersen, for sharing her own insights and openly discussing the ideas 
behind her company, LYS. 
Helle Østergaard Madsen, MD and PhD student, for discussing aspects of the research within SAD 
and light therapy with us.   
Michael von der Recke, Lysterapi.dk shop owner, for sharing experiences and insights about the light 
therapy lamp market in Denmark. 
Lars Lundmann, for letting us in on his initial idea and challenge, that started this project years ago. 
At last, thanks to the many people, who engaged and spend time enriching this project by sharing 
their experiences, letting us interview them, visit them and test with them. A special thanks to Bente 
Villumsen, Anabelle Jakobsen and Katrine Vestergaard.
==PAGE:8==
viii
Preface
TABLE OF CONTENT
 1 	
1
Project background 	
2
introduction 	
2
Main methodology 	
4
CHAPTER 2 	
9
Literature review	
10
Deconstruction phase	
20
Deconstruction: Product level	
21
Deconstruction: Interaction	
23
Five interaction qualities	
27
Deconstruction: Context	
28
CHAPTER 4	
31
Future context	
32
Context factors 	
34
Context factors 	
36
Interaction qualities	
58
Product qualities	
60
Vision	
61
PTER 6	
63
Concept vision	
64
The Reconnect system 	
67
The ability to pass on	
75
Vision-driven embodiment decisions 	
79
The daily dose explained	
66
The Ability to pass on	
76
Testing	
82
The concept test	
82
Concept test 1: Bente	
83
Concept test 2: Katrine	
85
Overall findings from concept tests	
86
The full-day clip test	
87
CHAPTER 8	
91
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION AND METHODOLOGY
1
CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW
9
CHAPTER 3: DECONSTRUCTION
19
CHAPTER 4: FUTURE CONTEXT
31
CHAPTER 5: INTERACTION AND PRODUCT QUALITIES
57
CHAPTER 6: CONCEPT
63
CHAPTER 7: VALIDATION
81
==PAGE:9==
ix
Process reflections 	
92
Discussion	
96
Limitations for the solution	
97
Conclusion	
99
CHAPTER 10	
101
List of figures, tables and pictures	
102
Figures	
102
Tables	
102
Pictures	
102
Literature references	
104
references for context factors	
107
CHAPTER 8: REFLECTION
91
CHAPTER 9: DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
95
CHAPTER 10: REFERENCES
101
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1 
INTRODUCTION & 
METHODOLOGY
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction & methodology
PROJECT BACKGROUND 
In 2007, psychologist Lars Lundmann got the idea of improving light therapy lamps, having met a 
great number of people suffering from seasonal fatigue in winter-time throughout his profession as a 
therapist. Although lamps with well-documented effect in helping people overcome winter depression 
were on the market, people did not seem to accept and use them. 
Having heard from his patients, that the light therapy lamps were perceived as being unpleasantly 
looking, Lars started a venture of creating a lamp, that people would want to place on their desks. 
A design competition was issued, with the winning design, MyBuddy, to be set for production 
[A1.1] . But, due to technical challenges, the financial crisis and a shortage of capital, the project was 
terminated in 2009. Eights year later, in 2017, Lars met M.Sc. MBA Niels Stengaard Hansen, the 
owner of the consultancy, Nilotech, who saw potential in taking on the project, identifying a match 
between his needed technical knowledge and the technical challenges of the MyBuddy. Eventually 
Niels managed to solve the underlying technical issue of MyBuddy, but still felt that the project was 
missing the unique competitive advance.
INTRODUCTION 
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a type of depression occurring at the same time of year every year, 
mainly in the winter months, with the symptoms starting in autumn and ending in spring. SAD has 
many names in common speech, such as winter depression and the winter blues. The symptoms of 
SAD include a lack of energy, feeling depressed, an increased need to sleep and an increased appetite 
(Danilenko and Levitan, 2012).
However, to this date, the cause for SAD still remains unknown, although it has been proven that 
there is a strong link to the human circadian rhythm and exposure to light (Zauderer and Ganzer, 
2015). About 12 % of the Danish population is experiencing SAD (Dam, Jakobsen and Mellerup, 
1998). A less severe version of SAD is referred to as subsyndromal SAD (s-SAD). People experience 
a lack of energy and experience changes in the same seasonal patterns as SAD, but are not as affected 
by it. As many as 43% of a population experience changes over the seasons, and having feeling less 
energy in the winter months (Kasper et al., 1989).
Bright light therapy, through lamps emitting white or blue light of a high intensity, has a well-
documented effect in treating SAD.
There is a great number of bright light therapy lamps for seasonal affective disorder on the market. 
Though these are efficient in treating SAD sufferers, people seem to have challenges in sticking to the 
use of them. Most of the products on the market are based on the same principle – illuminating the 
user with a high intensity of light, typically 10.000 lux, for a short amount of time. The experience 
of getting light therapy from these lamps seems very intense. With many people experiencing having 
less energy in the winter months, an unmet potential is seen. 
==PAGE:13==
3
Challenge
Until now, the domain of light therapy seems to have been dominated by incremental patches to a 
now +30 year old concept with “adding nice looks” for people to accept products being the focus of 
the latest years. This approach seems to have failed with commercial breakthrough missing, people 
still not enjoying the interaction with the product, and an underlying problem of products being 
outdated before they even manage to hit the market.
As a result, we want to reframe the situation by placing the interaction between human and solution 
in centre of design – and develop a solution for a future world instead of today. 
Project aim
The aim of this thesis is to reframe light therapy for everyday life, using visioning in developing an 
innovative concept targetted Nilotech using the processVision in design.
The objectives for the project: 
··
Conduct a literature review within the areas of SAD and light therapy, to serve as the scientific 
foundation of the project
··
Develop a vision, a future interaction and a final concept using Vision in Design
··
Validate the final concept 
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction & methodology
MAIN METHODOLOGY 
Vision in design (ViP), developed by Paul Hekkert and Matthijs van Dijk is the fundamental 
methodology followed for this design process (Hekkert and van Dijk, 2011). As a result, a detailed 
overview of the process and its steps will be unveiled, at it is crucial that the readers of this thesis 
understand the fundamental framework, terms and mind-set. 
VIP is a context-driven, interaction-centered process model supporting designers throughout a 
complete design process. Rather than focussing on present day problems, the model is opportunity-
driven, stressing possibilities and possible futures. Prior to any manifestation of an object, ViP weighs 
the importance of the generation and development of the idea, that provides a manifestation with 
a raison d’êntre – a reason to exist. This helps define what to design and why, and gives a clear idea 
on direction before materializing. This notion is visible in the structure of ViP, being of four general 
phases arching over three layers of description, that are fundamental and characteristic of ViP: the 
context level, the interaction level and the product level. The process of ViP is represented in the 
following model: 
The left side of the model represents the world and its products as they were or are – and the right side 
the world and its products as it will or should be. With ViP being opportunity-driven, a clear majority 
of the time and energy is spent in the right side.
The steps of ViP will now be explained – unveiling purpose, format and result of each. The explanations 
will largely follow explanations of the Vision in Design textbook by Hekkert and van Dijk(Hekkert 
and van Dijk, 2011).
Figure 1.1 :  Vision in Design model sourced from (Hekkert and van Dijk, 2011)
==PAGE:15==
5
Deconstructing 
The first step of ViP is a deconstruction of the existing product/service. Here, we look at the existing 
and ask ourselves why things are like they are. The goal is to get an understanding of the product 
(product level), how interaction with it is (interaction level) and try to reason what elements, beliefs and 
world view has affected how the product and interaction was designed (context level). 
··
At product level, the analysed element is observed. Both for what it literally is – but later in 
what is expresses and communicates. Is it warm? Approachable?  
··
At interaction level, the product is observed in use and the interaction condensed into five 
qualities, where inventing own words are encouraged by the authors, Hekkert and van Dijk.
··
At context level, we try to retrieve the factors that once induced the designer to design the 
object and interaction analysed. What considerations did they have in mind at the time? What 
was their world view in general, and on the product domain in particular? What standards, 
opinions or values do we think he or she had? Deconstruction at context level is about thinking, 
analysing and educated guessing, as we typically do not have the actual reasons or background 
considerations.
The deconstruction allows the designers to playfully engage in the domain, and familiarize themselves 
with the three layers of ViP prior to design. It is likely that the former context underlying the existing 
product, contains a number of factors that are now obsolete. “Seeing changes from the context level gives 
you a good feeling for the opportunities that might arise if fresh contextual considerations are taken into 
account”, the authors point (Hekkert and van Dijk, 2011, p. 136). 
Designing
Future context
Designing with ViP follows and eight-step process of bridging activities to help designers in making 
the necessary transitions moving from future context to future design. Four of these are within the 
future context. 
DOMAIN AND TIMEFRAME
As a first, designers establish the domain and timeframe, their contribution is thought to fit into (1). 
The domain constitutes the area of contribution for the development project, and is a way of scoping 
the exploration as well as broadening the perspective. It serves as a lens through which designers look 
at the world, and acts as a starting point guiding the exploration of context. Secondly, a timeframe for 
when the envisioned product is to hit the market - effecting the context exploration.
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction & methodology
CONTEXT FACTORS AND THE VISION
Having established a lens, designers dive into the extensive process of generating factors relevant for 
domain and timeframe (2). These relevant factors are coined as context factors and are very fundamental 
in designing the future context and for ViP in general. Context factors are “... observations, thoughts, 
theories, laws, considerations, beliefs and opinions” and “... can be true in general or true for you” 
(Hekkert and van Dijk, 2011, p. 141). An example from the domain of “food preparation” could be 
“37% af all Danes live alone” - as this factor might influence how we develop products and services 
within this domain in the future. Factors can be things in flux, such as trends and developments, or 
more stable elements such as states and principles. The origin of factors can be very near the domain, 
or come from a more remote source. In collecting and generating factors, ViP stresses originality and 
intuition. Having collected and developed a rich set of context factors, designers are to structure the 
factors in a way, that allows for unity in variety leading to an understanding of this future world. 
This process of synthesis is a challenging, highly complex and open-ended, with possible multiple 
outcomes (3). Structuring culminates in a vision, our response to the anticipated world (4). 
Interaction and product qualities
From here, interaction is designed – with designers articulating the qualities defined for the human-
solution interaction in the efforts of meeting the vision. VIP encourages to define five words – and 
seek inspiration in analogies. As a last activity, before embodiment is to define product qualities – 
what the solution should express and encourage.
Concept
Having designed a vision, the effect, designers want to have on people and society at large, this is 
translated into the most appropriate product manifestation; that be a product, service or a product-
service system.
==PAGE:17==
7
Thesis structure
By adopting the process methodology of ViP, most of the stages in our process are pre-set with 
predefined milestones. In addition, a literature review and a phase zero has been added – giving 
us time to familiarize ourselves with ViP as well as forming a theoretical basis, investigating and 
discussing literature of the field. Moreover, a validation phase has been added for our concept to be 
tested. For each phase, we have adopted a sprint-like structure, with a clear driver and subsequent 
tasks to reach this goal. In the figure 1.2, the process phases and milestones are illustrated. As visible, 
the phases in the illustration differ in size, aimed to reflect the weight of each.   
Reading guide
With the process being structured according to ViP, the report is shaped accordingly, for readers to be 
able to follow the full process.
In Chapter 1, an introduction for the thesis is provided and the methodology used in this thesis is 
presented. Chapter 2 covers the literature review: of SAD, circadian rhythms and light therapy. In 
Chapter 3, the Deconstruction is presented. The design phase begins in Chapter 4, where the future 
context is created and our vision formed. Chapter 5 presents the qualities of the future interaction 
as well as future product. In Chapter 6, the concept is presented. The validation of the concept is 
covered in chapter 7. Chapter 8 covers a reflection on the process carried out using the ViP. Chapter 
9 holds the discussion and conclusion of the results from this thesis. In the last part, Chapter 10, the 
references for the report, for the appendix report along with figures, tables and pictures can be found. 
The thesis should be read coherently from chapter 1 to 9. Each chapter will start with an introduction, 
explaining the activities that have been conducted for that step in the process, as well as the decisions 
presented in the chapter. In addition to this report, there is an appendix report, containing worksheets. 
These appendixes are optional to read, but provided to enable the reader to look further into the 
details of the work, presented in the report. These are referred to with the letter A, followed by a 
number according to the chapter and the order in which they appear in the report, e.g. (A3.1) is the 
first worksheet presented in chapter 3. 
Figure 1.2 :  The illustration shows the different phases and steps in the process carried out in this project. The dots 
represent milestones and the circles represent phases. 
Plan 
Future context 
Vision 
Domain 
Context statement 
Interaction qualities
Product qualities 
Concept 
Validation
Literature 
review 
Deconstruction
Future 
interaction 
Future 
product
Concept 
and 
detailing
Context 
factors
Conceptualization
Detailing
Concept 
choice
Context 
framework
Product 
level
Context 
level
Clusters
Interaction 
level
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2 
LITERATURE REVIEW
==PAGE:20==
10
Literature review 
LITERATURE REVIEW
The purpose of this literature review is to analyse and present the existing knowledge within the fields 
of seasonal affective disorder, bright light therapy and circadian rhythms in relation to light. The 
literature review will form the technical basis of the development project and outline of opportunities 
and limitations.
Seasonal affective disorder
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD), commonly known as winter depression, was first discovered 
and defined in the 1980’s by Rosenthal. It was described as a syndrome, where the affected would 
experience “recurrent depressions that occur annually at the same time each year” (Rosenthal et al., 
1984). More than thirty years of research within this area has led to an understanding of some aspects 
of the disorder. However, although different factors have been proven to be correlated to SAD the 
exact cause has not yet been discovered. This chapter will give an overview of the definition of SAD, 
and the lighter subsyndromal SAD, symptoms of SAD as well as possible causes.
SAD
In the “Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (DSM-5, 2013”) SAD 
is described as a major depressive disorder with a seasonal pattern. SAD differs from a regular major 
depressive disorder in being recurrent in seasonal cycles and in type of symptoms. SAD exists in both 
a winter and summer form. The winter-type covering the northern hemisphere is far more common. 
For Denmark, the largest investigation showed prevalence of SAD in 12% of the population (Dam, 
Jakobsen and Mellerup, 1998). For the UK the prevalence is 8% (SADA, 2016). SAD occurs four 
times as often for women than men and the age of onset between 18 and 30 (Rosenthal, 2015). From 
this point on, we will refer to the winter type, when SAD is mentioned, unless otherwise stated. 
Depressive episodes for SAD start in fall and end in spring with full remission of symptoms. The 
average duration of a SAD episode is 3,9 months or about 33% of the year (Rohan, Roecklein and 
Haaga, 2009). The symptoms of SAD are neurovegetative symptoms such as weight gain, hypersomnia, 
low energy levels, sadness and an increased appetite - particularly for carbohydrates (Danilenko and 
Levitan, 2012)typically occurring in the autumn and winter with remission in the spring or summer. 
In a given year, about 5 percent of the U.S. population experiences seasonal affective disorder, with 
symptoms present for about 40 percent of the year. Although the condition is seasonally limited, 
patients may have significant impairment from the associated depressive symptoms. Treatment can 
improve these symptoms and also may be used as prophylaxis before the subsequent autumn and 
winter seasons. Light therapy is generally well tolerated, with most patients experiencing clinical 
improvement within one to two weeks after the start of treatment. To avoid relapse, light therapy 
should continue through the end of the winter season until spontaneous remission of symptoms in 
the spring or summer. Pharmacotherapy with antidepressants and cognitive behavior therapy are also 
appropriate treatment options and have been shown to be as effective as light therapy. Because of the 
comparable effectiveness of treatment options, first-line management should be guided by patient 
preference (Danilenko and Levitan, 2012). In general SAD occurs more frequently for women and 
young people (Zauderer and Ganzer, 2015).
==PAGE:21==
11
Subsyndromal SAD 
Subsyndromal SAD (s-SAD) is as less severe type of SAD, where people only experience some of 
the diagnostic criteria of SAD and suffer from it to a lesser degree (Kasper, Rogers, et al., 1989) 
Researchers have proposed seasonality being a dimensional process and not a discrete entity (Kasper, 
Rogers, et al., 1989), placing s-SAD slightly below SAD, sharing many similarities. A study done in 
Maryland showed that 43% of the adult population “felt worst overall and/or experienced one or 
more mood related symptom(s) during the winter months”, whereas 4,3% of the population were 
experiencing all the diagnostic characteristics of SAD (Kasper, Wehr, et al., 1989)Maryland, were 
evaluated in randomly selected household samples by lay interviewers using a telephone version 
of the Seasonal Pattern Assessment Questionnaire. The method for selecting the sample unit was 
random-digit dialing. We found that 92% of the survey subjects noticed seasonal changes of mood 
and behavior to varying degrees. For 27% of the sample seasonal changes were a problem and 4.3% 
to 10% of subjects, depending on the case-finding definition, rated a degree of seasonal impairment 
equivalent to that of patients with seasonal affective disorder. The seasonal pattern of \”feeling worst\” 
exhibited a bimodal distribution with a greater winter and a substantially lower summer peak (ratio, 
4.5:1. 
Pathogenesis
As of today, the specific cause or causes for SAD remain unknown. It is considered a complex 
disorder, being a result of the interaction of many different vulnerability factors (Levitan, 2007). The 
Neurotransmitter Theory explains the occurrence of SAD by changes in the level of a neurotransmitter, 
serotonin, in the brain. Serotonin is a neurotransmitter involved in several different brain functions. A 
lack of serotonin in the brain has been associated with depressive episodes (Willeit et al., 2008). It has 
been found that the level of serotonin has a seasonal pattern with an overall low in winter and spring 
(Lam and Tam, 2009). The precursor, or building block, for serotonin is tryptophan, a natural amino 
acid found in foods such as bananas, milk and fish. Studies with remitted SAD patients, showed 
reappearance of depressive symptoms, when the participants were depleted tryptophan – and thereby 
had a decreased brain serotonin level (Levitan, 2007). The connection between depressive episodes in 
general and low serotonin levels in the brain is well established, but it does not have a causal role in 
SAD. When treating SAD and other types of depression with antidepressants, the aim is to raise the 
level of serotonin in the brain.
A popular hypothesis is that the latitude at which people reside, is an important factor in the 
prevalence of SAD – with shorter periods of natural daylight in winters for countries further from 
equator effecting the mental state of people. Although there has not been found a general overall 
significant correlation between latitude and prevalence of SAD, strong geographical differences have 
been found. A study examining the epidemiological literature on the prevalence of SAD in relation 
to latitude, showed that the prevalence of SAD is two times higher for North America than Europe, 
with Europe placed at higher more northern latitudes. If you take an isolated look at North America 
you find a significantly positive correlation between latitude and prevalence (Mersch et al., 1999). 
In addition, studies on the population of northerly placed Iceland, found a low prevalence of SAD, 
(Magnusson and Stefansson, 1993). As a result, the latitude alone cannot be said to be the causal role, 
but merely an influencing factor. These findings led the researchers on to two other factors – genes 
and climatological conditions. A suggested explanation for the low prevalence of Icelandic SAD, has 
been the fact that the Icelandic population has resided highly genetically isolated throughout the past 
thousand years adapting to the arctic (Magnusson and Boivin, 2003). Though this genetic theory has 
not been investigated further, it could explain the higher prevalence in North America, given the fact 
that the population has migrated from many different places during the past few centuries, leaving a 
new mixed genetic pool not biologically adapted to the darker winters. Another suggested explanation 
for the difference in prevalence between Europe and North America at the same latitudes, is the 
variations in climatological conditions. Studies investigating climatic factors have found that hours 
of daylight (photoperiod), temperature, cloudiness (Potkin et al. 1986) and total hours of sunshine 
(Sakamoto et al., 1993) is related to prevalence (Mersch et al., 1999).
==PAGE:22==
12
Literature review 
Figure 2.1: The human circadian rhythms. Source: (Nobelprize.org, 2017)
Circadian rhythm
Although the root cause for SAD remains unknown, there is an established link between SAD and 
seasonal deprivation of light, which changes the internal biological clock that determines our circadian 
rhythm (Zauderer and Ganzer, 2015). Circadian means “approximately a day” and the circadian 
rhythms are daily cycles of changes in behaviour and physiology. Examples of circadian rhythms 
are sleep-wake cycles, core body temperature and changes in hormone secretion (e.g. melatonin and 
cortisol) (Słomko and Zalewski, 2016). Circadian rhythms are the processes in living organisms 
repeating themselves in cycles every day. 
Organisms living on the earth are exposed to daily cycles of changing environmental factors, such as 
the dark-light cycles and changes in intensity and quality of light, temperature changes etc. Therefore, 
most organisms have evolved endogenous biological clocks that enables them to anticipate events 
in their daily cycle (when to sleep and eat etc.) according to the solar day (Sahar and Sassone-Corsi, 
2010). The endogenous circadian system consists of clock genes in almost any cells in the body. The 
human circadian rhythms are a bit longer than 24 hours and need environmental cues to synchronize 
to the length of a normal solar day (Cassone and Kumar, 2015). The circadian rhythms are controlled 
by a master clock called the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which is located in the hypothalamus 
in the brain. The SCI is also known as the circadian pacemaker. This process of synchronizing the 
internal clock to the environment is known as entrainment (Duffy and Wright, 2005)the timing of 
sleep and wakefulness, and environmental time (a.k.a. the phase angle of entrainment. Environmental 
cues, also called zeitgebers, inform the biological clock what time it is. The most significant zeitgeber 
is bright light hitting the eye. 
==PAGE:23==
13
Figure 2.2: Signal pathway of light into the Suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). The SCN controls the secretion of 
melatonin and signals to the Pineal gland to release the hormone . Source: (Gatewaypsychiatric.com, 2017) 
Signalling
The eyes have two systems for detecting light: The visual system is responsible for image formation, and 
the non-image-forming (NIF) system. The NIF system detects environmental irradiance (Daneault et 
al., 2016). Specific cells in the retina, intrinsic photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGC), are able to 
detect light intensities and signal this to the SCN via a neural pathway called the retinohypothalamic 
tract (RHT) (Hannibal and Fahrenkrug, 2006). In the SCN secretion of several hormones, such as 
cortisol, serotonin and melatonin, are controlled. A pathway leads from the SCN to the pineal gland 
in the brain, from where the hormone melatonin can be released.
Melatonin helps control the sleep-wake cycles (Pail et al., 2011) and is widely used as an index of 
body clock time (plasma, urine, saliva). Production of melatonin is inhibited by bright light - and 
stimulated by darkness. Figure 2.2 shows the ideal fluctuation in melatonin levels over a 24-hour 
period. In normal conditions, the melatonin levels will peak in the middle of the night – and reach a 
low in the morning. 
==PAGE:24==
14
Literature review 
Figure 2.3 :  Fluctuations in melatonin levels over 24-hour period. 
Source: (Gatewaypsychiatric.com, 2017) 
Picture 2.1 :  A person sitting in front of a light therapy lamp (light box). 
Source: (Brighteyourlife.info, 2018)
People with SAD have a higher tendency to phase delay, which means that the onset of melatonin 
secretion is later than in normal subjects (Danilenko and Levitan, 2012). As a result, sleep will 
naturally be induced later – and wakeup equivalently later.
Bright light therapy
In this section, SAD, circadian rhythms and the impact of light are joined in presenting a common 
practice against seasonal affective disorder: Bright light therapy. First, we will define bright light 
therapy as well as some key units. We will discuss research investigating efficacy of use as well as 
how studies have changed the protocol of use (duration, intensity and time of the day of treatment). 
Related side-effects are covered as well as a comparison to pharmaceuticals and dawn simulation 
lamps. Lastly, theories for mode of operation are presented and evaluated. 
==PAGE:25==
15
Def﻿ining bright light therapy and lux
Bright light therapy (BLT) is the use of the visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum as a 
therapeutic modality. The medium is the eye, and by exposing the retina to bright light, depressive 
symptoms for seasonal affective disorder are sought to be reduced. BLT is administered using a light 
box [see picture 2.1 ] emitting a certain level of illuminance in the direction of the eyes for a prescribed 
amount of time, and at a certain distance. 
Illuminance, measured in Lux, is a measure of how much luminous flux [lumen] is spread over a given 
area. One lux is equal to one lumen per square metre:
1 lux = 1 cd·sr/m2 = 1 lm/m2
A flux of 1000 lumens, concentrated into an area of 1 square metre, lights up that square metre with 
an illuminance of 1000 lux. However, the same 1000 lumens, spread out over 10 square metres, 
would produce a dimmer illuminance of only 100 lux. As a result, distance to a light source will affect 
the level of illuminance reaching the eye. Doubling the sitting distance will result in a flux-reading of 
a fourth. For examples of the illuminance provided under various conditions, see table 2.1: 
Condition
Illuminance (lux)
Direct sunlight
~ 110.000
Full daylight
~ 11.000
Overcast day
~ 1.100
Office lighting
300-500
Table 2.1 : Data retrieved at (Engineeringtoolbox.com, 2018)
==PAGE:26==
16
Literature review 
Efficacy and protocol
Besides illuminance level; timing, intensity and duration of light-sessions are factors influencing the 
efficacy of BLT. Shortly after SAD-pioneer Rosenthal presented his first controlled trial of bright light 
therapy using light boxes, an array of researchers continued experimenting on variations of these 
factors. Five years after the initial discovery, the first major meta-study focusing on the efficacy and 
timing of light therapy was performed, analysing studies from 14 research centres totalling in 332 
patients (Terman et al, 1989). The meta study concluded that bright light showed higher remission 
rates than dim light - and that early morning exposure had higher remission rates than evening and 
midday. An adequate placebo-condition had not been established until Eastman and colleagues were 
the first to add a placebo to their trial. This was done when by examining 6,000 lux given for 1,5 
hours versus an, unknown to the patient, turned off negative ion generator for 4 weeks (Eastman et 
al. 1998). Now, researchers could conclude that bright light therapy in fact was superior to a placebo 
condition. This approach set precedence for the research to come.
Light intensity of the light boxes had for years been a topic for exploration until a larger study exposed 
patients to 10,000 lux and shortened the treatment to sessions of just 0,5 hours but they remained 
at the same remission rates (Terman, 1998). From here on, 10,000 lux for 30 minutes became the 
golden standard. Since then, multiple major studies and meta-studies backed up the efficacy and 
superiority of morning bright light therapy for SAD patients (Lewy et al, 1998; Lee & Chan, 1998; 
Golden et al, 2005) at 10,000 lux. One study showed similar results for morning and afternoon 
exposure (Avery et al, 2001), but this study focused on subsyndromal seasonal affective disorder and 
not the more severe SAD.
In recent years, a treatment type called dawn simulators have been successful in bringing products to 
the consumer market targeting not only SAD-sufferers, but also the general population. These lamps 
work more like alarms by slowly brightening in the final hours of sleep upon a set wake-up time, 
facilitating an easier wake-up and thus helping you maintain a better sleep-wake-rhythm. Illuminance 
levels range from 100 to 300 lux. As opposed to conventional light therapy boxes, usage happens 
more peripherally with users not having to set aside dedicated time for treatment. As many patients 
using bright light boxes complain of the inconvenience of use (Oren, 1991) and discontinue use 
(Schwartz, 1996), dawn simulators could be an alternative when fighting SAD. As of today, research 
has not yet reached the same maturity level of that of bright light, with trials showing quite different 
results in terms of efficacy. When comparing the two, some find bright light being more effective than 
dawn simulators in terms of remission rates (Terman and Terman, 2006) whilst others have found 
dawn simulators being superior (Avery et al., 2001)we compared dawn simulation with bright light 
therapy and a placebo condition in patients with SAD. Method: Medication-free patients with SAD 
were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: bright light therapy (10,000 lux for 30 min, from 
6:00 am to 6:30 am. Studies focusing on the efficacy of dawn simulators alone have shown promising 
remission rates – although with very small sample sizes (Thompson et al., 2014; Gabel, 2016). 
Pharmaceuticals are a widespread method for the treatment of depressive disorders. Interestingly, 
a study found, that when comparing the popular anti-depressant drug fluoxetine (also known as 
Prozac) to bright light therapy for seasonal affective disorder, no significant differences in outcome 
were evident (Lam et al., 2006).
Side effects of bright light therapy have been studied concluding that although some are evident, none 
seem to be “serious and prolonged” (Kogan and Terman, 1998), and that dose-limitation (time and 
distance) could be used for novice patients experiencing initial side effects. Serious ocular damages can 
happen when the eye is exposed to UV-light, but in an investigation analysing light sources from eight 
fluorescent tubes used for LT, no UV-radiation was found to be present (Reme, 1996).
==PAGE:27==
17
The mechanisms of action for bright light therapy is still to be fully established. In the early years of 
research, the theory of photoperiod was most prominent. Photoperiod refers to the time that a plant or 
animal is exposed to light in a 24-hour period. Knowing the link between SAD and exposure to light, 
early research focused on simply extending the number of hours of daily bright light: The photoperiod. 
Researchers tested their hypothesis by extending short winter-days of test subjects administrating 
sessions of artificial light in the mornings and afternoons: One dose of artificial daylight (2,500 lux 
bright light) before sunset, and one after sunset raising the total hours of exposure to bright light 
(Rosenthal et al., 1984). This resulted in the first documented remission in symptoms of SAD using 
light therapy. However, later studies showed the same improvements for a short morning exposure, 
indicating that the duration of photoperiod of bright light, was not the sole factor.
Phase shift hypothesis
As presented earlier, most with SAD have a higher tendency to phase delay, a misaligned circadian 
rhythm measurable in their melatonin peaks. Because light acts as a strong synchronizer, this theory 
links the timing of light to the circadian rhythm. This is supported by the fact that bright light therapy 
in mornings, has shown to be more efficient in terms of remission rates compared to administration 
at other times of the day. By administrating bright light on evenings, melatonin onset is delayed. 
By administrating bright light in mornings, melatonin onset is advanced – rectifying an individual’s 
delayed circadian rhythm. Researchers have even tried to find the optimal point for phase-advancing 
bright light therapy based on melatonin secretion peak (Terman et al, 2001). For humans, full 
spectrum light should surpass 1500 lux to be able to induce a phase advance (Lam and Tam, 2009, 
p. 79).
Morning 
light
DLMO-B
B
A
DLMO-A
8 pm
10 pm
7 am
Wake
Wake
Clock
Time
Sleep-Wake
Cycle
Light-Dark
Cycle
Day
Day
Night
Sleep
Plasma Melatonin
Evening 
light
Figure 2.4 :  Phase shift with morning and evening exposure as measured by 
dim light melatonin onset (DLMO). Reproduction of figure from Lam et al., 
2006. 
==PAGE:28==
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3 
DECONSTRUCTION
==PAGE:30==
20
Deconstruction
DECONSTRUCTION
Deconstruction is the first phase in the ViP model. It is the preparation phase, where the existing 
solution is being analysed or critically questioned – and the three layers of ViP explored. The purpose 
of deconstruction is for the designer to familiarize him- or herself with elements of importance within 
the field, and to try to reason why a product exists (raison d’être) - and why it does so in this particular 
form. The deconstruction operates on three levels. The aims and activities connected to each level are 
presented here: 
PRODUCT LEVEL: HOW IS THE PRODUCT PERCEIVED?
The product qualities, connotations and impressions of the product is be described. 
INTERACTION LEVEL: HOW DOES INTERACTION WITH THE PRODUCT FEEL? 
Products obtain their meaning in the interaction between person and product. The product affords a 
certain interaction. The quality of that interaction will be questioned on the interaction level. When 
deconstructing the interaction in ViP, designers are encouraged to observe users interacting with the 
existing solution and try to boil the interaction down to five interaction qualities covering theperceived 
interaction experience (Hekkert and van Dijk, 2011, p. 120). 
CONTEXT LEVEL: IN WHAT SETTING DOES THE PRODUCT AND INTERACTION MAKE 
SENSE? 
The purpose is to understand in what context and from what kind of worldview this product was 
born. What kind of beliefs and principles made this product and its interaction? Reasoning will be 
based on the insights form product and interaction level, as well as knowledge form the literature 
review. 
==PAGE:31==
21
Picture 3.1: Light therapy lamp. Source: (verilux.com, 2018)
DECONSTRUCTION: PRODUCT LEVEL
The most prominent design for bright light therapy lamps (see an overview of products on the market 
in appendix A3.1) is the colour-less, large and plain design of the table face lamp as presented in 
image 3.1. It takes the form of a thick, vertical slate on a foot and typically features very simple on-off- 
controls at either foot or back. Connotations are flat PC screens due to the same individualized 
screen-experience - and tablets in terms of proportions, having a large screen surface stretching across 
the entire front and the controls being as discreet as possible. With its clinical colouring, non-shiny, 
matte surfaces and rounded edges, it looks like a product designed to come out as non-imposing. It is 
slightly cold, does not have a face, and does not evoke any particular feelings or emotions. Here, the 
conventions for the design have clearly been picked up in the clinical world - making the lamp look 
like something you would have on your hospital nightstand - or in a dentist clinic. 
Looking at previous, very boxy, light boxes (Picture 2.1 literature review), you can almost hear the lead 
developer asking his designers to design something “a bit easier to accept” for the users. Old therapy 
lamps were bulky and mechanical – and almost looked like table solariums: Colours have been toned 
down, mechanical elements hidden, shiny parts replaced with matte, corners rounded, the electrical 
wire coloured white and a slight backwards tilt imposed. Despite these design-alternations, the sheer 
size of the device makes it come out as imposing (typically a height around 0,5 metres and a width 
of 30 to 40 centimetres) taking up a lot of space when placed on a table. When lit, the device turns 
from being bulky and trying to blend in - into an almost hysterical, attention-demanding element. All 
other small design-patches are oblivious, as the insisting 10.000 lux light shines out from the massive 
surface. Here, it comes out as a highly functionalistic product, and with a simple focus on delivering 
bright light into the eyes. Connotations are dentist lamps, or lamps from domains like wall painting 
or photography, where a certain high degree of light intensity is desired.
==PAGE:32==
22
Deconstruction
Picture 3.10 :  User gathered  image of a setup
Picture 3.11 :  David interacting with a light 
therapy lamp
Picture 3.6 :  User 
gathered  image of use 
situation
Picture 3.7 :  User gathered image 
of use situation
Picture 3.9 :  User gathered image 
of use situation
Picture 3.8 :  User gathered image 
of storage situation
Picture 3.4 :  User gathered image of use situation
Picture 3.5 :  Cultural probes, image of use situation
Picture 3.2 :  Observation and semi-structured interview at home
Picture 3.3 :  Observation and semi-structured interview at work
==PAGE:33==
23
DECONSTRUCTION: INTERACTION
The purpose of the deconstruction on interaction level is to get to an understanding of the human-
product interaction and relationship between users and their light therapy lamps. How is the 
interaction between users and light therapy lamps perceived? Why do people use light therapy lamps? 
And for what reasons do people stop? 
To be able to answer these, we set out a large investigation of use and lack thereof – by talking to 
multiple of users and former users, having them broaden our understanding of the interaction beyond 
simply trying out the lamp ourselves. We named this investigation our exploratory study. To get a 
more detailed explanation and overview of the exploratory study and motives for each activity see 
appendix A3.2. 
The exploratory study:
··
Two contextual interviews with current users at place and time of use: To understand setting 
and surroundings of the use situation, we invited ourselves into the home of a user and to follow 
another at her workplace conducting an open-ended interview to understand their use. See 
appendix A3.3 and A3.4.
··
Having current users gather data for us: Observing use is difficult – as it often happens at morning 
in the homes of people. This made observing multiple users interacting with their lamps very time-
consuming. So, to get as close to the interaction as possible without being there ourselves, we had 
nine users gather elements from their use and send it to us. This involved them taking pictures of 
their use, setup and storage. In addition, they answered our questions related to use. Pictures can 
be viewed in appendix A3.5, A3.6 and A3.7 and question and answers in appendix A3.8.
··
Interviewing former users over phone and using questionnaire:  To understand the barriers of 
using light therapy lamps and reasons to stop, six former users were interviewed using These also 
filled out our questionnaire related to their use [A3.9]
All sixteen participants – users and non-users - were asked the same seven questions regarding their 
experience of the interaction. In addition, the current users were asked additional questions regarding 
their use routine. User and former were all reached through different channels. Both current and 
formers users were recruited in corporation with the Danish National Association for Depressions 
(DepressionsForeningen) with a Facebook post. Apart from that, former users were reached through 
their sales posts for light therapy lamps on dba.dk (Den Blå Avis) and Guloggratis.dk (Danish websites 
similar to Gumtree). In total, 16 users participated (10 current and 6 former users).  
Lamp personality
Participants were asked to describe their lamp as a person, they had a relation to. This worked as 
a basis for us to perceive the relationship between user and product. Statements ranged from “My 
dearest friend”, “Soothing, supportive, kind” to “Ugly, not really nice to have around, and noisy yet 
still hope-inducing” and “Like an annoying little sister constantly craving your attention - that you 
know you would benefit from spending time with” [A.10]
==PAGE:34==
24
Deconstruction
General experience
This variety in answers repeated itself when users and former users were asked to describe their general 
experience with light therapy in five sayings [A3.11]. Answers spread from: 
··
“Relaxing, freeing, cheering up, positive, self-help”
··
“Nice, necessary, boosting, a bit annoying” 
··
“On top, happier, more energy, good start of the day” 	
··
“Artificial, odd with all that light shining at you, relaxing, non-stress full (like being at a spa), nice” 
      to the more critical:
··
“Time consuming, impractical, slightly uncomfortable, lack of immediate effect, lack of motivation”, 
··
“Impractical, non-implementable in everyday life, ugly on my dining table, reminding me of the fact 
that I forget to use it (yet another self-care activity that I have failed), doubting if it even worked”
··
“It works - but is inconvenient as hell”. 
··
Product emotions 
Inspired by the theoretical framework a Multilayered Model of Product Emotions by Desmet (Desmet, 
2003) [3.12], we wanted to get a deeper understanding of why people felt the way they did about 
their use of light therapy lamps. Within the theory of product emotions, the lamp is considered an 
instrumental product (e.g. products that serve a specific purpose). For this product classification, 
Desmet dissects the process of emotional elicitation into a string of goals, product used to realize the 
goal, motive compliance and instrumental product emotions. 
··
Goal represents the goal(s) for using the specific product. 
··
Product is the product used to achieve the goal 
··
Motive compliance: If the product facilitates goal achievement it is appraised as motive compliant, 
if it obstructs the goal achievement it is appraised as motive incompliant. 
··
Instrumental product emotions: Emotions elicited from the appraisal of a product
Interpreting the user input from the questionnaires, four types of motive compliances (A, B, C & D) 
and four types of instrumental product emotions (1, 2, 3 & 4) were found, as illustrated in figure 3.1. 
A more in-depth explanation can be found in appendix [A3.13]. As visible, the goals for all users were 
the same: To get more energy and/or prevent winter depression The product was naturally the same. 
But the motive compliance and elicited instrumental product emotions differed. As could be seen 
from the personality of the lamp, as well as the experience in five words users showed complex emotional 
==PAGE:35==
25
Figure 3.1: Our interpretation of the basic motive instrumental product emotions for bright light therapy lamps for our 
sixteen asked participants based on their answer to the seven-point questionnaire.
goals
Getting more energy
Preventing winter 
depression
product
bright light 
therapy lamp
motive 
compliance
instrumental 
product 
emotions
 Joy
Calmness, joy and 
relaxation
The interaction is 
good. The lamp is 
facilitating calmness 
and wellbeing. ´
Energetic
It feels good to be a
able to do something 
good for myself 
and knowing that I 
prevent feeling bad 
in winter. 
Annoyance and 
discomfort
The light is 
uncomfortable, the 
lamp is unpractical 
ﬁnd the time and get 
up earlier, when you 
are not feeling well. 
Indifference and 
boredom
I don’t feel anything 
else than normally. 
It’s a bit boring and 
I’m not sure about 
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
D
However, a pattern still formed revealing different approaches to the light therapy. Fundamentally, we 
could group the users and non-users into three different types: 
1	 Robust, long term oriented: Although these users found the product use rather unpleasant and 
impractical, the hopes of getting better/avoiding depressive relapse made endurance possible.
2	 Enjoying the interaction: These users found the interaction itself pleasant for its ability to 
facilitate calmness in a busy life.
3	 Here-and-now: Not enjoying the interaction itself – and not being able to motivate themselves to 
endure by long term goals alone.
We interpret this as a difference in the mind-set of users. The interaction with the lamp is basically 
an investment into one’s health. But, how do you measure the goodness of the transaction? The 
investment is asked up-front and is quite demanding, as using the lamp is both uncomfortable, 
intruding and takes a great change of behaviour. The reward is much less hard-cut and more of a fussy 
long-term thing. How do you evaluate if you are feeling better? How do you isolate parameters such 
as sleep, energy level, diet and general mood from the effect of light therapy? No climax is offered and 
suspense, trust and persistence are key here. The beliefs of users are important when weighing the pros 
and cons. Users appreciating a pleasant interaction will give up – and users focussing on the long-term 
goals seem to endure and stick to their plan. 
responses to the interaction. For instance, feeling wellbeing (emotion 1) even though the use obstructs 
the morning routine (appraisal C). 
==PAGE:36==
26
Deconstruction
Overall impressions
Being in contact with a larger number of users and former users as a part of our exploratory study 
enabled a richer understanding of how the interaction between user and lamp is for users and has 
been for former users. Even the parts, that have not been drawn out in this chapter (ex. use routine 
details from users [A3.8]), have contributed to our understanding and ability to see the patterns in 
the user-product interaction. This has resulted in the following, accumulated impressions related to 
the interaction:
Suspense
Observing the use of a lamp is like observing two worlds meeting. Like watching an imbalanced 
monologue with a passive receiver. On the one side, we have a visually noisy and powerful exert - 
and on the other side passiveness. The situation is loud yet slow and calm. Attention-demanding yet 
passive. Between them is this suspended gap giving the impression that the lamp never really becomes 
a part of the user.
Spotlight
When using a light therapy lamp, the spotlight is pointed directly at you. Both literally and figuratively. 
There is no hiding, everything is exposed with your face completely illuminated in the often dark 
morning room of your home – where interaction often typically happens. When the device is turned 
on, it obstructs the as-is light design of the environment. Especially in the morning, the abrupt light 
of the lamp can seem disrespectful to the mood and settings that people prefer. 
Locked
The interaction requires time and is locked to a location and time. If the lamp is used in the morning, 
one might need to get up earlier than normally. This can be a barrier for use, as it interferes with 
their morning rituals. With use best described as a non-activity, the users is locked to a certain place 
and position: Passively sitting with open eyes in front of the. This facilitates a room for other calm 
and anti-busy activities, or it supports existing ones, such as eating breakfast, putting on makeup or 
reading the morning newspaper. 
Packed away
The way the product relates to its environment in a home seems awkward. It is not a piece of furniture 
nor a comfortable piece of lighting. In its current form, it is not appropriate to be shown and will 
most likely be put away when people get visitors. It is a thing that needs to be tidied up, like other 
strictly functional and clumsy products, such as vacuum cleaners or drying racks.
==PAGE:37==
27
FIVE INTERACTION 
QUALITIES
In our efforts of distilling our findings from our 
full exploration and personal experience down to 
five interaction qualities, the following have been 
chosen in describing what the interaction can be 
characterized by:
1. 
Artificial-ness
2. 
Intenseness 
3. 
Exposedness
4. 
Calmness facilitation
5. 
Hope
==PAGE:38==
28
Deconstruction
DECONSTRUCTION: CONTEXT
On the context level, we try to reason for the existence and form of the product and its interaction. 
We ask ourselves in what context, the qualities described for the product and interaction would be 
considered appropriate. And what world view(s) would make that specific relationship between user 
and product meaningful. The following lists our perception on what kind of developments in society 
as well as basic principles have been underlying factors in the design of the light therapy lamp.
Developments
··
Being out of the clinical and medical domain, this product comes out of a time where doctors and 
what they prescribed should excerpt trustworthiness, authority and look like something out of a 
clinic. This explains the rather one-way use and the clinical look to the design.
··
Self-improvement at home was a trend at the time of initial design. From VHS aerobics, home-
solarium and home gyms, a rise of devices and practices supporting a wave of self-improvement 
at home occured. The light therapy device finds itself in the slipstream of this being a device for 
boosting yourself at home.
··
T﻿hhe design of the light therapy lamp was coined in a time, where efficiency is key. Time could 
not be wasted and we should be productive. As a result, the device features a big screen and high 
intensity light facilitating, a fast and efficient mode of use - over a limited amount of time. The size 
and intensity also facilitates a placement of the lamp a bit further from the body - for users to be 
able to do certain other things, while receiving light therapy treatment. 
··
In the context of health care, a trend shifting from treatment to prevention arose, aiming to cut 
rising health care costs. This device is not truly a preventive solution - but aims to treat depressed 
patients before their mental health deteriorates to a severe degree. 
··
Non-invasive treatments are perceived as better. We see a shift from pharma and medicine, 
to alternative ways of treatment. Parents choose not to vaccinate their children, people go to 
acupuncture for injuries and women seek alternatives to the pill. Light therapy falls within 
this development - with non-pharmaceutical and non-invasive treatments being on the rise. 
··
The nature of our lives has changed greatly in the past centuries with hours spent indoors being on 
an extreme rise. From being outdoors, working the fields and living in closer contact with nature, 
urbanization and the shift of jobs has disconnected us from natural light. As a result, artificial 
solutions like therapy lamps targeting this deficit has arisen. 
··
As humans, we do not want to seem vulnerable. Emotions are carried on the inside, and we do not 
enjoy seeing ourselves or others seeing us as being weak. Especially not when it comes to mental 
vulnerabilities. As a result, we prefer treatments in the safe space of our homes. This device is 
designed for homes
==PAGE:39==
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
FUTURE CONTEXT
Introduction
We have now deconstructed the current way of 
dealing with light therapy – understanding why 
solutions are the way they are currently. 
This is where the design phase starts and the 
reframing begins. 
==PAGE:42==
32
Future context
FUTURE CONTEXT
In this chapter, we will define the future context – the context that we are designing for. Firstly, we 
will define the domain that we are working with and the timeframe for when the solution should 
come into this world. Then we will build this world by gathering influencing factors, context factors, 
clustering them and structuring these into an overall storyline, the future context as we see it. Then, 
we will form our response to this future world – in the form of a context statement; our vision, 
guiding our design process.
Domain and timeframe
The domain constitutes the area of contribution for the development project, and is a way of scoping 
the exploration as well as broadening the perspective. It serves as a lens through which you look at the 
world, and acts as a starting point guiding the exploration of context. We have chosen the following:
Domain: Managing the circadian rhythm with light
From our literature review, it was found that treating SAD with light therapy essentially is an act 
of synchronizing your circadian rhythm with a certain daily intake of bright light timed correctly, 
making this a natural scope. Not exclusively focusing on SAD and light therapy, opened for 
covering less severe, but more widespread degrees of winter fatigue. 
Having a timeframe for which the design is set to be realised naturally steers our exploration of 
future context. We have chosen the following: 
Designing for 2021 (in three years). 
Interesting things are happening in both health care, lighting technology – and within this domain 
in general. Although our partnering company aims to reach market with a product sooner, we 
wanted to tap into a world a bit further in the future, where trends and developments are expected 
to be more outspoken, enabling us to form a vision inspiring non-linear innovation rather than in 
increment solutions.
==PAGE:43==
33
Context factor generation
How is the world going to look like within the domain of managing your circadian rhythm with light 
in 2021? Many areas will have changed substantially compared to today, some less or even not at all. 
We have sought to gather, create, discuss and evaluate factors contributing to this future world by 
talking to experts and knowledgeable individuals within the field, and include what we distilled from 
our literature review, as well as our takings from our own exploratory story, investigating the beliefs of 
users and feedback from former users. 
In our efforts of explore the domain, we managed to interview different people with either practical, 
organizational or professional knowledge within the domain - in the efforts of getting the best possible 
understanding based on insights and research:
··
Helle Østergaard, MD and PhD researching light therapy and winter depression [A4.1]
··
Michael von der Recke, The owner of the largest retailer of light therapy devices in Denmark, with 
10+ years in the business [A4.2]
··
Jakob Hildebrandt Andersen, a business developer at DTU Photonics having written his master 
thesis on light therapy for the elderly, and who now works with professional athletes and E-sports 
athletes using light to manage their circadian rhythm and improving performance [A4.3]
··
Kasper Tingkær, General Secretary of the National Association for Depression and Bipolar 
Disorders of Denmark [A4.4]
··
Ngoc Mai Nguyen, UC Berkeley researcher teaching humane physiology [A4.5]
··
Christina Friis Bach Petersen, CEO and founder of a London-based start-up having developed a 
wearable to tracking the light intake of users [A4.6]
··
From the exploratory study, sixteen current or former users of bright light therapy lamps 
[Deconstruction]
==PAGE:44==
34
Future context
CONTEXT FACTORS 
All these accumulated thoughts, theories, laws, considerations, beliefs and observations inspired 
and drove us in the extensive work of synthesizing 100 context factors, we found relevant for the 
domain and perspective. Two examples of context factor cards, figure XX and XX are displayed on 
the following page. The factors are categorized according to their fields. The fields are; Biological, 
Cultural, Demografic, Economical, Political, Psychological, Sociological and Technological. Table 4.1 
shows an overview of the number of context factors in each field and according to the type; Trend, 
Development, State or Principle. All context factors will found on the following pages. Sources are 
available in appendix. 
Picture 4.4: Interview with Kasper 
Tingkær.
Picture 4.5: Interview with Ngoc Mai 
Nguyen
Picture 4.2: Interview with Michael 
von der Recke
Picture 4.3: Interview with Jakob 
Hildebrandt Andersen,
Picture 4.6: Interview with Christina 
Friis Bach Petersen
Picture 4.1: Interview with Helle 
Østergaard
==PAGE:45==
35
2
BIOLOGICAL D
WHO 2017
Depression is the leading cause of ill 
health and disability worldwide 
According to the latest estimates from WHO, 
more than 300 million people are now living with 
depression, an increase of more than 18% between 
2005 and 2015.
Trends [T]
1
4
1
1
5
2
Developments [D]
1
8
2
4
2
3
3
4
States [S]
1
7
1
1
8
s
3
Principles [P]
13
15
3
Biological
 Types
 Fields
Cultural
Demographic
Economical
Political
Psychological
Sociological
Technological
1
Mental health problems pose the biggest 
burden of desease in Denmark
Mental health problems represents 25% of the total 
burden of desease in Denmark, while cancer is 
responsible for 17%. 
FOREBYGGELSESPAKKE – mental sundhed
D
ECONOMIC
1
Figure 4.1: An example of a context factor. It presents a 
development (D) in the Economical field.
Table 4.1: Overview of the full number of context factors created sorted 
according to type and field. Naturally, a great number of biological and 
psychological principles were included given our field of exploration.
Figure 4.2:  An example of a context factor. It presents 
a development (D) in the Biological field. 
==PAGE:46==
36
Future context
Biological
Light has an immediate invigorating 
effect on all people [P] 
To humans the eyes are highly 
vulnerable [P] 
A natural reaction to bright light is 
closing the eyes [P] 
Vision and perception of light is 
individual and changes over life [P] 
Most patients with SAD have phase-
delayed circadian misalignment [P] 
Being exposed to nature has a good 
health effect [P] 
Depression is the leading cause of ill 
health and disability worldwide [D] 
More 
light 
in 
hospitals 
means 
healthier patients [P] 
The position of the light source 
relative to the eye influences the 
effect of the light [P] 
Ligh, and especially blue light, 
manipulates the circadian rythm by 
supressing the melatonin secretion 
[T] 
Darkness at night makes us tired [P] 
Light is the strongest method to 
synchronize the biological clock [P] 
There are many health risks involved 
in disrupting the circadian rhytm [P] 
Sleep patterns are important for our 
circadian rhythm [P] 
Light has an effect on our functions, 
feelings and health [P] 
You can’t put sleep in the fridge [S] 
“Picture or it didn‚Äôt happen” [T] 
We listen to recommendations from 
our peers - especially when it relates 
to health [D] 
Your home is a reflection of you - we 
remove ugly elements when having 
visitors [S] 
Echo-chambers - we are increasingly 
exposed to information that conforms 
with our own beliefs [T] 
Non-intrusive 
and 
non-pharma 
treatment types are preferred [D] 
We use substances and diets to effect 
how we perform and our health [D] 
People are exposed to less natural 
light [S] 
With the change of the labour 
market, work has become an indoor 
thing [D] 
Companies 
don’t 
want 
to 
hire 
mentally unstable people [S] 
People will have more leisure time 
[D] 
It’s an advantage to be a morning 
person (larks) in the 9-17 society [S] 
Antidepressants use is on the rise [T] 
Almost a third of americans report 
trouble sleeping and trouble falling 
asleep [D] 
Weekends are for many for “catching 
up” what you haven’t done during 
the week [S] 
Work is an activity - not a place [D] 
When people don‚Äôt know how 
things work, they will deem it hocus 
pocus [S] 
Work hours and meeting times are 
getting more flexible [D] 
Increased freedom and opportunities/
choises makes it difficult to make a 
decision [T] 
We use lamps as well as lighting 
design for home interior design [S] 
Cultural
A growing number of workers will be 
working at odd hours [D] 
We face a booming economic burden 
of the older as we live longer [D] 
Developed countries foster a more 
individualized culture [S] 
Demographic
Economical
There is a trend towards a sharing-
economy and circular economy [D] 
People travel more and experience 
jet lag from flying more often [D] 
Mental health problems represents 
25% of the total burden of desease 
in Denmark measured in direct and 
indirect costs [D] 
It is cheaper to treat people at home 
[T] 
The cognitive load of work has 
increased [D] 
Voters are turning away from the 
classical 
established 
cetralised 
parties [T] 
We live in the post-factual society, 
where medias have tremendous 
power [D] 
Workplaces has an increased focus 
on work environment [D] 
Things 
should 
be 
rational 
and 
productive [S] 
Political
Figure 4.3 : Overview of all context factors structured according to the field. See Appendix 
(A4.7) for references. 
CONTEXT FACTORS 
==PAGE:47==
37
Psychological
People enjoy instant feedback [P] 
We like familiar things [P] 
We valuate what we have much 
higher than what we are offered [P] 
We don’t like feeling stupid [P] 
Users enjoy feeling “understood” by 
products [P] 
It’s hard to make behavioural changes 
when you are not feeling well [P] 
If people do not see an effect from 
their efforts, they will not continue 
doing it [S] 
It takes a lot of will power to use 
light therapy [S] 
If the barriers for using a product are 
too big, the use will not continue [S] 
Bright ligt therpy lamps are very 
attention demanding [S] 
The morning is a quiet and sensitive 
time of the day [P] 
We 
enjoy 
tangible 
things 
and 
tangible interactions [S] 
People feel proud about doing self-
care [S] 
Bright, cold light exposes all our 
flaws and is not considered flattering 
[P] 
Bright light naturally draws apon 
attention [P] 
At work people do not wish to disturb 
others with bright light [P] 
40% of fitness subscribers never 
show up [D] 
Humans intuitively link light to 
mental and physical vitality [P] 
Light therapy is a non-activity [S] 
We hate waiting [P] 
People care about their health and 
wellbeing [P] 
We want to have fun [D] 
We enjoy finding shortcuts and 
feeling like we’re on top of something 
[P] 
People are curious and information-
seeking [P] 
Zapping: the young generation enjoys 
jumping from activity to activity in a 
hedonistic way [D] 
Actions overlap [S] 
Sociological
There is a rising “back to nature”-
trend [T] 
To avoid SoMe-stress, people delete 
their Facebook and turn to old Nokia 
phones [T] 
People like comfort of their own 
home [P] 
Humans want to belong and need re-
assurance [P] 
We have the possibility of redefining 
ourselves digitally [D] 
At the workplace, we don’t want to 
seem weak [S] 
We are constantly exposed to other 
people and their succes stories [T] 
People with mental health problems 
suffer from stigma and discrimination 
[S] 
Performance society - we should 
succeed in everything we do [S] 
40% of young Americans have Fear of 
missing out (FOMO) [T] 
We like giving others advice [S] 
We want to be seen/recognized for 
doing good [P] 
The internet has connected the world 
- 70% of the global pupulation is 
online [S] 
We have a global consciousness [S] 
Time poverty: the more valueable our 
time is, the more we want out of it 
[D] 
Social Jetlag: We have quite different 
sleep scedules for weekdays and 
weekends disturbing our circadian 
rythms. 
This 
is 
particularly 
for 
adolesents [S] 
Citizens question authorities and 
take control over their own health [D] 
The on demand-regime [T] 
People spend a lot of time on their 
devices [S] 
Nothing in life is static - everything 
moves very fast [S] 
Agility and adaptation will be key on 
the future job market [D] 
Dynamic LED lighting will change 
artificial lighting in homes and public 
places like hospitals [D] 
People use their devices all day and 
in the late evening [S] 
Bio-hacking is a movement of people 
improving the human condition using 
modern technology and DIY biology 
[T] 
Personalised treatments are getting 
more common [T] 
The digital home [D] 
Quantified self/lifelogging for an 
improved self [D] 
Technological
==PAGE:48==
38
Future context
Key takings : context factor formation
From our exploratory work creating and synthesizing context factors, two, to us very fundamental, 
findings were identified:
Light is like a nutrient: As humans, we need a basic daily intake of bright light hitting our retinal 
glands in the inner eye to synchronize and thus manage our circadian rhythm. Bright light is basically 
like a nutrient, a physiological need, and very few seem to know – with little indication of this changing 
in the future. The general understanding of light is very basic with people mostly understanding light 
as illuminance, and for some, related to mood-setting. People simply do not know what lux is, or 
how bright light is related to seasonal affective disorder, the circadian rhythm and winter fatigue. A 
few products focusing on light hygiene have reached the consumer market, but generally those focus 
on a comfortable wakeup (dawn simulators) or software to avoid blue light in the hours before sleep 
(f.lux). 
Modern life vs. daylight: Modern life leaves very little room for a daily intake of natural, bright 
light outdoors, as work, post industrialization, for the vast majority is an indoor activity. Work hours 
occupy a clear majority of daylight hours, sometimes all. Living as modern time cavemen, we spend 
87% of our time indoors, and 6% inside vehicles (Klepeis et al., 2001). 
==PAGE:49==
39
Structuring the context
As a part of our efforts of synthesizing context factors into a unified whole towards a vision, we have 
sought to uncover underlying narrative forces across our 100 context factors in the form of clusters - 
each contributing as joint entities to the whole that constitutes our view of the future. Key is making 
the future context more easy to navigate and grasp, while preserving the richness of the context factors 
[A4.8]. Nine clusters were formed from the factors: 
==PAGE:50==
40
Future context
Back to nature
A counter-movement has risen: Some people 
are turning away from the fast-moving, high-
productivity, 
performance-driven 
paradigm 
of 
today’s society, where sleep hygiene is not a priority. 
We see a general increased focus on mindfulness and 
an acknowledgement of the consequences of stress 
and lack of listening to you bodily signals and cues. 
People drop their smartphones and social media, 
and shift to old Nokia-phones and delete their 
Facebook accounts. Digital distractions are replaced 
with something solid and tangible. Time is valued 
differently and actions do not need to result in an 
objectively efficient output.
In doing things more naturally, people seek to live 
more like we did a century ago, moving to the 
countryside, disconnecting from the grid and living 
off the land. Focus is on simple, slow life and only 
having what you need. The tiny house movement 
is an example of this, with people trying to live in 
smaller spaces. Quite paradoxically, this movement is 
very popular on social media.
Light has an immediate invigorating effect on all 
people [P] 
There is a rising “back to nature”-trend [T] 
To avoid SoMe-stress, people delete their Facebook 
and turn to old Nokia phones [T] 
Picture 4.7: Source: (Pexel.com, 2018)
Picture 4.8: Source: (Pxhere.com, 2018)
Picture 4.9: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018)
==PAGE:51==
41
Comfort and stability
We strive to feel good and take care of ourselves. We 
cherish what we have and need to see a significantly 
higher value in whatever novel we are offered, to be 
convinced to undertake/do something new. When 
not feeling well, behaviour change can be particularly 
hard. In general, we do not want to place ourselves in 
situations where we risk being a sure failure - especially 
not for areas of self-care, where failing might be yet 
another self-disappointment. It is preferred to stay in 
a state where we feel stable, understood and on safe 
grounds. Well timed feedback is crucial for people - 
as it gives confirmation of what has been done, and 
what has been accomplished. 
To humans the eyes are highly vulnerable [P] 
A natural reaction to bright light is closing the eyes 
[P] 
Vision and perception of light is individual and 
changes over life [P] 
People enjoy instant feedback [P] 
We like familiar things [P] 
We valuate what we have much higher than what 
we are offered [P] 
We don’t like feeling stupid [P] 
Users enjoy feeling “understood” by products [P] 
It’s hard to make behavioural changes when you are 
not feeling well [P] 
If people do not see an effect from their efforts, 
they will not continue doing it [S] 
It takes a lot of will power to use light therapy [S] 
If the barriers for using a product are too big, the 
use will not continue [S] 
Bright ligt therpy lamps are very attention 
demanding [S] 
The morning is a quiet and sensitive time of the 
day [P] 
We enjoy tangible things and tangible interactions 
[S] 
People feel proud about doing self-care [S] 
People like comfort of their own home [P] 
Picture 4.10: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018)
Picture 4.11: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018)
Picture 4.12: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018)
==PAGE:52==
42
Future context
Define yourself through others
With our lives less focused on family and established 
institutions, we have a strong desire to define our 
personal story/identity. The internet and social 
media has opened for a platform for this - enabling 
us to define ourselves and connect with others from 
the comfort of where we are. With social media 
platforms, we are exposed to, and compare ourselves 
to, a vast amount of success stories - putting pressure 
upon ourselves to appear successful, interesting and 
productive. Everything is documented with a photo 
and posted online. The extensive use of social media 
has resulted in a large share of the younger generation 
suffering from fear of missing out - the anxiety of 
missing an opportunity for a rewarding event - 
that being a social interaction, a new experience or 
something similar. At work, we do not want to seem 
weak or expose our flaws - as it might decrease our 
market value.
We care about how we and our homes appear to 
others. It ought to look nice - and functional pieces 
of furniture, or tools such as the vacuum cleaner, 
and the BLT lamp is hidden in the closet.
“Picture or it didn’t happen” [T] 
We listen to recommendations from our peers - 
especially when it relates to health [D] 
Your home is a reflection of you - we remove ugly 
elements when having visitors [S] 
Bright, cold light exposes all our flaws and is not 
considered flattering [P] 
Bright light naturally draws apon attention [P] 
At work people do not wish to disturb others with 
bright light [P] 
40% of fitness subscribers never show up [D] 
Humans want to belong and need re-assurance [P] 
We have the possibility of redefining ourselves 
digitally [D] 
At the workplace, we don’t want to seem weak [S] 
We are constantly exposed to other people and 
their succes stories [T] 
People with mental health problems suffer from 
stigma and discrimination [S] 
Performance society - we should succeed in 
everything we do [S] 
40% of young Americans have Fear of missing out 
(FOMO) [T] 
We like giving others advice [S] 
We want to be seen/recognized for doing good [P] 
People spend a lot of time on their devices [S] 
Picture 4.13: (Pxhere.com, 2018)
==PAGE:53==
43
Global citizens
Globalization has changed citizens from being part 
of a local community, to being part of a global world. 
The transfer of goods, trade across borders and 
international competition has changed the labour 
market and opening hours. A growing number 
of workers will be working odd hours, shifting or 
disturbing their circadian rhythm, shifting sleep-
wake cycles and being exposed to light at odd 
hours. Distances seem shorter with the possibility of 
travelling everywhere and flying dropping in prices. 
With more travelling across longitudes, people 
experience jet lag (circadian shifts) more often. 
Seventy percent of the global population is connected 
to the internet, making everyone connected. This, 
along with massive exposure to the media. tells us 
what is going on everywhere in the world at all times, 
and builds upon a global consciousness. People care 
- and worry about climate change, disasters and 
developments in other countries and judge their own 
life and actions in relation to the rest of the world. 
The sharing economy and circular economy are 
developments arising from this global conscience. 
The fast-moving development of technology and 
new markets is changing the labour market. Needed 
skills will focus more on adaptation and agility than 
stability - and we won’t see people staying in their 
jobs for multiple years.
The role of the media is huge, and with the trend 
of fake news in the “post-factual society”, we define 
how the reality is through what we are presented. 
Echo chambers describes the phenomenon 
where social media users are mainly presented to 
information through news outlets and other people 
sharing the same opinions and values. This creates a 
vacuum where the same ideas that you believe in are 
amplified and repeated.
Echo-chambers - we are increasingly exposed to 
information that conforms with our own beliefs [T] 
A growing number of workers will be working at odd 
hours [D] 
There is a trend towards a sharing-economy and 
circular economy [D] 
People travel more and experience jet lag from 
flying more often [D] 
We live in the post-factual society, where medias 
have tremendous power [D] 
The internet has connected the world - 70% of the 
global pupulation is online [S] 
We have a global consciousness [S] 
Nothing in life is static - everything moves very fast 
[S] 
Agility and adaptation will be key on the future job 
market [D] 
Picture 4.14: (Pexels.com, 2018)
Picture 4.15: (Pxhere.com, 2018)
==PAGE:54==
44
Future context
Preventive healthcare
Mental illness has consequences beyond the individual 
human suffering - it is a large economic burden for 
society. WHO reports that depression is the leading 
cause of ill health and disability worldwide, and that 
mental health problems are reported to represent 25% 
of the total economic burden (direct and indirect 
costs) of disease in Denmark. As we live longer and 
thus face an increase in spending on health care, 
we see a development towards prevention and not 
treatment, and more natural treatments over pharma. 
Backed up by evidence on faster recovery and fewer 
spending pr. patient, home treatment, and increasing 
and better lighting conditions using dynamic light is 
tested at hospitals and care centres these days.
Most patients with SAD have phase-delayed 
circadian misalignment [P] 
Being exposed to nature has a good health effect 
[P] 
Depression is the leading cause of ill health and 
disability worldwide [D] 
More light in hospitals means healthier patients [P] 
Non-intrusive and non-pharma treatment types are 
preferred [D] 
We face a booming economic burden of the older as 
we live longer [D] 
Mental health problems represents 25% of the total 
burden of desease in Denmark measured in direct 
and indirect costs [D] 
It is cheaper to treat people at home [T] 
Humans intuitively link light to mental and physical 
vitality [P] 
Dynamic LED lighting will change artificial lighting 
in homes and public places like hospitals [D] 
Picture 4.16: (Pxhere.com, 2018)
Picture 4.17: (Pxhere.com, 2018)
==PAGE:55==
45
Productivity push
The dogma seems to be that every minute of our 
lives should be productive and result in a measurable 
outcome. Even though we have increasingly more 
leisure time, it does not seem to make us relax more. 
This just frees more time that we must fill with 
activities we think society expects us to do. With only 
24 hours a day, compromising on sleep hygiene is 
a quick fix for having more hours for achieving all 
the things, we want to do. Non-productive activities 
seem ambiguous to us. Activities need to be rational 
and argued for, and non-activities of staring into a 
bright lamp seems irrational.
The position of the light source relative to the eye 
infl uences the eff ect of the light [P] 
We use substances and diets to eff ect how we 
perform and our health [D] 
People are exposed to less natural light [S] 
With the change of the labour market, work has 
become an indoor thing [D] 
Companies don’t want to hire mentally unstable 
people [S] 
People will have more leisure time [D] 
It is an advantage to be a morning person (larks) in 
the 9-17 society [S] 
The cognitive load of work has increased [D] 
Workplaces has an increased focus on work 
environment [D] 
Things should be rational and productive [S] 
Light therapy is a non-activity [S] 
We hate waiting [P] 
Time poverty: the more valueable our time is, the 
more we want out of it [D] 
Picture 4.18: (Pxhere.com, 2018)
==PAGE:56==
46
Future context
Symptoms of modern life
With our over-ambitious planning as a result of 
feeling the need to constantly stay productive, our 
body tells us that something is not right. But, instead 
of reacting upon this, we use substances, products 
and activities to suppress the needs of our systems, in 
order to be able to continue without having to adjust 
our behaviour: Coffee for being able to work while 
tired, sugary drinks, snacks and foods for boosting 
energy levels, alcohol for speeding up the evening 
relaxation process, sleeping pills to fall asleep, 
antidepressants in pill-form and holidays for charging 
our batteries. In addition, we do things, we know are 
not smart. We want to have fun. We stay up late in 
the weekdays watching TV, or gazing at our phones, 
which results in late bedtimes and too little sleep. 
During weekends we go even more crazy, drinking 
too much alcohol and staying up significantly later. 
Friday to Sunday are, for many people, used to catch 
up or letting out steam from the week. This shift in 
sleep-wake-rhythm results in a feeling of jetlag (social 
jetlag) at Monday mornings.
Ligh, and especially blue light, manipulates the 
circadian rythm by supressing the melatonin 
secretion [T] 
Darkness at night makes us tired [P] 
Light is the strongest method to synchronize the 
biological clock [P] 
There are many health risks involved in disrupting 
the circadian rhytm [P] 
Sleep patterns are important for our circadian 
rhythm [P] 
Light has an effect on our functions, feelings and 
health [P] 
You can’t put sleep in the fridge [S] 
Antidepressants use is on the rise [T] 
Almost a third of americans report trouble sleeping 
and trouble falling asleep [D] 
Weekends are for many for “catching up” what you 
haven’t done during the week [S] 
People care about their health and wellbeing [P] 
We want to have fun [D] 
Social Jetlag: We have quite different sleep scedules 
for weekdays and weekends disturbing our circadian 
rythms. This is particularly for adolesents [S] 
People use their devices all day and in the late 
evening [S] 
Picture 4.19: (Pxhere.com, 2018)
==PAGE:57==
47
You are in control
With the individualistic society, we have placed 
ourselves in the centre of our own lives. Institutions 
have fallen - making it possible for us to redefine 
ourselves by doing whatever we want, whenever we 
want. Along comes a ton of question and things, 
we need to deal with. Nothing seems stable and we 
question what already exists. We google symptoms 
before going to the doctor. We seek to enhance 
our physical performance with modern technology 
and DYI biology, buy dawn simulators for a better 
wakeup, and track our sleep with apps. We shape our 
homes with technology tailored around our needs 
and work flexible hours that fit our lives. We do not 
accept the existing state, we are in control.
Work is an activity - not a place [D] 
When people don’t know how things work, they will 
deem it hocus pocus [S] 
Work hours and meeting times are getting more 
flexible [D] 
Increased 
freedom 
and 
opportunities/choises 
makes it difficult to make a decision [T] 
We use lamps as well as lighting design for home 
interior design [S] 
Developed countries foster a more individualized 
culture [S] 
We enjoy finding shortcuts and feeling like we’re on 
top of something [P] 
People are curious and information-seeking [P] 
Citizens question authorities and take control over 
their own health [D] 
Bio-hacking is a movement of people improving the 
human condition using modern technology and DIY 
biology [T] 
Personalised treatments are getting more common 
[T] 
The digital home [D] 
Quantified self/lifelogging for an improved self [D] 
Voters are turning away from the classical 
established cetralised parties [T] 
Picture 4.20: Source: (Pxhere.com, 2018)
Picture 4.21: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018)
Picture 4.22: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018)
==PAGE:58==
48
Future context
Zapping
With a great number of possible activities to do, 
we expect things to happen on demand. Netflix has 
replaced flow TV, and we enjoy jumping from activity 
to activity with no strings attached. We do not want 
to own or possess things, but rather lease things for 
a short period. Contracts are formed instantly and 
without hassle or any significant binding. Actions 
overlap, and our attention span is very short. We use 
our smartphones while working, eat while watching 
TV and check Facebook while biking.
 
Zapping: the young generation enjoys jumping from 
activity to activity in a hedonistic way [D] 
Actions overlap [S] 
The on demand-regime [T] 
Picture 4.23: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018)
Picture 4.24: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018)
==PAGE:59==
49
Key dimensions
Each of the nine clusters describe a part of the future, we find relevant for the domain of managing 
your circadian rhythm with light. But, to create a coherent picture of this future context, the bonds 
connecting clusters are to be uncovered. This very complex process of structuring the clusters into a 
coherent framework has been done by discussing and challenging different underlying narratives and 
forces [A4.9]. Our two key dimensions are:
==PAGE:60==
50
Future context
Attitude towards daily life
How you manage your circadian rhythm, is closely linked to how you choose to live your life. On the 
one hand, we have individuals living life in a narrower perspective, trained and accustomed to making 
things work along the way. Actions are meaningful here and now, and urges account for a large part 
of the individuals’ choices (Symptoms of modern life). As the person rarely plans far in advance, 
elements accessible here and now are perceived of great value (Zapping and Comfort and stability). 
We call this motive behaviour reactive.
On the other hand, we have a group of people aiming to ensure that the right things happen by taking 
control (You are in control). These people think in longer perspectives and place prevention over 
repairing (Preventive healthcare). General wellbeing and happiness is valued over immanent urges, 
and stable progress trumps distractions and momentary volatility. We call this motive behaviour 
forward-planning.
YOU ARE IN 
CONTROL
BACK TO NATURE
PREVENTIVE 
HEALTHCARE
COMFORT AND 
STABILITY
ZAPPING
attitude towards daily life
forward 
planning
reactive
SYMPTOMS OF 
MODERN LIFE
Figure 4.4: Context structure dimentions: Attitude towards daily life with the clusters that make up each pole ot the 
dimension
==PAGE:61==
51
Motivational compass
How one responds to this external performance pressure of today’s society is, to us, highly related to 
one’s motivational compass. On the one hand, we see people placing themselves centre to decisions 
(You are in control), responding to own personal desires (Back to nature and Comfort and stability) 
and feeling empowered by the many possibilities of todays’ society (Zapping). These individuals are 
motivated for reasons such as interest, enjoyment and satisfaction - all intrinsic factors from within. 
We say that these individuals have a motivational compass oriented towards themselves.
 
On the other hand, we see a set of people with a very broad attention span. They define themselves 
as part of a bigger whole and have a broader social attention span (Global citizens). They care deeply 
about the opinion of others (Define yourself through others) - and are motivated extrinsically by 
rewards and/or fear of punishment. Productivity is a high priority (Productivity push) and actions 
should be rational and instrumental, with an outcome, others will ideally endorse and approve: e.g. 
“I’m doing sports to look good”. Activities are compared to others - and there is an underlying fear of 
missing out. We say that these individuals have a motivational compass towards others 
GLOBAL CITIZENS
DEFINE YOURSELF 
THROUGH OTHERS
SYMPTOMS OF 
MODERN LIFE
PRODUCTION PUSH
YOU ARE IN 
CONTROL
BACK TO NATURE
COMFORT AND 
STABILITY
ZAPPING
motivational compas
towards 
others
towards 
self
Figure 4.5: Context structure dimension: motivaitonal compass daily life with the clusters that make up each pole ot the 
dimension
==PAGE:62==
52
Future context
Context framework
The two dimensions form a framework with four different modes of managing daily life, and thus, we 
envision the way these would manage their life in regard to the circadian rhythm and light. The modes 
should not be regarded as “person types” in general, but instead modes of behaving within this specific 
context as well as possible directions for the project to pursue. The four modes are:
 
1. AUTONOMOUSLY VOLATILE - The reactive and self-focused mode
This behavioural type will be focused on their own situational needs. They aim to do the actions that 
fulfil their here-and-now desires, and will not stick to the ones that do not provide them a meaningful 
and pleasurable experience. 
2. SELF-INVESTED - The forward-planning and self-focused mode
These individuals are motivated by their own needs, desires and generally doing well for themselves. 
Time scope is wide, with personal goals set out in the future. This type will invest in sticking to the 
plan and is more robust to the process itself not always being enjoyable. 
3. FOLLOWING THE CROWD - Reactive and oriented towards others
The reactive and externally focused describes behaviour, where actions are initiated through 
spontaneous triggers from others. What to accomplish and achieve is born from the perception of 
what others might think, and life is lived through what the individual regards as normative behaviour.
4. COMPETING - Forward-planning and oriented towards others 
This represents the type, who finds it rewarding to achieve goals that they expect others to be impressed 
of. Daily actions are performed to reach the future goal and get recognition.
forward 
planning
towards others
reactive
towards self
attitude towards daily life
motivational compass
SELF-INVESTED 
taking care of yourself 
by planning and 
structuring daily life to 
meet personal goals
COMPETING
achieving what you 
think you should every 
day
FOLLOWING THE 
CROWD
structuring everyday 
life through normative 
behaviour
AUTONOMOUSLY 
VOLATILE
living daily life by 
doing actions you find 
pleasure in (in the 
moment)
Figure 4.6: Future 
context framework 
showing the four 
different modes
==PAGE:63==
53
Choosing direction
From the four types, we have chosen to design for the autonomously volatile, the reactive with the 
motivational compass pointed towards him/herself. Here is why: 
Follow the crowd and competition share being extrinsically motivated: Driven by what others do, or 
what they believe these others do or expect from them. Designing for their behaviour would either 
entail designing for others, for these to follow. Alternatively manipulating them to think differently 
of what these others do or think. Being driven by own needs might appear selfish. However, in the 
domain of managing your circadian rhythm with light, we see being able to listen to yourself and your 
own body as a strong quality. This is a feature we want to promote, and it constitutes a strong starting 
point for our design. 
Being forward-planning, you are less sensitive to volatility here and now, with the eyes fixed on the 
goal you have set. Less pleasurable interactions in the moment are endured. As of today, the forward-
planning would be able to use products currently on the market. The interaction is not pleasant, but 
it delivers the necessary amount of lux to stay afoot. This is not the case for the reactive, as interactions 
here and now should be satisfying. In addition, sticking to the plan is expected to be a challenge for 
the reactive. By designing for the reactive, the forward-planning are not excluded – as it would be the 
other way around. A pleasurable interaction is a need-to-have for the reactive to keep them motivated 
to continue use – and a nice-to-have for the forward-planning. 
Figure 4.7: The context framework with focus on the reactive nature while adding some of the good elements of the 
forward planning to support the reactive nature.
attitude towards daily life
forward 
planning
towards others
reactive
towards self
motivational compass
SELF-INVESTED 
AUTONOMOUSLY 
VOLATILE
By joining our key elements: the basic challenge of a very low awareness of the importance of light, 
the struggle of getting daylight as a part of modern life and designing for the reactive, we reach the 
following vision: 
==PAGE:64==
54
Future context
CONTEXT STATEMENT
forward planning
towards others
reactive
towards self
attitude towards daily life
motivational compass
Figure 4.8: The context framework 
with the context statement inside. 
“We want people 
to be able to easily 
incorporate bright 
light as a part of 
everyday life - while 
letting them explore 
and reconnect to 
natural daylight”
==PAGE:65==
55
Solution space
Time and place
As we aim to enable people getting their daily dose of bright light every day, we naturally face two 
key considerations: when and where. As far as bright light, we have two possible medias: The sun 
outdoors, bright light lamps exerting more than 1500 lux (Lam and Tam, 2009) or blue light lamps 
emitting 100-200 lux. As previously mentioned, work life occupies most daylight hours in northern 
latitudes. In Copenhagen, Denmark the sun rises a 8.38 and sets at 15.38 on December 21st 
(DMI, 2018). With most people working between 8-17, a natural light intake outside work hours 
mid-December is not possible and a great challenge in other winter months.
From our literature review, we know that bright or blue light therapy sessions should happen early 
in the day, preferably before noon. This leaves two apparent options of location; at home before 
leaving for work or at work itself. 
From our interviews with users [A3.8] and former users [A3.9], we learned that time is a scarce 
resource at mornings with a stationary 30-minute non-activity of receiving light therapy highly 
challenging to combine with busy, everyday life. In addition, the scarce time forces the intensity of 
the light up very high for users to reach their daily dose, resulting in an unpleasant light experience. 
The workplace however, has a good potential for being a part of this solution. First, it is the place 
where most people during the relevant time for getting bright light exposure. 
Secondly, people spend an extended period of time at same place. Being static at one place has the 
advantage, that bright light exposure does not need to be as short as possible, but could be stretched 
for a longer period. Stretching the exposure time opens for decreasing the light intensity from the 
lamp, making the experience more comfortable – know from our literature review.
In addition, placing a solution at the workplace opens for a normalizing effect. Although SAD 
might be the accepted type of depression or mental illness, it is still relevant to consider stigma 
related to SAD. We want to take light exposure out of the private sphere and into the semi-public 
sphere, hoping that it will become a more normal thing. Therefore, the surroundings at a workplace, 
consisting of other people, is an important element in trying to change the perception of light, lack 
of light and SAD. Because of the abovementioned potential, it has been chosen to focus on the 
workplace as the setting for the solution. 
Work
Naturally, work can be many different things with tasks and place of work differing greatly whether 
you work as a teacher, doctor or an accountant. In this context, we define work as office work, 
where people are working at a desk for longer periods of time. 
There is a trend going toward the idea that work is not a place, but an activity and that work, as well 
as work hours, get more and more flexible. But, we do not expect work to change dramatically 
within the next three years. Therefore, we adopt this traditional understanding of a job as a place 
you go to, to do work. 
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
INTERACTION AND 
PRODUCT QUALITIES
==PAGE:68==
58
Interaction and product qualities
INTERACTION QUALITIES
Having designed a context statement, next part of vision-forming is designing the human-product 
interaction, embodied in interaction qualities for our future product, service or product-service 
system. A large number of interaction qualities and analogies were explored [A5.1], with the chosen 
being the following:
The interaction with the product should be characterized by...
Flushness
The interaction should leave you with an experience of flow and smoothness without abrupt 
transitions, pointy peaks, sharpness and/or embarrassing and exposing moments. Like an interaction 
between two old friends who understand, accommodate and respect each other. The solution must 
respectfully and gradually find its place in your life and avoid coming out as being intrusive or blunt.
Elastic commitment
The interaction should feel like a positive commitment to yourself, that you respect. Key here is 
feeling understood and supported. Users are human and will make mistakes – and our solution 
should incorporate this and make room for some degree of understanding and flexibility. 
Exploration
We believe in an inner curiosity, and want to inspire and empower people to follow that drive and 
explore within their own pace. Rather than a push, the interaction should feel being presented with 
breadcrumbs and given a torch to go and explore. The interaction should feel layered and without 
dead ends.
Personal development
The experience should be tailored around you. One should lead his/her own exploration and it should 
feel like a process driven by own needs – and for yourself. You should feel like you are heading towards 
something – and doing good for yourself.
Fulfilment
We enjoy the feeling of accomplishment and although habit formation is of longer perspective, the 
day-to-day interaction with the solution should feel like an achievement. 
==PAGE:69==
59
Key analogy for interaction
We want the human-product interaction between users and product to be like the one of two friends : 
Picture 5.1:  The pictures shows two friends running – a visualization of the friend 
analogy.  
The good-friend analogy: 
A good friend that you’ve recently started running together with. You are friends outside this relation - 
and you feel committed. She is clearly a more trained runner than you - and acts like a non-judgemental, 
gentle pacer. With her, you forget time and place - and enjoy the situation itself. You enjoy that you 
are doing good for yourself - and valuate her helping you with setting programmes and appointments 
for running. Slowly, you will improve your running - but with bumps along the way. Some weekends, 
you are simply too hungover to run - or too busy with studies. She accepts this, but when the case, she 
suggests some home-exercises instead. They are not perfect, but you are still very happy to get them 
done. She accepts this. She is good at making you feel a sense of accomplishment along the way - as 
overall progress can be hard to track in the very situation. Knowing you, she adopts the programme as 
you become better. Slowly, running feels very natural to you. You might even that you miss it, when 
a workout is somehow skipped. Now the workout is almost automated. No need for appointment 
booking or such. She’s just there when you get out the door and you go for a run. 
==PAGE:70==
60
Interaction and product qualities
PRODUCT QUALITIES
The product should be
Grounded
As our solution is aimed at changing the well-established habits and daily routines of people, it must 
come out as being trustworthy, of weight and credible. In the vastness of today’s world – with a great 
number of decisions to be taken every day, the solution must not be easily pushed over, but feel solid 
and have a heaviness to it. Hocus-pocus or whimsicalness will leave people in doubt, compromising 
the impact, adaptation and spread of the solution.  
Open
To create an individual, adapted experience, the solution must act forthcoming, listing to you and 
your needs. There should be more than one way of doing things, having a non-rigid and flexible 
solution embracing the humanness and curiosity of users. Users should feel empowered rather than 
forced.
Supportively guiding
Although the solution should fit with your life, we are not aiming for a colourless, chameleon-type 
of solution, simply listening to your needs. We are not trying to blend in with the carpet, but design 
an ambitions and inspiring solution suggesting, guiding and reaching out to you in a respectful and 
motivating way. 
Passitonable
For an impact beyond the individual, we want our solution to possess the ability to be passed on to 
a good friend or colleague if wanted – if/when users have reached a certain confidence level of use. A 
central analogy is plant cuttings. When a plant has reached a certain size and level of development, 
small parts of its root or stem can be cut off and planted in a new environment. If the transition is 
successful and the environment is suitable, the plant cutting will grow independent of the parent, 
forming a new plant. 
Figure 5.1: Illustration of the plant analogy for pass-it-on-ability
==PAGE:71==
61
VISION
Context statement
“We want people to be able to easily incorporate bright light as a part of 
everyday life - while letting them explore and reconnect to natural daylight.”
Grounded
Open
Supportively guiding
Pass-it-on-able
Flushness
Elastic commitment
Personal development
Exploration
Fulfilment
Interaction qualities
Product qualities
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 6
CONCEPT
==PAGE:74==
64
Concept
CONCEPT VISION
As humans, we seem to have forgotten the importance of natural light to our wellbeing and health. 
With the following concept, we strive to reconnect people to the positive effect of (light) natural 
daylight by letting them curiously experience and explore this for themselves, while making sure, that 
they get the light they need to be at their best.
Although our higher-level goal is to get more people out in the sun - we are not blind to the fact 
that many people today and in the future, will have a hard time getting the recommended time daily 
outdoors while managing a busy everyday life. Particularly at higher latitudes, where work hours and 
the limited hours of sunlight in winters make getting enough sunlight a difficult challenge. We strive 
to meet people where they are, make sure that they get enough light - and slowly support and inspire 
them in getting it naturally – while providing people with an alternative for the times where going 
outside is simply not possible.
As a result, we do not want to judge right or wrong in terms of artificial and natural light - but rather 
see artificial light as a bridge to get people closer to, and to better understand the importance of 
natural light to their lives.
Two worlds meet
We fundamentally see everyday work-life in relation to getting bright light as two worlds: 1) indoors 
at workplace and 2) outdoors in natural light. 
Traditionally, bright light has been delimited to the second world; outside work hours. 
With our concept, we strive to bridge the two, by introducing bright light in a new context, the 
workplace, using an intelligent lamp concept – and empower users to explore and link the two worlds 
of artificial bright light and natural daylight. 
W
or
ld
 2
W
o
r
l
d
 
1
Natural light
User
Figure 6.1: Illustration of the two 
worlds, 1: Indoor at the workplace 
and 2: Outdoor
==PAGE:75==
65
Establishing the daily dose of light
As humans, we need a certain daily intake of light of light to avoid light depletion causing circadian 
misalignments. This threshold can be reached either through natural daylight, artificial bright light or 
by combining the two. In bright or very bright form.
As stated, our overall vision is to eventually have people receiving their daily dose naturally. But, 
with the current, very basic understanding of how light is linked to wellbeing, our first task is simply 
to ensure that people get their daily dose at all – and only then inspire people to get an increasing 
amount of their daily dose naturally. But how does one know what is enough? And can natural light 
and artificial even be combined? And what about strong and less strong light? One should not have 
to write a thesis for five months to understand what light is, or to get enough of it. Introducing: The 
daily dose of light 
The daily dose facilitates an easy understanding of light by simplifying needed light intake to a 
percentage needed daily to be at your best. Going from 0 to 100% and breaking the contribution 
from different sources, intensities and durations down to a simple number, we aim to make light as 
nutrient easier to understand.  
Figure 6.2 outlines the current situation for our target users, and our plan for change:
··
Current situation – lacking light: People are getting a fraction of what they need, being indoors 
all day, with the slight bit they get, being entirely from daylight. 
··
Intervention – getting your daily dose: Ensuring people get what they need by topping up their 
intake of natural light with artificial light
··
Overall goal: Having reached people, we aim to inspire to convert an increasing part of their daily 
dose to come from artificial to natural light – while accepting that sometimes artificial alone light 
is fine.
Figure 6.2: Daily dose of light illustration. Goal number one is making sure people get their daily dose of light. When 
reached, next goal is trying to inspire people to get as much of their dose naturally. 
==PAGE:76==
66
Concept
THE DAILY DOSE EXPLAINED
To be able to combine different intensities of light, a common denominator is needed. For that, we 
have adopted different intensity/duration ratios from literature: 
Intensity [lux]
Duration [minutes]
Dose [%]
10,000
30
100
6,000
90
100
*As research has not yet produced findings surpassing 10,000 lux (Eastman et al., 1998) or below 
1,500 lux (Lam, 2009), these values represent our top and bottom limits.
Simple example: 
Exposure to 18 minutes of 10,000 lux natural light and 13 minutes of 6000 lux will yield:
(18/30)*100 + (13/90)*100 = 60% + 14 % = 64 % of the daily dose
Table 6.1: Examples of different intensities of light and duration of light exposure to form a daily 
dose of 100%. 
==PAGE:77==
67
THE RECONNECT SYSTEM 
The Reconnect is an intelligent lighting system aimed to provide users with a pleasant, tailored and 
engaging experience while aiding them in reaching their daily dose and exploring the metrics of light. 
It is designed for the semi-public and professional environment of the workplace, with the overall 
interaction shaped to be flush, respectful and enable users to comfortably get the backup light, they 
need to be at their best. 
How users wish to get their daily dose is up to them, but the Reconnect strives to inspire and let 
people curiously explore the possibilities for how to get it, with an extensive configuration and a 
regular, honest communication with users, asking for manageable actions done and providing them 
with valuable feedback.
The Reconnect system it built from three elements; a light bar (the lamp), a light sensor (the clip) and 
a smartphone application (the app).
Figure 6.3 : The system consist of the three elements. 
==PAGE:78==
68
Concept
The light bar is an appealing, dynamic LED lamp 
designed for placement on your desktop. Upon request, 
it emits bright, blue-enhanced white light or “normal” 
warm light for regular work. It is powered from the 
plug - and connects wirelessly to the smartphone and 
to the clip using BLE. It has an on/off, connect, work-
light, daily dose button and pause/resume button.
The clip is a small, battery-powered light-sensor that 
can be discreetly clipped on to one’s clothes, and 
wirelessly transmit lux data points to a smartphone 
app using BLE. When not in use, the clip is stored and 
charged in a socket in the lamp.
The app is a smartphone app connected to the lamp 
and clip using BLE. It receives, stores and visualizes 
dose-preferences and data points from the clip as well 
as sends mode settings to the lamp.  
Functions in the system
The light bar is the most central artefact in our system, being placed on the desktop of users for them 
to interact with Monday to Friday at work. The fundamental task of the light bar is to top up the 
natural light intake of people with artificial, for them to reach their daily dose. 
In doing so, it needs to know how users prefer their session of artificial light and how much light they 
are currently managing to get naturally. In addition, we find it vital that explaining the use to others 
is simple, for users to comfortably introduce the bar at the workplace, where colleagues inevitably will 
be curious. For these purposes, the app and clip comes into play. 
System interactions
The Reconnect system has four central interactions.
1.	
An initial setup with configuration
2.	
An initial and recurring calibration
3.	
Daily use emitting the daily dose
4.	
The voluntary ability to pass on
==PAGE:79==
69
As visible, all artefacts are in place for the initial setup, the clip and app for the calibration, the light 
bar for daily use with the app being optional – and lastly the clip and the app in play for the voluntary 
ability to pass on-interaction
The following pages will explain for these key activities. As setup with configuration and calibration 
happens together, these are explained together. 
The initial setup
Configuration
People are different, and so is their desk setup and preference in how they would prefer to get their 
top-up of bright light in terms of distance, intensity and duration. 
Until now, light therapy devices have all been designed with a fixed, as-short-as-possible session 
duration with maximum intensity, for users to be able to finish the time-consuming sessions as fast 
as possible. But, by designing for the workplace, new possibilities arise. With people being stationary 
at their desk for multiple hours, we have the opportunity of rethinking sessions. With light intensity 
[lux] and duration [min] being interlinked, we have the possibility of designing stretched sessions of 
longer duration but with a lesser intensity. 
As a result, the Reconnect features an intelligent configuration using the app, lamp and clip, for users 
to, in an informed way, tailor their preferred light session. Some will favour short sessions of high 
intensity. Others longer with less bright light. In setting up, users will get to explore and understand 
the metrics and mechanisms of light therapy. 
System elements taking part in key activities 
Setup with 
configuration
Calibration
Daily use 
– the daily 
dose
The ability to 
pass on
The clip
x
x
x
The light bar
x
x
The app
x
x
(x)
x
Table 6.2 : The table shows what artefacts are in play for the four interactions. 
==PAGE:80==
70
Concept
Calibration
As the light bar acts as a top-up to provide users with the extra light they need on top of natural light 
to reach their daily dose, it is essential that the system knows how much light users are getting from 
the outside. A calibration is a 24-hour activity for users to track their natural light intake. During 
these hours, users are to wear a tie-bar-like clip, placed at the outer layer of their clothes which 
measures and records lux-values and sends it to the app. The clip is to be placed somewhat near the 
face of users to mimic a recording of what light meets the eye. While tracking, users are free to explore 
light – with the possibility of viewing real time lux-values on the phone. How bright is my office? 
How much can I get outdoors today? After wearing the clip for a day, users will get a report displaying 
obtained lux-values and a condensed percentage of how much of their daily dose, they currently 
receive naturally. This then acts as a baseline for the light bar to top up. Say a user gets 24% of his/
her daily dosis naturally, the bar will top up with the remaining 76%. The first calibration happens 
as a part of the setup.
How much exposure to natural sunlight people obtain daily is expected to differ widely over seasons. 
As a result, this baseline is to be calibrated occasionally – with recommended frequency being 
monthly. More invested users are free to choose a more frequent calibration. Besides of practical 
reasons, this recurring tracking enables users to understand and track developments in light intake – 
while reminding users of the possibility of getting bright light naturally. 
Figure 6.4 Light intake changes over 
the seasons. The illustration shows an 
example of how much people are ex­
posed to in the different times of year. 
 Natural light
Year
January
April
July
October
==PAGE:81==
71
THE INITIAL SETUP
When powered, all three elements are 
wirelessly connected with Bluetooth
The users are asked to wear the clip for an 
initial, perzonalised setup 
In the app, a setup guide starts and prompts 
users to power the lamp to interconnect all 
devices
The leaflet instructs the users to download the 
app to get started
Users unwrap their package containing the 
lamp, the clip and a leaflet
The system is sent to the users
3
5
6
4
==PAGE:82==
72
Concept
Having designed the daily dose session, users 
are asked to schedule a wearing of the clip 
for 24 hours for the system to get to learn the 
outdoors light behavior of the users
The lamp excerts the chosen lux-values for 
the users to experience and choose upon 
preference
At setup the users can design the daily dose 
session, experimenting with the interlinked 
lux-value and duration
The chosen setup of the daily session is stored in 
“Daily dose” in the app. This preference is sent to 
the lamp.
For a full 24 hours, the clip registers how much 
natural bright light the 
users are exposed to
A report of the natural light intake is presented 
to the users for them to 
approve
7
8
9
11
12
10
==PAGE:83==
73
The “Daily dose” in the app is now updated to 
include the user’s natural light intake. The app 
sends this update to the lamp
The users can accept the registered bright light 
as a fair representative of their current daily 
intake - or adjust if desired
Users are presented with the fact that natural 
light intake typically changes drastically over 
seasons.
As a result, users are asked to subscribe to a 
calibration of the natural light intake (step 11-
14) monthly. More frequent calibration is also a 
possibility.
The natural light intake is deduced from the 
planned daily dose of artificial light. This is 
presented to users on their app.
Daily dose =
 Artificial dose - natural dose
ex. 
30 minutes - 17 minutes = 13 minutes
*at 10.000 lux
The clip is simply slid into the lamp for charging.
13
14
15
17
18
16
==PAGE:84==
74
Concept
DAILY USE
At work, we have a great number tasks and things we need to do. Days can be eventful, and new 
habits hard to introduce. As a result, things must be lean, flush and easy: Not asking too much of the 
users. As a result, all preferences have been stored previously in configuration and calibration of the 
natural light intake. The system knows what you need and will only ask you to do one thing: Pressing 
a button to get what you lack. Having done that, the lamp will turn on, and gradually rise in intensity 
to the point of being at desired level. When away from the desk, users can pause and resume their 
session. When finished, the lamp will turn off with the same, gradual pattern. 
Upon having excerted the daily dose, the lamp 
will slowly turn to normal, warm light. When 
desired, it can be turned off
The daily dose is excerted. If users leave the 
desk, the lamp can be paused. 
The lamp slowly turns on, gradually rising in 
intensity untill it reaches the saved session 
preference
Once ready, users simply press the “Daily dose” 
button
Users arrive at their desk work and choose when 
they want to recieve their daily dose themselves
DAILY USE - THE DAILY DOSE
1
2
3
5
4
==PAGE:85==
75
THE ABILITY TO PASS ON
When introducing a new element to the semi-public space of the workplace, colleagues will 
undoubtedly be curious, and potentially even ask users what this lamp is. This forms is a unique 
opportunity for the knowledge about the importance of light to spread, if users feel comfortable and 
empowered in doing so. 
By defining the daily dose, we have aimed to make talking about light intake easier for users and the 
broad population in general: More about physiology and the understanding of light as a nutrient, less 
a forced talk about personal feelings and emotions.
But one thing is hearing about light – another is trying something on your own body. For this, we 
have incorporated a way for users to, if feeling comfortable with it, let a friend or close colleague try 
out a part of the Reconnect themselves in a simple, easy and completely free way. As the clip is not 
in use most of the time, with the average user expected to use it only once a month, we envision 
a scenario where it can be passed over – together with a trial version of the app for 24 hours. The 
recipient then becomes a user and wears the light tracker on the clothes, exploring the metrics of 
light – exactly like a calibration. Upon finishing the 24 hours, the new users will be presented his/her 
obtained percentage of the daily dose on the app – and the clip returned to the original user. 
The aim is to bridge the worlds of users and non-users in an engaging and impactful way potentially 
changing the attitudes, intentions or even behaviours of others in relation to getting their daily dose 
– while learning about the Reconnect. 
W
or
ld
 2
W
o
r
l
d
 
1
W
o
rl
d 
2
W
o
r
l
d
 
1
Natural light
User
Other people
Figure 6.5: Pass-on-ability in the Reconnect system lets other people interact with the system.
==PAGE:86==
76
Concept
THE ABILITY TO PASS ON
1
2
3
5
6
4
A link to download the app with  
limited features available is sent to their 
smartphone.
The clip is clicked out of the lamp and attached 
to the clothes. The desired trial period is chosen.
For a colleague to try out, they simply tap their 
number into your app. 
The app features a “let a colleague try out the 
clip”, as it for most users will reside in the 
lamp the majority of the time
The colleague wears the clip for the chosen 
period, tracking their light intake. Real time 
data is available
The colleague downloads the app via the link, 
and is allowed to connect to the users’ clip. 
==PAGE:87==
77
7
8
9
The colleague is then presented with an 
attractive offer on a Reconnect 
system with a limited time frame
The clip is returned to the lamp of the original 
users.
Upon ended trial, a report is displayed for the 
colleague, visualising how large a share of 
their daily dose, they managed to recieve. 
16%
==PAGE:88==
78
Concept
DESIGNED TO FIT AND GUIDE USERS
The full interaction with the is system designed to be flush and fit into the lives of users – while 
guiding and taking a leading role at certain times. As a result, we only want to induce a cognitive  load 
on users at strategic times. Figure 6.6 (curve) shows a stylistic curve of the aimed degree of imposed 
cognitive load for interactions mapped over time.
The largest cognitive load is placed on users in setup and configuration, where users are expected to 
be motivated, highly curious and willing to invest in making their solution work. This is also where 
all artefacts of the system come in play, and users are asked to perform the first, initial calibration. For 
daily use, focus has been on creating a simple interaction for users to be able to easily perform without 
having to deal with many decisions. 
Having recurring calibrations, we wish to stay relevant for users, providing them with insights about 
their behaviour – while inspiring them to seek outdoors. 
Figure 6.6: wwIllustration of the cognitive load on the user. 
Setup
Calibration
Figure 6.7: Concept drawings of the light bar and the clip 
==PAGE:89==
79
VISION-DRIVEN EMBODIMENT DECISIONS 
In forming our design, we have faced multiple open-ended decisions [A6.1-6.5]. A central conflict has 
been a clash between features of strong theoretical potential and our vision. The following presents 
two examples of decisions, where our vision has aided us in navigating design. 
Embodiment of lamp: Efficiency and placement
In our final design, our lamp has a dense and low, bar-like, triangular body with a low centre of gravity 
and an illuminating-surface reaching the eye of users from below. It is designed to come out as solid, 
of weight and express a here-to-stay-ness while complying with the flow of a typical desk setup yet 
opening for some placement flexibility. But the way there proved challenging.
In exploring constraints of our design, we studied the physiology of the eye, and found that there is 
a difference in effect of bright light, depending on the angle of the light source. Light induced from 
above has a stronger therapeutic effect, as the rays hit the more sensitive lower part of the retina in 
the eye [A6.6]
Wanting maximum effect, we initially went with this upper positioning [A6.7], but found that it affected 
our design and thus product interaction significantly. The lamps were too dominating, whimsical or 
unstable. And with the top-placement, the lamp suddenly called for a lot of attention from colleagues. 
This conflicted with our vision of a flush interaction of individual nature, compromising whole idea 
of designing a product for the reactive. Going with a if no one wants to use it, no one will benefit from 
it-approach, we decided not to harvest the extra physiological benefit from a top-placement, but let 
our vision drive embodiment.
Light source – blue or bright white light?
With our vision, we aim to reconnect people to the importance of natural light. And with our concept, 
we wish to bridge this understanding with artificial light. Our final solution features white light, but 
another option was in play: Blue light.  

From our literature review and from products currently on the market, we learned that blue-light 
around the wavelength of 460 nm is particularly potent. With much lesser intensities of pure, blue 
light emitted (100-200 lux), indications of strong results in terms of SAD remission had been reached. 
Blue light could have been chosen as a medium for assisting people in getting their daily dose. But 
would they then have understood the link between this, highly artificially natured blue light and the 
natural daylight light outdoors? We believe that the link would have been much more challenging to 
explain to, and thus understand for users, compromising our vision of reconnecting them. As a result, 
the blue light was dropped. 
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 7
VALIDATION
==PAGE:92==
82
Validation
TESTING
Early validation is key when designing or developing innovative products and services for futures 
where market data is imperfect. Will the concept service the needs, the users have? Will they perceive 
it of value? Will use be as we pictured? 
The purpose of testing with potential users is to get important feedback and insights, uncover 
problems and opportunities and to understand if the proposed design fits the needs of the users. At 
this stage in the process, our tests have been designed to contribute to the further design generation 
and to evaluate the main assumptions in our concept. The tests have been conducted with low fidelity 
prototypes – rough representations of the concept elements and interface style. In our experience, 
low-fi prototypes tend to have people being more honest – as an advanced rendering or 3D-printed 
mock-up might signal being finished and not being open to fundamental critique. In addition, low-fi 
tests are cheaper and faster to conduct – still can, if conducted correctly, still provide designers with 
valuable insights. We have conducted two types of test:
1	 The concept test: Testing the full Reconnect concept in situ with two potential users
2	 The clip test: Testing the pass-it-on-ability with eight participants 
THE CONCEPT TEST
Visiting two potential users at their workplace. Each participant was presented with the overall idea, 
presented with the daily dose and guided through a task-centred walkthrough of the four key scenarios 
in the concept using a simple set of prototypes. The light bar was represented with a simple cardboard-
made lamp with a powerful, dimmable light bulb. The clip was a non-functional modified hair-clip 
and the app a simple “clickable” paper prototype with frames each step. After the walk-through, the 
light bar prototype was tested at the workplace of the participants – with inclusion of a colleague in 
testing in one of the cases. A more detailed overview of the test setup can be found in appendix [A7.1] 
and individual responses on appendix [A7.2] and [A7.3].
Key investigation points were: 
··
Do people find the system valuable? 
··
Are people willing to introduce light therapy to their workplace in this form?  
··
Will people share with others? 
Picture 7.1: Concept testing. The 
user is setting her daily dose pref­
erences
==PAGE:93==
83
CONCEPT TEST 1: BENTE
Bente was visited at her workplace, Gladsaxe Municipality in work hours. Here, the engineer suffering 
from SAD works in an open office. Bente uses light therapy at home in mornings – and works 
from home every Wednesday 8-12 to be able to get her light therapy. Bente was recruited through a 
Facebook-post from DepressionsForeningen.  We did a simulation of the key activities in the system 
and tested at the desk of Bente. The test subject was here asked, which of her colleagues, she would 
want to refer this to (pass-on-ability). Iver, her colleague, was recruited and asked a few questions.
Feedback and findings
··
The dim-ability of the lamp was the key selling point for the test subject, stating a direct 10,000 
lux lamp would bother her colleagues – and with her sitting at her desk for hours, this made great 
sense
··
It was perceived of great value that the lamp took charge and daily use was simple. Bente stated 
that she would never wear the clip on a daily basis: “It takes up cognitive resources to pay attention to 
those kind of things”. It is relevant for the recurring calibration day as well – the system should not 
rely on the user to remember when to track, but remind the user when the day is near.
··
The feedback and overview of how much light she had gotten was perceived of great value for the 
test subject, stating that she would love to know how much light she actually gets.
··
Bente highlighted liking that the light slowly increases in intensity, when turning on – stating that 
this give her eyes time to get use to the light 
··
The light bar was placed at the desk below the computer screen by the user, and the size, the shape 
and the placement was well received: “I like this one, it’s relatively robust”, “The tall ones are hard 
to place at the table relative to the screen.”. Bente placed her lamp immediately below her screen. 
··
Tracking (during calibration) for 24 hours is a bit too short, because days differ quite a lot. “I 
would track for two days”
··
To Bente, the recurring calibrating would provide an overview of how the light changes outdoor, 
and the need for compensation for that, indoor: “You will be able to see it for the entire year. At 
some point, you will learn (how your light intake changes)”. The frequency of recurrent calibrations, 
could be customized. Calibrating daily or weekly would be too frequent, but it should be more 
often than every month, because the outdoor light changes fast, Bente said stating that she would 
calibrate every second week. 
··
“The work desk can get crowded, you should take care not to pile up stuff in front of it” 
··
Bente envisioned that the small clip could get lost at the work desk or be left on the jacket after 
tracking. Since it’s not supposed to be worn that often, it does not need be neutral or “invisible”. 
··
The colleague Bente “referred the clip to”, Ivar, felt a need to “take action” when we said (for the 
sake of the reaction) that he did not get his daily dose of light. However, it was unclear to him 
why he should get more light, or what the consequences of not getting enough. He does not feel 
particularly more tired or affected of other symptoms in wintertime: “I have small kids – I’m always 
tired”
··
For Bente, having light therapy on the workplace did not constitute a problem.
==PAGE:94==
84
Validation
··
Having an automatic BLE on/off function for when leaving the desk during sessions did not make 
sense for Bente as she often leaves her phone at the desk – and switches of her Bluetooth for energy 
saving. She preferred a simple pause-button.
In general, the concept was highly well received by Bente, who proceeded to talk to other colleagues 
about the daily dose. Bente said that she wanted a Reconnect, when/if it reached the market. Reflecting 
on our own feelings when testing, it felt much easier to explain the concept to the colleagues of Bente 
with the daily dose rather than having to explain winter depression and sadness. 
Picture 7.2: Pictures from the concept test with Bente at her workplace
==PAGE:95==
85
CONCEPT TEST 2: KATRINE
Katrine was visited at her workplace, Aalborg University Copenhagen. Here, Katrine suffering what 
would be perceived at a mix of sub-SAD and winter tiredness works in an open office. Katrine owns 
a light therapy lamp – but has had a hard time combining it with work since the graduated and 
started working full-time. She has now gotten a dawn simulator alarm for her to wake up easier. 
Katrine was recruited four months prior to the interview through a Facebook-post. The test process 
was very like test 1 with Bente, although the colleagues of Katrine had left work at the time of 
interview. 
Findings and feedback
··
An opportunity was seen in integrating the use with a light therapy lamp at home. “Knowing that 
I got 20 min at home, I would just need to get 10 min at min workplace” 
··
There is a communication task in explaining how light should reach the eyes, and that the light 
sensor in the clip should be placed close to the eyes. When Katrine was told to put on the clip, she 
said; “Where should I put it - on the finger? I thought it might measure something”
··
The frequency of recurrent calibrations: “At least once a month or every second week, depending on 
how much the weather changes.”
··
It was found valuable, that the system tracks throughout the season. Katrine suggested an intelligent 
system getting to know the user and automatically adjusting the daily dose to fit the needs of user 
better, year after year. “It would be nice, if it could phase out automatically (in spring)”
··
Size and placement was well received: “It’s a good size - It fits on the table under the computer screen.”
··
Katrine stressed that it should not be too complicated to operate the functions on the light bar 
without the smartphone. 
In general, Katrine was very interested in the concept and would have bought one for her workplace, 
if it was on the market. In its form, Katrine had no problems with introducing it to the workplace 
stating that she would briefly clear light intensities with her colleagues. 
To Katrine, the system would provide value in being tailored to her needs and preference – especially 
in terms of light intensity and duration. 
“It would make it easier to use it, and to remember to use it.”
Picture 7.3: Katrine try­
ing out the light bar at 
her work desk
==PAGE:96==
86
Validation
OVERALL FINDINGS FROM CONCEPT TESTS
··
Overall, very well received with users very confident in introducing the system to the workplace 
– stating state that they would be considerate and engage in a conversation with colleagues about 
the intensity of the light.  
··
Size, form and placement is well received
··
There is a risk, that the clip gets lost – it could have noticeable design
··
Being able to adjust the daily dose is good, especially for changing days (sometimes people have 
meeting, sometimes they are stationary all day)
··
Letting people know how much light they actually receive made a great difference for the users
··
The frequency of recurrent calibration should be customizable or more often than every month 
(e.g. every second week)
··
It is important to communicate the physiological effect of the light and the reasons for wearing 
the clip close to the eyes
··
It is preferable to allocate many functions to system, so that the user is not burdened with too 
many tasks. However, it is important to keep the interface options simple and let the user operate 
the light bar without using their smartphone
Picture 7. 4: Katrine wearing the clip during the concept testing. 
==PAGE:97==
87
THE FULL-DAY CLIP TEST
A key part of our system is the clip, designed to be used for exploring the light emitted from the lamp 
during setup, in the recurring calibration - as well as for if users want to let a friend or colleague try 
it to map out their intake of light. But will use happen as we have envisioned, does it have an impact 
and does the embodiment work for people? In trying to understand this, we have designed a full-day 
test involving simple prototypes and eight users. Key investigation points were: 
1	 Are there any practical or social issues with wearing a light-tracker for 24 hours? 
2	 How do users feel when confronted with the end-result; the overview of their daily light intake? Is 
the attitude and/or intention of users changed?
3	 How can the concept embodiment be refined?
As having actual light trackers would be a costly affair - both in terms of time and money, we created 
very simple non-electronic prototypes of the clip (a hair-clip and a laser-cut front) and imitated the 
readings, it would have produced if working. In short, we gave out eight clips to eight people for 
them to wear the following day. During this wearing, they were to note their thoughts on issues with 
wearing the clip, take a picture of how they wore it and lastly note their exposure to outdoors daylight. 
All eight were desk workers. The following day, they were interviewed and confronted with their 
ratings of how much their daily dose, they had managed to get – and asked how the presented data 
made them feel. Lastly, they were asked on their thought about the design. A detailed overview of the 
setup can be found in appendix [A7.4] and individual responses on appendix [A7.5]
Picture 7.5: Self-taken pictures of users wearing their clip. As two of our eight participants forgot to wear their given 
clips the following day, their pictures are naturally not here. 
==PAGE:98==
88
Validation
Key takings and insights 
ON PRACTICAL CONCERNS
··
One user reported the clip scratching him on the neck – and another reported that the clip was 
hard to fit on her thick sweater. The future design must accommodate for multiple types of clothes 
and ensure a comfortable wearing
··
Size and dimensions were generally well received. Received conflicting feedback on the colouring. 
A user wanted a more professional look for it to blend in - but others a more noticeable look. “As 
I am only going to wear it for one day, it does not need to blend in completely”, one user stated. 
This user also briefly forgot his clip in his jacket when he arrived at his office. Further test with a 
broad set of users advised.
··
Instant feedback was wished by one user stating that he would have liked 
to know if it was logging or not. The future design must include real-time 
reading on the smartphone for the user to know if and what it is reading
Two of the users simply forgot to wear the clip on the test-day. The one was a man, we met a DTU 
but no other relationship with. The other one reported that his morning was quite busy. Some 
users will inevitably forget the clip. A simple reminder from the app could be incorporated to 
remind users to wear it the morning of their test day. 
ON SOCIAL CONCERNS
··
In terms of social concerns, the wearing the clip itself generally did not constitute a problem 
for users. Only one reported feeling a bit weird wearing it. No colleagues commented on it. 
Colleagues either did not notice, noticed and did not comment – or curiously asked what it was.
Picture 7.6: The clip that people wore on the test day. 
==PAGE:99==
89
ON THEIR REACHED PERCENTAGE OF DAILY DOSE/ATTITUDE OF USERS
··
People generally reacted in the same pattern: They felt bad when confronted with how little light, 
they had managed to get out of their daily dose (Only one user got over 27%). “Looks like I am 
lagging”, was a common first response of people. Following reactions were:
››
Despair: “I know that I should get more – but my job does not really allow for it”
››
Talking to colleagues about it: One user had a talk about light with a colleague and 
decided to go for a long walk the following day in their lunch break.
››
Distrust towards calculations: “I do not really believe that I got zero light. It must 
have some weight, that I have been sitting need the window, and have been sitting 
in an office with. But it certainly does not feel nice with the 0% stamp”, one stated. 
Two others had initially included minutes from driving and sitting in a window 
eating lunch. When confronted with it not counting, they stated that that was silly.
··
All users stated a positive attitude towards getting more light, but most of them not knowing how: 
“But honestly, what can I do about it? What is the alternative when you are at work? I am not sure 
I will be able to get the light on my way to and from work” one user stated.  
ON THE CLIP BEING GIVEN TO THEM BY A FRIEND
··
Test subjects very widely stated that it was of great importance that it was a product given to them 
by a person they knew well and trusted. “It felt like you had vouched for it”, one stated. 
Implications from here
Until now we have adopted an organic view on the link between duration and intensity – with a low 
threshold of 1500 lux known from our literature review. Light below this threshold was considered 
non-useful. But as we see, our users disagree – finding sitting near windows or driving their car on 
a sunny day highly rejuvenating. As a result, we need to adopt a more nuanced view of light intake.  
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 8
REFLECTION
==PAGE:102==
92
Reflection
PROCESS REFLECTIONS 
In this part, we will present some key reflections about our process carried out in this development 
project. They are structured according to the phase in ViP, they relate to. 
Deconstruction: 
When deconstructing the human-product interaction in ViP, designers are encouraged to observe 
users interacting with the existing solution (whether product or service) and try to boil the interaction 
down to five interaction qualities covering the perceived interaction experience (Hekkert and van 
Dijk, 2011). 
For light therapy lamps, simply observing users turned out challenging for a few reasons: 
1) Use happens at home and at odd hours:  Using a LT lamp is typically not something people do in 
public - but in the comfort of their homes. In addition, use typically happens in the mornings further 
complicating observations as strangers are not typically welcomed in our homes at those hours. 
2) Stigma: It was assumed that it would be challenging to discuss the use of LT in the public, because 
of stigma related to mental health issues. These were the main reasons for conducting the exploratory 
study with inspiration from cultural probes, where the users could gather the data for us themselves. 
In that way, we were able to get input from the users without being in their living rooms. However, 
a limitation of this collection method is that you are only able to access the thoughts, that the user 
chooses to articulate, whereas e.g. observations can uncover ways of acting and patterns of behaviour, 
that the user is not necessarily aware of. 
The insights from the user studies were very valuable for our understanding of the current interaction. 
However, in retrospect it can be argued that these could have been conducted in the future context 
phase instead of in the deconstruction phase. Having completed the entire process, we have gotten to 
the understanding that the most important part of the design process is to design the future context. 
Finishing the deconstruction phase rather quickly, instead of spending 3-4 weeks on it as we did, 
would leave more time to go into depth with the future context. By conducting user studies in the 
future context phase, it would also be more specified, what is being investigated. 
For our project, it was valuable to explore broadly and develop a deep understand of the human-
product interaction early in the project, but for other projects using ViP, this is not necessarily the 
case. 
Future context
Collecting and synthesizing a vast number of context factors takes and lot of time, and it takes 
several iterations in order to see the patterns and uncover the meaning of the context. Handling the 
complexity of, at some point, 160 different context factors made it clear that for structuring these, 
two criteria were important: 1) all factors should be gathered and updated in the same location, 2) the 
factors should be visible and tangible in order to get an overview of them. Unfortunately, these two 
criteria are somewhat conflicting. It is very difficult to get a valuable or inspiring overview in an excel 
sheet. However, it is also very time consuming to add pictures, and print context factors on paper, 
every time changes are made. We used Google Sheets for an updated library of context factors and 
the programme InDesign to set up the “physical” factor cards. In the end, a rather automated way of 
merging the data from the data sheet into InDesign for printing was figured out. 
For future projects, we would recommend that an automated way of handling the data is designed, 
before starting to collect the context factors. 
==PAGE:103==
93
Interaction and product qualities
Having defined the context statement, the next step is to design the future interaction. Designing 
the future interaction is highly based on the way the designer wishes the future interaction to be. 
Though certain parts of the vision have already been established and can guide the designer in how 
the future interaction should be, intuition and gut feeling plays a big part of this step. To an extent it 
came down to how we would like this interaction to be experienced by the user. In our process, the 
future interaction and future product phases were conducted simultaneously, iterating back and forth 
between interaction qualities and product qualities.
Though we were both agreeing on, what kind of interaction and product qualities we were designing, 
we found it challenging to nail down the qualities of the experience and the product using words. 
Choosing to work with a painting analogy helped. 
What we think, could have eased this step was to use images, mood boards and other ways of defining 
the qualities that were quite clear in our minds, but not easy to capture and articulate semantically. 
Concept:
Having the interaction qualities and product qualities defined, the conceptualization begins. As have 
been mentioned, the conceptualization in ViP is performed within a rather narrow solution space. 
The proposed ideas and concepts for the future product are measured against the vision to see if it 
fits or not. For the conceptualization and for choosing a concept, working with a vision was very 
useful. From our experience, it was clear to tell if a product or interaction proposal was “flush” or if 
it lived up the idea of reconnecting people to the natural light.  
General/planning
All phases in the process were completed successfully with the outcome of a strong vision and an 
innovative concept. However, we had expected to be able go a further in the detailing and testing 
of the concept. Because we are novices in using this methodology, we had no former experience to 
lean on when allocating time to the different phases of the process. An optimistic plan was set forth, 
because our strong wish to be able to test the final concept. Adding to that, a vast amount of time 
was spent reading about, understanding and discussing the steps and activities in the method before 
applying them. Now we know, that it takes more time to reach the point of having a final concept 
with this method. 
Figure 8.1: Process  illustration showing the different phases in our project 
Plan 
Future context 
Vision 
Domain 
Context statement 
Interaction qualities
Product qualities 
Concept 
Validation
Literature 
review 
Deconstruction
Future 
interaction 
Future 
product
Concept 
and 
detailing
Context 
factors
Conceptualization
Detailing
Concept 
choice
Context 
framework
Product 
level
Context 
level
Clusters
Interaction 
level
==PAGE:104==
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 9
DISCUSSION AND 
CONCLUSION
==PAGE:106==
96
Discussion and conclusion
DISCUSSION
This chapter will discuss the result of the project, evaluating our concept against our vision– while 
incorporating results from validation. In addition, we discuss limitations and further work. 
The concept itself
We have developed a solution aimed to help people get their daily dose of light while aiming to 
reconnect them to experiencing light as a means to do good for themselves. Key here has been 
introducing the solution to the workplace, making it easier and less obstructive to incorporate light 
therapy as a part of everyday life. For this, we have included non-users in our systems design – 
understanding that the opinion of others will affect if users will feel comfortable in introducing the 
solution to the workplace. First, by designing a flush system, that would not draw upon too much 
attention – and secondly by making light therapy easier to explain to colleagues by introducing the 
notion: the daily dose. In addition, we have tried to bridge the gap between users and non-users by 
incorporating the ability to pass on the clip to a friend or close colleague. From testing, this was 
impactful, with seven out of eight stating that tracking their daily dose had them change attitude 
towards light intake. 
For individual users, we have aimed to have them educate themselves about the metrics of light as a 
part of setup, configuration and their recurring calibration. This with the primary objective of them 
experiencing use as an individual experience – and secondary for them to learn and understand the 
metrics of light and link natural light and the light emitted at their desk. Having designed a system of 
highly open nature, merely confronting users with natural light and the possibilities of getting it, we 
do not know if our system will make people get more daylight. For this, the system is simply designed 
to trust the curiosity of people and a preference for natural daylight over artificial. 
Contributions
Offices and work hours are designed in such a way, that a natural light intake is very difficult in 
northern latitudes during winter time. But what if a debate on light intake was raised – potentially 
changing how we perceive light. By designing a solution for the semi-public sphere of the workplace, 
and facilitating pass-it-on-ability, we have aimed to make taking about light intake more open and 
natural. And by designing the daily dose, we have aimed to have the debate being objective, framing 
light as a nutrient and less about light in relation to mood and feelings.  
Contribution to Nilotech
For Nilotech, we have delivered a complete vision as basis of an extensive gathering, selecting and 
synthesising culminating in an interaction-driven concept. Having the interaction as well as a well-
articulated vision, the further work of detailing and selecting technical components for the solution 
can be mapped against these: “Would this material express grounded-ness? Or would these steps in the app 
be flush?”. For a young company, having a vision holds a direction, and can be used as a guideline for 
future development – as well as for other, future products.
==PAGE:107==
97
LIMITATIONS FOR THE SOLUTION
The limitations for the solution will be discussed in this part. 
Cultural differences
The technical and scientific foundation for this project is based on leading international research. The 
wide search for context factors about health, work, light etc. was performed with an international 
focus as well. The user insights were, however, gathered in Denmark because of practical reasons 
such as available time and resources for the project. The concerns and beliefs might be different for 
users from other cultures. For instance, we found that in Denmark, SAD is a well-accepted type 
of depression. From the testing, we also found indications for, that introducing bright light at the 
workplace would not pose a problem. Both conditions could be different in other places with other 
work cultures and a different structure of hierarchy, aspects of openness and trust at the workplace. 
These aspects should be investigated further before expecting to develop products for other markets.  
Attitude, intention and behaviour change 
In the clip-test simulating the pass-on-ability, the participants were introduced to the notion of the 
daily dose and given a simulated percentage of how much of the dose they had reached on the test day. 
When confronted with our statement of how much light they had received, most expressed a wish to 
take action in some way and to learn more about the conditions for a good light intake. We interpret 
this as good prospects for the passing on create more awareness about light by changing the attitude 
towards light as a physiological need. But, as we know from the Theory of Planned Behaviour (Ajzen, 
1991)1985, 1987, it takes more to change behaviour than just a change of attitude. Therefore, it is not 
possible to say if the attitude change will affect an intention of acting or changing behaviour. 
Weekends?
The Reconnect system has been designed for stationary placement at the workplace. This implies that 
people cannot get their top up of artificial light from the light bar, when they not at work, e.g. in 
weekends. One of the core parts of the Reconnect vision is, that we wish for people to eventually get 
more of the natural light by going outdoors – but not forcing them to do so. As a result, we hope that 
the weekends could be an opportunity for people to choose to go outdoors to get their daily dose, 
based on the gained awareness of the importance of light. 
Target users and daily dose
Throughout the project, the potential users to the solution have been a scattered group of people 
wanting to manage their circadian rhythm with light – that being SAD sufferers, sufferers of the 
milder sub-SAD or people who experiencing general winter fatigue. But by including colleagues and 
friends in our solution, by featuring the pass-on-ability, we also open for people who do necessarily 
experience any of the symptoms. There are benefits for getting enough light every day for all three 
groups, but these differ. Some of the participants from the clip-test did not experience changes in 
their energy levels and did not feel clear consequences of not getting enough light in the winter 
months. When confronted with having reached zero percentage of their daily dose, they were sceptical 
towards the construct of the dose, because they reported “not feeling that bad”. This lead us rethink 
our design of the daily dose. The dose has been designed based on existing research on light levels 
needed for circadian entrainment. It shows, that the eyes should be illuminated with 1500 lux in 
order to synchronize the circadian rhythm (Lam and Tam, 2009) therefore this low threshold was 
adopted for the daily dose design with the idea, that people should get bright light above 1500 lux 
every day. On the day, that people were wearing the clip, we measured the illuminance level outdoor, 
which did not exceed 500 lux. This meant, that we would have to tell every participant, regardless 
==PAGE:108==
98
Discussion and conclusion
of how much time they had spent outdoor, that they had reached 0% of their daily dose. That made 
us realise, that the clean-cut threshold of 1500 lux, did not necessarily work well for communicating 
the solution to everyone. As confirmed by some of the participants, people do feel an immediate 
effect from being in light –  below 1500 lux – and if you tell them, that this physiologically does 
not matter, it does not seem trust-worthy. Therefore, a way of communicating the daily dose to 
these different types of users with different needs should be refined – potentially changing ways of 
communication if addressing non-users of light therapy. Briefly, it is suggested to look further into 
the Circadian Stimulus Calculator [Appendix reference], a tool developed to define circadian stimulus 
form different light sources. 
Further work 
Testing:
··
Testing the placement of bright light at the workplace includingvery bright light, with a focus on 
colleague acceptance.
··
Further test and development of simple app-wireframes
··
Refine communication when having non-users try the clip for 24 hours. They should not be met 
with a mere 0%, but be delivered valuable and engaging insights
··
Consider a corporation with the start-up LYS focusing on light tracking with a wearable
==PAGE:109==
99
CONCLUSION
The aim of this thesis has been to reframe light therapy for everyday life by developing a vision and 
a concept based on this vision for Nilotech using the process of Vision in Design. 
We have developed a complete vision, driving the development of an innovative concept based on 
in-depth research, involvement of a large number of relevant stakeholders and highly challenging, 
complex and open-ended process of synthesis. Driven by this vision, we have managed to design 
a smart light concept for people to, in an easy and comfortable way, get their daily needed 
supplementary light at the workplace – while being empowered and supported in exploring and 
discovering the metrics of light. Key has been defining the daily dose of light, enabling users to 
combine natural daylight and artificial light as well as different intensities of light in a simple and 
understandable way. This has enabled users to customize how their daily supplement of light should 
be delivered, making way for longer sessions of lesser intensity, highly suitable for the stationary 
nature of traditional desk work common for many people. In addition, the notion, “the daily 
dose”, has made light therapy easier to talk about, coining light as a basic human need rather than a 
treatment for the ill. 
From our validation with potential users, the concept received highly positive feedback with both 
test subjects wanting one for their workplace. 
==PAGE:110==
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 10
REFERENCES
==PAGE:112==
102
References
LIST OF FIGURES, TABLES AND PICTURES
In this list, references can be found for all figures, tables and pictures, which has been sourced from 
others. All the material, figures, tables and pictures, that is not listed here has been produced by us.
Figure 1.1: Vision in Design model sourced from (Hekkert and van Dijk, 2011) The ViP 
model. Printed in (Hekkert and van Dijk, 2011) Hekkert, P. and van Dijk, M. (2011) 
Vision in Design - A guidebook for Innovators. BIS Publishers.
Figure 2.1: The human circadian rhythms. Source: (Nobelprize.org, 2017) Illustrator: 
Mattias Karlén, 2017. The circadian clock anticipates and adapts our physiology to the 
different phases of the day. Available at: https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/
laureates/2017/press.html [Accessed 24.01.18].
Figure 2.2: Signal pathway of light into the Suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). The SCN 
controls the secretion of melatonin and signals to the Pineal gland to release the hormone. 
Source: (Gatewaypsychiatric.com, 2017) Light pathways to pineal. Available at: https://
www.gatewaypsychiatric.com/melatonin-and-sleep/ [Accessed 24.01.18]
Figure 2.3: Fluctuations in melatonin levels over 24-hour period. Source: 
(Gatewaypsychiatric.com, 2017) Melatonin and sleep.[electronic print] Available at: https://
www.gatewaypsychiatric.com/melatonin-and-sleep/ [Accessed 20.01.18]
Figure 2.4: Phase shift with morning and evening exposure as measured by dim light 
melatonin onset (DLMO). Reproduction of figure from (Lam and Tam, 2009) Lam, R. 
W. and Tam, E. M. (2009) A Clinician’s Guide to Using Light Therapy.
Picture 2.1: A person sitting in front of a light therapy lamp (light box). Source: 
(Brighteyourlife.info, 2018) Image of man seated, reading a magazine while facing toward 
a light box for bright. Available at: http://www.brightenyourlife.info/ch2.html [Accessed 
04.01.18]
Picture 3.1: Light therapy lamp. Source: (verilux.com, 2018) HappyLight Deluxe Light 
Therapy Lamp. Available at: https://verilux.com/store/happylight-deluxe-light-therapy-
lamp [Accessed 04.11.17]
Picture 4.7: Source: (Pexel.com, 2018) Miguel Constantin Montes, 2018. Available 
at: 
https://www.pexels.com/photo/close-up-of-fresh-green-plant-246538/ 
[Accessed 
20.01.18]
Table 2.1: Data retrieved at (Engineeringtoolbox.com, 2018) Engineeringtoolbox.com 
(2018) Outdoor Light Levels. Available at: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/light-level-
rooms-d_708.html [Accessed 08.01.18].
FIGURES
TABLES
PICTURES
==PAGE:113==
103
Picture 4.8: Source: (Pxhere.com, 2018) Available at: https://pxhere.com/en/photo/1110440 
[Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.9: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018) Available at: https://www.pexels.com/photo/autumn-dawn-
daylight-environment-401080/[Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.10: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018) Available at: https://www.pexels.com/photo/coffee-cup-
notebook-pen-64775/ [Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.11: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018) Available at: https://www.pexels.com/photo/woman-in-
black-and-white-striped-long-sleeved-top-holding-white-ceramic-plate-698166/ [Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.12: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018) Available at: https://www.pexels.com/photo/boy-child-cold-
dog-341389/ [Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.13: Source: (Pxhere.com, 2018) Available at: https://pxhere.com/en/photo/70403 [Accessed 
20.01.18]
Picture 4.14: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018) Available at: https://www.pexels.com/photo/advertisement-
advertising-bright-business-439857/ [Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.15: Source: (Pxhere.com, 2018) Available at: https://pxhere.com/en/photo/103209 
[Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.16: Source: (Pxhere.com, 2018) Available at: https://pxhere.com/en/photo/902413 
[Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.17: Source: (Pxhere.com, 2018) Available at: https://pxhere.com/en/photo/953384 
[Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.18: Source: (Pxhere.com, 2018) Available at: https://pxhere.com/en/photo/99109 [Accessed 
20.01.18]
Picture 4.19: Source: (Pxhere.com, 2018) Available at: https://pxhere.com/en/photo/949763 
[Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.20: Source: (Pxhere.com, 2018) Available at: https://pxhere.com/en/photo/1073680 
[Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.21: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018) Available at: https://www.pexels.com/photo/adult-
education-from-above-furniture-545067/ [Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.22: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018) Available at: https://www.pexels.com/photo/action-adult-
adventure-backpack-237697/ [Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.23: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018) Available at: https://www.pexels.com/photo/time-lapse-
photo-of-lights-220118/ [Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.24: Source: (Pexels.com, 2018) Texting and Biking in Berlin. Paul Sableman. Available at: 
https://www.flickr.com/photos/pasa/5826959289 [Accessed 20.01.18]
Picture 4.25:  The pictures shows two friends running – a visualization of the friend analogy.  Source: 
http://www.15wing.af.mil/ Remember the Fallen, Honor the Living: 25th ASOS hosts 6th Annual 
TACP Remembrance Run.Tech. Sgt. Heather Redman. Available at: http://www.15wing.af.mil/News/
Photos/igphoto/2001724762/ [Accessed 25.01.18]
==PAGE:114==
104
References
LITERATURE REFERENCES
Ajzen, I. (1991) ‘The theory of planned behavior’, Orgnizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 50, pp. 179–211. doi: 10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T.
Avery, D. H. et al. (2001) ‘Bright light therapy of subsyndromal seasonal affective disorder in the 
workplace: Morning vs. afternoon exposure’, Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 103(4), pp. 267–274. 
doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0447.2001.00078.x.
Avery, D. H. et al. (2001) ‘Dawn simulation and bright light in the treatment of SAD: A controlled 
study’, Biological Psychiatry, 50(3), pp. 205–216. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3223(01)01200-8.
Cassone, V. M. and Kumar, V. (2015) Circadian Rhythms. Sixth Edit, Sturkie’s Avian Physiology. Sixth 
Edit. Elsevier. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407160-5.00034-8.
Dam, H., Jakobsen, K. and Mellerup, E. (1998) ‘Prevalence of winter depression in Denmark’, Acta 
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 97(1), pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0447.1998.tb09954.x.
Daneault, V. et al. (2016) ‘Light-sensitive brain pathways and aging’, Journal of physiological 
anthropology. Journal of Physiological Anthropology, 35, p. 9. doi: 10.1186/s40101-016-0091-9.
Danilenko, K. V. and Levitan, R. D. (2012) ‘Seasonal affective disorder’, in Handbook of Clinical 
Neurology. 1st edn. Elsevier B.V., pp. 279–289. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52002-9.00017-6.
Design Council (2018) The Design Process: What is the Double Diamond? | Design Council. Available at: 
https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/design-process-what-double-diamond 
(Accessed: 
20 January 2018).
Desmet, P. (2003) ‘A Multilayered Model of Product Emotions’, The Design Journal, 6(2), pp. 4–13. 
doi: 10.2752/146069203789355480.
Desmet, P. M. A. (2002) Designing emotion. doi: ISBN 90-9015877-4.
Desmet, P. M. a and Hekkert, P. (2002) ‘The Basis of Product Emotions’, Pleasure with Products: 
Beyond Usability, (1988), pp. 60–68. doi: 10.1201/9780203302279.ch4.
DMI (2018) Sunrise and sunset Copenhagen December 21st.
Duffy, J. F. and Wright, K. P. (2005) ‘Entrainment of the human circadian system by light’, Journal of 
Biological Rhythms, 20(4), pp. 326–338. doi: 10.1177/0748730405277983.
Eastman, C. I. et al. (1998) ‘Bright Light Treatment of Winter Depression: A Placebo-Controlled 
Trial’, Archives of general psychiatry, 55(10), p. 883. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.55.10.883.
Engineeringtoolbox.com (2018) Outdoor Light Levels. Available at: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.
com/light-level-rooms-d_708.html (Accessed: 8 January 2018).
Gabel, V. (2016) ‘Effects of Artificial Dawn and Morning Blue Light on Daytime Cognitive 
Performance, Well-being, Cortisol and Melatonin Levels’. doi: 10.1.1.959.8533.
Glickman, G. et al. (2003) ‘Inferior Retinal Light Exposure Is More Effective than Superior Retinal 
Exposure in Suppressing Melatonin in Humans’, 18(1), pp. 71–79. doi: 10.1177/0748730402239678.
==PAGE:115==
105
Golden, R. N. et al. (2005) ‘The efficacy of light therapy in the treatment of mood disorders: A 
review and meta-analysis of the evidence’, American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(4), pp. 656–662. doi: 
10.1176/appi.ajp.162.4.656.
Hannibal, J. and Fahrenkrug, J. (2006) Neuronal input pathways to the brain’s biological clock and their 
functional significance, Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol. doi: 10.1007/3-540-27789-7.
Hekkert, P. and van Dijk, M. (2011) Vision in Design - A guidebook for Innovators. BIS Publishers.
Kasper, S., Wehr, T. A., et al. (1989) ‘Epidemiological findings of seasonal changes in mood and 
behavior. A telephone survey of Montgomery County, Maryland.’, Archives of general psychiatry, 
46(9), pp. 823–33. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1989.01810090065010.
Kasper, S., Rogers, S. L., et al. (1989) ‘Phototherapy in individuals with and without subsyndromal 
seasonal affective disorder.’, Archives of general psychiatry, 46(9), pp. 837–44. doi: 10.1001/
archpsyc.1989.01810090079011.
Klepeis, N. E. et al. (2001) ‘The National Human Activity Pattern Survey (NHAPS): A resource 
for assessing exposure to environmental pollutants’, Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental 
Epidemiology, 11(3), pp. 231–252. doi: 10.1038/sj.jea.7500165.
Kogan,  a. O. and Guilford, P. . (1998) ‘Side Effects of Short-Term 10 , 000-Lux Light Therapy’, 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 155(February), pp. 293–294.
Lam, R. W. et al. (2006) ‘The can-SAD study: A randomized controlled trial of the effectiveness of 
light therapy and fluoxetine in patients with winter seasonal affective disorder’, American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 163(5), pp. 805–812. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.163.5.805.
Lam, R. W. and Tam, E. M. (2009) A Clinician’s Guide to Using Light Therapy.
Lee, T. M. and Chan, C. C. (1999) ‘Dose-response relationship of phototherapy for seasonal affective 
disorder: a meta-analysis (Structured abstract)’, Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 99(5), pp. 315–323. 
Available at: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/o/cochrane/cldare/articles/DARE-11999001049/frame.
html.
Levitan, R. D. (2007) ‘The chronobiology and neurobiology of winter seasonal affective disorder’, 
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 9(3), pp. 315–324. doi: 10.1016/j.jcin.2015.10.034.
Lewy, A. et al. (1998) ‘Morning vs Evening Light Treatment of Patients With Winter Depression’, 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 55(10), pp. 890–896. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.55.10.890.
Lewy, A. J. et al. (2014) ‘The role of circadian rhythms, light and melatonin in SAD and nonseasonal 
affective and anxiety disorders’, Current Psychiatry Reviews. Bentham Science Publishers B.V., 10(3), 
pp. 214–222.
Magnusson, A. and Boivin, D. (2003) ‘Seasonal Affective Disorder: An Overview’, Chronobiology 
International, 20(2), pp. 189–207. doi: 10.1081/CBI-120019310.
Magnusson, A. and Stefansson, J. G. (1993) ‘Prevalence of seasonal affective disorder in Iceland.’, 
Archives of general psychiatry, 50(12), pp. 941–946. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1993.01820240025002.
Mersch, P. P. et al. (1999) ‘Seasonal affective disorder and latitude: a review of the literature.’, Journal 
of affective disorders, 53(1), pp. 35–48. doi: 10.1016/S0165-0327(98)00097-4.
Oren, D. A. et al. (1991) ‘Usage patterns of phototherapy in seasonal affective disorder’, Comprehensive 
psychiatry, 32(2), pp. 147–152.
==PAGE:116==
106
References
Pail, G. et al. (2011) ‘Bright-Light Therapy in the Treatment of Mood Disorders’, Neuropsychobiology, 
64(3), pp. 152–162. doi: 10.1159/000328950.
POTKIN, S. G. et al. (1986) ‘SEASONAL AFFECTIVE-DISORDER - PREVALENCE VARIES 
WITH LATITUDE AND CLIMATE’, Clinical Neuropharmacology. LIPPINCOTT-RAVEN PUBL, 
9, pp. 181–183.
Remé, C. E. et al. (1996) ‘Bright light therapy in focus: lamp emission spectra and ocular safety.’, 
Technology and Health Care, 4(4), pp. 403–413. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003403.
Rohan, K. J., Roecklein, K. and Haaga, D. (2009) ‘Biological and Psychological Mechanisms of 
Seasonal Affective Disorder : A Review and Integration Biological and Psychological Mechanisms of 
Seasonal Affective Disorder ’:, (February 2016), pp. 37–47. doi: 10.2174/157340009787315299.
Rosenthal, N. E. et al. (1984) ‘Seasonal affective disorder: A description of the syndrome and 
preliminary findings with light therapy’, Archives of General Psychiatry.
Rosenthal, N. E. (2015) What is seasonal affective disorder?
Rüger, M. et al. (2005) ‘Nasal versus temporal illumination of the human retina: Effects on core body 
temperature, melatonin, and circadian phase’, Journal of Biological Rhythms, 20(1), pp. 60–70. doi: 
10.1177/0748730404270539.
S. Lazarus, R. (1991) Emotion and Adaptation. Oxford University Press USA.
SADA (2016) What is SAD? Available at: http://www.sada.org.uk/what_is_sad_2.php.
Sahar, S. and Sassone-Corsi, P. (2010) ‘Circadian clocks and their molecular organization’, in Seasonal 
affective disorder, practice and research. 2. ed, pp. 5–12.
Sakamoto, K. et al. (1993) ‘A nationwide survey of seasonal affective disorder at 53 outpatient 
university clinics in Japan’, Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 87(4), pp. 258–265. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-
0447.1993.tb03368.x.
Schwartz, P. (1996) ‘Winter seasonal affective disorder: A follow-up study of the first 59 patients of 
the National Institute of Mental Health Seasonal Studies Program’, American Journal of Psychiatry, 
153(8). Available at: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2271609612 (Accessed: 8 January 2018).
Słomko, J. and Zalewski, P. (2016) ‘The circadian rhythm of core body temperature (Part I): The 
use of modern telemetry systems to monitor core body temperature variability’, Polish Hyperbaric 
Research, 55(2). doi: 10.1515/phr-2016-0014.
Terman, J. S. et al. (2001) ‘Circadian time of morning light administration and therapeutic response 
in winter depression.’, Archives of general psychiatry, 58(1), pp. 69–75. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.58.1.69.
Terman, M. et al. (1989) ‘Light therapy for seasonal affective disorder: A review of efficacy’, 
Neuropsycho-pharmacology, 2(July 2014), pp. 1–22. doi: 10.1016/0893-133X(89)90002-X.
Terman, M. and Terman, J. S. (2006) ‘Controlled trial of naturalistic dawn simulation and negative 
air ionization for seasonal affective disorder’, American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(12), pp. 2126–2133. 
doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.163.12.2126.
Terman, M., Terman, J. S. and Ross, D. C. (1998) ‘A controlled trial of timed bright light and 
negative air ionization for treatment of winter depression.’, Archives of general psychiatry, 55(10), pp. 
875–882. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.55.10.875.
==PAGE:117==
107
Thompson, A. et al. (2014) ‘Effects of dawn simulation on markers of sleep inertia and post-waking 
performance in humans’, European Journal of Applied Physiology, 114(5), pp. 1049–1056. doi: 
10.1007/s00421-014-2831-z.
Willeit, M. et al. (2008) ‘Enhanced Serotonin Transporter Function during Depression in Seasonal 
Affective Disorder’, Neuropsychopharmacology, 33(7), pp. 1503–1513. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301560.
Zauderer, C. and Ganzer, C. A. (2015) ‘Seasonal affective disorder: an overview’, Mental Health 
Practice, 18(9), pp. 21–24. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.7748/mhp.18.9.21.e973.
REFERENCES FOR CONTEXT FACTORS
Anjali Joseph, P. D. (2006) Impact of Light on Outcomes in Healthcare Settings | The Center for Health 
Design. Available at: https://www.healthdesign.org/chd/research/impact-light-outcomes-healthcare-
settings (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Ars Technica (2017) The social media ‘echo chamber’ is real. Available at: https://arstechnica.com/
science/2017/03/the-social-media-echo-chamber-is-real/ (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Bentzen, J. (2015) Fakta | Psykiatrifonden. Available at: http://www.psykiatrifonden.dk/viden/fakta.
aspx (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Bratman, G. N. et al. (2015) ‘Nature experience reduces rumination and subgenual prefrontal cortex 
activation’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(28), pp. 8567–8572. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1510459112.
Co. Design (2012) Ambitious New Hospital Design Aims To Treat Patients Better And Faster. Available 
at: 
https://www.fastcodesign.com/1669886/ambitious-new-hospital-design-aims-to-treat-patients-
better-and-faster (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Deloitte Insights (2017) ‘Cognitive Health Care and Personalized Treatment in 2027 | Deloitte 
Insights’. Available at: https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/focus/cognitive-technologies/
cognitive-health-care-in-2027.html (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Doucet, T. J. (2013) ‘Feeling at Home: A Humanbecoming Living Experience’, Nursing Science 
Quarterly, 26(3), pp. 247–256. doi: 10.1177/0894318413489179.
Eurostat (2017a) Household composition statistics - Statistics Explained. Available at: http://ec.europa.
eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Household_composition_statistics#Household_size 
(Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Eurostat (2017b) Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistical-atlas/gis/viewer(Accessed: 22 
January 2018).
Eurostat - Data Explorer (2018) Average number of usual weekly hours of work in main job by sex, 
age and NUTS 2 regions (hours) [lfst_r_lfe2ehour]. Available at: http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.
eu/nui/show (Accessed: 22 January 2018)
==PAGE:118==
108
References
Evans, J. A. and Davidson, A. J. (2013) Health consequences of circadian disruption in humans and 
animal models. 1st edn, Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science. 1st edn. Elsevier Inc. 
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-396971-2.00010-5.
Glickman, G. et al. (2003) ‘Inferior Retinal Light Exposure Is More Effective than Superior Retinal 
Exposure in Suppressing Melatonin in Humans’, 18(1), pp. 71–79. doi: 10.1177/0748730402239678.
Global Webindex (2015) Internet users have average of 5.54 social media accounts - GlobalWebIndex 
Blog. Available at: https://blog.globalwebindex.net/chart-of-the-day/internet-users-have-average-of-
5-54-social-media-accounts/ (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Gourville, J. T. (2006) ‘Eager sellers and stony buyers’, Stony Buyers, Harvand Business Review, pp. 
99–106.
Gusmão, R. et al. (2013) ‘Antidepressant Utilization and Suicide in Europe: An Ecological Multi-
National Study’, PLOS ONE. Public Library of Science, 8(6), p. e66455. Available at: https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0066455.
Halal, W. E. (2014) ‘Global Consciousness’, World Futures Review, 6(3), pp. 261–272. doi: 
10.1177/1946756714555918.
Huffington Post (2016) ‘Why Humans Are Hard-Wired For Curiosity | HuffPost’. Available at: https://
www.huffingtonpost.com/footnote/why-humans-are-hardwired-_b_11984748.html (Accessed: 22 
January 2018).
Huffington Post (2017) ‘Coming of the Light: The 2017 Integrator Top 10 for Policy and Action 
in Integrative Health and Medicine’. Available at: https://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/coming-
of-the-light-the-2017-integrator-top-10-for_us_5a4150b6e4b06cd2bd03dc3c (Accessed: 22 January 
2018).
Hysing, M. et al. (2013) ‘Sleep patterns and insomnia among adolescents: A population-based study’, 
Journal of Sleep Research, 22(5), pp. 549–556. doi: 10.1111/jsr.12055.
International Telecommunications Union (2017) YOUTH ARE AT THE FOREFRONT OF 
INTERNET ADOPTION. Available at: https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/
ICTFactsFigures2017.pdf (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Jennum, P. et al. (2015) SØVN OG SUNDHED. Available at: http://www.vidensraad.dk/sites/
default/files/vidensraad_soevn-og-sundhed_digital.pdf (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Kearney, A. T. (2012) ‘Quantified benefits of Human Centric Lighting Human Centric Lighting’. 
Available at: https://www.lightingeurope.org/images/publications/general/150420_From_Barriers_
to_Measures_-_Final_Results_-_Complete_vF_004.pdf (Accessed: 28 January 2018).
Klepeis, N. E. et al. (2001) ‘The National Human Activity Pattern Survey (NHAPS): A resource 
for assessing exposure to environmental pollutants’, Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental 
Epidemiology, 11(3), pp. 231–252. doi: 10.1038/sj.jea.7500165.
Kommunikations Forum (2013) Kommunikationsforum | FOMO er den angst, som sociale mediers 
konstante strøm af fede ting at gøre, ligne og lave, indgyder i folk. Undersøgelser viser, at 40% af de 
yngre amerikanere jævnligt er bange for, at deres liv ikke er spændende nok til at måle sig med andres på 
de sociale medier. I Danmark er det nok ikke meget anderledes. Læs her om de forskellige typer FOMO. | 
| Tem Frank Andersen. Available at: http://www.kommunikationsforum.dk/artikler/fear-of-missing-
out-paa-sociale-medier (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Lam, R. W. and Tam, E. M. (2009) A Clinician’s Guide to Using Light Therapy.
==PAGE:119==
109
LEDs Magazine (2017a) ‘LightingEurope and IALD issue position paper on human-centric lighting 
(UPDATED) - LEDs’. Available at: http://www.ledsmagazine.com/articles/2017/03/lightingeurope-
and-iald-issue-position-paper-on-human-centric-lighting.html (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
LEDs Magazine (2017b) LightingEurope issues whitepaper on evolving LED lighting to support a circular 
economy - LEDs. Available at: http://www.ledsmagazine.com/articles/2017/10/lightingeurope-issues-
whitepaper-on-evolving-led-lighting-to-support-a-circular-economy.html (Accessed: 22 January 
2018).
Leff, B. et al. (2005) Hospital at Home: Feasibility and Outcomes of a Program To Provide Hospital-Level 
Care at Home for Acutely Ill Older Patients Background: Acutely ill older persons often experience adverse. 
Available at: http://www.hospitalathome.org/files/HAH_Annals_12-5.pdf (Accessed: 22 January 
2018).
Lewy, A. J. et al. (2014) ‘The role of circadian rhythms, light and melatonin in SAD and nonseasonal 
affective and anxiety disorders’, Current Psychiatry Reviews. Bentham Science Publishers B.V., 10(3), 
pp. 214–222.
Mari Joze Osredkar (2008) ‘Surviving Globalization: The Uneasy Gift of Interdependence 
- 
Google 
Bøger’, 
in. 
Available 
at: 
https://books.google.dk/books?id=CLnqiUMyeycC&
pg=PA231&lpg=PA231&dq=globalization+-+distances+shorter&source=bl&ots=hg4B
oIS_rs&sig=KxI-tg8aUg9ZmXJ6XR_XTK5xmX8&hl=da&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj-6_
O06tHXAhVEQJoKHZFvDHMQ6AEIJjAA#v=onepage&q=globalization - distanc (Accessed: 22 
January 2018).
Maslow, A. (1943) ‘A theory of human motivation’, Psychological Review, 50. Available at: https://
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2257827641 (Accessed: 12 January 2018).
MillwardBrown (2014) AdReaction Marketing in a multiscreen world Global Report. Available at: 
https://www.millwardbrown.com/adreaction/2014/report/Millward-Brown_AdReaction-2014_
Global.pdf (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Mintel (2016) Vitamin and supplements market in good health: 46% of all Brits are daily users | Mintel.
com. Available at: http://www.mintel.com/press-centre/social-and-lifestyle/vitamin-and-supplements-
market-in-good-health-46-of-all-brits-are-daily-users (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
New Google Data (2016) ‘How People Use Their Devices Device Usage in an Average Day How We 
Search Across Devices’. Available at: https://storage.googleapis.com/think/docs/twg-how-people-use-
their-devices-2016.pdf (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Nielsen Norman Group (1995) 10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface Design. Nielsen Norman 
Group. Available at: https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ten-usability-heuristics/ (Accessed: 22 
January 2018).
Nursing Times (2012) How does stigma affect people with mental illness? | Clinical | Nursing Times. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.nursingtimes.net/roles/mental-health-nurses/how-does-stigma-affect-
people-with-mental-illness/5046801.article (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Olivia Danmark (2016) Hospital at home. Available at: https://www.oliviadanmark.dk/ydelser/
hospital-at-home/ (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Our World in Data (2017) Working Hours - Our World in Data. Available at: https://ourworldindata.
org/working-hours (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Ouye, J. A. (2011) ‘Five Trends that Are Dramatically Changing Work and the Workplace’, Knoll 
Workplace Research, p. 14.
==PAGE:120==
110
References
Pew Research Center (2017) Experts on the Future of Work, Jobs Training and Skills | Pew Research 
Center. Available at: http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/05/03/the-future-of-jobs-and-jobs-training/ 
(Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Scientific American (2015) ‘Q&amp;A: Why Is Blue Light before Bedtime Bad for Sleep? - Scientific 
American’. Available at: https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/q-a-why-is-blue-light-before-
bedtime-bad-for-sleep/ (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Sundhedsstyrelsen (2012) Forebyggelsespakken - Mental Sundhed. Available at: https://www.sst.dk/~/
media/D986EF821E864D089B70BADDF4F7FFB8.ashx (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Supplement Police (2016) Guide to Biohacking. Available at: https://supplementpolice.com/health-
guides/biohacking/ (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
The Atlantic (2014) Here Are the Countries That Drink the Most Coffee—the U.S. Isn’t in the Top 
10 - The Atlantic. Available at: https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2014/01/here-are-
the-countries-that-drink-the-most-coffee-the-us-isnt-in-the-top-10/283100/ (Accessed: 22 January 
2018).
The Economist (2014) ‘Why is everyone so busy? - In search of lost time’. Available at: https://www.
economist.com/news/christmas-specials/21636612-time-poverty-problem-partly-perception-and-
partly-distribution-why (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
The Guardian (2013a) Antidepressant use on the rise in rich countries, OECD finds | Society | The 
Guardian. Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/nov/20/antidepressant-use-rise-
world-oecd (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
The Guardian (2013b) ‘Antidepressants: global trends | News | The Guardian’. Available at: https://
www.theguardian.com/news/2013/nov/20/mental-health-antidepressants-global-trends 
(Accessed: 
22 January 2018).
The New York Times (2015) ‘Admitted to Your Bedroom: Some Hospitals Try Treating Patients at 
Home - The New York Times’. Available at: https://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/04/27/admitted-
to-your-bedroom-some-hospitals-try-treating-patients-at-home/ (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
The Royal College of Psychiatrists (2008) Mental health &amp; Work report. Available at: https://www.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/212266/hwwb-mental-health-
and-work.pdf (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
The Statistic Portal (2018) • Number of Facebook users worldwide 2008-2017 | Statistic. Available at: 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/264810/number-of-monthly-active-facebook-users-worldwide/ 
(Accessed: 22 January 2018).
The Statistics Portal (2017) • Common sleep problems among adults U.S. by gender 2017 | Survey. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/668034/common-sleep-issues-among-us-adults-
gender/ (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
United Nations Development Programme - Human Development Reports (2016) Life expectancy at 
birth (years) | Human Development Reports. Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/69206 (Accessed: 22 
January 2018).
Venkateshiah, S. B. (2012) ‘Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorders’, in Venkateshiah, S. B. (ed.) 
Contemporary Sleep Medicine For Physicians. BENTHAM SCIENCE PUBLISHERS, pp. 156–181. 
doi: 10.2174/978160805153311101010156.
Videnskab.dk (2016) ‘Forbrugerne lades i stikken, når de køber vitaminer og kosttilskud’, July. 
==PAGE:121==
111
Available 
at: 
https://videnskab.dk/krop-sundhed/forbrugerne-lades-i-stikken-nar-de-kober-
vitaminer-og-kosttilskud (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
Washington Post (2016) ‘Confirmed: Echo chambers exist on social media. So what do we do about 
them? - The Washington Post’. Available at: https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/in-theory/
wp/2016/07/14/confirmed-echo-chambers-exist-on-social-media-but-what-can-we-do-about-
them/?utm_term=.e0647cd5a842 (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
World Health Organization (2017a) Depression and Other Common Mental Disorders Global Health 
Estimates. Available at: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/254610/1/WHO-MSD-MER-
2017.2-eng.pdf?ua=1 (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
World Health Organization (2017b) ‘WHO | &quot;Depression: let’s talk&quot; says WHO, as 
depression tops list of causes of ill health’, WHO. World Health Organization. Available at: http://
www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2017/world-health-day/en/ (Accessed: 22 January 2018).
YouGov UK (2016) YouGov | Chinese people are most likely to feel the world is getting better. Available 
at: https://yougov.co.uk/news/2016/01/05/chinese-people-are-most-optimistic-world/ (Accessed: 22 
January 2018).
==PAGE:122==
