==PAGE:1==
ABSOLUTE SUSTAINABILITY
from a Circular Architectural Perspective
M.Sc Thesis in Architectural Engineering
By Amalie Christine Nyholm, s123746
& Katja Lindschouw Frankvard, s123355
Kongens Lyngby - March 2018
==PAGE:2==
1 
Abstract 
 
Sustainability within the Danish building industry is evermore on the agenda. The sustainability is 
measured through LCA and certification systems such as DGNB, which uses relative comparison. While 
this development has positive influence on the sustainable development within the Danish building 
industry, the industry is not able to quantify just how sustainable the development is in absolute 
measures. So what is absolute sustainability in the Danish Industry and to what extent is absolute 
architectural sustainability achievable in a Danish circular perspective?  
This thesis will answer this question by investigate and developing a framework of absolute sustainability 
which is applicable on a building scale. The work is divided into four assessments, whereof three are 
investigating the absolute sustainability dimensions: social, environmental and economic sustainability 
and lastly the fourth assessment will investigate the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as 
performance indicators of absolute sustainability. All assessments are based on a definition defined by 
literature studies within all sustainability dimensions. The chosen assessment methods are: a developed 
quantitative assessment framework for assessing social sustainability, Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and 
Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA). These assessment are applied on the Danish social housing project Circle 
House in an absolute context. The Circle House project is based on purely circular design strategies and 
circular business cases and the first of it kind in Denmark.  
The results showed that it is possible to apply the absolute definition of sustainability to assessment 
methods. The results of the absolute assessment were that Circle House is not absolute sustainable. The 
social and environmental assessment were able to determine that Circle House transgresses the 
absolute limits within the dimensions. The economic assessment were not able to determine the 
absolute assessment due to descriptive data, when an CBA requires quantitative data. Had the 
assessment been carried out with quantifiable data, the assessment would be able to determine the 
absolute sustainability according to the absolute sustainability definition.  
The SDGs were found not to be directly applicable as performance indicators of absolute sustainability or 
directly applicable as quantitative performance indicators on a building scale. We suggest that more 
research and assessments, on the applicability of the SDGs, are needed if applied as quantitative 
performance indicators at a building level and within all three sustainability dimensions. 
The circular strategies helped improve the sustainability within all dimensions. If the circular strategies are 
effective, in relative terms, Circle House would be 19 % more environmentally sustainable, than if it would 
have been built without circular strategies.  
The application of absolute sustainability framework is achievable within the Danish building industry. The 
limits of absolute sustainability should be universally valid within all sustainability dimensions.  
Circle House was not absolute sustainable, but it is possible that other pioneer projects in the future 
could be. 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
2 
==PAGE:4==
3 
Foreword 
This master thesis is conducted at the department of Civil Engineering and Management Engineering at 
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). It is conducted in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring 
a M.Sc. degree in Architectural Engineering under the supervision of Associate Professor Morten Birkved 
and Associate Professor Lotte Bjerregaard.  
 
The thesis is the result of collaborative work between: 
 
Amalie Christine Nyholm,  
 
 
 
Katja Lindschouw Frankvard,  
Stud. M.Sc. Architectural Engineering  
 
 
Stud. M.Sc. Architectural Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amalie Christine Nyholm, s123746 
 
 
 
Katja Lindschouw Frankvard, 
s123355 
 
 
 
 
 
____________________________  
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Signature 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature 
Date:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date:  
 
 
 
2/3-2018
2/3-2018
s123355
==PAGE:5==
4 
Acknowledgement 
 
Morten Birkved - DTU 
We would like to thank you for being a great counselor, for guiding and delimiting us through the 
enormous aspects and interesting angles of sustainability. We thank you for the good talks and 
interesting aspects you brought to our attention.  
 
Freja Nygaard Rasmussen - SBI 
We would like to thank you for helping with the environmental aspect of sustainability, and taking the time 
to help and collaborate with us. 
 
Thomas - DK-BGC 
We would like to thank you for taking the time to talk with us and thank you for giving the Danish Green 
Building Council’s take on absolute sustainability and its applicability. 
 
Katrine West - Fællestegnestuen 
We would like to thank you for taking the time to participate in an interview and support our data 
collection with plans, drawings etc. to conduct our assessments.  
 
 
==PAGE:6==
5 
Nomenclature 
 
Absolute Sustainability……………………………………… Non-relative sustainability.  
Carrying Capacity…………………………………………… The number of people, animals, or crops  
which a region can support without 
environmental degradation. 
Circular Economy…………………………………………… Circular economy is a regenerative system in  
which resource input and waste, emission, 
and energy leakage are minimised by slowing, 
closing, and narrowing material and energy 
loops. 
DGNB Certification…………………………………………. Green building certification under DGNB 
Doughnut Economics……………………………………… Book by Kate Raworth on Sustainable 
Economics. 
Framework amount………………………………………… In danish: Rammebeløb.  
Amount of money which can be spent on  
social housing projects.  
Fællestegnestuen…………………………………………… Architectural collaboration between  
three architecture studios: 
Vandkunsten, GXN/3XN and Lendager 
Green Building Conference………………………………… Conference on green building technology held  
twice a year in Copenhagen and Aarhus. 
Lejerbo……………………………………………………… Social Housing association 
Life cycle expectancy……………………………………… The expectancy of which a building 
component will last. 
Planetary Boundaries……………………………………… Environmental boundaries to which the  
planet can be burdened. 
Product service system…………………………………… 
Business models that provide for cohesive  
delivery of products and services. 
Relative sustainability……………………………………… 
Sustainable by comparison 
Sustainability dimensions…………………………………. 
Social, environmental and economic. 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
6 
Abbreviations 
A1-A3………………………………………………………… Manufacturing stage of a product life cycle. 
A5…………………………………………………………….. Construction energy 
AP……………………………………………………………. Impact category Acidification Potential 
B3-B4………………………………………………………... Use stage including repair and replacement. 
B6……………………………………………………………. Operational energy. 
CBA………………………………………………………….. Cost Benefit Analysis 
C1……………………………………………………………. Deconstruction and demolition stage. 
C2-C4………………………………………………………... Transport, waste processing and disposal  
stage. 
CC……………………………………………………………. Impact category Climate Change 
CC,rad………………………………………………………. Impact category Climate Change radiation 
CC,temp…………………………………………………….. Impact category Climate Change temperature 
CH…………………………………………………………… Circle House 
DfD………………………………………………………….. Design for disassembly 
DGNB……………………………………………………….. Deutsche Gesellschaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen 
DK-GBC…………………………………………………….. Danish Green Building Council 
EoL………………………………………………………….. End of Life stage 
EP……………………………………………………………. Impact category Eutrophication potential 
FE……………………………………………………………. Freshwater Eutrophication 
FET…………………………………………………………… Freshwater Ecotoxicity 
GDP…………………………………………………………. Gross Domestic Product 
GNP…………………………………………………………. Gross National Product 
ILCD Handbook…………………………………………….. International Reference Life Cycle Data  
System Handbook 
LCA…………………………………………………………. Life Cycle Assessment 
LCI…………………………………………………………… Life Cycle Inventory 
LCIA…………………………………………………………. Life Cycle Inventory Assessment 
LU……………………………………………………………. Impact category Land Use 
LUB………………………………………………………….. Impact category Land Use biodiversity 
LUS………………………………………………………….. Impact category Land Use soil erosion 
ODP…………………………………………………………. Ozone Depletion Potential 
POCP……………………………………………………….. Photochemical Ozone Formation Potential 
S0……………………………………………………………. Scenario 0 
S1……………………………………………………………. Scenario 1 
S2……………………………………………………………. Scenario 2 
S3……………………………………………………………. Scenario 3 
SBI…………………………………………………………… Danish Building Research Institute 
SDGs………………………………………………………… Sustainable Development Goals 
TA……………………………………………………………. Terrestrial Acidification 
TE……………………………………………………………. Terrestrial Eutrophication 
WD…………………………………………………………… Water Depletion Potential 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
7 
Table of content 
 
Abstract 
1 
Foreword 
2 
Acknowledgement 
4 
Nomenclature 
5 
Abbreviations 
6 
Table of content 
7 
1. Introduction 
9 
1.2 Motivation 
9 
1.3 Problem statement 
10 
1.4 Process 
11 
1.5 Delimitation 
12 
1.6 Intended application of study 
13 
1.7 Reading guide 
14 
2. Literature studies 
15 
2.1 Sustainability and sustainable development 
16 
2.2 Social sustainability 
19 
2.3 Environmental sustainability 
23 
2.4 Economic sustainability 
27 
2.5 Sustainable Development Goals 
31 
2.6 Sustainability in the industry 
34 
2.7 Absolute Sustainability 
37 
2.8 Summary of literature study 
39 
2.9 Partial conclusion of literature study 
39 
3. Methodology 
41 
3.1 Case study 
41 
3.2 Assessment methodology 
44 
3.3 Social sustainability assessment 
45 
3.4 Environmental sustainability assessment 
49 
3.5 Economic sustainability assessment 
59 
3.6 Assessment of application of SDGs’ sustainability performance indicators 
61 
3.7 Summary 
62 
3.8 Conclusion 
63 
4. Results 
64 
4.1 Social sustainability results 
65 
4.2 Environmental sustainability results 
101 
4.3 Economic sustainability results 
102 
4.4 Results of application of the SDGs as sustainability performance indicators 
108 
==PAGE:9==
8 
4.5 Summary of the result chapter 
112 
5. Discussion 
114 
5.1 Discussion of the result sections 
115 
5.2 Discussion of the problem statement 
124 
6. Conclusion 
125 
7. Recommendations and outlook 
126 
7.1 Recommendations 
126 
7.2 Outlook 
126 
8. References 
127 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
9 
1. Introduction 
1.2 Motivation 
The motivation for this thesis originates from a wish to change the unsustainable development that takes 
place on our planet into true sustainable development.  
In the recent years there has been a growing trend of applying sustainable building design solutions in 
the Danish building industry. The United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) has brought 
sustainable development on the agenda and many front-movers within the building industry are now 
using them as a guidance towards sustainability. It is easy to compare the current sustainable building 
design with the buildings of yesterday and see sustainable development. But how sustainable are the 
new buildings actually? And are the SDGs really a good indicator of sustainability within the Danish 
building industry?  
 
Circle House1 is one of the most recent example of sustainable development in the Danish building 
industry, by implementing circular strategies and circular business in to the design and development. 
Thus Circle House is an extremely interesting case to investigate. We wish to investigate if Circle House 
really is sustainable today and tomorrow. Thus, we wish to find a framework of doing so without 
comparing Circle House to buildings of yesterday. 
 
Absolute environmental boundaries for the Earth’s system, also known as planetary boundaries, are a 
way of defining the absolute limits for the human activities. These limits indicate clearly to what extent we 
are able to exploit the natural resources, without affecting the fragile stable state we live and thrive in.  
By applying these absolute limits in a building context, we are able to perform a much more uniform 
assessment of the sustainability of buildings, because the absolute limit can be applied to every new 
building, without the need of relative comparison.  
Therefore, this thesis is investigating the application and usefulness of the absolute boundaries. All three 
dimensions of sustainability are included in this thesis and therefore the concept of ‘absolute’ limits is 
also applied to social and economic sustainability. The UN’s SDGs will be investigated in a building 
context, in order to determine its usefulness as a measure of absolute sustainability. 
 
 
 
                                                
1 Circle House is a social housing project initiated by the building owner Lejerbo and the architectural collaboration 
Fællestegnestuen (Lejerbo, 2017).   
==PAGE:11==
10 
1.3 Problem statement 
The authors of this thesis aspire to shift from a relative assessment method to an absolute sustainability 
assessment method of building design solutions and apply this to the case study, Circle House. Hence 
the problem statement and research questions are defined in the following: 
 
To what extent is absolute architectural sustainability achievable in a Danish circular perspective? 
 
● 
Q1: How can assessment methods be applied within the three sustainability dimensions in order 
to determine the absolute sustainability of Circle House? 
● 
Q2: How can the Sustainable Development Goals be used as indicators of the performance of 
absolute sustainability of Circle House? 
● 
Q3: When applying the assessment methods, to what extent is it possible to determine the 
absolute sustainability of Circle House? 
 
Through a literature study, this thesis will investigate what absolute sustainability is within the three 
sustainability dimensions; environmental, social and economical. It will investigate how absolute 
sustainability can be applied as an assessment method within each dimension. Alongside, a second 
literature study of the SDGs will investigate how the SDGs can be used as performance indicators of the 
absolute sustainability on a building scale. To get a grasp of the movement within the industry, the 
authors attended the Building Green conference and various other conferences and events in the fall of 
2017. Hence a summary of the trending topics and movements within the Danish building industry is 
described as a third study in the literature studies chapter. These studies have defined which 
assessments could be used to determine the absolute sustainability of Circle House. Circle House has 
been chosen as the case since we wanted to investigate the sustainability on a building scale, and Circle 
House is one of the most promising circular sustainable projects under development. At the point of 
writing, Circle House is in its early design stage, and thus this thesis could help further improve the 
sustainability of Circle House.  
 
As described the problem statement can be divided into two main aspects: 1) absolute sustainability 
within the sustainability dimensions: social, environmental and economic and 2) SDGs as performance 
indicators of absolute sustainability.  
These two main trails lead to assessments of absolute sustainability as seen from figure 1.1.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.1: The figure shows the two directions of the thesis: The absolute sustainability from the sustainability dimensions and the 
SDG indicators as performance indicators for absolute sustainability.  
==PAGE:12==
11 
1.4 Process 
The process stages of this thesis report can be seen from figure 1.2. Absolute sustainability has not 
before been applied in all three sustainability dimensions. Hence a lot of work has been put into 
investigating how this could be done. The process can be seen divided into four stages: Discover, define, 
develop and apply. The process diagram does not necessarily reflect the chronological order of the 
thesis work, as it has been an iterative process as seen from figure 1.3.  
The discovering process consisted of an extensive literature study, attending conferences and events on 
sustainability and circular economy in the building industry.  
The definition process consisted of defining the absolute sustainability from the literature study and 
delimit the scope of the study based on the maturity of the available assessment methods. After 
attending multiple events on Circle House, a collaboration between Fællestegnestuen, responsible for the 
design of Circle House, and the authors were established. During the definition process, meetings with 
DK-GBC2 and SBI3 were held to discuss the work of this thesis and the direction of the thesis 
development.  
In the development stage the assessment methods were planned and developed. Data in the form of 
interview, plan drawings etc. were collected and aggregated.  
The application process consisted of conducting the analyses by application of the assessment methods 
on the case. During this stage the results were interpreted through an iterative process.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.2: The figure shows the process of the thesis divided into four stages: Discover, Define, Develop and Apply.  
                                                
2 DK-GBC (Danish Green Building Council) 
3 SBI (Danish Building Research Institute)  
==PAGE:13==
12 
 
Figure 1.3: The figure shows the iterative process of the four stages of the thesis work, thus it shows a more accurate 
diagrammatic expression of the workflow.  
 
1.5 Delimitation 
In the literature studies, sustainability has been investigated on a large scale, in order to go one step 
back and find the definition within each sustainability dimension. This definition is then applied on Circle 
House on a building scale. 
The investigation and application of assessment methods in the three sustainability dimensions have 
been conducted on different levels. This is due to the fact that the authors’ engineering background 
mainly supports the environmental dimension of sustainability, and to some degree the social dimension, 
while the assessment method of the economic dimension has not been supported during their studies in 
Architectural Engineering. Therefore, the main focus in the three sustainability dimensions is on the 
environmental dimension. Secondly follows the social dimension, since this is both supported in the ‘soft’ 
design courses of Architectural Engineering and since an increased focus on social values was a wish 
from the industry during the Building Green conference in Copenhagen in 2017. Thirdly the economic 
dimension is investigated. The different workload put into the three sustainability dimensions reflects our 
competencies in Architectural Engineering.  
The reason why it is important to include all dimensions of sustainability, is that engineers are increasingly 
working with sustainability in the Danish building industry, eg. through certification systems in 
sustainability. It is progressively becoming the tasks of the engineers to implement sustainability. That 
includes both social, economic and environmental sustainability. It is our intention to strengthen their 
competencies in the social and economic dimension to even out the gap in our skills, see figure 1.4.  
 
Figure 1.4: The figure demonstrate the intended shift of magnitude to the competencies of the authors combined skills within each 
of the three sustainability dimensions in relation to each other over the course of the thesis. 
 
==PAGE:14==
13 
The intention of this thesis is to find or develop a framework that are able to assess the absolute 
sustainability of a social housing project in its early design stage. The early design stages are where the 
general ideas and overall strategies are decided. By assessing the sustainability in the early design 
stages the strategies are sustained throughout the project. Another reason for choosing to assess the 
early design stages is that the more concrete the project gets and the further along the building process 
is, the more difficult and costly it gets to implement sustainability (Kohler and Moffatt, 2003). This is 
illustrated through figure 1.5 below.  
 
 
Figure 1.5: The figure shows the relationship between the possibility to influence impacts and costs over the life cycle of a building. 
The x-axis shows the time by phases of the building stages. The y-axis shows the environmental impacts and costs.  Planning is 
the early design stage, and is thus the best time to influence the sustainability. Redrawn from (Kohler and Moffatt, 2003). 
1.6 Intended application of study 
Since the authors of this thesis are passionate about absolute sustainability, it is their hope that the 
findings of this study will resonate in the Danish building industry. The research made in this study will be 
presented to the involved parties in Circle House, mainly the responsible architects of Fællestegnestuen 
involved in Circle House and Lejerbo. Consequently the assessments will be carried out from both the 
perspective of Lejerbo as well as Fællestegnestuen.  
The social assessment will evaluate the social sustainability of Circle House for the future residents, thus 
it can be used as a guiding tool for both Fællestegnestuen and Lejerbo for further improvement and 
decision making.  
The environmental assessment will evaluate the environmental sustainability of one terrace house in 
Circle House. This will also support decision making and serve as guiding tool for further improvement for 
both Lejerbo and Fællestegnestuen by finding hotspots4 in Circle House’s entire life cycle within all 
sustainability dimensions.  
The economic assessment will evaluate the economic sustainability from Lejerbo’s point of view. It 
outlines the costs and benefits of implementing circular solutions in Circle House and hence support 
decision making. 
                                                
4 Hotspots are here used as a reference to a hotspot analysis in environmental sustainability assessment, as the spots of interest 
or spots for improvement. 
==PAGE:15==
14 
1.7 Reading guide 
This thesis consists of one report and three appendices. The report is divided into seven chapters (see 
figure 1.6). In each of the chapters is given an introduction, a summary and partial conclusion of the 
chapter. The conclusion will describe how the findings of each chapter will be used for further analysis.  
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
The introduction, that you are currently reading, includes our motivation, problem statement, delimitation 
and intended application of the thesis report.  
Chapter 2: Literature studies 
At first the chapter gives an introduction to sustainability and sustainable development. The literature 
studies then consists of five studies; 1) Social sustainability, 2) Environmental sustainability, 3) Economic 
sustainability, 4) The UN Sustainable Development Goals, and 5) Sustainability within the Danish building 
industry. The studies investigate the definition of the subject and how it can be assessed in an absolute 
manner. From these studies, we define absolute sustainability in a building context and apply it in the 
assessment methods. The literature studies work as the theory behind this thesis.  
Chapter 3: Methodology 
The methodology consist of four assessments methods; environmental sustainability assessment, social 
sustainability assessment, environmental sustainability assessment, economic sustainability assessment 
and assessment of the SDGs as indicators of sustainability in a building context. The assessment 
methods intend to determine the absolute sustainability. 
Chapter 4: Results 
The results describe the findings of the four applied assessment methods on the case Circle House.  
The results follow the chronological order of the methodology and thus consists of four assessment 
results. 
Chapter 5: Discussion 
The discussion chapter discusses the theoretical perspective, methods and assumptions made in this 
thesis report. 
Chapter 6: Conclusion 
This chapter rounds off the thesis report with a conclusion of the discussion chapter. 
Chapter 7: Recommendations and outlook 
Finally recommendations for improvement of Circle House and an outlook of how the absolute 
paradigme can be used in the future when applied in a building context.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.6: Composition and chronological order of the chapters in the thesis report. 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
15 
==PAGE:17==
16 
2. Literature studies 
 
In this chapter, the concept of sustainability will be described through the various literature and thereby 
seek to find common elements of the understanding of sustainability in order to give a definition of 
absolute sustainability. The literature studies are given in this chapter as a summary of the complete 
literature studies which are found in appendix A. Appendix A is divided in chapters. References to the 
chapters in appendix A will be given accordingly. 
2.1 Sustainability and sustainable development 
Sustainability can be seen as the ideal goal that has the capacity for continuance into the long-term 
future. Sustainable development can be seen as the process of reaching the end-stage, that is 
sustainability (Flint, 2013).  
2.1.1 The brundtland report 
Sustainability and sustainable development has been on the agenda for several decades but was 
thoroughly manifested in 1987 by the report ‘Our Common Future’ by the World Commission on 
Environment and Development (WCED), also known as the Brundtland Report. The report defines 
sustainable development in the following way:  
 
“Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (Brundtland, 1987).  
 
This definition has created the fundamental understanding in the sustainability community of what 
sustainable development needs to address. The report led to the understanding that sustainable 
development is an integrated strategy that should strive to improve the wellbeing of humans without 
damaging the environment and society (Flint, 2013). 
Sustainable development has since been described by a balance of the three E’s: Economy, Ecology 
and Equity [-]. This is also known as the triple bottom line (TBL), see figure 2.1 (Flint, 2013). 
 
 
Figure 2.1: The Venn diagram shows the three dimensions in the Triple Bottom Line:  
Economy, Ecology and Equity (Flint, 2013). 
 
The use of TBL tends to focus at each of the elements individually or often with focus leaning towards 
economy. Later the TBL has been developed through the Venn-diagram to underline that the 
sustainability is an integrated strategy (Flint, 2013). Now the Venn-diagram is used to describe 
sustainability as it is the commonly adopted understanding of sustainable development as an integrated 
strategy, see figure 2.2 (Dreyer, 2009). 
 
==PAGE:18==
17 
 
Figure 2.2: The three dimensions of sustainability:  
Social, Environmental (ecology) and Economic sustainability. The obtain sustainability the three dimensions have to be connected 
and integrated as mentioned by (Flint, 2013). 
 
The venn-diagram helps show the interconnection of the constituent dimensions of sustainable 
development: economic, social equity and ecology. The three dimensions are reviewed by Flint (2013) in 
the following way: 
 
● 
Social equity: “guaranteeing equal access to jobs, education, natural resources, and services for 
all people; total societal welfare; access to fair conflict resolution” (Flint, 2013). 
● 
Economic security: “development that protects and/or enhances natural resource quantities 
through improvements in management practices and policies, technology, efficiency, and 
changes in lifestyle” (Flint, 2013). 
● 
Ecological integrity: “understanding natural system processes of landscapes, watersheds, and 
seas to guide design of sound economic development strategies that preserve these natural 
systems”  (Flint, 2013). 
 
When going through the literature of sustainable development there is an overall agreement that, to truly 
achieve sustainability through sustainable development, all three constituent dimensions must be 
considered.  
Flint (2013) states that by focusing on sustainability as a whole, time, that would otherwise be spent 
trying to balance the three elements, can instead be used to generate resiliency and value that have 
impact across all of the three dimensions.  
In relation to the built environment the Congress for New Urbanism (CNU) describes this in an urban 
context by the following: “We recognise that physical solutions by themselves will not solve social and 
economic problems, but neither can economic vitality, community stability, and environmental health be 
sustained without a coherent and supportive physical framework” (Godschalk, 2004).  
As the Brundtland definition states an action or policy can not be sustainable if “...it will reduce the ratio 
of benefits to constraints, in any place or time”  (Flint, 2013). It is therefore worth noticing that 
sustainability has a time-dependent dimension. Actions carried out in the present will influence the future 
and the action must therefore be considered in the short as well as the long term.  
 
==PAGE:19==
18 
2.1.2 Circular economy 
Another more resourceful way of looking at sustainable development is through circular economy and life 
cycle thinking. Circular economy is defined by the founding Ellen MacArthur Foundation5 as restorative 
and regenerative by design while aiming to keep products, components and materials at their highest 
utility and value at all times (The Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2012). 
Circular economy distinguishes between two cycles: technical and biological, see figure 2.3. 
The technical cycle “...involves the management of stocks of finite materials. Use replaces consumption. 
Technical materials are recovered and mostly restored in technical cycles.” 
The biological cycle encompasses “...the flow of renewable materials. Consumption only occurs in the 
biological cycle. Renewable (biological) nutrients are mostly regenerated in the biological cycle” (The Ellen 
MacArthur Foundation, 2012). 
 
The circular economy consists of three principles:  
1. Preserve and enhance natural captivity by controlling finite stocks and balancing renewable 
resource flows. 
2. Optimise resource yields by circulating products, components and materials, in use at the 
highest utility at all times in both technical and biological cycles. 
3. Foster system effectiveness by revealing and designing out negative externalities (The Ellen 
MacArthur Foundation, 2012). 
 
 
 
Figure 2.3: The figure displays the principle of the technical and biological cycle in circular economy (The Ellen MacArthur 
Foundation, 2012). 
 
By using these principles, the Ellen MacArthur Foundation has created guidelines for how to achieve 
sustainable development through a circular economy. The figure 2.3 consists of three overall principles in 
                                                
5 A foundation devoted to “inspire a generation to re-think, re-design and build a positive future circular economy” (The Ellen 
MacArthur Foundation, 2012). 
==PAGE:20==
19 
the circular economy guidelines. These are (1) to “preserve and enhance natural capital by controlling 
finite stocks and balancing renewable resource flows”, (2)  to “optimise resource yields by circulating 
products, components and materials in use at the highest utility at all times in both technical and 
biological cycles”, and to “foster system effectiveness by revealing and designing out negative 
externalities” (The Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2012). Design strategies that support and implement the 
principles of circular economy are recycling, reusability, modularity, design for disassembly etc. (The Ellen 
MacArthur Foundation, 2012).  
2.2 Social sustainability 
This section gives a summary to the findings of the literature study on social sustainability as well as a 
review of the available assessment methods. The entire literature study on social sustainability and social 
assessment review can be found in appendix A0.  
2.2.1 The findings 
The findings of the literature study on social sustainability found that the literature discusses different 
wide-ranging aspects of social sustainability, often within an urban context. Generally, there were no 
exact definition of social sustainability but two concepts were consistent through the literature: Equity 
and Justice. These elements were discussed in various forms but were the foundation of all the elements 
the studied authors described in relation to social sustainability.  
In table 2.1 is given an overview of some of the authors take on the elements that constitute social 
sustainability. More terms associated with social sustainability can be found in appendix A0 table A0.2.   
 
Table 2.1: Overview of the constituting elements of social sustainability by author. 
(Flint, 2013) 
(Vallance et al., 2011) 
(Yiftachel et al., 1993) 
(Dempsey et al., 2011) 
Societal well-being 
Cultural vitality 
Citizen engagement 
Institutional effectiveness 
Social homogeneity 
Equitable income 
Access to goods, services, 
employment 
(Cultural justice) 
(Political justice) 
Equity 
Community 
Urbanity 
Social equity 
Social community 
 
2.2.1.1 Towards a definition of social sustainability 
While this paper focuses on the sustainability in an architectural (and thereby) urban perspective, the 
broader more general definition of social sustainability gave a more in-depth understanding of social 
sustainability. Thereby social sustainability can be summed up to the following four points and is a result 
of the reviewed literature: 
 
1. Societal wellbeing and equitable access to welfare 
2. Institutional justice and effectiveness 
3. Cultural vitality 
4. Citizen engagement and ethics 
 
The general understanding of these four points are summarised in table 2.2 below and the whole 
literature study can be found in appendix A0. 
 
==PAGE:21==
20 
Table 2.2: The table summarises the general understanding of social sustainability down to four points. The description in the 
second column relates the terms found in the literature to the four points.  
Social sustainability  
Description 
1. Societal well-being and 
access to welfare  
Sense of wellbeing: sense of belonging, sense of place, sense of self-worth, sense of safety, 
sense of connection with nature, access to goods, services and natural resources, access 
to education and employment, provision of health and housing 
2. Institutional justice and 
effectiveness 
Equitable incomes, effectiveness of governance, influence, conflict resolution, equitable 
pricing 
3. Cultural vitality 
Resident diversity, cultural diversity and inclusion, preservation of history and cultural values, 
use of culture and history to advance in societal learning,  
4. Citizen engagement and 
ethics 
Social cohesion, sense of community, social interaction, commitment, sense of 
responsibility 
 
2.2.1.2 Social sustainability assessment methodologies 
A review of the available assessment methods revealed that three methods in particular would suit the 
evaluation of social sustainability on a building scale: Kate Raworth’s Doughnut Economy, the 
methodology of Social Bricks using the Social Effect Prism and DGNB social sustainability criterias 
including DGNB Diamond (Raworth, 2017) (Carlberg and Buchhave Lind, 2017) (Ole and Gro, 2016) (DK-
GBC, 2017). 
 
Kate Raworth uses a combination of environmental assessment and social assessment to describe the 
‘just and safe space for humanity’, see figure 2.4. The just and safe space for humanity is where the 
Earth and the people are not burdened wrongly by the actions of humankind (Raworth, 2017). 
 
 
Figure 2.4: The figure shows the principles of Doughnut Economy by Kate Raworth. The doughnut shows ‘the safe and just space 
for humanity’ that is found within the ecological ceiling and social foundation. When entering outside these boundaries the societal 
shortfalls and the overshoot of the environmental burden on the planet, becomes visible (Raworth, 2017a). 
 
Raworths assessment of the social sustainability is updated to fit the SDGs and provides a good visual 
overview of the societal shortfalls (Carlberg and Buchhave Lind, 2017).While her way of combining the 
dimensions of sustainability will be used in the assessment, the SDGs focused on a range of elements 
that are not directly nor indirectly linked to buildings or the building industry.  
The Social Effect Prism on the other hand takes six dimensions that are directly linked to the human 
interaction with and perception of buildings, see figure 2.5. The methodology is developed with focus on 
architecture housing the socially vulnerable and marginalised (Carlberg and Buchhave Lind, 2017). 
==PAGE:22==
21 
 
 
Figure 2.5: The figure shows the six types of social effect in the social effect prisme.  
Developed by Carlberg and Christensen (2017). 
 
The Social Effect Prism evaluates the six dimensions qualitatively as described in table 2.3.  
 
Table 2.3: The table shows the six social sustainability dimensions of the social effect prism. The six dimensions are directly linked 
to the human interaction with and perception of buildings and are developed with focus on architecture housing the socially 
vulnerable and marginalised (Carlberg and Buchhave Lind, 2017). 
The dimensions 
Description (Carlberg and Buchhave, 2017) 
Mental Health 
The room as a stimulator of the senses:  
The focus is on mental health, rest and reception that can be stimulated by materials, 
lighting, colours and nature. 
Behaviour 
The room as a regulator of behaviour: 
Focus is on aspects as the feeling of safety, predictability and trust, that can be 
obtained by a spatial overview, intuitive wayfinding and individual control of stimuli.  
Activity 
The room as a stimulator of creative activity: 
The focus is on aspects activations, learning and competence edification through 
functional elements as kitchens, gardens and outdoor sports areas etc.  
Inclusion 
The rooms as a stimulator of inclusion: 
Focus is on the effects of inclusion, neighbourhood and community, that can be 
achieved by boundaries, common areas, and flow management.  
Identification 
The narrative of the room: 
Focus is on the signal value, acknowledge and pride, that can be achieved by a strong 
concept and architectural quality.  
Ownership 
The room a stimulator of creation: 
Focus is on ownership, engagement and lust of life, following a sense of involvement, 
to be listened to and by creation with others.   
 
 
==PAGE:23==
22 
2.2.1.3 DGNB 
The DGNB6-certification system has ten criterias which relates to social sustainability on a building scale 
that can be seen from table 2.4. A description of the criteria can be seen in appendix A0 table A0.3. 
These criteria relate mostly to the indoor climate, functionality and design quality of a building (DK-GBC, 
2014).  
 
Table 2.4: The table lists the ten criteria in DGNB which relates to social sustainability (DK-GBC, 2014). 
DGNB social criteria 
Thermal comfort 
Indoor air quality 
Visual comfort 
User control of indoor climate 
Quality of outdoor areas 
Safety and security 
Accessibility 
Conditions for bicyclist 
Architectural quality 
Plan disposition 
 
These criteria are assessed qualitatively and/or quantitatively.  
DGNB has created a pilot phase of a special certification, DGNB Diamond, which is given to buildings 
with high architectural quality. To reach a Diamond certification the buildings are assessed qualitatively 
through a matrix assessing the architectural virtues, see figure A0.6 in appendix A0 (DK-GBC, 2017). 
 
2.2.2 Conclusion 
The result of the literature study and assessment review led to the conclusion that there is various 
definitions of what social sustainability is. The same conclusion is reached when assessing social 
sustainability on an urban scale. The closest the literature study came to a definition was that social 
sustainability is about (1) societal wellbeing and equitable access to welfare (2) institutional justice and 
effectiveness (3) cultural vitality and citizen engagement and ethics.  
The best assessment method to assess social sustainability were found to be the Social Effect Prisme 
since it relates on a building level, which is the focus of this thesis. Dimensions from other assessment 
methods could also be useful in order to assess the social sustainability, here including the DGNB criteria 
and the visualisation of Kate Raworth diagram.  
 
 
 
                                                
6 DGNB-certification: The certification system developed by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen. The Danish Green 
Building Council has implemented the certification to fit the danish building industry and is the favoured certification system in 
Denmark.  
==PAGE:24==
23 
2.3 Environmental sustainability 
This section gives a summary of the findings of the literature study on environmental sustainability as well 
as a review of the available assessment methods. The entire literature study and assessment review can 
be found in appendix A1.  
2.3.1 Findings  
The literature study showed that the focus of environmental sustainability is to secure a stable 
environment for current and future generations. The environmental impacts we see today, both global, 
national and local are the result of large usage of non-renewable resources and cause the natural 
ecosystems to deteriorate (Brundtland, 1987). To save and restore our planetary system, these 
environmental impacts needs to be addressed and reduced so future generations also have the 
possibility to experience the same natural environment that surround us today (Morelli, 2011). 
To maintain the stable state where humanity has arisen from and thrives in, called the Holocene period, it 
is crucial to comply with the physical limits of the Earth (Lowe, 2006) (Rockström, 2009). 
 
2.3.1.1 Clarification of concept 
The literature study clarified that the essence of environmental sustainability is to “comply with the 
physical limits of our planetary system to secure a sustainable environment” (Rockström, 2009). In details 
meaning that “our resource and service needs of current and future generations does not compromise 
the health of the ecosystems that provides them” (Morelli, 2011). 
2.3.1.2 Environmental sustainability assessment methodologies 
To comply with the physical limits of the Earth, a lot of different assessment methods and tools has been 
developed throughout the last 40 years. The Ecological Footprint was one of the first academic 
assessment methods published, and is a way of quantifying impact limits of a specified human 
population or economy on the Earth (Wackernagel and Rees, 1996). The ecological footprint can 
estimate the extent of a global ‘overshoot’ which is “the amount by which humanity’s total Ecological 
footprint is bigger than global carrying capacity” (Wackernagel and Rees, 1996). 
Another very common environmental assessment method called Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
originates from the concept of Life Cycle Thinking (LCT) (Lehtinen et al., 2011). Life cycle thinking focus 
on understanding the impacts and benefits of a product, including goods and services, throughout the 
whole lifecycle of the product (Lehtinen et al., 2011). The purpose of an LCA is to support decision 
making and to identify environmental hotspots that needs to be targeted for improvements (European 
Commission, 2010). LCAs are also the most common tool within the building industry when assessing 
the whole building’s and the building components’ environmental profile. 
 
2.3.1.3 LCA 
The review of assessment tools will only focus in details on LCA since it is the environmental sustainability 
analysis tool used in this report. 
The LCA methodology consist of two international standards, ISO 14040 (ISO, 2006a) and ISO 
14040 (ISO, 2006b), that consist of a more general framework for LCA. There is in connection with this 
developed a more detailed guidance, containing more consistency and quality assurance called the 
International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook (Lehtinen et al., 2011). 
==PAGE:25==
24 
When performing an LCA, different steps and choices, that are a part of the LCA framework, 
have to be carried out. The different steps and choices with a short description of each can be seen in 
table 2.5 below. 
 
Table 2.5: A brief description of the different steps that one must follow during when carrying out a Life Cycle Assessment 
Steps 
Description 
Functional Unit (FU) 
A a measure of what is being delivered and provides the 
function to which all other data is normalised (2.-o LCA 
Consultants, 2017).   
Goal definition  
The reason for carrying out the assessment, the intended 
audience and the intended application (Lehtinen et al., 2011). 
Scope definition 
Determining system boundaries and level of detail (Lehtinen et 
al., 2011). 
Life Cycle Inventory analysis (LCI) 
Collecting input and output data to carry out the intended 
study within the system boundary (Lehtinen et al., 2011). 
Modelling approaches of LCI 
(Attributional & consequential) 
Attributional: describes environmental flows within the 
temporal window, generally flows of the recent past. 
Consequential: Describes the change of environmental flows in 
the future in response to possible decisions (Buyle, Braet and 
Audenaert, 2014). 
LCI databases  
Various options of LCI databases exist. E.g. the DGNB 
certification system uses Ökobau [i16] and One of the most 
commonly used LCI databases is the Ecoinvent LCI database 
that today includes global LCI data (Ecoinvent, 2017a). 
Impact assessment 
(Classification & characterisation) 
Converting the LCI data to environmental impacts. Includes 
two mandatory steps: classification and characterisation. 
Classification: results are divided in to impact categories. 
Characterisation: the potential environmental impact is 
estimated by scientific factors (Lehtinen et al., 2011). 
Characterisation methods: 
(Midpoint & endpoint categories)  
Midpoint: “ provides indicators for comparison of 
environmental interventions at a level of cause-effect chain 
between emissions/resource consumption and the endpoint 
level.” 
Endpoint: “provides indicators at the level of Areas of 
Protection or at a level close to the Areas of Protection level” 
(Hauschild et al., 2011). 
Optional assessments: 
(Normalisation & weighting) 
Normalisation: Impacts are put into context eg. regions or 
countries by given time frame 
Weighting: Allows the conductor of the study to indicate which 
impacts are of most importance (Lehtinen et al., 2011). 
 
Within the LCA framework there are many Life Cycle Impact Assessments (LCIA) with different 
methodologies that can be applied. They can differ in impact categories, selection of indicators and 
geographical focus (Lehtinen et al., 2011).In the building industry, the most commonly used method is 
CML 2002.  
 Attributional LCA is the most commonly used when conducting LCA in the construction sector (Buyle, 
Braet and Audenaert, 2014).  
The essence of LCA is the life cycle perspective. The different stages of a building’s life cycle has been 
divided into categories to easier identify which are included. They can be seen from figure 2.6 and a 
detailed description can be found in appendix A1.  
==PAGE:26==
25 
 
Figure 2.6: The diagram shows the life cycle thinking of LCA. All life cycle stages are included, including transport from location to 
location. Redrawn from (Birgisdottir, 2015). 
 
Depending on the scope of the included life cycle stages, the assessment can be referred to as gate-to-
gate, cradle-to-gate, cradle-to-grave and cradle-to-cradle, see figure 2.7 below.  
 
 
 
Figure 2.7: The diagram shows the different types of life cycle phases that can be assessed in LCA, redrawn from (European 
Commission, 2010). 
 
 
Many different tools to conduct LCAs exist and they support different phases and applications and are 
developed for a particular field or industry (Lehtinen et al., 2011). 
In Denmark, an LCA tool has been developed for the building industry called LCA-byg (Statens 
Byggeforskningsinstitut, 2017b). 
 
2.3.1.4 Planetary boundaries in LCA 
The physical limits in LCA has been described by Rockström et al. as planetary boundaries, that are 
values for control variables that are either at a ‘safe’ distance from thresholds or at dangerous levels. 
Rockström et al. argues that three out of nine chosen planetary systems have already exceeded these 
==PAGE:27==
26 
thresholds. These systems are climate change, rate of biodiversity loss and the nitrogen cycle 
(Rockström, 2009). See appendix A1, table A1.1 for further details about the specific thresholds.  
 
2.3.1.5 DGNB 
The DGNB-certification system has six criterias which relates to environmental sustainability on a building 
scale, which can be seen from table 2.6. Three of these criteria relate to LCA (DK-GBC, 2014). A 
description of the criteria can be seen in appendix A1 table A1.2.  
 
Table 2.6: The table lists the ten criteria in DGNB which relates to environmental sustainability (DK-GBC, 2014). 
Environmental criteria 
Life cycle assessment (LCA) - environmental impacts 
Environmental risks related to building products  
Environmental impact by extraction of raw materials 
Life cycle assessment (LCA) - primary energy 
Consumption of drinking water and wastewater spill 
Effective area utilization 
 
2.3.2 Conclusion  
The result of the literature study and assessment review led to the conclusion that environmental 
sustainability focus on quantitative measurements of humans’ impact on the natural environment and the 
physical limits to which the Earth’s systems can be sustained. There are various terms in respect to the 
focus of this environmental investigation. Those are: carrying capacity, planetary boundaries, and 
ecological footprint. It was found that the environmental methodology that is most appropriate to assess 
the case study is the LCA framework. With an LCA it is possible to investigate the whole life cycle of a 
product, building or service, which is the intend in this thesis.  
 
 
==PAGE:28==
27 
2.4 Economic sustainability 
This section gives a summary to the findings of the literature study on economic sustainability as well as 
a review of the available assessment methods. The entire literature study and assessment review can be 
found in appendix A2.  
2.4.1 Findings  
The findings of the literature study were that various opinions and approaches exists towards the 
definition of economic sustainability. 
When the first environmental problems became visible in the 1970s, many different branches of 
economists concerned with the environmental problems arose. In addition, the economic concern 
regarding the environmental problems was similarly caused by both the financial and the oil crisis that 
arose around that time and later in the 1970s (Meadows et al., 1972). However, it was not until the 
Brundtland report was published in 1987 that it became commonly recognised that pollution also had a 
more indirect impact on the economics (Ayres, 2008). Thanks to the Brundtland report and the effort of 
many researchers, economists started to accept and recognise that economic growth is not endless but 
has a limit. The well-known book “Limits to Growth” from 1972 (Meadows et al., 1972) makes this very 
clear stating that the economic growth is based on the natural resources we use; “and because of the 
planetary boundaries, there are limits to the rate of our use of resource; and hence also a limit to the 
related growth” (Meadows et al., 1972).  
Table 2.7 shows the most common branches of economics that are concerned with 
environmental problems found from the literature study. Thus, the study of economic sustainability in this 
thesis is based mostly on the understanding and definition of economic sustainability defined by these 
branches. A more detailed description of the different branches of economics can be found in appendix 
A2.   
 
Table 2.7: Branches of economics concerned with sustainability and their area of focus.  
Branches of economics 
Area of focus 
Resource economics 
Study optimal extraction of resources, cost and unit price to 
determine the extraction rates of giving resources (Ruth, 
2006). 
Environmental economics 
Study the environmental damage that arises from the 
production and consumption and how to integrate the 
associated costs into services and price of goods and hence 
to find modern market-based applications to address the 
environmental issues (Ruth, 2006). 
Ecological economics 
Study how economic activity and ecosystems interrelate 
(Baumgärtner and Quaas, 2010b), through pricing 
ecosystems’ goods and services, e.g. timber or fish (Ruth, 
2006). 
Industrial economics 
Study ways to minimise waste generation in production and 
consumption processes, and in the end minimise the 
environmental impact (Ruth, 2006). 
Natural economics 
Study economics with a more natural and holistic view on the 
world and has four themes they focus their work on: 
(1) community over individual, (2) efficiency and effectiveness 
decision-making, (3) iterative process of data collection and (4) 
holistic impact assessments (Ruth, 2006). 
 
==PAGE:29==
28 
 
2.4.1.1 Towards a definition of economic sustainability 
Since the various branches of economics have different fields of interest, their approaches and concepts 
are also different. This leads to various opinions on which area of economics has the best foundation for 
the future of sustainability economics (Ruth, 2006). 
Some of the different concepts and approaches can be seen in table 2.8 and a more detailed description 
is found in appendix A2. 
 
 
Table 2.8: The table gives an overview of different concepts and approaches used in different branches of economics. The first 
column shows the different concepts/approaches and the second column shows the focus of that given concept/approach 
(Baumgärtner and Quaas, 2010b)  (Ayres, 2008) (Ruth, 2006) (Meadows et al., 1972). 
Concept/approach 
Focus 
“Weak sustainability”  
vs.  
“strong sustainability” 
Anthropocentric and utilitarian7  
vs.  
anthropocentric but includes the essential rights of nature 
Conceptual valuation 
vs.  
practical valuation 
Non-measurable e.g. welfare or happiness  
vs.  
monetary valuation e.g. GNP8 
Normative concept 
vs.  
descriptive concept 
‘How the world ought to be’ 
vs. 
‘how the world actually is or could be’ 
 
By the literature study we claim that there is no definitive way of approaching economic sustainability. 
Despite this, the majority of the literature mention the definition by Stefan Baumgartner and Martin Quaas 
from 2010 (B&Q) as a general acknowledgement of the definition of “economic sustainability” 
(Baumgärtner and Quaas, 2010b) (Bartelmus, 2010) (Baumgärtner and Quaas, 2010a).The definition is 
as follow: 
 
“Sustainability economics is based on an ethical justification of a vision of the future, which is rooted in 
the two normative goals of  
(1) the satisfaction of human needs and wants and  
(2) justice, including inter9- and intragenerational10 justice and justice towards nature.  
This ethical justification is combined with the idea of efficiency, that is non-wastefulness in the use of 
scarce natural and human resources that have alternative uses.” 
 (Baumgärtner and Quaas, 2010b) (Baumgärtner and Quaas, 2010a) 
 
Because this definition has a more general form and is not going into details with the two specific goals, 
some economics give it a lot of critique. One of the critique points is the omission of externalities and was 
expressed by the economist Van den Bergh (VdB) (2010), who said that sustainability can only be 
reached if there is an absence of externalities, see appendix A2 VdB’s detailed critique. In addition, the 
                                                
7 non-declining utility over time  
8 Gross National Product, which measures the level of production of all the citizens or corporations from a particular country 
working or producing in any country (Investopedia, 2018). GNP is the most common monetary measurement used within the 
different economic branches. 
9 humans of different generations 
10 Humans of the same generation 
==PAGE:30==
29 
definition above does not give a detailed description of the term justice in the second goal. The 
understanding of the word ‘justice’ depends on one’s worldview of the human and nature relationship, 
which are described in table 2.8 as ‘weak or strong sustainability’. As a consequence the second goal 
within the definition above, can be interpreted in two different ways (Baumgärtner and Quaas, 2010a). 
However, this definition is inspired from the Brundtland report where ‘inter- and intragenerational justice’ 
are widely accepted aspects (Baumgärtner and Quaas, 2010b), as it too, includes present and future 
generations’ needs. As described early in this chapter, the Brundtland report defines sustainable 
development as “... development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs.” (Brundtland, 1987)]. Because the B&Q definition reflects 
aspects from the Brundtland report, it might be one of the reasons why this definition is the most 
acknowledged between the economics(Baumgärtner and Quaas, 2010b). 
 
2.4.1.2 Economic sustainability assessment methodologies 
A review of economic sustainability assessment tools and methodologies showed that there are many 
different tools today used both to give insight into the economic conditions as well as tool to developing 
a more sustainable economy.The different tools and methodologies are used at many different levels, 
from national level to building level.  
 
2.4.1.2.1 SEDA-index and Happy Planet Index 
The review found two interesting tools to measure a nation’s ‘economic sustainability’; the SEDA-index 
and the Happy Planet Index. 
The SEDA-index is developed by the Boston Consulting Group (BCG). It provides objective and 
systematically measures the wellbeing of a nation by using ten dimensions of socioeconomic 
development (The Boston Consulting Group, 2017). A more detailed description of the SEDA-index and 
a diagram of the ten dimension can be found in appendix A2. 
The Happy Planet Index (HPI) is produced by the New Economics Foundation and measures the 
sustainable growth and wellbeing of a country based on four elements; wellbeing, life expectancy, 
inequality of outcomes and ecological footprint (Marks, 2017). These four elements show “how efficiently 
residents of different countries are using environmental resources to lead long, happy lives.” (Marks, 
2017). The measurements are visualised through an equation which can be found in appendix A2 
together with a more detailed description of the HPI. 
 
What is interesting about these two assessment tools is that both of them are including additional 
parameters other than the country’s GNP. Both of them are assessing the wellbeing within a nation 
based on both environmental, social and economic parameters, which is a rather new approach for 
economics based on the literature study above.  
 
2.4.1.2.2 Cost-benefit analysis 
A way of determining the economic value creation of a project is the Cost-benefit analysis (CBA). A CBA 
is useful when some inputs and outputs can be assigned economic value and some cannot, especially 
when it comes to asset developments with social and environmental impacts (Josselin and Maux, 2017). 
The aim of a CBA is to determine whether an investment is beneficial or detrimental. The method is able 
to compare different options and thereby functions as a decision support tool (Josselin and Maux, 2017). 
An example of a CBA is the construction of a highway. The new highway leads to a change in the 
financial flows, affects traffic congestion and travel time, improves safety and influences real estate in the 
area near the new highway (Josselin and Maux, 2017). All these changes are accounted for in a CBA. It 
==PAGE:31==
30 
is normally used on large scale projects but can also be useful on smaller scale projects, since its 
strength lies in determining welfare and environmental improvements or damages within economics 
(Josselin and Maux, 2017). 
  
2.4.1.2.3 Life Cycle Costing 
Life Cycle Costing (LCC) has gained a lot of attention in the building industry within the last 5 years after it 
became a legal requirement to use the tool in public buildings (Bygningsstyrelsen, 2017). LCC is seen as 
a sustainable approach for the investment of financial resources when constructing buildings, because 
this assessment method takes the entire building’s life cycle into account. LCC takes into account the 
costs for construction, operational costs as replacement and maintenance etc. (Bygningsstyrelsen, 
2017). 
 
2.4.1.2.4 DGNB  
The DGNB system has three criteria that relates to economic sustainability and are shown in table 2.9 
below. All of them are concerned with the design of the building where the first criterion is based on an 
LCC analysis.  
 
Table 2.9: The table lists the three criteria in DGNB which relates to economic sustainability (DK-GBC, 2014). 
DGNB economic criteria 
Building related lifetime costs 
Flexibility and adaptability  
Robustness  
 
The assessment of the criteria is based on a quantitative evaluation where the indicators within each 
criteria have to comply with different building principles, e.g. gross floor area, building standard, and 
building geometry. These indicators are evaluated and given point based on different criterias defined by 
DGNB. The overall scores for all indicators are based on the comparison with a references value (DK-
GBC, 2014). A more detailed description of the three criteria can be found in appendix A2. 
 
2.4.2 Conclusion 
The results of this literature study have shown that economic sustainability is a multi-faceted and 
contested notion that many have different definitions and interpretations of but that an overall general 
definition is acknowledged within economics. Together with the assessment review it is clear that 
economic sustainability is not only focused on monetary aspects, e.g. a nations’ GNP, but also on other 
aspects, such as wellbeing, life expectancy, inequality of outcomes and ecological footprint. This focus 
led to a methodology framework for assessing economic sustainability in this report.  
The methodological framework will relate to B&Q’s definition of economic sustainability. This will be 
based on a combination of all the reviewed assessment tools, where the CBA will be the core inspiration 
for the methodological framework.  
 
 
==PAGE:32==
31 
2.5 Sustainable Development Goals 
In 2015, the Heads of State and Government met to decide on new UN Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDG) for 2030. The new SDGs contain 17 goals that are based on the Millennium Development Goals, 
and are made to stimulate action in areas of critical importance over the course of the next 15 years. [i8] 
The 17 SDGs are based on five pillars; people, planet, prosperity, peace and partnership.  
The pillars conclude that sustainable development is enforced for the sake of the people in order to 
ensure future generations prosperous lives. This is achieved by maintaining a healthy relationship with the 
planet. It is underlying that these goals can only be achieved when there is peace among humans and 
partnership among nations. Figure 2.8 shows the icons of the 17 SDGs that are commonly known and 
used to illustrate the sustainable development.  
 
 
Figure 2.8: The figure shows the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals illustrated in a circle. The goals serve as a common 
language of sustainable development for all UN countries. 
 
 
Table 2.10 below shows the 17 SDGs and the overall description of the scope for each goal. Each goal 
is accompanied by targets that describe how the goal is reached. Overall, there are 169 targets and 
within each target at least one indicator to describe how to measure improvements of said target. Hence, 
the indicators are quantitatively described. The indicator framework is developed by the Inter-Agency and 
Expert Group on SDG Indicators (IAEG-SDGs) and agreed upon to be the practical starting point at the 
47th session of the UN Statistical Commission held in March 2016 (UN Statistics Service, 2017). At the 
78th session of the UN Statistical Commission in March 2017, it was agreed upon to make refinements 
of several indicators. At the moment, there exists a total of 244 SDGs indicators, but nine of the 
indicators are repeated within two or three different targets. Thus, the actual number of individual targets 
are 232 and there exists a general agreement of these 232 targets (UN Statistics Service, 2017). 
The goals, targets and indicators are developed and described to be implemented on a global, national 
and/or regional level that brings together governments, civil society and the private sector (United 
Nations, 2015). 
 
Table 2.10: In the first column, the SDG are written in order by their respective number. In the second column, the general 
description of each of the goals is listed (UN Statistics Service, 2017). 
SDG no. 
Description of the overall scope of the goals 
1. No Poverty 
End poverty in all its forms everywhere  
2. Zero Hunger 
End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture  
3. Good Health 
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages 
4. Quality Education 
Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all 
==PAGE:33==
32 
5. Gender Equality 
Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 
6. Clean Water and 
Sanitation 
Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all 
7. Affordable and Clean 
energy 
Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all 
8. Decent Work and 
Economic Growth 
Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment 
and decent work for all 
9. Industry, Innovation 
and Infrastructure 
Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialisation and foster innovation 
10. Reduced Inequality 
Reduce inequality within and among countries 
11. Sustainable Cities 
and Communities 
Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable 
12. Responsible 
Consumption and 
Production 
Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns 
13. Climate Action 
Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 
14. Life Below Water 
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development 
15. Life on Land 
Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, 
combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss 
16. Peace Justice and 
Strong Institutions 
Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for 
all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels 
17. Partnership for the 
Goals 
Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalise the global partnership for sustainable 
development 
 
The SDGs “seek to realise the human rights of all and to achieve gender equality and the empowerment 
of all women and girls. They are integrated, indivisible and balance the three dimensions of sustainable 
development: the economic, social and environmental” (UN Statistics Service, 2017). The relation 
between the SDGs and the three dimensions of sustainability can be seen from figure 2.9. 
 
 
Figure 2.9: The figure displays the 17 UN Sustainable development goals (expressed in the inner circle) and each goal’s relation to 
the sustainability dimensions (expressed by a Venn diagram next to the individual goal). In the Venn Diagram the red circle 
represents the social sustainability dimension. The blue circle represents the economic sustainability dimension and the green circle 
represents the environmental sustainability dimension. For further explanation of the relation see appendix A3, table A3.1. 
 
==PAGE:34==
33 
The SDGs are not legally binding but governments are expected to take ownership and establish national 
frameworks to achieve the above-mentioned goals. See the Danish contribution to the SDGs in the 
section below. 
 
2.5.1 The sustainable development goals in a Danish perspective 
The SDGs are described within a Danish context through the published book “Bæredygtig Global 
Udvikling - FN’s 17 verdensmål i et dansk perspektiv” from 2016 (Hildebrandt). The book is written by 35 
leading experts within the different areas of the goals and are described according to the Danish 
conditions. The book tries to explain what the SDGs means to Denmark, what effort has to be 
conducted in Denmark, what responsibilities and opportunities Denmark has compared to other 
countries, and what Denmark can learn from other countries. Because the book investigates the goals 
within a Danish perspective, the focus is on what actions, initiatives, interventions etc. that are needed to 
implement in Denmark if the Danish society has to respect and live up to the SDGs. Thus, the book 
examines the SDGs on different levels; both the national, regional and business level (Hildebrandt, 2016). 
 
In June 2017, the Ministry of Finance published the report “Report for Voluntary National Review - 
Denmark’s implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”. This report is the Danish 
Government's National Action Plan “on how to follow up on the SDGs and already integrates sustainable 
development in policymaking” (Ministry of Finance, 2017). This report shows that the Danish government 
has taken ownership and through the National Action Plan establishes a national framework to pursue 
solutions that are sustainable and support the SDGs 2030 agenda. 
The National Action Plan contains 37 concrete national targets to measure the progress of the 
sustainable development. The Ministry of Finance is responsible for the coordination of national 
implementation of the SDGs and that the Action Plan is adopted by the Danish government. Despite this, 
it is emphasised that there is a need for stakeholders across the society to also contribute to the striving 
to achieve the SDGs in Denmark (Ministry of Finance, 2017). 
 
2.5.2 The Sustainable development goals and the building industry 
Since the building industry accounts for one third of all consumption of global resources and almost half 
of the world’s energy use (Braune, 2017), many of the SDGs will have to focus a lot on this industry to 
truly reach many of their environmental sustainability goals. 
But where in the specific goals and targets can the SDGs relate to the building industry? Green Building 
Council Denmark (DK-GBC) has decided to play an active role supporting the global sustainable goals 
and are therefore relating the SDGs as a source to the DGNB-certification. For now, the DGNB has 
made a comparison between the SDGs and SDG targets and their current DGNB system within a 
German context (Braune, 2017). Since DGNB has a significant role in the Danish building industry, when 
trying to include more sustainable solutions for building and city development, this comparison can be a 
good and fair basis for defining SDGs in the Danish building industry.  
The comparison is shown in figure 2.10 and the figure shows that there are already many overlaps and 
areas of potential synergy (Braune, 2017). In table A4.1 in appendix A4, the SDGs that overlap with the 
current DGNB system are shown and described. Based on this comparison, table A5.1 in appendix A5 
describes which SDG targets and indicators that relates to the Danish building industry. 
 
==PAGE:35==
34 
 
Figure 2.5: The figure displays the 17 UN Sustainable development goals and each goal’s relation to the DK-GBC. Coloured tiles 
indicate an overlap, grey tiles indicate a lack of overlap. For further explanation of the relation see appendix A4 table A4.1. 
2.5.3 Conclusion 
The literature study on UN’s Sustainable Development Goals found that the overall focus of 17 goals is to 
promote sustainable development within social, economic and environmental aspects and thus support 
all three sustainability dimensions. The SDGs are intended to be implemented by nations according to 
their sustainable development issues and thus the 17 goals have different importance within different 
countries.  
The framework of the SDGs is made to fit global, national and regional implementation. The study shows 
that there are also possibilities for implementation in the building industry based on the DGNB’s 
implementation. Furthermore, the SDGs have also made impact in the Danish society, where it is the 
government’s intention to support and include the SDGs in the Danish governance and legislation to 
promote a sustainable development both in a national and global context.  
==PAGE:36==
35 
2.6 Sustainability in the industry 
In the fall of 2017, the authors attended several conferences and events on the topic of sustainability 
within different perspectives and cases, held by various stakeholders in the industry. This section gives a 
summary to the findings of the Green Building Conference as well as a quick review of some of the 
sustainability tools available in the Danish building industry, based on the attended events and research. 
The entire summary and review can be found in appendix A6. 
2.6.1 Findings  
2.6.1.1 Green Building Conference 2017 
 
At the Green Building Conference 2017, there was an increased focus on the social dimension of 
sustainability. It was agreed upon throughout multiple debates that social sustainability was “the little 
brother” of the three dimensions in the industry and that greater focus should be given to the social 
sustainability. The reason for this was debated, but multiple actors mentioned the difficulty of quantifying 
social sustainability due to the human relation and its “fluffy-ness”, meaning that human action and 
interaction can be difficult to foresee and are not easily quantifiable. Hence, there was an agreement in 
the industry to rely on qualitative measurements when assessing social sustainability. The term ‘value 
creation’ or ‘architecture with added value’ was often used in the debate and was the overall theme 
when discussing sustainability to create positive value for people. It was argued that focus on positive 
externalities, when it comes to economy, should be investigated to become visible in the financial 
account. These themes have been used as guiding points for the outcome of this thesis. For more details 
on the conference see appendix A7.  
2.6.1.2 Sustainability tools in the industry 
The DGNB-certification is the preferred certification system in the industry but a number of other tools 
has seen the light of the day in recent years. A publication by the Danish Architecture Center (DAC), The 
Creation of Architectural Quality, has mapped a variety of tools or assessment methodologies for 
evaluating architectural quality within one or more of the three sustainability dimensions.  
Other tools have been described in appendix A6 and includes Realdania sustainability tool, the 
sustainability tool of the Municipality of Copenhagen and Ecolabels such as Svanemærket and Cradle to 
Cradle certification of building materials.  
The conclusion from the publication by DAC is the same as the conclusion of the review of the 
sustainability tools. There is a need for cohesion and a clear definition of what sustainability is and how it 
is achieved in the Danish building industry (Dansk Arkitektur Center, 2016). 
 
A meeting with a consultant at the DK-GBC office, Thomas Fænø Mondrup, for a talk about absolute 
sustainability on a social and economic level, resulted in an interesting take on absolute measures. He 
argued that the limits that are found in environmental sustainability could be seen as a balance between 
using natural resources and sustaining the natural ecosystems. This is understood as balancing negative 
and positive factors. An example from an environmental point of view was given as the following:  
 
“Negative: Resources are used for the production of building components, construction and operation of 
the building.  
Positive: The building can use passive design, exploit renewable energy sources, produce more energy 
than the building itself needs, and reuse old materials in a new life cycle” (Appendix A8). 
==PAGE:37==
36 
 
A constraint of this thinking could be applied to both social and economic sustainability with the focus on 
balancing positive and negative value as seen in table 2.11. 
 
 
Table 2.11: The table shows the outcome of the meeting with consultant Thomas Fænø Mondrup from DK-GBC office, on the talk 
of absolute limits in the economic and social sustainability dimension. The table shows examples on how to express absolute limits, 
by understanding them as a balance of positive and negative factors. (Appendix A8). 
Economy 
Negative 
Expenses related to the construction and operation of the building = 
economic expense 
Positive 
The building creates physical frames for life and work =  
economic value embedded in the building 
Social 
Negative 
A new building deprives the site and local community of its existing context and values = 
deprives the area  
Positive 
The building adds a new context and new activities to the site  
= gives something back 
 
Thomas’ full summary of the talk can be found in appendix A8.  
2.6.2 Conclusion 
The literature study on sustainability in the building industry let to the acknowledgement that sustainability 
is beginning to have and already has a big influence in the Danish building industry, especially in respect 
to the environmental approaches. It was also found that social sustainability is in need of more attention 
to improve the social aspects for all users of buildings. Today, there exists different quantitative social 
sustainability tools to assess the social relationships in buildings, but there is no coherently way to use 
these different tools. 
The literature study and participation in conferences, events and meetings made it clear what is needed 
in the industry, and how to come closer to absolute measures of sustainability.  
 
==PAGE:38==
37 
2.7 Absolute Sustainability  
The literature study has resulted in an understanding of what sustainable development is and 
sustainability within the three dimension; social, environmental and economic. Moreover, it has led to an 
understanding of how the SDG’s relates to these three dimensions of sustainability. However, the study 
also has to find out how absolute sustainability is reached and weather it is possible to achieve.  
From the Oxford dictionary the word ‘absolute’ is defined as “viewed or existing independently and not in 
relation to other things; not relative or comparative” or “a value or principle which is regarded as 
universally valid or which may be viewed without relation to other things” (Oxford University Press, 2017). 
Absolute sustainability can be seen as the opposite of relative sustainability where different solutions 
within a building context are compared and one is found better (more sustainable) than the other 
solutions.  
 
 
Figure 2.6: The figure shows the difference between relative sustainability and absolute sustainability. Own creation. The green 
cross (study A) is placed on the line of relative sustainability and is compared to a reference, the blue cross (Study B). The green 
cross (study A) is placed on the line of absolute sustainability and shows that it is absolute sustainable, when it is placed on the 
right side of the absolute limit i the positive x-axis.  
 
The literature study of absolute sustainability made it clear that this topic is not well defined within all 
dimension of sustainability and only literature on an absolute definition was found within the 
environmental dimension.  
 
2.7.1 Absolute environmental sustainability  
Absolute environmental sustainability is based on the knowledge of the ecological footprint analysis from 
1992 (Wackernagel and Rees), the planetary boundaries from 2009 (Rockström) and of course from the 
planet’s carrying capacity that already in 1679 was a topic of interest (Cohen, 1995). Since 1679 many 
have tried different approaches to estimate the limit to the planet’s carrying capacity. The ecological 
footprint and planetary boundaries are two examples of this.  
The carrying capacity describes the population limit on Earth to which the environmental ecosystems can 
sustain while still using natural resources (Cohen, 1995) (Wackernagel and Rees, 1996). The common 
denominator for the different definitions and approaches is that the result of exceeding the absolute 
physical limits will results in a degradation or extreme changes of the environment on a local, regional 
and global level and in the end population crash (Rockström, 2009) (Wackernagel and Rees, 1996).  
==PAGE:39==
38 
 
 
Based on the framework of absolute sustainability from Bjørn and Hauschild, Nykjær et al. has assessed 
a building’s absolute sustainable performance, based on the relation between the carrying capacity of 
the Earth and a dwelling. To perform this absolute sustainability assessment in LCA, normalization 
factors are used, which are based on carrying capacity developed by Bjørn and Hauschild (Bjørn and 
Hauschild, 2015). This way it is possible to provide a presentation of a person’s annual share/occupation 
capacity (Brejnrod et al., 2017). 
If the resulted carrying capacity for a person is < 1, a building is assessed as environmentally (absolute) 
sustainable, meaning that the building has less impact on the environment that the Earth system can 
cope with (Brejnrod et al., 2017). 
This way it is possible to describe a building as absolute environmentally sustainable compared to the 
general LCA methodology, where a house of reference is used as a comparison and gives a relative 
sustainable description.  
2.7.2 Our definition of absolute sustainability  
Since the main objective of this report is to investigate to what extend absolute sustainability is 
achievable in a Danish circular perspective, a definition of absolute sustainability within the social and 
economic dimension is needed. Therefore, the authors of this report, will make their own definition based 
on the complete literature study.  
 
It is difficult to define absolute limits in assessment methods that are based on qualitative criteria as 
social sustainability is. Likewise, limits, within economic sustainability growth are difficult to define since 
the meaning of ‘growth’ is the “process of increasing in amount, size or importance” (Oxford University 
Press, 2017) and therefore concrete limits does not exist. 
Inspiration from the definition of absolute environmental sustainability will be transferred to the authors’ 
definition of absolute social and economic sustainability. The idea of having limits to sustain a balance of 
the Earth’s ecosystems will be essential in the definition. Similarly, the thought is to sustain a balance 
within the socio-economic system.  
 
As the building industry has taught the authors, balance in the socio-economic system means 
counterbalancing negative expenses with positive value creation both inter- and intragenerational.  
Thereby absolute architectural sustainability is reached when all three sustainability dimensions are 
equally present.  
 
The understanding of absolute sustainability in this thesis: 
Absolute architectural sustainability is defined as balancing value creation in the socio-economic 
system while staying within the planetary boundaries. 
 
 
Figure 2.7: The figure shows the understanding of absolute sustainability within all three sustainability dimensions. The figure is 
derived from the understanding of planetary boundaries (Rockström, 2009) and the definition absolute sustainability defined above. 
It shows that in order to be absolutely sustainable a balance between the positive and negative must have settled within the 
absolute limit. Own creation. 
==PAGE:40==
39 
2.8 Summary of literature study 
The literature study of this thesis consists of five different studies concerning: social sustainability, 
environmental sustainability, economic sustainability, the Sustainable Development Goals, and 
sustainability in the Danish building industry. The whole literature study can be found in appendix A.  
The first three studies investigates the definitions of social, environmental, and economic 
sustainability respectively, and additionally consists of an assessment review of possible methodologies 
used to assess the specific sustainability dimension within a building context.  
Social sustainability focuses on societal wellbeing, equitable access to welfare, institutional justice and 
effectiveness, cultural vitality, citizen engagement and ethics. Different quantitative assessment methods 
exists, including the Social Effect Prisme, the social criteria within the DGNB-certification system and the 
Kate Raworth Oxfam visualisation diagram. 
Environmental sustainability focuses on quantifying the impact of humans on the environmental and 
physical limits of the Earth, and how to sustain them in respect to the natural resource consumption of 
humans. In a building context, a life cycle assessment (LCA) is the most appropriate tool to assess the 
environmental impacts.  
Economic sustainability is a multi-faceted and contested notion, but an overall definition is acknowledge 
within economics. This definition does not only focus on monetary aspects, but also on aspects such as 
wellbeing, inequalities, life expectancy and ecological footprint. The most used sustainable economic 
assessment tool in the building industry is life cycle costing (LCC). However for the objective of this thesis 
the Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) was found more appropriate as an assessment method of absolute 
sustainability. 
The fourth literature study clarifies the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals, as well as its 
framework, usability and the relation to the Danish society and building industry. The overall focus of the 
17 goals is to promote sustainable development within social, economic and environmental sustainability. 
The SDGs are intended to be implemented by nations according to their sustainable development issues 
and thus the 17 separate goals varies in respective importance within different countries. The SDGs have 
been implemented in the Danish society through the government. The literature study showed potential 
for the implementation of the SDGs in the Danish building industry. 
 
The fifth literature study investigates the existing situation, as well as the needs and wants of the 
future for sustainability in the Danish building industry. The study found that there is a need for more 
focus on the social aspects within the building industry. Today, different stakeholders have developed 
individual quantitative assessment tools to assess the social criteria, but there is no coherent way of 
doing it. Furthermore, it was found that many stakeholders in the industry ask for qualitative analyses of 
social relationships in a building context.  
The authors conclusively created their own definition of absolute sustainability within the social and 
economic dimension, based on the findings of absolute environmental sustainability.  
 
==PAGE:41==
40 
2.9 Partial conclusion of literature study 
The findings from the literature study will be applied to assess absolute sustainability of Circle House. The 
case study will be assessed within social, environmental and economic sustainability. 
The findings from the literature study shows that no assessment tools exist to evaluate absolute 
sustainability within the social and economic dimension, as it does within the environmental dimension. 
Thus, the authors’ own definition of absolute sustainability will be applied together with inspiration from 
the assessment methodologies in the social and economic literature study.  
The social sustainability assessment will consists of a qualitative assessment of the case study where 
inspiration from especially the Social Effect Prisme will be implemented. 
The economic sustainability assessment will consist of a qualitative cost-benefit analysis because it is 
found to be the analysis that best reflects and implements the authors’ definition of absolute 
sustainability. Even though an LCC might be more appropriate within the building industry, it would be 
difficult to balance the negative and positive inputs through this type of assessment tool and an LCC is 
more often than not used as a comparative tool. 
Lastly, an assessment of the application of the SDGs will be carried out through the case study, to 
investigate the possibility of using the SDGs as measurable performance indicators in the building 
industry and on a building level. The assessment will consist of an comparison between the goals and 
the indicators of the SDGs and of the criteria found within the three sustainability dimensions in the 
literature study. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
41 
3. Methodology 
This chapter is divided into six sections:  
● 
3.1 Case Study  
● 
3.2 Assessment Methodology 
● 
3.3 Social Sustainability Assessment 
● 
3.4 Environmental Sustainability Assessment  
● 
3.5 Economic Sustainability Assessment  
● 
3.6 Assessment of SDGs as Sustainability Performance Indicators.  
 
The first section describes the chosen case study Circle House.   
The second section describes the overall assessment methodology of the three assessments. 
The next three sections describe how the absolute sustainability definition is applied in the three 
sustainability dimensions and used to assess the sustainability of Circle House.  
The last section describes how the SDGs’ sustainability indicators can be used to assess sustainability of 
Circle House through the SDGs.  
3.1 Case study 
The intended purpose of this thesis is to apply the absolute boundaries to a case within a Danish building 
context, with circular design solutions.  
Danish social housing projects are commonly influenced by the social and economic perspectives, 
because the social housing projects sets a high standard within the social aspects, but at a limited 
budget. Therefore, a social housing project with circular design methods will be ideal and interesting to 
perform a comprehensive investigation on.  
 
Since sustainable building methods are gaining more impact in the Danish building industry, the 
concepts of circular economy and circular design are also starting to be implemented in different building 
projects. It is therefore possible to choose between different projects. The final choice is the social 
housing project ‘Circle House’ because this particular project implements strategies of using circular 
design.  Figure 3.1 shows an example of the architectural expression of circular design strategies.     
3.1.1 Circle House 
 
Figure 3.1: The figure shows a terrace with steel plates on the heavy part of the facade and wood on the light part, which appears 
grey from patination. The figure is a sketch example of the facade of Circle House and its architectural expression with circular 
design strategies (Appendix B4).  
==PAGE:43==
42 
 
Circle House is referred to as ‘the world’s first circular housing project’, designed by the architectural 
collaborative Fællestegnestuen, consisting of the three architectural firms 3XN/GXN, Vandkunsten and 
Lendager Arkitekter (F5, 2017). 
Circle House is a social housing project, with 60 dwellings that is going to be located in a new 
development area outside Aarhus, named Lisbjerg (Lejerbo, 2017b). 
Circle House is expected to be completed and ready to use in 2020. It is Fællestengestuen’s intent to 
use Circle House as a scalable demonstration project that will supply the building industry with 
knowledge and experience on constructing with circular principles (Lejerbo, 2017b).  
The housing association Lejerbo is the building owner of Circle House and has chosen to be a part of 
this project because they are committed to lead the way with projects such as circular design, where 
responsibility for future generations goes together with reasonable economy. More specifically, they hope 
to see how circular design strategies can help save operation costs, since social housing projects always 
has a limited budget (Lejerbo, 2017b). Additionally, Circle House is going to be the first circular housing 
project that is offered on markets terms which means that it will not be more expensive to live in because 
of the sustainable actions implemented (F5, 2017). 
Circle House is going to be a part of the urban development plan of Lisbjerg, “The new city in Lisbjerg”, 
initiated in the beginning of this millenium (Aarhus Kommune, 2014). Lisbjerg is situated north from 
Aarhus city and over the next few decades it will transform to a dense and livable city with residency of 
25.000 citizens (Aarhus Kommune, 2014). The core values for the urban development plan of Lisbjerg 
are sustainability, accessibility, urban equality and diversity, nature and landscape quality, architectural 
quality, historical anchoring, and citizen participation. The main structure of the development plan is 
based on these 7 core values for the city (Aarhus Kommune, 2014).  
3.1.1.1 Sustainability strategies 
 
 
Figure 3.2: The figure shows the building system of Circle House at a Circle House Event hosted by the Danish Association for 
Responsible Construction, December 4th, 2017.  
 
The innovative circular strategies of Circle House lie in the concept of constructing building components 
that can be assembled and disassembled without compromising the continued use of the components 
(F5, 2017). Thereby it is possible to reuse the components in the same fashion again while no waste is 
==PAGE:44==
43 
produced in the end-of-life phase. Thus, Circle House is exclusively build on circular principles. Figure 3.2 
shows the building system of Circle House.  
The main circular design strategies are 90 percent reuse without loss of value and design for 
disassembly (F5, 2017).  
To design and construct building components that can be reused without a loss of value, it is important 
that every component can be disassembled without damage (F5, 2017). The different components are 
assembled by brackets, screws and other reversible methods (appendix B4). 
Transferring to circular construction means producing building components in a whole new way, which is 
first of all a technical difficulty. Additionally, it means that many parts of the value chain in the building 
industry have to transform or even that new parts have to be developed. Therefore, collaboration of 
making Circle House is structured in a new way that supports the circular approach. 23 parties across 
the building industry have joined forces to find solutions in every stage of Circle House’s design process 
(Lejerbo, 2017b) (F5, 2017). 
Table 3.1 gives an overview of the circular strategies implemented in Circle House and table 3.2 shows 
all the 23 parties behind Circle House. 
 
Table 3.1: The circular strategies that are included in the design of Circle House and their effect, are shown in the table. 
Strategy 
Effect of the strategy  
Design for disassembly 
● 
Quicker and simpler construction process 
● 
Optimised operation and maintenance 
● 
Less waste during construction 
● 
Optimised reuse, upcycling and recycling 
● 
Buildings as material banks (3XN and DEPA, 2016) 
Modularity 
● 
Reduced material for construction 
● 
Easier assembly and disassembly (F5, 2017) 
90 % reuse of materials after  
the second life cycle 
● 
Reduced cost for materials 
● 
Reduced cost for waste disposal 
● 
Released pressure on resource scarcity (F5, 2017) 
Circular business cases 
● 
Implementation of product service systems 
● 
New businesses 
● 
New partnerships (F5, 2017) 
 
Table 3.2: The 23 parties that are behind the design and creation of Circle House are shown in the table below (Lejerbo, 2017b). 
*Parties that have contributed to this project. **Parties we have been in contact with.  
The parties behind Circle House 
Architects 
Building owner 
Entrepreneur / 
Consulting engineers  
Manufacturers / 
Service providers 
Associations, institutes and 
advisors within the building 
industry 
GXN** 
3XN*   
Vandkunsten*  
Lendager Arkitekter  
Lejerbo**  
 
MT Højgaard  
NCC  
Dansk Beton 
Peikko Group  
VELFAC  
ROCKWOOL  
Orbicon  
KOMPROMENT  
Gyproc  
KALK  
Spæncom  
Kingo  
Tscherning  
Tarkett  
Caverion  
RGS 90 
Foreningen for Byggeriets 
Samfundsansvar  
Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut*  
Responsible Assets  
 
==PAGE:45==
44 
3.2 Assessment methodology 
The assessment methodology described in this section applies to the absolute assessments within the 
three sustainability dimension. As the studies in the literature study showed, absolute limits of 
sustainability were only found within environmental sustainability. Hence the definition of absolute 
architectural sustainability within all sustainability dimensions were defined in chapter 2 as: “Absolute 
architectural sustainability is defined as balance in the socio-economic system while staying within the 
planetary boundaries”. This definition was used to carry out assessments within each of the sustainability 
dimensions. Figure 3.3 shows a diagrammatic understanding of the absolute limits inspired by 
Rockström (2009) and Raworth (2017), which all three sustainability dimensions follow.  
 
 
Figure 3.3: The figure shows a diagram of the understanding of absolute limits. Inside the red dotted circle is the sustainable planet 
where the absolute limits are not crossed. This is the space of absolute sustainability. The red space outside the absolute limits is 
the space of unsustainable development. Own depiction, inspired by Raworth (2017) and Rockström (2009). 
 
Using this diagram as inspiration, the idea was to develop diagrams within each dimension that could 
assess the absolute sustainability given as a balance between positive effects and detrimental effects. 
Figure 3.4 shows conceptual diagrams of the absolute assessments of the social, environmental and 
economic assessment methods. The following chapters will describe how each assessment is carried 
out by the use of these diagrams.   
 
 
 
Figure 3.4: Conceptual diagrams of the social, environmental and economic assessment methods. Inside the red dotted line is the 
absolute sustainable development. The space of unsustainable development lies outside this circle. Each dimension is assessed by 
sub criteria which is illustrated in a pie chart. Own depiction, inspired by Raworth and Rockström.  
 
==PAGE:46==
45 
These diagrams are assessed according to figure 3.5. The figure shows when absolute sustainability is 
present. When a sub-criteria lies outside of the circle, the sustainability dimension is not absolute 
sustainable. 
 
Figure 3.5: The figure shows the understanding of absolute sustainability within all three sustainability dimensions. The figure is 
derived from the understanding of planetary boundaries [15] and the definition of absolute sustainability defined in chapter 2.7.2. It 
shows that in order to be absolute sustainable a balance between the positive and negative must have settled within the absolute 
limit. Own creation. 
==PAGE:47==
46 
3.3 Social sustainability assessment 
3.3.1 Purpose 
The purpose of the social sustainability assessment is to assess the absolute social sustainability as 
described in chapter 2.7.2. The assessment will be applied on Circle House, the chosen Danish social 
housing project, based on social indicators. The indicators in the assessment will visualise the social 
performance of the case study, Circle House, and give an indication of the current social sustainability-
state of Circle House. This illustrated through the ‘negative’ and ‘positive’ balance of the various social 
indicators.  
3.3.2 Procedure 
The social sustainability assessment of the social housing is based on the literature study of the following 
two assessment methods:  
1) Doughnut economics (Raworth, 2017a)  
2) The social effect prism (Carlsberg and Buchhave, 2017) 
 
The methodology is primarily based on the social effect prism framework, but with a wider focus on 
social sustainability. The assessment methodology consists of a list of indicators within seven dimensions 
of social sustainability, see figure 3.6.  
 
  
 
Figure 3.6: The figure shows the seven dimensions of social sustainability, that this study found relevant when assessing social 
sustainability on a building scale. The urbanity category is coloured darker since it relates to a larger scale: city scale.11 
 
The seventh dimension ‘urbanity’ relates to the grounds and area of which the building project is taking 
place. Whereas the other six criteria relate to the building and the design of it. Every category consists of 
a number of sub-criteria. These are individually assessed through a qualitative evaluation.  
The full list of indicators can be seen in table 3.3 and full description of them can be found in appendix 
A0 table A0.6.  
 
 
                                                
11 The City is included since the site and placement of the social housing project is also of importance for the social sustainability. 
==PAGE:48==
47 
Table 3.3: List of social dimensions and indicators 
Criteria of social sustainability 
Social sub-criteria 
1. Ownership 
 
1.1 Equitable pricing  
1.2. Resident democracy 
1.3. Engagement and Co-creation 
1.4. Commitment and responsibility 
2. Identification 
 
2.1 Concept 
2.2 Signal value 
2.3 History and culture 
2.4 Architectural quality 
3. Inclusion 
 
3.1 Neighbourhood and boundaries 
3.2 Accessibility 
3.3 Diversity 
3.4 Cultural vitality 
4. Activity 
4.1 Learning and Competence edification 
4.2 Verbal interaction 
4.3 Non-verbal interaction 
5. Behaviour 
 
5.1 Safety 
5.2 Intuitiveness 
5.3 Overview 
6. Health 
6.1 Daylight quality 
6.2 Indoor air quality 
6.3 Acoustic comfort 
6.4 Thermal comfort 
6.5 Access to nature 
7. Urbanity 
7.1 Services and goods 
7.2 Transportation 
7.3 Fair governance 
7.4 Natural resources 
 
3.3.2.1 Evaluation 
The evaluation of the social housing project will be based on an interview since the project has not been 
constructed at the time of writing. Therefore, the interview will reflect the initial decisions and thoughts 
behind the future design.  
An interview guide was made before the actual interview was performed to ensure relevant and correct 
questions were asked in respect to the purpose of the analysis. The interview consists of a number of 
questions based on the seven criteria of social sustainability. Within every criterion questions are 
formulated to represent each sub-criterion. These questions will be the core of the interview and analysis 
together. 
The interviewee is one of the architectural collaborative of ‘Fællestegnestuen’ behind Circle House, called 
‘Vandkunsten’. In this interview Vandkunsten will represent the whole architectural collaborative. 
 
The evaluation of the analysis consists of three steps: 
1) Schematic categorisation by completeness and scale 
2) Documentation of social sustainability    
3) Interpretation 
 
These steps together will determine if Circle House is absolute sustainable according to the definition of 
absolute sustainability given in chapter 2.7.2.  
 
==PAGE:49==
48 
Schematic categorisation by completeness and scale 
The first step of schematic categorisation is used for consistency during the evaluation of the interview 
and to create an overview of the various sub-criteria analysed in the interview. 
The first evaluation clarifies the scale and detail of every sub-criteria through a schematic visualisation as 
seen in figure 3.7.  
The vertical axis is divided into three different scales; building, local area and city, which are the three 
scales that a sub-criterion can be evaluated on based on the answers of the question.  
Building scale relates directly to the component design and related construction of Circle House. The 
local area scale relates to the near surroundings of Circle House, such as the private and shared outdoor 
area and the nearest streets surrounding Circle House. The city scale relates to the larger area that Circle 
House is a part of and will mainly be in relation to Lisbjerg city and its development.  
The horizontal axis shows the concretisation and describes the detailing of the sub-criteria.  
The range of the concretisation axis describes weather the sub-criteria are categorised as overall 
thoughts, discussed ideas or as a specific design solution with documentation to support it. The axis is 
therefore divided into overall thoughts, possible idea and specific design solution. It will mainly be based 
on the present materials for the different sub-criteria together with the interview.  
 
 
Figure 3.7: Visualisation of the schematic categorisation by completeness and scale for the social sustainability assessment. The 
scheme is used to clarify the scale and completeness of every sub-criteria analysed. The x-axis indicates the level of concretization 
of each sub-criterion. The y-axis indicates the scale of which each criterion is defined. 
 
Documentation of social sustainability 
The second step documents the social sustainability of every sub-criteria and shows the degree of social 
value that every sub-criterion adds to Circle House. 
This part of the evaluation is qualitatively performed, but to create consistency, a mark system will be 
made together with a visualisation diagram. This is performed objectively, but can be subject to 
subjectivity, which should be avoided. 
Each sub-criterion can achieve a mark of poor, insufficient, sufficient, good, excellent or outstanding. 
This is shown in the diagram on figure 3.8, where poor to insufficient marks will be drawn outside of the 
circle boundary and sufficient to outstanding will be drawn from the boundary of the circle and inwards. 
See appendix A0 table A0.6 for a full description of how every sub-criterion is evaluated.  
==PAGE:50==
49 
The marking system visualises both the balance and the value obtained between the various sub-criteria. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.8: The figure shows how every sub-criterion of the social sustainability assessment method is evaluated. The dotted line is 
the social foundation and the limits to the social sustainability assessment. Inside the social foundation absolute sustainability is 
present. Outside the dotted line is where the sub-criteria fall short of the social foundation. 
Inspired by Raworth (Raworth, 2017), own creation. 
 
In the result section a similar figure will be used to visualise the social sustainability value of the 
assessment, both for the individual sub-criterion and for the overall design of Circle House.  
The result of the assessment will thereby show the balance between positive and negative value of the 
indicators and hence indicate the social value creation or social detrimental effect.  
 
Interpretation 
The third step interprets the results of the social assessment and determines the absolute sustainability. 
The social sustainability is assessed ‘absolute sustainable’ if all sub-criteria are within the absolute 
boundary “the social foundation”. This is done according to the definition of absolute sustainability in 
chapter 2.  
As seen in figure 3.8, the absolute sustainable is found within the absolute limit, where the positive value 
creation is happening. The evaluation does not consider whether the mark is better or worse within the 
absolute limit, as long as it is within the limit.  
 
==PAGE:51==
50 
3.4 Environmental sustainability assessment 
3.4.1 Purpose 
The purpose of the environmental sustainability assessment is to assess Circle House based on 
‘absolute’ environmental indicators. The indicators in the assessment will visualise the environmental 
performance of the case study and give a current view of the environmental sustainability-state of Circle 
House. This will be shown through an LCA with the use of absolute normalisation factors as presented 
by Bjørn and Hauschild (2015) allocated to a dwelling by Brejnrod et al. (2017).  
3.4.2 Procedure 
The procedure of conducting this LCA consists of five steps (European Commission, 2010), see figure 
3.9, and will be described in the following. The procedure is consistent with ISO 15978:2011. 
 
 
Figure 3.9: The figure shows the steps of conducting an LCA: 1 Goal definition (2) Scope definition (3) LCI analysis (4) LCA and (5) 
Interpretation. The process is conducted iteratively. The steps are described below (European Commission, (2010). 
 
3.4.2.1 Goal and scope definition 
The main objective of this study is to assess how the sustainability strategies of Circle House reflects 
when analysed using an LCA, and to evaluate if these strategies are sufficient to keep the environmental 
impacts within the planetary boundaries. More details can be found in appendix B0. 
 
Object of assessment 
The object of assessment is a section of the terrace house complex of the Circle House project as 
shown in figure 3.10. The chosen section includes one apartment of two stories, including foundation 
and roof. The section will be referred to as Circle House. 
==PAGE:52==
51 
 
 
Figure 3.10: The figure shows the object of assessment: a middle section of one of the terrace houses at Circle House project. The 
selected terrace house is a two-story house (appendix B4). 
 
System boundary 
 
The system boundaries are shown in figure 3.11. The figure includes all upstream and downstream 
processes needed to establish the functions of the building. It depicts the boundaries of two life cycles of 
120 years respectively.  
An explanation of the included processes in each stage can be found in DS/EN 15978:2011.  
 
 
Figure 3.11: System boundary of the Terrace house of the Circle House project in Lisbjerg (Dansk Standard, 2012a) in the first and 
second life cycle. 
 
Functional unit 
The functional unit is a terrace house of 90 m2 with a residency of 2.612 persons on average incl. 
operational use and wear on the building materials for a timeframe of 120 years.  
                                                
12 Follows the carrying capacity based normalization factors allocated to a dwelling defined by Brejnrod et al. 
==PAGE:53==
52 
 
3.4.2.2 LCI 
The step of the LCI includes collecting data and matching the data with the corresponding datasets.  
Background data 
The LCI consists of quantities of the building materials combined with LCI datasets. 
Building materials 
The data for the building materials consist of floor plans, sections and technical drawings delivered by 
Fællestegnestuen, see appendix B4. From these, quantities of materials are deduced. The quantities can 
be found in appendix B1.  
Transport 
Transport to and from the site is not included in this study. Only transport included in the datasets are 
present in this study, which counts all material data.  
Datasets 
The Ecoinvent 3.3 datasets will be used. In order to be country specific Danish dataset are preferred. 
Due to the lack of Danish datasets in the Ecoinvent database, datasets representing Europe {RER} are 
primarily used and global {GLO} datasets are used secondly. The energy datasets for electricity are 
specific to Denmark. Since no country specific dataset exists for heat energy, this is modelled by 
information on the composition of the Danish heat energy production using datasets representing either 
Europe, Switzerland or Denmark.  
Datasets using the allocation method Recycled Content also called the Cut-off approach is used. The 
recycled content method allocates the burden of manufacturing the materials to the first lifecycle as, can 
be seen on figure 3.12.  
EPDs on the specific building materials are not used in this study due to the different characterisation 
methods, making the impact categories incomparable.  
All datasets that will be used can be found in appendix B2.  
  
 
Figure 3.12: The figure shows the principle behind allocation by the Recycled Content approach. The x-axis shows the decision at 
the time t. The y-axis shows the environmental impacts. The main impact of producing product 1 lies at time t=0A. At the time 
t=80a the materials from product 1 is recycled for product 2. As seen the impact from manufacturing is not shared in the 
secondary life cycle as only the impact of recycling the material lies in the secondary life cycle. 
(Frischknecht, 2010, p.2 figure 1). 
3.4.2.3 LCA 
This step includes setting up the scenarios correspondent to the goal and scope definition, obtaining the 
characterised results and applying the carrying capacity based normalisation references.  
==PAGE:54==
53 
Scenarios 
This life cycle assessment intents to investigate four scenarios in order to show the full impact of the 
strategies implemented in Circle House. These are described in the following. From table 3.4 the 
deviations between the scenarios can be seen.  
 
Scenario 0 (S0) 
In order to validate that the circular strategies of Circle House are decreasing the environmental burden 
compared to today's practise, it is necessary to create a baseline representing the building industry of 
today. S0 will represent the conventional building practise.  
The scenario includes two life cycles of manufacturing, energy use, and demolition of Circle House, each 
spanning over 120 years. Thereby the two life cycles of Circle House add up to a scenario containing 
240 years in total. It is assumed that no materials are reused after end of life of both the first and second 
life cycle.  
 
Scenario 1 (S1) 
S1 includes the strategy of 90% reuse of all included components in the LCA study after 120 years. 
During the operation of the building, the materials will be replaced according to their respective average 
component lifetime expectancies.  After 120 years it is assumed that all building materials are in perfect 
condition and have the same quality as if they were new.  
Since the replacement of materials approach is not clearly defined in the 90 % strategy, the approach 
above was assessed as most realistic and was therefore chosen. Another approach could be to assume 
that during the 240 year of operation, none of the building materials are replaced. 
The building components exposed to the ambient environment are repaired with 1 % extra material 
during the 120-year life cycle. These include the roof and light facade.  
 
Scenario 2 (S2) 
S2 includes the strategies of S1, but in the system boundaries B3-B4, the materials of the building 
components are replaced by their individual lifetime allowed by the DfD.  
 
Scenario 3 (S3) 
S3 includes the strategies of S2, though the construction- and demolition/disassembly process are 30 % 
faster as a consequence of DfD.  
 
==PAGE:55==
54 
 
Table 3.4:  The table shows the variation between the four scenarios in the different life cycles (L1 and L2) and three different 
system boundaries (explained in figure 3.11).  (✓) equals the same as in the column of (S0, L1).  
L1: First lifecycle. L2: Second life cycle.  
 
S0 
S1 
S2 
S3 
Life 
cycle 
L1 
L2 
L1 
L2 
L1 
L2 
L1 
L2 
A1-A3 
100 % new 
materials 
(✓) 
(✓) 
10 % 
new 
materials 
(✓) 
10 % new 
materials 
(✓) 
10 % new 
materials 
A5 
67 kWh/m2 
(✓) 
(✓) 
(✓) 
(✓) 
(✓) 
47 kWh/m2 
47 kWh/m2 
B3-B4 
Replacement 
by average 
component 
lifetime. 
1 % repair on 
exterior 
component. 
(✓) 
(✓) 
(✓) 
Replacement 
by individual 
material 
lifetime. 
1 % repair on 
exterior 
component. 
Replacement 
by individual 
material 
lifetime. 
1 % repair on 
exterior 
component. 
Replacement 
by individual 
material 
lifetime. 
1 % repair on 
exterior 
component. 
Replacement 
by individual 
material 
lifetime. 
1 % repair on 
exterior 
component. 
B6 
BL 2020 
35 % 
electricity 
65 % heat 
(✓) 
(✓) 
(✓) 
(✓) 
(✓) 
(✓) 
(✓) 
C1 
31 kWh/m2 
(✓) 
(✓) 
(✓) 
(✓) 
(✓) 
22 kWh/m2 
22 kWh/m2 
C2-C4 
100 % of 
building 
components 
(✓) 
10 % of 
building 
components 
(✓) 
10 % of 
building 
components 
(✓) 
10 % of 
building 
components 
(✓) 
 
Assumptions 
One of the assumptions in this assessment is that the lifetime of a component is determined by the 
lifetime expectancy and thereby by  the disassembly design of the component. The DfD strategy in S2 
and S3 is that all components in the building can be disassembled. The lifetime expectancies of the 
building materials are individual.13 
The lifetimes in S0 and S1 are evaluated by the composition of the building component and by the 
accessibility of the building material with the lowest lifetime expectancy, as recommended by SBI 
(Aagaard et al., 2013). The lifetime expectancies can be seen in appendix B3. 
 
As seen from figure 3.13, the lifetime of a building component depends on how the given material is 
perceived. On the figure, four different lifetime expectancies are seen. The longest lifetime expectancy is 
the functional lifetime, while the shortest is the actual lifetime expectancy. The results of the replacement 
phase can vary greatly depending on which lifetime is used. In this assessment, the actual lifetime 
expectancy is used, based on the recommendation of SBI (Aagaard et al., 2013). 
 
                                                
13 An exception is the roof, where the top layer roofing membrane is fastened with a chemical (melting) procedure, instead of a 
mechanical solution. Therefore this layer has the same lifetime expectancy as the layer in the component with the lowest lifetime 
expectancy. 
==PAGE:56==
55 
 
Figure 3.13: Lifetime expectancies for building materials based on a normal distribution. The figure shows that building materials 
have different life times based on the context they are perceived in. Redrawn from (Aagaard et al., 2013, p. 10) 
 
 
LCIA method 
The LCIA method used is a combined method as recommended by Hauschild et. al (2013) on best 
practices. These recommendations are implemented in the ILCD 2011+ method.  
From the method, ten impact categories are assessed and is found in table 3.5. Applying this method on 
the LCI datasets gives the characterised results.  
 
==PAGE:57==
56 
Table 3.5: The table shows the 10 impact categories that are used in the assessment, the unit with which the respective category 
is measured and the method describing the impact category  
Impact categories 
Unit  
Method 
 Climate change (CC) 
kg CO2 eq. 
IPCC 2007 
Global Warming Potential calculating the radiative forcing 
over a time horizon of 100 years. 
 Ozone depletion (ODP) 
kg CFC-11 eq 
WMO 
Ozone Depletion Potential (ODP) calculating the destructive 
effects on the stratospheric ozone layer over a time horizon 
of 100 years.  
 Photochemical ozone formation (POCP) 
kg NMVOC eq 
ReCiPe Van Zelm et. al. 
Expression of the potential contribution to photochemical 
ozone formation. Only for Europe. It includes spatial 
differentiation 
 Terrestrial acidification (TA) 
molc H+ eq 
AE - Seppälä et al. 2006 and Posch et al. 2008. 
Accumulated Exceedance (AE) characterising the change in 
critical load exceedance of the sensitive area in terrestrial 
and main freshwater ecosystems, to which acidifying 
substances deposit. European-country dependent. 
 Terrestrial eutrophication (TE) 
molc N eq 
AE - Seppälä et al. 2006 and Posch et al. 2008. 
Accumulated Exceedance (AE) characterising the change in 
critical load exceedance of the sensitive area, to which 
eutrophying substances deposit. European-country 
dependent. 
 Freshwater eutrophication (FE) 
kg P eq 
ReCiPE version 1.05 
Expression of the degree to which the emitted nutrients 
reaches the freshwater end compartment (phosphorus 
considered as limiting factor in freshwater). European 
validity. Averaged characterisation factors from country 
dependent characterisation factors.  
 Marine eutrophication (EP) 
kg N eq 
ReCiPE version 1.05 
Expression of the degree to which the emitted nutrients 
reaches the marine end compartment (nitrogen considered 
as limiting factor in marine water). European validity. 
Averaged characterisation factors from country dependent 
characterisation factors. 
 Freshwater ecotoxicity (FET) 
CTUe 
USEtox 
Comparative Toxic Unit for ecosystems (CTUe) expressing 
an estimate of the potentially affected fraction of species 
(PAF) integrated over time and volume per unit mass of a 
chemical emitted (PAF m3 year/kg). Specific groups of 
chemicals requires further works. 
 Land use (LU) 
kg C deficit 
SOM - Mila i Canals et al. 2007. 
Soil Organic Matter (SOM) based on changes in SOM, 
measured in (kg C/m2/a). Biodiversity impacts not covered 
by the data set. 
 Water depletion (WD) 
m3 water eq 
Swiss ecoscarcity 
Scarcity-adjusted amount of water used. 
 
 
3.4.2.4 Normalisation 
After obtaining the characterised results, normalisation is applied by normalisation references. The 
normalisation references used on the characterised results are developed by Brejnrod et al., based on 
the methodology of Bjørn and Hauschild. Bjørn and Hauschild have created a set of carrying capacity 
==PAGE:58==
57 
based normalisation references allocated to annual person equivalents. Brejnrod et al. have allocated 
these to a dwelling.  
The normalisation references correspond to the carrying capacity of a single-family house of 128 m2 with 
an average of 2.6 persons living there.  
Since this normalisation reference is based on a 128 m2 house, these factors are applied with a factor 
0.7 corresponding to  
!!"
!! , where ACH is the area of Circle House and AR is the area of the reference, see 
table 3.6. 
 
Table 3.6: Normalisation references by Brejnrod et. al: Annual allocated carrying capacity per single-family house of 128 m2 based 
on an economic allocation with an average of 2.6 person per dwelling. NRR  are the normalization references provided by Bjørn and 
Hauschild.  NRCH  are the normalization references allocated to a dwelling (Circle House). 
Normalisation References by Brejnrod et. al compatible with Bjørn and Hauschild  
(Brejnrod et al., 2017) (Bjørn and Hauschild, 2015) 
Normalisation reference of 
90 m2 dwelling. 
Impact category 
unit 
NRR 
NRCH 
 Climate change, rad (CC) 
 kg CO2  eq/yr 
287 
201.8 
 Climate change, temp (CC) 
 kg CO2  eq/yr 
152 
106.95 
 Ozone depletion (ODP) 
 kg CFC-11 eq/yr 
0.02 
0,01 
 Photochemical ozone 
formation (POCP) 
 kg NMVOC eq/yr 
14 
9,8 
 Terrestrial acidification (TA) 
 molc H+ eq/yr 
670 
471.09 
 Terrestrial eutrophication (TE) 
 molc N eq/yr 
815 
573.05 
 Freshwater eutrophication (FE)  kg P eq/yr 
0.13 
0.09 
 Marine eutrophication (EP) 
 kg N eq/yr 
9 
6.335 
 Freshwater ecotoxicity (FET) 
 CTUe/yr 
2912 
2047.5 
 Land use, soil erosion (LUS) 
 kg C deficit/yr 
0.52 
0.37 
 Land use, biodiversity (LUB) 
 kg C deficit/yr 
4369 
3071.95 
 Water depletion (WD) 
 m3 water eq/yr 
89 
62.58 
 
 
By applying the normalisation factors to the annual impacts of Circle House the annual normalised 
impacts can be calculated by the following: 
 
!!",!
!
=
!!",!
!"!",!, 
 
where  
 
!!",!
!
 
is the annual normalised impact of Circle House by impact category, 
!!",! 
is the annual characterised impact of Circle House by impact category, 
and 
!"!",! is the normalisation reference, annual carrying capacity allocated to Circle House. 
 
 
The results are represented by the total annual impact of Circle House divided by the annual carrying 
capacity to the building type within a given impact category. Circle House is assessed absolute 
environmentally sustainable if !!",!
!
< 1, implying that Circle house burdens the planet less than the earth 
system can withstand.  
 
==PAGE:59==
58 
3.4.2.5 Interpretation 
In this step, the results are interpreted and re-assessed through an iterative process. 
 
Sensitivity analysis 
A sensitivity analysis is carried out to analyse the sensitivity of the results when the variables in the 
calculation are adjusted.  
The large impact hotspots of the analysis are identified and adjusted with ±10 % to determine the 
sensitivity.  
 
Alternative modelling 
Alternative modelling is carried out for a life cycle duration of 60 years instead of 120 years in order to 
test the deviation of the model by a changed life cycle duration.  
An additional scenario is added in order to test the model when considering the building legislation of the 
year 2140. It is assumed that the operational energy will require 0 kWh/m2/year due to increased energy 
efficiency in new buildings over the 120-year period.  
 
3.4.2.6 Evaluation according to the absolute definition 
The method of determining the absolute sustainability is given in the normalisation section and is 
included in the absolute sustainability definition. This is the base of the overall evaluation procedure 
leading to the evaluation method described in chapter 3.2. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
59 
3.5 Economic sustainability assessment 
3.5.1 Purpose 
The purpose of the economic sustainability assessment is to determine the balance between costs and 
benefit of the circular building custom, as well as the economic value creation or economically 
detrimental effect of Circle House in Lisbjerg. The value creation and the detrimental effect is based on 
the B&Q definition of economic sustainability (Baumgärtner and Quaas, 2010b), described in the 
literature study. The assessment will be conducted through the framework of a Cost-Benefit Analysis 
(CBA). 
3.5.2 Procedure 
The CBA will be conducted on a descriptive level. A fully calculated CBA on this level will require 
calculations that are without the scope of this study and the authors competencies. Hence the 
assessment will indicate the balance between the costs and benefits without the calculative work of a 
CBA. The analysis is more specifically investigating the costs and benefits by building Circle House, thus 
the circular design strategies are the area of focus for the CBA. The analysis is aimed at the building 
industry and the involved parties, which in this case is Fællestegnestuen, Lejerbo, manufactures etc.  
 
3.5.3 Evaluation 
A CBA is carried out by nine steps of which only four are included (Department of Finance and 
Administration, 2006): 
1) Scope and objective 
2) Identify constraints 
3) List feasible alternatives 
4) Specify costs and benefits 
 
The next steps (5-9) is to quantify costs and benefits, which is not carried out (Department of Finance 
and Administration, 2006). It is not carried out since it requires skills within economics, that the authors 
were not able to require within the timeframe of the thesis. Hence only the four listed steps are included.  
 
The objective of the CBA is to determine the cost and benefits of actions made to implement circular 
strategies. This follows the line of Lejerbo’s sustainability strategy and is a part of their Circle House 
project (Hauschild et al., 2013) (Lejerbo, 2017a).  
The constraints of implementing circular strategies in Circle House is that some of the proposed 
strategies are immature of nature, meaning that they are relatively new in the building industry and that 
the needed business cases are not yet established. Another constraint is time. The proposed strategies 
such as the modularity might not reflect the future of the building industry, thus undermine the general 
idea of Circle House. 
The alternative is not to implement circular strategies in Circle House. No other alternative is included. 
The fourth step of specifying costs and benefits includes costs such as; 
● 
Initial capital costs 
● 
Capital cost of replaceable objects during a life cycle, eg. building equipment 
● 
Operating and maintenance costs 
● 
Cost and benefits that cannot be valued in monetary terms 
● 
Revenues, cost savings and non-market outputs (Department of Finance and Administration, 
2006) 
==PAGE:61==
60 
 
The CBA evaluation is carried out by mapping the actions and outcomes of the circular design strategies 
within Circle House. The outcomes are illustrated as either a cost or a benefit and the area they affect; 
social economics and environmental economics.  
The economic sustainability currencies of measurement, that are included in this study, are developed 
upon the B&Q definition given in chapter 2.4.1.1 and are as follows:  
● 
Wellbeing (human needs and wants) 
● 
Nature (justice towards nature) 
● 
Money (efficiency and non-wastefulness) (Department of Finance and Administration, 2006) 
 
According to the absolute sustainability definition in chapter 2, to achieve absolute sustainability there 
must be a balance of value creation. Hence the economic sustainability assessment is absolute 
sustainable if the result of the CBA shows a balance of the costs and benefits as shown in figure 3.5 in 
chapter 3.2. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
61 
3.6 Assessment of application of SDGs’ sustainability 
performance indicators  
3.6.1 Purpose 
The SDGs are given as 17 overall goals, including 169 general targets and 232 indicators that every 
country can implement according to their issues and needs for a sustainable development, as mentioned 
in chapter 2.5  (UN Statistics Service, 2017). The purpose of this assessment is to figure out if and how 
the SDGs can be applied and used as a sustainability assessment tool within a Danish building context. 
More specifically if and how they can support the early design phases on a building level. All 17 goals are 
taken into account based on their environmental, social and economic aspects and are assessed 
according to their purpose. The SDG indicators, that can be used as measurable performance 
indicators, are used to perform an analysis on Circle House to visualise its functionality.  
The foundation of this assessment is based on the literature study of the SDGs in chapter 2.5 and the 
appendices describing the SDGs within the three sustainability dimensions and the building industry in - 
appendix A3 and A5, respectively.  
3.6.2 Procedure 
The assessment consists of two different analyses; one performed on a conceptual level and another 
one analysing the SDG indicators as directly measurable performance indicators.  
The first analysis is based on the overall scope of each of the 17 goals. It will be investigated whether the 
overall scopes can be related to the building industry, either in a social, economic or environmental 
perspective. 
The second analysis will include all of the SDG indicators and will analyse how they can be used as 
measurable sustainability performance indicators in the building industry. In this analysis, the applicability 
of the SDG targets is investigated, too. The two analyses are shown in figure 3.14 below. 
 
 
Figure 3.14: The figure shows the procedure: The 17 goals are used as conceptual performance indicators. The 242 indicators of 
the goals are used as measurable performance indicators. 
3.6.3 Evaluation 
The analysis of the SDGs as conceptual performance indicators is carried out by evaluating each of the 
17 goals separately. The scope of every goal is compared with the main objectives within the building 
industry to investigate their correlation. This is done based on the social, economic and environmental 
aspects and the scope of the goals.  
The analysis of the SDGs as measurable performance indicators is carried out by evaluating all of the 232 
indicators in the 17 goals separately. Every indicator is again compared with the main objectives within 
the building industry, based on their social, economic and environmental aspects. The indicators that are 
==PAGE:63==
62 
found to be applicable within the building industry will be reformulated, so they can be used as 
measurable performance indicators on a building scale.  
The reformulated SDG indicators will be used to perform an analysis of Circle House’s sustainability 
profile, with the main purpose of visualising the functionality of the SDGs as an assessment tool in the 
building industry.  
3.7 Summary  
This chapter describes the case study under investigation in this thesis and the four types of assessment 
methods that will be carried out through the case study. The four assessments are: Social sustainability 
assessment, environmental sustainability assessment, economic sustainability assessment and 
assessment of application of the sustainability performance indicators of SDGs. 
This section describes the purpose of the housing project Circle House, the associated 
stakeholders behind the project and the circular design strategies that Circle House is based on. The 
interesting scope of this case study is the mentioned circular design strategies because it is referred to 
as the first circular housing project in the world. Through the four assessments the absolute sustainability 
profile of Circle House is analysed in respect to the social, economic and environmental dimension, as 
well as analysed by applying the SDGs as a sustainability assessment tool.  
The first three assessments are based on the same concept of balancing positive effects and 
detrimental effects through the same type of assessment diagram. The diagrams are developed by the 
authors based on the absolute limits inspired by Rockström and Raworth as well as the definition of 
absolute sustainability created by the authors, described in the literature study. 
The method of the social sustainability assessment is developed by the authors because a qualitative 
assessment is found to be lacking in the industry. The method became the focus of the social 
sustainability assessment. The criteria within the social assessment are inspired by the existing 
methodologies in the literature study.  
The environmental assessment is carried out through an LCA because this is found to be the most 
appropriate quantitative method to assess the absolute environmental boundaries through the whole life 
cycle of a building.  
The economic sustainability assessment is carried out through the methodology of a cost-benefit 
analysis because it is found to be the most fitting method to balance positive effects and detrimental 
effects. A qualitative economic assessment is the most appropriate way within the defined framework of 
the economic sustainability dimension, due to the competencies of the authors as stated in the 
introduction under the delimitation section. 
The assessment method of the application of the SDGs as performance indicators is based on a 
comparison between the goals and indicators of the SDGs as well as the criteria found within the social, 
environmental and economic sustainability dimension from the literature study. The comparison is carried 
out on two levels: on an overall level of the scope of the 17 goals and on a more detailed and in-depth 
level of the SDG indicators.  
 
 
==PAGE:64==
63 
 
3.8 Conclusion 
The methodologies found and developed to carry out the four assessments will be used in the following 
process of the thesis as the assessment tools to evaluate absolute sustainability in the early design 
stages of circular building design.  
The social sustainability assessment will target social sustainability for the residents within Circle House, 
based on the design decisions and strategies of Circle House. The environmental assessment will target 
environmental sustainability of the implemented design strategies and construction methods. The 
economic sustainability assessment will target the costs and benefits of the circular strategies in Circle 
House. 
Thus, the results of the assessments are primarily meant for the owner of Circle House, Lejerbo, but also 
the architects, who can use the results as information for future design projects.   
 
 
==PAGE:65==
64 
==PAGE:66==
65 
4. Results 
This chapter describes the results derived from the methodological framework in the previous chapter. 
The results consist of four sections:  
● 
4.1 Social sustainability results 
● 
4.2 Environmental sustainability results 
● 
4.3 Economic sustainability results 
● 
4.4 Application of the SDGs’ as sustainability performance indicators 
 
In the end of the chapter a summary of the results is given. 
4.1 Social sustainability results 
The results of the social sustainability analysis of Circle House are described in this section.  
The analysis is based on the method described in chapter 3, section 3.3. Hence, the results are depicted 
in relation to that method and mainly consists of the three evaluation steps: 1) Schematic categorisation 
by completeness and scale, 2) Documentation of social sustainability  and 3) Interpretation. The full 
analysis can be found in appendix C1-C2 and the transcription can be found in appendix C0.  
 
4.1.1 Schematic categorisation by completeness and scale 
The schematic categorisation results give an overview of the first step of the evaluation. It shows on what 
level the social sustainability criteria have considered and implemented, in the early design stages of 
Circle House.  
The results are qualitatively evaluated and are divided into the seven overall social sustainability criteria, 
described in the methodology chapter, and are visualised in figure 4.1 below.  
Figure 4.1: The schematic categorisation of results of the social sustainability analysis of Circle House. The figure 
==PAGE:67==
66 
illustrates the scale of the different social sustainability sub-criteria used in the design of Circle House on the y-axis 
and the detail of this on the x-axis. The different colours of the circles indicates the 7 social sustainability criteria. The 
number in the circle indicates the number of the evaluated sub-criterion.  
 
Figure 4.1 is developed by the authors and is based on the literature study of social sustainability and the 
outcome of the interview. The findings from the literature study shows that social architectural 
sustainability can be evaluated on different scales and from the different social methodologies. This made 
it clear that the described social criteria can be divided into the overall scales of evaluation: City, local 
area and building scale. The interview with the architectural firm Vandkunsten, clarified that not all design 
solutions or strategies are decided on yet. Some of the social criteria that were discussed during the 
interview were not even thought of as a design criterion, and others were at the time of the interview still 
only possible design ideas. Thus, to make it clear which criteria that are implemented, which criteria that 
might be implemented in the later design phases and which criteria that are not and will not be a part of 
the design of Circle House, a concretisation of the design solutions are visualised. The concretisation 
shows every social sub-criterion. In the end, the figure is used to support the final evaluation of Circle 
House and to illustrate evaluation that is made in this assessment.  
An example of the application of the schematic categorisation figure below can be shown with the sub-
criterion 1.6 daylight quality. From the interview, it is found that the architects do not have any concrete 
design strategies or solutions visualised to ensure a good daylight in Circle House. But the architects 
always focus on designing high quality daylight in buildings within every project which is why it will also 
have great importance in the project of designing Circle House. As there is no documentation present of 
a good daylight design within Circle House at the current design stage, the sub-criterion 1.6 can only be 
categorised as a possible idea on a building scale, since the strategies and solutions will be implemented 
at a building level in the end.  
The categorisation ‘overall thoughts’ defines sub-criteria that have not been considered yet or are not 
possible to implement. ‘Specified design solution’ defines sub-criteria that are implemented already and 
criteria for which documentation exists, such as drawings, calculations etc.  
The scale ‘city’ defines sub-criteria that will have an effect on a city scale and not directly influence Circle 
House. The scale ‘local area’ defines sub-criteria that are implemented in the close area of Circle House, 
either in the outdoor spaces as e.g. the gardens, or at the local areas e.g. only a few blocks away from 
Circle House. It can also be sub-criteria that are implemented directly in Circle House on a building level, 
but affects the near and local surroundings, for example the orientation of the buildings.  
 
The results from figure 4.1 shows that the primary focus is on social sustainability within the local area 
and on the building scale from the architects’ perspective. In the scale local area, most of the criteria are 
implemented in the idea stage. On the building scale, many of the criteria are implemented as specific 
design solutions.  
However, the schematic categorisation results also show that there is not an equal focus on every 
criterion, as some of the criteria appear more frequently in the scheme than others.  
The criteria ownership, health and urbanity appears five times each in the schematic categorisation. 
Identification appears four times, inclusion and behaviour appear three times and activity appears two 
times. Despite this, one cannot directly conclude that the criteria with the most appearances in the 
scheme are the ones that are best implemented or most detailed in the design of Circle House. The 
analysis shows that some criteria can indirectly affect other criteria and hence be present on more levels 
than intended. For example, some of the design strategies, that support sub-criteria in the criterion 5 
behaviour, can indirectly enhance sub-criteria within the criterion number 3 inclusion. 
In addition, some of the sub-criteria are not related to the architects’ design, but related to the overall 
development plan from the municipality. These sub-criteria can possibly influence other design 
parameters of Circle House and thereby have an indirect influence on the evaluation of some of the other 
criteria, which is also one of the reasons for the results of the schematic categorisation. 
==PAGE:68==
67 
Furthermore, the analysis leads to an understanding that most of the sub-criteria can be divided even 
further into details. This way, each sub-criterion be evaluated on more than one scale and one 
characterisation level. This is also a part of the results in the schematic categorisation.  
The results in figure 4.1 shows the overall distribution of the seven criteria, which are used to give the 
second qualitative evaluation more consistency.  
A detailed description of the evaluation of the schematic categorisation of all sub-criteria can be found in 
the analysis in appendix C1.  
 
4.1.2 Documentation of sustainability 
The documentation of sustainability shows the degree of social value that every sub-criterion adds to 
Circle House. The analysis behind these results is based on step two of the evaluation within the social 
sustainability assessment method, described in chapter three.  
The results from this evaluation can be seen in figure 4.2 below. The results are based on a qualitative 
evaluation and the marks inside the circle boundary shows the degree of value added to Circle House 
within the described sub-criterion. The marks outside the circle boundary shows the degree of lack of 
value missing in Circle House within the described sub-criterion.  
The results in figure 4.2 shows that many of the sub-criteria in general adds social value to Circle House. 
It is only in the criteria ownership, identification, activity and urbanity that there are found as lack of value 
missing from Circle House.  
 
 
==PAGE:69==
68 
 
Figure 4.2: The figure shows the results of the social sustainability analysis of Circle House. The figure shows that 
four out of seven social criteria are exceeding the absolute social limits.  
 
4.1.3 Interpretation of the social sustainability results of Circle House 
This section gives a detailed description of the results found in the social sustainability analysis. Every 
sub-criterion is described in relation to Circle House and the reasoning behind the results that are shown 
in figure 4.2.  
 
==PAGE:70==
69 
4.1.3.1 Results of the criterion ‘1. Ownership’ 
 
Criterion 1.1 Equitable pricing 
Equitable pricing is about ensuring low rent for the residents by keeping low costs to all indicators 
relating to a building and therefore to minimize unnecessary costs in general.  
Since Circle House is a social housing project, there is a specific limit to the construction costs under the 
framework amount. The framework amount applies for every social housing project, but differs 
depending on the type of social housing such as family housing, elderly housing or youth/student 
housing (Trafik- Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2016).  
Therefore, the architects at Fællestegnestuen, behind Circle House, are affected by this requirement 
when they are designing social housing projects. The final design solution of Circle House has to comply 
with the framework amount and at the same time show new ways to design with a circular concept. 
Being innovative in the building industry often require higher costs in all phases because non-
standardised working methods and materials are very costly. But based on the information from the 
interview and sketches of the design solutions of Circle House, it is affirmed that it is possible to create 
circular design solutions within the low construction costs that are required in this project. This sub-
criterion is evaluated as ‘excellent’. The mark ‘outstanding’ was not given due to the fact that the project 
is still in the early design phase where improvements are still possible and the physical buildings of Circle 
House will hopefully reaffirm the above-mentioned conclusion.   
 
Criterion 1.2 Resident democracy 
Resident democracy is a common criterion in social housing in Denmark, and the future owners of Circle 
House, Lejerbo, put a lot of work in to enhance resident democracy in every department of their social 
housing (Lejerbo, 2017b). In respect to the design of Circle House, Fællestegnestuen have included the 
building committee when developing the different building components for the interior design. This way, 
Fællestegnestuen receives inputs on how they can design their components in the most optimal way for 
the future residents. Therefore, this sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘good’. The sub-criterion will not receive 
a higher mark, due to the fact that the building committee has not been included in the design of the 
outdoor areas and other aspects of the design of Circle House. If this was done, the sub-criterion would 
have created more value both in the design but also for the future residents.   
 
Criterion 1.3 Engagement and co-creation 
Engagement and co-creation can be partly supported through resident democracy, as described above, 
and this will also apply for Circle House. Other ways to support co-creation in the community of Circle 
House is by having other resident-driven initiatives, such as participation in different groups, 
responsibilities for different areas of Circle House etc. An example is seen in the social housing project 
‘AlmenBolig+’ (KAB, 2017). Here, all the operational services and maintenance is handled by the 
residents (KAB, 2017).   
Resident driven initiatives are seen in the interior design of Circle House, where the plan is that the 
residents can choose their own interior wall components, based on the room function. It might also be 
possible for the residents to remove some partition walls and to some extent maintain some of the 
interior components. Other resident-driven initiatives are not implemented in the design of Circle House, 
but there are many obvious solutions. For example, joint responsibility for cleaning and maintenance of 
outdoor areas and garden kitchens. Since there are so many other solutions that could create more 
value within this sub-criterion for Circle House, that has not been taken into account yet, the sub-criterion 
is evaluated as ‘sufficient’.   
 
Criterion 1.4 Commitment and responsibility 
==PAGE:71==
70 
The design of Circle House does not directly support commitment and responsibility for the residents of 
Circle House. This is strongly connected to the sub-criterion above; engagement and co-creation, and it 
makes sense that both of the two sub-criteria are not adding a high value to Circle House. A good way 
to implement this sub-criterion could be by having the residents maintain their own interior components. 
This has been up for discussion but nothing has been confirmed yet. Therefore, the sub-criterion is 
evaluated as ‘poor’. 
Other types of responsibility delegations to support a social unity within Circle House can also add a lot 
of value to this sub-criterion. A lot of this can be executed through the design, for example by designing 
a community kitchen for all the residents.  
 
4.1.3.2 Results of the criterion ‘2. Identification’ 
 
Criterion 2.1 Concept 
A lot of effort has been put in the design of Circle House in order for the design to reflect the concept 
and principles; circular design with 90 percent reuse, design for disassembly and modularity. This is 
reflected both in the interior and exterior components and surfaces, where joints and installations are 
visible. These design principles give the potential to reuse old materials and ornaments, together with 
visualising different and maybe new tectonics. All of these details are strongly reflected in the 
architecture, making the concept clear for the residents and hence easy for them to identify the lifestyle it 
supports, see figure 4.3. Therefore, the sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘excellent’. The reason for not giving 
it the mark ‘outstanding’ is because the concept is not implemented in other aspects of Circle House 
and the daily life of the residents. Other implementation solutions could be food and waste management 
and sharing economy. 
 
 
Figure 4.3: The figure shows a possible design solution of the interior components for Circle House. Here is the visual expression of 
the circular principle, design for disassembly, shown (appendix B4). 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
71 
Criterion 2.2 Signal value 
A lot has been done to visualise the signal value of Circle House, which is showing both the architectural 
and environmental possibilities and benefits when designing and constructing with a circular concept.  
Furthermore, the signal value shows great innovative design solutions and work methods. The circular 
principles of Circle House are using innovative design methods and solutions. This is especially seen in 
the technical solutions, where everything is possible to disassemble without destroying the components, 
but are possible to reuse. Figure 4.4 shows different assemble solutions. 
Another innovative aspect of Circle House is the design collaboration, which consists of a large number 
of various stakeholders from the building industry. They have worked together on designing the different 
components to optimise every aspect of Circle House. This is normally not how the building industry 
works, because it consists of a lot of competition. But it was possible when designing Circle House, 
because it was done before bidding process. This can be an inspirational way of working together in the 
industry in the future, both before, during and after offer of bid, to create the best solutions. 
Therefore, the sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘outstanding’.  
 
 
Figure 4.4: The figure shows different types of assemble solutions of DfD strategies. 
NO. 1 PE Textile. NO.2 is threaded angle bracket that mechanical ‘squeezes’ the facade plates together. NO. 3 is used to 
mechanical joints of concrete elements. NO. 4 shale brackets is a traditional way of suspending many different types of materials. 
All of these assemble solutions are easy to disassemble and have a long life times (appendix B4). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Criterion 2.3 History and culture  
No effort has been put into preserving and enhancing the history and culture of the area into the design 
of Circle House. The design of Circle House does not directly support the history and culture of the local 
community. 
But in the overall development plan made by the Municipality, there are different criteria to comply with, 
which are enhancing and preserving different aspects of Lisbjerg. This is for example to preserve the star 
structure of Lisbjerg, see figure 4.5 and the hill down to Aarhus City. Circle House will have to comply 
with the requirements of the overall development plan and this is affecting some of the design solutions 
of Circle House. Examples are the height, the placement/orientation and amount of buildings.  
But since Circle House has not implemented any direct design solutions adding value to the history and 
culture of the area, this sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘insufficient’.  
 
 
==PAGE:73==
72 
 
Figure 4.5: The figure shows the star structure of Lisberg on the left picture and how it is maintained with the development of 
Lisberg city on the picture to the right (Dansk Fjernvarme, 2017), (appendix B4).  
 
Criterion 2.4 Architectural quality  
The circular building principles used in Circle House promotes a high architectural quality in both the 
visual expression and in the functionality. Figure 4.6 and 4.7 show examples of the visual expression. The 
three main principles, mentioned above, ensures a long durability of the building components, while less 
work is supported within renovation, maintenance and retrofitting of the components, too. Generally, 
these principles ensure a longer lifetime for all the building components and create a strong story about 
the concept of Circle House. Therefore, this sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘outstanding’.  
 
 
Figure 4.6: The figure shows the visual expression of the material transition from a concrete wall to a wooden wall. This will be a 
part of the architectural experience in Circle House (appendix B4).  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
73 
 
Figure 4.7: The figure shows the visual expression of using wooden materials that can be disassembled. The pictures are from 
another housing project ‘Lisbjerg Bakke’ made by Vandkunsten, situated in Lisbjerg. The pictures are taken by the authors.  
 
 
4.1.3.3 Results of the criterion ‘3. Inclusion’ 
 
Criterion 3.1 Neighbourhood and boundaries  
It is important to implement a balance between neighbourhood and privacy is in the community of Circle 
House. In the outdoor spaces of Circle House, different hierarchies are designed to promote different 
types of social engagement. There will be small private gardens and balconies, a large shared terrace in 
the tower blocks placed with a good direction towards the sun, so barbecues are possible, small 
common areas for everyone and large common play areas, all depicted in figure 4.8. The specific design 
of the different hierarchies is not determined yet, and the design can have a big influence on the feeling of 
privacy and social engagement in the different areas. For example, can a large hedge between the 
private gardens can create a higher feeling of privacy than a small fence. Therefore, the final design is of 
great importance to ensure a high value of this design criterion. Thus, the sub-criterion is evaluated as 
‘good’.  
 
 
==PAGE:75==
74 
 
Figure 4.8: The figure shows some of the different hierarchies of the outdoor area at Circle House (appendix B4).  
 
 
Criterion 3.2 Accessibility  
Accessibility design that takes all needs into account, such as elderly and people with special needs, is 
important to integrate in the early design stages so future transformation is avoided. Additionally, it can 
contribute to the architecture instead of interfere, which can happen when accessibility is installed late in 
the design phase.  
The design of Circle House complies with the standards for accessibility but extra accessibility features is 
not implemented.  
In regards to accessibility in the outdoor area, a shared space for all the residents is designed. Cars, 
pedestrians and sport activities are mixed in the shared space and have to take each other into account, 
see figure 4.9. The overall plan of the architects is inspired from ‘Kartoffelrækkerne’ in Copenhagen, 
where a trafficked ground also works as a playground for the children in the neighbourhood. For this 
reason, the architects do not see any problems with applying the same strategy at Circle House, 
especially because it is a closed area, where only cars belonging to the residents are allowed. 
Nevertheless, further detailing is needed to show how the plan will work for the accessibility of the area. 
Since low effort in general is put into designing with easy and safe accessibility in and around Circle 
House is the sub-criterion evaluated as ‘sufficient’.  
 
==PAGE:76==
75 
 
 
Figure 4.9: The figure shows the accessibility of the outdoor area at Circle House. The left picture shows the 
accessibility for cars and the right picture shows the accessibility in from of the different buildings from the pedestrian 
trails (appendix B4). 
 
Criterion 3.3 Diversity 
There is no indication of Circle House is being designed in respect to a diverse community, especially in 
relation to age, gender, culture, income and special needs. As Circle House is a social housing project, 
which normally targets people with lower income, it can be discussed if it possible to design Circle 
House for people with a more diverse income. The architects point out in the interview that it is not really 
clear for them, which aspects that are important for designing for people with a higher income.  
However, the architects have put an effort in designing for different types of living arrangements. For 
example, by implementing partition walls that can be removed so a bedroom can be turned into a large 
living room or vise versa, see figure 4.10. But the overall plan shows that most of the dwellings are 
designed to fit families; 40 of the dwellings have 3 rooms, 10 of the dwellings have 4 rooms, 6 have 2 
rooms and 6 have 1 room.  
Diverse value added to Circle House will mostly come from the overall development plan. The strategy for 
Lisbjerg city is to make it a diverse city by mixing the different types of housing and ownership all over the 
city. This affects Circle House, to some extent, in the form of building sizes, types and placement of 
Circle House. The design of Circle House is restricted to build a certain amount of dwellings, because a 
large amount of social housing cannot be located in the same area of Lisbjerg.  
Therefore, this sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘sufficient’.  
 
==PAGE:77==
76 
 
Figure 4.10: The figure shows how the living arrangement can be changes in the terrace houses with two floors. A partition wall can 
be removed by to either make a larger living room. Another partition wall can be assembled next to the stairs (the dotted line) so 
there still are two bedrooms on the second floor (appendix B4). 
 
Criterion 3.4 Cultural vitality 
Cultural vitality is enhanced by a diverse community and through architecture that attracts different 
cultures. 
As described in the sub-criterion above, diversity is not implemented in the design of Circle House and 
therefore the design does not directly support or enhance cultural vitality either. It is uncertain how the 
architectural expression of Circle House will affect cultural vitality. The architectural expression can turn 
out to be so different from the standard construction ways that it will not add any value but have an 
opposite effect. The new tectonics of circular design can be so different that people would rather want to 
live in a more standardised dwelling.  
Since cultural vitality has great focus in the overall development plan of Lisbjerg, is it possible that it can 
affect the area of Circle House in a positive way.  
The sub-criterion is therefore evaluated as ‘sufficient’.  
 
4.1.3.4 Results of the criterion ‘4. activity’ 
 
Criterion 4.1 Learning and competence edification 
A lot of effort is put in designing the interior components in a way that makes it possible for the residents 
to disassemble and maintain the components by themselves and to make all the joint visible. This can 
enhance the learning and competence edification of the residents, see figure 4.11. They will get a better 
understanding of how a building is constructed through the design of Circle House and this will awake 
their curiosity in other contexts too. However, Circle House is not designed with strategies that support 
this criterion in other aspects of Circle House, such as food gardens or a shared community kitchen. 
Therefore, the sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘good’, since a lot of other actions can add even more value 
to Circle House. 
 
==PAGE:78==
77 
 
Figure 4.11: The figure shows a way to add value to learning and competence edification through a personalised assembling wall 
(appendix B4).  
 
Criterion 4.2 Verbal interaction 
The relationship between the residents is enhanced through verbal interaction that are supported by 
specific areas for these activities.  
In the design of Circle House, only a small indoor area has been assigned for the residents to come 
together and enjoy the company of each other. This area is placed on the ground floor in one of the 
tower blocks, see figure 4.12. The area has a total of 100 square meters, which is only two percent of 
the total dwelling square meters. The area consists of a room for the janitor, a technical room, a washing 
room, and a common area with a pantry kitchen. The design does not directly support or invite to verbal 
interactions for the residents and the placement does not support the inclusion of all residents because it 
is situated in one end of the residential area. The residents that live in the other end of Circle House are 
likely to not use the common indoor area so much because of the distance. 
The outdoor area can be used for verbal interaction as well, but it depends on the weather, as there is 
not any canopied or heating areas outside.  
Therefore, this sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘insufficient’.  
 
 
==PAGE:79==
78 
 
Figure 4.12: The figure shows the eastern tower block, which is where the common room are expected to be placed. At the figure 
are different dwellings shown, but some of these square meters will be used for the common room (appendix B4).  
 
Criterion 4.3 Non-verbal interaction 
As verbal interaction, non-verbal interaction enhances the relation between the residents, but it also 
enhances the health of the individuals by being active.  
The plan for the outdoor area by the architects supports non-verbal interaction between the residents by 
implementing different activities. The final plan for the specific activities is not settled yet, but it could be a 
basketball court and an area with a playground for younger children. Furthermore, it is the architects’ 
plan that the different outdoor hierarchies will support different types of social activities, both non-verbal 
and verbal. According to the architects the semi-private areas will ideally have an area where the 
residents can barbecue together. Therefore, the sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘good’. The sub-criterion 
does not get a higher mark, since more value can be added to this sub-criterion by investigating the 
specific needs for activities.  
 
4.1.3.5 Results of the criterion ‘5. Behaviour’ 
 
Criterion 5.1 Safety 
It is assumed that Circle House has implemented the necessary safety requirements stated in the 
building standards, both in the interior and exterior design. Further safety installations to accommodate 
special needs in the form of elderly or children, are not implemented in Circle House. A lot more effort 
can be put into the design to secure safety for a more diverse residential. Both in the form of direct 
installations, such as signs, light and chairs, but also to create the feeling of security, especially inside the 
dwellings.  
However, one of the objectives with the different hierarchies in the outdoor areas is to create the feeling 
of safety and belonging. The architects believe that this is an important aspect since the outdoor spaces 
are all shared. By giving the hierarchies different affiliations for the residents, the spaces will not feel so 
unfamiliar but create a safe space for them. Furthermore, the outdoor areas at Circle House are 
expected to be similar to ‘Kartoffelrækkerne’ in Copenhagen. At Circle House only the cars, owned by 
the residents, will be allowed entrance, which means the residents watch out for each other to keep 
everyone safe. Therefore, the outdoor design of a shared space, will not be a problem according to the 
architects, but it will create a very homely and intimate feeling. 
==PAGE:80==
79 
The big effort in creating a safe outdoor space at Circle House is the reason for evaluating the sub-
criterion as ‘good’. A higher mark can be given to a more detailed plan of the outdoor space and further 
safety instalments in Circle House or at least a better visualisation of the existing safety instalments. It is 
also important to know if the new building method will need further or other types of safety instalments.  
 
Criterion 5.2 intuitiveness 
It is important that both the interior components and the outdoor spaces are intuitive to use and to live 
and walk around in, both for the safety of the residents, but also to ensure a long durability of the 
components and outdoor spaces. 
The architects have worked hard on designing the interior and exterior building components intuitively. 
This is one of the main objectives for designing with circular principles, because components have to be 
easy to assemble, disassemble and maintain. Easy accessibility is important, too, when handling the 
components and technical installations intuitively, and therefore all the installations are visible in the 
stairwells, see figure  4.13.  
Since this type of component design is new and not tried out at this level before, a manual or guide is 
needed for the residents to be able to assemble and disassemble the wall components by themselves.  
Furthermore, all other building components are designed to be easily assembled without big machines 
that destroy the components, but can be taken out quickly and reused.  
Based on the high level of intuitiveness implemented in the components of Circle House, the sub-
criterion is evaluated as ‘excellent’. The mark ‘outstanding’ will not be given because the final design, 
which is not decided on yet, will have great importance for the actual intuitiveness of Circle House. In 
addition, a description of the intuitiveness of the outdoor space is needed as well, describing how to use 
and walk around in the different hierarchies. 
 
 
Figure 4.13: The figure shows the visible installations in the stairwells of the tower blocks. This will be a part of the decoration and 
will leave extra room for the dwelling and makes it easy to repair, replace and inspect (appendix B4).  
 
 
Criterion 5.3 Overview 
A good overview of the interior rooms and exterior areas is important to ensure a feeling of safety. This is 
done by avoiding long corridors, desert outdoor spaces and small narrow tunnels. Based on the current 
design of the interior rooms of Circle House, it is qualitatively evaluated that a good overview is created 
for the residents, according to figure 4.8. Furthermore, the outdoor spaces are designed with large open 
==PAGE:81==
80 
spaces, and by designing them with the purpose of different hierarchies, they will not become deserted 
but instead ensure a feeling of safety, as described in the sub-criterion ‘safety’. The feeling of safety in 
the outdoor space can be affected by the orientation of the buildings, because the wrong orientation can 
create obstacles of the view. The view is important in the outdoor space because a bad view can create 
unsafe surroundings due to the shared space between pedestrians, playing children and car “traffic”. The 
orientation of the buildings is not decided yet, but will be an important aspect in a good overview of the 
shared outdoor space. See figure 4.14 for the different types of orientations that are suggested. 
Therefore, the sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘good’ and a clearer strategy for a good overview would have 
provided a better mark.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.14: The figure shows three different suggestions for the orientation of the buildings at Circle House. Suggestion A is the 
one prefered by the architects and is therefore the one, which all analysis and sketches are based upon. The design systems are 
also based on suggestion B’s orientation, and of one of the other orientation suggestions are chosen, some of the systems have to 
be rethinked and redesigned according to the architects. It is also seen that the different orientations of the buildings create 
different types of overview of the outdoor spaces. The current types of hierarchies also have to be reassessed if suggestion A or C 
is prefered by Lejerbo (appendix B4).  
 
4.1.3.6 Results of the criterion ‘6. health’ 
 
Criterion 6.1 Daylight quality 
The daylight quality in Circle House is not evaluated yet and nothing specific has been implemented to 
ensure a good daylight. Despite this, the architects emphasise that a good daylight is always important in 
their design, and as a consequence, daylight design is focused on in every project. Furthermore, the 
architects will optimise window area and placement throughout the project to get the best daylight in 
Circle House.  
==PAGE:82==
81 
In the current phase of the design it is assumed that Circle House at least comply with the building 
standards for daylight since nothing else is shown in the design. Furthermore, it is not clear if and how 
the residents will have influence on the daylight. User influence is important to optimise the experience of 
the indoor climate in all aspects. Therefore, the sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘sufficient’.  
 
Criterion 6.2 Indoor air quality 
The architects hope that by designing and constructing with circular principles, it will lead to the usage of 
more natural materials that are not harmful but will instead improve the indoor air quality. More 
specifically, the plan is that DfD and modularity will lead to new types of vapor barriers in the dwellings. 
An example could be a wooden board instead of the traditional types that have a tendency to seal the 
building completely so it cannot “breath”. Furthermore, new types of vapor barriers are more likely to be 
reused than the existing ones, since the old ones are not designed for disassembly.  
No specific ideas and solutions have been presented and implemented in Circle House, but a great 
potential for optimised indoor air quality through circular design solutions is seen. Therefore, the sub-
criterion evaluated is as ‘good’.  
 
Criterion 6.3 Acoustic comfort 
No acoustic analysis for the rooms in Circle House has been performed, so it is uncertain how good the 
acoustic comfort will be. Since Circle House is constructed with a new type of interior walls where 
cladding is omitted, it is possible that the acoustic comfort is very different. This is both expected in the 
experienced and quantitative evaluation of the acoustic. Only one third of the interior walls are possible to 
replace with the customised panels, see figure 4.15. With this, it will be possible to improve the acoustic 
in the different rooms, by choosing a fitting panel. The other two thirds of the wall consist of raw concrete 
without any cladding, which can possibly worsen the acoustics. It is not certain how the final results of 
the acoustic comfort will be in Circle House with the circular design strategies. It is possible that the 
replaceable wall components can optimise the acoustics inside, but at the moment it must be assumed 
that Circle House only meets the requirement from the building standards. As it will be possible for the 
residents to influence the acoustic conditions, this sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘good’. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.15: The figure shows different types of wall panels that can be assembled on the lightweight part of the wall, consisting of 
wood. The different panels have different acoustic features, besides their different design expression and can be implemented in 
different rooms based on the function of the room. The figure also shows the modularity of the circular design concept (appendix 
B4). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
82 
 
 
Criterion 6.4 Thermal comfort 
The thermal comfort in Circle House is not yet assessed, but the architects emphasise that the thermal 
comfort is always given a lot of attention, as with the daylight. Furthermore, a potential for installing floor 
heating in Circle House is present, because of large instalment areas under the floors. This is not decided 
upon yet.  
Since no specific solutions to ensure a good thermal comfort in Circle House have been implemented 
yet, it is assumed that the building only complies with the requirements in the current design stage. 
Therefore, this sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘sufficient’.  
 
 
Criterion 6.5 Inclusion of nature 
The inclusion of nature is visible in many ways in Circle House and the shape of the surrounding nature 
has greatly influenced the form and behaviour of Circle House.  
Firstly, the orientation of Circle House and the outdoor areas are designed while taking into account the 
hill it is located on. The main proposal of the orientation (suggestion B in figure 14) gives the residents a 
great view over the hills and down to Aarhus City. The final orientation is not decided yet, but two other 
types of orientations are also discussed, see sub-criterion overview.  
Secondly, the circular strategies support the inclusion of nature in the form of using natural materials and 
also by implementing old materials due to the reusability. The reuse of natural materials will make the 
transformation and history of them visible, like in nature, which is a nice quality that the architects want to 
show.  
Lastly, Circle House is going to support the rainwater collection strategy made by the Municipality, 
because Circle House is placed close to the wedge, see figure 4.16 under sub-criterion 7.4. By making 
the collection visible for the residents, the architects include nature. The residents will be able to know 
and understand what they are a part of. This can be manifested through a lot of permeable surfaces 
such as green areas or visible channels running from Circle House down to the wedge. 
Inclusion of nature is prioritised in many ways in Circle House, which can help to create a healthier 
environment for the residents, both physically and mentally. Therefore, this sub-criterion is evaluated as 
‘excellent’. The sub-criterion will not receive the mark ‘outstanding’, as sustainable energy sources are 
not considered or implemented and the final design of the value of this sub-criterion is not yet available.  
 
4.1.3.7 Results of the criterion ‘7. Urbanity’ 
During the analysis, it became clear that the criterion ‘urbanity’ is difficult for Circle House to directly 
affect and improve, since it is the job of the Municipality to develop a good urban area in Lisbjerg. It can 
therefore be discussed how relevant this criterion is for the assessments of Circle House. However, 
because the surrounding area of Circle House and the urban area of the city is interlinked and to some 
degree can affect each other, is it is the authors’ opinion that this criterion is important to include in a 
holistic assessment. 
The development of Lisbjerg city is still at the very early stages and therefore the main area of Lisbjerg 
mostly consists of green fields at present day. This is clearly reflected in the assessment of the urbanity, 
because it is stating the present conditions of Circe House. In the future, this criterion will receive a higher 
mark than evaluated in the sub-criteria below, as the conditions are expected to change in Lisbjerg. 
Consequently the sub-criteria will be evaluated with better marks. 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
83 
Criterion 7.1 Services and goods 
The overall development plan for Lisbjerg city, is to create a very dense city, where many services and 
goods are placed in small distances, see figure 4.16. The public school is located across from Circle 
House, but apart from that, the city is not yet developed with many services and goods. The exact 
accessibility to services and goods from Circle House is therefore not yet known. With the current 
development of the city, Circle House will be placed far away from a lot services and goods because of 
the undeveloped city and there this sub-criterion evaluated as ‘insufficient’. This sub-criterion will be 
improved and create more value for Circle House over time, as Lisbjerg city becomes more developed. 
 
 
Criterion 7.2 Transportation 
Close public transportation is important for connectivity in an urban city. Circle House is placed across 
the street from a tram stop. The tram drives through Lisbjerg city, all the way down to Aarhus city in only 
15-20 minutes. The train route is, at the point of writing not operating fully. It is thus not possible to travel 
to and from Lisbjerg by the tram connection (Jyllands-Posten, 2017). 
A super-bike-lane14 is a part of the development plan and will be available from Lisbjerg to Aarhus city, 
going down hill in that direction. The infrastructure is going to be the foundation of Lisbjerg, where public 
transportation will be the primary transportation in focus, according to the architects. The current public 
transportation to and from Lisberg are busses. Therefore the sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘insufficient’. 
Over time this sub-criterion could potentially score higher, as Lisbjerg city and the public transportation to 
Lisbjerg becomes more developed. 
 
 
Criterion 7.3 Fair governance 
Fair and democratic governance is the form of regime in Denmark, where democracy and conflict 
resolution is the foundation of the Danish society (Housing Europe, 2010). It can therefore be discussed 
how relevant this sub-criterion is, considering that the sub-criterion will always score a high mark by this 
type of governance.  
At a smaller scale, the overall development plan has a strategy to include future residents, investors and 
project developers in the development of the city. This is carried out by a discussion of their thoughts 
and comments on the project. In this manner fair governance is implemented in the urban development. 
Additionally fair governance, through resident democracy, is the foundation of the concept of the Danish 
social housing associations. Hence causing the criterion to score a high mark in this sub-criterion. 
Further implementation of fair governance in Circle House is described in the sub-criterion 1.2.  
The development plan of Lisbjerg has put great work on an urban scale to include different stakeholders 
and thereby creating fair governance in the future of Lisbjerg City. Furthermore the social housing is a 
way to add democracy and fair governance in city areas. Therefore the sub-criterion is evaluated as ‘ 
outstanding’. 
 
 
Criterion 7.4 Natural resources  
We claim that a good urban area includes implementation of natural resources, such as parks, forests, 
beaches, lakes etc. and also preservation of existing ones. In Lisbjerg there is a large area of grazing 
land, a protected lake and a green wedge that all will be preserved in the development plan of Lisbjerg. 
The green wedge is located at the end of the hill, where Circle House is placed, while the other existing 
areas are in close biking distance, see figure 4.16. Across from Circle House is an area with sport fields 
located next to the public school.  
                                                
14 A super-bike-lane is a high quality bike lane, making it easy and comfortable to choose the bike as a mean of transportation 
(Sekretariatet for Supercykelstier, 2017).  
==PAGE:85==
84 
Additionally, the plan is to create a dense city with small green oases all around for the enjoyment of the 
citizens.  
The presents of natural resources create a good foundation for the urbanity of Lisbjerg and the 
surroundings of Circle House and therefore is the sub-criterion evaluated as ‘excellent’. The reason for 
not marking it with ‘outstanding’ is because the development of Lisbjerg is still in the early stage and the 
final results can create more value within this sub-criterion. 
 
 
Figure 4.16: The figure shows the future location of the green areas of Lisbjerg city, marked with yellow circles. 1. The city’s grazing 
land; 2. A protected lake; 3. The green wedge; 4. Lisbjerg forrest (appendix B4). The scale in the bottom right corner is not valid. 
 
 
4.1.3.8 Conclusion 
The results of the social sustainability assessment shows that many of the social sub-criteria are 
implemented in the early design phase of Circle House, causing most of the criteria to lie within the circle 
boundary of figure 4.2. This means that Circle House and the development plan is forcing positive value 
creation in respect to the different criteria. A general result, is that it is difficult for all the sub-criteria to 
achieve the two highest marks ‘excellent’ and ‘outstanding’, because the assessment is based on the 
implementation of criteria in the early design phases and the assessment is partly based on the 
concretisation of the design within the sub-criteria. In the current stage of Circle House many of the 
design ideas are not definite and therefore the design solutions are either unclear and undeveloped in a 
number of the sub-criteria.  
The results shows that the design of Circle House largely adds social value within the sub-criteria, while 
only a small part of the sub-criteria are not adding value, but might cause detrimental effect to the social 
aspects of Circle House.  
According to the authors’ definition of absolute sustainability, Circle House is evaluated not absolute 
sustainable because the sub-criteria within the four criteria ‘ownership’, ‘identification’, ‘urbanity’ and 
‘activity’ lies outside of the absolute social limit, as seen in figure 4.2. In order to be evaluated as absolute 
sustainable, all sub-criteria must generate social value creation and thus lie inside the absolute limit in the 
social dimension.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
85 
4.2 Environmental sustainability results 
In this chapter the results will be interpreted to be discussed in chapter 5.  
The results consist of the normalised results and characterised results by scenarios, life cycle stages and 
building components. The normalised results describe the overall environmental impact of Circle House, 
while the characterised results are used to describe where the environmental hot spots lies.  
In the end of this chapter the validity of the results are interpreted through a sensitivity analysis and 
alternative modelling. All output results can be found in appendix C3. 
4.2.1 Normalised results 
The normalised results are shown for scenario 0 and scenario 3, both based on the case study, Circle 
House. Scenario 3 represents the best case scenario for a circular building and scenario 0 represents the 
conventional building practise. The normalised results can be seen from figure 4.17, table 4.1 and figure 
4.18, table 4.2.  
==PAGE:87==
86 
Table 4.1: The table shows the carrying capacity based normalised impact results for the twelve impact categories of S0 of Circle 
House. The figures highlighted in red are the figures exceeding the planetary boundaries !!"!!,!
!
> 1.  
Figure 4.17: The radar chart shows the carrying capacity based normalised impact results for the twelve impact categories of S0 of 
Circle House. The red dashed line outlines the planetary boundaries, thereby indicating when an impact category exceeds the 
planetary boundaries. The figures indicate the factor of the normalised results and doubles by every circle. If !!"!!,!
!
> 1the 
planetary boundaries are exceeded.  
 
The normalised results, based on annual carrying capacity of Circle House seen over a period of two 
times 120 years, for scenario 0, shows that five of the impact categories have exceeded the carrying 
capacities. The five categories are CCrad, CCtemp, FE, FET and LUS. Both CC impact categories lies 
outside the boundary with normalised impact results of a factor 1.99 and 3.76, respectively. FE exceeds 
the carrying capacity with a factor 1.17 and FET with a factor 1.57. LUS exceeds the carrying capacity 
more than any of the other categories with a normalised result of a factor 5006; meaning that the LUS 
impact category exceeds the carrying capacity allocated to a dwelling of 90 m2 with a factor 5000. The 
remaining categories do not exceed the carrying capacities.  
The impact category LUB approaches the boundary with normalised results of a factor 0.6. The 
remaining categories reaches normalised results of about 1/10 of the limit or less.  
For the conventional building custom to be absolute sustainable, all impact categories should have 
normalised results below the limit per impact category. 7 out of 12 impact categories are absolute 
sustainable for S0. Hence, the conventional building custom is not absolute sustainable.   
 
Impact category 
!!"!!,!
!
 
 
Climate change, rad 
[CC, rad] 
1,99 
Climate change, temp 
[CC,temp] 
3,76 
Ozone depletion 
[ODP] 
0,002 
Photochemical ozone 
formation 
[POCP] 
0,12 
Terrestrial acidification 
[TA] 
0,005 
Terrestrial eutrophication 
[TE] 
0,007 
Freshwater eutrophication 
[FE] 
1,17 
Marine eutrophication 
[EP] 
0,073 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
[FET] 
1,57 
Land use, soil erosion 
[LUS] 
5006,23 
Land use, biodiversity 
[LUB] 
0,60 
Water depletion 
[WD] 
-0,0012 
==PAGE:88==
87 
Table 4.2: The table shows the carrying capacity based normalised impact results for the twelve impact categories for S3 of Circle 
House. The figures highlighted in red are the figures exceeding the planetary boundaries, !!"!!,!
!
> 1.  
Impact category 
!!"!!,!
!
 
 
Climate change, rad 
[CC, rad] 
1,68 
Climate change, temp 
[CC, temp] 
3,18 
Ozone depletion 
[ODP] 
0,001 
Photochemical ozone 
formation 
[POCP] 
0,09 
Terrestrial acidification 
[TA] 
0,004 
Terrestrial 
eutrophication 
[TE] 
0,01 
Freshwater 
eutrophication 
[FE] 
1,04 
Marine eutrophication 
[EP] 
0,06 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
[FET] 
1,27 
Land use, soil erosion 
[LUS] 
3761 
Land use, biodiversity 
[LUB] 
0,45 
Water depletion 
[WD] 
-0,002 
Figure 4.18: The radar chart shows the carrying capacity based normalised impact results for the twelve impact categories of S3 of 
Circle House. The red dashed line outlines planetary boundaries, thereby indicating when an impact category exceeds the planetary 
boundaries. The figures indicates the factor of the normalised results and doubles by every circle. If !!"!!,!
!
> 1the planetary 
boundaries are exceeded.  
 
The normalised results, based on annual carrying capacity of Circle House seen over a period of two 
times 120 years, for scenario 3, shows that five of the impact categories have exceeded the carrying 
capacities. The five categories are CCrad, CCtemp, FE, FET and LUS. The impact category FE lies 
comparatively close to the boundary with a normalised result of 1.04, while CCrad, CCtemp and FET 
exceeds the carrying capacity with normalised results of 1.68, 3.18 and 1.27, respectively. The remaining 
categories do not exceed the carrying capacities.  
LUB has a lower normalised impact result compared to S0 with a normalised impact result of 0.45. The 
remaining categories reaches normalised impact results lower than a 1/10 of the limit.  
7 out of 12 impact categories are absolute sustainable for S3. Hence the circular building custom is not 
absolute sustainable, although the respective impact results are better compared to S0. 
 
==PAGE:89==
88 
Table 4.3 shows how the circular building custom performs compared to the conventional building 
custom in the twelve impact categories for their normalised impact results. A general tendency is that the 
normalised impacts decrease by an average of 19 % with the circular building custom. This is valid for 11 
out of 12 impact categories. The impact category Water Depletion has an increase of 33 % from S0 to 
S3. Water depletion is the only impact category that have negative values from the characterisation 
results and thereby also normalised results; meaning that it is not depleting but regenerative. Some LCIA 
method calculate water emitted negative with the reasoning that putting water back to the environment is 
beneficial, thus explaining the negative results (Ecoinvent, 2017b).  
 
Table 4.3: The table shows the deviation in percent of S3 to S0 by impact category. S0 is set to 100 %. The deviation indicates the 
performance of circular building custom (S3) compared to conventional building custom (S0). 
Impact category 
Scenario S0 
S3 deviation from S0 
!!"!!,!
!
 [%] 
(1 −
!!"!3,!
!
!!"!0,!
!
) ⋅100 [%] 
Climate change, rad [CCrad] 
100 
-16 
Climate change, temp [CCtemp] 
100 
-16 
Ozone depletion [ODP] 
100 
-18 
Photochemical ozone formation [POCP] 
100 
-20 
Terrestrial acidification [TA] 
100 
-16 
Terrestrial eutrophication [TE] 
100 
-21 
Freshwater eutrophication [FE] 
100 
-11 
Marine eutrophication [EP] 
100 
-20 
Freshwater ecotoxicity [FE] 
100 
-19 
Land use, soil erosion [LUS] 
100 
-25 
Land use, biodiversity [LUB] 
100 
-25 
Water depletion [WD] 
100 
33 
Average (excl. WD) 
- 
-19 
 
In table 4.4 the impact categories exceeding the carrying capacity is listed by the two scenarios. The 
table shows how much the impact categories need to decrease in percentage. The percentage relates to 
the current state. It also shows how many square meters (m2) that can be built with the current impact 
load. Since the impact in LUS is exceeding the carrying capacity heavily, it needs to decrease by 99.98 
% and 99.97 % for scenario 0 and 3, respectively. This means that with the impact load of LUS only 
1/100 of a square meter can be built in scenario 0 and 2/100 in scenario 3. 
If looking beyond LUS, the floor area of 90 m2 should be as a minimum reduced to 24 m2 for scenario 0 
and 28 m2 for scenario 3 in order to stay within the planetary boundaries. This does not reduce the 
number of people occupying the space, meaning that the 24 m2 should hold residency of 2.6 person.  
 
==PAGE:90==
89 
Table 4.4: Percentage of the impact categories need to decrease to stay within the planetary boundaries. 
Impact category 
Scenario 0 
Scenario 3 
 Climate change, rad [CCrad] 
-50 % 
reduced to 45 m2 
-41 % 
reduced to 53 m2 
 Climate change, temp [CCtemp] 
-73 % 
24 m2 
-69 % 
28 m2 
Freshwater eutrophication [FE] 
-14 % 
77 m2 
-4 % 
86 m2 
Freshwater ecotoxicity [FE] 
-36 % 
57 m2 
22 % 
70 m2 
Land use, soil erosion [LUS] 
-99.98 % 
0,018 m2 
-99.97 % 
0.024 m2 
 
4.2.2 Characterised results 
In this section the characterised results have been interpreted by scenarios, life cycles stages and 
building components.  
4.2.2.1 Characterised results by scenarios 
Scenario 0 
 
Figure 4.19: The figure shows the characterised results of the LCA of Circle House by impact categories for the scenario S0 of 
conventional building customs, stacked by 100 %. On the x-axis is seen the impact categories; on the y-axi, percentage of the 
phases listed in the legends. Each phase in the legend includes two life cycles of 120 years, respectively. 
 
==PAGE:91==
90 
Table 4.5: The table shows the percentage of the contributing life cycle stages of the 10 impact categories listed in the first column. 
The figures listed are those of S0. The figures highlighted in red are the dominating in the impact categories, which were exceeded 
in the normalised impact results. 
Impact 
categories 
Product stage 
Construction 
process 
Replacement 
and repair 
Operational 
energy 
Deconstruction 
process 
End of Life 
CC [%] 
29 
3 
16 
49 
1 
2 
ODP [%] 
30 
2 
24 
38 
1 
5 
POCP [%] 
35 
1 
26 
32 
1 
5 
TA [%] 
29 
2 
28 
38 
1 
3 
TE [%] 
35 
1 
27 
29 
1 
6 
FE [%] 
18 
4 
19 
57 
2 
1 
EP [%] 
35 
1 
32 
25 
1 
6 
FET [%] 
18 
3 
20 
40 
1 
19 
LU [%] 
39 
1 
36 
20 
0 
4 
WD [%] 
43 
-4 
-103 
-47 
-2 
12 
Average (excl. 
WD) [%] 
29,7 
2 
25 
36 
0,9 
5,6 
 
The characterised results of scenario 0 as seen by figure 4.19 show that the phases of the product 
stage, replacement and repair, and operational energy are the categories with the largest impact through 
all impact categories. From table 4.5 it can be seen that the largest contributor on average of the impact 
categories is the operational energy stage with 36 % on average, secondly the production stage with 30 
% and thirdly the replacement and repair stage with 25 % on average. Together, the remaining 
categories contribute with app. 9 % of the total impact. The hotspot life cycle stages of the impact 
categories CC, FE, FET and LU, which were the categories exceeding the carrying capacities in the 
normalised results, are operational energy for CC, FE and FET while the the hotspot of LU is the 
production stage. Thus in order to improve the normalised results of Scenario 0 these life cycle stages 
ought to be improved.  
Noticeable is the impact of EoL in the impact category FET, being the only category with an impact of a 
fifth of the total impact in this category. The impact category WD has a total negative characterised 
result, hence the positive values seen in the product stage and EoL stage are the two phases 
contributing to the depletion of the water resources, while the other have a regenerative impact.  
 
==PAGE:92==
91 
Scenario 1 
 
Figure 4.20: The figure shows the characterised results of the LCA of Circle House by impact categories for the scenario S1 of 
conventional building customs, stacked by 100 %. On the x-axis are seen the impact categories; on the y-axis percent of the 
phases listed in the legends. Each phase in the legend includes two life cycles of 120 years respectively. 
 
Table 4.6: The table shows the percentage of the contributing life cycle stages of the 10 impact categories listed in the first column. 
The figures listed are those of S1. The figures highlighted in red are the dominating in the impact categories, which were exceeded 
in the normalised impact results. 
Impact 
categories 
Product stage 
Construction 
process 
Replacement 
and repair 
Operational 
energy 
Deconstruction 
process 
End of Life 
CC [%] 
18 
3 
19 
57 
2 
1 
ODP [%] 
20 
3 
29 
45 
1 
3 
POCP [%] 
23 
2 
32 
39 
1 
4 
TA [%] 
18 
2 
32 
44 
1 
2 
TE [%] 
24 
2 
34 
36 
1 
4 
FE [%] 
11 
4 
21 
62 
2 
1 
EP [%] 
24 
2 
39 
31 
1 
4 
FET [%] 
12 
3 
23 
48 
1 
12 
LU [%] 
26 
1 
45 
25 
0 
3 
WD [%] 
19 
-3 
-82 
-38 
-1 
5 
Average [%] 
20 
2 
30 
43 
1 
4 
 
The characterised results of scenario 1 as seen by figure 4.20 show that the phases operational energy 
and replacement and repair are the categories with the largest impact through all impact categories. 
From table 4.6 it can be seen that the largest contributor on average of the impact categories is the 
operational energy stage with an average of 43 %, secondly the replacement and repair stage with 30 % 
on average and thirdly the production stage with 20 % on average. Together the remaining categories 
contribute with app. 7 % of the total impact.  
The hotspot life cycle stages of the impact categories CC, FE, FET and LU, which were the categories 
exceeding the carrying capacities in the normalised results, is operational energy for CC, FE and FET 
while the the hotspot of LU is the replacement and repair stage. Thus in order to improve the normalised 
results of Scenario 1 these life cycle stages ought to be improved.  
Noticeable is the impact of EoL in the impact category FET, where the product stage and EoL contribute 
with a equal impact of 12 %.  
==PAGE:93==
92 
As for Scenario 0-1, the impact category WD has a total negative score (-100%), hence the positive 
values seen in the product stage of 19 % and EoL stage of 5 % are the two phases contributing to the 
depletion of the water resources. 
 
Scenario 2 
 
Figure 4.21: The figure shows the characterised results of the LCA of Circle House by impact categories for the scenario S2 of 
conventional building customs, stacked by 100 %. On the x-axis are seen the impact categories; on the y-axis percent of the 
phases listed in the legends. Each phase in the legend includes two life cycles of 120 years, respectively. 
 
Table 4.7: The table shows the percentage of the contributing life cycle stages of the 10 impact categories listed in the first column. 
The figures listed are those of S2. The figures highlighted in red are the dominating in the impact categories, which were exceeded 
in the normalised impact results. 
Impact 
categories 
Product stage 
Construction 
process 
Replacement 
and repair 
Operational 
energy 
Deconstruction 
process 
End of Life 
CC [%] 
18 
3 
17 
58 
2 
1 
ODP [%] 
20 
3 
26 
46 
1 
3 
POCP 
24 
2 
30 
40 
1 
4 
TA [%] 
19 
2 
30 
46 
1 
2 
TE [%] 
25 
2 
31 
38 
1 
4 
FE [%] 
11 
4 
19 
63 
2 
1 
EP [%] 
25 
2 
37 
32 
1 
4 
FET [%] 
12 
3 
22 
49 
2 
13 
LU [%] 
29 
1 
39 
27 
0 
3 
WD [%] 
16 
-2 
-85 
-31 
-1 
4 
Average (excl. 
WD)l [%] 
20 
2 
28 
44 
1 
4 
 
The characterised results of scenario 2 as seen by figure 4.21 and table 4.7 show similarly to scenario 1 
that the largest contributing phases are the operational stage with 44 %, the replacement and repair 
stage with 28 % and the production stage with 20 % on average for the impact categories. Together the 
remaining life cycle stages contribute with app. 8 % of the total impact.  
The hotspot life cycle stages of the impact categories CC, FE, FET and LU, which were the categories 
exceeding the carrying capacities in the normalised results, is operational energy for CC, FE and FET 
while the hotspot of LU is the replacement and repair stage. Thus, in order to improve the normalised 
results of Scenario 2 these life cycle stages ought to be improved.  
==PAGE:94==
93 
Noticeable is the impact of EoL in the impact category FET, where the product stage and EoL contribute 
with an impact 13 % and 12 % respectively.  
As for Scenario 0-1, the impact category WD has a total negative score, hence the positive values seen 
in the product stage of 16 % and EoL stage of 4 % are the two phases contributing to the depletion of 
the water resources. 
 
Scenario 3 
 
Figure 4.22: The figure shows the characterised results of the LCA of Circle House by impact categories for the scenario S3 of 
conventional building customs, stacked by 100 %. On the x-axis are seen the impact categories; on the y-axis percent of the 
phases listed in the legends. Each phase in the legend includes two life cycles of 120 years, respectively. 
 
Table 4.8: The table shows the percentage of the contributing life cycle stages of the 10 impact categories listed in the first column. 
The figures listed are those of S3. The figures highlighted in red are the dominating in the impact categories, which were exceeded 
in the normalised impact results. 
Impact 
categories 
Product stage 
Construction 
process 
Replacement 
and repair 
Operational 
energy 
Deconstruction 
process 
End of Life 
CC [%] 
19 
2 
18 
59 
1 
1 
ODP [%] 
21 
2 
26 
47 
1 
3 
POCP 
24 
1 
30 
40 
1 
4 
TA [%] 
19 
2 
30 
46 
1 
2 
TE [%] 
25 
1 
31 
38 
1 
4 
FE [%] 
11 
3 
19 
64 
1 
1 
EP [%] 
25 
1 
37 
32 
1 
4 
FET [%] 
12 
2 
22 
50 
1 
13 
LU [%] 
30 
1 
39 
28 
0 
3 
WD [%] 
16 
-2 
-86 
-31 
-1 
4 
Average (excl. 
WD) [%] 
21 
1.7 
28 
45 
0.8 
4 
 
The characterised results of scenario 3 as seen by figure 4.22 and table 4.8 show similarly to scenario 1 
and 2 that the largest contributing phases are the operational stage with 45 %, the replacement and 
repair stage with 28 % and the production stage with 21 % on average for the impact categories. 
Together the remaining life cycle stages contribute with app. 7 % of the total impact.  
The hotspot life cycle stages of the impact categories CC, FE, FET and LU, which were the categories 
exceeding the carrying capacities in the normalised results, is operational energy for CC, FE and FET 
==PAGE:95==
94 
while the the hotspot of LU is the replacement and repair stage. Thus in order to improve the normalised 
results of Scenario 3 these life cycle stages ought to be improved.  
Noticeable is the impact of EoL in the impact category FET, where the product stage and EoL contribute 
with an impact of 13 % and 12 % respectively.  
As for Scenario 0-2, the impact category WD has a total negative score, hence the positive values seen 
in the product stage of 16 % and EoL stage of 4 % are the two phases contributing to the depletion of 
the water resources. 
 
Comparison of Scenario 0 to Scenario 3  
 
Table 4.9: Improvement in percentage by scenario S3, S2 and S1 compared to scenario S0 for the ten impact categories. 
 
S3  
S2  
S1 
S0  
 
CC [%] 
-16 
-15 
-14 
196714 kg CO2 eq. 
ODP [%] 
-20 
-19 
-16 
0 kg CFC-11 eq 
POCP 
-22 
-21 
-18 
575 kg NMVOC eq 
TA [%] 
-18 
-17 
-14 
1048 molc H+ eq 
TE [%] 
-23 
-22 
-18 
2013 molc N eq 
FE [%] 
-12 
-10 
-9 
52 kg P eq 
EP [%] 
-21 
-21 
-19 
226 kg N eq 
FET [%] 
-20 
-19 
-17 
1577962 CTUe 
LU [%] 
-28 
-28 
-19 
927592 kg C deficit 
WD [%] 
52 
54 
25 
-32 m3 water eq 
Average (excl. WD) [%] 
-20 
-19 
-16 
300687 
- 
 
Table 4.9 above shows the circular building scenarios (S1-S3) of circle house compared to the 
conventional building scenario (S0). It shows that the largest difference among the scenarios is S1 when 
compared to S0. This is due to the impact of 90 % reuse strategy. Thus, causing S1 to decrease its 
environmental burden by 16 % on average, all impacts included except WD.  
From S2 to S0 is seen a decrease of 19 % or 4 %-point from S2 to S1. The decrease is caused by the 
change in the replacement and repair due to the design for disassembly.  
From S3 to S0 is seen a total decrease of the environmental impact of 20 %. Thus decreasing with 1 %-
point from S2 to S3 and thereby causing the smallest decrease in the scenarios. The decrease caused 
by the decrease in energy use in the construction and deconstruction processes. 
S1 has the largest decrease in impact category EP and LU which decreases by 19 % compared to S0.  
S2 has the largest decrease in impact category LU which decreases by 28 % compared to S0 and 
likewise for S3. The largest decreases from scenario to scenario is seen in S1 to S2 by 8 %-point in 
impact category LU and in S2 to S3 by 2 %-point in impact category FE.  
As before the impact category WD deviates from the rest of the results by its negative results. The 
decreasing tendency seen in the other impact categories is opposite for the WD which increases from 
scenario S0 to S2 and then decreases by 2 %-point from S2 to S3, leading to a total increase of 52 % in 
total from S0 to S3. 
 
==PAGE:96==
95 
Characterised results by life cycle stages 
 
The change in the scenarios through the two life cycles can be seen in a timely manner from figure 4.23. 
The figure shows the environmental impact of the impact category CC.  
From the figure the strategies implemented in S3 is clearly visible. The first strategies visible are the 
decrease in construction and deconstruction energy in the first life cycle and the replacement and repair.  
In the second life cycle, the decrease from only 10 % new materials compared to 100 % new materials in 
S0 can be seen. As the previous figures also showed, the largest decrease comes from the 90 % reuse 
strategy.  
 
 
Figure 4.23: The figure shows the characterised results of the LCA of Circle House shown over time by life cycle stages for scenario 
0 and 3 in the impact category Climate Change. The x-axis displays the life cycle stages through two life cycles of 120 years each. 
The y-axis displays the impact by thousand kg CO2 equivalents. 
 
In figure 4.24 the strategies can be seen affecting the impact category water resource depletion. As 
previously mentioned the impact category produces negative results and thus the figures shows a 
decrease through the life cycle stages opposite of the impact category climate change. In WD, S0 has a 
better environmental impact than S3. For each improvement in S3 the impact category increases. 
 
Figure 4.24: The figure shows the characterised results of the LCA of Circle House shown over time by life cycle stages for scenario 
0 and 3 in the impact category Water Resource Depletion (WD). The x-axis displays the life cycle stages through two life cycles of 
120 years each. The y-axis displays the impact by thousand kg C deficit. 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
96 
4.2.2.2 Characterised results by building component 
 
Figure 4.25: The figure shows the characterised results of the LCA of Circle House by building materials in the life cycle stage A1-
A3 for one life cycle. On the x-axis are seen the impact categories; on the y-axis percentage of the building materials.  
 
Figure 4.26: The figure shows the characterised results of the LCA of Circle House by the light facade building component in the life 
cycle stage A1-A3 for one life cycle. On the x-axis are seen the impact categories; on the y-axis percentage of the building 
materials. 
 
As seen by figure 4.25 the largest contributor to the environmental impacts of the building components 
are the foundation, the roof construction and the light facade. This is due to the fact that the roof 
construction and foundation include concrete while the light facade includes insulation and plywood 
which are the largest contributing materials, as seen on figure 4.26, 4.27 and 4.28. Thus, reducing the 
amount of concrete and insulation for the three building components or substituting these with more 
environmentally friendly materials would reduce the environmental impact of Circle House through all 
scenarios. Although the insulation material has negative values in WD, the reduced environmental impact 
from the remaining impact categories is outweighing the positive effect in WD.  
==PAGE:98==
97 
 
Figure 4.27: The figure shows the characterised results of the LCA of Circle House by the roof construction in the life cycle stage 
A1-A3 for one life cycle. On the x-axis are seen the impact categories; on the y-axis percentage of the building materials. 
 
Figure 4.28: The figure shows the characterised results of the LCA of Circle House by the foundation in the life cycle stage A1-A3 
for one life cycle. On the x-axis are seen the impact categories; on the y-axis percentage of the building materials. 
 
4.2.3 Sensitivity analysis 
 
The hotspots of the results have been identified. They are found in table 4.10 below.  
 
Table 4.10: The hotspots from the sensitivity analysis are described in the table, based on life cycle stages and building 
components and ranked from highest to lowest hotspot.  
Life cycle stages 
Building components 
1. 
Operational energy 
2. 
Replacement and repair 
3. 
Product stage 
 
1. 
Foundation 
2. 
Roof construction 
3. 
Light facade 
 
The hotspots have been adjusted with ±10 %, respectively. The result of the sensitivity analysis is shown 
by the deviation of the normalised results and can found in appendix C3 or as indicated by figure 4.29. 
 
==PAGE:99==
98 
 
Figure 4.29: The figure shows the sensitivity of the hotspots adjusted with ± 10 %. The different scenarios of the hotspots are listed 
in the legend. The deviation is shown in percentage in relation to the normalised results of scenario 3.    
 
The sensitivity analysis shows the sensitivity of the hotspots when adjusted by ±10 %. The results show 
that the life cycle stages are more sensitive to adjustment than the building components. The deviation 
from plus to minus are exactly the same. This could be expected due to factorial adjustment of ±10 %. 
In table 4.10 the hotspots are listed accordingly to their size. From the sensitivity analysis, the correlation 
between the larger hotspots and the larger deviations is visible and thereby show the same ranking as 
listed in the table.   
4.2.4 Alternative modelling 
4.2.4.1 Alternative life cycle duration 
The LCA has been carried out with two life cycles of 120 years each. An alternative modelling is carried 
out with two life cycles of 60 years each, in order to test the sensitivity of the modelling. The difference in 
the modelling of the two life cycle durations is seen in figure 4.30.  
 
 
Figure 4.30: The figure shows the difference in the modelling of two different life cycle durations: 120 years and 60 years. Both 
modellings include two times life cycles.   
 
The normalised results can be seen in appendix C3, while the deviation between the two modellings is 
seen from figure 4.31 as a sensitivity analysis.  
 
==PAGE:100==
99 
 
Figure 4.31: The figure displays a graph of the deviation between a life cycle duration of 60 years to 120 years. 120 years is used 
as a baseline for the results. The results are given i percentage and shown for both S0 and S3.  
 
The figure clearly shows that the duration of the life cycle has an effect on the results. The figure shows 
the 120 year life cycle compared to the 60 year life cycle. The 120 year life cycle has been used as the 
baseline for the comparison. Hence the figure shows that the normalised results of S0 and S3 are larger 
for a 60 year life cycle, than a 120 year life cycle. Meaning that a 60 year life cycle increases the degree 
of which the normalised impact exceeds the carrying capacity. The smaller the impact of the operational 
energy accounts for, the larger the deviation between a 60 and 120 year life cycle is seen. 
The figure shows that the difference between the life cycles is larger for S0 than S3. This is a result of the 
larger percentage of operational energy in S3 than S0 in the 60 and 120 year life cycle, caused by the 
reduction in materials in S3. The deviation in numbers is found in table 4.11. 
The characterised and normalised results are given in appendix C3.  
As previously described, WD has negative impact results leading to a decrease by the alternative 
modelling of 60 years.  
 
 
Table 4.11: The table describes the deviation in percentage by an alternative modelling of 60 years for the twelve normalised impact 
results. It shows the deviation of S3 and S0 for a 60 year life cycle compared to the 120 year life cycle. 
 
CC, temp 
CC, rad ODP 
POCP 
TA 
TE 
FE 
EP 
FET 
LUS 
LUB 
WD 
Average 
S3 [%] 
33 
33 
36 
45 
42 
45 
27 
32 
35 
28 
28 
-8 
31,21 
S0 [%] 
42 
42 
44 
53 
49 
53 
33 
44 
45 
37 
37 
-18 
38,44 
 
4.2.4.2 Alternative modelling: Operational energy in the second life cycle 
 
Since the scenarios do not account for the building legislation of 2140, the normalised results for 
scenario 3 was tested with the assumption that, in the year 2140 all new buildings would require 0 
kWh/m2/year due to increased energy efficiency legislations. The results can be seen from figure 4.32 
and table 4.12 and is called Scenario 3.1. 
The results show that the carrying capacity still exceeds the limit in three impact categories. The impact 
categories FE and FET have decreased to below the carrying capacities. CCrad and CCtemp are 
exceeding though they have decreased from S3. LUS is still exceeding the carrying capacity heavily. 
==PAGE:101==
100 
 
Table 4.12: The table shows the carrying capacity based normalised results for the twelve impact categories for S3.1 of Circle 
House. The figures highlighted in red are the figures exceeding the planetary boundaries,!!"!!.!,!
!
> 1.  
Impact category 
!!"!!.!,!
!
 
 
Climate change, rad 
[CC, rad] 
1,20 
Climate change, temp 
[CC, temp] 
2,26 
Ozone depletion 
[ODP] 
0,001 
Photochemical ozone 
formation 
[POCP] 
0,08 
Terrestrial acidification 
[TA] 
0,003 
Terrestrial 
eutrophication 
[TE] 
0,005 
Freshwater 
eutrophication 
[FE] 
0,71 
Marine eutrophication 
[EP] 
0,05 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
[FET] 
0,97 
Land use, soil erosion 
[LUS] 
3248,09 
Land use, biodiversity 
[LUB] 
0,39 
Water depletion 
[WD] 
-0,001 
Figure 4.32: The radar chart shows the carrying capacity based normalised results for the twelve impact categories of S3.1 of 
Circle House. The red dashed line outlines planetary boundaries, thereby indicating when an impact category exceeds the planetary 
boundaries. The figures indicates the factor of the normalised results and doubles by every circle. If !!"!!.!,!
!
> 1the planetary 
boundaries are exceeded.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
101 
4.2.5 Conclusion 
The results of the LCA showed that both the conventional building practise and the building practise with 
circular strategies implemented are exceeding the carrying capacities allocated to a 90 m2 dwelling with 
residency of 2.6 persons. In both cases five out of twelve impact categories exceeded the carrying 
capacity limit. These were CCrad, CCtemp, FE, FET and LUS, in both cases.  
The hotspot life cycle stages were identified as the operational energy stage (A5), replacement and repair 
(B3-B4) and product stage (A1-A3). The operational energy stage accounted for a larger part in S0 than 
in S3, due to the cut in materials in the second life cycle.  
The hotspot building components were identified as the foundation, the roof construction and the light 
facade, where concrete, insulation and plywood were largest contributors.  
The assessment was tested through a sensitivity analysis, where the hotspots were adjusted with +-10 
%. The tested subject responded as expected, validating the results.  
Two types of alternative modelling were carried out. The first alternative modelling was a modelling of a 
60 year life cycles instead of 120 year, as in S0-S3. The results showed that a shorter life cycle would 
increase the normalised impact results leading to a higher exceedance of the carrying capacity.  
Another result of the alternative modelling were that the DfD in replacement and repair stage plays less of 
a role with a 60 year life cycle than 120 year. This is due to the fewer replacements, since the lifetime 
expectancies of the materials are longer than 60 years. 
The second alternative modelling was a scenario called S3.1 testing S3 with no operational energy use in 
order to give an estimate of how the implementation of a building legislation in year 2140 with zero 
energy use would perform. The results were that less energy use led to only three impact categories 
exceeding the carrying capacity limits. Thus, a reduction compared to the original modelling.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
102 
4.3 Economic sustainability results 
As described in chapter 3.5, the economic assessment is based on a cost benefit analysis. The analysis 
is assessing the costs and benefits of the industry when implementing circular design strategies in Circle 
House as the case. Therefore, the focus has been primarily on the building owner, Lejerbo, but can also 
be used by other involved parties.  
The assessment is descriptive in the sense that it is outlining the costs and benefits without assessing 
their economic value or other values, such as impact of well-being or change in biodiversity etc. The 
assessment only describes the possible positive or negative economic effect. The assessment follows 
the five main targets of implementation of circular business. This lead to an action and an outcome, 
which can be divided into the ‘end points’ categories; socio-economic and environmental-economic 
outcomes. The assessment is seen on figure 4.33.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:104==
103 
4.3.1 Descriptive CBA results 
 
 
Figure 4.33: The figure shows the target of implementing circular business in Circle House. The figures shows how the five targets 
connect to actions, outcomes of these actions and what end-point they affect.  
 
As seen from figure 4.33, the five main targets were to implement  
 
● 
Modular design principles, 
● 
Product-service systems, 
● 
New partnerships,  
● 
Design for disassembly (DfD), 
● 
and Conversion to circular business. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:105==
104 
4.3.1.1 Modular design principles 
In order to succeed with these targets, some actions needs to be made. To implement modular design 
principles, first and foremost the action is to research and develop modular design.  
In Circle House, the three architectural firms collaborate on innovative modular design principles for 
concrete. In order to succeed with this target, Fællestegnestuen researched on the matter, by attending 
meetings, visiting sites, investigating firms with experience on the matter (appendix B4). The result of 
which has been a modular system, in collaboration with manufacturing firm Peikko (Brejnrod et al., 2017).  
Developing entirely new design solutions is time demanding and could thereby lead to increased wages 
in the design process. In the case of Circle House, the concrete firm Peikko already have solutions for 
mechanical assembly. Nevertheless, new machines and assembly methods is be tested by the 
construction of Circle House. Thus, a higher level of planning is required, but can also result in faster 
construction and thereby decrease the energy demand at site and reduce the amount of waste at site.  
The reduced amount of waste, can lead to the positive outcome of reducing the extraction of new raw 
materials and thereby decreasing the environmental impact. 
The research of modular principles enhance the specialised skills within the involved parties. A lack of 
specialised skills within the involved parties can be an extra expense, though in the long run could lead to 
added value for the parties by edification of specialised competencies.  
 
4.3.1.2 Design for disassembly  
The ambition to incorporate DfD is a result of the 90 percent reuse strategy. The design needs to take 
into consideration how the dismantling process will work, and incorporate this in the design. By 
incorporating this in the modular design principle from the beginning, DfD is not an extra expense as 
such, as it is a part of the modular design.   
The design for disassembly allows the building materials in the building components to be dismantled 
separately for maintenance, thereby both easing the maintenance, by making it more efficient and 
reducing waste from maintenance. Another positive outcome of DfD is that the recycling value in the EoL 
stage is higher, since the building material can be separated in clean waste fractions or directly reused in 
a new life cycle.  
 
Though, these are positive outcomes, the cash out of the extra work put into both the modular design 
and DfD lies in the end of the building’s life cycle. Thereby, the investment is a long term investment 
depending on the building’s life cycle. The only short term investment for the building owner is the easier 
maintenance in the operation stage of the building’s life cycle, and possibly a faster construction 
process.  
 
4.3.1.3 Product service system 
Circle House has opened up to the possibility of product-service systems eg. by entering an agreement 
with a window manufacturer of renting the window. The window would be bought at a fraction of the 
price or rented on a monthly basis, through an agreement that the window will be serviced by the 
company. Thereby, agreeing upon a service contract with the company. When the window needs 
replacement, the company replaces the window, and takes the window back for reuse or recycling to a 
new window.  
This prolongs the lifetime of the window as well as ensures the company to a service agreement 
throughout the lifetime of the window.  
The product-service system is a different kind of ownership, which places the risk and responsibility at 
the manufacturer, but ensures higher quality from the manufacturer to the customer who is renting. The 
==PAGE:106==
105 
benefit is a long lasting customer relationship, while the cost is long lasting guarantees (Schipull 
Kauschen, 2014).  
The economic model of social housing in combination with the model of product-service system has not 
been settled, as a results of the fact that product-service systems, at this stage, is a wish more than a 
reality (appendix B4).  
 
4.3.1.4 New partnerships 
The early phases of Circle House included involvement and engagement of a lot of stakeholders within 
the industry. Collaboration among many stakeholders has been the key to establish partnerships in the 
industry, thereby requiring a lot of meetings, workshops etc. The process has been open and inviting in 
the hope to inspire and engage the industry as much as possible. The action was to create sparing and 
sharing of knowledge within the industry. The outcome has resolved in some innovative work and new 
partnerships. Thus, strengthening the competitive capacity, but also setting the bar for a higher level of 
integrity and responsibility in the industry. The offspring of this could be new industrial symbiosis, but in 
this case, especially publicity by showcasing the innovative project at Building Green and other fora (F5, 
2017) (Lejerbo, 2017b). 
 
4.3.1.5 Conversion to Circular business 
By choosing to implement circular business cases in Circle House, Lejerbo is choosing to opt out of 
linear business and thus ending business and partnerships with non-transformable businesses.  
Circular business and environmentally sustainable buildings are a growing trend, and thus creates 
publicity and branding value. Since Lejerbo is a social housing association, they do not profit from the 
building, but sets an example in the industry and thus enhancing the sustainability branding value of the 
project even further. Hence, being involved in this project is a selling point and increases the sustainability 
branding value of the involved parties.  
Another action towards circular business is to mix construction economy with the operation economy as 
Lejerbo has implemented in their sustainability strategy, see figure 4.34. Thus, making implementation of 
product-service systems easier.  
 
 
Figure 4.34: The figure shows the  economic vision of Lejerbo, switching from a linear management  to a circular management of 
social housing, redrawn from (Lejerbo, Lendager Arkitekter and COWI, 2014). 
 
 
==PAGE:107==
106 
4.3.1.6 Putting value on Circular business 
 
 
 
Figure 4.35: The figure shows the of benefits inside the circle against costs outside the circle for each the strategies of 
implementing circular business in Circle House. The figures does not indicate the value of each benefit and cost.  
 
The results of this assessment has not been to put a value of the cost and benefits of implementing 
circular business in Circle House, but to outline the potential positive and negative outcomes of the 
implementation, illustrated by figure 4.35.  
The results show that circular business has a positive effect on the environment by reducing waste, 
reducing energy use at site etc. But it also shows that there are monetary benefits by implementing 
circular business in Circle House. The larger cost lies in developing and researching modular building 
principles in the short term. In the long term, the knowledge and competencies acquired can be used in 
further projects and the modular building design can be used in other building projects.  
Circular buildings require more planning and higher level of planning and thus it increases the wages, but 
could lead to positive benefits such as less construction time, as examples with modular buildings 
already show (3XN and DEPA, 2016). 
==PAGE:108==
107 
The challenge of circular buildings are the long lifetimes of the building materials and building 
components since the benefit of modular design and design for disassembly lies in the second life cycle 
of the building, in the case of Circle House. Benefits are also seen in the maintenance stage, since it can 
lower the costs both by using product-service systems, but also by the efficiency of the dismantling and 
assembly process under maintenance.  
 
Unlike the absolute sustainability diagram of the two other sustainability dimensions, the positive and 
negative effects have been given each a whole ‘pie-piece’ in the pie chart. The reason is that the costs 
and benefits have not been ‘measured’ to a degree where it was possible to determine if the costs 
outweighs the benefits or the opposite. Hence from this diagram it is not possible to determine the 
absolute sustainability of the actions. This would require that quantitative numbers were put into each 
strategy. Then the absolute sustainability could have been assessed according to the absolute 
sustainability definition and according to the assessment method described in chapter 3.2. 
 
4.3.2 Conclusion 
The result of the CBA was not able to determine the absolute sustainability due to the lack of quantifiable 
numbers to the cost and benefits. Instead costs and benefits were described separately as outcomes of 
actions towards the circular strategies of Circle House. It was clear from the results that time is an issue 
in the conversion towards circular business for buildings, due to the long lifetime duration of buildings. 
Thus, the investments made in circular business strategies have long return times, making the investment 
insecure by the unpredictable future. The result of the CBA also showed that both environmental and 
economic benefits could be a result of circular business, though the benefits have not been determined 
by quantitative data. 
 
 
==PAGE:109==
108 
4.4 Results of application of the SDGs as sustainability 
performance indicators  
This section describes the results of the assessment of the application of the SDGs as sustainability 
performance indicators within the social, environmental and economic dimensions of the building 
industry. The analyses can be found in appendix C4. The literature study show that the SDGs are 
described on three levels; overall scope of the goals, the targets and the relating indicators. As the name 
implies, the targets describe the different issues that are the focus of improvement and how it is 
executed within every goal. Thus the SDGs are a combination of specific issues and a general 
description of target improvements.  
4.4.1 The SDGs’ applicability within the building industry 
Through the literature study, it became clear that the 17 goals, the 169 targets, and the 232 indicators 
are defined on either a global level, national level or and regional level, supporting largely the sustainable 
development of undeveloped countries. Because of this, none of the goals or indicators were found as 
directly applicable as performance indicators on a building level to support sustainable design in the early 
design phases. The world ‘directly’ in this context, means that the goals and indicators cannot be used 
by their original formulation as performance indicators, neither qualitatively or quantitatively. The goals 
and indicators needs to be processed or reformulated in order to become applicable as a sustainable 
assessment tool: firstly on a building level and secondly in the early design phases.  
However, from the analysis it was found, that the goals related to the building industry can be used as 
guiding points of sustainable development in general. The generally applicable SDGs are described in the 
section below ‘results of the conceptual performance indicators’.  
Since it was found that the indicators are not directly applicable as measurable performance indicators, 
the analysis consisted of a reformulation of the indicators that supports the building industry. This was 
executed for the purpose of assessing which SDG indicators would be applicable as measurable 
performance indicators for absolute sustainability. The result are described in the section below ‘results 
of measurable performance indicators’. Therefore the results follows the methodology as described in 
chapter 3.6. It will focus on the goals as ‘conceptual performance indicators’ and the targets as 
‘measurable performance indicators’. 
 
4.4.2 Results of the conceptual performance indicators  
The results of the conceptual performance indicators analysis is shown in figure 4.36. The figure shows 
which of the 17 SDGs that can be used as a conceptual performance indicators to assess the social, 
economic and environmental sustainability within the building industry. 
 
==PAGE:110==
109 
 
Figure 4.36: The figure shows which of the UN 17 SDGs that is applicable as conceptual performance indicators in the building 
industry, visualised in colors. The grey goals are not applicable. 11 out of the 17 goals are applicable as conceptual performance 
indicators.  
 
The 11 coloured SDG in figure 4.36 are able to work as conceptual performance indicators for a 
sustainability assessment of buildings on a conceptual level, within all three sustainability dimensions; 
economic, social and environmental. Not all of the 11 SDG can simultaneously evaluate all three 
dimensions within a building perspective. Only the goals ‘6. Clean water’ and ‘11. Sustainable cities and 
communities’ covers all three sustainability dimensions. Four of the goals are applicable as to be 
conceptual performance indicators within two of the sustainability dimensions, which are ‘7. Affordable 
and clean energy’; ‘9. Industry, innovation and infrastructure’; ‘12. Responsible consumption and 
production’; and ‘13. Climate action’. These four goals comprise a variation of the three sustainability 
dimensions. The last five goals, applicable as conceptual performance indicators, cover one of the three 
dimensions, respectively.  
The goal ‘15. Life on land’ comprises the environmental sustainability dimension and the goals ‘1. No 
poverty’,’ 3. Good health and well-being’, ‘5. Gender equality’ and ‘10. Reduced inequalities’ comprise 
the social dimension. See the analysis in appendix C4 for the full description of every goal and their 
relations to the sustainability dimensions in the building perspective.  
The result of the conceptual performance indicators shows that these 11 goals cannot be used as 
measurable performance indicators, but as conceptual performance indicators for promoting sustainable 
building design within specific areas. This is obtained by reformulating and processing them to fit the 
Danish building industry.  
Thus, the goals do not directly give concrete design solutions within the different sustainable dimensions, 
but their overall scope describes the main strategies for sustainable building design. They do not offer an 
evaluation to the degree of the sustainability that can be obtained by using the 11 goals as sustainable 
performance indicators.  
 
4.4.3 Results of the SDG indicators as measurable performance indicators 
The results of the measurable performance indicators analysis is shown in figure 4.37. The figure shows 
that 24 indicators within 11 goals can be used as measurable sustainability performance indicators within 
building design. See appendix C4 for the full analysis.  
Indicator 12.2.1 and indicator 8.4.1 are based on the same measurable parameter, material footprint, 
and therefore only one of the indicators is included to avoid double accounting. Hence indicator 8.4.1 is 
the one included in the analysis and shown in the results.  
 
==PAGE:111==
110 
 
Figure 4.37: The figure shows that 24 indicators within 11 UN SDG can be used as measurable sustainability performance 
indicators in the building industry. The different colours of the indicators shows how Circle House performs when using the SDG 
measurable performance indicators. Green: Supported. Yellow: Partly supported. Red: Not supported. 
4.4.3.1 Performance of Circle House 
Figure 4.37 shows the sustainability performance of Circle House according to the measurable 
performance indicators of the SDGs. The ranking system created for the evaluation of the SDG indicators 
shows that the  design of Circle House is supported in nine out of 24 measurable performance 
indicators. It is partly supported within seven of the indicators, and not supported within eight of the 
indicators.   
The ranking ‘not supported’, marked as red in figure 4.37, means that Circle House has not implemented 
and/or visualised the sustainability criteria stated in the indicator. An example is the SDG indicator 7.2.1, 
about integration of renewable energies, which Circle House has not included in the design, thus the 
mentioned ranking.  
The ranking ‘partly supported’, marked with yellow in figure 4.37, implies that Circle House as 
implemented parts of the criterion in the indicator, or implemented the whole criterion but have not 
visualised the potentials within the different sustainability dimensions. The SDG indicator 12.1.1 - 
sustainable usage and production, is an example of this evaluation. Circle House has implemented 
design solutions that are sustainable in their use phase due to circular design strategies, but they have 
not visualised all the economic benefits and potentials these design strategies can have.  
The ranking ‘supported’, marked with green in figure 4.37, means that Circle House has implemented 
and visualised all criteria within the indicator. An example is the SDG indicator 11.7.1 - ‘open spaces for 
everyone’, where a lot of effort is put into the outdoor areas of Circle House to promote social 
engagement for everyone, by designing different hierarchies.  
The descriptions of all the indicators can be seen in the analysis in appendix C4. 
 
The ranking system shows that the reformulation of the SDG indicators did not make it possible to use 
them as quantitative indicators within the building industry. The reformulated SDG indicators can only be 
used as specific sustainable design strategies within the three sustainability dimension and ranked based 
on the degree of implementation.  
 
==PAGE:112==
111 
4.4.3.2 Scope of the SDG indicators 
The reformulating of the SDG indicators to support sustainable design within the building context, shows 
that a great amount of the SDG indicators support and include circular design strategies and solutions, 
see table 4.13 below. The indicators overall focus on energy, water and waste management, clean 
energy consumption, clean production and usage of materials, reduction in material footprint, and 
recycling of materials. All of these strategies are a part of the circular economy and circular design, found 
from the literature study and thus the SDGs can support circular design in the building industry. 
The reformulating of the SDG indicators was found to support social housing principle and strategies, 
local or urban scale strategies, and other general sustainable design strategies, see table C4.1 in 
appendix C4.  
 
Table 4.13: Shows the SDG performance indicators that includes and support circular design strategies. 
The reformulated SDG indicators that support circular design strategies  
Goal 
3.9.1: Ensure clean and good indoor climate and low ambient air pollution for a good health of 
the residents, by designing for a good indoor air quality.  
Goal 3: Good health and 
wellbeing 
6.4.1: Designing dwellings with focus on water-use efficiency, which can promote sustainable 
design solutions, decrease in water consumptions in buildings  and can furthermore enhance the 
responsibility of the residents and decrease the economic expenses.  
Goal 6. Clean water and 
sanitation 
7.1.2 Implementation of clean fuels and technologies in the design and operation of dwellings 
can decrease their environmental impact and maybe support other buildings by producing 
surplus in energy. Thus there can be some economic benefits for the residents by selling 
energy. 
7.2.1: Implementation of renewable energy in the design and operation of dwellings can 
decrease their environmental impact and the economic expenses. 
Goal 7. Affordable and 
clean energy 
8.4.1: Focus on designing solutions that decrease the overall material footprint of the dwellings. 
Goal 8. Decent work and 
economic growth 
11.6.1: Promote waste collection within the housing area to support the decrease of  
environmental impacts with solid waste and to create awareness and engagement for the 
residents about the environmental issues.  
 
11.6.2: Design the dwellings so their indoor air quality are affected at a minimum by the indoor 
and outdoor fine particulate matters and CO2 . For example by using natural materials.  
Goal 11. Sustainable cities 
and communities 
12.1.1: Ensure design solutions that support sustainable usage and production profiles. This can 
also promote economic benefits for the residents, by lower prices for components.  
 
12.4.2: Promote and implement design solutions that ensure materials and components that do 
not generate hazardous waste, both in regard to the health of the residents and the related 
environmental issues. Generating materials with less hazardous consequences can have 
economic benefits for example by longer lower prices. 
 
12.5.1: Implement recycling design solutions to support and accommodate the environmental 
issues with waste generation. This can also have economic benefits because of the resources 
efficiency it accommodate.  
Goal 12. Responsible 
consumption and 
production 
 
==PAGE:113==
112 
4.4.4 Conclusion 
The results from the assessment of the applicability of the SDGs as sustainability performance indicators 
shows that the SDGs and the indicators can be used as conceptual and specific sustainable strategies, 
respectively. The implementation of the strategies can support and enhance sustainable building design 
within all three dimensions of sustainability.  
The UN’s formulation of the SDGs is based on a global, national and regional level, where the indicators 
are designed to measure changes on national and local sector level, for all industries. Thus the indicators 
are commonly supporting and affecting national, regional and local legislation procedures. This means 
that the indicators, firstly are difficult to scale down on a building level, and secondly are difficult to 
establish quantitative measurements on because of their broad formulation. This is clearly shown in the 
results, as only 24 of the 232 indicators are possible to use as performance indicators on building level 
and none of them are able to be quantified. The indicators are not able to describe any absolute 
boundaries because they are not quantified and therefore they are only able to outline strategies for 
sustainable development within building design, which is also the main purpose of the SDGs; guidance 
for a sustainable development. 
 
4.5 Summary of the result chapter 
The chapter describes the results found from the four assessments carried out on the case study, Circle 
House. The four assessments are 1) a qualitative social sustainability assessment, 2) a quantitative LCA 
assessment, 3) a descriptive cost-benefit assessment and 4) an assessment of the application of SDGs 
as sustainable performance indicators.  
The results of the social sustainability assessment shows that a great part of the social criteria are to 
some extent implemented and integrated to in the design of Circle House and thus create positive value 
through the design. However, the design can be optimised in respect to many criteria, for a even better 
value creation, especially in the four criteria that are evaluated as creating detrimental effect. Since four of 
the criteria are exceeding the absolute limits, the overall performance of Circle House is evaluated as not 
absolute social sustainable.  
The results of the environmental sustainability assessment, carried out through an LCA, show that five 
out of twelve impact categories exceed the carrying capacity limit. This is found to be applicable for both 
the conventional building practice and the building practice with circular strategies. The hotpots found in 
the life cycle stages and on the building components are identified as the operational energy stage (A5), 
replacement and repair (B3-B4) and product stage (A1-A3), and the foundation, the roof construction 
and the light facade, respectively. Through a sensitivity analysis the results showed that (1) shorter life 
cycle of a building will lead to a higher exceedance of the carrying capacity, (2) the DfD in replacement 
and repair stage plays less of a role in a shorter life cycle of 60 years rather than 120 years, (3) lower 
operational energy leads to only three impact categories exceeding the carrying capacity limits. Overall is 
it evaluated that Circle House is not absolute environmental sustainable. 
The results of the economic sustainability assessment shows that the cost-benefit analysis is not able to 
determine the absolute sustainability performance of Circle House, due to the lack of quantifiable 
numbers to the costs and benefits. The results made it clear that time is an issue in the conversion 
towards circular business strategies for buildings, due to the long lifetime duration of buildings. However 
the results also shows that circular business can result in environmental and economic benefits, even 
though they have not been determined by quantitative data.  
The results of the applicability of the SDGs as sustainability performance indicators shows that the SDGs 
and the indicators can be used as conceptual and specific sustainable strategies, respectively. The 
results made it clear that the indicators are difficult to scale down on a building level and also difficult to 
==PAGE:114==
113 
establish quantitative measurements from because of their broad definition. Finally, only 24 of the 232 
SDG indicator were possible to use as performance indicators on a building leve. Because of their very 
broad formulation, they are not able to describe absolute boundaries but can support circular design 
strategies.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
114 
==PAGE:116==
115 
5. Discussion 
This chapter will discuss 1) the results of the assessments carried out and 2) the results in relation to the 
problem statement. 
5.1 Discussion of the result sections 
This section discusses the results of the four assessments carried out. It highlights all the sustainability 
dimensions and the SDGs with respect to the case study, Circle House.  
 
The discussion is divided into four discussions following the structure of the result chapter: 
● 
Absolute social sustainability of Circle House 
● 
Absolute environmental sustainability of Circle House 
● 
Absolute economic sustainability of Circle House 
● 
Application of the SDGs as performance indicators of absolute sustainability 
5.1.1 Social sustainability within Circle House 
The results of the social sustainability profile of Circle House shows that its design strategies and current 
solutions supports many of the social-criteria in the assessment method. This is seen through the 
diagram, in figure 4.2, created to visualise the results of the social sub-criteria assessment of Circle 
House. The diagram shows that the sub-criteria that had been in focus in the early design phases of 
Circle House, were adding social value to the sustainability profile of Circle House. Thus these sub-
criteria enhance and support social sustainability through the design of Circle House and create positive 
value. The diagram also shows the social sub-criteria that were not considered by the architects, either 
create social detrimental effect or very low and insufficient social value to the sustainability profile of Circle 
House. Thus they create negative value. The social sustainability performance of Circle House was in 
overall terms well, though it was not absolute sustainable. 
An interesting aspect of this assessment was that it was difficult to predict how Circle House would 
perform in the assessment. On the one hand it was expected that Circle House would perform well 
because it is a social housing project, which in general focuses on implementing and enhancing social 
criterias. On the other hand it was thought that Circle House might not perform well, firstly, due to the 
lack of focus on social sustainability, as it was pointed out in the literature study about sustainability in the 
industry, and thus this was also expected to be applicable for the design of Circle House. Especially 
when Circle House main focus is developing new circular design strategies for dwellings.  
Secondly, a low social value creation of Circle House was expected, because the assessment is carried 
out in the early design stages where in-depth design solutions and strategies often are not fully 
developed. Thus it would be difficult for the assessment to reflect the actual social thoughts and 
conditions that have been taken into account in Circle House. 
Thirdly, because no existing coherent method of assessing the social conditions within the building 
industry today exists, which was also a conclusion of the literature study. The DGNB certification system 
has included social criteria that mostly focus on the wellbeing of the users in respect to indoor climate, 
safety and accessibility, were large parts of the criteria are evaluated quantitatively. As seen from the 
Green Building Conference 2017, many other stakeholders in the building industry have developed their 
own quantitative evaluation methods to assess social sustainability and value creation through 
architectural design solutions, for example Realdania, AART architects, the municipality of Copenhagen 
etc, see appendix A6. As a result many different approaches and strategies exist to evaluate social value 
creation in the building industry. To this day there is a lack a of a standardised, comprehensive and in-
==PAGE:117==
116 
depth assessment method that can be used for all parties in the building industry to assess social 
sustainability.  For this reason, it cannot be expected that stakeholders in the industry develop design 
strategies and solutions in the same fashion or by the same principles, when it comes to social 
sustainability. This makes it very difficult to assess the social conditions and streamline the performance 
quality of different buildings by the available assessment methods,.  
Because of the many quantitative methodologies and the need for a coherent qualitative method within 
the Danish building industry,the discussed analysis and results became the focus of social sustainability 
in this thesis.  
 
Circular design strategies effect on social value creation 
Circle House performs best in the social criteria identification, because it has the highest score in most of 
the related sub-criteria. The reason for this result is because the architects have put a lot of effort in 
visualising the concept and hence the possibilities and architectural qualities of the circular strategies that 
Circle House are based on. Thus the circular design strategies have a big influence on this criteria and as 
the circular design is the main focus it has created positive value within the social criteria identification. 
Another criteria that is or can be largely affected as a result of circular design solutions is the health 
criteria. Specifically in the sub-criteria about indoor climate, such as thermal comfort, daylight and air 
quality, because circular design allow new types of materials and composition of them to be 
implemented, that can affect this criteria. Though, the results show that the circular design strategies did 
not provide a high social value within all of the health sub-criteria, because this perspective of the circular 
design solutions are not the main focus area at this point in the design stage. Circle House was expected 
to perform better in some of the health sub-criteria, such as daylight quality and indoor air quality, 
because they are a common focus area for architects.  
 
Passive design solutions that support social value creation 
The lack of design focus within the health related sub-criteria can affect Circle House negatively in the 
end.  
First of all it can create bad health conditions for the residents, as it is possible that the circular design 
solutions can have unforeseen or unknown effects of the thermal and atmospheric indoor climate. 
Secondly, it can possibly lead to additional costs for the architects further along in the design or 
construction process, because the health related issues have to be improved. 
Passive design solutions, which are evaluation in sub-criteria 6, are important for social housing projects, 
to minimise the operation costs of the residents, such as energy and water consumption due to the 
framework amount. The passive design have to support a good indoor climate for the residents, too, so 
it is important to integrate effective solutions in the early design stages, to avoid health issues and 
additional costs for improvement. Examples of passive design solutions are optimised orientation of 
buildings according to the sun path to utilise heat from the sun, personalised shading and ventilation 
systems, but also low-practical design solutions that minimise the energy consumption, such as drying 
racks and reuse of water (Lejerbo, Lendager Arkitekter and COWI, 2014). These design solutions are 
exemplified by Lejerbo as sustainable design solutions in social housing. But according to our 
assessment, these types of passive design solutions or similar strategies are not implemented in the 
design of Circle House. Thus, it seems like Lejerbo does not live up to their own strategies. Implementing 
and visualising these types of solutions in the early design stages can enhance the social value creation 
within the health criteria of Circle House and thereby can this thesis support and provide documentation 
in Lejerbo’s sustainable strategies. 
The results show that creating social value does not only depend on the specific design solution 
of the building components. The design solutions can enhance and provide the perfect framework for 
==PAGE:118==
117 
social value creation, but many other agreements on a non-design level have to be integrated, to 
enhance social sustainability in all aspects. This is for example seen in the sub-criteria engagement and 
co-creation, commitment and responsibility and in verbal interactions. Solutions as gardening tasks and 
waste management can support ‘commitment and responsibility’. Indoor and outdoor areas specifically 
made to support verbal interactions, are solution such as play rooms, library, communal kitchen. The 
solutions have to be made with the owner of Circle House, that is Lejerbo, to support and enhance value 
creation within these social sub-criteria. When that is done, the design can support the value creation of 
these places.  
Many of the sub-criteria are conditioned by this type of integrated collaboration between the owner and 
the architects and is also the reason why many of the social sub-criteria do not score a high marking. 
This applies to engagement and co-creation, commitment and responsibility and verbal interactions as 
mentioned above, but also to diversity and non-verbal interaction. 
An example of a social housing with large participation is the ‘AlmenBolig+’ created by the social 
housing association KAB. Here there are no janitor or caretaker of the AlmenBolig+ department, but all 
the residents are taking care of the operation obligations together. The residents are in charge of snow 
removal, gutter cleaning, assembly and disassembly of party walls, and contacting the handyman if 
anything is broken. This way the operation costs are extremely low and thus a very low rent is possible. 
Through this type of administration it is possible for social value creation within commitment, 
responsibility, learning and competence edification, verbal interaction and many other sub-criteria are 
also enhanced. This study shows that a collaboration between the architects and building owners and 
possible other stakeholders are important to support value creation within many of the social sub-criteria. 
This is an example where a lot more could have been done within these criteria of Circle House to 
enhance the social value creation.  
The results show that close partnerships between stakeholders can support and enhance the social 
sustainability criteria within building design. Especially through collaboration on the different social 
aspects that should be included in the housing projects from the owner’s point of view and how they 
architecturally can be supported and enhanced, so a high social value is created for the residents.  
Moreover do the results show that circular design can support and enhance certain social sustainability 
criteria such as inclusion and identification, through their sub-criteria. The circular design strategies such 
as modularity and DfD supports the sustainable concept and signal values of Circle House, which makes 
it easy for the residents to identify with the building programme and its sustainable ‘lifestyle’. The flexibility 
of the circular design strategy ‘modularity’ also enhance the diversity of the residents and thus support a 
diverse and thriving community in Circle House. 
 Possibly more criteria could be enhanced through circular design strategies, such as health, but more 
clear results have to be provided to support this assumption.  
 
Balance of positive and negative value creation  
The method of balancing the positive and negative value creation was difficult to evaluate Circle House 
from in some sub-criteria, because Circle House will not “deprive” the site and local community of its 
existing context and value, as it is located in an area that is undeveloped at the moment. Thus, it was 
especially difficult to evaluate the criteria that focus on the outdoor areas of Circle House, such as the 
whole ‘urbanity’ criteria. It was decided that all sub-criteria should be evaluated based on the current 
situation in Lisbjerg, to keep the results coherent.  
The urbanity sub-criteria will create social value to a certain extent because they are not taking value from 
existing residents or building. At the same time the sub-criteria perform bad because many of the 
aspects within the sub-criteria are not existing yet (services and goods) as Lisbjerg city is not fully 
developed. Thus, it is important to notice that another evaluation method, where the current situation at 
Lisbjerg is not taking into account, would have evaluated the performance of Circle House as better than 
==PAGE:119==
118 
what was found in the results. But it was argued that illustrating the current sustainability performance of 
Circle House also have to be applied in the current state of the surrounding areas and conditions that 
might affect the performance of Circle House.  
In the end, the method worked as intended because the social sustainability assessment made it clear 
were the circular design supported and enhanced the social value creation and were a lot more focus 
can be assigned to avoid detrimental effects of the design solutions.  
 
 
5.1.2 Environmental sustainability results 
 
This chapter discusses the environmental performance of Circle House, by the results presented in 
chapter 4.2.  
5.1.2.1 Normalised impact results 
The normalised results showed that the scenarios S0 through S3 exceeded five impact categories out of 
twelve. The results thus showed that both conventional and circular building are insufficient when striving 
towards absolute environmental sustainability.  
5.1.2.1.1 Exceeding impact categories 
The impact categories exceeding the planetary boundaries allocated to a dwelling were CCtemp, CCrad, 
FE, FET and LUS.  
Most remarkable were the LUS impact category exceeding with a factor 5006 for S0 and 3761 for S3. 
The normalised reference for LUS is by Brejnrod et al. defined as 0.52 t eroded soil per year for a 128 m2 
dwelling, where the erosion of soil is defined as the displacement of the upper layer of soil. The 
normalised impact result of LUS do not consider the soil erosion from the building site itself, but only the 
building materials, energy production and EoL. By comparison the soil erosion of the building site 
considering, only the footprint of one unit of Circle House of 45 m2, equals to soil erosion of app. 0.25 t 15 
corresponding to approximately half of the normalised reference. This is not included in the study, but 
gives a grasp of the strict limits set by the normalisation reference. Since a much larger area than the 
building site it self is excavated under the construction of a building, this poses the question if the limit is 
realistic in relation to the construction of buildings in general. The building materials dominating the LU 
impact category are mainly concrete, insulation, sawnwood and plywood. These building materials are all 
materials that have an effect on soil erosion. For instance Concrete consists of large parts sand and 
Rockwool insulation consists of app 95 % stone, which is dug up from the ground causing soil erosion. 
Trees have an impact on natural soil erosion by slowing down wind, containing moist and slowing 
raindrops, all factors that prevents soil erosion. By cutting trees for building materials and for the 
construction of buildings, the natural environment is exposed to these factors.  
Factors that decreases soil erosion from building materials is using only certified wood, concrete and 
insulation with a high recycling percentage. This are factors that have not been taken into account in the 
LCI.  
Though these factors could outweigh some of the impact from the building materials, the LUS 
normalisation reference is relatively low compared to the realistic impact of building construction. 
For the CC impact categories CCtemp and CCrad the normalised impact results were within a more realistic 
range than LUS. These had normalised results ranging from 3.76 to 1.68. The largest impact throughout 
the 120 year life cycle was the operational stage. Hence it would further reduce the environmental impact 
                                                
15 Assumed a soil density of 0.0027 t/m3 and an excavation 90 m3 soil (45 m2 in a two meter deep layer). 
==PAGE:120==
119 
of Circle House by introducing renewable energy into the design and strategies. The normalised results 
of S3 indicate, that to cut the environmental impacts, all life cycle stages must be taken into account, 
since the operational stage is the only life cycle stage not affected by the circular strategies of Circle 
House.  
 
5.1.2.1.2 Improvement by scenario 
The variation in the scenarios showed that the difference between conventional building custom and 
circular building custom only reduces the environmental burden by 19 percent on average, not including 
WD. The strategies implemented in S3 were the 90% reuse strategy in the second life cycle, reduction in 
replacements due to DfD and reduction in construction and deconstruction energy as a result of modular 
design and DfD. The largest impact reduction was seen from S0 to S1 due to the 90 % reuse strategy. 
An assumption that was necessary for this strategy to be implemented, was that after the first 120 year 
life cycle, all building components were in excellent condition. Thus the material life cycles would be reset 
to zero. The replacement in the second life cycle would follow the pattern of the first cycle according to 
the lifetime expectancies of SBI. It was discussed how the 90 % reuse strategy would work in real life, 
hence this assumption was preferred, since it was assessed the most realistic.  
Another alternative to handle the 90 % reuse strategy was to assume that all building materials would last 
the 120 year life cycle period without replacement and would all be in excellent condition after 120 years. 
This would lead to no replacements during a 240 year period, which were deemed unrealistic. But since 
the specifications of the 90 % reuse strategy were not clearly outlined, this could have been an 
interpretation.  
 
The design for disassembly in the replacement and repair stage, showed some interesting results. The 
reduction in replacements due to DfD showed that only five less replacements were made due to DfD 
through the life cycle of 120 years. The method of determining the replacement of building components 
was performed by assessing every component layer, and determining the lifetime expectancy of that 
layer based on its placement in the component and the other material layers’ lifetime expectancy. 
Thereby the material layer becomes dependent on the building component it is placed in. By 
implementing DfD the replacements change, since the material is no longer depending on the placement 
in the building component. The assessment of the replacement has been carried out has realistically as 
possible. Though it is up to interpretation, since the replacement without design for disassembly is also 
based on practicalities. For instance, if a material layer in a building component needs replacement after 
forty years and another one after fifty, it might make more sense for the building owner to replace both 
after forty years than to redo the process ten years later. 
As the result showed the replacement and repair stage accounted for 25 % of the total environmental 
burden of S0 and 28 % of S3. The lifetime expectancy have large impact on the result of the replacement 
and repair stage. As mentioned the lifetime expectancies used in this assessment are the actual lifetime 
expectancies compiled by SBI. The actual lifetime expectancies gives the shortest lifetimes, thus by using 
another lifetime expectancy table as the technical lifetimes or functional lifetimes this could further reduce 
the environmental impact.  
 
The reduction in the construction and demolition/dismantling phase in S3 was assumed to be 30 % 
based on an average of a previous example in chapter, see table 3.4 in chapter 3.4.2.3. Though it could 
be argued that this is a large reduction for a 90 m2 terrace house, as the results show that these stages 
are relatively small app. 3 % on average of the total environmental impact. Thereby making a reduction of 
30 % almost invisible in the results.  
 
==PAGE:121==
120 
5.1.2.1.3 Water Resource Depletion 
The impact category WD showed negative impact results in the characterised results, hence negative 
normalised results. The method used to assess WD is the proposed method of Bjørn and Hauschild 
which has been implemented in the ILCD 2011+ method. As previously mentioned the negative results is 
a result of assessing the return of water to the environment as a negative impact results, meaning that it 
is regenerative. No further explanation of these results have been found in the literature, and thus the 
results have been difficult to interpret further. We advise that these results are used with caution.  
 
5.1.2.2 The absolute method 
The absolute method developed by Bjørn and Hauschild, then allocated to dwellings by Brejnrod et. al. is 
based on person equivalents. Hence the absolute normalisation references proposed by Bjørn and 
Hauschild consideres how much a person can burden the planet per year. This means that the current 
development with an increasing number of people on the planet reduces the impact of the person 
equivalent. The temporal aspect of person equivalent is not included in the carrying capacity based 
normalisation references posed by Brejnrod et al, and should thus be considered when applied.  
The references by Bjørn and Hauschild were proposed in 2015 and by Brejnrod et al. in 2016. At the 
time of writing the year is 2018, hence the carrying capacities is still deemed applicable.  
The choice of person equivalent carrying capacities was made out of a moral principle that all people 
have equal rights to the planets resources. From a sustainable point of view this is the right principle to 
base the carrying capacities on, though from a more realistic point of view, people in developed countries 
contribute to a larger part of the global environmental impact.   
Thus the absolute results also reflect that the normalisation references are based on an equal person 
equivalent, making it more difficult for people in developed countries to stay within the planetary 
boundaries.  
As mentioned by Brejnrod et al. the carrying capacities could instead have been based on country GDP, 
to show more realistic carrying capacities. But as the result of the literature study showed, sustainability 
is about justice and equality among all human beings, thereby making person equivalent carrying 
capacities both the morally accurate and sustainably accurate choice.   
 
5.1.2.3 Modelling and assumptions 
The assessment has been carried out with as much detail as possible to support the strategies of Circle 
House, though some parts have been left out.  
The LCI excludes some of the interior and exterior supplementation such as technical installations, stairs 
and banister but also the road surfaces, parking spaces, track etc. The unit of the terrace house in the 
assessment is a midsection unit, hence only light exterior wall is included. By assessing the endsection 
unit the results would possibly deviate from the result of this assessment. This assessment has not been 
included in this study.  
 
5.1.2.3.1 Sensitivity check 
The sensitivity check has been carried out on the hotspots of the analysis. The sensitivity check showed 
as expected that adjusting the hotspots ±10 % would affect the major hotspot the most and the minor 
hotspot the least.  
 
==PAGE:122==
121 
5.1.2.3.2 120 years vs. 50 years 
To test the implication of a shorter lifetime duration, an alternative modelling of 50 years was carried out. 
As  assessment by Nygaard Rasmussen has proved, a longer lifetime duration reduces the impact per 
year, thereby the assessment of a 50 year lifetime duration leads to a further increase of the 
characterised results and hence the normalised results. The deviation between the life cycle durations of 
app. 40 % for S0 and 35 % for S3, is relatively large when compared to the study by Nygaard 
Rasmussen, which showed deviations between 8 - 22 % of two different life cycle scenarios 
(Rasmussen, 2012). The larger deviations in the results are caused by the smaller percentage of 
operational energy in this study compared to the study of Nygaard Rasmussen.   
 
5.1.2.3.3 Improved Operational Energy in 120 years 
Another alternative modelling has been carried out to test the implication of reduced operational energy 
use. As has previously been mentioned, the building legislation and the improvement in technology over 
the course of the next 120 years is difficult to predict. Hence the operational energy of the second 
lifecycle has been kept the same as in the first life cycle, even though this does not reflect the current 
development in buildings and technology. In order to test the implications of the operational energy, a 
fourth scenario called S3.1 was set up with no operational energy in the second life cycle based on the 
thought that the building would be self-sufficient. As the normalised results showed of S3.1 even this 
does not reduce the impact through all impact categories to a degree where the carrying capacities are 
not exceeded. The impact categories LUS, CCrad and CCtemp exceeded the carrying capacities. Thus 
underlining that even with the circular strategies the building industry would still exceed the carrying 
capacities with unsustainable development.  
 
5.1.3 Economic sustainability results 
 
In the economic results it becomes clear that time has a great influence on the economic sustainability. 
The investment made, to convert from linear business to circular business, is time. The results shows, as 
the phrase says, time is money.  
In the beginning increased time is spent on development, establishment of partnerships, industrial 
symbiosis etc. The anticipated benefit lies in the second life cycle of the building. In this case 120 years, 
but possibly, and most likely, shorter, e.g. 50 years. The problem here is that the life cycle duration of a 
building is possibly much longer than any person’s carrier, and without a doubt longer than any person’s 
carrier within one company. The good news is though, that good business can last much longer than a 
carrier. The point is that it takes a long lasting commitment to engage in circular business, when the 
benefit is so far out of reach as +50 years, as is the case of buildings. Thus this kind of business is not 
particularly suited for the private sector, unless the circular business pays of in the short term as well.   
The building owners of social housing, on the other hand, is a perfect example of an association with the 
possibility of engaging in long lasting commitment of sustainability and circular business. The only 
problem is the framework amount. Since circular business is about long term investments reaching far 
into the life cycles stages of the building, total economy is a valuable tool to make economically 
sustainable investments. The framework amount only takes the purchase of land, advisory costs and 
construction costs into consideration, making it difficult to choose solutions that are sustainable in the 
long term within the limits of the framework amount. Thus Lejerbo has proposed to include long term 
strategies in the decision making of the framework amount.  
==PAGE:123==
122 
It can be discussed if the framework amount is hindering sustainable investments and if a more flexible 
framework amount combined with total economy would promote sustainable investments better for the 
building owners.  
The framework amount is also hindering product-service systems, since it mixes the construction costs 
with operation cost and is an issue that has not yet been resolved in Circle House.  
 
As for design for disassembly, the time plays a huge role in its implementation in future building project. 
One of the risk of DfD is that changes in the building industry during the life cycle have occurred, making 
the DfD unfit in new projects. Thus the initial investment is lost. Another risk, is that the quality of the 
building components after the life cycle is unknown. It is also one of the most significant assumptions in 
the environmental assessment. The risk that the building components that are unfit for reuse, undermines 
the entire environmental impact reduction as well as the economic investment.  
 
There are many economic aspects that could have been handled in this study. For instance the most 
common economic assessment is an LCC. This study focuses on the positive and negative outcomes of 
implementing circular strategies into the design. An LCC would not be able to capture the balance 
between positive and negative outcomes, since it, in its current form assesses the costs of a building 
throughout its life cycle. An LCC can be used to choose between to design solution, but since absolute 
sustainability is not about the relative but the absolute, it was decided to try a different approach in 
sustainable building economics.  
It would have been interesting to assess the positive and negative effects of the building in the city 
context, as an CBA is able to do. However the scope of this assessment is on building level, and hence 
the proposed study would relate to city level, thereby moving outside the scope of the study. 
 
5.1.4 SDGs’ performance indicators results 
A great part of the formulated SDGs refer to the sustainable development of the undeveloped countries 
in the world, and thus many of the goals are focused on the social and economic aspects of sustainable 
development, such as improving the quality of life for all, especially for women and girls, support 
sustainable growth in undeveloped countries as Africa and ensure equal job conditions despite of sex, 
age or people with disabilities. The preliminary assumption was that many of the SDGs would not be 
applicable as performance indicators within the building industry. Because many of the scopes within the 
goals are a matter of course within the Danish society, such as healthcare, education and job 
opportunities for everyone.  
The results of the 11 SDGs conceptual evaluation guidelines show that eight of the goals can be used 
within the social sustainability dimension and five of the goals can be used within the economic 
sustainability dimension. Only six of the 11 goals can be used within the environmental sustainability 
dimension.  
The results from the assessment of the application of SDGs indicators as measurable performance 
indicators show the same pattern, where most of the 24 indicators supports the social sustainability 
dimension. 16 of the SDG indicators support the social sustainability dimension, eight support the 
economic sustainability dimension and 13 of the SDG indicators support the environmental sustainability 
dimension. Hence the results shows that the SDGs can support all three dimensions within the building 
industry and hopefully create more attention to especially the social sustainability criteria, which is 
needed according to the literature study. Though the social aspects within the SDGs are not directly 
relating to the building industry, this sustainability dimension might be the most difficult to implement 
within building design. 
The results of the performance of Circle House when assessing it through the 24 SDGs 
indicators, show that the SDGs indicators are not able to give a detailed sustainability assessment at 
==PAGE:124==
123 
their current level. The ranking system is very limited because of the general format that the indicators still 
consist of, even though they are fitted to the building industry. Since only 24 out of the 232 SDGs 
indicators were possible to use within a building context, the performance results also show a very small-
ranging sustainability performance of Circle House. Thus the used SDGs indicators do not perform a 
comprehensive sustainability assessment, compared to the other three analyses made in this report. As 
the literature study showed, well-documented sustainability assessment methods already exists in the 
building industry today. Thus it would possibly be difficult to introduce the industry to the SDGs 
indicators as direct performance indicators. Based on the assessment of the SDGs as performance 
indicators, is it expected that a larger number of the 232 SDG indicators have to be applicable, to get 
more wide-ranging performance indicators, before they can get a direct and practical influence in the 
danish building industry. As it was found that 10 of the 24 indicators includes and support circular design 
strategies and solutions, we suggest that the practical implementation of the SDGs in the industry will be 
easier through the focus of circular strategies. A way to ease the implementation of the SDGs, is 
promoting circular business models for building components. For example product-service systems and 
design for disassembly solutions as seen in Circle House. 
The SDG indicators are formulated as quantitative indicators within the scope of the SDGs, which are all 
described on a global, country or local sector level. To use the SDG indicators within a building context 
and on building level, they had to be reformulated and narrowed down to fit the building industry, but still 
keep their measurable scope. As mentioned, it was found possible to reformulate and use 24 of the SDG 
indicators within the building industry as specific sustainable design strategies in the three sustainability 
dimension. It was not however, possible to keep their measurable scope. From the findings of the 
usability of the SDGs, it shows that specialised assessments and processing are needed within all three 
sustainability dimensions to suggest quantitative SDG indicators that are usable within the building 
industry. As the SDGs indicators are suitable for both the social, economic and environmental 
sustainability dimension, they cover different detail levels and decision contexts, which means that 
different evaluation approaches have to be used to find the right quantitative measurement for each 
indicator. Furthermore some of the SDG indicators cover more than one sustainability dimension, hence 
these indicators describe and quantify more than one decision context. For example, the environmental 
and economic indicators can be extremely detailed and mostly quantitative, such as CO2 level inside 
dwellings, economic value of the specific design solution for the residents. Whereas the social aspects 
are mostly qualitative and focus both on the individual resident and the community. To find a common 
quantitative indicator that covers more than one of these levels can be very complex.  
As the 24 SDG indicators were not possible to quantify, they cannot be used as absolute performance 
indicators within the assessment of Circle House.  
A study on the environmental sustainability indicators within the framework of amongst other the SDGs 
by Dong and Hauschild, shows it is possible to some degree to use the SDGs as quantitative 
environmental sustainability indicators. However the study also made it clear that not all quantitative 
SDGs indicators are fully developed yet and not all of them quantifies the direct environmental impact, 
because the SDGs decision context are formulated in a different way than for example the LCA 
framework. As found in the result section of the SDGs, the SDGs are formulated as guidelines within a 
global, national or local scale and thus most of the indicators quantifies guidelines and regulations, such 
as environmental taxes, and the amount of resource or energy use for the industries. Studies like this can 
be used as an approach to develop quantitative guidelines within the building industry that also covers 
the economic and social sustainability dimensions. Here the book ‘Sustainable Global Development: The 
17 goals in a Danish perspective’ and the report ‘Report for the Danish National Review: Denmark's 
Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development’ from the Ministry of Finance can be 
used as a supporting tools.  
 
==PAGE:125==
124 
5.2 Discussion of the problem statement 
The problem statements asks “To what extent is absolute architectural sustainability achievable in a 
Danish circular perspective?”. The conclusion from the literature study showed that no current method 
exists to assess the absolute sustainability of all three dimensions of sustainability. The doughnut 
economy of Raworth was the closest to an assessment of multi-dimensional absolute sustainability, thus 
the social assessment developed was largely inspired by the doughnut economy. The problem with 
absolute sustainability within all three dimensions is, that the economic dimension is about growth and 
the social dimension about welfare. These are factors that, in our society, is sought after, and thus do not 
have an upper limit. In this case sustainable development is about balance in all three dimensions, as it 
has been discussed in Limits to Growth. Thus it was not possible to assess the absolute sustainability in 
all three assessments with absolute universally valid measures. Instead it was necessary to implement 
the balance in each dimension.  
The environmental assessments applied in this study showed that carrying capacity based LCA is a great 
tool to assess the absolute sustainability of buildings, and thus it was possible to assess the absolute 
sustainability of the environmental dimension. The social and economic assessments on the other hand 
were not quantitative, thus making it difficult to set a universally valid limit. The social sustainability 
assessment is made from a Danish point of view but could potentially be applied globally. The limit to the 
social absolute sustainability was set by an indication based on how well each criterion performed. 
Quantitative measures are better when the goal is to apply limits that are universally valid. However we 
argue that the social dimension should not be assessed quantitatively. The social dimension in buildings 
relates to architecture, which can never be absolute, but is a subjective perception. The assessment 
carried out is performed with as much objectivity as possible, with guidance of the sub criteria. With this 
in mind we argue that the social method presented in this thesis has great potential as an assessment 
method in the building industry.  
As for the economic method, it would require quantitative data to assess the absolute sustainability of 
the circular strategies in Circle House. Thus we are not able to say if this method is effective on building 
level, or whether it is absolute sustainable or not. We argue that the overall method of absolute 
sustainability as it is described in the definition in chapter 2.7.2, can be applied to the economic 
dimension. This is possible because of the implementation of balance, as all financially sustainable 
businesses should create a positive bottom line. Hence the economy can be expressed as a balance 
between cost and earnings, which is possible to show by our definition. 
 
The SDGs come close to a framework of assessing absolute sustainability on a large scale such as 
country or city level. On building level the goals are immature, and thus the goals had to be reformulated 
in order to relate to the building sector. Since the goals are developed in order to fit a global standard, it 
might be of more value if each country reformulated these goals to fit sectors within each country, 
thereby making the SDGs and the indicators quantifiable on a smaller scale.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:126==
125 
6. Conclusion  
This chapter will answer the problem statement by a conclusion from the result and discussion chapters. 
It will answer Q1, Q2 and Q3, see chapter 1.3 and thereby answer the main question. 
 
Q1: Our definition can be applied to the assessment methods of this study, which is then able to assess 
the absolute sustainability within all three dimensions. This requires to set boundaries which are 
universally valid within each dimension. The environmental assessment method carrying capacity based 
LCA has already set such limits. Absolute limits were not found in any other currently available 
assessment method, that suited our study. Instead we developed a framework by applying absolute 
limits in the social dimension with qualitative measures. The economic limits were that costs and benefits 
in Circle House should follow the definition set in chapter 2.7.2. Meaning that Circle House should 
generate more economic benefits than costs. On building level we advise to use LCA in the 
environmental dimension. We would recommend our method of assessing absolute social sustainability, 
while the definition of absolute sustainability would also be applicable in other dimensions. We used CBA 
in the economic dimension, but other methods could be applicable as well. 
Q2: The SDGs were not directly applicable as performance indicators of absolute sustainability or directly 
applicable as quantitative performance indicators on a building scale. We suggest that more research 
and assessments, on the applicability of the SDGs, are needed if applied as quantitative performance 
indicators at a building level and within all three sustainability dimensions.  
In regard to the SDGs as absolute performance indicators, it would be possible to use them as a limit for 
absolute sustainability according to the definition given in chapter 2.7.2. Since the goals and indicators 
are universally valid, in some areas indicators set the bar low, compared to what is achievable in a Danish 
context. We would thus recommend a higher bar, than the SDGs in their current form suggest when 
setting the limit of absolute sustainability. 
Q3: It was possible to determine the absolute sustainability within two dimensions: environmental and 
social. Both dimensions were found to be not absolute sustainable. The assessment of social 
sustainability, which were inspired by the way of assessing the environmental dimension, was not 
absolute sustainable since all criteria have to be within the absolute limit in order to be absolute 
sustainable. Likewise, was the environmental limits exceeded and therefore not absolute sustainable.  
It was not possible to determine the absolute sustainability of the economic dimensions since no values 
were assessed in the cost-benefit analysis. If quantitative data were put in to the analysis it could have 
been determined by the definition given in chapter 2. 
 
From the assessment in the three dimensions and the assessment of the SDGs as performance 
indicators we were also able to conclude the following: 
● 
Circular design improves the sustainability within all three sustainability dimensions. 
● 
Active design decisions create value creation within the social sustainability dimension. 
● 
The circular design strategies improves the environmental sustainability profile of Circle House by 
an avg. of 19 %. 
● 
Further improvement of the sustainability in both the social and environmental dimension could 
be obtained by implementing passive design and reused, recycled or upcycled materials. 
● 
Absolute sustainability of Circle House in the LUS impact category is unobtainable.  
● 
Time related issues as long return time is an issue in the transition to circular business and 
questions the effectiveness of the circular strategies. 
● 
11 goals and 24 SDG indicators can be used as sustainable strategies and performance 
indicators within the building industry, see figure 4.35 and figure 4.36 in chapter 4.  
● 
10 of the SDG indicators support circular design strategies within a building context, see table 
4.37 in chapter.  
==PAGE:127==
126 
7. Recommendations and outlook 
This chapter gives recommendation based on the discussion and conclusion chapter. 
7.1 Recommendations 
7.1.1 Holistic design solution 
An recommendation for the further improvement of Circle House within all sustainability dimensions is the 
holistic design solution. The circular focus on Circle House has had a large influence on the sustainability 
results which has improved the sustainability, but has also led to a lack of focus on the operational 
energy in the environmental dimension and lack of implementation of passive design strategies in the 
design solution. Hence Circle house is not absolute sustainable. A way to improve the environmental 
sustainability could be by reusing, upcycle or recycle old materials as seen in Upcycle House16 (SBi, 
2013), as it is seen that circular strategies alone is not enough. Therefore the recommendation of the 
social and environmental sustainability dimension is to implement sustainable design solutions that 
support all life cycles stages through holistic design. 
For the economic dimension, circular strategies should not be implemented at all costs due to the long 
return of investment time. The recommendation is to implement circular business with a shorter return 
time, since the future of building technology is difficult to predict. 
7.2 Outlook 
7.2.1 The Future of the Absolute Sustainability Method 
We believe that the definition of absolute sustainability given in chapter 2.7.2 is universally valid. We 
believe that it is possible to apply it to assessment methodologies and thus this thesis has proved that 
the absolute sustainability as a measurement tool of sustainability is possible. The definition can be 
applied to other assessment methodologies than described in this thesis and thus have a broad 
application. The absolute limit needs to be defined according to the scope of the study, but it should 
always be universally valid and applied in accordance with the sustainable development definition of the 
brundtland report.  
7.2.2 The future of SDGs as performance indicators in the Danish building 
industry 
As presented in this thesis, the SDGs’ current scope are to wide to use directly as quantitative 
performance indicators on a building level. A recommendation of the applicability within the Danish 
building industry is that further processing and assessing of them are needed, if SDGs have to play an 
active part as a quantitative sustainability assessment tool. By specifying the criterias within the three 
sustainability dimensions, it might be possible to use the SDGs within all three sustainability dimensions 
and be applied as a holistic sustainability tool in the building industry. But since there already exists 
various sustainability assessment methods in the building industry, it as to be considered the importance 
of applying them in the industry. However, they might have the ability to create a more universal 
                                                
16 Upcycle House are constructed by building components that only consist of reused materials or recycled materials. Circle House 
is from 2013 and is designed by Lendager Arkitekter. 
==PAGE:128==
127 
assessment tool that can be applied global, but in respect to each nations’ sustainable development 
issues.  
==PAGE:129==
128 
8. References 
 
[1] 
Lejerbo (2017) Lejerbo har beboerdemokrati. Available at:  
http://www.lejerbo.dk/da/beboer/beboerdemokrati#.WmSOka3OORs. 
 
[2] 
Kohler, N. and Moffatt, S. (2003) ‘Life-cycle analysis of the built environment’, Industry  
and Environment, 26(2–3), pp. 17–21. Available at: 
http://www.bvsde.paho.org/bvsaia/fulltext/lifecycle.pdf. 
 
[3]  
Flint, R. W. (2013) Practice of Sustainable Community Development. doi:  
10.1007/978-1-4614-5100-6. 
 
[4]  
Brundtland, G. H. (1987) ‘Our Common Future: Report of the World Commission on  
Environment and Development’, United Nations Commission, 4(1), p. 300. doi:  
10.1080/07488008808408783. 
 
[5] 
Dreyer, L. C. (2009) Inclusion of Social Aspects in Life Cycle Assessment of Products,  
Department of Management Engineering. 
 
[6]  
Godschalk, D. R. (2004) ‘Land use planning challenges: Coping with conflicts in  
visions of sustainable development and livable communities’, Journal of the American  
Planning Association, 70(1), pp. 5–13. doi: 10.1080/01944360408976334. 
 
[7] 
The Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2012) ‘Towards a Circular Economy - Economic and  
Business Rationale for an Accelerated Transition’, Greener Management International,  
p. 97. doi: 2012-04-03. 
 
[8]  
Vallance, S., Perkins, H. C. and Dixon, J. E. (2011) ‘What is social sustainability? A  
clarification of concepts’, Geoforum. Elsevier Ltd, 42(3), pp. 342–348. doi:  
10.1016/j.geoforum.2011.01.002. 
 
[9]  
Yiftachel, O. and Hedgcock, D. (1993) ‘Urban social sustainabilityThe planning of an  
Australian city’, Cities, 10(2), pp. 139–157. doi: 10.1016/0264-2751(93)90045-K. 
 
[10]  
Dempsey, N., Bramley, G., Power, S. and Brown, C. (2011) ‘The Social Dimension of  
Sustainable Development: Defining Urban Social Sustainability’, Sustainable  
Development, 19(May 2009), pp. 289–300. doi: 10.1002/sd.417. 
 
[11] 
Raworth, K. (2017) ‘A Doughnut for the Anthropocene: humanity’s compass in the  
21st century’, The Lancet Planetary Health. The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.  
This is an Open Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license, 1(2), pp. e48–e49. doi:  
10.1016/S2542-5196(17)30028-1. 
 
[12]  
Carlberg, N. and Buchhave Lind, H. (2017) Sociale mursten. 
 
[13]  
Ole, J. and Gro, A. (2016) Aalborg Universitet Evaluering af AlmenBolig+ Jensen,   
Jesper Ole; Stensgaard, Anne Gro. 
==PAGE:130==
129 
 
[14]  
DK-GBC (2017) ‘Information om DGNB Diamant’, (april 2017). 
 
[15]  
Raworth, K. (2017a) Doughnut - What on Earth is the Doughnut?…. Available at:  
https://www.kateraworth.com/doughnut/. 
 
[16]  
DK-GBC (2014) ‘DGNB System Denmark’, 1.1, p. 435. Available at:  
http://www.dk-gbc.dk. 
 
[17]  
Morelli, J. (2011) ‘Environmental Sustainability: A Definition for Environmental  
Professionals’, Journal of Environmental Sustainability, 1(1), pp. 1–10. doi:  
10.14448/jes.01.0002. 
 
[18]  
Lowe, R. (2006) ‘Defining absolute environmental limits for the built environment’,  
Building Research and Information, 34(4), pp. 405–415. doi:  
10.1080/09613210600772482. 
 
[19]  
Rockström, J. (2009) ‘A safe operating space for humanity’, 461(September). 
 
[20]  
Wackernagel, M. and Rees, W. . (1996) ‘Our Ecological Footprint: Reducing Human  
Impact on the Earth’, pp. 185–187. 
 
[21]  
Lehtinen, H., Saarentaus, A., Rouhiainen, J., Pits, M. and Azapagic, A. (2011) ‘A  
review of LCA methods and tools and their suitability for SMEs’, Eco- innovation  
BIOCHEM, (May), p. 24. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004. 
 
[22]  
European Commission (2010) ILCD Handbook - General guide for Life Cycle  
Assessment - Detailed guidance, Constraints. doi: 10.2788/38479. 
 
[23]  
2.-o LCA Consultants (2017) The functional unit. Available at:  
https://consequential-lca.org/clca/the-functional-unit/. 
 
[24]  
Buyle, M., Braet, J. and Audenaert, A. (2014) ‘Life cycle assessment of an apartment  
building: Comparison of an attributional and consequential approach’, Energy  
Procedia. Elsevier B.V., 62, pp. 132–140. doi: 10.1016/j.egypro.2014.12.374. 
 
[25]  
Ecoinvent (2017a) Ecoinvent version 3.4. Available at:  
http://www.ecoinvent.org/home.html. 
 
[26]  
Hauschild, M., Goedkoop, M., Guinée, J., Heijungs, R., Huijbregts, M. A. J., Jolliet,  
O., Margni, M. and De Schryver, A. (2011) ILCD handbook, Assembly. doi:  
10.278/33030. 
 
[27]  
Birgisdottir, H. (2015) ‘Bæredygtigt byggeri’, Energistyrelsen, (April), p. 28. doi:  
10.2337/db16-ti04. 
 
[28]  
Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut (2017b) LCA-Byg. Available at:  
https://www.lcabyg.dk. 
 
[29]  
Meadows, D. H., Meadows, D. L., Randers, J. and Behrens, W. W. (1972) The Limits  
==PAGE:131==
130 
to Growth, Chelsea. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-1688.1972.tb05230.x. 
 
[30]  
Ayres, R. U. (2008) ‘Sustainability economics: Where do we stand?’, Ecological  
Economics, 67(2), pp. 281–310. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2007.12.009. 
 
[31]  
Ruth, M. (2006) ‘A quest for the economics of sustainability and the sustainability of  
economics’, Ecological Economics, 56(3 SPEC. ISS.), pp. 332–342. doi:  
10.1016/j.ecolecon.2005.09.012. 
 
[32]  
Baumgärtner, S. and Quaas, M. (2010b) ‘What is sustainability economics?’,  
Ecological Economics, 69(3), pp. 445–450. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2009.11.019. 
 
[33]  
Bartelmus, P. (2010) ‘Use and usefulness of sustainability economics’, Ecological  
Economics. Elsevier B.V., 69(11), pp. 2053–2055. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2010.06.019. 
 
[34]  
Baumgärtner, S. and Quaas, M. (2010a) ‘Sustainability economics - General versus  
specific, and conceptual versus practical’, Ecological Economics. Elsevier B.V., 69(11),  
pp. 2056–2059. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2010.06.018. 
 
[35]  
Investopedia (2018) What is the functional difference between GDP and GNP?  
Available at:  
https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/030415/what-functional-difference-between-gdp-
and-gnp.asp. 
 
[36]  
The Boston Consulting Group (2017) Sustainable Economic Development  
Assessment (SEDA). Available at: https://www.bcg.com/industries/public-sector/sustainable-
economic-development-assessment.aspx. 
 
[37]  
Marks, N. (2017) Happy Planet Index. Available at: http://happyplanetindex.org. 
 
[38]  
Josselin, J.-M. and Maux, B. Le (2017) Statistical Tools for Program Evaluation:  
Methods and Applications to Economic Policy, Public Health, and Education. doi:  
10.1007/978-3-319-52827-4. 
 
[39]  
Bygningsstyrelsen (2017) Totaløkonomi i offentligt byggeri. Available at:  
https://www.bygst.dk/godt-byggeri/totaloekonomi-i-offentligt-byggeri/. 
 
[40]  
UN Statistics Service (2017) SDG indicators - Global indicator framework for the  
Sustainable Development Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
Available at: https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/indicators-list/ . 
 
[41]  
United Nations (2015) Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Available at:  
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300. 
 
[42]  
Hildebrandt, S. (2016) Bæredygtig global udvikling : FN’s 17 verdensmål i et dansk  
perspektiv. 
 
[43]  
Ministry of Finance (2017) ‘Report for the Voluntary National Review - Denmark’s  
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development’, (June), p. 140.  
Available at: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/16013Denmark.pdf. 
==PAGE:132==
131 
 
[44]  
Braune, A. (2017) Saving the world – the DGNB’s contribution to the United Nation’s  
SDGs. Available at: http://blog.dgnb.de/en/sustainable-development-goals/. 
 
[45]  
Dansk Arkitektur Center (2016) ‘Arkitekturens værdiskabelse’, (December). 
 
[46]  
Oxford University Press (2017) Oxford living dictionaries. Available at:  
https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/growth. 
 
[47]  
Cohen, J. E. (1995) ‘Population Growth and Earth’s Human Carrying Capacity’,  
269(July), p. 1995. 
 
[48]  
Bjørn, A. and Hauschild, M. Z. (2015) ‘Introducing carrying capacity-based  
normalisation in LCA: framework and development of references at midpoint level’,  
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 20(7), pp. 1005–1018. doi:  
10.1007/s11367-015-0899-2. 
 
[49]  
Brejnrod, K. N., Kalbar, P., Petersen, S. and Birkved, M. (2017) ‘The absolute  
environmental performance of buildings’, Building and Environment. Elsevier Ltd, 119,  
pp. 87–98. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.04.003. 
 
[50]  
F5 (2017) VERDENS FØRSTE CIRKULÆRE BOLIGBYGGERI BYGGES I AARHUS.  
Available at: https://f5.dk/post/verdens-frste-cirkulre-boligbyggeri-bygges-i-aarhus/. 
 
[51] 
Lejerbo (2017b) Lejerbo har beboerdemokrati. Available at:  
http://www.lejerbo.dk/da/beboer/beboerdemokrati#.WmSOka3OORs. 
 
[52]  
Aarhus Kommune (2014) ‘Fremtidens Lisbjerg - Udviklingsprincipper’, p. 24. 
 
[53]  
Aarhus Kommune (2017) ‘Aarhus i udvikling’, p. 36. 
 
 
[54]  
3XN and DEPA (2016) ‘Building A Circular Future’, p. 284. Available at:  
https://issuu.com/3xnarchitects/docs/buildingacircularfuture. 
 
[55]  
Frischknecht, R. (2010) ‘LCI modelling approaches applied on recycling of materials in  
view of environmental sustainability, risk perception and eco-efficiency’, International  
Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 15(7), pp. 666–671. doi:  
10.1007/s11367-010-0201-6. 
 
[56]  
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2014) ‘Potential for Denmark As a Circular Economy a  
 
Case Study From : Delivering the Circular Economy – a Toolkit for Policy Makers’, pp.  
 
1–134. Available at: http://mst.dk/media/151170/15-11-25-cirkulaer-oekonomi.pdf. 
 
[57]  
Aagaard, N.-J., Brandt, E., Aggerholm, S. and Haugbølle, K. (2013) Levetider af  
bygningsdele ved vurdering af bæredygtighed og totaløkonomi, 1. Available at:  
http://www.sbi.dk/byggeteknik/kvalitet/levetider-af-bygningsdele-ved-vurdering-af-
baeredygtighed-og-totalokonomi-1/appendiks-f-sbi-2013-30. 
==PAGE:133==
132 
 
[58]  
Hauschild, M. Z., Goedkoop, M., Guinée, J., Heijungs, R., Huijbregts, M., Jolliet, O.,  
Margni, M., De Schryver, A., Humbert, S., Laurent, A., Sala, S. and Pant, R. (2013)  
‘Identifying best existing practice for characterization modeling in life cycle impact  
assessment’, International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, 18(3), pp. 683–697. doi:  
10.1007/s11367-012-0489-5. 
 
[59]  
Department of Finance and Administration (2006) ‘Introduction to Cost-Benefit  
Analysis and Alternative Evaluation Methodologies’, 24(5), pp. 2829–2832. 
 
[60]  
Lejerbo (2017a) Circle House - Videndeling er vejen frem for cirkulært byggeri.  
Available at: http://www.lejerbo.dk/da/om-lejerbo/byggeri/koncepter/circlehouse#.Wo2EalXibcs. 
 
[61] 
Trafik- Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen (2016) ‘Regulering af maksimumsbeløb for støttet  
boligbyggeri pr. 1. januar 2017’, (1226), pp. 2016–2017. 
 
[62] 
KAB (2017) AlmenBolig+. Available at:  
https://www.kab-bolig.dk/boligsoegende/boligformer/almenbolig. 
 
[63] 
Jyllands-Posten (2017) Åbning af letbanen til Odder og Grenaa er uafklaret. Available  
at: https://jyllands-posten.dk/aarhus/erhverv/ECE10145740/aabning-af-letbanen-til-odder-og-
grenaa-er-uafklaret/. 
 
[64] 
Housing Europe (2010) Social Housing in Europe - Denmark. Available at:  
http://www.housingeurope.eu/resource-102/social-housing-in-europe. 
 
[65] 
Sekretariatet for Supercykelstier (2017) Hvad er en supercykelsti. Available at:  
http://supercykelstier.dk/hvad-er-en-supercykelsti/. 
 
[66]  
Dansk Fjernvarme (2017) Faktaark om fjernvarmesystemer. Available at:  
http://www.danskfjernvarme.dk/viden-om/publikationer/faktaark-om-fjernvarmesystemer. 
 
[67]  
Ecoinvent (2017b) Why is the LCIA score of a certain product negative? Available at:  
http://www.ecoinvent.org/support/faqs/methodology-of-ecoinvent-3/why-is-the-lcia-s 
core-of-a-certain-product-negative.html. 
 
[68] 
Schipull Kauschen, J. (2014) Bæredygtige systemleverancer ved renovering. 
 
[69] 
Lejerbo, Lendager Arkitekter and COWI (2014) Lejerbos bæredygtige almene boliger. 
 
[70] 
Rasmussen, F. N. (2012) ‘Certification of sustainable buildings in a life cycle  
assessment perspective’. Available at: 
http://production.datastore.cvt.dk/oafilestore?oid=575e962ae6f951534a002b83&targetid=56d7
54eabf19455102002253. 
 
[71]  
SBi (2013) ‘Livscyklusvurdering af MiniCO2-husene i Nyborg’, p. 46. Available at:  
http://www.realdaniabyg.dk/media/187942/lca_p__minico2husene_17_10_2013.pdf. 
 
[72]  
Dreyer, L. C. (2009) Inclusion of Social Aspects in Life Cycle Assessment of Products,  
Department of Management Engineering. 
==PAGE:134==
133 
 
[73]  
Jørgensen, A. (2013) ‘Social LCA - A way ahead?’, International Journal of Life Cycle  
Assessment, 18(2), pp. 296–299. doi: 10.1007/s11367-012-0517-5. 
 
[74]  
Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, B. and N. S. (2017)  
ÖKOBAUDAT. Available at: http://www.oekobaudat.de/en.htm. 
 
[75]  
Dansk Standard (2012a) ‘Bæredygtighed inden for byggeri og anlæg –  
Miljøvaredeklarationer – Grundlæggende regler for produkt-kategorien byggevarer  
Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – Core rules  
for the product (DS/EN 15804 + A1)’. 
 
[76]  
Dansk Standard (2012b) ‘Bæredygtighed inden for byggeri og anlæg – Vurdering af  
bygningers miljømæssige kvalitet – Beregningsmetode (DS/EN 15978)’, p. 64. 
 
[77]  
Hamedani, A. Z. and Huber, F. (2012) ‘A comparative study of “DGNB” certificate  
system in urban sustainability’, 7th International Conference on Urban Regeneration  
and Sustainability, 155(5), pp. 1–12. doi: 10.2495/SC120111. 
 
[78]  
Haugbølle, K. (2015) ‘Introduktion til LCC på bygninger’, Energistyrelsen. 
 
[79]  
Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut (2017c) LCCbyg. Available at: https://lccbyg.dk. 
 
[80]  
Green Building Council (2017) DGNB Certificeringssystem. Available at:  
http://www.dk-gbc.dk/dgnb. 
 
[81]  
Realdania (2017) Værktøj til bæredygtig byudvikling. Available at:  
https://realdania.dk/om-os/realdaniabyogbyg/vaerktoej-til-baeredygtig-byudvikling. 
 
[82]  
Københavns Kommune (2017) Københavns kommunes bæredygtighedsværktøj. 
 
[83]  
Københavns Kommune (2014) ‘9 dogmer - Kvalitet i byggeriet’, (September), p. 14. 
 
[84]  
Miljømærkning Danmark (2017) Svanemærkede byggerier. Available at:  
https://www.ecolabel.dk/da/aktuelt/temaer/svanemaerkede-byggerier. 
 
[85] 
Vugge til vugge (2017) Cradle-to-Cradle Certificering. Available at:  
https://vuggetilvugge.dk/ydelser/cradle-to-cradle-certificering/. 
 
[86] 
3XN (2017) 3XN Quay Quarter Tower. Available at:  
http://3xn.com/project/quay-quarter-tower-2. 
 
[87] 
GXN (2015) GXN Green Solution House. Available at:  
http://gxn.3xn.com/project/green-solution-house. 
