==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
New Sulﬁde Materials as Photoelectrodes for
Water Splitting
Master in Materials and Manufacturing Engineering
Author:
Nicolaj Nyboe Kaiser - s110085
Hand-in date:
1th of January 2018
Supervisors:
Andrea Crovetto
Brian Seger
==PAGE:2==
1
Abstract
This rapport summarizes the results from 53 experiments made in the attempt to make
a thin ﬁlm of the material YSbS3. The results show that at temperatures under 850
◦C residual oxygen in the precursor will form oxysulﬁde phases. At 550 ◦C and up the
antimony will vaporize from the thin ﬁlm. Attempts to decrease the volatility of Sb2S3
was unsuccessfully. It was found, when trying to add more antimony to the precursor,
that it increased the sublimation rate. By starting from a stacked precursor with Y2S3
on the bottom and antimony on top, only a small amount of inter diﬀusion was observed
resulting in a few crystals of a sulfur phase with a Y:Sb ratio of 1:3. A phase with the
same composition was observed when depositing Sb2S3 onto a Y2S3 ﬁlm at 850 ◦C and
950 ◦C and evaporating of the Sb2S3 at 550 ◦C. Two new yttrium antimony oxysulﬁde
phases was observed one with a band gap of 1.82 eV and a photo luminescence response
of 1.82 eV.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Introduction
4
3
Theory
5
3.1
ABX3 material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Material requirements for a solar water splitting device . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Yttrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Antimony . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Yttrium-antimony system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6
PVD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.7
Thermodynamics of annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.8
Scanning electron microscope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.8.1
Gun
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.8.2
Anode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.8.3
Condenser lenses and objective apparatus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.8.4
Scanning coil and objective lens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.8.5
Sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.8.6
Interaction volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.8.7
Monte Carlo Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.9
X-ray diﬀraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.9.1
The machine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.9.2
X-ray tube/Source
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.9.3
Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.9.4
Sollar and slits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.9.5
Spectrum
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.10 XPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.11 UV-Vis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Methods
29
4.1
PVD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2
==PAGE:4==
4.1.1
Preparing the substrate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Calibration of the sputtering rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.3
Sputtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Annealing in oxygen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Annealing to form Y2S3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
UV-Vis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
XRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Results
32
5.1
Sample naming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Metal precursors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Oxide precursors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4
Y2S3 precursors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Low temperature experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.5.1
Very low temperature samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.5.2
TiO2 experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5.3
Sacriﬁcial antimony . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.6
Experiment with Y2S3 precursor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.7
High temperature experiments with powder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.8
Reacting excess Sb2S3 with Y2S3 at high temperatures
. . . . . . . . . . .
67
6
Discussion
72
7
Conclusion
74
References
75
8
Appendix
78
3
==PAGE:5==
2
Introduction
One of the biggest problems facing humanity today is global warming caused by release
of green house gasses. Scientists and engineers are focusing on developing solutions to
minimize the release of green house gasses, primarily focusing on minimizing the release
of CO2, which is produced when burning fossil fuels.
Many countries are starting to convert their economy to a green energy based one. One
example is Denmark where the goal is that the economy is fully based on green energy in
2050[1]. Many countries are however still reluctant to convert into a green energy based
economy, because of the high price.
Today the two main energy carrier technologies are batteries and hydrogen. Where bat-
teries is a technology of today, and hydrogen is a technology of tomorrow which solves
the two main problems with batteries, the price and the energy density.
Green energy is periodic, the wind needs to blow, the tide needs to move etc. In a hydrogen
based economy, hydrogen is used as an energy carrier, where it is possible to store the
energy that is in surplus by using it to make electrolysis on water to make hydrogen, and
when the energy is needed, it can be combined with oxygen from the air in a fuel cell, to
produce energy.
One of the proposed ways to produce hydrogen is by photo electrolysis where solar energy
is converted directly into hydrogen, increasing the photon to hydrogen eﬃciency. Materials
with the composition ABO3 are some of the most used and studied ceramic materials.
In photo electrolysis applications, ABO3 materials often have a too high band gap for
them to be used, and it has been observed that the band gap of ABS3 materials is much
lower [2]. In an attempt to push the photo electrolysis technology forward DTU Surfcat
has made a simulation based screening of 705 ABS3 materials to see if they had suitable
properties[2].
Because of the many applications, many ABO3 materials have been researched, it is much
harder to make ABS3 because oxygen compounds are much more stable than sulﬁdes. The
earths atmosphere contains a lot of oxygen, meaning that when synthesizing sulﬁdes the
reacting atmosphere needs to be separated from the earths atmosphere. This makes it
much harder because special equipment is needed, and ABS3 is unstable in air limiting
its uses, therefore ABS3 is not a well researched area[2].
One of the materials predicted to have a suitable band gap is YSbS3 or SbYS3, which
have never been made, however the simulation predict that the band gap is between 1.84
eV and 3.36 eV depending on the crystal structure [2]. The simulation assumed that
the crystal structure would be one of 10 diﬀerent common ABX3 crystal structures. The
goal of this report is to try to synthesize a thin ﬁlm of the material to see what crystal
structure and properties the ﬁnal material has.
4
==PAGE:6==
3
Theory
3.1
ABX3 material
Materials with an ABX3 composition are often known as perovskites or perovskite like
materials, named after the mineral perovskite CaTiO3 discovered by Count Lev Alekse-
vich von Perovski. In realty the perovskite structure is cubic, where A and B are cations
and A is larger then B. The B ion is placed in the middle of the unit cell, A at the corners,
and X is anions, most often oxygen, and it is placed in the center of the faces. Figure 1
shows the perovskite unit cell. The unit cell for most materials with the ABX3 compo-
sition are however not cubic. ABX3 materials has some of the most unique properties,
some applications are superconductors, piezoelectric elements, semiconductors, and high
temperature pigments [3].
Figure 1: An illustration of a cubic perovskite [4]
3.2
Material requirements for a solar water splitting device
The principle of a solar water splitting device is to use one or a conﬁguration of semicon-
ductor materials to convert photon energy into chemical energy. Normally two types of
conﬁgurations are used a S2 or a D2, where S stands for single material device and D for
dual material device, and the number 2 describes the number of photon needed to create
one molecule of H2 [5]. Figure 2 shows the two setups with reactions and the band gaps
illustrated.
5
==PAGE:7==
Figure 2: Illustration of two types of photo electrolysis devises a: S2 b: D2 [5]
A semiconductor used in a S2 conﬁguration needs a band gap of 1.6 eV to 2.4 eV although
the thermoneutral potential of splitting water is 1.48 eV and at 25 ◦C is the potential
needed 1.23 eV , this is because the system is not ideal and a small over potential is needed
[5]. Figure 3 is an illustration of the half reactions and the reaction of splitting water,
∆G is the theoretical energy needed to split one mole of water at 25 ◦C. In reality, some
energy is needed to transport of gasses and water to and from the surface , and resistance
in the material means that some energy is converted to heat, therefore an overpotential
is needed to supply energy for both the reaction and resistances.
Figure 3: Illustration of reactions and half reactions of splitting water[5]
Besides having the right band gab, the potential of the conducting and valence bands
compared with a standard hydrogen electrode are important because is it necessary for a
S2 material device to have a conducting band lower than 0 V, and for the valence band
to be higher than 1.23 eV. It is impotent for the materials to perform well so that it or
6
==PAGE:8==
they do not corrode during operation whether it is a S2 or D2 material device, meaning
that they need to be stable in a aqueous environment at a potential of 1.23 V and 0 V at
a pH of 7.
However because there are only a few materials with a band gap in the right range and the
bands at the right potential, a D2 material device is often used where two materials are
stacked, one with a conducting band lower then 0 V and one with a valence band larger
then 1.23 V [5]. Figure 4 shows the potential of the bands compared with a hydrogen
electrode for some of the most well known materials used in photovoltaic applications,
the current density can also be seen to have a relationship with the band gap, a low band
gap results in a large current density.
Figure 4: Band gap and placement of the band compered with a standard hydrogen
electrode, left is the conducting band, right the valence bands [5]
For a D2 devise the band gap can be under 1.6 eV for the two material as longs as the
valance band for one material overlaps the conducting band for the other, and the total
band gap is larger 1.6 eV. A D2 conﬁguration opens op for more material candidates, but
the amount of candidates is still short [5].
All materials that absorb a photon also releases a the energy again. The energy can
be released as a photon, a photon is normally created when a hole recombine with an
electron, but there are many other ways where holes and electrons can recombine without
forming a photon or by forming a photon with less energy, these processes will introduce
loses and makes the material less eﬃcient when used in a photo electrolysis device, so a
good material also needs to have a good photo luminescence response [6][7].
Photo luminescence is measured by exciting the material by hitting it with photons of a
greater energy than the band gap, thereby pushing electrons from the valences band to the
conducting band, making holes and electrons. When the holes and electrons recombine
a photon is produced, the wavelength and intensity of this photon is then measured.
Good materials result in a photo luminescence response where photons with wavelengths
7
==PAGE:9==
matching the band gap are generated with high intensity.
3.3
Yttrium
Yttrium, Y, is number 39 in the periodic table with a atomic mass of 88.9 g/mol, the
atomic size is 1.62 ˚A, the melting point is 1526 ◦C and the boiling point 3336 ◦C, it has
a hexagonal crystal structure at room temperature [8]. The main application of yttrium
has, in many years, been in ﬂuorescent light bulbs where a mix of phosphor, Y2O3 and
europium (Eu) converts x-rays into red light, but with the introduction of new technologies
such as LED and OLED the demand for Y2O3 in light bulbs has decreased. The other
main applications of yttrium is in alloys and in ceramic materials used as abrasives,
oxygen sensors, and laser crystals [9][10].
One of the most used ceramic materials is
yttrium stabilized zirconia or YSZ, which is one of the only known ceramics with fracture
strength, and has some interesting electrical properties. The special electrical properties
can be tuned by the amount of yttrium doping, the corrosion resistance is also very good
even at high temperatures.
Yttrium alloys also have extremely useful properties, making yttrium an extremely useful
element. Furthermore, yttrium is quit abundant in the earths crust, even more than lead
and almost as abundant as copper, Figure 5 shows the content of diﬀerent elements in
the earths crust.
Figure 5: The content of yttrium compared with other rare earth metals in the earths
crust [9]
.
Yttrium is normally found as xenotime or yttriumposphate, YPO4, which is only found
in concentrated areas [9]. For example 40.74 % of the deposit of yttrium is in China, see
Figure 5.
8
==PAGE:10==
Figure 6: Size and location of the earths deposits of yttrium [10]
The price of yttrium is predicted to be very unstable because of three factors
1: The many applications of yttrium
2: An increasing demand for these rear earth metals
3: The main reserves in China will run out within the next 20 years [11]
The increasing demand of rear earth metals can be attributed to the increasing wealth in
China [12]. As seen in 7 there is a small drop in the wolds demand after the start of the
ﬁnancial crisis in the west in 2008-2009, followed by a quit high increase from China the
next 6 years from 2009-2015 and in 2015 it is almost necessary for China to import rare
earth metals.
Figure 7: Supply of and demand for rare earth metals from 2005 to 2015 [13]
9
==PAGE:11==
Because of a possible shortage, it is normal when designing new materials to try to
minimize the amount of yttrium in it, and if it can be avoided to used yttrium without
decreasing the functionality too much, it is preferred. However, if it is easy to recover
and reuse the yttrium from the material, the uses of yttrium is not as critical. If the only
option is to use materials with yttrium then the amount should be minimized as much as
possible[12].
3.4
Antimony
Antimony, Sb, is number 51 in the periodic table with a atomic mass of 122 g/mol, the
atomic size is 2,06 ˚A, the melting point is 630 ◦C and the boiling point 1380 ◦C, and it
has a rhombohedral crystal structure at room temperature[14]. Antimony is a very brittle
material, as a pure material, and combined with very bad thermal and electrical conduc-
tivity the applications of pure antimony are very limited. This means that antimony is
normally used as an alloy agent, or as the ceramic material antimony trioxide Sb2O3.
The main application of antimony trioxide is as a ﬂameretardant in diﬀerent products
from textiles to rubber to paints[15]. The main impurities in antimony are iron, sulfur,
and arsenic. China has develop a scale to describe the purity of the antimony for normal
industrial use, see 8. In is report is laboratory grade antimony used with a purity 99.999%
[16], which is much more pure than the standard grade I.
Figure 8: Amount of typical impurities in antimony metal for diﬀerent grades [15]
The marked distribution of antimony is 72 % to ﬂameretardant, 10 % to transportation
mainly as an alloy agent in lead acid batteries, 10 % to the chemistry industry where
there is a growing marked for antimony trioxide used as a catalyst in PET production, 4
% to ceramic materials, and 4 % to other things [15].
Antimony is normally found in nature as stibnite or antimony sulﬁde, Sb2S3, and a typical
ore is mixed with stibnite, pyrite (FeS), quartz, calcite, barite, kaolin and gypsum, it only
contains 2,7 % antimony [15]. Figure 9 shows the main location of the most producing
mines in the world, it can be seen that China is the main producer of antimony with the
largest reserve .
10
==PAGE:12==
Figure 9: Wolds reserves and production of antimony in 2010 and 2011 [15]
The raw material is ﬁrst processed by a mechanical separation where the diﬀerence in size
and density is used during hand-sorting, heavy medium separation and ﬂotation. This
results in three products with diﬀerent puritys which is then thermally treated depending
on the purity. One product contains 5 % - 25 % antimony and it is treated by vaporization
were the volatility of Sb2O3 is used. This is normally done in a rotary furnace where it is
possible to control the atmosphere because a too high amount of oxygen in the atmosphere
results in the formation of Sb2O4 this is done at 1000 ◦C. The second product contains
25 % - 40 % antimony and is treated in a blast furnace, and third product with a purity
of 40 % - 65 % antimony is treated by liquidation [15].
The vapor pressure of Sb2S3 can be seen in Figure 10, it is clear that there is a great
diﬀerence between solid phase and liquid phase [18].
Figure 10: Vapor pressure for Sb2S3 at diﬀerent temperatures [17]
3.5
Yttrium-antimony system
Yttrium and antimony will alloy to form several diﬀerent phases, see Figure 11.
It has also been shown that they will form the ceramic material YSbO3, but the original
article could not be found.
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 11: Phase diagram for the Y-Sb system [19]
3.6
PVD
There are many diﬀerent types of physical vapor deposition techniques, also shortened
to PVD, but the principle is to sputter a ﬁlm of a material onto a substrate. This is
normally done by hitting particles into one or more materials called targets, material
from the target is then vaporized oﬀand deposited onto the substrate. to make a thin
ﬁlm when more than one material is sputtered at the same time is it called co-sputtering,
and this method can be used to make alloys or diﬀerent ceramic coatings.
In DTU Surfcat PVD is done by magnetron sputtering. PVD sputtering works by applying
a electric ﬁeld between the target and the substrate see ﬁgure 12. In magnetron sputtering
a magnetic ﬁeld is introduced around the target, this introduces a force perpendicular to
the electric ﬁeld, which makes the particles circulate around, and the path the particles
has to travel from the target to the substrate becomes longer. This increases the number
of collisions between ions and electrons, enabling the plasma to self sustaining at lower
pressures [20].
12
==PAGE:14==
Figure 12: Illustration of a magnetron sputter [20]
The micro structure of a ﬁlm created by PVD depends on the pressure and the relationship
between the sputtering temperature and the melting point of the sputtered material, see
Figure 13. Normally this relationship is converted into one of four “zones”, called zone-1,
-T, -2, and -3.
Figure 13: Illustration of sputter pressure and temperatures eﬀect on the microstructure
[20]
As describes in [20] the micro structure of zone 1 (T/Tm < 0.3) is “coarse columnar
growth morphology characterized by low mobility. This area is characterized by high
degree of intergranular porosity.” and “the ﬁlms are characterized by voids and colum-
nar/ﬁbrous morphology. Th internal structure of the individual crystal, forming the larger
structures, is highly irregular and ﬁlled with defects and dislocations.” This means that
ﬁlms formed at low temperatures will result in a porous ﬁlm with columnar grains with
13
==PAGE:15==
a lot of defects, coursed by low mobility at the low temperature. The high amount of
defects is an advantage, if the ﬁlm is reacted after the formation, because it increases
diﬀusion in the ﬁlm. High porosity is often not wanted, but if the ﬁlm is heated, the ﬁlm
will densify and some of the porosity will be eliminated. However gasses like O2 may be
trapped in the closed porosity, and this can result in unwanted phases when the ﬁlm is
reacted to form nitriles or sulfurizes, because oxides often are much more stable. If the
chamber is perfectly air tight there should not be any O2 present during sputtering, but
this is normally not the case, as at least a small amount of O2 normally will be present.
The next zone is zone T and [20] describes this as “an intermediate region where the
obtained morphology is dependent on the sputtering pressure, which in turn has a major
impact on the obtained morphology. By lowering the pressure the ion energy increases
and the morphology becomes denser.“ The temperature interval is not well described, and
the main diﬀerence from zone 1 is that the pressure has a larger eﬀect.
Zone 2 (0, 3 > T/Tm < 0.5) is a zone where the microstructure is described by [20]
as “ coarse columnar type growth and signiﬁcantly more dense than Zone 1.” and “
Larger columnar grains separated by grain boundaries. Defects are primarily located in
the grain boundary regions with grain boundary diﬀusion being the limiting factor for
forming larger well ordered crystals.” At this temperature interval recovery of the ﬁlm
is possible, but the temperature is too low for re-crystallization and grain growth. The
main advantage of zone 2 ﬁlms is the lowering of porosity, but this comes with the cost of
lowering the activity of the ﬁlm. Grain boundary diﬀusion is the limiting factor meaning
that at 0.3 > T/Tm < 0.5 bulk diﬀusion is not possible.
The last zone, zone 3 (0, 5 > T/Tm) is by [20] described as “equi axial grown crystals.
This area is characterized by the fact that the thermal energy is high enough to approach
equilibrium growth independent of the pressure nucleation and growth is progressing
according to minimization of gibbs free energy i.e. preferring low surface energy.” or “bulk
diﬀusion is possible which causes grain growth and re-crystallization with the formation
of larger and more defect free crystals as results”. This means the temperature is high
enough to allow bulk diﬀusion, resulting in re-crystallization and grain growth, resulting
in large stable equi axial crystals. This is only an advantage if the ﬁlm should be used
“as deposited”.
3.7
Thermodynamics of annealing
A lot of scientist use the same technique were a metal ﬁlm is exposed to ﬂow of a of
H2S gas at elevated temperatures in a tube furnace to form a ceramic sulﬁde ﬁlm. A
description of the thermodynamics behind is normally no described, but can be described
by the driving force of the non-equilibrium reaction to go towards equilibrium, and the
nucleation of the sulﬁde phase.
This report will be looking at two systems one pure metal precursors in a perfect air
tight setup, and one where oxygen has reacted with yttrium to form one of the stable
oxysulﬁdes ”Y2SO3” and annealed in a setup leaking air containing H2O, and O2. First
the driving force of the reaction between the gas and solid phase will be expressed by using
the standard Gibbs free energy for the reaction and the non-equilibrium constant. This
driving force makes it possible to calculate at which temperature the formation of the
14
==PAGE:16==
phase ”Y2S3” is more stable than ”Y2SO3”, to understand the the optimal temperature
for the phase transition, homogeneous nucleation theory will be used.
First lets look at the reaction between Y and H2S:
2Y + 3H2S ⇀
↽Y2S3 + 3H2
(3.1)
The Gibbs free energy for this reaction in a non-equilibrium situation that can be described
with as:
Q = pY2S3 + p3
H2
p2
Y + p3
H2S
(3.2)
Solids can be neglected from Q if there volume change is neglected, therefore can Q be
written as [21]:
Q1 = p3
H2
p3
H2S
(3.3)
Standard Gibbs free energy for the reaction expressed with the equilibrium constant K is:
∆G0
1 = −RTln(K)
(3.4)
The Gibbs free energy in a non-equilibrium situation expressing the driving force for the
reaction to go into a equilibrium situation, can be written as:
∆G1 = ∆G0
1 + RTln(Q1)
(3.5)
∆G1 = ∆G0
1 + RTln
 p3
H2
p3
H2S

(3.6)
This equation shows that when G1 = 0 the system is in equilibrium, during annealing in
the system H2 is constantly being removed by the ﬂow of H2S resulting in:
0 > ∆G1
This means that all pure metals will sulfurize with inﬁnite amounts of time, hoever the
system is much more complicated if there is oxygen present.
As seen in the Ellingham diagrams, see Figure 14 all the sulﬁdes are more stable than the
pure metal, but the oxides are even more stable.
15
==PAGE:17==
Figure 14: Ellingham diagrem, green: Y2O3, ligth blue: Y2S3, black: Sb2O3, dark blue:
Sb2S3 [22]
The reaction between O2 and Y is the most favorable, meaning that if any oxygen is
present it will attack yttrium and form oxysulﬁds, when a oxysulﬁde ﬁlm is annealed in
H2S the reaction will look like this:
Y2SO2 + 2H2S ⇀
↽Y2S3 + 2H2O
(3.7)
Q2 = p2
H2O
p2
H2S
(3.8)
When comparing Q for the two systems it can be seen that for a pure metal ﬁlm the H2S
is cubed and for the oxysulﬁde it is squared resulting in an much smaller G for the pure
metal reaction, meaning it is much more reactive.
If the annealing setup is not perfect and it is leaking air into the reaction, the reaction
between O2 and Y2S3 is also important:
Y2SO2 + S2 ⇀
↽Y2S3 + O2
(3.9)
Q3 = pO2
pS2
(3.10)
If there are oxygen present the Gibbs free energy for the two reactions Gc can be calculated
as:
∆Gc = ∆G0
1 + RTln
p2
H2O
p2
H2S

+ ∆G0
2 + RTln
pO2
pS2

(3.11)
∆Gc = ∆G0
1 + ∆G0
2 + RT

ln
p2
H2O
p2
H2S

+
pO2
pS2

(3.12)
16
==PAGE:18==
∆Gc = ∆G0
1 + ∆G0
2 + RTln
pO2 · p2
H2O
pS2 · p2
H2S

(3.13)
These formulas show the driving force for the reaction to go towards equilibrium, The
stability of the diﬀerent phases is taken into account in the standard Gibbs free energy
for the reaction. If the Y2SO2 phase is much more stable than the phase Y2S3, GO
1 and
GO
2 will be very positive and a high equilibrium driving force is needed.
To understand how quick the transformation occur, when the driving force is under 0,
homogen nucleation theory is used. First the stability of nucleus with a radius r can be
described as:
∆Gr = −3/4πr3∆Gv + 4πr2λ
(3.14)
The formula has two parts, First the energy stored in the interface of a nucleating phase
is described as:
4πr2λ
(3.15)
The second part describes the energy gained by replacing the volume of one phase with
the other.
−3/4πr3∆Gv
(3.16)
In standard nucleation theory the total number of clusters can be calculated as:
nr = n0 exp −∆G∗
r
kbT
(3.17)
Where n0 is the total number of atoms, kb is Boizmans constant, T is the temperature,
and ∆G∗
r is the Gibss energy for the lowest possible stable radius.
∆G∗
r can also be written as:
∆G∗
r = 16πλ3
3∆G2
v
(3.18)
This shows that close to the temperature where Gv=0 the formation of stable nucleation
clusters starts, and increases with the temperature. Just above the temperature where
Gv=0, G∗
r will be very large and the temperature will be low, at higher temperatures will
G∗
r will be smaller and the temperature higher.
If the energy gained from the phase transition is a large positive value, when chemical
equilibrium with the gas phase is not taken in to account, the temperature range with
suﬃcient nucleation will be small and if it is a small positive or a negative value, the
temperature range will be very large.
17
==PAGE:19==
In reality is this much more complicated, things like diﬀusion needs to be high enough for
the nucleated phase to grow, and strain can stabilize phases making the Gv more positive
or negative.
3.8
Scanning electron microscope
A scanning electron microscope, SEM, consists of a gun, anode, condenser lenses, objective
apparatus, objective lens, scanning coil, sensors, and a sample stage, see ﬁgure 15.
Figure 15: Illustration of a scanning electron microscope [23]
3.8.1
Gun
Normally one of two diﬀerent guns are used, either a ﬁeld emission gun or a thermionic
gun. The thermionic gun is the oldest type and it generates electrons by heating a piece
of ﬁlament typically made of tungsten until it emits electrons. This is a very cheap source
of electrons and it is easy to maintain, but the release of electrons is not well controlled
resulting in a thick electron beam.
The electron source in a ﬁeld emission gun is a piece of crystal with a pointed end, the
tip is very narrow. a very high electric ﬁeld is then applied between the tip and a anode,
resulting in emission of electrons. This technique is more expensive, but it allows for a
much higher resolution, because of a more controlled emission of electrons results in a
narrower beam.
DTU has microscopes with both types of guns, and in this report both types are used,
but because the main purpose of SEM, in this report, is to make elemental analysis, not
to look at the very ﬁne microstructure, and main microscope used had a thermionic gun.
However, in a few cases the microscope with a ﬁeld emission gun was used.
18
==PAGE:20==
3.8.2
Anode
To direct the electrons down at the target they are accelerated through an electric ﬁeld,
the size of the ﬁeld controls the speed/energy of the electron beam, and it is normally
between 5 kV to 25 kV. Low energies around 5 kV- 15 kV is normally used to investigate
the surface or coating on a substrate because of a low penetration depth, where a higher
energy 15 kV - 25 kV is used to look at the bulk of a material.
3.8.3
Condenser lenses and objective apparatus
A condenser lens is used to make the initial focus of the beam before the objective appa-
ratus. The objective apparatus is used to determine the point size and is simply a series
of holes physically removing the electrons that are not in focus in the point. This results
in only electrons that are in phase, making it possible to focus on a smaller spot on the
target. This leads to a better image resolution, but if a small hole is selected a lot of the
electrons will be ﬁltered oﬀand this gives a lower signal. Therefore a small hole is good
for imaging of the surface, but bad for the investigation of the bulk.
3.8.4
Scanning coil and objective lens
The scanning coil is used to control the electron beam to scan the surface to make the ﬁnal
image. The way the two most common image techniques makes images from the data, is
by using backscatter and secondary electron imaging, where the amount of electron hitting
the sensor at the diﬀerent points is counted. The contrast in the images is the diﬀerence
in intensity, in order to get more information/contrast in an image the scanning time is
extended. It is not possible to boost the signal by the use of any software, therefore the
only way is by letting more electrons hit the target because the contrast that the sensor
can obtain becomes larger. The objective lens is used to do the ﬁnal focus of the electron
beam onto a point on the surface.
3.8.5
Sensor
The three most used techniques in SEM is backscatter electron (BS), secondary electron
(SE), and energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The BS sensor is placed over the
sample around the electron beam, and measure backscattered electrons with is elastic
scattered back in the direction of the electron beam and is used to see diﬀerence in
atomic density in the sample making it possible to see areas with diﬀerent phases. SE
is low energy inelastic scattered electrons which is used to look at the typography of the
sample and to make size measurements, SE imaging is very common. EDS measures the
generated x-rays from collisions of electrons with atoms, the energy of the x-rays is unique
for all elements and can therefore be used to make element analysis either as a point or
area analysis or as mapping of the surface.
19
==PAGE:21==
3.8.6
Interaction volume
The most important illustration in SEM is of the interaction volume and is normally
drawn as in Figure 16. The interaction volume is the volume where the electrons interact
with the material before they have lost so much energy that they either cannot leave
the material and be detected, or interact with the material to make x-rays that can be
detected.
Figure 16: Illustration of the interaction volume [24]
From the illustration in Figure 16 it can be seen that secondary electrons only can be
detected from the top surface. They are generated all the way through the interaction
volume, but because they are formed by inelastic scattering they are low energy electrons
due to a lot of the energy going into the scattering. This means that they do not have
the energy to escape from deeper, but when measuring close to an edge it is possible for
SE from deeper in the interaction volume to escape the interaction volume, making edges
appear brighter on SE images, therefore SE is used to look at typography.
The next part of the interaction volume is the part where backscattered electrons comes
from, BS electrons are scattered by elastic scattering meaning that they have a higher
amount of energy and can therefore escape from deeper inside the sample, the amount of
scattering depends on the atomic density, higher density results in a higher scattering and
therefore a larger signal have atoms appear brighter. Backscattered electrons are used to
see diﬀerences atomic densities.
The last part of the interaction volume is where only the x-rays can be detected from, like
BS and SE x-rays are generated from the whole volume, but only the x-rays has the energy
to escape from this depth, the energy of the x-rays is characteristic for all elements and
can therefore be used to make elemental analysis. Only 3 elements can not be detected by
EDS; hydrogen, helium, and lithium. Hydrogen and helium do not generate x-rays, and
the energy of the lithium x-rays is so weak that they cannot escape the material. When
making EDS it is also necessary to adjust the power of the electron beam so it is high
enough to produce x-rays.
20
==PAGE:22==
3.8.7
Monte Carlo Simulation
A Monte Carlo simulation, is a simulation were the random path of a given number of
electrons is simulated for diﬀerent energies and materials to see how big the interaction
volumes are and where the diﬀerent electron signals comes from. Figures 17 to 19 show
Monte Carlo Simulations of a material consisting of Sb, Y, and S in a relationship of 1:1:3
at 5 kV, 12 kV, and 20 kV. It can be seen that for a energy of 5 kV the interaction volume
is 175 nm, for 12kV the depth is 757nm, and for 20 kV the depth is 1515 nm. This means
that for a thin ﬁlm of 500 nm the most optimal energy is somewhere between 5 kV and
12 kV, because at 12 kV a lot of the signal will come from the substrate, and at 5 kV the
interaction volume is too small and a lot more information can be gained by adjusting
the interaction volume, furthermore at 20 kV almost all of the signal is coming from the
substrate. If the depth of the interaction volume is plotted against the keV as shown in
Figure 20 it can be seen that the most optimal depth for a 500 nm ﬁlm is around 10 keV.
Figure 17: Monte Carlo Simulation with 200 electrons acceleratet with 5 kV onto a YSbS3
target [25]
Figure 18: Monte Carlo Simulation with 200 electrons acceleratet with 12 kV onto a
YSbS3 target [25]
21
==PAGE:23==
Figure 19: Monte Carlo Simulation with 200 electrons acceleratet with 20 kV onto a
YSbS3 target [25]
Figure 20: Curve of simulatet penetration deph form 5 kV to 20 kV on to a YSbS3 target
3.9
X-ray diﬀraction
X-ray diﬀraction, XRD, is one of the most useful methods in microstructure charac-
terization, as it can be used to determine micro strain, macro strain, crystallite size,
crystallographic texture, and the most used application is phase determination. A XRD
machine has three main parts; a X-ray tube, a stage and a detector. The x-ray tube emits
x-rays onto a target placed on the stage at a angle, the detector is placed mirrored to the
x-ray tube opposite the stage, and measure the intensity of the diﬀracted x-rays . One
type of XRD is grazing incident where the detector will move and the x-ray tube will
be stationary resulting in a constant low incoming angle making it possible to measure
a thin layer, where in standard Bragg diﬀraction XRD the angle will vary. By varying
the incoming angle θ of the x-rays onto the target, and measuring the intensity of the
diﬀracted x-rays hitting the detector a spectrum can be made by plotting 2θ with the
intensity. This spectrum is unique for all phases, because it depends on the type of unit
cell and lattice parameters. The spectrum can be calculated by Brags Law, see equation
3.19.
2d · sin(θ) = nλ
(3.19)
Were d is the lattice parameters, θ is the incoming angle of the x-rays, λ is the wave
length of the x-rays and depends on the source. A simple setup can be seen in Figure 21.
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 21: Illustration of a XRD machine [26]
3.9.1
The machine
A XRD machine consists of a x-ray tube/source, kβ-ﬁlter, soller slit for the incoming
beam, divergence slit, stage, scattering slit, soller slit for the scatter beam.
3.9.2
X-ray tube/Source
A x-ray tube works by heating some ﬁlament to create electrons which is accelerated
through an electric ﬁeld into a metal target, resulting in x-ray generation. See ﬁgure 22.
Figure 22: Illustration of an x-ray tube [27]
There are many options when it comes to the x-rays source, but by the most common
used is a Cu-Kα sources, however for some applications another source can give more
information, because of a change in penetration depth. Figure 23 shows an example of
the penetration depth in a Cu and Fe target at 2 θ=20 and 150, for Cu-, Co- ,and Cr-Kα,
it can be seen that if the goal is to investigate the surface of a thin ﬁlm of Cu a Cr-Kα
source is preferred, and for Fe a Cu-Kα is preferred.
23
==PAGE:25==
Figure 23: Penetration depth in a Cu and Fe target for Kα x-rays generated by diﬀerent
sources at diﬀerent angles. [28]
The penetration depth can be calculated for symmetric XRD as shown in equation 3.20
[28].
τ = sin(θ)cos(ψ)
2µ
(3.20)
Where τ is the penetration depth, θ incoming angle of x-rays, ψ is the angle of the plane
in the sample to the incoming beam, µ is the linear absorption coeﬃcient or attenuation
coeﬃcient.
3.9.3
Filter
The x-rays are generated when an electron hits an electron orbiting a nucleus and hits it
out of its orbit, this result in a electron vacancy in a lower energy level, meaning that an
electron from a higher energy level will fall into the vacancy, resulting in a energy release
in the form of x-rays. If the jump is from a L to K level the x-ray generated is called a
Kα x-ray and from M to K it is a Kβ. Figure 24 shows the diﬀerent x-rays that can be
created from diﬀerent energy level jumps [29].
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 24: Illustration on what x-rays are generated from diﬀerent energy levels [29]
Kα and Kβ x-rays are normally created together and the diﬀerence in intensity and wave
length of the Kα and Kβ (see Figure 25) will result in two diﬀerent spectra depending on
the wave length. Therefore a ﬁlter is used to remove one of the two x-rays. Normally the
Kα radiation is used because the intensity is higher which gives a better signal. However
in some special applications the Kβ x-ray can be used to investigate surfaces. The ﬁlter
consists of a metal with a high absorption coeﬃcient for Kβ x-rays, but this normally also
removes some of the Kα signal, and it can therefore sometimes be useful to remove the
ﬁlter to get a better signal from a thin ﬁlm. However, because of the diﬀerence in wave
length the ﬁnal spectrum will contain two spectra [29].
Figure 25: Illustation of the standard amoundt of Kα and Kβ x-rays a x-ray tube generate
[29]
25
==PAGE:27==
3.9.4
Sollar and slits
The ﬁrst set of sollar is used in order to only allow x-rays with the right polarity through.
The second set is made to only let the polarized x-ray through and the slits assure that
only parallel x-ray beams hits the target and sensor.
3.9.5
Spectrum
Conventional XRD is an integral method meaning that the measurement is not only taken
in one point but as a sum of a surface. In a TEM there are some techniques that can make
point measurements, this can be useful if there are many diﬀerent phases in a sample or
to determine the crystal orientation. Conventional XRD cannot be used when multiple
phases are present because it will result in a mix of the patterns for the diﬀerent phases.
However, if two of tree phases are present and one or two of the phases are known, the
patent of the last XRD can be recorded. Normally if the XRD is done on a ﬁlm on
a substrate, the phase of the substrate is known and can be removed as back ground
noise, if the ﬁlm also has two phases it is normally possible from the spectrum and some
knowledge about the composition and what phases are present to separate the spectrum
and therefore use XRD to determine the phase [28].
However, when comparing XRD and TEM it is important to take into consideration how
time consuming the preparation of the samples is. Preparing a sample for a TEM point
measurement is very time consuming and therefore XRD is preferred if the knowledge
about the other present phases is available.
Figure 26 shows an illustration of the diﬀerence of measuring one point or conventional
XRD.
Figure 26: Illustration of point XRD used in TEM (left) and standard XRD (rigth) [28]
The shape, position, and intensity of the peaks tell a lot about the measured sample.
The position of the peaks and the intensity are mainly used to make phase analysis.
The intensity can also be used to determent the “crystallographic texture” or overall
orientation of the crystals, this can be either random or preferred. A random orientation
is normally seen in powders, whereas thinﬁlms and other grown surface coatings generally
have a preferred orientation. A preferred orientation results in an increase of intensity of
some planes and a decrease others, with a reference pattern the preferred orientation can
be determined.
The peak position is sensitive to macrostrain which will result in a change in lattice pa-
rameters and is described by Brags Law as it will result in a shift in the peak position.
It is also possible from the spectrum to determine the lattice parameter D and by deter-
mining D at diﬀerent ψ it can be determined if the stain is compressive or tensile. For
26
==PAGE:28==
example when making a coating of one materiel on top of a diﬀerent substrate at high
temperature the diﬀerence in thermal expansion will course macrostain in the coating, if
the force is higher than the work of adhesion, the coating will peal of the substrate, but
if the coating stays on the substrate and XRD is done on it, a change in peak position
compared to the reference pattern is to be expected. If the stain is local in the sample,
meaning that some areas down to individual grains have a diﬀerent strain, microstrain
is occurring, and because the measurement is the sum of all measured grains, variations
in stain through the sample will result in a diﬀerence in lattice parameters. Furthermore
the total sum of diﬀerent spectra with slightly diﬀerent lattice parameters is a spectrum
with broader peaks. The size of the grains in the direction of the diﬀraction vector also
has a inﬂuence on the broadening of the peaks [28].
3.10
XPS
XPS is technique used to make elemental analysis, it is not a point analysis like EDS,
but the measuring depth is only a few nanometers, making it a powerful tool for surface
analysis. It can also be used to make depth proﬁles where a measurement is taken following
a removal of the surface by an ion beam and then a new measurement can be taken, this
procedure describes one step. It is normally not know how much material is removed in
one step, but if it takes X numbers of steps to hit the substrate and the thickness of the
ﬁlm is known, then it is possible to convert steps into depth and a true depth proﬁle can
be made.
A XPS machine consist of a x-ray source, a stage, a lens system, and a detector, see
Figure 27. The x-ray source sends x-rays out with a known energy, when the x-rays hits
the sample placed at the stage and photo electrons are created, they are then guided into
the detector, and the sensor measure the energy of the photo electrons. The diﬀerence in
energy from the x-rays hitting the electron pushing them out of orbit and the electrons
hitting the detector is called the binding energy and is unique for all elements and com-
pounds. This makes it possible to determine which elements that are present and the
bonds between the elements.
Figure 27: Illustation of a XPS machine [30]
27
==PAGE:29==
3.11
UV-Vis
UV-Vis is a machine used to make transmittance spectra which can be used to determine
the band gap of the material. The machine consist of a light source, monochromator,
sample holder, and a detector, see ﬁgure 28. The light source can consist of diﬀerent
emitters normally it is a UV source which emits uv-light, and a vis-source emitting visible
light. The monochromator focuses and ﬁlters the light resulting in a light beam consisting
of one wave length light which can be varied. The light beam is passed through the sample
placed in the sample holder. The wave length is then varied from high to low, and the
detector measures the intensity of the beam. This results in a scan of the transmission
compared to wave lengths.
Figure 28: Illustration of a uv-vis machine [31]
transmission measurement can bee converted to absorption with the formula:
α = log(1/T)
(3.21)
The relationship between the band gap and absorption is [32]:
α · hv = A · (hv −Eg)1/2
(3.22)
where A is a constant, hv is the photon energy, and Eg is the band gab. It can be seen
that if α is zero, then hv=Eg. To experimentally ﬁnd Eg (α · hv)2 is plotted against hv,
and in an ideal material, the material will absorb all light with a greater energy than
the band gab, and instantly not absorb photon with a lower energy. The band gab is
the point where the graph goes from zero to max. In a real sample the absorbing is not
instant it starts out by being exponentially increasing until a point were it becomes linear
when scanning from low energy photon to high. The band gab can be found by extending
the linear part until it crosses the x axises.
28
==PAGE:30==
4
Methods
4.1
PVD
4.1.1
Preparing the substrate
The substrate used is quartz wafers with a thickness of 0.5 mm, which is cut in half. The
wafer is placed on a piece of paper and then a diamond cutter is used to make a cut line
through the middle of the wafer and the wafer broken in half. To remove broken of quartz
particles, the two halves of the quartz wafer is cleaned with high pressure air.
4.1.2
Calibration of the sputtering rate
Before sputtering for the ﬁrst time in a long time or after the chamber has been opened,
it is important to calibrate the sputtering rate. This is done by loading the stage into
the main chamber, and then the quartz micro balance is moved in front of the stage.
The targets can now be ignited, one at a time. Yttrium always uses the DC power and
antimony always uses RF power, due to its poor conductivity, it is not possible to used
DC power for antimony.
The max DC power used for yttrium is 60 W and max RF power used for antimony is
30 W. The up and down ramp used was 0.5 W/sec. The pressure used when calibrated
should be the same as when sputtering. Three pressures were used 10 mtorr, 5 mtorr,
and 3 mtorr, but when igniting 30 mtorr was always used, and the argon gas ﬂow used
was 35 sccm.
First antimony is ignited because it is the limiting factor. A ramp of 60 sec to 30 W is used,
when calibrating after the chamber has been opened a presputtering time of 15 minutes
is used, otherwise a sputtering time of 2 min - 5 min is used. After the presputtering the
deposition thickness is measured 3 times over 1.5 min, to determine the deposition rate.
Before the metal thin ﬁlm is made it is important to calculate the relationship between
antimony and yttrium as this is needed to obtain the wanted composition of the ﬁlm. In
this report two types of co-sputtering ﬁlms are used with atomic ratios of 1:1 (Sb:Y) and
2.8:1. When these atomic ratios are converted to thickness ratios the ratios are 0.91:1
and 2.6:1.
To calibrate the deposition rate for a 1:1 ﬁlm, the yttrium target is ignited with a ramp
of 120 sec to 60 W because it is known that the power needed is between 50 W and 60 W.
The presputtering conditions is the same as for the antimony target. First the deposition
thickness is measured 3 times over 1.5 min, and then the sputtering rate is measured at 50
W by ramping down with a 20 sec ramp and measuring the deposition thickness 3 times
over 1.5 min. By interpolation it is possible to get an idea about what the right power is
and then the power is ramped up to that point. Then the deposition rate is tested, this
data can then be used for a more precise interpolation, this is done until the right power
is reached.
For the ratio of 2.8:1 it is known that the power which should be used for the yttrium
target is between 10 W and 20 W, and the procedure is the same as for a 1:1 ﬁlm. For
29
==PAGE:31==
mono layers the deposition rate is only measured at the max power.
4.1.3
Sputtering
The quartz substrates are loaded onto the stage and the stage is then loaded into the main
chamber, and the height of the stage is set to 32. Some ﬁlms were made at a elevated
temperature which was done by heating the main chamber to 150 ◦C with a ramp of 10
◦C/min.
When the gas ﬂow is set to 35 sccm and the pressure is set to a previously picked pressure.
The targets are ignited with the calibrated power, and the sputtering begins. The normal
thickness of the metal ﬁlms is between 300 nm to 400 nm.
When the sputtering is completed, the temperature and power are both ramped down
and the metal ﬁlms are removed when the temperature is under 50 ◦C.
4.2
Annealing
Annealing is done by placing one or more metal ﬁlms in a quartz tube. The quartz tube
is then placed in a tube furnace. On one side the tube connected to a valve where it is
possible to switch between a H2S and an Ar supply, on the other side the tube is connected
to a pump and a water look, which can be opened and closed independently.
To make sure that the metal ﬁlms is placed the same place every time the glass tube
placed in the furnace and a marker is used to mark on the tube where the edges of the
furnace align with the tube. The tube is then removed from the furnace and a ruler is
then used to measure out were the middle of the furnace is, and this is called position
”1”, on the left side of position 1 is position 2 to 5 and on the right is position -2 to -5,
the position are placed with a distance of 1.8 cm between them.
The samples are placed in the tube, and aligned with one of the locations between -5
and 5. If the experiment is done with a glass boat with Sb2S3 powder in it, the boat is
placed in location 1. The tube is placed in the furnace and the tube is hooked up to the
Ar/H2S source in the left and pump/water lock in the right end. The tube is ﬁrst vented,
and then ﬂushed with argon, and vented again. After this the pump is stopped and the
tube is ﬂushed with argon for 30 seconds before the water lock is opened. The H2S and
furnace can now be turn on. The gas ﬂow is set to 50 sccm, the heating and cooling ramp
used is normally between 10 ◦C/min to 20 ◦C/min op and 5 ◦C/min to 20 ◦C/min down.
During cooling when the temperature is under 100 ◦C argon can be started and when the
temperature is under 60 ◦C the tube can be removed from the furnace.
4.2.1
Annealing in oxygen
To make oxide precursors, a co-spottered metal ﬁlm is placed at position 1 in the tube.
The tube is placed in the furnace and heated to 600 ◦C in air with a ramp of 10 ◦C/min
up and 5 ◦C/min down.
30
==PAGE:32==
4.2.2
Annealing to form Y2S3
To make Y2S3 precursors an yttrium ﬁlm is placed at position 1 in the tube, and the tube
is placed in the furnace and pump and vented as for a standard experiment. The ﬁlm is
heated to 950 ◦C for 10 hour, with a ramp of 20 ◦C/min up and 20 ◦C/min down.
4.3
UV-Vis
Transmission measurements is made from 950 nm to 185 nm.
4.4
XRD
XRD is done with a Cu-Ka x-ray source and the scan is made from 0 – 100 with a scanning
rate of 3.33 ◦/min, the sollar used is 0,4 ◦.
4.5
SEM
The setting used during EDS is a spot size of 4 and a keV of 8 keV, if necessary 5 keV is
used, and the analysis time is 30 sec.
31
==PAGE:33==
5
Results
5.1
Sample naming
In total, 53 experiments were made.
This report highlights 16 experiments, as they
provided the primary information gained. The 16 experiments are continuously numbered
from 1 to 16.
Furthermore, the samples are be named as follow ”YY XX AB” where YY is the experi-
ment number, XX is the position, and A is the type of precursor either M, O or S, as M
stands for metal, O stands for oxide and S is sulﬁde, B is the number of the precursor.
If all the samples in a experiment is placed at the same position, the samples are be named
”YY AB”, or if the samples in one experiment all are made with the same precursor will
they be named ”YY XX”. Initial investigative experiments are not named as they were
done in order to gain knowledge about the setup.
5.2
Metal precursors
Six diﬀerent precursors were created. The precursors M1 and M2 was primary used in
some inertial experiments and to make oxygen precursors. The goal was to make a co-
sputtered ﬁlm with a 1:1 ratio, but it was found that it was diﬃcult to sputter antimony
at 5 mtorr and sputtering at 10 mtorr resulted in a much more stable plasma. The ﬁrst
metal ﬁlm, M1, was therefore made at 10 mtorr and it was observed that this ﬁlm was
dark transparent when removed, which indicates that the ﬁlm quickly was turning into
an oxide. This is because 10 mtorr is a high sputtering pressure and it resulted in a ﬁlm
with high porosity, making it easy for air to diﬀuse into the ﬁlm. The second ﬁlm M2
was made at 5 mtorr which resulted in a more unstable plasma for the antimony target,
but when looking at the composition in Table 1 it can be seen that the Sb:Y ratio is 1:1.
The color of the ﬁlm was black metallic meaning that the ﬁlm was starting to oxide but
was not completely oxidized.
As it in the initial experiments quickly was found that the sublimation of antimony was
a problem, a thin ﬁlm M3 with extra antimony was made for an experiment to see if this
was a solution to the sublimation problem. This ﬁlm had a metallic look, the diﬀerence
from the ﬁrst ﬁlms is the very small amount of yttrium compared with antimony, meaning
that antimony will act passivating.
The ﬁlm M4 was ﬁrst a pure yttrium ﬁlm which was annealed at 950 ◦C for 10 hours in
a H2S ﬂow to form a Y2S3 layer, and then an antimony layer was sputtered on top at
only 3 mtorr and at 150 ◦C to increase the crystallinity. This was done in an attempt to
decrease the oxygen level in the two layers, and the EDS data indicates that it worked.
With the experience from the previous ﬁlms, M1 through M4, a new co-sputtered thin
ﬁlm was made, M5. M5 similarly had a antimony-yttrium ratio of 1:1, and a passivating
top layer of antimony, M5 was also made at a high temperature and at 3 mtorr, this ﬁlm,
like M4, had a metallic look when ﬁnished.
In another attempt to reduce the sublimation, a 50 nm top layer of TiO2 was sputtered
32
==PAGE:34==
on top of a co-sputtered antimony and yttrium ﬁlm. This ﬁlm is in this report named
”TiO”, and is made with the same method as M4, but instead of a passivating top layer
of antimony, it has a passivating layer of TiO2.
The sputtering parameters and composition of the metal precursors can be seen in Table
1.
Table 1: Overview of the sputtering conditions and elemental composition for the metal
precursors
Sample
Substrate
Pressure
Temperature
Top layer
Y
Sb
O
Ti
Sb/Sb+Y)
Layer thickness
[mtorr]
[◦C]
[mol %]
[mol %]
[mol %]
[mol %]
[ nm]
M1
Quartz
10
ambian
No
20
20
61
0
0.51
352
M2
Quartz
5
ambian
No
20
20
60
0
0.49
352
M3
Quartz
5
ambian
No
14
44
42
0
0.76
570
M4
Y2S3
3
150
Sb
0
86
13
0
1
245
M5
Quartz
3
150
Sb
30
50
30
0
1.52
499 + Sb (46)
TiO
Quartz
3
ambian
TiO2
8
6
58
28
0.43
352 + TiO2( 50 )
It is worth noting that the metal ﬁlm M5 has a much lower content of oxygen. This could
be due to the lower pressure, higher temperature or/and the passivating layer of antimony
on the top layer. However, if there really were 60 % oxygen in the other samples it would
mean that the ﬁlm was an oxide and not a metal ﬁlm. When doing EDS on the ”TiO”
ﬁlm, a lot of the signal was coming from the top layer of TiO2.
5.3
Oxide precursors
The oxide ﬁlms were made by placing the ﬁlms at position 1 and slowly heated to 600
◦C with 10 ◦C/min and slowly cooling it down with 5 ◦C/min, the resulting ﬁlms were
completely transparent.
Because the EDS measurements for the oxide precursors was made in the beginning of
the project, a too high beam voltage of 20 kV was used to make the measurement, which
means that the signal mainly comes from the quartz substrate and the quantity of Y,Sb
and O, is not very precise in these measurements. The purpose at the time with this
measurement was to see if the antimony and yttrium still were present or if one of them
had evaporated.
Table 2 shows the EDS data, it shows that there may be is a small bias in the yttrium-
antimony ratio towards yttrium, and it is impossible to conclude weither the ratio is 1:1
or 1:0.9, however it is close to 1:1, when the uncertainty of EDS is taken into account.
Table 2: Overview of the annealing conditions and elemental composition for the oxide
precursors
Sample
Metal ﬁlm
Hold time
Temperature
Ramp
Y
Sb
O
Si
Sb/Sb+Y)
[min]
[◦C]
[◦C/min]
[mol %]
[mol %]
[mol %]
[mol %]
O1
M2
0
600
5
9
8
63
20
0.47
O2
M3
0
600
5
16
14
57
13
0.48
33
==PAGE:35==
5.4
Y2S3 precursors
A Y2S3 ﬁlm was made to eliminate oxygen in the precursor.
The temperatures and
time was chosen on the basis of earlier experiments made by Andrea Crovetto who has
experience in working with yttrium sulﬁde. The microstructure of the ﬁlm can be seen
in Figure 29, which shows that the grain size is quite big, around 1 µm. Figure 30 shows
the EDS data and it shows that the ﬁlm has a very low level of oxygen, in fact it is so
low that it is uncertain if there is any present, when taking the inaccuracy of EDS into
account.
Figure 29: SE picture of the microstructure of S1 precursor
Figure 30: Elemental analysis of the S1 ﬁlm
34
==PAGE:36==
A XRD measurement was made for the precursor and it can be seen that there are two
phases present Y2S3 and Y2SO2, see Figure 31. The measurement was made in the end
of the project and the ﬁlm had changed visually, it had become more transparent, and
the EDS data made right after the ﬁlm was made, showed no oxygen, meaning that the
Y2S3 properly oxidized. All experiments where this ﬁlm was used was done before the
ﬁlm started to change appearance.
Figure 31: XRD pattern for S1 precursor
5.5
Low temperature experiments
Investigative experiments showed that evaporation of antimony from the surface would
be a problem and that the furnace had a large thermal gradient.
Therefore the ﬁrst
experiments was made with a max temperature of 550 ◦C in the middle of the furnace
and 5 samples were placed with a distance of 1.8 cm between them from the middle to the
edge, in position 1 to 5. This gave a good indication of the eﬀect of the temperature on
the development of the ﬁlm. Figure 32 shows the placement of the ﬁlms and a illustration
of the color of the ﬁlms. Position 1 and 2 resulted in a clear yellow almost transparent
ﬁlm, in position 3 the ﬁlm became red, and the ﬁlms in position 4 and 5 had a gray ﬁlm.
To investigate the microstructure of the ﬁlm, SEM was used to look at the microstructure
using SE, and the elemental composition of the base material was examined with EDS,
XRD was also used to determine which phases that were dominant.
35
==PAGE:37==
Figure 32: Illustration of the placement of precursors in experiment 1
Figures 33 to 37 show SEM pictures of the sample 5 to 1, and it is seen that there are
large crystals on the surface of the ﬁlms in position 5 and 4, and at position 3, 2 and 1
the surface no longer is dominated by crystal, only a main phase with very low crystalline
is seen.
Figure 33: SE picture of the ﬁlm made at position 5 in experiment 1
Figure 34: SE picture of the ﬁlm made at position 4 in experiment 1
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 35: SE picture of the ﬁlm made at position 3 in experiment 1
Figure 36: SE picture of the ﬁlm made at position 2 in experiment 1
37
==PAGE:39==
Figure 37: SE picture of the ﬁlm made at position 1 in experiment 1
Figure 38 shows the XRD pattern for position 5, 4, 3, and 2. It can bee seen that at
position 5, and 4, the surface crystals are antimony metal, and the main phase at position
3 and 2 is Y2SO2.
Figure 38: XRD spectrum for experiment 1 black: 1 5, red: 1 4, blue: 1 3, green: 1 2,
Stars: Y2SO2 peaks, squares: Sb peaks
38
==PAGE:40==
Table 3 shows the EDS data for the base material, and the base material at position 5 has
a composition of 1:2 yttrium-antimony and a 1:1 composition of O:S. The composition ﬁts
with a phase of the composition Y4Sb2(S,O)9 and position 4 has a composition ﬁtting with
a Y4Sb2S6O3 phase, A4B2O9 together with A3B5O12 are two well known structures when
working with perovskites because this phases normally are in equilibrium with ABO3 [3].
The amount of antimony in the base phase for position 5 and 4 is the same, it is only the
sulfur and oxygen content that are changing, showing that this phase is losing one oxygen
before the antimony on the surface forms Sb2S3. This means that the δ G for Sb to Sb2S3
is higher than for Y4Sb2(S,O)9 to Y4Sb2S6O3, at the temperature.
At position 3 the antimony content is much lower but the O:S ratio is 1:1 suggesting that
the structure is Y2(S,O)3 doped with 6 % antimony, however XRD shows that the phase
is Y2SO2. The two last positions 1 and 2 have one phase, namely Y2SO2 doped with small
amounts of antimony.
Table 3: EDS data for experiment 1
Sample
Temperature
Position
Y
Sb
S
O
Sb/(Y+Sb)
[C]
[mol %]
[mol %]
[mol %]
[mol %]
1
550
5
27
13
30
30
0.33
1
550
4
29
11
37
23
0.28
1
550
3
26
6
32
35
0.20
1
550
2
40
1
17
41
0.03
1
550
1
40
4
18
37
0.09
From this experiment it can be seen that at temperatures under 550 ◦C the oxygen level
is too high, for the formation of a YSbS3 phase, and the only way to remove the oxygen
is to increase the temperature. However, the sublimation/evaporation rate of antimony is
increasing with temperature and even at 550 ◦C all the antimony in the ﬁlm has vaporized.
The sample placed at position 3 in experiment 1 showed that, even if there is oxygen
present, it might be possible to make oxyslulﬁde ﬁlms with interesting band gabs, therefore
an investigation was made at lower temperatures.
5.5.1
Very low temperature samples
Low temperature experiments showed that 300 ◦C for 960 min did result in metallic
looking samples, but 450 ◦C for 120 min and 600 min resulted in a ﬁlm with very dark
red to dark yellow color, depending on which precursor that was used.
In experiment 2 and 3 a sample of M1, M2, O1, and O2 was placed as shown in Figures
39 and 40. In experiment 2 the samples were heated to 450 ◦C for 120 min with a ramp
of 10 ◦C/min up and 5 ◦C/min down to room temperature, whereas in experiment 3 the
same ramps were used to the same temperature but the hold time at the 450 ◦C was 600
min.
39
==PAGE:41==
Figure 39: Illustration of the placement of precursors in experiment 2
Figure 40: Illustration of the placement of precursors in experiment 3
Figures 41 to 48 show SEM images of the ﬁnal ﬁlms divided into precursors used in the
order M1, M2, O1, and O2, the ﬁrst image is from experiment 2 and the second is from
experiment 3. From Figures 43,45, and 47 it can be seen that in experiments 2, when
using M2, O1, or O2 precursors, gives very large crystals on the surface, which are not
present in experiment 3.
Figure 41: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made with the precursor m1 in
experiment 2
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 42: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made with the precursor m1 in
experiment 3
Figure 43: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made with the precursor m2 in
experiment 2
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 44: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made with the precursor m2 in
experiment 3
Figure 45: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made with the precursor O1 in
experiment 2
42
==PAGE:44==
Figure 46: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made with the precursor O1 in
experiment 3
Figure 47: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made with the precursor O2 in
experiment 2
43
==PAGE:45==
Figure 48: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made with the precursor O2 in
experiment 3
The EDS data can be seen in Table 4. At these temperatures the antimony level is very
high, almost no antimony has evaporated, only in the ﬁlms made from the precursor O1
have a very low level of antimony. The M1 ﬁlm contains more antimony in experiment
3 than in experiment 2, which could be because of the placement, as in experiment 2, of
the ﬁlm is placed close to position 1 and in experiment 3 it is closer to position -2. This
results in a lower temperature in experiment 3 but for a longer time, and because of the
exponential relationship between the vapor pressure and the temperature, it will result in
a much lower evaporation.
The biggest diﬀerence between starting with a metal ﬁlm and starting with an oxide ﬁlm
at 450 ◦C is that, the resulting ﬁlms made from the metal ﬁlm have a lower oxygen content
and at the same time they have a higher antimony level.
The lower level of antimony when starting from a oxide ﬁlm could be because some of the
antimony evaporates oﬀduring the oxidation of the metal ﬁlms.
44
==PAGE:46==
Table 4: Elemental composition of ﬁlms made in experiment 2 and 3
Experiment
Precursor
Sb
Y
O
S
O/(S+O)
Sb/(Sb+Y)
[at %]
[at %]
[at %]
[at %]
[%]
[%]
2
M1
13
20
30
37
44
39
3
M1
22
23
20
35
37
50
2
M2
15
25
25
35
42
37
3
M2
12
25
28
35
45
34
2
O1
7
21
46
26
64
24
3
O1
4
27
49
21
70
12
3
O2
11
29
32
29
53
27
2
O2
11
21
35
33
52
33
From Figure 49 it can be seen that the samples 3 m2, 3 O1, 3 O2 mainly are Y2SO2.
2 O1 is mainly Sb2S3 with a weak signal of Y2SO2, this is because the surface is coated
with Sb2S3 as shown in Figure 45. It looks like 3 O2 is a mix Y2SO2 and the same phase
as 2 O2. Sample 2 O2 was etch with 0.1 M NaOH in 10 sec, before edging it was only
possible to pick up the signal for the Sb2S3 crystals on its surface. After etching the signal
from the base material is very weak but it can be seen that the signal is not Y2SO2 or
Sb2S3, and no phase in the PDF matches the spectrum.
Figure 50 shows the spectrum for 3 m1, 2 m1, and 2 m2, they are all the same phase, the
phase could not be found in the PDF.
45
==PAGE:47==
Figure 49: XRD spectrum with main references peaks for Sb2S3 and Y2SO2 blue: 3 m2,
green 3 O1, red: 2 O1, cyan: 3 O2, black: 2 O2, Star: Y2SO2, Delta: Sb2S3
Figure 50: XRD spectrum for green 3 m1 red: 2 m1, blue: 2 m2
46
==PAGE:48==
Figure 51 shows the microstructure of the edged ﬁlm, it can be see that the crystals are
gone and only the scars are left.
Figure 51: Microstructor of 2 O2 after etching with NaOH
From the view point of materials which are useful in a solar electrolysis cell, these materials
are interesting because of there band gap of 1.62 eV - 2.48 eV, as discussed in the theory,
see table 5.
Table 5: Measured band gap for ﬁlms made in Experiment 2 and 3
Sample
Min Eg
Max Eg
Note
[eV]
[eV]
2 m1
1.88
1.88
3 m1
2.04
2.04
2 m2
2.06
2.06
3 m2
1.64
1.86
2 O1
2.48
2.48
3 O1
1.87
1.87
2 O2
1.68
2.26
2 O2
1.70
1.82
after etch
3 O2
1.62
1.88
The reason that there are minimum and maximum band gap values in Table 5, is that
it can be diﬃcult to determine if a tale is a tale or if the material has more phases with
diﬀerent band gaps, and sometimes the glass substrate can create interference, making it
hard to determine what the true slope of the linear part is. Two examples can be seen in
Figure 52. The measurement for 2 O2 has a lot of interference, and 3 O2 has two linear
parts resulting in two band gaps.
47
==PAGE:49==
Figure 52: Uv-vis messurement of a. 2 O2 after etching with NaOH b. 3 O2
Photo luminescence showed that the ﬁlms made with O2 precursors have a photo lumi-
nescence response. Figures 53 and 54 show that the response of 2 O2 is much larger than
for 3 O2, this is probably because of a much more pure phase. In 2 O2 the response is also
at a photon energy of 1.82 eV and for 3 O2 it is 1.6 eV. The lower energy in 3 O2 must
be coursed by the interaction between the Y2SO2 phase and the new phase. This makes
3 O2 the, by far, the most interesting ﬁlm, and with a band gap of 1.82 eV and a photo
luminescence response at 1.82 eV, it would be interesting to investigate the performance
of this ﬁlm in a photo electrolysis device.
48
==PAGE:50==
Figure 53: Photo luminescence measurement for 2 O2
Figure 54: Photo luminescence measurement for 3 O2
The composition of the 2 O2 ﬁlm is very close to a 1:1 ratio of Y:Sb and O:S, suggesting
that the composition of the phase is YSb(S,O)3. the next step would be to try to increase
the antimony content by making a oxide precursor with higher antimony content, to see
if a 1:1 ratio of yttrium and antimony would result in new phase or the same phase with
increased or decreased photo luminescence response.
It is extremely interesting that there are materials in the Y2O2-Y2S3-Sb2S3-Sb2O3 system
with potential uses in a photo electrolysis device which can be made at lower temperatures.
However to make the material, YSbS3, a precursor with a very low oxygen content is
needed or the volatility of Sb2S3 must be reduced, in order to make it possible to go to
49
==PAGE:51==
higher temperatures without losing it, because at higher temperatures the driving force
for substituting oxygen with sulfur will be improved.
5.5.2
TiO2 experiments
To try to reduce the sublimation of antimony experiment 4 was made. Similar to exper-
iment 1, 5 TiO2 ﬁlms were placed in position 1 to 5, and heated to 550 ◦C for 30 min
with a ramp of 20 ◦C/min up and 10 C/min down. For this experiment the ramp up was
done in a argon atmosphere, because earlier experiments showed that this decreased the
sublimation rate, resulting a higher amount of antimony.
Figures 55 and 56 show that the ﬁlm placed in position 3 has a low level of antimony and
the TiO2 is cracked. This could be because of the expansion from forming the sulﬁde ﬁlm
from the metal, or the diﬀerence in the thermal expansion during heating between the
layers. A lower heating ramp could be used to try to mitigate the crack formation in the
TiO2 layer, but the low antimony level measured in this experiment at position 3, makes
it uninteresting to try.
Figure 55: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made at position 3 in experiment
4
50
==PAGE:52==
Figure 56: Elemental analysis of 4 3
5.5.3
Sacriﬁcial antimony
If the volatility of antimony could not be reduced, a possibility could be to increase the
amount of antimony in the precursor to compensate for the loss. By calculating the loss
of antimony at position 1 and 2 in experiment 1, it was found that a 1:2.6 atomic ratio
of Y:Sb was needed to compensate for the loss due to sublimation.
The ﬁlm M3 is designed to have this composition and was tested in experiment 5. The
experiment was similar to experiment 1 where 5 ﬁlms was place at position 1 to 5 and
heated to 550 ◦C for 30 min with a ramp up of 20 ◦C/min and 10 ◦C/min down.
Figures 57 and 58 show EDS data of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made at position 3,
and it was found that at position 3 there was no antimony left, meaning that the increased
antimony content in the precursors increased the sublimation rate of the antimony sulﬁde.
As seen in the phase diagram for the Sb-Y system a metal ﬁlm with a composition of
more then 50 % antimony will result in a two phase ﬁlm, namely an YSb phase and pure
antimony phase.
An explanation for the increased loss could be, that the antimony phase will form Sb2S3
where an YSb phase will react and form a more stable oxysulﬁde phase, and because the
vapor pressure of Sb2S3/Sb2S3 is higher than the Sb2S3 over the mixed oxysulﬁde phase,
excess antimony could therefore promote the sublimation of Sb2S3.
51
==PAGE:53==
Figure 57: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made at position 3 in experiment
5
Figure 58: Elemental analysis of 5 3
5.6
Experiment with Y2S3 precursor
To form YSbS3, it is necessary to start with a much more pure precursor or a higher
temperature. This is needed to increase the driving force from the equilibrium reaction
between the ﬁlm and the gas phase.
The earlier experiments show that it is hard to decrease the sublimation rate of antimony
by decreasing the surface area and adding antimony to compensate is not an option. In
52
==PAGE:54==
an attempt to decrease the oxygen in the precursor a stacked precursor was used with a
bottom layer of Y2S3 and a top layer of antimony made at 3 mtorr and 150 ◦C to minimize
the porosity in the ﬁlm.
In experiment 6, the layered precursor was placed at position 1 and heated with a ramp
of 20 ◦C/min up and down. First it was heated to 500 C in 120 minutes, but as there
were no visual reaction between the ﬁlms, the temperature was then increased to 550 ◦C.
After 30 min was there still no visual reaction at 550 ◦C, and after 90 min at 550 ◦C it
was no longer possible to see a gray top layer. Figure 59 and 61 show the microstructure
of two areas of this ﬁlm, and in only one small area in Figures 59 and 60 is it possible to
see a phase with 8 % antimony. In the rest of the ﬁlm represented by Figures 61 to 63
a pure Y2S3 phase is present, which means that the phases did not react. This could be
because of the high stability of the Y2S3 ﬁlm, which was made at 950 ◦C for 10 hours, as
this is a high enough temperature for a high diﬀusion, the ﬁlm will therefore go to the
lowest possible energy resulting in a very stable ﬁlm.
Figure 59: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made in experiment 6
53
==PAGE:55==
Figure 60: Elemental analysis of 6
Figure 61: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made in experiment 6
54
==PAGE:56==
Figure 62: Elemental analysis of 6
Figure 63: Elemental analysis of 6
The phase YSbS3 is predicted to be more stable than Y2S3 at 0 K, it is unknown how
stable the phase is at 550 ◦C or if there is one or more stable phases at this temperature,
when entropy is taken into account. If it is assumed that YSbS3 is the most stable at
any temperatures, more time is needed at higher temperatures to increase the diﬀusion
of antimony in to the Y2S3, and a higher temperature would increase the nucleation rate
of the YSbS3 phase.
However by increasing the temperature the Sb2S3 will melt and result in an increase in
evaporation rate. To try to reduce the evaporation a technique, often used in ceramic
55
==PAGE:57==
manufacturing, where a sacriﬁcial powder of the volatile material is placed in the furnace,
is used to increase the partial pressure of the volatile material in the gas phase.
In Experiment 7, in attempt to lower the evaporation, a glass boat ﬁled with Sb2S3 powder
was placed at position 1, and the samples were placed at position 3, 2, -2 and -3, and
heated to 550 ◦C.
Figures 64 to 67 show that the powder had no eﬀect and only the base material with no
antimony in it remained.
550C with powder
Figure 64: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made at position 2 in experiment
7
Figure 65: Elemental analysis of 7 2
56
==PAGE:58==
Figure 66: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made at position -2 in experiment
7
Figure 67: Elemental analysis of 7 -2
Experiment 8 was made, similar to experiment 7, with the only exception being that it
was heated to 600 ◦C. Figures 68 to 72 shows the microstructure and EDS data for the
samples placed at position -2 and -3. The experiment showed an increase in the antimony
for the ﬁlm at position -2, by a very small amount, and the ﬁlm placed at position -3 had
been coated in Sb2S3. The EDS data shows that a much higher amount of antimony had
diﬀused into the Y2S3 layer, but 3.7 % is still a very small amount.
57
==PAGE:59==
The low amount of antimony in the the Y2S3 phase just next to condensed Sb2S3 shows,
that the area where the temperature and partial pressure of Sb2S3 is just right, is very
small. With a two zone tube furnace it would be possible to try to tune the evaporation
temperature and the temperature of the ﬁlm in order to reduce the evaporation of Sb2S3,
but in the furnace used in this project it was not possible. DTU Surfcat does not own a
two zone tube furnace, so an attempt to combine two furnaces was made, but the energy
loss between the two furnaces made a thermal gradient in the furnace where the powder
was heated, and the antimony condensed before entering the second furnace.
Figure 68: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made at position -2 in experiment
8
Figure 69: Elemental analysis of 8 -2
58
==PAGE:60==
Figure 70: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made at position -3 in experiment
8
Figure 71: Elemental analysis of 8 -3
59
==PAGE:61==
Figure 72: elemental analysis of 8 -3
To see if it was possible to react the ﬁlm with Sb2S3 in the gas phase, experiments 9, 10
and, 11 were made with a pure Y2S3 precursor, in experiments 9 one ﬁlm was heated to
750 ◦C in 30 min, and experiments 10 and 11 were heated to 850 ◦C, experiment 10 for
30 min and experiment 11 for 120 min. All samples were placed at position -2 because
the condensation point was close to position -3. It was found that around 1 % to 2 % is
the maximum content of antimony in these ﬁlms. The results can be seen in Table 6.
Table 6: EDS data for experiment 6 to 11
T
Hold
S
O
Sb
Y
Y/(Y+Sb)
Sb/(Y+Sb)
S/(O+S)
O/(O+S)
[◦C]
[min]
[at %]
[at %]
[at %]
[at %]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
550
30
55
4
0
42
100
0
94
6
600
30
53
4
1
42
98
2
92
8
750
30
48
7
2
43
96
4
87
13
850
30
51
6
1
41
97
3
89
11
850
120
51
6
1
41
97
3
89
11
To ﬁnd out if the antimony was defusing into the ﬁlm or only sitting at the surface a
composition, a depth proﬁle was made with XPS on sample 10 -2, see Figure 73. It is
seen that the antimony is dispersed through the thickness of the ﬁlm and the average
ratio of antimony to yttrium was 1.6 at% to 48 at%.
To correlate the edging time to a depth, a calibration experiment is needed where the
thickness of a ﬁlm on a substrate is known, then the time to etch through the ﬁlm, can
then be used to correlate time to depth. There were, however, not made any calibration
experiment and the time can therefore not be correlated to the depth.
60
==PAGE:62==
An interesting thing is that the oxygen content increases with the depth, and the sulfur
content decreases, but the yttrium and antimony stays the same. This means that the
oxygen signal is not coming from the substrate, and it shows how stable the oxysulﬁdes
are after 10 hours at 950 ◦C and 30 min at 850 ◦C, as it is only at the surface layer that
all the oxygen has been substituted with sulfur. The ﬁrst point on Figure 73 shows high
levels of antimony, sulfur, and oxygen, this is because Sb2S3 from annealing and oxygen
from the air has been absorbed on the surface.
Figure 73: XPS analysis of 10 -2
5.7
High temperature experiments with powder
To see if the precursor has an eﬀect on the antimony level, experiments with Sb2S3 powder
was made. A new optimized precursor was made at 3 mtorr and at 150 ◦C, resulting in
a much more dense ﬁlm, and a thin passivating top layer, to reduce the oxygen level.
Experiment 12 had a O1 precursor and experiment 13 a M5 precursor placed at position
2 and -2, and heated to 600 C◦for 30 min. It can be seen in Figures 74 to 77 that the ﬁlm
made from the O1 precursor placed at position -2 has a much higher level of antimony
compared with position 2, but the level is still too low.
Figures 78 to 80 shows that the ﬁlm made from the M5 at position -2 resulted in a ﬁlm
with two phases one with a small amount of antimony and one with a 1:2 ratio of Sb:Y.
The antimony content is still too low and the oxygen level is too high.
61
==PAGE:63==
Figure 74: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made at position 2 in experiment
12
Figure 75: Elemental analysis of 12 2
62
==PAGE:64==
Figure 76: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made at position -2 in experiment
12
Figure 77: Elemental analysis of 12 -2
63
==PAGE:65==
Figure 78: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made at position -2 in experiment
13
Figure 79: Elemental analysis of 13 -2
64
==PAGE:66==
Figure 80: Elemental analysis of 13 -2
To see if it made a diﬀerence starting with metal precursor and not a pure Y2S3 ﬁlm,
experiment 14 was made at 850 ◦C, it can be seen in Figures 81 and 82 that it result in
an Y2S3 ﬁlm with 1 % antimony, which is the same result as experiment 11.
Figure 81: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made at position -2 in experiment
14
65
==PAGE:67==
Figure 82: Elemental analysis of 14 -2
Experiments made at 950 ◦C with the powder in the furnace resulted in a clear piece of
quartz, see Figures 83 and 83. These show the EDS data for experiment 15 were a ﬁlm
was made at 900 ◦C and it can be seen that the ﬁlm is so thin, that the quartz substrate
can be seen through the ﬁlm. This is probably caused by a lowering of the melting point
because of the impurities of antimony in the Y2S3, resulting in a higher vapor pressure
and an increase in sublimation of the Y2S3 ﬁlm.
Figure 83: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made at position -2 in experiment
15
66
==PAGE:68==
Figure 84: Elemental analysis of 15 -2
5.8
Reacting excess Sb2S3 with Y2S3 at high temperatures
It was found that when removing Sb2S3 from samples coated with Sb2S3 in experiments
with powder at high temperatures, either the Y2S3 layer was thinner or completely gone,
and in some cases a thin layer of Y2SO2 remained, suggesting that the Y2S3 had dissolved
into the Sb2S3 layer. Therefore two ﬁlms from earlier experiments which was coated in
Sb2S3, and was used in experiment 1,6 where the Sb2S3 was sublimated of at 550 ◦C.
The ﬁrst ﬁlm was made from a M5 precursor and annealed with powder at position -4
for 30 minutes at 950 ◦C, with a 20 ◦C/min up and down ramp. The second was also
made from a M5 precursor, but it was placed at position -3 for 30 min at 850 ◦C, with
20 ◦C/min up and down ramp. The plated samples were then heated to 450 ◦C for 20
minutes and then to 550 ◦C for 90 minutes with a ramp of 20 ◦C/min up and down.
Figures 85 to 88 show that the ﬁrst sample annealed at 950 ◦C. The base material is
Y2SO2, probably due to the thermal gradient being so large in the furnace that Y2S3 is
not formed at position -4, even when the furnace is set to 950 ◦C. On top of the base
material a very porous structure can be seen all over the surface.
EDS shows that the composition is low in oxygen and has a 3:1 ratio of Y:Sb. This is the
same ratio seen in experiment 5, and as seen in Figures 89 to 92, the ﬁlm made at 850 ◦C
has a phase with the same composition as found in experiment 5.
During the experiment a small part of the 950 ◦C ﬁlm was covered by the backside of the
850 ◦C ﬁlm, this resulted in lower sublimation rate for the Sb2S3 crystals, and it can be
seen in Figure 85 that the crystal goes from a phase primary containing antimony and
some yttrium to the 3:1 Y:Sb phase. This suggests that this is the most stable phase in the
system Y2S3-Sb2S3 at 550 ◦C, a lower temperature is needed, but at lower temperatures
the sublimation rate is much lower and it would take a very long time to evaporate of the
excess Sb2S3.
67
==PAGE:69==
Figures 89 to 92 shows that at 850 ◦C the base material is Y2S3 with and without a small
amount of oxygen, and there are porous structures on the surface with a 3:1 ratio of Y:Sb.
Even if it was possible to get the right composition with this technique, it would result
in a very porous phase with bad optical properties.
Figure 85: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made from precursor made at 950
◦C in experiment 16
Figure 86: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made from precursor made at 950
◦C in experiment 16
68
==PAGE:70==
Figure 87: Elemental analysis of 16 950
Figure 88: Elemental analysis of 16 950
69
==PAGE:71==
Figure 89: SE picture of the microstructure of the ﬁlm made from precursor made at 850
◦C in experiment 16
Figure 90: Elemental analysis of 16 850
70
==PAGE:72==
Figure 91: Elemental analysis of 16 850
Figure 92: Elemental analysis of 16 850
71
==PAGE:73==
6
Discussion
The experiments shows that at temperatures lower than 850 ◦C it is only possible to form
oxysulﬁdes, but at temperatures higher then 550 ◦C all the antimony has vaporized. To
form YSbS3 it is necessary to start from a co-spattered precursor with a Y:Sb ratio of
1:1, and a very low content of oxygen. As shown in experiment 2 and 3 the optimal
annealing temperature is 450 ◦C. At this temperature the sublimation rate of antimony is
very low and the ﬁlm reacts with H2S, if it is possible to start from a very pure metallic
precursor it is maybe possible to make the material. With the equipment in the DTU
Surfcat department it is not possible to make a a pure enough ﬁlm to make the YSbS3 at
450 ◦C.
To make YSbS3 at 850 ◦C it is necessary to control the vaporization of Sb2S3, which is
very diﬃcult. It was found that if excess antimony is added to the ﬁlm, the vaporization
at low temperatures is promoted. It has also been discovered that reducing the surface
area with TiO2, did not make a diﬀerent the sublimation rate, and sacriﬁcial powder
made a small diﬀerence but much higher temperature control is needed for this to work.
The method of using sacriﬁcial powder can only be done in a two zone furnace, and is
extremely hard to calibrate.
Thin ﬁlms made at low temperatures i.e.
T < 550 ◦C starting from oxide or metal
precursors resulted in a oxysulﬁde ﬁlm because of too much oxygen in the ﬁlm. It is
believed that there are two main oxygen sources, one is when the samples are exposed
to air, as the samples normally are stored in an argon atmosphere, but as it is moved
from the PVD to the argon container and before an experiment, the sample is exposed
to air. It is believed that this amount can be minimized by a thin passivating layer of
crystalline antimony on top of the co-sputtered ﬁlm. The second source is the target used,
the sputter chamber has a lot of users and is often opened to switch targets, and every
time the chamber is open the yttrium target is exposed to oxygen, this results in a lot of
oxygen diﬀusing into the target and ending op in the ﬁlm. A long presputter time will
make sure that the oxide layer on the surface of the target is removed, but if the oxygen
is in the bulk of the target, it is impossible to remove it.
The stacked precursor where antimony is sputtered on top of Y2S3 resulted in only a
limited reaction. It is much easier to form a mixed phase when starting from a mixed
metal phase full of defects, than to react a highly crystalline Y2S3 phase with a crystalline
Sb2S3 phase stacked on top, even though the surface area is very large.
For this kind of project it would be an idea to start out by making a powder sample of the
material. It would then be possible to ﬁnd out, if it is even possible to make the material,
and if it is, it would be possible to make thermal analysis on the powder to determine the
melting point and at what temperatures there are phase transition. A XRD pattern could
also be made to determine what phase is stable at 25 ◦C to see if it is even interesting to
try to make a thin ﬁlm out of the material. It would save a lot of time when trying to
make the thin ﬁlm.
The big advantage in a powder production is that by mixing Y2S3 and Sb2S3, all the
components already are mixed from the beginning. This means that the powder can be
synthesized in a closed volume, in a furnace, where the atmosphere can be controlled like
the tube furnace, which limits the evaporation of Sb2S3 to a very low amount. Furthermore
72
==PAGE:74==
because of the volume of the powder compared with a thin ﬁlm any evaporation of Sb2S3
from the surface and oxygen impurities would have a reduced eﬀect on the bulk.
The most interesting material found was the 2 O3 material, it is worth investigating this
material, to see how well this it preforms and if a optimization of the composition can
improve the properties.
One of the big problems with any material containing yttrium is that it will become rare
and therefore expensive in the future. Because of the higher cost it will make it hard to
mass produce this material in the future. However, it would be very easy to recover the
yttrium from the ﬁlm, as it can be done simply by heating it, the antimony will vaporize
and only Y2SO2 is left, which then can be recovered and used in other materials or to
new photo electrolysis devices.
73
==PAGE:75==
7
Conclusion
It was found that residual oxygen in the precursors caused the formation of a oxysulﬁde
phase at temperatures lower the 850 ◦C, at temperatures over 450 ◦C the vapor pressure
for Sb2S3 is so high that it vaporizes and leaves the ﬁlm, resulting in a low antimony level,
resulting in the formation of the material Y2SO2.
Annealing the precursors between 300 ◦C and 450 ◦C for 2 to 10 hours, results in formation
of phases with a band gap between 1.60 eV to 2.0 eV, two of the phases made had never
been made before, one had a photo luminescence response at a photon energy of 1.82
eV with a band gap of 1.82 eV, making it a material that can be used in a solar water
splitting device.
Attempts to reduce the loss of antimony at higher temperatures were made, ﬁrst by
coating the metal ﬁlm with a layer of TiO2, which did not reduce the sublimation. Another
attempt was to use sacriﬁcial Sb2S3 powder which was placed up stream from the samples
to saturate the gas phase and thereby reduce the loss in the ﬁlm. This did not work, and
resulted in an antimony doped Y2S3 ﬁlm. Attempts to reduce the antimony loss did not
work and therefore a precursor was made with excess antimony, when heated this resulted
in an increase in the loss of antimony.
In an attempt to reduce the oxygen in the precursor, a new co-spotted ﬁlm with a top
layer of 50 nm antimony, was made at 150 ◦C at 3 mtorr made, which resulted in less
oxygen but still enough to form primary oxysulﬁde phases at low temperatures.
Experiments were Sb2S3 was deposited onto of Y2S3 layer, either by sputtering of antimony
in the sputter chamber or by condensing Sb2S3 on top at elevated temperatures, resulted
in at best a phase with a Y:Sb ratio of 3:1, when heated to 550 ◦C in H2S gas, and for
the sample where antimony was sputtered on top there were only a small part of the ﬁlm
where antimony could be found.
The main conclusion is that it is only possible to make YSbS3, by annealing a precursor
with little to no oxygen in a H2S gas at 450 ◦C.
74
==PAGE:76==
References
[1] Richardson Katherine et al., ‘Denmark’s Road Map for Fossil Fuel Independence’, The
Solutions Journal, vol. 2, no. 4, 2011, p. 45-55
[2] Kuhar Korina et al. , Sulﬁde Perovskites for Solar Energy Conversion Applications:
A Computational Screening Approach, unpublish, 2017
[3] Levy Mark, 2005, ’Crystal Structure and Defect Properties in Ceramic Materials’,
Doctor of Philosophy and the Diploma of Imperial College, University of London
department of Materials, London England.
[4] Serafettin
Demicet
al.
(2017).
Recent
Progresses
in
Perovskite
Solar
Cells,
Nanostructured Solar Cells, Dr. Narottam Das (Ed.), InTech, Available from:
https://www.intechopen.com/books/nanostructured-solar-cells/recent-progresses-in-
perovskite-solar-cells
[5] Walter Michael G. et al., ‘Solar Water Splitting Cells’, Chemical Reviews, vol. 110,
no. 11, 2010, p. 6446–6473
[6] Fox, M. Optical Properties of Solids; Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2010.
[7] Nakita K. Noel et al.,‘Enhanced Photoluminescence and Solar Cell Performance via
Lewis Base Passivation of Organic Inorganic Lead Halide Perovskites’, ACS Nano, vol.
8, no. 10, 2014, p. 9815–9821
[8] Wikipedia, Yttrium, [ONLINE] Available at: https://da.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yttrium,
[Accessed 27 December 2017]
[9] Barry T. Kilbourn , ‘Metallurgical Applications of Yttrium and the Lanthanides ’,’The
Journal of The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society’, vol. 40, no. 5, 1988, p. 22–25
[10] Zhang Kuangyuan et al., ‘An economics strategy for criticality – Application to rare
earth element Yttrium in new lighting technology and its sustainable availability’,
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 77, 2017, p. 899–915
[11] Chris Lo , mining-technology, 2017, Mined into extinction:
is the world run-
ning out of critical minerals?
[ONLINE] Available at:
http://www.mining-
technology.com/features/featuremined-into-extinction-is-the-world-running-out-of-
critical-minerals-5776166/, [Accessed 22 December 2017]
[12] Goodenough Kathryn M. et al., ‘The Rare Earth Elements: Demand, Global Re-
sources, and Challenges for Resourcing Future Generations’, Natural Resources Re-
search, 2017, p. 1–16
[13] Panneﬂek Eric , PGM Capital, 2013, Why Investing In Rare Earth Elements?,
[ONLINE] Available at:
http://www.pgmcapital.com/why-investing-in-rare-earth-
elements/, [Accessed 22 December 2017]
[14] Wikipedia, Antimony, [ONLINE] Available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antimony,
[Accessed 27 December 2017]
75
==PAGE:77==
[15] Corby G. Anderson , ‘The metallurgy of antimony’,Chemie der Erde, vol. 72, no. 4,
2012, p. 3–8
[16] Kurt J. Lesker Company, Antimony (Sb) Sputtering Targets, [ONLINE] Available at:
http://www.lesker.com/newweb/deposition materials/depositionmaterials sputtertargets 1.cfm?pgi
[Accessed 27 December 2017]
[17] V.Piacente et al., ‘Study of the vaporization behaviour of Sb2S3 and Sb2Te3 from
their vapour pressure measurements’,Journal of Alloys and Compounds, vol. 178, no.
1-2, 1992, p. 101–105
[18] Springer materials, YSbO3 (Y3Sb5O12) Crystal Structure [ONLINE] Available
at:
http://materials.springer.com/isp/crystallographic/docs/sd 0545554, [Accessed
22 December 2017]
[19] L.G.Zhang et al., ‘Thermodynamic description of the Al–Sb–Y system’,Journal of
Alloys and Compounds, vol. 475, no. 1-2, 2009, p. 233–237
[20] Møller, P. Nielsen, L., 2013. Advanced surface technology. 1st ed. Denmark: NASF.
[21] Gaskell, D. Laughlin, D., 2008. Introduction to the Thermodynamics of Materials.
5st ed. NY. USA: Taylor & Francis group.
[22] HSC Chemistry, vision 5.1, Chemistry software, Houston USA.
[23] Jonathan Atteberry,
How stuﬀworks,
How Scanning Electron Microscopes
Work, [ONLINE] Available at: https://science.howstuﬀworks.com/scanning-electron-
microscope2.htm, [Accessed 22 December 2017]
[24] Y. Leng, Materials Characterization: Introduction to Microscopic and Spectroscopic
Methods, John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
[25] Casino, v2.41, Universit´e de Sherbrooke, Qu´ebec CA.
[26] Takashi IDA, 1998, Instrumental function of a Bragg-Brentano diﬀractometer, [ON-
LINE] Available at: http://www.crl.nitech.ac.jp/ ida/research/introduction/instr/,
[Accessed 22 December 2017]
[27] Keith
Gibbs,
school
physics,
2013,
X-rays,
[ON-
LINE]
Available
at:
http://www.schoolphysics.co.uk/age16-
19/Medical%20physics/text/X rays/index.html, [Accessed 22 December 2017]
[28] Karen Pantleon , “ Lecture 9 : X-ray diﬀraction analysis ” slide show, 41658 Methods
for experimental materials characterization, Lyngby, DTU, delivered 05/04 2016
[29] Wolfgang Pantleon , “ Lecture 2 : Diﬀraction ” slide show, 41658 Methods for ex-
perimental materials characterization, Lyngby, DTU, delivered 02/02 2016
[30] Kimmo Lahtonen, Tampere University of Technology, 2012, Electron spectroscopy
(XPS, AES, UPS), [ONLINE] Available at: http://www.tut.ﬁ/en/research/research-
ﬁelds/photonics/surface-science/electron-spectroscopy/index.htm, [Accessed 22 De-
cember 2017]
76
==PAGE:78==
[31] San Diego Miramar College, UV Visible Absorption Spectroscopy, [ONLINE] Avail-
able at: http://faculty.sdmiramar.edu/fgarces/labmatters/instruments/uv vis/cary50.htm,
[Accessed 22 December 2017]
[32] Nadia Chahmat et al., ‘Eﬀect of Sn Doping on the Properties of ZnO Thin Films
Prepared by Spray Pyrolysis’,Journal of Modern Physics, vol. 3, no. 11, 2012, p. 1781-
1785
77
==PAGE:79==
8
Appendix
Figure 93: Experiment 1 sample 5 to 2
78
==PAGE:80==
Figure 94: Experiment 2 samples
Figure 95: Experiment 3 sample
79
