==PAGE:1==
Antibiotic susceptibility testing of
undeﬁned starter cultures by pheno-
and genotypic methods
by
Cecilie Nyholm Andersen (s123976)
Supervisor:
Professor Lone Gram
Gitte Maegaard Knudsen, Chr. Hansen A/S
Yvonne Agersø, Chr. Hansen A/S
Ph.d. Patrick Munk
Master thesis fall semester 2017
The technical university of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The greatest threat to the application of antibiotic is the emergence and spread of antibiotic
resistance to pathogenic bacteria. The spread of antibiotic resistance through horizontal gene
transfer has been investigated in diﬀerent environments and especially in the gut microbiota.
Here it has been proven that horizontal gene transfer not only occur among the anaerobic gut
commensals, but also the facultative anaerobic bacteria in particular lactic acid bacteria. These
bacteria are in the industry used to produce fermented dairy products, and the food chain is
therefore being considered as a route for antibiotic resistance gene transmission.
The dairy
starter cultures applied today in the food industry are often undeﬁned starter cultures, which
means the strain composition is not thoroughly known.
However the European food safety
agency (EFSA) and the US food and drug administration FDA allow the application of these
cultures without pre-market authorisation, due to their long history of safe application. A rea-
son for no premarket authorisation of these cultures is that no standardized method testing for
antibiotic susceptibility of starter cultures exists.
Therefore the aim of this study was to develop procedures to test for antibiotic susceptibil-
ity of undeﬁned starter cultures. A phenotypic method for minimum inhibitory concentration
(MIC) and a genotypic investigation by metagenomic sequencing were applied. The phenotypic
MIC method was an agar-based method applying antibiotic break-point concentrations to test
four of Chr. Hansens undeﬁned starter cultures. This method was proved to be able to test
these cultures and revealed no antibiotic resistance. One of the starter cultures was further
investigated by metagenomic sequencing, and through read-mapping to a antibiotic resistance
gene database no antibiotic resistance genes were identiﬁed. However through spiking with an
antibiotic resistant strain in low percentage and inoculation with the given antibiotic, it was
revealed that with the right conditions the an antibiotic resistant strain was able to grow up to
a concentration sequence detectable.
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis is part of ﬁnalizing the master programs in Biotechnology at the Technical
University of Denmark. The project was performed in collaboration between the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark and Chr. Hansen A/S. The workload for the project was 35 ECTS credits.
All the experimental work was performed at Chr. Hansen A/S in Hørsholm, Denmark.
I have received a lot of help during this project and I would like to acknowledge all the peo-
ple how have helped and inspired me. First of all I would like to mention my four supervisors:
From Chr. Hansen: Gitte Maegaard Knudsen and Yvonne Agersø (Department of Identiﬁcation
- Analysis). I thank you for all the guidance, inspirational thoughts, support and constructive
feedback throughout throughout the project. From the Technical University of Denmark: Pro-
fessor Lone Gram (department; DTU Biotechnology and biomedicine) and Ph.d. Patrick Munk
(department; DTU food). I thank you both for your guidance, constructive feedback and help
through the project.
All the technicians in the Department of Identiﬁcation have been very helpful throughout all the
experiments. A special thanks should be provided to Anne Minor, Helle Andersen and Karin
Schlichter for their help in getting started in the laboratories and guidance in both the pheno-
typic and genotypic studies. The Research Scientists Martin Abel-Kistrup and Jacob Bælum in
the Department of Identiﬁcation for their help with metagenomic sequencing, I really appreci-
ated all your help, encouragement and support during the long process of trouble shooting.
Thank you all!
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
0.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
0.1.1
Antibiotic resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
0.1.2
The environments antibiotic resistome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
0.1.3
Chr. Hansen’s starter cultures and their application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
0.1.4
Deﬁned and undeﬁned starter culture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
0.1.5
The common bacteria of cultures in dairy industry and their function
. . . . . . .
12
0.1.6
The application of starter cultures in dairy production process
. . . . . . . . . . .
15
0.1.7
Antibiotic resistance in starter cultures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
0.1.8
Phenotypic and genotypic characterization of antibiotic resistance
. . . . . . . . .
18
0.1.9
The purpose of the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
0.2
Methods and materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
0.2.1
Bulk cultures, bacterial strains and media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
0.2.2
Phenotypic antibiotic susceptibility characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
0.2.3
Genotypic antibiotic resistome characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
0.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
0.3.1
Phenotypic antibiotic susceptibility characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
0.3.2
MIC method for mixed undeﬁned cultures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
0.3.3
The break-point agar based MIC method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
0.3.4
Genotypic characterization of mixed starter cultures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
0.3.5
The artiﬁcial dataset - assembly and binning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
0.3.6
Metagenomic sequencing of the starter culture C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
0.3.7
The analysis of the metagenomic sequencing of the starter culture C . . . . . . . .
43
0.4
Discussion and future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
0.4.1
Phenotypic characterization of antibiotic susceptibility starter cultures . . . . . . .
46
0.4.2
Genotypic characterization of antibiotic resistance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
0.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
0.6
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
0.6.1
Phenotypic studies - appendix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
0.6.2
MIC method for mixed undeﬁned starter cultures appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
0.6.3
Metagenomic sequncing and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
3
==PAGE:5==
0.1
Introduction
Antibiotics are life-saving medications and are one of the most important medical discoveries.
However we are now faced with the problem of antibiotic resistant bacteria, which threatens the
future of treatment of infectious diseases. These antibiotic resistance bacteria often of clinical
relevance have evolved or acquired resistance to many of the front-line therapeutics, and some
microbes have even developed resistance to multiple antibiotics. This compromise the ability to
treat infectious diseases due to the remaining options of treatments are ﬁrst of all less eﬀective,
more toxic and more expensive (Van Hoek et al. (2011)). At this point it has been estimated
that more than 2 million people in the United States become infected with antibiotic resistant
bacteria every year, and at least 23,000 die as a result of it (Centers for disease control and
prevention (2018)).
To ﬁght this development many countries, national surveillance and research programs have
been initiated to monitor resistance in bacteria isolated from humans and food animals. Since
it is possible that antibiotic resistance genes can be transferred between bacteria of diverse
origin, it is important to monitor both non-pathogenic as well as pathogenic bacteria. Thus
non-pathogenic bacteria may be a source for antibiotic resistance genes that potentially can
spread to pathogens (Katla et al. (2001)).
Lactic acid bacteria (LABs) such as Lactococcus lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteriodes have pro-
biotic properties and have a long history of safe use as starter culture bacteria for diﬀerent dairy
products (Stiles and Holzapfel (1997)). Two types of dairy starter cultures are applied in the
food industry commercial deﬁned starter cultures and undeﬁned starter cultures. The commer-
cially produced starter cultures consist of one or two strains, however these starter cultures are
often not preferred due to failure of development of speciﬁc ﬂavour and texture to the product.
Therefore many dairy production companies still prefer the undeﬁned starter cultures, which are
starter cultures isolated from small dairy production farms during the industrialization. These
cultures have a special complexity which gives the desired ﬂavour and texture to the product.
These starter cultures are intentionally grown into high numbers, and have been considered to
may act as a reservoir of antibiotic resistance genes which through human consumption spread
antibiotic resistance genes to the human microbiota (Salminen et al. (1998)).
Today the safety guidelines for dealing with food cultures have been given by European Food
Safety Agency (EFSA) and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The EFSA has de-
veloped a Qualiﬁed Presumption of Safety (QPS) list, which is a risk assessment tool that is
4
==PAGE:6==
used by EFSA panels when evaluating products with microorganisms that require a premarket
authorisation. This QPS-list was developed in 2007 and by 2017 included 88 species that has
been qualiﬁed by the lack of presence of virulende factors, toxic metabolites and transmissible
antibiotic resistance. The species on the QPS-list does therefore not need a premarket authori-
sation to be applied in the food industry. However when it comes ot food cultures a long history
of safe use in food immediately classiﬁes them as traditional food ingredients and are therefore
legally permitted for use in food products within EU without pre-market authorisation. The
EFSA panels therefore do not evaluate food cultures, although the QPS-list can be consulted
when safety evaluation of food cultures are made (Ricci et al. (2017)). The USA has no speciﬁc
regulation for food cultures either, but has a list like the QPS called GRAS that are species and
strains that are generally recognized as safe and are notiﬁed to the FDA (Mattia and Merker
(2008)).
0.1.1
Antibiotic resistance
In August 1928 Alexander Flemming discovered penicillin in contaminated petri dishes (Fleming
(1929)). Since then the antibiotics have saved millions of lives for more than 60 years. The
decade of the 1960’s was the golden age of antibiotic discovery and development, which lead to
be one of the most important medical interventions with regard to reducing human morbidity
and mortality. However our intensive use of antibiotics has now lead to a dramatically increase
in the frequency of antibiotic resistance among human pathogen strains. One of the ﬁrst reports
of antibiotic resistance was the ﬁnding of a cell-free extract from a coliform bacterium that
was unaﬀected by penicillin because of its ability to inactivate penicillin (Abraham and Chain
(1940)).
The world’s ﬁrst superbug occurred in 1953 the penicillin resistant Staphylococcus
aureus phages type 80/81, which caused a pandemic. The threat of this superbug ended when
the antibiotic methicillin was released (Chambers and Deleo (2010)). At this point there have
even been discovered multi-drug resistant strains, and new resistant strains emerge with a high
rate (Sebaihia et al. (2006)).
0.1.1.1
Antibiotic class and mechanisms
The numerous antibiotics developed have been categorized into several antibiotic classes based
on their molecular structures, mode of action and spectrum of activity. The common classes of
antibiotics based on their chemical and molecular structures include; Beta-lactams, macrolides,
tetracyclines, quinolones, aminoglycosides, sulphonamides, glycopeptides and oxazolidinones
(Adzitey (2015)). The mode of action is dependent on antibiotic class and the major mode of
5
==PAGE:7==
actions includes the following; Inhibition of cell wall synthesis, breakdown of cell wall membrane
structure or function, inhibition of the structure and function of nucleic acids, inhibition of
protein synthesis and blockage of key metabolic pathways (Wright (2010b)) illustrated in Figure
1. However the antibiotics mode of action can be obstructed, due to diﬀerent antibiotic resistance
mechanisms.
0.1.1.2
Antibiotic resistance and mechanisms
Although the term antibiotic resistance is a term, which has been used in the context of the rapid
increase over the last years, it is a mechanism which is ancient. Several antibiotic resistance genes
have been detected through sequencing of ancient environmental DNA preserved permafrost sed-
iments (Dcosta et al. (2011)). Thereby indicating that the occurrence of antibiotic resistance
genes started before antibiotic human use. Several antibiotic resistance mechanisms exist which
are illustrated in Figure 1. One resistance mechanism involves the inactivation of the antibiotic
through enzymatic modiﬁcation or degradation of the antibiotic compound. This example of
antibiotic resistance mechanism is referred to the known mechanisms of β-lactamases against
the β-lactam antibiotics including penicillins (Neu (1969)). Another strategy of antibiotic re-
sistance is protection, alteration, or overexpression of the antibiotic target. This mechanism
is represented in vancomycin resistant Enterococcus which enzymatically modify vancomycin’s
target peptidoglycan in the cell wall thereby decreasing the vancomycin binding aﬃnity (Cour-
valin (2006)). The last two resistance mechanisms are set to keep the antibiotic out of bacterial
cell. This can either be done through eﬄux pumps or an alteration in the cell membrane per-
meability. The eﬄux pumps exports the antibiotic out of the cell, which has been seen with
tetracycline eﬄux pumps (Roberts (1996)). On the contrary the alteration of the cell membranes
permeability actually inhibits the antibiotics from entering the cell (Poulou et al. (2013)).
6
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1: Common mechanisms of antibiotic action and antibiotic resistance - The current antibi-
otics generally encounter the bacterial ribosome, cell wall synthesis, single-carbon metabolic pathways and DNA
maintenance. The common mechanisms for antibiotic resistance are; enzymatic degradation or modiﬁcation of
the antibiotic, alteration of the antibiotic target, active eﬄux of the antibiotic and at last a reduced permeability
(Crofts et al. (2017))
0.1.1.3
Emergence and spread of antibiotic resistance genes
The greatest threat to the application of antibiotics is the emergence and spread of antibiotic
resistance to pathogenic bacteria. Two types of antibiotic resistance exists intrinsic and acquired
antibiotic resistance. Bacterial species or genera can be intrinsic resistant to a given antibiotic,
and this resistance is an inherent characteristic of the organism. In contrast acquired resis-
tance is only present in some strains within a species, which usually is susceptible to the given
antibiotic. Acquired resistance can arise from mutations in the bacterial genome or through
acquisition of additional genes such as plasmids and transposons (Mathur and Singh (2005)).
Antibiotic resistance can be spread vertically and horizontally. Vertically transferred antibiotic
resistance is through cell division, whereas horizontal gene transfer (HGT) are genes transferred
between diﬀerent individual cells. HGT can occur through several mechanisms; transformation,
cell-to-cell conjugation or transduction (illustrated in Figure 2). Transformation is the uptake of
naked DNA from the environment. Cell-to-cell conjugation is direct cell-to-cell contact through
conjugation pili, where plasmids can be transferred. Transduction is the transfer of bacterial
DNA through bacteriophages, which have accidentally incorporated in the viral particle and is
thereby transferred to the next bacterial cell the bacteriophage infects. The antibiotic resistance
mechanisms associated with HGT is drug modiﬁcation through diﬀerent enzymes, target protec-
7
==PAGE:9==
tion, bypass protection, replacement of susceptible drug targets, and eﬄux pumps (Andersson
and Hughes (2010)).A Fourth option of antibiotic acquisition is through de novo mutation in the
bacterial genome obstructing the antibiotic’s action. The appearance rate of antibiotic-resistant
bacteria is determined by the combined rates of de novo mutation and HGT (Perry and Wright
(2014)). Research has previously been focused on the antibiotic resistance associated with the
clinical pathogens, but with the studies of HGT it has now become clear that the environment
is a vast source of new and emerging resistance genes, thereby focusing on the global view of re-
sistance (Wright (2010a); Benveniste and Davies (1973)). This increased focus on environments
antibiotic resistance genes has given rise to the term ”antibiotic resistome” which describes the
collection of antibiotic resistance genes in a given environment (D’Costa et al. (2006)).
Figure 2: Mechanisms of resistance acquisition - Resistance genes can be transferred by horizontal gene
transfer through transformation, cell-to-cell conjugation or transduction. A fourth option is de novo mutation
altering the antibiotic target gene and obstructing the antibiotics mode of action (Andersson and Hughes (2010)).
0.1.1.4
The antibiotic resistome
In 2006 the concept ”antibiotic resistome” was developed, to include not only genes that confer
resistance to pathogens but also non-pathogenic species (D’Costa et al. (2006)). This concept di-
vide resistance genes up in phenotypic sensitive resistance genes and phenotypic resistance genes
illustrated in the schematic overview in Figure 3. The phenotypic sensitive resistance genes in-
cludes proto-resistance genes and silent resistance genes, which don’t cause phenotypic resistance
until their expression changes through mobilization or mutation. The diﬀerence between proto-
8
==PAGE:10==
resistance and silent resistance genes, are that silent resistance genes have been identiﬁed based
on their sequence homology to known resistance genes (Koskiniemi et al. (2011); Barlow and Hall
(2002)). Whereas proto-resistance genes are evolutionary precursors to drug-resistance genes,
which are unknown since they are not homolog to known antibiotic resistance genes (Hon et al.
(1997)). Through mobilization by HGT or mutation of either proto- or silent-resistance genes
can become phenotypic resistance genes. The switch from phenotypic sensitive genes to pheno-
typic resistant genes is diﬃcult to predict and prevent, though a better knowledge about the
antibiotic resistome of the environment, human and animal commensals can help to identifying
sources contributing to the antibiotic resistance gene spread (Perry et al. (2014)).
Figure 3: The antibiotic resistome - a schematic overview of phenotypic sensitivity and phenotypic resistance.
Both slient- and proto-resistance genes are phenotypic sensitive, however through mutation or mobilization they
can become phenotypic resistance (Perry et al. (2014)).
0.1.2
The environments antibiotic resistome
In the search for predicting and preventing the emergence and spread of antibiotic resistance,
for many years studies have focused on clinically relevant bacterial species have been conducted.
However with the studies of the environmental antibiotic resistome, it has now become clear
that at least some clinically relevant resistance genes have originated in environmental bacteria
(Wright (2010a)). The fact that the environmental bacteria also carry antibiotic resistance genes,
contribute to the emergence of resistant bacteria through selective pressure imposed by the use
of antibiotic. One of the environments extensively investigated is the human gut microbiota,
which is a densely populated microbial ecosystem oﬀering great opportunities for the HGT
(van Schaik (2015)). Metagenomic studies of the human gut resistome have revealed the gut
9
==PAGE:11==
microbiota as a large reservoir of antibiotic resistance genes (Forslund et al. (2013)). This led
to the question of HGT between the gut bacteria. Studies have revealed that HGT especially
by conjugation and transduction contribute to the spread of antibiotic resistance genes in the
gut microbiota (Nordg˚ard et al. (2012)). This HGT in the gut microbiota has not only been
documented for the strictly anaerobic gut commensals, but also facultative anaerobic bacteria
in particular Lactic Acid Bacteria (LABs), which is important microorganisms used in the
food industry for fermented dairy products (Tuohy et al. (2002); Feld et al. (2008)). Therefore
recently many investigators have speculated that commensal bacteria may act as reservoirs of
antibiotic resistance genes similar to those found in human pathogens. Thereby considering the
food chain as the main route for antibiotic resistant gene transmission to the human population
(Rolain (2013)).
There are several food products that contain high densities of non-pathogenic bacteria as a
result of their natural production process. Fermented milk products use LAB starter cultures,
and these bacteria enter into our intestines in large numbers, where they can interact with the
intestinal microﬂora. These bacteria cultures for dairy products have been applied for several
years, however there is little information regarding the presence of antibiotic resistance genes
and their potential to transfer the resistance genes to pathogens (Katla et al. (2001)).
0.1.3
Chr. Hansen’s starter cultures and their application
In 1874 Christian Ditlev Ammentorp Hansen founded ”Chr. Hansen’s teknisk-kemiske labo-
ratorium” in Copenhagen to produce commercial rennet as well as natural cheese and butter
colorings and malt extract. By 1877 Chr. Hansen’s customers throughout Europe were produc-
ing about 1 million pounds of cheese per day using his rennet. In 1893 Chr. Hansen introduced
the ﬁrst standardized commercial starter cultures for acidiﬁcation of milk for cheese and other
dairy products (Chr. Hansen website History section).
The bacterial strains that were used and still are used for these starter cultures are the LABs
Leuconostoc ssp. and Lactococcus lactis, which have been used for dairy product production for
years. The cultures investigated in this study are anonymised and called; A, B, C and D. These
four cultures are products from Chr. Hansen used for diﬀerent dairy products. These starter
cultures are categorized as undeﬁned starter cultures that consist of either one species or are
mixed of two species, and can consist of 30-100 diﬀerent strains. The starter culture A is mixed
Lactococcus lactis species and the B is mixed Leuconostoc spp. The last two starter cultures C
and D are mixed with Leuconostoc spp. and Lactococcus lactis species (Eric Johanson; employee
10
==PAGE:12==
at Chr. Hansen). These starter cultures are sold to dairy production companies as freeze dried
bulk starter culture isolated from inoculation in milk.
The starter cultures A, B and D are primarily used for cheese production, whereas the culture
C is used for several fermented milk products like butter milk and cream cheese. The starter
culture D was acquired for Chr. Hansen in 1982 from another Danish company, and the starter
culture C was developed through addition of four known strains from the starter culture D (Eric
Johanson; employee at Chr. Hansen).
0.1.4
Deﬁned and undeﬁned starter culture
Even though Chr. Hansen introduced their ﬁrst commercial starter culture for dairy products in
1893, it was ﬁrst in the early twentieth century there was an increase in the industrialization and
commercialization of fermented food products (Gatti et al. (2014)). Fermentation research was at
that point focused on isolation of microbes originating from natural spontaneous fermentations,
and thereby the development of deﬁned cultures consisting of either single or mixed-strains
(Gatti et al. (2014)). These deﬁned starter cultures for dairy products was however not well
received due to several complication for example limitations in carbon and nitrogen source
availability, salt stress, temperature ﬂuctuations, pH changes and phage predation (Stadhouders
(1986); Gatti et al. (2014)). These are all factors that has an inﬂuence on the ﬂavour formation
during dairy fermentation, which contribute to the fact that the undeﬁned starter cultures still
are preferred. The undeﬁned starter cultures are robust and do not have these limitations, which
has been explained to be due to the rich consortium of bacteria. The interaction between the
bacteria in the undeﬁned starter cultures creates dynamics and functionalities that is diﬃcult
to recreate with deﬁned starter cultures (Gatti et al. (2014)).
The bacteria applied for dairy starter cultures are lactic acid bacteria (LAB), which have the
ability to ferment lactose. Depending on the dairy production process diﬀerent undeﬁned starter
cultures are applied. For cheese production starter cultures consisting of starter LABs and non-
starter LABs are often applied. The starter LABs and non-starter LABs are identiﬁed by their
diﬀerent abilities to grow in changing substrate (Gatti et al. (2014)). The starter LABs are
reduced within a few hours by autolysis, which release their enzymes to the food matrix. The
non-starter LABs are able to grow using other energy sources than lactose, and they are more
resistant to the environmental stresses, and thereby becoming the dominant microﬂora (Gatti
et al. (2014)). This is an example of the complexity within undeﬁned starter cultures, and the
reasoning to the diﬃculties to create deﬁned starter cultures with the same functionalities as
11
==PAGE:13==
the undeﬁned starter cultures.
0.1.5
The common bacteria of cultures in dairy industry and their function
In the production of cheeses and fermented milk products the group of LABs are central in the
role of fermentation. These bacteria cause rapid acidiﬁcation of the raw material through the
production of lactic acid. In addition they also produce other important ﬂavour and texture
compounds such as ascetic acid, ethanol, aroma compounds, exopolysaccharides and several
enzymes (Broadbent et al. (2001); Corsetti et al. (1998); De Vuyst et al. (1996); Kleerebezemab
et al. (2000)).
The LABs commonly used for dairy production includes Streptococcus, Lactococcus, Leuconostoc
and Lactobacillus genera. The choice of LAB culture depends on the type of product desired,
and the common LABs product applications are included in Table 1. The dairy production
such as cheeses and buttermilk applies starter cultures based on the LABs Lc. lactis and Leu.
mesenteroides, whereas production of yoghurts applies the LABs Lactobacillus, Streptococcus
thermophilus and Biﬁdobacterium (Leroy and De Vuyst (2004)).
Table 1:
Lactic acid bacteria dairy application - depending on the dairy product diﬀerent LABs are
acquired to produce the right ﬂavours and texture. Here diﬀerent cheese products, and milk products LABs
strains are presented (Leroy and De Vuyst (2004)).
Lactic acid bacteria
Product
Lactococcus lactis ssp.
hard cheeses
Lactococcus lactis ssp. and Leuconostoc mesenteriodes ssp.
cheeses with small eyes
Lactococcus lactis ssp. and Leuconostoc mesenteriodes
buttermilk
Lactobacillus, Streptococcus thermophilus and Biﬁdobacterium
yoghurt and probiotic milk
0.1.5.1
The genus Lactococcus
Lactococci are homofermentative, facultatively anaerobic, gram-positive bacteria which can grow
at a temperature 10◦C-40◦C and they produce L(+) lactic acid as the end product from glucose
fermentation (Kim et al. (1999)). Therefore it is also a member of the lactic acid bacteria.
Lactococcus strains require complex media containing carbohydrates, amino acids, vitamins and
fatty acids for optimal growth. The morphology is characterized as ovoid cells that can appear
individually, in pairs or in chains. This morphology contribute to the diﬃculty in diﬀerentiating
them from other genera like; Streptococcus, Enterococcus and Leuconostoc which also are cocci
12
==PAGE:14==
and occur in chains or pairs (Wijtzes et al. (1997)).
The genus Lactococcus belongs to the family Streptococcaceae and includes ﬁve species presented
in Table 2. Among these ﬁve species it is only the Lc. lactis which is used in dairy technology.
This species have two subspecies and a biovar; Lc. lactis subsp. lactis, Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris
and Lc. lactis subsp. lactis biovar diacetylactis (Salama et al. (1991); Klijn et al. (1991)). Lc.
lactis has been isolated from plant material, but the most recognized habitat is raw milk, cheese
milk and cheese whey (Sandine et al. (1972); Leroy and De Vuyst (2004); Salama et al. (1993);
Guti´errez-M´endez et al. (2010)).
Table 2: The Genus Lactococcus - belong to the family streptococcaceae and consist of four species.
Family
Genus
Species
Streptococcaceae
Lactococcus
Lc. garvieae
Lc. piscium
Lc. plantarum
Lc. raﬃnolactis
Lc. lactis
0.1.5.2
Lactococcus lactis in the dairy industry
In the dairy industry the Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris and Lc. lactis subsp. lactis are used
for; the production of lactic acid from lactose, hydrolysis of proteins, fat lipolysis and citric
acid fermentation.
Their metabolic end products and enzymes directly or indirectly have a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the textures and ﬂavours of the ﬁnal products. When grown in milk the
lactococcis proteinase and oligopeptide transport systems play a crucial role in the hydrolysis
of the protein casein. The hydrolysis of casein is important since it contributes to the cells
growth (Bacon et al. (1994)). As other LABs the lactococci has the ability to metabolize lactose
through hydrolysis of lactose into glucose and galactose. The glucose and galactose are then
simultaneously catabolized and the end product is lactic acid (Abdel-Rahman et al. (2013)).
The Lc. lactis also contribute to the ﬂavour development through the metabolism of citrate,
which results in the compounds; diacetyl, acetoin, 2,3-butylene glycol, acetylaldehyde, ethanol
and lactic acid (Libudzisz and Galewska (1991)).
13
==PAGE:15==
0.1.5.3
The genus Leuconostoc
Leuconostoc are facultatively anaerobic, catalase-negative, gram-positive cocci organized in pairs
or chains, and they belong to the low G+C branch of the gram-positive bacteria (Hemme and
Foucaud-Scheunemann (2004)). Leuconostoc species have an intrinsic resistance to vancomycin,
which is due to a diﬀerent composition in the peptidoglycan in the cell wall, thereby preventing
the binding of vancomycin (Lee (1994)).
The genus Leuconostoc belongs to the family Leuconostocaceae and includes 13 species presented
in Table 3. The species Leu. mesenteroides has three subspecies; Leu. mesenteroides subsp.
cremoris, subsp. dextranicum and subsp. mesenteroides (Hemme and Foucaud-Scheunemann
(2004)). The Leuconostoc strains are present in several environments, but their natural eco-
logical niche is green vegetation and roots (Mundt (1970)). In the dairy industry are the Leu.
mesenteroides subsp. cremoris or Leu. lactis strains are used in butter and cream production
and some fermented fresh dairy products (Hemme and Foucaud-Scheunemann (2004)).
Table 3: The Genus Leuconostoc - belong to the family Leuconostocaceae and consist of 13 species.
Family
Genus
Species
Leuconostocaceae
Leuconostoc
Leu. mesenteroides
Leu. lactis
Leu. pseudomesenteroides
Leu. carnosum
Leu. gelidum
Leu. fallax
Leu. citreum
Leu. argentinum
Leu. gasicomitatum
Leu. kimchi
Leu. ﬁculneum
Leu. fructosum
Leu. inhae
14
==PAGE:16==
0.1.5.4
Leuconostoc in the dairy industry
In the dairy industry Leu. mesenteroides is used for the production of aromatic compounds
and gas. As Lc. lactis the Leuconostoc can also produce the aromatic compounds from citrate
metabolism such as; diacetyl, acetate and ethanol. However this metabolism can only be per-
formed Leu. mesenteroides in a acidic pH, therefore to initiate Leuconostocs citrate metabolism
a suﬃcient acid production by Lc. lactis is required. The Leu. mesenteroides is also used for
their CO2 production especially in the production of certain cheeses such as Edam and Gouda
to produce small openings in the cheese (Hemme and Foucaud-Scheunemann (2004)).
0.1.6
The application of starter cultures in dairy production process
Starter cultures are added at diﬀerent steps in the production process depending on the desired
product. The key processing steps that are used in several cultured dairy products includes
these; lactose fermentation, coagulation of milk proteins, homogenization, pasteurization and
cooling. Lactose fermentation is the result of the starter culture LAB’s hydrolysis of lactose.
Coagulation of milk proteins is the result of the decrease in pH due to the increase of lactic acid,
which causes the casein in the milk to coagulate. Homogenization is referred to the problem
of milk fat globules clustering, which is homogenizied through force. Pasteurization treatment
is to kill the native microorganisms in the raw material, and potential pathogens. After the
pasteurization inoculation with a desired starter culture can occur. Cooling occurs once the
desired pH, ﬂavour and texture is reached, which slows the growth of the bacteria added from
the starter culture (Boylston (2012)).
To give an example of a detailed dairy production process, the steps of cheese production will
be described in this section. The primary steps involved in the processing of cheese are the
coagulation of the casein proteins, separation of the curds from the whey and ripening the curd
illustrated in Figure 4 (Boylston (2012)). Standardization of the milk is the adjustment of casein-
to-fat ratio content in the milk. The next step is pasteurization and afterwards the process of
coagulation of milk proteins is initiated by addition of enzymes and/or acid and starter culture.
When the required acidity is reached through lactic acid production by the starter culture the
cheese curds are separated from the remaining liquid called whey. Shaping and pressing of the
curds is performed with external force, which then is followed by salting of the cheese that
inhibits the growth of the bacteria and aﬀects the ﬂavour. The ﬁnal salt content of cheeses
ranges between 0,7% - 4% depending on the type of cheese. Depending on the type of cheese
either the process step ripening is performed or left out. The ripening process develops the
15
==PAGE:17==
characteristic texture and ﬂavour of the cheese through a series of biochemical reactions. This
includes the lysis of the microorganisms of the starter culture and thereby release of enzymes
that catalyze degradation of proteins, lipid, and lactose in the cheese. Increased ripening time
decreases the moisture of the cheese and increases the intensity of the ﬂavour (Boylston (2012)).
Figure 4: The cheese production process - the primary steps involved in cheese production are coagulation
of casein proteins, separation of the curds from the whey and ripening (Boylston (2012)).
0.1.6.1
Starter culture backslopping
In general to optimise the fermentation backslopping has been applied for years. Backslopping
is the inoculation of the raw material with a small quantity of a previously performed successful
fermentation. Backslopping is still applied today when preparing new starter cultures, however
this backslopping method also results in dominance of the best adapted strains (Leroy and De
Vuyst (2004)).
16
==PAGE:18==
These changes in the starter cultures composition have also been recorded for Chr. Hansen’s
starter culture ”D” (Eric Johanson; employee at Chr. Hansen). Studies have also shown dif-
ferentiation in Lc, lactis ssp. lactis and ssp. cremoris, where the Lc. lactis ssp. cremoris is
less robust against stress such as acid and temperature (Kim et al. (1999)). The phenotypic
diﬀerence between Lc. lactis ssp. lactis and ssp. cremoris is that ssp. lactis can grow at
40◦C and in the presence of 4% NaCl and the ssp. cremoris cannot is used to distinguish the
two subspecies (Sanders et al. (1999)). Genotypic studies of Lc. lactis ssp. cremoris isolates
from both industrial and natural sources have revealed that Lc. lactis ssp. cremoris isolated
from nature can have stress resistance (Klijn et al. (1995)). Thereby indicating that industrial
Lactococcus lactis ssp. cremoris probably have lost some of these stress resistance properties
due to continuous subculturing in the dairy environment (Sanders et al. (1999)).
Since the starter cultures are used to diﬀerent food products, several parameters are used to
either promote the growth of the microorganisms or prevent spoilage of the product. It is there-
fore important to know which conditions are favourable and which are detrimental for the life
of the microorganisms (Sanders et al. (1999)).
0.1.7
Antibiotic resistance in starter cultures
Investigation of dairy starter cultures antibiotic resistance have been performed through iso-
lation of LABs directly from the starter cultures or dairy products. However there are some
studies deﬁning intrinsically coded antibiotic resistance and acquired resistance in LABs. The
genus Lactobacillus have a high natural resistance to the antibiotics; ciproﬂoxacin, kanamycin,
gentamicin, streptomycin, metronidazole and vancomycin (Danielsen and Wind (2003)). The
genus Leuconostoc has also been proven to be natural resistant to vancomycin (Swenson J
Thornsberry C (1990)). Whereas no natural resistance to any antibiotic have been observed in
the genus Lactococcus (Katla et al. (2001)). However the natural antibiotic resistance is not
a safety concern, due to the fact that the LABs have a long safe human application history.
In the safety assessment of LABs the concern is of whether transmissible antibiotic resistance
genes are present, which can contribute to the increasing numbers antibiotic resistance human
pathogens (EFSA (2012)).
Mobile genetic elements in LABs have been reported, especially plasmids which are quite com-
mon in LABs. Normally these plasmids contains genes with functions like hydrolysis of proteins,
metabolism of carbohydrates, amino acids and citrate. The plasmids have especially been found
in lactococci, leuconostoc and in some lactobacilli (Davidson et al. (1996)). However plasmids
17
==PAGE:19==
encoding antibiotic resistance genes have also been reported in LABs presented in Table 4. A
multiple antibiotic resistance plasmid pK214 have been reported in a Lc. lactis strain K214, a
strain isolated from raw milk soft cheese (Perreten et al. (2001)). This plasmid encoded antibiotic
resistance genes to streptomycin, tetracycline and chloramphenicol and a antibiotic eﬄux pump
gene mef 214. An further investigation revealed that the mef 214 encoded a multi antibiotic
eﬄux pump (Perreten et al. (2001)).
R-plasmids encoding tetracycline, erythromycin, chlo-
ramhenicol or macrolide-lincomycin-streptogramin resistance have been reported in Lb. reuteri,
Lb. fermentum and Lb. acidophilus (Axelsson et al. (1988); Vescovo et al. (1982); Raibaud et al.
(1997)). Acquired antibiotic resistance in LABs have been identiﬁed in some dairy products,
however there is generally not many of these studies.
Table 4: Aquired antibiotic resistance genes in LABS - these strains are all isolated from dairy products
and have plasmids with diﬀerent antibiotic resistance genes.
Food products
Species
Resistance
References
Raw milk soft cheese
Lc. lactis strain K214
Str-tet (S)-cat
(Perreten et al. (2001))
Yoghurt
Lb. fermentum strain ROT1
erm(LF)
(Gfeller et al. (2003))
tet(M)
Taleggio cheese
Leu. mesenteroides
tet(S)
(Fl´orez et al. (2016))
Taleggio cheese
Leu. mesenteroides ssp. dextranicum
erm(B)
(Fl´orez et al. (2016))
0.1.8
Phenotypic and genotypic characterization of antibiotic resistance
For many years phenotypic characterization of an environment has been performed by separating
and identifying the genus and species in the environment. Through identiﬁcation and cultiva-
tion to pure culture a phenotypic characterization for antibiotic resistance can be performed.
However through a genotypic characterization of the antibiotic resistome in an environment,
there is no need for cultivation and there is no need for isolation of species if a metagenomic
analysis is performed (Crofts et al. (2017); Amann et al. (1995)).
0.1.8.1
Phenotypic testing for antibiotic resistance
When it comes to characterization of bacterial strains susceptibility to antibiotics, internation-
ally recognized ISO and CLSI standardized phenotypic methods are applied. These methods
deﬁne the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of antibiotics in the units mg/L or µg/ml.
This concentration is also deﬁned as the concentration at which no visible growth is present. To
distinguish antibiotic resistant strains from susceptible strains, deﬁned microbiological cut-oﬀ
18
==PAGE:20==
values have been identiﬁed through studies of chosen antibiotic MICs in several bacterial popula-
tions. Populations that clearly deviated from the normal susceptible values have been classiﬁed
as resistant and cut-oﬀvalue has been established. This cut-oﬀvalue deﬁnes a bacterial strain
as susceptible when it’s growth is inhibited at a antibiotics concentration that is equal or lower
than the established cut-oﬀvalue of that speciﬁc antibiotic. If the growth inhibited concentra-
tion is higher that the established cut-oﬀvalue the bacterial strain is deﬁned as resistant to the
speciﬁc antimicrobial tested (EFSA (2012)).
Approved standardized methods for MIC determination are broth or agar dilution methods.
These are standardized methods deﬁned by the clinical and laboratory standards institute
(CLSI), and is aimed to test single strain cultures ((Weinstein et al., 2012)).
The agar di-
lution method for determining antibiotic susceptibility is a technique where the antibiotic agent
is incorporated in the agar medium, and each plate then contain diﬀerent concentration of the
antibiotic agent to determine the concentration minimum inhibitory concentration. To each
plate 32 to 36 inocula can be tested, the inoculum is prepared to the turbidity of 0.5 Macfarland
standard corresponding to 1-2 x 108CFU/ml. The inoculum is placed on the agar-plates in
spots of 5 mm to 8 mm corresponding to 104 CFU/ml per spot. The plates are incubated at
appropriate temperature depending on the microorganism tested, and the minimum inhibitory
concentration can then be determined ((Weinstein et al., 2012)). The broth dilution method is
performed by two-fold serial dilution of the antibiotic agent in broth and a standard inoculum
at the turbidity 0.5 Macfarland is added. Thereby the ﬁnal inoculum is 5 x 105 CFU/ml in
each dilution. The dilutions are incubated at the appropriate temperature depending on the
microorganism and the minimum inhibitory concentration is deﬁned ((Weinstein et al., 2012)).
In the food industry there are nine antibiotics that are required to be tested these are deﬁned by
the European food safety authority (EFSA) and includes; ampicillin, vancomycin, gentamicin,
kanamycin, streptomycin, erythromycin clindamycin, tetracycline and chloramphenicol. The
EFSA has proposed a antibiotic resistance assessment of a bacterial strain used for feed additive
illustrated in Figure 5. It starts with identiﬁcation of the strain at species level. A quanti-
tative MIC determination of the pure bacterial culture is performed if the MIC value of the
nine antibiotics are under the cut-oﬀvalues the bacterial strain is acceptable, and no further
investigation is required. Although if the MIC value of any of the antibiotics are above the MIC
cut-oﬀvalue, the genetic basis of the resistance is required to be determined. The genetic basis
of the resistance should be determined as either acquired or intrinsic resistance. If the resistance
19
==PAGE:21==
is demonstrated to be intrinsic the bacterial strain is acceptable as feed additive. If however
it turns out to be acquired resistance further investigation is needed, to determine whether the
acquisition is either added genes or a genomic mutation. The bacterial strain is only accepted
to if it is demonstrated that it is a genomic mutation (EFSA (2012)).
Figure 5: The guidance on assessment of bacterial susceptibility to antibiotics - This pipeline describes
additional analysis if the given MIC value is not acceptable. The additional analysis involves a genetic analysis
demonstrating the genetic basis of the resistance (EFSA (2012)).
0.1.8.2
Next-generation approach to deﬁne the antibiotic resistome
To investigate the antibiotic resistome in an complex environment the research technique ”metage-
nomics” has been applied in several studies. It is a research technique, which seeks out to un-
derstand the community of organisms inhabiting a common environment. Metagenomics can
be divided into sequence-based and function-driven analysis. The functional analysis includes
screening of the metagenomic libraries of diﬀerent phenotypes for example diﬀerent enzyme ac-
tivities or antibiotic production (Dinsdale et al. (2008)). The sequence based approach can for
example include identiﬁcation of species by 16S genes or genome reconstruction of dominant
species (Tyson et al. (2004)). Metagenomic studies became possible with shotgun sequencing
(Breitbart et al. (2002)), though it became clear that this technology could not provide suf-
ﬁcient read depth to investigate the diverse communities. However with the development of
20
==PAGE:22==
next-generation sequencing platforms deep and high-throughput sequencing became possible.
The next-generation sequencing platforms includes Roche 454 sequencing, Illumina sequencing
and Ion Torrent. The advantage of these sequencing methods is that there is no need of cul-
tivation or pure cultures, which would mean a loss of the unculturable microorganisms in the
environment (Kr¨ober et al. (2009); Lazarevic et al. (2009); Westover (1999)).
0.1.8.3
Metagenomic analysis
There is no universally applicable analysis strategy for metagenomic datasets. However one step
that is essential disregarding which analysis is desired to be performed is the quality assurance
/ quality control of the sequenced reads. This step involves trimming and/ﬁltering of the reads,
to acquire the best quality of sequences reads. Further analysis is determined by the complexity
of the community investigated. If the community complexity is high extraction of phylogentic
marker sequences analysis could be a possibility. Whereas if the community complexity is low
metagenomic assembly and binning could be a possible analysis. Even though it has been sug-
gested that samples with high community complexity are unlikely to beneﬁt from an assembly
analysis, it can depend on the read depth that is achieved. A metagenomic assembly analysis
ﬁnds overlapping reads and constructs continuous or semi-continuous genome fragments. This
allows for a more detailed analysis of genes within a genomic context (Hugenholtz and Tyson
(2008); Westover (1999)). This analysis can either be a guided assembly or a de novo assembly.
A guided metagenomic assembly is performed with a reference genome from a closely related
species, where the reads which are homologous to the reference genome sre applied to cinstruct
longer fragments. De novo assembly is an analysis where no reference genome is applied, but
overlapping reads are identiﬁed and merged to form a contig (a ”contigous” sequence). Scaf-
folding is a process bridging the gabs between the contigs by order and orientation relative
to one another using paired-end or mate-pair sequences. This process is often incorporated in
the assembly tool, and the scaﬀolding can indicate whether contigs are ambiguous within the
assembly and also identify regions of the assembly which are potentially inconsistent. Then
phylogenetic marker genes of the contigs and scaﬀolds can be identiﬁed with BLAST, assigning
the contigs/scaﬀolds to a given species (Thomas et al. (2012); Westover (1999)). The contigs
that cannot be identiﬁed may be classiﬁed using sequence-”binning” analysis.
Binning metagenomic sequences aims to assign sequences/contigs/scaﬀolds to ”bins” corre-
sponding to their taxonomic origins.
Sequence-binning is divided into two broad categories
supervised and unsupervised binning. Supervised binning analysis classiﬁes sequences by com-
parison to reference databases. Whereas the unsupervised binning analysis uses the read fea-
21
==PAGE:23==
tures, such as G+C content, coverage, codon usage, oligonucleotide frequencies, and periodic
sequence signatures to classify sequences into species ”bins” (Thomas et al. (2012)). However
every metagenome is unique, thereby a customized approach to the community analysed and
the biological questions driving the study, should be decided (Thomas et al. (2012)).
0.1.8.4
Databases for research of antibiotic resistance genes
In the searching of antibiotic resistance genes several antibiotic resistance gene databases can
be used to identify these genes. These databases includes; Antibiotic resistance genes database
(ARDB) (Liu and Pop (2009)), Resﬁnder (Zankari et al. (2012)), antibiotic resistance gene anno-
tation (ARG-ANNOT) (Gupta et al. (2014)), and comprehensive antibiotic resistance database
(CARD) (McArthur et al. (2013)). All these databases have been created through collection
of protein or nucleic acid sequences of antibiotic resistance genes from diﬀerent databases such
as NCBI or Swiss-prot. They all apply a BLAST interface for identiﬁcation and annotation of
sequences. The databases then represent the hits with the best-matching genes to the input
sequence. The number of resistance genes in each database diﬀers and several of the databases
have collected genes from the ﬁrst published database ARDB (Liu and Pop (2009); McArthur
et al. (2013); Zankari et al. (2012); Gupta et al. (2014)). The ARDB was published in 2009,
Resﬁnder was published in 2012 and at last was the CARD database published in 2012. How-
ever the recently published database CARD and ResFinder are not only focused on acquired
antibiotic resistance genes, buts allows for detection of point mutations in chromosomic target
genes. The most recently database ARG-ANNOT database detect existing and putative new
antibiotic resistance genes in bacterial genomes (Gupta et al. (2014)).
0.1.9
The purpose of the study
Even though the undeﬁned starter cultures are classiﬁed as ”safe” due to the long and safe his-
tory, the increased focus on antibiotic resistance, and the documentation for absence of antibiotic
susceptibility is needed. The standard method to document absence of antibiotic resistance is
the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) method by CLSI, which has been approved by
EFSA. However this method is only a standardized and validated for testing the antibiotic sus-
ceptibility of pure single cultures and not mixed starter cultures. In cases where the mixed
starter cultures do get tested the CLSI states that the results should be reported as preliminary.
However if there is antibiotic resistance gene present in the undeﬁned starter culture, there is
a possibility that it is encoded by a strain in a low abundance as well as a strain in a high
abundance. Therefore testing the antibiotic susceptibility by the standardized procedure, the
22
==PAGE:24==
possible antibiotic resistant strain in low abundance might not be observed.
The aim of the study was to develop procedures to test for antibiotic susceptibility of these
undeﬁned complex starter cultures. Two diﬀerent approaches were planned a phenotypic and
genotypic method. The phenotypic antibiotic susceptibility testing approach is a MIC deter-
mination method, which had to be able to be standardized and validated for undeﬁned starter
cultures. Furthermore, a metagenome approach for genotypic detection for antibiotic resistance
genes in metagenomic sequence data was carried out, and detection limits estimated.
0.2
Methods and materials
0.2.1
Bulk cultures, bacterial strains and media
Four diﬀerent undeﬁned starter cultures referred to as bulk cultures used for dairy production
have been investigated. For MIC determination several strains have been used for standard-
ization of MIC values for Lc.
lactis and Leuconostoc sp., media controls and as antibiotic
concentration controls. The bulk cultures and control strains have been listed in Table 5 and 6.
Table 5: Chr.
Hansens four undeﬁned starter bulk cultures - The four bulk cultures names, species
present in the culture and the source/product number is the provided.
Bulk culture
Species
Source
Starter culture A
Lactococcus lactis ssp.
030001051062
Starter culture B
Leuconstoc mesenteroides
000000517155
Starter culture C
Lactococcus lactis ssp. and Leuconostoc mesenteroides
714032
Starter culture D
Lactococcus lactis ssp. andLeuconostoc mesenteroides
704685
23
==PAGE:25==
Table 6: Strains applied in this study - for the standardized ISO MIC method and the agar-based MIC
method. The strains are named and have Chr. Hansens strain number and the special feature describes the
strains application.
Strain
Special feature
Lactobacillus plantarum CHCC28626
LSM media control
Lactococcus lactis CHCC28622
IST media control
Bacillus licheniformis CHCC5114
Antibiotic sensitive strain
Bacillus paralicheniformis CHCC29215
Erythromycin resistant strain
Lactobacillus animalis CHCC27682
Streptomycin resistant strain
Lactococcus lactis CHCC6005
Tetracyklin resistant strain
The media applied in this study for the mixed bulk cultures depended on the species combination.
The culture consisting of only Lc.
lactis were grown in either IST (ISO-Sensitest OXOID
CM0473 and CM0471) and M17 (M-17 OXOID CM0817 and BIOKAR BK088HA) agar or
broth. The culture consisting of only Leuconostoc were grown in either LSM (90% ISO-sensitest
OXOID CM0473 and OXIOD CM0471, 10% M.R.S OXOID CM0359 and CM0361) or MRS
(DIFCO 288210 and DIFCO 288110) agar or broth. The mixed bulk culture with both the
species Lc. lactis and Leu. mesenteroides were grown in the media LSM, IST, MRS and M17,
this was done to favour both species in the cultures. All the bulk cultures were grown at 30◦C,
but cultures consisting of Lc. lactis they were incubated anaerobic and cultures consisting of
Leu. sp were incubated aerobically. Control strains have been grown in media favoured by
species; Lactococcus lactis were grown in either IST or M-17 30◦C anaerobic. Leu. sp. were
grown in either LSM or MRS 30◦C aerobic. Bacillus strains were grown in CASO or TSA blood
(REF PB5012A) 37◦C anaerobic, and the Lactobacillus strains were grown in either LSM or
MRS 37◦C anaerobic.
0.2.2
Phenotypic antibiotic susceptibility characterization
0.2.2.1
ISO standardized MIC determination of starter cultures
The method was performed as the standard operation procedure used at Chr. Hansen (SOP-
05603) based on the ISO 10932 method. The antibiotics tested; gentamicin, kanamycin, strep-
tomycin, neomycin, tetracycline, erythromycin, clindamycin, chloramphenicol, ampicillin, peni-
cillin, vancomycin, Quinupristin-dalfopristin, linezolid, trimethoprim, ciproﬂoxacin and rifampicin.
Two replicate samples of the bulk cultures were tested by this method; direct sample, pre-growth
sample and pre-growth with tetracycline 0.125 µg/ml sample. A 10−1 dilution of the freezed
24
==PAGE:26==
dried bulk culture in saline was prepared. Pre-growth samples were inoculated 10 µl of the 10−1
dilution was inoculated in 10 ml BD5-1 media (batch no. 3701-517) for 24hr at 30◦C. To create
the direct bulk sample the freeze dried bulk cultures were washed 3 times with saline, centrifuga-
tion at 5000 x g for 3 min to remove of milk residues. The cell pellet from the direct bulk culture
sample and the pre-growth samples were directly used to dilute to Mcf1 in glass ampule with
Api suspension (bioM´erieux REF 70 700) measured using Densimat (bioM´erieux IDN014694).
The Api suspension was diluted 1000 x fold in the relevant media (LSM or IST) and distributed
100 µl in each well of the MIC test panel (VetMIC Lact-1 Lot no. 182/17 and VetMIC Lact-2
Lot No. 176-17) with two-fold dilution of the 16 antibiotics. In addition all the wells contained
100 µl distributed pure media and the last column in the MIC test panel served as a negative
control to check the media contamination. A purity control was also prepared on TSA (REF
PB5012A), MRS (DIFCO 288210 and DIFCO 288110) and M17 (M-17 OXOID CM0817 and
BIOKAR BK088HA) agar. The MIC plates and the purity controls were incubated depending
on the bulk culture species. Bulk cultures containing Lc. lactis strains were incubated in IST
media (OXOID CM0473) anaerobic at 30◦C for 48 hr and inspected. Bulk cultures containing
Leu. sp. strains were incubated in LSM media (OXOID CM0473 and CM0359) aerobic at 30◦C
for two days, and was inspected at 24 hr and 48 hr. The MIC values were deﬁned as the con-
centration at which no visible growth was present. To deﬁne the susceptibility the MIC values
were compared to the EFSA cut-oﬀvalues of the given genus or species (EFSA journal 2012,
10:2740).
0.2.2.2
Break-point agar-based MIC determination of the starter cultures
The freeze dried bulk cultures were washed 3 times in saline, centrifugation at 5000 x g for 3
min to remove milk residues. The cell pellet was then directly used to dilute to Mcf1 in glass
ampule with Api suspension (bioM´erieux REF 70 700) measured using Densimat (bioM´erieux
IDN014694). A 100 µl of the concentrations; Mcf 1.0, 1000 x fold dilution, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3 were
plated on three antibiotic LSM (OXIOD CM0471 and CM0361) or IST (OXIOD CM0471) agar
plates with the concentrations; antibiotic break-point conc., two-fold over and under break-point
antibiotic concentration (antibiotics tested and concentrations in Table 7). A 100 µl and 500 µl
directly from the bulk culture was also plated on the three antibiotic concentration plates. The
controls used for this method was; a media control strain, a positive antibiotic resistant strain
control and a negative antibiotic sensitive strain control. A positive control of the cultures grown
on plates without antibiotics was also performed. The plates were incubated depending on the
bulk culture or the strain. Bulk cultures containing Lc. lactis strains were incubated on IST
25
==PAGE:27==
media (OXOID CM0473) anaerobic at 30◦C for 48 hr and inspected. Bulk cultures containing
Leu. sp. strains were incubated on LSM media (OXOID CM0473 and CM0359) aerobic at
30◦C for two days, and was inspected at 24 hr and 48 hr. The MIC values were deﬁned as
the concentration at which no visible growth was present. To deﬁne the susceptibility the MIC
values were compared to the EFSA cut-oﬀvalues of the given genus or species (EFSA journal
2012, 10:2740).
Table 7: The antibiotics tested in the agar-based MIC- three diﬀerent antibiotics were tested by this
method, and the concentrations tested are presented here. BP - Break-point.
Antibiotic
Two-fold under BP
BP
Two-fold over BP
Tetracycline (SIGMA lot-110M1693V)
2 µg/ml
4 µg/ml
8 µg/ml
Erythromycin (SIGMA Lot-WXBC1653V)
0.5 µg/ml
1 µg/ml
2 µg/ml
Streptomycin (SIGMA lot-SLBP6412V)
16 µg/ml
32 µg/ml
64 µg/ml
0.2.3
Genotypic antibiotic resistome characterization
0.2.3.1
The artiﬁcial metagenomic dataset - assembly and binning investigation
The artiﬁcial dataset was created with 31 genomes of Lc. lactis, 3 genomes of Leu. mesenteriodes
and 1 genome of tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis strain from Chr. Hansen. These genomes were
acquired in fastq format, therefore a FastQC quality control and trimming was performed. The
sequences were assembled with the SPAdes a genome assembly algorithm (Bankevich et al.
(2012)). The artiﬁcial dataset was designed to ressemble the planned metagenomic sequencing
of the starter culture ”C”, therefore a dataset with size of 15Gbp distributed with 5Gbp to 1
samples and the 10Gbp distributed equally to the 17 other samples. The samples with the 35
genomes in diﬀerent coverage were simulated with the name ART a next-generation sequencing
read simulator (Huang et al. (2012)) see ﬂow chart in Figure 6. The ART simulator was set to
simulate illumina reads from a Miseq sequencer, which was paired with the read length at 250
bp, fragment size of 1000 bp and with a standard deviation of 10. All the samples were converted
to interleaved fasta ﬁles, and gathered to one fasta ﬁle. The fasta ﬁle with all combined reads
from the 18 samples, was assembled with the de novo assembler IDBA-UD (Peng et al. (2012)).
The metagenomic assembly was then indexed by BBMap, which then was applied as a reference
for crossmapping of the 18 samples. At last binning with the crossmapped coverage/variance
was performed with the software Metagenome Binning with Abundance and Tetra-nucleotide
frequencies (MetaBAT (Kang et al. (2015))).
Finally to assess the quality of the genomes
26
==PAGE:28==
CheckM was used to analyse the created ”bins”.
Figure 6: The artiﬁcial dataset - 18 samples with with 35 genomes was created with the ART-read simulator.
A metagenomic assembly was performed with the IDBA-UD assembler. The assembly was indexed with BBmap
and the 18 samples were crossemapped to the assembly, and coverage/variance of the crossmapping was used for
MetaBat binning. At last was the created ”bins” quality inspected by checkm.
0.2.3.2
Metagenomic sequencing of the starter culture ”C”
Altering culture diversity and sampling - to be able to account for the strains even in
low percentage diﬀerent approaches were taken to shift the diversity in the starter culture ”C”
and increase the possibility to perform a binning analysis on the dataset. In total 12 diﬀerent
conditions were tried out to shift the diversity the conditions and sampling points are presented
in Table 8.
The bulk culture ”C” was washed for milk residues in pep saline and natrium
citrate buﬀer. All the conditions were inoculated at the OD600=0.01 in media BD5-1 (batch no.
3701-517) 30◦C aerobically with 180 rpm shake. An exception to these growth conditions was;
growth over time which also was performed anaerobically, inoculation in milk instead of BD5-1
media and inoculation with bacteriophages which was not shaken. The cells were harvested at
sampling point and washed with TES buﬀer and afterwards stored at -20◦C. At last samples
27
==PAGE:29==
was prepared directly from the bulk culture.
Table 8:
The conditions to change the diversity of the culture - the conditions are listed with the
sampling points, where cells were harvested. Antibiotics; vancomycin (SIGMA lot-037M4008V), erythromycin
(SIGMA-Aldrich Lot-WXBC1653V), streptomycin (SIGMA-Aldrich lot-SLBP6412V) and tetracycline (SIGMA
lot-110M1693V). Tetracycline resistant strain Lactococcus lactis CHCC6005.
Conditions
Sampling point
Growth over time anaerobe and aerobe
Exponential phase OD600=0.6
24hr
48hr
Bacteriophages 1%
24hr
48hr
Sub-concentrations of antibiotics:
vancomycin 8 µg/ml
24hr
erythromycin 0.06 µg/ml
24hr
streptomycin 2 µg/ml
24hr
tetracycline 0.5 µg/ml
24hr
Salt 2%
24hr
Temperature change 37◦C
24hr
Inoculation in autoclaved milk
24hr
Spiking tet+ resistant strain 0.1‰
24hr
Spiking tet+ resistant strain 0.1‰ with tet-0,5 µg/ml
24 hr
Direct bulk sample
No growth sample
Metagenomic library construction and sequencing - The DNA puriﬁcation of the sam-
ples was prepared through two steps. First a DNA puriﬁcation was performed with the Qiagen
DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Cat. No. 69506), and an additional DNA puriﬁcation step was
performed with Qiagen QIAquick PCR puriﬁcation kit (REF 28106) for further removal of
impurities. Two library construction methods were tried out where the major diﬀerence be-
tween the two methods was the fragmentation step, which was either done by sonication or
fragmentase enzymes. Library construction with fragmentation by sonication was performed
with biorupter (Diagnode SA P-151107) with the aim to create fragments of 500-700 bp length.
To assess the fragmentation the samples were fragment analysed with the Advanced Analyti-
cal fragment analyzer (SN 2954). The adaptor ligation of the fragments was performed with
KAPA HTP library preparation kit (KK3234). The second library construction method was
performed with an enzymatic fragmentation with the aim to create fragments of 500-700 bp
28
==PAGE:30==
length. The fragmentation and adaptor ligation was performed with the KAPA Hyper prep
kit (REF07962428001). The constructed libraries were PCR ampliﬁed with either KAPA HTP
library kit (KK3234) or KAPA Hyper prep kit(REF07962428001) according to their deﬁned
protocols. The libraries concentration was measured with Qubit (Invitrogen SN 2321602339)
and quantiﬁed by qPCR (7500 fast real-time PCR system) with the KAPA library quantiﬁcation
kit (KAPA REF 07960336001) and fragment analysis with the Advanced Analytical fragment
analyzer (SN 2954). Based on the libraries avg. fragment size provided by the fragment analyzer
and the concentration of the library provided either by Qubit or qPCR a library pool of the
samples was prepared. The library pool was adjusted to the expected data outcome of 15Gbp.
A deep sequencing sample on 5Gbp (Bulk sample) was prepared and the remaining 10 Gbp
was distributed equally among the rest of the samples. The samples were distributed on a V2
and V3 ﬂow cell (REF 15043894) with the purpose to acquire about 15 Gb data from a MiSeq
sequencing (Illumina MiSeq REF SY-410-1003).
0.2.3.3
Metagenomic analysis of the starter culture ”C”
The sequenced reads from each sample was ﬁrst quality assessed by FastQC, and trimmed. The
trimmed sequence reads was mapped to the antibiotic resistance gene database ResFinder and
the 16S gene database Silva. These read mappings was performed with the MGmapper tool
(Petersen et al. (2017)), with a paired read setting and a 80% match/mismatch for true hits.
The samples were evaluated on the read count matches to the ResFinder database and the
16S gene datbase Silva. The Silva 16S gene read mappings was evaluated on genus level and
R-abundance (read count/reads in the sample percentage) was calculated.
29
==PAGE:31==
0.3
Results
0.3.1
Phenotypic antibiotic susceptibility characterization
Chr. Hansens four mixed undeﬁned starter cultures were tested for antibiotic susceptibility by
the standardized MIC method deﬁned by EFSA and the new proposed break-point concentration
agar-based MIC method. This new proposed MIC method was set out to test a higher bacterial
cell concentration, thereby giving the possibility to catch strains in lower abundance. The ﬂow
process of the two methods is illustrated in ﬁgure 7.
Figure 7: The ﬂow chart of the two MIC methods - The EFSA standardized MIC method placed to the
left was performed with the four mixed undeﬁned starter cultures. Samples tested was either directly from the
bulk culture or a 24 hr inoculation of the bulk culture. The samples were diluted to Mcf1 and further diluted
1000 x fold, this dilution tested in two-fold antibiotic dilutions. The proposed MIC method for mixed undeﬁned
starter cultures is placed to the right. The samples tested was directly from the bulk culture, which was diluted
to Mcf1 and inoculated on three agar-plates with the antibiotic concentrations; two-fold under break-point conc.,
the break-point conc. and two-fold over the break-point conc.
0.3.1.1
The ISO standardized MIC method
Initially MIC was determined for single strains of Lc.
lactis ssp., Leu.
mesenteroides and
Leuconostoc species unknown according to the single strain culture aimed ISO10932 standard
(CH SOP-05603) to assess the susceptibility of strains within the same species present in the
starter cultures. The MIC values were compared to the microbiological cut-oﬀvalues of EFSA’s
”Guidance on the assessment of bacterial susceptibility to antimicrobials of human and veteri-
nary importance” to assess the susceptibility of the strains. The MIC values of the Lactococcus
lactis ssp. revealed a generally susceptibility to all antibiotics, whereas the Leuconostoc strains
revealed an expected resistance to vancomycin, but otherwise susceptible. MIC values of the
controls were within QC range and the tested strains were in line with previous experiments
30
==PAGE:32==
(Appendix section 0.8.1.1).
Secondly the ISO standardized MIC method was carried out with the four undeﬁned starter cul-
tures. The standard MIC method tested 16 antibiotics, where the results of the 9 EFSA required
antibiotics are presented in this section and the remaining are included in the appendix section
0.8.1.2. Three diﬀerent inoculums were used for the MIC determination i.e. samples directly
from the bulk culture, pre-growth sample from 24 hr inoculated bulk culture and pre-growth
samples with tetracycline subMIC concentration of 0.125 µg/ml. These diﬀerent inoculums were
investigated to test the eﬀects of growth on the bacterial composition change on the MIC values
and to select for tetracycline resistant strains. The MIC values of the four starter cultures were
compared to the EFSA microbiological cut-oﬀvalues to assess the susceptibility of the cultures
(Tables 5, 6 and 7). Compared to the EFSA cut-oﬀvalues, no resistance was revealed in the
starter culture ”A”. However a vancomycin resistance was revealed in the cultures; ”B”, ”C”
and ”D”. This was expected in these cultures containing Leuconostoc due to Leuconstocs in-
trinsic vancomycin resistance. The clindamycin MIC value was one to two two-fold dilutions
above the EFSA cut-oﬀwhere one two-fold dilution above is accepted by EFSA. There was not
revealed any patterns of the MIC value ranges between the three diﬀerent inoculums. However
a MIC value diﬀerence of the two cultures ”C” and ”D” was seen depending on the media. LSM
media MIC values were generally slightly higher than IST media MIC values. This diﬀerence
might only be due to the fact that the LSM media favour the Leuconostoc with higher cut-oﬀ
MIC values and the IST media favour the Lactococcus.
31
==PAGE:33==
Table 9: MIC values for the starter culture ”A” performed in IST media and ”B” culture performed
in LSM media - the table includes MIC values of the three inoculums and EFSA cut-oﬀvalues of Lc. lactis
(culture ”A”) and Leu. (culture ”B”).
The starter culture ”A”
Antibiotic
type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Direct1)
Pre-growth2)
Pre-growth + Tet3)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
1
1-2
1
32
Kanamycin
4
4
4
64
Streptomycin
16
8
8-16
32
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
0.5
0.5
0.5
4
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.12
0.12
0.06-0.12
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
0.12
0.12
0.12
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
4
4
4
8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
0.25
0.25
0.25
2
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
0.25
0.5
0.25
4
The starter culture ”B”
Antibiotic
type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Direct1)
Pre-growth2)
Pre-growth + Tet3)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
0.5-1
0.5-1
0.5
16
Kanamycin
16
16
16
16
Streptomycin
8
8
8-16
64
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
4
8
8
8
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.25
0.25
0.25-0.5
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
4
4
4
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
8
8
8
4
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
1
1-2
1-2
2
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
>128
>128
>128
N.R.
1) Direct - sample directly from bulk culture.
2) Pre-growth - sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture.
3) Pre-growth + Tet -sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture with sub-concentration of tetracycline 0.125 µg/ml.
32
==PAGE:34==
Table 10: MIC values for the starter culture ”C” performed in either IST or LSM media - the table
includes MIC values of the three inoculums and EFSA cut-oﬀvalue ranges of Lc. lactis and Leu.
The starter culture C in media IST
Antibiotic
type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Direct1)
Pre-growth2)
Pre-growth + Tet3)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
2
0.5
0.5-1
16-32
Kanamycin
4-8
4
4
16-64
Streptomycin
8
8
8
32-64
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
2
4
4
4-8
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.12
0.12
0.12
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
1-2
2-4
2
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
4
4
4-8
4-8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
1
1
1
2
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
>128
>128
>128
4 or N.R.
The starter culture C in media LSM
Antibiotic
type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Direct1)
Pre-growth2)
Pre-growth + Tet3)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
1
1
1
16-32
Kanamycin
8-16
16
16
16-64
Streptomycin
16
16
16
32-64
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
2
4
4
4-8
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.25
0.25
0.25
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
4
4
4
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
4-8
4-8
8
4-8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
1
1
1
2
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
>128
>128
>128
4 or N.R.
1) Direct - sample directly from bulk culture.
2) Pre-growth - sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture.
3) Pre-growth + Tet -sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture with sub-concentration of tetracycline 0.125 µg/ml.
33
==PAGE:35==
Table 11: MIC values for the starter culture ”D” performed in IST and LSM media - the table
includes MIC values of the three inoculums and EFSA cut-oﬀvalue ranges of Lc. lactis and Leu.
The starter culture D in media IST
Antibiotic
type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Direct1)
Pre-growth2)
Pre-growth + Tet3)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
0.5-1
0.5-1
0.5-1
16-32
Kanamycin
4-8
4-8
4-8
16-64
Streptomycin
8-16
8
8-16
32-64
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
4
4
4
4-8
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.12
0.12
0.12
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
4
4
4
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
4
4
8
4-8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
1
0.5
0.5-1
2
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
>128
>128
>128
4 or N.R.
The starter culture D in media LSM
Antibiotic
type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Direct1)
Pre-growth2)
Pre-growth + Tet3)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
1
0.5-2
0.5-1
16-32
Kanamycin
8-16
16
16-32
16-64
Streptomycin
16
16-32
8-16
32-64
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
4
4
4-8
4-8
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.25
0.25
0.25
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
4
4
4
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
8
8
8
4-8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
1
1
2
2
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
>128
>128
>128
4 or N.R.
1) Direct - sample directly from bulk culture.
2) Pre-growth - sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture.
3) Pre-growth + Tet -sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture with sub-concentration of tetracycline 0.125 µg/ml.
34
==PAGE:36==
0.3.2
MIC method for mixed undeﬁned cultures
The purpose was to develop a method for MIC determination, which was able to test a broader
spectrum of the strains in the mixed undeﬁned starter cultures. Diﬀerent methods were dis-
cussed, but a agar MIC method was chosen due to the possibility to test a higher bacterial
concentration. The MIC method chosen was based on break-point antibiotic concentrations,
with a 2-fold dilution over and under the break-point concentration. A pilot experiment with
this method testing diﬀerent condition i.e. diﬀerent inoculum and tetracycline concentrations
was performed. The MIC values for the four undeﬁned starter cultures are presented in Table
12.
Compared to the EFSA cut-oﬀvalues the four starter cultures revealed susceptibility to tetra-
cycline.
Compared to the standardized MIC method the tetracycline MIC values was close
corresponding, however the MIC value for the starter culture ”B” was one-two two-fold dilution
higher in the standardized MIC method. The MIC values controls were within the expected
MIC value range and the cultures were able to grow on the media without antibiotics (Appendix
section 0.8.2.1).
Table 12:
Pilot experiment break-point agar-based MIC method - The tetracycline concentrations
applied; 2, 4 (break-point conc.) and 8 (µg/ml). The bacterial cell concentration tested was the Mcf1. The MIC
values of the four cultures and controls are presented with the applied media. S.C. - starter culture. These MIC
values are extracted from the table in appendix section 0.8.2.1.
Antibiotic
type
Antibiotic
Bacterial culture
Media
MIC value
(µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Beta-lactam
Tetracycline
S.C. - A
IST
≤2
4
S.C. - B
LSM
≤2
8
S.C. - C
IST
4
4-8
S.C. - C
LSM
≤2
4-8
S.C. - D
IST
4
4-8
S.C. - D
LSM
≤2
4-8
PC1) Lc. lactis
IST
>8
RS2)
PC1) Lc. lactis
LSM
>8
RS2)
1) PC - Positive control a tetracycline resistant.
2) RS - resistant strain.
35
==PAGE:37==
0.3.3
The break-point agar based MIC method
To test the agar-based MIC method it was performed with the antibiotics erythromycin and
streptomycin (Table 0.3.3 and 0.3.3). Compared to the EFSA cut-oﬀvalues all the cultures
revealed susceptibility to erythromycin and streptomycin. The erythromycin MIC values for
four cultures independent from the LSM or IST media was below or equal to 0.5(µg/ml) and this
corresponded to the MIC values achieved by the standardized MIC method. The streptomycin
MIC values were one and in some cases two two-fold dilutions MIC values diﬀerence.
Three types of antibiotic classes was tested and the method resulted in expected MIC values.
Positive control and negative control strains conﬁrmed the agar-plates antibiotic concentrations
to be correct. All four cultures were able to grow on the media without antibiotics (Appendix
section 0.8.2.2 and 0.8.2.3).
With these experiments the method showed promise as a MIC
method for mixed undeﬁned starter cultures.
Table 13: The break-point agar-based MIC method for undeﬁned starter cultures - the MIC method
was performed with the antibiotics erythromycin and streptomycin. The antibiotic concentrations applied: ery-
thromycin - 0.5, 1 (break-point conc.) and 2 (µg/ml). The bacterial cell concentration tested was the Mcf1. The
MIC values of the four cultures and controls are presented with the applied media. S.C. - starter culture. These
MIC values are extracted from the table in appendix section
Antibiotic
type
Antibiotic
Bacterial culture
Media
MIC value
(µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Macrolide
Erythromycin
S.C. - A
IST
≤0.5
1
S.C. - B
LSM
≤0.5
1
S.C. - C
IST
≤0.5
1
S.C. - C
LSM
≤0.5
1
S.C. - D
IST
≤0.5
1
S.C. - D
LSM
≤0.5
1
PC1) Bc. paralicheniformis
IST
>2
RS3)
NC2) Lc. lactis
IST
≤0.5
1
PC1) Bc. paralicheniformis
LSM
>2
RS3
NC2) Bc. licheniformis
LSM
≤0.5
4
1) PC - Positive control a erythromycin and streptomycin resistant strain.
2) NC - Negative control a erythromycin and streptomycin sensitive strain.
3) RS - resistant strain.
36
==PAGE:38==
Table 14: The break-point agar-based MIC method for undeﬁned starter cultures - the MIC method
was performed with the antibiotics erythromycin and streptomycin. The antibiotic concentrations applied: strep-
tomycin - 16, break-point concentration 32 and 64 (µg/ml). The bacterial cell concentration tested was the Mcf1.
The MIC values of the four cultures and controls are presented with the applied media. S.C. - starter culture.
These MIC values are extracted from the table in appendix section
Antibiotic
type
Antibiotic
Bacterial culture
Media
MIC value
(µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Aminoglycoside
Streptomycin
S.C. - A
IST
32
32
S.C. - B
LSM
32
64
S.C. - C
IST
32
32-64
S.C. - C
LSM
32
32-64
S.C. - D
IST
64
32-64
S.C. - D
LSM
32
32-64
PC1) Lb. animalis
IST
64
RS3)
NC2) Bc. licheniformis
IST
≤16
32
PC1) Lb. animalis
LSM
>64
RS3)
NC2) Bc. licheniformis
LSM
≤16
8
1) PC - Positive control a erythromycin and streptomycin resistant strain.
2) NC - Negative control a erythromycin and streptomycin sensitive strain.
3) RS - resistant strain.
0.3.4
Genotypic characterization of mixed starter cultures
To gentypically characterize the antibiotic resistome of these undeﬁned cultures metagenomic
sequencing was and obvoius choice. The undeﬁned starter culture ”C” was chosen to be further
investigated by metagenomic sequencing. The goal of the metagenomic sequencing was to ﬁrst oﬀ
all to do read mapping against antibiotic resistance databases to search for antibiotic resistance
genes. The second goal was to attempt assembly and binning to identify possible strains and
to assign possible resistance genes to a strain. To increase the possibility of binning a change
in the strain diversity in of the starter culture ”C” was attempted through diﬀerent conditions.
This strain diﬀerentiation will increase the binning analysis applying sequences composition and
coverage across multiple samples to cluster contigs into ”bins”.
37
==PAGE:39==
0.3.5
The artiﬁcial dataset - assembly and binning
To investigate the possibility of metagenomic assembly and binning with the expected metage-
nomic sequencing data an artiﬁcial dataset resembling the expected metagenomic dataset from
the starter culture ”C” was developed. With the ART-read simulator 18 samples were con-
structed with the genomes of 31 Lactococcus lactis, 3 Leuconostoc mesenteroides and 1 tetra-
cycline resistant Lactococcus lactis strain. The genomes coverage was calculated on the basis
of the estimated data outcome on 15Gbp and which condition the sample was supposed to
simulate. The samples genome percentage and coverage can be seen in appendix section 0.8.3.
The purpose was to use the 18 simulated samples containing 35 genomes of diﬀerent coverage
to assemble and genome bin. Thereby revealing how eﬀectively a combination of assembly and
genome binning could reconstruct the individual genomes
The simulated samples were gathered and a de novo assembly with the assembler IDBA-UD
was performed. The statistics of the assembly created with the 18 samples is represented in the
Table 15. It was revealed that the de novo assembly recovered a total scaﬀold length on 6.849
Mbp, which only correspond to about 3 genomes since the average genome of Lactoccus and
Leuconostoc is around 2.500 Mbp. However the scaﬀold contig coverage is quite high, deﬁning
that the scaﬀold/contigs are 97.71% covered when reads are mapped to them again.
Table 15: The de novo assembly with the assembler IDBA-UD - the number of scaﬀolds and contigs
created. The total scaﬀold and contig length created in the assembly.
Number
of scaﬀolds
Number
of contigs
Total
scaﬀold length
Total
contig length
Scaﬀold
contig coverage
1289
2144
6.894.035
6.735.998
97,71%
Afterwards the assembly was indexed by BBMap and the 18 simulated samples were mapped
against the indexed assembly. The coverage and variance of the crossmapped simulated samples
was used to run MetaBat binning. The quality of the bins recovered from MetaBat binning was
assessed with Checkm which uses marker genes to assess the quality. Checkm provided reported
statistics of marker lineage indicating the taxonomic rank, number of reference genomes used to
identify the marker gene sets. The completeness and contamination of the genome is determined
by the number of times each marker gene is identiﬁed. This analysis identiﬁed only two bins to
be partial or almost complete genomes. The identiﬁed genomes were identiﬁed to belong to the
marker lineage Lactobacillales, and by examining the phylogenetic tree provided by the checkm
38
==PAGE:40==
analysis the genomes where identiﬁed to be the species Lc.
lactis and Leu.
mesenteroides
(Appendix section 0.8.3.2). The dataset was created by 35 genomes and with assembly/binning
it resulted in two genomes, leading to the fact that assembly/binning is diﬃcult especially with
strains so phylogenetic close.
Table 16: ‡extbfMetabat binning assessment by Checkm - Two bins of both binnings were identiﬁed as partial
genomes. These bins where identiﬁed as the species Lc. lactis and Leu. mesenteroides. Number of reference
genomes and the number of times marker genes were identiﬁed used to identify the genome completeness and
contamination.
MetaBat binning default settings
Lineage/Species
Genomes
No. of times
marker set 0-3
Complete
Contamination
Lactobacillales/Lc. lactis
294
99, 363, 9, 1
84,32%
3,06%
Lactobacillales/Leu. mesenteroides
471
147, 201, 0, 0
55,88%
0%
MetaBat binning settings
Lineage/Species
Genomes
No. of times
marker set 0-3
Complete
Contamination
Lactobacillales/Lc. lactis
294
101, 366, 5, 0
84,1%
1,89%
Lactobacillales/Leu. mesenteroides
471
136, 212, 0, 0
59,81%
0%
0.3.6
Metagenomic sequencing of the starter culture C
In this study a metagenomic Illumina Miseq sequencing of the starter culture ”C” was con-
ducted, however the preparation of 18 metagenomic libraries was not performed without several
complications. Through the attempts to construct libraries for the 18 samples, the sequencing
resulted in over-clustering of the ﬂow-cells and thereby no or poor quality of the data output.
In the attempt to solve and deﬁne the problem two diﬀerent approaches for library build were
carried out. The major diﬀerence between the two methods was the fragmentation step, which
was either done by sonication or fragmentase enzymes. The steps of the two methods carried
out are illustrated by the ﬂow chart in ﬁgure 8.
39
==PAGE:41==
Figure 8: Two approaches to construct libraries - Both library construction approaches starts with the
same DNA puriﬁcation step. Afterwards the two approaches diﬀer in the fragmentation step. The approach to
the left is an library construction approach with fragmentation by bioruptor/sonication, with a fragment analysis
step afterwards. Whereas the approach to the right have a fragmentation step conducted by enzymes, without a
fragmentanalysis afterwards. The library build was performed the same in both approaches; fragment end-repair,
A-tailing and adaptor ligation. Afterwards a PCR ampliﬁcation of the libraries can be performed. If however the
libraries are not ampliﬁed a qPCR quantiﬁcation is performed for library concentration. Whereas for ampliﬁed
libraries the concentrations is only determined by a Qubit measurement. The library pool is prepared by the
concentration and average fragment size. At last is the quantiﬁed library pool fragment analysed for the avg.
fragment size and the library concentration is measured. The loading concentration to ﬂow-cell is then calculated
by the fragment avg. size and the concentration.
40
==PAGE:42==
The experimental design of library preparation is important, because it can result in misrepre-
sentation in the data. One factor that can result in a misrepresentation is PCR library ampli-
ﬁcation, which ﬁrst was excluded to minimize the bias of preferential ampliﬁcation of diﬀerent
sequences. However this also required a library build with a high concentration of adaptor lig-
ated fragments. The concentration of adaptor ligated fragments was identiﬁed by qPCR library
quantiﬁcation. The qPCR library quantiﬁcation was performed with 6 standards with the 10-
fold concentrations between 20-0.0002 pM. The average Cq value for each of the DNA standards
were plotted against the log(concentration) to generate a standard curve. The standard curve
was then used to convert to the concentrations of the adaptor ligated fragments. All the libraries
had a concentration around 0.01 pM or below, which corresponded to a low concentration of
adaptor ligated fragments. Therefore, to be able to get a high enough concentration of adaptor
ligated fragments, a PCR ampliﬁcation step of the libraries was performed. However due to
diﬀerentiation of the concentration acquired by Qubit measurement and qPCR quantiﬁcation it
resulted in an over-clustering of the ﬂow-cell.
In the attempt to solve the problem of over-clustering a new approach of library build was
performed. This approach was performed with enzyme fragmentation and PCR library ampliﬁ-
cation. To assess the concentration to be loaded on to the ﬂow cell, a Qubit measurement and
a fragment-analysis was carried out of the library pool. Normally a normal distribution around
the 500 bp fragment size would be revealed with this approach, however this was not the case;
two peaks of fragments appeared as seen in Figure 9. A perfect fragmentation would show a nor-
mal distribution of fragments like the one in Figure 10. This separation of fragments resulted in
two average fragment sizes, which contributed to the diﬃculty in estimating the library concen-
tration in nM and therefore also the loading concentration for sequencing. This forced a return
to the original library construction method, with the fragmentation by Bioruptor/sonication.
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 9: Fragmentanalyzer of library pool constructed by enzyme fragmentation - the analysis lead
to an average fragment size of 474 bp. The two peaks are very characteristic since the fragmentation should have
resulted in a normal distribution of fragment sizes. These two peaks were ﬁrst assumed to be an error due to
problems with the fragmentanalyzer, but was actually correct.
Figure 10: Example of a well performed fragmentation - this is the fragmentanalyzer from one of the 18
library constructed samples. This is a good example of how a fragmentation should appear, a normal distribution
of fragments, with an average fragment size around 500 bp.
The last attempt to construct the metagenomic libraries, was performed by the original method
42
==PAGE:44==
with library PCR ampliﬁcation. This resulted in a library pool which presented two peaks of
fragment distributions in the fragment-analysis, however the separation of the two fragment
distributions was not as great as the fragmentation with enzymes Figure 11. The fragmentan-
alyzer estimated two peaks one around 138 bp fragment size and the second around 1200 bp
fragment size leading to the estimate of an average fragment size of 787 bp. However with the
experience from the previous library constructions it was believed that the estimation of the
average fragment size was set higher due to the two fragment size distributions. A 100bp lower
estimation of the average fragment size was used for concentration calculation, which lead to no
over-clustering during sequencing, however it lead to bit under-clustering resulting in a lower
amount of data, but a high quality of data. This data has been analysed, and mapped against
a antibiotic resistance database and a 16S rRNA database.
Figure 11: The library pool created through the fragmentation by bioruptor and PCR library
ampliﬁcation - in the last attempt to create a suitable library pool for sequencing, it had been discovered
that the reason to the over-clustering was due to the uncertainty of the average fragment size estimated by the
fragmentanalyzer.
0.3.7
The analysis of the metagenomic sequencing of the starter culture C
Due to these problems of sequencing not all samples were not sequenced. The samples included in
the library pool that was sequenced was; samples with sub-concentration of antibiotics, growth in
milk, salt, at 37C, with phages, spiking with tet+ resistant strain with and without tetracycline,
and at last the bulk sample. The reads acquired from these samples were mapped against the
43
==PAGE:45==
databases; Resﬁnder and the 16S rRNA database Silva. The mapped reads for each samples is
presented in the Table 17 below.
Table 17:
Mapped reads for each sample - the reads for each sample were mapped to the antibiotic
resistance database ResFinder and 16s gene database Silva. The number of reads mapped to the two databases
are represented and the unmapped reads for each sample.
Sample
Resﬁnder
Silva
Unmapped
Sm+
0
0
1290
Em+
0
0
5174
Te+
0
3702
1099460
V a+
0
3496
999190
Milk
0
9036
1256718
37C
0
11456
1298520
Salt
0
7468
1233430
Phage 24hr
0
11410
1674072
Phage 48hr
0
9246
1565610
Spike-Tet
0
680
168468
Spike+Tet
278
9818
1420616
Bulk
0
8042
1090018
Based on the mapped read counts the samples with subconcentration of streptomycin and ery-
thromycin was not mapped to any 16S rRNA genes, this was however expected due to the low
reads acquired from the sequencing. The ratio between the genera Lactococcus and Leuconosoc
based on read counts was calculated for each sample and is presented in the Table ??. The
ratios does not reveal a pattern, however the R-abundance for the genera Lactococcus and Leu-
conostoc did show that the sample grown in milk and the bulk sample was similar see Figure
12. This similarity between the bulk sample and milk sample could be expected, since the bulk
sample was grown in milk before it was freeze dried so the ratio between the Lactococcus and
Leuconostoc should be the same. The other samples Lactococcus and Leuconostoc ratio did seem
to be shifted compared to the bulk culture sample, however it is important to stress that this is
not a count of strains but a count of reads mapped compared to the total reads in the sample.
44
==PAGE:46==
Table 18: Lactococcus:Leuconostoc ratio - Based on the reads mapped to 16S gene of the genera Lactococcus
and Leuconostoc the ratio between the reads of genera was calculated.
Sample
Lactococcus:Leuconostoc
Te+
44:753
V a+
79:1431
Milk
3287:177
37C
1407:38
Salt
2218:667
Phage 24hr
533:99
Phage 48hr
2887:742
Spike-Tet
194:85
Spike+Tet
1742:135
Bulk
2893:73
Figure 12:
R-abundance - the mapped read counts divided with the total reads of the sample.
The R-
abundance is presented for Lactococcus and Leuconostoc.
The x-axes present the diﬀerent condition samples
sequenced. The y-axes is the R-abundance which is quite low, since it is a read-mapping of one gene the 16S-
gene.
The mapping of reads to the acquired antibiotic resistance gene database ResFinder revealed no
antibiotic resistance genes present in the samples except the sample spiked with the tetracycline
resistant strain grown with the given antibiotic. These 278 reads where mapped to three tetra-
cycline genes in ResFinder see Table 19. These reads were mapped to the tetracycline resistance
gene tet(S), this was the gene present in the spiked tetracycline resistant strain.
45
==PAGE:47==
Table 19: ResFinder mapping hits - the sample spiked with tetracycline resistant strain revealed mapped
reads to tet(S) resistance gene.
Sample
Gene
Description
Mapped reads
Spike + Te
tet(S)-1-DQ377340
tetracycline resistance
72
tet(S)-2-L09756
tetracycline resistance
124
tet(S)-3-X92946
tetracycline resistance
82
0.4
Discussion and future perspectives
Presently food cultures with a long history of safe use in foods are considered as traditional food
ingredients and are therefore legally permitted for use in food in the EU and USA. However with
the increase of antibiotic resistant pathogens, the food cultures are now suspected to contribute
to the transmission of antibiotic resistance genes. This leads to the purpose of this study to
develop procedures to test for antibiotic resistance in mixed undeﬁned starter cultures (Rolain
(2013); Feld et al. (2008)). In this study four of Chr. Hansen’s undeﬁned starter cultures were
antibiotic susceptibility tested by the ISO standardized MIC method and by an agar-based MIC
method, which was developed with the purpose to be able to test undeﬁned starter cultures. In
addition the presents of antibiotic resistance genes in the starter culture ”C” was investigated
by a metagenomic study.
0.4.1
Phenotypic characterization of antibiotic susceptibility starter cultures
The aim for the developed agar-based MIC method for undeﬁned starter cultures was to ex-
pand the testing bacterial cell concentration, thereby the possibility of observing strains in low
abundance. The ISO stadardized MIC method tested the bacterial cell concentration 1000 x
fold of Mcf1, which should correspond to 3x105 CFU/ml. Whereas the pilot experiment of the
agar-based MIC method demonstrated to be able to test the bacterial cell concentration Mcf1
which should correspond 3x108 CFU/ml(conﬁrmed by cell concentration calculation appendix
0.9.2). In the attempt to test higher bacterial cell concentration samples directly from the bulk
cultures were also tested by the agar-based method. These demonstrated that the cell density
was too high to be tested. However the method was able to test a higher bacterial cell density
compared to the ISO/CLSI standardized MIC method. For further studies of the detection
level of low abundant strains, a antibiotic resistant strain spiking in low concentration could be
carried out to determine the detection level for this agar-based MIC method.
46
==PAGE:48==
The development of a method testing starter cultures instead of single strain cultures repre-
sents some issues. First of all, many of the starter cultures consisting of two species, like Chr.
Hansen’s cultures ”C” and ”D”, are diﬃcult to test due to the diﬀerent MIC break-point of
the two species. In this case the two species Lc. lactis and Leu. mesenteroides leads to a
diﬃculty in assessing the resistance to vancomycin, due to the Lc. lactis sensitivity and the
Leu. mesenteroides natural resistant to vancomycin. Secondly the two species mixed starter
cultures were tested in two media either LSM or IST revealing some diﬀerences in MIC values,
which was considered to be due to favorizing of either Lactoccus or Leuconostoc. However the
media selection should be chosen carefully when testing these cultures, due to the media’s eﬀect
on MIC determination (Huys et al. (2002)).
The currently several MIC methods are applied for testing single strain cultures in the food
industry. However the agar-dilution was quickly descided upon, due to the opportunity of us-
ing the whole surface of the agar-plate to test a higher bacterial concentration and giving the
opportunity to observe low abundant strains. In the literature no studies of antibiotic suscep-
tibility testing of food cultures had been reported, until this February 2018 a study measuring
antibiotic resistance in mixed cultures by microcalormetry (von Ah et al. (2018)). In this study
14 mixed bulk starter cultures consisting of Lb. delbrueckii susp. lactis and Streptococcus ther-
mophilus was tested for antibiotic resistance by isothermal microcalorimetry. This method uses
heat produced from the bacterial metabolism to assess bacterial growth of starter cultures inoc-
ulated in milk with diﬀerent antibiotic concentration and thereby determining the MIC value.
This isothermal microcalorimetry method might have some advantages, when comparing to the
agar-based MIC break-point method. The method can be performed in milk which preserve the
starter cultures strain ratio and might not be as time consuming as the agar-based break-point
MIC method.
However the MIC determination by isothermal microcalorimetry uses 1‰for
starter culture inoculation to create a proper growth curve, which is a small proportion of cells
in the bulk culture. To further determine the advantages and disadvantages of the two methods
studies with both methods should be performed. Thereby an evaluation of MIC value diﬀerences
between the two methods, and for standardization of the methods proper controls have to be
deﬁned.
0.4.1.1
The antibiotic susceptibility of the genera Lactococcus and Leuconostoc
In this study the four starter cultures tested revealed no antibiotic resistance, other than van-
comycin resistance in the cultures containing Leuconostocs species. However a clindamycin MIC
value one to two two-fold dilutions above the break-point value was observed in the starter cul-
47
==PAGE:49==
tures ”B”, ”C” and ”D”. This high MIC value was not observed in single strains of Lc. lactis
or Leuconostoc sp. in this study. However in a study of 43 isolates of Leuconostoc species a
clindamycin MIC value range of ≤0.008-2 µg/ml was determined, revealing three clindamycin re-
sistant strains (Swenson J Thornsberry C (1990)). In regard to Lactococcus species clindamycin
resistance has been recorded in Lc. garvieae with the MIC value 8 µg/ml (Elliott1996). How-
ever the Lc. garvieae has not been isolated from Chr. Hansens starter cultures and the high
MIC value does not correspond to MIC values of the three cultures. The MIC values for the
Leuconostoc resistant species is however more corresponding to the clindamycin MIC values of
the three cultures. Therefore an investigation of the Leuconostoc species in the three cultures
could lead to further identiﬁcation of which species is causing the sligthly higher clindamycin
MIC value.
In a single strain study of 189 isolates from dairy products and commercial cultures MIC value
ranges were established for Lactococcus and Leuconostoc strains (Katla et al. (2001)). The chlo-
ramphenicol MIC value ranges of Lactococcus and Leuconostoc strains revealed generally MIC
values close to MIC break-point or equal to the break-point MIC value. This corresponded to
the ISO standardized MIC determination of the four cultures, which also revealed MIC values
close to MIC break-point or equal to the break-point MIC value. Low MIC value ranges for
gentamicin and eythromycin were also observed in the study of Katla et al. (2001). The ery-
htromycin MIC value range of Lactococcus and Leuconostoc strains was observed to be between
0.5-0.75 µg/ml. This corresponded to the erythromycin MIC values of the four cultures, which
were under 0.5 µg/ml independent of the MIC method. The tetracycline MIC value ranges of
the Lactococcus and Leuconostoc strains were no higher than 8 µg/ml (Katla et al. (2001)). In
our study the four cultures MIC values for tetracycline was not higher than the MIC break-
point concentration 8 µg/ml either. However the break-point agar-based MIC method did reveal
lower tetracycline MIC values for some of the starter cultures, thereby indicating that the MIC
values can diﬀer between the methods. The MIC values of the four cultures therefore seemed
to be corresponding to studies of MIC values acquired for single strains of Lactococcus and
Leuconostoc.
0.4.2
Genotypic characterization of antibiotic resistance
Due to the present problems of increasing antibiotic resistance and the evidence of HGT between
environments, it has become important to characterize whether a phenotypic resistance is due
to an intrinsic or an acquired gene.
In this study a metagenomic approach was applied to
investigate whether antibiotic resistance genes were present in the starter culture ”C”. However
48
==PAGE:50==
the metagenomic library constructions resulted in sequencing problems through over-clustering
of the ﬂow cells. This problem occurs especially when the DNA loading concentration onto a
ﬂow cell is estimated incorrectly (Illumina (2016)). The problem of over-clustering the ﬂow-cell
in this study was identiﬁed as a wrong estimation of the average fragment size. The average
fragment size was actually much lower than estimated by the fragment analysis.
With the
sequenced samples aquired at the end of the study, it was observed that the fragment insert
size only was 300bp long. This was quite lower than expected, since the fragmentation methods
applied both had been tested in Chr. Hansens laboratories and have yielded fragments with an
average size of 500-700 bp. Both fragmentation methods applied in this study have been proven
to be eﬀective (Knierim et al. (2011)), which contribute to the mystery of the small average sized
fragments. Therefore it is recommended that diﬀerent incubation times in the fragmentation
step is investigated, before metagenomic sequencing of the remaining three starter cultures.
0.4.2.1
Analysing the antibiotic resistome by metagenomic sequencing
In this study 18 samples of the starter culture ”C” were planned to be sequenced by Miseq
sequencing. These samples were set out to shift the strain diversity of the culture by diﬀerent
conditions. The choice of 18 samples was taken due to a study proving a high gene capture across
samples by assembly and binning (Nielsen et al. (2014)). The artiﬁcial dataset was aimed to test
how eﬀectively a binning analysis with 18 samples reassembling the starter culture ”C” could
be. The simulation study resulted in an identiﬁcation of two complete/partial genomes one Leu.
mesenterodies and a Lc. lactis. This was two genomes out of the 32 Lc. lactis genomes and 3
Leu. mesenteroides genomes used to create the simulated samples. Although a SNP analysis
did observe diversity between the genomes applied, bining analysis was proven to be diﬃcult
with such a dataset. With these diﬃculties in mind only a read-mapping analysis was carried
out on the acquired data of the starter culture ”C”. However an analysis through read mapping
for antibiotic resistance genes only provide information about whether a read is mapped to a
gene or not. In context it is important to remember that the read only represents a part of gene
sequence, and this gene might not represent a functional gene (Bengtsson-Palme et al. (2017)).
In addition is this analysis not able to identify which species or strain the resistance gene belong
to, thereby complicating the risk assessment. To be able to identify the resistance gene encoding
strain complete sequences is needed, which can be achieved by assembly and binning (Bengtsson-
Palme et al. (2017)). However this seemed to be diﬃcult with a dataset such as the simulated
starter culture ”C” dataset, which was due to the many phylogentic close strains. Therefore
further studies of both assembly and binning analysis of this dataset is needed.
49
==PAGE:51==
However if further studies of assembly and binning reveals the same diﬃculties as with the
artiﬁcial dataset, one consideration could be acquisition of longer sequenced reads (Giordano
et al. (2017)). This could be accomplished with new sequencing technologies producing longer
read lengths like nanopore MinION and PacBio (Laver et al. (2015); Rhoads and Au (2015)).
These two technologies have revealed to be able to produce reads with hundreds of kilobases
length. These longer reads have been able to combine gaps between contigs produced by de novo
assembly creating scaﬀolds (Laver et al. (2015)). A study of longer reads in an artiﬁcial dataset
could reveal whether it would contribute to a better assembly and binning of the phylogenetic
close strains. However if it is decided to conduct a study with MinION or PacBio sequencing
the high sequencing read error rate of these technologies should be considered. The MinION has
been estimated to have an error rate of 38.2%, whereas PacBio has been estimated to have an
error rate on 13% (Laver et al. (2015); Rhoads and Au (2015)). This can however be resolved
through read correcting the MinION or PacBio reads with Miseq reads, which have revealed to
increase the accuracy of the reads to 99.9% (Lemon et al. (2017)). This could be a consideration
for further studies of the metagenomes of the remaining three starter cultures.
0.4.2.2
The metagenomic study of starter culture C
Due to library build diﬃculties only 12 of the 18 planned samples were sequenced.
These
sequenced samples were investigated for antibiotic resistance genes by read-mapping to the
database ResFinder. Thereby no indication of a clindamycin resistance gene, causing the slightly
higher MIC-values. The only sample with mapped reads to ResFinder was the sample spiked
with a tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis strains inoculated and grown with the antibiotic tetra-
cycline. The mapped reads belonged to the tet(S) resistance gene, which was the tetracycline
resistance gene of the spiked strain. This detection revealed that a spiking of an antibiotic resis-
tant strain in 0.1‰ with the given antibiotic was able to grow up to a concentration detectable
by metagenomic sequencing. However the antibiotic resistance gene was not detectable in the
sample only spiked with the antibiotic resistant strain. This revealed that the strain had not
been able to grow up to an abundancy detectable by sequencing. Therefore any antibiotic re-
sistant strains in low abundance in these cultures, they should be able to grow up to detectable
abundance with the right conditions.
A 16S gene mapping was carried out to assess the Lactococcus and Leuconostoc diversity in
the samples. This mapping suggested that a change in the strain diversity of the culture had
been achieved through the diﬀerent conditions. However changing the diversity in these cultures
can be quite diﬃcult due to studies that have revealed that Lc. lactis and Leu. mesenteroides
50
==PAGE:52==
strains are generally quite resistant to stresses (Kim et al. (1999); D’Angelo et al. (2017)). The
Lc. lactis subspecies do however have a diﬀerence in stress tolerance, the Lc. lactis ssp. cremoris
has revealed a lower stress tolerance (Kim et al. (1999)). This subspecies of Lc. lactis has been
proven to have a lower salt, acid and heat tolerance (Kim et al. (1999)). The Leu. mesenteroides
is quite stress tolerant, however the species Leu. pseudomesenteroides have been revealed to be
less tolerant to temperature, acidic and salt increase (D’Angelo et al. (2017)). Previous internal
studies at Chr. Hansen have shown that the culture ”C” contain Lc. lactis ssp. cremoris and
Leu. pseudomesenteroides. Therefore for further study of the metagenomic dataset it could be
interesting to analyse the presents of these two species in the diﬀerent conditions. This could
also provide an understanding of which conditions, could be applied for metagenomic study of
the three remaining starter cultures.
0.5
Conclusion
The aim of this study was to develop procedures to test for antibiotic susceptibility of undeﬁned
starter cultures. The two methods planned in this study were a phenotypic MIC determination
and a genotypic detection of antibiotic resistance genes in metagenomic sequenced data. The
phenotypic MIC determination method had to be able to be standardized and validated for
starter cultures.
For the genotypic method a detection level of antibiotic resistance had to
be established. The phenotypic method was tested with Chr. Hansens four undeﬁned starter
cultures; A, B, C and D. Whereas the genotypic metagenomic study was only performed with
the starter culture ”C”.
The MIC determination method developed for undeﬁned starer cultures was an agar-based MIC
method. This method was based on the MIC break-point concentrations deﬁned by EFSA, and
included three antibiotic concentrations; break-point concentration, two-fold over and under
break-point concentration. This method was tested with four of Chr. Hansens undeﬁned starter
cultures and compared to the ISO standardized MIC determination method. The agar-based
MIC determination method was proven to work and revealed MIC values equal or close to the
MIC values revealed by the ISO standardized MIC method.
The four starter cultures were
not resistant to most antibiotics deﬁned by EFSA, when tested by the ISO standard method
or the agar-based MIC method.
Only antibiotic resistance to vancomycin was revealed for
the cultures containing Leuconostoc strains, which was expected due to Leuconostocs intrinsic
resistance.
However to validate and standardize this agar-based MIC method for undeﬁned
starter cultures repetition of the method is needed, and standards revealing the same MIC value
51
==PAGE:53==
through repetition are needed to be established. A detection level of antibiotic resistance strains
have to be established too, this could be carried out with spiking of antibiotic resistant strains
in low percentage.
The genotypic method was based on a metagenomic study of one of starter culture ”C”. The
ultimative aim of this metagenomic study was not only to establish whether acquired antibiotic
resistance genes were present in the culture, but also to be able to assign these genes to a strain
through binning analysis. Through a simulation study the possibility of binning analysis was
investigated, and the simulated dataset was designed to resembled the planned metagenomic
dataset of starter culture ”C”. The simulated dataset contained 35 diﬀerent Lc. lactis and Leu.
mesenteroides strains, and through binning analysis only two partial genomes were recovered.
This concluded that binning analysis of these cultures with only two species strains was rather
diﬃcult.
In the metagenomic study of starter culture ”C” 18 samples were prepared with
diﬀerent conditions to shift the strain diversity of the culture. Through read-mapping to 16S
genes a shift in the Lactococcus and Leuconostoc ratio was observed depending of the growth
conditions. At last a read-mapping to antibiotic resistance genes revealed that no antibiotic
resistance genes were present, other than in a sample spiked with an antibiotic resistant strain.
This antibiotic resistant strain was spiked in 0.1‰ and when grown with the given antibiotic it
was able to grow up to concentrations detectable by sequencing. However growth without the
given antibiotic, did not result in detectable antibiotic resistance genes. For further studies of
binning analysis longer reads acquired from MinION or PacBio could be considered, to increase
the possibility to connect contigs creating scaﬀolds.
52
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
Abdel-Rahman, M. A., Y. Tashiro, and K. Sonomoto
2013. Recent advances in lactic acid production by microbial fermentation processes. Biotech-
nology Advances, 31(6):877–902.
Abraham, E. P. and E. Chain
1940. An Enzyme from Bacteria able to Destroy Penicillin.
Adzitey, F.
2015.
Antibiotic Classes and Antibiotic Susceptibility of Bacterial Isolates from Selected
Poultry; A Mini Review. World s Veterinary Journal, 6(1):36.
Amann, R. I., W. Ludwig, K. H. Schleifer, R. I. Amann, and W. Ludwig
1995. Phylogenetic identiﬁcation and in situ detection of individual microbial cells without
cultivation . Phylogenetic Identiﬁcation and In Situ Detection of Individual Microbial Cells
without Cultivation. 59(1):143–169.
Andersson, D. I. and D. Hughes
2010. Antibiotic resistance and its cost: Is it possible to reverse resistance? Nature Reviews
Microbiology, 8(4):260–271.
Axelsson, L. T., S. E. Ahrn´e, M. C. Andersson, and S. R. St˚ahl
1988. Identiﬁcation and cloning of a plasmid-encoded erythromycin resistance determinant
from Lactobacillus reuteri. Plasmid, 20(2):171–174.
Bacon, C., V. Jennings, I. Fhaolain, and G. O’Cuinn
1994. Puriﬁcation and Characterization of an Aminopeptidase A from Cytoplasm of Lacto-
coccus lactis subsp. cremoris AM2. International Dairy Journal, Pp. 503–519.
Bankevich, A., S. Nurk, D. Antipov, A. A. Gurevich, M. Dvorkin, A. S. Kulikov, V. M. Lesin,
S. I. Nikolenko, S. Pham, A. D. Prjibelski, A. V. Pyshkin, A. V. Sirotkin, N. Vyahhi, G. Tesler,
53
==PAGE:55==
M. A. Alekseyev, and P. A. Pevzner
2012.
SPAdes: A New Genome Assembly Algorithm and Its Applications to Single-Cell
Sequencing. Journal of Computational Biology, 19(5):455–477.
Barlow, M. and B. G. Hall
2002. Origin and Evolution of the AmpC β -Lactamases of Citrobacter freundii Origin and
Evolution of the AmpC beta -Lactamases of Citrobacter freundii. Antimicrob Agents and
Chemotherapy, 46(5):1190–1198.
Bengtsson-Palme, J., D. G. J. Larsson, and E. Kristiansson
2017. Using metagenomics to investigate human and environmental resistomes. Journal of
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy.
Benveniste, R. and J. Davies
1973. Aminoglycoside Antibiotic-Inactivating Enzymes in Actinomycetes Similar to Those
Present in Clinical Isolates of Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria.
Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 70(8):2276–2280.
Boylston, T. D.
2012. Diary Products. Food Biochemistry and Food Processing, Pp. 426 – 441.
Breitbart, M., P. Salamon, B. Andresen, J. M. Mahaﬀy, A. M. Segall, D. Mead, F. Azam, and
F. Rohwer
2002. Genomic analysis of uncultured marine viral communities. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 99(22):14250–14255.
Broadbent, J. R., D. J. Mcmahon, C. J. Oberg, and D. L. Welker
2001. Use of exopolysaccharide-producing cultures to improve the functionality of low fat
cheese. 11:433–439.
Chambers, H. F. and F. R. Deleo
2010. Waves of resistance Staphylococcus aureus in the antibiotic era. Nature Reviews Mi-
crobiology, 7(9):629–641.
Corsetti, A., M. Gobbetti, J. Rossi, and P. Damiani
1998. Antimould activity of sourdough lactic acid bacteria: Identiﬁcation of a mixture of
organic acids produced by Lactobacillus sanfrancisco CB1. Applied Microbiology and Biotech-
nology, 50(2):253–256.
54
==PAGE:56==
Courvalin, P.
2006. Vancomycin Resistance in Gram-Positive Cocci. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 42(Sup-
plement 1):S25–S34.
Crofts, T. S., A. J. Gasparrini, and G. Dantas
2017. Next-generation approaches to understand and combat the antibiotic resistome. Nature
Reviews Microbiology, 15(7):422–434.
D’Angelo, L., J. Cicotello, M. Zago, D. Guglielmotti, A. Quiberoni, and V. Su´arez
2017. Leuconostoc strains isolated from dairy products: Response against food stress condi-
tions. Food Microbiology, 66:28–39.
Danielsen, M. and A. Wind
2003. Susceptibility of Lactobacillus spp. to antimicrobial agents. International Journal of
Food Microbiology, 82(1):1–11.
Davidson, B. E., N. Kordias, M. Dobos, and a. J. Hillier
1996. Genomic organization of lactic acid bacteria. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, 70(2-4):161–83.
Dcosta, V. M., C. E. King, L. Kalan, M. Morar, W. W. L. Sung, C. Schwarz, D. Froese,
G. Zazula, F. Calmels, R. Debruyne, G. B. Golding, H. N. Poinar, and G. D. Wright
2011. Antibiotic resistance is ancient. Nature, 477(7365):457–461.
D’Costa, V. M., K. M. McGrann, D. W. Hughes, and G. D. Wright
2006. Sampling the antibiotic resistome. Science, 311(June):1550–1554.
De Vuyst, L., R. Callewaert, and B. Pot
1996. Characterization of the antagonistic activity of Lactobacillus amylovorus DCE 471 and
large scale isolation of its bacteriocin amylovorin L471. Systematic and Applied Microbiology,
19(1):9–20.
Dinsdale, E. A., R. A. Edwards, D. Hall, F. Angly, M. Breitbart, J. M. Brulc, M. Furlan,
C. Desnues, M. Haynes, L. Li, L. McDaniel, M. A. Moran, K. E. Nelson, C. Nilsson, R. Olson,
J. Paul, B. R. Brito, Y. Ruan, B. K. Swan, R. Stevens, D. L. Valentine, R. V. Thurber,
L. Wegley, B. A. White, and F. Rohwer
2008. Functional metagenomic proﬁling of nine biomes. Nature, 452(7187):629–632.
EFSA
2012. Guidance on the assessment of bacterial susceptibility to antimicrobials of human and
veterinary importance. EFSA Journal, 10(6).
55
==PAGE:57==
Feld, L., S. Schjørring, K. Hammer, T. R. Licht, M. Danielsen, K. Krogfelt, and A. Wilcks
2008. Selective pressure aﬀects transfer and establishment of a Lactobacillus plantarum resis-
tance plasmid in the gastrointestinal environment. Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy,
61(4):845–852.
Fleming, A.
1929. On the antibacterial action of cultures of a penicillium, with special reference to their use
in the isolation of B. inﬂuenzae. 1929. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 79(8):780–
790.
Fl´orez, A. B., I. Campedelli, S. Delgado, ´A. Alegr´ıa, E. Salvetti, G. E. Felis, B. Mayo, and
S. Torriani
2016. Antibiotic susceptibility proﬁles of dairy leuconostoc, analysis of the genetic basis of
atypical resistances and transfer of genes in vitro and in a food matrix. PLoS ONE, 11(1):1–20.
for disease control, C. and prevention
2018. Antibiotic/Antimicrobial resistance from centers for disease control and prevention.
Forslund, K., S. Sunagawa, J. R. Kultima, D. R. Mende, M. Arumugam, A. Typas, and P. Bork
2013. Country-speciﬁc antibiotic use practices impact the human gut resistome. Genome,
23:1163–1169.
Gatti, M., B. Bottari, C. Lazzi, E. Neviani, and G. Mucchetti
2014. Invited review: Microbial evolution in raw-milk, long-ripened cheeses produced using
undeﬁned natural whey starters. Journal of Dairy Science, 97(2):573–591.
Gfeller, K. Y., M. Roth, L. Meile, and M. Teuber
2003.
Sequence and genetic organization of the 19.3-kb erythromycin- and dalfopristin-
resistance plasmid pLME300 from Lactobacillus fermentum ROT1. Plasmid, 50(3):190–201.
Giordano, F., L. Aigrain, M. A. Quail, P. Coupland, J. K. Bonﬁeld, R. M. Davies, G. Tischler,
D. K. Jackson, T. M. Keane, J. Li, J. X. Yue, G. Liti, R. Durbin, and Z. Ning
2017. De novo yeast genome assemblies from MinION, PacBio and MiSeq platforms. Scientiﬁc
Reports, 7(1):1–10.
Gupta, S. K., B. R. Padmanabhan, S. M. Diene, R. Lopez-Rojas, M. Kempf, L. Landraud, and
J. M. Rolain
2014. ARG-annot, a new bioinformatic tool to discover antibiotic resistance genes in bacterial
genomes. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy.
56
==PAGE:58==
Guti´errez-M´endez, N., J. C. Rodr´ıguez-Figueroa, A. F. Gonz´alez-C´ordova, G. V. Nev´arez-
Moorill´on, B. Rivera-Chavira, and B. Vallejo-Cordoba
2010. Phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of <i>Lactococcus lactis</i> strains isolated
from diﬀerent ecosystems. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 56(5):432–439.
Hemme, D. and C. Foucaud-Scheunemann
2004. Leuconostoc, characteristics, use in dairy technology and prospects in functional foods.
International Dairy Journal, 14(6):467–494.
Hon, W. C., G. A. McKay, P. R. Thompson, R. M. Sweet, D. S. Yang, G. D. Wright, and A. M.
Berghuis
1997. Structure of an enzyme required for aminoglycoside antibiotic resistance reveals homol-
ogy to eukaryotic protein kinases. Cell, 89(6):887–895.
Huang, W., L. Li, J. R. Myers, and G. T. Marth
2012. ART: A next-generation sequencing read simulator. Bioinformatics.
Hugenholtz, P. and G. W. Tyson
2008. Metagenomics. Nature, 455(August 2006):481–483.
Huys, G., K. D’Haene, and J. Swings
2002. Inﬂuence of the culture medium on antibiotic susceptibility testing of food-associated
lactic acid bacteria with the agar overlay disc diﬀusion method. Letters in Applied Microbi-
ology, 34(6):402–406.
Illumina
2016. Optimizing Cluster Density on Illumina Sequencing Systems Table of Contents. Pp. 1–
12.
Kang, D. D., J. Froula, R. Egan, and Z. Wang
2015. MetaBAT, an eﬃcient tool for accurately reconstructing single genomes from complex
microbial communities. PeerJ, 3:e1165.
Katla, A.-K., H. Kruse, G. Johnsen, and H. Herikstad
2001. Antimicrobial susceptibility of starter culture bacteria used in Norwegian dairy products.
International Journal of Food Microbiology.
Kim, W. S., J. Ren, and N. W. Dunn
1999. Diﬀerentiation of Lactococcus lactis subspecies lactis and subspecies cremoris strains
by their adaptive response to stresses. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 171(1):57–65.
57
==PAGE:59==
Kleerebezemab, M., P. Hols, and J. Hugenholtz
2000. Lactic acid bacteria as a cell factory: Rerouting of carbon metabolism in Lactococcus
lactis by metabolic engineering. Enzyme and Microbial Technology, 26(9-10):840–848.
Klijn, N., a. H. Weerkamp, and V.-W. M. De
1991. Identiﬁcation of mesophilic lactic acid bacteria by using polymerase chain reaction-
ampliﬁed variable regions of 16S rRNA and speciﬁc DNA probes. Appl-Environ-Microbiol,
57(11):3390–3395.
Klijn, N., A. H. Weerkamp, and W. M. de Vos
1995. Detection and characterization of lactose-utilizing Lactococcus spp. in natural ecosys-
tems. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 61(2):788–792.
Knierim, E., B. Lucke, J. M. Schwarz, M. Schuelke, and D. Seelow
2011. Systematic comparison of three methods for fragmentation of long-range PCR products
for next generation sequencing. PLoS ONE, 6(11).
Koskiniemi, S., M. Pr¨anting, E. Gullberg, J. N¨asvall, and D. I. Andersson
2011. Activation of cryptic aminoglycoside resistance in Salmonella enterica. Molecular Mi-
crobiology, 80(6):1464–1478.
Kr¨ober, M., T. Bekel, N. N. Diaz, A. Goesmann, S. Jaenicke, L. Krause, D. Miller, K. J. Runte,
P. Vieh¨over, A. P¨uhler, and A. Schl¨uter
2009. Phylogenetic characterization of a biogas plant microbial community integrating clone
library 16S-rDNA sequences and metagenome sequence data obtained by 454-pyrosequencing.
Journal of Biotechnology, 142(1):38–49.
Laver, T., J. Harrison, P. A. O’Neill, K. Moore, A. Farbos, K. Paszkiewicz, and D. J. Studholme
2015. Assessing the performance of the Oxford Nanopore Technologies MinION. Biomolecular
Detection and Quantiﬁcation, 3:1–8.
Lazarevic, V., K. Whiteson, S. Huse, D. Hernandez, L. Farinelli, M. Øster˚as, J. Schrenzel, and
P. Fran¸cois
2009. Metagenomic study of the oral microbiota by Illumina high-throughput sequencing.
Journal of Microbiological Methods, 79(3):266–271.
Lee, M. S.
1994. Vancomycin-Resistant Leuconostoc mesenteroides and Lactobacillus. 176(1):260–264.
58
==PAGE:60==
Lemon, J. K., P. P. Khil, K. M. Frank, and J. P. Dekker
2017. Rapid Nanopore Sequencing of Plasmids and Resistance Gene Detection in Clinical
Isolates. 55(12):3530–3543.
Leroy, F. and L. De Vuyst
2004. Lactic acid bacteria as functional starter cultures for the food fermentation industry.
Trends in Food Science and Technology, 15(2):67–78.
Libudzisz, Z. and E. Galewska
1991. Citrate metabolism in Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis var. diacetylactis strains. Food /
Nahrung, 35(6):611–618.
Liu, B. and M. Pop
2009. ARDB - Antibiotic resistance genes database. Nucleic Acids Research, 37(SUPPL.
1):443–447.
Mathur, S. and R. Singh
2005. Antibiotic resistance in food lactic acid bacteria - A review. International Journal of
Food Microbiology, 105(3):281–295.
Mattia, A. and R. Merker
2008. Regulation of Probiotic Substances as Ingredients in Foods: Premarket Approval or
“Generally Recognized as Safe” Notiﬁcation. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 46(s2):S115–S118.
McArthur, A. G., N. Waglechner, F. Nizam, A. Yan, M. A. Azad, A. J. Baylay, K. Bhullar,
M. J. Canova, G. De Pascale, L. Ejim, L. Kalan, A. M. King, K. Koteva, M. Morar, M. R.
Mulvey, J. S. O’Brien, A. C. Pawlowski, L. J. Piddock, P. Spanogiannopoulos, A. D. Suther-
land, I. Tang, P. L. Taylor, M. Thaker, W. Wang, M. Yan, T. Yu, and G. D. Wright
2013.
The comprehensive antibiotic resistance database.
Antimicrobial Agents and
Chemotherapy.
Mundt, J. O.
1970. Lactic Acid Bacteria Associated With Raw Plant Food Material. Journal of Milk and
Food Technology, (12):529–574.
Neu, H. C.
1969.
Eﬀect of beta-lactamase location in Escherichia coli on penicillin synergy.
Applied
microbiology, 17(6):783–6.
59
==PAGE:61==
Nielsen, H. B., M. Almeida, A. S. Juncker, S. Rasmussen, J. Li, S. Sunagawa, D. R. Plichta,
L. Gautier, A. G. Pedersen, E. Le Chatelier, E. Pelletier, I. Bonde, T. Nielsen, C. Manichanh,
M. Arumugam, J.-M. Batto, M. B. Quintanilha Dos Santos, N. Blom, N. Borruel, K. S.
Burgdorf, F. Boumezbeur, F. Casellas, J. Dor´e, P. Dworzynski, F. Guarner, T. Hansen,
F. Hildebrand, R. S. Kaas, S. Kennedy, K. Kristiansen, J. R. Kultima, P. L´eonard, F. Lev-
enez, O. Lund, B. Moumen, D. Le Paslier, N. Pons, O. Pedersen, E. Prifti, J. Qin, J. Raes,
S. Sørensen, J. Tap, S. Tims, D. W. Ussery, T. Yamada, MetaHIT Consortium, P. Renault,
T. Sicheritz-Ponten, P. Bork, J. Wang, S. Brunak, S. D. Ehrlich, and MetaHIT Consortium
2014. Identiﬁcation and assembly of genomes and genetic elements in complex metagenomic
samples without using reference genomes. Nature biotechnology.
Nordg˚ard, L., L. Brusetti, N. Raddadi, T. Traavik, B. Averhoﬀ, and K. M. Nielsen
2012. An investigation of horizontal transfer of feed introduced DNA to the aerobic microbiota
of the gastrointestinal tract of rats. BMC Research Notes, 5(1):170.
Peng, Y., H. C. M. Leung, S. M. Yiu, and F. Y. L. Chin
2012. IDBA-UD: A de novo assembler for single-cell and metagenomic sequencing data with
highly uneven depth. Bioinformatics, 28(11):1420–1428.
Perreten, V., F. V. Schwarz, M. Teuber, and S. B. Levy
2001. Mdt(A), a New Ef ux Protein Conferring Multiple Antibiotic Resistance in. Society,
45(4):1109–1114.
Perry, J. A., E. L. Westman, and G. D. Wright
2014. The antibiotic resistome: What’s new?
Perry, J. A. and G. D. Wright
2014. Forces shaping the antibiotic resistome. BioEssays, 36(12):1179–1184.
Petersen, T. N., O. Lukjancenko, M. C. F. Thomsen, M. M. Sperotto, O. Lund, F. M. Aarestrup,
and T. Sicheritz-Ponten
2017.
MGmapper: Reference based mapping and taxonomy annotation of metagenomics
sequence reads. PLoS ONE, 12(5):1–13.
Poulou, A., E. Voulgari, G. Vrioni, V. Koumaki, G. Xidopoulos, V. Chatzipantazi, F. Markou,
and A. Tsakris
2013.
Outbreak caused by an ertapenem-resistant, CTX-M-15-producing Klebsiella pneu-
moniae sequence type 101 clone carrying an OmpK36 porin variant.
Journal of Clinical
Microbiology, 51(10):3176–3182.
60
==PAGE:62==
Raibaud, P., M. Fons, and R. Ducluzeau
1997. Isolation and Characterization of a Plasmid from. Plasmid, 203(2):199–203.
Rhoads, A. and K. F. Au
2015. PacBio Sequencing and Its Applications. Genomics, Proteomics and Bioinformatics,
13(5):278–289.
Ricci, A., A. Allende, D. Bolton, M. Chemaly, R. Davies, R. Girones, K. Koutsoumanis,
R. Lindqvist, B. Nørrung, L. Robertson, G. Ru, P. S. Fernandez Escamez, M. Sanaa, M. Sim-
mons, P. Skandamis, E. Snary, N. Speybroeck, B. Ter Kuile, J. Threlfall, H. Wahlstr¨om, P. S.
Cocconcelli, L. Peixe, M. P. Maradona, A. Querol, J. E. Suarez, I. Sundh, J. Vlak, S. Correia,
and L. Herman
2017. Update of the list of QPSrecommended biological agents intentionally added to food
or feed as notiﬁed to EFSA 6: suitability of taxonomic units notiﬁed to EFSA until March
2017. EFSA Journal, 15(7).
Roberts, M. C.
1996. Tetracycline resistance determinants: mechanisms of action, regulation of expression,
genetic mobility, and distribution. FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 19(1):1–24.
Rolain, J. M.
2013. Food and human gut as reservoirs of transferable antibiotic resistance encoding genes.
Frontiers in Microbiology, 4(JUN):1–10.
Salama, M., W. Sandine, and S. Giovannoni
1991. Development and application of oligonucleotide probes for identiﬁcation of Development
and Application of Oligonucleotide Probes for Identiﬁcation of Lactococcus lactis subsp .
cremorist. 57(5):1313–1318.
Salama, M. S., W. E. Sandine, and S. J. Giovannoni
1993. Isolation of Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris from nature by colony hybridization with
rRNA probes.
Salminen, S., A. Von Wright, L. Morelli, P. Marteau, D. Brassart, W. M. De Vos, R. Fond´en,
M. Saxelin, K. Collins, G. Mogensen, S. E. Birkeland, and T. Mattila-Sandholm
1998. Demonstration of safety of probiotics - A review. International Journal of Food Micro-
biology, 44(1-2):93–106.
Sanders, J. W., G. Venema, and J. Kok
61
==PAGE:63==
1999. Environmental stress responses in Lactococcus lactis. FEMS Microbiology Reviews,
23(4):483–501.
Sandine, W., P. Radich, and P. Elliker
1972. Ecology of the lactic streptococci. Milk food technology.
Sebaihia, M., B. W. Wren, P. Mullany, N. F. Fairweather, N. Minton, R. Stabler, N. R. Thomson,
A. P. Roberts, A. M. Cerde˜no-T´arraga, H. Wang, M. T. Holden, A. Wright, C. Churcher,
M. A. Quail, S. Baker, N. Bason, K. Brooks, T. Chillingworth, A. Cronin, P. Davis, L. Dowd,
A. Fraser, T. Feltwell, Z. Hance, S. Holroyd, K. Jagels, S. Moule, K. Mungall, C. Price,
E. Rabbinowitsch, S. Sharp, M. Simmonds, K. Stevens, L. Unwin, S. Whithead, B. Dupuy,
G. Dougan, B. Barrell, and J. Parkhill
2006.
The multidrug-resistant human pathogen Clostridium diﬃcile has a highly mobile,
mosaic genome. Nature Genetics, 38(7):779–786.
Stadhouders, J.
1986.
The control of cheese starter activity.
Netherlands Milk and Dairy Journal,
40(January):115–173.
Stiles, M. E. and W. H. Holzapfel
1997. Lactic acid bacteria of foods and their current taxonomy. International Journal of Food
Microbiology, 36(1):1–29.
Swenson J Thornsberry C, F. R.
1990. Antimicrobial susceptibility of vancomycin-resistant Leuconostoc, Pedicoccus, and Lac-
tobacillus species. Antimicrob Agents Chemother, 34(4):543–549.
Thomas, T., J. Gilbert, and F. Meyer
2012. Metagenomics - a guide from sampling to data analysis. Microbial Informatics and
Experimentation, 2(1):3.
Tuohy, K., M. Davies, P. Rumsby, C. Rumney, M. R. Adams, and I. R. Rowland
2002. Monitoring transfer of recombinant and nonrecombinant plasmids between Lactococcus
lactis strains and members of the human gastrointestinal microbiota in vivo - Impact of donor
cell number and diet. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 93(6):954–964.
Tyson, G. W., J. Chapman, P. Hugenholtz, E. E. Allen, R. J. Ram, P. M. Richardson, V. V.
Solovyev, E. M. Rubin, D. S. Rokhsar, and J. F. Banﬁeld
2004. Community structure and metabolism through reconstruction of microbial genomes
from the environment. Nature, 428(6978):37–43.
62
==PAGE:64==
Van Hoek, A. H., D. Mevius, B. Guerra, P. Mullany, A. P. Roberts, and H. J. Aarts
2011. Acquired antibiotic resistance genes: An overview. Frontiers in Microbiology, 2(SEP):1–
27.
van Schaik, W.
2015. The human gut resistome. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 370(1670):20140087–20140087.
Vescovo, M., L. Morelli, and V. Bottazzi
1982. Drug resistance plasmids in Lactobacillus acidophilus and Lactobacillus reuteri. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 43:50-56., 43(1):50–56.
von Ah, U., N. Shani, M. Chollet, A. Solokhina, and O. Braissant
2018. Measuring antibiotic resistance in mixed cultures: Isothermal microcalorimetry as a
novel analytical tool. International Dairy Journal, 77:73–79.
Weinstein, M. P., B. L. Zimmer, F. R. Cockerill, J. D. Turnidge, M. A. Wikler, K. Bush, M. N.
Dudley, G. M. Eliopoulos, D. J. Hardy, D. W. Hecht, J. F. Hindler, J. B. Patel, M. J. Ferraro,
and J. M. Swenson
2012. Methods for Dilution Antimicrobial Susceptibility Tests for Bacteria That Grow Aerobi-
cally ; Approved Standard — Ninth Edition. Methods for Dilution Antimicrobial Susceptibility
Tests for Bacteria That Grow Aerobically; Approved Standar- Ninth Edition, 32(2):18.
Westover, K. M.
1999. Environmental Microbiology, volume 80.
Wijtzes, T., M. Bruggeman, M. Nout, and M. Zwietering
1997.
A computerised system for the identiﬁcation of lactic acid bacteria.
International
Journal of Food Microbiology, 38:65–70.
Wright, G. D.
2010a. Antibiotic resistance in the environment: A link to the clinic?
Current Opinion in
Microbiology, 13(5):589–594.
Wright, G. D.
2010b. Q & A : Antibiotic resistance : where does it come from and what can we do about
it ? BMC Biology, 8.
Zankari, E., H. Hasman, S. Cosentino, M. Vestergaard, S. Rasmussen, O. Lund, F. M. Aarestrup,
63
==PAGE:65==
and M. V. Larsen
2012.
Identiﬁcation of acquired antimicrobial resistance genes.
Journal of Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy.
64
==PAGE:66==
0.6
Appendix
0.6.1
Phenotypic studies - appendix
0.6.1.1
Standard MIC method on single strains Lactococci and Leuconostoc
Initially MIC was determined for single strains of Lc.
lactis ssp., Leu.
mesenteroides and
Leuconostoc species unknown according to the single strain culture aimed ISO10932 standard
(CH SOP-05603) to assess the susceptibility of strains within the same species present in the
starter cultures.
Table 20: The ISO standardized MIC method for two Lactococci and two Leuconostoc - the stan-
dardized MIC method performed with the tetracycline resistant strain Lc. lactis ssp. lactis in IST media.
Lactococcus lactis ssp. lactis CHCC6005
Antibiotic type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
2
32
Kanamycin
8
64
Streptomycin
8
32
Neomycin
2
-
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
64
4
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.12
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
0.12
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
8
8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
0.25
2
Penicillin
0.25
-
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
0.25-0.5
4
MLS
Qd
2
-
Oxazolidinone
Linezolid
4-8
-
Folate pathway inhibitors
Trimethoprim
>64
-
Quinolones
Ciproﬂoxacin
4-8
-
Ansamycins
Rifampicin
32
-
65
==PAGE:67==
Table 21: The ISO standardized MIC method for two Lactococci and two Leuconostoc - the stan-
dardized MIC method performed with the strain Lc. lactis ssp. cremoris in IST media.
Lactococcus lactis ssp. cremoris CHCC12083
Antibiotic type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
0.5
32
Kanamycin
2
64
Streptomycin
2
32
Neomycin
0.5
-
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
0.5
4
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.06
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
0.06
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
4
8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
0.25
2
Penicillin
0.25
-
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
0.25
4
MLS
Qd
1
-
Oxazolidinone
Linezolid
2
-
Folate pathway inhibitors
Trimethoprim
>64
-
Quinolones
Ciproﬂoxacin
1-2
-
Ansamycins
Rifampicin
64
-
66
==PAGE:68==
Table 22: The ISO standardized MIC method for two Lactococci and two Leuconostoc - the stan-
dardized MIC method performed with the strain Leuconostoc sp. unknown in LSM media.
Leuconostoc. sp. unknown CHCC28429
Antibiotic type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
0.5
16
Kanamycin
8-16
16
Streptomycin
8-16
32
Neomycin
0.5-1
-
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
1
8
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.12
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
0.03-0.06
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
4-8
4
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
1-8
2
Penicillin
0.5-4
-
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
¿128
N.R.
MLS
Qd
1
-
Oxazolidinone
Linezolid
4
-
Folate pathway inhibitors
Trimethoprim
8
-
Quinolones
Ciproﬂoxacin
2
-
Ansamycins
Rifampicin
1
-
67
==PAGE:69==
Table 23: The ISO standardized MIC method for two Lactococci and two Leuconostoc - the stan-
dardized MIC method performed with the strain Leu. mesenteriodes in LSM media.
Leuconostoc mesenteriodes CHCC16058
Antibiotic type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
0.5-2
16
Kanamycin
16
16
Streptomycin
16
64
Neomycin
0.5-2
-
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
1
8
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.5
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
0.12
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
4
4
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
1-8
2
Penicillin
1-16
-
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
>128
N.R.
MLS
Qd
1-2
-
Oxazolidinone
Linezolid
4
-
Folate pathway inhibitors
Trimethoprim
32-64
-
Quinolones
Ciproﬂoxacin
4
-
Ansamycins
Rifampicin
0.5-1
-
68
==PAGE:70==
Table 24: The ISO standardized MIC method for two Lactococci and two Leuconostoc - the IST
media control strain Lc. lactis.
IST media control Lactoccus lactis CHCC28622
Antibiotic type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
0.5
32
Kanamycin
2
64
Streptomycin
4-8
32
Neomycin
0.5
-
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
1
4
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.12
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
0.12-0.5
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
4-8
8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
0.25
2
Penicillin
0.25
-
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
0.5
4
MLS
Qd
4
-
Oxazolidinone
Linezolid
2
-
Folate pathway inhibitors
Trimethoprim
>64
-
Quinolones
Ciproﬂoxacin
16
-
Ansamycins
Rifampicin
16
-
69
==PAGE:71==
Table 25: The ISO standardized MIC method for two Lactococci and two Leuconostoc - the LSM
media control strain Lb. plantarum.
LSM media control Lactobacillus plantarum CHCC28626
Antibiotic type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
1-4
16
Kanamycin
32-64
64
Streptomycin
16-32
N.R.
Neomycin
1-4
-
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
32
32
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.5
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
0.5
2
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
0.5
8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
0.25-0.5
2
Penicillin
2
-
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
¿128
N.R.
MLS
Qd
2
-
Oxazolidinone
Linezolid
4
-
Folate pathway inhibitors
Trimethoprim
4
-
Quinolones
Ciproﬂoxacin
64
-
Ansamycins
Rifampicin
2-4
-
70
==PAGE:72==
0.6.1.2
Standard MIC method of mixed undeﬁned starter cultures
The MIC was performed with direct sampling from the bulk, pre-growth is after inoculation in
BD5-1 media 24hr, and pre-growth + tet is after inoculation in BD5-1 media with 0.125 µg/ml
tetracycline 24 hr.
Table 26: MIC values for the A culture performed in IST media - the table includes MIC values of the
three inoculums and EFSA cut-oﬀvalues of Lc. lactis.
Starter culture A
Antibiotic type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Direct1)
Pre-growth2)
Pre-growth + Tet3)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
1
1-2
1
32
Kanamycin
4
4
4
64
Streptomycin
16
8
8-16
32
Neomycin
1
1
1-4
-
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
0.5
0.5
0.5
4
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.12
0.12
0.06-0.12
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
0.12
0.12
0.12
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
4
4
4
8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
0.25
0.25
0.25
2
Penicillin
0.25-0.5
0.25
0.25
-
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
0.25
0.5
0.25
4
MLS4)
Qd5)
4
2-4
4
-
Oxazolidinone
Linezolid
4
2-4
2-4
-
FPI6)
Trimethoprim
>64
>64
>64
-
Quinolones
Ciproﬂoxacin
8
8
4-8
-
Ansamycins
Rifampicin
16
16
16
-
1) Direct - sample directly from bulk culture.
2) Pre-growth - sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture.
3) Pre-growth + Tet -sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture with sub-concentration of tetracycline 0.125 µg/ml.
4) MLS - Macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin.
5) Qd - Quinupristin-dalfopristin.
6) FPI - Folate pathway inhibitors.
71
==PAGE:73==
Table 27: MIC values for the B culture performed in LSM media - the table includes MIC values of
the three inoculums and EFSA cut-oﬀvalues of Leuconostoc sp.
Starter culture B
Antibiotic type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Direct1)
Pre-growth2)
Pre-growth + Tet3)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
0.5-1
0.5-1
0.5
16
Kanamycin
16
16
16
16
Streptomycin
8
8
8-16
64
Neomycin
1-2
1
1
-
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
4
8
8
8
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.25
0.25
0.25-0.5
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
4
4
4
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
8
8
8
4
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
1
1-2
1-2
2
Penicillin
1
1
0.5-1
-
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
>128
>128
>128
N.R.
MLS4)
Qd5)
1
1
1
-
Oxazolidinone
Linezolid
4-8
4
4
-
FPI6)
Trimethoprim
16
>64
8
-
Quinolones
Ciproﬂoxacin
4-8
2-4
4
-
Ansamycins
Rifampicin
4
0.5-1
1
1) Direct - sample directly from bulk culture.
2) Pre-growth - sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture.
3) Pre-growth + Tet -sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture with sub-concentration of tetracycline 0.125 µg/ml.
4) MLS - Macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin.
5) Qd - Quinupristin-dalfopristin.
6) FPI - Folate pathway inhibitors.
72
==PAGE:74==
Table 28: MIC values for the C culture performed in IST media - the table includes MIC values of the
three inoculums and EFSA cut-oﬀvalues of Lc. lactis and Leuconostoc sp.
Starter culture C in IST media
Antibiotic type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Direct1)
Pre-growth2)
Pre-growth + Tet3)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
2
0.5
0.5-1
16-32
Kanamycin
4-8
4
4
16-64
Streptomycin
8
8
8
32-64
Neomycin
1-2
1
0.5-1
-
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
2
4
4
4-8
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.12
0.12
0.12
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
1-2
2-4
2
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
4
4
4-8
4-8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
1
1
1
2
Penicillin
0.5
0.5
0.5
-
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
>128
>128
>128
4 or N.R.
MLS4)
Qd5)
2
2
2
-
Oxazolidinone
Linezolid
2
2
2
-
FPI6)
Trimethoprim
>64
>64
>64
-
Quinolones
Ciproﬂoxacin
16
8
8
-
Ansamycins
Rifampicin
32
16-32
16
-
1) Direct - sample directly from bulk culture.
2) Pre-growth - sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture.
3) Pre-growth + Tet -sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture with sub-concentration of tetracycline 0.125 µg/ml.
4) MLS - Macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin.
5) Qd - Quinupristin-dalfopristin.
6) FPI - Folate pathway inhibitors.
73
==PAGE:75==
Table 29: MIC values for the C culture performed in LSM media - the table includes MIC values of
the three inoculums and EFSA cut-oﬀvalues of Lc. lactis and Leuconostoc sp.
Starter culture C in LSM media
Antibiotic type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Direct1)
Pre-growth2)
Pre-growth + Tet3)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
1
1
1
16-32
Kanamycin
8-16
16
16
16-64
Streptomycin
16
16
16
32-64
Neomycin
2
1-2
1-4
-
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
2
4
4
4-8
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.25
0.25
0.25
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
4
4
4
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
4-8
4-8
8
4-8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
1
1
1
2
Penicillin
0.5
0.5
0.5
-
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
>128
>128
>128
4 or N.R.
MLS4)
Qd5)
2
1
1
-
Oxazolidinone
Linezolid
2-8
4
4
-
FPI6)
Trimethoprim
>64
>64
>64
-
Quinolones
Ciproﬂoxacin
8
4
4
-
Ansamycins
Rifampicin
32-64
32
16
-
1) Direct - sample directly from bulk culture.
2) Pre-growth - sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture.
3) Pre-growth + Tet -sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture with sub-concentration of tetracycline 0.125 µg/ml.
4) MLS - Macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin.
5) Qd - Quinupristin-dalfopristin.
6) FPI - Folate pathway inhibitors.
74
==PAGE:76==
Table 30: MIC values for the D culture performed in IST media - the table includes MIC values of the
three inoculums and EFSA cut-oﬀvalues of Lc. lactis and Leuconostoc sp.
Starter culture D in IST media
Antibiotic type
Antimicrobial
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Direct1)
Pre-growth2)
Pre-growth + Tet3)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
0.5-1
0.5-1
0.5-1
16-32
Kanamycin
4-8
4-8
4-8
16-64
Streptomycin
8-16
8
8-16
32-64
Neomycin
1-2
0.5-4
0.5-1
-
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
4
4
4
4-8
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.12
0.12
0.12
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
4
4
4
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
4
4
8
4-8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
1
0.5
0.5-1
2
Penicillin
0.5
0.5
0.5-1
-
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
>128
>128
>128
4 or N.R.
MLS4)
Qd5)
2
2
2
-
Oxazolidinone
Linezolid
2
2
2-4
-
FPI6)
Trimethoprim
>64
>64
>64
-
Quinolones
Ciproﬂoxacin
4-8
4
2-8
-
Ansamycins
Rifampicin
32
32
16
-
1) Direct - sample directly from bulk culture.
2) Pre-growth - sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture.
3) Pre-growth + Tet -sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture with sub-concentration of tetracycline 0.125 µg/ml.
4) MLS - Macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin.
5) Qd - Quinupristin-dalfopristin.
6) FPI - Folate pathway inhibitors.
75
==PAGE:77==
Table 31: MIC values for the D culture performed in LSM media - the table includes MIC values of
the three inoculums and EFSA cut-oﬀvalues of Lc. lactis and Leuconostoc sp.
Starter culture D in LSM media
Antibiotic type
Antibiotic
MIC value (µg/ml)
EFSA cut-oﬀ
value (µg/ml)
Direct1)
Pre-growth2)
Pre-growth + Tet3)
Aminoglycoside
Gentamicin
1
0.5-2
0.5-1
16-32
Kanamycin
8-16
16
16-32
16-64
Streptomycin
16
16-32
8-16
32-64
Neomycin
2
1-2
2-4
-
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
4
4
4-8
4-8
Macrolide
Eryhtomycin
0.25
0.25
0.25
1
Lincosamide
Clindamycin
4
4
4
1
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
8
8
8
4-8
Beta-lactam
Ampicillin
1
1
2
2
Penicillin
0.5
0.5
1
-
Glycopeptide
Vancomycin
>128
>128
>128
4 or N.R.
MLS4)
Qd5)
2
1-2
1
-
Oxazolidinone
Linezolid
2-4
4
4
-
FPI6)
Trimethoprim
>64
>64
>64
-
Quinolones
Ciproﬂoxacin
8
2-4
4-8
Ansamycins
Rifampicin
32
16
16
-
1) Direct - sample directly from bulk culture.
2) Pre-growth - sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture.
3) Pre-growth + Tet -sample of 24hr inoculated bulk culture with sub-concentration of tetracycline 0.125 µg/ml.
4) MLS - Macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin.
5) Qd - Quinupristin-dalfopristin.
6) FPI - Folate pathway inhibitors.
76
==PAGE:78==
0.6.2
MIC method for mixed undeﬁned starter cultures appendix
0.6.2.1
Pilot experiment of the agar-based MIC method - tetracycline
The pilot experiment of the break-point agar-based MIC method was ﬁrst performed with the
antibiotic tetracycline. All four starter cultures; A, B, C and D were tested in this pilot ex-
periment. This section includes the antibiotic plate inspection counts, deﬁning the MIC values
presented in the result section 0.4.1.
Starter culture A:
Table 32: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the culture A IST media - the table includes colony
counts on the plates with tetracycline concentrations applied; 2, 4 (break-point conc.) and 8 (µg/ml). The tested
bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 10−2, 10−3, 10−4, 100 µl Bulk and 500 µl Bulk. N.C. - not counted too much
growth. S.C. - starter culture
Starter culture A
Culture
Tetracycline conc.
Mcf1
10−1
10−2
10−3
100 µl Bulk
500 µl Bulk
S.C. - A
8 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
4 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
Table 33: Starter culture A IST media - positive control of starter culture A grown on non-antibiotic IST
plates in the serial dilution concentrations from 1000 x fold diluted Mcf1; 10−2, 10−3 and 10−4. S.C. - starter
culture
Starter culture A positive control
Culture
10−2
10−3
10−4
S.C. - A in IST 1000 x fold Mcf1
61 x 103
5 x 104
1 x 105
S.C. - A in IST 1000 x fold Mcf1
51 x 103
5 x 104
0
77
==PAGE:79==
Starter culture B:
Table 34: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the culture B LSM media - the table includes
colony counts on the plates with tetracycline concentrations applied; 2, 4 (break-point conc.) and 8 (µg/ml). The
tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 10−2, 10−3, 10−4, 100 µl Bulk and 500 µl Bulk. N.C. - not counted
too much growth. S.C. - starter culture
Starter culture B
Culture
Tetracycline conc.
Mcf1
10−1
10−2
10−3
100 µl Bulk
500 µl Bulk
S.C. - B
8 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
4 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
Table 35: Starter culture B LSM media - positive control of starter culture B grown on non-antibiotic LSM
plates in the serial dilution concentrations from 1000 x fold diluted Mcf1; 10−2, 10−3 and 10−4. S.C. - starter
culture
Starter culture B positive control
Culture
10−2
10−3
10−4
S.C. - B in LSM 1000 x fold Mcf1
15 x 103
0
0
S.C. - B in LSM 1000 x fold Mcf1
17 x 103
2 x 104
0
78
==PAGE:80==
Starter culture C:
Table 36: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the culture C IST and LSM media - the table
includes colony counts on the plates with tetracycline concentrations applied; 2, 4 (break-point conc.) and 8
(µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 10−2, 10−3, 10−4, 100 µl Bulk and 500 µl Bulk. N.C. -
not counted too much growth. S.C. - starter culture
Starter culture C IST and LSM media
Culture
Tetracycline conc.
Mcf1
10−1
10−2
10−3
100 µl Bulk
500 µl Bulk
S.C. - C in IST
8 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
4 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
2 (µg/ml)
1
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
S.C. - C in LSM
8 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
4 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
Table 37: Starter culture C LSM and IST media - positive control starter culture C grown on non-antibiotic
LSM and IST plates in the serial dilution concentrations from 1000 x fold diluted Mcf1; 10−2, 10−3 and 10−4.
S.C. - starter culture
Starter culture C IST and LSM positive control
Culture
10−2
10−3
10−4
S.C. - C in IST 1000 x fold Mcf1
25 x 103
3 x 104
1 x 105
27 x 103
5 x 105
0
S.C. - C in LSM 1000 x fold Mcf1
24 x 103
3 x 104
0
19 x 103
1 x 103
0
79
==PAGE:81==
Starter culture D:
Table 38: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the culture D IST and LSM media - the table
includes colony counts on the plates with tetracycline concentrations applied; 2, 4 (break-point conc.) and 8
(µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 10−2, 10−3, 10−4, 100 µl Bulk and 500 µl Bulk. N.C. -
not counted too much growth. S.C. - starter culture
Starter culture D IST and LSM media
Culture
Tetracycline conc.
Mcf1
10−1
10−2
10−3
100 µl Bulk
500 µl Bulk
S.C. - D in IST
8 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
4 (µg/ml)
1
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
S.C. - D in LSM
8 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
4 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
Table 39: Starter culture D LSM and IST media - positive control of culture D grown on non-antibiotic
LSM and IST plates in the serial dilution concentrations from 1000 x fold diluted Mcf1; 10−2, 10−3 and 10−4.
S.C. - starter culture
Starter culture D IST and LSM positive control
Culture
10−2
10−3
10−4
S.C. - D in IST 1000 x fold Mcf1
18 x 103
0
1 x 105
26 x 103
0
0
S.C. - D in LSM 1000 x fold Mcf1
11 x 103
0
0
14 x 103
0
0
80
==PAGE:82==
Media and antibiotic resistant controls:
Table 40: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the Lb. Plantarum LSM media and Lc. lactis
IST media contols - the table includes colony counts on the plates with tetracycline concentrations applied; 2,
4 (break-point conc.) and 8 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3.
Lactobacillus Plantarum CHCC28626 LSM media control
Lactococcus lactis CHCC28622 IST media control
Culture
Tetracycline conc.
Mcf1
10−1
10−2
10−3
Lactobacillus Plantarum CHCC28626 LSM
8 (µg/ml)
>100
0
0
0
4 (µg/ml)
>100
>100
46 x 103
4 x 104
2 (µg/ml)
>100
>100
31 x 103
3 x 104
Lactococcus lactis CHCC28622 IST
8 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
4 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
Table 41: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the Lb.
Plantarum and Lc.
lactis positive
control - the table includes colony counts on the plates with tetracycline concentrations applied; 2, 4 (break-
point conc.) and 8 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3.
Lactobacillus plantarum CHCC28626 LSM media control
Lactococcus lactis CHCC28622 IST media control
Culture
10−2
10−3
10−4
Lb. plantarum LSM 1000 x fold Mcf1
45 x 103
4 x 104
1 x 105
42 x 103
4 x 104
0
Lc. lactis IST 1000 x fold Mcf1
140 x 103
15 x 104
1 x 105
120 x 103
12 x 104
0
81
==PAGE:83==
Table 42: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the tetracycline resistant positive control strain
- the table includes colony counts on the plates with tetracycline concentrations applied; 2, 4 (break-point conc.)
and 8 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3.
Lactococcus lactis CHCC6005 positive Tetracycline resistant strain
Culture
Tetracycline conc.
Mcf1
10−1
10−2
10−3
Lactococcus lactis CHCC6005 IST
8 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
4 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
Lactococcus lactis CHCC6005 LSM
8 (µg/ml)
7
0
0
4 (µg/ml)
7
0
0
2 (µg/ml)
6
1
0
Table 43: Tetracycline resistant positive control strain LSM and IST media - positive control Lc,
lactis CHCC6005 grown on non-antibiotic LSM and IST plates in the serial dilution concentrations from 1000
x fold diluted Mcf1; 10−2, 10−3 and 10−4. This strain was tested again on the plates and was able to
show resistance.
Lactococcus lactis CHCC6005 Tetracycline resistant IST and LSM positive control
Culture
10−3
10−4
Lc, lactis IST media
0
0
Lc. lactis LSM media
1 x 105
0
82
==PAGE:84==
0.6.2.2
Minimum inhibitory concentration of Erythromycin and Streptomycin
The break-point agar-based MIC method performed with the antibiotic erythromycin and strep-
tomycin. All four starter cultures; A, B, C and D were tested in this pilot experiment. This
section includes the antibiotic plate inspection counts, deﬁning the MIC values presented in the
result section 0.4.2.
Starter culture A:
Table 44: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the culture A IST media - the table includes
colony counts on the plates with erythromycin concentrations applied; 0.5, 1 (break-point conc.) and 2 (µg/ml).
The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 1000 x Mcf1, 100 µl Bulk and 500 µl Bulk. N.C. - not counted too
much growth. S.C. - starter culture.
Starter culture A
Culture
Erythromycin conc.
Mcf1
1000 x Mcf1
100 µl Bulk
500 µl Bulk
S.C. - A
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
1 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
0.5 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
Table 45: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the starter culture A IST media - the table
includes colony counts on the plates with streptomycin concentrations applied; 16, 32 (break-point conc.) and 64
(µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 1000 x Mcf1, 100 µl Bulk and 500 µl Bulk. N.C. - not
counted too much growth. S.C. - starter culture.
Starter culture A
Culture
Streptomycin conc.
Mcf1
1000 x Mcf1
100 µl Bulk
500 µl Bulk
S.C. - A
64 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
32 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
16 (µg/ml)
N.C.
8
N.C.
N.C.
Table 46: Starter culture A in IST media - positive control of starter culture A grown on non-antibiotic
IST plates in the serial dilution concentrations from 1000 x fold diluted Mcf1; 10−1, 10−2 and 10−3.
Starter culture A positive control
Culture
10−1
10−2
10−3
S.C. - A 1000 x fold bulk
N.C.
N.C.
173 x 104
S.C. - A 1000 x fold Mcf1
N.C.
49 x 103
8 x 104
83
==PAGE:85==
Starter culture B:
Table 47: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the starter culture B in LSM media - the table
includes colony counts on the plates with erythromycin concentrations applied; 0.5, 1 (break-point conc.) and 2
(µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 1000 x Mcf1, 100 µl Bulk and 500 µl Bulk. N.C. - not
counted too much growth. S.C. - starter culture.
Starter culture B
Culture
Erythromycin conc.
Mcf1
1000 x Mcf1
100 µl Bulk
500 µl Bulk
S.C. - B
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
1 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
0.5 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
Table 48: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the starter culture B in LSM media - the table
includes colony counts on the plates with streptomycin concentrations applied; 16, 32 (break-point conc.) and 64
(µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 1000 x Mcf1, 100 µl Bulk and 500 µl Bulk. N.C. - not
counted too much growth. S.C. - starter culture.
Starter culture B
Culture
Streptomycin conc.
Mcf1
1000 x Mcf1
100 µl Bulk
500 µl Bulk
S.C. - B
64 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
32 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
16 (µg/ml)
1
0
N.C.
N.C.
Table 49: Starter culture B in LSM media - positive control for starter culture B grown on non-antibiotic
IST plates in the serial dilution concentrations from 1000 x fold diluted Mcf1; 10−2, 10−3 and 10−4.
Starter culture B positive control
Culture
10−1
10−2
10−3
S.C. - B 1000 x fold bulk
N.C.
142 x 103
2 x 104
S.C. - B 1000 x fold Mcf1
187 x 102
32 x 103
5 x 104
84
==PAGE:86==
Starter culture C:
Table 50: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the starter culture C in IST and LSM media
- the table includes colony counts on the plates with erythromycin concentrations applied; 0.5, 1 (break-point
conc.) and 2 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 1000 x fold Mcf1, 100 µl Bulk and 500 µl
Bulk. N.C. - not counted too much growth. S.C. - starter culture.
Starter culture C IST and LSM media
Culture
Erythromycin conc.
Mcf1
1000 x Mcf1
100 µl Bulk
500 µl Bulk
S.C. - C in IST
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
1 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
0.5 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
S.C. - C in LSM
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
1 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
0.5 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
Table 51: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the starter culture C in IST and LSM media
- the table includes colony counts on the plates with streptomycin concentrations applied; 16, 32 (break-point
conc.) and 64 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 1000 x fold Mcf1, 100 µl Bulk and 500 µl
Bulk. N.C. - not counted too much growth. S.C. - starter culture.
Starter culture C IST and LSM media
Culture
Streptomycin conc.
Mcf1
1000 x Mcf1
100 µl Bulk
500 µl Bulk
S.C. - C in IST
64 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
32 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
16 (µg/ml)
N.C.
1
N.C.
N.C.
S.C. - C in LSM
64 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
32 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
16 (µg/ml)
76
0
N.C.
N.C.
85
==PAGE:87==
Table 52: Starter culture C in LSM and IST media - positive control of the starter culture C grown on
non-antibiotic LSM and IST plates in the serial dilution concentrations from 1000 x fold diluted Mcf1; 10−1, 10−2
and 10−3. N.C. - not counted too much growth. S.C. - starter culture.
Starter culture C IST and LSM positive control
Culture
10−1
10−2
10−3
S.C. - C in IST 1000 x fold bulk
N.C.
218 x 103
0
S.C. - C in IST 1000 x fold Mcf1
289 x 102
29 x 103
0
S.C. - C in LSM 1000 x fold bulk
N.C.
208 x 103
0
S.C. - C in LSM 1000 x fold Mcf1
305 x 102
12 x 103
2 x 104
Starter culture D:
Table 53: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the starter culture D IST and LSM media - the
table includes colony counts on the plates with erythromycin concentrations applied; 0.5, 1 (break-point conc.)
and 2 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 1000 x fold Mcf1, 100 µl Bulk and 500 µl Bulk.
N.C. - not counted too much growth. S.C. - starter culture.
Starter culture D IST and LSM media
Culture
Erythromycin conc.
Mcf1
1000 x Mcf1
100 µl Bulk
500 µl Bulk
S.C. - D in IST
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
1 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
0.5 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
S.C. - D in LSM
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
1 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
0.5 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
86
==PAGE:88==
Table 54: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the starter culture D IST and LSM media - the
table includes colony counts on the plates with streptomycin concentrations applied; 16, 32 (break-point conc.)
and 64 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 1000 x fold Mcf1, 100 µl Bulk and 500 µl Bulk.
N.C. - not counted too much growth. S.C. - starter culture.
Starter culture D IST and LSM media
Culture
Streptomycin conc.
Mcf1
1000 x Mcf1
100 µl Bulk
500 µl Bulk
S.C. - D in IST
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
4 (µg/ml)
1
0
N.C.
N.C.
2 (µg/ml)
N.C.
0
N.C.
N.C.
S.C. - D in LSM
8 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
4 (µg/ml)
0
0
N.C.
N.C.
2 (µg/ml)
89
0
N.C.
N.C.
Table 55: Starter culture D LSM and IST media - positive control of starter culture D grown on non-
antibiotic LSM and IST plates in the serial dilution concentrations from 1000 x fold diluted Mcf1; 10−1, 10−2
and 10−3. N.C. - not counted too much growth. S.C. - starter culture.
Starter culture D IST and LSM positive control
Culture
10−1
10−2
10−3
S.C. - D in IST 1000 x fold bulk
too many to count
154 x 103
13 x 104
S.C. - D in IST 1000 x fold Mcf1
245 x 102
27 x 103
20 x 104
S.C. - D in LSM 1000 x fold bulk
too many to count
128 x 103
1 x 104
S.C. - D in LSM 1000 x fold Mcf1
189 x 102
21 x 103
8 x 104
87
==PAGE:89==
Media controls:
Table 56: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the Lb. Plantarum LSM media and Lc. lactis
IST media contols - the table includes colony counts on the plates with erythromycin concentrations applied;
0.5, 1 (break-point conc.) and 2 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3.
Lactobacillus Plantarum CHCC28626 LSM media control
Lactococcus lactis CHCC28622 IST media control
Culture
Streptomycin conc.
Mcf1
10−1
10−2
10−3
Lactobacillus Plantarum CHCC28626 LSM
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
1 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
0.5 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
Lactococcus lactis CHCC28622 IST
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
1 (µg/ml)
4
0
0
0
0.5 (µg/ml)
51
0
0
0
Table 57: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the Lb. Plantarum LSM media and Lc. lactis
IST media contols - the table includes colony counts on the plates with erythromycin concentrations applied;
16, 32 (break-point conc.) and 64 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3.
Lactobacillus Plantarum CHCC28626 LSM media control
Lactococcus lactis CHCC28622 IST media control
Culture
Streptomycin conc.
Mcf1
10−1
10−2
10−3
Lactobacillus Plantarum CHCC28626 LSM
64 (µg/ml)
79
0
0
0
32 (µg/ml)
N.C.
N.C.
35
2
16 (µg/ml)
N.C.
N.C.
39
3
Lactococcus lactis CHCC28622 IST
64 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
32 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
16 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
88
==PAGE:90==
Table 58: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the Lb.
Plantarum and Lc.
lactis positive
control - the table includes colony counts on the plates with tetracycline concentrations applied; 2, 4 (break-
point conc.) and 8 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3.
Lactobacillus plantarum CHCC28626 LSM media control
Lactococcus lactis CHCC28622 IST media control
Culture
10−1
10−2
10−3
Lb. plantarum LSM 1000 x fold Mcf1
356 x 102
40 x 103
3 x 104
Lc. lactis IST 1000 x fold Mcf1
N.C.
201 x 103
27 x 104
Erythromycin concentration controls:
Table 59: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the positive control Bacillus paralicheniformis
and negative control Bacillus licheniformis LSM media - the table includes colony counts on the plates
with erythromycin concentrations applied; 0.5, 1 (break-point conc.) and 2 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell
concentrations; Mcf1, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3.
Positive control Bacillus paralicheniformis CHCC29215 LSM media control
Negative control Bacillus licheniformis CHCC28622 LSM media control
Culture
Streptomycin conc.
Mcf1
10−1
10−2
10−3
Bc. paralicheniformis CHCC29215 LSM
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
1 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
0.5 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
Bc. licheniformis CHCC28622 LSM
2 (µg/ml)
N.C.
N.C.
N.C.
0
1 (µg/ml)
N.C.
N.C.
N.C.
0
0.5 (µg/ml)
N.C.
N.C.
N.C.
0
89
==PAGE:91==
Table 60: Break-point agar-based MIC method for the positive control Bacillus paralicheniformis
and Lactococcus lactis IST media - the table includes colony counts on the plates with erythromycin concen-
trations applied; 0.5, 1 (break-point conc.) and 2 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell concentrations; Mcf1, 10−1,
10−2, 10−3.
Positive control Bacillus paralicheniformis CHCC29215 IST media control
Negative control Lactococcus lactis CHCC6005 IST media control
Culture
Erythromycin conc.
Mcf1
10−1
10−2
10−3
Bacillus paralicheniformis IST
2 (µg/ml)
N.C.
N.C.
0
0
1 (µg/ml)
N.C.
N.C.
N.C.
0.5 (µg/ml)
N.C.
N.C.
N.C.
Lactococcus lactis IST
2 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
1 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
0.5 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
Streptomycin concentration controls:
Table 61:
Break-point agar-based MIC method for the positive control Lactobacillus animalis
and negative control Bacillus licheniformis LSM media - the table includes colony counts on the plates
with streptomycin concentrations applied; 16, 32 (break-point conc.) and 64 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell
concentrations; Mcf1, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3.
Positive control Lactobacillus animalis LSM media control
Negative control Bacillus licheniformis LSM media control
Culture
Streptomycin conc.
Mcf1
10−1
10−2
10−3
Bc. licheniformis LSM
16 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
32 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
64 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
Bc. paralicheniformis LSM
16 (µg/ml)
N.C.
N.C.
0
0
32 (µg/ml)
N.C.
N.C.
0
0
64 (µg/ml)
N.C.
N.C.
0
0
90
==PAGE:92==
Table 62:
Break-point agar-based MIC method for the negative control Bacillus licheniformis
and positive control Lactobacillus animalis IST media - the table includes colony counts on the plates
with streptomycin concentrations applied;16, 32 (break-point conc.) and 64 (µg/ml). The tested bacterial cell
concentrations; Mcf1, 10−1, 10−2, 10−3.
Positive control Lactobacillus animalis IST media control
Negative control Bacillus licheniformis IST media control
Culture
Erythromycin conc.
Mcf1
10−1
10−2
10−3
Lactobacillus animalis CHCC29215 IST
64 (µg/ml)
N.C.
0
0
0
32 (µg/ml)
N.C.
0.
0
16 (µg/ml)
N.C.
0
0
Bacillus licheniformis IST
64 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
32 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
16 (µg/ml)
0
0
0
0
91
==PAGE:93==
0.6.3
Metagenomic sequncing and analysis
0.6.3.1
The Artiﬁcial dataset
Figure 13: The Bulk sample - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis strains, orange are Leu. mesenteriodes and
the red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
92
==PAGE:94==
Figure 14: Exponential phase anaerobe growth sample - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis strains, orange
are Leu. mesenteriodes and the red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
93
==PAGE:95==
Figure 15:
24hr anaerobe growth sample - Strains that purple are Lc.
lactis strains, orange are Leu.
mesenteriodes and the red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
94
==PAGE:96==
Figure 16: 48hr anaerobe growth - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis strains, orange are Leu. mesenteriodes
and the red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
95
==PAGE:97==
Figure 17: Exponential phase aerobe growth - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis strains, orange are Leu.
mesenteriodes and the red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
96
==PAGE:98==
Figure 18: 24hr aerobe growth - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis strains, orange are Leu. mesenteriodes
and the red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
97
==PAGE:99==
Figure 19: 48hr aerobe growth - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis strains, orange are Leu. mesenteriodes
and the red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
98
==PAGE:100==
Figure 20: Vancomycin - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis strains, orange are Leu. mesenteriodes and the
red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
99
==PAGE:101==
Figure 21: Streptomycin - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis strains, orange are Leu. mesenteriodes and the
red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
100
==PAGE:102==
Figure 22: Erythromycin - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis strains, orange are Leu. mesenteriodes and the
red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
101
==PAGE:103==
Figure 23: Tetracycline - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis strains, orange are Leu. mesenteriodes and the
red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
102
==PAGE:104==
Figure 24: Salt - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis strains, orange are Leu. mesenteriodes and the red is the
tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
103
==PAGE:105==
Figure 25: Temperature - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis strains, orange are Leu. mesenteriodes and the
red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
104
==PAGE:106==
Figure 26:
Bacteriophages 24hr growth - Strains that purple are Lc.
lactis strains, orange are Leu.
mesenteriodes and the red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
105
==PAGE:107==
Figure 27:
Bacteriophages 48hr growth - Strains that purple are Lc.
lactis strains, orange are Leu.
mesenteriodes and the red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
106
==PAGE:108==
Figure 28: Spiking of tetracycline resistant strain with tetracycline - Strains that purple are Lc. lactis
strains, orange are Leu. mesenteriodes and the red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
107
==PAGE:109==
Figure 29: Spiking of tetracycline resistant strain without tetracycline - Strains that purple are Lc.
lactis strains, orange are Leu. mesenteriodes and the red is the tetracycline resistant Lc. lactis.
108
==PAGE:110==
0.6.3.2
MetaBat binning trees
Lactococcus lactis bin:
Leuconostoc mesenteroides bin:
109
