==PAGE:1==
!
 
DTU AQUA 
MSc in Aquatic Science and Technology 
Master´s Thesis 2018 
Effekter af laksesammentrængning på spredning af lakselus under 
driftsforhold i havbure 
Effects of salmon crowding during operational practices in sea cages 
on the dispersion of salmon lice 
Author: Juan Carlos Torres Puerto 
Supervisors: Manuel Gesto Rodríguez (DTU) 
   Yngvar Olsen (NTNU) 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!1
==PAGE:2==
!
ABSTRACT: 
Among all the salmon lice species, L. salmonis is the most pathogenic species on 
Atlantic farms. This might be because of the large body size. It is more persistent 
and prevalent on farmed fish than C. elongatus (Costello, 2006). Its problematic 
started in the 1970s, and nowadays, in comparison to other parasites, the salmon lice 
has the greatest impact on the industry´s economy (Costello et al., 2004). Many 
questions about sea lice remain unanswered, as the spreading effect on this parasite 
caused by some fish farming operations, like the crowding of the salmon.  
In order to measure such effect on the spread of the sea lice, sea lice larvae was 
sampled and counted in two different farms. Changes in larvae concentration during 
several stages of the crowding were statistically analyzed. 
Generally, the highest larvae concentrations were found at the beginning of the 
crowding, when the cages were still full with salmon infected by adult lice. This 
could suggest that the amount of adult lice in the water might be the most relevant 
factor at the time of generating new lice larvae, over any effect of the crowding. 
However, non conclusive differences were found both farms, being this study in 
lack of a higher sampling effort that can represent the larvae concentration dynamics 
during the whole crowding process. 
Blandt lakse-havbrug i Atlanten er L. salmonis den mest pathogene art af lakselus. 
Årsagen kan skyldes denne arts store størrelse. Arten er mere hårdfør og 
fremherskende blandt opdrættede fisk end C.elongatus (Costello, 2006). Lakse-
lusens problematiske indflydelse  startede i 1970’erne, og er i dag blandt de 
parasitter, der forårsager den største indflydelse på industriens økonomi (Costello et 
al., 2004). Mange spørgsmål vedr. spredningen af havlus er stadig ubesvarede, blandt 
andet hvilke effekter der ses ved havbrugsindustrien med stordrift, herunder 
følgerne af antal laks pr. bur. Formålet med dette studie var at undersøge 
spredningseffekten af havlus, hvor koncentrationen af luselarver blev undersøgt ved 
indsamling og optælling fra to forskellige havbrug. Ændringer i koncentrationen af 
larver henover flere stadier af opdrætsprocessen er statistisk analyseret, hvor 
indsamlet data er behandlet med Anova. Dette studie viste, at der generelt var størst 
koncentration af larver i begyndelsen af indsamlingsprocessen, hvor burene fyldes 
med laks inficeret med voksne lus. Dette kunne tyde på at den mest betydende 
faktor for dannelsen af nye luselarver er antallet af adulte-lus i vandet i forhold til 
effekten af driftprocessen med sammenstuningen af laks på mindre areal. Studiet af 
data fra to havbrug har imidlertid ikke givet en entydeíg konklusion, grundet sparsom 
indsamling af data, der ikke har været fuldkommen repræsentativ for variationen i 
larve-koncentrationen gennem perioden for den samlede opdrætsprocess. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!2
==PAGE:3==
!
INDEX 
INDEX
3
INTRODUCTION
4
Background
4
Biology of the sea lice
5
The correlation of the sea lice and the salmon farming
9
The history of the battle against the sea lice
14
OBJECTIVES
16
MATERIAL AND METHODS
18
Mulingen and Oksbåsen
18
Sampling
21
Lab work
25
RESULTS
27
DISCUSSION
38
CONCLUSIONS
43
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
43
BIBLIOGRAPHY
44
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!3
==PAGE:4==
!
Introduction 
Background 
It was the Danish–Norwegian bishop, Erik L. Pontoppidan (1698–1764), the first 
person who probably described the salmon lice in print through his publication, in 
which he mentioned a `greenish vermin called `Laxe-Luus´, that could be found ` 
between the fins, plaguing the salmon in the heat of spring’ (Berland and Margolis, 
1983). His report already suggested that salmon lice was abundant enough in 1750 to 
create discomfort and wounds on the Atlantic salmon individuals affected by this 
parasite. 
In the past, finding salmon in the rivers parasitized by salmon lice, was considered 
a sign of prime quality as this indicated that the fish had recently entered the river 
and had not suffered  yet the decline in quality associated with sexual maturation. At 
the beginning, scientific interest in salmon lice was low. However, when just a few 
papers had been published covering the topic, salmon lice had already begun to 
become a problem for the aquaculture production of Atlantic salmon (Brandal et al., 
1976). 
In 2009, Atlantic salmon production in aquaculture had already reached the 
amount of 1.5 million tons per year, being Norway the largest producer in the world, 
followed by Chile, United Kingdom and Canada (Torrissen et al., 2011). This 
coincided with the decline of the wild salmon stocks, and in 2010, the wild catch 
added the amount of 1589 tons, only a 0,1% of the total landings of wild and cultured 
Atlantic salmon (NASCO, 2011). 
The problematic with salmon lice already started in the 1970s, and nowadays, in 
comparison to other parasites, the salmon lice has the greatest impact on the 
industry´s economy (Costello et al., 2004).  
Due to the production method, having the salmon in very high densities in cages, 
it did not last long until the salmon farms were proposed to be the primary sources of 
salmon lice found on wild sea trout in Ireland (Tully and Wheland, 1993). 
Since then, the apparent connection of intense salmon farming with lower wild 
salmon catches has originated many discussions and conflicts between the salmon 
farming industry and society, often led by different NGOs (for instance, Salmon and 
Trout Conservation UK). The core of the conflict takes place over the disagreement 
on the real impact of the sea lice on the wild salmon populations or non-targeted 
species (Torrissen et al., 2013). 
It is important to clarify that a correlation between the two sets of data does not 
necessarily indicate a cause–effect relationship. The current controversy is partly 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!4
==PAGE:5==
!
justified due to partly lack of solid data, which leads to over-interpretations and 
possibly misinterpretation of the available information (McVicar, 2004).  
Aquaculture production of salmon species in cages will most likely always be 
challenged by salmon lice and, as with many other diseases and parasites, the 
management of salmon lice infestations will remain an ongoing challenge. In this 
battle, the farming industry will develop multiple strategies to control salmon lice 
infestation rates to acceptable levels, while the parasite will demonstrate a capacity 
to adapt to these efforts (Torrissen et al., 2013). 
Biology of the sea lice 
Copepoda is a subclass which belongs to subphylum crustacea that is composed by 
over 11500 species (Boxshall and Halsey, 2004). Their importance in aquatic ecology 
most likely comes from their key role as primary consumers in both freshwater and 
marine ecosystems. However, copepods that don't base their feed on phytoplankton, 
also perform a very economical and ecological impact on a big variety of 
invertebrate and fish species (Rohde, 1993). 
Different lice species have varying tolerance for dissimilar environments. The 
behaviors are different between the species, both as adults and larvae. Growth and 
survival on different hosts might  also vary (Penston, 2004). 
In the case of Lepeophtheirus salmonis, it is an ectoparasite which is specialized 
in the marine phase of salmonids (Pike and Wadsworth, 1999). In addition to that, 
wild and farmed salmon are also often exposed to another ectoparasite, this time a 
generalist, called Caligus elongatus (known as the Scottish lice) (Schram et al., 
1998). Found on over 80 different species of elasmobranch and teleost fish, the 
Scottish lice is, together with the salmon lice, the most economically important 
metazoan pathogen for the salmon farming industry, involving an annual cost to the 
industry of 80 million € (Johnson et al., 2004). 
Lepeophtheirus salmonis, commonly known as the salmon lice, has a circumpolar 
distribution in the Northern Hemisphere (Kabata, 1979) and is principally an 
ectoparasite of 12 different species of salmonids in the genera Salmo, Oncorhynchus 
and Salvelinus (Pike, 2000). It presents a stenohaline nature, being able to develop 
and survive only in high salinity water. Due to the life cycle of the Atlantic salmon, 
the following dilemma shows up: survival in an environment that ranges from low 
host density and high salinity to one of high host density and strict fresh water. For 
wild salmon populations, reproduction and transmission of the salmon lice take place 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!5
==PAGE:6==
!
coordinately with the two intervals in the life history of the salmon in which host 
density and salinity are optimized: in coastal ecosystems during the spawning 
migration of adults and following the return of juvenile salmon to the ocean. This 
timing is very important, since lice detach from salmonids that are migrating up 
rivers, even though the eggs survive this and hatch in the estuary. However, L. 
salmonis do not fall off their host until they have been in the fresh water some days, 
but their eggs do not hatch in fresh water (Costello, 1993), what makes the intervals 
explained above crucial for the survival of the sea lice. 
On the other hand, on farmed salmon populations that are grown in sea cages in 
high-salinity coastal environments for period that last up to 24 months, the chances 
for reproduction and transmission of the parasite are, in principle, continuously high, 
with increased potential for more intense and therefore harmful infestations 
(Hayward et al., 2011). However, experience has shown that when lice-infested fish 
were transferred from sea to fresh water the infestation decreased and with it the 
salmon swimming performance improved (Wagner, 2004). 
Atlantic salmon post-smolts leave coastal waters quickly after migration from the 
rivers and improbably represent a significant source of salmon lice larvae in coastal 
waters (Butler, 2002). The general assumption is that before the salmon farming 
arose as a big industry, the year-round presence of sea trout, Salmo trutta L., in 
coastal waters probably supported a local over-wintering population of salmon lice 
(Rikardsen, 2004). (Revie, 2002) supported before that that re-infestations of C. 
elongatus most likely come from wild sources, due to the similarity in abundance in 
the first and second sea-years of farmed fish. This means that both sea lice species 
probably infect the farms in the first place coming from wild sources. 
Atlantic salmon that are returning to coastal areas to spawn are a significant 
source of lice with a nearly 100% prevalence, and the lice population infesting them 
is mainly composed by mature females (Jackson et al., 2012). 
Due to its economical and ecological importance, the life cycle, population 
dynamics and epidemiology of L. salmonis have been the object of multiple research 
programs (Pike and Wadsworth, 1999). On the other hand, mainly because of it 
generalist nature, C. elongatus has been less studied by the scientific community, 
and it is in consequence less understood (Revie et al., 2002). 
Temperature is key factor for the growth of the sea lice. In environments with 
cold temperature, the sea lice live longer and grow larger. This is relevant because 
large females produce more eggs (Pike, 2000). 
However, if the average sea temperature rises, lice abundance on both wild and 
farmed fish is likely to increase. Shorter generation times produce more individuals, 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!6
==PAGE:7==
!
although individuals grow less. In addition, an increase in mean sea temperature will 
not only increase the infestation pressure on farms and wild fish, but it might also 
affect the geographical distribution of hosts and parasites. (Costello, 2006). 
Even though the sea lice abundance highly depends on their fecundity and growth 
rates, other factors such as competition for space within and between species of sea 
lice, and on host responses to infestation might also be important factors (Costello, 
2004). A density dependent competition between species is suggested, since the first 
infestation on a farm is often carried out by C. elongatus, which gets replaced by L. 
salmonis in time, which remains the dominant species (McKenzie, 2004). 
The distribution of the lice on the host might also be affected by competition for 
mates. Before mating, adult male lice actively compete for and protect female lice. 
They also transfer a spermatophore that blocks the female from mating again for a 
time (Richie, 1996). Polyandry is common, females often mate again (Todd, 2005). 
The need for mating at low parasite densities is reduced by sperm storage. 
Summer generations of females are smaller and have fewer eggs, because of the 
shorter generation time in warmer temperature. Summer population can increase 
exponentially (Costello, 2004). Fertilization in both species is internal, and the 
eggstrings are externally kept by the female until the hatching takes place (Todd, 
2007).The amount of eggs a female sea lice can carry, varies with time of year, lice 
size, age, host species and population. The eggs are carried in a pair of uniseriate 
strings of 100 to 1000 eggs which hang from the abdomen of the female lice 
(Costello, 1993). 
Eggs hatch in sequence from the end of the string. Firstly, two planktonic stages of 
larvae are present (Image 1). During these two developmental stages the individuals 
do not feed and require of 5–15 days to grow (depending on the water temperature). 
Planktonic stages of the sea lice that are not attached to a host yet, are essentially 
passive (Bron et al., 1993). However, vertical movement seems to be promoted by 
environmental stimuli, such as swimming towards light (Heuch et al., 1995) and 
avoidance of freshwater (Bricknell et al., 2006). Experiments have shown that 
survival of the salmon lice decreases once a salinity of 29ppt is reached, and it gets 
worse as salinity goes down (Bricknell et al., 2006). Metamorphosis of nauplii does 
not take place when the salinity of the water is below 25ppt (Johnson and Albright, 
1991). Nevertheless, this does not seem to happen on the field, since salmon lice’s 
planktonic stages migrate vertically looking for the water layers with the most 
suitable salinity, while remaining close to the surface (Heuch, 1995). 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!7
==PAGE:8==
!
Image 1. Group of sea lice nauplii collected during the thesis. 
After that, metamorphosis leads to an infective free-living copepodid stage, that 
attaches to a host by its antennae (Costello, 2006). Then, the copepodid melts into a 
chalimus that is attached to the host by a special frontal filament (Pike, 2000). The 
four different chalimus stages are sessile (do not move) and feed on the host skin 
through the filament used for the fastening. In the case of the salmon lice, but not 
necessarily in the Caligus species, two pre-adult stages are present which move 
around the host looking for appropriate feeding spots. Although authors like (Kabata, 
1972) support that the lice shows ten different developmental stages (two nauplius, 
copepodid, four chalimus, two preadult, adult), the lack of evident pre adult stages 
in species of the genus Caligus sets the number of stages down to eight (Costello, 
2006). 
The infectious larval copepodid subsists entirely on endogenous lipid reserves, 
which allows it to use its time on looking for a host by using a set of adaptive 
behavioral traits. These traits include positive phototaxis, positive semiotaxis and 
positive rheotaxis, which provides the larval copepod the ability to display diurnal 
vertical migrations (Heuch et al., 1995), respond to waterborne gradients of host-
derived chemicals and move towards vibrations of host origin, respectively (Heuch 
and Karlsen, 1997). 
Norði et al., (2015) found during their research that abundance of Lepeophtheirus 
salmonis and Caligus elongatus is seasonal dependent. During the winter, when the 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!8
==PAGE:9==
!
surface water is colder than the deeper water, Caligus elongatus is more commonly 
found. On the other hand, Lepeophtheirus salmonis abundance is higher during the 
warmest periods of the year. This could suggest that salmon lice seeks actively for 
the warmest temperatures as an attempt of decreasing the development time and 
thereby reduce their predation mortality. 
It has also been found that due to the preference of Lepeophtheirus salmonis for 
the upper layers, the effect of the wind on its spread is higher, in comparison to 
Caligus elongatus, which prefers deeper waters (Norði et al., 2015). It seems that 
Caligus elongatus locates a bit deeper in order to increase the variety of potential 
hosts, which also tend to aggregate around fish farms (Dempster et al. 2009). 
On the other hand, salmon lice increase during the fall and winter periods might 
also have something to do with the wild salmon populations that are returning to 
spawn, and that could help to spread the infection (Marty et al., 2010). Regarding 
the survival of the planktonic stages of the sea lice, it might be influenced by the 
amount of aquatic organisms feeding on the plankton or the lack of suitable fish to 
parasite (Torrissen et al., 2013). 
The correlation of the sea lice and the salmon farming 
Atlantic salmon is a fish species that is highly affected by anthropogenic 
influences, which have affected its original native range. In many rivers, salmon can 
only breed with human intervention, mainly due to the effect of the multiple dams 
and power plants installed along the river. Many salmon populations have been 
exposed to pollution, changed temperature regimes and low or managed water flow 
for very long periods of time, which makes very difficult to determine the real 
effects of diseases and parasites on the salmon populations (Bakke and Harris, 1998). 
It could be said that the main social impact of the salmon is its effect on the 
creation of working positions and livelihood. Aquaculture is the main activity in this 
respect, but recreational and professional fisheries are also relevant. Negative 
impacts on wild salmon stocks from farming activities are perceived to reduce wild 
catches and therefore to weaken locally the fishing industry (Olaussen and Liu, 
2011). While fish farms might be displacing fishermen from their traditional 
harvesting areas, farming may also lead to local increases in catches as wild fish feed 
on waste feed coming from close farms. Salmon aquaculture also creates an indirect 
livelihood for a number of people, such as suppliers, administrators and processors. It 
has been estimated that the number of people employed in aquaculture-related jobs 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!9
==PAGE:10==
!
is twice that of people directly involved in the aquaculture industry (Olavsen et al., 
2011). 
One of the reasons that justifies the increase of interest over the salmon lice, is 
the potential spread of this parasite from the salmon which is being farmed, to the 
wild salmon populations. In addition, the interactions between farms is also of 
special interest for the farming companies, in order to control the infestations. It is 
important to set a distinction between the costs to individual farms associated with 
salmon lice infestation and the social costs of salmon lice coming from those farms. 
Costs to individual farms not only include those associated with production loss due 
to diseases or fallowing, but also the cost of all the delousing procedure, which 
occupies a very relevant percentage of the production cost. On the other hand, costs 
associated with salmon lice that affect other farms or the surrounding ecosystem 
include higher production costs for other farms due to elevated infestations 
(involving lower FCR or growth rates, apart of the direct cost of the delousing 
performance) or reduced catches of wild salmon due to increased mortality of wild 
salmon stocks, which weakens the fishing industry (Asche et al., 1999). 
Farm-specific costs due to salmon lice are relatively well understood. A farm will 
normally treat against sea lice when production costs are increased due to a reduced 
growth rate, increased feed conversion rate and reduced marketability due to skin 
injuries at a levels exceeding the treatment costs. In 2006, global production of 
Atlantic salmon was 1.6 million tons; and it is estimated that lice treatment cost the 
industry approximately 305 million € (Costello, 2009).  
Criticism of the salmon farming industry due to the way the salmon lice issue has 
been handled has influenced the design of regulations and licenses in order to open 
and run a sea based fish farm. In Norway, for instance, the idea of a possible increase 
in the maximum allowable biomass has been postponed, and almost abandoned due 
to the social concern about the sea lice (Asche and Bjørndal, 2011). The continuous 
negative publicity on the sea lice issue promoted by different NGOs, has also had an 
effect on the public reputation of salmon and the salmon industry, which has 
decreased the demand in certain places, and because of this, the price of salmon has 
also been affected. However, the global market for salmon has limited and 
minimized the consequences of this demand decrease (Asche et al., 2005). 
If the salmon industry was analyzed based on production growth and employment, 
it would be considered as a great success. The growth increase could be justified by 
all the different innovations that have enhanced productivity and that have improved 
competitiveness (Guttormsen, 2002). However, salmon farming has also the potential 
to cause negative impacts on the surrounding ecosystem, both by excessive use of 
resources and through interactions with wild stocks. Therefore, regulations and good 
governance are necessary to establish a sustainable industry (Smith et al., 2010). 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!10
==PAGE:11==
!
Nevertheless, it is also important to keep in mind that regulations have a very strong 
impact and influence on the competitiveness of any industry, and because of this, 
the design of the different regulations is key for the economic and societal 
sustainability of the industry (Torrissen et al., 2013). 
Among all the salmon lice species, L. salmonis is the most pathogenic species on 
Atlantic farms. This might be because of the large body size. It is more persistent 
and prevalent on farmed fish than C. elongatus (Costello, 2006). Depending on the 
number and developmental stages of the sea lice, the host presents different grades 
of physiological and pathological consequences due to its interactions with the sea 
lice. 
Physiological changes become evident during infection by the chalimus stages, 
however, when the infestations takes place by pre-adult and adult sea lice, severe 
pathophysiological consequences are suffered by the salmon, due to the feeding 
behavior of these stages (Finstad et al., 2000). Exposure of the dermis is generated 
under heavy infestations, and, in severe cases, skeletal muscle. The lice scrapes the 
host with their mouthparts and remove mucus, skin and underlying tissue. The 
impact of the skin can be bleeding, epithelium loss, increased mucus discharge, 
tissue necrosis and loss of physical and microbial protective function (Johnson, 
2004). The sea lice do not feed much on the blood of the host. However, high levels 
of lice infestation might cause significant blood loss for the host (Wagner and 
McKinley, 2004).  
In addition to the skin damage, the host fish suffers from reduced appetite, 
growth and food-conversion efficiency (Wagner and McKinley, 2004). The lice often 
congregate on the head, but can be found anywhere on the fish. Nevertheless, 
morbidity or mortality resulting from sea lice infection are rare among wild salmon 
(Johnson et al. 1996). Effects as stress, changes in blood glucose or electrolytes, 
reduced haematocrits and reduced swimming performance (Wagner et al., 2008) are 
strongly influenced by the number of copepods and their stage of development. 
(Tully and Noland, 2002) added that anaemia, reduced lymphocytes and protein, ion 
imbalance and elevated cortisol are common symptoms too. 
It is important to mention that the effects of the salmon lice vary among species 
of Pacific salmon, especially because of the differences in natural susceptibility to 
the parasite which each species present (Johnson and Albright, 1992). However, 
independently the salmon species, several studies suggest that salmon lice induces 
changes to the skin that generate decrease or a total loss of ion-regulatory 
homoeostasis (Torrissen et al., 2013). The sea lice irritates the salmon, and the 
salmon responds with leaping behavior to dislodge the lice. In nature, this behavior 
might attract predators and has an energy cost for the salmon (Stone, 2002). 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!11
==PAGE:12==
!
It is of importance to underline that the feeding behavior of L. salmonis consists 
not only of mechanical abrasion and consumption of host tissues, but also the 
production of certain products called SEPs (excretory/secretory products) (Fast et 
al., 2003), which have shown to have dysregulatory effects on some immune-related 
genes (Fast et al., 2007). Nowadays, there is no solid evidence that Atlantic salmon 
expresses a protective immune response to either L. salmonis infection or 
immunization with parasite antigens (Grayson et al.,1991), being even susceptible to 
reinfection (Raynard et al., 2002). (Costelloe, 1995) stated that many larvae re-
infest their parents host. This is shown by the typical development of infestations on 
farmed salmon. All copepodites do not disperse away from the cages, staying around 
the farm until they get mature enough to find a host. 
Theoretical epidemiology works with the concept that an increase in host density 
might promote a growth in the population of a parasite, since there is a higher 
chance of host contact by this parasite. Higher transmission involves a higher 
parasite reproductive rate (Anderson and May, 1991). Applied at a farm level, lice 
infections on wild salmon increase during migration, if that takes place close to 
salmon farms. Such a concept would associate salmon farms with the transmission of 
infectious stages of the sea lice (Krkosek et al.,2005). This could be connected with 
the research developed by (Penston et al., 2008), which suggested that the location 
of salmon farms affect the spatial and temporal densities of salmon lice planktonic 
stages. Significant correlations between copepodites in the water column and 
estimated numbers of gravid female lice on farms were reported. Multiple studies as 
the previously mentioned suggest that effective countermeasures to sea lice 
infections must take into consideration host and farm densities in the context of 
local oceanographic and other environmental conditions. The proximity of farmed 
salmon and wild salmon in places like Norway and Scotland, may promote the spread 
of diseases and parasites between both populations. Transmission between 
populations is most likely to occur during the planktonic stages of sea lice. Once the 
copepodid stage is reached, the sea lice actively search for a host where they can 
survive and mature (Amundrud and Murray, 2009). Potential transmission of the sea 
lice can only be estimated by understanding the local water currents, so the possible 
places where planktonic stages of the sea lice can be transported are properly 
identified (Revie et al., 2003). 
It seems there is a clear connection between the size of the fish and the salmon 
lice infestation level, since the highest lice concentrations are found on the biggest 
fish within the farms (Lees et al., 2008). This could be explained both by the fact 
that there is a higher contact rate between infective parasites and large hosts 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!12
==PAGE:13==
!
(Tucker et al., 2002) or because they are exposed for longer periods of time, which 
results on higher lice accumulations (Jackson and Minchin, 1992). Either if its due to 
one reason or another, it implies that farms with large fish potentially support large 
sea lice populations (Torrissen et al., 2013). 
The infective copepodites concentration is critical in the population dynamics of 
salmon lice and their concentration depends on several factors such as the number of 
mature females, their fecundity and survival of the nauplii. Females fecundity, 
development times through the different life stages and probably also survival 
through all life-cycle stages of salmon lice are highly affected by water temperature 
(Stien et al., 2005). This temperature dependency that takes place naturally is 
assumed to be a basic driving force for the salmon lice’s population dynamics, which 
has been characterized by annual oscillations in parasite abundance. However, and 
even though temperature has a clear and critical effect on the development of the 
sea lice, its relationship with the population dynamics of the salmon lice is not 
simple. Annual peaks seem to have a little delay when compared to the maximum 
and the minimum temperatures during the year (Jansen et al., 2012). When it comes 
to salmon lice, there is a solid evidence of an infestation increase in spring, as water 
temperatures rise and the adult wild salmon arrive to the coast from the open sea 
(Jackson et al., 1997). On the other hand, the abundance of C. elongatus variates 
more over time than what might be expected from population growth and mortality 
on farmed Atlantic salmon. This suggest that mobile stages might infest and leave 
their hosts (Revie, 2002). 
Salmon lice mean abundance is of 6-33 per fish on wild individuals, and female L. 
salmonis from wild salmon present a larger size than those found on farmed fish 
(Copley et al., 2005) and have higher fecundity (Jackson and Minchin, 1992).  
Local wild sea trouts from the river systems that are entering into the bay seem to 
be the most probable host reservoir for those infestations which take place on 
recently installed farms that have no wild salmon populations around (Torrissen et 
al., 2013). The chalimus stages of the sea lice is the one dominating epizootics of sea 
lice on wild fish. (Morton, 2008) This indicates that the fish encounter high 
concentrations of the infective planktonic copepodites simultaneously. Researchers 
have had a hard time finding out how copepodids increase their chances of 
intercepting a host. Immature lice individuals, infective copepodites especially, are 
most abundant in shallow estuarine areas, which are ideal locations to intercept 
migratory salmonids (Castelloe, 1997). L. salmonis larvae are transported 
horizontally to shallow waters, where salmonids are more abundant. This horizontal 
movement comes in addition to the vertical movement they do. The vertical 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!13
==PAGE:14==
!
movement of sea lice larvae can increase the chance of infestation, because it is 
more likely that host and parasite get in touch with each other. 
The deep effect of salmon farms on the abundance of some parasites can not be 
questioned (Bakke and Harris, 1998). However, the effect of their real impact on wild 
populations of salmonids remains controversial. Several studies predicted the 
extinction of some salmon species, such as the pink salmon, due to the mortality 
induced by the sea lice (Krkosek et al., 2007). However, the population of pink 
salmon continues increasing every year. Subsequent studies as the one performed by 
(Krkosek et al., 2011), concluded that lice number on farms can not be negatively 
linked with productivity of wild salmon. Nevertheless, this conclusion was also 
received by the scientific community with controversy. 
The truth is that the decline of salmonid stocks might be affected by the 
interaction of multiple factors, such as anthropogenic, biological or physical factors. 
These factors might sometimes be underestimated as an attempt of finding simpler 
explanations. However, the complexity of this issue makes extremely difficult to 
determine the effect of each parameter. 
On the other hand, Otero et al., (2011) states that a recent macro-analysis 
supports that wild populations tend to decrease in areas where the presence of 
salmon farms is high. Even though authors such as (Jackson et al., 2011) concluded 
during their research that the level of infestation pressure by salmon lice 
experienced by migrating smolts did not present a clear increase in marine mortality. 
As previously said, this is a discussion that creates a lot of controversy among the 
scientific community. 
The history of the battle against the sea lice 
Chemotherapeutants interventions: Several ways of dealing with the sea lice 
have been tested over the years. At the beginning, formaldehyde baths were applied, 
but they became soon unpopular, due to the questionable effects observed on the 
salmon (Johannessen, 1974). After that, organophosphates as metrifonate were 
introduced, being the mentioned one an oral treatment (Brandal and Egidius, 1977). 
Nevertheless, oral treatments did not reach the safety margins expected in the 
industry, and that led to the application of bath treatments (Brandal and Egidius, 
1979). In Scotland for instance, a related organophosphate called dichlorvos, was 
introduced in 1979 (Rae, 1979). After its success, it became the most widely used 
treatment in salmon-producing countries. However, the development of resistance 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!14
==PAGE:15==
!
against this compound by the sea lice became evident in the early 1990s (Jones et 
al., 1992). As a response of that, alternative baths were developed, such as the one 
in hydrogen peroxide. Although its safety margin resulted to be very narrow, it 
became very useful in areas where the dichlorvos was not effective anymore 
(Thomassen, 1993). 
From the 1980s, oral treatments based on different substances were tested, being 
the first one the macrocyclic lactone ivermectin, which showed a lasting effect, but 
in expense of a low safety margin (Palmer et al., 1987). Years later, a compound 
called diflubenzuron was tested, being very effective as a chitin synthesis inhibitor 
(Horsberg and Hoy, 1991). It was then followed by a similar product, called 
teflubenzuron (Branson et al., 2000). However, and even though these products 
presented a proficient margin of safety, they were only effective against the early 
developmental stages of the sea lice, since the need by the adults to synthesize 
chitin is very low. In the mid-1990s, azamethiphos, an organophosphate which 
involved a lower threat for those who were handling it, in comparison to dichlorvos, 
was launched (Roth et al., 1996). It was then followed by cypermethrin (Hart et al., 
1997) and deltamethrin (Roth, 2000), both pyrethroids. Contrary to teflubenzuron, 
the pyrethroids were very effective against every different phase of the sea lice. 
Finally, in 1999, emamectin benzoate was launched to the market (Stone et al., 
2000). Lasting up to 10 weeks, it was a safe to handle product and effective, as the 
pyrethroids, against every different phase of the sea lice. This product was the last 
one which could be found in the market, and no new patents have appeared since 
then.  
Because of this, the development of resistance in the salmon lice, especially L. 
salmonis, against every compound that has been previously mentioned, has become a 
very serious issue for the industry. In most of the salmon producing countries, the 
amount of salmon that can be found in the farms is much higher than in nature. This 
fact makes the farms the main source for re-infestation, where all the actions 
against sea lice have put a constant selection pressure that has made the lice 
populations stronger and stronger in time (Torrissen et al., 2013). 
Cleaner fish: The use of cleaner fish was born in the late 1980s, with the 
application of wrass for the biological control of the sea lice (Bjørdal, 1990). 
Nevertheless, their culture was not possible, and their application was based on the 
catch of wild individuals. Multiple species have been then used for this purpose (for 
example Ctenolabrus rupestris, Labrus bergylta and Symphodus melops as the most 
common ones), being their average stocking density of 4 wrass for every 100 salmon, 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!15
==PAGE:16==
!
depending on the size of the cleaner fish (big fish needed less than 4, while small 
fish needed more). 
The success at the time of using these fish, depends on the fish health and the 
cleanliness of the cages. Cages without an appropriate cleaning will provide the 
cleaner fish of alternative feeding source, and their efficiency will decrease rapidly 
(Torrissen et al., 2013). 
The use of wrass fish in aquaculture has raised concerns about their conservation, 
since not many things about their biology and ecology are known, and they might be 
potential victims of overfishing activities. Because of this, the interest on lumpfish 
Cyclopterus lumpus, has recently increased, since its cultivation in captivity is 
possible (Hanssen, 2012). 
Vaccination: (Grayson et al., 1995) extracted proteins from adult L. salmonis and 
used these antigens to immunize Atlantic salmon. A significant reduction in 
infestation levels was found, and the female attached to the vaccinated individuals 
also presented a lower larvae spawning rate. Further analysis of the results showed 
that the vaccine effect was due to the reduced settlement of larvae produced by lice 
on the immunized fish. The overall effect of the vaccination was a 57% inhibition of 
infestation. Traditional vaccines against virus and bacterias promote resistance in the 
host by decreasing the reproductive capacity of the pathogen. However, for 
ectoparasites as the lice, the effect is significantly different. A decrease in the 
reproductive capacity in the lice, involves a lower capacity for new infections. In the 
case of the cattle tick vaccine against the lice, the overall effect is a 90% reduction 
in the reproductive capacity. Nevertheless, even with such effect, the action against 
the sea lice can not be a single way activity. By combining the vaccination with the 
other two controllers mentioned above, it would not only be achieved a lower 
infestation rate in the farms, but it would also contribute to further lice control by 
those individuals that manage to escape from the farms (Torrissen et al., 2013). 
Objectives 
The crowding of the salmon (Image 2) is a common practice within the salmon 
cage farming industry. By decreasing the surface of the net in the water, a much 
lower volume is achieved inside the cage. That simplifies significantly the pumping of 
the salmon inside a boat, both for delousing or for the harvesting itself. Once the 
salmon are onboard, in the case of the delousing, different procedures are applied 
on them against the lice. The most common one, nowadays, is a mix of warm water 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!16
==PAGE:17==
!
(32ºC) and a mechanical treatment that detaches the lice from the salmon through 
friction, normally with spinning brushes.  
Image 2. Crowding of the salmon. The net is progressively removed from the water with 
hooks controlled from the different boats participating in the procedure. 
However, this practice is also well known for having a very stressful impact on the 
fish, causing sometimes a mortality increase or diseases outbreaks (Hjeltnes et al., 
2016).It is important to highlight that other authors such as Erikson et al., 2016, 
support the theory that even though the crowding increases the stress levels on the 
fish significantly, dangerous levels are not commonly reached. 
Nevertheless, there is not much knowledge regarding the effect of the crowding 
on the lice’s stress. Taskforce lakselus project works with the hypothesis that the 
stress produced on the lice due to this practice, increases the larvae spawning rate in 
the females of this parasite. This would promote the infestation of neighbor farms 
which, after a couple of weeks (depending on the water temperature), would be 
infected by the copepodites originated in the cages where the crowding took place. 
In order to measure the effect of the crowding on the spread of the sea lice, the 
present Master´s thesis was carried out in collaboration between DTU and NTNU. To 
achieve this, sea lice larvae was sampled and counted in two different farms. 
Changes in larvae concentration during several stages of the crowding were 
statistically analyzed, by applying Anova on the data collected. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!17
==PAGE:18==
!
Material and Methods 
Mulingen and Oksbåsen 
The sampling was done in two different farms: 
Mulingen (Image 3) ( 65° 6’30.68”N, 12°26’21.32”E) and Oksbåsen (Image 5)
(65°11’31.54”N, 12°40’12.35”E). Both sites were reached by sailing from the port of 
Terråk (Norway). 
Sea cages are usually installed according to many different parameters that are 
carefully studied before the installation takes place, such as currents, waves, 
weather conditions, wind, among others.  
In our case the most relevant one is the one which involves everything that has to 
do with the dynamics of the currents (Images 4 and 6), since the target of our 
sampling are the different planktonic stages of the sea lice, and, as part of the 
plankton, it follows the water masses as the result of their inability to swim against 
the currents. 
Pictures 4 and 6 show that the installation of both farms took place mainly 
according to the maximum current speed within the fjord. 
Image 3 and 4. Satellite picture of the fish farm of Mulingen (left) and the water maximum 
speed dynamics at 5m deep (right). Taken from Barentswatch and the locality report. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!18
==PAGE:19==
!
Image 5 and 6. Satellite picture of the fish farm of Oksbåsen (left) and the water 
maximum speed dynamics at 6m deep (right). Taken from Barentswatch and the locality 
report. 
Delousing takes place following the environmental regulations established by The 
Salmon Lice Directive (FOR-2009-08-18-1095 2009). This regulation establishes that a 
maximum of 0,5 female lice or 3 mobile lice per fish is allowed, during the period 
which extents from 1st of January to 31st of August. During the rest of the year, 1 
female lice or 3 mobile lice per fish is allowed. If this lice concentration is reached, 
delousing measures must be applied. 
Following these instructions, the farm of Mulingen reported in week 41, a very 
high concentration of female lice on the salmon (Image 7). Consequently, a delousing 
treatment had to be performed, in order to respect the legal requirements. 
Image 7. Summary of the lice density on the fish in the fish farm of Mulingen (lice/fish). 
Data collected from Barentswatch website. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!19
==PAGE:20==
!
In week 42, a delousing round took place, which decreased the female lice 
numbers per fish down to 0,18 female lice (Image 9), in comparison to the initial 
value of 1,15, found in week 41 (Image 8). 
Image 8 and 9. Lice infestation levels reported in the farm of Mulingen, both in week 
41(left) and week 42 (right). Data collected from Barentswatch website. 
The sampling took place in week 43, during the last delousing of the year. As 
mentioned above, in week 42 part of the cages within the farm had been treated. 
During week 43 the remaining cages were deloused, and it was then when the 
samples were taken. With a water temperature of 10,8ºC (Image 11), the final result 
of the delousing procedure left the farm with a total female lice concentration on 
the fish of 0,22 (Image 10), a value under the limits established by the environmental 
authorities.  
Image 10 and 11. Lice infestation levels reported in the farm of Mulingen in week 43 (left). 
Water temperature and delousing schedule(right). Data collected from Barentswatch website. 
The fish farm of Oksbåsen was deloused the following week, in week 44, after 
reporting a high female lice concentration, very close to the 0,5 established by the 
regulations (Image 12). Oksbåsen presented a lower salmon density than Mulingen, 
which is important to highlight for the understanding of the results. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!20
==PAGE:21==
!
Image 12. Summary of the lice density on the fish in the fish farm of Oksbåsen (lice/fish). 
Data collected from Barentswatch website. 
As a result of reporting a female lice concentration per fish of 0,46 in Oksbåsen in 
week 43 (Image 13), delousing protocols were activated, decreasing the lice levels on 
the salmon down to 0,08 during week 44 (Image 14). Samples were gathered during 
the performance of this delousing in Oksbåsen, presenting the water a temperature 
of 9,6ºC. 
Image 13 and 14. Lice infestation levels reported in the farm of Oksbåsen, both in week 43 
(left) and week 44 (right). Data collected from Barentswatch website. 
Sampling 
Water currents within the multiple fjords which can be found in Norway, are highly 
influenced by the tidal dynamics, making the study of these water masses´ 
movement very complex and difficult (Kowalik et al., 2015). 
Early stages of the sea lice, as planktonic organisms, are moved around by the 
multiple water masses that are fluctuating according to oceanographic factors such 
as currents, tides, wind, among others. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!21
==PAGE:22==
!
Salmon farms, which are installed on the way of this movement, are reached by 
this parasite at some point, and this concept is the key of the sampling procedure 
that will be explained below. 
As the result of placing the multiple cages that perform a fish farm, on the way of 
the different currents existing in the fjord, a water in-flow and a water out-flow is 
created in relation to each cage. As explained before, planktonic organisms travel 
following these currents, and among them, planktonic stages of the sea lice are 
transported (Image 15).  
Image 15. Planktonic stages of the sea lice are carried by the water currents, being part of 
the water mass getting in and out of the cage. 
In theory, by sampling the water column both in the in-flow and the out-flow of 
each cage, an approximate lice production within the cage can be estimated. On the 
other hand, in the case  the samples were taken only at a single part of the cage, it 
would be impossible to calculate the amount of larvae which is coming for real from 
the cage from the larvae that comes from external sources. But, with the lice 
concentration sampled in the out-flow (what came from the fjord plus what was 
produced inside the cage), minus the lice concentration obtained in the in-flow 
(what came exclusively from the fjord), a pretty accurate sea cage - lice production 
can be calculated. 
First of all, the in-flow was properly identified. This was achieved by observing 
the behavior of the net inside the cage. If the net bent in, that meant there was an 
incoming water flow (in-flow), and if it bent out, the water was leaving the cage 
(out-flow). 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!22
==PAGE:23==
!
Once the two different sampling points were detected, three replicates were 
taken on each place. 
Each replicate was taken by sinking a zooplankton net twice per sample (mesh 
size 150 µm and diameter 57 cm) 10 meters deep, which did not gather any sample 
on its way down. Once the 10 meters deep were reached, the net was pulled up by 
hand, taking care of not exceeding the speed of 1 meter every 3 seconds. Due to the 
design of the net, it only sampled the water column on its way up, what makes a 
total water volume sampled of 2,55 x 2 = 5,1 cubic meters, approximately (Image 16 
and 17).  
After each sample was taken, it was introduced into a plastic bottle with labels 
both in the inside and on the outside detailing the number of cage, the location (in 
or out), the moment of the crowding (explained below) and the number of the 
replicate. The samples were preserved cold in 97% Ethanol. 
It is important to emphasize, that it was critical to make sure constantly that the 
currents had not changed. 
Image 16 and 17. Three replicates were taken at the in-flow and another three replicates 
at the out-flow, making sure all the time that the currents were not changing. 
In order to figure out a possible effect of the crowding, different samples were 
taken during three different moments of the crowding: D1, D2 and End. 
-D1, or early crowding, was done during the first stage of the crowding, when 90% 
or more of the salmon were still in the cage (Image 18). 
-D2, or late crowding, was done during the last stage of the crowding, when 30% 
or less of the salmon were still in the cage (Image 19). 
-End, or post crowding, was done the following morning after the crowding had 
taken place, once the cage was totally empty and there were no salmon left (Image 
20). 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!23
==PAGE:24==
!
Image 18. D1, or early crowding. 
Image 19. D2, or late crowding. 
Image 20. End, or post crowding. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!24
==PAGE:25==
!
In total, 18 samples were taken per cage, 6 during D1 (3 in-flow, 3 out-flow), 6 
during D2 (same as D1) and 6 during End (taking again 3 samples on each side of the 
cage).  
In each farm, 3 different cages were sampled, which adds a total amount of 54 
samples per farm. 
As explained before, 2 different farms were object of this sampling technique, 
what results on a total of 108 samples during the performance of this thesis. 
Lab work 
Once both samplings were over, and the lab was reached, the samples were 
visually analyzed on the microscope one by one, preserving the other samples in the 
fridge at 8ºC. 
First of all, each sample was taken out from the bottle while filtered with a 100 
µm lab filter. The main purpose of this was getting rid of the ethanol where it had 
been preserved. Remaining ethanol was flushed away by using filtered sea water. 
Once the sample was ethanol free, it was extracted from the lab filter by flushing 
it from the other side of the filter with filtered sea water. The sample was then 
placed, in addition to some sea water, in a beaker. 
Following that, the microscope work took place, where one by one, planktonic 
stages (only) of the sea lice were identified and isolated from the rest of the sample. 
Depending on the author, the number of life cycle stages present in the sea lice 
varies, mostly if discussing the case of C. elongatus (Kabata, 1972). However, most 
authors agree that L. salmonis presents 10 life stages (Costello, 2006) (Image 21). 
At the beginning, raw samples presented a very high diversity of zooplankton, 
being the copepods the most common group. Filaments of unknown origin were also 
common, and used to make the distinction between organisms more difficult and 
time consuming (Image 22). 
Therefore, each sample was watered with filtered sea water, as an attempt of 
decreasing the density of zooplankton and other organisms, which made the visual 
identification significantly easier (Image 23). 
At the end, nauplii of the sea lice were isolated, counted and stored in 97% 
ethanol, inside the freezer at a temperature of -21ºC. 
Storage was done in eppendorf, with the appropriate labelling, stating farm, 
number of cage, moment of the crowding and replicate number (Image 24). 
Overall, the larvae showed, a regular and similar size with each other, presenting 
an average length of 500 µm and a width of 200 µm (Image 25). 
Results were statistically analyzed by using Numbers and R studio, and they can be 
found in the following chapter. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!25
==PAGE:26==
!
 
Image 21. 10 life stages present in the salmon lice L. salmonis. Image taken from 
(Costello, 2006). 
Image 22 and 23. Raw sample (left), just before the watering for its visual analysis (right). 
Image 24 and 25. Nauplii of the sea lice before their final storage in Ethanol (left) and sea 
lice measured in the microscope (right). 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!26
==PAGE:27==
!
Results 
The results showed a much higher larvae concentration in the farm of Mulingen, in 
comparison to the farm of Oksbåsen. Generally, samples which were taken in the 
out-flow of the cages, presented a higher abundance than those taken in the in-flow. 
Results were obtained as number of larvae per sample, and therefore standardized 
into number of larvae per cubic meter. For this calculation, the diameter of the 
circular plankton net (0,57m) and the 10 meters sampled in the water column for 
each sample were used, in order to calculate the total water volume sampled for 
each replicate. A total water volume of 5,1 cubic meters was then calculated. 
Samples from the same cage, crowding stage and farm were gathered together 
into an average calculation (Tables 1 and 2). Standard deviation (SD), coefficient of 
variation (CV), standard error (SEM) were also calculated and presented in the same 
table. 
Table 1. Summary of the farm of Mulingen. Mean, SD, CV and SEM were calculated. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!27
==PAGE:28==
!
Table 2. Summary of the farm of Oksbåsen. Mean, SD, CV and SEM were calculated. 
A correlation between the number of lice and the coefficient of variation was 
represented through two graphs, one for each farm (Figure 1 and 2). Results showed 
a higher CV when the numbers of lice were low. On the other hand, high densities of 
lice in the water involved a lower CV. Patchy random distributions, expressed by the 
variability of the samples obtained, are often found in planktonic organisms (Omori 
and Hamner, 1982). 
Figure 1 and 2. Correlation between the number of lice and the coefficient of variation in 
the farms of Mulingen (left) and Oksbåsen (right). 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!28
Mulingen
CV
0,00
0,30
0,60
0,90
1,20
Lice density
0,00
1,00
2,00
3,00
4,00
5,00
Lice / m3 vs Coe. Of Variation
Oksbåsen
CV
0,00
0,45
0,90
1,35
1,80
Lice density
0,00
0,50
1,00
1,50
2,00
Lice / m3 vs Coe. Of Variation
==PAGE:29==
!
Results gathered in tables 1 and 2 were represented in graphs, making two for 
each cage. One representing the larvae average with its standard error, and another 
one representing the Out minus In calculation, with its corresponding error, 
calculated by applying the following equation: 
SdIn-Out = √(Sd12 + Sd22)  
Overall, D1 presented the highest results, followed by D2. However, this trend 
seems to be different depending on the cage which is being object of study. Below, 
the different graphs can be found, coming first those from Mulingen (Figure 3 to 8), 
followed by Oksbåsen (Figure 9 to 14). 
Figure 3. Cage number 1 from Mulingen. Lice average and SEM. 
Figure 4. Cage number 2 from Mulingen. Lice average and SEM. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!29
M1 Average and Std. Error
Lice / m3
0,00
1,25
2,50
3,75
5,00
M1 -D1- In
M1 -D1- Out
M1 -D2- In
M1 -D2- Out
M1 -End- In
M1 -End- Out
M2 Average and Std. Error
Lice / m3
0,00
1,25
2,50
3,75
5,00
M2 -D1- In
M2 -D1- Out
M2 -D2- In
M2 -D2- Out
M2 -End- In
M2 -End- Out
==PAGE:30==
!
Figure 5. Cage number 3 from Mulingen. Lice average and SEM. 
Figure 6. Cage number 1 from Mulingen. In - Out average and SEM. 
Figure 7. Cage number 2 from Mulingen. In - Out average and SEM. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!30
M3 Average and Std. Error
Lice / m3
0,00
1,25
2,50
3,75
5,00
M3 -D1- In
M3 -D1- Out
M3 -D2- In
M3 -D2- Out
M3 -End- In
M3 -End- Out
M1 Out - In
Lice / m3
-1,25
0,00
1,25
2,50
M1-D1
M1-D2
M1-End
M2 Out - In
Lice / m3
-1,25
0,00
1,25
2,50
M2-D1
M2-D2
M2-End
==PAGE:31==
!
Figure 8. Cage number 3 from Mulingen. In - Out average and SEM. 
Figure 9. Cage number 1 from Oksbåsen. Lice average and SEM. 
Figure 10. Cage number 2 from Oksbåsen. Lice average and SEM. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!31
M3 Out - In
Lice / m3
-1,25
0,00
1,25
2,50
M3-D1
M3-D2
M3-End
M1 Average and Std. Error
Lice / m3
0,00
0,50
1,00
1,50
2,00
D1- In
D1- Out
D2- In
D2- Out
End- In
End- Out
M2 Average and Std. Error
Lice / m3
0,00
0,50
1,00
1,50
2,00
D1- In
D1- Out
D2- In
D2- Out
End- In
End- Out
==PAGE:32==
!
Figure 11. Cage number 3 from Oksbåsen. Lice average and SEM. 
Figure 12. Cage number 1 from Oksbåsen. In - Out average and SEM. 
Figure 13. Cage number 2 from Oksbåsen. In - Out average and SEM. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!32
M3 Average and Std. Error
Lice / m3
0,00
0,50
1,00
1,50
2,00
D1- In
D1- Out
D2- In
D2- Out
End- In
End- Out
M1 Out - In
Lice / m3
-1,00
-0,50
0,00
0,50
1,00
M1-D1
M1-D2
M1-End
M2 Out - In
Lice / m3
-1,00
-0,50
0,00
0,50
1,00
M2-D1
M2-D2
M2-End
==PAGE:33==
!
Figure 14. Cage number 3 from Oksbåsen. In - Out average and SEM. 
Finally, four new graphs were made, gathering all the data from the two different 
farms. The first two graphs represent the farm of Mulingen, showing a mean of the 
three different cages within the farm, by using as data the larvae averages with their 
standard errors (Figure 15) and the average of the three cages of the Out minus In 
calculations (Figure 16). The same procedure was done in the farm of Oksbåsen 
(Figures 17 and 18). 
Figure 15. Cage average from Mulingen. Lice and SEM averages. 
Figure 16. Cage average from Mulingen. In - Out and SEM averages. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!33
M3 Out - In
Lice / m3
-1,00
-0,50
0,00
0,50
1,00
M3-D1
M3-D2
M3-End
Cages Average and Std. Error
Lice / m3
0,00
1,25
2,50
3,75
5,00
Cages-D1-In
Cages-D1-Out
Cages-D2-In
Cages-D2-Out Cages-End-In Cages-End-Out
Cages Out - In
Lice / m3
-1,25
0,00
1,25
2,50
Cages-D1
Cages-D2
Cages-End
==PAGE:34==
!
Figure 17. Cage average from Oksbåsen. Lice and SEM averages. 
Figure 18. Cage average from Oksbåsen. In - Out and SEM averages. 
At first glance, it could seem that the larvae concentration in the water column 
remained stable, even though the number of female adults decreased during the 
crowding (since they were being sucked out from the water into the delousing boat). 
This would suggest that although there were less female lice producing larvae inside 
the cage, an hypothetical effect of the stress due to the crowding might had been 
increasing their larvae spawning rate. Nevertheless, and in order to obtain solid 
results supported by statistical analysis, two double factor Anova were done, one for 
each farm. Analyzed factors were In/Out and the phases of the crowding. 
Apart of that, as an attempt of gathering all the data into one single parameter, 
results were expressed and analyzed as percentages, presenting Out as a percentage 
of In. This way, the crowding is expressed as a strict relation between In and Out, 
decreasing the effect of the variability in the data. 
Performing Anova requires of several pre-requisites that must be fulfilled in the 
first place. These requisites were tested with the following analysis: 
-Normal distribution. Analyzed through Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) test, being 
necessary a p-value higher than 0,05. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!34
Cages Average and Std. Error
Lice / m3
0,00
0,50
1,00
1,50
2,00
Cages-D1-In
Cages-D1-Out
Cages-D2-In
Cages-D2-Out Cages-End-In Cages-End-Out
Cages Out - In
Lice / m3
-1,00
-0,50
0,00
0,50
1,00
Cages-D1
Cages-D2
Cages-End
==PAGE:35==
!
-Homogeneity of variances. Analyzed by Bartlett test, which also requires a p-
value higher than 0,05. 
These tests resulted positive in the different pre-Anova tests performed, which 
allowed the data to be analyzed through the Anova test. 
Mulingen: (Table 3). P-value of In/Out resulted in 0,58, meaning that there was 
not a significant difference between the results in In and Out, since a p-value higher 
than 0,05 was obtained. 
P-value of In/Out compared with the different phases of the crowding resulted in 
0,54, which means that there was not a significant impact of In or Out on any phase 
of the crowding. 
Finally, p-value of the phases resulted in 0,002, meaning that there was a 
significant difference between the results in the phases of the crowding. 
Tukey test was then performed for a multiple comparisons of the means, which 
showed that D1 presented a lower p-value than 0,05 when compared to the other 
two phases of the crowding (Table 5). This means that there was a significant 
difference between this phase and the others. However, D2 and End did not present a 
significant difference between each other. 
Oksbåsen: (Table 4) P-value of In/Out resulted in 0,46, meaning that there was 
not a significant difference between the results in In and Out, since a p-value higher 
than 0,05 was obtained. 
P-value of In/Out compared with the different phases of the crowding resulted in 
0,61, which means that there was not a significant impact of In or Out on any phase 
of the crowding. 
Finally, p-value of the phases resulted in 0,34, meaning that there was not a 
significant difference between the results in any phase of the crowding. 
Table 3 and 4. Results of the Anova test in the farms of Mulingen (left) and Oksbåsen 
(right). 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!35
==PAGE:36==
!
 
Table 5. Results of the Tukey test in the farm of Mulingen. 
As mentioned above, data was also transformed into percentages, in order to 
decrease the effect of the big variability showed in the results. Out values were 
calculated as a percentage of In (Table 6 and 7). 
Table 6 and 7. Out values expressed as a percentage of In data in the farms of Mulingen 
(left) and Oksbåsen (right). 
After the pre-Anova tests were performed, two Anova were done, one of each 
farm (Table 8 and 9). P-value in Mulingen resulted in 0,03, meaning that there was a 
significant difference between the results in the phases of the crowding.  
Tukey test was then performed for a multiple comparison of the means, which 
showed that only D2, when compared to End, had a significant difference (Table 10). 
P-value in Oksbåsen resulted in 0,14, meaning that there was not a significant 
difference between any phase of the crowding.  
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!36
==PAGE:37==
!
 
Table 8 and 9. Results of the Anova test in the farms of Mulingen (left) and Oksbåsen 
(right). 
Table 10. Results of the Tukey test in the farm of Mulingen. 
As a summary, the results showed, when analyzed based on number of larvae per 
cubic meter, that there was not a significant difference between In and Out, and 
they did not either have a significant effect on any of the three different phases of 
the crowding (D1, D2 or End).  
It was found a significant difference between D1 and the other two phases (D2 and 
End) in Mulingen, being D2 and End non significantly different from each other. 
On the other hand, there has not been found a significant difference between any 
of the phases in the farm of Oksbåsen. 
In contrast to these results, D1 and D2 in Mulingen did not present a significant 
difference between each other, when results were analyzed as percentages. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!37
==PAGE:38==
!
Discussion 
First of all, it is important to highlight the importance of this research project. 
Even though sea lice has been an issue basically since the salmon farming industry 
was born (Costello et al., 2004), the scientific knowledge we have about it is 
relatively low, especially if compared for instance with the economic impact it has 
on the industry (Brandal et al., 1976) (explained during the Introduction). 
It would be fairly understandable to think that everything that has to do with the 
biology of the sea lice is widely known. However, that thought could not be further 
from the truth (McVicar, 2004). How the infestation levels that can be found within 
the farms are so high, when the larvae concentration is the water is so low, is just 
one of many questions about sea lice that remain unanswered (Morton, 2008). Also, 
where do all those lice come from and how do they get to attach to the salmon with 
the limited mobility they have? All these questions, highlight the importance of 
projects such as Taskforce Lakselus, and in a smaller scale, my master´s thesis, in 
order to increase the knowledge about the sea lice. If the industry is to adequately 
combat its sea lice problem, more research is clearly needed. 
This work is meant as a pilot for future projects, and its utility comes from 
avoiding future mistakes and promoting the improvement of the current practices 
that, one day might answer questions as those previously mentioned. It is necessary 
to analyze this thesis with critical thinking, but keeping in mind that more sampling 
effort is necessary, so a better idea of the effect of the crowding on the spread of 
the sea lice is achieved. Such an objective involves a longer period of work than 6 
months, which has been the duration of this thesis. Having said this, the following 
discussion will be divided into three different parts, undertaking the sampling, the 
lab work and the results. 
Sampling 
The first thing you notice, when you work for a while in a sea farm which is placed 
in a fjord, is the hostility that exists there, hostility coming from nature. It might 
sound like a commonplace, but after working there for a couple of days, questions 
about the lack of solid results (Bakke and Harris, 1998) regarding the sea lice are a 
bit clarified. The waves, the wind, the weather, the tides, the currents dynamics 
within the farm, the movement of the boats sailing around, the structure of the 
cages themselves, are factors that had a very relevant impact on the sampling. 
As explained in the chapter of `Material and Methods´, different samples and 
replicates were gathered in different cages during different moments of the 
crowding.  
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!38
==PAGE:39==
!
There is a high probability that the results were affected by the environmental 
factors that happened while they were being gathered, which is something that 
should be taken into account. 
One day the sea could be flat, and the following day, big waves could be affecting 
the sampling, by making different environmental conditions, while hampering the 
labor involved in the sampling activity. Cages within the same farm, presented high 
differences in salmon density or grade of lice infestation, what made their 
comparison very problematic.  
At the time of comparing the three different phases of the crowding, it was 
necessary to keep in mind that they took place during different environmental 
conditions, such as calm, heavy wind or waves. In addition, the crowding involved a 
big number of boats, and adapting to them without disturbing the sailors, made us 
improvise new sampling spots. 
As it was also mentioned in Material and Methods, the location of the in-flows and 
the out-flows of each cage were visually determined, but under bad weather 
conditions, it was impossible to determine accurately their precise location. Because 
of this, the relative reliability on the relevance of In and Out is something that 
should be considered. However, in view of the huge variability of larva abundance 
among cages, we also used percentages to get a more homogeneous measure of the 
effect of the crowding. Out values were transformed into a percentage of In values. 
This operation decreased the high variability found in the samples and made the 
results more homogenous. 
In the future, it would be advisable to determine the location of In and Out with 
more accurate oceanographic tools or devices, in order to provide them of solid 
statistical importance, independently of the weather or the underwater current 
dynamics. 
Regarding the environmental conditions, the best way of decreasing their 
relevance and their impact on the results, would be by increasing the number of 
samples, and the number of days on which these samples are taken. More replicates 
taken in a higher number of farms, would minimize the environmental impact, and 
would therefore increase the trust level on the results. 
Lab work 
Firstly, even though the sea lice presents a morphology that distinguishes it from 
the rest of the zooplankton, in a pretty clear way, an error led by the amount of 
organisms in the sample or the lack of focus can always exist. Due to the very low 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!39
==PAGE:40==
!
number of lice counted in some of the samples (0, 1, 2), this error could make a 
significant difference at the time of analyzing the results statistically. In addition, 
the pigments that make them look totally different from the rest, disappear or get 
modified with time, which implies an urgency to analyze the samples. 
On the other hand, it is fair to say that it is a very time consuming task, requiring 
each sample between 40 minutes and 2 hours, depending on the sample density and 
the amount of unidentified filaments which make the analysis much slower and 
harder. 
Because of this, it would be advisable to develop a more accurate way of 
counting. The risk of human error at the time of developing the task is very high. 
Moreover, it requires a high amount of working hours, limiting the amount of samples 
which can be analyzed before the pigment gets modified. This goes together with the 
suggestion that more samples are needed, in order to decrease the effect of the 
environment on the validity of the samples. A possible improvement could be the 
utilization of the antigens extracted by (Grayson et al., 1995). Proteins from adult L. 
salmonis were extracted in order to immunize Atlantic salmon against the settlement 
of the larvae. This discovery could be combined with the multiple fluorescence 
techniques that are being used in different universities around the world, such as the 
one applied by (Lopez-Llorca and Robertson, 1992), combining fluorescence and 
antibodies. A similar technique could be applied for the detection of the early stages 
of the sea lice. These antibodies would attach to the larvae which are present in the 
samples, and by making them `shine´ through fluorescence, their detection would be 
much simpler. This would allow the person in charge of the counting finish each 
sample in a very short period of time, with a lower error, and consequently, more 
samples could be counted (which is a basic requirement for the success of this 
research project). 
Results 
Samples were analyzed in two different ways, using as raw data either the number 
of lice per cubic meter or the percentages, calculating Out as a percentage of In 
values. As exposed in the larvae per cubic meter results, the statistics showed that 
there was not a significant difference between In and Out, and they did not either 
have a significant effect on any of the three different phases of the crowding (D1, D2 
or End).  
The original idea was that, as planktonic organisms that follow the currents, the 
larvae of the zooplankton would go through the different cages. By counting their 
density at the in-flow and the out-flow of the cage, an approximate larvae 
production within the cage could be estimated (explained in Material and Methods). 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!40
==PAGE:41==
!
However, due to sampling difficulties and lack of statistical trust, in combination 
of the Anova tests, the variables that finally counted, were the three different 
phases of the crowding. 
The results revealed a significant difference between the D1 and the other two 
phases (D2 and End) in Mulingen, being D2 and End non significantly different from 
each other. On the other hand, it was not found a significant difference between any 
of the phases in the farm of Oksbåsen. 
There were two possible answers regarding the effect of the crowding on the 
spread of the sea lice. In the case the crowding had an effect, assuming that the 
factor `stress´ results on a higher larvae spawning rate on the adult females, a high 
larvae concentration should have been found in D2. Nevertheless, it was found a 
significant difference between D1 and D2 in Mulingen. If the crowding had increased 
the spawning rate,  it should have compensated the low numbers of salmon (and in 
consequence, of lice)  within the cage during D2. As a result of that, D1 and D2 
should not have presented any difference, being the End phase the different one 
from the rest, instead of D1. 
Following this argument, taking the case of Oksbåsen, the low initial numbers 
found in D1, should have been increased in D2 due to the crowding, but no difference 
was found. The way these results could be interpreted, would be by accepting as 
correct the second alternative to the question about the crowding. There is no clear 
evidence of an effect on the spread of the sea lice performed by the crowding. 
This hypothesis would support that the factor that counts is the number of female 
lice in the cages. D1 in Mulingen presented a very high number of salmon and adult 
lice at the beginning. However, as soon as lice were removed from the water and 
sucked into the boat, larvae concentration in the water decreased. 
In Oksbåsen, initial numbers of salmon and lice were lower, and the effect of the 
pumping could not be perceived in the counting. 
According to the results obtained using as raw data the number of lice per cubic 
meter, there are not evidences that support and hypothetical effect of the crowding 
on the spread of the sea lice. 
On the other hand, when Anova was performed based on the values calculated as 
percentages, D1 and D2 did no present significant differences in the farm of 
Mulingen, being End phase the one differing from the rest. This result could be 
interpreted as a possible effect of the crowding on the sea lice larvae concentration. 
Although there were less salmon inside the cages (carrying adult female lice) during 
D2 phase, larvae levels remained similar to D1, what could suggest a higher larvae 
spawning rate. However, results in Oksbåsen did not present any difference between 
phases, what makes this hypothesis unclear and not conclusive.  
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!41
==PAGE:42==
!
In the future, it would be advisable to increase the number of samples taken 
during the crowding, by increasing the number of phases. D1 and D2 had time lapses 
up to eight hours. If more samples were taken in between, instead of exclusively at 
the beginning and at the end of the crowding, a better idea of the larvae density 
dynamics would be obtained. Hence, due to the great environmental threat implied 
by the sea lice, and its negative impact on the industry, the answer to the 
problematic of the crowding remains inconclusive, being required a bigger sample 
that shows a better view of the larvae population fluctuation during the crowding. 
Lastly, I would like to add several suggestions than those given by Costello, 2006. 
They are meant help to decrease the problematic of the lice, while making easier its 
control. 
-To break the population cycle of the sea lice, by having a fallow period in farms 
where no fish are farmed (Costello, 2006). Construction of land based facilities 
associated to these farms could be the way of culturing fish during the empty cage 
period, so the production remains running. 
-Cleaner fish should be stock into the fish cages (Costello, 2006). This should be 
mandatory by law, instead of leaving the decision up to the farmers. 
-Parasiticides should be given to smolts in freshwater tanks before transfer to sea 
cages (Costello, 2006). Again, this measure should be mandatory in every farm. 
-If present, lice should be treated during the winter to remove females before the 
spring (Costello, 2006). Decreasing the lice / fish limits would decrease the lice 
peaks during the year, and would force the farms to find alternative measures. 
-More strict regulations, like the ones mentioned above, in combination to the use 
of vaccines as the one found by (Grayson et al., 1995), would create a multiple 
action front that would make more difficult for the lice to develop and spread. Every 
effective measure known should be mandatory, combining chemotherapeutants, 
cleaner fish and vaccines. 
-Since male lice compete for females while females storage sperm (Richie, 1996), 
the release of a genetically modified strain of male sea lice, unable to reproduce 
(sterile) could be studied. These individuals would compete for the females against 
the fertile ``wild´´ male lice, decreasing the reproductive capability of the species. 
At the same time, females would storage their sperm, which would lead nowhere. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!42
==PAGE:43==
!
Conclusions 
-In future projects, the location of In and Out should be determined with more 
accurate oceanographic tools or devices, in order to provide the data of solid 
statistical importance, independently of the weather or the underwater current 
dynamics. 
-Applying lab techniques as the one applied by (Lopez-Llorca and Robertson, 
1992), would decrease the counting time and the error derived from the counting at 
the time of analyzing the samples in the lab. More samples could be counted in the 
same amount of time. 
-When the unit under analysis was the number of larvae per cubic meter, no 
evidence of an effect of the crowding on the number of larvae was obtained. The 
number of adult female seemed to be the most relevant factor. 
-When the unit under analysis was the relation of Out with In, calculated as Out as 
a percentage of In, no differences between D1 and D2 were found. This might suggest 
a possible effect of the crowding on the number of larvae in the water. 
-No conclusive results were obtained, being necessary a higher amount of 
samples, so the effect of the environmental conditions in the fjord gets decreased. 
Also, a higher amount of phases during the crowding, so a better idea of the larvae 
concentration dynamics during the whole crowding process is achieved. 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks a lot to Manuel, my supervisor, who has shown an infinite patience with me 
during the whole thesis. He always found a moment to help me, whenever my 
questions took place. 
Thanks to Bendik, for helping me with the language and the redaction of this 
thesis. 
A million thanks to Carlos, a friend of mine in Australia, for saving me from the 
mess the statistics of this project made. 
And over all, thanks to Frøydis, my life partner, for dealing with my grumpy mood 
during the performance of this Master´s thesis and being the support only a few 
people ever find in life. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!43
==PAGE:44==
!
Bibliography 
Amundrud, T.L. and Murray, A.G. (2009). Modelling sea lice dispersion under 
varying environmental forcing in a Scottish sea loch. Journal of Fish Diseases 2009, 
32, 27–44  
Anderson, R.M. and May, R.M. (1991) Infectious Diseases of Humans: Dynamics and 
Control. Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
Asche, F. and Bjørndal, T. (2011) The Economics of Salmon Aquaculture. Wiley-
Blackwell, Chichester.  
Asche, F., Guttormsen, A.G., Sebulonsen, T. and Sissener, E.H. (2005) Competition 
between farmed and wild salmon: the Japanese salmon market. Agricultural 
Economics 33, 333– 340.  
Asche, F., Guttormsen, A.G. and Tveteras, R. (1999) Environmental problems, 
productivity and innovations in Norwegian salmon aquaculture. Aquaculture 
Economics & Management 3, 19–29.  
Bakke, T. A and Harris, P.D. (1998) Diseases and parasites in wild Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar) populations. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 55, 
247–266.  
Berland, B. and Margolis, L. (1983) The early history of ‘Lakselus’ and some 
nomenclatural questions relating to copepod parasites of salmon. Sarsia 68, 281–288.  
Bjordal, Å. (1990). Sea lice infestation on farmed salmon: possible use of cleaner-
fish as an alternative method for de-lousing. Canadian Technical Reports of Fisheries 
and Aquatic Sciences 1761, 85–89.  
Bjørn, P.A., Finstad, B. and Kristoffersen, R. (2001) Salmon lice infection of wild 
sea trout and Arctic char in marine and freshwaters: effects of salmon farms. 
Aquacult. Res. 32, 947–962  
Boxshall, G. A. and Halsey, S. H. (2004) An Introduction to Copepod Diversity. The 
Ray Society, London.  
Brandal, P.O. and Egidius, E. (1977) Preliminary report on oral treatment against 
salmon lice, Lepeophtheirus salmonis, with Neguvon. Aquaculture 10, 177–178.  
Brandal, P.O. and Egidius, E. (1979) Treatment of salmon lice (Lepeophtheirus 
salmonis Krøyer, 1838) with Neguvon® — description of method and equipment. 
Aquaculture 18, 183–188.  
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!44
==PAGE:45==
!
Brandal, P.O., Egidius, E. and Romslo, I. (1976) Host blood: a major food 
component for the parasitic copepod Lepeophtheirus salmonis, Kroyeri, 1838 
(Crustacea: Caligidae). Norwegian Journal of Zoology 24, 341–343. 
Branson, E.J., Ronsberg, S.S. and Ritchie, G. (2000) Efficacy of teflubenzuron 
(Calicide((R))) for the treatment of sea lice, Lepeophtheirus salmonis (Kroyer 1838), 
infestations of farmed Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.). Aquaculture Research 31, 
861–867.  
Bricknell, I.R., Dalesman, S.J., O’shea, B., Pert, C.C. and Luntz, A.J.M. (2006) 
Effect of environmental salinity on sea lice Lepeophtheirus salmonis settlement 
success. Diseases of Aquatic Organisms 71, 201–212.  
Bron, J.E., Sommerville, C. and Rae, G.H. (1993) Aspects of the behaviour of 
copepodid larvae of the salmon louse Lepeopht- heirus salmonis (Krøyer, 1837). In: 
Pathogens of Wild and Farmed Fish: Sea Lice (ed. by G.A. Boxshall & D. Defaye), pp. 
125–142. Ellis Horwood, New York.  
Butler, J.R.A. (2002) Wild salmonids and sea louse infestations on the west coast 
of Scotland: sources of infection and implications for the management of marine 
salmon farms. Pest Management Science 58, 595–608. 
Copley, L., Tierney, T.D., Kane, F., Naughton, O., Kennedy, S., O’Donohoe, P., 
Jackson, D. and McGrath, D. (2005) Sea lice, Lepeophtheirus salmonis and Caligus 
elongatus, levels on salmon returning to the west coast of Ireland, 2003. Journal of 
the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom 85, 87–92. 
Costello, M.J. (1993) Review of methods to control sea-lice (Caligidae, Crustacea) 
infestations on salmon farms. In Pathogens of Wild and Farmed Fish: Sea Lice 
(Boxshall, G.A. and Defaye, D., eds), pp. 219– 252, Ellis Horwood 
Costello, M.J. (2004) A checklist of best practice for sea lice control on salmon 
farms. Caligus 8, 18 
Costello, M.J. (2006). Ecology of sea lice parasitic on farmed and wild fish. 
TRENDS in Parasitology Vol.22 No.10. 
Costello, M.J. (2009) The global economic cost of sea lice to the salmonid farming 
industry. Journal of Fish Diseases 32, 115–118.  
Costello, M.J., Burridge, L., Chang, B. and Robichaud, L. (2004) Sea Lice 2003 – 
Proceedings of the sixth international conference on sea lice biology and control. 
Aquaculture Research 35, 711–712. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!45
==PAGE:46==
!
Costelloe, J., Costelloe, M. and Roche, N. (1995) Variation in sea lice infestation 
on Atlantic salmon smolts in Killary Harbour, west coast of Ireland. Aquacult. 
Internat. 3, 379–393 43  
Dempster, T., Uglem, I., Sanchez-Jerez, P., Fernandez-Jover, D., Bayle-Sempere, 
J., Nilsen, R. and Bjørn, P.A. (2009) Coastal salmon farms attract large and persistent 
aggregations of wild fish: an ecosystem effect. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 385:1−14. 
 Fast, M.D., Burka, J.F., Johnson, S.C. and Ross, N.W. (2003) Enzymes released 
from Lepeophtheirus salmonis in response to mucus from different salmonids. Journal 
of Parasitology 89, 7–13.  
Fast, M.D., Johnson, S.C., Eddy, T.D., Pinto, D. and Ross, N.W. (2007) 
Lepeophtheirus salmonis secretory/excretory products and their effects on Atlantic 
salmon immune gene regulation. Parasite Immunology 29, 179–189.  
Finstad, B., Bjørn, P.A., Grimnes, A. and Hvidsten, N.A. (2000) Laboratory and 
field investigations of salmon lice Lepeophtheirus salmonis (Kroyer) infestation on 
Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.) post-smolts. Aquaculture Research 31, 795–803.  
Grayson, T.H., Jenkins, P.G., Wrathmell, A.B. and Harris, J.E. (1991) Serum 
responses to the salmon louse, Lepeophtheirus salmonis (Kroyer, 1838), in naturally 
infected salmonids and immunised rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), 
and rabbits. Fish & Shellfish Immunology 1, 141–155.  
Grayson, T.H., John, R.J., Wadsworth, S., Greaves, K., Cox, D., Roper, J., 
Wrathmell, A.B., Gilpin, M.L. and Harris, J.E. (1995) Immunization of Atlantic salmon 
against the salmon louse: identification of antigens and effects on louse fecundity. 
Journal of Fish Biology 47, 85–94.  
Guttormsen, A.G. (2002) Input factor sustainability in salmon aquaculture. Marine 
Resource Economics 17, 91–102.  
Hanssen, T. M. (2012) Lovende resultat med rognkjeks (Promising results with 
lumpfish). In: Nytt fra Havbruk. Forskningsrådet (Norwegian Research Council), Oslo, 
Norway, pp. 1.  
Hart, J.L., Thacker, J.R.M., Braidwood, J.C., Fraser, N.R. and Matthews, J.E. 
(1997). Novel cypermethrin formulation for the control of sea lice on salmon (Salmo 
salar). Veterinary Record 140, 179–181.  
Hayward, C.J., Andrews, M. and Nowak, B.F. (2011) Introduction: Lepeoptheirus 
salmonis – a remarkable success story. In: Salmon Lice: An Integrated Approach to 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!46
==PAGE:47==
!
Understanding Parasite Abundance and Distribution (ed. by S. Jones & R. Beamish), 
pp. 1–28. John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester, UK. 
Heuch, P.A. (1995) Experimental evidence for aggregation of salmon louse 
copepodids (Lepeophtheirus salmonis) in step salinity gradients. Journal of the 
Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom 75, 927–939.  
Heuch, P.A., Parsons, A. and Boxaspen, K. (1995) Diel vertical migration: a possible 
host-finding mechanism in salmon louse (Lepeophtheirus salmonis) copepodids? Can. 
J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 52, 681–689 
Heuch, P.A., Bjørn, P.A., Finstad, B., Holst, J.C., Asplin, L. and Nilsen, F.  (2005) A 
review of the Norwegian ‘National Action Plan against Salmon Lice on Salmonids’: the 
effect on wild salmonids. Aquaculture 246, 79–92 
Heuch, P.A. and Karlsen, H.E. (1997) Detection of infrasonic water oscillations by 
copepodids of Lepeophtheirus salmonis (Copepoda: Caligida). Journal of Plankton 
Research 19, 735– 747.  
Horsberg, T.E. and Hoy, T. (1991) Tissue distribution of 14C- diflubenzuron in 
Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica 32, 527–533.  
Jackson, D., Cotter, D., Omaoileidigh, N., O’Donohoe, P., White, J., Kane, F., 
Kelly, S., McDermott, T., McEvoy, S., Drumm, A., Cullen, A. and Rogan, G. (2011) An 
evaluation of the impact of early infestation with the salmon louse Lepeophtheirus 
salmonis on the subsequent survival of outwardly migrating Atlantic salmon, Salmo 
salar L., smolts. Aquaculture 320, 159–163.  
Jackson, D., Cotter, D., Newel, J., McEvoy, S., O’Donohoe, P., Kane, F., 
McDermott, T., Kelly, S. and Drumm, A. (2012) Impact of Lepeophtheirus salmonis 
infestations on migrating Atlantic salmon smolts at eight locations in Ireland with an 
analysis of lice-induced marine mortality. Journal of Fish Diseases, doi: 10.1111/jfd.
12054. 
Jackson, D., Deady, S., Leahy, Y. and Hassett, D. (1997) Variations in parasitic 
caligid infestations on farmed salmonids and implications for their management. ICES 
Journal of Marine Science 54, 1104–1112.  
Jackson, D. and Minchin, D. (1992) Aspects of the reproductive output of two 
caligid copepod species parasitic on cultivated salmon. Invertebrate Reproduction & 
Development 22, 87–90.  
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!47
==PAGE:48==
!
Jacobsen, J.A. and Gaard, E. (1997) Open-ocean infestation by salmon lice 
(Lepeophtheirus salmonis): comparison of wild and escaped farmed Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar L.). ICES J. Mar. Sci. 54, 1113–1119. 
Jansen, P.A., Kristoffersen, A.B., Viljugrein, H., Jimenez, D., Aldrin, M. and Stien, 
A. (2012) Sea lice as a density-dependent constraint to salmonid farming. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 279, 2314–
2322.  
Johannessen, A. (1974) Lakselus [Salmon lice]. Fisken og Havet Ser B 2, 21–31.  
Johnson, S.C. and Albright, L.J. (1991) Development, growth, and survival of 
Lepeophtheirus salmonis (Kroyer, 1837) (Copepoda: Caligidae) under laboratory 
conditions. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom 71, 
425–436.  
Johnson, S.C. and Albright, L.J. (1992) Comparative susceptibility and 
histopathology of the response of naive Atlantic. Chinook and coho salmon to 
experimental infection with Lepeophtheirus salmonis (Copepoda: Caligidae). Diseases 
of Aquatic Organisms 14, 179–193.  
Johnson, S.C., Blaylock, R.B., Elphick, J. and Hyatt, K.D. (1996) Disease induced 
by the sea louse (Lepeophtheirus salmonis) (Copepoda: Caligidae) in wild sockeye 
salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) stocks of Alberni Inlet, British Columbia. Canadian 
Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 53, 2888–2897.  
Johnson, S. C., Treasurer, J. W., Nagasawa, K., Kabata, Z. and Bravo, S. (2004) A 
review of the impact of parasitic copepods on marine aquaculture. Zool. Stud., 43, 
229 – 243.  
Johnson, S.C. and Fast, M.D. (2004) Interactions between sea lice and their hosts. 
In Host–Pathogen Interactions (Flik, G., Wiegertjes, G. and Wendellar-Bonga, S., 
eds), pp. 131-160, SEB Symposium Series 55 
Jones, M.W., Sommerville, C. and Wootten, R. (1992) Reduced sensitivity of the 
salmon louse, Lepeophtheirus salmonis, to the organophosphate dichlorvos. Journal 
of Fish Diseases 15, 197–202.  
Kabata, Z. (1979) Parasitic Copepoda of British Fishes. The Ray Society, British 
Museum, London, UK.  
Krkosek, M., Connors, B.M., Morton, A., Lewis, M.A., Dill, L.M. and Hilborn, R. 
(2011) Effects of parasites from salmon farms on productivity of wild salmon. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!48
==PAGE:49==
!
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
108, 14700–14704.  
Krkosek, M., Ford, J.S., Morton, A., Lele, S., Myers, R.A. and Lewis, M.A. (2007) 
Declining wild salmon populations in relation to parasites from farm salmon. Science 
318, 1772– 1775.  
Krkosek, M., Lewis, M.A. and Volpe, J.P. (2005) Transmission dynamics of parasitic 
sea lice from farm to wild salmon. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series 
B, Biological Sciences 272, 689–696.  
Lees F., Gettinby, G. and Revie, C.W. (2008) Changes in epidemiological patterns 
of sea lice infestation on farmed Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar L., in Scotland 
between 1996 and 2006. Journal of Fish Diseases 31, 259–268.  
Marty, G.D., Saksida, S.M. and Quinn, T.J. (2010) Relationship of farm salmon, sea 
lice, and wild salmon populations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the United States of America 107, 22599–22604.  
McKenzie, E., Gettinby, G., McCart, K. and Revie, C.W. (2004) Time-series models 
of sea lice Caligus elongatus (Nordmann) abundance on Atlantic salmon Salmo salar L. 
in Loch Sunart, Scotland. Aquacult. Res. 35, 764–772 
Morton, A., Williams, R. and Routledge, R.D. (2005) Temporal patterns of sea louse 
infestation on wild Pacific salmon in relation to the fallowing of Atlantic salmon 
farms. N. Am. J. Fish. Manage. 25, 811–821 
Mustafa, A., Speare, D.J, Daley, J., Conboy, G.A and Burka, J. F.. (2000) Enhanced 
susceptibility of seawater cultured rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), 
to the microsporidian Loma salmonae during a primary infection with the sea louse, 
Lepeophtheirus salmonis. J. Fish Dis. 23, 337–341 
NASCO (2011) Report of the Twenty-Eighth Annual Meeting of the Council. North 
Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization, Ilulissat, Greenland. pp. 1–349. 
Olaussen, J.O. and Liu, Y.J. (2011) On the willingness-to-pay for recreational 
fishing: escaped farmed versus wild Atlantic salmon. Aquaculture Economics & 
Management 15, 245–261.  
Olavsen, T., Sandberg, M., Henriksen, K., Bull-Berg, H., Johansen, U. and Stokka, 
A. (2011) Betydningen av fiskeri- og havbruksnæringen for Norge i 2009 – En nasjonal 
og regional ringvirkningsanalyse (In Norwegian: The impact of the fishing and 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!49
==PAGE:50==
!
aquaculture industry in Norway in 2009 – A national and regional analysis of 
multiplicator effect). In: SINTEF Report. SINTEF, Trondheim, Norway.  
Omori, M. and Hamner, W.M. (1982). Patchy distribution of zooplankton: Behavior, 
population assessment and sampling problems. Marine Biology Volume 72, Issue 2, pp 
193–200. 
Otero, J., Jensen, A.J., L’abee-Lund, J.H., Stenseth, N.C., Storvik, G.O. and 
Vollestad, L.A. (2011) Quantifying the ocean, freshwater and human effects on year-
to-year variability of one-sea-winter Atlantic salmon angled in multiple Norwegian 
rivers. PLoS ONE 6, e24005.  
Palmer, R., Rodger, H., Drinan, E., Dwyer, C. and Smith, P.R. (1987) Preliminary 
trials on the efficacy of ivermectin against parasitic copepods of Atlantic salmon. 
Bulletin of the European Association of Fish Pathologists 7, 47–54.  
Penston, M.J., Millar, C.P., Zuur, A. and Davies, I.M. (2008) Spatial and temporal 
distribution of Lepeophtheirus salmonis (Kroyer) larvae in a sea loch containing 
Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar L., farms on the north-west coast of Scotland. Journal 
of Fish Diseases 31, 361–371.  
Penston, M., McKibben, M. A., Hay, D.W. and Gillibrand, P. A. (2004) Observations 
on open-water densities of sea lice larvae in Loch Shieldaig, Western Scotland. 
Aquacult. Res. 35, 793–805 
Pike, A.W., Mordue, A. J. and Ritchie, G. (1993) The development of Caligus 
elongatus Nordmann from hatching to copepo- did in relation to temperature. In: 
Boxshall GA, Defaye D (eds) Pathogens of wild and farmed fish: sea lice. Taylor and 
Francis, Chichester, p 51–60 
Pike, A. W. and Wadsworth, S. L. (1999) Sealice on salmonids: their biology and 
control. Adv. Parasitol., 44, 233–337. 
Rae, G.H. (1979) On the trail of the sea lice. Fish Farmer 2, 22–25.  
Raynard, R.S., Bricknell, I.R., Billingsley, P.F., Nisbet, A.J., Vigneau, A. and 
Sommerville, C. (2002) Development of vaccines against sea lice. Pest Management 
Science 58, 569–575.  
Revie, C.W., Gettinby, G., Treasurer, J.W. and Wallace, C. (2003) Identifying 
epidemiological factors affecting sea lice Lepeopht- heirus salmonis abundance on 
Scottish salmon farms using general linear models. Diseases of Aquatic Organisms 57, 
85–95.  
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!50
==PAGE:51==
!
Revie, C. W., Gettinby, G. and Treasurer, J. W. and Rae, G. H. (2002). The 
epidemiology of the sea lice, Caligus elongatus Nordmann, in marine aqua- culture of 
Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar L., in Scotland. J. Fish Dis., 25, 391–299.  
Revie, C.W., Gettinby, G., Treasurer, J.W., Grant, A. N. and Reid, S.W.J. (2002) 
Sea lice infestations on farmed Atlantic salmon in Scotland and the use of 
ectoparasitic treatments. Vet. Rec. 151, 753– 757 
Rikardsen, A.H. (2004) Seasonal occurrence of sea lice Lepeophtheirus salmonis on 
sea trout in two north Norwegian fjords. Journal of Fish Biology 65, 711–722.-Roth M. 
(2000) The availability and use of chemotherapeutic sea lice control products. 
Contributions to Zoology 69, 109– 118.  
Ritchie, G., Mordue, A.J., Pike, A. W. and Rae, G.H.   (1996) Observations on 
mating and reproductive behaviour of Lepeophtheirus salmonis, Kroyer (Copepoda: 
Caligidae). J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 201, 285–298 
Rohde, K. (1993) Ecology of Marine Parasites. CAB International, Wallingford.  
Roth, M. (2000) The availability and use of chemotherapeutic sea lice control 
products. Contributions to Zoology 69, 109– 118.  
Schram, T. A., Knutsen, J. A. and Heuch, P. A. and Mo, T.A.. (1998) Seasonal 
occurrence of Lepeophtheirus salmonis and Caligus elongatus (Copepoda: Caligidae) 
on sea trout (Salmo trutta), off southern Norway. ICES J. Mar. Sci., 55, 163–175.  
Siegal, D.A., Gaylord, B., Kinlan, B.P. and Gaines, S. D. (2003) Lagranganian 
descriptions of marine larval dispersion. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 260, 83–96 
Simonsen, K.,   á Norði, G., Danielsen, E.,   Eliasen, K.,   Mols-Mortensen, A., 
Christiansen,   D.H., Steingrund, P., Galbraith, M., and   Patursson, Ø.   (2015) 
Abundance and distribution of planktonic Lepeophtheirus salmonis and Caligus 
elongatus in a fish farming region in the Faroe Islands. Aquaculture Environment 
Interactions. Vol. 7: 15–27. 
Smith, M.D., Roheim, C.A., Crowder, L.B., Halpern, B.S., Turnipseed, M., 
Anderson, J.L., Asche, F., Bourillon, L., Guttormsen, A.G., Khan, A., Liguori, L.A., 
McNevin, A., O’Connor, M.I., Squires, D., Tyedmers, P., Brownstein, C., Carden, K., 
Klinger, D.H., Sagarin, R. and Selkoe, K.A. (2010) Sustainability and global seafood. 
Science 327, 784–786.  
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!51
==PAGE:52==
!
Stien, A., Bjørn, P.A., Heuch, P.A. and Elston, D.A. (2005) Population dynamics of 
salmon lice Lepeophtheirus salmonis on Atlantic salmon and sea trout. Marine 
Ecology-Progress Series 290, 263–275. 
Stone, J., Sutherland, I.H., Sommerville, C., Richards, R.H. and Varma, K.J. 
(2000) Field trials to evaluate the efficacy of emamectin benzoate in the control of 
sea lice, Lepeophtheirus salmonis (Kroyer) and Caligus elongatus Nordmann, 
infestations in Atlantic salmon Salmo salar L. Aquaculture 186, 205–219.  
Stone, J., Roy, W.J., Sutherland, I.H., FErguson, H.W., Sommerville, C. and Endris, 
R. (2002) Safety and efficacy of emamectin benzoate administered in-feed to 
Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar L., smolts in freshwater, as a preventative treatment 
against infestations of sea lice, Lepeophtheirus salmonis (Kroyer). Aquaculture 210, 
21–34 
Thomassen, J.M. (1993) Hydrogen peroxide as a delousing agent for Atlantic 
salmon. In: Pathogens of Wild and Farmed Fish: Sea Lice (ed. by G.A. Boxshall & D. 
Defaye), pp. 290–295. Ellis Horwood, New York, USA.  
Todd, C.D., Stevenson, R.J., Reinardy, H. and Richie, M. G. (2005) Polyandry in the 
ectoparasite copepod Lepeophtheirus salmonis despite complex precopulatory and 
postcopulatory mate-guarding. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 303, 225–234 
Todd, C.D. (2007). The copepod parasite (Lepeophtheirus salmonis (Krøyer), 
Caligus elongatus Nordmann) interactions between wild and farmed Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar L.) and wild sea trout (Salmo trutta L.): a mini review. Journal of 
plankton research. Vol. 29. Supplement 1. Pages 61-71. 
Torrissen, O., Jones, S., Asche, F., Guttormsen, A., Skilbrei, O.T., Nilsen, F., 
Horsberg, T. E. and Jackson, D. (2013). Salmon lice – impact on wild salmonids and 
salmon aquaculture. Journal of Fish Diseases 2013, 36, 171–194. 
Torrissen, O., Olsen, R.E., Toresen, R., Hemre, G.I., Tacon, A.G.J., Asche F., Hardy 
R.W. and Lall, S. (2011) Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar): the “super-chicken” of the 
sea? Reviews in Fisheries Science 19, 257–278.  
Treasurer, J.W., Grant, A. and Davis, P. J. (2000) Physical constraints of bath 
treatments of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) with a sea lice burden (Copepoda: 
Caligidae). Contrib. Zool. 69, 129–136  
Tully, O. and Nolan, D.T. (2002) A review of population biology and host-parasite 
interactions of the sea louse Lepeophtheirus salmonis (Copepoda: Caligidae). 
Parasitology 124, S165–S182 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!52
==PAGE:53==
!
Tully, O. and Whelan, K.F. (1993) Production of nauplii of Lepeophtheirus salmonis 
(Krøyer) (Copepoda: Caligidae) from farmed and wild salmon and its relation to the 
infestation of wild sea trout (Salmo trutta L.) off the west coast of Ireland in 1991. 
Fisheries Research 17, 187–200.  
Tucker, C.S., Sommerville, C. and Wootten, R. (2002) Does size really matter? 
Effects of fish surface area on the settlement and initial survival of Lepeophtheirus 
salmonis, an ectoparasite of Atlantic salmon Salmo salar. Diseases of Aquatic 
Organisms 49, 145–152.  
Wagner, G.N., Mckinley, R.S., Bjørn, P.A. and Finstad, B.(2004) Short-term 
freshwater exposure benefits sea lice-infected Atlantic salmon. J. Fish Biol. 64, 1593– 
1604 
Wagner, G.N., Fast, M.D. and Johnson, S.C. (2008) Physiology and immunology of 
Lepeophtheirus salmonis infections of salmonids. Trends in Parasitology 24, 176–183.  
Wagner, G.N. and McKinley, R.S. (2004) Anaemia and salmonid swimming 
performance: the potential effects of sub-lethal sea lice infection. J. Fish Biol. 64, 
1027–103. 
 
Master´s Thesis JC Torres 2018 
!53
