==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Investigation of superconducting electromagnet interior 
mounted in the rotor of a wind turbine generator 
 
 
Andreas Herling Kieldsen 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0196 
March 2018 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Authors: Andreas Herling Kieldsen 
Title: Investigation of superconducting electromagnet interior mounted in the 
rotor of a wind turbine generator 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0196 
March 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project Period:  
September 2017 – March 2018 
 
ECTS: 35 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Asger Bech Abrahamsen 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
Telephone  46 77 50 85 
 
info@vindenergi.dtu.dk 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Contents
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Wind turbine functionality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2.1
Synchronous generator for a wind turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Superconductor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3.1
IV curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
IV curve measuring method and setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4.1
Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4.2
Resistance of a strip of superconductive tape
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Electromagnetic theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5.1
Calculation of H-ﬁeld
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5.2
Basic model of the Lorentz force . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.5.3
Lorentz force of an electromagnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Design of an electromagnet, employing a coil of superconductor
15
2.1
General concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Dimensions of the electromagnet and the pole-pair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Analytic calculation of the required magneto-motive force . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
Derivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.3
FEM evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Determining parameters for the electromagnet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.1
Method 1: Iterative search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.2
Method 2: Geometric constrained
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5
Generator design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Construction coil case and winding of the coil
23
3.1
Determining the magnetic properties of unknown iron alloys . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Minor changes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Winding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Experimental work
29
4.1
Characterising a strip of superconductor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
Preparation of test object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Measured resistance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.3
IV curve with liquid nitrogen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Characterising the electromagnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Evaluating the magnetic ﬂux density above the electromagnet . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Discussion
35
5.1
Resulting IC for the electromagnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Conclusion
37
7
Future work
39
7.1
Hall probe measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
i
==PAGE:6==
ii
CONTENTS
Bibliography
41
A Appendix Method and setup
43
B Appendix Schematics
47
C Appendix VSM
53
D Appendix Construction
55
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Hypothesis
Is it possible to design, build and test a small electromagnet employing a coil of superconductor,
intended for a 10 kW generator with a 1 T air-gap ﬂux density.
1.2
Wind turbine functionality
A wind turbine is a converter of energy. It takes the kinetic energy of air in movement, and convert
it to electrical energy through several steps. When air is passing by the air-foil shaped blades of
the wind turbine, it creates a lift force that will move the blades. The same eﬀect takes place on
the wings of an air-plane that will force the air-plane up. The wings/blades of a wind turbine are
placed on a rotational axis, so instead they are forced to rotate on this axis. The kinetic energy
of air has now been converted to rotational mechanical energy. On the axis is a shaft that leads
to an electrical machine. Here the rotational mechanical energy is converted to electrical energy.
The kinetic energy in moving air is expressed with the equation:
E = 1/2 · mv2
(1.1)
where m is the mass of air and v is the velocity of air. The mass of air depends on the volume V
and the mass density ρ, standard set to 1.225 kg/m3. The volume of moving air is expressed as
the amount of air moving through a cross-sectional area, A, during a time period, t:
V = Avt
(1.2)
where velocity is included because a larger amount of air moves through the area at a higher
velocity. Substituting volume and mass density into equation 1.1 gives:
E = 1/2 · ρAv3t
(1.3)
When designing a wind turbine, kinetic power is more interesting than kinetic energy, hence
P = E/t. Secondly, the area mentioned in the equations above is for a wind turbine the swept
area of the blades, hence A = πr2. Furthermore, the amount of energy converted, from kinetic to
mechanical, depends on the pressure diﬀerence in front of and behind the wind turbine, that the
blades are able to make. However, when the pressure diﬀerence gets too high, the air in front of
the turbine moves out of the swept area and goes around the tip of the blades into the rear of the
turbine. This will lower the lift force created by the blades and will lower the rotational speed
signiﬁcantly. The pressure diﬀerence is too high when the amount of extracted power is a factor
of 16/27 (59.3 %) of the total power in the wind. This factor is called the Betz’ limit from Albert
Betz, the German physicist who published it in 1919. The amount of extracted power depends on
the air-foil used for the blades and is denoted as the power coeﬃcient, Cp. All the above can now
be summarised into one equation[3]:
P = 1/2 · ρπr2v3Cp
(1.4)
From this equation it can be seen that the amount of power generated by a wind turbine depends
on three factors; the length of the blades, the velocity of the wind and the eﬃciency of the blades. It
1
==PAGE:8==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
is obvious that the biggest factor is the velocity of the wind. This factor can not be controlled, and
even the locations with the highest wind velocity are found far away from the locations that need
the generated power. The second biggest factor is the length of the blades. This factor is the reason
why newer turbines tend to be larger than older turbines[1]. The last factor is the power coeﬃcient
and it is diﬃcult to improve. It requires many resources because it depends on the complex re-
lation between the shape of the air-foil design, wind velocity and the rotational speed of the blades.
The rotational speed of the blades has a limiting factor called the tip speed, vtip. If this is not
limited the blade tips will cause audible noise which is not desirable in residential areas. The
rotational speed is further aﬀected by the length of the blades, by the equation:
ω = vtip/r
(1.5)
which means that the longer the blades are, the slower the wind turbine has to rotate.
Rotational speed and power are values that is set by the blade design. They translate to mechanical
energy through torque, T, with the equation:
P = Tω
(1.6)
The torque is a criteria that must be matched by the generator design.
1.2.1
Synchronous generator for a wind turbine
Generators consist of a rotating part called the rotor and a stationary part called the stator. They
resemble cylinders and share the same axis and length, but have diﬀerent radii and thickness.
Usually the rotor is within the stator, but some designs are reversed, and they are separated by an
air-gap. The stator has copper windings carrying an AC current that creates a rotating magnetic
ﬁeld in the air-gap. The rotational speed is set by the frequency of the AC current. The rotor also
creates a magnetic ﬁeld in the air-gap, either by permanent magnets or by DC electromagnets.
This means that the rotors magnetic ﬁeld is stationary relative to the rotor, but since the rotor is
rotating, the magnetic ﬁeld seems to be rotating from the stators perspective. The two magnetic
ﬁelds rotate with the same speed and in the same direction, hence the name ’synchronous generator’.
The two magnetic ﬁelds seek to align with each other and power is generated when an outside force
attempt to misalign them. The rotor ﬁeld is denoted ’magnetic loading’, Bg, in units of Tesla and
the stator ﬁeld is denoted ’current loading’, As, in units of ampere/meter. The force produced by
them is the product between them and their shared area:
F = AsBgA
(1.7)
where their shared area is the product between the circumference, O, of the air-gap and the length,
L, of the generator.
A = O · L ⇒2πraL
(1.8)
The torque of a generator is the product between the force produced and the distance from the
axis it is produced, hence:
T = F · ra
(1.9)
where ra is the radius of the air-gap. Now, combining equation 1.7, 1.8 and 1.9, a summarising
equation for generator design can be acquired:
T = AsBg2πr2
aL
(1.10)
Equation 1.10 states that the torque produced by a generator depends on the electric loading,
magnetic loading and the size of the generator, radius and length. The electric loading of the stator
windings are limited by the joule heating resulting from the current squared and the resistance of
the copper windings, I2R. The magnetic loading is limited by the saturation of the iron along its
magnetic path. When iron saturates, its reluctance increase which results in a lower magnetic ﬁeld
in the air-gap. Torque can eﬀectively be increased with a larger generator, but the application of
does not always allow for a large generator. It can be limited by weight, volume or price criteria.
==PAGE:9==
1.3. SUPERCONDUCTOR
3
Figure 1.1: 3 dimensional superconductive region, deﬁned by current density, temperature and
magnetic ﬁeld. Reproduced from [2].
Magnetic loading
As mentioned before, the magnetic loading of the rotor is created by either permanent magnets or
DC electromagnets. The ﬁeld created by electromagnets can be controlled by varying the current of
the coil, but takes up a lot of space compared to permanent magnets. The downside of permanent
magnets is the unchangeable magnetic ﬁeld they create. The ﬁeld they create has a direction,
and an area of the air-gap with the same magnetic ﬁeld direction is called a pole. Due to Gauss’s
law for magnetism, that states that the divergence of a magnetic ﬁeld is zero, magnetic poles
always comes in pairs. This means that if there is an area in the air-gap with a magnetic ﬁeld
in one direction, there is always another area in the air-gap with a magnetic ﬁeld in the opposite
direction. The position of the other pole can be guided by another source of magnetic ﬁeld, or it
can be guided by magnetic iron called ’rotor return yoke’. If the ﬁrst possibility is used, the poles
are said to be surface mounted, since they are mounted on the surface of the rotor. If the latter is
used, the poles are said to be interior mounted because the rotor now seems to contain the poles.
1.3
Superconductor
A superconductor is a ceramic material that shows electrical superconductive behaviour in the
right environment.
When cooled below a critical temperature, the electrical resistivity in the
material disappear and the current density can be increased signiﬁcant, with no losses to follow.
When the current is increased to a critical value, the magnetic ﬁeld, produced by the current,
delivers enough energy to ﬂuxtubes than begin to move. The movement of the ﬂuxtubes results in
an fast increasing power dissipation in the superconductor. If the removal of the generated heat
load is insuﬃcient, the superconductor will take damage. To avoid damaging the superconductor,
the operation must be kept within a critical temperature, TC, a critical current density, JC, and a
critical magnetic ﬁeld, HC, see ﬁgure (1.1).
1.3.1
IV curve
The IV curve is used to ﬁnd the critical current of the superconductor. Below the critical current,
the voltage drop across the superconductor is very low. Usually it is lower than the noise ﬂoor of
many voltage meters. The point of IC is deﬁned as where the power dissipation is signiﬁcant and
the voltage drop becomes E0 = 1µV/cm. Above IC the voltage rise exponentially fast, often to
==PAGE:10==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Test object
V
Agilent 34420A
Agilent 6681A
Figure 1.2: Setup of the 4-point measurement,
showing the current source attached to the ends
of the test object, and the voltage meter attached
a distance from the ends.
the power of 20-30. This behaviour can be described by a power law:
U = U0 ∗I
IC
n
here, U is the measurable resulting voltage, U0 is the threshold voltage, E0, multiplied with the
length of the superconductor, I is the dependable parameter, IC is the critical current and n is
the exponential value.
1.4
IV curve measuring method and setup
The IV curve measurement facilitates a 4-point method, visualised in ﬁgure (1.2). The current
source, Agilent 6681A, is connected at the ends of the test object. It is important that the contact
surface between the current leads and the test object is large in order to reduce the voltage drop.
The voltage meter, Agilent 34420A, is connected at a distance from the ends of the test object, in
order to avoid the voltage drop of the current contact points.
1.4.1
Equipment
This experiment use a current source, a voltage meter and a LabView program. The LabView
program is used for automating the datalogging process and it controls the current source and
voltage meter.
Current source Agilent (HP) 6681A 0-8V / 0-580A
The current source is a model 6681A from Agilent. The voltage range is from 0 V to 8 V and
the current range is from 0 A to 580 A. The superconductor is not expected to have a signiﬁcant
voltage drop, but it is expected that the copper power cables have. A quick calculation reveals
that the cables will have a voltage drop of:
V =I · R ⇒V = I · ρ ·
l
π · r2
(1.11)
V =119 A · 1.68e−8 Ωm ·
10 m
π · (2.5e−3 m)2 = 1.018 V
(1.12)
where ρ is the resistivity of copper, l is the total length of the cable and r is the radius of the
cable. The Current source Overprotection voltage is therefore set to 2-3 V. The datasheet states
that the programming accuracy is 300 mA ± 0.1 % and that the average programming resolution
is 155 mA. The current step size has also been investigated manually which resulted in a minimum
step size of 160 mA. However, sometimes an increment of 160 mA was not suﬃcient for stepping
up and the current source were found cycling on the same step. Minimum step size is set to 200
mA. The datasheet also states various response and processing times of several milliseconds. For
good measure, minimum stabilisation time must be 1 second. Extra time must account for thermal
stabilisation of the superconductor.
==PAGE:11==
1.4. IV CURVE MEASURING METHOD AND SETUP
5
Voltage meter Agilent 34420A
The voltage meter is an Agilent model 34420A which is a nano voltmeter with a 100 pV sensitivity.
Its datasheet states that the noise performance is 1.3 nVrms which is well below the expected
threshold, E0 = 1 µV/cm for a superconductor.
LabView program
The LabView program automate the IV curve measurement process and shortens it to a fraction
of the time a manual process takes. The program facilitates the GBIP protocol and has drivers
for the instruments. Before the LabView program is Run, it needs initialisation, see ﬁgure (1.3)
for a ﬂowdiagram. The user must set the GBIP address of the Current source Agilent 6681A and
the Voltage Meter Agilent 34420A. Other values are also required set, but these are hidden in the
backend and is set automatically. When the program is Run, it enters a lobby where it constantly
measures and shows the instantaneous supply voltage, supply current and voltage meter voltage.
It is also possible to set the supply current and the maximum supply voltage. The user now has
two choices: Either to start a resistance measurement or an IV curve measurement. The resistance
measurement plots the resistance with a given sampletime, until the user stops the measurement
and returns to the lobby. The plotted resistance is still visible while in the lobby. The IV curve
measurement samples and plots voltage meter voltage at every current step set by the user. The
current is increased until the voltage threshold is passed, then current will decrease with a number
of steps and the program will subsequently stop the measurement and return to the lobby. The
plotted IV curve is still visible while in the lobby. The measuring parameters are preset, but the
user can change these prior and during the measurement. All data are saved continuously.
Initialisation:
Set GBIP addresses
Select measuring 
program
IV curve measurement.
Set Current step, Max current, 
Stabilisation time, Voltage threshold, 
Current step down and number of 
Current steps down
Voltage measurement while 
cooling.
Set sample interval.
Stop LabView
Sample 
and 
plot.
Lobby:
Watch live measurements of:
Supply current
Supply voltage
Voltage meter
Set max supply voltage
Set supply current
Sample, plot, current step 
up until Voltage threshold.
Sample, plot, current step 
down with number of steps
Stop
Stop
Figure 1.3: Flowdiagram of LabView program used for resistance measurement during cooldown
and IV curve measurement.
1.4.2
Resistance of a strip of superconductive tape
What is the resistance of a strip of superconductor at room temperature. This question can be
answered from the dimension and resistivity of the superconductor and its components.
The relevant components are the superconductive layer, the substrate and the protective copper
layer. These three components are parallel to each other, but because the superconductive layer
is non-conductive at room temperature it is ignored. YBCO is a ceramic material that exhibits
superconductivity at low temperatures.
At room temperature it is, as a cup or a plate, not
conductive. No one knows why it does that, it was discovered unintentionally. It is assumed that
==PAGE:12==
6
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
all layers have the same width of 4 mm and the same length of 10 cm. A sketch of the strip can
be seen in ﬁgure (1.4). Resistance values and dimensions are found in the datasheet in appendix
??. Calculations and the resulting equivalent resistance for the strip at hand is as such:
Figure 1.4: Sketch of the SC strip (not to scale).
• Hastelloy substrate resistance:
Thickness: 50 µm. Resistivity: 1.23 µΩm.
RH = ρ l
A ⇒1.23 µΩm
0.1 m
4 mm · 50 µm = 615 mΩ
• Copper shield resistance:
Thickness: 2x20 µm. Resistivity: 17 nΩm.
RC = ρ l
A ⇒17 nΩm
0.1 m
4 mm · 40 µm = 10.625 mΩ
• Equivalent resistance:
Req = RH · RC
RH + RC
⇒615 mΩ· 10.625 mΩ
615 mΩ+ 10.625 mΩ= 10.44 mΩ
1.5
Electromagnetic theory
1.5.1
Calculation of H-ﬁeld
Analytical
Ampere’s law under the assumption of a magnetostatic environment.
∇× ⃗H = ⃗J
(1.13)
Ampere’s law states that a current density with a direction has a curling magnetic ﬁeld around it.
We want to make a surface integral on the cross section of the current density. The
Stoke’s theorem is applied to convert the diﬀerential form to an integral form. Stoke’s theorem
states that the surface integral of a curl of a vector is the same as a contour integral of the same
vector.
Z
S
∇× ⃗H dA =
Z
C
⃗H d⃗l
(1.14)
Ampere’s law then becomes:
Z
C
⃗H d⃗l =
Z
S
⃗J d ⃗A
(1.15)
It is assumed that the current follows a straight, inﬁnitely long conductor and that the current is
steady. This results in a homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld. The open surface area is placed as a perfect
circle perpendicular to the direction of the current, and the path of the contour follows the edge
of the open surface area, see ﬁgure (1.5).
Focusing ﬁrst at the left side of equation (1.15).
The magnetic ﬁeld is integrated along the
circumference of the contour and the direction of the sections, dl, is chosen to point in the same
==PAGE:13==
1.5. ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY
7
Figure 1.5: Geometry of conductor and applied
contours.
direction as the magnetic ﬁeld. This enables to simplify the equation due to the resulting curl-
symmetry. The equation can be further simpliﬁed by excluding the magnitude of the magnetic
ﬁeld from the integration. This will then only integrate a unit vector. The equation has now been
reduced to a constant multiplied with a closed contour integration. Since the contour is applied
as a perfect circle, the total length of all d⃗l is equal to the circumference of the circle, 2πr.
Z
C
⃗H d⃗l =
 ⃗H

I
C
d⃗l = H2πrH
(1.16)
where rH is the radius to the point where the magnetic ﬁeld is to be evaluated, see ﬁgure (1.5).
Focusing now on the right side of equation (1.15). The surface is placed such that its normal
vector follows the direction of the current. The area that the current density is integrated over is
applied as a perfect circle so d ⃗A becomes equal to the area of a circle, πr2. This results in an easy
integration and the equation becomes:
Z
S
⃗J dA = Jπr2
J
(1.17)
where rJ is the radius to which the current ﬂows within the radius rH.
It follows then that
rJ =< rH always.
Inserting (1.16) and (1.17) into (1.15) and isolating H gives:
H2πrH = Jπr2
J ⇔H = J r2
J
2rH
(1.18)
To calculate the H-ﬁeld for a conductor of ﬁnite radius, ra, equation (1.18) must be evaluated
from the center and outwards. There will be two domains with diﬀerent properties; a conductor
for where the H-ﬁeld is created, and air for where the total H-ﬁeld is sustained. Equation (1.18) is
thus evaluated seperately for r < ra and r > ra. For r < ra : rJ = rH = r and for r > ra : rJ = ra
and rH = r.
H(r) =





Hi(r) = J r
2
for
r < ra
Ho(r) = J r2
a
2r
for
r > ra
(1.19)
where Hi is the H-ﬁeld inside the conductor and Ho is the H-ﬁeld in the air outside the conductor.
Two boundary conditions can be set up; At the intersection between the two domains the resulting
H-ﬁeld must be equal, thus Hi(ra) = Ho(ra). The second boundary condition states that at a
distance inﬁnitely far away, the H-ﬁeld must be zero, Ho(r →∞) = 0.
Hi(ra) = Ho(ra) ⇒
J ra
2 = J r2
a
2ra
⇔J ra
2 = J ra
2
(1.20)
Ho(r →∞) = 0 ⇒
J r2
a
2 · r

lim r→∞
= 0
(1.21)
==PAGE:14==
8
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Equation (1.20) and (1.21) conﬁrms the validity. Figure 1.6 shows the magnitude of the H-ﬁeld as
a function of the radius. In compliance with the equation, it can be seen that the H-ﬁeld rise linear
within the conductor and falls hyperbolic outside the conductor. Figure 1.5 shows the geometry
of the conductor and the applied contours.
Figure 1.6: Plot of H-ﬁeld at a contour for a
conductor with radius ra.
Two conductors
Hvordan ved man at det resulterende H-felt fra ﬂere ledere indgår under superpositionsprincippet.
Empirisk konklusion?
It is possible to apply the principle of superposition for sources of H-ﬁeld. The resulting H-ﬁeld
of two individual H-ﬁelds is then the vector sum of the two. Assume two conductors of equal size
and current density, placed on the same horizontal line and spaced 3 · ra from each other, center
to center, see ﬁgure 1.7 and 1.8.
Boundary conditions:
- Opposite current direction: Between the two conductors at equal distance, the horizontal com-
ponents of the two H-ﬁelds cancel each other.
cos

⃗H1(r1)

= −cos

⃗H2(r2)

for r1 = r2
(1.22)
where r1 and r2 are the distance from the center of conductor 1 and 2, respectively.
- Same current direction: Between the two conductors at equal distance, the vertical components
of the two H-ﬁelds cancel each other.
sin

⃗H1(r1)

= −sin

⃗H2(r2)

for r1 = r2
(1.23)
Between two conductors of opposite current direction, the horizontal components of the H-ﬁelds
cancel each other and the vertical components add up. This results in a strong ﬁeld in one direction,
see ﬁgure 1.7.
The ﬁeld for two conductors of same current direction is such that the conductors can be assumed
as one conductors with a current equal to the sum of the two individual currents, see ﬁgure 1.8.
==PAGE:15==
1.5. ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY
9
Figure 1.7: MatLab quiver plot of two conduc-
tors with opposite current direction.
Arrows
shows direction and size of H-ﬁeld.
Figure 1.8: MatLab quiver plot of two conduc-
tors with same current direction. Arrows shows
direction and size of H-ﬁeld.
Two conductors, increasing distance
The eﬀect of distance between two antiparallel conductors on the total H-ﬁeld can be seen in ﬁgure
1.9. For an electromagnet, the highest ﬁeld is reached when the conductors are as close to each
other as possible. The H-ﬁeld in the middle decreases hyperbolic with increasing distance, but
with half the speed as for a single conductor. No matter the distance, the H-ﬁeld at the edge of
one conductor will always be between 1 and 2 pu.
Figure 1.9: Total H-ﬁeld as a function of distance between two antiparallel conductors.
==PAGE:16==
10
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.5.2
Basic model of the Lorentz force
The force, ⃗F, acting on a charge, ⃗Q, moving at a velocity ⃗v perpendicular to a B-ﬁeld is
⃗Fmag = Q(⃗v × ⃗B)
(1.24)
and is known as the Lorentz Force. For a current running in a line, equation (1.24) can be rewritten
to
⃗Fmag = I
Z
(d⃗l × ⃗B)
(1.25)
where the vector ⃗l is in the direction of the wire.
A simpliﬁed version of the Lorentz Force can be expressed as:
F = Il × B
where I is the current in a wire with the length, l, and B is the magnetic ﬂux. All variables are
vectors. This equation has been simulated in Comsol with the values of I = 1 A, l = 1 m and B
= 1 T, hence when evaluating the force, F should equal 1.
The direction of B is as shown in ﬁgure 1.10 and the length of the wire is into the paper.
Figure 1.10: Arrows show the direction of B around a wire. B = 1 T. Axis are scaling units ra/ro.
Model design
The model consists of 2 wires, where one is creating the B-ﬁeld and the other is used to evaluate
the force. The wire creating the B-ﬁeld is placed in center (0,0) and has a current density of
J = 108
π
A
m2 . This high current has been calculated by using equation (2.2) and (1.27).
B = µ0H
(1.26)
H = J r2
a
2ro
(1.27)
where ra is the radius of the wire, and ro is the distance from the center of the wire. B is set to 1
T, µ0 = 4π · 10−7 T · m
A , ra is 1, for simplicity, and ro is set to 20·ra to acquire a uniform magnetic
ﬂux density around the test wire. Substituting (1.27) into (2.2) and isolating J:
1 T =4π · 10−7 T · m
A · J
12 m
2 · 20 m
⇔
J =
1 T · 40 m
4π · 10−7 T · m
A · 1 m2
⇔
J =
40
4π · 10−7 m2
A
= 108
π
A
m2
The physic used is ’Magnetic Fields’ and the current in the two wires is applied by ’External
Current Density’.
==PAGE:17==
1.5. ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY
11
Result
The lorentz force acting on the wire in ﬁgure 1.10 is derived from a surface integration of the
Lorentz force contribution in the x-direction. The result is 9.99999E-1 N/m, and since the depth
is 1 m, then the resulting force is 1 N.
1.5.3
Lorentz force of an electromagnet
Modelling issues:
• Bad mesh cause imprecise results. When modelling the coil as a single conductor with a
certain current density, Comsols ’Free Triangular’ mesh creates only a few triangles within
the coil. This has resulted in too high values in the corners of the coil closest to the iron
core.
• Too small background geometry. This is numerically seen in the Lorentz force. If a single
conductor with a current density is placed in the positive x-direction from a background
circles center, the conductor has a negative Lorentz force contribution in the x-direction.
The dimensions of the superconductive electromagnet regarded in this section is taken from this
paper[?], and the model can be seen in ﬁgure (1.11). A coil width of 5 mm with 25 windings per
layer and 2 layers. This gives a tape thickness of 2 mm, which is the actual tape thickness plus
insulation and winding eﬃciency. The current is 100 A.
Figure 1.11: Geometry of electromagnet with core and coil windings.
Lorentz force on right coil side in the x-direction:
• Aircore: 20 N
• Ironcore: -44 N
For the aircore, the outward force on the wire is 20 N, which is approximately the force that gravity
pulls a mass of 2 kg with. Applying a force of 20 N on the coil sides in opposite lateral direction
will break the brittle ceramic. This can be avoided by distributing the force on a bigger area, hence
the sides of the electromagnet will be enclosed in non-magnetic walls, covering the longitudinal
side.
For an electromagnet with an iron core, the opposite occurs. The force is inwards due to the
magnetisation of the iron. Due to the high permeability of the iron core, the ﬂux lines, produced
by the adjacent coil wire, are pulled into the material. This results in a high B-ﬁeld inside the
core, and a low B-ﬁeld outside, close to the edge of the core adjacent to the wire, see ﬁgure (1.12).
The wire and the core seeks to close the area of reduced B-ﬁeld by pulling each other towards the
area.
The force in the referenced design, with an iron core, is 44 N inwards. The design, ’Double Pancake
Racetrack Coil’, is winded such that the middle of the tape is on the inside of the coils and goes
diagonally from the bottom coil to the top coil. This results in a high and unbalanced pressure
that might damage the wire.
Distribution of force within the coil. Is the Lorentz force evenly distributed within the coil,
or is it opposite in each end and will tear the windings apart. Surface integration of the force in
==PAGE:18==
12
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.12: magnetic ﬂux density in pu of rectangular iron core and circular wire with air in
between.
the x-direction has been evaluated for the two inner most, the two outer most and all of the tape
windings of the right coil side. These results are presented in table 1.1. The two inner most tape
windings are pushed outwards with a force of 0.36 N and the two outer most tape windings are
pulled inwards with a force of 5.13 N. This means that the coil sides are actually pulled together
and that the net force is 44 N into the core. This behaviour is visualised in ﬁgure (1.13) where
Table 1.1: Lorentz force in the x-direction on the right side coil windings.
Innermost
Outermost
All
0.36 N
-5.13 N
-44 N
the Lorentz force is evaluated with an ’arrow surface’ plot. The modelled coil has only current
ﬂowing in the tapes pictured. Besides the compression on the x-axis, it can be seen that the top
and bottom part of the coil are also forced together. The behaviour is consistent with Amperes
experiment with parallel and antiparallel wires, [?] pp. 203, that showed that parallel wires attract
each other and antiparallel wires reject each other.
Enabling the current to ﬂow in the tapes not pictured, results in the Lorentz force contribution
plotted in ﬁgure (1.14). It is seen that the center of attraction is moved slightly away from the
opposite coil side. Resulting in a net force away from the air core. Having an iron core results
in the Lorentz force contribution showed in ﬁgure (1.15). It shows that the iron core moves the
center of attraction close to the core, eﬀectively resulting in a net force towards the iron core.
==PAGE:19==
1.5. ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY
13
Figure 1.13: Right side of an air
core coil. Current only ﬂows in
the tapes pictured. Arrow sur-
face plot of the Lorentz force
contribution.
Figure 1.14: Right side of an
air core coil with arrow surface
plot of the Lorentz force contri-
bution.
Figure 1.15: Right side of an
iron core coil with arrow surface
plot of the Lorentz force contri-
bution.
==PAGE:20==
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Design of an electromagnet, employing a
coil of superconductor
2.1
General concept
How small can a superconductive electromagnet be. The critical bending diameter for the 2G
HTS from SuperPower is 11 mmA, and for this project the minimum bending diameter is set to
20 mm. The electromagnet coil type is chosen as a Double-pancake racetrack. The racetrack
resembles a rectangle with smoothed edges, and with a minimum diameter of 20 mm, the length of
the rectangle is set short to 40 mm, which is still long enough that the coil resembles a racetrack.
To reduce the reluctance in the magnetic circuit, as much air as possible must be replaced with
iron. This dogma help increase the ﬂux density in the air-gap, between the rotor and the stator
of the generator. The air-core of the racetrack coil is thus replaced with an iron core.
In this project, focus is given to a single electromagnet and therefore a rotor pole-pair will consist
of one electromagnet with rotor return yoke on either side and rotor back iron. The stator is
assumed to be a block of iron without slots. In reality the stator will have slots and teeth of either
iron or a non-magnetic material and the slots and teeth keep the armature copper windings in
place. This assumption is done to keep the design and calculations simple.
The electromagnet is designed to be comparable to permanent magnets, which often can produce
a ﬂux density of 1 T. The desired air-gap ﬂux density of the pole-pair is therefore set to 1 T.
2.2
Dimensions of the electromagnet and the pole-pair
The smallest conﬁguration of the dimensions depend on the number of windings of the coil. To
begin with, this number is unknown and an initial design is set. An estimate of the required
magneto-motive force is based on the initial design. Afterwards, this estimate is used to determine
the parameters of the electromagnet, such as number of windings, critical current and temperature.
Because the geometry depend on the number of windings, the initial design is changed into a
dynamic design where many dimensions change as a function of the number of windings.
For the initial design, a standard thickness of domains is set to 5 mm. These domains include front
iron height, coil width, coil outer wall width, vacuum distance and cryostat wall width, see ﬁgure
(2.1). This thickness might be ﬁtting for the front iron height, coil outer wall width and cryostat
wall width, but for the coil width and vacuum distance it is a rough assumption. The coil width
depends on the number of windings, which depend on the required kilo-Ampere-turns, (kAt), and
the critical current of the superconductor used. The vacuum width must be wide enough to contain
the Multi-Layer-Insulation, (MLI), and to reduce the radiation heating from the cryostat wall. In
this project, the vacuum is assumed to be complete, hence the radiation heating does not depend
on the distance. Furthermore, it is assumed that the radiation heating is so low that the MLI
is not needed. The air-gap distance is assumed to be 1 mm for the initial design. However, this
paper [9] and this report [10] suggest that a minimum air-gap distance of 0.1 % of the generator
diameter is required to account for the mechanical robustness. The lid and the bottom plate of
the electromagnet are included to keep the coil in place. Since they are placed in the magnetic
path, they are desired to be as thin as possible to reduce the magnetic reluctance. They are set
to 1 mm each.
15
==PAGE:22==
16
CHAPTER 2. DESIGN OF AN ELECTROMAGNET, EMPLOYING A COIL OF
SUPERCONDUCTOR
Figure 2.1:
Linear representation of a com-
plete pole-pair with generic dimensions. SC coil
(red), iron (lavender), non-magnetic material
(white) and magnetic path (black line).
−+
F
R3
R2
Φ
R1
R4
R1
Figure 2.2: Magnetic circuit of the polepair, with
reluctance for airgaps and a mmf source for the
coil.
Table 2.1: Dimensions of the pole-pair, for the initial and dynamic design.
Initial design
Dynamic design
Width [mm]
Height [mm]
Width
Height
Core
20
9
20
9
Coil
5
9
N·hsc
9
Coil wall
5
9
5
9
Lid/bottom plate
40
1
wcore + wcoil · 2 + wcoil-wall · 2
1
Vacuum
50
21
wlid+10 mm
21
Cryostat
60
31
wvacuum+10 mm
31
Front iron
30
5
τp/3
5
Front spacer
15
5
τp/6
5
Return yoke
15
36
τp/6
36
Rotor back iron
90
15
τp
τp/6
Air-gap
90
1
τp
1
Stator
90
15
τp
τp/6
The pole-pair described in this thesis is a simple design. It is a linear representation with no
moving parts. The stator windings and stator slots are neglected and replaced with a uniform
piece of iron. It is a stationary study with no time-dependency.
The pole-pitch, τp consist of three areas; front iron, spacer and return yoke. The front iron and
return yoke must be of equal width to keep an equal ﬂux density for each pole. The spacer serves
to reduce the leakage ﬂux between the front iron and the return yoke, and is therefore set to the
same total width. Each part then takes up 1/3 of the pole-pitch. The total width of the pole-
pitch is based on the width of the cryostat. The front iron and the spacer must take up an equal
part of the cryostat width and the return yoke width must equal half the cryostat width hence:
τp = 3/2wcryostat. The cryostat width is 10 mm wider than the vacuum width, which is 10 mm
wider than the width of the lid. The width of the lid depend on the core width, coil width and
the coil-wall width, hence the pole-pitch becomes:
τp = 3
2 · (wcore + 2 · wcoil + 2 · wcoil-wall + 2 · 5 mm + 2 · 5 mm)
(2.1)
The dimension values for the initial design, and the dimension functions for the dynamic design
are summarised in table 2.1. where hsc is the height of the superconductor including a winding
eﬃciency of 50 %; hsc = 0.1 mm · 1.5 = 0.15mm.
==PAGE:23==
2.3. ANALYTIC CALCULATION OF THE REQUIRED MAGNETO-MOTIVE FORCE
17
2.3
Analytic calculation of the required magneto-motive force
Calculating a complete solution for the distribution of magnetic ﬂux density is a meticulous and
comprehensive task. In many cases a complete solution is not necessary, and some rough assump-
tions can be made to get a solution in the vicinity of the complete solution. In this case, some
simplifying assumptions are listed below:
• Iron of inﬁnite permeability.
• No leakage ﬂux.
• Uniform ﬁeld along the magnetic ﬁeld path.
For inﬁnite permeability of iron it can be said, that there is no magnetic "loss" in the iron or that
there is no required ﬁeld intensity, see equation 2.2.
B = µ0µrH ⇔H =
B
µ0µr
⇒H =
 0
for µr = ∞
B
µ0
for µr = 1
(2.2)
where the relative permeability for air is 1.
2.3.1
Derivations
It is also assumed that there is no leakage ﬂux, which simpliﬁes the magnetic circuit. The magnetic
path, with reluctance blocks introduced for when the path cross non-magnetic materials, can be
seen in ﬁgure (2.2). R1 and R2 represent the reluctance of the air-gap at the return yoke and the
front iron respectively. R3 is the reluctance between the front iron and the electromagnet and R4
is the reluctance between the electromagnet and the rotor back iron. F is the magneto-motive
force generated by the coil and Φ is the magnetic ﬂux. The reluctance of a uniform magnetic ﬁeld
in a material is based on the length, area and permeability of the material:
R =
l
µ0µrA
(2.3)
where µ0 = 4π · 1e−7 H/m is the permeability of free space.
The magneto-motive force is the magnetic analogy to voltage and in the same way; it is the product
of the current/ﬂux and the resistance/reluctance, hence:
F = ΦR = NI
(2.4)
Under the assumption of no leakage ﬂux, then the magneto-motive force generated by a coil is
based on the number of windings, N, and the current, I, in them. The ﬂux through a reluctance
can be expressed by the desired ﬂux density and the area it ﬂows through, hence:
Φ =BA
(2.5)
To simplify the circuit even further, the two parallel R1 reluctances are joined thus;
R1,eq = R1||R1 = R1 · R1
R1 + R1
=
R2
1
2 · R1
= R1
2
(2.6)
Equation 2.4 is expanded to represent the magnetic circuit in ﬁgure (2.2):
NI =Φ · (R1/2 + R2 + R3 + R4)
(2.7)
2.3.2
Calculations
All four reluctances are calculated with equation 2.3 and is based on the values of width, depth
and length summarised in table 2.2, along with the resulting reluctance. The width of the area
is the average width. The desired 1 T ﬂux density in the air-gap cross the area of R1, hence the
desired ﬂux becomes:
Φ =1 T · 1200 mm2 = 1.2 mWb
(2.8)
The results from table 2.2 and equation 2.8 is inserted into equation 2.7
NI =1.2 mWb · (1326/2 + 663 + 8753 + 8753) kAt/Wb = 22.6 kAt
(2.9)
Under simplifying assumptions we get that a desired air-gap ﬂux density of 1 T requires a magneto-
motive force of 22.6 kAt for this geometry.
==PAGE:24==
18
CHAPTER 2. DESIGN OF AN ELECTROMAGNET, EMPLOYING A COIL OF
SUPERCONDUCTOR
Table 2.2: Dimensions and reluctances in the magnetic circuit.
Width [mm]
Depth [mm]
Area [mm2]
length [mm]
Reluctance [kAt/Wb]
R1
15
40
600
1
1326
R2
30
40
1200
1
663
R3
25
40
1000
11
8753
R4
25
40
1000
11
8753
Figure 2.3: Distribution of ﬂux density based
on analytically calculated values.
Figure 2.4: Distribution of ﬂux density in the
air-gap.
2.3.3
FEM evaluation
To evaluate the analytic calculations, the geometry modelled and the functionality is simulated in
the ﬁnite element program Comsol Multiphysics. The inﬁnite permeability of the iron is simulated
with a relative permeability of 1e9. The current in the coil is simulated with a current density of
the desired kAt divided by the cross-sectional area of the coil, see table 2.1. The distribution of
ﬂux density in the pole-pair and in the air-gap can be seen on ﬁgure (2.3) and (2.4), respectively.
The simulation gives a maximum air-gap ﬂux density of 0.85 T at the front iron and 0.88 T at the
return yoke. The diﬀerence between these two is presumably due to leakage ﬂux. Furthermore,
the diﬀerence between the simulated values and the desired value of 1 T is also presumably due
to leakage ﬂux. It has not been possible to limit the ﬂux density distribution within the desired
magnetic path, which is also seen on the ﬂux lines in the ﬁgures.
FEM programs is a useful
tool for fast and somewhat precise evaluation of solutions. This model consist of a 2D geometry
with dimensions described earlier in this chapter. Relevant iron corners are ﬁlleted with a 0.5-1
mm radius. The materials used are Soft-Iron(No losses) for the iron parts, and Air for the rest.
The Physics used is Magnetic Fields and consist of Ampère’s Law for air, Ampère’s law for iron,
one External Current Density for the left and right coil each, Periodic Condition in the sides
and Magnetic Insulation top and bottom. The two External Current Density has opposite facing
current density in the z-direction. The current density is the mmf divided by the area of the coil
(5 mm · 9 mm). This results in a high current density for the initial design, but it is corrected
for the dynamic design in the next section. The Periodic Condition simulates neighbouring pole-
pairs. It can be assumed that there is no interchange of ﬂux between the pole-pairs so the type
of periodicity is Continuity. The Magnetic Insulation force the magnetic ﬁeld on the edge to zero
which simulates an inﬁnite distance of air. The model is meshed free triangular with a maximum
element size of 0.5 mm within the cryostat and in the air-gap. The rest is meshed free triangular
with normal element size.
Forward in the thesis, FEM simulations are used instead of analytic mathematics. With root in
the FE model presented, an FE model with a maximum air-gap ﬂux density of 1 T is investigated.
The iron permeability is changed from a relative constant to the HB-curve of the Soft-Iron material
found in Comsol. Leakage ﬂux is no longer neglected. The necessary mmf generated by the coil is
found to be 29 kAt. This value is used forward.
==PAGE:25==
2.4. DETERMINING PARAMETERS FOR THE ELECTROMAGNET
19
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Local magnetic field in coil [T]
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
Magnetisation hysteresis 
m(B,T) / 
m(0 T, 77 K)
Lift factor for SuperPower 4050, Ic = 125 A (77 K, self-field)
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
T = 77 K
Sequence
Figure 2.5:
Lift factor at 77 K for Super-
Power 4050 [7], and the sequence of the iterative
search for an operating point.
Figure 2.6:
Resulting pole-pair geometry for
point G with an IC=16.61 A and a τp
=
465.68 mm.
2.4
Determining parameters for the electromagnet
It is desired to keep a constant magneto-motive force which means that changeable factors in the
design are current and the number of windings, due to this equation mmf = NI. The windings
takes up space in the pole-pair design and the pole-pitch is eﬀectively increased, when the number
of windings increase. The highest operating temperature for 2G HTS YBCO superconductor is
77 K and at this temperature the critical current for a roll of 2G HTS YBCO SCS4050-AP tape
from SuperPower is 119 A. This critical value can be increased if the temperature is lowered. This
behaviour adds another dimension to the determination of the parameters. As described in section
1.3, the operation of a superconductor depend on the current, the temperature and the applied
magnetic ﬁeld. Below are described two diﬀerent methods to determine these parameters. Method
1 sets the temperature constant and then searches iteratively for a suitable arrangement of the
number of windings, current and applied magnetic ﬁeld. Method 2 set the number of windings
constant and then calculates the required current and the necessary temperature. Both methods
use the magnetisation lift factor described in section 1.3, and both methods use FEM simulations
to evaluate the local magnetic ﬁeld in the coil. The ﬁeld is the maximum value independent of
direction, which in Comsol is the normB. The critical current of the superconductor is operated
at 75 % of the original critical current, in order to avoid damage on the superconductor during
operation.
2.4.1
Method 1: Iterative search
The method searches iteratively for a point on the lift factor graph that match the topology of
pole-pair. The method is similar to the one described in this paper [6]. The number of windings
change when the critical current is changed, as per N = mmf/IC. When the number of windings
are changed, the width of the coil also change, in which also the pole-pitch changes. All-in-all this
means that when the current changes, the whole topology of the pole-pair changes, which aﬀect
the local magnetic ﬁeld in the coil. Therefore, the search for an operating point is done iteratively.
The FEM simulations evaluate the maximum resulting magnetic ﬁeld at certain IC levels. This
sequence, along with the lift factor are plotted in ﬁgure (2.5). The operating temperature is set to
77 K. The starting point, A, is 75 % of the critical current speciﬁed on the tape, IC,A = 119 A·.75 =
89.25 A, and the self-ﬁeld of the tape, 0 T. The magnetic ﬁeld is evaluated and the sequence move
to point B. The lift factor at point B’s magnetic ﬁeld is found at point C, and this lift factor is
multiplied on the original I: IC = 89.25A · 0.1811 = 14.0361A. IC is then inserted in the FEM
simulation and the new maximum magnetic ﬁeld is evaluated. The sequence now move to point D
and so forth, until the new I has changed less than 1 % of the former I. I at point G has changed
0.57 % from I at point E. The resulting I is 16.61 A and the resulting number of windings are
868. This is a large number of windings compared to the relative low air-gap ﬂux density of 1 T.
The geometry is visualised in ﬁgure (2.6).
==PAGE:26==
20
CHAPTER 2. DESIGN OF AN ELECTROMAGNET, EMPLOYING A COIL OF
SUPERCONDUCTOR
Figure 2.7: Relevant parameters.
N
τp [mm]
L [mm]
Bair−gap
150
108.75
40
1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Maximum local magnetic field B [T]
101
102
103
Lift factor  119 A  75 % [A]
T=5 K
T=10 K
T=20 K
T=30 K
T=40 K
T=50 K
T=60 K
T=65 K
T=77 K
Operating point
Figure 2.8: Magnetisation lift factors for SuperPower 4050
tape[7], multiplied by IC,77 K, 0 T and a 25 % safety mar-
gin, as function of applied local ﬁeld. Superimposed are
the operating point of method 2 with N=2·75. The re-
quired temperature is about 40 K.
Table 2.3: Technical data for a commercially available wind turbine[8].
AirCon
Rotor placement
Upwind
Regulation
Stall
Rated power, P
[kW]
9.8
Rated wind speed, vw
[m/s]
11
Rotor diameter, 2ra
[m]
7.5
Rated speed, ω
[RPM]
130
2.4.2
Method 2: Geometric constrained
In this method, the geometry is ﬁxed to avoid a pole-pitch that does not ﬁt into a desired space. The
drawback is that the required operating temperature is unknown. As a starting point, the number
of windings are set to 150. This will require a current of I = mmf/N ⇒I = 29 kAt/150 = 193.3 A.
During the FEM evaluation it was discovered that the maximum local magnetic ﬁeld is lower when
the lid and bottom plate is made out of a magnetic material instead of a non-magnetic material.
The maximum local ﬁeld went from 2.56 T to 2.09 T. The iron lid and bottom plate are used in
the thesis forward. This operating point is plotted on top of the magnetisation lift factor from
this paper [7]. The lift factor is scaled by the original IC of the tape and a 25 % safety margin.
The required operating temperature can now be read from ﬁgure (2.8). It can be seen that the
temperature need to be around 40 K. This temperature is quite low, but not diﬃcult to reach.
The results in this method is accepted for further work in this thesis and the relevant param-
eters is summarised in table 2.7. Further work consist of generator design, construction of the
electromagnet and experimental work.
2.5
Generator design
The scope of the thesis is to design a wind turbine generator. It is out of the scope to design a
complete wind turbine. Generators for wind turbines vary greatly in size and speed, and depends on
the power and rotational speed of the blade design. To design a generator with suitable parameter
values, it is necessary to deﬁne a rotor blade design. However, since rotor blade design is out of the
scope of the thesis, the generator is designed for an existing, commercially available, wind turbine
listed in table 2.3 below.
The dimension of the electromagnet, and consequently the pole-pair, is ﬁxed. This means that the
only way to design the generator is to adjust the number of pole-pairs so the resulting generator
==PAGE:27==
2.5. GENERATOR DESIGN
21
power output is in the vicinity of the desired wind turbine power output. This design method is
like the "chicken and egg" dilemma: Which end of the drive-train is deﬁned ﬁrst, the rotor blade
or the generator pole. From the table above, power and rotational speed is given. These two
parameters set the torque required by the blade design, see equation 1.6. The generator must
match this torque through equation 1.10, where the radius, ra, in this design is deﬁned by the
number of pole-pairs, pp, multiplied by the pole-pitch, τp and divided by 2π, hence:
ra = pp · τp
2π
(2.10)
Inserting equation 2.10 and 1.6 into equation 1.10 and solving for the number of pole-pairs, gives
the equation:
pp =
s
T2π
AsBgτ 2pL =
s
P2π
ωAsBgτ 2pL
(2.11)
Values for P and ω are stated in table 2.3. Values for τp, L and B are stated in table 2.7. The
electric loading of the stator is set to 75 kA/m. The required number of pole-pairs that match the
torque required by a power of 9.8 kW and a rotational speed of 130 RPM is:
pp =
s
9.8 kW · 2π
130 RP M·2π
60 s
· 75 kA/m · 1 T · (108.75 mm)2 · 40 mm = 11.29
(2.12)
It is anticipated that the resulting number of pole-pairs is not an integer, but a decimal number.
This number is rounded up to the ﬁrst integer, ie. 12 pole-pairs. This is because the resulting
pole-pair number is the lowest number required to match the torque from the blade design. The
matching torque from the generator can be reduced by reducing the current in the ﬁeld winding.
However, an economical investigation could determine what is least expensive throughout the
turbines lifetime; is it an oversized generator, or an oversized blade design.
==PAGE:28==
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Construction coil case and winding of the
coil
It would be too comprehensive to build the whole generator. Instead, a single electromagnet is
constructed and tested. The constructed electromagnet will exclude the iron return yokes and
the cryostat. Based on the design considerations explained in chapter 2 a 3D model is made in
SolidWorks along with schematic drawings. The ﬁnal 3D model is presented in ﬁgure (3.1) and
the schematics can be found in appendix B. The ﬁgure below shows the electromagnet without
the coil, which can then be called the coil case.
Figure 3.1: 3D model of the electromagnet, without coil.
The materials chosen, to build the electromagnet with, are copper, aluminium and magnetic iron.
The copper is used for the current clamps, because it need to carry a high current. Aluminium is
used for the support of the coil, because it is light and non-magnetic. Magnetic iron is used for the
core, lid and bottom plate. The iron comes from three diﬀerent parts; a square block for the center
of the core, a cylinder for the circular ends of the core and a sheet for the lid and bottom plate.
The magnetic property is unknown, but three small samples has been investigated in a Vibrating
Sample Magnetometer (VSM). The process is described in the following section and the result is
an HB curve that can be used in FEM simulations.
3.1
Determining the magnetic properties of unknown iron alloys
The magnetometer used is a Lakeshore 7407 Vibrating Sample Magnetometer. The test sample
is placed on a non-magnetic rod and then lowered in between powerful electromagnets. The rod
is adjusted in height, before starting the experiment, to reduce the reluctance of the magnetic
circuit. During the test, the sample is vibrating so it is important that the sample sticks to the
rod. The length of the test sample should be placed along the applied magnetic ﬁeld, in order to
increase the measurement precision.
23
==PAGE:30==
24
CHAPTER 3. CONSTRUCTION COIL CASE AND WINDING OF THE COIL
For the best results, the test samples should be rectangular prisms with a quadratic cross-section
and with dimensions no larger than 1x1x5 mm. However, due to the small required dimensions
and the tools available, it has been diﬃcult to meet the demand for a quadratic cross-section. The
test samples ended up with the following dimensions:
The dimensions have been measured with a caliper, which have high precision. However, it has
been diﬃcult to measure precisely because the samples has chips, splinters and uneven cuts that
make it diﬃcult to deﬁne the "real" dimensions, that ﬁt into the rectangular prism-dogma with
quadratic cross-section. Figure (C.1) in the appendix shows the test samples. The low precision
stated in table 3.1 is caused by a correction of the values. The dimensions are corrected in order
to ﬁt a certain volume. The volume is calculated from the mass of the samples and the common
density of iron, see table 3.1.
The shape of the test samples aﬀects the resulting magnetic moment. It is therefore necessary to
include the sample dimensions in the post-processing, hence the demagnetisation constant, N. The
demagnetisation constant is calculated with the script seen in appendix listing C.1. The script is
based on this article [11]. The article accounts for a demagnetisation factor for a rectangular prism
with a quadratic cross-section. In general, sharp edges have a high inﬂuence on the measurable
data and makes the prism-dogma inherently imprecise. However, making a sample as a rectangular
prism with a quadratic cross-section is much easier than an ellipsoid.
Calculations
The equipment operates in cgs-units and applies a ﬁeld in Gauss and measures a moment in
emu. Gauss is converted to Tesla by multiplying with 10−4. Moment, in emu, is converted to
magnetisation, in A
m, by multiplying with 10−3 and dividing with the volume of the test sample.
The equations used are:
Ha = 10−4 · BGauss/µ0
(3.1)
M = 10−3 · memu/V
(3.2)
Hd = k · N · M
(3.3)
Hi = Ha −Hd
(3.4)
Bi = µ0 · (Hi + M)
(3.5)
where BGauss and memu are output from the equipment, H is the magnetic ﬁeld intensity, B is
the magnetic ﬂux density, M is the magnetisation (magnetic moment per unit volume), N is the
demagnetisation constant, µ0 is the permeability of free space and the subscripts a, d and i means
’applied’, ’demagnetisation’ and ’internal’ respectively. The correction factor, k, is used to reduce
or increase the eﬀect of the demagnetisation constant. k is introduced due to the low precision
of the sample dimensions, and is adjusted freely to get appropriate results. All equations and
conversions are found in this book [12].
Measurements
The magnetometer applies a magnetic ﬁeld with predetermined limits of ±1.6 · 104 Gauss and a
number of steps of 401. The magnetometer measures the magnetic moment, and the raw data are
plotted in ﬁgure (3.2). The sheet-sample shows the highest moment measured, probably because
it has the highest mass. The mass of the block and cylinder sample are closer to each other, see
table 3.1, which is also reﬂected in the measurement data.
The value of applied ﬁeld goes from zero to max to min to max in order to account for the hysteresis
in the alloys. The raw data has been averaged with a moving average algorithm in MatLab and
the code, with comments, can be seen in appendix listing C.2.
Results and discussion
Equations 3.2-3.5 is applied on the average data from the three samples, and the results are plotted
in ﬁgure (3.3). The resulting correction factors are seen in table 3.1. The graph in ﬁgure (3.3) is
essentially what is inserted in Comsol, but the curve is assumed to symmetric so only the positive
values are copied.
The slope of the BH-curve determines the relative permeability of the material. It can be rather
diﬃcult to evaluate the slope of the curve on a BH characteristic. The relative permeability has
==PAGE:31==
3.2. MINOR CHANGES
25
Table 3.1: Test sample information.
Dimensions
Mass
Mass density
Demagnetisation
Correction
H x W x L [mm]
m [g]
ρ [g/cm3]
constant N
factor k
Sheet
1.4 x 1.3 x 4.1 ± 0.2
0.0563
7.85
0.1363
0.838
Block
1 x 1 x 4.4 ± 0.2
0.03422
7.85
0.1002
0.758
Cylinder
1 x 1 x 4.1 ± 0.2
0.03056
7.85
0.1036
0.788
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Field [kGauss]
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Moment [emu]
Sheet
Block
Cylinder
Figure 3.2: Raw data output from the magne-
tometer.
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
Field intensity H [kA/m]
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Flux density B [T]
Sheet
Block
Cylinder
Figure 3.3: Resulting BH-curves, including fac-
tor k.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Magnetic field intensity H [kA/m]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Relative permeability 
r [H/m]
Comsol Soft Iron
Sheet
Block
Cylinder
Figure 3.4: Relative permeability as a function
of ﬁeld intensity for the three samples and Soft
Iron from Comsol.
µr = 1 + M
Hi
(3.6)
therefore been calculated, using equation 3.6, and has been plotted as a function of the magnetic
ﬁeld intensity, see ﬁgure (3.4). This ﬁgure also contains the same visualisation for the iron used
in Comsol; Soft Iron. The dashed lines represent a linear assumptions of the relative permeability
in a low ﬁeld. This reduce computation time in Comsol signiﬁcantly. The shape of the curves
are similar, but the magnetic property of the samples are 1/3 to 2/3 lower than the Comsol iron.
However, the iron is accepted for the project.
3.2
Minor changes
• It was not possible to ﬁnd a 1 mm thick iron sheet for the lid and bottom plate of the
electromagnet, but the closest candidate were 2 mm thick. The distribution of ﬂux density
will change due to the increased thickness, but the diﬀerence is deemed marginal and is
neglected.
• The width of the coil-walls are increase with 1 mm to make room for the countersunk screw
==PAGE:32==
26
CHAPTER 3. CONSTRUCTION COIL CASE AND WINDING OF THE COIL
heads.
• The coil width are changed from 11.25 mm to plain 11 mm.
A minor detail that ease
production.
• The four screws going through the core must be magnetic in order to compensate for the
removed magnetic material. However, magnetic M2 screws could not be found so the screw
holes are widened to ﬁt magnetic M3 screws. This adjustment is not expected to change the
distribution of the magnetic ﬂux density.
• During assembly it was noticed that the bolts, tightening the copper clamps, were ruining the
isolating Kapton tape. Small aluminium plates were manufactured on the spot to prevent
this. The three bolts are pushing on the same plate, so the tightening force is distributed
on the plate. Initially there were no room for the aluminium plate so a piece of the copper
clamp are cut oﬀ.
• To reduce the interface resistivity of the copper clamp, all contact surfaces has been cleaned
with sandpaper and ethanol.
• Countersink are performed on all holes on one side of the bottom plate, and also on the
underside of the Ø8 holes of the clamps.
3.3
Winding
The winding process is tricky. The product is a prototype so there are no premade setup and it
must be made with available equipment. Available are two winding frames with rotatable axes, see
ﬁgure (3.5). The main frame has two rotatable axes and the second frame has one rotatable axis.
The second frame is only used to divide the superconductor onto two rolls. The coil is winded
as a Double-pancake Racetrack which means that the middle of the superconductor is the inmost
winding of the coil, closest to the core. Therefore, half of the total length of the coil must be rolled
onto another roll, before the coil can be wound. When this step is done, the roll on the second
frame is detached, moved one round around the core and attached above the coil case. The second
roll is ﬁxed and follows the turning of the coil case around the same axis, while the ﬁrst roll of
superconductor is rolled onto the core. When the ﬁrst half of the superconductor is wound, the
end is ﬁxed to the coil case with normal tape. The empty roll is removed, and the ﬁxed second
roll is detached and moved to the rotatable axis where the empty ﬁrst roll used the be. Now the
second coil are wound and the coil case are rotated in the opposite direction as before. The end
of the superconductor is ﬁxed the same way as the other.
• Wind as tight as possible.
• The outer coil is wound ﬁrst, because the inner roll is ﬁxed to the frame axis.
• Rubber spacers are used, during winding of the ﬁrst coil, to keep the coil in place, see
appendix ??.
• Two pieces of normal tape holds the superconductor in place on the second roll while the
ﬁrst roll is wound, see appendix ??.
This process is ﬁrst tested on gift ribbon to detect any ﬂaws that might occur. This could be
misalignment of the rolls that would damage the superconductor. Damage to the superconductor
could also happen when moving the rolls around. Inappropriate stretches or jerks could break the
brittle ceramics.
The reliability of the winding process is still uncertain.
Damage to the superconductor could
happen, so a second winding test were made with an old and disposable 11 m long tape of super-
conductor. The winding of this tape were an apparent success and the functionality were conﬁrmed
with an IV curve test in liquid nitrogen. Due to lack of time, and the success of the 11 m tape, no
more coils were made. The ﬁnal number of windings were N=34. Since the coil is now about half
the length of the designed coil, Comsol models are updated in order to compare results.
Each end of the superconductor are cut to ﬁt within the clamps. Then, one winding, at each end,
is unfolded and the epoxy coating is removed at four points, two for the voltage meter and two
for the current clamps. Also here, ethanol is used to clean the surfaces. The ends are then wound
again and tightened to the walls by the clamps. The ﬁnished product can be seen in ﬁgure (3.6).
==PAGE:33==
3.3. WINDING
27
Figure 3.5: Winding setup. Main winding frame
with the ﬁrst half of the superconductor to the
left. Second winding frame with the second half
of the superconductor to the right.
Figure 3.6: Finished double-pancake racetrack
coil of superconductor.
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Experimental work
4.1
Characterising a strip of superconductor
In the theoretical design chapter, the IC used for the superconductor is the factory guaranteed
value. Even if this is true when the superconductor left the factory, it might have been damaged
during transportation.
Or the superconductor could have been prone to deterioration due to
insuﬃcient storage quality. Nonetheless, it is always a good idea to check the quality of your
materials.
4.1.1
Preparation of test object
The superconductor is a 2G HTS from the company SuperPower[4], see ﬁgure (4.1), datasheet in
appendix. The wire has been epoxy coated for isolation at DanFysik[5].
A strip of approximately 37 cm is cut oﬀthe roll for the experiment. The experiment is a 4-point
measurement at 77 K, described in section 1.4. The voltage probes are attached 10 cm apart in
which sets the voltage threshold to 10 µV, see section ??. The contact points for the current are 4
cm long which is a high enough contact area, that a bottle neck in the current path can be avoided.
The two contact points for the voltage measurement are not required to be large. The epoxy at
all contact points are removed with 120 grain sandpaper, see ﬁgure (4.3).
Braided wires are soldered at each end of the superconductor. Figure (4.4) shows the ﬁrst wire
to be soldered. It was diﬃcult due to the high thermal conductivity of the braided wire, but a
good connection was achieved. Figure (4.5) shows the second wire to be soldered. To decrease the
thermal conductivity, the wire were pulled slightly apart so less wire were in between the soldering
iron and the superconductor. Both ends of the superconductor were tied to a ﬁbreglass plate, with
sticky dental ﬂoss, to support the test object. The loose ends of the each braided wire are soldered
to cable shoes and bolted to a stationary current cable.
Two small diameter wires are soldered to the voltage contact points in the center of the supercon-
ductor. There are no requirements to the wire diameter as it only carries a small current. These
two wires are not soldered to the same contact points as the current supply, in order to avoid the
voltage drop resulting from the resistance of the solder and the high current. The complete test
object in a styrofoam box can be seen in ﬁgure (4.2).
4.1.2
Measured resistance
The voltage of the superconductor strip is measured at room temperature. After the test, the
dissipated power and the resistance of the superconductor has been calculated with the equations P
= VI and R=V/I. Figure (4.6) shows the IV curve of the superconductor strip at room temperature.
The voltage increase linearly with current until around 6-7 A where the ambient cooling becomes
insuﬃcient. After this point the voltage begin to increase non-linearly with current. The calculated
resistance of the strip from section 1.4.2 is used to calculate the expected voltage. This is plotted
with the linear dashed line in the ﬁgure. It can be seen that the calculated value is equal to
the measured value until the cooling becomes insuﬃcient. The non-linear behaviour can best be
described by plotting the dissipated power and the measured resistance as a function of current,
see ﬁgure (4.7). It can be seen that the resistance increase as the current increase. This is due
to the amount of dissipated power in the superconductor.
The dissipated power creates heat
which increase the resistivity of the copper.
The increased resistivity increase the amount of
29
==PAGE:36==
30
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
Figure 4.1: A roll of 2G HTS from
SuperPower.
Figure 4.2: A strip of HTS tape mounted on a ﬁbreglass plate
with current contacts at the ends and voltage probe wires
in the middle.
Placed in a styrofoam container to provide
insulation of the LN2.
Figure 4.3: A strip of superconductor with epoxy sanded oﬀat current contact points (outer) and
voltage contact points (inner).
Figure 4.4: First try of soldering a braided
copper wire to superconductor.
Figure 4.5: Second try of soldering a braided
copper wire to superconductor.
dissipated power through I2R, and the dissipated power creates more heat in which again increase
the resistivity. This translates to a non-linear increase with current. These values increase until
the system reaches a steady state where the heat transfer to the surroundings is equal to the
dissipated power in the copper. Increasing the current increases the rate at which this eﬀect takes
place, and at some point the dissipated power is too high and the superconductor melts. During
the test, enough power were dissipated in the superconductor that the epoxy changed colour along
the center line of the tape. The amount of power dissipated were approximately 7 W. A subsequent
test at low current showed the same resistance as before in which no damage has been done to the
copper layer. However, it is unclear whether the superconductive layer has taken damage. This
can only be tested at low temperatures.
4.1.3
IV curve with liquid nitrogen
Cooling a warm container eﬀectively, is done by pouring the liquid nitrogen into it slowly. When
it is poured too fast, too much nitrogen evaporates before it can withdraw the heat from the
container. The thermal interaction is higher between a solid and a liquid, than a solid and gas.
Another factor to consider is the rate of contraction, that the various materials undergo, when
exposed to cold temperatures. It is therefore important that the cooling happens slowly, in order
to avoid that adjacent materials stress each other mechanically. In addition, the ﬁrst pour should
hit the container and not the superconductive strip which could be damaged.
Figure (4.8) shows the resistance of the superconductor while liquid nitrogen is poured into the
container. The pour is done in steps in order to avoid mechanical stress and to not waste the cooling
==PAGE:37==
4.1. CHARACTERISING A STRIP OF SUPERCONDUCTOR
31
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
0 , 0 0
0 , 0 5
0 , 1 0
0 , 1 5
0 , 2 0
0 , 2 5
0 , 3 0
0 , 3 5
V o l t a g e  ( V )
C u r r e n t  ( A )
 M
e a s u r e d
 C a l c u l a t e d ,  R = 1 0 . 4 4  m
Ω
Figure 4.6: Measured and calculated voltage of
SC strip at room temperature. The calculated
voltage is based on a strip resistance of 10.44
mΩ.
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 D i s s i p a t e d  p o w e r
 R e s i s t a n c e
C u r r e n t  ( A )
D i s s i p a t e d  p o w e r  ( W
)
0
2
4
6
8
1 0
1 2
1 4
1 6
1 8
R e s i s t a n c e  ( m
Ω)
Figure 4.7: Measured resistance of, and power
dissipated in the SC strip at room temperature.
8 0
1 0 0
1 2 0
1 4 0
1 6 0
1 8 0
2 0 0
0
2
4
6
8
1 0
S C  r e s i s t a n c e  [ m
Ω]
T i m
e  [ s ]
Figure 4.8: R(t), during LN2 cool down. The
"steps" is a result of each pour.
eﬃciency of the liquid nitrogen. The ﬁrst pour is done around 105 seconds after the measure has
begun, and prior to this the resistance is measured to around 10 mΩ. This value complies with the
calculated value in section 1.4.2. At some point around 190 seconds, the superconductor becomes
so cold that the resistance apparent plunges to zero Ω, which means that the non-resistive property
of the YBCO-layer has been achieved. From this point on, enough liquid nitrogen will be poured
into the container to submerge the test object completely, including the cable shoes.
Now the IV curve measurements can begin. The LabView program is set to increase the current
in steps of 1 A and log the voltage after an amount stabilisation time. An IV curve measurement
has been performed 7 times, of which 5 were deemed acceptable measurements, see ﬁgure (4.9).
The measurement process is repeated several times to get a statistical picture of the IV behaviour.
Of the raw data, the lowest value measured was right below -5 µV . 6 µV is then added to all
data in order to achieve a proper logarithmic representation.
In a logarithmic representation
the exponential behaviour of the VI curve becomes linear.
The negative value is due to the
thermoelectric oﬀset. The measurement data are divided by U0 = 10µV , which is the threshold
voltage for where the superconductor is considered to be non-superconductive. It is based on the
physical value of E0 = 1µV/cm and the length of the superconductor strip in the test which is
10 cm long. The measurements are fused together and ﬁtted with the non-linear power curve
explained previously. In ﬁgure (4.9) the y-axis is the raw data plus the 6 µV oﬀset divided by the
threshold voltage. The oﬀset parameter in the power law equation, u, is therefore the real oﬀset
plus the 6 µV divided by the threshold voltage, which makes it unit less. The results are listed in
==PAGE:38==
32
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
1 0
1 0 0
0 , 5
1
2
3
( U + o f f s e t ) / U 0  [ 1 ]
C u r r e n t  [ A ]
 I V  c u r v e  n o .  1
 I V  c u r v e  n o .  2
 I V  c u r v e  n o .  3
 I V  c u r v e  n o .  4
 I V  c u r v e  n o .  5
 F i t  o f  a v e r a g e d  d a t a
E q u a t i o n
u + ( x / I c ) ^ n
I c  [ A ]
1 2 8 , 7 5  ±  0 , 0 3
u  [ 1 ]
0 , 2 1  ±  0 , 0 0 2 3
n  [ 1 ]
2 9 , 3 7  ±  0 , 2 8
1 1 0
1 2 0
1 3 0
0 , 5
1
2
3
Figure 4.9: 5 IV curves of a 10 cm strip of superconducting tape from SuperPower. Current leads
are soldered to the strip. Fit of average data from all 5 IV curves. Inset: Zoomed window.
Table 4.1: Resulting parameter values of ﬁtted data based on an experiment with a strip of
superconductor tape from SuperPower, measured at T=77 K.
IC [A]
u [1]
n [1]
128.75 ± 0.03
0.210 ± 0.002
29.4 ± 0.3
table (4.1), and all 3 parameters show decent uncertainties. IC is 128.75 A which is 9.75 A higher
than the speciﬁed value. The n-value of 29.37 reveals the strip as being a superconductor of fairly
high quality.
4.2
Characterising the electromagnet
Six IV curve measurements are done for the superconductor electromagnet, see ﬁgure (4.10). They
have been individually ﬁtted with the same power law function. U is the raw data, offset is the
same for all IV measurements and is added to bring the raw data to the positive side of zero. U0
is the threshold voltage set by E0 and the length of the tape. However, for this experiment L is
not the total length of the tape, but rather the length of tape closest to the core. IC is eﬀectively
decreased in a magnetic ﬁeld, and since the superconductor is wound to a coil, the magnetic ﬁeld
is highest closest to the core. The innermost length of tape in a Double-pancake racetrack coil is
calculated as:
2 · (2 · Lcore mid + 2 · rcore end · π) ⇒
2 · (2 · 4 cm + 2 · 1 cm · π) = 28.6 cm
(4.1)
U0 is then 1 µV/cm·28.6 cm = 28.6 µV . The noise ﬂoor is high due to the total length of the tape
and is close to the voltage threshold, see ﬁgure (4.10). IC is the critical current, u is the oﬀset in
the plot, which includes the thermoelectric oﬀset as well, and n is the power that determine the
quality of the superconductor.
The ﬁttings all ﬁnd the oﬀset to be a little higher than 0.7, which means that IC is found at x
when y is a little higher than 1.7. The ﬁttings ﬁnd IC to about 35.5 A and n to around 20.
==PAGE:39==
4.3. EVALUATING THE MAGNETIC FLUX DENSITY ABOVE THE ELECTROMAGNET33
1
1 0
0 , 5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
( U + o f f s e t ) / U 0  [ 1 ]
C u r r e n t  [ A ]
 I V  c u r v e  n o .  1
 I V  c u r v e  n o .  2
 I V  c u r v e  n o .  3
 I V  c u r v e  n o .  4
 I V  c u r v e  n o .  5
 I V  c u r v e  n o .  6
 F i t  o f  a v e r a g e d  d a t a
E q u a t i o n
u + ( x / I c ) ^ n
I c  [ A ]
3 6  ±  0 , 0 2 4
u  [ 1 ]
0 , 7 2  ±  0 , 0 0 5 9
n  [ 1 ]
2 1  ±  0 , 2 0
3 0
3 5
4 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 4.10: 6 IV curves of a coil of superconducting tape from SuperPower. Fit of average data
from all 6 IV curves. Inset: Zoomed window.
4.3
Evaluating the magnetic ﬂux density above the electromagnet
A Hall probe has been used to measure the magnetic ﬂux density above the electromagnet, normal
to the racetrack coil. The measurement is done while the electromagnet is submerged in liquid
nitrogen, and the results can be seen in ﬁgure (4.11).
Also in the ﬁgure, are plotted Comsol
simulations of the expected ﬂux density above the electromagnet. The simulations are done with
two diﬀerent types of iron, however the results are not diﬀerentiate signiﬁcant.
==PAGE:40==
34
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL WORK
0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
F i e l d  [ m
T ]
C u r r e n t  [ A ]
 H a l l  p r o b e
 C o m
s o l  V S M
 I r o n
 C o m
s o l  M
4 0 0
Figure 4.11: Magnetic ﬁeld normal to the elec-
tromagnet. Measured with a Hall probe, placed
in the center 1-2 mm above the core. Evaluated
in Comsol with two iron alloys with diﬀerent HB
curve.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
Resulting IC for the electromagnet
The electromagnet does not function well outside of the rotor. Without the return yokes, rotor
back and stator iron the surroundings are highly reluctant, and the path of the ﬂux reduce to the
electromagnet internally. Due to the iron lid and bottom plate, the ﬂux ﬁnd the most direct path
between them; ie. the ﬂux does not leave the electromagnet. From an FEM simulation of the
electromagnet, without the rest of the pole-pair, the local maximum magnetic ﬁeld in the coil, at
an IC of 36 A, is evaluated to 0.2519 T. Figure (5.1) shows the lift factor as a function of applied
ﬁeld from a transport current measurement [13]. The evaluated value from the FEM simulation
is interpolated on the curve and a resulting lift factor is found to 0.2855. Dividing the IC of the
electromagnet with this value, we get an IC,self field value of 36 A/0.2855 = 126.07 A.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Applied B
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Lift factor - IC(B,T) / IC(self field, 77 K)
Transport current measurement
Figure 5.1: Lift factor as a function of applied ﬁeld, made from transport current measurements.
Reproduced from [13].
35
==PAGE:42==
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
Yes. It is possible to design, build and test a small electromagnet employing a coil of supercon-
ductor, intended for a 10 kW generator with a 1 T air-gap ﬂux density, see section 1.1.
37
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 7
Future work
7.1
Hall probe measurement
The result from section 4.3 show that the measured values are higher than the simulated values.
This could possibly be because the FEM model is a 2D model. In the future, a 3D model can be
modelled in order to seek a more precise simulation of this case.
Future changes for the construction
The following bullet points are advices when designing
blueprints.
• 1 mm extra space were set between the two pancakes. It was deemed enough space for Kapton
tape and winding eﬃciency, but in retrospect this was not enough. During the winding of
the second coil, the superconductor were scraping between the bottom plate and the ﬁrst
coil. 1 mm more of extra space would improve the winding process.
• The height of the clamps are set the same as the height of the core. However, due to the layers
of Kapton tape on both the lid and the bottom plate, there were no room for the clamps.
After some machine sanding the clamps could be squeezed in place, without damaging the
Kapton tape.
• All duwel holes had no tolerances speciﬁed. It was necessary to drill all duwel holes with a
10 % larger drill for a proper ﬁt.
39
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1] H. Polinder, J.A. Ferreira, B.B. Jensen, A.B. Abrahamsen, K. Atallah, R. A. McMahon, Trends
in Wind Turbine Generator Systems, IEEE Journal of emerging and selected topics in power
electronics, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 174-185, September 2013.
[2] S.S. Kalsi, Chapter 2, Applications of High Temperature superconductors to electric power
equipment, IEEE Press, 2011.
[3] DNV, Risoe, Guidelines for Design of Wind Turbines, 2002.
[4] http://www.superpower-inc.com/, accessed: October 4, 2017.
[5] http://www.danfysik.com/, accessed: October 4, 2017.
[6] D. Liu, H. Polinder, A.B. Abrahamsen, J.A. Ferreira, Comparison of 10 MW Superconducting
Generator Topologies for Direct-Drive Wind Turbines, Electric Machines & Drives Conference
(IEMDC), pp. 174-180, 2015.
[7] A.B. Abrahamsen, B.B. Jensen, E. Seiler, N. Mijatovic, V.M. Rodriguez-Zermeno, N.H. Ander-
sen, J. Østergård, Feasibility study of 5 MW superconducting wind turbine generator, Elsevier
Physica C vol. 471 pp. 1464-1469, May 2011.
[8] https://www.lely.com/media/filer_public/bb/71/bb71670f-b537-4675-a456-9882c21b2344/
lely_aircon_product_brochure_en.pdf, accessed: March 4, 2018.
[9] H. Polinder, F.F.A. van der Pijl, G.J. de Vilder, P.J. Tavner, Comparison of Direct-Drive and
Geared Generator Concepts for Wind Turbines, IEEE Transactions on energy conversion, vol.
21, no. 3, September 2006.
[10] A. B. Abrahamsen, D. Liu and H. Polinder, Direct drive superconducting generators for IN-
NWIND.EU wind turbines, INNWIND.EU, Deliverable 3.11, Superconducting generators, 31
August 2017.
[11] A. Aharoni, Demagnetizing factors for rectangular ferromagnetic prisms, Journal of applied
physics, vol. 83, no. 6, 15 march 1998.
[12] S. Blundell, Chapter 1.1.4, Appendix A & D, Magnetism in condensed matter, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2001.
[13] D. W. Hazelton and V. Selvamanickam SuperPower’s YBCO Coated High-Temperature Su-
perconducting (HTS) Wire and Magnet Applications, Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 97, No. 11,
November 2009.
41
==PAGE:48==
==PAGE:49==
Appendix A
Appendix Method and setup
43
==PAGE:50==
Copper Stabilizer
Silver Overlayer
(RE)BCO - HTS (epitaxial)
Buffer Stack
Substrate
< 0.1 mm*
* not to scale; SCS4050
20 µm
2 µm
1 µm
~0.2 µm
50 µm
20 µm
Sputtering
Electroplating
Electropolishing
MOCVD
IBAD/Magnetron Sputtering
~1.8 µm
Substrate Thickness: 
 
50 µm Hastelloy® C-276 
 
[or 100 µm for SF12100]
Substrate Yield Strength: 
 
1,200 MPa at 77K
Substrate Resistivity: 
 
125 µΩ-cm – higher resistivity leads to lower eddy current ac loss 
Magnetic Properties: 
 
non-magnetic, leads to lower ferromagnetic ac loss
Minimum Ic
measured by continuous 
direct current
Width 
Total Wire 
Thickness
Critical Axial 
Tensil Strain
at 77K
Critical Bend 
Diameter in 
Tension (40µm)
@ room temp
Critical Bend 
Diameter in 
Compression (40µm)
@ room temp
SF = Stabilizer Free (standard 2µm of silver)
SF2050
50 amp
2 mm
0.055 mm
0.45%
11 mm
11 mm
SF3050
75 amp
3 mm
0.055 mm
0.45%
11 mm
11 mm
SF4050
100 amp
4 mm
0.055 mm
0.45%
11 mm
11 mm
SF6050
150 amp
6 mm
0.055 mm
0.45%
11 mm
11 mm
SF12050
300 amp
12 mm
0.055 mm
0.45%
11 mm
11 mm
SF12100*
300 amp
12 mm
0.105 mm
0.40%
25 mm
25 mm
SCS = Surround Copper Stabilizer (standard 2µm of silver and 40µm of copper; critical tensile stress of >550MPa at 77K)
SCS2050
50 amp
2 mm
0.1 mm
0.45%
11 mm
11 mm
SCS3050
75 amp
3 mm
0.1 mm
0.45%
11 mm
11 mm
SCS4050
100 amp
4 mm
0.1 mm
0.45%
11 mm
11 mm
SCS6050
150 amp
6 mm
0.1 mm
0.45%
11 mm
11 mm
SCS12050
300 amp
12 mm
0.1 mm
0.45%
11 mm
11 mm
* 2G HTS wire type SF12100 with highly resistive substrate, flexibility in wire stabilization options and very tight current 
uniformity is suitable for fault current limiter (FCL) applications. First peak limitation demonstrated with fast response 
time, low quench current, and rapid recovery.
SuperPower® 2G HTS Wire Specifications
==PAGE:51==
Haynes International - HASTELLOY® C-276 alloy
RT= Room Temperature
Physical Properties
Physical Property
British Units
Metric Units
Density
RT
0.321 lb/in3
RT
8.89 g/cm3
Electrical 
Resistivity
RT
48.4 μohm.in
RT
1.23 μohm.m
200°F
48.7 μohm.in
100°C
1.24 μohm.m
400°F
49.0 μohm.in
200°C
1.25 μohm.m
600°F
49.5 μohm.in
300°C
1.26 μohm.m
800°F
49.8 μohm.in
400°C
1.26 μohm.m
1000°F
50.6 μohm.in
500°C
1.28 μohm.m
-
-
600°C
1.30 μohm.m
Thermal 
Conductivity
100°F
71 Btu.in/h.ft2.°F
50°C
10.5 W/m.°C
200°F
77 Btu.in/h.ft2.°F
100°C
11.2 W/m.°C
400°F
90 Btu.in/h.ft2.°F
200°C
12.9 W/m.°C
600°F
104 Btu.in/h.ft2.°F
300°C
14.7 W/m.°C
800°F
117 Btu.in/h.ft2.°F
400°C
16.5 W/m.°C
1000°F
132 Btu.in/h.ft2.°F
500°C
18.3 W/m.°C
Mean Coefficient of
Thermal Expansion
75-200°F
6.2 μin/in.°F
24-100°C
11.2 μm/m.°C
75-400°F
6.7 μin/in.°F
24-200°C
12.0 μm/m.°C
77-600°F
7.1 μin/in.°F
24-300°C
12.7 μm/m.°C
77-800°F
7.3 μin/in.°F
24-400°C
13.1 μm/m.°C
77-1000°F
7.4 μin/in.°F
24-500°C
13.3 μm/m.°C
77-1100°F
7.8 μin/in.°F
24-600°C
13.8 μm/m.°C
Magnetic Permeability
200 oersted
1.0002
15.9 kA/m
1.0002
Specific Heat
RT
0.102 Btu/lb.°F
RT
427 J/kg.°C
Dynamic Modulus of
Elasticity
RT
29.8 x 106 psi
RT
205 GPa
400°F
28.3 x 106 psi
200°C
195 GPa
600°F
27.3 x 106 psi
300°C
189 GPa
800°F
26.4 x 106 psi
400°C
183 GPa
1000°F
25.5 x 106 psi
500°C
178 GPa
Melting Range
2415-2500°F
-
1323-1371°C
-
Poisson’s Ratio
-
-
RT
0.31
==PAGE:52==
==PAGE:53==
Appendix B
Appendix Schematics
47
==PAGE:54==
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1.5
SHEET 1 OF 4
A4
WEIGHT: 
Electromagnet
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
==PAGE:55==
 4 styk
3,20
 
 12 styk
2,20
 
 2 styk 
5
 
 0 
 3 
 13 
 27 
 41 
 51 
 54 
 0 
 5 
 54 
 79 
 105 
 120 
 140 
 155 
 181 
 205 
 210 
A
A
 0 
 2 
SECTION A-A
 4 styk
3,20 
 12 Stk. 
2,20 
 0 
 20 
 46 
 61 
 81 
 96 
 122 
 142 
 0 
 3 
 27 
 51 
 54 
B
B
 0 
 2 
SECTION B-B
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 2 OF 4
A4
WEIGHT: 
Electromagnet
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
==PAGE:56==
 2 Stk.
3,20 
 0 
 10 
 20 
 0 
 10 
 30 
 40 
C
C
 0 
 9 
SECTION C-C
 
3,20 
 0 
 10 
 20 
 0 
 5 
 10 
D
D
 0 
 9 
SECTION D-D
 6 Stk. 
2,20 
 0 
 3 
 6 
 0 
 20 
 46 
 61 
 81 
 96 
 122 
 142 
E
E
 0 
 9 
SECTION E-E
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 3 OF 4
A4
WEIGHT: 
Electromagnet
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
==PAGE:57==
 
8 
 0 
 8 
 23 
 33 
 0 
 10 
 20 
 50 
F
F
 3 Stk.
3,20 
 0 
 4 
 8 
 0 
 25 
 35 
 45 
 50 
SECTION F-F
 3 Stk. M3x0.5 
 0 
 4 
 8 
 0 
 5 
 15 
 25 
 30 
G
G
 0 
 5 
SECTION G-G
 0 
 8 
 0 
 30 
M
M
 0 
 1 
SECTION M-M
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2
SHEET 4 OF 4
A4
WEIGHT: 
Electromagnet
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
Appendix C
Appendix VSM
Figure C.1: Test samples.
Listing C.1: Demagnetisation constant.
1
disp('Calculate the demagetisation factor N from Aharoni 1998')
2
disp('Input a, b, c. (H || c)')
3
4
a= input('Dimension of a = ');
5
b= input('Dimension of b = ');
6
c= input('Dimension of c = ');
7
8
DemagN=1/pi*((b^2−c^2)/(2*b*c)*log((sqrt(a^2+b^2+c^2)−a)/(sqrt(a^2+b^2+c^2)+a))+...
9
(a^2−c^2)/(2*a*c)*log((sqrt(a^2+b^2+c^2)−b)/(sqrt(a^2+b^2+c^2)+b))+...
10
b/(2*c)*log((sqrt(a^2+b^2)+a)/(sqrt(a^2+b^2)−a))+...
11
a/(2*c)*log((sqrt(a^2+b^2)+b)/(sqrt(a^2+b^2)−b))+...
12
c/(2*a)*log((sqrt(b^2+c^2)−b)/(sqrt(b^2+c^2)+b))+...
13
c/(2*b)*log((sqrt(a^2+c^2)−a)/(sqrt(a^2+c^2)+a))+...
14
2*atan(a*b/(c*sqrt(a^2+b^2+c^2)))+(a^3+b^3−2*c^3)/(3*a*b*c)+...
15
(a^2+b^2−2*c^2)/(3*a*b*c)*sqrt(a^2+b^2+c^2)+...
16
c/(a*b)*(sqrt(a^2+c^2)+sqrt(b^2+c^2))−...
17
((a^2+b^2).^(3/2)+(b^2+c^2).^(3/2)+(c^2+a^2).^(3/2))/(3*a*b*c))
Listing C.2: ’Moving average’-code with lid-sample data as example.
1
[a, a_I] = sort(SoftIronLid.FieldG(82:end));
2
% a is .FieldG sorted and a_I is its index.
3
b = SoftIronLid.Momentemu(82:end);
4
b = b(a_I);
5
% b is .Momentemu sorted relative to .FieldG's index.
6
k = 2;
7
% when k=2 movmean averages the current and previous value.
8
x = movmean(a,k);
9
y = movmean(b,k);
10
% movmean is the moving average algorithm.
53
==PAGE:60==
==PAGE:61==
Appendix D
Appendix Construction
55
==PAGE:62==
56
APPENDIX D. APPENDIX CONSTRUCTION
Figure D.1:
Rubber spacers are used, during
winding of the ﬁrst coil, to keep the coil in place.
Figure D.2: Two pieces of normal tape holds the
superconductor in place on the second roll while
the ﬁrst roll is wound.
==PAGE:63==
57
Figure D.3: Voltage probe soldered to one end
of the coil.
Figure D.4: Winding eﬃciency. The inner wind-
ings tend to bend and take up unnecessary space.
