==PAGE:1==
Visualization and Navigation of
Personal Data Time Series
Johan Kristoﬀer Frølich
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
In this thesis I will investigate some of the current problems with visualisation
in personal informatics.
As a proposed approach for solving some of these
problems, I will then describe the development of an application prototype that
can visualise personal data as a part of a personal informatics system.
The prototype allows the user to interact with, and navigate in the data. The
prototype is also able to display diﬀerent aspects and dimensions of the data,
as for example diﬀerent temporal levels, analysis of the data, and showing the
data in context of other variables that correlates with the data.
This prototype has been tested on four participants, who have been interviewed
while using the application. The usage of the application as well as the knowl-
edge they obtained about the data has been observed. I have described and
discussed the result of the user evaluation.
Based in these ﬁndings, I have
suggested ideas for future improvements.
The result is very positive, and the ﬁnal prototype is able to give users a tool
which provides new insight and knowledge about the data, and heightens the
reﬂection of the data to new levels.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract (Danish)
I denne afhandling vil jeg undersøge de aktuelle problemer med visualisering i
personlige informatiksystemer (personal informatics systems). Jeg beskriver der-
efter udviklingen af en prototype til en applikation, der kan visualisere personlig
data, som en foreslået tilgang til løsning af nogle af disse problemer.
Prototypen tillader brugeren at interagere med og navigere i dataene. Proto-
typen kan også vise forskellige aspekter og dimensioner af dataene, som for
eksempel forskellige tidsmæssige niveauer, analyse af dataene og viser dataene
i sammenhæng med andre variabler, der korrelere med dataene.
Denne prototype er blevet testet på ﬁre deltagere, som er blevet interviewet,
mens de testet og anvendte programmet. Anvendelsen, samt den viden de har
opnået omkring dataene, er blevet observeret. Resultatet af denne brugereva-
luering test er beskrevet og diskuteret, og baseret på disse fund er ideer til
fremtidige forbedringer foreslået.
Resultatet er meget positivt, og den endelige prototype er i stand til at gi-
ve brugerne et værktøj, som giver ny indsigt og viden om dataene, samt øger
muligheden for reﬂeksion over dataene til nye niveauer.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at The Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in fulﬁlment of
the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in engineering.
This thesis describes the design, implementation and evaluation of a web appli-
cation for visualising personal data. The application allows for interactive data
exploration, and diﬀerent data analysis utilities.
Lyngby, 18-February-2018
Johan Kristoﬀer Frølich
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the following people for their involvement, and valuable
help, in regards to carrying out this project.
First of all would I like to thank my supervisor, Jakob Eg Larsen, for excel-
lent collaboration, and for interesting discussions and useful insights about this
project and personal informatics in general. Jakob has devoted many hours over
countless meetings to evaluate and discuss this project and the diﬀerent aspects
of the visualisation prototype. He has furthermore helped with the structure of
the thesis report, and given valuable feedback during the whole project. With-
out his supervision and help, this project would not have been possible.
Secondly I would like to extend my gratitude to Thomas Blomseth Christiansen,
for letting me use his personal data, that he has recorded over a whole year, as
well as being a participant in the user evaluation tests himself. Those data sets
has been invaluable in the user testing, and in the continued evaluation of the
prototype. His insights into the same data has also been extremely valuable in
the test we conducted together.
Finally I would like to thank Karen Anna Handberg Martiny, Alex Thage
Schwarz and Kristian Dam-Jensen for being willing to participate in the user
evaluation test, and for giving good and constructive criticism and feedback on
the prototype. This has been valuable for determine the result of this project.
Finally I would like to thank my girlfriend Karen Anna Handberg Martiny for
proofreading this thesis. Her English proﬁciency has contributed to the level of
the written language and thus the readability of this thesis. I would also like to
==PAGE:7==
v
thank her as well as my friends and family for the support and encouragement
throughout this project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract (English)
i
Abstract (Danish)
ii
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goal of this Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Visualisation of Time Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Mobile Applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Analysis
9
3.1
Personal Informatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Visualising Time Series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Existing Visualisation Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Interactivity and Navigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Design
18
4.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Iterations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
The Foundation: A Time-series Table
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Interactivity and Navigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.5
Improving the Foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.6
The Problem with Time Zones
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
viii
4.7
Tiles, Circles and Violin Plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.8
A New Dimension: Summarising and Analysing Data
. . . . . .
28
4.9
Contextual Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Technical Implementation
35
5.1
The Platform: Why Web? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
D3.js - Data Driven Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
React and Redux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Architecture and Data Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5
Performance Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
User Evaluation
43
6.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.1
Post-Test Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Test Interview Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2.1
Overall Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2.2
Data Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2.3
Time Zone Axes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2.4
Summary Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2.5
Contextual Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
Questionnaire Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Discussion
50
8
Future Work
52
8.1
Summary Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.2
Context Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.3
General Prototype Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.4
New Extensions to the Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.5
A Improved User Test Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
9
Conclusion
57
A User Evaluation Questionnaire
59
B The Prototype
64
C Project Plan
66
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In the last decade (since the launch of the ﬁrst iPhone in 2007) the development
and usage of smartphones has really taken on, and more then every second
person all over the world are using one today 1. In the last years has there
furthermore been seen a signiﬁcant raise in the wearable devices market 2. This
includes smart-watches, smart-wristbands, such as ﬁtness trackers, and many
more.
All these devices are able to track certain things about us individually. For
example almost all smart-phones can track your location, and ﬁtness trackers
are often made to track your heart rate, diﬀerent physical activities, etc.
The new opportunities that this technology gives us, have started the "quantiﬁed
self" movement, where many people today track a lot of data about themselves.
This makes people able to follow progress, for example as a result of exercising,
or to ﬁgure out more speciﬁcally what to focus on to improve a certain personal
trait, such as personal health, productivity, physical abilities or any other trait
that you are able to track and quantify.
1Source:
We
Are
Social,
https://wearesocial.com/special-reports/
digital-in-2017-global-overview.
2Source:
Forbes,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2016/03/18/
15-mind-boggling-facts-about-wearables-in-2016/.
==PAGE:12==
1.1 Goal of this Thesis
2
However we, ourselves, might not be the only ones that have an interest in this
new personal data. Collecting precise and coherent personal data on a lot of
people can be very useful for scientiﬁc research. A lot of companies today try
to collect personal data on a grand scale, to better target marketing eﬀorts.
One especially interesting example of collecting personal data is for professionals
that services you. While it’s interesting to track diﬀerent private parameters
for your own use, it can possible be much more useful if you can share this data
with doctors, psychologists, personal trainers and/or other health professionals.
One example of this is a study conducted in 2016 and 2017, where a patient
suﬀering PTSD 3, was equipped with a tracking device in form of a wristband
with a single button.
The patient was then able to track one of his symp-
toms (hyper arousal) by clicking the button. This data was then shared with
his therapist and together were they able to ﬁnd patterns in his symptoms
that led them to new ways of assisting the patient in handling these symptoms
[LEC17][LEC16][LCE17].
This is a good example of how to use personal data tracking in a very useful
way. However to analyse the data and extract patterns and meanings you have to
process it. Diﬀerent processing and visualisation techniques will reveal diﬀerent
information about the data, and it can be diﬃcult to ﬁnd the best technique
beforehand.
1.1
Goal of this Thesis
The main goal of this thesis is to try to investigate the problem outlined in the
previous section (section 1), as well as trying to ﬁnd a solution by designing and
implementing a software tool to process and visualise this kind of data in a way
that is broad enough to cover most cases.
In this thesis I will describe the development of such an application. The appli-
cation will be developed for a web platform to broaden the target group. The
goal of this application is to investigate diﬀerent ways of visualising data, and
comparing how each visualisation work. I will furthermore try to implement
several diﬀerent visualisation techniques into a single display, to improve the
understanding of the data by showing several dimensions and parameters simul-
taneously. The idea is to enable the user to understand diﬀerent aspects of the
3Posttraumatic stress disorder; a mental disorder that is most often a result of a traumatic
experience https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Posttraumatic_stress_disorder.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Report Structure
3
data in relation to the total overview or a overview of an particular slice of the
data.
I will focus on the type of data called personal data, i.e. time dependent and
often periodic data sets. Furthermore I will try to extend the visualisation with
context data, which does not always need to be personal data, but data that
shows a relevant variable for the main personal data.
The ﬁnal prototype of the application, should be as user friendly as possible, as
the target group will be individuals who want insight into their own data, as
well as health professionals or other professionals who can help users take action
based on the data analysis. It will not be targeted to statisticians, or software
professionals that might have an advantage when it comes to analysing data on
a computer.
A ﬁnal goal, will be to test if the prototype is able to clearly reveal information
and patterns, that were previously diﬃcult to ﬁnd with existing visualisation
techniques and software tools.
Throughout the project we (my supervisor and I) have tried to test these goals,
by using a iterative process of evaluating and discussing the prototype as it
evolved. The ﬁnal prototype has furthermore been tested by a group of users,
using a think-aloud test as well as post-test questionnaire.
1.2
Report Structure
This thesis is structured into several chapters that are supposed to guide the
reader through the process of the project behind the thesis. Chapter 1 describes
the background and motivation behind this project and acts as a introduction to
the project itself. Chapters 2 and 3 describes the theory behind the project, i.e.
personal informatics systems and visualisation techniques for visualising time
series data. These sections details the current knowledge of these ﬁelds as well
as examples of related work within each ﬁeld. If you are not familiar with the
concept of personal informatics systems, chapter 3.1 describes and explains this
in more detail.
These chapters provide the foundation and background of the prototype devel-
opment. Chapter 4 describes the process of developing the prototype, all the
iterations of development, the thoughts behind each feature, and the continuous
evaluation of the prototype as it evolved. This chapter will not strictly follow
the design process in the order that each feature was developed, but instead fo-
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Report Structure
4
cus on and highlight each essential feature on it’s own, and describe the process
of that feature in isolation, as well as how it relates to the whole application.
This way focus will be on the importance of each feature, and the thoughts and
discussions thereof, instead of the more technical development process.
The technical process, and the arguments behind the technical decisions will be
described in chapter 5. Here I will go into detail about the diﬀerent technologies
that are used in developing the application, as well as why these technologies
were chosen.
After the design and implementation of the prototype, a user evaluation that
was conducted of the ﬁnal prototype, will be described. Chapter 6 describes the
reason behind and the method of the actual evaluation, as well as the results of
the test.
These results as well as some more general insights into the prototype will be
discussed in chapter 7. This will lead to chapter 8 where possibilities for future
work and improvements will be explored. Finally the thesis will be concluded
in chapter 9.
Throughout the thesis there will sometimes be referred to "we" and "I". "I"
meaning me, the author, and "we" meaning my supervisor Jakob Eg Larsen and
I.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Related Work
In this chapter I will try to highlight some of the most interesting and most
relevant work, that has been done in the ﬁelds of personal informatics and
visualisation of time series data.
2.1
Visualisation of Time Series
There are several existing attempts at new visualisations of time based data
series. Some of the most interesting examples for this thesis will be described
below.
Cubism 1 is a JavaScript library that works as a plugin for D3 2, and is spe-
cialised in visualising time series. Cubism uses area and horizon graphs (for more
details on horizon graphs, read section 3.2.1), to display the time series which
makes it very relevant when showing dynamic streams of data (for example live
time series data).
1Link: http://square.github.io/cubism/. Cubism is a open source library developed by
Square (https://squareup.com/).
2A JavaScript library for creating manipulating and working with visual representation of
data: https://d3js.org/.
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Mobile Applications
6
Figure 2.1: A demo of Cubism from their website.
Another interesting D3 library is Event Drops 3. Event Drops is used to visualise
series of events and provides both a overview with information, like the concen-
tration of events in a given point in time, as well as "on-demand details" [Shn96]
of each event on hover.
Figure 2.2: The demo from the Event Drops website.
There are many more examples then what I can write about here. A good place
for further exploration is the D3 website, which has a page full of examples:
https://github.com/d3/d3/wiki/Gallery. A video showing some of the more
standard visualisation types, done in D3, is also available at https://vimeo.
com/29862153 4.
2.2
Mobile Applications
There exists several applications which try to use some of the visualisations
described above as well as other new techniques, to ﬁnd new ways of visualising
personal information, so it can improve the user’s reﬂection of the information.
One specially interesting app for this project is Moves 5, a personal informatics
mobile application system that tracks your activities (walking, running, using
transportation or simply staying in a speciﬁc place), as well as the location or
routes of these activities.
3Link: https://marmelab.com/EventDrops/. Created by marmelab (https://marmelab.
com/).
4A demo from the video can be found at https://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/1256572.
5Link: https://moves-app.com/.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Mobile Applications
7
(a) The
top
of
the
home screen shows
a overview of the
users current day.
(b) A
overview
of
all
the
days
(or
weeks)
that
has
been recorded.
(c) A
detailed
view
of
all
activities
and locations that
has been recorded,
during the day.
Figure 2.3: Screenshots of the diﬀerent views in Moves.
Moves uses nice, and highly distinguishable colours, and a simple visualisation
that gives a quick and clear overview. However while the day view gives a simple
and user friendly overview of the users activities during the day, it is diﬃcult to
compare your activity circles. When you go to the page featuring days or weeks,
is it even harder and the user cannot easily ﬁnd patterns in their activities (such
as which day of the week shows peak activity).
SleepCycle 6 is another popular smartphone app that tracks the user’s sleep
patterns and uses it to ﬁnd the perfect time (for example in a 20 minutes time
interval) to wake the user. However SleepCycle also gives the user many ways
to ﬁnd trends and gain insight into his or her sleeping patterns.
This works well and can show how diﬀerent variables inﬂuences your sleep time
and sleep quality (a score from 0 to 100 %, deﬁned and measured by the app).
The app can for example show you the inﬂuence of the weather, your location
or the moon phases on these parameters. The user can also import data from
Apple Health 7 to see the inﬂuence of physical activities, heart rate, and daily
steps. A ﬁnal variable that can be used in analysing your sleep patterns are the
ability for the user to add custom description to a sleep recording, like "worked
6Link: https://www.sleepcycle.com/.
7Link: https://www.apple.com/ios/health/.
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Mobile Applications
8
Figure 2.4: A screenshot showing the daily sleeping patterns over the week.
late", "was drunk", or anything else that you think could inﬂuence your sleep,
and that you would ﬁnd interesting to analyse.
While SleepCycle loads many diﬀerent variables into the application, and uses
it to analyse possible correlations with the sleep data, it still has several limi-
tations. There is no way to compare a single day, or a speciﬁc period of time,
with the changes in these diﬀerent variables. You can only see overall trends,
and analyses that SleepCycle calculates for you. It is therefore also diﬃcult to
see changes in your sleep patterns, when you make changes to your sleep habits
or to any of these inﬂuencing variables like physical activity.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Analysis
3.1
Personal Informatics
Personal informatics systems is a term describing systems used for collecting,
analysing and reﬂecting upon personal data about ourselves, in order to ob-
tain self-knowledge. This process is also called self-tracking, and the movement
around self-tracking is sometimes called quantiﬁed self. This deﬁnition and the
term "quantiﬁed self" was ﬁrst deﬁned by Wolf in [Wol09].
Li et al. proposed a stage based model for personal informatics systems in a
paper from 2010 [LDF10]. They described a model where the system was split
into the following ﬁve diﬀerent stages, with diﬀerent properties. These stages,
properties, and their importance for this thesis, will be described below:
• Preparation: choosing what kind of personal data to track, together
with how and why to track it.
• Collection: collecting the personal data about oneself.
• Integration: preparing the data so it’s possible (and easy) to reﬂect
upon.
==PAGE:20==
3.1 Personal Informatics
10
• Reﬂection: reﬂect upon the personal information to learn about status
and patterns, and get new understanding about oneself.
• Action: take action, based on the learnings from the reﬂection.
Figure 3.1: The ﬁve stages of personal informatics and the diﬀerent proper-
ties of such systems (iterative, cascading barriers, user-driven vs
system-driven and uni-faceted vs multi-faceted).
Each stage has diﬀerent barriers and diﬀerent properties. The main properties
of a stage has been speciﬁed as follows:
• Iterative: stages are iterative, meaning that users can (and often will)
"incorporate new data, tools, and/or processes as they progress through
the states" (from [LEC16, p. 563]).
• Cascading barriers: barriers in one stage cascade into the next stages
and creates problems later on.
• User-driven vs system-driven: user-driven stages are where the user
actively needs to do something. This could for example be manually regis-
ter observations, in the collection stage. System-driven is when the stage
is automatised, e.g. automatically registering data in the collection stage.
A system can also be both (you could have a system with both manu-
ally and automatically registered data, or a system that helps you with
suggestions in the action stage, but it’s still up to the user to choose).
• Uni-faceted vs multi-faceted: uni-faceted systems are systems that
only look at a speciﬁc facet of the user’s life, e.g. health, training, produc-
tivity, etc. It can still include data from diﬀerent sources but try only to
reﬂect on a single facet. Multi-faceted systems are more rare, and try to
look at diﬀerent personal facets and see if one has an inﬂuence on another.
This can provide great beneﬁts, but can also be more complex and have
more barriers in several stages.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Visualising Time Series
11
For this project, is it mostly the reﬂection stage, and somewhat the preparation
and integration stage that are important. Preparation is user-driven but it’s
important to make a system that is ﬂexible and at the same time has as few
and low barriers as possible when it comes to the other stages.
The collection stage is not at all part of this project, but some of the data that
I use later is gathered through an earlier project where collection stage was
the main focus, see [LEC17] and [LEC16]. This however, makes it even more
important that the system helps the user as much as possible when it comes
to the integration stage. This means that the system should be able to accept
as many diﬀerent common data input formats as possible, to support many
diﬀerent collection methods.
The reﬂection stage is the main focus in this project and thesis. In this stage
there will always be a user-driven part, where the user has to reﬂect upon the
information given. However it’s important to display the information in a way
that makes it clear, easily understandable, and shows patterns in the data in a
way that highlights new information which the user can make conclusions about.
This is where the system-driven part comes into play. It is also in this stage that
a multi-faceted system can be really interesting, as it makes it possible to see
the personal information in the context of information from other facets of the
users life, and thereby be able to ﬁnd connections between diﬀerent information
data and facets.
Finally there is the action stage. As this project mainly focuses on the reﬂection
stage, the most important task is to avoid barriers in the reﬂection stage, that
will cascade into the action stage. Some of the main barriers of the reﬂection
stage, according to Li et al., is lack of time, visualisation, self-criticism, interpre-
tation, ease of search, missing context, and sparse and/or useless data [LDF10].
So these barriers are important to focus on when designing this stage.
3.2
Visualising Time Series
As described above, is it important to give the user tools to analyse and reﬂect
upon the data that has been collected in personal informatics systems. However
it is quite diﬃcult and even the best statistical analysis does not always pro-
vide enough information. A study conducted by Matejka et al. in 2017 shows
how many diﬀerent data sets, that each share the same statistical values, have
very diﬀerent visualisation, and that important information about these data
therefore get lost if you rely on statistical analysis only [MF17a].
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Visualising Time Series
12
Furthermore, visualisation often gives a much more clear and understandable
presentation of the data than statistical values and other analysis tools can.
Especially for persons who are not used to working with statistical analysis,
programming and data analysis in general, visualisation is often much more
interpretable.
As some of the arguments behind visualisations have now been established, I
will describe how to best visualise personal data. Personal data, the kind that
are used most in personal informatics systems, shares a lot of properties. They
are ﬁrst and foremost time series, i.e. the data is often observations of changes
to a variable over time, or the occurrences of a event over time. This could be
heart rate over time, or the observations of chest pains together with the time
of the occurrence and maybe even the severity of each occurrence.
Another
common property is that these time series are often periodic, meaning the same
patterns repeats itself over time. A simple example could be a user tracking his
or her location during the day. It would here be expected that patterns would
repeat itself on a daily basis (work from 8-16 and home most of the remaining
time) as well as on a weekly basis (working on the weekdays, most variations on
the weekends), and even in other intervals like yearly or following the seasons
etc.
To make a personal informatics system that focuses on reﬂection, it is there-
fore important to understand the diﬀerent techniques to visualise time series
data and which beneﬁts each presents. According to Cuttone et al. there are
four main design heuristics to consider when designing a personal informatics
system, and these also helps determine the usefulness of diﬀerent visualisation
techniques [CPL14]. The four heuristics are:
• Make data interpretable at a glance.
• Enable exploration of patterns in time series data.
• Enable discovery of trends in multiple data streams.
• Turn key metrics into aﬀordances for action.
3.2.1
Existing Visualisation Techniques
There already exists a great number of well used techniques to visualise time
series.
I will now describe some of the most interesting techniques, and try
to highlight the advantages and disadvantages of each technique to be able to
better compare them.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Visualising Time Series
13
A very standard approach to visualising a variable that changes over time is
to use a line plot (see 3.2. This is properly one of the ﬁrst ways that humans
ever visualised data as charts, with some of the earliest recordings going back
to the 10th century [Aig+11, p. 15]. Line plots extend point plots by showing
the continuity of the data points. However line plots are not good at comparing
diﬀerent periods with each other, and thereby not good at ﬁnding periodic
information in the data [Aig+11, pp. 152-153].
Figure 3.2: Line plots connects diﬀerent data points to visualise changes over
time. Source: [Aig+11, p. 153].
To compare diﬀerent periodic intervals there have been created several exten-
sions of the line chart, which makes the diﬀerence between each interval much
more clear. One of such extensions is the horizon graph. The horizon graph is
mostly used to compare diﬀerent time-dependent variables but can also be used
for other comparisons like diﬀerent intervals of the same time series [Aig+11,
pp. 157]. Horizon graphs are however best at variables that toggles between
two discreet states, like the value of stocks that either raise or fall. And ﬁnally
horizon graphs are not good at ﬁnding periodic patterns if you do not know the
periodic interval beforehand.
A graph type that has gained some attention recently, especially in relation
to visualising time series and for use in personal informatics systems, is the
spiral graph (see for example [WAM01], [CLL13], [LCL13] and [Pal14]). Spi-
ral graphs are especially good at ﬁnding periodic patterns, as well as periodic
variations [LCL13]. They are also good at cyclic time series data. However
while the periodic patterns are emphasised, other details might become lost.
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Visualising Time Series
14
Figure 3.3: Horizon graphs are useful for comparing diﬀerent time-dependent
variables or diﬀerent intervals of the same time-series. The left
image shows the creation of a horizon graph from a line plot.
Source: [Aig+11, p. 157].
This is especially true when trying to integrate other kinds of data, to create a
multi-faceted system and/or provide context of the time series. A spiral graph
is limited in the amount of data it is able to show while still providing a clear
overview, especially when the context data is not periodic in nature.
(a) A spiral graph show-
ing the the periodic
patterns of location
data over a time pe-
riod
of
24
hours.
Source:
[Aig+11, p.
185].
(b) A example of the use
of colours and thick-
ness to represent data
in
a
spiral
graph.
Source: [CLL13].
(c) A
interactive
spiral
graph
application,
showing
diﬀerent
activities as well as
location
over
time.
Source:
[Pal14,
p.
49].
Figure 3.4: Diﬀerent examples of spiral graph visualisation.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Visualising Time Series
15
The last visualisation technique that I will analyse is the calendar heat map or
tile map. This is a way to visualise time series by arranging the observations in
diﬀerent temporal levels. For example you could group the observations by day
and then show the number of observations at a speciﬁc day by the colour of the
tile. The tile is then displayed in a grid with rows representing the temporal
level (e.g. days) and columns representing a temporal level higher (e.g. months).
Tile maps are also good at ﬁnding periodic patterns, however they are not as
specialised for this pattern analysis as the spiral graph. Tile maps are very good
at ﬁnding long term trends, and are also good at looking at the bigger view and
still be able to see variations and patterns.
(a) Source: [Aig+11, p. 178].
(b) Source: https://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/4063318.
Figure 3.5: Examples of tile maps showing concentration of observations per
day as colours, where rows are weekdays in the week and columns
are weeks and months. The whole matrix shows a full year.
Instead of a tile map of colours is it also possible to display diﬀerent values as
circles of diﬀerent sizes. This has both advantages and disadvantages. However
a study shows that people are almost equally good at accurately comparing area
and colour variations [CM85].
==PAGE:26==
3.3 Interactivity and Navigation
16
Figure 3.6: Comparison of diﬀerent cues for data visualisation.
Source:
[Ald16].
3.3
Interactivity and Navigation
While there is a lot of diﬀerent visualisation techniques, that each has it’s own
advantages, and each excel at showing speciﬁc information about the data, they
will always be limited in their use as long as the visualisation is displayed stati-
cally. Creating interactive visualisation on the other hand gives a lot of impor-
tant advantages for the exploration and understanding of especially larger data
sets.
Interactivity, and the ability to change the visualisation, helps the user to realise
the eﬀects of visualisation parameters, ﬁnd hidden patterns in the data, and
learn about the data, both overall and in details.
Furthermore interactivity
often creates curiosity which is particular important when exploring unknown
data [Aig+11, p. 105]. Interactivity gives the user the ability to learn about
the data, gain new insights [CLL13], and thereby keeping the interest in a way
that static visualisation never can archive. The importance of extending data
visualisation with interactive elements is well explained in the following quote:
"Visual representations alone cannot satisfy analytical needs. Inter-
action techniques are required to support the dialogue between the
analyst and the data."
Source: [TC05, p. 30]
While interactivity gives new options for exploration of the data, it can also
easily make the system too complex. It is important to have the right tools
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Interactivity and Navigation
17
for interaction, and make the interface as user friendly as possible, by following
existing rules and guides for user experience design. For example one of the big
advantages of a interactive visualisation is that the user can focus on speciﬁc
parts of the data (either by zooming in, or by ﬁltering). As said by Shneiderman
(source: [Shn96]): "Overview ﬁrst, zoom and ﬁlter, then details-on-demand".
More speciﬁcally, it means that the user has to be able to see the whole overview
of the data, and then be able to zoom in on speciﬁc parts, or ﬁlter out part of
the data, to focus the analysis and reﬂection. Finally the user should be able
to ﬁnd details about data points when needed. While zooming in, is it also still
important to allow the use to see the context of the zoom, i.e. what part of the
whole, is the user currently looking at [CPL14].
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4
Design
4.1
Method
When making an application, like the one introduced in this thesis, is it im-
portant to know how to test your assumptions. A common method, is to start
out with mock-ups and test them using user evaluation tests. However, as this
application is strongly based on it’s interactivity and the ability to "explore"
the data, is it hard to make user evaluation based tests, without a functioning
prototype. It is also important to use data that the user can relate to in some
way, which is diﬃcult with mock-ups.
It was therefore instead decided to follow an iterative process where each iter-
ation was evaluated and discussed between me and my supervisor (similar to
the evaluation found in [CLL13]). After a prototype was completed with all
the basic required functionality, a user evaluation test was conducted to fur-
ther test the prototype and ﬁnd ideas and suggestions for future changes and
improvements.
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Iterations
19
4.2
Iterations
Below are all the versions for each iteration of the prototype development. These
screen shots are included to provide an overview and a guide through the process,
as well as for future reference through the rest of this chapter.
(a) Version 1
(b) Version 2
(c) Version 3
(d) Version 4
(e) Version 5
(f) Version 6
Figure 4.1: Version 1 to 6 of the prototype.
==PAGE:30==
4.3 The Foundation: A Time-series Table
20
(g) Version 7
(h) Version 8
(i) Version 9
Figure 4.1: Version 7 to 9 of the prototype.
4.3
The Foundation: A Time-series Table
The ﬁrst version of the prototype was a tile map table, showing the data. Darker
colours of red showed a higher concentration of observations.
The tile map
showed, in an easily understandable way, how the data was spread out over a
period of time. The idea was that it should help the user to recognise patterns
in the data, for example periodic trends (see ﬁgure 4.1a).
However it was quickly realised that more time periods needed to be shown at
the same time, to be able to compare for example several weeks at once. Several
iterations (see ﬁgures 4.1a, 4.1b, 4.1c and 4.1e) resulted in the table view shown
at ﬁgure 4.2. In this version is it possible to see several periods at once, and
contextual time period information like weekends are displayed as the grey area.
Grid lines were also added to make it easier to focus on speciﬁc time periods in
the, now larger, table view.
The colours were also changed, making it easier to diﬀerentiate between the
diﬀerent values. The colours that ended up being used in the ﬁnal versions were
==PAGE:31==
4.4 Interactivity and Navigation
21
taken from ColorBrewer 2.0 1, which carefully chooses colours that ﬁts together
in a way that are easily distinguishable.
All of this made it much easier to see diﬀerent periodic patterns, such as the
pattern of few observations at night, and many observations in the morning.
Figure 4.2: The ﬁnal version of the tile map.
4.4
Interactivity and Navigation
From the ﬁrst iteration it was clear that showing all of the data at once would
not always be beneﬁcial. Often it would instead be overwhelming with too much
data, especially if the patterns you were looking for were hidden in more detailed
view of the data.
To allow the user both to zoom in on a speciﬁc part of the data, and see the
more ﬁne-grained details, as well as being able to zoom out and see an overview
1Link: http://colorbrewer2.org/
==PAGE:32==
4.4 Interactivity and Navigation
22
of the whole, it was clear that some kind of interactivity was needed.
The ﬁrst attempt at solving this problem was to implement a drop-down menu
to select the temporal levels of the data visualisation, i.e. if the data should be
shown per hour, per day, per month, etc. More speciﬁcally, I choose four diﬀerent
temporal levels: hours over days (hours as rows and days as columns), weekdays
over weeks, dates over months and months over years. These four options were
chosen because they represented common patterns in normal human lives. Most
common patterns will of course emerge in daily or weekly intervals (like work,
sleeping, exercising, morning routines, the circadian rhythm 2, etc.).
Other
patterns, often the more health related ones, would sometimes follow yearly
intervals (seasons, some allergies, vacation, length of days, "winter ﬂu", etc.).
Months over years was mostly chosen to be able to show yearly intervals in
more detail, however there are a few natural cycles that follow a monthly or
near monthly interval (the lunar phases, woman’s menstrual cycle, etc.).
The ﬁrst version of the prototype handled this problem by using two simple
buttons to "scroll" forward and backwards in the data, together with the drop-
down menu for selecting the temporal levels.
This simple solution worked ﬁne. However it was sometimes cumbersome to go
through a big data set that spanned several weeks or months. At the same time
it was diﬃcult to compare the data in the detailed view with the context of the
whole data set. To solve these problems, a "time line" was implemented. The
time line was rendered below the table, and in the ﬁrst version it was simply a
line from start to ﬁnish of the time period that the data spanned over. It was
however later extended with a time line chart showing a overview of the whole
data from start to end (see section 4.8 for more on the time line chart).
(a) Navigation buttons, to
move forward and back-
wards in the data.
(b) Time line with mini-chart behind.
The grey area
can be moved with the mouse, to change the shown
section of data.
Figure 4.3: Time line interaction examples
This time line made it possible to navigate through the data, and look at a
speciﬁc time period and it’s slice of data. But what if the user wanted to see
more (or less) data at once? This question let me to extending the time line
navigation so the user could expand and reduce the selected area on the time
2A natural daily cycle of many biological processes.
==PAGE:33==
4.5 Improving the Foundation
23
line by dragging on the edges (see ﬁgure 4.4).
Figure 4.4: Zooming works by dragging the edge of the time line selection box.
(a) Example showing the normal view,
zoomed in on a subset of the data.
(b) Example showing a zoomed-out view,
where much more of the data is visible
at once.
Figure 4.5: Comparison of normal view and zoomed-out view.
4.5
Improving the Foundation
Throughout the iterations, we kept improving on the foundation. Several im-
provements were found over time, and I will discuss some of them below.
Through one of the iterations I found that linear scale did not always work very
well. Outliers could distort the visualisation a lot, without being clear for the
user. I therefore decided to include two other scales: logarithmic and quantiles.
Logarithmic was simply a base 10 logarithmic function.
This decreased the
inﬂuence of outliers, but also displayed the values more similar overall. Many
natural phenomenons follows a logarithmic scale 3, however most human activi-
ties are not logarithmic which also means that many personal information data
set are not logarithmic.
Another way of dealing eﬀectively with outliers is using quantiles, i.e. grouping
the data into quantities based on the value or number of observations for a given
3Link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logarithmic_scale
==PAGE:34==
4.6 The Problem with Time Zones
24
data point. This will group outliers together with less extreme values. However
it might hide the diﬀerences of data points if the number of quantiles are too
low, or most data points are very close.
Each of these scales were useful for diﬀerent data sets, but hid information for
other kinds of data sets. I therefore made it possible for the user to change
between scales.
Another improvement that I decided on, was to include tooltips on the data
points. When clicking a data point (tile or circle) a tooltip box will appear,
showing more detailed information about that speciﬁc data point. This followed
the principle of "overview ﬁrst, zoom and ﬁlter, then details-on-demand" (quote
from [Shn96], see section 3.3 for more detail).
Finally a lot of improvements were introduced to each element of the applica-
tion, throughout the iterations. A legend was introduced to help understand
the values of the data points, and settings was introduced to change diﬀerent
parameters (e.g. the scale described before), and the axis was through several
changes before the ﬁnal prototype (see ﬁgure 4.6).
(a) Prototype 1:
a basic numeric axis
showing the dates.
(b) Prototype 2: added tick lines to better
understand the axis points.
(c) Prototype 3:
added more space to
make the axis more clear to under-
stand.
(d) Prototype 5: added several temporal
levels to the axis, making it more easy
to focus on e.g. dates only.
Figure 4.6: The evolution of the axis through the iterations.
4.6
The Problem with Time Zones
Through the ﬁrst couple of iterations one speciﬁc problem clearly emerged; in
big data sets (spanning around a year or more) there is almost always periods
with observations in other time zones, because of travels or the change too and
from daylight saving time (henceforth DST 4).
This meant that either every observation should be shown in coordinated uni-
4DST: Daylight Saving Time (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daylight_saving_time)
==PAGE:35==
4.6 The Problem with Time Zones
25
versal time (henceforth UTC 5), or in local time. Showing observations in UTC
would mean that data periodic in daily intervals, for example higher concentra-
tion in the day than in the night, would be shifted according to the time line,
so what the user would read as nighttime, might not have been nighttime in the
local time zone of the observation. On the other side, showing observations in
local time would mean that there would be "jumps" in the data. When chang-
ing to DST, there will be a blank hour that is jumped over when the clock is
adjusted one hour forward. And when changing back, two hours of time will
overlap, because the clock is adjusted one hour back (see ﬁgure 4.7).
(a) Example of how an hour is skipped when DST starts.
(b) Example of how an hour is repeated twice when DST ends.
Figure 4.7: The problem with DST and time zone changes in general.
On the contrary, the information about the time zone the observation was taken
in, is also relevant for some data sets. It was therefore decided that, instead of
going with one of the solutions proposed above and the problems they implied,
the time zones should be clearly visible and the data should be readable in both
local and UTC time. I ended up with a solution that was partly inspired by how
Google implemented time zones and time axes in Google Calendar (see ﬁgure
4.8).
5UTC:
Coordinated
Universal
Time
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coordinated_
Universal_Time)
==PAGE:36==
4.6 The Problem with Time Zones
26
Figure 4.8: A screenshot from Google Calendar, showing how they solved the
time zone problem, with multiple axes for each time zone.
This implementation works very well. However while Google Calendar has the
advantage that it can let the user decide the diﬀerent time zones based on where
he or she spend most the time, I needed a way to add time zone axes for each
time zone that was present in the data set, while also not overwhelm the user
with to many axes. I designed the time zone axes so that only the time zones
that were visible in the current slice of data, was visible as an axis. Also the
axes were ordered by the number of observations in the given time zone, so the
most relevant axis was displayed most to the right, next to the table.
While this worked well as ﬁrst version, it also had some problems. It was still
much easier to read the times in UTC, because this was the main axis that
started at 00:00. I therefore decided to extend the time zone axes so that you
could change the main axis by simply clicking on it. By clicking on a axis, the
visualisation would change to be displayed in the time of that time zone, and
all the axes would move so the main axis started at 00:00.
Finally I added an option to remove the time zone axes all together and simply
show the data in local time. The ﬁnal version of the time zone axes implemen-
tation can be seen in ﬁgure 4.9.
==PAGE:37==
4.7 Tiles, Circles and Violin Plots
27
Figure 4.9: Timezones example showing the change from Central European
Summer Time (CEST) to normal standard Central European
Time Zone (CET). Axises for both CEST (+02:00), CET (+01:00)
and UTC (+00:00) is shown.
4.7
Tiles, Circles and Violin Plots
The ﬁrst versions used squares in lighter or darker variations of the same colour,
to show the value or concentration of observations in the given time period. This
works well for comparing diﬀerent values, especially when trying to ﬁnd patterns
and variations. People are however not very good at comparing values of colours
accurately compared to using lengths [Ald16].
I wanted to experiment with diﬀerent ways of showing the data. I therefore
tried implementing the same table, but with circles, and let the area of the
circle, instead of the colour, determine the value of the data point. Circle plots
had some advantages as well as disadvantages compared to the square plots. I
found that tiles, as they touched each other, often were easier to compare to
adjacent tiles, while circles gave a overview that was more quickly understood.
Circles also gave more room for context data like weekends vs. weekdays and
qualitative data like location (see section 4.9). However the accuracy of which
people measure the value is almost the same between circles and tiles [CM85]
(see section 3.2).
A third approach to visualising the data, was a simple version of violin plots. A
violin plot is normally an extension of the box plot, where the data is also shown
==PAGE:38==
4.8 A New Dimension: Summarising and Analysing Data
28
as a visualised distribution. This makes it possible to ﬁnd multiple "peaks"
in the data, contrary to the box plots. Also box plots and data statistics in
general can sometimes hide information that only appears when visualising the
data [MF17b]. However my simpliﬁed implementation of the violin plots did
not include the box plot information, i.e. the diﬀerent quantiles of the data.
Instead I used the violin plot to show the data series more continuously. This
worked very well to get a sense of continuous time through the data (see ﬁgure
4.10c).
(a) The
ﬁrst
iterations
used tiles of diﬀerent
colour intensity as the
scale.
(b) Later iterations intro-
duced circles, with dif-
ferences in area size.
(c) Violin plots, somewhat
diﬀerent then the oth-
ers, provided more con-
tinuity.
Figure 4.10: Example of diﬀerent plot types.
With these diﬀerent ways of visualising the data, it was possible easily discover
patterns and get a clearer overview when focusing on speciﬁc information like
outliers, variations and periodic patterns. Especially violin plots stood out from
the other two, and gave another, more continuous, understanding of the data.
4.8
A New Dimension: Summarising and Analysing
Data
I had a very good foundation for the prototype after the fourth iteration. It was
now time to try and implement one of the original ideas to be able to extract
even more information out of the data. I wanted the user to be able to analyse
the data in regards to the columns and rows. The idea was that this would make
periodic patterns much more clear (for example summarising per hour would
most likely reveal if there was a periodic rhythm throughout the day).
The ﬁrst analysis graph that was introduced, was a graph that summarised
every visible column of data, and showed the result as a bar chart over the data
==PAGE:39==
4.8 A New Dimension: Summarising and Analysing Data
29
table (see ﬁgure 4.1e). This worked very well, and made it possible to quickly
see patterns that were otherwise more hidden, such as which days of the week
that had most activity (see 4.11a). However it still had its limitations; while it
was easy to ﬁnd some patterns in the slice of data that you were looking at, it
was more diﬃcult to ﬁnd patterns that only emerged when looking at the whole
data set at once. I therefore extended this graph to the time line, so I could
show a summarised graph of the whole data set at once (see ﬁgure 4.1f). This
improved the analytic capabilities even more, and it was now very easy to ﬁnd
variations and peaks in the data (see ﬁgure 4.11b).
(a) In this example is it clear that the
data follows a weekly periodic pat-
tern, with almost no observations in
the weekends.
(b) The peak of observations in June, is
immediately clear from the time line
summary graph.
Figure 4.11: Example of diﬀerent plot types.
There were still dimensions of the data that were diﬃcult to analyse with the
new graphs. While I now had a good way of looking at both the current slice
of data and the data overall in regards to summarising the columns, I missed
a way to summarise by row. It was possible to change the temporal levels so
for example rows went from hours to minutes, and columns went from days to
hours. However it was inconvenient and only allowed the user to look at a single
hour in a single day, not the summation of data per hour over several days.
If this summation could be included, the visualisation would be very useful,
especially for ﬁnding period patterns.
It was therefore decided to implement another graph on the y-axis, summarising
over the rows. I made a graph on the right side, that showed the summation
of the current slice of data, i.e. the current visible data points in the table, for
each row. This graph was more easily understood because it worked the same
way as the top graph (see ﬁgure 4.12). Now I only needed a way to display
summation over rows for the whole data set.
With the column summation it made sense to have a graph over the table that
showed the summation for the current slice of data, and another graph below
the table, with the time line, that showed summation for the whole data set.
This worked well because I already had established how the time line showed a
selection as part of the whole.
==PAGE:40==
4.8 A New Dimension: Summarising and Analysing Data
30
This was not as simple to set up for the rows. I could make a chart on the left
side showing the summation for the whole data set, however it would not have
been obvious whether the left or right graph shows the whole data set. Also a
graph on the left side would properly look cramped right next to the y-axis, and
it would be harder to see the connection between the rows and the graph.
Instead I ended up with another solution. I extended the graph on the right
side, with another graph on top of the ﬁrst, that was coloured after the data
in the current view. The original graph (in grey) was then used to show the
summation of the whole data set (see ﬁgure 4.12).
This solution has another clear advantage: it was now very easy to compare
the current slice of data to the total data set. This enabled the user to ﬁnd
variations and outliers, not only as single data points, but for speciﬁc time
intervals as well.
This actually worked so well that I decided to extend the graphs with other
types of statistical analysis options. Instead of only showing the summation of
the data, I wanted the user to be able to show the mean, median and max value
of both the total data set and the current slice of data (see ﬁgure 4.12).
==PAGE:41==
4.9 Contextual Data
31
(a) The
ﬁrst
version
showing
the
sum-
mation
over
rows
for
the
current
slice
of
data.
(b) The
ex-
tended
version,
showing
summa-
tion
for
both
the
current
data
slice
and
the
total
data
set.
(c) The
ex-
tended
version,
showing
mean value
for
each
row.
(d) The
ex-
tended
version,
showing
median
value
for
each row.
(e) The
ex-
tended
version,
showing
max
value
for
each
row.
Figure 4.12: Comparison between the ﬁrst version of the analysis graph for
rows, and the extended version with diﬀerent analysis methods.
4.9
Contextual Data
As the development of the prototype progressed, a simple visualisation evolved
to a tool that could analyse many diﬀerent aspects of data in several temporal
==PAGE:42==
4.9 Contextual Data
32
levels and in real depths. The prototype had evolved into a very strong visu-
alisation tool. This opened up for the option to extend the prototype in new
ways, beyond the diﬀerent visualisations, which could lead to the user getting
even more information about the data.
There is a big potential in multi-faceted systems when working with personal
informatics [LDF10], as described earlier (see section 3.1). I.e. systems that
shows data from diﬀerent facets of the users life, or even more general data that
are not directly related to the persons life. By showing these diﬀerent kinds
of data, the user can explore connections between the data and ﬁnd possible
correlations between diﬀerent variables. It could be something as simple as the
correlation between expenditure and eating locations [LDF10], or the correlation
between pollen count and allergy symptoms.
I wanted to explore this potential, and therefore decided to try and implement
visualisation for so called "context data", to give extra background or "context"
information to the main data set. The ﬁrst attempt at integrating context data
is shown in ﬁgure 4.13. The context data was shown as a background colour in
the table, where the intensity of the colour speciﬁed the value, similar to the
colour tiles for the main data set.
Figure 4.13: Showing context data (here the pollen count, taken at a speciﬁc
time of day, each day) as a background colour.
For context data like this, that did not change during the day, and that was
continuous from day to day, I found that this way of visualising, did not work
as well as expected. The background colour was somewhat confusing, and there
was no overview of the data. Overview is especially important for context data,
because you often want to use the context data to compare with variations in the
main data set. In the next iteration of the prototype, I therefore tried another
approach. The context data was instead shown as a line plot on top of the
==PAGE:43==
4.9 Contextual Data
33
summary graphs above and below the table.
Figure 4.14: Showing context data (here the pollen count taken at a speciﬁc
time of day, each day) as a line plot above the summary graphs
of the days. It is quite clear that there is a correlation of the
main data and the context data in this example.
This worked much better, as it was now immediately clear if there was a possible
correlation between the two data sets.
I now had a way to show simple quantitative continuous context data. However
I also wanted to be able to show other kinds of data, especially qualitative data
like locations. Previous work within the personal informatics visualisation area,
like [Pal14] and [Naz15], has worked with data from the Moves app (see section
2.2), with great success. I therefore decided to also use Moves data, and make
a visualisation that worked well with this kind of data.
This time background colour was very useful. Background colour was not good
at showing diﬀerent values, and confused the interpretation of the main data
set, but with qualitative data, the background colours provided a very intuitive
way to visualise the context of the main data (see ﬁgure 4.15).
==PAGE:44==
4.9 Contextual Data
34
Figure 4.15: Showing qualitative context data. This examples shows the lo-
cation as context data, and the main data shows the duration of
diﬀerent activities (like walking, running and using transporta-
tion). The correlation, such as the change of location resulting
in increased activity, is clear from the visualisation.
Adding these qualitative context data allowed for even deeper understanding of
the main data. I experimented with a data set from Moves where the main data
showed activities during the day, and the context data showed locations. The
data was collected by myself, back in 2015 and 2016. It was quite clear that
the change of location resulted in increases in activity, because I had moved
(walked, biked or used other transportation methods). It was also very easy to
get a overview of how I spent my days, and ﬁnd patterns like work and studying
in the weekdays, and higher variations of locations in the weekends.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Technical Implementation
In this section I describe the diﬀerent technical tools used to develop the pro-
totype, as well as the choice behind each tool. Afterwards I describe the actual
implementation, using these tools.
5.1
The Platform: Why Web?
The ﬁrst choice to make in regards to the development tools was which platform
the prototype should be build on. When it comes to software, the two main
platforms are: native and web.
Native applications are often constrained to only work on a speciﬁc device model.
When people say "computer program" they are most likely talking about native
applications for desktop computers, which are a good example of native applica-
tions. Other examples are iOS applications (or apps) that only works on iPhones
and/or iPads, or OS X applications that only works on Mac Book computers.
So native applications are constrained to some speciﬁc devices, mostly separated
by operation system (Windows, OS X, Linux, etc.) and device type (desktop,
tablet, mobile). There are some ways to develop native applications so they
work across several devices. Java is a popular language for writing applications
==PAGE:46==
5.2 D3.js - Data Driven Documents
36
that work on most operation systems, including Mac OS X and Windows, as
well as the mobile android operation systems. However there does not exist any
single native programming language that works across all types of devices.
This is why more and more applications today are developed for the web.
All modern computer devices, that being desktop computers, smart phones or
tablets, can access the internet with a web browser that is able to run modern
web applications in JavaScript 1, CSS 2 and HTML 3.
Choosing the web as the platform for the application and JavaScript as the
programming language, also made it possible to use some of the many libraries
for animations, visualisations and renderings that exists for JavaScript. The
web has many libraries because it is very focused on rendering and visualising
documents compared to for example running large algorithm, or serve as a server
side application that communicates with other front end application. JavaScript
is a very good front end language.
Because of all of these reasons I choose the web and JavaScript as the platform
and programming language for the prototype build in this project.
5.2
D3.js - Data Driven Documents
D3 4 is properly the most popular library for visualising data of all JavaScript
libraries. D3 enables the developer to bind data to the DOM 5, and then apply
data driven transformation to the DOM. You can represent the data as a table,
using HTML and CSS, or you could just as easily represent the data as a bar
chart using SVG 6.
D3 is not meant to be a framework, but is more a generic tool that makes it
easy to make dynamic and interactive visualisations of data in the DOM. D3 also
supports both normal HTML transformations, i.e. rendering visualisation with
HTML elements like divs, and style them with CSS, as well as SVG transfor-
mation, which is a markup language for rendering vector graphics. This makes
1Read more: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaScript.
2Cascading Style Sheets. Read more: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cascading_Style_
Sheets.
3Hyper Text Markup Language. Read more: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML.
4Data-Driven Documents: https://d3js.org/.
5Document Object Model.
Read more:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Document_
Object_Model.
6Scalable Vector Graphics.
Read more:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalable_
Vector_Graphics.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 React and Redux
37
D3 very ﬂexible and there are almost no limits to the use cases for D3, as long
as it is possible to do on the web platform, with JavaScript, CSS, HTML and
SVG [BOH11]. This is also why many existing chart libraries are built on top of
D3. The website of D3 shows many diﬀerent visualisation examples (see 5.1) to
showcase this ﬂexibility. Some of the examples are quite diﬀerent from normal
visualisation techniques and worth checking out.
Figure 5.1: The homepage of the D3 website (https://d3js.org/), showing
a lot of examples of visualisations using the library.
Lastly, D3 is full of useful functions for analysing, manipulating and chang-
ing data.
It is for example easy to make a function that calculates a value
based on a variable and another function.
Making a quantile scale function
that maps a set of data to a grey colour between black and white is as easy as
d3.scaleQuantile ().domain(data).range([’black’; ’white’]). D3 has also func-
tions for statistical data analysis, data manipulation and much more.
This all speaks for the usefulness and eﬃciency of D3, which is why this library
was chosen as the visualisation tool for the prototype.
5.3
React and Redux
While it is clearly possible to implement a dynamic and interactive visualisation
of data in D3, the main beneﬁt of D3 is to calculate with data and render
forms and ﬁgures based on these calculations. It is for example easy to draw a
curved line that represents the change of a variable over time or a area graph
representing the same.
But when the visualisation is not very complex, when what you render is mostly
boxes (as the web often is), and when instead the handling of data and data
==PAGE:48==
5.4 Architecture and Data Flow
38
ﬂow becomes the most complex part of the system, is it properly not D3, at
least not alone, that you need to handle these challenges.
Another library that has gained immense popularity the last few years is Re-
act 7 [BGR17]. React is also very ﬂexible and quite simple to use, and is spe-
cialised in interactive elements and handling the state of data and the resulting
rendering of that state. It uses a concept of "components" which are smaller
elements that handles its own state and life cycle, which is a intuitive way to
split up bigger applications into smaller parts.
For more complex and shared data management there is a third library, Redux 8,
which works very well with react.
There are many other libraries that handle some of the same problems. Of the
more popular ones, there are Angular 9, Vue.JS 10 and Backbone 11. However
React is still the most popular one, which also means that there exists many
libraries that integrate well with React. Furthermore I personally have a lot of
experience with React, as well as Redux, which made it a even more obvious
choice.
This is why the choice ended on React, together with D3 and Redux. Redux
handled all the state management (storing of data and current state like zoom
level, conﬁguration options, etc.), React handled most of the DOM renderings
and visualisations, and D3 handled the data analysis, most of the data transfor-
mation and a little bit of the data visualisation as well, for example the curved
violin plots. This combination turned out to work very well for this project.
5.4
Architecture and Data Flow
The ﬁnal prototype of the application is implemented using the above mentioned
libraries and frameworks. React is used as the main framework for rendering the
visualisation, and organising the code. The application is split up into many
components, in a hierarchical structure, where each child component renders
a speciﬁc part in the application, given some speciﬁc properties. For example
each column is a component, and every data point inside the columns are child
components (for violin plots, the whole plot is a single component though). A
7Link: https://reactjs.org/.
8Link: https://redux.js.org/.
9Link: https://angular.io/.
10Link: https://vuejs.org/.
11Link: http://backbonejs.org/.
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Architecture and Data Flow
39
drawing of the structure of the component hierarchy can be seen in ﬁgure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: The structure of the component hierarchy. Red boxes are parent
components and light red boxes are their child components (some
structures however are several levels deep).
This has several advantages. It means that each component has a very spe-
cialised purpose, and therefore is relatively simple and small in regards to code
and implementation.
Also each component can be reused in several places.
For example, each circle is the same component (CircleCell), it just receives
a "property" from the parent CircleColumn component that knows about all
the row data in that column (which it has received from the parent Table com-
ponent). Another example is the Axis component which renders a basic axis
with ticks and numbers. It is however very ﬂexible and customiseable and can
be rendered with diﬀerent sizes, diﬀerent directions and diﬀerent label formats
based on diﬀerent scales. By implementing the Axis component like this, it was
possible to reuse it on all axes in the application, even the time zone axes. The
same patterns has been used for BarPlot and LinePlot. A draft of a diagram
showing the hierarchy of most of the components as well, as some examples of
the properties that are set on each component (based on the current state) can
be seen in ﬁgure 5.3.
==PAGE:50==
5.4 Architecture and Data Flow
40
Figure 5.3: A diagram over the most important components in the application.
This is how the visualisation is rendered in React, with reusable component and
data properties that is speciﬁed by the parent component. However if you were
to examine ﬁgure 5.3 for a while, you would properly realise that there are two
"types" of components that have shared properties. There are parent compo-
nents that are unique, and does not have any deﬁned properties, and then there
are child components that are reused, but with diﬀerent properties in diﬀerent
places to customise the rendering. In the React community parent components
like this are often called "containers". Container components handle the conﬁg-
uration of their child components, but where does the container get the current
data state from? This is where Redux comes into play. Redux is a shared data
store manager, and each container can hook into part of this data and trigger a
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Architecture and Data Flow
41
re-render (automatically handled by React) when the data changes.
The data structure in this application is very simple, as there are only a few
data transformations, i.e. the changes of conﬁguration options as well as the
current selection and zoom level. The main data is for the most part static
and does not change (unless of course you change the loaded data set in the
conﬁguration).
However the main data needs to be formatted, depending on the conﬁguration
option and the current selection. The data has to be grouped by hour in the
"hour/day" view, but by day in the "date/month" view. To handle this, there
is a set of functions that formats and extract the data that each container
component needs. These functions are called "selectors", and is a widespread
concept in the React/Redux community. Each selector function caches the result
of the formatting, and only recalculates this result, if the input data changes.
This result is then send to the container component that then again extracts
and delegates data to each of its child components. A diagram of this data ﬂow
can be seen in ﬁgure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: A example diagram of how the data ﬂow works with Redux, se-
lector functions, containers and child components.
==PAGE:52==
5.5 Performance Optimisation
42
5.5
Performance Optimisation
This usage of React, Redux and the concept of selector functions gave a lot of
automatic performance beneﬁts from the beginning. React uses an algorithm
to check if the state has changed, and does not re-render unless this is true.
Furthermore, even when re-rendering, React is very good at comparing the new
rendering with the old, using something they call the "Virtual DOM" 12, for
comparison. This means that React only re-renders the DOM elements it needs
to render, and also tries to reuse the same elements instead of removing and
adding them in another place in the DOM. This greatly improves performance
in highly dynamic applications like the visualisation application in this thesis.
The caching mechanism of the selector functions, uses a similar concept to avoid
recalculating and formatting data if the input data has not changed since last
calculation. This has therefore been extensively used throughout the applica-
tion. The application has been designed so it re-calculates as much of the for-
matted data as possible, when changing conﬁguration options, in order to avoid
re-calculating when navigating the data, and allowing a smooth experience for
the user.
This has lead to an application that worked very well and smoothly on most
data sets, which was important for when we conducted the user evaluation tests
(see chapter 6). The data set I used in the test included 5664 data observations,
or 867 KB of raw data. Additionally there were 6 pollen count data sets with
between 100 and 300 data points each. Even with this rather large amount of
data, the tests ran fast and without lag or other problems. These tests were
conducted on a MacBook pro computer with a 2,7 GHz Intel Core i7 CPU 13
and 16 GB of 2133 MHz LPDDR3 RAM 14, so it is also a relatively powerful
computer, and it might not have run as well on a less powerful computer.
While the current implementation works very well, at least on a powerful com-
puter, there are still room for more performance optimisations. Currently, one
problem is that caching these big formatted data sets uses a lot of memory on
the computer. Another problem is that even after the diﬀerent existing perfor-
mance optimisations, there is still some data formatting that is run each time
the user navigates in the visualisation of the data.
12Link: https://reactjs.org/docs/faq-internals.html.
13Central Processing Unit; the main computing power of a computer. Read more: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_processing_unit.
14Random-access memory; the "short-term memory" of a computer. Read more: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Random-access_memory.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
User Evaluation
As described in section 4.1, there was no user testing through the main part of
developing the prototype. Each iteration was evaluated in cooperation between
myself and my supervisor, Jakob Eg Larsen, who is an expert and long time
researcher in the ﬁeld of personal informatics. However it was the idea from
the beginning, that as soon as a prototype was ready, the prototype should be
tested on other users. The prototype was deemed ready when it lived up the
the initial goals of visualising personal information data in a way that could
improve reﬂection and depthen understanding.
6.1
Method
I reached this point of the prototype around the eighth iteration, almost at the
end of the project. The prototype was adjusted so it was usable for testing. Some
of the visual and informative aspects, like legends and axes, were improved.
The option to change between data sets was removed, and instead a single
data set was loaded, which showed recordings of precursor symptoms for grass
pollen allergy. Furthermore was six diﬀerent pollen count data sets loaded into
prototype, so the user had the option to change between those. The version of
the prototype that was used in the test, is shown in appendix B.
==PAGE:54==
6.1 Method
44
The data set used, came from a person who had recorded each time he felt
an itching in his nose. This person had allergy for grass pollen, which lead to
sneezes when the pollen count was high. The person however discovered that
itching in the nose was a precursor to sneezes. Itching proved an even better
observation than the sneeze itself, especially after his allergy had become less
serious and the occurrences of sneezes had become very low, but the occurrences
of itching remained high, relatively speaking.
A test was then conducted on each participant individually. The participant
was told that the data was allergy data, showing occurrences of itching in the
nose, and that there were several sets of pollen count data as well. After this
introduction the participant was assigned a small task of ﬁguring out the type
of allergy of the person providing the data. Finally the user was also told to tell
as much about the data as they were able to learn, i.e. if they could ﬁnd any
patterns, any variations or any other kind of information about the data. These
tasks were mostly to motivate the user to try and interact with the system,
and try out diﬀerent conﬁguration options, as well as to see how much these
interactions and the diﬀerent visualisations helped the user to learn about the
data.
There were four participants in the test. Three of them were friends, common
people that did not have any special relations to the project or the ﬁeld of
personal informatics. The participants included two men and one woman. The
participants where all students, and studied innovation and entrepreneurship,
digital media engineering and veterinary medicine respectively. All three were
young, in between 20 and 30 years old. It is important to test on people like this,
because the idea was to develop a prototype that could be used by people who
were not professionals or experts in data analysis, statistics, computer science
or personal informatics.
The fourth participant, however, was Thomas Blomseth Christiansen who is a
expert in the ﬁeld of personal informatics. He has held many talks on the area,
and has also been involved in several research projects. He is the co-author
on all three PTSD articles ([LEC17] [LEC16] and [LCE17]) and co-founder of
the self-tracking instrumentation company, TOTTI labs 1, together with my
supervisor, Jakob Eg Larsen. Furthermore Christiansen is the person that has
recorded the previous mentioned data set of itching in the nose.
Christiansen was therefore the perfect candidate to participate in the test; not
only is he an expert in the ﬁeld, he also knows the data very well, and is able to
evaluate the usefulness of the prototype on a whole other level than the other
participants.
1Link: http://www.tottilabs.com/.
==PAGE:55==
6.2 Test Interview Results
45
6.1.1
Post-Test Questionnaire
After the test, each participant received a questionnaire to ﬁll out. The ques-
tionnaire included sections with questions for each main feature of the prototype
application, as well as some general questions. Some questions were asked as
a statement where the participant would rate how much they agreed with the
statement from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). In other questions,
the participants had to choose between several possible choices (like "Which plot
method worked best for your data set: circle, square or violin plot?"). Finally
there were more open questions where the participant could write their answer
as they wanted.
Questions from the questionnaire as well as written answers from participants
will be written as quotes with quotation marks in the following sections, but
be aware that the quotes are translated from Danish, as the questionnaire was
given in Danish.
The details of the questionnaire and all the questions in it, both with the original
Danish questions and the translated English versions, can be seen in appendix
A.
6.2
Test Interview Results
The test interview was conducted while the participants used the application.
It was simply an ongoing conversation, as they tried out the prototype, and
solved the tasks they were given. The tests was overall a great success. All
four participants was very willing to try the prototype, and they were all able
to use each part of the system as well as each conﬁguration option. Each test
took about 20-30 minutes which was enough time for all of the participants
to understand the application in depths, and to also learn a lot of information
about the data set.
The only problem in the test was that a bug was found. When changing the
current main time zone, by clicking on the axes, the data moved by the time
zone oﬀset in hours, but in the wrong direction (forward instead of backwards
and vice versa).
==PAGE:56==
6.2 Test Interview Results
46
6.2.1
Overall Feedback
The feedback during the test interviews was overall positive, and the participants
were all impressed by the application. All participants expressed that they found
the visualisation useful, and that the application was good and even fun to work
with.
Thomas and one other participant quickly understood the visualisation, and how
the data was represented. The other participants however, said that the initial
impression was somewhat confusing, and it needed some explaining before it was
clear what was going on, what the data showed and how to use the application.
Several participants expressed a desire for more labels, icons, etc. which could
help the user understand and use the application.
However as they learned to use the application, all of the participants found
that the visualisation was very clear. They were all able to get a very good
understanding of the data, such as in which periods the occurrences were es-
pecially high, how the occurrences fell over the day, and which type of pollen
allergy that was most likely behind the data.
The navigation was also intuitive to use, but some participants had problems
with dragging the zoom selection around.
6.2.2
Data Table
Half of the participants preferred the circles and the other half preferred the
coloured tiles.
Their arguments for this choice was very diﬀerent and often
emotional like "they look more pleasant" or "i liked the circles better". How-
ever one of the more interesting thoughts expressed in the interview, was that
circles are more clear on the background, especially in relation to the weekend
highlights (greyed background). One participant also said that it was easier to
compare the value of tiles than with circles.
6.2.3
Time Zone Axes
Most participants liked the time zone axes. Thomas said that the time zones
axes were a very good solution, one similar to how Google have done in their cal-
endar application, and it was something he had looked for in data visualisation
for a long time.
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Test Interview Results
47
One participant said that it would have been easier just to look at the data in
local time, and for this analysis the time zones were irrelevant. The time zone
axes were not used very much by the participants.
6.2.4
Summary Graphs
All participants quickly realised the daily patterns in the data, as soon as they
focused on and understood the summary graphs. They all described how the
occurrences was most signiﬁcant in the day and especially in the afternoon,
while it decreased in the evening.
One participant however had a hard time understanding the visualisation in
the beginning. Before it was explained to him, he thought that the grey graph
might represent an average of other people with the same allergy. While not
correct, this was still a interesting thought for future work. After this participant
understood the graphs, he quickly began using it to extract more important
information like the variations through the day. He also found it very interesting
that the data in the peak period (mid June to mid July) accounted for around
half of all the occurrences compared to the whole data set. This gives a even
bigger understanding of how severe the symptoms were in this time period.
Thomas suggested that the comparison between the two graphs (the summary
of the current data slice, and the total data) should be improved, so it was easier
to see variations in the current slice of data.
One participant did not ﬁnd the total summary graph very helpful, but sug-
gested that it would be more relevant if instead of total, the graph only showed
a summary for a speciﬁed interval of the data.
6.2.5
Contextual Data
As said earlier, the participants were tasked with ﬁnding the type of allergy
that was behind the data set. All participants quickly found that it was grass
pollen that was the main contributor, after they started changing the context
data (switching between the diﬀerent pollen type data sets).
Some participants also speculated if Thomas could have had other, less severe,
allergies to birch and even mugwort.
Two participant suggested that it would be easier and more clear, if it was
==PAGE:58==
6.3 Questionnaire Results
48
possible to show several or all of the diﬀerent pollen data sets at once in diﬀerent
colours.
Two participants also suggested to include other kinds of context data. One
suggested sleep patterns (when the person is asleep and awake). The other was
Thomas, who suggested that location data would improve the understanding.
This was mainly because location also has a impact on pollen count, especially
because the pollen data provided in the test all were from recordings taken in
Copenhagen, while the itching data was recorded all over the country.
6.3
Questionnaire Results
Many of the questions in the post-test questionnaire were asked as a statement
that the participants should then rate on a scale from 1 to 5.
The results
were mostly positive. Participants were asked about how clear and easily un-
derstandable they found each part of the application prototype, as well as the
application as a whole. Here the participants in average rated the application
4,5, as a whole, and no ratings where below 4. Participants found the time zone
axis to be the least easily understandable part of the system, with a average
score of 3,75.
They were furthermore asked the same in regards to the intuitive and ease-of-
use, and here the participants rated the application 4 in average, with the lowest
rating being 3. For the speciﬁc parts of the application, these questions were
only asked if the part was interactive, i.e. the time zone axes and the time line.
Again, the time zone axes scored lowest, with a average of 4.
Participants were furthermore asked to rate or write their thoughts about spe-
ciﬁc parts of the application.
One of these questions was which plot method that worked best, according to
the participant. Here 50 % answered the coloured tiles, and the other 50 %
answered the circles. No one choose the violin plots, as the best plot method.
In regards to scale, all participants found the linear scale to be the best scale to
show the data.
Participants did not agree when it came to time zone axes. One said that the
connection between axes and data with colour was not obvious and more clear
labels would help. Another said that it would have been better to remove the
time zones altogether and normalise the data into local time. A third participant
really liked the way time zones were shown; "That’s something I’ve missed in
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Questionnaire Results
49
other contexts for years. I have not seen any better way [to show this]".
The summary graphs also split the participants. 50 % liked it a lot and rated 5
to the statement "The summary graphs allowed me to ﬁnd patterns and other
information that would otherwise have been diﬃcult or impossible to ﬁnd". One
participant said it made it possible to get a "short overview", while another said
it made him/her aware of the changes at a speciﬁc time of day as he/she moved
between diﬀerent periods of the data. Another 50 % only rated 3 to the previous
statement, and one participant found the graphs a bit confusing, when presented
with them all at once.
The time line seemed to work very well when it came to showing the overview of
the data. Participants also found it intuitive to see what section that they where
currently looking at, and compare that to the whole. However one participant
said that the ability to zoom out and see more data at once, was not very useful,
and actually made the visualisation less easy to understand.
Most participants (75 %) found that hours over days was the best way to show
the data.
A single participant preferred days over weeks.
Participants also
correctly guessed that the data was periodic, and that the same period each
year would peak in occurrences.
Everyone also answered correctly that the
allergy seemed to be from grass pollen.
Finally the participant gave some general feedback. One participant repeated
the need of labels and similar tools to better explain the elements of the visual-
isation. Another suggested to add box plots to the visualisation, as a addition
to the summary graphs.
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 7
Discussion
Gathering information and data, especially personal data through self-tracking,
is easier today then it has ever been before.
However analysing these large
amounts of data and being able to reﬂect upon them in a constructive manner
is a diﬃcult problem. Especially because it is mostly normal people, not profes-
sionals and experts, that look and reﬂect upon the result in personal informatics
systems.
The goal of this project was to try and make a visualisation that could help
with this problem. The idea was that the visualisation should work as a ﬂexible
and interactive application to explore and visualise the data for the user. This
application should both provide an example of how to handle this problem, as
well as a tool to experiment with and explore the problem in more detail for
future work.
This resulted in a prototype that was tested on four participants (see chapter
6). The results from the test showed that each feature of the prototype, as well
as the application in general, worked very well. As always there is some room
for improvement, and the test also gained some valuable feedback, and insight
into how other people might perceive the application and the visualisation. But
the overall feedback was positive, and more importantly did all the participant
learn a lot about the data by using the prototype. Each part of the prototype
gave the insights that was hoped for, like the fact that the summary graphs
==PAGE:61==
51
showed the periodic patterns over a day. One of the participants, Thomas, who
was also the one who recorded the data used for the test, even gained a few
insights that he had not thought about before, even though he had been using
the data for years.
The summary graphs and the diﬀerent temporal levels especially worked very
well, and showed some information that would otherwise have been hard to
extract from the data. The context data also gave some very important new
information for analysing the main data set.
There were however only four test participants, and several participants did
not understand the application before some introduction. This might have in-
ﬂuenced how they perceived the visualisation, and what information they ex-
tracted from it. The data used in the test was also the same for all participants,
which does not show how the users would evaluate the prototype if it was their
own data that they worked with.
It has not been tested if the users would actually use this application over a
longer period of time, and if it was useful personally for them and not only in
the broader sense.
There might also have been other hidden variables, as the test was conducted
as a think-out-loud test, and the presence of the interviewer and the settings of
the test could have impacted the result. This again could have been improved,
if the users had used the application over a period of time, and on their own
data as they collected them.
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 8
Future Work
As discussed in the previous chapter, the user tests show that especially the
summary graph and the context data were important for the user to be able
to explore the data in depths. There are several possible improvements that
was discussed under the test interviews, especially for these two parts of the
system. The most interesting improvements for these parts and in general, will
be described in this section.
I will also discuss some other possible improvements, extensions and general
future work for this project, which I have discussed with my supervisor, but
never implemented, or that I have found after the tests were conducted.
8.1
Summary Graphs
The summary graph worked very well. Actually so well that many of the test
participants wanted to use it in new ways, and summarise over new data. One
extension that could really improve the usage of the summary graphs, is to allow
the user to more precisely compare the graph for the current data slice to the
total data graph. This way it could help the user to better ﬁnd variations in
relation the the total data. This is already possible to some extend by using the
mean or average option, instead of the sum option. However it would be even
==PAGE:63==
8.2 Context Data
53
clearer if the user could see a graph that showed the diﬀerence between the two
graphs instead, or a graph that displayed the percentage value of the current
data slice graph in relation to the total graph. This should properly be a option
that could be toggled on and oﬀ, because the current rendering also gives some
other important information, like a overview of the data and a easy way to ﬁnd
periodic patterns.
Another extension that could improve the summary graph, is to allow the user
to select two areas dynamically and compare these two, instead of always com-
paring the current area (dynamic selection) with the total (static). This would
properly work very well together with the ﬁrst extension.
A smaller extension that was suggested under the test interview, and that easily
could be implemented, is to be able to set the scale function for the summary
graphs, as it currently works for the main data visualisation. I.e. that you could
change the summary graphs to use for example logarithmic or exponential scale,
instead of only linear.
8.2
Context Data
Under the tests came a lot of suggestions to improving the context data. Some
of these are however more speciﬁcally related to the data that was used in the
test (see section 6.1).
One suggested extension was to allow the user to see more then one context data
set at the same time. This would especially have been useful in the test, where
the participants was tasked with ﬁnding the kind of pollen (i.e. the diﬀerent
context data sets) that correlated with the allergy data. This is also a relatively
small improvement in regards to the required work. It could be implemented
by allowing the user a "multi-select" option instead of a "single-select" option
ﬁeld, and then show the context data set as a line plot, as it is now, but with
diﬀerent colours for each set of data.
Thomas suggested to load in other kinds of context data, and not only use
pollen. This could for example be heart rate data, as some of the peaks in the
allergy data was from sickness, not allergy, and sickness correlates a lot with
heart rate. Location could also be very interesting, however this problem was
caused by lack of data, not functionality, because the prototype already supports
loading in qualitative context data (see 4.9). One very interesting suggestion
however was to allow the user to add qualitative context data themselves, i.e.
allow them to label and describe periods of time. This could be used for location
==PAGE:64==
8.3 General Prototype Improvements
54
information, but also for (in the case of the test and the data used there) periods
of sickness, or other events that could inﬂuence the data. Implementing this
would require a way to persist data, which the prototype currently is not able
to do.
A ﬁnal idea for extension is to allow a third type of context data: a data set
with the average of other people. For example the prototype could be extended
to display a summary graph showing the summary of other peoples allergy
symptoms. It might even be more interesting in other examples, for example
when looking at heart rate data, activity data, sleep patterns, etc. This might
allow the user to better take action as suggested in [LDF10] and [CPL14].
8.3
General Prototype Improvements
As stated in section 6.2.1, the overall feedback was very positive. However the
main concern was that it was confusing for non-experts to understand the system
without some introduction. These users would beneﬁt greatly from improved
labels, icons, ﬂoating info text boxes, and/or other help tools. There could even
be some kind of small tutorial with a step-by-step introduction, as it is known
from many other software systems.
Another way to make the interface less confusing, is to hide some of the more
complex parts and only show them when they are needed, so the data was
more interpretable from the beginning, which is a important goal for personal
informatics systems [CPL14]. The prototype could in general properly beneﬁt
from using more UX 1 techniques to improve the users usage and perception of
the application.
The conﬁguration settings, could also be improved so they looked better, were
more understandable and more intuitive to use.
Improving the UX as well as the "look and feel" of the application might even
increase the users’ motivation and thereby the usage of the system, if it was
available to the public. It could be interesting to experiment more with the
visualisations in regards to how captivating and beautiful they were perceived
by the user. This could all improve the usage and the motivation and ability
for users to actually act on the information, as they used the system, according
to [FFD12].
1User Experience.
Read more:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_experience_
design.
==PAGE:65==
8.4 New Extensions to the Prototype
55
Finally the prototype would beneﬁt for improved performance optimisation. The
data structure of the diﬀerent versions of data formats that are used, should be
reconsidered to be able to decrease the amount of data that is stored in memory.
It should also be further optimised to reduce the amount of calculation that is
needed when navigating in the data visualisation.
8.4
New Extensions to the Prototype
As an extension of the discussion above about improving the UX and the usabil-
ity for the user, it would be ideal to allow the prototype to work well on tablets,
and even smart phones. This would require either diﬀerent designs, or a respon-
sive design that changed accordingly to the size of the screen. Responsive design
is the main solution to this problem in modern web development, both because
the amount of diﬀerent devices with diﬀerent screen sizes are enormous, but also
because it’s easier to maintain a single version that can adapt to screen sizes,
than multiple versions for each size category (see [Gha14] for a good comparison
of the two solutions).
A more speciﬁc extension that was suggested under one of the test interview,
was to allow the user to select the temporal levels themselves. I.e. let the user
choose the duration of a single data point (either freely, or by choosing between
second, hour, day, week, month and year) and then choose the number of rows.
This would allow the user to see more unusual period patterns like patterns
with for example ﬁve-days intervals. However as explained in section 4.4, most
human cycles and activities follow the same few intervals.
A ﬁnal extension that would properly be a must-have, if the prototype should
be used for more than testing, would be to allow the user to load their own
data into the system. The prototype already has a very ﬂexible load system,
that supports many diﬀerent types of DSV 2, as long as they are included in a
folder in the application. However there is no way to upload a ﬁle yourself to
the website of the prototype.
2Delimiter
seperated
values.
Read
more:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Delimiter-separated_values.
==PAGE:66==
8.5 A Improved User Test Evaluation
56
8.5
A Improved User Test Evaluation
I have now discussed some of the extensions that could be implemented to
improve the prototype in the future, if one should continue the development.
However the current state of the prototype is already so well developed that it
is highly usable for visualising and analysing most personal information data.
To make sure that continued development is focused in the right direction, it
will be very beneﬁcial to conduct more extensive, or maybe even ongoing test
of the newly developed features. One way to do this, is to extend the current
prototype, so it supports a way to load the users own personal data, and then
distribute the prototype to a couple of test users that can then use the prototype
continually over a period of time.
The beneﬁts of this approach is that the developers will be able to roll out
new versions, and continue to test these new features as the development of the
prototype moves forward. Another advantage would be the possibility to log
and analyse the behaviour of the users, instead of relying on only qualitative
interviews and tests, similar to what have previously been done in [CLL13].
It would also be very interesting to try and conduct some tests with more context
data, or with other kinds of data. This could for example be a test with both
the allergy and pollen data, as well as heart rate and location data. It could also
be other kinds of data like the social and location based data used in [CLL13].
These multi-faceted visualisations could hopefully show some new aspects and
information about the data, that has not been seen before.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
In this thesis I have described the goal and motivation behind a personal infor-
matics system that explored new ways of visualising personal information data
to get new insights in a easier way than with previous visualisation tools.
There have been many attempts at new techniques and methods to visualise
data in personal informatics systems. However there is still a need for further
exploration of this area, both because it is a very growing ﬁeld, as well as because
many current personal informatics systems still use less than ideal visualisations.
There is also a shortcoming of systems that allows the user to really interact
with, and explore diﬀerent types of personal data in depths. Furthermore there
are not many systems that allow users to compare data with data from other
facets, to provide context for the observations.
This has lead to the development of an application to facilitate the visualisation
in such a system. The development process, and the design decisions throughout
this process has been described in details (see chapter 4).
This prototype has then been tested on several test participants with great
success. The participants have been interviewed about their thoughts of the
prototype, as well as what they learned about the data by using the prototype.
The test showed that the prototype was able to visualise the data in a way that
gave new insights into the analysis, and enabled the user to explore and learn
==PAGE:68==
58
about the data in new ways. It also showed that the prototype was useful and
lead to usable and interesting knowledge for the test participants, even though
none of the participants had seen the application before, and only few had any
knowledge about personal informatics systems in general.
Several possibilities for future work on this project, have been found based on
these tests, the interviews and the overall evaluation of the prototype.
The
success of the project and the following tests, sparks a motivation for future
improvements and continued work on this project.
It is therefore concluded that this project has potential to improve the current
state of visualisation and personal informatics systems, and that I have reached
the goal of the project, as described in section 1.1.
==PAGE:69==
Appendix A
User Evaluation
Questionnaire
Below are the questions that the users was asked in the post-test questionnaire.
The questionnaire was made with and answered in Google forms 1. The ques-
tionnaire was split into ﬁve sections: The Table, Time Zone Axes, Summary
Graphs, Time line, and General. Each section was answered on it’s own page,
before continuing to the next section. There were three kinds of questions. The
kind of questions are marked in brackets before the actual question text. The
three kinds of questions was:
• Scale: a statement that the user should rate on a scale from 1 (strongly
disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
• Multiple-choice a question that had two ore more possible answers,
which the user could choose from. The user could only choose a single
answer. The possible answers are written below the question.
• Text a question where the user could answer freely by writing an answer
text.
1Link: https://www.google.dk/intl/en/forms/about/
==PAGE:70==
60
The questionnaire was given in Danish, as all the participants spoke Danish.
However the questions have been translated into English in this thesis, but the
original questions can be read in parentheses.
The Table (Tabellen)
• [Scale] The table produced the data in a clear and easy-to-understand
manner (Tabellen fremstillede dataene på en overskuelig og let forståelig
måde)
• [Multiple-choice] Which plot method worked best for your data set? (Hvilken
plot metode virkede bedst for dit datasæt?)
– Squares with colour scale (Firkanter med farveskala)
– Circles with size scale (Cirkler med størrelsesskala)
– "Violinplots" with size scale ("Violinplots" med størrelsesskala)
• [Multiple-choice] Which scaling method worked best for your data set?
(Hvilken skalering metode virkede bedst for dit datasæt?)
– Linear (Lineær)
– Logarithmic (Logaritmisk)
– Quantiles (Kvartiler)
Time zone axes (Tidszone akserne)
• [Scale] The axes produced the time zones in a clear and easily under-
standable manner (Akserne fremstillede tidszonerne på en overskuelig og
let forståelig måde)
• [Scale] It was easy and intuitive to switch between time zone axes (Det
var let og intuitiv at skifte imellem tidszone akserne)
• [Scale] It was clear to see what time zone a particular data point belonged
to (Det var tydeligt at se hvilken tidszone et bestemt datapunkt tilhørte)
• [Scale] It was clear to see what time a particular data point was ob-
served (Det var tydeligt at se hvilket tidspunkt et bestemt datapunkt var
observeret)
==PAGE:71==
61
• [Text] Was it advantageous to switch between time zones? Had it been
better to show the data diﬀerently in relation to time scale and time
zones? (Var det en fordel at kunne skifte imellem tidszonerne? Havde det
været bedre at fremvise dataene på en anden måde i forhold til tidsskala
og tidszoner?)
Summary graphs (Summerings graferne)
• [Scale] The summary graphs showed the data in a clear and easily under-
standable manner (Summerings graferne fremstillede dataene på en over-
skuelig og let forståelig måde)
• [Scale] The summary graphs allowed me to ﬁnd patterns and other in-
formation that would otherwise have been diﬃcult or impossible to ﬁnd
(Summerings graferne gav mig mulighed for at ﬁnde mønstre og andre
informationer som ellers havde været svært eller umuligt at ﬁnde)
• [Text] What were the summary graphs especially useful for? What was the
biggest diﬀerence compared to the table? (Hvad var summerings graferne
specielt anvendelige til? Hvad var den største forskel i forhold til tabellen?)
Time line (Tidslinjen)
• [Scale] The time line chart produced data in a clear and easily under-
standable way (Tidslinje grafen fremstillede dataene på en overskuelig og
let forståelig måde)
• [Scale] The time line was easy and intuitive to interact with (Tidslinjen
var let og intuitiv at skifte rund i)
• [Scale] To zoom out in the time line graphs, allowed me to ﬁnd patterns and
other information that would otherwise have been diﬃcult or impossible
to ﬁnd (At zoome ud i tidslinjen graferne gav mig mulighed for at ﬁnde
mønstre og andre informationer som ellers havde været svært eller umuligt
at ﬁnde)
• [Text] What was the time line and time line graph especially useful for?
What was the biggest diﬀerence between the table and/or the summary
graphs? (Hvad var tidslinjen og tidslinje grafen specielt anvendelige til?
Hvad var den største forskel i forhold til tabellen og/eller summerings-
graferne?)
==PAGE:72==
62
General (Generelt)
• [Scale] The visualization as a whole was clear and easily understood (Vi-
sualiseringen som helhed var overskuelig og let forståelig)
• [Scale] The program as a whole was intuitive and easy to use (Programmet
som helhed var intuitivt og let at bruge)
• [Multiple-choice] Which temporal levels worked best for your data set?
(Hvilke tidsmæssige niveauer virkede bedst for dit datasæt?)
– Hours over days (hour/date) (Timer over dage (hour/date))
– Weekdays over weeks (day/week) (Ugedage over uger (day/week))
– Days over months (date/month) (Dage over måneder (date/month))
– Months over year (month/year) (Måneder over år (month/year))
• [Text] Is there another time-level that might have worked better? Why?
(Er der et andet tidsmæssigt niveau der muligvis havde virket bedre? Hvor-
for?)
• [Multiple-choice] Do you think the data was periodic (the same pattern
repeats over and over again over a certain period of time)? (Tror du at
dataene var periodisk (det samme mønster gentager sig igen og igen, over
en bestemt tidsperiode)?)
– Yes data were periodic with hourly intervals. (Ja dataene var peri-
odisk med timeintervaller.)
– Yes data were periodic with dayly intervals. (Ja dataene var periodisk
med dagsintervaller.)
– Yes data were periodic with weekly intervals. (Ja dataene var peri-
odisk med ugentlige intervaller.)
– Yes data were periodic with monthly intervals. (Ja dataene var pe-
riodisk med månedsintervaller.)
– Yes data were periodic with yearly intervals. (Ja dataene var peri-
odisk med årsintervaller.)
– No data was not periodic (Nej dataene var ikke periodisk)
• [Text] Did you ﬁnd other patterns in the data? Certain days or times of
ﬂuctuation? (Fandt du andre mønstre i dataene? Bestemte dage, eller
tidspunkter med udsving?)
• [Text] Do you think the data was dependent or independent of context
data? How? (Tror du at dataene var afhængig eller uafhængig af kontekst
data? Hvordan?)
==PAGE:73==
63
• [Text] Do you generally ﬁnd that you discovered something in the data
that was diﬃcult/impossible in a normal graph? (Synes du generelt at
du opdaget noget i dataene som havde været svært/umuligt i en normal
graf?)
• [Text] Do you have any general feedback or ideas? (Har du nogen general
feedback, eller ideer?)
==PAGE:74==
Appendix B
The Prototype
The live prototype can be found at http://thesis.jokklan.dk/prototype-test/
public/. This is the version of the prototype, that was used in the user evalu-
ation tests. The prototype is loaded with a data set, showing observations of a
allergy precursor event. More speciﬁcally each observation represents itching in
the nose, which sometimes is a precursor for sneezing.
There are also six diﬀerent pollen count data sets loaded into the prototype. It
is possible to change between each type of pollen in the conﬁguration options
(see screen shot below).
The prototype is initially conﬁgured to show hours on the y-axis and dates on
the x-axis. The data points are shown as circles where the area of the circle
determine the number of observations in the given hour. The scale for the area is
set to be linear. The summary graphs (over, below and to the right of the table)
are all showing the total sum of observations. Each of these conﬁgurations can
be changed as desired.
==PAGE:75==
65
Figure B.1: A screenshot of the ﬁnal prototype, with labels for all the diﬀerent
elements.
==PAGE:76==
Appendix C
Project Plan
The initial project plan, with milestones for the diﬀerent iterations, as well as
general tasks like writing the thesis, is shown below. Be aware that this is not
exactly how the development and writing was distributed in the end. The plan
changed as the project progressed.
A full version of the project plan can be found at http://thesis.jokklan.dk/
milestone-map/build/.
Figure C.1: The initial project plan.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[CM85]
W. S. Cleveland and R. McGill. “Graphical Perception and Graph-
ical Methods for Analyzing Scientiﬁc Data”. In: Science 229.4716
(1985), pp. 828–833. issn: 0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.229.
4716.828. url: http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/
science.229.4716.828.
[Shn96]
B. Shneiderman. “The eyes have it: a task by data type taxonomy for
information visualizations”. In: Proceedings 1996 IEEE Symposium
on Visual Languages (1996), pp. 336–343. issn: 1049-2615. doi: 10.
1109/VL.1996.545307. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/545307/.
[WAM01]
M. Weber, M. Alexa, and W. Muller. “Visualizing time-series on
spirals”. In: IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 2001.
INFOVIS 2001. (2001), pp. 7–13. issn: 1522-404X. doi: 10.1109/
INFVIS . 2001 . 963273. url: http : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org /
document/963273/.
[TC05]
James J. Thomas and Kristin A. Cook. “Illuminating the path: The
research and development agenda for visual analytics”. In: IEEE
Computer Society (2005). issn: 1664302X. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.
2011.00006.
[Wol09]
Gary Wolf. “Know Thyself: Tracking Every Facet of Life, from Sleep
to Mood to Pain, 24/7/365”. In: Wired Magazine (2009), pp. 1–4.
url: https://www.wired.com/2009/06/lbnp-knowthyself/.
[LDF10]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. “A stage-based model of per-
sonal informatics systems”. In: Proceedings of the 28th international
conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’10 (2010),
==PAGE:78==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
68
pp. 557–566. doi: 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753409. url: http : / /
portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1753326.1753409.
[Aig+11]
Wolfgang Aigner et al. Visualization of Time-Oriented Data. Springer
London, 2011. isbn: 978-0-85729-078-6. doi: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 0 -
85729-079-3. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-0-
85729-079-3.
[BOH11]
Michael Bostock, Vadim Ogievetsky, and Jeﬀrey Heer. “D3 data-
driven documents”. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 17.12 (2011), pp. 2301–2309. issn: 10772626.
doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2011.185.
[FFD12]
Chloe Fan, Jodi Forlizzi, and a Dey. “A Spark Of Activity: Ex-
ploring Informative Art As Visualization For Physical Activity”.
In: The 14th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing
(2012), pp. 81–84. doi: 10.1145/2384916.2384923. url: http:
//www.chloefan.com/static/files/2012-UbiComp-Fan.pdf.
[CLL13]
Andrea Cuttone, Sune Lehmann, and Jakob Eg Larsen. “A mobile
personal informatics system with interactive visualizations of mobil-
ity and social interactions”. In: Proceedings of the 1st ACM inter-
national workshop on Personal data meets distributed multimedia -
PDM ’13 (2013), pp. 27–30. doi: 10.1145/2509352.2509397. url:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2509352.2509397.
[LCL13]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Andrea Cuttone, and Sune Lehmann. “QS Spiral :
Visualizing Periodic Quantiﬁed Self Data”. In: Personal Informatics
in the Wild: Hacking Habits for Health & Happiness — CHI 2013
Workshop (2013).
[CPL14]
Andrea Cuttone, Michael Kai Petersen, and Jakob Eg Larsen. “Four
data visualization heuristics to facilitate reﬂection in personal in-
formatics”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including sub-
series Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics). Vol. 8516 LNCS. PART 4. 2014, pp. 541–552. isbn:
978-3-319-07508-2. doi: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 07509 - 9. url:
http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2- s2.0-
84903443844&partnerID=tZOtx3y1.
[Gha14]
Armen Ghazarian. The Pros and Cons of Responsive Web Design
vs. Mobile Website vs. Native App - Designmodo. 2014. url: https:
//designmodo.com/responsive-design-vs-mobile-website-
vs-app/.
[Pal14]
Tomas Palsson. Visual Exploration of Quantiﬁed Self Data Using
Spiral Visualizations. 2014.
[Naz15]
ShaﬁNazar. Exploring Time Series with Interactive Data Visualiza-
tion Using Touch Interaction ShaﬁNazar. 2015.
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[Ald16]
Peter Aldhous. Data visualization: basic principles. 2016. url: http:
//paldhous.github.io/ucb/2016/dataviz/week2.html.
[LEC16]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Chris-
tiansen. “Keeping the Human in the Loop with Subjective Experi-
ence in Mental Health Tracking”. In: (2016).
[BGR17]
Raphaël Benitte, Sacha Greif, and Michael Rambeau. The State
of JavaScript 2017: Front-end Frameworks – Results. 2017. url:
https://stateofjs.com/2017/front-end/results.
[LCE17]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Thomas Blomseth Christiansen, and Kasper Es-
kelund. “Fostering Bilateral Patient-Clinician Engagement in Active
Self-Tracking of Subjective Experience”. In: Proceedings of Pervasive
Health (2017).
[LEC17]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Chris-
tiansen. “Active Self-Tracking of Subjective Experience with a One-
Button Wearable: A Case Study in Military PTSD”. In: (2017). url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03437.
[MF17a]
Justin Matejka and George Fitzmaurice. “Same Stats, Diﬀerent Graphs”.
In: Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems - CHI ’17 (2017), pp. 1290–1294. doi: 10.1145/
3025453.3025912. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
doid=3025453.3025912.
[MF17b]
Justin Matejka and George Fitzmaurice. Same Stats, Diﬀerent Graphs:
Generating Datasets with Varied Appearance and Identical Statistics
through Simulated Annealing. 2017. url: https://www.autodeskresearch.
com/publications/samestats.
