==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Exploring Interaction Methods for Self-
Logging with a Wearable Smartbutton
Kristian Ohrt Dam-Jensen (s113103)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The time it takes to perform a self-log, is central to the effectiveness of self-logging.
Particularly long-term self-logging is prone to abandonment, as the user forgets or
cannot be compelled to complete logging because the effort required is deemed to
great. It is therefore of uttermost importance to reduce this burden.
In this report we introduce three novel ways of performing self-logging that are
targeted at phenomena of a mathematically discrete character. All three centered
around the usage of a smartbutton to minimize the reliance on a display, and thereby
decreasing the number of steps required, which in effect lessens the burden.
By evaluating each method in a controlled test against Visual Analogue Scale
as the baseline, we can assess the accuracy of the methods, to determine if they
can maintain the accuracy of the baseline. This is done through rating of blackness
based on previous work by Matejka et al., as this is suitable way of appraising the
performance in a neutral way.
The results show that all three methods had no significant divergence from the
accuracy of the baseline in a controlled test. That means that all three are viable
alternative methods, that should be taken under serious deliberation when considering
long-term self-logging.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Digital Media Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, February 16, 2018
Kristian Ohrt Dam-Jensen (s113103)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank first and foremost my supervisor Jakob Eg Larsen for excellent
guidance.
Next, I would also like to thank the people who volunteered their time to partici-
pate in the test.
I also wanna say thanks to my family for continuous moral support.
Special thanks goes to Natalia Bori for making sure my grammar is in order.
Last but not least, I would also like to thank my Bodum Columbia French Press,
for its outstanding service.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Self-Logging Methodologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Visual Analogue Scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Smartbuttons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Self-Logging Start Vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Existing Work
9
3.1
Matejka et al., 2016
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Borg and Borg, 1991 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Intille et al., 2016 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Kamiński 2016
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Method
11
4.1
Ideal Rating Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Baseline Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Prototyping The Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4
Watch-as-a-Button Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.5
Controlled Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.6
Mapping of Method Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Implementation
21
5.1
Server & Database “Ivy” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Stimulus & Baseline “Walnut”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Shared Features of External Rating Apps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Method A “Aspen” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.5
Method B “Blackthorn” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6
Method C “Chestnut” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.7
Post-Test Interview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.8
Pilot Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Results
43
6.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Rating Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
Characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.4
Rating Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.5
Summary of Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.6
Post Test Interview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7
Discussion
57
7.1
Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2
Baseline Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.3
Outliers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.4
Rating Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.5
Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.6
Viability of Novel Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8
Future Work
63
8.1
Aspen Long-Term Consistency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.2
Normalization Without Truth Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
9
Conclusion
65
A Absolute Error Histograms
67
B Controlled Test Photos
71
C Survey Answers
73
C.1 “Why did you prefer this method?” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Self-logging is the process of logging details about yourself regularly over time. It is
not a new phenomenon, and depending on what definition you pick it can be anything
from ancient historical account or diaries to wearing a smartwatch that measures your
heart rate.
We can distinguish between two types of self-logging; the logging that you do
manually, and the logging that happens automatically. The latter being a phenomena
that has grown incredibly fast within the last decade or so. With the explosion of
digital devices, and the growing connected world, there are more and more devices
that are capable of measuring almost any perceivable part of you.
However, there are still a large number of parameters that are outside the scope
of digital devices, where some may be within grasp in the next decade, while others
are not considered to be measurable at all. This means that there are still a big
interest in being able to log something manually. But the arrival of the swathe of
digital devices has made it increasingly easy to self-log.
But for some metrics, there aren’t any established units or scales, and this makes
it particularly difficult to self-log, because the solution in these circumstances tradi-
tionally has been to ask patients to rate a phenomena such as pain using a relative
scale; for instance something like the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) [8].
This has
lately been improved with the introduction of the Ecological Momentary Assessment
(EMA) methodology, and it’s derivatives like µEMA [10].
These methods are however schedule-driven, and are unsuitable for discrete pain
events (inconsistent pain), compared to continuous pain events (constant, but varying
intensity) where the time and place can be important to discover underlying causes
or triggers.
For such scenarios, it is important to do the logging in the moment it occurs while
the details of the event are still fresh in memory. By extension, it is then critical
that the individual follows through on the logging in the moment, instead of recalling
events later. This means that how burdensome it is to perform the self-logging is very
important to the success, as lowering the burden, means that the individual is more
likely to complete it, as the events may happen in the most inconvenient moments.
If not completed in situ, a lot of events may be forgotten [14].
Being asked to fill out a VAS when the event occurs is therefore problematic, as
it requires first of all a phone to be nearby, and then that the individual reaches for
the phone, opens the relevant app, and first now is able to rate.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
While that may seem fast enough, it can be done faster and more convenient
using alternative methods that are more easy and fast to complete when in the most
inconvenient moment.
In this report I therefore present three novel methods of rating, which can be
done without an explicit need for a display when rating, as is the case with rating
on a line. Instead they are based on the usage of a smartbutton which can be used
without looking. These methods are then implemented as prototypes and tested in
a controlled test together with the baseline, with the aim of identifying how they
compare to the baseline VAS method in terms of accuracy and ease of use. The null
hypothesis being that they have similar accuracy as VAS.
The goal is ultimately to determine if they are feasible methods to apply instead
of the VAS method for a select category of self-logging instances where some accuracy
can be sacrificed for reducing the time-to-log. The hypothesis being that it is possible
to find an alternative method, that matches the accuracy offered by the VAS method
to a reasonable degree.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Background
Before we can get deeper into the problem, the solution, and the results, it is im-
portant to get acquainted with a few topics that are used. This background section
provides a brief but not exhaustive introduction to the concepts which will be referred
to later.
2.1
Self-Logging Methodologies
Self-logging can be done in various ways, but we will introduce two concepts, that
will provide a distinction between two different categories of methodologies; schedule-
driven and event-driven. These methodologies outline how to proceed with the self-
logging that maximizes the accuracy and the reliability.
2.1.1
Schedule-Driven
Self-logging has a history with diaries or logbooks, where the participant typically
writes down phenomenon on a schedule, or recalls phenomenon every time the partic-
ipant goes to a scheduled check-up with the health professional. This approach has
been refined and codified to what is known as the Experience Sampling Methodology
(ESM) or the Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) which tries to do away with
the recall, and restrict itself to only real-time self-logging/assessment, but according
to some schedule, regular or not.
The method is fairly broad, but specifies a guideline wherein the participant is told
to self-log at regular or irregular intervals. This way, the participant cannot be biased
in the selection of when to log, and when to wait, although subject to participants
compliance.
The methodology is very much based on the idea of surveying the participant like
a scientist would survey an experiment, and implementations rely often on survey
formula’s that a participant is told to fill out at given times. An example could be
to ask for the level of pain at the given moment, and often describe the situation the
participant is in.
Experience Sampling has its strength in continuous phenomenon, like the level of
pain, or the level of anxiety, where the participant might not have thought about a
growing pain or anxiety up until that moment, this could give indicators to gradually
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Background
increasing levels of a phenomenon, but it will then miss the peaks where the pain
becomes sufficiently high to pass through into the consciousness of the participant.
This brings us to the concept of event-driven self-logging.
2.1.2
Event-Driven
Contrary to experience sampling, event-driven logging does not happen at regular
or irregular schedules, and it does not involve recalling past events. Instead it hap-
pens when the phenomena to be logged, actually happens. This lends itself to more
mathematically discrete phenomenon, but can also be a tool for logging continuous
phenomenon at the point where the intensity of the phenomenon breaks into the con-
science of the participant (compare a constant headache that varies in intensity to a
sudden chest pain)
By logging at the moment an event happens, the participant can easily remember
all the details and the precise time and place where it occurred. This makes it easy
to follow the phenomena, and correlate them to other events and metrics.
The fundamental challenge with the approach however, is that it can be quite
a burdensome to do the self-logging, and it is therefore essential to the longevity
that this burden is only as big as is absolutely required. Examples of mitigating the
burden involves ideas such as using predefined conventions, and minimizing variability
in order to have as few actions as possible.
2.2
Visual Analogue Scale
For the rating of the subjective experiences, the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) is a
preferred choice within psychometrics, and is used extensively to rate phenomenon
like pain, which cannot be directly measured. However, with VAS, it is possible to
use an objective approach to gauge a patients’ pain level, by having the patient mark
the experienced pain relatively on a visual scale.
There is not a clear definition of how a VAS is supposed to take shape, but it is
very common to administer it as a 10cm horizontal or vertical line, where endpoints
are marked as each extreme of the given phenomena; for example “no pain”, and
“excruciating pain” for rating pain. An alternative approach is a selection of emoji’s
in different emotional states, but for the remainder of the report, unless otherwise
stated; VAS refers to the rating on a 10cm line.
2.3
Smartbuttons
Smartbuttons come in all kinds of shapes, size, styles, and capabilities. As of writing,
there are many suppliers of both buttons and the underlying electronics for custom
buttons available to purchase.
But it’s possible to distinguish somewhat between
them, in a variety of ways:
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Smartbuttons
5
• Independent vs. Dependent — Is it tethered to the phone, or does it run it’s
own system, connected to cellular and/or wifi.
• Touch vs.
Tactile — Essentially, can it be used without looking, and how
sensitive is it.
• Long-endurance battery vs.
Rechargeable short-medium term endurance —
How much effort is it to keep it powered and available.
• Multi-purpose vs simple — Is it just a button, and nothing else, or does it do
other things.
These features are important to take note of when evaluating the practicality and
usability of a smart button.
2.3.1
Known Smartbuttons
Figure 2.1: Flic Smartbutton[16]
Figure 2.2: Particle Internet Button[15]
Figure 2.3: Logitech POP[12]
Figure 2.4: bt.tn Mini Flat[17]
2.3.1.1
Flic Smartbutton
An extremely simple Bluetooth LE button developed in Sweden[16], which features a
tactile button on a soft touch silicon. It has a long-endurance CR2016 battery with up
to 18 months of power. The button is dependent on a bluetooth master device such
as a smartphone or separately-sold hub. However, it can continue to run partially
while not connected, and will upon reconnect notify of past clicks.
2.3.1.2
Particle IoT Internet Button
A fairly advanced button with ARM processor and WiFi chip[15]. It works more
as a IoT device, and as such is independent from any phone. The device contains
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background
several tactile hard buttons, and is charged with a rechargeable battery over USB. It
is programmed through a web interface which pushed new firmware onto the device.
2.3.1.3
Logitech POP
The Logitech POP button[12] is a simple button which works both with Bluetooth
and Wifi. The wifi access is however provided through a Bridge button, which acts as
gateway for multiple buttons to the router. It is similar to the Flic button, but roughly
twice the diameter—Designed to replace the physical switch in homes. Includes a
replaceable battery which according to specs should last up to five years.
When
tethered to a phone, it connects over bluetooth to a companion app.
2.3.1.4
bt.tn
An advanced IoT button similar to the Particle IoT Internet Button, in the sense that
it is also not tethered to a phone, but works independently. Models include chipsets
for both mobile (GSM) networks, Wifi and Sigfox connection[17].
It is similarly
sized, but includes just a single button. It runs on rechargeable batteries as well as
replaceable batteries, depending on the model.
2.4
Self-Logging Start Vectors
The most crucial step in the self-logging process is how the participant goes from the
state of phenomenon-happened to logging-phenomenon, as it is usually this crucial
step that causes the participant to abandon the self-logging at some stage of process,
because the burden outweighs the perceived value. A start vector is the minimum
amount of effort required to log something. To give an example of what it could
be, and what self-logging historically has done, is to use a logbook, and write things
down.
1. Find logbook.
2. Open the logbook, and go to the appropriate page.
3. Note down details of the phenomena.
4. Close logbook, and put back in its place.
2.4.1
Examples of Start Vectors
The following subsections list the start vector for a variety of devices that were consid-
ered for this project. As evident from the list, logging becomes gradually easier as we
progress from a phone through watch to a smartbutton. But this progress comes at
the cost of reduced logging details and flexibility. With a phone, it is easier to design
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Self-Logging Start Vectors
7
a user interface that works well across a range of scenarios, whereas the smartbutton
requires a lot of pre-defined parameters—but getting them right can make logging
very smooth.
2.4.1.1
Apple iPhone
1. Take the phone out of pocket.
2. Unlock the phone.
3. Open the logging app.
4. Log details of the phenomena.
2.4.1.2
Android Phone
1. Take the phone out of the pocket.
2. Unlock the phone.
(a) a Find widget.
(b) b Open the logging app.
3. Log details of the phenomena.
2.4.1.3
Apple Watch
1. Raise hand or tap display.
2. Tap logging app compliment.
3. Log details of the phenomena.
2.4.1.4
Android Wear
1. Raise hand or tap display.
2. Use custom watch face to log.
2.4.1.5
Flic Smartbutton
1. Click button to log.
2.4.1.6
Particle IoT Internet Button
1. Click button to log
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background
2.4.1.7
Logitech POP
1. Click button to log
2.4.1.8
bt.tn
1. Click button to log
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Existing Work
3.1
Matejka et al., 2016
The work by Matejka et al. [13] who did a research paper on “The Effect of Visual
Appearance on the Performance of Continuous Sliders and Visual Analogue Scales”
has heavily influenced the work of this project, specifically in the design of a controlled
test. They particularly looked at the addition of tick marks on the Visual Analogue
Scale, and how this influenced bias when participants were asked to rate with it. Their
conclusion was that adding tick marks introduced a bias, such that participants would
be more likely to align their rating with the ticks.
Although their focus and results are tangential to the focus of this report, the way
they designed their experiment is of great interest, as it aligns strongly with the aims
of this project. Particularly, the choice of rating blackness (based on work by Borg
and Borg [6], see Section 3.2), and how they present this task to the participant to
mitigate unintended bias.
Figure 3.1: The setup used by Matejka et al. [13, page 5423]
They designed a website with a larger section of the screen covered in a black and
white noise pattern. Inside this noise pattern, they placed a square. This square is
then set to a random shade of grey, and the user is asked to rate the blackness of
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Existing Work
the square using the line below it. Clicking somewhere on the line would then put
a marker there, and allow the user to proceed to the next random grey color. They
then experiment with the design of this line, with features such as (various sets of
tick marks, end marks, banded, percentage, values, etc). Figure 3.1 shows how they
did it.
3.2
Borg and Borg, 1991
The rating of a blackness which was used in the controlled test by Matejka et al. [13],
is a crucial point, and the choice is based on the work done by Borg and Borg, in
their report from 1991[6], which concludes that the rating of the blackness works well
as a generic way of doing a rating test. Not only does it provide a good neutral rating
behavior, it also provides a truth value, which is the actual blackness level displayed,
which can then be compared with the rated level of the blackness.
3.3
Intille et al., 2016
Another approach to a better self-logging has been explored by Intille et al. [10], who
worked with directly improving the method of EMA, by delivering in situ assessment
through the use of a smartwatch app, to similarly reduce the burden of self-logging.
They had a success with their approach, which increased the compliance of assessment
requests. For subjective experiences that are continuously changing throughout the
day, this is a step in the right direction, but it still does not cover experiences that
are discrete in the mathematical sense, where the subjectiveness is in the intensity of
this experience.
3.4
Kamiński 2016
Kamiński [11] investigates in his thesis paper, the possible approaches to reduce
human interactions when using an EMA methodology. He does this through a metic-
ulous and methodical analysis of interactions necessary to perform a rating. By an
iterative process with volunteers, he reduces the average interaction time with 30%
compared to other methods.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 4
Method
With the aim of designing a rating method that can be used without having to look
at a display, I specifically worked on taking advantage of a hypothetical smart-button,
which would have a built-in gyroscopic sensor. The interaction design was developed
on the premise of the currently known smart-buttons (Section 2.3.1), particularly
the Logitech POP and Flic button. Our hypothetical button supports the following
events:
• Button down
• Button up
• Click
• Double-click
• n-click (possible, but highly discouraged)
• Hold (extended click duration)
4.1
Ideal Rating Methods
From the hypothesized smartbutton, I devised three distinct methods of rating that
takes into account the strengths and weaknesses of a smartbutton.
4.1.1
Hold Button
The simplest way to interact with the button is simply to measure the time between
pushing the button down, and subsequently releasing it.
Measurement: Duration that button is held down.
Units: Milliseconds
This method is referred to as method A as in Aspen1 (project code name)
1Project code names are based on plant names; Aspen, Blackthorn, Chestnut, Walnut, and Ivy
==PAGE:22==
12
4 Method
4.1.2
Rotate Lower Arm
A physiological description of the movement: Rotation of the lower arm.
Figure 4.1: Example of a start position.
Figure 4.2: Example of a stop position.
Taking advantage of the gyroscope, the button acts as the start and the stop
button to measure the change in angle when one is rotating the lower arm. So in
order to rate something, one would hold the button in the hand, and place the arm in
a neutral position, and then hold down the button to initiate the measurement. The
arm is then rotated to a position, where the change of angle, reflects the perceived
magnitude of the subject to be rated. Once satisfied with the angle, the button is
released.
This could be done using both the method of holding the button down for the
duration of the measurement, but also clicking the button to start and stop. However,
I decided to use holding the button, as it conveyed a sense of on-off in terms of
measurement, where the user intuitively knows if a rating is in progress.
Measurement: Change of angle for one axis of the button.
Units: Degrees
This method is referred to as method B as in Blackthorn (project code name)
4.1.3
Rotate Upper Arm Around Elbow
Physiological description of the movements: Rotation of the lower arm around the
elbow (Type1) or Vertical Flexion of the Elbow (Type2).
It is similar to the rotation of the lower arm. The main difference compared to the
previous method is that it is much more intuitive, as it draws on the ingrained concept
of an analogue dial, which most people are acquainted with from the speedometer in
a car.
The button is then held in the hand in a fixed position, with the arm in a neutral
position (e.g. relaxed on a table). Just as the previous method, the button is then
held down to start, and released when satisfied with the angle corresponding the given
rating subject.
Measurement: Change of angle for one axis of the button.
Units: Degrees
This method is referred to as method C as in Chestnut (project code name)
==PAGE:23==
4.2 Baseline Method
13
Figure 4.3: Example of a Type1 start position. Figure 4.4: Example of a Type1 stop position.
Figure 4.5: Example of a Type2 start position. Figure 4.6: Example of a Type2 stop position.
4.2
Baseline Method
The baseline will be the standard VAS, in the format of a ten centimeter line. The
line is continuous, and the user will have to mark an arbitrary point on the scale. The
value of the scale is measured as the distance from the left extreme to the center of
the marker. The result is a scale that goes from 0.0 to 100.0 (mm).
This method is referred to as either Baseline or Walnut (project code name).
4.3
Prototyping The Methods
Moving from the conceptual interaction methods to an actual prototype, I needed to
select and appropriate button.
Of the known devices 2.3.1, the Flic Button (Figure 2.1) and the Particle Internet
Button (Figure 2.2) were available to borrow from the faculty. They also happen to
==PAGE:24==
14
4 Method
represent the two different groups of buttons available at the time; IoT buttons de-
signed for industry/business purposes (Particle), or a simple personal button designed
to work as a physical extension of the smartphone (Flic).
Although the Particle technically incorporates both the button and gyroscope of
the hypothetical button, the device is not well suited for personal use, both because
of its sheer size (almost 4 times as big as the Flic) and simplistic button-type, but also
because of its IoT-design, which focuses on being connected directly to the internet
instead of a phone, and therefore does not include Bluetooth.
Choosing the Flic button on the other hand, means that we now have a user-
friendly button in an appropriate format, that visually resembles our hypothetical
button the best.
This means that we need to find an alternative way to access
gyroscopic data.
4.4
Watch-as-a-Button Prototype
Most of the smartphones incorporate a gyroscopic sensor nowadays, but holding a
phone and at the same time also holding a smartbutton that needs to be pressed is
rather problematic.
So instead of strapping the phone onto the arm, an alternative approach, is to
simply use a smartwatch with a built-in gyroscopic sensor. The benefits being that
the watch is light-weight, firmly fitted to the arm, and keeps the hand free to use the
button at the same time.
4.4.1
Apple Watch
With the Apple Watch, Apple has focused particularly on its use for health-focused
individuals, fitness-folk and within health-tech.
Apple is also positioned strongly
among health professionals, and its HealthKit is both designed with both professional
health applications as well as “consumer” applications.
One of the benefits of using a watch instead of only having the button, is the ability
to provide the user with a direct auditory and a tactile feedback on success/failure.
The importance of a system feedback is hard to overstate, and can make the rating a
much more satisfying experience.
4.5
Controlled Test
To evaluate the three different novel methods for rating subjective experiences, it was
important to run them in a controlled test with sufficient users, where each method
could be evaluated both on the methods characteristics, how each method compared
over all the users, and how they compared on the same user.
In order for us to do that, I designed a controlled test, based on the work by
Matejka et al. [13], where a rating of blackness was used to measure the hypothesized
==PAGE:25==
4.5 Controlled Test
15
bias of adding ticks to the VAS line. Their test was run with 2000 participants by
taking advantage of the Amazon Mechanical Turk program[1], and was done using a
website they implemented.
The nature of my test, means that it is practically impossible to perform parallel
with other people over a web interface or in person, as the test requires a lot of devices
which most people do not own or have access to.
Instead, an iPad was used as the basis for showing the random grey scale colored
square (also called the stimulus) superimposed on top of a black-and-white noise
pattern. The pattern is there to minimize the ability of the user to compare the
stimulus to the background as a reference value (e.g. if the background was white or
black). All other colors on the device were changed to be either blues or reds, in order
to further reduce the users ability to compare the stimulus with reference values.
A big advantage of using the Apple iPad Pro 9.7” is the fact that the display is
one of the absolute best displays available[7], with a native support for DCI-P3 Wide
Color Gamut, and a color-calibrated from the factory. The display also has a very
high peak brightness, a very low screen reflectance, and a very high color accuracy.
The most important aspect however, is that all participants will be using the same
display. But the ambient lighting of the rooms in which the tests were conducted are
difficult to control, but the high brightness and low reflectance do assist in mitigating
this factor.
Participants used the methods in a random predetermined order, which mitigates
any learning effect that might exist in either method-usage or color recognition.
4.5.1
Setup
The test consist of 4 devices. See Figure 4.7
Figure 4.7: Overview of the devices involved.
==PAGE:26==
16
4 Method
• Flic Smartbutton
• Apple iPhone 6S, iOS 11.2.1
• Apple Watch Series 3 42mm, watchOS 4.2
• Apple iPad Pro 9.7”, iOS 11.2.1
The iPad was then placed on a table in front of the user at an arm’s length, and
angled towards the user’s eyes. The iPhone is then placed on the table in front of the
iPad. The participant wears the Apple Watch on the users preferred arm, in a way
that is fastened, but does not restrict blood flow. The participant then holds the Flic
button in its preferred hand.
4.5.1.1
Device Configuration
The iPad is set with the below specifications.
• Sufficient power level or plugged into a charger.
• Connected to internet using a sufficiently fast connection.
• Display Settings:
– Brightness: Maximum
– True Tone: Disabled (Matches ambient color temperature)
– Auto-Lock: Never
– Night Shift: Disabled
• “Do Not Disturb” mode is enabled:
– Silence: Always
– Repeated Calls: Off
Similarly the iPhone is set to the below specifications:
• Sufficient power level or plugged into a charger.
• Connected to the internet using a sufficiently fast connection.
• Display Settings are set to:
– Auto-Lock: Never
• “Do Not Disturb” mode is enabled:
– Silence: Always
– Repeated Calls: Off
==PAGE:27==
4.5 Controlled Test
17
The watch follows the iPhone configuration, but a few settings are watch-specific:
• Sufficient power level.
• Connected to the phone.
• Relevant apps added as complications to active watch face (increases execution
time allowed).
• Workout Power Saving Mode: Off
• Sounds & Haptics Settings:
– Silent Mode: Off
– Haptic Strength: Max
• Passcode Settings:
– Wrist Detection: Off (allows easy on-off)
4.5.2
Procedure
A test procedure was developed as seen below, which explains the basis of the test.
A detailed test procedure for each particular method and details about the specific
app is provided in the Implementation chapter.
1. The objective of rating blackness is explained to the participant, and that each
method will be introduced ad-hoc.
2. The iPad app is opened, and configured.
3. Stimulus is displayed.
4. Using the method appointed, the participant rates the blackness.
5. When the participant is satisfied with the rating given, the rating is saved.
6. The stimulus is hidden from view for 2 seconds while the color is changed into
a new random grey scale color.
7. When the new stimulus reappears, it is ready to be rated.
8. Step 4 to 7 is repeated for a minimum of 50 times.
9. After a minimum of 50 ratings, the method is changed to the next method
assigned to the participant.
10. This is repeated until all methods have been used.
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Method
11. When all methods have been used, there should be a minimum of 200 ratings
in total.
12. The participant then fills out a questionnaire, to provide some qualitative data
on the participants personal experience.
In step 6 it is mentioned that the stimulus is removed from sight for 2 seconds,
only leaving the noise pattern visible. This is done for the same reasons that the noise
pattern is there; to make it as hard as possible for the participant to have a reference
value available when judging the blackness, as this could potentially introduce a bias.
4.5.3
Colors
As previously mentioned, we will be using the same set of colors as was used by
Matejka et al. [13], who based his work on [6], selected fifty shades of gray2, between
white and black of equal perceptual change. Taking fifty evenly spread out colors on
the RGB model from 0 to 255 does not give you equal perceptual change between
each color. Therefore, we need to use a special color space, which supports this. This
is why we use the CIEL*a*b* color space[9] (also simply called LAB color space) used
by Borg & Borg. In this color space, you have three parameters:
L is the lightness, and starts at 0, and gradually becomes whiter (lighter) as the value
increases, the max value (i.e. absolute white) is often at 100, but can vary.
a is the green-red balance, which balances out at 0, with greens in the negative, and
red in the positive
b is the blue-yellow balance, which balances out at 0, with blue in the negative, and
yellow in the positive.
By setting the a and b component to 0 (i.e. both balanced out), we get a grey scale
as L varies.
We can then increment L with a constant amount k for each shade, then the
shades change color with an equal perceptual amount.
The fifty shades of grey are seen in Figure 4.8
Figure 4.8: The fifty shades of grey, of equal perceptible difference. Red marks beginning and end.
2Not related to any fiction, literature or not — but instead to the work by Matejka et al. [13],
where they also use 50 shades.
==PAGE:29==
4.6 Mapping of Method Output
19
4.6
Mapping of Method Output
With the three novel methods of rating, we are faced with a challenge of converting
their output values into something that we can compare to the shown color, and to
the baseline. Our color and baseline follow a scale of 0 to 100, so this is what we want
to map the other methods to.
In other words, if we are given the following sets
M is the set that describes the output values of a certain type of rating method.
B is the set that describe blackness of a color.
Where
M ⊆ℜ
(4.1)
B = {b ∈B|0 ≤b ≥100}
(4.2)
Then we want to find a function f such that
f : M 7→B
(4.3)
We can use a regression analysis to find f, but since each user rates in their own
particular way, we need to make the regression analysis for each individual user for
each method.
This will work for both ratings based on time (Aspen) as well as rotation (Black-
thorn & Chestnut). The regression analysis is easy to do, because by choosing to rate
colors, there is a “truth” value, which is the actual color that the participant rated,
and that will be our X value, while the output value is our Y value.
4.6.1
Regression Analysis
A regression analysis can be done based on several functions, but because the users
are asked to rate with time and angles, the expectation is that this can be mapped
with a linear regression.
However, it is not possible to rule out a non-linear regression, so to be prepared,
it should be evaluated on a case basis, whether or not the user’s ratings are best
described with a linear or a non-linear regression.
So, in order to, be fully prepared, we can calculate the linear, the exponential and
the logarithmic regression, as these functions are most realistic in terms of describing a
rating correlation. In order to, then determine which of these describe the correlation
best, we will calculate the coefficient of determination (called R2).
4.6.1.1
Linear
Linear regression solves for the variables m and c in the formula for a linear equation:
y = mx + c
(4.4)
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Method
After we have found m and c we can construct our mapping function:
x = y −c
m
(4.5)
4.6.1.2
Exponential
With exponential regression we are trying to fit a function of the form
y = beax
(4.6)
Such that we can find b and a, to be used when we construct the function
x = ln( y
b )
a
(4.7)
4.6.1.3
Logarithmic
For logarithm the function we are trying to fit has the form
y = a ln(x) + b
(4.8)
Such that when a and b are found we get
x = e
y−b
a
(4.9)
4.6.1.4
Goodness of Fit
Because we have a strong expectation to see linear regressions, we will use linear as the
default regression if we have no strong evidence to support any particular regression.
If the R2 of the exponential or logarithmic, against expectations beat the linear
regression in this score, we will demand that the improvement is above a certain
threshold j, to be certain that it is significantly better.
Because logarithmic regression is such a different, and unexpected regression, we
want to be absolutely sure that the data suggests that logarithmic regression. We
can do this by either demand similar improvements in R2, or we can require that
the exponential regression of the same data is a strong unfit (score less than j),
since a “true” logarithmic data set, would have a very poor R2 score for exponential
regression.
The values of j and i are parameters that can be tweaked such that they give the
best results.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
The implementation of the prototype was done with the focus on developing an ar-
chitecture that was simple, robust, and straight-forward to the code, which makes it
easier to debug, more reliable when doing the tests, and fast to develop. In practice,
this means that some implementations are done to reduce the time-to-code, at the
expense of flexibility under the assumption that this is only used for the controlled
test.
It was assumed that there would be only one instance of a test running at any
given time, as there were not more devices. Together with the fact that direct com-
munication between devices was a challenging endeavor, I decided on a client-server
design, where a device would communicate to a server, that was tasked with keeping
everything synchronized and keep one source of truth, with a single database, instead
of storing the data locally. This also meant that the apps work together as a system,
orchestrated by the server. Figure 5.1 shows the system.
In order to avoid, implementing too much communication back and forth—which
is time-consuming; each app would simply communicate its own status and changes.
This implementation lets the server sort out and match the stimulus with the rating.
This greatly simplifies overall design, and only introduces constraints that are already
there. Each component will be described in detail in the sections below.
==PAGE:32==
22
5 Implementation
«Device» 
Linux Server
«Container Service» 
Docker
«Container» 
microsoft/aspnetcore
«Execution Environment» 
.NET Core 2.0
«Server» 
Ivy
REST API
«Device» 
Apple iPad Pro
«Client» 
Walnut App
Show Stimulus
Conﬁguration
Baseline Rating
«Database» 
SQLite3
«HTTPS»
«Device» 
Apple iPhone 6s
«Client» 
Rating App
Flic Manager
Rating
«Device» 
Flic Smartbutton
Button
«HTTPS»
«Bluetooth LE»
«Device» 
Apple Watch
MotionData
«WatchConnectivity»
Figure 5.1: UML Deployment Diagram
5.1
Server & Database “Ivy”
The server consists of an ASP.NET Core 2 WebAPI application written in C#, and
a local SQLite 3 database. The server is the brain of the system, and manages a
state machine that keeps track of which user,set, and stimulus is active, (i.e. using
the system), and handles the matching of ratings with stimulus.
5.1.1
Models
The server defines the models used in the system, but makes a distinction between
the database models, and the models transferred between the server and the apps,
called DTO models, which are simplified to the extent that they only include the
relevant data.
Figure 5.2 shows an entity relationship diagram of the different entities that were
used.
Properties in bold are the primary keys (identifiers), and types in italics are other
entities (foreign key). Below we go through each model to highlight their purpose
and the details of their properties.
==PAGE:33==
5.1 Server & Database “Ivy”
23
Figure 5.2: Entity Relationship Diagram
5.1.1.1
User
The user model is used to identify the last active user, and apply the values of this
user to the incoming stimulus. It therefore records when it was last active, to find
the user model that was active most recently.
As the model is defined by a composite key, consisting of the User ID and the
Set ID, the database has multiple records with the same user ID, but different set
ID. This design was chosen, because the user model is not strongly coupled with the
stimulus. Consequently, it will allow the possibility of changing the active user after
setting a stimulus. The alternative solution would require more API calls, and longer
time to make it more strongly coupled. In order to avoid unnecessary complexity, the
latter solution is out of the scope of the current thesis.
User
Id:
Int
SetId:
Int
IsPractice:
Bool
ActiveFrom:
DateTime
==PAGE:34==
24
5 Implementation
Id
The unique identifier of a participant. An excel spreadsheet maps the details
of the user like name, age and gender to an assigned user Id. Together with the SetID
it is the primary key.
SetId
Each time the user does a continuous number of ratings it is considered
a set. If the parameters are changed in anyway (like switching arm) it is considered
a new set. Together with the User it is the primary key.
IsPractice
A boolean to determine whether ratings are not to be considered,
and makes it possible to test things out, to get to know the colors better, and learn
how to work with the novel rating methods.
ActiveFrom
Denotes when the record was last active, and through that it is
determined that the currently active user, is the most recently active user. If a user-set
already exists, it is simply updated to the current time.
5.1.1.2
Stimulus
The stimulus model is primarily concerned with storing the blackness of the stimulus.
Stimulus
Id:
Int
Created:
DateTime
Rating:
Rating
Blackness:
Float
UserReference:
Int
SetReference:
Int
IsPractice:
Bool
IsActive:
Bool
ActiveFrom:
DateTime
Id
Primary key
Created
When the stimulus was created
Rating
Once the stimulus has been rated, the rating is referenced here.
Blackness
Stores the reversed lightness component of the CIEL*a*b* color
space. The field therefore goes from 0 to 100, where 100 is completely black. (the
CIEL*a*b* colorspace uses lightness instead of blackness where 100 is white)
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Server & Database “Ivy”
25
UserReference, SetReference, IsPractice
Values of the active user is copied
over to these fields, and stored statically with it.
IsActive & ActiveFrom
Used to identify which Stimulus is active.
As noted above, when the stimulus is rated, the details of the currently active
user are added to the stimulus, and stored with it, this is done to keep the stimulus
as a shallow model, simplifying the database at the expense of extensibility — which
is not that relevant for a controlled test. The stimulus therefore stores the user and
set ID, its practice status, and of course a reference to the rating itself.
5.1.1.3
Rating
The rating entity simply works as the base of all ratings, and all subsequent ratings
inherit from it, therefore it is the only rating entity with an Id.
Rating
Id:
Int
Created:
DateTime
Source:
String
Id
Primary key, and used as reference in Stimulus.
Created
When the user performed the rating.
Source
The source of origin for this method. It is particularly relevant for the
methods Blackthorn and Chestnut, which both use MotionRating. The value is one
of the following: Baseline, Aspen, Blackthorn, or Chestnut.
5.1.1.4
BaselineRating
The baseline rating is sent from Walnut, and represents the VAS method, which in
the code is referred to as either Baseline or Walnut.
BaselineRating
Value:
Float
Value
Is the value of the slider when the participant submits the rating. The
slider allows values between 0.0 and 100.0.
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Implementation
5.1.1.5
HoldRating
The hold rating is used by the Aspen rating method.
HoldRating
Duration:
Int
Duration
The number of milliseconds between the button down and button up
events, in other words, how long the participant held the button down.
5.1.1.6
MotionRating
Now the MotionRating model is quite a bit more complicated than the other ratings,
which comes as a result of storing associated motion data.
Without getting into the maths behind quaternions, there is a useful (and easy
to serialize; see below) way of representing a three dimensional rotation. Its main
advantage is that contrary to the simpler Euler angles, quaternions are not sensitive to
the gimbal lock problem, which causes the loss of one degree of freedom. Alternative
ways of solving that, is the use of rotational matrices, but quaternions are easier to
convert to Euler angles, and that is what we ultimately want to work with.
Only the degree property is meant to be used for calculating results, but the
rotational data is stored as well, in case there would be any issues related to the
usage of degree. The main degree is therefore also found in the AttitudeChange as
Roll, Pitch or Yaw, stored as radians.
MotionRating
Degree:
Float
MainRotation:
String
Start:
DateTime
Stop:
DateTime
QuaternionStart:
Quaternion
QuaternionStop:
Quaternion
AttitudeChange:
Attitude
Quaternion
Id:
Int
W:
Float
X:
Float
Y:
Float
Z:
Float
Attitude
Id:
Int
Roll:
Float
Yaw:
Float
Pitch:
Float
Degree
The amount of degrees with which the participant has altered the ori-
entation of the device with. The axis of the rotation where this comes from, depends
on the method and device configuration.
MainRotation
The rotation which is set as the source, and is thus different
depending on method and device configuration. By Blackthorn, it is always Roll, and
if the rating comes from Chestnut, it is configurable to be either Yaw or Pitch.
==PAGE:37==
5.1 Server & Database “Ivy”
27
Start
When the rating measurement is started.
Stop
When the rating measurement is ended, and rating stored.
QuaternionStart
The initial attitude/rotation when rating starts.
QuaternionStop
The final attitude/rotation when rating ends.
AttitudeChange
Stores the change in rotation as Euler angles, in radians.
5.1.2
Functionality
It is the job of the server to orchestrate the multiple devices into a coherent relational
database. That can later be queried, in order to easily perform analytics.
5.1.2.1
Active Stimulus and User Management
As the devices do not communicate individually, it’s the job of the server to know
which stimulus is active and which user is active.
Every time Walnut sends a new active user, it is checked in the database, and
if another user with same ID and set ID already exists, its ActiveFrom is simply
updated to the current time. If it did not exist, a new record is inserted.
The Stimulus is similarly tracked, and every time a new stimulus is received from
Walnut, it is set as the new active stimulus. If an active stimulus already exists, it
will be marked as no longer the active, prior to adding the new one.
5.1.2.2
Rating a Stimulus
When a participant rates a stimulus, the rating is sent to the server, and the active
stimulus is found, and its Rating property is set to the rating in question, and the
active user is loaded, and its details copied to the stimulus object. The stimulus is
then marked as no longer active. In the event that a rating is submitted when there
is no active stimulus, the rating submission is dropped and through HTTP Status
Codes, it is communicated back to the client that a rating was not possible.
But if a stimulus is added while there already is an unrated active stimulus, the
new stimulus is marked as the active, and the existing marked as no longer active.
The old one is replaced on the assumption that we are most likely dealing with a new
test, and no longer know the old stimulus. Otherwise, it would require the Walnut
method to send a request for the currently active stimulus, which would complicate
the code, and require more time to develop.
Finally a way to un-rate was also added, in the event that a participant regretted a
rating, and wanted to undo. This would then select the most recently rated stimulus,
and remove it’s rating, so that it would not be used later.
==PAGE:38==
28
5 Implementation
5.2
Stimulus & Baseline “Walnut”
The iPad app, with the project name “Walnut”, is where the test is configured, where
the participant sees the stimulus, and also serves as the input device for rating with
the baseline VAS method.
5.2.1
Showing Stimulus
One of the main purposes of the iPad app, Walnut, is to show the stimulus that the
participant is asked to rate. This is done by generating a random number between
0 and 50, and then multiply this number with 2, to get 50 random (even) numbers
between 0 and 100.
This number is then used when creating the color, by using
it as the value for the lightness component of a CIELAB-color type (implemented
in a third-party library DynamicColor which extends the UIColor class to support
alternative color schemes), with a* and b* equal to 0 (making it greyscale). The result
is a that Walnut picks a random greyscale color between white and black among 50
possible shades. The noise pattern is implemented as a static black and white noise
pattern image, with a very small grain size, to make it difficult to use as comparison.
5.2.1.1
Controlling Bias
As mentioned in the Section 4.5 there is a significant amount of work done to reduce
any bias. The hypothesis is that having a reference color close to the stimulus, makes
it easier to determine if a stimulus is darker/lighter than the reference, and how much
different it is. This is why Matejka et al. [13] chose to apply the noise pattern behind
the stimulus, on an otherwise white website background. I decided to build further
on this, and introduce some additional ways of reducing bias:
2-Second Hidden Stimulus
is the introduction of a delay after a stimulus is
rated. The stimulus box is hidden, and changed to its new color when it arrives back.
The idea is here that if the stimulus was instantly changed, it would be trivial for a
participant to judge small variations in color if for instance a grey was shown, and
afterwards a slightly darker grey was shown. The visual step up in blackness is then
remembered by the participant and thus reflected as a more accurate measurement,
particularly for colors that are very similar.
Eliminating Greyscale colours everywhere else
is another way of tackling the
bias, which is possible on an iPad device, as I can control the entire screen. It simply
means that all colors used are either blueish hues, red or some other color. It makes
the interface slightly less professional to look at, but the effect is that there is no
place on the device where the user can directly compare a stimulus, but comparing
the lightness/darkness of a color.
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Stimulus & Baseline “Walnut”
29
5.2.2
Test Configuration
In order to, easily set up a test for participant, configuration options were added to
the bottom of the view, where it is possible to set the following settings:
User ID Such that it matches with the user in an accompanying spreadsheet, that
provides more user details.
Set ID Increment for each change to how rating is performed (method type, rating
behavior, multiple sessions, etc)
Practice Mode Toggle on and off, which changes the state in the backend for the
currently active user model.
Internal or external rating External rating means that the VAS scale is hidden.
AutoNext Continuously ping the backend to check if the stimulus has been rated,
and if true, changes to a new stimulus. This makes rating much faster and
smooth experience. As the participant does not have to manually move to next
stimulus.
5.2.3
VAS Baseline Rating
The implementation of the VAS method is done with a ten centimeter wide Slider,
which only upon first touch displays a marker, and allows the participant to tap
anywhere on the line to set the marker to this position. Descriptions of each extreme
are added, as well as end ticks. The slider does not perform any snapping behavior,
and the position of the slider is completely in the control of the participant.
Only after the participant has selected a position on the line, does the Next button
appear, and it is therefore not possible to submit an empty rating, purposefully or
incidentally.
5.2.4
Design
The UI of the app was designed to mimic the test from Matejka et al. [13], but with
some few additions with the use of a control panel. Figure 5.3 shows how the app
looks when performing the VAS method of the rating, before setting the marker.
After touching the slider for the first time, the marker becomes visible, and the
button to move to the next stimulus appears see Figure 5.4.
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Implementation
Figure 5.3: User interface of Walnut before rating with baseline.
Figure 5.4: Marker and button appears after marking on the line with a touch.
Figure 5.5: When using external rating, baseline is hidden.
5.3
Shared Features of External Rating Apps
The following features are common for all the iPhone apps; Aspen, Blackthorn, and
Chestnut. They are therefore explained here, instead of individually.
5.3.1
Connecting to The Smartbutton
Before the app can be used, the smartbutton needs to be connected, and this is done
through a hook into an official Flic app, which handles the connection to the button.
The user of the app therefore simply “Grab” a Flic button, and select which one to
connect to. As I only had a single Flic button, it was necessary to do this step each
time a new app was used, as the Flic would otherwise be tied to that app.
If one had multiple Flic buttons, it would be possible to only need this step once,
and each app would then be associated with that physical Flic (hopefully in three
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Shared Features of External Rating Apps
31
Figure 5.6: Connecting to the Flic Button
different colors).
After binding with the Flic button, it would connect, and setup, before announcing
itself as ready.
At this point, the delegates for button events become active, and clicking the
button triggers the relevant events.
5.3.2
Submitting a Rating
As a confirmation step, before sending the rating to the server, the user is asked
to “Swipe to Submit”, and by swiping the large green area, the stored active rating
is sent to the server. With auto-next enabled on the iPad, it will change to a new
Stimulus within a second. See Figure 5.7 to see how this looks.
The connection to the server is done via the servers HTTPS RESTful API, where
objects sent are serialized to JSON objects.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Implementation
Figure 5.7: Swipe to submit a rating.
5.3.3
Status Bar
When the app is communicating with the Flic and with the server, it uses two discrete
rectangles that changes colors according to the current/last status. Green for success,
blue for a warning such as sending a rating if there is no active stimulus, and red for
serious errors. The only exception is for the Flic status bar, where the connected/-
success color is the same color as the button (Flic SDK can determine this), in order
to easily identify the button color.
5.4
Method A “Aspen”
The way Aspen works is very simple, and does not require the smartwatch. It only
requires accurate timing, which is provided by a small library that simply wraps
Swift’s built-in Date() into an easy-to-consume API.
5.4.1
How to Rate
Below are the instructions for how to use Aspen to rate.
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Method A “Aspen”
33
1. Connect the smartbutton by ”Grabbing” the Flic.
2. Press down the smartbutton to start the stopwatch.
3. Release the button to stop the stopwatch.
4. A HoldRating object is created, and saved.
5. The green swipe-to-submit box appears.
6. If satisfied with the rating, simply swipe to submit, and the rating is finished.
7. Otherwise re-do the rating to overwrite (which updates the timestamp), or hold
the red “Hold to Clear” button for 1.5 seconds to discard the rating.
5.4.2
Design
The UI was designed of the principle that form follows function. It is therefore very
simple, but does what it needs to do well.
Figure 5.8: The UI of Aspen
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Implementation
5.4.3
Issues and Workarounds
5.4.3.1
Accurate Timing
A key aspect of this type of a measurement is the ability to accurately and consistently
determine the time between the button being pressed, and the button being released.
When the user presses down the button, the button registers the event, and sends the
signal to the communication chip, in this case, Bluetooth, which then communicates
to the phone that the button was pressed down. This triggers the relevant code in
the app.
During implementation, it was discovered, that the Flic button would intermit-
tently add a roughly 300ms delay. As this delay was inconsistent, it made it impossible
to accurately measure a discernible difference between a very fast click, and a relaxed
click, which is crucial for rating purposes. The delay was caused by the Bluetooth
connection, which would regularly slow down to save power. The result was that
almost half of the measurements were on average at 290ms, whereas the other half
was on average 16ms, which gives a standard deviation of the sample at 140ms.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Duration (ms)
Button Click #
Repeated Click Test
Default
Bluetooth Low-Latency
Figure 5.9: Timing Accuracy of the Flic Button
This was however solved by putting the Flic button in a Bluetooth Low Latency
mode, which makes the Bluetooth connection much more stable, at the expense of
a slightly higher latency floor (~97ms higher), but because it is now a consistent
delay, it makes it possible to use for reasonably accurate timing. As a result, the
small sample test had an average of 114ms, with a standard deviation of 18ms. See
Figure 5.9 which shows the samples plotted on a graph.
==PAGE:45==
5.5 Method B “Blackthorn”
35
5.5
Method B “Blackthorn”
As the user starts the Blackthorn Watch App, the watch begins a workoutsession
(More on this in Section 5.5.5.1), and starts capturing motion data. When the user
then holds down the smartbutton to start a measurement, the phone saves the next
motion data to arrive from the watch as the starting point. As confirmation, a vibra-
tion is sent back to the watch, to give the user a feedback, that capturing has begun.
Subsequent received data is then ignored, until the user releases the smartbutton,
triggering the phone to save the next received motion data as the final point. The
watch is sent a vibration to signal the end of the motion capturing.
With the start and finishing point saved, the phone then calculates the delta
by taking the inverse of the start quaternion (the conjugate), and then performs
quaternion multiplication to get the change. See Equation 5.1.
Qδ = Q−1
startQstop where {Qstart, Qstop, Qδ ∈H}
(5.1)
With the resulting delta quaternion, we can convert it to Euler angles in the form
of roll, pitch and yaw using equation 5.2


roll
pitch
yaw

=


arctan
(
2(qwqx+qyqz)
1−2(q2x+q2y)
)
arcsin (2(qwqy −qzqx))
arctan
(
2(qwqz+qxqy)
1−2(q2y+q2z)
)


(5.2)
Now that we have the angles, we will take the angle that describes the rotation
around the axis relevant to the motion we perform. In the case of Blackthorn, this is
the roll motion, so we will take the value of roll (in radians) and convert it to degrees
(our preferred output unit) and store it as the Degree property in our MotionRating
object. Along with it, we will store the two quaternions, and the delta converted to
Euler Angles, in the event we would need the underlying data.
The MotionRating is then sent to the server, and the watch is sent a vibration
that varies depending on whether or not the submission was a success or a failure.
5.5.1
Motion Data Capture
The app gets the motion data from the CoreMotion[2] Framework provided by Ap-
ple, with which the Watch gets updated at a set frequency with the current motion
data. Among these data, are the data specific to the rotations of the device, called
the device attitude.
This data is then streamed to the phone through the Apple
WatchConnectivity[5] Framework, which provides messaging capabilities.
But be-
cause Euler angles are vulnerable to Gimbal lock, the data is extracted from the
CoreMotion using CoreMotion’s Quaternion structure (see Section 5.5.5.2) instead of
an Euler Angles.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Implementation
5.5.2
Vibration Feedback
Because measuring the change of angle is slightly more complex, and due to delays in
communication between the phone and the watch, it is necessary to provide the user
with some cues, that nudge the user into completing the measurement in a correct
way.
Chief of these being the usage of notifications that cause the watch to vibrate,
and if not muted, play a small notification sound.
Apple does not allow custom
notification sounds or vibrations for the watch in watchOS 4, but instead provide the
following profiles, of which the ones marked in bold are used.
• notification
• directionUp
• directionDown
• success — Submitting Rating Succeeded
• failure — Submitting Rating Failed
• retry
• start — Measurement Started
• stop — Measurement Ended
• click
5.5.3
How to Rate
Rating with Blackthorn works in the following way (it is assumed the watch is already
attached and connected):
1. Connect the smartbutton by “Grabbing” the Flic.
2. Start the Blackthorn Watch App on the watch.
3. Click “Start” to begin the measurement session.
4. Hold the hand/watch in an appropriate start position.
5. Press and hold the smartbutton.
6. This should cause vibration in the watch.
7. When it vibrates, you are allowed to move the hand.
8. Change the angle of the hand/watch to a degree you find appropriately repre-
sents the intensity (blackness) of the stimulus.
==PAGE:47==
5.5 Method B “Blackthorn”
37
9. Release the button when you have found the appropriate position.
10. A confirming vibration is sent to the watch.
11. When the vibration is received, the MotionRating object is saved.
12. The green swipe-to-submit box appears.
13. If satisfied with the rating, simply swipe to submit, and the rating is finished.
14. Otherwise re-do the rating to overwrite (which updates the timestamp), or hold
the red “Hold to Clear” button for 1.5 seconds to discard the rating.
5.5.4
Design
The phone UI of Blackthorn is identical to the one for Aspen. See Figure 5.8. But
for Blackthorn and Chestnut, there’s also a small watch app which simply starts and
stops the motion data collection. See Figure 5.10, and 5.11.
Figure 5.10: The UI of the Watch app
5.5.5
Issues and Workarounds
5.5.5.1
Execution Time
The Apple Watch is designed to last throughout an entire day (or more), and of the
ways Apple manages this, is by being extremely defensive about giving execution time
to the application that runs on it.[4] This is why an app will in practice suspend all
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Implementation
Figure 5.11: The UI of the Watch app — Data capture active
execution once the display turns off. When using the watch you usually look at it in
front of you with the display facing you, but if the watch is turned away from the
user, it will automatically sense this and turn off the display. The latter movement
happens for instance at the rating, where the watch is expected to be rotated, and
thus not always be in view. The net effect of this behavior is that CoreMotion data
will immediately cease streaming to the phone as soon as the display turns off. It will
consequently make angle measurements impossible.
The solution to this problem is perhaps a bit strangely, to enter a HealthKit[3]
WorkoutSession, and pretend that the user is doing some sort of workout. When
the Apple Watch is in a workout session, the app that runs the workout is given
execution time, even when the display is off, although slightly slower than being in
the foreground.
So in the case of this app, when the user clicks on the “Start” in the watch
app interface, the app starts a new workout session (configured to be indoor core
training—to be accurate to certain extent).
5.5.5.2
Angle Calculation
When getting angles from CoreMotion, it is possible to use the attitude data directly
in its quaternion format, to calculate the net change from some quaternion q0 to q1,
but Apple does not allow creating new attitude object on your own, so you need
to do the calculation at the moment you receive CoreMotion data updates, as the
calculation methods are part of this attitude object. Because I wanted to off-load data
processing to the phone, as this is the only device which can manage the connection
==PAGE:49==
5.6 Method C “Chestnut”
39
to the smartbutton, I had to export the raw quaternion values, and through the use
of a third-party VectorMath Swift library, do the quaternion calculations.
5.6
Method C “Chestnut”
The implementation of Blackthorn and Chestnut are almost identical, with a few ex-
ceptions, which we will go through here. For the general implementation of Chestnut,
I will refer to the above Section 5.5 about Blackthorn, which covers this.
The primary difference between Chestnut and Blackthorn, is that Chestnut uses a
different axis of rotation than Blackthorn. In fact, Chestnut supports two rotations;
pitch and yaw.
The user then prior to starting rating, selects which rotation to
use using a binary button (see Figure 5.12.) The implication of this choice is when
deciding which rotation to convert to degrees and feature as the Degree property of
the MotionRating object.
5.6.1
Design
For the chestnut, the design is similar to the previous methods, with the exception
of a toggle for switching between pitch and yaw. See Figure 5.12
5.6.2
Issues and Workarounds
Ideally you would not have to worry about which particular axis you do the rotation
with, but the work required to make this happen is far greater than working with
just a single rotation axis, and as this is not critical to evaluating the accuracy (the
user can pick the rotation freely), it made sense to simply restrict the user to only
use whichever was the preferred, and then only look at the rotation of this axis, and
simply ignore the rotation of the other axis.
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Implementation
Figure 5.12: The UI of the Chestnut app
5.7
Post-Test Interview
The post test interview was done as a Google Forms survey, where participants would
be asked to fill out right after completing the controlled test. For ambiguous questions,
the user was instructed to interpret as best effort.
Each method would be evaluated using a 7-step scale, using some statements, that
the participant would be asked to rate agreement with.
5.8
Pilot Test
Prior to actual controlled test, two initial tests were conducted. Here it was discov-
ered that the test progressed more smoothly when the participant was able to move
at his or her own pace, and submit rating as part of the test, instead of the test coordi-
nator being responsible for this. The swipe-to-submit was introduced to simplify this
process. The post-test interview was also further refined, and questions streamlined,
for easier understanding.
As part of the pilot test, the initial data was investigated to evaluate if the right
data was captured, and if it was usable. This underwent without problems, and the
==PAGE:51==
5.8 Pilot Test
41
real test was then commenced.
==PAGE:52==
42
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Results
The controlled test was conducted in the beginning of 2018, from mid-January until
the beginning of February. The group of volunteer participants consisted of various
DTU students as well as friends and acquaintances, with a median age of 25 and
consisting of a roughly 30:70 female:male gender distribution. Most participants are
or were students at the Technical University of Denmark.
We will go through the results, starting from the data gathered until we get to
the information that we are looking for, namely comparing the accuracy between the
three different methods and the baseline.
6.1
Data
Before removing outliers and applying mapping of the data to the blackness domain,
let’s take a look at how the data looks, and and look for any immediate patterns.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Value
Blackness
Baseline
Figure
6.1:
Raw data from the Baseline
method (ie. VAS)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Milliseconds
Blackness
Aspen
Figure 6.2: Raw data from the Aspen method
The raw baseline data in Figure 6.1 shows a nice linear trend fairly centered on
the actual blackness with accordance to our expectation, but we are clearly seeing
a lot of noise as we get closer to the middle. For Aspen on Figure 6.2 this is also
noticeable. The red line is there to give an idea of where the data is centered around,
and does not reflect any calculated trend line. We can notice that large majority of
ratings are within 4 seconds.
In Figure 6.3 the data is a bit more interesting, and here we’ve added two red lines
that correspond to a participant using a scale of roughly 0–90° and 0–180°. This is
==PAGE:54==
44
6 Results
also seen in Figure 6.4, but there we can only distinguish a 0–90°. For both of them,
we can see that there is a number of outliers (marked with the red square) where the
degree is below 10° even when the actual blackness is significantly higher than one
would expect.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Degrees
Blackness
Blackthorn
Figure 6.3:
Raw data from the Blackthorn
method
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Degrees
Blackness
Chestnut
Figure 6.4:
Raw data from the Chestnut
method
6.1.1
Outlier Exclusion
Because these outliers look like the result of a measurement error by the prototype,
which is supported by the fact that both Blackthorn and Chestnut have this at exactly
the same place—we shall exclude them with a simple filter, such that they will not
skew our results, and particularly our mapping to the blackness domain, which is
particularly sensitive to outliers.
First, let’s define some variables
J is the set of raw data from Blackthorn or Chestnut
b is the blackness component of data j ∈J
d is the degree component of data j ∈J
(6.1)
We will then define our outlier detection function as
is-outlier(b, d) =
{
True
if b > 30 ∧d < 5
False
otherwise
(6.2)
Which we’ll use to define our set of data that doesn’t include outliers.
J′ = {(b, d) : j ∈J ∧¬is-outlier(b, d)}
(6.3)
6.1.2
Mapping
With the removal of outliers, we will apply the mapping, so we can directly compare
the data inputs on one graph. As mentioned in Section 4.6.1.4 we can tweak the
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Data
45
choice of regression model in terms of how good an improvement over linear should
be. A good balance was found when setting:
i ≡EXPONENTIAL_MAX = 0.5
j ≡IMPROVEMENT_THRESHOLD = 0.05
(6.4)
6.1.2.1
Choice of Regression
After processing the data sets for each user for each method, we’ve found that the
overwhelming majority of all mappings were mapped best with a linear regression,
but a few didn’t:
User
Method
Model
Linear R2
Exp. R2
Log. R2
Improvement
A
Aspen
Exp.
0.78
0.94
0.55
+0.16
B
Aspen
Exp.
0.84
0.93
0.64
+0.09
C
Aspen
Exp.
0.71
0.76
0.47
+0.05
D
Aspen
Exp.
0.68
0.79
0.45
+0.11
E
Aspen
Exp.
0.69
0.80
0.49
+0.11
F
Blackthorn
Exp.
0.69
0.89
0.44
+0.20
D
Blackthorn
Exp.
0.55
0.63
0.43
+0.08
E
Chestnut
Exp.
0.77
0.91
0.48
+0.14
G
Chestnut
Log.
0.81
0.43
0.86
+0.5
H
Chestnut
Log.
0.73
0.41
0.79
+0.6
Table 6.1: Mappings fitted best with non-linear regression
In the case of Aspen, this actually represents 20% (5/25) of the Aspen mappings,
and overall there are 13% of mappings that are not mapped with linear. Not only
are some mapped better with non-linear, for Aspen, the average R2 improvement is
0.104, and the strongest improvement is performed by User F with an improvement of
0.20. The strongest alternative fit is from User A with an R2 of 0.94 for exponential
regression.
6.1.3
Mapped Data
By mapping the data, we get the following graph, where all rating methods have been
added to a single graph. This gives us the first glimpse of how the different methods
perform. See Figure 6.5.
What is very interesting about Figure 6.5 is how well it follows the actual blackness,
which matches the patterns we saw earlier in Figure 6.1. If we pay particular attention
to the colors we can see that blue is slightly more spread out, while the rest are fairly
concentrated at the ideal line.
==PAGE:56==
46
6 Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Rated Blackness
Actual Blackness
All Ratings
Aspen
Chestnut
Blackthorn
Baseline
Actual
Figure 6.5: Graph of all methods after removing outliers, and applying mapping
6.2
Rating Distribution
The distribution of ratings, shows how often a participant rated something with a par-
ticular value. Ideally, we would see a perfectly uniform distribution, but as observed
by Matejka et al. [13], this is unlikely to be the case. Therefore it is not surprising
that we see the same results that Matejka et al. [13] found. See Figure 6.6 which
displays this phenomena. The effect is enhanced by the bin size of 2; particularly at
each extreme.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
# of ratings
Rated Blackness (Bin size = 2)
Baseline Histogram
Figure 6.6: Distribution of ratings for Baseline
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
# of ratings
Rated Blackness (Bin size = 2)
Aspen Histogram
Figure 6.7: Distribution of ratings for Aspen
Contrast this with how Figure 6.7, 6.8, and 6.9 looks, where the distribution is
more mixed. The mapped methods also show increased extremes, but in their case,
==PAGE:57==
6.3 Characteristics
47
it is the result of a floor and ceiling, where all mapped values are set to 100 if above
100, and 0 if less than 0.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
# of ratings
Rated Blackness (Bin size = 2)
Blackthorn Histogram
Figure 6.8: Distribution of ratings for Black-
thorn
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
# of ratings
Rated Blackness (Bin size = 2)
Chestnut Histogram
Figure 6.9: Distribution of ratings for Chest-
nut
6.3
Characteristics
With box-and-whisker plot of the lower-quartile, upper-quartile, median, and 5–95th
percentile as whiskers, we can see the individual characteristics of each method across
the range of blackness, which is segmented into bins of size 10, to have enough data for
each bin. Each bin contains a minimum of 97 ratings, with roughly 130 on average.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 — 10
10 — 20
20 — 30
30 — 40
40 — 50
50 — 60
60 — 70
70 — 80
80 — 90
90 — 100
Rated Value
Actual Blackness (Bin size = 10)
Aspen
Figure 6.10: Aspen ratings as they vary across the blackness scale
Ideally, we would want to see each box fit in-between two major lines (height of
10), and with the middle line around the middle of the range. But instead we are
seeing a fair amount of intervals where the ratings extend greatly beyond this.
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 — 10
10 — 20
20 — 30
30 — 40
40 — 50
50 — 60
60 — 70
70 — 80
80 — 90
90 — 100
Rated Value
Actual Blackness (Bin size = 10)
Blackthorn
Figure 6.11: Blackthorn ratings as they vary across the blackness scale
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 — 10
10 — 20
20 — 30
30 — 40
40 — 50
50 — 60
60 — 70
70 — 80
80 — 90
90 — 100
Rated Value
Actual Blackness (Bin size = 10)
Chestnut
Figure 6.12: Chestnut ratings as they vary across the blackness scale
According to Figure 6.13, it would seem as if the majority of baseline ratings are
more spread out than the other methods, but with a median closer to the target. But
when comparing linearity of the four different methods, the graphs suggests that the
baseline is more linear, whereas the three alternatives are changing slope at around
the middle.
==PAGE:59==
6.4 Rating Accuracy
49
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 — 10
10 — 20
20 — 30
30 — 40
40 — 50
50 — 60
60 — 70
70 — 80
80 — 90
90 — 100
Rated Value
Actual Blackness (Bin size = 10)
Baseline
Figure 6.13: Baseline ratings as they vary across the blackness scale
6.4
Rating Accuracy
In this section, we will look closer at the results showing how accurate each rating
method is. Figure 6.14, 6.15, 6.16, and 6.17 show a histogram of the distance of each
rating to the true blackness.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-96 -92 -88 -84 -80 -76 -72 -68 -64 -60 -56 -52 -48 -44 -40 -36 -32 -28 -24 -20 -16 -12 -8 -4
0
4
8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72 76 80 84 88 92 96
# of Ratings
Error (Bin size = 2)
Histogram of Aspen Error
Figure 6.14: Distribution of Aspen ratings.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-96 -92 -88 -84 -80 -76 -72 -68 -64 -60 -56 -52 -48 -44 -40 -36 -32 -28 -24 -20 -16 -12 -8 -4
0
4
8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72 76 80 84 88 92 96
# of Ratings
Error (Bin size = 2)
Histogram of Blackthorn Error
Figure 6.15:
Distribution of Blackthorn rat-
ings.
The red bar is to help identify the midpoint, which is the bin with range -1 to 1.
Notice how the peak is located slightly to the right, perhaps with the exception of
baseline which is more evenly distributed around the true value.
If we then bring them all together in a graph, we can see if there are any differences
that stand out. See Figure 6.18 which shows the relative frequency of errors.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-96 -92 -88 -84 -80 -76 -72 -68 -64 -60 -56 -52 -48 -44 -40 -36 -32 -28 -24 -20 -16 -12 -8 -4
0
4
8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72 76 80 84 88 92 96
# of Ratings
Error (Bin size = 2)
Histogram of Chestnut Error
Figure 6.16: Distribution of Chestnut ratings.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-96 -92 -88 -84 -80 -76 -72 -68 -64 -60 -56 -52 -48 -44 -40 -36 -32 -28 -24 -20 -16 -12 -8 -4
0
4
8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72 76 80 84 88 92 96
# of Ratings
Error (Bin size = 2)
Histogram of Baseline Error
Figure 6.17: Distribution of Baseline ratings.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
-50 -48 -46 -44 -42 -40 -38 -36 -34 -32 -30 -28 -26 -24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50
Percentage
Error (Bin size = 2)
Histogram of Error
Aspen
Blackthorn
Chestnut
Baseline
Figure 6.18: Overlay of the histogram from all methods.
6.4.1
Absolute Error
Figure 6.19 shows the same data as Figure 6.18, but it uses the absolute error instead,
to focus on the difference from the true blackness.
==PAGE:61==
6.5 Summary of Accuracy
51
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
Percentage
Error Magnitude (bin size = 2)
Histogram of Error Magnitude
Aspen
Blackthorn
Chestnut
Baseline
Figure 6.19: Overlay of the histogram from all methods.
6.5
Summary of Accuracy
In Table 6.2 the data is summarized into a single table, which shows the mean average
error for the entire range of blackness. Additionally, it includes the results split into
lower, mid, and upper ranges of blackness, to identify if some methods perform better
in parts of the spectrum than others.
Table 6.2 also contains a comparison between the first half of ratings done by a
user, as well as the second half, to compare any the methods in terms of a learning
effect.
Average error is calculated as the mean error for each user (with the exception
of All Users which bundles all ratings as one user). The average and median user
is therefore calculated as the aggregate of the 25 users internal1 average error. The
standard deviation is consequently, the standard deviation of the 25 users values. It
is therefore an indicator for how similar the users are.
6.5.1
Significance
As the average error follows a normal distribution, we will perform a two-sample two-
sided T test, to see if the methods have comparable accuracy, or if one is significantly
different. From Table 6.2 we have the mean (total, average user) and standard devi-
1Restricting aggregates to only that particular user
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Results
Accuracy of Rating
Average Error
Baseline
Aspen
Blackthorn
Chestnut
Total
- All Users
8.72
8.85
8.96
8.34
- Average User
8.73
8.82
8.97
8.21
- Median User
8.31
8.76
8.70
8.27
- Std. Dev.
3.14
2.21
1.90
2.03
Lower Blackness: 0–33
- All Users
7.59
6.85
8.71
8.18
- Average User
7.61
6.87
8.75
7.95
- Median User
7.05
5.98
7.65
8.16
- Std. Dev.
2.18
2.48
3.79
2.86
Mid Blackness: 33–66
- All Users
11.18
9.69
10.09
9.64
- Average User
11.05
9.58
10.32
9.42
- Median User
9.36
9.00
10.03
9.61
- Std. Dev.
4.85
2.80
2.64
2.36
Upper Blackness: 66–100
- All Users
6.99
9.87
8.16
7.21
- Average User
6.97
9.96
7.95
7.23
- Median User
5.83
10.02
7.96
6.50
- Std. Dev.
4.27
3.38
1.94
2.88
First Half
- All Users
8.51
8.89
9.50
8.14
- Average User
8.81
9.19
8.96
7.91
- Median User
7.91
8.09
9.16
7.97
- Std. Dev.
3.47
2.64
2.40
2.31
Second Half
- All Users
8.92
8.80
8.41
8.54
- Average User
8.65
8.45
8.99
8.51
- Median User
7.72
8.37
8.34
7.78
- Std. Dev.
3.43
2.49
2.34
2.45
Table 6.2: Summary of the accuracy of the four different method.
ation. H0: The accuracy is same as baseline. Ha: The accuracy is not the same as
baseline.
Method
T-Value
Degrees of Freedom
P-Value
Signifiant (p < 0.05)
Aspen
0.117
48
0.907
No
Blackthorn
0.327
48
0.745
No
Chestnut
0.695
48
0.490
No
==PAGE:63==
6.6 Post Test Interview
53
6.5.2
Change from Baseline
Table 6.3 shows the change from baseline for each of the three new methods, and
highlights respectively better and worse results from baseline.
Accuracy Change From Baseline
Average Error
Aspen
Blackthorn
Chestnut
Total
- All Users
1.5%
2.8%
-4.4%
- Average User
1.0%
2.8%
-5.9%
- Median User
5.4%
4.7%
-0.5%
Lower Blackness: 0–33
- All Users
-9.7%
14.8%
7.8%
- Average User
-9.7%
14.9%
4.3%
- Median User
-15.2%
8.5%
15.7%
Mid Blackness: 33–66
- All Users
-13.3%
-9.7%
-13.8%
- Average User
-13.3%
-6.6%
-14.7%
- Median User
-3.8%
7.2%
2.7%
Upper Blackness: 66–100
- All Users
41.2%
16.7%
3.1%
- Average User
42.8%
14.1%
3.6%
- Median User
71.9%
36.5%
11.5%
First Half
- All Users
4.5%
11.6%
-4.3%
- Average User
4.2%
1.6%
-10.2%
- Median User
2.3%
15.8%
0.8%
Second Half
- All Users
-1.3%
-5.7%
-4.3%
- Average User
-2.3%
4.0%
-1.5%
- Median User
8.4%
8.0%
0.8%
Table 6.3: Summary of the accuracy of the four different method.
Changes that are better compares to the baseline are marked with green, and
worse are marked with red.
6.6
Post Test Interview
Excerpts of the post test interview are included here. Its use is mainly to provide
insight to how the participant experienced the test and initial impressions.
One
interview was lost for unknown technical reasons, and another was interrupted; as a
result, there are only 23 interviews.
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Results
6.6.1
General Questions
Which Method Did You Prefer?
Method
N
%
Aspen
4
17.4
Blackthorn
4
17.4
Chestnut
8
34.7
Baseline*
7
30.4
Table 6.4: First question of the post-test interview.
* Baseline was removed from the beginning, because the goal was to compare the
three other methods.
When it was asked to explain why the participants picked this particular method,
the most common answer referred to the ability to visually confirm the action (See
Appendix C.1). The preference towards baseline is further confirmed in Figure 6.6
with the question about which method was deemed the fastest.
Which method was the fastest?
Method
N
%
Aspen
7
30.4
Blackthorn
0
0
Chestnut
1
4.3
Baseline
15
65.2
Table 6.5: Answers to the question “Which method was the fastest?”
However, when asked which was the most accurate, the Chestnut showed up as
the preferred alternative method.
Which method was the most accurate?
Method
N
%
Aspen
2
8.7
Blackthorn
0
0
Chestnut
5
21.7
Baseline
16
69.5
Table 6.6: Answers to the question “Which method was the most accurate?”
Two questions turned out to be ambiguous during the survey, as people had diffi-
culty distinguishing between the two (Participants were asked to interpret it as they
saw it). They consequently also answered fairly similar, but chestnut and blackthorn
are slightly more represented as convenient at the expense of the baseline.
==PAGE:65==
6.6 Post Test Interview
55
Which method was the most convenient?
Method
N
%
Aspen
6
26.1
Blackthorn
4
17.4
Chestnut
3
13
Baseline
10
43.4
Table 6.7: Answers to the question “Which method was the most convenient?”
Which method was the most practical?
Method
N
%
Aspen
6
26.1
Blackthorn
4
17.4
Chestnut
0
0
Baseline
13
56.5
Table 6.8: Answers to the question “Which method was the most practical?”
6.6.2
Fatigue
7 out of the 23 participants experienced fatigue when using one of the angle measure-
ment methods, primarily Blackthorn. Participants reported that their arm got sore
after doing the 50 ratings.
6.6.3
Method Evaluation
Each participant was asked to evaluate on a 7-point scale whether the user agreed
with a certain statement. A maximum score means that the user strongly agreed,
and respectively disagreed for the lowest score. Figure 6.20 summarizes the results,
with the mean average across the 23 users.
6.6.4
Maximum Blackness
For each method, participants were asked what (if any) they considered the maximum
blackness. I intended to get responses such as “90°” or “4 seconds”. Table 6.9, and 6.10
shows the number of participant that rated a certain category, for each method.
“None” meaning that the user use anything.
90°
90°–100°
180°
Body Limit
None
Invalid
Blackthorn
9
1
5
3
1
1
Chestnut
14
1
2
2
1
1
Table 6.9: What users considerd the blackest when measuring angles.
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Method is accurate
Method is intuitive
Method is convenient
Method is fast
Average Agreement %
User Experience of Methods
Baseline
Aspen
Blackthorn
Chestnut
Figure 6.20: User agreement level of statements
<2s
2s
3s
4s
5s
Count to 6
Count to 10
Long Press
None
Invalid
Aspen
1
1
3
4
5
2
2
1
3
1
Table 6.10: What users considerd the blackest when measuring time.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
With 25 users, and over 5000 ratings performed that is split over 4 methods, the
results of this project should give an indication of the type of results a larger more
extensive survey would find. There are still many unanswered questions, which are
discussed in detail in Chapter 8. The controlled test has focused squarely on the
evaluation of the three methods, in terms of how accurately these can be, whether
participants can successfully and consistently rate a subjective experience.
7.1
Mapping
One of the most interesting and fascinating aspects of the controlled test is the mere
fact that some users do not fit on a linear regression, which would be the obvious
expectation.
But a significant number of users mapped to either exponential or
logarithmic. This alternative regression essentially means that for a few people, they
either slowed down, or sped up ratings that had an increased blackness.
As the
majority of alternative regressions are for Aspen, and all of them being exponential,
it raises the question whether these individuals experience time slightly exponential.
7.2
Baseline Accuracy
One of the most striking observations is perhaps not the accuracy of the three novel
methods, but the accuracy of the baseline, or rather lack thereof. With a mean error
of 8.72 (Table 6.2) for baseline, the accuracy is quiet surprisingly low. To make the
difference more clear, consider the 10 grey squares below in Figure 7.1, between each
of them is the same difference. Another way to think about it, is that it only allows
you around 11 different shades of grey on the scale.
Figure 7.1: Band of colours with a colour difference of 8.72 L (LAB Lightness)
==PAGE:68==
58
7 Discussion
This collaborates with the results found by Matejka et al. [13, page 5422] in terms
of the wide range of estimations received for one shade of grey.
7.3
Outliers
In Section 6.1 we saw the raw data, which included outliers. For both Blackthorn
and Chestnut, there was a substantial amount of outliers showing up as ratings with
very low rated value compared to the blackness shown, relative to the majority of
ratings. These were not the result of few users who rated poorly, but were spread out
over a dozen participants, suggesting that the outliers are caused by the prototype
not capturing the angle measurement correctly. This could be addressed with better
angle measurement implementation, and potentially some more user feedback.
7.4
Rating Distribution
The distribution of ratings, confirmed the results of Matejka et al. [13], in the case
of baseline.
While they also seemed to show that the rating distribution of the
three novel methods were less susceptible to bias, this could also be explained by the
mapping process, which is very likely to diffuse any bias. The concentration of ratings
in each extreme, is as mentioned earlier a result of the mapping, which constricts the
mapped values to the range [0, 100]. Any value outside of this range will then be
changed to the first value within, in this case, 0 and 100.
7.5
Accuracy
When looking at the distribution of a rating around the true value, aggregated across
all values as the error, shown on Figures 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.6 — the red bar is slightly to
the left of the peak. As already hinted, this may suggest that participants generally
rated something as more black that it actually was. As this is aggregated over the
entire range of shades, there are likely to be variation depending on blackness.
This variation is seen in Section 6.3 where box-and-whisker plots show how each
method varies depending on blackness. All the alternative methods have a tendency
to plateau near the middle, which would correspond to the users rating grays in the
mid range very similarly.
With that said, all four figures in that section are remarkably similar, and in
general all four methods have shown to be hard to distinguish, which is even more
evident on Figure 6.18 where all methods are overlaid. Only when we look at the
magnitude of the error do we start to see some distinct differences, where baseline
sticks slightly out with a sharper decline of error after 10.
==PAGE:69==
7.6 Viability of Novel Methods
59
With Table 6.2 we see the numerical difference between the four methods, and
they are strikingly close when comparing their overall accuracy, for both the internal
comparison as well as external.
A thing that stands out slightly is the standard deviation of the baseline.
It
translates to saying that when users are using baseline, the differences in accuracy
for each user varies more than for the alternative methods, perhaps indicating that
some users are very good with baseline, while others less so, and compared to the
alternative methods, where user are more equally good. Put another way, the lower
the value, the more likely it is, that the majority of users found it difficult to use, and
consequently the majority rated with a homogeneous accuracy.
7.5.1
Learning Effect
Looking at the data in Table 6.2 showing the accuracy for the first and last half of
ratings only showed a decline in errors for the average user of Aspen, while other
methods actually showed an increase, including the median Aspen user. This is not
so surprising, and is actually good, because users were allowed to practice before their
actual ratings were done, in order to minimize this effect, such that the regression of
the user would have a consistent level of quality.
7.6
Viability of Novel Methods
With the overall goal of evaluating the viability of these novel methods, Table 6.3
summarizes this well, and unsurprisingly, the net change from baseline is less than
10% for all the three methods.
What however is very interesting is that Chestnut according to the results in this
controlled test managed to improve on the accuracy compared to baseline. Chestnut
particularly improved in the mid grays similar to the other methods, but contrary to
the other methods, did not lose the accuracy gains in the darker grays, as was the
case for Aspen and Blackthorn.
7.6.1
Aspen
Aspen makes a particularly interesting case with improvements in accuracy at both
low and mid level blackness, but then loses at the higher blackness levels.
If we
look back at the raw data of Aspen in Section 6.1 we will notice an outlier with
an accelerating increase as the blackness increases. Perhaps this reflects a drop-off in
ability of accurate time measurement, which may be possible to improve with practice.
Improvements of Aspen at the upper blackness levels could significantly improve its
overall accuracy.
The fact that participant rated it worse in the interview than Blackthorn and
Chestnut, seems primarily driven by the lack of feedback, which is mentioned as an
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Discussion
important aspect when describing why a favorite was picked. With only the passing
of time as feedback of rating, users feel unsure whether their intended timing is also
what was measured.
One might imagine a feedback mechanism where the user sees or feels something
that intensifies as time changes, critically it would have to be only shown after mea-
surement, as it would otherwise transfer the mode of rating from time to a visual-as-
a-function-of-time.
7.6.2
Blackthorn
Blackthorn is the worst performing method of the three, but as seen in the interview,
participants could also see its practicality and discrete way of working. The main
complaint was a lack of control, where participants felt it was inaccurate. A lot of
people mentioned fatigue during usage. This seems to come from a tightening of the
muscles to keep the hand steady, which ends up causing more motion, as the muscles
weaken after using several times. The result is the highest inaccuracy of the controlled
test.
7.6.3
Chestnut
Against expectations, Chestnut managed to perform overall better than the baseline
in terms of average error of the user. It was also rated most favorably by the par-
ticipants, who particularly thought it felt very accurate to use. The motion that
Chestnut uses also has much greater arc length, which translates into a higher degree
of precision, as the hand can more easily adjust a small amount.
7.6.4
Relative Change
Before declaring any particular method the best or worst, it is important to reflect
back on the inaccuracy that is inherent to begin with. So to visualize the difference
between the 4 different method, consider the 5 grey squares below in Figure 7.2.
Consider the top square the “true” value of a rating, then the 4 squares below it are
each respective method and its average error of a user for the average user.
Figure 7.2: Illustration of the difference between the methods. (From left to right: Baseline, Aspen,
Blackthorn, Chestnut)
==PAGE:71==
7.6 Viability of Novel Methods
61
This corroborates with the significance test, which showed that the methods dif-
ference from baseline are insignificant — by a wide margin.
That being said, Chestnut had the best accuracy in this controlled test, better
than even the baseline. Blackthorn, had the poorest accuracy, but still good enough
to not be significantly different.
==PAGE:72==
62
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 8
Future Work
The work done with these three methods has only started, and there are lots of
questions that have to be answered in future work. The sections below outline the
most crucial problems.
8.1
Aspen Long-Term Consistency
One of the more promising methods is Aspen, which had a good accuracy, particularly
in the lower and mid ranges of blackness. But the question is, if this performance can
be repeated when using Aspen over a longer duration of time. The null hypothesis
being that the user can not be consistent in the timings of rating, when the 50 ratings
are spread out over a week, a month, etc. It would be very interesting to explore the
method further in a rating experiment side-by-side with VAS.
8.2
Normalization Without Truth Values
One of the fundamental limitations of this project is the reliance on a truth value
(the actual color shown), in order to build the regression. Finding a way to maintain
the accuracy that this provided without having a truth value is important.
There are different ways this could be done, but below are some of the more
interesting.
8.2.1
Machine Learning
Using machine learning to simply learn the users patterns of rating, using tools like
an artificial neural network. This subject area is heavily researched at the moment,
and it could be very interesting to see if this could also be applied in this situation,
with either supervised learning, or unsupervised learning.
8.2.2
Pre-Calibrated
A different approach to converting it to a different domain, would be the use of dual-
rating during an initial period, where another method like VAS is used as truth value,
==PAGE:74==
64
8 Future Work
to guide creation of a regression model.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
With the introduction of three novel methods; one using time, and two using angular
rotation of limbs—through use of a smartbutton in combination with a phone and a
smartwatch, this report breaks new ground for self-logging by establishing that such
methods can be comparable to traditional methods.
With an average error of 8.73%, the rating of blackness is not particularly precise,
and this is one of the main contributing factors to why alternative methods are very
viable. To then evaluate the three alternative methods to be within 5% of this, is
surprising. It is even more surprising to find that one of the three was measured to
be upwards of 5% more accurate than the baseline. Although not significantly more
accurate, it does mean however, that it should be taken under serious consideration.
The advance is nevertheless very dependent on the proficiency of the mapping
from the domain of the rating, to a standardized domain of a limited range.
In
the controlled test this was evident from the varying accuracy of the method when
segmenting based on blackness. Whether this is a reflection of difficulties in mapping
accurately, estimating blackness, or translating a mental estimate to a corresponding
rating is unclear.
It remains to be seen, if these methods can carry through similar results when
moving from rating of blackness, to rating a truly subjective experience, such as
pain—for which there is neither a scale nor correct answers. If possible, this could
make a critical impact on the viability of long-term self-logging, by reducing the risk
of abandonment.
The fact that the methods performed so close to the baseline in this controlled test,
means that it is worthwhile to further explore the potential and real-world viability
of these three novel methods.
In conclusion, the controlled test gave an indication that, using these three novel
methods of rating can be on par with the well-established Visual Analogue Scale in
terms of their overall accuracy, when comparing their performance in a controlled
environment.
Coupled with an implementation that solves the limitations of the
prototype, the final product would have the accuracy of the VAS, but faster and
more convenient to use.
==PAGE:76==
66
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Absolute Error
Histograms
0
50
100
150
200
250
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
# of Ratings
Error Magnitude (Bin size = 2)
Histogram of Aspen Error Magnitude
Figure A.1: Histogram of Aspen Absolute Error
==PAGE:78==
68
A Absolute Error Histograms
0
50
100
150
200
250
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
# of Ratings
Error Magnitude (Bin size = 2)
Histogram of Blackthorn Error Magnitude
Figure A.2: Histogram of Blackthorn Absolute Error
0
50
100
150
200
250
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
# of Ratings
Error Magnitude (Bin size = 2)
Histogram of Chestnut Error Magnitude
Figure A.3: Histogram of Chestnut Absolute Error
==PAGE:79==
A Absolute Error Histograms
69
0
50
100
150
200
250
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
# of Ratings
Error Magnitude (Bin size = 2)
Histogram of Baseline Error Magnitude
Figure A.4: Histogram of Baseline Absolute Error
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX B
Controlled Test Photos
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX C
Survey Answers
C.1
“Why did you prefer this method?”
Responses to the question:
“Movement more comfortable, easier to asses.”
“It was easier to use all the degrees of freedom.”
“Easier to judge the actual position on the black-white scale.”
“It felt like the most accurate and fast method.
Also, the two methods with
moving my arm was annoying.”
“Physical movement seems strange, but depending on the situation those methods
might be preferable. Walnut is more appealing in terms of being visual than the other
methods — and possibly more precise.”
“Easer to rate the box”
“I feel like I had the most control over what grade I’m giving.”
“Visual feedback.”
“Easier to rate precisely.”
“Convenient, fast, ḧassle-free.̈”
“Easiest.” translated
“It was easier to construct ä scaleb̈etween 0 and 90 degrees twisting, then it was
with rotating or time without a clock..”
“Better f̈eell̈ess uncertainty than time and more movement freedom.”
“Felt like more choices to choose from in the range of motion.”
“Simplest. Smallest gesture.”
“Seems better for a use case when using a digital pen to draw in programs like
photoshop.”
“easy af.”
“I felt like I was able to answer more precise because of the bigger motion. It was
more comfortable for my arm.”
“Convenient and easy.”
“Because it was easy to do.”
“Time becomes very relative to the past few timings. Both rotation and twisting
works well, but I felt that it was easier to accurately estimate a position by rotating.”
“Visual feedback for myself.”
“It gives a limit due to limitation of the arm movement, which ease to determine
the scale for rating.”
==PAGE:84==
74
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1]
Amazon Mechnical Turk. Amazon Mechanical Turk. url: https://www.mturk.
com (visited on February 15, 2018).
[2]
Apple Inc. CoreMotion Framework Documentation. url: https://developer.
apple.com/documentation/coremotion (visited on February 16, 2018).
[3]
Apple Inc. Healthkit Framework Documentation. url: https://developer.
apple.com/documentation/healthkit/ (visited on February 16, 2018).
[4]
Apple Inc. The Watch App Architecture. 2016. url: https://developer.apple.
com/library/content/documentation/General/Conceptual/WatchKitProgrammingGuide
DesigningaWatchKitApp.html (visited on February 16, 2018).
[5]
Apple Inc. WatchConnectivity Framework Documentation. 2018. url: https:
//developer.apple.com/documentation/watchconnectivity (visited on
February 16, 2018).
[6]
Gunnar Borg and Elisabet Borg. A General Psychophysical Scale of Blackness
and its Possibilities as a Test of Rating Behaviour. Technical report. Stockholm:
Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, 1991.
[7]
DisplayMate Technologies Corporation and Raymond M. Soneira. iPad Pro 9.7
Display Technology Shoot-Out. 2016. url: http://www.displaymate.com/
iPad%7B%5C_%7DPro9%7B%5C_%7DShootOut%7B%5C_%7D1.htm (visited on
February 15, 2018).
[8]
M.H. Hayes and D.G. Patterson. “Experimental development of the graphic
rating method”. In: Psychological Bulletin 18.1 (1921), pages 98–99.
[9]
Gernot Hoffman. “CIELab Color Space Contents”. In: Gamut (2003), pages 1–
62.
[10]
Stephen S. Intille et al. “µEMA : Microinteraction-based Ecological Momentary
Assessment ( EMA ) Using a Smartwatch”. In: UbiComp ’16 (2016), pages 1124–
1135. doi: 10.1145/2971648.2971717. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.
cfm?doid=2971648.2971717.
[11]
Tomasz R. Kamiński. “A Wearable System for Acquiring Data on Subjective
Experiences”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
[12]
Logitech. Logitech POP Smart Button. url: https://www.logitech.com/en-
us/product/pop-smart-button (visited on February 16, 2018).
==PAGE:86==
76
Bibliography
[13]
Justin Matejka et al. “The Effect of Visual Appearance on the Performance of
Continuous Sliders and Visual Analogue Scales”. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2016), pages 5421–5432.
doi: 10.1145/2858036.2858063. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
doid=2858036.2858063.
[14]
Andreas Möller et al. “Investigating self-reporting behavior in long-term stud-
ies”. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems - CHI ’13. 2013, page 2931. isbn: 9781450318990. doi: 10.1145/
2470654.2481406. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2470654.
2481406.
[15]
Particle. Particle Internet Button. url: https://docs.particle.io/datasheets/
kits-and-accessories/particle-shields/%7B%5C#%7Dinternet-button
(visited on February 16, 2018).
[16]
Shortcut Labs. Flic Smart Button. url: https://flic.io/shop/flic-1pack
(visited on February 16, 2018).
[17]
The Button Corporation Ltd. bt.tn Mini. url: https://shop.bt.tn/pages/
iot-button-models (visited on February 16, 2018).
