==PAGE:1==
 
Validation of simulation 
models and design of 
semi-outdoor spaces
Master Thesis 
Lasse Skammelsen Trankjær  
February 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Validation of simulation models and 
design of semi-outdoor spaces 
MASTER THESIS 
Lasse Skammelsen Trankjær 
Technical University of Denmark  
Department of Civil Engineering 
SUBMITTED: 
February 2018, Kongens Lyngby 
MAIN SUPERVISOR:  
Jørn Toftum, Associated Professor, Technical University of Denmark 
Front page picture: 
Dome of Visions 
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface 
The thesis represents the completion of a Danish Master degree in Architectural Engineering. 
It is credited for 32.5 ECTS and was carried out in the period September 2017 to February 
2018.  
The idea to the subject originated from a project proposal named “Detailed analysis of the 
thermal environment and energy performance of structures with semi-outdoor space” from a 
ICIEE 2017 student project catalog, but is outlined according to the speciﬁc interests of the 
author.  
A special thank is assigned to main supervisor of the thesis associated professor Jørn Toftum 
for his interest in the project, support and qualitative discussions throughout the entire 
process. Further, senior researcher Rune Korsholm Andersen should be thanked for answering 
questions regarding the simulation software, and associated professor Christian Rønne for 
taking the time to discuss the content of the semi-outdoor space concept. Finally, a special 
thanks to my fellow students for support and good friendship.     
Kongens Lyngby, 2018 
Lasse Skammelsen Trankjær  
"V
==PAGE:6==
"V
==PAGE:7==
Abstract 
The semi-outdoor space concept represents a transparent shield and the environment created 
in the gap between it and an inner building. By using the IDA-ICE simulations software, this 
study investigated how the shape and volume of the semi-outdoor space inﬂuenced the indoor 
climate of the semi-outdoor space as well as the temperature and energy consumption of the 
inner house in a Danish climate. Prior to this the simulation models were validated in relation 
to geometry, solar radiation through two layers, and natural ventilation. The designs included 
two domes-, two rectangular-, and two triangular shaped semi-outdoor spaces at respectively 
750 m3 and 1500 m3. The shield was made of polycarbonate and the inner house was 
designed for a single family. The performances of the semi-outdoor spaces were compared in 
terms of temperature, CO2-concentration, and relative humidity and further analyzed with 
the use of airﬂows and energy balances. The temperature and energy consumption of the 
inner houses were compared to the same house which was not protected by a semi-outdoor 
space.  
The average temperature of the six semi-outdoor spaces varied from 12.6 - 15.3 oC compared 
to the average 10.3 oC outdoors and the lowest and highest temperatures registered were -9.0 
cC and 37.2 cC respectively. The semi-outdoor spaces were found to provide thermal comfort 
23 - 27 % of the time throughout the year when an 18-27 cC comfort interval was used. 
Additionally, the time within the interval ranged in average from 0 - 60 % between the month. 
The relative humidity was found to be considerably high most of the time, but the CO2-
concentration was always low. The energy consumption of the inner house varied from 125 - 
131 kWh/m2 and was reduced by 40 % in average. Two out of the six designs were used to 
investigate the annual average temperature in the inner house which rose by 0.3 oC and 1.0 oC 
respectively compared to the inner house not protected. Finally, the results indicated that the 
shape of the semi-outdoor space affected the results signiﬁcantly more than the volume of the 
semi-outdoor space. 
"VI
==PAGE:8==
"VII
==PAGE:9==
Table of Contents  
1
Introduction  …………………………………………………………….……………..…..
1
1.1
Objective  ………………………………………………………………………………
3
1.2
Scope  ……………………………………………………………………………….…..
4
2
Background  …………………………………………………………………..……………
5
2.1
The development of semi-outdoor space concept  ……………………….……………
6
2.2
Interesting projects  …………………………………………………….…………….…
8
2.3
Results of previous studies  ………………………………………………..……………
13
2.4
Perspectives and properties of the semi-outdoor space  ………………………………..
14
2.5
Assessment of indoor climate in semi-outdoor spaces  ……………………..…………..
15
3
Theory  …………………………………………………………………………..………….
19
3.1
Solar radiation - heat gain  ………………………………..……………………..…….
20
3.2
Airﬂows and driving forces with natural ventilation  …………………..………………
22
3.3
Indoor climate assessment  ……………………………………………………………..
24
4
Methodology  …………………………………………………………………..…….…….
27
4.1
IDA-ICE model validation  ………………..…………………………………………..
28
4.1.1
Creation of the Geometry - SketchUp import  ………………….…………… 
29
4.1.2
Reference model  …………………………………………………..………….
30
4.1.3
Solar heat gain  …………………………………………………………….….
31
4.1.4
Natural ventilation  …………………………………………………………….
34
4.1.5
Validation  ……………………………………………………………….…….
38
4.2
Establishment of simulation models  …………………………………………..………
39
4.2.1
Inner house construction  ………………………………………………………
39
4.2.2
Semi-outdoor space  ………………………………………………………..….
41
4.2.3
Internal gains  ………………………………………………………………….
45
4.2.4
HVAC  ………………………………………………………………………….
48
4.2.5
Additional inputs  ……………………………………………..……………….
51
4.3
Data conﬁguration  ………………………………………………………….………….
52
4.3.1
Analysis parameters  …………………………………………………..……….
52
4.3.2
Data processing  ……………………………………………………….……….
54
"VIII
==PAGE:10==
5
Results  ……………………………………………….………………………..……………
57
5.1
Thermal conditions in the semi-outdoor space  ………………………………….….…
58
5.2
Air quality in the semi-outdoor space  …………………………………………………
63
5.2.1
CO2 - concentration  ………………………………………………………..…
63
5.2.2
Relative humidity  ………………………………………………..……………
63
5.3
Airﬂows in the semi-outdoor space  …………………………………………….………
66
5.4
Energy balance of the semi-outdoor space  ……………………………………………
67
5.5
Energy consumption of the inner house  ………………………………………………
70
5.6
Temperature in the inner house  ………………………………………………….……
71
6
Discussion  …………………………………………………………………………………
73
6.1
Validation of IDA-ICE simulation models …………………………………………..…
74
6.2
Temperature in the semi-outdoor space  ……………………..…….…………………..
75
6.3
Air quality in the semi-outdoor space  ………………………………………….………
76
6.4
Ventilation of the semi-outdoor space  ……………………………………..………….
76
6.5
Energy balance of the semi-outdoor space  ……………………………………………
77
6.6
Energy consumption of the inner house  ………………………………………………
79
6.7
Temperature in the inner house  ……………………………..…………….…………..
79
7
Conclusion  …………………………………………………………………….……..……
81
8
References  …………………………………………………………………………………
85
9
Appendices  …………………………………………………………………….………..…
89
"IX
==PAGE:11==
List of tables 
2.1
Key results from previous projects  ………………………………….….………….……..
13
3.1
Recommended CO2-concentrations  ……………………………………………….……
25
3.2
Recommended design criteria for dehumidiﬁcation and humidiﬁcation systems  …….…  
25
4.1
Thermal performance of the solar heat gain investigation  ………………………………
34
4.2
Natural investigation 1 results  ………………………………………………….…..….…
37
4.3
Natural investigation 2 results  ……………………………………………………………
37
4.4
Inner house construction  …………………………………………………………………
40
4.5
Properties of the polycarbonate shield  …………………………………..……….………
42
4.6
Shield sizes and ratios  …………………………………………………………….………
45
4.7
Occupant distribution  ……………………….…………………………………….…..…
46
4.8
Schedule and factors of the occupants presence  ………………..…………….….………
46
4.9
Equipment unit power  ……………………….……………………….……………..……
46
4.10
Schedule for the equipment's power intensity  ………………………..….……….………
47
4.11
Light unit power  ……………………….……………………………………….……..…
47
4.12
Schedule for light and the corresponding power intensity  ………………………..…..…
48
4.13
Floor area of the semi-outdoor spaces  …………………………………………….….…
55
5.1
Temperatures of the semi-outdoor spaces  …………………………………………..….. 
60
5.2
Percent of time during year in temperature intervals  ……………………………..……. 
60
5.3
Maximum CO2-concentration of the semi-outdoor spaces  ………………………..……
63
5.4
Annual energy balance of six semi-outdoor spaces  …………………………………..…
67
5.5
Monthly energy balance associated with the semi-outdoor space of Dome750  …………
69
5.6
Energy consumption of the inner house  …………………………………………………
70
5.7
Temperature in the inner house  ……………………………………………………….…
71
"X
==PAGE:12==
"XI
==PAGE:13==
List of ﬁgures 
2.1
Buckminster Fuller and Otto Frei  ……………………………………..……………..…..
7
2.2
Norwegian family dome and Amazon ofﬁce building  ………..…………………….……
9
2.3
Dome of Visions  ….………………………..…………………………………….………  
10
2.4
Indoor environment assessment in Dome of Visions  …….……………..………….……
11
2.5
Livsstykke by Lendager Group  …….………………..……………………………………
11
2.6
Stedsans in the woods by Lendager Group  …….…..……………………………….……
12
2.7
ReGen Villages project by EFFEKT  ………..……………………………………………
12
3.1
Solar radiation  ………..…………………………………………………………..……… 
20
3.2
Transmittance of solar radiation through a window  ……………..………………………
21
3.3
Strategies for natural ventilation  …………………………………………….……………
23
4.1
Illustration of reference model  ……………………………………………………..……
31
4.2
Heat from direct and diffuse solar radiation  ……………………………………….….…
34
4.3
Illustration of the reference model …….…..……………….…………………….…….…
36
4.4
Floor plan of the inner house  ………………………………………………………….…
41
4.5
Illustration of the two dome-shaped semi-outdoor spaces with the inner house  ……..…
42
4.6
Illustration of the two triangular-shaped semi-outdoor spaces with the inner house  .…..
43
4.7
Illustration of the two rectangular-shaped semi-outdoor spaces with the inner house  ….
44
4.8
IDA-ICE visualization of the Dome750  …………………………………………………
44
4.9
The inner door opening schedule  ………………………………………………………..
50
4.10
The entrance door opening schedule  …………………………………..……………..…
51
5.1
Annual outdoor temperature  …………………..………………..………………………
58
5.2
Temperature inside the semi-outdoor spaces  ………………..…………………………..
59
5.3
Percent of time in thermal comfort  ………………..………………..………….……….
61
5.4
Temperature difference between outdoor and the semi-outdoor spaces  ………………..
62
5.5
Relative humidity in the six semi-outdoor spaces  ………………..……..………………
64
5.6
Average relative humidity in the semi-outdoor space  ………………..…………………
64
5.7
Annual relative humidity of model Rect750  ………………..………………………….
65
5.8
Outward average airﬂows through the external surface  ………………..……………….
66
5.9
Outward average airﬂows through the external surface corrected  ……………………..
67
"XII
==PAGE:14==
"XIII
==PAGE:15==
 
1  
I n tr o du c t i o n  
==PAGE:16==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
The urbanization of the world’s population is increasing. By the year 2050 two-thirds are 
expected to live in cities, which therefore are forced to expand and develop [61]. In the 
context of climate change, this development should take place in an environmental-, 
economic-, and social sustainable way, but according to UN this cannot be achieved unless the 
design and operation of urban environments are changed [29]. This includes particularly a 
reduction of buildings' energy consumption and a shift to sustainable energy sources. 
Nonetheless, the World’s energy demand has doubled over the last 40 years [38].  
In Denmark, the goal is to be independent of fossil fuels by the year 2050 [56]. This greatly 
concerns the building industry, since almost 40 % of the total Danish energy consumption 
may be attributed to our buildings [1]. However, several investigations indicate that it will be 
more problematic than ﬁrst anticipated to actually reduce the energy consumption [3, 4]. 
Firstly, Denmark has not been able to lower the total energy consumption used for heating in 
dwellings and ofﬁces over the last 25 years. Further, the Danish Building Research Institute 
found that the actual energy consumed in energy efﬁcient homes was signiﬁcantly higher than 
the theoretical due to occupant behavior. 
Huge energy savings should however not be achieved at the expense of inadequate indoor 
climate since Europeans spend approximately 90 % of their time inside buildings because of 
the shelter, warmth, shade, and security provided [38]. This is despite the fact that outdoor 
spaces contribute greatly to urban livability and vitality, engage social activities, and 
encourages people to interact [57, 60]. Citizens should be well served with qualitative 
alternatives to the indoor environment, and thus be tempted to seek outdoors. Nonetheless, 
people stay indoors because of poor weather conditions and hence lack of comfort outdoors.   
Opposite predictions, the availability of housing types has not changed over the last decades 
[32]. Furthermore, research has revealed that 40-50 % of the buildings’ energy consumption 
can be directly related to the design [33]. Thus, it is maybe time for a change in the way we 
design our buildings and exploit the potential of the architecture itself in order to solve the 
current challenges.      
This thesis studies an innovative architectural idea - the semi-outdoor space concept. It 
represents the construction of an additional transparent envelope or shield and the 
environment created in the gap between it and an inner building. The shield provides  
!2
==PAGE:17==
 1 Introduction   ●
protection against harsh weather, while wind and solar radiation can be utilized beneﬁcially to 
create a comfortable environment. Thus, the climate created inside the semi-outdoor space is 
a unique blend of the indoor and outdoors. Additionally, heat can be stored and lead to 
energy savings in the inner, covered building during cold periods. Furthermore, the concept 
improves the architectural versatility and the semi-outdoor space can create a stimulating 
outdoor feeling. 
The concept is not a new invention since the ﬁrst ideas came in the 1950s and 1960s. Up to 
now, only a minimal number of studies of the concept has been conducted, which mainly 
focused on the architectural composition, for predictability of performance, and documented 
energy savings [7, 8, 10, 16, 17, 18]. In recent years, several DTU-related projects have 
studied the concept and investigated the indoor climate and energy performance of speciﬁc 
semi-outdoor space designs [11, 19, 20, 22, 36]. The results have primarily been based on 
simpliﬁed simulation models, where the indoor climate was assessed according to adjusted 
standards for conventional buildings. Such an approach may be problematic, since it is well-
documented that there exists a discrepancy between people's actual and anticipated comfort 
when an environment deviates from normal indoor conditions [52, 53, 54]. Overall, there is a 
lack of studies identifying the indoor climate conditions of semi-outdoor spaces and 
determining how basic design variations impact the performance. Furthermore, no studies 
have investigated how the indoor climate of the covered buildings was impacted.      
1.1 Objective  
The objective of this study was to investigate the semi-outdoor space concept with the use of 
simulation models and quantify the association between shield shape, volume of the space, 
and the corresponding energy and indoor climate conditions of the semi-outdoor space. 
Secondly, the objective was to study how the energy consumption and indoor climate of a 
semi-outdoor space inner house was affected by the addition of a semi-outdoor space. Finally, 
the objective was to study the validity of “IDA Indoor Climate and Energy” (IDA-ICE) 
simulation models. This was a necessity prior to the main investigation to ensure that the 
complex design of the semi-outdoor space concept would be simulated reliably. 
!3
==PAGE:18==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
1.2 Scope 
This study investigated the combination of one inner building construction, two volumes and 
three shapes of the semi-outdoor space. Its indoor climate was assessed on the basis of 
airﬂows, CO2-concentrations, relative humidity, and temperature parameters. Regarding the 
covered house, the study investigated how the temperature and energy consumption were 
affected in a comparison with the same house, not encapsulated by a semi-outdoor space.  
!4
==PAGE:19==
 
2  
Backg round  
==PAGE:20==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
The purpose of this chapter is to present the semi-outdoor space concept. This includes a 
presentation of the origin and development of the concept together with selected current 
projects where the concept is implemented. To summarize, a list of the main properties and 
characteristics of the concept will be presented. Additionally, the chapter contains a section 
concerning assessment of the indoor climate in semi-outdoor spaces.    
2.1 The development of semi-outdoor space concept 
The semi-outdoor space is one name among others describing an innovative building design 
concept. Basically, the concept is a transparent extension of a building’s envelope which 
creates a new space in the gap between the normal facade and an additional facade. The 
existing envelope can partly be covered, the space between several buildings ﬁlled, or one or 
more buildings can be entirely encapsulated. The design opportunities are many. Typically, it 
is constructed of an individual glass shield attached, or not, to a existing facade and is 
operated exclusively with the use of passive means such as natural ventilation and solar 
heating. The semi-outdoor space neither functions as the indoor or outdoor conditions but as 
something in between - a third type. Therefore it has its own unique properties that 
distinguish it from the two traditional environment types.   
The architectural ideas evolved in the 1950s and 1960s by the architects Buckminster Fuller 
and Frei Otto shown in Figure 2.1 [7, 8]. They proposed to encapsulate Manhattan and other 
cities in the arctic regions with the use of enormous transparent dome constructions able to 
cover up to thousands of buildings. Frei Otto wanted to temper and modify tough climate 
conditions to provide a pleasant environment without making people feel stuffy. The same did 
Buckminster Fuller, but he also believed that such project would decrease the energy 
consumption signiﬁcantly. The dome structure should regulate the temperature so there no 
longer was a need for individual heating and cooling systems. Additionally, he also estimated 
that the surface area of his dome would be 80 times smaller than the surfaces of the buildings 
inside the dome. A difference that he also evaluated would inﬂuence the total heat loss 
positively. They both had a passion for organically shaped architecture and especially 
Buckminster Fuller’s work on geodesic domes seems to have inspired and inﬂuenced the 
further development and use of the semi-outdoor design concept.    
Geodesic domes are spherical shell structures made of composite triangles. This conﬁguration 
creates a very efﬁcient construction that is both strong, light weight and has the highest surface  
6
==PAGE:21==
2 Background   ●
area-to-volume ratio [11]. That makes it very suitable for large semi-outdoor design projects, 
where one or several buildings are to be covered off. The largest constructed geodesic-dome 
structure is the Fantasy Entertainment Complex in Japan with a diameter of 216 meters [10]. 
The majority of domes can, however, not be considered as semi-outdoor spaces since they do 
not contain any inner building, but the environment created inside these domes will assumable 
be similar to actually semi-outdoor space designs and therefore useful to investigate. Especially 
because many of the modern dome designs originate from B. Fuller’s ideas.   
In the 1980s D. J. Croome proposed the use of an air-supported dome planned for 2000 
dwellings in Canada [7]. He investigated the technology to a greater extent than seen before 
and tried to understand how the occupants’ will response psychologically and physically to 
longer stays in his dome. On the other hand, Croome understood that there was no way to 
predict the population’s different views and reactions to such project. A common perception 
of a particular environment did not exist. Some of the important subjects processed in his 
design were:  
• Air quality and ventilation in both inner buildings and the semi-outdoor space.  
• Security - ﬁre, claustrophobia.  
• View -  visual fatigue and the way the semi-outdoor space is perceived as “open”. 
• Thermal comfort - windchill index, metabolic rate, air velocity.  
• Membrane/cover material - amount of light and UV transmitted , direct vs. diffuse light, 
distribution, color.      
• Heat - extreme temperatures, storage/reuse, mass effect.  
!7
Figure 2.1: Buckminster Fuller to the left and Frei Otto to the right [58, 59].   
==PAGE:22==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
Inspired by Croome’s visions Lin et al. conducted more recent studies and published several 
articles about the semi-outdoor space concept [10, 16, 17, 18]. A mathematical approach was 
used and different models were developed and veriﬁed. These models were designed to predict 
the performance of dome-covered houses in the following ways; 1) Solar radiation model 
coupled with a thermal and an airﬂow model to predict the interaction between the outdoor 
environment and ground, and interaction between the house, airﬂow, solar and air 
temperature distribution inside the dome, 2) model of the airﬂow and thermal phenomena to 
predict the variation of the air temperature inside the dome with the height, 3) annual 
energy/thermal performance including calculations of the single air and surface 
temperatures, 4) a more detailed 3D model composed of a thermal and an airﬂow model 
which predicts the energy need. Main results from the different case studies conducted by Lin 
et al. are presented later in this chapter.    
Thorough semi-outdoor space design changes the interface between the urban and private 
environments and people’s perception of the architecture. The more smooth transition 
created, from indoor to outdoor, can potentially affect the social behavior in and around the 
built environment. This social aspect of the concept and its “hidden” potential has through 
the years also caught attention. Among others Birgit Cold and Jan Gehl have written about 
the subject and made the following observations [28]; 1) Closed facades may form a desolate 
and unsafe sense of a city, 2) it can function as an alternative solution for the part of the 
population that is sensitive to the exposure from normal outdoor climate, 3) plants and 
visibility contribute with an outdoor feeling that is particularly stimulating and thereby an 
important part of the semi-outdoor space interior. Additionally, access to green natural 
outdoor elements is associated with different improving psychological conditions such as stress 
reduction [57]. The following presented projects also show how the involved have the social 
beneﬁts in mind when they implement a semi-outdoor space.    
2.2 Interesting projects  
The concept’s beneﬁts and its wide range of architectural opportunities seem to be more 
utilized than earlier. Architect teams have started to implement the semi-outdoor concept into 
more conventional designs and simultaneously are more comprehensive projects being built. 
In the following interesting projects a wide range of semi-outdoor design opportunities  
!8
==PAGE:23==
2 Background   ●
regarding shape, size, applicability etc. are shown and some of the developers' visions 
described. 
Dome projects 
Several construction projects develop and exploit the uniqueness and beneﬁts of the dome 
structure. A Norwegian family, living north of the Arctic circle, attempts to live a more 
sustainable life [12]. They took up the challenge and used a 15 m wide and 7.5 m high glass 
geodesic dome to cover of their three-story house. Thus they created a semi-outdoor space for 
themselves. Their dome structure is able to withstand the area’s harsh weather with high wind 
speeds and heavy snowfall and simultaneously minimize the need for maintenance of the 
inner building. Choosing a dome design reduced their need for building materials with 30 % 
compared to conventional rectangular designs. Now they are able to grow vegetables not 
normally belonging to the climate and dramatically reduce their heating bills. The home is 
shown in Figure 2.2. 
A larger scale project is Amazon’s new Seattle headquarters currently under construction 
(Figure 2.2) [13]. The centerpiece of the project is three intersected sculptural domes covering 
a ﬁve-story ofﬁce, dining and retail area ﬁlled with plants. The idea is that the employees think 
more creatively and collaborate better when they can work around nature all year.    
Dome of Visions (DoV) is an Aarhus located 450 m2 geodesic dome in its third optimized 
version [46]. It is constructed of 588 cross laminated timber (CLT) wood components and 
covered with an outer ﬂexible and transparent polycarbonate layer. It surrounds a 105 m2 
building made of CLT (Figure 2.3). The project is an architectural experiment and an urban 
laboratory which hosts cultural and private events. The DoV developers want to test and show  
9
Figure 2.2: A picture of  Norwegian families dome covered home to the left [14] and an illustration of  
Amazon’s future Seattle ofﬁce building to the right [15]. 
==PAGE:24==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
that the composition of buildings is not predeﬁned and promote new materials and indoor 
environment technologies. Simultaneously people should be inspired to built and live in new 
and particular sustainable ways in terms of both the economic, social, and environmental 
aspects. Some of the implemented design features which promote this could be; a separable 
and reassemble construction, only FSC-certiﬁed wood is applied, comprehensive use of raw 
and reusable materials such as wood ﬁber insulation and steel, no use of concrete, contribute 
to better urban life by occupying temporary empty locations, less material waste etc. This is 
beyond the beneﬁts the actually semi-outdoor space provides [23].   
DoV is probably the project where the semi-outdoor concept is exploited to the most. The 
developers aim to expand our knowledge about the concept and understand its full potential 
through a comprehensive investigation of its performance and examination of how people, 
building, and climate inﬂuence each other. Therefore the number of occupants are registered 
and the indoor and outdoor climate conditions measured together with the electricity and 
water consumption. In DoV version 3.0 it was done with the use of 202 sensor points where 
the data were recorded for later analysis [25]. No accessible data from these measurements 
was found to make conclusions (checked the 11th Oct. 2017). The technical installations are 
reused from the previous versions, but design improvements, based on the experience 
obtained, have been made. Primarily to achieve more stable comfort temperatures in both the 
inner building and semi-outdoor space. It has been difﬁcult to mitigate high temperatures and 
to create sufﬁcient high temperatures in the inner building during winter. Therefore, the 
mechanically controlled natural ventilation system was updated and better solar shading 
installed while the inner building’s insulation and airtightness was improved [24].   
10
Figure 2.3: Pictures from the inside and outside of  Dome of  Visions [27]. 
==PAGE:25==
2 Background   ●
The current indoor climate conditions in the dome are quantiﬁed and visualized with use of a 
color indicator. The boundary conditions and colors used are shown in Figure 2.4. A simple 
tool revealing whether the conditions are within the acceptable comfort range or not. Thus 
the occupants can better adjust the conditions to achieve higher comfort with respect to the 
CO2 concentration, temperature, relative humidity and noise level. 
Livsstykke 
Livsstykke by Lendager Group is a competition proposal for new dwellings in the Danish 
village Seest [6]. Their vision is to create ordinary sustainable dwellings focusing on the 
community by providing good conditions for socializing. Traditional and innovative 
architecture is combined and semi-outdoor spaces implemented as Figure 2.5 shows. The 
dwelling units are clustered and connected with a simple glass construction creating a shared 
space. They are meant as places with a unique semi-outdoor environment where you can stay 
most of the year and grow vegetables.      
Another interesting project by Lendager Group is the “Stedsans in the woods” project 
illustrated in Figure 2.6 [9]. It will be built in Hyltebruk in southern Sweden. 
!11
Figure 2.5: Rendered pictures of  Lendager Group’s proposal for the project Livsstykke [6].
Figure 2.4: Values and corresponding colors of  the four 
parameters used to assess the indoor environment [26]. 
==PAGE:26==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
 
ReGen Villages 
ReGen Villages is an ambitious pilot project in the Netherlands (Figure 2.7) [5]. It is designed 
by Danish EFFEKT and is intended to later propagation across Northern Europe. The 
project is a holistic off-grid neighborhood focusing on both environmental, economic and 
social beneﬁcial aspects. The ambition is to mitigate global issues such as; greenhouse gas 
emissions, resource waste and scarce arable land by integrating a variety of technologies that 
make the village able to supply itself with food, water, and energy in an efﬁcient way. Towards 
reaching these goals, the semi-outdoor concept has been used extensively in the design 
solution. Besides functioning as a greenhouse, the semi-outdoor spaces are meant as an 
extension of the living zone and as a blended option between inside and outside.      
!12
Figure 2.6: Lendager Group’s design of  “Stedsans in the woods” [9]. 
Figure 2.7: Rendered pictures of  the ReGen Villages project by EFFEKT [5].
==PAGE:27==
2 Background   ●
2.3 Results of previous studies 
The most notable results from the mentioned studies are presented in Table 2.1. They 
primarily concern energy savings. 
Table 2.1: Previous similar projects and key results.
D. J. Croome, 1985, Northern Canada, [7]
Covered township for 2000 residents with a 60 m high pneumatical construction made of different 
ﬂexible membrane materials. It had a 9 times larger power consumption for fresh air fans, but much 
lower consumption in order to reach the thermal requirements of the internal buildings compared to 
normal buildings. Total annual energy consumption reduced from 51 GWh to 43 GWh (16 % 
reduction). Additionally, a large temperature increase, towards comfort temperatures, was achieved. 
Y. Lin, R. Zmeureanu et al., 2006, Canada, Yellowknife, [10]
A dome with a radius of 20 m covering a 100 m2  house was built and compared to the same house 
unprotected by the dome. During the heating season (Oct.-Mar.) the dome helped reducing the daily 
heating load of the house between 1.1 % and 80.1 %. A simulation predicted an annual average 
reduction of 19.1 %.  
Y. Lin & R. Zmeureanu, 2014, Canada, Yellowknife and Montreal, [16]
A single clear glass dome with a radius of 20 m covering a 100 m2 heavy building. It was compared 
with the same house unprotected by the dome. The annual average reduction of the heating load in 
Montreal was 92.9 % and 56.3 % in Yellowknife.
Y. Lin & R. Zmeureanu, 2007, Canada Montreal, [17, 18]
A single clear glass dome with a radius of 20 m covering a 100 m2 heavy building. It was compared 
with the same house unprotected by the dome. The model predicted that the use of a dome reduced 
the annual heating load of the inner house by 62.6 %.   
C. Papachristou, K. Foteinaki et al. 2016, Denmark, [19, 20]
Two cases both simulated with and without a shield. The DoV project managed to obtain a 37.7 % 
heating load saving and 61.6 % cooling load saving. The EMBRACE project, where only one out of 
four facades was covered by a semi-outdoor space, managed to obtain a 3.1% heating load saving 
and 14.6 % cooling load saving. Furthermore, they concluded that the semi-outdoor spaces annually 
offer a double amount of comfortable occupancy hours than an outdoor space with the use of an 
evaluation approach based on EN/DS 15251 [21].    
S. Møller, 2014, Denmark, [22]
IDA-ICE simulated design variations of 60-100 m2 buildings enclosed of a greenhouse structure 
which likewise varied in size. The results were compared to measured data from an Odense located 
project. The general conclusion was that high energy improvements were achieved, but issues with 
high temperatures in the summer period occurred. The largest improvement was achieved in a case 
with the small greenhouse size.    
!13
==PAGE:28==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
Additionally, several other studies and similar projects do exist, but they are omitted due to 
incomparable climate conditions that differ signiﬁcantly from the northern region. 
Furthermore, projects which not quantify and document the performance are also omitted.    
2.4 Perspectives and properties of the semi-outdoor space 
Summation of the main perspective and properties of the concept found during the research. 
They are considered advantageous to know prior to design of a building with a semi-outdoor 
space.  
• Creates a comfort improving shelter effect which mitigates exposure to harsh weather 
conditions such as hard precipitation and strong winds.   
• The semi-outdoor space creates solar radiation storage (thermal buffer) which causes 
temperature increase that improves comfort during cold periods. 
• A simultaneous risk of overheating may occur during warm periods so a sufﬁcient cooling 
strategy including solar shading and effective natural ventilation is a necessity.  
• The higher air temperature and lower wind speeds in the semi-outdoor space compared to 
the outdoor conditions can potentially reduce the heating loss from the inner house. 
• Minimizes the need for expensive “traditional square meters” and thus contributes to 
reducing of the total amount of building materials. 
• Supports the pleasure of outdoor conditions such as sunlight, vegetation and fresh air in an 
alternative energy neutral environment without the sense of enclosure in the transparent 
semi-outdoor space.    
• Safety - acceptable ﬁre escapes can be more advanced to design.  
• There is a lack of studies showing how the indoor climate of the inner building is 
inﬂuenced. Especially daylight, thermal comfort, mold growth and air quality are assumed 
to be affected signiﬁcantly. 
!14
==PAGE:29==
2 Background   ●
• The unique environment created inside the semi-outdoor space makes a different growth 
conditions and hence allows the use of alternative vegetation.  
• Volume, shape, and attachment solution of the semi-outdoor space to the inner building 
affect the performance and usability considerably.  
• Technical installations such as ventilation systems and chimneys can be problematic to 
install and incorporate appropriately into a design.   
• There is less need to maintain the inner building due to minimized abrasion.  
• Creates a space with an inviting atmosphere which typically makes great opportunities for 
socializing and a variety of activities that not always are suitable for the traditional indoor 
or outdoor environments.   
• The concept can be used as a design strategy for renovation projects in order to improve 
existing conditions.   
• There exist a potential risk for very high humidity and thus a bad indoor climate when the 
temperature is low during the winter and openings are kept closed to keep up the 
temperature.  
2.5 Assessment of indoor climate in semi-outdoor spaces 
Several investigations emphasize that it is not reliable to assess thermal comfort in semi-
outdoor spaces with the use of traditional methods [52, 53, 54]. Unfortunately, evaluation 
methods associated with such spaces do not exist. A typical approach to address this problem 
has been to assess thermal comfort by adapting the indoor comfort models to outdoor 
conditions. For example [11, 19, 20] used the Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) to predict the 
occupant’s comfort level in the DoV and EMBRACE projects. They deemed the normal 
comfort range as conservative, but the method as useful and therefore decided to adapt it by 
expanding the comfort range. However, such an approach is considered to be inadequate for a 
qualiﬁed valuation of the thermal conditions. This is due to the fact that thermal comfort  
15
==PAGE:30==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
under such environments is more complex to predict than normal because it depends on more 
parameters than the PMV calculations include.   
The traditional methods are typically based on a physiological approach which deﬁnes 
comfort according to heat balance calculations. Heat transfers between the human body and 
the surrounding environment until equilibrium and potentially comfort is achieved. A PMV 
heat balance comfort calculation includes air temperature, radiant temperature, air velocity, 
humidity, clothing insulation, and metabolic rate to predict people’s thermal sensation [54]. 
The prediction outcome is a number on a seven-point scale indicating whether people feel the 
given environment satisfying, too hot, or too cold [21]. People can then regulate the heat 
balance by activating the body or modifying the surrounding climate according to the context 
and their preferences. Besides the clothing and metabolic rate, people can control these 
parameters indoors with the HVAC system, but outdoors such control opportunity is limited. 
Furthermore, according to [53], the thermal sensation of people tested outdoors deviated 
from those predicted when the traditional methods were used, but the consensus was that the 
lack of the psychological aspects in the calculations were the main reason for the unreliability 
when converted indoor assessment methods were used. The omitted parameters affecting 
people’s opinion about their thermal state are [52, 53, 54];  
• Time of exposure. 
• Expectations. 
• Experience. 
• The need of environmental stimulation.  
• Thermal history. 
• Memory effect. 
• Adaptive opportunities.  
         
Höppe [52] mentions beach guests as a typical example where there is large discrepancy 
between how the heat balance predicts the thermal preferences of the beach guests and how it 
actually is. Nikolopoulos et al. [53] explain why with the following: “Once people have decided to 
come out and sit outside, they have accepted various facts about the thermal conditions and are prepared to 
accommodate them”. 
No well-established method including both the psychological and physiological aspects to 
assess thermal comfort in semi-outdoor spaces do exist despite this knowledge. However, the  
!16
==PAGE:31==
2 Background   ●
traditional methods for indoor conditions are well documented and even though the 
psychological parameters also are relevant in an indoor context, they seem to have a higher 
level of importance outdoors when thermal comfort is assessed. Nevertheless, Olsen and 
Andersen’s recent ﬁndings, which included some psychological parameters, showed that a 
18-27 oC temperature interval can be used to indicate comfort in semi-outdoor spaces [55]. 
Their ﬁndings are in good accordance with some of the ﬁndings in [52, 53].    
On the contrary, no reasons for not assessing the air quality with the use of traditional 
methods were found in the literature. The air quality is also more relevant to consider from a 
health perspective instead of a comfort perspective. Consequently, the type of space and 
environment may be of less importance. 
   
17
==PAGE:32==
18
==PAGE:33==
 
3  
T h e o r y 
==PAGE:34==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
This theory chapter deals with three subjects; heat gained by solar radiation, natural 
ventilation, and assessment of indoor climate. 
3.1 Solar radiation - heat gain  
Solar radiation transmitted to buildings is a combination of diffuse radiation emanated from 
the sky vault, direct radiation from the sun, and their reﬂection on surfaces according to the 
material properties [30]. How much heat/energy the solar radiation contains depends on the 
radiation wavelengths as shown in Figure 3.1.          
 
The energy balance of a window is primarily determined as the balance between the total 
solar energy transmittance (radiation - determined by the g-value) and the heat loss 
(transmission - determined by the U-value) through the window.  
When solar radiation reaches the window surface, a part, will be reﬂected, another part will be 
directly transmitted, and third part will be absorbed in the glass. The radiation mechanism 
through a window is shown in Figure 3.2. The absorbed energy is split into two parts where 
one creates a secondary heat transmission towards the outside and the other part a secondary 
heat transmission towards the inside. The g-value thus describes the total amount of solar 
energy entering through the window glazing [37]:   
20
Figure 3.1: The correlation between solar radiation wavelength and 
irradiance [31].
==PAGE:35==
3 Theory   ●
 
 
 
 
g = te +qi  
 
 
 
 
(1) 
Where 
 
g 
 
Total solar energy transmittance  
 
 
[-] 
 
 
te  
 
Direct solar transmittance   
 
 
[-] 
 
qi  
 
Secondary heat transfer towards the inside   
[-] 
 
 
  
 
The solar heat gain from windows can be predicted as [41]: 
 
 
Φsol = g ∙ fβ ∙ fafsk ∙ fskyg ∙ fglas ∙ Avin ∙ Isol 
 
    
  (2) 
Where  
 
Φsol  
 
Solar heat gain   
 
 
[W or Wh/day] 
 
g 
 
Solar heat coefﬁcient  
 
 
[-] 
 
fβ 
 
Angle factor 
 
 
 
[-] 
 
fafsk  
 
Shading factor  
 
 
 
[-] 
 
fskyg  
 
Shadow factor  
 
 
 
[-] 
 
fglas 
 
Window glass share  
 
 
[-] 
 
Avin  
 
Total window area 
 
 
[m2] 
 
Isol  
 
Total solar radiation 
 
 
[W/m2 or W/(m2 ∙day)] 
21
Figure 3.2: Transmittance, reﬂectance and absorption of  solar 
heat radiation through a double layered window glass [45].
==PAGE:36==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
3.2 Airﬂows and driving forces with natural ventilation 
Natural ventilation is driven by the forces created from natural pressure differences. Normally 
they are created by wind pressure and the stack effect [38, 41, 42]. 
The stack effect occurs when the air has different density. The difference causes air movement 
as the warm and lighter air will rise. Therefore, effective natural ventilation is often created by 
allowing the indoor air to escape the building through top openings. The difference in density 
is mainly caused by an air temperature difference or secondary a humidity difference. The 
difference occurs typically between the indoor and outdoor air. An important design 
parameter to consider is the height of the ventilated room. A larger height allows the designer 
to place openings at a larger vertical distance. A pressure difference exists with the height and 
varies proportionally to the distance and can, therefore, lead to a higher air change [42].  
Wind pressure occurs when the building is exposed to wind. Air penetrates through the 
envelope at the windward sides (inﬁltration) where overpressure is created. Afterwards, it ﬂows 
through the building towards the remaining leeward sides where negative pressure causes 
exﬁltration. The maintenance of the mass balance ensures this mechanism. The pressure on 
the facade is determined by several variables; meteorological wind speed, wind direction, 
roughness of terrain, air density, building shape, and building height [41].  
Under typical conditions natural ventilation will be caused by a combination of these two 
types of driving forces, but not with a semi-outdoor design concept. The inner building is 
sheltered and would only be exposed to minimum wind speeds. Simultaneously, the 
temperature of the inner building would probably be higher than outdoors, which also 
potentially minimizes the natural ventilation caused by the stack effect. Thus, the two driving 
forces may be reduced to an inadequate level. It makes it difﬁcult to incorporate sufﬁcient 
natural ventilation in the inner building. Conversely, the conditions in the semi-outdoor space 
allow for extensive use of natural ventilation.  
Even without dedicated openings, natural ventilation/inﬁltration will occur more or less 
because buildings are not totally airtight. When natural ventilation is to be implemented, there 
are many design opportunities, but typically basic strategies are used (Figure 3.3); one-sided 
ventilation, cross ventilation, buoyancy-driven ventilation (the stack effect), and mixed [41].    
22
==PAGE:37==
3 Theory   ●
The overall natural ventilation will therefore consist of inﬁltration and air ﬂowing through the 
individual openings in the facade. Airﬂow through a single opening, due to stack effect, can be 
calculated as [41]: 
 
 
 
qv = Ck ∙ Cv ∙ A ∙ √( (2 ∙|∆p|) / ρ )   
 
 
 
(3) 
Where 
 
qv 
 
Airﬂow through opening  
 
 
 
[m3/s] 
 
Ck 
 
Opening contraction factor (Typically for window ≈ 0.7) 
[-] 
 
Cv 
 
Friction velocity factor at opening  (∼ 0.98)  
 
[-] 
 
A 
 
Opening geometric cross section area  
 
 
[m2] 
 
∆p 
 
Air pressure difference at opening   
 
 
[Pa] 
 
ρ 
 
Density of the air  
 
 
 
 
[kg/m3]  
Air pressure and density are dynamic variables during the simulations and not possible to 
control. The air pressure inside a building will constantly try to stabilize itself and create 
equilibrium. Thus, the pressure will both be lower and higher than outdoors. The air pressure 
varies proportionally with the height and the temperature. At a certain height, called the 
neutral plane, the air pressure inside would be equal to the outdoor air pressure. According to 
[41] the air pressure can, at a speciﬁc opening height in a facade, due to stack effect, be 
calculated as:  
∆p = ρu ∙ g ∙ (H0 - h) ∙ (∆T/Ti)   
 
 
(4)  
Where 
 
ρu 
 
Density of outdoor air 
 
 
 
 
[kg/m3] 
 
g 
 
Gravitational 
 
 
 
 
 
[m/s3] 
 
H0 
 
Neutral plane height  
 
 
 
 
[m] 
 
h 
 
Facade opening height 
 
 
 
 
[m]  
 
∆T 
 
Difference between indoor and outdoor temp. 
 
[K] 
 
Ti  
 
Indoor temperature 
 
 
 
 
[K] 
 
23
Figure 3.3: Strategies for natural ventilation: Left: One-sided, Middle: The stack effect, 
Right: Cross ventilation [44].  
==PAGE:38==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
Equations (3, 4) reveal that during normal temperature conditions (when it is warmer inside 
than outside) the air above the neutral plane will ﬂow out of the room and below neutral ﬂow 
into the room. 
Wind driven airﬂows through an opening and the associated air pressure can similarly be 
calculated (see [41] page 27-29). The combined pressure (sum), at the opening determines the 
airﬂow direction. The resulting airﬂow through an opening can be calculated, assuming ρu ∼ 
ρi, as [41]: 
Where 
 
Cd 
 
Airﬂow coefﬁcient opening (0.65) 
 
 
 
[-] 
 
∆pT 
 
Pressure difference due to stack effect  
 
 
[Pa] 
 
∆pv 
 
Pressure difference due to wind pressure 
 
 
[Pa] 
 
 
Thus, it is important to know the single airﬂows and the corresponding ﬂow directions in 
order to understand and design a natural ventilation system, although they may vary and air 
pressures may depend on uncontrollable weather conditions.      
3.3 Indoor climate assessment 
According to DS 3033 the quality of the indoor climate can be assessed based on nine 
parameters: ventilation rate, CO2, thermal conditions, radon, formaldehyde, particles, 
moisture/mold, daylight/artiﬁcial light, and acoustic conditions [51].   
DS/EN 15251 assesses the quality with the use of four categories, which are meant as 
recommended design input criteria for dimensioning of buildings’ HVAC systems [21]. The 
explanation of the applicability of the categories are:  
• Category I: “High level of  expectations and is recommended for spaces occupied by very sensitive and 
fragile persons with special requirements like handicapped, sick, very young children and elderly persons”. 
• Category II: “Normal level of  expectation and should be used for new buildings and renovations”. 
24
(5)
==PAGE:39==
3 Theory   ●
• Category III: “An acceptable, moderate level of  expectation and may be used for existing buildings”. 
• Category IV: “Values outside the criteria for the above categories. This category should only be accepted for 
a limited part of  the year”. 
Category I is thereby considered as the best category. However, this categorization system is 
not customized for all of the nine parameters. Indoor air quality parameters such as 
formaldehyde and particles are indirectly approached via ventilation rate requirements 
because it greatly inﬂuence the concentrations. This does also apply to the Danish building 
regulations [2].  
Table 3.1 presents the recommended design criteria associated with CO2-concentrations 
above outdoor air concentration. CO2-concentration considerable higher than category IV 
can appear without causing any health risk [40]. 
The recommended design criteria associated with relative humidity are presented in Table 
3.2. Both too high and too low humidity can affect the quality negatively. Very low humidity 
(<15-20 %) can cause dryness and irritation of eyes and airways. Too high humidity in an 
indoor environment can cause microbial growth leading to a build-up of mould and rot [21]. 
That can as a consequence cause deterioration of organic-based building materials [46]. To 
comply with a speciﬁc category, the relative humidity must lie within one of the following four 
intervals.  
Table 3.1: Recommended CO2 concentration above outdoor concentration for the four indoor climate categories [21].
Category I
Category II
Category III
Category IV
350 ppm
500 ppm
800 ppm
 < 800 ppm
Table 3.2: Recommended design criteria for dehumidiﬁcation and humidiﬁcation systems for the four indoor climate 
categories [21].
Relative Humidity
Category I
Category II
Category III
Category IV
Dehumidiﬁcation
50 %
60 %
70 %
> 70 %
Humidiﬁcation
30 %
25 %
20 %
< 20 %
25
==PAGE:40==
26
==PAGE:41==
 
4  
M e t h o d o l og y 
==PAGE:42==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
The objective of this thesis was to study the validity of energy and indoor environment 
simulation models used with the semi-outdoor space concept. In order to limit the scope, the 
main focus has been on design and analysis of different shapes and volumes of the semi-
outdoor spaces. The geometric diversity was used to demonstrate how the semi-outdoor 
spaces generally perform. Furthermore, the different shapes and volumes were analyzed to 
detect possible relations between design and performance.        
    
Previous related studies [11, 22, 36], where IDA-ICE also was used as the simulation tool, 
were forced to make many assumptions and simpliﬁcations to overcome the limitations of the 
program and to reach reliable results. This thesis aims to create more detailed models and 
attempt to overcome the limitations prior to the main investigations. Therefore, this chapter 
begins with a model validation section. Afterwards, the detailed models are established and 
simulated with the inclusion of the experiences achieved from the validation section.
Software 
The software applied to build the geometries was “SketchUp Pro 2018” version 18.0.16975. 
The energy and indoor climate simulations were conducted with “IDA Indoor Climate and 
Energy” (IDA-ICE) version 4.7.1 by “EQUA simulation AB”. Microsoft Excel was used for 
data processing. Unless otherwise mentioned, all settings, properties, etc. are per default 
according to the software.    
4.1 IDA-ICE model validation 
Previously, the connection between the inner house and semi-outdoor space caused complex 
design issues, which were difﬁcult to model and simulate. Besides minor adjustments of system 
parameters the issues concerned geometric modeling, solar radiation through two transparent 
layers, and natural ventilation of the semi-outdoor space. The capability of the software is 
constantly investigated by the users and improved by the developers. Thus, there was a good 
basis for accommodating similar problems. The aim of the following validation chapter was to 
thoroughly investigate the program's capability regarding the geometry, solar radiation, and 
natural ventilation issues and ensure that further simulations will be based on valid and 
functional models. 
28
==PAGE:43==
4 Methodology   ●
4.1.1 Creation of the Geometry - SketchUp import  
Initially it was attempted to create a zone model directly in IDA-ICE. Two zones were drawn 
from the same center point. The ﬁrst zone was drawn and the following zone enclosed the 
other by simply being larger. Hereby a semi-outdoor space was created in the gap. The 
software could not process the intersection created between the two zones and the method 
thus failed.  
If it is not possible to create the geometry directly in IDA-ICE, EQUA recommends importing 
building geometries from external programs. At the same time they specify that SketchUp is 
the easiest 3D modeling software, which works well across the programs. Therefore, SketchUp 
was chosen to prepare the geometry, but all material properties, system parameters, and 
further settings were deﬁned in IDA-ICE. In order to create a functional model and readable 
ﬁle for a transition from SketchUp to IDA-ICE, it was necessary to comply with the following 
precautions. They do not apply for all types of geometries, but typically more complex 
geometries like designs using the semi-outdoor concept.   
SketchUp to IDA-ICE geometry transition:     
1.
Geometry imported from SketchUp to IDA-ICE should be volumes enclosed by polygon 
surfaces without gaps between the surfaces. One enclosed volume represents a zone. 
Also, it should be possible to deﬁne external walls and inner surfaces [34]. That excludes 
curved, spherical, and other surface shapes which often are used as part of the semi-
outdoor space design. It is assumed that such shapes can be avoided in further 
investigations or if necessary geometrical simpliﬁcations can be made.   
2.
The volume above outwardly leaning facades and walls cannot be detected and 
simulated. Thereby the geometry is restricted to vertical or inwardly leaning facades so 
all roofs, ceilings, and walls will be above the ﬂoor surface area for the single simulated 
zone [35].    
3.
A SketchUp geometry ﬁle with multiple zones can be imported into IDA-ICE as 
individual volumes by painting them in separate colors. That makes it possible for IDA-
ICE to distinguish between the volumes and generate individual zones. Such action 
makes it possible to modify the individual zone geometry after the IDA-ICE import, but  
29
==PAGE:44==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
4.
prevents edits to the shape. The distance between the surfaces of the different zones 
determines whether the gap is detected as one internal wall or as two single external 
walls. If the distance maximum corresponds to the thickness of the predeﬁned internal 
wall it will be registered as one [34]. 
5.
The airﬂow cannot be mixed properly when zones are stacked above each other and only 
separated by a large opening [35]. 
6.
Building bodies exported from SketchUp should not contain any surfaces. They will 
cause error messages in IDA-ICE. Zones can still be marked or separated with walls after 
the import [34].    
7.
The zone height can be deﬁned in two basic ways. The height can be set to be the 
distance from the ﬂoor to either the roof or the ceiling. It is important to distinguish 
between those two or else IDA-ICE will process the wrong zone volumes. If the ceiling 
option is selected, the zone will be deﬁned with an average constant ceiling height - 
useful in ordinary rooms. The roof option makes it possible to create a zone with a 
varied room height, since the feature deﬁnes the height as the connection between the 
ﬂoor, which also can be placed at different levels, and the roof shaped above [35]. 
4.1.2 Reference model 
The reference model was an 8 ₒ 12.5 ₒ 3.0 m inner building surrounded by a semi-outdoor 
space constructed of ﬁve windows each placed at 3 m distance from the parallel facades of the 
inner building. The inner building was composed of a lightweight wood structure with 250 
mm insulation in the walls and 300 mm in the roof. Both zones had a 150 mm concrete ﬂoor 
with 200 mm insulation below. In the inner building ten single 1.5 m2 windows were placed in 
the long walls and four of 1.8 m2 in the short walls. The location of the model was 
Copenhagen and “Värlöse (Copenhagen) TRY” climate ﬁle was used. The inner building was 
supplied with an ideal heater and a CAV (constant air volume) air handling unit, but the 
cooling unit was removed. In the semi-outdoor space both the ideal heater, the cooler, and the 
ventilation system units were removed. The leak area (inﬁltration) was increased to 0.3 m2 
because a semi-outdoor space shield is less airtight than a conventional facade. The thermal 
bridges were adjusted from “None” to “Typical”. The semi-outdoor zone’s only remaining 
internal gain was 25.9 occupants which was the program’s upscaling of default number of  
30
==PAGE:45==
4 Methodology  ●
occupants. The inner building zone had ﬁve occupants and 1750 W internal gain 
(combination of light and equipment) scheduled as always on. The program’s visualization of 
the model is shown in Figure 4.1. 
 
Before the model could be further used, it was necessary to inspect the correctness of the 
geometry. The simulation can run seamlessly, and still generate results ﬁlled with errors, if the 
volumes and areas were detected wrong. It was done by comparing the measures of the 
SketchUp geometry model with the corresponding; “Model ﬂoor area”, “Model volume”, 
“Model ground area”, and “Model envelope area” in the IDA-ICE simulation model. They 
were automatically calculated by IDA-ICE during the simulation and found in “Delivered 
Energy Report”.  
4.1.3 Solar heat gain  
The reliability of the solar heat gain calculations was investigated based on a hypothetical-
deductive method. IDA-ICE simulates solar radiation reliably through one transparent surface 
as in traditional building design. However, it is doubtful how it handles the radiation through 
two layers. The radiation should transmit through the outer shield of the semi-outdoor space 
ﬁrst and secondly through the windows of the inner building. Since solar radiation 
signiﬁcantly affects the performance of buildings, it is crucial that it is simulated reliably. This 
is especially important when performances of both the inner building and semi-outdoor space 
were investigated. 
31
Figure 4.1: Screenshot from IDA-ICE of  the reference model used for 
the validation. 
==PAGE:46==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
Solar radiation includes both visible light and heat and thereby affects several performance 
parameters in a dynamic simulation. However, the light transmittance related performances 
were not treated further in this chapter, since natural light was not a parameter later 
considered. Nevertheless, it was not possible to modify the heat-related variables without 
taking the light related variables into consideration. 
The windows in the reference model had the following properties: 
• Glass construction:  
 
3 pane glazing, clear, 4-12-4-12-4 
• g, Solar Heat Gain coefﬁcient:  
0.68 
• T, Solar transmittance: 
 
0.60  
• Tvis, Visible transmittance: 
 
0.74 
• Glazing U-vlaue 
 
 
1.9 W/(m2 K) 
• Internal emissivity:  
 
0.837 
• External emissivity:  
 
0.837  
4.1.3.1 Design variations and expected performance 
Simulation of the reference model and two model variations were used to investigate the solar 
heat gain. The expected performance which was based on theory, were compared to the 
actual performance of the program. The g-coefﬁcient and the size of the windows in the 
inner building were differentiated from the reference model. However, IDA-ICE was not able 
to directly show the impact of the g-value, because the resulting heat balance did not separate 
heat in radiation and conduction. Thus, the heat balance of the inner building zone and the 
operative temperatures were used to compare the performances and evaluate if IDA-ICE can 
manage solar radiation in buildings with semi-outdoor spaces in a reliable way. 
Variation 1: 
Halving the g-coefﬁcient to 0.34 and T-value to 0.30 .  
1
Variation 2:  
Area of  all windows doubled. 
The performance expectations were based on the theory of solar radiation. It was expected 
that modiﬁcations of the window properties would be reﬂected in the heat balance and 
temperature of the inner building zone in the following way:  
 Due to the laws of physics, it is not possible to reduce the g-value without changing the T-value. 
1
Therefore it was halved as well, which, however, did not have a direct impact on the heat balance [38]. 
32
==PAGE:47==
4 Methodology  ●
In “Variation 1”, if the radiation was transmitted reliably, the heat from solar radiation would 
presumably be approximately halved. This performance was expected although the heat 
balance presented in Table 4.1 does not include both direct solar transmittance and secondary 
heat transfer (see equation 1). This is due to the fact that the omitted secondary heat transfer 
was assumed to have an insigniﬁcant impact on the outcome, since only approximately 1% of 
the solar radiation was absorbed in the glazing [39]. Its impact was instead included in the 
“Heat from the windows and openings”, which included the conductivity related heat 
transmission components of the total heat balance. The temperature of the inner building 
was assumed to decrease along with the amount of transmitted radiation since the heat 
transfer coefﬁcients of neither the windows nor construction were changed.   
In “Variation 2” the assumption was that a double window size approximately would double 
the heat contribution from solar radiation. It was assumed since the “Solar heat gain from 
windows” (see equation 2) would show a linear correlation between the total window area and 
the solar heat gain. Too many parameters which can affect the temperature were modiﬁed in 
“Variation 2” and it was therefore not possible to predict it. However, it was assumed sufﬁcient 
to investigate the reliability with the use of only one parameter in this variation. Finally, the 
reliability of the solar heat gain was investigated by inspecting the ﬂuctuations of the three 
versions annual solar radiation heat contribution on the diagrams shown in Figure 4.2. All 
three diagrams were assumed to show similar ﬂuctuations throughout the simulation period, 
but with different magnitude according to their different window properties. 
Additionally, the energy output “Window & Solar” was also included which shows the overall 
thermal performance of the windows. The results are shown in Table 4.1 and in Figure 4.2.      
33
==PAGE:48==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
4.1.3.2 Results of solar heat gain investigation 
 
4.1.4 Natural ventilation 
Semi-outdoor spaces do not have any mechanical ventilation systems, heating, or cooling 
units. Therefore, it is important that the simulation of the natural ventilation reacts reliably 
since it impacts the overall energy and indoor climate performance. IDA-ICE simulations do 
not include CFD based calculation procedures which could provide more detailed information 
about the natural ventilation and the thermal conditions. However, Lin et al. [17] compared a 
three-dimensional thermal and airﬂow model with a detailed CFD model. Such airﬂow based 
model corresponds to the applied mathematics of the IDA-ICE software [35]. The reliability  
Table 4.1: Thermal performance of  the 3 versions for a one year simulation period of  the “Inner building zone”.
Monthly Average
Monthly heat 
from solar 
radiation - 
direct and 
diffuse [W]
Monthly avg. 
Operative 
Temperature in 
the zone [oC]
Monthly avg. 
Total Window 
Energy balance 
[kWh]
Annual Total 
Energy 
performance 
windows [kWh]
Reference 
model
Min.
106
21.08
-536
2798
Mean
534
23.59
319
Max.
1097
27.87
1284
g-value halved
Min.
34
21.02
-636
-931
Mean
179
22.11
-106
Max.
368
24.33
434
Double 
window size
Min.
192
21.09
-1080
4244
Mean
987
24.68
484
Max.
2042
30.67
2205
34
Figure 4.2: Heat from direct and diffuse solar radiation for the entire simulation period. Left: The reference 
model, Middle: Variation 1, Right: variation 2. Y-axis: Heat [W], x-axis: Time [Month, Occupant Hour].  
==PAGE:49==
4 Methodology  ●
of IDA ICE’s natural ventilation performance would, however, not be validated by an 
equivalent program comparison or in a comparison with experimental data like the DoV 
related projects [11, 19, 20]. An analytical hypothetical-deductive method, comparable to the 
investigation of the solar heat gain validity, was applied again with use of the reference model.   
Currently, two degrees of accuracy exist for the mathematical model in IDA-ICE; a “Climate 
model“ and an “Energy model” [40]. This study was limited to use the “Energy model”, 
which has a lower level of accuracy and less detailed simulation possibilities, like a vertical 
temperature gradient, compared to the very detailed physical model of the “Climate model”. 
The limitation was due to the complexity of the applied geometry. Only rectangular 
geometries can be processed by the climate model. Additionally, it is not possible to create 
desirable shapes by “cheating” the climate model by merging several rectangular geometries 
and afterwards separate them with the use of large vertical and horizontal openings [35].  
IDA-ICE simulates the wind pressure driven natural ventilation by pairing the climate ﬁle 
(wind speed and direction) with different pressure coefﬁcients for each wind exposed surface. 
This is calculated with an “Auto ﬁll” function that takes geometry and surrounded roughness 
into account. 
Ventilation can be quantiﬁed in various ways. IDA-ICE simulates and divides ventilation 
results into three main categories; “Air age”, “Air ﬂow in zone”, and “Ventilation air ﬂows”. 
The “Air ﬂow in zone” sums the mechanical and non-mechanical (summation of leaks, 
inﬁltration and openings) airﬂows in and out of the individual zones’ surfaces. The 
“Ventilation air ﬂows” shows all the individual air ﬂows through the single openings.
4.1.4.1 Design variations and expected outcome 
Two different investigations were conducted and compared to validate the reliability of the 
simulation of natural ventilation. The investigations took place in the semi-outdoor space why 
the performance of the natural ventilation is more crucial here due to lack of mechanical 
ventilation and a risk of uncomfortably high temperatures. The simulation period was one 
year. The investigated scenarios were:    
1.
The roof window was constantly kept open either 10 % or 20 % of its maximum area. 
The performances of these two scenarios were compared with a scenario with all  
35
==PAGE:50==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
2.
windows closed. Additionally, the connection between operative temperature and 
ventilation was investigated across the three scenarios.   
3.
Two pressure driven ﬂow IDA-ICE ”Leak” components, with a size of 0.01 m2 each, were 
placed in a vertical facade on the reference model. Initially, both leaks were placed at 3 m 
height, as shown in Figure 4.3 with a green mark. Subsequently, the leaks were placed at 
5.6 m distance 0.2 meters beneath the roof level (Leak 2) and above ﬂoor level (Leak 1), 
as shown in Figure 4.3 with purple marks. In order to place the leaks in the facade, it was 
necessary to place a small wall section in the window facade. All windows were closed 
during the simulation. Assuming that the impact of the two leaks on the entire zone’s 
performance was minimal, only air ﬂows (“Ventilation air ﬂows”) through the leaks were 
investigated. 
Based on the theory of natural ventilation and general knowledge about building physics the 
simulations were expected to result in the following outcome:
Expected outcome 1: 
1) The larger window opening, the higher airﬂows and thus a corresponding a lower air age 
and operative temperature. 2) The outﬂow through the roof window should be higher than 
the air inﬂow. 3) The air outﬂow through the roof window should always be lower than the 
entire zone's airﬂow. 4) There will be a clear performance difference between “Always closed” 
and “Always open 20 %”. 5) When the roof window is opened the airﬂow through the window 
should make up the majority of the total airﬂow in the zone. The results are shown in Table 
4.2.   
36
Figure 4.3: IDA-ICE illustration of  the reference model 
with the incorporated central wall section. The green and 
purple circles shows the locations of  the leaks.
==PAGE:51==
4 Methodology  ●
Expected outcome 2: 
1) When the two leaks are placed next to each other they should have almost identical air 
ﬂows. 2) A considerable performance difference should appear between the different 
placements of the two “leak couples”. 3) When Leak 2 is placed at the roof, the outward air 
ﬂow should be increased due to the stack effect. 4) Simultaneously the amount of outward air 
ﬂow at Leak 1 should decrease when it is placed at the ﬂoor. The results are shown in Table 
4.2.
4.1.4.2 Results of the natural ventilation investigation 
Table 4.2: Natural ventilation investigation 1. Results of  simulations of  the “Semi-outdoor zone”.  
Monthly Average
Always closed
Always open 10 %
Always open 20 %
Min.
Mean
Max.
Min.
Mean
Max.
Min.
Mean
Max.
Air age [h]
2.5
4.9
8.0
0.7
0.9
1.1
0.4
0.4
0.5
Zone airﬂow (Outﬂow 
ext. walls) [L/s]
77
138
190
381
505
663
705
917
1181
Airﬂow in zone 
(Inﬂow ext. walls) [L/s]
70
131
183
375
484
619
699
888
1122
Ven. airﬂows (Outﬂow) 
Roof window [L/s]
0
0
0
164
343
634
475
730
1137
Ven. airﬂows (inﬂow) 
Roof window  [L/s]
0
0
0
122
181
246
513
638
729
Operative temp. [oC]
4.8
21.3
40.9
3.6
17.6
32.3
2.8
15.7
28.9
Table 4.3: Natural ventilation investigation 2. Results of  simulations of  the “Semi-outdoor zone” [l/s]. 
Airﬂow 
Monthly 
Average
Leaks at central height
Leaks at ﬂoor and roof height
Min.
Mean
Max.
Mean ∙ 
8760 h 
Min.
Mean
Max.
Mean ∙ 
8760 h 
Leak 1  
Inﬂow
0
0
0
0
0.8
3.0
7.2
26,200.
Leak 1  
Outﬂow
9.0
13.0
18.0
114,000.
0.1
1.6
3.4
13,900.
Leak 2  
Inﬂow
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Leak 2  
Outﬂow
9.8
14.0
19.5
122,700.
14.7
20.8
29.4
182,300.
37
==PAGE:52==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
The results from both investigations were evaluated in order to clarify if the simulation results 
were as expected and as a consequence determine whether the IDA-ICE simulations are 
based on valid and functional models. 
4.1.5 Validation 
In order to achieve a desirable semi-outdoor space design it was necessary to import 
geometries from external programs to IDA-ICE and comply with the described precautions. 
Otherwise it would be necessary to introduce design limitations. 
There was consistency between the expected solar heat gain and the corresponding 
simulations results. When the g-value was halved, the transmitted solar radiation more than 
halved, but the small deviation from the presumable performance was considered realistic. 
This solar radiation heat gain reduction decreased the average operative temperature in the 
inner building with 1.5 oC and consequently the total energy balance of the window was 
reversed. Both results complied with the expected. When the window area was doubled, the 
solar radiation increased from 534 W to 987 W and the average operative temperature of the 
inner building increased with 1.1 oC. Additionally the total energy balance of the inner 
building increased from 2798 kWh to 4244 kWh. As expected, there were ﬂuctuations across 
the three diagrams showing the annual heat from direct and diffuse solar radiation in Figure 
4.2. Thus, IDA-ICE seems capable of simulating solar radiation through two facades in a 
reliably way.       
There was a good accordance between natural ventilation investigation 1 and 2 and the nine 
assumed elements of the two expected outcomes. Also, there was cohesion between the 
window opening degree, the ventilation rate, and the corresponding temperatures. By 
changing the roof window setting from “Always closed” to “Always open 20 %” the mean 
operative temperature decreased from 21.3 oC to 15.7 oC, while the mean air age decreased 
from 4.9 h. to 0.4 h. Most of the airﬂow in the zone took place through the window opening 
as expected corresponding to 68 % (10 % opening) and 80 % (20 % opening) of the total 
airﬂow, respectively. 
The location of the two leaks in investigation 2 affected the airﬂows remarkably. When the 
leaks were placed at similar heights, as expected, almost identical airﬂows were observed. 
Inﬂow only occurred when Leak 1 was placed at ﬂoor height, but this was probably due to the  
38
==PAGE:53==
4 Methodology  ●
markedly higher temperature in the semi-outdoor space than outdoors. The impact of the 
stack effect was clear when the two leaks were separated. Leak 2’s annual outﬂow increased 
from 122,700 L/s to 182,300 L/s and Leak 1’s decreased from 114,000 L/s to 13,900 L/s. 
This shows that the pressure difference between indoor and outdoor increased with height. 
Likewise, the outﬂow was always larger than the inﬂow for all cases in investigation 1. Thus, 
the pressure causing the natural ventilation was driven by the same forces no matter where 
openings were placed.   
  
 
Overall, it was possible to design a functional and realistic natural ventilation system in IDA-
ICE. However, it is necessary to consider the driving forces and be aware of the location and 
the size of the ventilation openings since they signiﬁcantly affected the airﬂows. 
4.2 Establishment of simulation models 
The main focus of this thesis was the performance the semi-outdoor space. Therefore, the 
design of the inner house was kept identical throughout the different simulations opposite the 
semi-outdoor space constructions. In this section, the different constructions are presented 
followed by a description of additional information necessary to recreate the results. 
4.2.1 Inner house construction 
The inner house was constructed as a 100 m2 (gross area) building consisting of six 2.5 m tall 
rooms/zones with varied size. It represents a typical small single family home ﬁtted for the 
semi-outdoor space concept. The material composition of the house was based on the Danish 
Building Regulations’ 2015 requirements to U-values for Danish “Sommerhuse” and 
Rockwool’s recommended insulation thicknesses for such houses [48]. The main constructions 
are described in Table 4.4. 
39
==PAGE:54==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
The material composition creates a building with a relatively low thermal mass since the 
constructive system primarily was composed of wood components. Furthermore, the vapor 
barrier was omitted because the inner house was not exposed to rain and it was also 
considered irrelevant for the thermal performance of the inner house. The outer surfaces’ 
optical properties were changed to “Clear Oak” and the roof to “Dark grey color”. Thereby 
the surfaces matched the emissivity, reﬂectance, roughness, and specularity of used wood and 
asphalt cladding.                 
  
All windows were identical and measured 1.25 ₒ 1 m giving a total area of 20 m2. They were 
placed 0.9 m above ﬂoor level with the following properties; a total U-value of 1.3 W/m2∙K, a 
solar heat gain coefﬁcient (g-value) of 0.73, and a total solar transmittance of 0.70. The door 
opening between the inner house and the semi-outdoor space was type “Entrance door”. The 
remaining openings were type “Inner door”. All further detailed construction information and 
material data are described in Appendix A. The ﬂoor plan, with door and window 
placements, is shown in Figure 4.4. 
Table 4.4: The construction parts, thickness and total U-value of  the inner house.
Construction
Material layers
Total thickness 
[m]
Total U-value  
[W/m2∙K]
Exterior walls Wood (Cladding), Wood (Frame), 
Insulation (rock wool), Gypsum.
0.220
0.199
Internal walls
Gypsum, Wood (frame), Insulation (rock 
wool), Gypsum.
0.134
0.376
Slab
Expanded clay aggregate, Insulation 
(polystyrene), Concrete, Wood (frame), 
Insulation (rock wool), Wood (ﬂoor).  
0.525
0.122
Roof
Asphalt rooﬁng, Plywood, Wood (frame), 
Insulation (rock wool), gypsym. 
0.316
0.126
40
==PAGE:55==
4 Methodology  ●
 
4.2.2 Semi-outdoor space 
The semi-outdoor space was designed in six different versions; three different shapes each 
with two different volumes. The shapes were chosen based on their geometric diversity and 
with inspiration from the projects presented in the literature review. The shapes were; 
rectangular, triangular prisms, and domes. The semi-outdoor spaces had a net volume of 750 
m3 and 1500 m3 to provide room for recreational activities inside the semi-outdoor space. 
Polycarbonate plates were used as the cover material of the outer surface/shield. It was 
chosen because of its low weight, transparency, stiffness, and insulation ability [46] and due to 
the fact that ordinary glass windows will be quite expensive for such large areas. In IDA-ICE 
the plates were inserted as one layered “detailed window” units, with properties matching 
polycarbonate instead of modifying the wall material. This was necessary in order to be able 
to control it as a window and ensure the transparent properties. The window frames were 
intended as a replacement of construction wood and the frames’ U-value was calculated as 
200 mm wood battens. The properties of the polycarbonate shield of the semi-outdoor space 
are shown in Table 4.5. 
41
Figure 4.4: Floor plan of  the inner house. 
Windows are marked red and doors green.
==PAGE:56==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
The semi-outdoor space slab was constructed with two layers. A 0.5 m soil layer topped with a 
0.05 m wood surface. This provides a comfortable surface for the occupants, the opportunity 
to grow plants, and thermal mass so that the temperature of the semi-outdoor space 
assumable will be more stable. The wood corresponds to the type used in the inner house 
construction. The soil had the following properties; thermal conductivity: 2.0 W/(m∙K), 
density: 2000 kg/m3, and speciﬁc heat capacity: 1000 J/(kg∙K). Additionally, the optical 
properties of the outer slab surface were changed to “Clear Oak”. 
 
The two dome models (later referred to as Dome750 and Dome1500), shown in Figure 4.5, 
were constructed as ball sections. The large one was made from a ball with a radius of 11.37 
m and the small one a ball with a radius of 9.70 m. The two dome spheres were converted 
into planar surfaces in order to be able to insert the polycarbonate window units in IDA-ICE. 
Each dome was composed of ﬁve different surfaces/polycarbonate window sizes and a total of  
42
8.0 m
6.5 m
21.62 m
18.16 m
Figure 4.5: Illustration of  the two dome-shaped semi-outdoor spaces with the inner house. The one with a 
volume of  1500 m3 to the left and the other with a volume of  750 m3 to the right.
Table 4.5: Properties of  the polycarbonate plates of  the 
semi-outdoor space shield [47]. 
Thickness
4 mm
Solar heat gain coefﬁcient
0.81
Solar transmittance, visible
0.80
Total solar transmission
0.89
Glazing U-value
5.36 W/m2 ∙K
Frame U-value (wood)
0.60 W/m2 ∙K
Frame fraction
0.05
==PAGE:57==
4 Methodology  ●
120 single surface units. These geometric conﬁgurations reduced the volumes of the domes, 
but the small deviation from the intended 750 m3 and 1500 m3 was assumed insigniﬁcant for 
the overall performance.       
The two triangular prism models (later referred to as Tria750 and Tria1500), shown in Figure 
4.6, have heights similar to the domes. The remaining dimensions were speciﬁed in order to 
achieve the desired volumes. The shields were composed of 168 and 224 polycarbonate 
surface units respectively.      
 
The two rectangular models (later referred to as Rect750 and Rect1500) are shown in Figure 
4.7. The dimensions were not related to the four other spaces, but speciﬁed in order to be 
geometrically simple and obtain the desired volumes. The shields were composed of 236 and 
242 single polycarbonate surface units respectively.
   
43
Figure 4.6: Illustration of  the two triangular-shaped semi-outdoor spaces with the inner house. The one 
with a volume of  1500 m3 to the left and the other with a volume of  750 m3 to the right.
8.0 m
6.5 m
24.0 m
20.0 m
18.23 m
15.38 m
==PAGE:58==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
The 3D IDA-ICE visualizations of the six models can be seen in Appendix B, but one of the 
dome models is presented in Figure 4.8. When the volume is chosen as the ﬁxed design 
parameter, the shield size would vary according to shape and volume. The shield sizes can be 
useful information for more accurate analyzes of the performance, because it can be the 
decisive design parameter instead of the shape or volume. The shield sizes are presented in 
Table 4.6.    
 
44
Figure 4.7: Illustration of  the two rectangular-shaped semi-outdoor spaces with the inner house. The one 
with a volume of  1500 m3 to the left and the other with a volume of  750 m3 to the right.
5.47 m
5.05 m
20.0 m
16.50 m
16.0 m
12.0 m
Figure 4.8: IDA-ICE visualization of  the dome simulation model with a 750 m3 
semi-outdoor space.
==PAGE:59==
4 Methodology  ●
4.2.3 Internal gains 
The internal gains represent a typical everyday life scenario appropriated for a single family. 
Thus the building was only loaded to a minimum. The internal gains included light, 
equipment, and occupants, but no light and equipment were installed in the semi-outdoor 
space. The internal gains were identical in all simulations. 
4.2.3.1 Occupants 
The building had four occupants. They were distributed into the zones according to type and 
function. The model used two schedules - one for the bedrooms and one for the remaining 
zones. This formation was established to ensure that all the occupants stayed in the bedrooms 
together during the night and in the other zones in the remaining time. In order to construct 
that scenario in IDA-ICE it was necessary to simulate with 2 ₒ 4 occupants simultaneously 
and make sure their individual time schedules did not overlap. The two bedrooms each had 
two occupants present from 23.00 to 07.00. The remaining zones used the schedule presented 
in Table 4.8 and the four occupants were distributed according to Table 4.7. The average 
activity level of the occupants was assumed to be 1.0 met, which corresponds to be seated and 
relaxed with a heat output of 58 W/m2 [50]. The thermal insulation from clothing (clo) was 
also important for the thermal comfort of the occupant and they were dressed for typically 
Danish indoor climate conditions. In the semi-outdoor space there was a slightly higher 
activity level and ﬂexibility in the clothing insulation. See the values in Table 4.7.   
  
45
Table 4.6:  Shield sizes and ratios of  the six different models.
Model type
Shield size [m2]
“Shape type” shield to shield size ratio
Shield size to volume ratio
Dome750
388
1.45
0.52
Dome1500
561
0.37
Rect750
485
1.47
0.65
Rect1500
714
0.48
Tria750
503
1.45
0.67
Tria1500
728
0.49
==PAGE:60==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
4.2.3.2 Equipment 
According to [11] ASHRAE suggests that heat gain from equipment for a single family home 
corresponds to 470 W. That amount was divided between the zones in relation to their size 
and function. In order to simplify the model, only one equipment unit with a high power in 
each zone was used. The zones and their associated power are shown in Table 4.9.   
46
Table 4.7: Distribution of  the four occupants between the zones and their activity level 
and clothing degree.  
Zone 
Occupants
Activity level [met]
Clothing [clo]
Semi-outdoor
0.8
1.2
1.0 ± 0.5
Living Room
1.2
1.0
0.85 ± 0.25
Hall
0.2
Kitchen
1.2
Bath
0.6
Bedrooms
(Separate schedule)
Table 4.8: Schedule and factors of  the occupants presence for all 
zones except the bedrooms.
Time
Weekdays 
Weekends
07.00 - 09.00
1.0
1.0
09.00 - 15.00
-
15.00 - 18.00
0.5
18.00 - 23.00
1.0
Table 4.9: The zones and their associated 
equipment unit power. 
Zone 
Equipment - Unit Power [W]
Bedroom 1
60
Bedroom 2
60
Living room
110
Hall
40
Kitchen
180
Bath
20
==PAGE:61==
4 Methodology  ●
The equipment was scheduled to be turned on according to the occupants’ presence, but at 
least 10 % were always turned on, see Table 4.10. The schedule applied throughout the year 
for all zones. This composition of the equipment caused a yearly total consumption of 1972 
kWh. 
4.2.3.3 Light 
Lighting was assumed to be 3 W/m2 equally distributed between zones with one unit per zone 
installed. See Table 4.11 for the light power of the zones. 
The light was scheduled to be turned on according to the season and the occupants’ presence. 
See Table 4.12 for the schedules, which applied throughout the year for all zones. This 
composition of the light caused a yearly total consumption of 881 kWh. 
47
Table 4.10: Schedule for the equipment's power intensity.
Time
Weekdays 
Weekends
07.00 - 09.00
80 %
100 %
09.00 - 15.00
10 %
15.00 - 18.00
50 %
18.00 - 23.00
100 %
23.00 - 07.00
10 %
10 %
Table 4.11: The zones and their associated 
light unit effect. 
Zone 
Light - Unit Power [W]
Bedroom 1
32
Bedroom 2
37
Living Room
96
Hall
38
Kitchen
77
Bath
21
==PAGE:62==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
4.2.4 HVAC 
All mechanical HVAC units were removed from the semi-outdoor space so the indoor 
environment only was supplied and affected by passive means. The inner house was fully 
equipped as a regular Danish dwelling without a cooling system. No speciﬁc heating system 
was applied and therefore the default “Ideal Heater” was used with a power capacity large 
enough to meet the heating demand. The heating set-point was 20 oC in all zones. The 
heating system was supplied with district heating. 
4.2.4.1 Mechanical ventilation system 
The mechanical ventilation system of the inner house was connected to the outdoor 
conditions by linking it to the climate ﬁle. Thereby, the air supply and exhaust were not 
directly affected by the air conditions in the semi-outdoor space. The system was of type CAV 
(constant air volume). All zones of the inner house had supply air units installed, but only the 
kitchen and bathroom zones had exhaust units. The remaining exhaust units were removed. 
The ventilation rates used were based on DS/EN 15251 [21] Table B.5 category I, which 
recommends that the supply air ﬂow should be 1.4 l/s/m2. The kitchen exhaust air ﬂow rate 
was similar, but for the bath zone, it was increased to 2.88 l/s/m2 due to the minimum 
exhaust demands. To balance the system in the bath zone the supply air was increased to 2.88 
l/s/m2. The heat exchange effectiveness of the air handling unit was increased from 0.6 to 0.8 
(80 %). The supply air temperature was kept low at 16 oC. The air ﬂows are recommended to 
be kept during occupied hours. Therefore, and to reduce the energy consumption, the fan 
operation was scheduled to stop during weekdays from 9.00 - 15.00 when all the occupants 
were out of the house.   
48
Table 4.12: Schedule for the light and the corresponding power intensity.
Time
October - April
May - September
Weekdays Weekends
Weekdays Weekends
07.00 - 09.00
50 %
100 %
30 %
60 %
09.00 - 15.00
0 %
0 %
15.00 - 18.00
50 %
30 %
18.00 - 23.00
100 %
60 %
==PAGE:63==
4 Methodology  ●
4.2.4.2 Natural ventilation 
Inner house window openings 
The primary function of the window openings was to avoid uncomfortably high temperatures. 
The mechanical ventilation system should ensure that the zones of the inner house complied 
with the air quality recommendations. Therefore, the opening of the sixteen windows of the 
inner house was managed by a PI-control. The control opens and closes the individual 
windows according to the internal and external air temperatures, the 20 oC heating set-point 
and the 25 oC cooling set-point. All windows were designed to open horizontally by adjusting 
the “Max relative width” to 100 % and “Max relative height” to 25 %. Thus, the maximum 
opening area for a single window corresponds to 0.31 m2.     
Semi-outdoor space shield openings 
The shield openings were the only modiﬁable variable of the semi-outdoor space, which 
during simulations could affect the indoor climate performances. However, natural ventilation 
could be implemented and used to a greater extent in the semi- outdoor space compared to 
conventional buildings for several reasons. The natural ventilation should compensate for 
missing mechanical ventilation. Further, traditional standards and discomfort factors like 
draught could be ignored and ﬁnally, the ventilation system should be able to reduce 
potentially higher temperatures than normal. The system was not designed to achieve a 
speciﬁc indoor air quality because prior to the simulations the quality was assumed high. This 
was due to the fact that air quality tends to be better outdoors than indoors and that the 
environment of the semi-outdoor space presumable have more similarities with the outdoors 
than conventional indoor spaces.     
Since the semi-outdoor spaces were different across the simulation models, it was vital that the 
natural ventilation systems in the semi-outdoor space were designed appropriately for the 
different designs. This was necessary to achieve a comparable benchmark. That was assumed 
possible if they had identical large total opening areas. Hence, models with similar semi-
outdoor space volumes had the same opportunity to create equivalent air changes. 
The semi-outdoor spaces with a 750 m3 volume had a 29.52 m2 maximum opening area and 
those with a volume of 1500 m3 volume had a 40.68 m2 maximum opening area. Based on 
recommendations from [43] two-thirds of that area was placed as top openings and the last 
third around the bottom of the shield. These areas were derived from the domes which shields  
49
==PAGE:64==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
were constructed of ﬁve polycarbonate window “circles”, shown in Figure 4.8. The area of 
the top circles corresponded to the described two-thirds of the maximum opening areas. The 
remaining third was not equivalent to the size of the twenty-four bottom windows, but the 
area was achieved by adjusting the “max relative width” and “max relative height” of the 
window opening areas. This method was also applied to the four other models in order to 
create identical total opening areas, but in these cases, all of the top and bottom windows did 
not have opening mechanisms due to a large number of windows. To achieve the desirable 
opening areas it was assumed sufﬁcient to have an estimated large number of window 
openings. The two rectangular shaped models had opening mechanisms on 40 top windows 
(every other) and on 20 windows around the bottom (ﬁve on each side). The two triangular 
shaped models had opening mechanisms on 20 of the top windows (every other) and 20 along 
the bottom (six on the long sides and four on the short sides).      
Likewise, the windows in the inner house were all windows with an opening mechanism 
managed by PI-controls with the same cooling- and heating temperature set-points.        
Door openings 
The inner doors were scheduled to be either fully opened, fully closed or 50 % opened one 
third of the time. The time distribution is shown in the IDA-ICE schedule in Figure 4.9.  .   
The entrance door to the inner house had a separate schedule. From October to April the 
door was only opened shortly a few times during the day, but from May to September the 
door was 50 % opened 50 % of the daytime. The time distributions are shown in the IDA-
ICE schedules in Figure 4.10.   
 
50
Figure 4.9: The inner door opening schedule. The x-axis shows time in hours and the y-
axis the opening degree factor. 1.0 corresponds to fully opened.   
==PAGE:65==
4 Methodology  ●
Inﬁltration 
Besides the natural ventilation that occurred at window and door openings there was also 
inﬁltration through the constructions. The degree of inﬁltration/air tightness was determined 
by the “Wind-driven ﬂow” and thereby the pressure coefﬁcients. It was assumed that the 
shields of the semi-outdoor spaces were less airtight compared to conventional building 
envelopes, why the air tightness was decreased. It was assumed three times less airtight than 
the default setting corresponding to an inﬁltration increased from 0.5 ACH to 1.5 ACH. Since 
this setting was one general parameter in IDA-ICE it applied to the entire building. 
Consequently, it was incorrect because the inner house construction was designed to have an 
ordinary air tightness construction. Potential deviations in the results were assumed to be 
insigniﬁcant since the inner house not was exposed to wind.   
4.2.5 Additional inputs  
Before the simulations were conducted some additional input-parameters were adjusted and 
data ﬁles added. The models had Copenhagen, Denmark, as the location. 
Location ﬁle:   
 
Copenhagen/Kastrup_061800 (ASHRAE 2013). 
Climate ﬁle:  
 
 
DNK_KOEBENHAVN-KASTRUP_061800_IW2.PRN. 
Pressure coefﬁcients:  
 
AIVC “Semi-exposed” (Auto Fill). 
Generator efﬁciency:  
 
Heating COP: 1 (District). 
Thermal bridges:  
 
All adjusted. See IDA-ICE screenshot in Appendix C. 
Simulation period:  
 
1st January to 31st December.    
Occupant location: 
 
Center of the zones at a height of 0.6 m. 
Outdoor CO2 concentration: 
400 ppm. 
 
51
Figure 4.10: The entrance door opening schedule. The x-axis shows time in hours and the 
y-axis the the opening degree factor. 1.0 corresponds to fully opened.   
==PAGE:66==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
4.3 Data conﬁguration 
The six models were simulated for a year each, which generates a very large amount of 
relevant and irrelevant data. This section explains which analysis parameters there were 
simulated and afterwards used to evaluate the performance of the models. Additionally, it is 
described on what basis the parameters were assessed and how some of the simulation data 
was processed prior the presentation of results.   
4.3.1 Analysis parameters 
It was possible to determine the ventilation rate, CO2 concentration, thermal conditions, 
moisture (relative humidity), and daylight conditions with the use of IDA-ICE simulations. 
Other indoor climate parameters were neglected. Further, the applied design was also 
assumed not to affect these parameters when comparing to conventional building designs. In 
order to limit the scope, the daylight parameter was neglected too, even though it interacts 
with other indoor climate parameters and energy. It especially applies when the inner house is 
investigated. In such case, the daylight has to transmit through an extra window layer hence 
the level will be reduced.  
  
4.3.1.1 Thermal conditions 
Focus was on the analysis of the thermal conditions. The approach was to document the 
thermal conditions instead of assessing them due to the lack of appropriate standards. 
Nevertheless, the 18-27 oC temperature comfort interval from Olsen and Andersen’s study has 
been used to indicate comfort [55]. Only operative temperatures were used to analyze the 
thermal conditions, but thermal discomfort due to draught may occur when the occupants 
were exposed to air movements. However, it was not assumed possible to qualitatively assess 
draught without the use of CFD based simulations.   
4.3.1.2 Air quality 
The air quality was assessed using the CO2-concentration and relative humidity according to 
the categorization system described in DS/EN 15251 [21] although no CO2-concentration 
controlled ventilation system or dehumidiﬁcation- and humidiﬁcation systems were installed in 
the models. Category II would be the best air quality category appropriate for single-family 
design scenario. Thus, it is not necessary to obtain a category I level to reach a satisfying 
performance. 
52
==PAGE:67==
4 Methodology  ●
4.3.1.3 Airﬂows 
The air quality can be assessed according to the recommendations for ventilation rates in DS/
EN 15251, because there was a clear association between them [21]. However, the air quality 
was only assessed by considering the CO2-concentration and relative humidity. The airﬂows 
will, however, still be included in the results because the shield openings and the 
corresponding airﬂows are vital for how the remaining parameters behave. Thus, potential 
correlations between airﬂows, energy ﬂows, thermal conditions, and the air quality can be 
detected.     
IDA-ICE simulates four basic types of airﬂows - in and out of the external and internal 
surfaces. During the preliminary examination of the results it was seen that the airﬂows 
through the internal surfaces were small compared to the airﬂow through the external 
surfaces. To simplify the results, only airﬂows through the external surfaces/shield were 
considered because it was assumed that it would not affect the interpretation of the overall 
performance. Only the outward airﬂows were considered due to the fact that in- and outﬂows 
are almost similar in order to obtain balance. The extra information would not contribute 
with any further necessary understanding of the airﬂows.           
4.3.1.4 Energy 
The energy balance and the total energy consumption were simulated. No energy 
consumption can be assigned to the semi-outdoor space because no HVAC systems were 
installed. Since the inner house was designed as a conventional building, it was relevant to 
consider its energy consumption. The energy balance was used to understand the thermal- 
and air quality performances of the semi-outdoor spaces similar to the airﬂow results. 
Additionally, if the energy balance showed a surplus it should not be interpreted as a 
consumption because the energy then was spent somewhere else. The full energy balance of 
the semi-outdoor space components was composed by IDA-ICE into ﬁve categories:  
• Floor and thermal bridges -  Heat transmissions through the ground ﬂoor and all thermal 
bridges.    
• Inner house walls and masses - Heat transmissions through the inner house and the 
construction embedded energy.   
53
==PAGE:68==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
• Window and solar - long and short wave solar radiation and transmission through glass 
and frame of all windows connected to the zone.  
• Inﬁltration and openings - heat transfers due to all non-mechanically driven air ﬂows. 
• Occupants - heat from people inside the zone according to their activity level.    
An additional simulation was conducted in order to compare the energy consumption of the 
inner house of the six models with an inner house unprotected from a semi-outdoor space and 
shield. The model contained only the inner house which did not differ from the inner house 
else used except that the entrance door was scheduled to be always closed. 
4.3.2 Data processing      
After the IDA-ICE simulations some of the different outcomes were further processed in 
Excel. 
IDA-ICE tends to take the average of the average when looking at temperatures. To avoid this 
simpliﬁcation, the data was sorted in Excel when average values were considered and extreme 
values should be found. 
Normally requirements to ventilation are based on airﬂows in relation to a room size, but 
IDA-ICE simulates the airﬂows as l/s. This unit would not function as a proper benchmark 
since the semi-outdoor spaces vary in both volume and ground ﬂoor area. Thus, it would not 
be possible to determine which model ventilates the most or least in relation to their size and 
shape. DS/EN 15251 [21] uses l/s per m2 as the unit, but since all of the semi-outdoor spaces 
were not constructed of vertical shield elements, the airﬂows were converted to an airﬂow per 
semi-outdoor space volume unit (l/s per m3). 
The total energy consumption was based on the “Delivered Energy” report for the entire 
building which shows the result as kWh/m2. That corresponds to the kWh/m2 per year unit 
used in the Danish Building Regulations because the models were simulated for exactly a year.  
Nevertheless, the energy consumption still need to be recalculated because the entire ﬂoor 
area of the simulated building was included in the report and thereby also the semi-outdoor 
space ﬂoor area and the roof of the inner house. IDA-ICE does not distinguish between 
horizontal surfaces as long as they are within the envelope/shield. Therefore, it accounts all  
54
==PAGE:69==
4 Methodology  ●
square meters as “normal” ﬂoor area and thus includes them in the kWh/m2 outcome. It 
would be incorrect to include these areas since the energy consumption will appear lower than 
it actually was in a comparison with conventional buildings. Therefore, the delivered energy 
was multiplied by a factor corresponding to the relationship between the 100 m2 area of the 
inner house and the area of each of the six models. The areas of the semi-outdoor spaces are 
presented in Table 4.13.      
55
Table 4.13: Floor area of  the semi-outdoor spaces [m2].
Floor area
Dome750
156
Dome1500
263
Rect750
98
Rect1500
220
Tria750
208
Tria1500
338
==PAGE:70==
56
==PAGE:71==
 
5  
Re s u l t s 
==PAGE:72==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
The outdoor temperature during the year is shown in Figure 5.1. The interaction between the 
weather, the indoor climate, and the heat balance is essential in order to evaluate the 
performance of the building and the semi-outdoor space. The outdoor temperature spans 
from -11 cC to 28 cC.  
5.1 Thermal conditions in the semi-outdoor space 
Figure 5.2 shows all temperatures simulated in the semi-outdoor spaces. The temperature 
distribution of the six models followed the same pattern and the spaces thus behaved equally. 
90 % of the time the temperature was between approximately 2 cC and 27 cC. Only 1-2 % of 
time the temperature raised above 30 cC and 2-4 % of the time it was not possible to keep it 
above the freezing point. In comparison with the outdoor temperature (see Figure 5.1), this 
distribution revealed that the semi-outdoor space temperature ﬂuctuated just as much as the 
outdoor conditions. The temperature was only approximately 10 % of the time within the 
20-25 cC cooling and heating set-point interval. Furthermore, it indicates that the spaces were 
able to both receive and release heat quickly. At approximately 25 cC, corresponding to the 
cooling set-point, the temperature tended to suddenly increase more rapidly. This indicates  
58
Outdoor temperature [oC]
Time [Hour]
Figure 5.1: Annual outdoor temperature from the applied IDA-ICE climate ﬁle.  
Annual outdoor temperature
==PAGE:73==
5 Results   ●
that the window control was able to reduce the time with highest temperatures. Additionally, it 
is seen that the two domes had a higher temperature more of the time than the remaining 
four models.    
   
Table 5.1 presents the extreme, median, and average temperatures of the individual models. It 
shows that the temperatures spanned -9.0 cC to 37.2 cC and that the corresponding median 
and average temperature were in the range 11.6 cC to 15.3 cC. All the temperatures of the 
1500 m3 models ﬂuctuated more than the corresponding 750 m3 models. The 1500 m3 models 
were thus less able to keep a steady temperature. The highest median temperature difference 
was 3.5 cC between Rect1500 and Dome750 as the warmest.    
59
Operative temperature [Co]
Figure 5.2: Cumulative curves of  the temperature inside the semi-outdoor spaces.
Operative temperatures for all models
% of time during year
==PAGE:74==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
The comfort temperature interval 18 - 27 oC and the time beneath and above it are presented 
in Table 5.2. Overall, it is observed that the performance differences were due to shape and 
not size. The two triangular models were the best performing shapes because they managed to 
be within the comfort interval the longest. Model Tria750 as the best with 27 % of the time 
within the interval. The four other models were equal time within the interval, but they 
differed from each other. The domes were longer time out of the comfort interval than the 
rectangular ones due to its warmer environment, but in general, it was the cold that was the 
main reason why the temperature was out of the comfort interval. On average was the 
temperature only 4 % of the time too high.    
Figure 5.3 shows the time within the 18 - 27 oC interval during the year. It was assumed to be 
adequate to show the average distribution of all six models. The time distribution of the single 
models can be seen in Appendix D.    
60
Table 5.1: Temperatures of  the semi-outdoor spaces [oC].
Lowest
Median
Average
Highest
Dome750
- 7.1
15.3
15.3
37.0
Dome1500
 - 7.5
14.7
14.8
37.2
Rect750
- 9.0
11.6
12.6
32.7
Rect1500
- 9.0
11.8
12.7
35.9
Tria750
- 7.7
12.6
13.4
33.2
Tria1500
- 8.0
12.3
13.1
34.8
Table 5.2: Percent of  time during year in temperature intervals [%].
< 18 oC
18 oC - 27 oC
27 oC <
Dome750
67
24
9
Dome1500
68
24
8
Rect750
76
24
1
Rect1500
75
23
2
Tria750
72
27
1
Tria1500
72
26
2
Average
71
25
4
==PAGE:75==
5 Results   ●
The simulation shows in Figure 5.3 that the time within the 18 - 27 oC interval varied from 0 
% in November, December, January, and February and up to 62 % in August. Winter was 
thus the most critical period during the year. A temperature rise will be necessary to increase 
time within the comfort interval except during the three summer months. It is anticipated, 
during this period, that a temperature increase in the semi-outdoor space will “move” the time 
from beneath the 18 cC limit to above the 27 cC limit and hence not increase the time within 
comfort. Considering the concept as a way to extend the summer's outdoor conditions inside 
the semi-outdoor space, it was achieved in March, April, September, and October. Here the 
time within comfort varied from 5 - 37 % corresponding to 1.2 - 8.8 hours per day on average.    
  
In Figure 5.4, the temperature difference between outdoors and inside the semi-outdoor 
spaces is presented. In Appendix E all the extreme temperatures and average temperatures for 
the single models are shown.    
   
61
Percent of time in temperature interval [%]
0
25
50
75
100
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
2
10
14
10
7
2
11
37
62
60
55
44
21
5
100
100
89
61
28
26
35
49
77
95
100
100
< 18 degC
18 - 27 degC
> 27 degC
Figure 5.3: Distribution of  time in three temperature intervals in the semi-outdoor spaces. The green 
interval is considered as thermal comfort. 
Percent of time in comfort
oC
oC
oC
==PAGE:76==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
As illustrated, the temperature differences were always positive and as a consequence, the 
temperature was always warmer inside the semi-outdoor spaces than outdoors. Thus, a “heat-
shield” was established around the inner house all year, which as a result potentially can lower 
the heating demand. The average temperature difference was at its lowest during December 
and January where the temperature was only approximately 1 oC higher inside the semi-
outdoor space than outdoors. The tendency was that during the warmer months the average 
temperature increased more indoors than outdoors. The highest difference was obtained in 
May where the average temperature was 7 oC higher. The “Lowest extreme” curve reveals 
that no matter which month considered, there was always about a 2 oC difference between the 
lowest temperature registered inside the semi-outdoor spaces and outdoor. It shows that the 
temperature was not able to be "stored" and kept up overnight. The “Highest extreme” curve 
does, however, reveal, that the highest temperatures were signiﬁcantly higher indoors than 
outdoors. Furthermore, the annual average temperature inside the semi-outdoor spaces was 
4.1 oC higher than the 10.3 oC outdoors. 
62
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Average
Highest extreme
Lowest extreme
Figure 5.4: Comparison of  the average, single highest extreme, and single lowest extreme temperature 
difference between outdoor and the semi-outdoor spaces. 
Temperature differences between outdoor and indoor
Temperature Difference [oC]
==PAGE:77==
5 Results   ●
5.2 Air quality in the semi-outdoor space 
The air quality was assessed on the basis of the CO2 - concentration and the relative humidity 
which will be considered individually.    
5.2.1 CO2 - concentration 
Considering the CO2-concentration in Table 5.3 the air quality was really high. Since the 
space only contained a minimum of occupants compared to their volumes, the CO2-
production was too low to signiﬁcantly affect the concentration inside either the 750 m3 or 
1500 m3 models. Inside model “Dome750” a CO2-concentration of 582 ppm equal to 182 
ppm above the outdoor concentration was registered as the highest concentration. It is 
considerably better than the category I 350 ppm above outdoor concentration limit (see Table 
3.1).  
Furthermore, it is seen that the maximum and average CO2-concentrations were almost 
identically between the six models. With so small differences and overall low concentrations 
and consequently good air quality, it is estimated to be irrelevant to do further investigations 
of the CO2-concentration.  
5.2.2 Relative humidity 
The relative humidity in the semi-outdoor spaces is illustrated in Figure 5.5. The relative 
humidity varied minimally across the models and between the similar shapes almost no 
variation occurred. Thus, shape had more effect on the relative humidity than the size of the 
semi-outdoor space. The rectangularly shaped models were those with the highest relative  
63
Table 5.3: Maximum CO2-concentration of  the semi-
outdoor spaces [ppm]. 
Maximum CO2 
concentration
Average CO2 
concentration
Dome750
582
493
Dome1500
560
487
Rect750
576
493
Rect1500
554
474
Tria750
578
493
Tria1500
558
478
==PAGE:78==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
humidity because they were within the category IV interval the longest time. The largest 
difference was between Rect1500 and Dome750 where Rect750 was 12 % of the total time 
longer within category IV. Both domes managed to be within category II or better 39 % of 
the time and thereby had the best performances.     
Figure 5.6 shows how the relative humidity varied throughout the year. The diagram is 
composed of average values of the single model's monthly performance. The individual 
performances can be seen in Appendix G.   
64
0
25
50
75
100
Dome750
Dome1500
Rect750
Rect1500
Tria750
Tria1500
21
21
19
19
23
23
15
15
13
13
16
16
15
15
14
13
17
17
49
49
54
55
45
43
Category IV
Category III
Category II
Category I
Figure 5.5: Relative humidity in the semi-outdoor space of  the six models.
Relative humidity category distribution
Percent of time in interval [%]
0
25
50
75
100
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
1
4
10
24
39
42
40
33
27
20
7
6
5
9
11
14
22
24
23
22
19
16
8
6
13
13
14
16
19
16
14
18
18
16
15
9
81
74
65
46
20
18
24
27
36
48
71
79
Category IV
Category III
Category II
Category I
Figure 5.6: Relative humidity in the semi-outdoor space. Average of  the six models.
Relative humidity category distribution
Percent of time in interval [%]
==PAGE:79==
5 Results   ●
As illustrated in Figure 5.6, the relative humidity varied greatly compared to the time of the 
year. From November to February the relative humidity was as a minimum 71 % of the time 
within the worst category IV, corresponding to being either below 20 % relative humidity or 
above 70 %. Thus the relative humidity was too high or too low almost all of the winter 
period. It shows that the ventilation strategy applied was not able to obtain a sufﬁciently high 
air change most of the year to comply with the recommended design criteria for traditional 
buildings according to DS 15251 [21]. From May to August the relative humidity was 
minimum 50 % of the time within category II or better. It  is considered as a acceptable level 
in the absence of a mechanical ventilation system. 
Figure 5.6 does not show the actual relative humidity. Thus it is not possible to determine 
whether it was above the 70 % limit or below the 20 % limit when the conditions 
corresponded to category IV. Figure 5.7 is shown to accommodate this lack of information. 
Because Rect750 was the model with the most time within category IV it was used as an 
example. It is revealed that the relative humidity almost never ﬂuctuated below the 20 % limit 
but above the 70 % limit most of the time. Thus too high humidity, including condensation, 
will be the main concern.  
65
Figure 5.7: Annual relative humidity of  model Rect750.
Time [Hour]
Relative Humidity [%]
Relative Humidity
==PAGE:80==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
5.3 Airﬂows in the semi-outdoor space 
The outward airﬂows through the shield are shown in Figure 5.8. All of the six models 
followed the same trend. From October to March almost no air moved out through the shield 
compared to the remaining months. Presumably, the small airﬂow left during that period was 
due to inﬁltration. It illustrates how much the airﬂows depended on the opening controls, 
which opened the windows almost exclusively during the warmest half of the year. The shape 
of the shield had large inﬂuence on the size of the airﬂows. The largest airﬂows occurred in 
July and ranged from 1.0 - 2.5 l/s per m3 depending on the model. Throughout the entire 
year, the trend was that the dome models had the two highest airﬂows, followed by the two 
triangular models, and ﬁnally the rectangular models had the smallest airﬂows. Monthly 
airﬂows in and out of the individual models are presented in Appendix H.   
Furthermore, in a comparison with Figure 5.5, it is observed that a clear correlation between 
relative humidity and the airﬂow existed. Low airﬂows caused high relative humidities.  
Since the models did not have similarly large maximum shield opening areas compared to the 
semi-outdoor space volumes, it was considered too uncertain to determine how the volume of 
the semi-outdoor spaces affected the airﬂows. A correction factor was applied to Figure 5.9 to 
accommodate this. The two graphs in Figure 5.8 and 5.9 are similar except that all the 
airﬂows on the 1500 models were multiplied with a 1.459 factor. Thereby, all six models have   
66
0
1
2
3
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Dome750
Dome1500
Rect750
Rect1500
Tria750
Tria1500
Airﬂow [l/s per m3]
Figure 5.8: Monthly outward average airﬂows through the shield of  the six models.
Outward Airﬂows
==PAGE:81==
5 Results   ●
identical relations between maximum opening areas and space volumes. This could be done 
because it is known from equation 3 and 5 that there is a linear correlation between opening 
area and airﬂow through an opening for both natural ventilation driven by the wind and stack 
effect. Figure 5.9 shows that the spaces’ ability to generate an airﬂow was affected minimal by 
the volume of the space compared to the importance of the shape type. Nonetheless, all the 
1500 models had a slightly higher airﬂow compared to the corresponding 750 models.   
5.4 Energy balance of the semi-outdoor space 
The annual energy gains and losses assigned to the different component categories of the 
semi-outdoor space are presented in Table 5.4.  
Table 5.4: Annual energy balance of  six semi-outdoor spaces. [kWh].
Floor and 
thermal bridges
Inner house 
walls and 
masses
Window and 
solar
Inﬁltration 
and openings
Occupants
Dome750
-2844
1441
36132
-20868
298
Dome1500
-4139
1550
43388
-31897
302
Rect750
-4595
1973
59330
-105
324
Rect1500
-6412
1966
93312
-6515
324
Tria750
-4843
1810
78297
-6295
313
Tria1500
-6238
1818
115049
-12593
315
67
0
1
2
3
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Dome750
Dome1500
Rect750
Rect1500
Tria750
Tria1500
Airﬂow [l/s per m3]
Figure 5.9: Monthly outward average airﬂows through the shields of  the six models. The 1500 
models’ airﬂow were multiplied by a 1.459 factor.  
Outward Airﬂows - opening area corrected
==PAGE:82==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
The investigation of the annual energy balance of the six models in Table 5.4 shows that the 
different models tended to behave similarly, although some of the energy ﬂows varied 
signiﬁcantly in magnitude. This similarity applied all ﬁve categories except the energy 
associated “Inﬁltration and openings”. Here the correlations between this speciﬁc energy 
category and the remaining categories deviated across the models. However, this category was 
also the only one directly affected by the opening control. Overall, it is observed that the sum 
of the models’ individual energy balances was positive. Thus the semi-outdoor spaces gained 
more energy than the lost and therefore the temperature increased compared to outdoors. As 
excepted, the primary energy transfer were associated with the shields since the “Window and 
solar” and “Inﬁltration and openings” quantities were considerably larger than the remaining 
categories quantities with the exception of model Rect750. Its energy loss due to “Floor and 
thermal bridges” was particularly larger than its loss related to “Inﬁltration and openings”. 
The largest gains were associated with the “Window and solar” category which varied from 
36132 kWh (Dome750) to 115049 kWh (Tria1500). The two largest losses were the domes’ 
loss due to “Inﬁltration and openings”. 
Due to the overall similarity, it was assumed adequate to further investigate only one model, 
Dome750, as an example of them all. This assumption was also necessary to make to further 
analyze the behavior of the models, at a monthly level, without showing all of the 
performances individually. Dome750 monthly energy losses and gains are shown in Table 5.5.  
68
==PAGE:83==
5 Results   ●
Overall, the amount of energy to and from the semi-outdoor space varied during the year. 
The performance from April to September was primarily determined by the energy related to 
the shield since the “Window and solar” and “Inﬁltration and openings” dominated. The 
remaining time of the year, the performance were more depended on all the energy categories 
because the quantities were more similarly.   
From November to February the transmission losses through the shield were larger than the 
solar radiation heat gain. Thus the shield, as a component, contributed negatively. To convert 
this to a positive contribution would an improvement of the insulation properties be necessary. 
In December the loss was 1186 kWh compared to the 9923 kWh maximum gain achieved 
during July. However, during the winter the remaining categories typical contributed positively. 
The positive contributions from “Floor and thermal bridges” indicate that the ground on 
average was warmer than inside the dome. The positive contributions from “Inﬁltration and 
openings” indicate that the windows of the inner house were opened and thus warm air/
energy was ﬂowing into the semi-outdoor space. The same applied to the “Inner house walls 
and masses”. Up to 321 kWh was transferred from the inner house during the winter to the 
semi-outdoor space. From May to August this heat transfer had the opposite direction and the  
Table 5.5: Monthly energy balance associated with the semi-outdoor space of  the Dome750 model [kWh].
Floor and 
Thermal bridges
Inner house 
walls and 
masses
Window and 
solar
Inﬁltration 
and openings
Occupants
January
- 16
314
- 802
802
36
February
- 101
266
- 478
708
32
March
- 536
186
829
635
30
April
- 745
71
3095
- 794
24
May
- 577
- 6
7067
- 4281
18
June
- 795
- 53
8649
- 5818
16
July
- 434
- 40
9923
- 7281
15
August
- 297
- 19
7727
- 5691
17
September
- 32
35
2027
- 902
20
October
147
131
7
360
26
November
278
234
- 726
594
30
December
262
321
- 1186
801
36
69
==PAGE:84==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
semi-outdoor space heated the inner house, but only up to 53 kWh was transferred in that 
direction. It is known from Figure 5.3, that discomfort due to high temperatures occurred 
from May to August. Table 5.5 shows that during this period energy losses due to “Inﬁltration 
and openings” did not obtained a level corresponding to the energy gained from the solar 
radiation (“Window and solar”). As an example 8649 kWh were gained in June, but only 5818 
kWh lost again. Thus it would be necessary to apply additional actions to eliminate high 
temperatures. In conclusion, the energy contribution from the occupants was insigniﬁcant and 
almost similar for each month, because the presence of the occupants did not vary between 
seasons in the simulations.  
5.5 Energy consumption of the inner house  
The simulated energy consumptions of the inner house are shown in Table 5.6. The six 
variations of the semi-outdoor space design affected not the energy consumption of the inner 
house considerably. The energy consumption varied only from 125 - 131 kWh/m2. Dome750 
had the lowest consumption as expected because its semi-outdoor space had the highest 
average temperature. Comparing the unprotected inner house with the six semi-outdoor space 
protected houses, showed a average total energy consumption reduction from 215 to 129 
kWh/m2 per year corresponding to 40 %. All the savings were due to a decrease in heating 
demands. As a maximum Dome750 achieved a 47 % reduction in its heating demands. All the 
energy consumptions, not included in the semi-outdoor space area, were high compared to 
the current 40 kWh/m2 per year demand in the Danish Building Regulations [2]. However, if 
the semi-outdoor spaces are interpreted as “traditional square meters”, the 29.9 - 66.2 kWh/
m2 per year energy performance was close to and within the demand.  
Table 5.6:  Energy consumption of  the inner house [kWh/m2 per year].
Facility Electric
District Heating
Total
Total incl. semi-
outdoor space
Dome750
25
101
125
49.0
Dome1500
25
102
127
35.0
Rect750
25
106
131
66.2
Rect1500
25
106
131
41.0
Tria750
25
106
130
42.4
Tria1500
25
106
131
29.9
Inner house unprotected
25
190
215
-
70
==PAGE:85==
5 Results   ●
5.6 Temperature in the inner house  
In order to investigate the thermal environment of the inner house, the monthly average and 
highest daily average temperatures are shown in Table 5.7. The inner houses of the two 
models with the highest (Dome750) and the lowest (Rect750) average temperature inside their 
semi-outdoor space (see Table 5.1) were used in a comparison with the unprotected house. 
The average temperatures shown in Table 5.7 were a combination of all the individual inner 
house zones' average temperatures. The monthly highest daily average temperatures were 
taken from  a speciﬁc zone.  See Appendix I for the temperatures in the single zones.         
As illustrated in Table 5.7, the average temperature inside the inner house was always above 
the 20 oC. It indicates that the heating system was able to keep the temperature above the 
heating set-point. Overall, the yearly average temperature inside inner house was 0.3 oC and 
1.0 oC higher when it was protected by a semi-outdoor space. However, when the highest 
temperatures were considered, the unprotected inner house could be warmer than if it was  
Table 5.7: Monthly temperature in the inner house [oC].
Unprotected inner house
Dome750 inner house
Rect750 inner house
Average
Highest 
daily avg.
Average
Highest 
daily avg.
Average
Highest 
daily avg.
January
20.3
20.6
20.1
21.8
20.1
21.3
February
20.3
20.7
20.2
22.2
20.1
20.4
March
20.5
21.1
21.1
23.8
20.4
21.6
April
21.0
23.3
22.7
26.7
21.5
24.0
May
22.2
24.5
24.5
27.5
23.2
25.4
June
23.0
25.1
24.8
27.6
23.9
26.2
July
23.7
27.3
25.4
29.1
24.4
27.0
August
23.3
26.7
24.7
28.4
23.8
26.2
September
21.3
22.8
23.0
25.4
21.8
23.6
October
20.5
21.3
21.2
23.7
20.7
21.9
November
20.3
20.8
20.3
22.3
20.2
21.7
December
20.3
20.4
20.1
21.4
20.1
21.0
Year average
21.4
22.4
21.7
Max 
temperature
29.5
31.9
28.8
71
==PAGE:86==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
not protected. As a maximum, there was 29.5 oC inside the unprotected house and 28.8 oC 
and 31.9 oC in the protected inner house. That could be due to the fact that the solar 
radiation does not have to transmit through the shield layer before transmitting into the inner 
house and heats it up when it is unprotected. The highest temperature in the semi-outdoor 
space was 32.7 oC for Rect750 and 37.0 oC for Dome750 for comparison. From October to 
March the temperature was quite stable across the models, but the rest of the year it raised 
signiﬁcantly towards uncomfortable high temperatures. Throughout the year, the highest daily 
average temperature spanned 6.9 oC for the unprotected model, 7.7 oC for the Dome750 
protected inner house, and 6.6 oC for the Rect750 protected house. 
72
==PAGE:87==
 
6  
D i s c u s s i o n  
==PAGE:88==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
The purpose of this study was to investigate the indoor climate of semi-outdoor spaces and 
see how different volumes and shapes of the semi-outdoor space impacted the performance. 
Furthermore, the study investigated how the energy consumption and temperature of the 
inner house was affected. Overall, no doubtful results were found and they were in good 
correlation with previous studies.  
Since design greatly affects the performance of a building it was expected that the six models 
would behave differently. However, there were no speciﬁc expectations to what signiﬁcance 
shape and volume of the semi-outdoor space would have on the results, but a trend was 
found. The shape of the semi-outdoor space affected the performance notably more than its 
volume. It was expected that the two volumes, varied with a factor two, would lead to more 
remarkable performance differences. A larger discrepancy in volume could have been 
investigated, but it was not considered realistic to design semi-outdoor space covered buildings 
where the semi-outdoor space would be considerably larger than 1500 m3 or smaller than 750 
m3 when the inner house was 250 m3. 
6.1 Validation of IDA-ICE simulation models 
All simulations were carried out in IDA-ICE. The reliability of the simulation models was 
validated in relation to solar radiation, natural ventilation, and the establishment of the semi-
outdoor space geometry prior to the main investigation, and as part of the overall method. 
That process took some precautions into account through a comprehensive research of 
instructions, recommendations and forum discussions. Finally, the model was validated by 
comparing the simulation outcome with a predicted outcome based on theory. Although the 
outcome was consistent with the expectations, it is still uncertain whether the magnitude of 
the outcome was correct. However, as long as the models behaved realistically, no reasons 
were found not to trust the credibility of the program. It has been advantageous to use a 
comparative analysis for the validation. Nonetheless, such analysis is time consuming and 
difﬁcult to use without making design limitations due to the programs’ different interfaces and 
individual capabilities. Another useful extensive method could be to inspect the implemented 
mathematic codes in IDA-ICE and thus survey how the program handles a semi-outdoor 
space. However, it will be a really demanding process. Furthermore, EQUA is aware of the 
program’s limitations and capabilities, why they keep updating and making sure that incorrect 
actions are blocked. Nevertheless, semi-outdoor space designs are complex and it was assumed 
necessary to conduct the validation which fortunately succeeded. 
74
==PAGE:89==
6 Discussion   ●
6.2 Temperature in the semi-outdoor space 
The annual average temperature in the semi-outdoor space of all six models was 4.1 oC 
higher than outdoor. Thus, an environment was created which differed from both the normal 
outdoor- and indoor conditions. This temperature difference is in accordance with ﬁndings 
from a previous study where a 3 oC difference was detected for similar climate conditions [11, 
20]. The average temperature in the semi-outdoor space varied only between 0.1 - 0.5 oC 
within shapes, but between 0.4 - 2.7 oC within models with identical volumes (Table 5.1). The 
temperature was thus affected more by the shape of the semi-outdoor space than by volume. 
No thermal comfort in the semi-outdoor space from November to February was found with 
the use of an 18-27 oC comfort interval because the temperature always was below the 18 oC 
limit. Nevertheless, the environment created inside the semi-outdoor space will presumably 
still be signiﬁcant more comfortable than outdoors during this period.   
The domes were able to keep a higher temperature compared to the two other shapes. Most 
remarkable was the 3.7 oC annual median temperature difference between Dome750 and 
Rect750. Thereby, the dome shape would be the preferred design choice during cold periods, 
but not throughout the entire year. During July, the temperature was 37.2 oC in the semi-
outdoor space of Dome1500 which is uncomfortably high. This situation was expected 
because several studies warned against uncomfortably high temperatures in the semi-outdoor 
space during summer [16, 20, 22]. However, the outdoor temperature would probably also be 
more comfortable and hence preferable during the warmest hours of the day in that period. 
July was also the month where the semi-outdoor spaces provided the best comfort conditions, 
meaning in average 60 % of the time was within the 18-27 oC comfort interval. The two 
triangular shaped models had the highest percentage of time with temperatures within the 18 
- 27 oC comfort interval, but only slightly longer time than the two other shapes. The volume 
of the semi-outdoor space had almost no impact on the temperature which was unexpected.        
Furthermore, Lin and Zmeureanu [10] calculated the maximum temperature difference 
between outdoor and in a semi-outdoor space of a dome-covered house located in Canada to 
be 12.4 oC. Although the study only investigated a single day in February, the ﬁndings were in 
accordance with the results obtained in this study. Here a corresponding difference of 12.1 oC 
was recorded in April. Since the temperature inside the semi-outdoor space could deviate so 
much from outdoors, it presumably also ﬂuctuated greatly during the day, but it was only  
75
==PAGE:90==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
considered on an overall level. In order to fully understand the performance and possibilities 
of the concept, it would be advantageous to further investigate the thermal conditions on a 
daily level. 
6.3 Air quality in the semi-outdoor space  
All the CO2-conditions were almost equal to the outdoor background concentration. In this 
context, the air quality was always high, but the relative humidity in the semi-outdoor space 
was too high. This was also seen in Dome of Visions [46]. The high relative humidity 
primarily occurred during winter, but from April to September 18 - 46 % of the time was 
within Category IV, corresponding to below 20 % or above 70 % relative humidity (Table 
3.2). Thus the problem occurs throughout the year. A normal solution to this problem would 
be to increase the ventilation rate, but during summer the ventilation rate was already high. 
Opposite, almost no ventilation occurred during the coldest six months because the control of 
the openings reacted only to the temperature. If the ventilation was increased, it would be at 
the expense of the temperature difference gained compared to outdoors. 
The identically shaped models had similar relative humidity, but there were small deviations 
between the different shaped models. The domes were 39 % of the time within Category II 
and I as the best models, compared to 32 % of the time of the rectangular models as the 
worst. These performance differences were associated with the airﬂows- the higher airﬂow the 
better relative humidity.  
6.4 Ventilation of the semi-outdoor space 
The two dome-shaped models had the highest temperatures in the semi-outdoor spaces. This 
also explains why the models had the largest airﬂows because the opening controls tried to 
keep the temperature below the 25 oC cooling set-point. As a consequence, the domes also 
released the largest amount of energy related to “Inﬁltration and openings” compared to the 
other models. There was no difference in the overall trend, since these parameters reacted 
according to each other. The shape of the semi-outdoor space affected the magnitude of the 
airﬂow considerable, while the volume of the semi-outdoor space did not affect the airﬂow 
remarkably. For example in July (the month with largest airﬂows), the airﬂows varied only 
between 0.18 - 0.70 l/s per m3 within shape, but between 0.42 - 2.60 l/s per m3 within models 
with identical volumes (Figure 5.8). When the airﬂows were corrected for the different  
76
==PAGE:91==
6 Discussion   ●
maximum opening areas, like in Figure 5.9, this observation stood out even more clearly. 
Furthermore, it is still questionable whether the largest airﬂow can be attributed the design of 
the semi-outdoor space and its ability to transfer air or if the airﬂow was just larger because 
the openings were open for longer time due to higher temperatures. 
6.5 Energy balance of the semi-outdoor space 
The impact of the shape and size of the semi-outdoor spaces on the indoor climate could be 
determined, but it is unknown how some of the ﬁxed design parameters affected the overall 
result. The evaluation of the energy balance outcome could accommodate this issue, by 
showing correlations between energy gained and lost by the different components of the semi-
outdoor space and the indoor climate. 
As expected, the annual energy balance of the different semi-outdoor spaces had similar 
behavior. Nonetheless, large differences occurred within the energy associated with “Window 
and solar” and “Inﬁltration and openings” respectively. The losses related to “Inﬁltration and 
openings” ranged from -105 kWh to -31897 kWh and thus followed size of the airﬂows of the 
individual models (chapter 4.3). The larger airﬂows, the larger were the energy loss due to 
“Inﬁltration and openings”. The contribution from “Window and solar” ranged from 36132 
kWh to 115049 kWh. A relationship between shield size and amount of energy transferred 
related to “Window and solar” was expected. A relationship was found in all cases except one. 
It was observed that Rect750 gained 59330 kWh with a 485 m2 shield, but Dome1500 only 
gained 43388 kWh with a 561 m2 shield, why a larger shield size not necessarily leads to a 
higher energy gain from “Window and solar”. However, this deviation is considered natural 
because the result was depended on the individual shield surfaces' orientation according to the 
sun.  
It is unknown why Tria750 and Tria1500 did not have the highest temperatures when they 
received the most energy and simultaneously had lower airﬂows than the domes. Thus it is 
considered problematic to use the energy balance to predict potential performances of the 
different models. However, there were still clear correlations between the temperature, air 
quality, and the airﬂows.  
The monthly energy balance of the semi-outdoor space of Dome750, clearly indicated how 
the performances were impacted by the design of the semi-outdoor spaces. It also revealed  
77
==PAGE:92==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
how the design could be changed to make optimizations. As expected, the largest elements in 
the energy balance were the parameters associated with the shield. Consequently, these 
parameters would also be the ones to change in order to optimize the performance. The 
maximum areas of the shield openings were 29.5 m2 or 40.7 m2, why it would be problematic 
to enlarge the openings further to increase the ventilation rate and hence reduce high 
temperature. Instead, external solar shading could be used to reduce solar heat gains from 
April to September when the temperatures rose to above 27 oC. In July, 9923 kWh were 
gained through the shield, but only 7755 kWh were lost again. In a simpliﬁed case in order to 
obtain balance, the 2642 kWh difference would correspond to the amount desirable to 
eliminate with the use of solar shading. 
Furthermore, the energy balance showed that heat associated with thermal mass was 
transferred to and from the semi-outdoor space when it was beneﬁcial. Heat was added 
during cold periods and removed again during warm periods. The density and speciﬁc heat 
capacity of the applied ground and construction allowed for heat to be accumulated. In the 
semi-outdoor space of “Dome750” 583 kWh was added during December corresponding to 
41 % of all energy applied. Opposite, 848 kWh was lost in June corresponding to 13 % of all 
energy lost. Since the temperature in the semi-outdoor spaces range from -9.0 - 37.2 oC, it 
would be advantageous to stabilize that temperature in order to increase comfort. This should 
be possible by increasing the thermal mass of the building which was relative low due to the 
light constructions applied.      
From September to March the average temperature in the semi-outdoor space was only 1.5 - 
4 oC higher than outdoors and 89 - 100 % of the time the temperature was below the 18 oC 
comfort limit. Therefore, it would be desirable to increase the temperature even further in that 
period which should be possible with a few modiﬁcations. The energy balance of Dome750 
was negatively affected by the shield in the period from November to February. The amount 
of solar radiation was thus not high enough to compensate for the losses due to conduction 
and convection. The heat transfer coefﬁcient of the polycarbonate shield used was 5.36 W/
m2∙K. This is low compared to modern windows, but the 0.81 solar heat gain coefﬁcient was 
high. The heat accumulated in the semi-outdoor space during the day was then lost again at 
night. As a consequence, the average temperature was only minimally higher than outdoors, 
but changing to a shield with different material properties could mitigate that problem. 
Nonetheless, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a construction material with a higher solar heat gain  
78
==PAGE:93==
6 Discussion   ●
coefﬁcient, but it would be possible to lower the heat transfer coefﬁcient of the shield by 
increasing the thickness or by changing to glass. However, these solutions would be expensive 
considering the large size of the shield compared to the potential gain. Furthermore, it would 
be necessary to investigate how such changes would inﬂuence the thermal comfort during 
summer. Without additional adjustments, the temperature would increase throughout the year 
and thus lead to uncomfortably high temperatures. 
6.6  Energy consumption of the inner house  
It was expected that the energy consumption of the inner house protected by a semi-outdoor 
space would be signiﬁcantly reduced compared to the same house unprotected since this was 
investigated in several previous studies. Here were heating load savings between 16 - 92.9 % 
found in various climates (chapter 2.4). In this study, the average total energy consumption 
was reduced by 40 % due to a 47 % heating load saving. Most comparable to this study was 
the DoV project where a 38 % heating load saving was obtained [19]. A result in accordance 
with actual measurements they conducted which enhance the credibility of this study. The 
total energy consumption savings varied from 39 - 42 % between the six models. This shows 
that the design of the semi-outdoor spaces was of less importance. The inner house envelope 
contained between 150 - 250 mm insulation and was thus light insulated compared to modern 
standards. The same 40 % energy saving could presumably be obtained by increasing the 
amount of insulation instead. Nonetheless, the ambient temperature of the inner house would 
still be increased because of the semi-outdoor space and hence would an even further energy 
saving be possible. Seen from a sustainable perspective, the intention would be to use as few 
materials as possible and thereby indirectly consume less energy. 
6.7 Temperature in the inner house 
No previous studies have investigated how the thermal conditions in the inner house were 
impacted by the semi-outdoor space. The temperature increase in the semi-outdoor space did 
not lead to problematic high temperatures in the inner house. When the inner house was 
protected by Dome750 its highest daily average temperature was above 27 oC for four months 
of the year and thus uncomfortably high. However, the yearly average temperatures of the 
two investigated protected houses were only 0.3 oC and 1.0 oC higher than in the unprotected 
house. This shows that the high temperatures only to a small degree can be attributed the 
semi-outdoor space. 
79
==PAGE:94==
  
80
==PAGE:95==
 
7  
C o n c l u s i o n 
==PAGE:96==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
The aim of this study was to investigate the indoor climate of semi-outdoor spaces with three 
different shapes and two different volumes and to investigate the impact of these factors on 
the energy consumption and temperature of the inner house. Furthermore, the aim was to 
validate the simulation model used in investigations.      
With the use of an external program, such as SketchUp, it was possible in IDA-ICE to 
simulate the geometry of semi-outdoor spaces. This was a crucial prerequisite of this and of 
continued studies on semi-outdoor spaces. The investigated simulation reference model 
behaved as predicted. Thus, it was found valid to simulation the natural ventilation of semi-
outdoor spaces and solar radiation through two transparent layers with IDA-ICE.  
The instantaneous temperature in the six semi-outdoor space models followed the same 
temperature-time distribution trend and spanned from -9.0 - 37.2 cC. The average 
temperature inside the semi-outdoor space was found to be between 1.2 oC and 6.8 oC higher 
than outdoors depending on the season. No signiﬁcant temperature difference between the 
models with identical shape was found, but there were clear differences between the models 
with different shapes. The annual median temperature in the dome-shaped semi-outdoor 
spaces were found to be 2.9 - 3.7 oC higher than in the rectangular shaped semi-outdoor 
spaces and 2.1 - 3.0 oC higher than in the triangular shaped semi-outdoor spaces. Throughout 
the year, the temperature in the semi-outdoor space as determined by the six models was an 
almost equal percentage of time within the assumed 18 - 27 cC thermal comfort interval. On 
average it was only 25 % of the time within the comfort interval; slightly higher in the two 
triangular models. It is concluded, that there was created an environment inside the semi-
outdoor spaces which was a more comfortable than outdoor, large parts of the year. 
The CO2-concentrations in the semi-outdoor space varied were only little between the six 
models, because the concentration in 100 % of the time was below the air quality category I 
limit, which is the best category according to DS/EN 15251 [21]. When the air quality was 
assessed according to the relative humidity, it was poor in all models due to high relative 
humidities. The volume differences of the semi-outdoor spaces did not affect the relative 
humidity, but the time with a CO2-concentration within the acceptable air quality category II 
and I ranged from 39 % in the dome-shaped spaces to 32 % in the rectangular-shaped spaces. 
Furthermore, there was an association between the relative humidity and the airﬂow in the  
82
==PAGE:97==
7 Conclusion   ●
semi-outdoor space. The larger the airﬂows, the lower the relative humidity. No association 
between the energy balance and the indoor climate of the six semi-outdoor spaces was found.   
The simulations predicted a 40 % average annual energy saving in a 100 m2 inner house 
when it was encapsulated by a semi-outdoor space as compared with the same inner house 
unprotected from a semi-outdoor space. All savings were due to the decrease in heating 
demands, which varied slightly between the models according to the different temperatures in 
the semi-outdoor spaces. The annual average temperature inside the inner house was for the 
Dome750 and Rect750 models 0.3 cC and 1.0 cC higher than inside the unprotected house, 
respectively.  
Even though this study provided new knowledge about the shape, volume, and ventilation 
with semi-outdoor concept, there is still a need to further study the concept to quantify how 
the design impacts the indoor climate in both the semi-outdoor space and the inner house. 
Further knowledge about materials, air tightness, solar shading of the semi-outdoor space, and 
daylight conditions in the inner house could be beneﬁcial, so the concept could be propagated 
and adapted to different climates.  
83
==PAGE:98==
84
==PAGE:99==
 
8  
Re f e r e n c e s 
==PAGE:100==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
86
[1]
Energistyrelsen, “Byggeri og renovering”, Available from: https://ens.dk/ansvarsomraader/
energibesparelser/byggeri-og-renovering [Sep. 22nd 2017]
[2]
Traﬁk, Bygge- og boligstyrelsen, “Building Regulations 2015”, Available from: http://
bygningsreglementet.dk/english/0/40 [Sep. 22nd 2017] 
[3]
Ingeniøren, (2017),”Vi bruger lige så meget energi i bygninger som for 25 år siden”, Available from: 
https://ing.dk/artikel/vi-bruger-lige-sa-meget-energi-bygninger-25-ar-siden-204862 
[4]
Gram-Hanssen K. Rhiger Hansen A., (2016), “Forskellen mellem målt og beregnet energiforbrug til 
opvarmning af  parcelhuse”, Statens byggeforskningsinstitut.     
[5]
EFFEKT Arkitekter ApS, “Regen Villages”, Available from: http://www.effekt.dk/work#/
regenvillages/ , [Sep. 26th 2017].
[6]
Lendager Group, “Livsstykke”, Available from: https://lendager.com/arkitektur/livsstykke/ , 
[Sep. 26th 2017]
[7]
Croome D. J. (1985), “Covered northern township”, International Journal of Ambient Energy.
[8]
CO.DESIGN (2016), “How Buckminster Fuller Made A Dome Over Manhattan Sound Sensible”, 
Available from: https://www.fastcodesign.com/3058386/how-buckminster-fuller-made-a-
dome-over-manhattan-sound-sensible, [Sep. 29th 2017]  
[9]
Lendager Group, “Stedsans in the woods”, Available from: https://lendager.com/arkitektur/
stedsans-in-the-woods/#hovedgreb ,  [Sep. 29th 2017]
[10]
Y. Lin, R. Zmeureanu, (2006), “Thermal performance of  a dome-covered house”, Concordia 
University.
[11]
Papachristou C. Foteinaki K. (2015), “Experimental an Theoretical Study of Indoor 
Environment and Energy Use in Houses with a Second “Skin” and Semi-outdoor Space”, 
DTU Byg.
[12]
Solardome Geodesic domes, “The nature house, North Norway”, Available from: http://
www.solardome.co.uk/case-study/the-nature-house-north-norway/ , [Oct. 2nd 2017]
[13]
NBBJ, “Work Global, Live Local”, Available from: http://www.nbbj.com/work/amazon/ , [Oct. 
2nd 2017]
[14]
Inhabitat ,“Solar Geodesic Dome-Covered Cob House Rises in the Far Reaches of  Norway”, Available 
from: http://inhabitat.com/the-heartfollowers-are-building-a-solar-dome-covered-cob-house-
in-the-far-reaches-of-norway/cob-geodesic-dome-norway-2/ , [Oct. 2nd 2017]
[15]
The Architects Newspaper, (2013), “Amazon Domes 2.0 in Seattle by NBBJ”, Available from: 
https://archpaper.com/2013/10/pictorial-amazon-domes-2-0-proposed-in-seattle-by-nbbj/ , 
[Oct. 2nd 2017]
[16]
Y. Lin, W. Yang, R. Zmeureanu (2014), “Solar performance of  a Dome-covered House”, Trans Tech 
Publications, Switzerland.
[17]
Y. Lin, R. Zmeureanu, (2007), “Computer model of  the airﬂow and thermal phenomena inside a large 
dome”, Concordia University.
[18]
Y. Lin, R. Zmeureanu, (2007), “Three-dimensional thermal and airﬂow (3D-TAF) model of  a dome-
covered house in Canada”, Concordia University.
[19]
K. Foteinaki et al. (2016), “Structures that Include a Semi-Outdoor Space PART 1: Energy Performance”, 
Technical University of Denmark.  
[20]
C. Papachristou et al. (2016), “Structures that Include a Semi-Outdoor Space PART 2: Thermal 
Environment”, Technical University of Denmark.    
==PAGE:101==
8 References   ●
87
[21]
DS/EN 15251, (2007), “Input-parametre til indeklimaet ved design og bestemmelse af  bygningers 
energimæssige ydeevne vedrørende indendørs luftkvalitet, termisk miljø, belysning og akustik”, Dansk Standard.
[22]
S. Møller, (2014), “Energy and indoor environment simulations a house in a greenhouse”, DTU. 
[23]
Dome of visions, (2017), “A3 Dome Avis sommer 2017 dansk”, www.domeofvisions.dk  
[24]
Dome of visions, (2017), “Målinger af  din adfærd påvirker fremtidens byggeri”, Available from: http://
domeofvisions.dk/malinger-af-din-adfaerd-pavirker-fremtidens-byggeri/ , [Oct. 11th 2017]
[25]
Dome of visions, (2017), “Domen lever og ånder”, Available from: http://domeofvisions.dk/
domen-lever-og-ander/  , [Oct. 12th 2017]
[26]
Dome of visions, (2017), “Monteringsceremoni af  domens visuelle indendørs klima”, Available from: 
http://domeofvisions.dk/monteringsceremoni-af-domens-visuelle-indendors-klima/ , [Oct. 
12th 2017]
[27]
Dome of visions, (2017), “Dome 3.0”, Available from: http://domeofvisions.dk/the-
architecture/dome-3-0/ , [Oct. 12th 2017]
[28]
N. Henriksen, B. Olesen, (2015), “Renovering af  den integrerede institution Sølund ved brug af  
tredjerumsstrategien med fokus på design, indeklima og bæredygtighed”, Danmarks Tekniske Universitet. 
[29]
UNDPs nordiske kontorer, “FN’S verdensmål for bæredygtig udvikling”, Available from:  http://
www.verdensmaalene.dk//maal/11, [Jan. 21st 2018].  
[30]
A. Jacobs et al., (2004), “Synthlight Handbook”, London Metropolitan University.
[31]
Course: 11142 - Dagslys og belysning presentation, (2014), “Introduction”, DTU.
[32]
Dagensbyggeri, (2017), “Arkitektforeningen sætter fokus på fremtidens bolig”, Available from: http://
www.dagensbyggeri.dk/artikel/97234-handvaerkere-klar-til-digitale-udbud?
utm_source=db&utm_medium=newsletter-20171025-0915&utm_content=http%3A%2F
%2Fwww.dagensbyggeri.dk%2Fartikel%2F97234-handvaerkere-klar-til-digitale-
udbud&utm_campaign=Nyhedsbrev ,[ Oct. 25th 2017]
[33]
Henning Larsen Architects, (2012), “Design med viden”. Copenhagen.
[34]
EQUA, (2017), “ Exercise: Building and zone geometry import from SketchUp”, Available: Through the 
question forum incorporated in the IDA-ICE program.  
[35]
EQUA, (2017), “EQUA IDA ICE Portal: Support, Ask a Question” Available: Through IDA ICE 
version 4.7.1 interface.   
[36]
M. Andersen, A. Sauerberg, (2016), “Design af  lavenergibygning, Implementering af  et tredje rum i en 
integreret institution”, DTU
[37]
DS/EN 410, (2011), “Bygningsglas - Bestemmelse af  lys- og solstrålingskarakteristika”, Dansk Standard.
[38]
VELUX Knowledge Centre for Daylight, Energy and Indoor Climate, (2014), “Daylight, Energy 
and Indoor Climate Basic Book”.
[39]
Course: 11142 - Dagslys og belysning presentation, (2014), “Glazings, windows and skylights” , 
DTU Civil Engineering.  
[40]
EQUA, (2017), “IDA ICE version 4.7.1 - User Guide”, Available through the program’s help 
function.
[41]
H. T. Jensen, (2005), “Naturlig Ventilation”, DTU BYG 
[42]
DTU Course: 11112 Bygningsinstallationer, (2015), Lecture presentation: “Naturlig Ventilation 
1”, DTU BYG
==PAGE:102==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
88
[43]
DTU Course: 11112 Bygningsinstallationer, (2015), Lecture presentation: “Naturlig Ventilation 
2”, DTU BYG
[44]
Efﬁcient Windows Collaborative, “Natural Ventilation”, Available from: http://
www.commercialwindows.org/ventilation.php , [Nov. 16th 2017] 
[45]
Pilkington, “How It Works”, Available from: https://www.pilkington.com/en-gb/uk/architects/
types-of-glass/solar-control-glass/how-it-works ,  [Nov. 16th 2017] 
[46]
Dome of Visions, (2016), “Experiments towards sustainable futures”. 
[47]
Danpal Australia Pty Limited, ”Danpal Light Architecture”, Available from: http://
www.aap.net.au/products/danpalon/Danpalon_20p_Brochure..pdf, [Dec. 4th 2017] 
[48]
Rockwool, “Krav til sommerhuse og tilbygninger til sommerhuse”, Available from: http://
www.rockwool.dk/vaerd-at-vide/bygningsreglement/projekttyper/sommerhuse/, [Dec. 4th 
2017] 
[49]
Energi vinduer, “Positivlisten” , Available from: http://energivinduer.dk/wp/wp-content/
uploads/positiv-201117.pdf, [Dec. 5th 2017] 
[50]
J. Toftum, (2004), “Handbook of  Human Factors and Ergonomic Methods”.
[51]
Dansk Standard, (2011), “Frivillig klassiﬁcering af  indeklimaets kvalitet boliger, skoler, dagsinstitutioner og 
kontorer”. www.ds.dk. 
[52]
P. Höppe, (2002), “Different aspects of  assessing indoor and outdoor thermal comfort”, Ludwig-
Maximilians-University.  
[53]
M. Nikolopoulou et al. (2001), “Thermal comfort in outdoor urban spaces: Understanding the human 
parameters”, University of Cambridge.  
[54]
R. de Dear, J. Spagnolo, (2005), “Thermal comfort in outdoor and semi-outdoor environments”, 
Macquarie University.   
[55]
A. Olsen, J. Andersen, (2018), “Det gode indeklima i det tredje rum”, DTU.
[56]
Energi-, Forsynings- og Klimaministeriet, (2018), “Klimaindsatsen i Danmark”, Available from: 
http://efkm.dk/klima-og-vejr/klimaindsatsen-i-danmark/, [Jan. 19th 2018].
[57]
Rambøll, (2016), “Strengthening blue-green infrastructure in our cities”, Livable cities lab. 
[58]
The New York Review of Books, (2015), “Frei Otto’s Airborne Architecture”, Available from: http://
www.nybooks.com/daily/2015/05/06/pritzker-prize-frei-otto-airborne/, [Jan. 19th 2018]. 
[59]
gettyimages, (2018), “Buckminster Fuller in vintage photo outside New City Hall”, Available from: 
https://www.gettyimages.dk/license/450390300, [Jan. 19th 2018].  
[60]
L. Chen, E. Ng., (2011), “Outdoor thermal comfort and outdoor activities: A review of  research in the past 
decade”, The Chinese University of Hong Kong.  
[61]
videnskab.dk, (2016), “Urbanisering: I 2050 vil to ud af  tre bo i byer”, Available from: https://
videnskab.dk/kultur-samfund/urbanisering-i-2050-vil-to-ud-af-tre-bo-i-byer , [Jan. 21st 2018].  
==PAGE:103==
 
9  
Appendices  
==PAGE:104==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
Appendix A: 
Thermal properties of the inner house construction. 
Appendix B:   3D models. 
Appendix C: 
Thermal bridges. 
Appendix D: 
Time within 18-27 oC thermal comfort interval. 
Appendix E:  
Temperature difference between outdoor and the semi-outdoor spaces. 
Appendix F: 
Monthly energy balance of the semi-outdoor spaces. 
Appendix G: 
Relative humidity in the semi-outdoor spaces. 
Appendix H: 
Airﬂows through the semi-outdoor space shield. 
Appendix I: 
Temperatures in the inner house. 
90
==PAGE:105==
9 Appendices   ●
Appendix A  - Thermal properties of the inner house construction  
Table A1: Thermal properties of  the exterior walls.
Material
Thermal conductivity 
[W/(m ∙K)]
Density 
[kg/m3]
Speciﬁc Heat 
capacity [J/(kg ∙K)]
Thickness 
[m]
Wood - cladding
0.14
500
2300
0.03
Wood - frame
0.14
500
2300
0.014
Insulation - rock wool
0.034
30
1030
0.15
Gypsum
0.22
970
1090
0.026
Total U-value
0.199 W/m2 ∙K
Table A2: Thermal properties of  the internal walls.
Material
Thermal conductivity 
[W/(m ∙K)]
Density 
[kg/m3]
Speciﬁc Heat 
capacity [J/(kg ∙K)]
Thickness 
[m]
Gypsum
0.22
970
1090
0.026
Wood - frame
0.14
500
2300
0.007
Insulation - rock wool
0.034
30
1030
0.075
Gypsum
0.22
970
1090
0.026
Total U-value
 0.376 W/m2 ∙K
Table A3: Thermal properties of  the slab.
Material
Thermal conductivity 
[W/(m ∙K)]
Density 
[kg/m3]
Speciﬁc Heat 
capacity [J/(kg ∙K)]
Thickness 
[m]
Expanded clay aggre.
0.085
215
1000
0.2
Insu. - polystyrene
0.038
28
1340
0.15
Concrete
1.7
2300
880
0.10
Wood - frame
0.14
500
2300
0.005
Insulation - rock wool
0.034
30
1030
0.05
Wood - ﬂoor
0.14
500
2300
0.02
Total U-value
0.122 W/m2 ∙K            
91
==PAGE:106==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
Table A4: Thermal properties of  the roof.
Material
Thermal 
conductivity 
[W/(m ∙K)]
Density [kg/m3]
Speciﬁc Heat 
capacity  
[J/(kg ∙K)]
Thickness 
[m]
Asphalt rooﬁng
0.25
1100
1600
0.004
Plywood
0.14
500
1700
0.016
Wood - frame
0.14
500
2300
0.02
Insulation - rock 
wool
0.034
30
1030
0.25
Gypsum
0.22
970
1090
0.026
Total U-value
 0.126 W/m2 ∙K
92
Table A5: Properties of  windows used in the inner house. 
Model “FUTURA+ 30” by Idealcombi A/S was used as a 
reference window [49]. 
Solar heat gain coefﬁcient
0.73
Solar transmittance, visible
0.82
Total solar transmission
0.70
Frame fraction
0.10
Glazing U-value
 1.22 W/m2 ∙K
Frame U-value
 2.0 W/m2 ∙K
Total U-value
1.30 W/m2 ∙K
==PAGE:107==
9 Appendices   ●
Appendix B - 3D models 
 
93
Figure B1: 3D-visualizations from the six different IDA-ICE models. Those with the largest volume are 
on the right side (1500 models) and those with the smallest on the left side (750 models).
Model: Rect750
Model: Rect1500
Model: Tria750
Model: Tria1500
Model: Dome750
Model: Dome1500
==PAGE:108==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
Appendix C - Thermal bridges  
94
Figure C1: Screenshot from IDA-ICE of  the applied thermal bridges.
==PAGE:109==
9 Appendices   ●
Appendix D - Time within 18-27 oC thermal comfort interval 
95
Table D1 - D6: Monthly distribution of  the six simulation models’ time within the 18-27 oC comfort interval 
shown in both hours and percent.   
==PAGE:110==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
Appendix E - Temperature difference between outdoor and semi-
outdoor spaces. 
96
Table E1: All monthly average temperatures of  the single models compared to the outdoor average temperatures [oC].
Table E3: All the monthly single warmest extreme temperatures of  the individual models compared to the outdoor 
extreme temperatures [oC].
Table E2: All the monthly single coldest extreme temperatures of  the individual models compared to the outdoor extreme 
temperatures [oC].
==PAGE:111==
9 Appendices   ●
Appendix F - Monthly energy balance of the semi-outdoor spaces 
 
97
Figure F1: Energy balance of  Dome1500 [kWh].
Figure F2: Energy balance of  the rectangular models. Rect750 to the left and Rect1500 to the right 
[kWh].
Figure F3: Energy balance of  the triangular models. Tria750 to the left and Tria1500 to the right 
[kWh].
==PAGE:112==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
 Appendix G - Relative humidity in the semi-outdoor spaces 
98
Table G1: Relative humidity distribution in hours and percent of  Dome750.
Table G2: Relative humidity distribution in hours and percent of  Dome1500.
Table G3: Relative humidity distribution in hours and percent of  Tria750.
Table G4: Relative humidity distribution in hours and percent of  Tria1500.
==PAGE:113==
9 Appendices   ●
 
99
Table G5: Relative humidity distribution in hours and percent of  Tria750.
Table G6: Relative humidity distribution in hours and percent of  Tria750.
==PAGE:114==
●   Validation of simulation models and design of semi-outdoor spaces
Appendix H - Airﬂows through the semi-outdoor space shield 
100
Table H1: Airﬂows - outﬂow through the semi-outdoor space shield [l/s].
Table H2: Airﬂows - inﬂow through the semi-outdoor space shield [l/s].
Table H3: Airﬂows - outﬂow through the semi-outdoor space shield [l/s per m3].
Table H4: Airﬂows - inﬂow through the semi-outdoor space shield [l/s per m3].
==PAGE:115==
9 Appendices   ●
Appendix I - Temperatures in the inner house 
101
Table I2: Monthly temperatures of  the inner house’s individual zones of  model Dome750 [oC].
Table I3: Monthly temperatures of  the inner house’s individual zones of  model Rect750 [oC].
Table I1: Monthly temperatures of  the unprotected inner house’s individual zones [oC].
==PAGE:116==
