==PAGE:1==
TMT4520 - Materials Technology, Master Thesis
Fall 2017
Optimization of the casting process for
silicon nitride crucibles
Ermis Kanakakis
Supervisors: Professor Eiving Johannes Øvrelid
Professor Jørgen Schou
Co-Supervisors: Professor Marisa Di Sabatino Lundberg
Dr. Arjan Ciftja
Department of Materials
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
==PAGE:2==
i
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my deep gratitude to my supervisors, Eivind Johannes
Øvrelid from NTNU and Jørgen Schou from DTU, for their valuable guidance and advice as well
as my co-supervisors Marisa Di Sabatino and Arjan Ciftja who contributed to the realization of
this project. Their guidance helped me throughout a whole year of research and writing for this
thesis. I would also like to thank all the experts who got involved in my project. Their help was
crucial and each one added their small bit which, in the end, was a sine qua non. Finally, words
will never be enough to thank my family for their constant support, both ﬁnancial but mostly
emotional, despite the numerous obstacles I faced during this year.
Ermis Kanakakis
==PAGE:3==
ii
Abstract
As renewable energy sources get to replace conventional fossil fuel power plants, solar cells will
come to play a major role. For this purpose, their efﬁciency must be enhanced and their cost
minimized in order to compete with alternative forms of power such as hydroelectric or wind.
A major part of the cost during solar cell fabrication belongs to the expense for the crucible
required for crystal growth. So far, on industrial scale, crucibles are non-reusable, which means
that they need to be replaced after each use. The aim of this work was to:
1. Test the inﬂuence of oxidation on the wetting properties of Si3N4
2. Deﬁne alternative types of coatings for directional solidiﬁcation casting of Si
3. Develop a new process for casting in small crucibles
Surface oxidization of Si3N4 reduces its wettability and acts as a barrier that prevents impu-
rity diffusion into the silicon melt during solidiﬁcation. Small Si3N4 samples were heat-treated
under various temperatures and durations. Surface oxidation and the formation of a silicon
oxynitride layer were tested. Afterwards, four cylindrical and four conical Si3N4 crucibles were
heat-treated at 1200oC in order to get their surfaces oxidized. All of the cylindrical crucibles
were destroyed by cracks and excessive ﬂaking during heat-treatment or coating. Three of the
conical ones were further treated using different coatings and one was left uncoated. The coat-
ings were: a) Normal Si3N4 powder; b) Colloidal silica mixed with Si3N4; c) BaO intermediate
layer and normal Si3N4 on top. P-type silicon ingots were grown in all of them. Subsequently,
the ingots were removed and cut in order to be characterized. The ingot grown in the uncoated
crucible was strongly attached to the substrate and was impossible to remove. Finally, samples
from the rest three ingots were acquired and characterized by measuring their resistivity, minor-
ity carrier lifetime and impurity concentration (interstitial oxygen and substitutional carbon).
The ingot grown in the crucible with normal Si3N4 powder coating showed the highest av-
erage lifetime. The ingot from the colloidal silica mix was very clean which means that the me-
chanical stability of the coating had increased. It also had the lowest oxygen concentration, a
fact which suggests that coating dissolution into the melt had been limited. However, metal-
lic impurities from the crucible had killed lifetime completely. Finally, the ingot from the BaO
==PAGE:4==
iii
coated crucible showed no particular improvement in comparison to the normal one and its
ﬂuctuating resistivity suggests that a lot of oxides had formed during solidiﬁcation.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
5
2
Theory and Background
7
2.1
Properties of materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Multicrystalline Silicon and Feedstock
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Silicon Nitride and Oxidation Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
Wettability of ceramics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.4
Coating Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Impurities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
Axial segregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Experimental Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
Operating Principle of Thermocouple . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.3
Directional Solidiﬁcation (DS) and Vertical Gradient Freeze (VGF) . . . . . .
21
2.3.4
Four point Probe Resistivity Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.5
Minority Carrier Lifetime Measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.6
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Experimental Procedure and Equipment
28
3.1
Sample and apparatus preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.1
Si3N4 samples for electron microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
iv
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
1
3.1.2
Crucible Preparation and Feedstock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.3
Building the Thermocouple . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.4
Four Point Probe and QSSPC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.1.5
FTIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2
Solidiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Results and Discussion
36
4.1
Mass gain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Solidiﬁcation and ingot production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Resistivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Minority Carrier Lifetime
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6
Chemical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Conclusions and further work
47
Bibliography
49
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms and symbols
BSE Backscattered Electrons
DS Directional Solidiﬁcation
EDS Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy
FPP Four Point Probe
FTIR Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
mono-Si Monocrystalline Silicon
multi-Si Multicrystalline Silicon
QSSPC Quasi Steady State Photoconductance
SEM Scanning Electron Microscope
SE Secondary Electrons
VGF Vertical Gradient Freeze
µW-PCD Microwave Photoconductance Decay
cL Concentration of impurity in liquid
cS Concentration of impurity in solid
c(x) Oxygen concentration
Cs Substitutional Carbon
2
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
3
fs Fraction of solidiﬁed ingot
G Electron-hole pair generation rate
k distribution coefﬁcient
Nd donor concentration
Oi Interstitial Oxygen
r Average pore channeel radius
s Distance between two probes in FPP technique
γLV Liquid surface tension
γSV Solid free surface energy
γSL Interfacial liquid-solid tension
δ Secondary electron coefﬁcient
∆n Excess carrier density
η backscattered electron coefﬁcient
θ Contact angle
µn electron mobility
ρ resistivity
σ conductivity
τe f f Effective minority carrier lifetime
τbulk Bulk lifetime
τsur f Surface lifetime
τrad Radiative recombination lifetime
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
4
τAug Auger lifetime
τSRH Shockley-Read-Hall lifetime
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
With the current demands for electricity and due to the rapid climate change we are facing in the
21st century, it is essential that renewable energy technologies be constantly improved in order
to compete with fossil fuels. The earth is constantly exposed to sunlight of power density around
1kW per square meter. Harvesting just a portion of this energy would be a priceless contribution
to meeting the global electricity needs.
The dominant material in today’s solar cell industry is still silicon, mainly due to its abun-
dance, efﬁciency and stability. Furthermore, the share of multi-crystalline Si in 2015 was 68% of
the total with 43.9 GWp annual power production [1]. Hence, optimizing solar cell performance
and fabrication is currently one of the most researched scientiﬁc ﬁelds. Another factor that
will determine the future of photovoltaics is their price per kWp compared to other renewable
sources of energy.
According to the International Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaic [2], 16% of mc-Si mod-
ule cost is due to the wafer construction. A signiﬁcant portion of this amount is spent on the
crucible in which the raw material (feedstock) is melted. On industrial scale, the most common
crucibles are made of fused silica and they can only be used once. Thus, developing methods
that will allow the reusability of crucibles will greatly reduce the total cost of silicon solar cells.
In addition, a possible candidate should satisfy some crucial parameters such as low con-
tamination of the silicon ingot and non-sticking (wetting) behaviour during the ingot growth.
Impurities play a key role in solar cell performance. Contamination due to the feedstock itself,
the crucible and the environment reduce minority carrier lifetime. Especially near the edges of
5
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
6
the ingot, the impurities caused by diffusion from the crucible cause the, so called, red zone, a
region in the crystal that exhibits extremely low performance and needs to be removed. There-
fore, contamination needs to be kept as low as possible.
One material that could replace fused silica crucibles, due to its mechanical and chemi-
cal stability, is Silicon Nitride (Si3N4). The most important aspect of silicon nitride being used
as crucible material is its reusability. Quartz crucibles are used only once due to their phase-
transformation in high temperature, which results in cracks during cooling of the ingot. Silicon
nitride does not undergo a phase transformation and withstains its mechanical and thermal
properties over the temperature range. Therefore, it can be used several times. In addition,
since it is oxygen free, provided that everything else is the same (impurity content, crystalliza-
tion technique, coating etc.), it should enhance the efﬁciency of the solar cells compared to
oxide crucibles.
However, in order to be used several times, the silicon ingot must be effectively removed
from the crucible without damaging it. For this to happen, the silicon melt should not wet and
stick to the crucible walls. Si3N4 is wetted by molten silicon whereas SiOxNy is not (silicon
oxynitride). Therefore, oxidation of nitride crucibles by heating it to high temperatures, or by
applying oxide or oxide-containing coatings is important.
In this work, we aimed to investigate the effect of alternative coatings and oxidation of
silicon nitride crucibles. Small Si3N4 crucibles were provided by Steuler Solar Advanced Ce-
ramics. Heat-treatment in various conditions was tested to achieve the optimal oxidation
level. Two alternative coating methods were studied in comparison against the industrial
standard. Finally, directional solidiﬁcation silicon casting was tested. For the purpose of the
whole project, new methods of coating, casting and characterization needed to be developed.
It is important to take into consideration that all our experiments were done in small labo-
ratory scale and, therefore, it is expected that quality characteristics will improve on industrial
applications. A factor that highly affects silicon purity is the surface-to-volume ratio of the ma-
terial that is in contact with the crucible substrate or the atmosphere on top of the melted Si.
This ratio needs to be as low as possible in order for the red zone to be proportionally minimal.
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Theory and Background
2.1
Properties of materials
2.1.1
Multicrystalline Silicon and Feedstock
Silicon is one of the most abundant chemical elements on earth. It is a member of the 14th group
of the periodic table (along with carbon, germanium et al). It has 4 electrons in its outermost
shell and forms diamond crystal lattice (see Figure 2.1). It has a melting point of 1687K (1414oC)
when in pure form. Silicon is classiﬁed according to its level of purity. For solar cell applications,
silicon must be at least 99.9999% pure, commonly referred to as 6N (six nines) pure.
Figure 2.1: Crystal structure of diamond showing the tetrahedral bond arrangement. [3]
The three most common types of silicon are mono-crystalline, multi-crystalline and amor-
phous. Each of them consists of smaller parts of perfectly oriented crystal structures, called
7
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
8
grains. The main distinction between each type is grain size. In the case of multi-Si, which was
the type investigated, grain size is 1mm-10cm [4].
Figure 2.2: a) Multi-Si across the grain boundaries. b)A 10x10cm textured multi-Si wafer. Grains
of different orientation appear with different colour. [5]
Another important physical property of silicon is its density, which is higher in liquid (2420
kg/m3) than in solid phase (2300 kg/m3) [6]. Therefore, it is expected to expand as it solidiﬁes
and can cause cracks or complete destruction of the crucible. One way of dealing with this
problem is by using the method of directional solidiﬁcation.
2.1.2
Silicon Nitride and Oxidation Mechanisms
Silicon Nitride is a light-gray material with a very high melting point (1900oC). It is chemically
inert and thermodynamically stable at high temperatures. However, its wetting behaviour when
in contact with liquid silicon makes it an inappropriate material for crucibles.
A study by Ogbuji and Jayne [7] suggests that heat treatment of Si3N4 at 1100oC in the pres-
ence of oxygen causes thermal oxidation through progressive substitution of N by O. Thermo-
dynamically, the oxidation process was described by Honghua et al. [8] in the two following
chemical equations:
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
9
Si3N4 +3O2 →3SiO2 +2N2
(2.1)
Si3N4 + 3
4O2 →3
2Si2N2O + 1
2N2
(2.2)
Moreover, Portz and Thummler examined the oxidation of reaction-bonded silicon nitride
(RBSN) in proportion to the material’s porosity [9]. Both studies showed that the ratio of N:O on
a cross section of the silicon oxynitride (SiN2−xO2+x) varies along different depths. Furthermore,
a SiO2 crust is formed on top of the oxynitride layer.
Figure 2.3: Diffusion on oxygen through a pore channel on Si3N4 [9]
In more detail, oxidation of silicon nitride takes place in two stages. First, under the right
temperature and pressure, oxygen diffuses through the pores and reacts with Si3N4 forming SiO2
as can be visualized in ﬁgure 2.3. In order to describe the process we assume an average channel
radius, r. As oxygen ﬂows inside the pore, its concentration is reduced due to oxidation of the
channel surfaces. We can deﬁne the oxygen concentration as c(x), where x is the distance from
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
10
the specimen surface and the concentration at the surface to be constant and equal to c0. For a
constant channel radius, r, the depth, L, of the oxidation depends on the reaction time, tR and
the transport time, tD.
When the pore channels have been sealed by oxygen, no more diffusion is allowed into the
specimen, and the second stage begins. The only space where further oxidation is permitted is
the outer surface of the sample. It is expected that the total internal oxidation strongly depends
on heat treatment conditions and structure of the specimen.
Different studies [10], [11] have also shown that the presence of oxygen on the surface of sili-
con nitride creates a protective layer that prohibits wetting. Therefore, the (Si3N4) crucibles that
were tested during the project underwent heat treatment that caused the sintering of oxygen on
their surface and the formation of a protective silicon oxynitride layer.
Figure 2.4: Electron microscopy images of a Si3N4 surface: a) area in the sample with high poros-
ity; b) B&W duplicate; c,d) cracks near large pores
Electron microscopy images showing the Si3N4 surface were acquired by my co-supervisor
Dr. Arjan Ciftja (see ﬁg.2.4). In these pictures, the porosity of the material is clearly visible and,
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
11
after creating a B&W duplicate, the pores were calculated to occupy roughly 29% of the sam-
ple’s surface and their average radius was found 6.5µm, by using a circular pore approximation.
In addition, cracks seemed to occur near the largest pores, a fact which could potentially be
problematic in case oxidation and thermal expansion created mechanical stress.
2.1.3
Wettability of ceramics
A critical parameter for crystal growth is the wetting behaviour of the crucible. When a drop of
liquid comes in contact with a solid substrate, electrostatic forces between them will deﬁne the
shape of the liquid. If the surface energy is high enough, the droplet will spread and, in extreme
cases, cover the entire substrate surface.
Figure 2.5: The contact angle between the liquid droplet and the substrate deﬁnes the wetting
properties of the liquid-solid interface. [12]
Wettability is quantitatively deﬁned by the contact angle, θ (see ﬁgure 2.5). There is a re-
lationship between θ, the liquid surface tension, γLV , the solid free surface energy, γSV and the
interfacial tension between liquid and solid, γSL. This relationship is described by Young’s equa-
tion:
γSV = γSL +γLV ·cosθ
(2.3)
If the liquid droplet is nonwetting (θ > 90o), it will form a bead, achieving minimum contact
with the solid. On the contrary, for contact angles lower than 90o, the liquid is deﬁned as wetting.
It is essential that molten silicon is nonwetting when in contact with the crucible. If not,
it will stick during solidiﬁcation and the extraction of the ingot will require the crucible’s de-
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
12
struction. Therefore, a coating is usually applied on the crucible, as described below, in order to
minimize wettability properties of Si.
2.1.4
Coating Properties
In the process of Si ingot growth, the standard approach requires coating of the interior surface
of the crucibles. This coating acts as an intermediate layer between the crucible and the melt,
and its purpose is to prevent adhesion. Another crucial parameter of the coating is to minimize
contamination in the ﬁnal product. Furthermore, part of the coating will always dissolve into
the silicon melt. In case this phenomenon is too intense, the silicon can stick to the crucible,
making its detachment infeasible without breaking part of it. As a result, the coating material
must be carefully selected and applied. For our experiments, three different coatings were tested
and compared.
Si3N4 based coating
A common characteristic of all nitrides is their high chemical and thermal stability. According to
information provided by H.C. Starck Ceramics GmbH [13], Si3N4-based coating not only allows
removal of the Si ingot after solidiﬁcation but also acts as a barrier preventing the diffusion of
impurities into the melt and the reaction between the silicon and the crucible. Furthermore, its
wear resistance and low degree of thermal expansion make it the most common ceramic used
for crucible coating.
Colloidal Silica
Although Si3N4 is chemically and thermally stable, its mechanical resistance is often limited. As
a result, a pure Si3N4 coating has been reported by Rancoule [14] to ﬂake off during or even be-
fore use. Hence, methods have been suggested in order to enhance the mechanical resistance
of the coating by introducing materials with high binding abilities in the mix. A 5% mix of Col-
loidal Silica (aqueous solution of nano-scale silica particles) in Si3N4 powder was investigated
by Rancoule and the results showed improved mechanical resistance while the full effectiveness
of the silicon nitride grains was maintained.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
13
Barium Oxide
A way of further increasing the quality and purity of the ﬁnal product is by minimizing contam-
ination from the crucible. One material that has been widely used in the silica crucible coating
process as devitriﬁcation promoter is Barium oxide (BaO). For this purpose, a Barium Hydrox-
ide anhydrous (Ba(OH)2) powder, by Alfa Aesar, with 94%-98% purity was used. It was dissolved
in warm, distilled water and a saturated solution was used to soak one of the crucibles. After-
wards, the crucible was left overnight in a hot chamber (150oC) to dry and, ﬁnally a normal
Si3N4 coating was applied on top (heating up to 1200oC). According to Hsieh et al. [15], during
this process, carbon dioxide from the atmosphere reacts with the (Ba(OH)2), forming barium
carbonate which subsequently reacts again, resulting in the formation of an intermediate BaO
layer between the crucible and the Si3N4 coating.
2.2
Impurities
Impurities are introduced in the crystal lattice during both the solidiﬁcation and the cooling
process and can either be inserted on purpose (such as in doping) or accidentally from the en-
vironment. Apart from the dopants, the most common elements found in the silicon ingot are
oxygen, nitrogen, carbon and iron. Smaller traces of other metals such as aluminium and cop-
per can be found, depending on the purity of the crucible and feedstock. Impurities inﬂuence
the solar cells’ efﬁciency because they introduce energy levels in the band gap and act as traps.
The closer those levels lie to the middle of the band gap the easier it is for electrons in the con-
duction band to use them as intermediate energy levels and recombine with holes in the valence
band. In addition, defects such as grain boundaries and dislocations can act as recombination
centres. With increasing impurity concentration, also rises their electrical activity. Therefore,
impurities are an important parameter in the solar cell’s overall performance and we will de-
vote this section in summarizing their main characteristics and how they get incorporated in
the silicon.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
14
Oxygen
Oxygen is one of the most common impurities and is mainly introduced by the feedstock and
the crucible. Part of the dissolved oxygen can, then, evaporate from the top surface. There are
two ways that it can be incorporated in the ﬁnal ingot. It can either appear as interstitial atoms
[Oi] spread out in the crystal or as precipitates. According to a study by Häßler et al. [16] the ﬁrst
case does not affect the material’s performance. On the other hand, oxygen precipitates affect
both the electrical and mechanical properties of the crystal. Even though Oi does not directly
contribute to carrier recombination, it promotes the formation of precipitates and therefore,
needs to be minimized. In our case, both the crucibles and the coatings were highly oxidized
and it is expected that oxygen levels are signiﬁcant in the ﬁnal product, especially due to the
small ingot size. High oxygen levels in the ingot are also indicating excessive dissolution of the
coating into the melt during solidiﬁcation.
Carbon and Nitrogen
Carbon is an element with the same number of electrons as silicon in its outermost shell (iso-
valent impurity) and can, therefore, be incorporated in the crystal lattice as a substitutional
element [Cs]. When oxygen atoms get in contact with the graphite insulation in the furnace,
carbon monoxide forms, which can dissolve into the molten silicon through the top surface. It
can also be originally present in the crucible and dissolve into the silicon through the coating.
Nitrogen is another common impurity in solar silicon. Usually, it originates from the Si3N4 coat-
ing but, in our case, it is expected to have a higher concentration in the ingot due to the nature
of the crucibles.
Even though they are both electrically inactive, they can promote the formation of oxygen
precipitates and cause the formation of SiC and Si3N4 particles which will accumulate lifetime-
killing impurities, but can also form dislocations [17][18]. On the other hand, studies have
shown that both carbon and nitrogen can improve the electrical properties of silicon crystals
by neutralizing the defects [19][20].
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
15
Iron
Iron is the most common metallic impurity in multicrystalline silicon. This fact, in combination
with its electrical and kinetic properties, makes iron the impurity with the highest impact for
lifetime deterioration. Interstitial iron introduces deep levels in the band gap, thus creating
recombination centres. Although iron has a low distribution coefﬁcient in silicon and, during
solidiﬁcation, most iron segregates to the top of the ingot, it can, afterwards, diffuse back to
the solid bulk. In addition, iron precipitated at defects such as grain boundaries, dislocations
or oxygen is much more mechanically stable, but can still act as an impurity source at hight
temperature (for example, during emitter diffusion and contact ﬁring)[21]. Iron can originate
both from the feedstock and the crucible/coating but also from the furnace environment. Figure
2.6 summarizes the most important impurities and their source.
Figure 2.6: The most common impurities found in a silicon ingot (enclosed in the red rectangle)
and their source
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
16
2.2.1
Axial segregation
Along the crystal ingot, impurities are usually found in different amounts. This is caused be-
cause their solubility differs from liquid to solid state. The ratio of solid-to-liquid across the
interface is given by the distribution coefﬁcient:
k = CS
CL
(2.4)
where CS and CL are the solid and liquid concentrations, respectively.
Usually, k<1, which means that impurities have higher solubility in liquid than in solid form.
As a result, impurities tend to segregate towards the top of the ingot. When describing solute
variations in the crystal growth process it is normally assumed that we have complete mixing
(homogeneity) of solutes in the liquid and no diffusion can happen in the solid part. The con-
centration of solute in the solidiﬁed part is, then, given by Sheil’s equation:
CS = k ·C0(1−fS)(k−1)
(2.5)
where C0 is the initial concentration of solute in liquid form. The concentration of solid solute
at the beginning (when fs = 0) is, according to Equation 2.5, k ·C0 and decreases as we move
further up which means that the liquid gets richer and richer in solute during the process. Con-
sequently, the doping concentrations increase along the ingot. A schematic representation of
this distribution is shown in Figure 2.7
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
17
Figure 2.7: Schematic representation of the solute distribution during crystal growth process.
Three stages are depicted: (left) beginning of solidiﬁcation, (middle) 50% of the process and
(right) after complete solidiﬁcation. Picture taken from NTNU PhD thesis of Guilherme Gaspar
[22]
2.3
Experimental Methods
2.3.1
Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)
Scanning electron microscopy is one of the most powerful tools in research. In contrast with
conventional microscope, SEM allows the observation and characterization of the most kinds
of materials on a scale down to a few nanometres. It also has the capability of acquiring in-
formation from deeper layers of the sample, thus creating a three-dimensional proﬁle of the
material. In the SEM, an electron beam is ﬁrstly accelerated by a high voltage. Subsequently,
a magnetic ﬁeld created by an electromagnet (magnetic lens) exerts Lorentz force on the beam
causing it to shrink in diameter. Alterations in electromagnet current ﬂow have a direct impact
on the focal point of the lens. A simpliﬁed schematic overview of the SEM apparatus is depicted
in ﬁgure 2.8.
The focused electron beam reaches the sample and is swept across its surface. Various kinds
of interactions give rise to backscattered electrons (BSE), secondary electrons (SE), Auger elec-
trons, characteristic and continuous X-Rays and heat as shown in ﬁgure 2.9. These signals
strongly depend upon the energy of the primary beam and the atomic number of the speci-
men. For the purpose of this master thesis, BSE, SE and X-Rays signals were examined and
those methods will be further discussed below.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
18
Figure 2.8: Schematic representation of the SEM column. The electron gun, lenses and detector
are depicted. [23]
Backscattered Electrons (BSE)
Backscattered electrons are electrons initially coming from the beam. After they reach the sam-
ple, they undergo one or several elastic collisions with the specimen nuclei (see ﬁgure 2.11).
A proportion of them manages to exit the specimen as backscattered electrons. The ratio of
backscattered electrons, nBSE, to the initial number of electrons in the beam, nB, is deﬁned by
the backscattered electron coefﬁcient, η.
η = nBSE
nB
(2.6)
The backscattered electron coefﬁcient is strongly dependent on average atomic number, Z.
For low atomic numbers, scattering mechanisms are weak and only a small number of the initial
beam electrons is returned as BSE. As the atomic number increases, the BSE signal rises too. As
a result, information regarding the elemental constitution of the specimen can be visualised.
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
19
Figure 2.9: Different signals emerging from the interaction between the primary electron beam
and the specimen. [24]
Secondary Electrons (SE)
Secondary electrons are emitted from the specimen atoms when beam electrons collide with
loosely bound electrons of outer shells (see ﬁgure 2.11), thus gaining enough kinetic energy to
escape their orbitals. They are characterized by extremely low energies (typically <50eV) which
makes them unlikely to escape from the sample if they originate at a depth bigger than 50
◦
A. As
a result, these electrons provide information about surface morphology of the specimen. The
total SE coefﬁcient, δ, is given by
δ = nSE
nB
(2.7)
where nSE is the number of secondary electrons generated by a beam of nB number of pri-
mary electrons.
Since SE are former bound electrons of outer orbitals in the specimen, they are not depen-
dent on atomic mass. Due to the complexity of scattering processes, it has been a challenging
task to accurately predict the coefﬁcients η and δ. In 1966, after long experimental investiga-
tions, Heinrich and Wittry came up with the empirical dependence of BSE and SE on the atomic
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
20
number as seen in ﬁgure 2.10.
Figure 2.10: Backscattered electron and secondary electron coefﬁcients as a function of atomic
number [23]
Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS)
When a beam electron reaches an atom of the specimen, it can interact with an inner orbital
electron and eject it from its shell. This leaves an empty space in this orbital and the atom
becomes an unstable excited ion as shown in ﬁgure 2.11. A speciﬁc set of allowed transitions will
cause the atom to relax to its ground state. For each element, atomic energy levels are sharply
deﬁned. Consequently, the energy difference between different orbitals is also characteristic.
In the case of X-Ray emission, this energy difference is emitted as electromagnetic radiation of
well-deﬁned energy.
2.3.2
Operating Principle of Thermocouple
A thermocouple is a device used to give real time measurements of high temperatures. It con-
sists of two dissimilar wires, called thermoelements, fusion-welded at one end (see ﬁgure 2.12).
Their other end is kept at a constant temperature, TR and connected to our system through a ref-
erence junction. By applying heat at the measuring junction, the temperature rises to TM and a
voltage is produced between the two thermoelements. This voltage is called electromotive force
(EMF) and depends on the temperature difference between the two junctions and the material
of the thermoelements. Thermocouples are usually enclosed in ceramic tubes to prevent them
from creating short circuits along the way and, also, to protect them from the environment.
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
21
Figure 2.11: Different kinds of emissions upon impact of the incident electron. Secondary
electrons emerge after inelastic collisions and backscattered electrons are elastically scattered.
Larger nuclei can deﬂect more of the incoming electrons, increasing the signal strength. Finally,
Auger and X-Rays are caused by an ejected electron in a lower orbital which is compensated by
electrons of higher energy. This excess energy is either emitted as characteristic X-Ray or used
to eject an electron of the outer orbital. [25]
According to the alloys used in the thermoelements, thermocouples have a distinct name
(type). In our experiment a B type thermocouple was responsible for providing the necessary
feedback to the furnace power supply and two C-type thermocouples were fabricated for the
temperature proﬁle acquisition (see below for more details).
2.3.3
Directional Solidiﬁcation (DS) and Vertical Gradient Freeze (VGF)
In most modern industrial applications, multi-Si is grown in the same crucible where it is melted,
with a technique called Directional Solidiﬁcation (DS). In this growth method, a SiO2 crucible
coated with silicon nitride (Si3N4) is ﬁlled with Solar Grade polysilicon (feedstock) as well as the
doping element (commonly Boron or Phosphorus). The crucible is then placed in the furnace,
surrounded by a graphite case. Afterwards, a pump is used to create a vacuum of 1·10−2 mBar
in the furnace. Finally, the pump is shut down and the chamber is ﬁlled with an inert gas, most
commonly argon, of constant ﬂow in order for vaporized elements to be removed.
Inside the furnace (ﬁgure 2.13), heating is achieved through induction. A current ﬂows
across a coil, causing the heating of a graphite shield that surrounds the crucible. The heat
emitted from the graphite is responsible for warming up the silicon until it is melted, keep its
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
22
Figure 2.12: Schematic of a Thermocouple
temperature stabilized for a certain period and, ﬁnally, cool it down until it completely solidiﬁes
and reaches room temperature. A thermocouple measures the temperature in the furnace and
provides feedback to the power supply in order to achieve the wanted temperature. In our ex-
periment, two more thermocouples were placed at the top and bottom of the crucible to provide
a more accurate temperature proﬁle at those speciﬁc points. During the solidiﬁcation phase, the
bottom of the crucible is constantly at a lower temperature than the upper part. As a result, heat
is emitted from below to the ambient and solidiﬁcation proceeds upwards. Because there is al-
ways a temperature difference along the height of the silicon, this method of DS is called Vertical
Gradient Freeze (VGF).
Ideally, the solid-liquid interface is planar. This requires very good insulation at the sides of
the crucible and is achieved by the same graphite shield which is used for heating.
2.3.4
Four point Probe Resistivity Measurements
This is a very simple technique to crudely measure the resistivity of semiconductor samples. A
small and known current (I) passes through the two outer probes (see Fig. 2.14). By measuring
the voltage (V) between the two inner probes, the resistivity of the sample (ρ) can be calculated
using the formula (for bulk samples):
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
23
Figure 2.13: Schematic of the Vertical Gradient Freeze Crystallox furnace
ρ = 2πsV
I
(2.8)
where s is the distance between the probes (assuming equal distance between them).
As doping concentration, Nd, depends on the position in the ingot, it can be identiﬁed using
the formula:
ρ = 1
σ
(2.9)
where σ is the conductivity of the sample
σ = qµnNA
(2.10)
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
24
Figure 2.14: Electrical resistivity measurement of semiconductor surface using four-point probe
method. [26]
2.3.5
Minority Carrier Lifetime Measurement
When a semiconductor material such as silicon is exposed to light, electrons are excited from
the valence to the conduction band, leaving empty states (holes) behind. Depending on the
main dopant we have introduced to the semiconductor, we deﬁne minority carriers as electrons
for p-type and holes for n-type material. Excited minority carriers have an average time to be
collected before they recombine and this lifespan is called minority carrier lifetime. This is one
of the most important parameters upon characterization of semiconductor materials. Minority
carrier lifetime depends on many recombination mechanisms such as radiative recombination,
Auger recombination, Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination, also known as recombination
through traps, and surface recombination [22]. Since recombination can occur both in the bulk
material and on the surface, we can deﬁne the effective carrier lifetime as:
1
τe f f
=
1
τbulk
+
1
τsur f
=
µ 1
τrad
+
1
τAug
+
1
τSRH
¶
+
1
τsur f
(2.11)
As shown in equation 2.11, the bulk lifetime includes the radiative lifetime, τrad, the Auger
lifetime, τAug and the Shockley-Read-Hall lifetime, τSRH. Surface recombination occurs due to
discontinuities of the crystal lattice on the surface. There, missing Si atoms (also called dangling
bonds) give rise to a spectrum of allowed states in the silicon bandgap. However, those surface
discontinuities can be eliminated by hydrogen through a process called surface passivation.
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
25
For indirect bandgap semiconductors such as Si, radiative recombination is extremely rare;
for this reason, it can be neglected. In addition, Auger lifetime can be calculated by using simu-
lations (a model has been suggested by Schmidt et al.[27]). On the contrary, SRH lifetime highly
depends on the crystal quality and is difﬁcult to calculate through simulations. Therefore, it has
to be experimentally investigated.
Quasi Steady State Photoconductance - QSSPC
The ﬁrst technique that was used in this project is called Quasi Steady State Photoconductance
(QSSPC). It is a widely employed method for fast measurements of bulk minority carrier lifetime
with relatively low resolution (around 18mm depending on the trap density in the material). A
semiconductor block or wafer is illuminated by a long, compared to the carrier lifetime, slowly-
decaying light pulse. This allows the excess carriers to be, practically, in steady-state since the
generation and recombination rates are balanced (hence the name of the method). The excess
electron-hole pairs that are generated, ∆n, proportionally increase the material’s conductance.
A coil, inductively coupled to the charge in the semiconductor, can then measure this excess
photoconductance for each time and simultaneously, a sensor measures the intensity of the
ﬂash pulse. The sample conductance is converted into the average excess carrier density, ∆n,
and the measured pulse intensity into the generation rate of electron-hole pairs, G, for each
time. Finally, lifetime τbulk is calculated as a function of excess carrier density via:
τbulk = ∆n
G
(2.12)
Microwave Photoconductance Decay (µW-PCD)
This is another, widely employed, technique for measuring the effective minority carrier life-
time. An infrared (λ=904nm) laser pulse excites free electron-hole pairs which alter the conduc-
tivity of the material. After excitation, free carriers recombine, decreasing the sample’s conduc-
tivity until it reaches equilibrium once again. Conductivity affects the semiconductor’s reﬂec-
tivity at microwave wavelengths. So, it can be monitored by measuring the reﬂected microwave
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
26
power as a function of time. The measured reﬂectivity resembles an exponential decay and it
can be ﬁtted with a curve so that the time constant provides the effective lifetime in this speciﬁc
position of the sample.
Figure 2.15: Schematic of a µW-PCD setup [28]
2.3.6
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR)
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy is a fast, non-destructive and accurate chemical anal-
ysis method. It can give both qualitative and quantitative results on a wide variety of materials.
Its working principle is based on the vibrational modes of different chemical bonds. When a
chemical bond is exposed to radiation with the same frequency as the difference between its
ground and excited state, it can be promoted to this state absorbing a portion of the initial light
pulse. Since pure silicon is transparent to the wavelengths used during FTIR, the absorbance
of infrared light, plotted versus the wavenumber of the radiation, can be used to calculate the
concentration of speciﬁc elements forming the chemical bonds. Downward peaks on the plot
suggest absorption at speciﬁc wavenumbers which constitute the ﬁngerprints of those bonds.
FTIR is widely used in silicon characterization to identify interstitial oxygen (Oi) and sub-
stitutional carbon (Cs) whose absorption peaks lie at 1107 cm−1 and 605 cm−1, respectively. A
typical absorption spectrum of silicon is shown in ﬁgure 2.16. For calculating the concentra-
tions quantitatively, the peak heights relative to the baseline are measured and then multiplied
by calibration factors based on speciﬁc international standards. In our case the ASTM standards
F1188-93a and F1391-93 for (Oi) and (Cs), respectively, were used.
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND BACKGROUND
27
Figure 2.16: Absorption peaks for interstitial oxygen and substitutional carbon in crystalline
silicon [29]
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Experimental Procedure and Equipment
Our study involved four experimental parts:
1. Heat treatment of small samples to investigate oxidation effect on porosity and formation
of oxynitride layer.
2. Heat treatment and coating of small Si3N4 crucibles
3. Casting of silicon ingots
4. Sample Characterization
3.1
Sample and apparatus preparation
In this section, the process of sample preparation as well as thermocouple fabrication are de-
scribed.
3.1.1
Si3N4 samples for electron microscopy
For this experiment, pieces of Si3N4 with dimensions 10mm x 10mm x 4mm were ground and
roughly polished with silicon carbide sandpapers of average particle diameter 125µm according
to FEPA standards. They were heat treated in the presence of oxygen for different durations and
temperatures, as illustrated in table 3.1.1.
28
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND EQUIPMENT
29
Warm up Time (h)
Holding Time (h)
Temp.(oC)
8
12
1200
8
24
1200
8
12
1400
8
24
1400
10
12
1600
10
24
1600
Table 3.1: SEM sample Preparation
After being thermally treated, the samples destined for SEM measurements were dipped in
epoxy resin and their cross section was polished up to 1µm with diamond particles. Since Si3N4
is a non conductive material it was necessary for the samples to be wrapped around aluminium
foil and carbon coated. Finally, they were left overnight in a warm chamber at 70oC to com-
pletely dry and get degassiﬁed.
3.1.2
Crucible Preparation and Feedstock
The Si3N4 crucibles were fabricated by Steuler Solar Advanced Ceramics through a slip-casting
process that involves silicon powder which then goes into a nitridation process at high temper-
atures until a ﬁnal silicon nitride product is achieved. The crucibles that were examined had a
high concentration of metallic impurities. Speciﬁcally, iron and aluminium concentrations were
provided by Steuler and they were 380ppmw and 960ppmw respectively. These high values were
expected to affect the ﬁnal product’s quality even though coating acts as a diffusion barrier to
some extent. Both cylindrical and conical crucibles were tested. The cylindrical crucible had a
height of 9cm and an outer diameter of 10cm and the conical one had top diameter of 9.0 cm, a
bottom diameter of 6.5 cm and a height of 12.2 cm.
Firstly, four cylindrical crucibles were prepared for solidiﬁcation. They were all left overnight
in a warm chamber at 150oC for drying and degassing. Afterwards each one was heat treated at
a different temperature under atmospheric air. Two crucibles were heated up to 1200oC, one
up to 1400oC and one up to 1600oC. This step had a binary purpose: ﬁrst of all, to create the
necessary oxidized layer and SiO2 crust needed for non-wettability properties, and, secondly,
to block the pore channels and reduce diffusivity of impurities into the silicon ingot. However,
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND EQUIPMENT
30
Figure 3.1: Cylindrical (a) and conical (b) silicon nitride crucibles used for directional solidiﬁca-
tion
during thermal treatment they were all damaged externally either by forming cracks (ﬁg. 3.2 (a))
or by exfoliation of the outer part (ﬁg. 3.2 (b)). Finally, two of the crucibles broke completely;
one during the initial heat treatment at 1600oC and another one during Si3N4 coating (ﬁg. 3.2
(c))
Figure 3.2: Cracks and outer surface ﬂaking of cylindrical crucibles after heat treatment
One possible explanation to this behaviour is that water was still trapped in the pores of
the crucibles and caused violent expansion upon heating to very high temperatures. Another
possibility is that errors in the casting process had created areas with high inhomogeneity which
behaved differently during heat treatment. The cylindrical crucibles were discarded and only
the conical ones were tested afterwards.
The next attempt involved the preparation of the conical crucibles. Four similar crucibles
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND EQUIPMENT
31
Coating
Method
Si3N4 powder
Warming up to 450oC
Spray coating with Si3N4solution
Heat treatment at 1100oC for 4 hours
Cooling down to 700oC and keeping for 2 hours
Colloidal Silica
95% Si3N4 mixed with 5% SiO2 solution
Same process as above
Barium Oxide and Si3N4 powder
Intermediate BaO coating as described in 2.1.4
Normal Si3N4 coating on top
Uncoated
-
Table 3.2: Crucible coating parameters
were left overnight at 150oC for drying and degassing. According to the EDS measurements,
it was discovered that maximum oxidation was achieved when heat treatment was done at
1200oC. Consequently, they were heated at 1200oC for twelve hours in the presence of atmo-
spheric air. The warm-up rate was 150oC/h. After heat treatment three of them were coated and
one was left uncoated according to table 3.2.
The crucible that was ﬁrstly treated with BaO had to be coated twice afterwards because the
ﬁrst attempt failed (see ﬁg.3.3a). A possible reason for this could be that a thick layer of Ba(OH)2
powder that had not been absorbed by the crucible prevented the Si3N4 coating from sticking
properly to the substrate. In addition, at the bottom of the crucible, some reaction had caused
the color to change to green (ﬁg. 3.3b).
The ﬁnal step of the preparation was ﬁlling the crucibles with polysilicon feedstock. A Boron
alloy of concentration 1.4E19 atoms
cm3
was used. In order to achieve the required resistivity of 1
Ohm*cm in the ingot, the alloy was mixed with the polysilicon in a ratio of 0.12
100 [wt].
3.1.3
Building the Thermocouple
In order to measure the temperature inside the furnace with higher accuracy, two C type ther-
mocouples were fabricated and inserted in the chamber. To prevent the wires from touching
each other and causing a short circuit, they were inserted in a ceramic tube (see ﬁg. 3.4a).
The next step required building a feed through port to transfer the signal out of the fur-
nace without causing interference and disturbing the vacuum. Therefore, two compensation
cables were passed through an aluminium tube which was then ﬁlled with epoxy resin and left
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND EQUIPMENT
32
Figure 3.3: (a) Peeled-off Si3N4 coating after treatment with Ba(OH)2. (b) Change of color after
reaction
overnight to dry. Two connectors were mounted on the compensation cable ends afterwards
and the feedthrough port was mounted on the furnace chamber (ﬁg 3.4b).
3.1.4
Four Point Probe and QSSPC
One bulk sample (1cm thickness) from each of the three ingots that were characterized was
ground and roughly polished on one side using 80 to 1200 grit SiC paper.
3.1.5
FTIR
One slice of 2mm thickness was sliced from each ingot by using a diamond saw. They were all
mechanically polished from 80 grit SiC paper up to 1µm diamond particles (mirror-like surface)
on both sides.
3.2
Solidiﬁcation
Given the size of the crucibles we used, the nature of our experiments was unprecedented.
Therefore, we had to develop and implement a whole new technique in order to customize the
current method and make it suit our facts.
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND EQUIPMENT
33
Figure 3.4:
(a) A C-type thermocouple enclosed in ceramic tube. (b) Feedthrough port with
connectors and compensation cable
The four crucibles that were prepared were inserted into the Crystalox furnace (see ﬁg. 3.5).
For safety reasons, but also for higher temperature homogeneity, they were placed inside a large
quartz crucible as can be seen in the same picture. This speciﬁc furnace is programmed to create
large silicon ingots in such crucibles. Therefore, a graphite felt insulator of 1cm thickness was
placed at the bottom of the large crucible to create an effective thermal gradient between the
top and the bottom of the crucible.
Figure 3.5: a) 1cm of graphite felt placed at the bottom of a large quartz crucible; b) four cru-
cibles ﬁlled with polysilicon feedstock are added, ﬁtting in the felt holes.
The ﬁrst step was creating vacuum inside the furnace. When the pressure had reached 0.08
mbar the warming up phase started. During this process, gasses and volatiles that had been
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND EQUIPMENT
34
adhered to the furnace surface evaporated and were pumped out of the chamber. The second
phase started when the temperature had reached 900oC. Then, the pump was turned off and
a valve was opened to let argon at a constant ﬂow inside the furnace. The pressure reached
1atm again. The warming up process continued until the temperature reached 1500oC, which
is above the melting point of Si. In order to ensure complete melting, the system was kept stable
at this temperature for 5.5 hours. Afterwards, a heat leakage valve opened from below and the
solidiﬁcation process started.
Since the program was set to keep a speciﬁc temperature proﬁle, the power supply needed
to function accordingly in order to achieve the wanted result. This is very important in order
to acquire information regarding the solidiﬁcation process. As long as a material changes phase
from liquid to solid, heat is emitted into the environment which means that there is a lower need
for external power to meet the temperature needs. However, when the solidiﬁcation is complete,
a slight rise in the power supply is necessary to keep the temperature slope in the controller. The
reason is that when the solidiﬁcation is ﬁnished there is no latent heat from the solidiﬁcation.
This phenomenon can be observed in graph 3.6 about 8 hours after the solidiﬁcation process
started.
Finally, the system was left to cool down until it reached room temperature and the ingots
were removed from the furnace. An overview of the temperature levels but also the power as a
function of time is given in graph 3.6.
Another important observation we can make is that the two C-type thermocouples we fabri-
cated show a much lower temperature than the actual one (around 500oC less). This divergence
was caused by a very strong coupling between the induction heating system and the thermo-
couples. As can be seen in the graph, every change in the power supply affects the temperature
signal. However, the most important information acquired from this data is that during solid-
iﬁcation there is always a 25-40oC difference from the top to the bottom of the crucibles, thus
ensuring directional solidiﬁcation.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND EQUIPMENT
35
Figure 3.6: Temperature and power levels during the solidiﬁcation process
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Mass gain
A crude but often useful way to identify the change in elemental structure of specimens after
heat treatment is by measuring the change in mass. This process can only give qualitative results
because the chemical reactions during calcination cannot be precisely described. According
to our predictions based on the study by Ogbuji and Jayne [7], we expect the replacement of
nitrogen by the slightly heavier oxygen. However, we cannot exclude the possibility of interstitial
oxygen which would further cause an increase of the samples’ mass. The weight of both small
samples and crucibles was measured before and after heat treatment. The percentage change
in mass after heat treatment is shown in table 4.1.
Those results were in accordance with the theoretical expectations found in the literature
[9]. As expected, oxidation in higher temperatures reaches a maximum much faster and ther-
mal annealing for longer exposure times does not play any role. Moreover, the total amount of
oxidation is lower as the protective SiO2 that is created faster prohibits any further diffusion of
oxygen into the sample pores. Finally, the samples that were treated at 1600oC showed signs of
bubble creation and surface cracking (see ﬁgure 4.1), something that suggests the unsuitability
of this temperature for any further investigations.
36
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
37
Kind of Sample
Thermal Treatment
Average mass gain
ﬁnal condition
Small Sample
12h 1200oC
3.42%
stable
Small Sample
24h 1200oC
3.70%
stable
Small Sample
12h 1400oC
2.01%
stable
Small Sample
24h 1400oC
2.01%
stable
Small Sample
12h 1600oC
1.83%
small cracks
Small Sample
24h 1600oC
1.37%
small cracks
Conical Crucibles
12h 1200oC
2.32%
stable
Cylindrical Crucibles
12h 1200oC
1.83%
Broke during coating
Cylindrical Crucibles
12h 1400oC
-
Broke during heat treatment
Table 4.1: Difference by percentage in samples’ weight. Higher mass gain in lower temperatures
suggests that pore channels get sealed by oxygen faster as temperature increases.
4.2
SEM
In our experiments with the electron microscope, the goal was to characterize the micro struc-
ture of silicon nitride after heat treatment and identify the depth and magnitude of oxidation.
A low energy primary electron beam (5kV) was used in order to achieve high surface imaging
resolution. The samples were investigated through a secondary electron detector and showed
the presence of a brittle material near the edges after thermal treatment (see ﬁgure 4.2).
Later investigation with EDS showed that this was a silicon oxide layer as was expected by
the literature and previous studies. Moreover, EDS experiments on samples treated at 1400oC
revealed a layer of varying thickness (70µm-150µm) directly below the silicon dioxide crust with
signiﬁcantly higher oxygen concentration than the rest of the sample. Finally, comparing the
Si3N4 samples before and after heat treatment, we can observe that the material’s porosity has
been reduced to some extent due to oxidation, but the pores have not been completely sealed.
This indicates higher chance of wetting during silicon solidiﬁcation.
Line scans were performed on all samples to investigate the oxidation proﬁle relative to the
temperature and duration of heat treatment. The results are illustrated in graph. 4.3.
According to the results, the highest oxidation levels were achieved through heat treatment
in low temperature (1200oC). It is also notable that heat treatment in 1400oC and 1600oC caused
higher oxidation levels near the edges than the middle of the samples. This was probably caused
due to minimization of porosity near the edges through high rate of oxygen absorption.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
38
Figure 4.1: SEM image showing the formation of bubble during heat treatment at 1600oC
4.3
Solidiﬁcation and ingot production
After the furnace had cooled down, it was opened and the four crucibles were removed. The
crucible without coating had broken but the silicon ingots seemed to have been successfully
grown in all four crucibles. The ingots seemed, at ﬁrst, attached to the crucibles, which rendered
their separation infeasible, leaving cutting the ingots out of the crucibles as the only option.
However, during the process of doing so, two out of the four ingots (normal coating and colloidal
silica) detached form the crucibles on their own. The ingot grown in the crucible with a mix of
colloidal silica andSi3N4 coating (4.4a) was cleaner than the rest, a fact which suggests that it
had, indeed, enhanced its mechanical stability.
One more ingot, the one grown in the BaO coated crucible (4.4d), was also released after it
was cut in half. It was then revealed that due to improper coating at the bottom of the crucible, a
small part of the ingot was in direct touch with the Si3N4 beneath and had wetted the substrate,
which had caused strong sticking (4.4e).
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
39
Figure 4.2: Comparison of sample edges before and after thermal treatment at 1200oC. A brittle
silicon oxide layer has been formed on the second sample.
The only ingot to remain attached to the crucible even after cutting was the one grown in
the crucible without coating. Excessive wetting had caused deep inﬁltration of silicon into the
Si3N4 substrate. In addition, direct contact with the crucible gave rise to large scale bulk defects
such as dislocations and voids as seen in ﬁgure 4.4c. The ingot was cut using a SiC disc and a
small sample was examined with an optical microscope (see ﬁg.4.5). It was revealed that, due
to the crucible’s porosity, silicon had penetrated the substrate and had caused the formation of
a 30µm wide region with excessive wetting of the crucible. Coefﬁcients of thermal expansion
differ between Si (2.6 · 10−6/OC) and Si3N4 (3.3 · 10−6/OC). In case of such wetting, shrinking
during the cool-down phase will cause immense stress between the two materials, resulting in
cracks as depicted.
After closer observation, it was seen that the shape of the ingots was not purely conical as
expected but their bottom was wider (ﬁg. 4.4a). This deformity was due to the shape of the
crucible and had also caused the initial sticking of the ingots.
However, the crucibles showed no other sign of damage (cracking or ﬂaking) after the whole
process, something which suggests that they remained mechanically and chemically stable dur-
ing solidiﬁcation and they could have likely been reused for more silicon ingot production.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
40
Figure 4.3: EDS line scan showing oxidation levels in all samples
4.4
Resistivity
After the bulk samples had been prepared they were tested with a Jandel RM2 system. The
probes in the head that was used had a spacing of s=1.591mm and a constant current of 5mA
was induced. Thus, the resistivity of the silicon ingots along the growth axis was acquired and
the results are displayed in graph 4.6. For the silicon ingot grown in the crucible with the normal
coating, a curve representing the theoretical resistivity from Sheil’s equation was also calculated
and is shown in the same graph. Experimental values follow Sheil’s equation with an excep-
tion near the bottom where high resistivity ﬂuctuation is probably caused by bad sample-probe
contact.
We can see that the values vary between 0.1-1 Ohm·cm and the resistivity is lower towards
the top, something that was expected due to higher concentration of Boron (segregation of im-
purities to the end). Moreover, the dopant concentration was calculated, using the empirical
data from the book of ASTM standards [30]. It was found to be in the range of 1016 −1017 atoms
cm3
with slight variations among the different ingots and increasing towards the top. The ingot
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
41
Figure 4.4: Ingots from all four crucibles: a) colloidal silica-Si3N4 mix coating; Here, the non-
conical shape of the ingot is clearly seen; b) normal Si3N4 coating; c) uncoated crucible; d) BaO
intermediate layer; d) sticking of silicon due to improper coating.
grown in the BaO treated crucible showed highly varying signals (3 orders of magnitude dif-
ference) between close regions in the ingot. This was probably caused by oxides in the crystal
lattice, which caused very high local resistivity. Later, study with FTIR showed that its Oi con-
centration was more than 3 times higher than the other two samples. Finally, the resistivity of
the ingot grown on colloidal silica mix coating is lower than the other two. This could be due
to small deviation in the doping concentration but we cannot exclude the possibility that it is
also caused by high presence of Al which lies in the same column as boron and can act as p-type
dopant.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
42
Figure 4.5: Cross-section of the Si-Si3N4 interface from the non-coated crucible after solidiﬁ-
cation: a) excessive wetting resulted in cracking and the formation of defects; b)a 30µm wide
wetting region had caused strong sticking
4.5
Minority Carrier Lifetime
The QSSPC measurements were performed on a BCT-300 photoconductance instrument. Life-
times were measured near the center of each sample to ensure that the coil does not exceed the
sample’s borders but also because it is the region where lifetime is expected to be the highest.
The acquired values are presented in table 4.5.
Type of coating
Average effective lifetime [µs]
Normal Si3N4
5.6
Colloidal Silica mix
0
BaO + Si3N4
5.8
Table 4.2: Average lifetime measured by the QSSPC method.
It is important to mention, at this point, a trapping phenomenon which can give rise to ex-
traordinarily high lifetime values. When a number of shallow energy levels are present in the
band gap, minority carriers are captured and released again, resulting in high lifetimes which
need to be taken into consideration. The density of these shallow traps depends on defect den-
sity and is expected to rise near the red-zone of the ingot. Since the size of our ingots was so
small, accurate measurements of lifetime with QSSPC were almost impossible. Therefore, they
were also examined using the µw-PCD method.
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
43
Figure 4.6: Resistivity along the three silicon ingots.
The thickness of our bulk samples was too high to ﬁt in the microwave scanner so, the pol-
ished samples that were prepared for the FTIR analysis were examined instead. The sample ac-
quired from the BaO coated crucible represents half of the cross-section of the ingot. As a result,
the highest lifetimes are expected at the top left border. An overview of the lifetime mapping is
illustrated in ﬁg. 4.7.
The ingot grown on the colloidal Silica mix coating (4.7.b) showed almost no lifetime with
both techniques. This was probably caused by metallic impurities introduced in the crucible
by the crucible and during feedstock ﬁlling. The highest bulk lifetime was acquired from the
normal coating ingot and was roughly 5µs. Such low lifetimes were to be expected from small
ingots and without any sample passivation. A previous study by Boulfrad et al. [31] on the
same furnace showed that the extent of red zone is approximately 2cm. Given the size and
contamination of our crucibles, the acquired results were to be expected. On an industrial scale,
defects and impurities introduced by the crucible are much lower proportionally and material
performance rises rapidly.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
44
Figure 4.7: Lifetime mapping acquired with µw-PCD: a) Normal Coating; b) Colloidal Silica mix;
c)BaO intermediate coating
4.6
Chemical Analysis
The FTIR measurements were performed on a Nicolet 6700 by Thermo Scientiﬁc, using a res-
olution of 4cm−1 and number of scans, 32. Firstly, a calibration measurement was taken to
measure the background concentration of light elements due to the atmosphere. These values
are stored and then subtracted from the sample measurements to reassure minimal noise inter-
ference from the environment. Afterwards, FTIR measurements were performed near the top
and center of each sample, where the lifetime was found to be highest. The qualitative results
are presented in graph 4.8.
The presence of both Oi and Cs is conﬁrmed in all samples. However, high impurity con-
centration near the vibrational mode of Cs in the sample from the colloidal-Si coated crucible
has caused extreme noise, thus making the detection of carbon infeasible. We assume that this
was caused by the metallic impurities that were also lifetime-killing factors. When impurities
cause the light to scatter multiple times within the sample, interference fringes arise. It is also
important to note that FTIR only detects vibrations between speciﬁc bonds. Therefore, oxygen
or carbon grown on precipitates is transparent to this technique and need to be detected with
other methods; a possible way could be etching followed by examination with microscope.
The quantitative calculation is an automatized process done by the FTIR software and works
as described in chapter 2.3.6. The concentration numbers were given in ppma and were con-
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
45
Figure 4.8: Qualitative FTIR results from all samples. High noise-to-signal ratio near the Cs
region for the sample from the colloidal-Si coated crucible is probably due to the metallic im-
purities.
verted into absolute numbers
µatoms
cm3
¶
by using the SEMI AUX022-0611 standards.
Type Of Coating
Element
·
1017 atoms
cm3
¸
Oi
Cs
Normal Si3N4
1.9
6.35
Colloidal Silica mix
0.5
-
BaO + Si3N4
5.8
5.9
Table 4.3: Concentration of Oi and Cs measured by FTIR
The acquired results show similar oxygen concentration to the study by Häßler et al. [16]
where Oi near the top of the ingot was 2·1017 atoms
cm3 . In addition, the sample from the colloidal
silica mix coating shows about 1/4 less Oi concentration compared to the normal one. This
could be due to the enhanced stability of the coating since the oxidized coating has a lower
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
46
grade of diffusion into the melt.
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 5
Conclusions and further work
Summarizing, Si3N4 crucibles are a very promising alternative to the industrial standard SiO2
ones. Even after multiple heat treatments in very high temperatures they showed mechanical
durability and were able to grow ingots of high quality relative to their size. The initial purity of
the Si3N4 powder that is used to cast the crucibles is of high importance; impurities, especially
metallic ones can completely destroy a semiconductor. Therefore, they need to be minimized
because they can diffuse into the silicon even through the coating. However, non-disposable
crucibles can be expected to perform better after each use, since they get cleaner. Shape and size
are also important. In our case, they had to be destroyed to release the ingots, but on industrial
levels, where they need to follow the approved standards, they can be optimized to grow high
quality silicon ingots that can easily be detached.
Coating is still inevitable and plays a key role in the outcome. Out of the three coating meth-
ods that were tested, the colloidal silica mix was the closest one to the ideal behaviour of coat-
ings. It interacted the least with the silicon and could also have been the reason for low oxygen
content in the ingot. Unfortunately, high concentration of metals from the crucible didn’t allow
for lifetime measurements which need to be performed in further studies.
The BaO intermediate layer did not prevent oxygen and carbon from diffusing into the molten
silicon. In addition, the four point probe measurements showed local resistivity with values up
to 3 orders of magnitude difference between nearby locations (approximately 1mm distance).
This anomaly persisted even after better polishing, something that excludes the possibility of
bad sample-probe contact. In my opinion, this was caused by high concentration of oxides that
47
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK
48
could have been formed because of the BaO.
Further research that includes chemical analysis for metallic impurities needs to be con-
ducted. Since the initial concentration of metals in the crucible is known, such a study can
show the effect of oxidation and coating as a diffusion barrier. Another parameter that needs
to be further studied is the grain characteristics during solidiﬁcation. Identifying grain size and
orientation could reveal many details of the Si-crucible interaction and the effect of different
coatings. Finally, the transition from lab to industrial scale requires many identical tests in or-
der to ensure statistical homogeneity of results. Therefore, future work should include the same
process with slight variations for optimization purposes.
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1] Fraunhofer ISE.
©Fraunhofer ISE: Photovoltaics Report, updated: 17 November 2016.
Technical Report November, 2016.
[2] Semi Pv Group. International Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaic—. Itrpv, (March):1–
37, 2017.
[3] C Kittel. Introduction to Solid State Physics, volume 8th editio. 2004.
[4] Paul A. Basore. Deﬁning terms for crystalline silicon solar cells. Progress in Photovoltaics:
Research and Applications, 2(2):177–179, 1994.
[5] Christiana Honsberg and Stuart Bowden. Multi Crystalline Silicon, 2017.
[6] M. Gunzburger, E. Ozugurlu, J. Turner, and H. Zhang. Controlling transport phenomena in
the Czochralski crystal growth process. Journal of Crystal Growth, 234(1):47–62, 2002.
[7] L. U. T. Ogbuji. Mechanism of Incipient Oxidation of Bulk Chemical Vapor Deposited Si[sub
3]N[sub 4]. Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 140(3):759, 1993.
[8] Honghua Du. Thermodynamics of the Si-N-O System and Kinetic Modeling of Oxidation
of Si[sub 3]N[sub 4]. Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 136(11):3210, 1989.
[9] F. PORZ and F. Thummler. Oxidation mechanism of porous silicon nitride. Journal of Ma-
terials Science, 19:1283–1295, 1984.
[10] J G Li and H Hausner. Inﬂuence of Oxygen Partial Pressure on the Wetting Behaviour of
Silicon Nitride by Molten Silicon. 9:101–105, 1992.
49
==PAGE:55==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
50
[11] Ingvild Brynjulfsen, Astrid Bakken, Merete Tangstad, and Lars Arnberg. Inﬂuence of oxi-
dation on the wetting behavior of liquid silicon on Si 3 N 4 -coated substrates. Journal of
Crystal Growth, 312(16-17):2404–2410, 2010.
[12] M Sayuti, S Sulaiman, T R Vijayaram, B T H T Baharudin, and M K a Ariﬁn. Manufacturing
and Properties of Quartz ( SiO 2 ) Particulate Reinforced Al-11 . 8 % Si Matrix Composites.
Matrix, 2012.
[13] Silicon Nitride Crucible Coatings for Photovoltaic Cell Manufacturing. H.C Stark:1–6, 2014.
[14] G. Rancoule. Crucible for the crystallization of silicon and process for making the same,
October 30 2012. US Patent 8,298,333.
[15] C. C. Hsieh, A. Lan, C. Hsu, and C. W. Lan. Improvement of multi-crystalline silicon ingot
growth by using diffusion barriers. Journal of Crystal Growth, 401:727–731, 2014.
[16] C. Häßler, H. U. Hofs, W. Koch, G. Stollwerck, A. Müller, D. Karg, and G. Pensl. Forma-
tion and annihilation of oxygen donors in multicrystalline silicon for solar cells. Materials
Science and Engineering B: Solid-State Materials for Advanced Technology, 71:39–46, 2000.
[17] Arjan Çiftja. Solar silicon reﬁning; Inclusions, settling, ﬁltration, wetting. PhD thesis, 2009.
[18] Rannveig Kvande. Incorporation of impurities during directional solidiﬁcation of multicrys-
talline silicon for solar cells. PhD thesis, NTNU, 2008.
[19] W. Von Ammon, R. Hölzl, J. Virbulis, E. Dornberger, R. Schmolke, and D. Gräf. The impact
of nitrogen on the defect aggregation in silicon. Journal of Crystal Growth, 226(1):19–30,
2001.
[20] Song Zhang, Mari Juel, Eivind Johannes Vrelid, and Gabriella Tranell. Investigating the ef-
fect of carbon on oxygen behavior in n-type Czochralski silicon for PV application. Journal
of Crystal Growth, 411:63–70, 2015.
[21] R. Kvande, L. J. Geerligs, G. Coletti, L. Arnberg, M. Di Sabatino, E. J. Øvrelid, and C. C.
Swanson. Distribution of iron in multicrystalline silicon ingots. Journal of Applied Physics,
104(6), 2008.
==PAGE:56==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
51
[22] Guilherme Gaspar. N-type Czochralski silicon solidiﬁcation. (March), 2016.
[23] Joseph I. Goldstein, Dale E. Newbury, Patrick. Echlin, David C. Joy, Charles E. Lyman, Eric.
Lifshin, Linda. Sawyer, and Joseph R. Michael. Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-ray
Microanalysis. Springer US, 2003.
[24] Jim Mazzullo. Backscattered Scanning Electron Microscopy and Image Analysis of Sediments
and Sedimentary Rocks, volume 80. 1999.
[25] Matthew Dewar. Characterization and Evaluation of Aged 20Cr32Ni1Nb Stainless Steels.
page 235, 2013.
[26] Akira Shimamoto, Keitaro Yamashita, Hirofumi Inoue, Sung-Mo Yang, Masahiro Iwata, and
Natsuko Ike. A Nondestructive Evaluation Method: Measuring the Fixed Strength of Spot-
Welded Joint Points by Surface Electrical Resistivity. Journal of Pressure Vessel Technology,
135(2):0215011–215017, 2013.
[27] Jan Schmidt, Mark Kerr, and Pietro P. Altermatt.
Coulomb-enhanced Auger re-
combination
in
crystalline
silicon
at
intermediate
and
high
injection
densities.
http://oasc12039.247realmedia.com/RealMedia/ads/click_lx.ads/www.aip.org/pt/adcenter/pdfcover_test/L-
37/386502181/x01/AIP-PT/JAP_ArticleDL_092017/scilight717-1640x440.gif/434f71374e315a556e614141417
jul 2000.
[28] Marisa Di Sabatino, Gaute Stokkan, Birger Retterstø Olaisen, Rune Søndenå, and Øystein
Dahl. Characterisation Techniques for Silicon Solar Cells, 2011.
[29] B M Keyes, L M Gedvilas, R Bhattacharya, Y Xu, X Li, and Q Wang. The FTIR Laboratory in
Support of the PV Program. (January), 2005.
[30] American Society for Testing and Materials. Standard Practice for Conversion Between Re-
sistivity and Dopant Density for Boron-Doped, Phosphorous-Doped, and Arsenic-Doped
Silicon. Annual Book of ASTM Standards, F 723-99:1–7, 1999.
[31] Yacine Boulfrad, Antti Haarahiltunen, Hele Savin, Eivind J. Øvrelid, and Lars Arnberg. En-
hanced performance in the deteriorated area of multicrystalline silicon wafers by internal
gettering. Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 23(1):30–36, jan 2015.
