==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Master thesis February, 2018 
Characterization of secondary 
metabolism in Aspergillus 
Written by: Marie Sander Marke, s123419 
Superviser:  Professor Thomas Ostenfeld Larsen,  PhD student Karolina Subko 
and  PhD student  Peter Persson Wolff 
 DTU Bioengineering - Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine - research 
group MCE-Natural Product Discovery  
 
==PAGE:2==
Resume  
Skimmel svampe syntetiserer et utal af sekundære metaboliter (SM'er), hvoraf mange anvendes som 
lægemidler. Tetracyclines (TC'er) er en gruppe polycycliske polyketider med aromatiske ringe. Mange TC 
har antibakterielle egenskaber. TC'er isoleres hovedsageligt fra bakterier, men nogle få er lavet af svampe, 
fx TAN-1612 (ada cluster) fra A. niger og viridicatumtoxin (vrt cluster) i Penicillium aethiopicum. 
Kernegenene i cluster ada og vrt koder for en type I-iterativ non-reducing polyketide synthase (NR-PKS). 
NR-PKS generne er blevet anvendt i et omfattende bioinformatikstudie for at finde andre svampe, der kan 
syntetisere TC'er. En sandsynlig kandidat er svampen Aspergillus sydowii, som koder for NR-PKS genet 
157033. De gener, der koder for enzymerne, nødvendige for at syntetisering af en SM, er lokaliseres 
sammen i svampe genomet som en biosyntetisk gen cluster. Formålet med dette speciale var at finde 
cluster til 157033 og se om de enzymer, der kodes laver en TC. Cluster i projektet blev navngivet tcl 
(tetracycline like cluster). I speciale afgrænsede et lille bioinformatisk undersøgelse af A. sydowii tcl cluster 
til at omfatte biosyntese generne 157033 (NR-PKS), 92454 (Metallo-β-lactamase-type thioesterase (MβL-
TE)), 1394988 (flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent monooxygenase (FMO)), 48554 (prenyltransferases 
(PTA)), transcription factor (TF) kodende af genet 183300 og to kandidatgener 34258 og 48550 for kodning 
af en transporter. Forud for speciale var det kendt, at tcl cluster er silent, og der blev lavet en stamme 
(OxeTF) overudtrykede 183300. Afgrænsningen af tcl cluster blev verificeret med to typer forsøg. For det 
første viste quantitative PCR, at ekspressionen af alle de hypotetiske biosyntetiske gener var forbundet. 
QPCR indikerer at 34258 er ansvarlig for transporter i tcl cluster, da ekspressionen af dette gen fulgte de 
andre gener, mens 48550 ikke gjorde det. Fra gen 48550 (OxeTF-50A) og for generne der koder for 
enzymerne NR-PKS (OxeTF-PKSA), FMO (OxeTF-FMOΔ) og PTA (OxeTF-PTAΔ) blive CRISPR-medieret 
deletion anvendt til at lave deletions stamme fra OxeTF. For gen 92454 og 34258 mislykkedes deletions. 
OxeTF og deletionen stemmerne vokset på agarplader og blev analyseret for SM'er med Ultra High 
Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) -diode array detektion (DAD) -mass spektrometri (MS). 
Ændringen i SM-profilen for stammerne bekræftede, at generne, der koder for TF, NR-PKS, FMO og PTA, er 
en del af tcl cluster. Yderligere forsøg skal udføres, herunder deletions stammer for gener 92454 (MβL-TE) 
og 34258 for at bekræfte deres funktion. Den kemiske analyse af OxeTF gav mange SM'er med samme 
UV/Vis-spektrum som for TC, men ingen af dem havde den forventede masse for SM fra tcl cluster. OxeTF-
stammen producerede også to røde pigmenter (nominel masse 334 og 423). Formlerne for de nye SM'er 
syntes at passe sammen med dem som polyketider. Kemisk analyse af OxeTF-PTAA viste, at alle undtagen 
"pigmentet 334" tilsyneladende blev prenyleret. Strukturen for de nye SM'er skal løses med NMR. 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract 
Filamentous fungi synthesize a myriad of secondary metabolites (SMs), many of which are used as 
pharmaceuticals. Tetracyclines (TCs) are a group polycyclic polyketides, with aromatic rings. Many TCs have 
antibacterial properties. TCs are mainly isolated from bacteria, but a few are made by fungi, e.g., TAN-1612 
(ada cluster) from A. niger and viridicatumtoxin (vrt cluster) in Penicillium aethiopicum. The core genes of 
cluster ada and vrt encodes a type I iterative non-reducing polyketide synthase (NR-PKS). The NR-PKS genes 
have been used in an extensive bioinformatics study to find other fungi that may synthesize TCs. A likely 
candidate is the fungus Aspergillus sydowii encoding the NR-PKS gene 157033. The genes encoding the 
enzymes necessary for synthesizing a SM are localized together in the fungus genome as a biosynthetic 
gene cluster. The object of this master thesis was to find the cluster for the 157033 and see if the enzymes 
encoded by it makes a TC. The cluster for the project was named tcl (tetracycline like cluster). In the thesis 
a small bioinformatical study of A. sydowii delimit the tcl cluster to encompass the biosynthesis genes 
157033 (NR-PKS), 92454 (Metallo-β-lactamase-type thioesterase (MβL-TE)), 1394988 (flavin adenine 
dinucleotide-dependent monooxygenase (FMO)), 48554 (prenyltransferases (PTA)), the transcription factor 
(TF) encoding gene 183300, and two candidate’s genes 34258 and 48550 for encoding a transporter. Prior 
to the project it was known that the tcl cluster is silent and there was made a strain (OxeTF) overexpressing 
183300. The delimitation of the tcl cluster was verified with two types of experiments. First of all 
quantitative PCR showed that the expression of all the hypothesized biosynthetic genes were linked. The 
qPCR indicates that 34258 is responsible for the transporter in the sif cluster as the expression of this gene 
followed the other genes, while 48550 did not. From gene 48550 (OxeTF-50Δ) and the genes encoding the 
enzymes NR-PKS (OxeTF-PKSΔ), FMO (OxeTF-FMOΔ) and PTA (OxeTF-PTAΔ) CRISPR-mediated deletion was 
used to make deletion strain from OxeTF. For gene 92454 and 34258 the deletion failed. The OxeTF and 
deletion grown on agar plates was analyzed for SMs with Ultra high-performance liquid chromatography 
(UHPLC)-diode array detection (DAD)-mass spectrometry (MS). The change in SM profile for the strains 
confirmed that the genes encoding the TF, NR-PKS, FMO and PTA are part of the tcl cluster. Further 
experiments need to be made including deletion strains for genes 92454 (MβL-TE) and 34258 to confirm 
their function. The chemical analysis of OxeTF gave many SMs with the same UV/Vis spectrum as for TC, 
but none of them had the mass expected for the SM from the tcl cluster. The OxeTF strain also produced 
two red pigments (nominal mass 334 and 423). The formulas for the new SMs seemed to fit with them 
being polyketides. Chemical analysis of OxeTF-PTAΔ showed that all but the “pigment 334” apparently were 
prenylated. The structure for the new SMs need to be solved with NMR.   
Preface and acknowledgements 
The master thesis ”Characterization of secondary metabolism in Aspergillus” consist of 35 ECTS points and 
was conducted in the fall term of 2017 at DTU Bioengineering - Department of Biotechnology and 
Biomedicine - research group MCE-Natural Product Discovery. The thesis is part of a MSc Eng in 
Biotechnology at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis is written for students with the 
same level of education as the author. 
I would like to thank professor Thomas Ostenfeld Larsen for guidance and for the opportunity to complete 
my master's thesis in his group. Thank also to PhD student Karolina Subko and Peter Persson Wolff for 
supervision in the lab and for help to comprehend data processing. 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Table of Contents 
 
Abstract 
2 
Preface and acknowledgements 
2 
Table of Contents 
3 
List of Figures 
6 
List of abbreviation 
8 
1 
Background 
10 
1.1 
Filamentous fungi 
10 
1.1.1 
Aspergillus 
10 
1.2 
The Central Dogma 
12 
1.3 
Secondary Metabolites 
13 
1.3.1 
Tetracyclines 
13 
1.3.2 
Classes of Secondary Metabolites 
14 
1.4 
Polyketides 
17 
1.4.1 
Type I iterative 
18 
1.4.2 
Product Template Domain 
19 
1.5 
Gene Clusters 
21 
1.5.1 
TAN-1612 synthesize by Ada cluster 
21 
1.6 
Genome mining 
22 
1.7 
Verification of cluster 
23 
1.7.1 
Deletion strains 
23 
1.7.2 
Quantitative PCR 
25 
1.8 
Analytical Chemistry 
26 
1.8.1 
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography 
26 
1.8.2 
Diode Array Detection 
29 
1.8.3 
Mass Spectrometry 
32 
1.8.4 
Processing data from HPLC-DAD-TOF-MS 
35 
2 
Experimental Strategy 
41 
3 
Material and Method 
42 
3.1 
Bioinformatics 
42 
3.1.1 
Acquiring Query Sequences 
42 
3.1.2 
Gene Cluster Mining with AdaA 
42 
==PAGE:5==
3.1.3 
BLAST search in clusters 
42 
3.1.4 
Exploring genes in Tetracyline clusters 
43 
3.2 
Creation and verification of A. sydowii strains. 
43 
3.2.1 
Media 
43 
3.2.2 
Plasmids for transformation of A. sydowii 
44 
3.2.3 
Transformation of A. sydowii 
45 
3.3 
Quantitative PCR 
46 
3.4 
Chemical analysis of A. sydowii strains 
46 
4 
Results and Discussion 
47 
4.1 
Cluster Mining for AdaA analog in Aspergillus 
47 
4.1.1 
BLAST search for TC cyclization genes 
48 
4.1.2 
Cluster-width comparison with the ada cluster 
50 
4.1.3 
Cluster-wide comparison the vrt cluster 
53 
4.1.4 
Putative cluster in A. sydowii and putative structure of SM 
55 
4.2 
Creation of tcl cluster deletion strains 
56 
4.2.1 
PCR amplification of Up and Down fragments for gene deletion 
57 
4.2.2 
Cutting and nicking of pU2002 plasmid 
58 
4.2.3 
USER-cloning of deletion plasmids 
58 
4.2.4 
Construction of CRISPR plasmid for pathway and transporter genes 
60 
4.2.5 
USER-cloning of CRISPR plasmid 
62 
4.2.6 
Sequencing of CRISPR plasmids 
63 
4.2.7 
Co-transformation of deletion and CRISPR plasmids increase transformation rate 
65 
4.2.8 
Verification of deletion strains 
65 
4.3 
Cluster delimitation with quantitative PCR 
69 
4.3.1 
Determined difference in expression over time 
69 
4.3.2 
Expression of tcl cluster genes and surrounding genes 
70 
4.4 
Chemical analysis of genetically altered A. sydowii to uncover function of enzymes in tcl cluster 74 
4.4.1 
Chemical analysis of A. sydowii reference strain ASYD4 
74 
4.4.2 
Effect of overexpressing transcription factor 183300 
80 
4.4.3 
Effect of deleting PKS gene in OexTF strain 
90 
4.4.4 
Deletion of Flavin Adenine Dinucleotide-Dependent Monooxygenase 
92 
4.4.5 
Deletion of Prenyltransferase 
96 
4.4.6 
Deletion of presumed transporter gene 34258 and 48550 
101 
4.5 
Delimitation of tcl cluster is support by qPCR and chemical analysis results 
103 
==PAGE:6==
5 
Conclusion and Future perspective 
104 
6 
References 
105 
Appendix I Amino acid sequence of AdaA, AdaB, and AdaC 
110 
Appendix II - Annotated theocratic gene clusters 
111 
Appendix III Media 
112 
Appendix IV Plasmid maps 
114 
Appendix V primers and DNA fragments 
116 
Appendix VI PCR Protocols 
118 
Appendix VII USER-cloning 
119 
Appendix VIII Transformation of A. sydowii 
120 
Appendix IX qPCR 
121 
Appendix X red pigments in MM liquid 
122 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures 
Figure 1: Illustration of the tree of life, with focus on filamentous fungi. 
10 
Figure 2: Aspergillus sydowii growing on defined and rich media. 
11 
Figure 3: Selection of secondary metabolites often isolated from the fungus Aspergillus sydowii. 
 12 
Figure 4: The central dogma in biology. 
13 
Figure 5: Examples of tetracyclines. 
14 
Figure 6: Secondary metabolites from central pathways. 
15 
Figure 7: Precursors for the terpenoid biosynthesis 
16 
Figure 8: Prenylation of viridicatumtoxin intermediate. 
16 
Figure 9: Claisen condensation for adding an extender units (malonyl- thiolester) to a starter unit. 
17 
Figure 10: Phosphopantetheine bund to a Serine residue. 
17 
Figure 11: Type I iterative PKS. 
18 
Figure 12: Reducing domains in polyketide synthases. PKS. The ER domain is found only in highly reducing. 
19 
Figure 13: Orsellinic acid pathway. 
19 
Figure 14: The biosynthesis of TAN-1612, from Aspergillus niger. 
20 
Figure 15: The Ada biosynthetic gene cluster in Aspergillus niger. 
21 
Figure 16: The ada cluster from A. niger compare with the vrt cluster from P. aethiopicum in the program Easyfig. 23 
Figure 17: Gene deletion. An enzyme can be inactivated by deleting the parenting gene. 
23 
Figure 18: schematic presentation of CRISPR mediated deletion. 
24 
Figure 19: Method for liquid chromatography. 
27 
Figure 20: Schematic overview of gradient capable High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). 
28 
Figure 21: Absorbtion of light by conjugated double bonds.  
29 
Figure 22: UV/Vis spectrum of Chlorophyll b. 
30 
Figure 23: UV/Vis spectrum for tetracyline carboxamide core. 
31 
Figure 24: Diode array detection (DAD). 
31 
Figure 25: Overview of the most significant part of the ESI-Q-TOF-MS- employed for analysis in this thesis. 
32 
Figure 26: Proces for ESI 
33 
Figure 27: Ionization of molecules in ESI positive mode. 
33 
Figure 28: Concept of quadruple (QP) in Mass Spectrometry. 
34 
Figure 29: Collision cell.  
34 
Figure 30: TOF-MS. 
35 
Figure 31: Base Peak Chromatogram (BPC). 
36 
Figure 32: Mass spectrum at reaction time 8.1 minutes. 
36 
Figure 33: Extracted Ion Chromatogram (EIC) 
37 
Figure 34: MS/MS spectrum. 
38 
Figure 35: Isotope patterns in mass spectrum. 
38 
Figure 36: Total Wavelengths Chromatogram (TWC) and BPC. 
39 
Figure 37: Extracted Wavelength Chromatogram for absorption at 400 nm. 
39 
Figure 38: UV spectrum for the peak between 8.150 and 8.870 min. 
40 
Figure 39: Dilutions of spores for spore PCRs. 
46 
Figure 40: Location for plug extraction 
47 
Figure 41: Cluster-wide comparison of A. luchuensis cluster with the ada cluster in A. niger. 
51 
Figure 42: Cluster-wide comparison of A. brasiliensis cluster with the ada cluster in A. niger. 
51 
Figure 43: Cluster-wide comparison of A. sydowii cluster with the ada cluster in A. niger. 
52 
Figure 44: Cluster-wide comparison of A. versicolor cluster with the ada cluster in A. niger. 
53 
Figure 45: Cluster-wide comparison of A. sydowii cluster with the vrt cluster in P. aethiopicum. 
54 
Figure 46: Outline of the putative biosynthetic gene cluster tcl in A. sydowii. 
55 
Figure 47: Putative structure SM (12) made by the enzymes encodes by the genes in the tcl cluster from. 
56 
Figure 48: Gel electrophoreses results for amplification for Up and Down (Dw) DNA fragments 
57 
Figure 49: Gel electrophoreses results for amplification of Up DNA fragment 
57 
==PAGE:8==
Figure 50: Gel electrophorese results for plasmid pU202 digested  
58 
Figure 51: Restriction enzyme analysis of potential deletion plasmids for the genes 1394988 (FMO) and 92454 (MβL-
TE) digested with swaI. 
59 
Figure 52: Restriction enzyme analysis of potential deletion plasmids for the gene 48554 (PTA). 
59 
Figure 53: Restriction analysis of potential deletion plasmids for the gene 34258 
60 
Figure 54: Restriction analysis of potential deletion plasmids for the gene 48550  
 60 
Figure 55: Gel electrophoreses results for amplification of CRISPR fragment 
61 
Figure 56: Gel electrophoreses results for amplification CRISPR fragment MβL-TE CRI-2 and FMO CIR-3. T 
62 
Figure 57: Restriction analysis of potential CRISPR plasmids pCF332-PTA, pCF332-FMO, pCF332-58, and pCF332-50 62 
Figure 58: Restriction analysis of potential CRISPR plasmids pCF332-MβL digested with BspEI.  
63 
Figure 59: Alignment of sequencing results of Protospacer One and Protospacer Two from CRISPR plasmids 
64 
Figure 60: Gel electrophoreses results for verification PCR of the putative OexTF-PKSΔ strain  
66 
Figure 61: Gel electrophorese results for spore PCR of the putative OexTF-FMOΔ strain 
67 
Figure 62: Gel electrophorese results for GapChk spore PCR of the putative OexTF-PTAΔ strain  
67 
Figure 63: Gel electrophorese results for UpChk spore PCR of the putative OexTF-FMOΔ strain 
68 
Figure 64: Gel electrophorese results for GapChk and UpChk spore PCR of the putative OexTF-50Δ strain. 
68 
Figure 65: The graph shows the relative fold changes for the expression level of the PKS gene 157033 
70 
Figure 66: The presumed tcl cluster with surrounding genes. 
71 
Figure 67: The bar chart shows the relative fold changes 
71 
Figure 68: The bar chart show the relative fold changes 
73 
Figure 69: The strains ASYD4, used as references for all the other strains grown for seven days at 28°C. 
75 
Figure 70: BPC of ASYD4 growth for 7days at 28°C on MM and YES media plates. 
76 
Figure 71: Mass spectrum for the compounds 333, 510, and 664. 
76 
Figure 72: Dereplication of compound 510. 
77 
Figure 73: Dereplication of compound 664. 
78 
Figure 74: Antibase2012 hits for molecular formula C20H19N3O2. 
79 
Figure 75:  MM and YES media plates after the fungi have grown on them for seven days at 28 °C. 
80 
Figure 76: BPC of ASYD4 and OexTF strains grown on YES plates. 
81 
Figure 77: EWC at 400 nm for ASYD4 and OexTF strains grown on YES plates.  
81 
Figure 78: EWCs for 500 nm. Top: EWC OexTF strain grown on MM plates.  
82 
Figure 79: UV/Vis spectrums for the peaks eluted at 7.13 and 9.42 minutes in the EWC for 500 nm in Figure 78. 
83 
Figure 80: Interesting of the BPCs for the OexTF strain grown on MM and YES media. 
83 
Figure 81: Growth of OexTF strain on solid media over the span of three weeks. 
86 
Figure 82: For liquid media, rice and beans liquid extractions were performed. 
86 
Figure 83: EWCs at 400 and 500 nm for OexTF grown for 7 and 11 days in liquid MM media. 
87 
Figure 84: BPCs for OexTF grown on liquid OAT and CYA, rice, beans, solid MM, OAT, YES and CYA media. 
89 
Figure 85: The strains ASYD4 (references), OexTF and OexTF-PKSΔ grown for seven days on YES media plates. 
90 
Figure 86: BPC results of reference (ASYD4), OexTF, and OexTF-PKSΔ A. sydowii strains grown on YES plates. 
91 
Figure 87: EWC at 400 nm for the strains ADYS4, OexTF, and OexTF-PKSΔ. 
91 
Figure 88: Strain ASYD4, OexTF, and OexTF-FMOΔ grew for seven days at 28 °C on MM, YES, and CYA plates. 
93 
Figure 89: EWC at 400nm OexTF-FMOΔ strain groen on MM, YES and CYA plates. 
94 
Figure 90: BPCs for strain ASYD4, OexTF, and OexTF-FMOΔ grew seven days at 28 °C. 
94 
Figure 91: Deconvolution on [M+H]+ adduct of compound 426. 
95 
Figure 92: 13 product of ada cluster without adaC gene for FMO and the masse of [M+H]+ adduct. 
96 
Figure 93: Strain ASYD4, OexTF, and OexTF-PTAΔ grew for seven days at 28 °C on MM, YES, and CYA plates. 
97 
Figure 94: EWCs at 400nm for the strains ASYD4, OexTF and OexTF-PTAΔ grown on YES for seven days at 28°. 
98 
Figure 95: Deconvolution on [M-H]- adducts of proposed non-prenylated compounds. 
99 
Figure 96: A piece of BPC for OexTF (top) and  OexTF-PTAΔ (bottom) on CYA plates. 
100 
Figure 97: UV/VIs spectrum for the red pigment eluded at ≈7.1 minutes 
101 
Figure 98: Top and bottom view of the strain ASYD4, OexTF, and OexTF-50Δ grown on YES plates f 
102 
Figure 99: BPCs for the strains ASYD4, OexTF, and OexTF-50Δ grown on YES plates for seven days at 28°. 
103 
==PAGE:9==
 
List of tables  
Table 1: The most commonly seen adduct and losses for electrospray ionization in positive mode [73,92]. 
36 
Table 2: List of strains used in experiments for the thesis. 
43 
Table 3: List of media used for both cultivation and selection. 
44 
Table 4: Plasmids used and made during the thesis. 
44 
Table 5: Results of nine Aspergillus species mined with the protein sequence of PKS AdaA. 
48 
Table 6: Results of protein-protein BLAST with AdaB as the query sequence. 49 
Table 7: Results of protein-protein BLAST with AdaC as query sequences. 49 
Table 8: List of gene name in the ada cluster from A. niger with the name of the protein product and the acronyms 
of them. 
50 
Table 9: List of gene name in the vrt cluster from Penicillium aethiopicum with the name of the protein product. 
54 
Table 10: Number of colonies on transformation plates. 
65 
Table 11: Detected compounds in the ASYD4 strain after seven days growth on YES plates at 28 °C. 
79 
Table 12: Detected compounds in the OexTF strain after seven days growth on YES plates at 28 °C. 
84 
Table 13: Table of Novel OexTF compound formulas and their non-prenylated analogues. 
99 
 
List of abbreviation 
SM 
Secondary metabolite 
cDNA 
Complementary DNA 
TC 
Tetracylines  
PK 
Polyketide 
ESI 
Electrospray Ionization 
NRP 
Nonribosomal Peptides 
CID 
Collision-Induced Dissociation  
MVA 
Mevaloic acid 
IPP 
Isopentenyl diphosphate 
DMAPP 
Dimethylallyl diphosphate 
CoA 
Coenzyme A 
PKS 
Polyketide synthase 
QP 
quadruple  
KS 
Ketosynthase 
AT 
Acyl transferase 
ACP 
Acyl carrier protein 
DH 
Dehydratase domain 
KR 
β-ketoreductase domain 
EWC 
Extracted Wavelength Chromatogram 
ER 
Enoyl Reductase domain 
MβL-TE 
Metallo-β-Lactamase-type ThioestErase 
FMO 
Flavin denine dinucleotide-dependent MonoOxygenase 
OSMAC 
One train-Many Compounds  
JGI 
Joint Genome Institute  
CLC 
CLC Main Workbench 
SAM 
S-Adenosyl methionine 
NR-PKS 
Non-Reducing PKS 
PR-PKS 
Partially Reducing PKS 
HR-PKS 
Highly Reducing PKS 
==PAGE:10==
DSBs 
Double-Stranded Breaks 
[m/z] 
Mass-to-Charge ratio 
DR 
Direct Repeat 
qPCR 
Quantitative PCR 
UHPLC 
Ultra high-performance Liquid Chromatography 
TWC 
Total Wavelengths Chromatogram  
LC 
Liquid Chromatography 
DAD 
Diode Array Detection 
Q-TOF 
Quadrupole Time-of-Flight 
MS 
Mass Spectrometry 
BPC 
Base Peak Chromatogram 
NP 
Normal Phase  
EIC 
Extracted Ion Chromatogram  
RP 
Reversed-phase 
UV/Vis spectrum 
Ultraviolet/ Visible light (UV/Vis) spectrum 
HOMO 
Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital  
LUMO 
Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital 
OexTF 
A. sydowii overexpressing the transcription factor encoding gene 183300 
ASYD4 
Wilde-type A. sydowii strain 
OexTF-pyrGΔ 
OexTF without pyrG 
OexTF-PKSΔ 
Derivative of OexTF with 157033Δ 
OexTF-FMOΔ 
Derivative of OexTF with 13949488Δ 
OexTF-PTAΔ 
Derivative of OexTF with 48554Δ 
OexTF-50Δ 
Derivative of OexTF with 48550Δ 
kb 
kilobase pair 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
1 Background 
1.1 Filamentous fungi  
All the different organisms living in the world can theoretically be traced back to a common universal 
ancestor. The kinship between species is illustrated in the tree of life, which is divided into the domains 
Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukaryota. In Figure 1 are a shown a tree of life with focus on filamentous fungi.  
 
 
Figure 1: Illustration of the tree of life, with focus on filamentous fungi. Filamentous fungi are in the domain Eukaryota, supergroup 
Opisthokonta, kingdom Fungi, subkingdom Dikarya, and both phyla Ascomycota and Basidiomycota. Adapt form [1,2]. 
The introduction of DNA sequencing has given rise to much controversy in regards to how to classifying the 
various groups in the Eukaryota domain. In Figure 1 the Eukaryota domain are divided into six supergroups. 
Fungi are together Animal and many unicellular eukaryots in the supergroup Opisthokonta [1,2].  Fungi are 
still their own separate kingdom within Opisthokonta. There are four phyla in the Fungal kingdom, 
Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, Chytridiomycota, and Zygomycota. Ascomycota and Basidiomycota are the 
two most interesting phyla with regards to biotechnology and compass roughly 98% of all described fungi 
[3]. Together Ascomycota and Basidiomycota makes up the subkingdom Dikarya [4]. The name Dikarya is 
given because all fungi at one point in their life cycle two nuclei in one cell. The Dikarya includes both 
filamentous fungi and unicellular yeasts [3]. Many of the classic production organisms with fungal origin are 
Ascomycota, e.g., the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the filamentous fungi Penicillium and Aspergillus 
[5].  
1.1.1 Aspergillus  
The genus Aspergillus is highly diverse and involved in many aspects of human life. Species such as A. flavus 
can infect crops, contaminating them with the carcinogen aflatoxin. Humans with compromised immune 
systems are at risk from infection with A. fumigatus and other opportunistic pathogens [6]. Other species of 
Aspergillus are significant in the manufacturing of fermented food, industrial chemicals, and 
pharmaceuticals [7]. A key "workhorse” in the fermentation industry is A. niger; it produces the majority of 
industrial citric acid and several other compounds, for example enzymes. In food fabrication, Aspergillus 
oryzae is a highly used fungus, especially in Asia [8]. Even opportunistic pathogens can have beneficial 
applications. A. terreus is an opportunistic pathogen of humans but is also the organism from which  the 
cholesterol-reducing secondary metabolite lovastatin was initially isolated [6,9]. 
==PAGE:12==
 
The mesophilic fungus A. sydowii is isolated in terrestrial environments from polar to tropical regions 
[10,11]. A. sydowii belongs to the Aspergillus section Versicolores and are together with A. versicolor one of 
the more well-known fungi in Versicolores [12,13]. In general the fungus is saprotrophic and survive by 
excreting hydrolytic enzymes into the surroundings to decay organic matter [14]. When grow under 
standard lab conditions A. sydowii give white colonies with highly hydrophobic green and turquoise spores, 
see Figure 2. On rich medium A. sydowii can make exudate drops as seen to the right in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2: Aspergillus sydowii growing on defined and rich media. On the rich medium to the right the fungus makes small exudate 
drops. 
A. sydowii can act as an opportunistic pathogen in immune-compromised animals including humans and 
plants especially in stress filled environments. In marine environments, A. sydowii is well-known for causing 
extensive outbreak of the disease aspergillosis in sea fan corals [10,11].  The number of aspergillosis cases 
caused by A. sydowii is increasing which have made researcher look closer into which secondary 
metabolites (SMs) A. sydowii produce. Some of the SMs are in Figure 3.  
 
==PAGE:13==
 
Figure 3: Selection of secondary metabolites often isolated from the fungus Aspergillus sydowii. Next to the structure of the 
molecule are given the name, chemical formula, monoisotopic mass, and the mass of the [M+H]+adduct. 
The diketopiperazine cyclo-(L-phenylalaninyl-L-tryptophanyl) (1) have been found in A. sydowii as well as 
other Aspergillus, where it acts as a plant growth regulator [15,16]. The compound class 
Bispyrrolidinoindoline diketopiperazine alkaloids consists of homo- and heterodimeric diketopiperazine. 
These alkaloids have been isolate from Aspergillus species in both terrestrial and marine environments [17–
19]. In 2015 Kaur et al. purified a cyclo-(L-phenylalaninyl-L-tryptophanyl) homodimeric diketopiperazine (2) 
from an A. sydowii strain. The structure of 2 in Figure 3 was determined by comparing NMR data with the 
bispyrrolidinoindoline diketopiperazine alkaloids WIN 64821, and asperazine [15]. Compounds that have 
been first isolated from A. sydowii include the polyketide Sydowinol (3) and the terpenoid Sydonic acid (4) 
and metabolites related to both of them [10,20]. 
1.2 The Central Dogma  
The central dogma of biology lies the foundation for biomolecular work and understanding of life sciences, 
in Figure 4 the dogma is illustrate. In short the central dogma describes the flow of genetic information 
from DNA to RNA and from RNA to protein [21,22]. More exhaustively the central dogma dictates that all 
information about the structure and regulation of protein expression is stored within the DNA sequence of 
an organism. The structure of enzymes determines the composition and structure of the metabolites they 
synthesize [23]. The knowledge is passed on to a new generation by either sexual or asexual propagation 
[24]. When the cells divide, DNA replicates into two new double-stranded DNA molecules. The new DNA 
molecules are made of one newly synthesize DNA strand and one original DNA strand,  making them 
semiconservative [25]. Sequences in the DNA that compose genes can be “read” by RNA polymerases to 
produce a complementary single-stranded RNA polymer. This process is called transcription [24]. 
==PAGE:14==
 
Figure 4: The central dogma in biology. Information in DNA is kept across generation via DNA replication. In transcription, RNA 
polymerase can read the genetic information by base pairing and makes a complimentary messenger RNA string. In translation, 
ribosome catalyze the polymerization of amino acids in to proteins, based on the RNA sequence. Exceptions to the central dogma is 
the reverse transcriptase, that makes DNA from RNA templet, and RNA replication 
The cell utilizes various types of RNA. The ones carrying the gene information from DNA to protein are 
messenger RNA (mRNA). Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) obtain a three-dimensional structure by making base 
pairing with itself. Together with several proteins, rRNA makes up the ribosome complex. Ribosomes are 
responsible for the next step in the central dogma, the translation of RNA to protein. The mRNA sequences 
are read by the ribosome, which synthesizes a polypeptide by linking amino acids together with peptide 
bonds. The order of the amino acids is determined by the nucleotide sequence in the mRNA. A triplet of 
nucleotides is called a codon and codes for a specific amino acid. The exception is the three Stop codons 
that signal termination of translation. The amino acids are delivered to the ribosome by transfer RNA 
(tRNA).  A specific tRNA are connected to every amino acid and have an anticodon sequence 
complimentary to the codon sequence in the mRNA. Like rRNA, tRNA has a three-dimensional structure 
stabilized by hydrogen bonds between base pairs. The orders of amino acids in the complete protein is 
dictated by the sequences of nucleotides in the mRNA. This sequence is conserved from DNA as the RNA is 
made through base pairing with DNA [21,24,26]. Exceptions to the central dogma comes from RNA virus 
and retrovirus, both using RNA as genetic material. The retrovirus uses the enzyme reverse transcriptase to 
synthesize DNA from an RNA templet. DNA made from RNA are called complementary DNA (cDNA) [27]. 
Reverse transcriptase are uses in biotechnology for experiment involving transcription. As mRNA is a 
relative unstable polymer it have to be convert into the more stable DNA before processes, as for example 
PCR, can be conducted. This can be done with reverse transcriptase [28]. Another advantage with cDNA is 
that it do not contains introns making is easier to make heterologous expression.  
1.3 Secondary Metabolites 
Many metabolites are widespread and can be found in most organisms across all kingdoms. Examples are 
nucleotides, amino acids, and all the metabolites involved in glycolysis. A common name for this group of 
molecules is primary metabolites, because they are essential for an organism to maintain central cellular 
functions [29]. A more specialized group of compounds are the secondary metabolites (SM). The pathways 
for SM biosynthesis have evolved later than the ones for primary metabolites. SMs are therefore generally 
only synthesized in a single species or genera [30]. SMs are the evolutionary outcome of organism’s 
adaptation in specific niches and the ever-growing rivalry between species. These small molecules give 
color and smell to flowers and fungi and provide weapons for chemical warfare among microorganisms 
[31]. Many of these natural products have beneficial qualities that can be exploited. Food can be colored 
red with carmine extracted from scale insects [32]. Fungi and bacteria produce a wide range of antibiotics 
and other compounds that may find uses as therapeutic drugs [33].  
1.3.1 Tetracyclines 
Antibiotics are one of the most important medical discoveries ever. The first group of antibiotics used was 
Penicillins, famously discovered by Alexander Fleming in 1928 (Demain & Sanchez, 2009). Since other 
==PAGE:15==
groups of antibiotics have been incorporated in the arsenal against infectious diseases. The first group of 
antibiotics effective against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria were the tetracyclines (TCs) 
(Chopra, Hawkey, & Hinton, 1992). The first molecules in this broad-spectrum group of antibiotics were 
found in the 1940s, all in the bacterial genus Streptomyces. TCs with antibacterial properties bind to the 
30S subunit in bacterial ribosomes and stop protein synthesis by allosterically inhibiting binding of amino 
acyl-tRNAs to the acceptor site [34]. The simplest tetracycline with antibacterial activity is 6-deoxy-6- 
demethyltetracycline (5), seen in Figure 5.  
 
Figure 5: Examples of tetracyclines. 6-Demethyl-7-chlortetracycline have bacterial origin, the core structure is marked in red. TAN-
1612 and Viridicatumtoxin is from fungi. Structures from [35–37].    
The core structure of 6-deoxy-6- demethyltetracycline are highlighted in red in Figure 5 and consist of four 
linear arranged six-membered rings. The four rings A, B, C and D are decorated with various functional 
groups (Chopra & Roberts, 2001). The antibacterial property of TCs comes from the demetylamino group 
on the C4 carbon in ring A and from the oxygen-rich half of the ring system. The combination of ketone and 
enol systems makes TC strong chelating agents. The effectiveness of TC antibiotics diminishes if the oxygen 
containing side groups are removed [34,35]. Bacteria develops resistance towards tetracyclines primarily by 
increasing the activity of the Tet family of proteins which are tetracycline efflux pumps.  
 
TCs are also found in fungi, but so far only a few have been discovered. One of them is TAN-1612 (6), seen 
in Figure 5. TAN-1612 lack the demetylamino group and do not display antibacterial properties, but acts as 
an inhibitor of neuropeptide substance P binding. The ada cluster in A. niger encodes enzymes for TAN-
1612 biosynthesis. The TC Viridicatumtoxin (7) ( Figure 5 )was isolated from Penicillium virridicatum in 1973 
and have sines been found in other Penicillium species [38,39]. Viridicatumtoxin has been shown to inhibit 
the growth of Staphylcoccus aureus [40]. The structure of  viridicatumtoxin is shown in Figure 5. The 
pathway for biosynthesis of viridicatumtoxin was mapped in Penicillium aethiopicum studyby Chooi et al. in 
2010. The genes for the pathway are in the vrt cluster [39].  
1.3.2 Classes of Secondary Metabolites  
Despite the many different functions and structures of SM, they can be divided into classes based on the 
pathways they originate from [29]. The four main classes are polyketides, terpenoids, nonribosomal 
peptides, shikimic acid derivatives, and hybrids of the four. They are all derived from primary metabolites, 
but as seen in Figure 6, they all branch out from the central pathways at different points. The polyketides 
(PKs), terpenoids, and nonribosomal peptides (NRP) all consist of building blocks originating from primary 
metabolism, joined in varying numbers to form the backbone of a given molecule. A broad group of 
tailoring enzymes modifies the core molecule by adding and removing chemical groups or forming rings 
within the molecule.  
==PAGE:16==
 
Figure 6: Secondary metabolites from central pathways. The figure shows a simplified version of the central pathways of glycolysis 
and TCA cycle, linked with the oxidation of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA. Primary metabolites are shown in blue and secondary SM are 
shown in orange. Terpenes, PKs and fatty acids comes from the primary metabolite Acetyl-CoA. NRP can use all the amino acid in 
made by the cell. For the shikimic acid derivatives it is manly the intermediates which are used at starting point for SM.  
In NRPs, the building blocks are amino acids, both the 20 standard amino acids used for proteins and many 
nonproteinogenic amino acids. As the name indicates, the NRPs are not assembled by the ribosomes. 
Instead, mega-enzymes called nonribosomal peptide-synthetases joins the amino acids via peptide bonds. 
After the small peptide is synthesized, it can undergo cyclization to form ring structures, or amino acids 
within the NRP may be enzymatically modified. The NRP class of SMs includes antibiotics such as penicillins 
and cephalosporins [41]. Shikimic acid is the starting point for the pathways leading to the aromatic amino 
acids L-tryptophan, L-phenylalanine, and L-tyrosine. Intermediates in the aromatic amino acid pathways are 
used as precursors for SM. Many of the SM from shikimic acid are aromatic, e.g., flavonoids and quinones 
[29].  
 
Terpenoids consist of branched five-carbon units, named isoprene. The precursors for the isoprene are the 
isomers isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP), seen in Figure 7  [41].  
==PAGE:17==
 
Figure 7: Precursors for the terpenoid biosynthesis 
Two different pathways in nature provide the precursors, either via a pathway that have mevalonic acid 
(MVA) as intermediate or via the methylerythritol phosphate pathway. The MVA pathway is used by fungi 
[29,42]. The isoprene units can be assembled head-to-tail to form larger carbon skeletons. The DMAPP 
loses the diphosphate and becomes an allylic carbocation that act as an electrophile in the reaction with 
the nucleophilic IPP. The terpenoids are classified according to the number of isoprene units in the 
molecule, e.g. hemiterpenes (C5), monoterpenes (C10), sesquiterpenes (C15), diterpenes (C20), 
sesterterpenes (C25), triterpenes (C30), and tetraterpenes (C40). Following synthesis of the terpenoid 
backbone, the tailoring enzymes take over [43]. An important part of the tailoring enzymes function is to 
remove the diphosphate, this prevents further polymerization. The terpenoids are often cyclized, as seen in 
pleuromutilin, an antibiotic precursor. Other alterations are additional reduction or introduction of 
hydroxyl and carbonyl groups [29]. Terpenoids are often found in hybrids SMs, where they for example can 
increase the hydrophobicity of a molecule. When terpenoids forms hybrids with PK or NRP the terpenoid 
unit is usually attached to an aromatic ring formed either by cyclization within the PK or by the presence of 
aromatic amino acids in NRP. The process of adding a hydrophobic side group is known as prenylation. The 
mechanism for the prenylation step in viridicatumtoxin synthesis is seen in Figure 8. The enzymes 
prenyltransferases catalyze the reaction. In the vrt cluster for viridicatumtoxin the gene vrtC encodes the 
prenyltransferase [39].  
 
 
 
Figure 8: Prenylation of viridicatumtoxin intermediate. The DMAPP loses diphosphate and become an allylic carbocation.  
 Terpene diphosphates of different length can act as prenyl donors (Heide, 2009; Koehl, 2005). After 
prenylation the molecule can undergo additional cyclization steps at seen in viridicatumtoxin and the NRP-
terpenoid group Okamine. (Chooi, Cacho, & Tang, 2010; Shiono, Akiyama, & Hayashi, 2014)   
==PAGE:18==
1.4 Polyketides  
Polyketides make up a highly diverse class of compounds and are commonly biosynthesized with acetyl-
CoA as starter unit and malonyl-CoA as extender units. Each new unit  is added to the growing chain via 
Claisen condensation, as seen in Figure 9 [41]. The enzyme or the enzyme complex polyketide synthase 
(PKS) catalyzes the reaction [44].  
 
Figure 9: Claisen condensation for adding an extender units (malonyl- thiolester) to a starter unit. 
There exist three types of PKSs. The organization of catalytic domains differ depending on the type, though 
the reactions involved are similar [45]. In Type I PKS all the domains are part of the same mega enzyme. The 
minimal number of domains necessary for addition of one extender unit is ketosynthase (KS), acyl 
transferase (AT) and acyl carrier protein (ACP) [46]. Type I PKS exists as either non-iterative or iterative. The 
non-iterative PKSs are observed in bacteria. They have a specific active site for every catalyzed reaction 
only used once, and the domains necessary for each cycle of elongation are organized in modules next to 
each other. The modular structure makes it easier to predict the size of the PK chain [44]. The iterative type 
of PKSs are known from fungi [47]. Here the different domains are used several times. The iterative nature 
of the PKS makes it difficult to predict the length of the chain. The Type II PKSs consists of many proteins, 
which make up a single complex. Each protein catalyzes only one reaction. The individual domains are used 
in an iterative fashion. This type of PKS is commonly found in bacteria. For both Type I and Type II PKSs the 
acetyl units have to bind to the acyl-carrier protein domain (ACP) for activation. The ACP contains a 
conserved Serine residue [48]. The enzyme phosphopantetheinyl transferase attaches the prosthetic group 
phosphopantetheine to the conserved Serine; this changes apo-ACP to holo-ACP [49]. The 
phosphopantetheine, gives ACP an approximately 18 nm long arm, seen in Figure 10. With the terminal 
thiol group, the phosphopantetheine arm can bind and move the acetyl chain between the different active 
sites.  
 
Figure 10: Phosphopantetheine bund to a Serine residue. 
 Type III PKS are the most diverse group as they can be found in plants, bacteria, and fungi. The enzyme is a 
homodimeric protein and has only a single active site that catalyzes the condensation, cyclization, and 
decarboxylation reactions. The Type III PKSs can use acetyl-CoA directly in condensation; whereas the other 
types have to activate the acetyl units first [44,50].  
==PAGE:19==
1.4.1 Type I iterative 
The same kinds of domains catalyze the central reactions in non-iterative and iterative Type I PKS. This 
thesis focuses on PK synthesis in fungi so the following section will only focus on the iterative Type I PKSs. 
For Type I PKSs the minimal number of domains necessary for addition of one extender unit is KS, AT and 
ACP [46]. In Figure 11 the extension process is shown.   
 
Figure 11: Type I iterative PKS. A) Loading of acetyl-CoA starter unit. B) Loading of extender unit, malonyl-CoA. Growing chain added 
to extender unit via Claisen type condensation. C) Growing chain moved to KS domain. D) The growing chain ready for a new round 
of extension. E) A TE catalyze the release of the complete polyketide chain. F) Completed and released linear polyketide backbone. 
The AT domain selects the acetyl substrates, both the starter and the extender unit. In Figure 11 A, the 
starter unit is transferred from CoA to a thiol group on a cysteine in the active site of the KS domain. The AT 
domain loads the extender units onto the phosphopantetheine group of the ACP, Figure 11 B. With both of 
the units loaded the KS domain can catalyze a Claisen type condensation between the acetyl and malonyl 
thiolester. In Figure 11 B the mechanism is displayed. After the carbon-carbon bond is formed the chain is 
moved to the KS domain, and the PK is ready for one more round of elongation, Figure 11 C and D. After 
the final round of elongation the PK has to be released from the ACP [45]. For the iterative Type I PKS 
shown in Figure 11 E there is a dedicated chain-releasing thioesterase (TE) domain. To give a linear PK as 
shown in Figure 11 F. The TE domain catalyzes the nucleophilic attack on the thioester by an external 
nucleophile. Usually the nucleophile will be water, which entails that the PK chain, ends with a carboxylic 
acid. If the PK itself act as nucleophile for the chain release it gives a cyclic compound. The Chain-Releasing 
Thioesterase/Claisen cylase (TE/CLC) domains catalyzes the reaction. Some PKSs do not have a TE domain. 
The release of PK from these PKSs are achieved by other enzymatic activity, not included in the PKS. The 
use of additional enzymes for PK release can affect cyclization and oxidation pattern [45,51].  
 
==PAGE:20==
The Type I iPKS can be divided into sub-types based on the types of reducing domains the enzyme contains 
[51]. In Figure 12 the different reducing domains are seen. 
 
Figure 12: Reducing domains in polyketide synthases. The enzyme β-ketoreductase (KR) reduce the ketone group to an alcohol 
group. Afterwards, the Dehydratase (DH) domain can reduce the alcohol group to an alkene. The double bond is reduced to an 
alkane by the enoyl reductase (ER) domain. The KR and DH domains are found in both partially reducing and highly reducing type I 
PKS. The ER domain is found only in highly reducing. 
In the non-reducing PKS (NR-PKS) there are no reducing domains which entail that all ketone groups are 
initially kept. It is from NR-PKS the aromatic fungal PKs originate [46]. The Partially Reducing PKS (PR-PKS) 
have the two reducing domains keto reductase (KR) and dehydratase (DH). The Highly Reducing PKS (HR-
PKS) also includes an enoyl reductase (ER) domain in addition to the KR and DH [47]. The reactions 
catalyzed by the reducing domains are shown in Figure 12. In the first reducing step catalyzed by KR, the 
ketone group is reduced to an alcohol. From there the DH catalyzes the formation of an alkene. A fully 
saturated bond is formed when ER catalyzes the reduction of the alkene to an alkane. For PR-PKS and HR-
PKS the individual units can be reduced to different degrees. The reduction status has a large influence 
upon which ring formation the finished PK chain can make. How the reduction pattern is programmed into 
the enzymes is not entirely understood [51].  
1.4.2 Product Template Domain 
The finished PK backbone from a NR-PKS is highly reactive due to the high number of ketones. Left to them 
self the PKs spontaneously form ring structures within the molecule, also before the backbone is fully 
synthesized. To secure regiospecific cyclization within the molecule many NR-PKS includes a product 
template (PT) domain [52,53]. Based on the number of rings and which ring is made first PTs can be divided 
into five groups. Group I catalyze the synthesis of aromatic monocyclics with the ring forming bond 
between C2 and C7. The NR-PKS that synthesize Orsellinic acid contains a Group 1 PT, reaction is seen in 
Figure 13.  
 
Figure 13: Orsellinic acid pathway. 
Orsellinic acid is one of the simplest aromatic PK. It is made from an acetyl-CoA starter unit and three 
malonyl-CoA extender units. Even for this small polyketide, there are two ways for it to fold into a six-
==PAGE:21==
membered ring. With a Claisen condensation, the aromatic product is phloracetophenone. The PT domain 
ensure that the ring is closed with an Aldol condensation with subsequent loss of the hydroxyl group, giving 
Orsellinic acid, as seen in Figure 13 [54]. Orsellinic acid differs from other SM by being found in many 
different species both fungi and bacteria [55,56]. The small size and high number of reactive groups make 
orsellinic acid well suited for being incorporated into larger molecules [57,58].  
Multiple rings 
Group II and III PTs also forms a bond between C2 and C7 but the products are respectively bicyclic and 
multicyclic. For group II PTs the second ring is closed by a TE/CLC domain in the NR-PKS. Group IV and group 
V yield multicyclic compounds as end products. In group V the initial ring is formed with a bond between C6 
and C11, as seen in Figure 14. For all the groups the PT domain catalysis the aldol cyclizations that forms 
the first ring. In the multicyclic compounds the PT also catalysis cyclization of other aromatic rings. The 
formation of the remaining rings is spontaneous, but regiospecific due to the constraint posed by the 
primary and the potential second ring. The group V NR-PKS do not include a releasing domain and have to 
rely on secondary enzyme to catalysis the release [59]. This is often done by a metallo-β-lactamase-type 
thioesterase (MβL-TE) [60]. The TC TAN-1612 has a decaketide (20 carbons) backbone. The PKS responsible 
for synthesizing the backbone (8) feature a group V PT [61]. The reaction of ring formation is shown in 
Figure 14.  
 
Figure 14: The biosynthesis of TAN-1612, from Aspergillus niger. An acetyl-CoA starter unit and nine malonyl-CoA extender units 
make up the decaketide 8. The NR-PKS  (AdaA) from the Ada cluster assembles the acyl units and catalyzes the three cyclizations. 
The PT domain in the NR-PKS given the three rings in 9.  A flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent monooxygenase (AdaC) 
hydroxylate carbon 2 and forms 10. The fourth ring is made by a Metallo-β-lactamase-type thioesterase, that also releases the 
polyketide C. Lastly C is methylated by an O-methyl-transferase to give D. The methyl group is donate by SAM.  
==PAGE:22==
The PT domain catalyzes the folding of the two aromatic rings. The third ring is spontaneously formed and 
gives (9) in Figure 14. For closure of the fourth ring the C2 is first oxydised by the addition of a hydroxyl group 
(10) . The step is catalyzed by the enzyme flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent monooxygenase (FMO). 
The fourth ring is closed by a MβL-TE which also release the PK from the ACP (10). In the final step of the 
TAN-1612 (6) pathway one of the hydroxyl groups in the first aromatic ring is methylated by an O-methyl-
transferase. The methyl is donate by SAM [36]. 
1.5 Gene Clusters  
To biosynthesize a SM, an organism needs one or more core genes, e.g., PKS or NRPS, and various tailoring 
enzymes. The necessary genes are often localized next to each other in the genome without any non-
pathway genes among them. This constellation of genes is defined as a biosynthetic gene cluster [41]. The 
genes of a biosynthetic gene cluster are generally under the control of a single regulator. In eukaryotes, the 
regulator can be a transcription factor that bind to the regulatory sequence for all the genes in the cluster. 
The gene encoding the regulator may also be found in the cluster. Many biosynthetic gene clusters are not 
expressed under standard laboratory conditions. As SM are often produced as a response to specific 
environmental factors, it can be almost impossible to guess and reproduce these circumstances in the 
laboratory. Consequently, the gene clusters are considered “silent." It is necessary to express the genes, to 
link a biosynthetic gene cluster with a particular SM [29]. Many methods for overcoming silent gene 
clusters have been developed. Global regulators that influence the expression of more than one gene or 
gene cluster exist. An example is the nuclear protein LaeA found in various Aspergillus species. 
Overexpression of LaeA leads to the activation of more than one cluster and the synthesis of many different 
SMs [62]. Many of the global regulators work by chromatin remodeling, making the DNA more accessible 
for RNA polymerases. The same effect can be obtained by adding chromatin-modulating agents to the 
growth medium, for example, histone deacetylase or DNA methyltransferase inhibitors. If only one 
biosynthetic gene cluster is of interest a classic approach is to overexpress the regulator that belongs to the 
cluster. This can be done by exchanging the promoter of the regulator with a more active promoter. If the 
concentration of the local regulator is high enough it can influence expression of not only its target cluster 
but also other biosynthetic gene clusters. When this happens multiple new SMs can by synthesized. The 
appearance of many new SMs is problematics when trying to solve which SMs are made by a given cluster 
[63].  
1.5.1 TAN-1612 synthesize by Ada cluster  
The tetracyline TAN-1612 is synthesized in A. niger by the enzymes encoded by genes contained in the Ada 
cluster. The cluster was linked with biosynthesis of TAN-1612 in a paper by Li et al. in 2011. Four of the five 
genes in the Ada cluster encode biosynthetic enzymes. The fifth gene adaR encodes a transcription 
regulator. The adaA codes for a PKS, adaB for a MβL-TE, adaC for a FMO and adaD for an O-methyl-
transferase (O-MeT). The genes are organized as seen in Figure 15. 
 
Figure 15: The Ada biosynthetic gene cluster in Aspergillus niger. The cluster encodes a transcription factor (AdaR), O-methyl-
transferase (AdaD), a flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent monooxygenase (AdaC), an Metallo-β-lactamase-type thioesterase 
(AdaB), a non-reducing polyketide synthase, and a transporter [61] . 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
1.6 Genome mining 
The basic building blocks for a given category of SM are the same, e.g., acetyl units for PKs and amino acid 
for NRP. The core gene in a biosynthetic gene cluster is responsible for connecting the building. As the 
biochemical process for joining two acetyl unit or amino acid are virtually the same no matter, the size of 
the SM backbone, the enzymes involved in the synthesis have highly conserved domains [64]. The gene 
sequence from a conserved domain can be used to find other clusters that contain similar domains and 
hopefully uncover new SMs. The use of conserved gene sequences is the central element in genome 
mining, from there it branches out to many different methods depending on the objective of the mining. 
Before gene sequencing became available and affordable, the discovery of new cluster was sometimes 
done by making semi-specific primers that would bind to slightly different variations of a conserved 
domain. Nowadays as more and more genomes are fully sequenced genome mining are mostly done with 
in silica techniques [65,66].   
Conserved domains such as AT domain in PKS or the adenylation domain in NRPS can be used as a query 
sequence in broad searches that maps the number and types of gene clusters within an organism. The 
methods have been used on many model organisms, such as A. nidulans. The gene sequences for core gene 
in known clusters were used to discover 56 potential genes for core enzymes in A. nidulans [66]. Instead of 
mining with only one gene sequence at a time, software programs exist that can identify many different 
types of biosynthetic gene clusters in a genome [65]. The program Antibiotics and Secondary Metabolite 
Analysis SHell (AntiSMASH) have multiple layers of algorithms it uses to make a rule-based prediction of 
clusters in a sequenced genome. Firstly, core genes are located by comparing genes from the investigate 
genome with a premade database of known core genes. Dependent on which core genes are identified the 
surrounding genes were screened with other algorithms to find genes belong to the cluster. The core gene 
is also further studied to determine the size of the backbone and with units are used, if possible [23].  
When new core genes have been found the rest of the genes in the cluster have to be identified. 
Comparison between a known cluster and the genes surrounding the new core gene is a quick method for 
getting an overview of the extent of the cluster and which type of genes the cluster may contain. EasyFig is 
a Python based program that treat annotation files and gives a visual representation of a comparison 
between clusters based on BLAST, both BLATn and tBLASTx [67]. An example of the visual representation is 
given in Figure 15, where the two TC clusters ada and vrt have been compared. As TAN-1612 and 
viridicatumtoxin have the same core structure, the EasyFig results show consensus between the genes in 
both clusters encoding the PKS, FMO, MβL-TE enzymes.  
==PAGE:24==
 
Figure 16: The ada cluster from A. niger compare with the vrt cluster from P. aethiopicum in the program Easyfig.   
Had only the ada cluster been known the results in Figure 16 could have been used tell that the vrt cluster 
could potentially make a TC, probably with more modification that TAN-1612 as the cluster contains more 
genes.    
Genome mining can also be used for specific purposes. In a study by Li et al. they wanted to get information 
on how MβL-TE synthesized the fourth ting in TC of fungi origin. One of the methods they used were 
comparative pathway investigation with an anthracenone tricyclic. Both the TC and the tetracyclic have a 
Type I iterative NRPKS with a group V PT domain as core gene in their clusters. Li et al. used the PKS gene 
from the tricyclic asperthecin as a query sequence in a BLAST search to find the cluster responsible for the 
tetracyclic TAN-1612 in A. niger [36].  
1.7 Verification of cluster  
1.7.1 Deletion strains  
It is not enough to overexpress a regulator to confirm that a given cluster is linked to particular SM. As 
stated previously, the overexpressed regulator may be affecting other clusters than the target. To verify the 
link between cluster and SM a commonly used technique is to inactivate the assumed core gene. The 
enzyme from the core gene is responsible for the first step in the biosynthesis of the SM. If a strain without 
the presumed core gene no longer produce the SM it is clear evidence that there is a link between the 
cluster and the SM [63]. One of the ways genes are inactivated is by gene deletion. Here the gene of 
interest is exchanged with a selection marker. The process is shown in Figure 17.  
 
Figure 17: Gene deletion. An enzyme can be inactivated by deleting the parenting gene. In the figure it is done via homologous 
recombination between the gene of interest  in the chromosome and a marker gene from an extrachromosomal template. Here the 
marker gene is pyrG for orotidine-5’-phosphate decarboxylase. To facilitate homologous recombination the Up and Down sequences 
in the template have to be identical with the Up and Down sequences in the chromosome. 
==PAGE:25==
In a plasmid the selection gene is flanked by an Up and Down sequences, that have the same sequence as a 
section of the chromosome up and downstream form the gene of interest. The plasmid is digested before 
transformation, cutting the backbone from the deletion template. After transformation with the deletion 
template the fungus will see the deletion template as damaged DNA and preform homologous 
recombination to repair the damage. The homologous recombination exchanges the gene of interest with 
the marker gene. By growing the transformed fungi on selection media only fungi where the exchange has 
happened will form colonies [68]. The maker gene inserted in the chromosome will often be flanked with 
two identical Direct Repeat (DR) sequences. The presence of DR makes it possible to loop out the maker 
gene. In this way the maker system can be reused. Gene deletion can also be used to verify the rest of the 
presumed genes in the cluster, as the end product will disappear if any of the enzymes in the pathway is 
missing. Inactivation of pathway genes can lead to accumulation of intermediates. If the structure of the 
intermediates are solved, they can help clarifying the biosynthesis of the SM.  
1.7.1.1 
CRISPR mediated deletion 
Gene deletion can be difficult to achieve as it requires the fungus to make homologous recombination on a 
chromosome that has no breaks in its DNA. The number of successful transformants can improve if there is 
introduced double-stranded breaks (DSBs) in the DNA, as this forces the fungus to make homologous 
recombination in order to survive. Bacteria and archaea used the mechanism CRISPR (clustered regularly 
interspaced short palindromic repeats)-Cas9 (CRISPR-associated protein 9) to make DSBs in the DNA of 
invading viruses [69]. The enzyme Cas9 are used for CRISPR mediated deletion in many organisms, including 
Aspergillus. A schematic presentation of CRISPR mediated deletion are shown in Figure 18.  
 
Figure 18: schematic presentation of CRISPR mediated deletion. The protospacer in the single guide RNA (sgRNA) guides the 
nuclease Cas9 to a target sequence, at the 5’-end of the Protospacer Adjacent Motif (PAM) sequence. Cas9 introduce double-strand 
breaks (DSBs) in the DNA. Homologous recombination repairs the DSBs, using the deletion plasmid as template. Figure adapted 
from [68] 
==PAGE:26==
The Cas9 is a nonspecific nuclease, to make site-specific DSBs the enzyme reliant on a single guide RNA 
(sgRNA) that directs Cas9 to a specific sequence in the DNA. The sgRNA contains a 20 nucleotides. The 
protospacer apply base pairing to recognize the target DNA sequence. By altering the protospacer 
sequence Cas9 can be guided to different targets and perform DSBs.  
 
The protospacer sequence is only limited by the need of a Protospacer Adjacent Motif (PAM) sequence. 
PAM helps Cas9 bind to the correct location on the DNA. Cas9 enzymes from different bacteria have 
different PAM sequences. Normally the Cas9 used comes from Streptococcus pyogenes. For S. pyogenes the 
PAM sequence is NGG [68]. CRISPR mediated deletion are performed by co-transforming the target 
organism with two plasmids, a standard deletion plasmid and a plasmid encoding Cas9 and the target 
specific sgRNA. The CRISPR-Cas9 system will make a DSBs and the deletion plasmid will act as an 
extrachromosomal template for homologous recombination [68].  
1.7.2 Quantitative PCR 
Individual genes in a biosynthetic gene cluster can have different expressions depending on how much of 
the gene product is necessary for making the SM, but the expressions will follow the same pattern. If there 
is a high production of the SM, the expression of all the genes will be higher than if there is low production. 
The genes flanking the cluster both up and downstream will have other expression patterns than the ones 
in the cluster. The border of a biosynthetic gene cluster can be determined by measuring the concentration 
of mRNA for the genes suspected to be part of the cluster and for the flanking genes [28]. In conditions 
where the SM is produced there will be an expression of cluster genes, and in conditions where there is no 
production of the SM, the gene cluster will be silent. The flanking genes are expected to have the same 
expression in both conditions.  
A technique for measuring mRNA expression is quantitative PCR (qPCR) also called real-time PCR. The first 
step is to purify the mRNA from the sources. It can be the same fungal strain grown on two different media 
where only one of them stimulates SM production. Alternatively the sources can be a genetically modified 
strain and a reference grown on the same media. Purification of mRNA is a delicate procedure as mRNA is 
an unstable molecule that easily breaks down due to elevated temperatures or contact with RNases. After 
purification, the mRNA is converted to complementary DNA (cDNA) [70]. This is done both because the 
cDNA is more stable than the mRNA and because DNA is needed for the qPCR. The enzyme reverse 
transcriptase uses the mRNA as temples for cDNA synthesis. Reverse transcriptase needs primers to initiate 
the reverse transcription. To obtain a full transcription of all mRNA in a sample it is necessary to have 
universal primers that will bind to all mRNA. The oligo dT primers anneals to the poly-A tail of mRNA. 
Together with random-hexamers-primers oligo dT primers cover most of the mRNA [71].  
Quantitative PCR differ from standard PCR by measuring the concentration of double stranded DNA 
(dsDNA) after each round of amplification. Fluorescence is used to measure the dsDNA concentration. 
There is either used unspecific fluorescence dye that binds to all dsDNA or specific fluorescence that only 
bind to specific fragments of dsDNA. SYBER green is an example of an unspecific fluorescence; it has to be 
bound to dsDNA before it emits fluoresce [71]. The advantage with SYBER green is it is relatively 
inexpensive compared to the specific dyes, and it can be used no matter the target sequence. The broad 
binding of SYBER green unfortunately also means it will bind to primer-dimers, giving an overestimation of 
==PAGE:27==
the cDNA start concentration. In a qPCR, the fluoresce will increase in correlation with the dsDNA 
concentration. A qPCR instrument finds the Cycle threshold (Ct) by registering the number of PCR cycles it 
takes to generate a fluorescent signal significantly above the noise level in the qPCR [70]. In absolute 
quantification, the total amount of starting cDNA is worked out from the Ct with the assistance of a 
standard curve for the target gene. The standard curve can be difficult to make as it requires known start 
concentration of the target gene. In relative quantification, there is no need for a standard curve. Instead, 
the Ct of one or more reference genes will be used to find the relative expression of the target gene [70]. 
The reference genes are often so-called housekeeping genes, which theoretically have the same expression 
level no matter which changes are made elsewhere in the genome [71].  Two of the most used 
housekeeping genes are hhtA encoding histone 3 and actA encoding gamma-actin [72].  
1.8 Analytical Chemistry  
When a biosynthetic gene cluster is expressed in a fungus or other organisms, the resulting SM is often 
produced in a minute quantity making the compound challenging to detect. The process of linking a 
biosynthetic gene cluster with its SM dependent on researchers being able to precisely identify the 
compounds (Nielsen et al., 2011). A wide variety of methods have been developed towards this goal. The 
methods used in the thesis starts by extracting the SM produces by A. sydowii with an organic solvent to 
extract them.  
For chemical analysis of samples in the thesis used a combination of Ultra High-Performance Liquid 
Chromatography (UHPLC), Diode Array Detection (DAD), and Quadrupole Time-of-Flight (Q-TOF)-Mass 
Spectrometry (MS). The three processes are connect and the sample passes from the UHPLC through the 
DAD to the Q-TOF-MS. In the UHPLC the molecule are Initially separated based on physical-chemical 
properties, then the DAD create a UV spectrum for compounds containing conjugated double bonds. The 
Q-TOF-MS is capable of detecting molecular masses with an ultra-high accuracy after they have been 
ionized [73]. A more detailed explanation of the three analytical technique is found in the following section.  
1.8.1 High-Performance Liquid Chromatography 
Chromatography is techniques used for the separation of the different chemicals found in a sample. In 
liquid chromatography (LC) the compounds in the sample are dissolved in a liquid solvent. LC consist of a 
mobile and stationary phase, the stationary phase is a soild packed within the column as seen in Figure 19. 
The column is linked with a type of detector, for example, a MS as seen in Figure 19.  
==PAGE:28==
 
Figure 19: Method for liquid chromatography. The central part of liquid chromatography is the column. Particle with in the column 
compose the stationary phase. Molecules in a sample interacts with the stationary phase (to the left in the figure). The molecules 
are flushed out (eluted) at different times by a liquid mobile phase. The column is connected to a detector, in this case a mass 
spectrometer. Inspired by [74]  
The samples are injected at the top of a column. Compounds in a sample have different affinity for the 
stationary phase based on their physical-chemical properties, e.g., compounds with the same polarity as 
the stationary phase have a higher affinity for the column than the compounds with the reverse polarity.  
The mobile phase flushes out the compounds at different time intervals dependent on their affinity. For the 
earlier types of liquid chromatography, gravity was used to force the mobile phase through the column. 
HPLC is a specific type of liquid chromatography where pressure is used to force the mobile phase through 
the column that contain small particles. The technique is more efficient than only using gravity, as the 
compounds are flush through column faster [75,76].  
By varying, the mobile or stationary phase different degrees of separation can be achieved. The ideal 
combination to choose depends on the nature of the compounds of interest. The earliest method used for 
HPLC is Normal Phase (NP). In this method, the column has a polar stationary phase and is eluted with a 
nonpolar mobile phase. Another method is ion-exchange systems, where a charged column binds 
oppositely charged chemicals. Release from the column is initiated when changes in pH lead to a neutral 
column. The most commonly used HPLC method is reversed-phase (RP). It is called reversed-phase because 
the mobile phase is polar and the stationary phase is nonpolar opposite to NP [77]. RP is well suited for the 
separation of neutral compounds which covers many SM. The mobile phase is typically water mixed with 
acetonitrile or methanol [75]. Better separation is achieve if the compounds in samples are neutral. As 
many SM have an acid group there will often be a need to add a small amount of acid to the mobile phase 
to lower its pH to ensure that such SM are neutrally charged [78]. Most RP columns consist of small silica 
beads with nonpolar side chain bound to the surface. The silica particles make for a stable column that can 
be used for a long time. Various types of side chains are employed to give the stationary phase different 
==PAGE:29==
qualities. The most common are fully saturate C18 chains [74]. An advantage with RP is that it is relatively 
simple to gradually decrease the polarity of the mobile phase. The mobile phase will initially consist mostly 
of water and then steadily increase the proportion of nonpolar part, for example acetonitrile. By using, a 
gradient for the mobile phase a single column can separate a broader range of molecules [75].  
 
 
Figure 20: Schematic overview of gradient capable High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). For gradients, the liquids in 
the mobile phase are in separate flasks. The mix is achievde by the liquids having their own pumps. The samples are in sample tray 
where an autosampler automatically suck op the samples. To maintain constant temperature the column is placed in an oven. Diode 
array detection (DAD), and mass spectrometry (MS) detects the compounds after separation. Figure adapted from [75]  
In Figure 20, a schematic overview of an HPLC machine. The function of the parts in the HPLC machine are 
listed below [75,76].  
 
Mobile phases: For HPLC runs with gradient the individual solvents for the mobile phase are in 
separate vessels 
 
Pumps: Individual pumps for mobile phase chemicals solvents the gradient.  
 
Degasser: Before entering the HPLC machine the liquids have to be degassed for air bobbles not to 
interfere with the readings. 
 
Autosampler: Automatically control when a new sample is run on the HPLC, making it easier and 
quicker to run large quantities of samples.  
 
Column: The column is located in the  machine so it is simple to change. 
 
Column oven: The temperature of the column has a significant influence on the stationary phase’s 
affinity. The column oven ensure consistent temperature throughout the running time and can also 
provide elevated temperatures when required.  
 
Detectors: HPLC machines are coupled to one or more forms of detectors. In Figure 20, the 
detectors are DAD and MS. MS is a destructive analytic process, so it is vital that nondestructive 
==PAGE:30==
analytic processes are placed before the MS. Nondestructive detectors are used if the object of the 
HPLC is to purify compounds. 
 
1.8.2 Diode Array Detection 
Molecules with Conjugated Double Bonds (CDBs) can absorb light at different wavelengths dependent on 
the level of conjugation. This gives many compounds with CDBs a Ultraviolet/ Visible light (UV/Vis) 
spectrum that can aid in identifying the compound [78].  
1.8.2.1 
Conjugated Double Bunds and Colors  
A double bound between two carbon atoms requires both atoms to be sp2 hybridized whereby each atoms 
contribute with a π orbital. The two π orbitals combine to give a bonding molecular orbital, with two shared 
electrons that constitute the second bond in a double bond, and an antibonding molecular orbital. The two 
electrons from the π orbital are in the Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO) and the Lowest 
Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO) is free of electrons. For compounds with only one double bond, the 
situation is as in Figure 21 A. If the molecule is hit with a photon carrying energy corresponding to the 
difference between HOMO and LUMO, one of the π electrons can jump from the HOMO to the LUMO, as 
seen in Figure 21 B. This is called a π to π* transition [79].  
 
Figure 21: Absorbtion of light by conjugated double bonds. A and B: In a doublet bond, two atoms each contribute with a π electron 
to form bonding molecular orbital. The π electrons are in the HOMO. With the proper amount of energy, an electron can jump to the 
(LUMO. Light with the right wavelength can be absorbed by the double bond and provide the energy for the π to π* transition. C: If 
a molecule have multiple conjugated double the energy in the HOMO will increase as the energy in the LUMO decrease, lessen the 
energy difference (ΔE) between them.  
For a molecule with many CDBs, the energy difference between HOMO and LUMO will be smaller than for a 
molecule containing few conjugated double (Figure 21 C). As wavelength and energy are inversely 
proportional to each other, lower energy will correspond to a higher wavelength, see equation 𝐸=
ℎ∙𝑐
𝜆. 
==PAGE:31==
With a high enough number of CDBs the energy difference between HOMO and LUMO gets small enough 
for a molecule to absorb wavelength in the visible spectrum, seen in Figure 22 B. When a molecule absorbs 
light at one wavelength in the visible spectrum the color is not reflected back from the molecule. The 
removal of one wavelength from the white light gives a color to the molecule [79].
 
Figure 22: UV/Vis spectrum of Chlorophyll b. A: The pigment Chlorophyll b, in the top of the figure,  is an example of a molecule with 
a high number of conjugated double bonds. The pigment absorbed both in the blue and red part of the visible spectrum, leaving only 
the green colors to be reflected. B: The wavelengths in the visible spectrum goes from 400 to 780 nm, flank by the ultraviolet and 
the infrared spectrum. [79] 
As an example, the UV/Vis spectrum for the plant pigment chlorophyll b is shown in Figure 22 A. 
Chlorophyll b have a high absorbtion at around 450 nm corresponding to blue light, and lower absorbtion 
at about 550 nm, 600 nm, and 675 nm in the orange and red colors. The combination of absorbtion leave 
only the green wavelengths to be reflected. Chlorophyll b and other pigments are the reason leaves appear 
green [79,80]. 
The compound class TC has a tetracyclic carboxamide core containing double bonds in the ring structure 
and the ketone groups, many of which are conjugated. The TCs absorb light in the ultraviolet spectrum as 
well as light with wavelengths around 400 nm. Bacteria and fungi that produce TCs will often color growth 
medium yellow or orange. The UV/Vis spectrum for the core structure of TCs is shown in Figure 23.  
==PAGE:32==
 
Figure 23: UV/Vis spectrum for tetracyline carboxamide core. The core of TCs give them a characteristic UV/Vis spectrum. The TC 
absorb at tree wavelengths in the UV spectrum (≈232 nm, 275 nm, and 342 nm) and at around 400 nm in the visible spectrum. The 
absorbtion of blue wavelengths give TCs a yellow color. The UV/Vis spectrum I the figure are made with the program MassHunter.   
1.8.2.2 
Diode Array Detection 
UV-detection works by continuously shining a light through a flow cell connected with a HPLC setup. A 
photocell detects the amount of light passing through the mobile phase. By comparing the results from the 
photocell with a reference, the absorbance can be calculated [81]. In the early days of UV-detection, only 
one fixed wavelength was used at a time. A wavelength of 254 nm from a low-pressure mercury lamp were 
widely used. In a diode array detection (DAD), several wavelengths can be detected at the same time. In 
Figure 24 a schematic drawing of a DAD is shown. UV and white light is emits from a light source. A slit 
ensures that the light only travels in one direction as it encounters the flow cell. The light that is not 
absorbed by the molecule in the solvent hits a diffraction grating that breaks up the light after wavelengths. 
An array of photodiodes measures the intensity of the wavelengths [82].  
 
Figure 24: Diode array detection (DAD). A light source emits light in the UV/Vis spectrum. The light passes through a slit directional 
the light. A solvent with sample passes through a flow cell. Molecule with conjugated double bonds absorbed specific wavelengths. 
The unabsorbed light hits a diffraction grating that break up the light after wavelengths. A photodiode array measurer the intensity 
of all wavelengths  after they have gone through the flow cell, from there the absorbtion can be calculate. Figure adapt from [82] 
==PAGE:33==
1.8.3 Mass Spectrometry 
Mass Spectrometry (MS) is a technique to precisely isolate and identify the mass of compounds in a 
sample. With a highly accurate mass, a potential formula for the molecule can be estimated [83] [73]. In MS 
liquid samples have to be vaporized and the compounds ionized [84]. For this thesis electrospray ionization 
(ESI) was employed to obtain the charged compounds. In addition to separation based on molecular 
charge, ions can be divided according to on their masses. For this thesis Time-of-flight (TOF)-MS has been 
used. In TOF the particles are all affected by the same amount of energy, why particles with a higher mass 
take longer to travel the same distance than particles with lower mass. The results of TOF-MS are given as 
mass-to-charge ratio [m/z] of the molecules in the sample. Figure 25 is an outline of an ESI-Q-TOF-MS, as 
the one employed in this thesis, the various part of the equipment will be explained in the following 
section.  
 
Figure 25: Overview of the most significant part of the ESI-Q-TOF-MS- employed for analysis in this thesis. In ESI molecules in a 
sample are ionized as the sample solvent evaporates. In the QP ions with unwanted m/z discarded. In the collision cell collision gas 
collides with the ions to make charged figments. In the TOF ions are pushed with equal amount of energy and are divide after mass. 
Figure adapt from [85].  
1.8.3.1 
Electrospray ionization 
ESI as an atmospheric pressure ionization technique, one of the more gentle forms of ionization that do not 
lead to high fragmentation of compounds as other ionization techniques does [73]. In the setup used for 
this thesis, the samples were injected into the mobile phase from the HPLC that was connected to the MS. 
The solvent has to be evaporated to protect the equipment from overload. In ESI the evaporation is part of 
the process that ionizes the compounds. The ESI consist of a capillary in stainless steel, see Figure 26, to 
which is applied a high voltage (e.g., 2.5 - 6.0 kV). At the end of the capillary is a funnel which spreads the 
solvent. This cause the liquid to form droplets as it is reaches the end of the electrospray. The outgoing 
droplets have the same charge as the capillary given two forms of ESI, one where there is made positive 
ions (ESI+) and one where is negative ions (EIS-) [84,86]. By ionizing a sample using both positive and 
negative ESI mode additional compounds might be ionized [78]. After the electrospray the ion stream pass 
through a slit that only allows ions traveling in lengthwise direction to pass [86].  
==PAGE:34==
 
 
Figure 26: Proces for ES). The molecules are dissolved in liquid, here the mobile phase from the HPLC. The solvent flows through a 
highly charged capillary with a funnel at the end. The solvent exits the funnel as a spry of fine droplets. A superheated gas dry the 
solvent and the droplets decrease in size. Inside the droplets ions are form. At the critical point  the surface tension of the droplets 
cannot hold in the ions. As the leavings the droplets they will end in a gasses phase [84,86]. Figure adapt from [87]  
A superheated drying gas is used to evaporate the solvent leading to the droplets rapidly decreasing in size. 
As ionized molecules inside a droplet are forced into close proximity, the compounds will interact with ions 
to become ionized adducts such as [M+H]+ and [M+Na]+, see Figure 27. The droplets keep the same surface 
charge as the dimension go down until a critical point where the electric field strength within that the 
surface tension is broken and the newly formed ions are ejected to make a gaseous phase (Figure 27). The 
stream of ions is guided towards the next step in the MS by a pressure and potential gradient [84,86].  
 
Figure 27: Ionization of molecules in ESI positive mode. As the droplets leves the electrospray they are a mix of solvent, larger 
molecules from sapmle, and small ions as H+ and Na+. The size of the droplets rapily decrease as the solvent evaprorate. The 
molecules and the ions are drive closely together the ion are forced into association with molecules given them a charge. As the 
charge of the newly formed ions exceed the surface tension thye exited into the gas phase. Figure adapt from [84,86].  
==PAGE:35==
1.8.3.2 
Quadrupole  
When the molecules are charged, their movement can be effected by electrical and magnetic fields. This is 
used to guide the ions through the MS. A “quadrupole”, in connection MS, refers to four parallel metal 
rods, which provide an alternating electrical field, controlling the flight of ions The rods are connected in 
pairs with opposite charge [85]. The charges switches with a set frequency, as indicated in Figure 28 B. The 
Ions travelling in the z-direction between the rods will oscillate with the alternating electrical field in the 
x/y-direction, see Figure 28 A. Only compounds with specific m/z will have a stable trajectory through the 
quadrupole without getting defect into the rods, this way unwanted masses can be eliminated. By altering 
the frequency different masses will pass through the quadruple. If the masse of compound of interest is 
known, a quadruple can sort out background noise and simplify the analysis [86].  
 
Figure 28: Concept of quadruple (QP) in Mass Spectrometry. A: An alteration electric fields between four parallel metal rods affect 
the flight pattern of ions. The ions will oscillated in the x/y-direction as they travel in the z-direction. B: The metal rods are link two 
and two, with an opposite charge between them. The oscillating of the ion is a achieve by changing the charge of the rods in a set 
frequency. Figure A adapt from [86].  
1.8.3.3 
Collision cell 
Fragmentation of molecules can give important information about structure of unknown compounds. To 
introduce fragmentation most MS systems have a collision cell, as seen in Figure 29. In the cell, a collision 
gas flows the opposite direction of the ions. Collation of the gas with the charge molecules (precursor-ion) 
resulting in fragmentation and the creation of product-ion. The process are called collision-induced 
dissociation (CID). The collision cell used for the thesis can vary the degree of CID by using different level of 
collision energy, mostly 10, 20, and 40 eV. The collision cell are sometime followed by an additional 
quadrupole to sort the daughter ions. The quadrupole-collision cell-quadrupole configuration gives data 
know as MS/MS in literature [85,86].  
 
 
Figure 29: Collision cell. Ions enter an octopole ion guide that secure that the ion travel the right path. Collision gas is blown in the 
opposite direction of the ions. When ions and gas collide, the gas can knock out part of the ion generating new fragment ions. 
[85,86] 
==PAGE:36==
1.8.3.4 
Time-Of-Flight-Mass-Spectrometry  
The final stage of the analysis is the time-of-flight (TOF) MS, as seen in Figure 30. In the first step of TOF, 
the ions are supplied with an equal amount of kinetic energy from a pusher which accelerates the ions in 
the y-direction [85]. As the particles already have a velocity in the x-direction, they will fly through the TOF 
at an angle until the particles hit the reflector and are reflected towards the detector [88].  
 
Figure 30: TOF-MS. Ions are supply with kinetic energy from a pusher. Ions with higher mass have a lower velocity than Ions with 
small masses. When the ions hit the detector their flight time is measured and from there the [m/z] of the ions can be calculate. The 
ions have velocity in the x-direction before they are pushed in the y-direction resulting in the ions flight at an angle. Because of the 
angled flight path the ions will not hit the pusher when they are reflected back from the reflector. Figure adapt from [89] 
The time it takes for an ion the travel the distance from pusher to detector is recorded and from there the 
velocity of the ion can be determined. The lighter ions travel faster that the heavier ions. From the formula 
for kinetic energy, 𝐸𝑘𝑖𝑛=
1
2 𝑚𝑣2, the velocity of the molecule depends on the kinetic energy that have 
been supplied and the molecule mass. The mass of the compound can be calculated, since the kinetic 
energy supplied is constant and the velocity can be derived from the time of flight [90,91]. 
1.8.4 Processing data from HPLC-DAD-TOF-MS 
The results from DAD and MS are converted to signals that can be processed by a computer. Many 
programs have been developed for the interpretation of MS and DAD data. The examples in the following 
sections are from the program MassHunter Qualitative Analysis B.07.00(Agilent) which is the program used 
for data processing in the current project. 
Throughout the MS run, the total number of ions are recorded, regardless of [m/z}. In a Base Peak 
Chromatogram (BPC) only the intensity of the most abundant ion is shown (Figure 31). In a BPC it is easier 
to see at which time points different compounds eluted. The different peaks seen in Figure 31 comes from 
==PAGE:37==
the way compounds was retained by the HPLC. BPCs are good for comparisons of two or more samples as it 
is easy to various in peaks.  An example could be; if there are several candidates for synthesizing a single 
SM, and they are all deleted in different strains. The correct gene will be the one for which the SM peak in 
the BPC disappears in the deletion strain.   
 
Figure 31: Base Peak Chromatogram (BPC). The back arrow points to a peak with a top at elution time 8.1 minutes. The mass 
spectrum for the elution time is shown in Figure 32. 
For each time point in the BPC, there is a mass spectrum for all the eluted ions. A peak marked with a black 
arrow in Figure 31 has its highest intensity at elution time 8.1 minutes. The corresponding mass spectrum is 
displayed in Figure 32.  
 
Figure 32: Mass spectrum at reaction time 8.1 minutes. Mass-to-charge differences between common adducts in mass spectrums.  
In a mass spectrum, the ions are divided according to their [m/z] and the count of ions determines the 
intensity of the signal. The challenge of analyzing a mass spectrum is to figure out which of the [m/z] are 
adducts of the same compound. The different adducts are made in the ionization process [92]. The most 
common adduct and losses for ESI in positive mode are shown in Table 1. The adduct pattern can be used to 
deduce which tops belong together and with this information is possible to work out what the 
monoisotopic mass of the compounds [73].  
Table 1: The most commonly seen adduct and losses for electrospray ionization in positive mode [73,92]. *the isoprenoid is not a 
normal loss but significant for this thesis.  
Adduct 
Mass [Da] 
Difference from [M+H]+ [Da] 
H 
1.0078 
- 
Na (very stable) 
22.9898 
22 
NH4 
18.0344 
17 
==PAGE:38==
H + CH3CN 
41.0265 
41 
Na + CH3CN 
64.0163 
63 
K (very stable) 
28.9637 
38 (16 relative to Na) 
Losses 
Mass [Da] 
Difference from [M+H]+ [Da] 
H2O 
18.0106 
18 
CO2 
43.9898 
44 
CH2CHO 
44.0262 
44 
HCOOH 
46.0055 
46 
CH3COOH 
60.0211 
60 
C5H9 (Isoprenoid)* 
69.1250 
68 
 
 Some adducts are more common than others. For ESI in a positive mode the most frequently observed 
adduct are [M+H]+, [M+Na]+, [M+K]+, and the losses of water [M+H-H2O]+. The common adducts make 
recognizable patterns that can aid in the identification of adducts, see Figure 32. The [M+H-H2O]+ and 
[M+Na]+ adducts have a mass difference of ≈ 40 Da between them. The [M+H]+ lies roughly midway 
between them, ≈ 18 Da heavier than [M+H-H2O]+ and ≈22 Da lighter than [M+Na]+. This constellation is 
relatively easy to find in a mass spectrum. Another useful method is to look for the ≈22 mass difference 
between [M+H]+ and [M+Na]+ and then find the [M+K]+ adduct that lies ≈48 Da from [M+H]+ and ≈16 amu 
from [M+Na]+. All the adducts are not always produced which makes it hard to find compounds. A solution 
is to run the ESI in both positive and negative mode as this creates different adducts [78].  
If the mass of the compound of interest is known, MassHunter can be used to search for the specific mass 
or range of masses, by making an Extracted Ion Chromatogram (EIC), see Figure 33. If there are many peaks 
in the BPC, an EIC is a good way to see if the compound of interest is in the sample. The EIC are also used 
when more compounds are eluted overlapping. In Figure 33 an EIC for the [m/z] 401 is shown. The green 
line shows the count for ions with a [m/z] of 401 ± 0.5. The dotted orange line is a part of the BPC also seen 
in Figure 33. With the help of the EIC, the vague peak at 8.1 minutes becomes a well-defined peak. There 
also appears a small peak for a compound with the same [m/z] at 7.9 minutes which in the BPC was 
completely concealed.  
 
 
Figure 33: Extracted Ion Chromatogram (EIC), for the m/z 401, with the BPC it is extracted from. The green line is the EIC on top of 
the BPC shown as a dotted orange line. The EIC has two peaks for m/z 401, one of which cannot be seen in the BPC.  
==PAGE:39==
1.8.4.1 
MS/MS 
For MS/MS collision gas are used to fragment precursor-ion to product-ion. The data from MS/MS helps 
with resolving the structure of an unknown molecule. Specific side groups are more inclined to be lost 
when ions fragment, then others. The most seen losses are in Table 1. MassHunter can make a MS/MS 
spectrum for the product-ion belong a specific precursor-ion. Some side groups are stronger associated 
with the core molecule then others, to get them to fragment is necessary to use a higher CID. Most MS 
have tree degree of fragmentation with CID of 10, 20, or 40 eV. In Figure 34 are the MS/MS spectrum for 
product-ion with a [m/z] of 443.1968. The mass loss for tree product-ion are see in Figure 34.  
 
Figure 34: MS/MS spectrum. The figure show some of the most commonly formed product-ion when a precursor-ion is fragmented. 
The spectrum are made with a CID of 10 eV.  
1.8.4.2 
Isotope Pattern 
Some of the atoms frequently found in SMs exist natural as more than one type of isotope. The 
incorporation of isotopes in SMs gives rise to small variation in mass that can be seen as isotope patterns in 
mass spectrums. Elements like carbon, chlorine, bromine, and sulfur all have recognizable isotope patterns 
there can be used to determine if the elements are present in the SM. Both the present and the absence of 
isotope patterns can be used to limed the number of possible formula for an unidentified compound. 
 
Figure 35: Isotope patterns in mass spectrum. The compound have a monoisotopic mass of ≈401 in the [M] top. In [M] all the carbon 
is carbon-12. In the [M+1] one carbon in every molecule is a carbon-13. The present of a heavier isotope give a mass shift.  
In Figure 35 is a close-up of a mass spectrums showing the isotope patterns of a compound. The first tope is 
made up by the most abounded isotope for each element in the molecule, in Figure 35 is give the 
[monoisotopic mass for [M+H]+. Approximately 1.1 % of the carbon found in nature are carbon-13 where 
rest is carbon-12. The M+1 top in Figure 35 contents all molecules where one of the carbon is a carbon-13. 
The higher the M+1 top is compared with M, the more carbons are in the molecules, as more carbons given 
higher likelihood for one of them being carbon-13.  
==PAGE:40==
1.8.4.3 
UV-spectrum 
DAD measures the absorption of all compounds that passes through the DAD on the way from the HPLC to 
the MS. For compounds with CDBs the absorption is given in a Total Wavelengths Chromatogram (TWC), 
see Figure 36. A compound goes through the DAD before the MS, so there will always be a shift between the 
reaction time for a compound in the TWC and the BPC or the TIC, as seen in Figure 36.  
 
Figure 36: Total Wavelengths Chromatogram (TWC) and BPC. The BPC is shown at the top of the figure in orange. The TWC is seen 
in the bottom of the figure in blue. The delay between a compound being analyzed in the DAD and the MS gives a shift in reaction 
time between TWC and BPC. The two black arrows point at the same compound to illustrate the difference in reaction time.  
It is possible to make a chromatogram for only one wavelength or a range of wavelengths in an Extracted 
Wavelength Chromatogram (EWC). Some classes of compound have a core structure with conjugated 
double bonds. The core structure is general conserve regardless of which other modification a made in the 
molecule. EWC can be used to find presumptive new compound with in a class based on their absorption 
[78]. In this thesis the objective is to find new tetracyclic compounds, which have absorption at 400 nm.  
Figure 37 shows an EWC for 400 nm (orange line), on top of the TWC from Figure 36 (black dotted line).  
 
Figure 37: Extracted Wavelength Chromatogram for absorption at 400 nm. The EWC is the orange line. The TWC that the EWC is 
extracted from is the dotted black line.  
Many molecules with CDBs have absorbances at more than one wavelength, giving them a recognizable UV 
spectrum that can be used in the identification of the compound. The EWC only tells that there is 
==PAGE:41==
absorption at a specific wavelength, it says nothing about if the molecule also absorbs at other 
wavelengths. By integrating a whole peak in the EWC, a UV spectrum can be created, as seen in Figure 38. 
The yellow peak seen in the upper right corner of Figure 38 is the integrated peak. The integration gives the 
UV spectrum seen in Figure 38, Which shows absorption at 400 nm as well as at ≈230 nm, ≈275 nm, and 
≈315 nm.  
 
 
Figure 38: UV spectrum for the peak between 8.150 and 8.870 min. The small chromatogram in the top right corner is a section of 
the EWC in Figure 37. The peak that lies between 8.150 and 8.870 min is integrated, and is marked in yellow. The resulting UV 
spectrum is shown in orange. In the UV spectrum, there is absorption peaks at ≈230 nm, ≈275 nm, ≈315 nm, and ≈400 nm.  
1.8.4.4 
Dereplication 
Fungi synthesize many different SM so the results for a sample run through an HPLC-DAD-Q-TOF-MS setup 
will show many compounds. A vital part of the analyzing process is to find compounds there is already 
known, the process is called dereplication. When searching for novel compounds, dereplication helps 
narrow down the number of candidates by identifying the ones there have been seen for the strain before 
or known from other organisms [93]. Dereplication utilizes all the information gathered in HPLC-DAD-Q-
TOF-MS. The most important clues are the mass given by the MS. For masses with high accuracy there a 
limited number of possible formulas for the compounds. Both the masses and formulas can be used to 
search databases. Information from HPLC-DAD-MS and taxonomy knowledge are used to assess potential 
hit from the databases [78]. If the compound has a UV/Vis spectrum, hits without CDBs can be eliminated. 
The isotope pattern of the adducts can give clue to which atoms are and are not in the compound. By 
looking at the MS/MS data, it can be determined which side groups have to be part of the structure before 
a hit can be considered. If the compound has been found in a fungus sample, it is highly unlikely that hits 
from bacteria or plants are correct and vice versa. If a hit is from a closely related species, there is a high 
likelihood that the hit fitted with the compound from the sample. For the project have been used two 
databases; AntiBase, where the information comes from articles, and an in-house secondary metabolite 
and standard library (MPF-12)[73,94]. 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
2 Experimental Strategy 
The master thesis is part of a bigger ongoing project, which aims to find new TC compounds from fungi, as 
TC are potential antibiotics. Preceding the master thesis, there has been conducted a comprehensive 
bioinformatical study of biosynthetic gene clusters to find likely candidates for TC production. This master 
thesis will focuses on the gene 157033 found in the genome of Aspergillus sydowii. The gene 157033 has 
based on sequencing data been classified as a Type I iterative NR-PKS, the same type of PKS responsible for 
other fungal TCs. The hypothesis is that gene 157033 together with the surrounding genes constitute a 
cluster whose gene products can synthesize a TC. The working title of the cluster is tcl. To better 
understand the bioinformatical background for choosing gene 157033 the initial part of the thesis is a small 
version of the bioinformatical study focuses on only nine Aspergillus species. Two known TCs from fungi is 
TAN-1612 and viridicatumtoxin products of respectively the ada and the vrt cluster. The core PKS gene 
from the ada cluster will be used to mine the nine Aspergillus species after other Type I iterative NR-PKS. 
Protein-protein BLAST search with other pathway enzymes for TC will be used to see if any of the NR-PKS 
belong to potential TC clusters. For good candidate cluster the program EasyFig will be used to make a 
cluster-width comparison with the ada cluster, to assess wither or not the clusters produces novel 
tetracyclines. The tcl cluster will also be compared with the vrt cluster, using EasyFig. Comparison of the tcl 
cluster with ada and vrt cluster can hopefully tell more about the function of the other genes in the tcl 
cluster. Based on the function of the genes of the cluster a proposal for the folding of the molecule can be 
made.   
 
Experiment leading up to the master thesis has concluded that the tcl cluster is silent. Close to gene 157033 
the gene 183300 is located. The gene 183300 encode a transcription factor (TF) that probably controls the 
expression of the tcl cluster. The TF was integrated in another place in the A. sydowii’s genome with higher 
expression to create a TF overexpression (OexTF) strain. The OexTF strain will together with a reference 
strain be grown for seven days at 28 °C on agar plates. To see if the overexpression leads to the production 
of new SMs plug extraction will be used to sample the agar plates. HPLC, DAD and MS will be used in 
combination to separate the compounds in the samples and give information about the compounds in the 
form of UV/Vis absorption and [m/z]. The program MassHunter will be used for the analysis of the HPLC, 
DAD and MS results.  
 
If the chemical analysis results from the OexTF strain indicate that the hypothesis is correct, further work 
has to be done to identify all the genes in the cluster and confirm the tcl is responsible for the production of 
the TC compound. The first step is the delete of the gene 157033 encoding the PKS in the OexTF strain, 
creating an OexTF-PKSΔ strain. As gene 157033 is the suspected core gene in the tcl cluster, any new 
metabolites detected in the OexTF strain ought to disappear when the PKS is knocked out. The knockout is 
done by exchanging the PKS gene with a marker gene. Likewise, deletion strains for the other potential 
genes in the sif cluster will be made. When the new deletion strains have been made the same type of 
chemical analysis as performed for the OexTF strain will be done. Before the master thesis an initial growth 
experiment with the OexTF strain was performed. The experiment revealed many new metabolites were 
produced in the OexTF strain compared to the reference. To limit the number of metabolites made by the 
fungus it will be grown after the one strain-many compounds (OSMAC) principle on defined and rich media 
in both liquid and solid form over the course of three weeks. With regular intervals, samples will be 
extracted and analyzed with HPLC-DAD-Q-TOF-MS.  
==PAGE:43==
 
Another approach that will be used to map the boundaries of the tcl cluster is Real-time PCR. The OexTF 
strain and the OexTF-PKSΔ will with the reference strain be grown for three, five, seven, ten and 14 days on 
agar plates. On each sample day, the RNA will be harvested and converted to cDNA. Using qPCR the relative 
expression of RNA from the 157033 gene at the given days can be determined. For the day with the highest 
expression qPCR will be performed for all the possible genes in the tcl cluster. By observing, which genes 
have a low expression when gene 157033 is highly expressed it is possible to infer which gene does not 
belong in the cluster.  
3 Material and Method 
3.1 Bioinformatics 
3.1.1 Acquiring Query Sequences 
DNA and amino acid sequences were obtained from the National Center for Biotechnology Information 
(NCBI) database found at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. The gene cluster ada for TAN-1612 is in NCBI 
under the accession number JN257714, and was downloaded as a GenBank file. From there the AA 
sequence of AdaA could be localized and downloaded as a FASTA file. The accession number for AdaA is 
AEN83889. The amino acid sequence of AdaB and AdaC were fund in the same manner and have the 
accession numbers AEN83888 and AEN83887 respectively. The gene sequence for the vrt cluster was 
acquired from supervisor. The sequences are in appendix I.  
 
3.1.2 Gene Cluster Mining with AdaA 
Cluster mining with AdaA in the nine Aspergillus species A. aculeatus, A. carbonarius, A. brasiliensis, A. 
luchuensis, A. nidulans, A. sydowii, A. versicolor, A. wentii, and A. zonatus was conducted. The genome of 
the Aspergillus species is all in a database run by the Joint Genome Institute (JGI)1. For the individual 
species, a protein-protein BLAST was performed with the JGI database software. AdaA served as the query 
sequence against all the model proteins in the fungi. Standard settings for the BLAST tool proved by JGI 
were used. For A. brasiliensis, A. luchuensis, A. sydowii, and A. versicolor the BLAST hits selected were 
predetermined by a bioinformatical study made before the master thesis. For A. aculeatus, A. carbonarius, 
A. wentii, and A. zonatus a random BLAST hit with an E-value of zero and a subject covering of at least 80 % 
was selected, for A. nidulans two BLAST hits were selected. An in silico representation of potential gene 
clusters was made with the program CLC Main Workbench (CLC) (Qiagen). The PKS gene analog to AdaA 
was displayed in CLC flanked by 20,000 base pair up and downstream from the gene. The DNA sequences 
were from JGI. The genes within the range were annotated with ID in accordance with JGI annotation. 
When appropriate, the name or function of the genes were also noted. The annotated clusters are in 
appendix II.    
3.1.3 BLAST search in clusters 
The integrated BLAST tool in CLC was used to explore the clusters for analogs to AdaB and AdaC. To make 
the BLAST search, all the theoretical clusters were collected in a small database in CLC. The amino acid 
sequences of AdaB and AdaC were BLASTed against the translated nucleotide sequences of the clusters. For 
                                                          
1 http://genome.jgi.doe.gov/  
==PAGE:44==
the translation, the standard genetic code provided from CLC was used, and for BLAST, the standard 
parameters in CLC were used.  
3.1.4 Exploring genes in Tetracyline clusters 
The Python program EasyFig 2.2.2 was used to compare the clusters with the ada cluster from A. niger and 
the vrt cluster from P. aethiopicum. EasyFig gives a visual representation of the differences and similarities 
between the clusters. The query cluster (ada or vrt) and the cluster of interest were saved as annotated 
GeneBank files then uploaded to EasyFig as feature files. There two types of BLAST files were created; a 
blastn and a nblastx file. For the BLAST files to be made the GeneBank files have to be in the same folder. 
The BLAST parameters were set to Min. length 40 bp, max. e-Value 0.001 and min. Identity value 50 %. The 
resulting figures were saved as BMP picture files.  
3.2 Creation and verification of A. sydowii strains.  
For initiate cloning work there was used Escherichia coli DH5α. The new strains made for the thesis was 
made from the A. sydowii ASYD4. All strains used in the thesis are in Table 2.  
Table 2: List of strains used in experiments for the thesis. 
Strain 
Description 
Aspergillus sydowii 
ASYD4 
The standard A. sydowii strain used in lab. 
OexTF 
Derivative of ASYD4 overexpressing the 
transcription factor encoding gene 183300 
OexTF-pyrGΔ 
Derivative of OexTF with pyrGΔ 
OexTF-PKSΔ 
Derivative of OexTF with 157033Δ 
OexTF-FMOΔ 
Derivative of OexTF with 13949488Δ 
OexTF-PTAΔ 
Derivative of OexTF with 48554Δ 
OexTF-50Δ 
Derivative of OexTF with 48550Δ 
 
 
Escherichia coli 
DH5α 
Competent cells 
3.2.1 Media 
The recipes for the media used in molecular work and cultivation can be found in Appendix III. The media 
were sterilized by autoclavation (121 °C for 20 minutes). Ampicillin and uridine were added to media after 
autoclavation. Uridine was dissolved in water, and filter-sterilized through a 0.45 μm sterilized Q-Max 
syringe filter (Frisenette). Solid medium was made by adding 20 g/L of Bacto® agar to the medium before 
autoclavation. To cast plates the warm medium was distributed in plastic Petri dishes with 15 to 20 ml in 
each and dried under sterile conditions. The media are listed in Table 3. 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
Table 3: List of media used for both cultivation and selection. Recipes for media are in Appendix III. * Common media prepared by 
lab staff. 
Media 
Description 
LB-amp Solid/liquid 
Luria-Bertani medium with 100 μg mL-1 ampicillin. 
Selections and maintains of E. coli DH5α 
5-FOA Solid* 
Minimum medium with 5-fluoro-orotic acid. Selects  
for pyrGΔ mutant 
YPD-Uri 
 
TM Solid 
Transformation Media. Selections of A. sydowii strain. 
MM Solid/liquid 
Maintenance and cultivation of A. sydowii 
MM-Uri Solid 
Maintenance and cultivation of A. sydowii pyrGΔ 
YES Solid/liquid* 
Cultivation of A. sydowii 
CYA Solid/liquid* 
Cultivation of A. sydowii 
Oats Solid/liquid* 
Cultivation of A. sydowii 
Rice* 
Cultivation of A. sydowii 
Beans* 
Cultivation of A. sydowii 
3.2.2 Plasmids for transformation of A. sydowii 
For transformation of A. sydowii deletion and CRISPR-plasmids were made, see Table 4. The deletion-
plasmids consist of a pU2002 plasmid and an Up and Down DNA fragments specific for the target gene. The 
CRISPR-plasmids have plasmid pFC332 as a backbone and contain the three CRISPR-fragments CIS-1, CIS-2, 
and CIS-3 coding the protospacer sequence for the target gene. In preparation for USER-cloning, both 
plasmids pU2002 and pFC332 were digested. 34 µl of plasmid solution was mixed with two µl PacI 
restriction enzyme (New England BioLabs), and four µl CutSmat buffer (New England BioLabs), incubated at 
37 °C overnight (O/N). Next day was added one µl PacL and 2µl Nb. BbvVI (New England BioLabs).  
Table 4: Plasmids used and made during the thesis. Plasmid maps of pU2002 and pFC332 are in appendix IV, together with an 
example of deletion and CRISPR-plasmid. 
Name 
Description 
pU2002 
E. coli plasmid. Backbone contains origin of replication for E. coil and ampR. Have pyrG 
gene from A. fumigatus flank with direct repeats. Contains two USER- cassettes. 
pMβLΔ 
Made from pU2002 with Up and Down DNA fragments for 1394988 deletion 
pFMOΔ 
Made from pU2002 with Up and Down DNA fragments for 1394988 deletion 
pPTAΔ 
Made from pU2002 with Up and Down DNA fragments for 48554 deletion 
p58Δ 
Made from pU2002 with Up and Down DNA fragments for 34258 deletion 
p50Δ 
Made from pU2002 with Up and Down DNA fragments for 48550 deletion 
pFC332 
Ama-plasmid. Backbone  contains origin of replication for E. coil, ampR, pryG, cas9. 
Contains two USER- cassettes. 
pFC332-FMO 
Made from pFC332 and have two protospacers targeting 1394988 
pFC332-PTA 
Made from pFC332 and have two protospacers targeting 48554 
pFC332-50 
Made from pFC332 and have two protospacers targeting 48550 
 
==PAGE:46==
For PCR amplification of UP and Down fragments to deletion-plasmids were used gDNA from ASYD4 as 
templet. For CRISPR-fragments amplification the templet was plasmid Pac902. The DNA fragments made 
for the plasmids are in appendix V along with the primes required from the PCR reactions. The primer 
introduced USER overhang for the DNA fragments. For the PCR reactions was used the polymerase enzyme 
X7. The recipe for the standard PCR mix and standard PCR protocol are in appendix VI. The concentration of 
DMSO and MgCl2 were modified if standard PCR mix did not yield a product. The PCR was run on T100TM 
Thermal Cycler (Bio-red) PCR machine.  
The plasmids with their associated DNA fragments were assembled by USER-cloning. In appendix VII are the 
recipes for USER-mix and the USER-protocol.  Both types of plasmids were transformed into and amplified 
with competent DH5α E. coli cells. For the USER-protocol was uses a PCR machine. After the USER-protocol 
was carried out the cell was grown on LB-amp plates O/N. Colonies were selected and grown O/N in liquid 
LB-amp. One ml of O/N culture was mixed with 1:1 glycerol and kept at – 80 °C as cryostoc. The plasmids 
were purified from E. coli O/N culture with ZyppyTM Plasmid Miniprep kit (Zymo resarch) following the 
provided protocol. On the purified plasmids were perform restriction analysis to determine if the right DNA 
fragments were inserted. For CRISPR-plasmids 2 µl plasmid solution was mixed with two µl 3.1 buffer (New 
England BioLabs), 5.5 µl water and 0.5 µl BspE1 restriction enzyme (New England BioLabs). The mix was 
incubated at 37 °C for two h. For deletion-plasmids was made a mix with 20 µl plasmid, solution four µl 3.1 
buffer, 15 µl water and one µl SwaI restriction enzyme (New England BioLabs) and incubated at 25 °C for 2-
3 h. The enzyme was inactivated at 65 ° for 20 minutes. The digested deletion-plasmids was purified with 
ZymocleanTM Gel DNA recovery kit (Zymo resarch) following standard protocol.  
3.2.3 Transformation of A. sydowii  
The OexTF strain was grown on 5-FOA plates to selected for pryG mutations. Colonies were inoculated on 
MM and MM-Uri plates. For a mutant not growing on MM plates, there was made three-point stabs on two 
MM-Uri plates for protoplastation. The MM-Uri plates were incubated for a week at 28 °C. For 
protoplastation and transformation Were used the protocol Genetic transformation of filamentous fungi 
(in-house) with some modification. All the buffers and solution used can be seen in the protocol. The 
suspensions were grown for two days in YPD-Uri media at 30 °C and 150 rpm to achieve sufficient mycelial 
concentration. The biomass was harvested through sterile Mira cloth. The biomass was diluted up to 40 ml 
with APB in a falcon tube and overlaid with 50 % ATP. The falcon tubes were centrifuged with a Heraeus 
Multifuge X1R centrifuge (Thermo Scientific) for 13 minutes a 3,000 g, with with the acceleration at setting 
nine and deacceleration at setting four. Protoplasts were withdrawn from the interphase between the two 
liquids. The protoplast was pelleted and dissolved in one ml ATP and after that aliquoted in 200 µl portions, 
kept at -80 °C.  
For transformation was used the digested deletion-plasmids either by themselves or together with the 
CRISPR-plasmids. As positive control was also conducted by transformating with the pPLAT plasmid. The 
recipe of the transformation mixes and the transformation are in appendix VII. After transformation, the 
protoplasts were plated on TM plates and grown for seven days at 28 °C. Colonies were inoculate on MM 
plates with three-point stabs.  
The mutations in the A. sydowii strains were verified with two types of spore PCR. The primers are listed in 
appendix VIII, as well as the recipe for PCR mix. As templates were used spores from MM plates. A small 
amount of spore and mycelia was transfer to PCR mix in a PCR tube with a sterile pipette tip and mixed by 
==PAGE:47==
pipetting up and down. The spore PCRs were run in three dilutions made in the manner shown in Figure 39. 
For difficult PCR verification 3 ml YPD media was inoculated with spores and grown for three days at 30 °C 
and 150 rpm. Genome DNA was purified from the culture with "Fast gDNA from Fungi " kit (in lab kit) with 
the standard protocol. The two types of PCRs were then conducted with gDNA as template. 
 
Figure 39: Dilutions of spores for spore PCRs.  
3.3 Quantitative PCR 
The ASYD4, OexTF, and OexTF-PKSΔ strains were grown on YES plates. After three, five, seven, ten and 14 
days of growth RNA was purified from the colonies. The purification was done with the RNeasy Plus Mini kit 
(Qiagen). The RNA purification consists of scraping the biomass in the colony from the plate with a sterile 
scalpel. The biomass put in a 2 mL tube with two three mm sterile steel balls and frozen in liquid nitrogen. 
The tubes were then run on a TisssueLyser LT (Qiagen) for one minute at 45 Hz. Then there was added 350 
µl RLT-plus with β-MeOH. Form there was followed the protocol from the RNeasy plus Mini kit. The RNA 
samples were stored at -20 °C. For converting RNA into cDNA was used the SensiFAST™ cDNA Synthesis Kit 
(BioLine). The RNA samples from each day were diluted, so the RNA concentration was the same for all 
three strains to a maximum of 900 ng RNA per sample. The SensiFAST™ cDNA Synthesis Kit protocol was 
followed to make cDNA. The cDNA was stored at -20 °C. 
All the qPCR reaction was run on CFX-ConnectTM Real-time system (Bio-Red) with the PCR mix and protocol 
seen in appendix IX. The primers used for qPCR runs are also in appendix IX. For every day and every strain, 
there was made a dilution series for the cDNA zero, five, 25, 125, and 625 times, with water. For all 
deletions, there was run qPCR for gene hhtA. The qPCR runs for the dilution series gave a trend line for the 
Cq value from which the optimal dilution of the samples was calculated. For the samples from day three 
where uses a 125-time dilution and for the remaining samples was used a 50-time dilution. For every day 
and every strain, there was run qPCR reactions with primers for gene hhtA and gene 157033. For day three 
and day five was run qPCR reactions for the genes hhtA, actA, 408188, 48550, 34253, 92454, 183300, 
134988, 48554, 157033, 34258, 134993, 80817, 34262, and 208061.  
3.4 Chemical analysis of A. sydowii strains 
For chemical analysis of strain grown on agar plates there was used plug extraction. Plugs were taken from 
different spots in the colony, as seen in Figure 40, with a drinking straw. The extraction was done by adding 
one ml isopropanol-ethyl acetate (1:3) with one % formic acid to the plugs and immersing them in an 
ultrasound bath for one hour. A nitrogen dryer was used to vaporize the extraction solution. The samples 
were resuspended in 100 µl methanol and were treated for 15 minutes in an ultrasound bath. 
==PAGE:48==
 
Figure 40: Location for plug extraction 
For liquid cultures plus rice and beans, liquid-liquid extractions were conducted. The liquid cultures were 
treated for 15 minutes in an ultrasound baht. SMs were extracted from liquid cultures plus rice and beans 
with 200 ml ethyl acetate with one % formic acid for one to two hours.  The top liquid with the organic 
solvent was poured into a blue cap bottle through a filter. A 1.5 ml sample was taken from the extraction 
and vaporized with a nitrogen dryer. The samples were resuspended as described for plug extraction. Both 
types of samples were spun down, and 60 µl was transferred to 200 µl HPLC vials. The samples were 
analyzed using LC-DAD-Q-TOF-MS. The equipment used was an Agilent 1290 Infinity UHPLC with an Agilent 
Poroshell 120 Phenyl Hexyl 2.7μm, 250×2.1mm, column maintained at 60°C. The injection volume was 1μl. 
There was run reverse phase HPLC with a linear water-acetonitrile (both buffered with 20mM of formic acid 
(FA)) gradient starting at 10% ACN increased to 100% ACN over 15min. The rate was maintained for 2.5 
minutes before returning to starting conditions in 0.1 minutes and equilibrating for 2.4min before the next 
run (0.350 ml/min). UV was set to measure at 210 and 280nm. The DAD measure the spectrum from 200 to 
60 nm. The UHPLC was connected to an Agilent 6545 Q-TOF LC/MS with electrospray ionization (ESI) source 
operating in both positive and negative modes. Data was collected for masses within the range of m/z 30-
1700. For analyzing of the data was used Agilent MassHunter Qualitative Analysis B.07.00 software. For 
dereplication purposes were used the databases Antibase12 and the in-house secondary metabolite and 
standard library MPF12.  
4 Results and Discussion 
4.1 Cluster Mining for AdaA analog in Aspergillus 
The master thesis is part of a bigger project looking for TCs in Aspergillus. In connection with the TC thesis, 
there has been conducted a comprehensive bioinformatics study to find clusters that potentially produce 
TCs. To better understand how the bioinformatics study was performed the first part of the master thesis is 
a small bioinformatics study of nine Aspergillus species. In the hope of detecting new TC clusters not 
previously described, the focus was species that only recently have been sequenced. The genomes of A. 
nidulans were published in 2012 [95]. The remaining seven species A. aculeatus, A. brasiliensis, A. 
luchuensis, A. sydowii, A. versicolor, A. wentii, A. zonatus, and A. carbonarius were all published in 2017 
[96,97]. Genes in the ada cluster from A. niger encode the enzymes necessary for the synthesis of TAN-
1612. The core gene is adaA gene encoding a NR-PKS. The amino acid sequence of AdaA was used to mine 
the nine Aspergillus species for genes analogous to adaA. The adaA-like NR-PKS gene may be part of a 
cluster producing a TC. The JGI database was used to conduct a protein-protein BLAST search with AdaA in 
==PAGE:49==
the nine Aspergillus species. For each species, one or two BLAST hits was chosen. In Table 5 are the result of 
the BLAST search with AdaA.  
 
Table 5: Results of nine Aspergillus species mined with the protein sequence of PKS AdaA. For each species is the gene ID of a BLAST 
hit together with the scores of the BLAST hit. 
Strain 
Gene ID (PKS) 
Score 
E-Value 
Ident [%] 
Subj. Cov. [%] 
A. aculeatus 
33832 
4.211 
0 
51.8 
85.8 
A. brasiliensis 
71307 
8.437 
0 
94.5 
95.8 
A. luchuensis 
68040 
8.506 
0 
95.1 
96.0 
A. nidulans 
4290 (asperthecinkendt) 
6.132 
0 
71.3 
91.2 
6652 (monodictyphenone) 
4.227 
0 
51.3 
86.7 
A. sydowii 
157033 
5.869 
0 
67.8 
90.5 
A. versicolor 
115258 
6.177 
0 
71.3 
91.4 
A. wentii 
34272 
4.179 
0 
51.2 
84.8 
A. zonatus 
145059 
4.109 
0 
48.9 
90.3 
A. carbonarius 
7032 
2.918 
0 
42.3 
60.0 
 
The two PKS genes 4290 and 6652 found in A. nidulans have already been described and linked to clusters 
synthesizing the compounds asperthecin and monodictyphenone respectively. As the function of the genes 
4290 and 6652 are known, they are not interesting in regards to the master thesis and will not be 
considered further. For A. carbonarius, the chosen PKS gene 7032 was the BLAST hit with the best 
alignment score for AdaA. The alignment of AdaA covers only 60 % of the protein encoded by 7032. For the 
other Aspergillus the alignment covers from 85 % and up. Of the 60 % of the AdaA sequence alignment with 
the protein for 7032 only 42 % is identical. As the alignment for the protein encoded by 7032 is so poor 
compare with the other results see in Table 5 the 7032 is an unlikely candidate for a PKS that can make the 
backbone of a TC. Therefore, there will not be worked more with A. carbonarius. For the remaining BLAST 
hits in the other species the AdaA alignment covers most of the protein sequences, as previous stated. The 
covered part of the protein sequences is at least 49 % identical with AdaA. For the good BLAST hits in A. 
aculeatus, A. brasiliensis, A. luchuensis, A. sydowii, A. versicolor, A. wentii, and A. zonatus, there is a chance 
some of the PKSs are the starting point for a TC producing pathway.  To compare the surrounding genes 
with the other pathway genes in the ada cluster there was constructed theoretical clusters for the seven 
good BLAST hits. The theoretical clusters were constructed by downloading the DNA sequence for the PKS 
genes together with 20,000 base pair up and downstream for the genes. The in silica work was done with 
the program CLC Main Workbench (CLC). The theoretical clusters were annotated with the information 
found in JGI. The annotated clusters for A. aculeatus, A. brasiliensis, A. luchuensis, A. sydowii, A. versicolor, 
A. wentii, and A. zonatus are in appendix II. The range of 20,000 base pair from the PKS gene where used to 
ensure none of the possible genes in the cluster were left out. The theoretical clusters will therefor consist 
of too many genes, but a more precise extent of the clusters can be specified with further bioinformatical 
work. 
4.1.1 BLAST search for TC cyclization genes  
Having an adaA analog in a cluster does not guarantee that the Aspergillus have the genes required for 
synthesizing TC. The genes adaB and adaC encode respectively MβL-TE and FMO responsible for correctly 
==PAGE:50==
folding the fourth ring of TAN-1612 in A. niger. To see if any of the new clusters contains analogs to adaB 
and adaC genes in addition to adaA protein-protein BLAST was performed with both AdaB and AdaC as 
query sequences. The BLAST search was done in CLC. The results are in Table 6 and Table 7. The BLAST hits are 
listed by scores.  
 
Table 6: Results of protein-protein BLAST with AdaB as the query sequence. The program CLC Main Workbench perform the BLAST.  
Strain 
Gene ID 
Score 
Min E-value  
Max Identity (%) 
A. luchuensis 
41544 
1,538.00 
0.00 
91.29 
A. brasiliensis 
112553 
1,509.00 
8.64 x 10-164 
98.57 
A. sydowii 
92454 
1,148.00 
9.01 x 10-116 
70.00 
A. versicolor 
40811 
1,164.00 
1.43 x 10-100 
70.27 
A. zonatus 
72797 
748.00 
7.51 x 10-90 
47.94 
A. wentii 
102062 
785.00 
7.95 x 10-88 
47.34 
A. aculeatus 
33688 
747.00 
4.47 x 10-78 
50.96 
 
All the in silica construct clusters included a protein significantly identically to AdaB to give a BLAST hit in 
Table 6. The results can be divided into two groups. The results form A. luchuensis, A. brasiliensis, A. 
sydowii, and A. versicolor all have a high identity with the query sequence and low E-value. For A. zonatus, 
A. wentii, and A. aculeatus the identity is significantly lower and the E-value are higher. From the results in 
Table 6 it can be seen that the A. luchuensis, A. brasiliensis, A. sydowii, and A. versicolor clusters feature 
better analogs for the adaB gene than A. zonatus, A. wentii, and A. aculeatus.  
 
Table 7: Results of protein-protein BLAST with AdaC as query sequences. The program CLC Main Workbench perform the BLAST. 
Strain 
Gene ID 
Score 
Min E-value  
Max Identity (%) 
A. luchuensis 
41542 
1,953.00 
0.00 
96.44 
A. brasiliensis 
191317 
1,915.00 
0.00 
95.41 
A. versicolor  
130860 
1,300.00 
3.85 x 10-162 
62.04 
A. sydowii 
134988 
1,241.00 
3.56 x 10-154 
58.17 
A. wentii 
99620 
57.00 
0.74 
30.65 
 
For the adaC gene only A. luchuensis, A. brasiliensis, A. sydowii, A. versicolor, and A. wentii gave hit in the 
BLAST search, see Table 7. The theoretical clusters for A. zonatus and A. aculeatus did not have any gene 
encoding a protein with remotely the same amino acid sequence as the FMO enzyme. The theoretical A. 
wentii cluster only has a hit with a high E- score and low identity with the AdaC sequences. The 99620 from 
A. wentii are unlikely to encode a FMO enzyme with the poor BLAST results. A. luchuensis, A. brasiliensis, A. 
sydowii, and A. versicolor all have good results for the BLAST in Table 7. The genes 41542 and 191317 from 
A. luchuensis and A. brasiliensis both encodes an enzyme almost identical to the FMO enzyme encode by 
adaC. The Identities are around 95 % and the E-value is zero for both of them. The enzymes encoded by 
41542 and 191317 are likely a form of FMO. The results from the clusters in A. sydowii and A. versicolor are 
not as good as for A. luchuensis and A. brasiliensis. The identities are only around 60 %.  The genes 134988 
and 130860 probably still encode a type of FMO just not one as similar to the AdaC as the one form A. 
luchuensis and A. brasiliensis. A less similar FMO may suggest that the enzyme give a compound more 
==PAGE:51==
different from TAN-1612, than the FMO from A. luchuensis and A. brasiliensis. Based on their poor BLAST 
results for both the MβL-TE and the FMO enzyme the clusters from A. zonatus, A. wentii, and A. aculeatus 
are not expected to encode enzymes for the production of TCs, and consequently will not be study further. 
The clusters found in A. luchuensis, A. brasiliensis, A. sydowii, and A. versicolor all encodes version of the 
MβL-TE and the FMO thus the clusters have the genetic foundation for producing TCs when expressed.  
4.1.2 Cluster-width comparison with the ada cluster 
Few known clusters in filamentous fungi synthesize TCs. The ada cluster from A. niger is one of the few. By 
comparing the theoretical cluster made for A. luchuensis, A. brasiliensis, A. sydowii, and A. versicolor with 
ada, educated guesses can be made on the tailoring enzymes acting on the PKs which can help determine if 
the clusters have the potential to make a novel TCs. For the cluster-wide comparison, the Python base 
program EasyFig was employed. EasyFig gives a visual representation of the similarity in gene sequence 
between two clusters, as shown in Figure 41. Similar sequences are connected with a line. The broadness of 
the line indicates the length of sequences that are alike. The color of the line indicates which percentage of 
the base pairs match with the DNA sequences of the reference cluster. The lowest match shown in EasyFig 
figures is 50 %. For DNA sequences there are directly comparable the color gradient goes from blue (100 % 
match) to red (50 % math). Two gene sequences can also be similar in reverse if one of the genes are 
transcribed in the opposite direction. For inverted DNA sequences, the line is twisted, and the gradient 
goes from orange (100 % match) to yellow (50 % math). The four remaining theoretical clusters were 
compared with the ada cluster to decide which of them is the best candidate for producing a novel TC. In 
Table 8 is a list of the genes in the ada cluster and which enzymes they encode. For the figures in this 
section the ID number of the genes in the theoretical clusters are stated according to the annotation in the 
JGI database. When significant the annotated function of the gene is also given.  
 
Table 8: List of gene name in the ada cluster from A. niger with the name of the protein product and the acronyms of them.  
Gene name  
Enzyme/protein  
Acronyms 
adaR 
Transcription Factor 
TF 
adaA 
No-reducing type I iterative PKS 
NR-PKS 
adaB 
Metallo-β-lactamase-type thioesterase 
MβL-TE 
adaC 
flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent monooxygenase 
FMO 
adaD 
O-methyl-transferase 
O-MeT 
1178623 (transporter) 
Major facilitator superfamily transporter 
MSF-trans 
  
==PAGE:52==
 
Figure 41: Cluster-wide comparison of A. luchuensis cluster with the ada cluster in A. niger. The A. luchuensis centers around the PKS 
gene 68040. For the comparison have been done by the program EasyFig. Information about the genes in the ada cluster is in Table 
8. The genes in the A. luchuensis cluster are number according to the JGI database. When possible the name of the enzyme/protein 
type is also stated. Abbreviation in figure: Pb-like (Phenazine biosynthesis-like), TF (Transcription Factor), O-MeT (O-methyl-
transferase), FMO (flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent monooxygenase), MβL (Metallo-β-lactamase-type thioesterase), MSF-
Trans (Major facilitator superfamily transporter), Sugar-Trans (Sugar transporter), 2-HA-DA (2-Hydroxy acid dehydrogenase) and M-
DH (Malate dehydrogenase). 
The theoretical cluster from A. luchuensis that includes the PKS gene 68040 have in Figure 41 been 
compared with the ada cluster. Most of the genes in the A. luchuensis cluster have similar DNA sequences 
to the genes in the ada cluster. There is also a high degree of agreement between DNA sequences on both 
sides of the ada cluster. The A. luchuensis cluster seemingly has a version of all the genes in the ada cluster, 
not only the genes expressing the enzymes essential for synthesizing the four rings, but also the O-MeT 
enzyme. The cluster in A. luchuensis will likely make a TC with the same structure as TAN-1612 and 
therefore not a novel compound. As the master thesis is about finding novel compound, the A. luchuensis 
cluster will not be considered further.  
 
 
Figure 42: Cluster-wide comparison of A. brasiliensis cluster with the ada cluster in A. niger. The A. brasiliensis centers around the 
PKS gene 71307. For the comparison have been done by the program EasyFig. Information about the genes in the ada cluster is in 
Table 8. The genes in the A. brasiliensis cluster are numbered according to the JGI database. When possible the name of the 
enzyme/protein type is also stated. Abbreviation in the figure: O-MeT (O-methyl-transferase), FMO (flavin adenine dinucleotide-
dependent monooxygenase), MβL (Metallo-β-lactamase-type thioesterase), MSF-Trans (Major facilitator superfamily transporter), 
2-HA-DA (2-Hydroxy acid dehydrogenase) and M-DH (Malate dehydrogenase). 
The cluster with the 71307 PKS gene in A. brasiliensis are compared with the ada cluster in Figure 42. All 
the genes in ada cluster have analogs in the A. brasiliensis cluster, indicating that the enzymes from the A. 
brasiliensis cluster can carry out biosynthesis of a TC. As the A. brasiliensis cluster encodes analogs for both 
==PAGE:53==
the ring forming enzymes and the O-MeT, the SM from the cluster likely have a structure as the one for 
TAN-1612. According to the results in Figure 42 the A. brasiliensis cluster can be delimited to the genes 
37275, 112553, 191317, 71307, 37273, and 50855. All except for gene 37273 are analogs genes in the ada 
cluster. As 37273 lies between the PKS and the transporter analogs it may be part of the delimit cluster. The 
type of enzyme 37273 encodes is not known, but it is possible that it catalyzes modification of the TC core 
structure not seen in TAN-1612. With the additional gene in the A. brasiliensis cluster have the potential to 
make a novel TC and is an excellent candidate for further studies.   
 
Figure 43: Cluster-wide comparison of A. sydowii cluster with the ada cluster in A. niger. The A. sydowii centers around the PKS gene 
157033. For the comparison have been done by the program EasyFig. Information about the genes in the ada cluster is in Table 8. 
The genes in the A. sydowii cluster are number according to the JGI database. When possible the name of the enzyme/protein type 
is also stated. Abbreviation in figure: MSF-Trans (Major facilitator superfamily transporter), MβL (Metallo-β-lactamase-type 
thioesterase), TF (Transcription Factor), FMO (flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent monooxygenase) and PTA (prenyltransferase). 
The A. sydowii cluster with the PKS gene 157033 is in Figure 43 compared with the ada cluster. For the PKS 
gene 157033, the DNA sequence is analogous to the DNA sequence of the adaA gene. The alignment 
between 157033 and adaA is not as good as for the PKS genes in A. luchuensis and A. brasiliensis. The A. 
sydowii cluster contains genes corresponding to adaB and adaC. The 92454 gene for MβL in A. sydowii is in 
another location than in A. niger. The FMO encoding gene 134988 in A. sydowii are transcribed in the 
reverse direction of the FMO gene in A. niger. The match between the adaB and -C genes and their 
corresponding genes in the A. sydowii cluster are closer to 50 % than 100 % indicated by the red and yellow 
lines between the genes. According to Figure 43, the A. sydowii cluster do not encode any analog to the O-
Met. All the information suggests that the A. sydowii cluster makes a TC like molecule, but that the 
compound does not share similarity with TAN-1612 beyond the core part. The A. sydowii cluster may 
encode enzymes for a novel TC and is another excellent candidate for use in the master thesis.   
 
==PAGE:54==
 
Figure 44: Cluster-wide comparison of A. versicolor cluster with the ada cluster in A. niger. The A. versicolor centers around the PKS 
gene 886277. For the comparison have been done by the program EasyFig. Information about the genes in the ada cluster is in Table 
8. The genes in the A. versicolor cluster are number according to the JGI database. When possible the name of the enzyme/protein 
type is also stated. Abbreviation in figure: FMO (flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent monooxygenase) and MβL (Metallo-β-
lactamase-type thioesterase). 
The results of the cluster-wide comparison between the ada cluster and the A. versicolor cluster centered 
around the PKS gene 886277 are in Figure 44. The genes adaA, adaB, and adaC responsible for forming the 
core structure of TC have analogs in the A. versicolor cluster. As for A. sydowii, the identity of the analogs 
was at the lower end, and there was no gene encoding the O-MeT. The A. versicolor cluster’s enzymes can 
presumably make the TC core, but as with A. sydowii, there will be other side groups than for TAN-1612. 
The A. versicolor cluster is also a great candidate for biosynthesis of novel TCs.  
The cluster in A. sydowii has been identified as a good candidate in the previously mentioned 
comprehensive bioinformatics study. An A. sydowii strain (ASYD4) have already been domesticated for lab 
use, and some preliminary experiments have been conducted. It was chosen that the A. sydowii cluster was 
a good cluster to work within the master thesis.  
4.1.3 Cluster-wide comparison the vrt cluster 
In addition, to the ada cluster, the vrt cluster from P. aethiopicum express enzymes for TC synthesis [39]. 
The enzymes from the vrt cluster make viridicatumtoxin. In Table 9 are a list of the genes in the vrt cluster 
together the enzymes types they encode. A cluster-wide comparison of the A. sydowii cluster with vrt was 
made and are shown in Figure 45. Is was hoped that by comparing the A. sydowii cluster with an additional 
TC cluster there could be uncovered more information about the structure of the potential SM.  
 
 
==PAGE:55==
Table 9: List of gene name in the vrt cluster from Penicillium aethiopicum with the name of the protein product. 
Gene name  
Enzyme/protein  
vrtR1 
Transcription Factor  
vrtR2 
Zn(II)2Cys6 binuclear cluster DNA-binding domain 
vrtA 
No-reducing type I iterative PKS (NR-PKS) 
vrtB 
Acetoacetyl-CoA synthetase 
vrtC 
Aromatic prenyltransferase 
vrtD 
Trans-isoprenyl diphosphate synthases 
vrtE 
Cytochrome P450 
vrtF 
Methyltransferase domain type 12 
vrtG 
Metallo-b-lactamase superfamily 
vrtH 
UbiH and related FAD-dependent oxidoreductases 
vrtI 
Dioxygenases  
vrtK 
Cytochrome P450 
vrtL 
Major Facilitator Superfamily transporters 
 
 
Figure 45: Cluster-wide comparison of A. sydowii cluster with the vrt cluster in P. aethiopicum. The A. sydowii centers around the PKS 
gene 157033. For the comparison have been done by the program EasyFig. Information about the genes in the vrt cluster is in Table 
9. The genes in the A. sydowii cluster are number according to the JGI database. When possible the name of the enzyme/protein 
type is also stated. Abbreviation in the figure: MSF-Trans (Major facilitator superfamily transporter), MβL (Metallo-β-lactamase-
type thioesterase), TF (Transcription Factor), FMO (flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent monooxygenase) and PTA 
(prenyltransferase). 
The EasyFig results in Figure 45 show the same trend for the A. sydowii cluster compared with the vrt 
cluster as compared with the ada cluster. The A. sydowii cluster have analogs to the genes vrtA, vrtG, and 
vrtH encoding the enzymes responsible for making the four-ring core structure of. TAN-1612 and 
viridicatumtoxin are both TCs so the result was anticipated and are further evidence for the A. sydowii 
cluster encodes enzymes for a TC. The A. sydowii gene 48554 was by the JGI annotation as a type of 
prenyltransferase. The gene vrtC in P. aethiopicum encodes an aromatic prenyltransferase that catalyzes 
the attachment of a geranyl prenyl group to one of the aromatic rings in viridicatumtoxin. The EasyFig 
result in Figure 45 shows that the gene vrtC have similarity with the gene 48554. The similarity suggests 
that 48554 encodes an aromatic prenyltransferase acting on PKs.  
 
==PAGE:56==
4.1.4 Putative cluster in A. sydowii and putative structure of SM  
An important part of mapping a cluster is to narrow down the number of genes in the cluster and define 
the extent of the cluster. The core gene in the cluster is the PKS encoding gene 157033. According to the 
BLAST data and the cluster-wide comparison of the A. sydowii cluster with both ada and vrt the genes 
92454 and 134988 codes respectively for the enzymes MβL and FMO. The PKS, MβL, and FMO enzymes 
together make up a promising first part of a pathway, and their genes a most likely part of the same cluster. 
The genes 48554 and 183300 lies in between the genes for the ring forming enzymes. Typically, the cluster 
consists entirely of cluster-genes with no unrelated genes in between, so 48554 and 183300 are 
presumably also part of the cluster. The 48554 gene encodes a type of aromatic prenyltransferase like the 
one found in the vrt cluster. The 183300 gene is annotated as a TF. In both Figure 43 and Figure 45 the 
183300 gene show some similarity with the transcription regulator for the two clusters. Based on the 
alignments the gene 183300 is probably the TF that regulates the expression of the other genes in the 
cluster, and is itself part of the cluster. Biosynthetic gene clusters typically also include a transporter. There 
are two candidates for being the gene expressing the transporter, gene 34258 and gene 48550. Gene 34258 
is a candidate due to the gene location in the cluster. It sits just downstream of the PKS gene as is the case 
for the transporter in the ada cluster. The 48550 is by JGI annotated as an MFS transporter. Between gene 
48550 and gene 92454 lies gene 34253, whose function is unknown. Due to its location 34253 may be part 
of the cluster. In Figure 46 is the delimited A. sydowii cluster, flanked by both of the putative transporter 
encoding genes. During the thesis, the A. sydowii cluster seen in will be named tcl (tetracycline like cluster). 
 
Figure 46: Outline of the putative biosynthetic gene cluster tcl in A. sydowii. The red arrow denotes pathway genes, green arrow 
transcription regulators, dark blue arrow are putative transporters and light blue arrow denote genes with unknown function. The 
genes are number as in the JGI database. The function of a gene is stated under underneath the gene 
From the type of putative pathway enzymes encoded by a cluster is possible to predict the structure of the 
molecule synthesize by the enzymes. In Figure 47 are the proposed structure of the SM synthesized by the 
enzymes encoded by the genes in the tcl cluster from A. sydowii.  
 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
Figure 47: Putative structure SM (12) made by the enzymes encodes by the genes in the tcl cluster from. The core structure of the 
molecule is in black, and the prenyl side group is in dark red. The molecular formula of the molecule is C25H24O9, and the 
monoisotopic mass is 468.14032.  
The genes adaA and vrtA in A. niger and P. aethiopicum encodes a Type I iterative NR-PKS with PT domain 
belonging to Group IV. The core PKS gene 157033 in A. sydowii are similar to the adaA and vrtA genes, this 
suggested the PKS from gene 157033 catalyzes the same folding of a decaketide backbone as the PKSs from 
the adaA and vrtA genes. The enzymes MβL and FMO can together act on the decaketide and catalyze the 
formation of a fourth ring. The process is observed in the pathway for both TAN-1612 and viridicatumtoxin. 
As the tcl cluster also encodes MβL (92454) and FMO (1394988) the core structure of the molecule will by 
all accounts be the same as for TAN-1612 and Viridicatumtoxin. The core structure is given in black in Figure 
47. The tcl cluster has no gene for an O-MeT, so the molecule will not be methylated as TAN-1612 and 
Viridicatumtoxin. The tcl cluster does include an analog to the vrt cluster’s aromatic prenyltransferase 
encoded by the gene 48554. The core structure of the molecule in Figure 47 has two aromatic rings. The 
second aromatic ring is likely the target for the prenylation, as it is the second ring that a prenylated in 
Viridicatumtoxin. In Figure 47 the prenyl group is given as a hemiterpenoid in dark red. The molecule has 
the chemical formula C25H24O9 and a monoisotopic mass of 468.14032.  
4.2 Creation of tcl cluster deletion strains  
The putative tcl cluster, with gene numbers, are shown in Figure 46. Before the beginning of this thesis an A. 
sydowii strain (OexTF) overexpressing the 183300 gene had been created and verified. Attempts have also 
been made to delete the PKS encoding gene 157033 from the tcl cluster in the OexTF strain. However, the 
OexTF PKS deletion (OexTF-PKSΔ) strain has yet to be verified. Deletion strains have also been made for 
each of the three pathway genes 924454, 1394988, and 48554, encoding respectively a MβL-TE, a FMO and 
a PTA. The two genes 34258 and 485550 are both candidates for the gene encoding the transporter of the 
tcl cluster. Deletion strains for genes 34258 and 485550 have also been made. The method used for 
deleting genes consists of exchanging the gene of interest with a marker gene, via homologous 
recombination. The marker gene used for gene deletions is the pyrG flanked with DR. For PCR reactions 
were used gel electrophorese to verify the length of the DNA fragment. The electrophorese was run at 100 
V for 20 minutes on a 1 % agarose gel The length was estimate by comparing the location of the band with 
either a 1 kb (kilobase pair) or 100 base pair DNA ladder. Lengths of ladder bands are indicated in the 
figures.  
==PAGE:58==
4.2.1 PCR amplification of Up and Down fragments for gene deletion 
Purified gDNA from the A. sydowii strain ASYD4 was used as a template for PCR amplification of Up and 
Down DNA fragments for deletion plasmids for the genes encoding MβL-TE, FMO, PTA, and the two 
putative transporters. The results of the gel runs are shown in Figure 48. 
 
Figure 48: Gel electrophoreses results for amplification for Up and Down (Dw) DNA fragments, for use in deletion plasmids for the 
genes 92454 (MβL-TE), 139988 (FMO), 48554 (PTA), 34258, and 48550. As template were used gDNA from the A. sydowii strain 
ASYD4. 
The Up and Down DNA fragments have lengths ranging from 1.6 kb to 2.1 kb. In Figure 48 the products of 
all the PCR amplifications lies around two kb, indicating that all the Up and Down DNA fragments have been 
correctly synthesized. The exceptions are the Up fragments for the deletion plasmids targeting gene 34258 
and 48550, where there was no PCR product. The conditions for the two PCR reactions were altered, and a 
new gel electrophorese was performed, as seen in Figure 49.  
 
Figure 49: Gel electrophoreses results for amplification of Up DNA fragments, for use in deletion plasmids for the genes 34258 and 
48550. As template were used gDNA from the A. sydowii strain ASYD4.  
The changed PCR reactions both yielded a DNA fragment as seen in Figure 49. The lengths of the DNA 
fragments are between 1.5 kb and 2.0 kb, fitting with the expected lengths of the Up fragments for the 
deletion plasmids for both gene 34258 and 48550.  
==PAGE:59==
4.2.2 Cutting and nicking of pU2002 plasmid 
The parent plasmid used for the deletion-plasmid is pU2002. Before the plasmid was used forUSER-cloning, 
it wascut and nicked by the enzymes PacI and Nb. BbvVI. To assess if the cutting and nicking was successful 
the pU2002 plasmid was run on a gel electrophorese. The result of the run is shown in Figure 50.  
 
Figure 50: Gel electrophorese results for plasmid pU202 digested with 
 restriction enzyme pacI and nicking enzyme Nb. BbvVI. 
The plasmid have two restriction sites for PacI, so the digestion of the plasmid should give two bands on 
the gel electrophores. For pU2002 the expected length of the two DNA fragments were 2.9 kb and 2.2 kb, 
fitting with the bands in Figure 50.  
4.2.3 USER-cloning of deletion plasmids 
To prepare deletion plasmids for the genes 92454 (MβL-TE), 1394988 (FMO), 48554 (PTA), 34258, and 
48550 the pU2002 plasmid was used. The resulting deletion plasmids were named respectively pMβLΔ, 
pFMOΔ, pPRAΔ, p58Δ, and p50Δ. All the PCR amplified Up and Down fragments, as well as the digested 
plasmids, had USER-overhangs. USER-cloning and amplification of the resulting plasmids were carried out in 
E. coli. The E. coli transformants were grown on LB plates with ampicillin to select successful transformants. 
The plasmids were purified from E. coli colonies and with the restriction enzyme SwaI. Initially four E. coli 
colonies for each USER-cloning of pMβLΔ, pFMOΔ, and pPTAΔ plasmids were selected. None of the selected 
colonies contained plasmids with the correct inserts, so there were selected four new colonies. The results 
of the restriction analysis of putative pMβLΔ and pFMOΔ deletion plasmids are seen in Figure 51. For the 
pPTAΔ deletion plasmid, the results were again all negative. Eight new colonies were selected for the 
pPTAΔ deletion plasmid, in Figure 52  the results of the restriction analysis are seen. Plasmids were purified 
from eight E. coli colonies containing plasmids p58Δ and p50Δ to verify their assembly. The results of the 
restriction analysis for the eight putative p50Δ deletion plasmids are seen in Figure 54. For the putative 
p50Δ plasmids, none of the digested plasmids had a band on the gel electrophorese consistent with a 
correctly assembled p50Δ plasmid. In Figure 53  the results of restriction analysis of eight putative p58Δ 
plasmid isolate from new colonies are seen.  
==PAGE:60==
 
Figure 51: Restriction enzyme analysis of potential deletion plasmids for the genes 1394988 (FMO) and 92454 (MβL-TE) digested 
with swaI. Plasmids for both ΔFMO and ΔMβL-TE were purified from E. coli colonies number five to eight. Correct plasmids ought to 
have bonds at 5.9 kb and 2.8 kb for ΔFMO and 6.4 kb and 2.8 kb for ΔMβL-TE. 
Without insertion of Up and Down DNA fragments the pU2002 plasmid will give bands at 2.8 kb and 2.3 kb 
on a gel. The pFMOΔ deletion plasmid digestion with Swal given band at 5.9 kb and 2.8 kb. In Figure 51 the 
putative pFMOΔ plasmids purified from colonies #5, #6 and #7 all have bands fitting with a pU2002 plasmid 
without Up and Down. The plasmid isolated from colony #8 has the right inserts for a pFMOΔ deletion 
plasmid and will be used for transformation. For the putative pMβLΔ plasmids the ones purified from the 
colonies #5, #7, and #8 all have bands a little under the 3 kb and a little over the 2 kb. The bands fit with the 
pU2002 plasmid without Up and Down fragments. The putative pMβLΔ plasmid from colony #6, in Figure 
51, has two bands, one a little over the 6 kb and one a little over 2 kb, so the plasmid from colony #6 is a 
genuine pMβLΔ plasmid and can be used for transformation of A. sydowii.  
 
Figure 52: Restriction enzyme analysis of potential deletion plasmids for the gene 48554 (PTA) digested with swaI. Plasmids were 
purified from E. coli colonies number nine to 16. Correct plasmids ought to have bands at 6.0 kb and 2.8 kb. 
In Figure 52 are the results of the restriction analysis of eight putative PTAΔ deletion plasmids purified from 
E. coli colonies nine to 16. The plasmids from colonies #9, #10, #13, and #14 have bands matching an empty 
pU2002 plasmid. From colonies #11, #15, and #16 plasmids were isolated that only gave one band at 
approximately 3 kb, see Figure 52. The plasmids from colonies #11, #15, and #16 probably do not contain 
the correct inserts. It is expected that the pPTAΔ restriction analysis would give bands on a gel 
electrophorese at 6.0 kb and 2.8 kb. The plasmid from colony #12 has one band at approximately 3 kb 
fitting the expected 2.8 kb band. The restriction analysis of the plasmids from colony #12 in Figure 52 also 
has a band between the 6 kb and the 8 kb. This band is probably the expected 6.0 kb band. The plasmid 
==PAGE:61==
purified from colony #12 is most likely a correctly assembled pPTAΔ deletion plasmid and will be used for 
transformation of A. sydowii.  
 
Figure 53: Restriction analysis of potential deletion plasmids for the gene 34258 (putative transporter) digested with swaI. Plasmids 
were purified from E. coli colonies number nine to 16. Correct plasmids ought to have bands at 5.6 kb and 2.8 kb. 
The gel electrophoreses run of the restriction analysis for putative p50Δ plasmid in Figure 53 show that 
most of the plasmid only gave one of the expected two bands. The plasmids purified from the colonies #10, 
#14, and #16 gave two bands after enzyme digestion. The plasmid from colony #14 had one band at 
approximately 2.8 kb and one between 1.5 and two kb. The band pattern for a correct plasmid is a band at 
5.6 kb and 2.8 kb, so the plasmid from colony #14 is incorrect. The band pattern for the plasmids from 
colony #10 and #16 match the anticipated band pattern and were used for the deletion.  
 
Figure 54: Restriction analysis of potential deletion plasmids for the gene 48550 (putative transporter) digested with SwaI. Plasmids 
were purified from E. coli colonies number nine to 16. Correct plasmids ought to have bonds at 6.0 kb and 2.8 kb. 
4.2.4 Construction of CRISPR plasmid for pathway and transporter genes  
Many attempts were made to transform A. sydowii protoplast from the OexTF strain with the deletion 
plasmids, but all of them were unsuccessful. There was not formed any A. sydowii colonies. The problem 
does not seem to be with the protoplast as there was colony formation on the positive control. The reason 
for the lack of transformants can be that the target gene does not have any double-stranded breaks (DSBs) 
in their DNA. Without DSBs the fungus has little reason to perform homologous recombination. The 
==PAGE:62==
CRISPR-Casa9 system can introduce DSBs at specific DNA sequences. By co-transforming the protoplasts 
with a deletion plasmid and a CRISPR plasmid targeting the same gene it was hoped that the 
transformation rate would go up.    
The protospacers in a CRISPR plasmid determines where the Cas9 enzyme cuts the host DNA. The 
protospacers are introduced into the CRISPR plasmid via USER-cloning. For each CRISPR plasmid, three 
CRISPR-fragments was made, CRI-1, CRI-2, and CRI-3. As template for CRISPR-fragments the plasmid Pac902 
was used. The CRISPR-fragments were amplified by PCR. In Figure 55 are the result of gel electrophorese. 
 
Figure 55: Gel electrophoreses results for amplification of CRISPR fragment CRI-1, CRI-2, and CIR-3 for the genes 92454 (MβL-TE), 
139988 (FMO), 48554 (PTA), 34258, and 48550. As template  the plasmid Pac902 was used. The electrophorese was run at 100 V for 
40 minutes on a 2 % agarose gel. Reference for DNA length, 100 bp DNA ladder. 
The expected CRI-1 DNA fragments all have a length of 560 bp. On the gel for CRI-1 in Figure 55 there are 
two bands for all PCR reaction. The lower of the two bands, marked with a red square, lies between the 500 
bp and 600 bp. The fragments in the red square were purified and used in the construction of CRISPR 
plasmids. The CRI-2 and CRI-3 fragments are expected to have a length of respectively 180 bp and 400 bp. 
For the majority of the CRISPR fragments for CRI-2 and CRI-3 in Figure 55 the observed band length fit  the 
expected band length. The exceptions are the CRI-2 fragment for MβL-TE and the CRI-3 fragment for FMO, 
where there was no PCR product. For the FMO CRI-3 fragment, the conditions for the PCR reaction were 
modified resulting in the band in Figure 56. For the MβL-TE CRI-2 fragment it was necessary to design new 
primers before the PCR amplification yielded any product. The result is seen in Figure 56.  
==PAGE:63==
 
Figure 56: Gel electrophoreses results for amplification CRISPR fragment MβL-TE CRI-2 and FMO CIR-3. The gel electrophorese was 
run at 100 V for 40 minutes on a 2 % agarose gel. Reference for DNA length, 100 bp DNA ladder 
The new primers for the MβL-TE CRI-2 fragment gave a PCR product with a length of approximately 200 bp, 
in Figure 56, fitting with the anticipated band at 180 bp. In Figure 56 the PCR product for FMO CRI-3 has a 
band at roughly 400 bp, as expected.   
4.2.5 USER-cloning of CRISPR plasmid  
After the CRISPR-fragments were verified, they were USER-cloned into the vector pFC332. E. coli cells were 
transformed with the CRISPR-plasmids via heat shock to amplify the CRISPR-plasmids. To ensure that the 
CRISPR-fragments and the pFC332 vector were correctly assembled the CRISPR-plasmids were purified 
from the E. coil cells. There was conducted a restriction analysis of the CRISPR plasmids with the restriction 
enzyme BspE1. The results of the restriction analysis are shown in Figure 57 and Figure 58. For the gel 
electrophorese in Figure 57 the pFC332 plasmid without protospacers was included as a control.   
 
Figure 57: Restriction analysis of potential CRISPR plasmids pCF332-PTA, pCF332-FMO, pCF332-58, and pCF332-50 digested with 
BspEI. The plasmids were purified from E. coli colonies number one to five from the USER-cloning for each plasmid. Correct plasmids 
ought to have bands at 58.3, 3.5, 2.8, and 2.3 kb. To the left in the figure is plasmids pFC332 digested with BspEI, as a control. 
The gel in Figure 57 is of poor quality. Some of the bands are smeared, and it can be difficult to distinguish 
the bands. The protospacer parts of the CRISPR plasmids have to be sequenced, so it is not necessary to 
verify the CRISPR plasmids. The restriction analysis only has to find likely candidates for sequencing. 
Fortunately, the pFC332 plasmid was digested and can be used as a reference for the plasmids. For the 
==PAGE:64==
pF332-PTA restriction analysis, all of the tested plasmids have band pattern different from the one 
observed for the pFC332 control. The plasmid purified from colony #1 gave  clears bands, so it was selected 
for sequencing. In the restriction analysis for the putative pF332-FMO plasmids, only the plasmid isolated 
from colony #3 gave bands that were not entirely smeared. As the band pattern for the colony #3 plasmid 
was not the same as for the control, it was picked for sequencing. The plasmids purified from both pFC332-
58, and pFC332-50 colonies gave very poor bands in Figure 57. For most of the restriction analysis’s, it is not 
possible to make any interpretation. The putative pFC332-58 plasmid from colony #3 has some faint bands 
that can be used to see that the band pattern is different from the control, so it was selected for 
sequencing.  The putative pFC332-50 plasmid from colony #3 was sent for sequencing based on it being the 
only one of the plasmids that gave any visible bands.   
 
Figure 58: Restriction analysis of potential CRISPR plasmids pCF332-MβL digested with BspEI. The plasmids were purified from E. coli 
colonies number one to six. Correct plasmids ought to have bands at 8.3, 3.5, 2.8, and 2.3 kb. 
In Figure 58  the results of the restriction analysis for six putative pFC332-MβL plasmids are shown. 
Plasmids with protospacers should give four bands with the lengths of 8.3, 3.5, 2.8, and 2.3 kb. The 
plasmids purified from colony #3 and #5 provided the correct band pattern for plasmids with protospacers. 
The colony #3 plasmid was chosen for sequencing.  
4.2.6 Sequencing of CRISPR plasmids 
As the protospacers sequence directs the Cas9 enzyme to the place in the genome where the enzyme 
makes DSBs, it vital that the sequence of the protospacer is right. One of each constructed CRISPR plasmids 
were sent for sequencing to verify the protospacer sequence. 
==PAGE:65==
 
Figure 59: Alignment of sequencing results of Protospacer One and Protospacer Two from CRISPR plasmids pCF223-MβL, pCF332-
PTA, pCF332-FMO, pCF332-58, and pCF332-50. The top sequences of each alignment come from in silico plasmid maps. Middle 
sequences are the consensus sequences, and bottom sequences shows the sequencing results. 
The DNA sequences given by the sequencing results were compared with in silico plasmid maps with the 
CLC. The alignment results are shown in Figure 59. Each CRISPR plasmid contains two protospacer 
sequences, Protospacer One and Protospacer Two. Figure 59 shows the alignments for Protospacer One to 
the left and the alignments for Protospacer Two to the right. For the CRISPR plasmids pCF332-FMO, 
pCF332-PTA, and pCF332-50 the sequencing results showed no conflicts between the plasmid maps and 
DNA sequences. The three plasmids all have the correct protospacer sequences. For the sequenced 
pCF332-MβL and pCF332-58 plasmids, the alignments in Figure 59 show a high number of conflicts 
==PAGE:66==
between the DNA sequences from the sequencing and the sequences in the plasmid maps. The number of 
conflicting base pairs entail that the Cas9 enzyme will not be guided to the proper target sequences in A. 
sydowii’s genome. The plasmids pCF332-MβL and pCF332-58 are consequently not usable.   
4.2.7 Co-transformation of deletion and CRISPR plasmids increase transformation rate 
 Two transformations for the pathway genes and the two possible transporter genes were performed. One 
transformation was a co-transformation with both the deletion plasmid and the CRISPR plasmid. In the 
second transformation only the deletion plasmid was used. The two types of transformations were made to 
test the efficacy of CRISPR-mediated deletion versus standard deletion. As an control, protoplasts were also 
transformed with the plasmid pPLAT. In Table 10  the results of both types of transformations are shown.  
Table 10: Number of colonies on transformation plates. The OexTF protoplasts were transformed with either deletion plasmid by 
them self or co-transformed with deletion and CRISPR plasmids. 
Transformation 
Positive 
control pPlat 
1394988 
FMO 
48554 
PTA 
48550 
Putative transporter 
Plasmids 
22 
3 
0 
1 
Deletion [# colonies] 
Deletion, CRISPR  
 [# colonies] 
34 
21 
10 
 
The control transformation gave 22 colonies, so the protocol and the protoplasts were good. The results in 
Table 10 shows the effect of CRISPR mediated deletion. Without the CRISPR plasmid, the transformation 
was inefficient, and few colonies were formed. The transformations for genes 48554 did not give any 
colonies. In co-transformation with CRISPR plasmid, the transformations were far more efficient. Colonies 
were formed for all deletions strains, and the number of colonies increased. The results in Table 10, 
indicate that the DSBs introduce by the CRISPR-Cas9 system has a positive influence on transformation 
rate. 
4.2.8 Verification of deletion strains  
Spore PCR is one of the methods used to verify that the desired gene deletion has occurred. In spore PCR a 
scrape of spores is taken directly from the fungal colony on a plate and uses as a template for the PCR 
reaction. As fungal spores can contain compounds that inhibit PCR reactions the spore samples were 
diluted. Two sets of primers were used to test each deletion. The GapChk primer pair binds the 
chromosome upstream and downstream of the exchanged DNA sequence. If the deletion was successful, 
the resulting PCR product would have a different length than if the wild-type gene is still in place. For the 
other primer set UpChk the upstream primers binds to a DNA sequence conserved after the deletion. The 
downstream primer binds to a DNA sequence in the middle of the pyrG gene. The PCR reaction with the 
UpChk primers will only yield a product if the target gene has been exchanged with the pyrG gene. For the 
GapChk PCR reactions, a spore PCR of the ASYD4 strain were included as a reference. For some of the 
strains the PCR reactions yielded no results even after several attempts, for these, gDNA)was purified and 
the same PCR reactions were carried out with the gDNA as a template.   
 
 
==PAGE:67==
4.2.8.1 
Verification of OexTF-PKSΔ strain  
The molecular biology work for the putative OexTF-PKSΔ strain was accomplished before the master thesis, 
but the deletion was not verified. None of the spore PCRs gave any results, positive or negative, as the 
reactions yielded no PCR product. The outcome was the same when gDNA was used as a template. The 
putative OexTF-PKSΔ strain had another phenotype that the OexTF strain so it was expected that deletion 
of the PKS gene had succeeded. There was designed new primers for the GapChk and UpChk PCR reaction 
for the putative OexTF-PKSΔ strain. Even with the new primers, the spore PCR yielded no products, so 
gDNA was used at template. The results of are shown in Figure 60. 
 
Figure 60: Gel electrophoreses results for verification PCR of the putative OexTF-PKSΔ strain wilt gDNA from four different colonies, 
C1 to C4. To the left are the PCR reactions with the GapChk primer pair. To the right are the PCR reactions with the UpChk primer 
pair. For both reactions  the strain ASYD4 as a control were used. The GapChk wild-type fragment has a length of 6.1 kb, the PKSΔ of 
3.6 kb. A correct UpChk DNA fragment has a length of 4.4 kb. 
In the GapChk PCR reaction, in Figure 60 only the C3 colony do not have a band at the same length as the 
ASYD4 control. The band of C3 fits with the expected band of 3.6 kb. The PCR product from the C1 colony 
have bands matching  both the wild-type gene and the PKS deletion indicating that the C3 mutant is a 
heterokaryon. The two remaining colonies, C2 and C4 only have a band at the same length as the ASYD4 
control. The results of the UpChk PCR amplification support the results of the GapChk PCR reaction. Both 
the C1 and C3 colonies gave a PCR product at 4.4 kb, as expected for strains where the PKS gene has been 
exchanged with pyrG gene. To sum up the C3 colony was confirmed to be an OexTF-PKSΔ strain, 
overexpressed the TF encode by 183300 and lacking the PKS gene 157033. 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
4.2.8.2 
Verification of OexTF-FMOΔ strain  
The Co-transformation of OexTF strain’s protoplast targeting the 1394988 gene encoding FMO gave 34 
colonies. Four of the colonies were inoculated on MM plates until thye formed spores. Spore PCR was 
performed for two of the colonies. The results of spore PCRs are shown in Figure 61.    
 
Figure 61: Gel electrophorese results for spore PCR of the putative OexTF-FMOΔ strain from two different colonies, C1 and C2. To the 
left are the PCR reactions with the GapChk primer pair, with the ASYD strain as a control. To the right are the PCR reactions with the 
UpChk primer pair. The GapChk wild-type fragment has a length of 2.2 kb, the FMOΔ of 3.8 kb. A correct UpChk DNA fragment has a 
length of 4.4 kb.  
The two putative OexTF-FMOΔ colonies gave bands in both the GapChk and the UpChk spore PCR, as did 
the ASYD4 control in the GapChk reaction. The GapChk bands for the tested in Figure 61 are clearly 
different from the ones for the ASYD4 control, and have the anticipated length of 3.8 bp. The spore PCR 
with the UpChk primer set gives bands at the expected length of 4.4 kb. Both types of spore PCR confirms 
that the colonies C1 and C2 have the correct genotype of the OexTF-FMOΔ strain.    
4.2.8.3 
Verification of OexTF-PTAΔ strain  
Protoplast made from the OxeTF strain was co-transformed with the deletion and CRISPR plasmid for the 
PTA encoding gene 48554. The transformation gave 21 colonies, four of which were plated on MM plates. 
After the putative OxeTF-PTAΔ colonies had formed spores, scrape from the plates were used for spore 
PCR, with both GapChak and UpChk primers. The results of the PCR reaction with GapChk primers are in 
Figure 62. For the spore PCRs with UpChk primers, the results are shown in Figure 63.  
 
Figure 62: Gel electrophorese results for GapChk spore PCR of the putative OexTF-PTAΔ strain from four different colonies, C1 to C4 
As control the ASYD4 strain was used. The GapChk wild-type fragment has a length of 2.0 kb, the PTAΔ of 2.3 kb. 
All of the GapChk spore PCRs gave a band in the gel seen in Figure 62. The spore PCR of the ASYD4 control 
was expected give band with the length 2.0 kb; this fits with the band observed in Figure 62. All of the 
tested colonies gave a band at a length different from ASYD4. It was expected that the GapChk spore PCRs 
==PAGE:69==
of the putative OexTF-PTAΔ colonies would provide bands at 2.3 kb. The bands in the gel seems to be closer 
to three kb. As it is small differences in length, the bands at three kb are still good for verification. 
 
Figure 63: Gel electrophorese results for UpChk spore PCR of the putative OexTF-FMOΔ strain from four different colonies, C1 to C4. 
A correct UpChk DNA fragment has a length of 3.7 kb. 
The results for the UpChk spore PCRs for all the tested colonies are shown in Figure 63. All the PCR 
reactions gave a product. All the PCR product have a length between 1 and 1.5 kb. This does not match the 
expected length of 3.7 kb. In order for the PCR reactions to give a product the pyrG gene must by in the 
genome of the fungus as the reverse primer of the UpChk primer pair binds within the pyrG gene. The 
result of the spore PCR with GapChk primes are the most important of the two so the strain are still usable.  
4.2.8.4 
Verification of OexTF-50Δ strain  
The transformation of OexTF protoplasts gave ten putative OexTF-50Δ colonies. To find the genotype of the 
colonies four were plated on MM plates. Only colony C2 and colony C3 grew on the MM plates. Spore PCRs 
with both the GapChk and the UpCnk primer pairs were conducted for colony C2 and colony C3. The results 
are in Figure 64. 
 
Figure 64: Gel electrophorese results for GapChk and UpChk spore PCR of the putative OexTF-50Δ strain from two different colonies, 
C2 and C3. As a control for GapChk  the ASYD strain was used. The GapChk wild-type fragment has a length of 3.4 kb, the 508Δ of 
4.0 kb. A correct UpChk DNA fragment has a length of 3.8 kb. 
In Figure 64 the GapChk spore PCR for the control ASYD4 gave bands with expected length of 3.4 kb. Both 
of the putative OexTF-50Δ colonies tested gave bands at the expected 4.0 kb for the GapChk PCR reaction. 
For the UpChk spore PCR, both colony C2 and C3 gave bands a little under the four kb. The results of the  
GapChk and the UpChk spore PCRs confirm that the OexTF-50Δ strains isolated from colony C2 and C3 have 
the correct genotype. The OexTF-50Δ from colony C2 was used in further experiments.  
==PAGE:70==
4.3 Cluster delimitation with quantitative PCR 
The genes in a biosynthetic gene cluster are typically under the control of the same regulator and will be 
expressed under the same conditions. By measuring the amount of mRNA transcribed from the genes 
presumed to be part of the same cluster and the surrounding genes under different conditions the extent 
of the cluster can be delimitated. For this thesis, the quantity of mRNA was determined by qPCR. The 
expression of the putative tcl cluster genes and the surrounding genes were measured in three A. sydowii 
strains: The ASYD4 reference strain, where the tcl is not expected to be expressed. The OexTF strain, where 
the TF encode by 183300 is overexpressed which presumably would lead to the expression of the other 
genes in the tcl cluster. The OexTF-PKSΔ strain where the TF is still overexpressed and the PKS gene 157033 
of the tcl cluster have been deleted. The three strains were grown on YES medium ager plates at 28 °C. RNA 
was purified from A. sydowii colonies after three, five, seven, ten, and fourteen days of growth. Reverse 
transcription was used to convert the mRNA into cDNA. In qPCR the quantity of dsDNA is measured after 
each round of amplification with the fluorescence dye SYBER green. The Cycle threshold (Ct) is record by 
the qPCR instrument, when the fluorescence of SYBR green is significantly above the background 
fluorescence. For this thesis, the relative quantification for each of the tested genes were determined by 
respectively comparing the OexTF and the OexTF-PKSΔ strain with the ASYD4 reference strain. To be able to 
compare expression across strains the expression level was normalized in regards to the average expression 
of two housekeeping genes hhtA and actA. The normalization was done by subtracting the average Ct value 
of the reference genes from the Ct value of the tested gene.  
The qPCR measurements are more precise when the Ct value lies somewhere in the middle of the PCR run. 
The qPCR process for the experiments had 40 rounds of amplification, so the Ct values should preferably be 
in the twenties. As the Ct value dependents on the start concentration of cDNA in the samples, the Ct value 
can be changed by diluting the cDNA. At all time points for the three strains, there were made a dilution 
series with cDNA samples diluted 0, 5, 25, 125, and 625 times. The qPCR was run on a microtiter plate in 
triplicate with primers specific for the hhtA housekeeping gene. To achieve the best Ct values the day 3 
samples were diluted 125 times and the rest of the samples were diluted 50 times.  
4.3.1 Determined difference in expression over time 
As fungi grow the expression levels of different clusters can change. To find the time point where the 
expression of the tcl cluster is highest, there were taken RNA samples from the strains at day three, five, 
seven, ten, and 14 after inoculation. The expression level of the PKS gene 157033 in the samples taken from 
the three strains at the different days was used to determine the growth period leading to the highest 
expression of the tcl cluster. For each of the samples, there were conducted qPCR with primer sets for 
157033 and for the reference genes hhtA, all the qPCRs were run in triplicate on a microtiter plate. The 
expression level of 157033 was normalized with regards to the average hhtA Ct values. To determine at 
which day the greatest fold change of 157033 expression was obtained, the normalized Ct values from the 
OexTF strain were compared the Ct values from the ASYD4 strains giving the fold change seen in Figure 65.  
==PAGE:71==
 
Figure 65: The graph shows the relative fold changes for the expression level of the PKS gene 157033 after different times of grows. 
The highest relative expression was for day three and day seven was an outlier. 
In Figure 65 are fold change observed for the expression level of gene 155033 in the strain OexTF relatively 
to the ASYD4 strain at different growth intervals. Overall, the tendency for the fold change is to decrease as 
growth period gets longer. The relative expression level of in 155033 in OexTF begin high with a fold change 
of 94.2 observe after day three of growth. From day three to day five there is a large decrease in fold 
change from 94.2 to 18.5. The fold change for day ten and day 14 are at respectively 14.2 and 4.2 
continuing the trend. The only sample point not fitting with the overall tendency is a day seven. Here the 
expression level of gene 155033 only has a fold change of 0.2 when the TF is overexpressed. The low fold 
change for day seven indicates there is no transcription from the 157033. As the samples taken on the 
seventh day are in the middle of the experiment, it does not seem likely that the expression level will go 
down drastically from day five to seven just to go up again at day ten. It's more likely that something has 
gone wrong the day of the samples. The results from the day seven samples will, therefore, be disregarded. 
The comparison shows that as the strains grow for a longer time, the fold change goes down, which suggest 
that the expression of the tcl cluster decrease over time. Therefore it will be best to measure the 
expression of the genes in the tcl cluster in the samples taking at the beginning of the growth period. The 
samples from both day three and day five will be used to give more data.  
4.3.2 Expression of tcl cluster genes and surrounding genes 
From the bioinformatical study it is assumed that the tcl cluster contains the genes 92454, 183300, 
1394988, 48554, and 157033. Either gene 34258 or gene 48550 are expected to encode the transporter 
belong to the tcl cluster, if it is the 48550 gene the gene 34253 probably also belong to the tcl cluster.   
94.2
18.5
0.2
14.2
4.2
0.0
20.0
40.0
60.0
80.0
100.0
120.0
3days
5days
7days
10days
14days
Relative fold changes (Log)
Growth  time
Relative experssion level of 157033 at different time points
OexTF - ASYD4
==PAGE:72==
 
Figure 66: The presumed tcl cluster with surrounding genes. The genes marked in orange are presumed to be part of the cluster. 
There are two candidates for transporter encoding gene marked in red, together with the gene 34253. The genes assumed not to 
belong are marked in blue. The identification number for the genes comes from the JGI database, as do the annotation of the gene 
function of the most significant genes. 
In Figure 66 are the tcl cluster and the surrounding genes. For the three strains, there were run qPCR 
reactions for all the genes listed in Figure 66, as well as the two reference genes hhtA and actA. The cDNA 
from the day three and day five samples were used as a template. The qPCR reactions were run as previous 
described. The fold change for all the tested genes are in Figure 67 for the day three samples and in Figure 
68 for the day five samples.  
 
Figure 67: The bar chart shows the relative fold changes for the expression level of the genes presumed to be in the tcl cluster and 
the surrounding genes in two genetically modified strains compared with the ASYD wild-type strain after three days of growth. In 
dark orange are the relative fold changes for the OexTF strain versus the ASYD4 strain. In black are the relative fold changes for the 
OexTF-PKSΔ strain versus the ASYD4 strain. The expression of the genes expected to be in the cluster is higher than for the ones not 
in the cluster. *The fold changes of the 92454 gene have been divide by 100.  
Both the fold changes of the 92454 gene seen in Figure 67 have been divide by 100. As anticipated when 
the OexTF strain is compared with the ASYD4 strain, in Figure 67, there is an observable expression of the 
PKS gene 157033, with a fold changes of 10.1. The three other pathway genes 92454, 1394988, and 48554 
also presumed to be part of the tcl cluster show even higher expression than the 157033 gene, with fold 
1.0
0.4
2.2
1164.1
20.5
2670.6
7106.9
10.1
484.4
1.3
2.5
0.8
1.2
0.8
0.7
1.7
540.6
11.3
1375.6
5167.5
1.2
1.6
0.89
2.85
0.70
0.90
0.1
1.0
10.0
100.0
1000.0
10000.0
100000.0
Relative fold changes (Log)
Genes
Relative experssion level of genes day 3
OxeTF - ASYD4
OxeTF-PKSΔ -ASYD4
==PAGE:73==
changes of 11.6 x 104, 26.7 x 102, and 71.1 x 102. The high expression suggests that the three genes are part 
of the same cluster as 157033. The two candidate genes 34258 and 48550 have vastly different expression 
levels. The fold change for 48550 are less than one as seen in Figure 67. In relative quantification, a fold 
change under one, suggest that the gene is not expressed. If the 48550 is not expressed it is unlikely to 
encode the tcl cluster accompanying transporter. Further evidence for 48550 not being part of the cluster is 
that the gene 34253 lying between 48550 and the genes confirm to be in the cluster have low expression of 
2.2 indicate that 34253 is also not part of the cluster. The 34258 gene contrary have fold change at 484.4, 
higher than fold change seen for the PKS gene, this indicates that the 34258 gene could be part of the tcl 
cluster. The genes 408188, 134993, 800817, 34262 and 208061 surround the tcl cluster and are not 
presumably not part of the cluster. All the genes have expression level far lower than the one seen for the 
PKS gene in Figure 67. The low expression indicate that the genes are as expected not part of the tcl cluster.  
The comparison between the OexTF-PKSΔ strain and the ASYD4 strain is in Figure 67 show in black. The PKS 
gene 157033 are deleted in OexTF-PKSΔ so as anticipated there no significant expression of 157033 gene. 
The expression of the pathway genes 92454, 1394988, and 48554 are again high with fold changes at 54.0 x 
103, 13.8 x 102, and 51.6 x 102 respectively, further confirming that the genes are in the tcl cluster. All the 
genes that show low expression level when OexTF was compared with ASYD4 have an even lower 
expression when OexTF-PKSΔ is compared with ASYD4, showing the delimitation of the tcl cluster. An 
interesting change from the OexTF strain to the OexTF-PKSΔ is the fold change for the gene 34258. In Figure 
67 the fold change goes from 484.4 to 1.6 when the PKS gene is deleted. The product or products made by 
the tcl cluster in the OexTF strain is expected to be gone in the OexTF-PKSΔ strain, while the level of TF is 
assumed to remain the same. As the expression for 34258 decreases in the OexTF-PKSΔ strain, the 
expression level of 34258 may be dependent on the intracellular concentration of products or 
intermediates from the tcl cluster and not the TF.  
 
==PAGE:74==
 
Figure 68: The bar chart show the relative fold changes for the expression level of the genes presume to be in the tcl cluster and the 
surrounding genes in two genetically modified strains compare with the ASYD wile-type strain after five days of growth. In dark 
orange are the relative fold changes for the OexTF strain versus the ASYD4 strain. In black are the relative fold changes for the 
OexTF-PKSΔ strain versus the ASYD4 stain. 
In Figure 68 are given the fold changes in expression for all the tested genes in the day five sample, the 
results when the OexTF strain is compared with ASYD4, are given as dark orange bars and the black bars 
give the results for the OexTF strain is compared with OexTF-PKSΔ. From the results in Figure 65 is was 
expected that the expression of the 157033 gene in OexTF will be lower at day 5 than at day 3. The results 
in Figure 67 and Figure 68 support the assumption. After three days of growth the fold changes for the 
157033 is 10.1 and after five days it has decreased to 7.4. The expression level the rest of the genes 
assumed to be in the tcl cluster follow the trend set by the 157033 gene, as their fold change in Figure 68 is 
lower than in Figure 67. The observation that the expression level of gene 92454, 1394988, and 48554 
somewhat follows the expression of gene 157033 is further evidence that the genes are part of the same 
cluster. For the putative transporter genes, 34258 and 48550 the fold change was seen in Figure 68 for 
OexTF compared with both ASYD4 and OexTF-PKSΔ correlate well with the results seen Figure 67. The 
48550 gene had in all instances a fold change less than one and is not expressed as part of the tcl cluster. 
The 34258 gene is expressed in the OexTF strain as seen by the high fold change at 190.7 and is not 
expressed when the PKS gene is deleted.   
The expression level of the genes 408188, 134993, 800817, 34262 and 208061 which are not presumed to 
be part of the tcl cluster, have changed when going from three to five days of growth. For the day three 
samples the expression level of all the genes range from minute to not at all. After five days of growth, the 
expression of the genes ha increased for the OexTF strain, while there is no significant change in the 
2.4
0.7
2.9
2820.6
7.7
1281.2 1691.0
7.4
190.7
3.4
10.0
13.9
3.5
0.6
0.3
0.8
999.6
3.8
363.4
1054.8
0.7
1.1
0.56
1.92
1.10
0.51
0.0
0.1
1.0
10.0
100.0
1000.0
10000.0
Relative fold changes (Log)
Genes
Relative experssion level of genes day 5
OxeTF - ASYD4
OxeTF-PKSΔ -
ASYD4
==PAGE:75==
expression for the OexTF-PKSΔ strain. The genes 408188, 134993, 800817, 34262 and 208061 are not 
following the decreasing expression of the gene 157033 indicating that they are not part of the cluster 
157033 is. From the qPCR results in Figure 67 and Figure 68 it is highly likely that the tcl cluster consists of 
the genes 92454, 183300, 139488, 48554, 157033, and 34258.  
4.4 Chemical analysis of genetically altered A. sydowii to uncover function of enzymes in 
tcl cluster 
The primary purpose of this thesis’s is to identify which SMs are synthesized by the enzymes encompassed 
in the tcl cluster, given by the initial bioinformatics study. To achieve this goal, several A. sydowii strains 
have been genetically modified in regards to the tcl cluster. As the tcl cluster has been shown to be silent 
under lab conditions, the first mutant strain was created by overexpressing the TF encoded by the gene 
183300 (OexTF). The overexpression of the TF has prior to thesis shown to change the phenotype of A. 
sydowii, suggesting that the TF activates the tcl cluster. The rest of the molecular work conducted to study 
the tcl cluster was done in the OexTF strain. The core gene for the tcl cluster is 157033 that codes for a NR-
PKS. There was created a 157033 deletion strain (OexTF-PKSΔ) to see if the new SMs made in OxeTF strain 
were all linked to the tcl cluster. Deletion of the non-core genes in the tcl cluster can help clarify the 
structure of some of the novel compounds in the OexTF mutant strain. The genes encoding the pathway 
enzymes, FMO and PTA were deleted to create OexTF-FMOΔ and OexTF-PTAΔ mutant strains. Moreover, 
the bioinformatics study gave two gene candidates for encoding a transporter for the SMs produced by the 
tcl cluster enzymes. The gene and 48550 have been deleted to create OexTF-50Δ. Due to the time 
constraint, mutant strain with a deleted MβL-TE and 34258 gene was not made. All the deletion strains 
were made by exchanging the gene of interest with the pyrG maker gene. All strains were grown on MM, 
YES and CYA media plates at 28 °C for 7 days, followed by plug extraction and chemical analysis with 
UHPLC-DAD-Q-TOF-MS. The results for growing the altered strains are in the following section.  
4.4.1 Chemical analysis of A. sydowii reference strain ASYD4 
All the work in this thesis was done on the saprotrophic fungus A. sydowii. The wild type strain used in the 
lab is ASYD4 have been domesticated for lab use. The chemical profile of ASYD4 was analysed prior to 
analysis of mutant strains.  Figure 69 shows ASYD4 strain grown on MM, YES and CYA media, the tree type 
of agar plates used throughout the experiment.  
 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
Figure 69: The strains ASYD4, used as references for all the other strains grown for seven days at 28°C on MM, YES and CYA media 
plates. Top and bottom view of the plates are at respectively top and bottom of the figure. 
On all media in Figure 69 the colonies have the turquoise colored spores characteristic for A. sydowii. There 
is no observable coloring of the media themselves. The ASYD4 colonies on YES media have a larger 
diameter than on the other plates. As YES media is a rich media, it is not surprising that the fungus grows 
faster than on the define MM media. On the CYA media, the fungus makes small exudate drops. Figure 70 
showsthe results of the UHPLC-DAD-Q-TOF-MS analysis of plug exactions from ASYD4 grown on MM and 
YES plates.  
 
==PAGE:77==
 
Figure 70: BPC of ASYD4 growth for 7days at 28°C on MM and YES media plates. The peaks of nine dereplicated compounds are 
marked with red arrows and the nominal masses of them are given. 
In Figure 70 red arrows mark nine dereplicated peaks. The numbers at the top of the arrows is the nominal 
mass of the compound. In the text, the compounds will be named after their nominal, e.g., compound 333, 
until the compound has been dereplicated or a name has been given. The peaks for almost all the marked 
compound are more pronounced on YES media rather than on MM media. The compound 333 is only found 
in ASYD4 sample grown on YES media. Yes media has been previously shown to induce the synthesis of SMs 
both in terms of numbers and abundance [98]. As this is also the case for ASYD4 the results from YES media 
will be used to identify the compounds. The dereplication process for the compounds 333, 510 and 664 will 
be shown as examples.  
 
Figure 71: Mass spectrum for the compounds 333, 510, and 664. The figure show the adduct pattern used for finding the [M+H]+ 
adduct. 
For all thre compounds, the [M+H]+ adducts were identified based on the presence of 22 Da distance 
between [M+H]+ and [M+Na]+ adducts in the mass spectrum seen in Figure 71. Form the isotopic pattern 
observed for the [M+H]+ adducts in Figure 71 none of the three compounds have any atom with detectable 
isotopes, except for carbon. The isotopic pattern was used to eliminate some of the calculated formulas 
==PAGE:78==
given by MassHunter. For example, suggested formulas with sulfur are not possible. The masses of the 
three compounds were used to search the Antibase and MPF12 databases.  
 
Figure 72: Dereplication of compound 510. Results for MPF12 database search, with mass of compound 510. Top: structure of 
tetrapeptide-(Phe-Val-Val-Phe). Bottom: MS/MS spectrum for compound 510 and tetrapeptide-(Phe-Val-Val-Phe) 
The molecule in Figure 72 is a linear NRP made of two phenylalanine and two valine amino acid residues. 
The NRP is a tetrapeptide-(Phe-Val-Val-Phe), temporary named as as Nidulanin X8. The tetrapeptide has 
chemical formula C28H38N4O5 identical with the MassHunter predicted formula  for compound 510. The 
retention time given for Nidulanin X8 is 7.35 minutes. As the retention time for compound 510 is 7.32 
minutes, this is further evidence that Compound 510 is Nidulanin X8. The MPF12 database given the 
MS/MS fragmentation pattern for the Nidulanin X8 as a mass spectrum. In Figure 72 is the MS/MS 
spectrum for the product ions of both compound 510 and Nidulanin X8 when fragmented with CID of 10 
eV. The fragmentation patterns have all the same major product ions, therefore the compound 510 is 
found to be Nidulanin X8.  
 
 
==PAGE:79==
 
Figure 73: Dereplication of compound 664. MPF12 database search gave two results. Left: WIN-6421. Right: Asperazine. Top: 
structure of results. Bottom: MS/MS spectrum for compound 665 and the database results. 
The compound 664 gave two hits in the MPF database, WIN-6421 and Asperazine. Both are NRP of the class 
Bispyrrolidinoindoline diketopiperazine alkaloid, the structures are in Figure 73. The formulas of WIN-6421 
and Asperazine are the same and fit with compound 664. As none of the hits can be eliminated by formula 
it is necessary to look at the fragmentation patterns. In Figure 73, the MS/MS spectrum of compound 664 is 
compared with the MS/MS spectrum for both WIN-6421 and Asperazine. Compound 664 has a 
fragmentation patterns as WIN-6421 but not as Asperazine. The retention time of Asperazine is 4.32 
minutes far from compound 664 retention time of 9.13. Therefore can Compound 664 not be Asperazine. 
Based on formula and fragmentation pattern compound 664 could be WIN-6421, but the retention times 
are different. WIN-6421 has a retention time at 9.65 minutes not close enough for compound 664 to be 
WIN-6421. Given that the fragmentation pattern of compound 664  is identical to the one for WIN-6421, 
compound 664 is most likely a stereoisomer of WIN-6421. This is further supported by the fact, that many 
types of Bispyrrolidinoindoline diketopiperazine alkaloid have been isolated from A. sydowii and other 
strains from the genus Aspergillus. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
Figure 74: Antibase2012 hits for molecular formula C20H19N3O2. Top: Compounds of bacterial origin, bottom: Compounds of fungal 
Compound 333 with the formula C20H19N3O2, gave four hits in Antibase-2012.  Two of hits were of bacterial 
origin and two from Penicilium and Aspergillus species (Figure 74). Compound 333 was determined to be 
diketopiperazine cyclo-(L-phe-L-trp) based on the species agreement and a number of publications citing 
the presence of Cyclo-(L-phe-L-trp) in A. sydowii strain (Kaur et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2017). 
Five more compounds were dereplicated in ASYD4 strain. Table 1 shows all the adduct patterns detected, 
list of predicted molecular formulas, which have a mass difference no more than 2 ppm form the measured 
mass and fit with the observed isotope pattern of the adducts, the type of database used for dereplication, 
and reasons for selecting hits. The compounds found in the ASYD4 strain are not made by the enzymes in 
the tcl cluster and can be disregard for the remaining chemical analysis.   
Table 11: Detected compounds in the ASYD4 strain after seven days growth on YES plates at 28 °C.  
Retention 
time 
[min] 
M 
[Da] 
Adducts 
Formula 
Diff 
[ppm
] 
Database 
Hit 
Tentative ID 
Reasons 
6.57 
333.1477 
[M+H]+ 
[M+Na]+ 
[M+K]+ 
C20H19N3O2 
0.31 
Antibase 
4 
Cyclo-(L-phe-
L-trp) 
Species  
agreement 
7.32 
510.2842 
[M+H]+ 
[M+Na]+ 
C28H38N4O5 
-0.59 
MPF-12 
1 
Nidulanin X8 
MS/MS 
9.13 
664.2798 
[M+H]+ 
[M+Na]+ 
[M+K]+ 
C40H36N6O4 
0.59 
MPF-12 
2 
WIN-64821 
MS/MS 
9.54 
317.293 
[M+H]+ 
[M+Na]+ 
C18H39NO3 
-0.09 
Antibase 
MPF-12 
1 
Phytosphingo
sine 
Species  
agreement 
MS/MS 
10.05 
535.2791 
[M+H]+ 
[M+Na]+ 
C29H37N5O5 
-0.55 
MPF-12 
2 
Nidulanin D-I 
MS/MS 
RT 
10.67 
519.3325 
[M+H]+ 
[M+Na]+ 
C26H50NO7P 
0.4 
MPF-12 
1 
1-linoyl-sn-
glycero-3-
phosphocholi
ne 
MS/MS 
==PAGE:81==
10.76 
453.2866 
M+H-
H2O]+ 
[M+H]+ 
[M+Na]+ 
C24H44NO7P 
0.75 
Antibase 
MPF-12 
0 
Novel 
 
11.46 
444.3087 
[M+H-
H2O]+ 
[M+H]+ 
[M+Na]+ 
[M+K]+ 
C24H44O7 
0.04 
Antibase 
MPF-12 
0 
Novel 
 
4.4.2 Effect of overexpressing transcription factor 183300 
The gene 183300 for TF was overexpressed in an ASYD4 strain, creating the strain OexTF. After the new 
genotype of the OexTF strain was confirmed the strain was grown on MM and YES plates for chemical 
analysis, with the ASYD4 strain as a reference. In Figure 75 are photos of the strains after seven days of 
growth.  
 
Figure 75:  MM and YES media plates after the fungi have grown on them for seven days at 28 °C. Left side: The fungi on MM plates. 
Right side: The fungi on YES plates. The top of the figure shows top view of the plates and at the bottom the bottom view. 
The OexTF strain causes coloration of the growth media not observed for the ASYD4 strain. The colors 
concentrated around the A. sydowii colonies. The color starts out as a dark orange-red and goes towards a 
more yellow color further away from the colony. The coloring of the media is most likely the result of 
pigments produced by the fungus. The presence of pigments in the OexTF strain indicates that the 
overexpression of the 183300 gene has an impact on the metabolite profile of A. sydowii. The colonies for 
the OexTF strain seems to have a smaller diameter than the ASYD4 colonies indicating that the OexTF strain 
grows slower than the ASYD4 strain. The slower growth of the OexTF stain may be due to the fungus using 
energy on producing pigments. The pigments are darker on MM plates than on YES plates. It may be that 
the different media induce the production of various pigments. Standard UHPLC-DAD-Q-TOF-MS analysis 
was performed on plug extracts to determine which new compounds are made by the OexTF strain, on 
both MM and YES media. As for the ASYD4 strain, the OexTF strain produced more compounds on YES 
plates than on the MM plates. For this reason, the results for growth on MM plates are not shown. In 
==PAGE:82==
Figure 76 are the BPC results for both strains on YES plates. There is an obvious effect of overexpressing the 
TF, as new peaks appear on the BPC for the OexTF strain. The results support the visual observation of the 
plates in Figure 75. 
 
Figure 76: BPC of ASYD4 and OexTF strains grown on YES plates. Both strains grew for seven days at 28°C. Plug extraction samples 
were run on UHPLC-DAD-MS. 
All of the new peaks elute ≈7 minutes and ≈10.5 minutes, as marked in Figure 76. The molecular structure 
of TCs has many CDBs and giving the molecules the distinct UV spectrum seen in Figure 23. Most 
significantly TCs adsorb light at 400 nm, giving them a yellow color. As the OexTF strain colors the media 
yellow in Figure 75, some of the new compounds have absorption at 400 nm. In Figure 77 is an Extracted 
Wavelength Chromatogram (EWC) for 400 nm, which can be used to see at which time point compounds 
with the right absorbance elute.  
 
Figure 77: EWC at 400 nm for ASYD4 and OexTF strains grown on YES plates. For ASYD there is no significant absorption. The EWC 
for OexTF has several peaks. The UV/Vis spectrum of the most significant peak is also in the figure. 
For the ASYD4 strain, the EWC shows no significant absorption at 400 nm, as expected given the lack of 
coloration of ASYD4's growth media. The EWC for the OexTF strain in Figure 77 is more interesting. There 
are multiple distinct peaks around the same elution times as the new peaks, from the BPC in Figure 76. The 
==PAGE:83==
most intense EWC is between 8.28 and 8.92 minutes, where there is a single broad peak. The peak, 
between 8.28 and 8.92 minutes, was integrated to give the UV/Vis spectrum which is also seen in Figure 77. 
The other major peaks in the EWC for 400 nm have UV/Vis spectrums similar to the one shown in Figure 77. 
The UV/Vis spectrum show absorptions at ≈230 nm, ≈275 nm, ≈315 nm, and ≈400 nm. The same 
absorptions as seen for TCs. The UV/Vis suggested that the new compounds from the OexTF strain could be 
TCs. Other types of SMs, e.g., tricyclic, have the same UV/Vis spectrums as TC, so the UV/Vis spectrums 
itself does not prove the compounds are TC. 
On the plates, in Figure 75 the OexTF strain makes not only yellow pigments but also reddish pigments, 
significantly more on MM media than on YES media. To give a reddish color, a molecule has to absorb at 
500 nm. In Figure 78 are the EWCs at 500 nm for OexTF on MM and YES. The EWCs for the ASYD reference 
on MM and YES did not have any absorption at nm 500 (data not shown). 
 
Figure 78: EWCs for 500 nm. Top: EWC OexTF strain grown on MM plates. Bottom: EWC OexTF strain grown on YES plates. Elution 
of compound 354 and 422 are marked with back arrows. 
In Figure 78, the EWC for OexTF on MM shows two peaks with absorption at 500 nm. The peaks have the 
retention time 7.13 and 9.42 minutes. The peak with retention time 9.42 minutes are also distinct in the 
EWC from OexTF on YES media. The peak with retention time 7.13 minutes is less pronounced when OexTF 
grows on YES. As the OexTF strain does not make as many SMs on MM media as on YES media, the two red 
pigments are easier to see in the samples from the MM plate. From the BPC for OexTF the two red 
pigments were named as compound 354 and 422. In Figure 79 are the UV/Vis spectrums for both 
compound 354 and 422.  
==PAGE:84==
 
Figure 79: UV/Vis spectrums for the peaks eluted at 7.13 and 9.42 minutes in the EWC for 500 nm in Figure 78.  From a sample of 
the OexTF strain grown on MM plates. 
As expected both of the UV/Vis spectrums in Figure 79 have absorption around 500 nm, explaining the 
reddish color seen on the plates. For compound 422 the absorption in the Vis spectrum is at higher 
wavelengths, abound 520 nm, than for compound 354 where the wavelengths absorbed is close to 500nm. 
The absorption at higher wavelengths makes the color of compound 422 a darker red than compound 422.  
 
Figure 80: Interesting of the BPCs for the OexTF strain grown on MM and YES media. The BPC for MM is on the top, and the BPC for 
YES are on the bottom. The nine most significant new peaks on both media are marked with their monoisotopic mass. 
In Figure 80 is the interesting part of the BPC for OexTF on MM and YES plate. The nine most interesting 
peaks in Figure 80 are marked with the mass of their compound. Most of the compounds were identified 
on YES media; the exception is the two red pigments compound 354 and 422, which had higher intensity on 
the MM media. Table 12 provides the retention time and formula of the nine compounds and list which 
adducts were used to find the monoisotopic masses of compounds. For all the compounds there were 
performed dereplication, which gave no potential hits in either Antibase2012 or MPF12.  
 
 
==PAGE:85==
Table 12: Detected compounds in the OexTF strain after seven days growth on YES plates at 28 °C. ¤: from growth on MM plates. 
Retention 
time 
[min] 
M 
[Da] 
Adducts 
Formula 
Diff 
[ppm] 
UV/VIS 
[nm] 
7.18 
354.0734 
[M+H]+,  
[M+Na]+ 
C19H14O7 
0.08 
250 
300 
370 
500 
7.52 
426.1310 
[M+H-H2O]+ 
[M+H]+,  
[M+Na]+ 
C23H22O8 
0.02 
- 
7.90 
400.1516 
[M+H-H2O]+ 
[M+H]+,  
[M+Na]+ 
C22H24O7 
0.2 
235 
280 
330 
410 
8.13 
400.1522 
[M+H-H2O]+ 
[M+H]+,  
[M+Na]+ 
[2M+H]+,  
[2M+Na]+ 
C22H24O7 
0.8 
235 
280 
330 
410 
8.61 
442.1628 
[M+H-H2O]+ 
[M+H]+ 
[M+Na]+ 
[2M+H]+ 
 [2M+Na]+ 
C24H26O8 
-0.93 
235 
280 
330 
410 
8.742 
442.1628 
[M+H-H2O]+ 
[M+H]+, 
 [M+Na]+ 
[2M+H]+,  
[2M+Na]+ 
C24H26O8 
-0.48 
235 
280 
330 
410 
9.32 
382.1410 
[M+H-H2O]+ 
[M+H]+, 
 [M+Na]+ 
C22H26O6 
0.2 
225 
280 
350 
9.48 
422.1360 
[M+H]+ 
[M+Na]+ 
C24H22O7 
0.07 
250 
300 
370 
500 
9.87 
424.1522 
[M+H-H2O]+ 
[M+H]+ 
[M+Na]+ 
C24H24O7 
-1.23 
230 
280 
330 
2420 
 
All of the detected compounds in Table 12 are novel. It was expected that the tcl cluster would make a TC 
compound with an average mass of 468.1420 Da. This mass does not fit with any of the novel compounds 
detected in the sample. The novel compounds have some of the characteristics that were anticipated for a 
SM produced by the enzymes from the tcl cluster. Many of the novel compounds have UV/Vis spectrums 
similar to a TC UV/Vis spectrums, and some have mass losses that fit with losing a hemiterpene prenyl 
group. Therefore although the expected TC mass is not found the results from the OexTF strain, the 
==PAGE:86==
outcome is still promising. The novel compounds can be either tricyclic or tetracyline compounds with 
different modifications. Before drawing any conclusions about the structure of the novel compounds, it is 
beneficial to see which compounds are made in deletion strains.  
The presence novel compound shows the influence of the overexpression the TF of otherwise silent 
clusters. It was expected that only one new compound would be produced in the OexTF strain, which is not 
the case. There can be various reasons for the high number of novel compounds. If the TF is a more global 
than local regulator it can stimulate the expression of more than one cluster and give rise to many new 
compounds. Another reason can be the intracellular concentration of the TF. As the TF is highly 
overexpressed, there is an unnaturally high concentration of the regulator. This can be enough to stimulate 
the transcription of genes that usually will not be affected by the TF. It is also possible that high production 
of the polyketide backbone gives rise to crosstalk with other pathways. Based on the presented data it is 
difficult to determine which explanation is correct. A strain with a lower expression of the TF is required to 
determine if gene 183300 is a global or local regulator.  
4.4.2.1 
Production of secondary metabolites in OexTF is affected by OSMAC 
OSMAC or one strain-many compounds is a common approach for exploiting the full biosynthetic potential 
of a fungi. Using this approach, the chemical profile of the OexTF strain changed depending on the growth 
media. On MM media there were only few SMs made, but their peaks where better defined and separated. 
The OexTF strain produced more SMs on YES, but the peaks were difficult to separate as many of the 
compounds eluted partially on top of each other. The change in SM profile demonstrates that the growth 
environment can have an impact on production. Given the SM profiles, it is highly interesting to see how 
SMs production of the OexTF strain is influenced by different growth media. To test the effect of growth 
media OexTF strain was grown on MM, OAT, YES and CYA media, in both liquid and solid form and on rice 
and beans. It was expected that on other types of media some of the peaks seen on YES media will be more 
isolated and therefore easier to identify the corresponding compound. The liquid version of MM, OAT, YES 
and CYA were included because fungi grow differently in liquid than on solid media. The SM profile can also 
change over time, for this reason samples from all media were taken at day 7, 11, 14, 18 and 21.  For the 
solid MM, OAT, YES and CYA media standard plug extraction was carried out. For the liquid media, rice, and 
beans there was a two step liquid extraction. All the samples were analyzed with UHPLC-DAD-MS.  
The samples for the different media type were examined in their respective groups to see if there was a 
change in SM profiles over time. In Figure 81 are photos of the plates after 7, 14 and 21 days of growth. For 
the liquid media plus rice and beans, there are photos in Figure 82 of the extractions from day 11, 14, 18 
and 21.  
==PAGE:87==
 
Figure 81: Growth of OexTF strain on solid media over the span of three weeks. From top to bottom are the plates at day 7 14 and 
21. From left to right are the OexTF strain on MM, OAT, YES, and CYA media. 
On solid media, there is no significant changes in phenotype and chemical profile in OexTF strain. The same 
is also generally observed for the liquid media, rice and beans.  
 
Figure 82: For liquid media, rice and beans liquid extractions were performed. In the photos are the extractions, from life to the 
right, MM, OAT, YES, CYA, Rice, and Beans. Top left day 11, Top right day 14, bottom left day 18, and bottom right day 21. 
==PAGE:88==
The exceptions are the growth of OexTF on liquid MM media, where the SM profiles change significantly 
from day 7 to day 11. In Figure 83 are the EWCs for absorption of 400 and 500 nm from the samples of 
OexTF grown in liquid MM media for day 7 and day 11.   
 
 
Figure 83: EWCs at 400 and 500 nm for OexTF grown for 7 and 11 days in liquid MM media. At the top are the EWCs from day 7and 
at the bottom are the EWCs at from day 11. To the left is the EWC for absorption at 400 nm and to the right for absorption at 500 
nm.  
In the top right of Figure 83 is the EWC at 500 nm for the day 7sample. Red pigments give the two marked 
peaks in the EWC, which in the previous section have been identified as compounds 354 and 422. The 
absorption for compound 354 is higher than for compound 422. There are no yellow pigments in the day 
seven sample. The peaks in the EWC at 400 nm (top left in Figure 83) comes from compounds 354 and 422 
as both pigments have a small absorption at 400 nm. In the period from day 7 to day 11, OexTF strain 
produced an entirely new set of pigments. Compounds 354 and 422 cannot longer be detected in the 
sample and their corresponding peaks in the EWC at 500 nm (bottom right Figure 83) are gone. From the 
photo in Figure 82 is observed that the extraction is still red and therefore other red pigments must have 
been synthesized. In the 500 nm EWC for day 11 there are three small peaks whose UV/Vis spectrums show 
good absorption around 500 nm (UV/Vis spectrums are in appendix X). Unfortunately, corresponding 
pigments in ESI+ mode were poorly ionized to be able to assign corresponding masses and due to the time 
constrain, none of the OSMAC samples were run on the negative mode. . In the 400 nm EWC for the day 11 
sample (bottom left of Figure 83) several new peaks have appeared. The two most significant peaks are 
marked with black arrows in Figure 83 and have retention times at 5.58 and 6.25 minutes, respectively. The 
corresponding UV/Vis spectrahave good absorption at 400 nm. Again, it is difficult to precisely assign 
==PAGE:89==
masses to the pigments. Using deconvolution masses of these compounds were identified as follows. 
Compound with retention time of 5.58 minutes had m/z [M+H]+ 453.1180, resulting in molecular formula 
C24H20O9 ( accuracy -0.05ppm) and compound with retention time of 6.25 minutes had m/z [M+H]+ 
387.0713, with the formula C19H14O9 (accuracy -0.6ppm). This fits well with list of novel compounds seen in 
OexTF grown on YES agar media. These compounds have same number of carbons, just a higher number of 
oxygen atoms.  
The samples for the rest of the days have SM profiles similar to the one observed for day 11. In day 18 the 
three unidentified red pigments disappear. This fit with photos of the samples in Figure 82, as the day 18 
sample is yellowish and the other samples for liquid MM are dark red. The growth conditions for OexTF in 
liquid MM did not have a positive influence on the synthesis of SMs of interest. There were not seen any of 
the compounds produced by the OexTF strain on YES plates in Figure 80 and the two red pigments found 
on MM plates disappeared after a week of growth. The photos in Figure 81 and Figure 82 shows the OexTF 
strain produced pigments in a wide range of colors yellow over orange to dark red. The color variation 
shows the influence of different media types of on OexTF strain. There are many differences between SMs 
production on the various media, not all of them are important for studying the tcl cluster. A meticulous 
study of all differences lies beyond the scope and time restrict of this thesis therefore the main focus was 
on the differences in production of the compounds 354, 422, 400, and 442. From Table 12 is know that 
compound 354 and 422 are red pigments, and compound 401 and 443 are yellow pigments. All four have 
formulas which fit with PK type SM. It was interesting to see in which media type these four compounds 
achieve the highest production and isolation. The knowledge can be used to determine which media is best 
to grow the fungus on for both experiments with various mutant strains and for purification of target 
compounds. The significant difference between production of the four pigments is observed after 11 days 
of growth. Thus the comparisons will be made between the samples from day 11. None of the four 
compounds were produced on liquid MM media, so it is not interesting to compare with the other media. 
The liquid YES media gave a low production of the red pigments and for the yellow pigments there was a 
high degree of overlap between peaks, therefore are the liquid YES media not part of the comparisons. For 
the remaining media, their BPCs for day 11 are in Figure 84. To the left are the BPCs for the liquid media 
and to the right is the BPCs for the solid media. 
 
==PAGE:90==
 
Figure 84: BPCs for OexTF grown on liquid OAT and CYA, rice, beans, solid MM, OAT, YES and CYA media. The retention time for 
compound 354, 400, 442 and 423 are marked with black arrows.    
Compound 354 elutes more isolated from the other SMs made by OexTF, so for compound 354, the 
problem is not to separate the peak. On the solid media in Figure 84 the peaks for compound 354 are small 
and will not be considered major peaks. On liquid media, there is generally better production of compound 
354. Especially on rice and beans, there are good peaks for compound 354. For purification purposes of 
compound 354, it is best to use rice and beans media. The standard protocol used for chemical analysis 
uses agar plates for comparing the effect of various mutations in fungus. For this purposes, the rice and 
beans media will be difficult to work with. In this situation, it will be better to grow the OexTF strain on YES 
or CYA ager plates. Compound 423 is often overlaps with other peaks. This is especially a problem as the 
other peaks contain compounds with masses close to compound 423. For the solid media, the overlapping 
is clearly seen on MM and YES media. On OAT and CYA plates, the peak for 423 is more isolated. There 
seems to be a higher production of compound 423 on CYA plates that on OAT plates. As CYA media is a 
richer and easier accessible media than OAT, the fungus has more energy for synthesis. In general, the 
highest peaks for compound 423 are achieved on rice and beans media as for compound 354. On rice, there 
is overlap in the elution, but on beans the compound 423 is almost completely isolated. The bean media is 
a good choice for compound 423 purification. A problem with compound 401 is that it elutes in between 
two background peaks found in all media. Therefore, it is necessary to have high production of compound 
401 to give a proper peak. On both liquid and solid OAT media, the production of compound 401 is too low 
to provide a desired peak. On MM plate and liquid CYA media, the compound 401 peak is almost 
==PAGE:91==
undetectable due to the background peaks. None of the four media will therefore, be good for identifying 
compound 401. The reminding media all have good peaks for compound 401 could be used for purification 
or identification. When OexTF grows on liquid or solid OAT media, there is none or very little production of 
compound 442. On the other media the production of 442 gave massive and broad peak. The problem with 
compound 442 is that its peak is so broad that is overlaps with the surrounding peaks on all the media. On 
solid OAT and CYA media there is smaller overlap as there are produced less of the compounds.  
From the results in Figure 84, MM and YES plates can be used for chemical analysis of deletion strain to 
detect a change in production of compound 401 and 442. For compound 354 and 423, it will be a good 
strategy to also include the growth of deletion strain on CYA plates, as the peaks for compound 354 and 
423 are more pronounced.  
4.4.3 Effect of deleting PKS gene in OexTF strain 
The gene 157033 encodes the NR-PKS core enzyme in the tcl cluster. The NR-PKS gene was exchanged with 
the pyrG marker gene to make the deletion strain OexTF-PKSΔ. By deleting the NR-PKS gene it was 
expected that the new compounds produced by the OexTF strain will no longer be made as the enzyme 
responsible for the first step in the biosynthesis is gone. Alternatively, if the TF effect the expression of 
other clusters than the tcl cluster, the associate SM should still be produced even if 157033 is deleted. To 
see the effect of the combined overexpression of TF and deletion of NR-PKS, the OexTF-PKSΔ strain was 
grown with OexTF and ASYD4 as references, in the same manner as for the OexTF. In Figure 85 are the 
three strains grown on YES plates. Again, overexpression of TF leads to lower growth and the production of 
yellow and red pigments. When the core PKS gene is deleted in the overexpression strain, fungus regains 
the phenotype of the ASYD4 reference strain. All the reddish colors are gone, and the growth rate is 
roughly the same as for ASYD4.   
 
Figure 85: The strains ASYD4 (references), OexTF and OexTF-PKSΔ grown for seven days on YES media plates. The ASYD4 strain is to 
the left, the OexTF in the middle and OexTF-PKSΔ to the right of the figure. Top and bottom view of the plates are at respectively top 
and bottom of the figure. 
==PAGE:92==
The chemical analysis was performed on UHPLC-DAD-MS. The analysis of the three strains shows that the 
fungi grown on YES plates produced more compounds and in higher concentration than on MM plates. In 
Figure 86 is the BPC for all three strains grown on YES plates for seven days.   
 
Figure 86: BPC results of reference (ASYD4), OexTF, and OexTF-PKSΔ A. sydowii strains grown on YES plates. All strains grew for 
seven days at 28°C.  
As expected from the results in Figure 85, all the peaks for the novel compounds in OexTF (Figure 80) 
disappear in the sample from the OexTF-PKSΔ strain. From the photos in Figure 85 is was expected that the 
OexTF-PKSΔ strain would have no absorbance at 400 nm, same as the ASYD4 strain. In Figure 87 are the 
EWCs for 400 nm for the three samples. Only the sample from the OexTF strain has a significant absorbance 
at 400 nm.   
 
Figure 87: EWC at 400 nm for the strains ADYS4, OexTF, and OexTF-PKSΔ. All for samples when the fungi were grown on YES media 
plates for seven days. 
==PAGE:93==
The results from the BPCs, the EWCs and the all point to the PKS gene 157033 being responsible for 
synthesizing the backbone of all the novel compounds made by the OexTF strain. As gene 157033 codes for 
a PKS, all of the novel compounds most by PK or PK hybrids.  
4.4.4 Deletion of Flavin Adenine Dinucleotide-Dependent Monooxygenase 
The FMO enzyme catalyzes the second step in the presumed pathway made by the enzymes encoded by 
the tcl cluster. FMO is encoded by the gene 1394988. The FMO enzyme adds a hydroxyl group to the 
second carbon in the PK chain. Without the oxidization, the MβL-TE cannot catalyze the release of the PK 
intermediate. The hypothesis is that without the 1394988 gene the PK intermediate will either stay on the 
PKS, be released spontaneously with the help of water, or another enzyme will catalyze the releases. If the 
intermediate primarily remains on the PKS, there will be little to no production of novel compounds in the 
strain, and there will not be pigmentation of the growth media. If the PK chain is released, by any 
mechanism, the compound or compounds is still expected to absorb UV/Vis light. The exact wavelength the 
compounds will theoretical absorb depends on the release mechanism, although only minor shifts in 
UVmax are expected. In Li et al. paper about TAN-1612, the pathway was mapped via heterologous 
expression of the different enzymes in the pathway. In a strain, expressing all the enzymes in the pathway 
except FMO, the PK was released as a tricyclic molecule, with conjugated double bonds from of two 
aromatic rings and a ketone [36]. It is possible that the same will happen if the gene for FMO is deleted in 
the tcl cluster. In that situation, there will still by coloring of growth media. To test the hypothesis an 
OexTF-FMOΔ strain was made by deleting the 1394988 gene in the OexTF strain. The resulting strain was 
grown for seven days at 28 °C on MM, YES, CYA agar plates with both ASYD4 and OexTF as reference 
strains. A phenotype overview of the three strains growth on all media are in Figure 88. 
==PAGE:94==
 
Figure 88: Strain ASYD4, OexTF, and OexTF-FMOΔ grew for seven days at 28 °C on MM, YES, and CYA plates. In the left column are 
strain ASYD4, center column OexTF, and the right column are OexTF-FMOΔ.    
The two reference strains ASYD4 and OexTF show the same phenotype tendency as in the previous 
experiments. The ASYD4 strain does not produce any pigments on any of agar plates, as seen by the lack of 
colored media in Figure 88. The OexTF makes yellow and reddish pigments on all three media. From Figure 
88 it can be seen that the OexTF colonies on YES media are lighter and more orange than the colonies on 
MM and CYA media. The OexTF colonies on MM and CYA media are a darker reddish brown, directly 
underneath the colonies. Looking at Figure 88 the pigments in the media for the OexTF-FMOΔ strain on 
MM, YES, and CYA is more yellowish than the one for the OexTF strain. The underside of the OexTF-FMOΔ 
colonies on MM and CYA is lighter than of the OexTF colonies on corresponding media. If the same holds 
true on the YES plates cannot be determined as the fungi on the OexTF-FMOΔ plates have grown all the 
==PAGE:95==
way through the plates and have begun making spores at the bottom of the plates. The OexTF-FMOΔ on 
MM and CYA plates are by themselves enough to indicate that the deletion of the 1394988 gene has a 
phenotype effect. If the color change between the OexTF and the OexTF-FMOΔ strains is due to more 
yellowish pigments being produced or the overall concertation of pigments are lower due to difficulty with 
release from the PKS cannot be seen from the photos alone.   
 
Figure 89: EWC at 400nm OexTF-FMOΔ strain groen on MM, YES and CYA plates. The UV/Vis spectrum of the most significant peak 
is also in the figure. 
In contrast to OexTF, the EWCs at 400 nm for OexTF-FMOΔ on all media shows very weak absorption in 
Figure 89. The weak absorption for OexTF-FMOΔ on MM media can be because the concentration of the 
pigments is too low for detection. On the rich media YES and CYA, the absorption at 400nm is slightly 
stronger. Only one of the peaks the characteristic TC absorption at 400nm. This means, that the OexTF-
FMOΔ strain makes at least one compound of interest not produced by ASYD4. This can explain yellow 
coloring of all the media when the OexTF-FMOΔ strain grows on them. Based on the EWCs in Figure 89 the 
yellow are also produced in the OexTF strain. To see which compound gives the yellow a section the BPCs 
on YES and CYA media are compared in Figure 90.  
 
Figure 90: BPCs for strain ASYD4, OexTF, and OexTF-FMOΔ grew seven days at 28 °C. To the left is the BPCs for the strains grown on 
YES plates and on the right is the BPCs for the strains grown on CYA plates. 
==PAGE:96==
 
As seen in Figure 90 the BPCs for OexTF-FMOΔ have a broad not well defined peak which begins to elute at 
roughly 9.3 minutes with a nominal mass of 426 Da and corresponds to characteristic TC absorption. It is 
difficult to determine if compound 426, with absorption at 400 nm, is novel for OexTF-FMOΔ strain or is 
also made by the OexTF strain. As seen in Figure 90Fejl! Henvisningskilde ikke fundet. there are many 
peaks with elution time between 9 and 10 minutes for the OexTF strain on both YES and CYA media. To 
remove the overlapping peaks and see if compound 426 is also present in OexTF strain, deconvolution can 
be used. In Figure 91 is EICs of [M+H]+ ion for compound 426 for OexTF and OexTF-FMOΔ on YES media. 
 
Figure 91: Deconvolution on [M+H]+ adduct of compound 426. The dotted lines show the BPCs, while solid the EICs. * denotes EIC at 
427.1763 
In Figure 91, deconvolution of m/z 427.1763 in both OexTF and OexTF-FMOΔ gives almost identically 
shaped peaks with similar intensity. It means that compound 426 is produced by both the OexTF and 
OexTF-FOMΔ strains and does not require the FMO enzyme to be released. This fits very well with the color 
intensity of OexTF-FMOΔ plates. It can be hypothesized, that without FMO only a small amount of 
compounds is release as the MβL-TE enzyme do not catalyzed the release of the non-oxidize PK, thus media 
color is not as bright ad in OexTF strain. In the study of TAN-1612 all pathway genes in the ada cluster 
except for the one for FMO were expressed.  
 
 
==PAGE:97==
Without the FMO enzyme the product of the pathway are 13 sin Figure 92 [61]. If compound 426 are 
release in the same manner and are prenylated it will give the molecule 14 also in Figure 92. The [M+H]+ 
adduct of 14 have the same mass at the [M+H]+ of compound 426, so it may well be the case. To prove the 
hypothesis it is necessary to solve the structure of compound 426 or obtain the fragmentation pattern of 
13.  
 
Figure 92: 13 product of ada cluster without adaC gene for FMO and the masse of [M+H]+ adduct. 14 suggestion for structure of 
compound 426 and masse of [M+H]+ adduct. 
4.4.5 Deletion of Prenyltransferase 
The last pathway gene in the tcl cluster is 48554, which is expected to encode a prenyltransferase. It is 
expected that the prenyltransferase catalyzes the last step in the pathway encoded by the tcl cluster. As the 
prenylation is the final step of the pathway, a deletion of the 48554 gene should not entail changes in the 
rest of the structure of the molecule. For this reason, the core structure for the novel compounds produced 
by the OexTF strain should still be found in a sample for a strain without the prenyltransferase. The 
compounds that before were prenylated will likely have a lower mass without an enzyme to add the prenyl 
group, as the mass of the molecule will be approximately 68 Da less. A lack of prenyl group will also lead to 
a shift in retention time. The prenyl group is highly hydrophobic, and a loss of the group will increase the 
polarity of the compound, which will cause the compound to elute earlier. A strain (OexTF-PTAΔ) was made 
by deletion the gene 48554 for prenyltransferase in the transcription factor overexpressing strain OexTF. 
The OexTF-PTAΔ strain was grown on MM, YES, and CYA agar plates for seven days at 28 °C with ASYD4 and 
OexTF as references. In Figure 93 is photos of the plates. 
==PAGE:98==
 
Figure 93: Strain ASYD4, OexTF, and OexTF-PTAΔ grew for seven days at 28 °C on MM, YES, and CYA plates. In the left column are 
ASYD4, in center column are OexTF, and in the right column are OexTF-PTA.  
The reference plates for OexTF and ASYD4 in Figure 93 are the same as for the OexTF-FMOΔ strain in Figure 
88 so the plates have already been discussed in the previous section. From the plates in Figure 93, it can be 
seen that the OexTF-PTAΔ strain must produce pigment as all three media are colored a dark red. On the 
==PAGE:99==
MM and CYA plates, there is no clear trace of the yellow pigments as in the OexTF strain. The YES plate for 
OexTF-PTAΔ still has some yellow-orange coloring, and whether it is due to lower concentration of red 
pigments or the strain producing other more yellow pigments on YES media can be determined after the 
chemical analysis. It was expected that the OexTF-PTAΔ strain will still produce yellow-colored compounds 
as the strain is only lacking the prenyltransferase gene, as there is no reason for the core structure of the 
yellow pigments not to be produced. It is possible that the yellow pigment is still being produced in small 
quantity but cannot be seen in the media due to high concentration dark red pigment. Samples from all 
three strains on all three media were chemically analyzed in the same manner as the previous samples.   
 
 
Figure 94: EWCs at 400nm for the strains ASYD4, OexTF and OexTF-PTAΔ grown on YES for seven days at 28°. Plots are not scaled, 
due to weak absorption of OexTF-PTAΔ. 
As expected, compounds with absorption at 400 nm elute earlier. As seen in the EWCs in Figure 94, 
compounds elute between ≈5-7.5 minutes instead between ≈7.5-10 minutes. Most of the compounds 
eluting between ≈5-7.5minutes have the same characteristic UV spectra as the compounds eluting between 
≈7.5-10 minutes from the OexTF strain.  
It was difficult to detect compounds with absorption at 400 nm in OexTF-PTAΔ strain, therefor there was 
calculated the theoretical m/z values for the molecular adducts of non-prenylated compounds from OexTF. 
Table 13 shows molecular formulas of novel OexTF compounds, proposed molecular formulas of non-
prenylated OexTF- PTAΔ compounds and the calculated m/z values for [M+H]+ and [M+H]-  molecular 
adducts. 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
Table 13: Table of Novel OexTF compound formulas and their non-prenylated analogues. m/z values shown are calculated from 
proposed OexTF formulas and were used for EIC chromatograms. * denotes a non-prenylated compound already seen in OexTF 
strain. 
OexTF Formula 
OexTF-PTAΔ Formula 
m/z [M+H]+ 
m/z [M-H]- 
C19H14O7 
C19H14O7* 
355.0817 
353.0655 
C23H22O8 
C28H24O8 
359.0761 
357.0605 
C22H24O7 
C27H16O7 
333.0968 
331.0812 
C24H26O8 
C19H18O8 
375.1074 
373.0917 
C22H26O6 
C17H18O6 
319.1176 
317.1019 
C24H22O7 
C19H14O7 
355.0812 
353.0655 
C24H24O7 
C19H16O7 
357.0968 
355.0812 
 
Due to many overlapping peaks of low intensity in time point between ≈5 and ≈7.5 minutes in positive MS 
mode (data not shown), it was chosen to work with negative mode. The [M+H]- masses listed in Table 13 
were used to deconvolute the target peaks and see if any of the proposed mases can be found in BPC of 
OexTF-PTAΔ.  
 
 
Figure 95: Deconvolution on [M-H]- adducts of proposed non-prenylated compounds. The dotted lines show the BPC , while solid the 
EICs of OexTF-PTA  grown on YES for seven days at 28°C. 
In Figure 95, only 4 out of 7 proposed m/z values are seen after extracting EICs. EICs for [M-H]- at m/z of 
357.0605 and 317.1019 did not produce any peaks in the EIC. Interestingly, EICs for [M-H]- m/z of 373.0917 
and 331.0812 produced two peaks each. The non-prenylated analogue (compounds 400) to m/z [M-H]- of 
331.0812 also gave two sharp peaks in BPC of OexTF. Compounds 442 it the non-prenylated analogue m/z 
==PAGE:101==
[M-H]- of 373.0917 and gave two broad peaks in BPC of OexTF (Figure 80). The produced amount of these 
yellow compounds must be low, as the major pigmentation seen is red.  
 
Figure 96: A piece of BPC for OexTF (top) and  OexTF-PTAΔ (bottom) on CYA plates. Arrow shows that compound 354 is present in 
both strains, while compound 422 only seen in OexTF strain. 
To see which compound is responsible for the red color in the plates there were made EWCs at 500 nm for 
OexTF and OexTF-FMOΔ grown on CYA plates; the results are in Figure 96. There was only one peak in the 
EWC for OexTF-FMOΔ, indicating that only one pigment makes the red color seen in Figure 93. The OexTF 
strain produces two red pigments, one eluted at ≈7.1 minutes and the other at ≈9.4 minutes. The red 
pigment with retention time ≈7.1 minutes is the same as red pigment made by the OexTF-PTAΔ strain. Both 
have a mass of ≈354 Da and the same retention time. In Figure 97Fejl! Henvisningskilde ikke fundet. are 
the UV/Vis spectrums for the red pigment 354 from both OexTF and OexTF-PTAΔ. The two UV/Vis 
spectrums show absorption at the same wavelengths. As the red pigment from OexTF-PTAΔ has the same 
retention time, mass and UV/Vis spectrum as one of the red pigments from OexTF they are the same 
compound. The synthesis of compound 354 is not affected by the deletion of the prenyltransferase gene 
48554; this means compound 354 is not prenylated. 
==PAGE:102==
 
Figure 97: UV/VIs spectrum for the red pigment eluded at ≈7.1 minutes from both OexTF strain (left) and the OexTF-PTAΔ strain 
(right) on CYA plates. 
On the other hand, compound 422 completely disappears from OexTF-FMOΔ strain. As the difference 
between compound 422 and compound 354 is 68 Da, it is most likely, that the compound 422 is a 
prenylated version of compound 354. This can be supported by the fact, that UV intensity of compound 354 
in OexTF-FMOΔ strain is almost twice as high as in OexTF strain; this can be seen in Figure 96.  
4.4.6 Deletion of presumed transporter gene 34258 and 48550 
SMs are made in response to environmental factors and are often needed outside the cell. Antibiotics are 
especially needed to be moved out of the cell, as their targets are competing bacteria or fungi in the 
surroundings and because antibiotics can be harmful to the cell itself. To ensure export of the SM many 
biosynthetic gene clusters encode a transporter. In the tcl cluster, there were found two candidate genes 
for the transporter protein, gene 34258 and gene 48550. Gene 34258 were deleted, in the OexTF A. Sydowii 
strain, to give the strain OexTF-50Δ. The attempt to make a gene 34258 was unsuccessful. The new strain 
was grown for seven days at 28° on MM, YES, and CYA media with both ASYD4 and OexTF as references. If 
the deleted gene is responsible for making the transporter protein, the deletion will have an impact on the 
phenotype of the strain. Without a transporter, the SMs will accumulate within the cell, and the media will 
not be colored. If the SMs produced are toxic to the cell, accumulation will lead to ether cell dead or 
decrease growth rate depending on how sensitive A. sydowii are towards the SMs. In Figure 98 are the 
three strains after a week grow on YES plates. 
==PAGE:103==
 
Figure 98: Top and bottom view of the strain ASYD4, OexTF, and OexTF-50Δ grown on YES plates for seven days at 28 °C. The ASYD4 
strain is in the column at the far left. In the middle is the plate with OexTF. OexTF-50Δ plates on the right.  
The two reference strains ASYD4 and OexTF, in Figure 98, behave as they have in the previous experiments. 
The OexTF stain makes yellowish and reddish pigment, not produced by the ASYD4 strain and the growth 
rate of the OexTF strain is lower than the ASYD4 strain. In Figure 98 the observable phenotype of OexTF-
50Δ looks the same as for the OexTF strain, without any significant difference in color production or the 
growth rate. Based on the photos alone gene 48550 encode the transporter responsible exporting the SM 
products made by the enzymes in the tcl cluster. There was also performed chemical analysis for all three 
strains on all three media. In Figure 99 is a part of the BPCs between ≈7.5 and ≈11 minutes from all three 
strains on YES.  
 
==PAGE:104==
 
Figure 99: BPCs for the strains ASYD4, OexTF, and OexTF-50Δ grown on YES plates for seven days at 28°. 
As anticipated the BPC for the OexTF reference sample has many peaks with retention time between 7.5 
and ≈11 minutes, that are not found in the BPC for the ASYD4 strain. Fitting with the observations in Figure 
98 the BPCs for OexTF-50Δ is indistinguishable for the BPC for the OexTF strain. The same tendency goes 
for the EWCs for both 400 and 500 nm. The EWCs for ASYD show no absorption and the EWCs for OexTF-
50Δ shows identical absorptions as the EWCs from OexTF (data not shown). As deletion of the gene 48550 
did not influence ether production or exertion of the SMs produced by the tcl cluster enzyme the proteins 
encoded 48550 is probably not transporter.   
4.5 Delimitation of tcl cluster is support by qPCR and chemical analysis results  
The bioinformatical study of the NR-PKS encoding gene 157033 and the surrounding genes gave the 
putative cluster tcl, seen in Figure 46, based on cluster-wide comparison with the ada and the vrt cluster. 
The comparison did not yield a putative gene for a transporter. Two candidate genes for the transporter 
was instead found based on location (34258) and annotation (48550). Overexpression of the TF gene 
183300 gave production of many new SMs in OexTF. For the subsequent deletion of 157033 in OexTF, none 
of the new SMs were made, this show both that the TF is responsible for activating the tcl cluster and that 
157033 encodes the NR-PKS that synthesize the backbone PK for the new SMs. The TF only activated one 
cluster, so it is a local regulator and not a global regulator. The qPCRs made for the tcl’s genes and the 
genes flanking the putative cluster shows that the expression level of the genes encoding pathway enzymes 
MβL-TE, FMO, and PTA follows the expression level of 157033 (Figure 67). For the OexTF-FMOΔ and OexTF-
PTAΔ strains, most of the new SMs from OexTF either disappeared entirely or was only seen in an 
unprenylated form. The qPCR results and the chemical profile of deletion strain show that genes 92454, 
1394988, and 48554 are part of the same cluster as 157033. For transporter candidate 48550 both the 
qPCR data and the chemical analysis of OexTF-50Δ indicates that the gene is not part of the cluster. In 
qPCR, there was no expression from the 48550 and the chemical profile for OexTF-50Δ was indistin-
guishable from the chemical profile for OexTF. As 48550 is not part of tcl it does not express a transporter 
for the cluster. For gene 34258 the qPCR (Figure 67) show that there was an expression of the gene in 
OxeTF. The expression of 34258 seems to follow the production of SMs from tcl, as there is no significant 
expression of 34258 in the OexTF-PKSΔ strain. Gene 34258 is, therefore, a better candidate for a 
transporter gene in tcl. As there was not made an OexTF-58Δ strain, it cannot be determined if the lack of 
34258 will lead phenotypical changes.  
==PAGE:105==
5 Conclusion and Future perspective 
The NR-PKS encoding gene 157033 from A. sydowii was found to be a good candidate in a lager 
bioinformatics study for a core gene in a cluster that express enzymes for synthesizing a TC. The genes 
surrounding 157033 were in a 20,000 base pair range compared with the biosynthetic gene clusters 
belonging to the TC polyketides TAN-1612 (cluster ada) and viridicatumtoxin (cluster vrt) in silica with the 
program EasyFig. EasyFig results show that genes lying nearby 157033 were analogues to the genes in ada 
and vrt encoding enzymes for the core structure of TCs and for a TF encoding gene. One of the selected A. 
sydowii genes show similarities with a gene in vrt coding for a prenyltransferase tailoring enzyme. In A. 
sydowii the genes 92454, 1394988, 48554, and 183300 encode the enzymes MβL-TE, FMO, PTA, and TF 
according to the BLAST data in EasyFig. The EasyFig results did not show any concordance in DNA sequence 
between any of the A. sydowii genes and genes for transports in the ada and vrt cluster. The gene 48550 in 
A. sydowii is annotated as a MFS transporter and gene 34258 has location corresponding to the one for the 
transporter genes in the ada cluster. The genes were collected into a putative biosynthetic gene cluster 
named tcl (tetracycline like cluster). The tcl cluster was expected to encompass the genes 92454, 1394988, 
183300, 48554, 157033, and one of the two genes 34258 and 48550. The SMs link to the tcl cluster was 
presumed to be a prenylated TC. To study the tcl cluster there was made an OexTF strain overexpressing 
the TF from gene 183300. The resulting strain was used for CRISPR mediated deletion in OexTF to make 
deletion strain for gene 157033 (OexTF-PKSΔ), 1394988 (OexTF-FMOΔ), 48554 (OexTF-PTAΔ), and 48550 
(OexTF-50Δ). There were also unsuccessful attempts to make deletion of the genes 92454 and 34258.  
To verify the delimitation of the tcl cluster qPCR was performed. The change in expression level of tcl’s 
genes and the surrounding genes in OexTF compared with the wild-type strain ASYD4 and OexTF-PKSΔ 
were calculated. The expression of gene 92454, 1394988, 48554, 34258, and 183300 follow the expression 
of 157033 indicating that the gene are in the tcl cluster. There was no expression 48550 indicating that 
48550 is not part of the tcl cluster.  
The chemical analysis was conducted for the OxeTF strain and the deletion strains to confirm the 
delimitation of the tcl cluster and to see which products the strains synthesize. OexTF produced many novel 
compounds not see in ASYD4. Most of the novel compounds were prenylated and have TC like UV/VIS 
spectra, the expected monoisotopic mass of 468.1403 was not detected. All novel compounds vanish in the 
OexTF-PKSΔ strain. In the OxeTF-FMOΔ all but one novel compound (which is likely released spontaneously 
from PKS) were not synthesized. In the OxeTF-PTA strain compounds fitting with the novel compounds 
without prenylation were synthesized. Compound 334 was the only novel compound seen unchanged in 
OexTF-PTAΔ indicating that the compound is not prenylated. For OexTF-50Δ there was no change in 
produced SMs compared with OxeTF.  
The results from chemical analysis confirm the delimitation of tcl given with qPCR. It can be concluded that 
the tcl cluster in A. sydowii consist of the genes 92454, 1394988, 183300, 48554, 157033, and 34258 and 
that gene 48550 is not a part of the cluster. To say definitely that genes 92454 and 34258 are part of the 
cluster deletion, strains have to be made and chemically analyzed. The enzymes from the tcl cluster did not 
made the expected TC, but resulted many similar novel compounds. The structures of novel compounds 
still have to be solved, which require purification of a large amount of the compounds and subsequent 
NMR analysis.  
==PAGE:106==
6 References 
[1] 
A.G.B. Simpson, A.J. Roger, The real “kingdoms” of eukaryotes, Curr. Biol. 14 (2004) R693–R696. 
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2004.08.038. 
[2] 
L.W. Parfrey, E. Barbero, E. Lasser, M. Dunthorn, D. Bhattacharya, D.J. Patterson, L.A. Katz, Evaluating support 
for the current classification of eukaryotic diversity, PLoS Genet. 2 (2006) 2062–2073. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.0020220. 
[3] 
J.E. Stajich, M.L. Berbee, M. Blackwell, D.S. Hibbett, T.Y. James, J.W. Spatafora, J.W. Taylor, The Fungi, Curr. 
Biol. 19 (2009) R840–R845. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2009.07.004. 
[4] 
D.S. Hibbett, M. Binder, J.F. Bischoff, M. Blackwell, P.F. Cannon, O.E. Eriksson, S. Huhndorf, T. James, P.M. Kirk, 
R. Lücking, H. Thorsten Lumbsch, F. Lutzoni, P.B. Matheny, D.J. McLaughlin, M.J. Powell, S. Redhead, C.L. 
Schoch, J.W. Spatafora, J.A. Stalpers, R. Vilgalys, M.C. Aime, A. Aptroot, R. Bauer, D. Begerow, G.L. Benny, L.A. 
Castlebury, P.W. Crous, Y.-C. Dai, W. Gams, D.M. Geiser, G.W. Griffith, C. Gueidan, D.L. Hawksworth, G. 
Hestmark, K. Hosaka, R.A. Humber, K.D. Hyde, J.E. Ironside, U. Kõljalg, C.P. Kurtzman, K.-H. Larsson, R. 
Lichtwardt, J. Longcore, J. Miądlikowska, A. Miller, J.-M. Moncalvo, S. Mozley-Standridge, F. Oberwinkler, E. 
Parmasto, V. Reeb, J.D. Rogers, C. Roux, L. Ryvarden, J.P. Sampaio, A. Schüßler, J. Sugiyama, R.G. Thorn, L. 
Tibell, W.A. Untereiner, C. Walker, Z. Wang, A. Weir, M. Weiss, M.M. White, K. Winka, Y.-J. Yao, N. Zhang, A 
higher-level phylogenetic classification of the Fungi, Mycol. Res. 111 (2007) 509–547. 
doi:10.1016/j.mycres.2007.03.004. 
[5] 
M. Oliveira, M.I. Amorim, E. Ferreira, L. Delgado, I. Abreu, Main airborne Ascomycota spores: characterization 
by culture, spore morphology, ribosomal DNA sequences and enzymatic analysis, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
86 (2010) 1171–1181. doi:10.1007/s00253-010-2448-z. 
[6] 
J.G. Gibbons, A. Rokas, The function and evolution of the Aspergillus genome, Trends Microbiol. 21 (2013) 14–
22. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2012.09.005. 
[7] 
L. Parenicova, P. Skouboe, J. Frisvad, R.A. Samson, L. Rossen, M. ten Hoor-Suykerbuyk, J. Visser, Combined 
Molecular and Biochemical Approach Identifies Aspergillus japonicus and Aspergillus aculeatus as Two Species, 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67 (2001) 521–527. doi:10.1128/AEM.67.2.521-527.2001. 
[8] 
A.L. Demain, S. Sanchez, Microbial drug discovery: 80 years of progress, J. Antibiot. (Tokyo). 62 (2009) 5–16. 
doi:10.1038/ja.2008.16. 
[9] 
A. Rokas, Aspergillus, Curr. Biol. 23 (2013) R187–R188. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.01.021. 
[10] 
A. Hayashi, A. Crombie, E. Lacey, A. Richardson, D. Vuong, A. Piggott, G. Hallegraeff, Aspergillus Sydowii 
Marine Fungal Bloom in Australian Coastal Waters, Its Metabolites and Potential Impact on Symbiodinium 
Dinoflagellates, Mar. Drugs. 14 (2016) 59. doi:10.3390/md14030059. 
[11] 
G. Greco, M. Capello, G. Cecchi, L. Cutroneo, S. Di Piazza, M. Zotti, Another possible risk for the Mediterranean 
Sea? Aspergillus sydowii discovered in the Port of Genoa (Ligurian Sea, Italy), Mar. Pollut. Bull. 122 (2017) 
470–474. doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.06.058. 
[12] 
J.P.Z. Siqueira, D.A. Sutton, D. García, J. Gené, P. Thomson, N. Wiederhold, J. Guarro, Species diversity of 
Aspergillus section Versicolores in clinical samples and antifungal susceptibility, Fungal Biol. 120 (2016) 1458–
1467. doi:10.1016/J.FUNBIO.2016.02.006. 
[13] 
M.A. Klich, Morphological studies of Aspergillus section Versicolores and related species, Mycologia. 85 (1993) 
100–107. doi:10.2307/3760484. 
[14] 
A.P. Alker, G.W. Smith, K. Kim, Characterization of Aspergillus sydowii (Thom et Church), a fungal pathogen of 
Caribbean sea fan corals, in: Hydrobiologia, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001: pp. 105–111. 
doi:10.1023/A:1013145524136. 
[15] 
A. Kaur, H.A. Raja, B.A. Darveaux, W.L. Chen, S.M. Swanson, C.J. Pearce, N.H. Oberlies, New diketopiperazine 
dimer from a filamentous fungal isolate of Aspergillus sydowii, Magn. Reson. Chem. 53 (2015) 616–619. 
doi:10.1002/mrc.4254. 
[16] 
S. Liu, H. Wang, M. Su, G.J. Hwang, J. Hong, J.H. Jung, New metabolites from the sponge-derived fungus 
Aspergillus sydowii J05B-7F-4, Nat. Prod. Res. 31 (2017) 1682–1686. doi:10.1080/14786419.2017.1289205. 
[17] 
C.J. Barrow, P. Cai, J.K. Snyder, D.M. Sedlock, H.H. Sun, R. Cooper, WIN 64821, a New Competitive Antagonist 
to Substance P, Isolated from an Aspergillus Species: Structure Determination and Solution Conformation, J. 
Org. Chem. 58 (1993) 6016–6021. doi:10.1021/jo00074a031. 
[18] 
M. Varoglu, T.H. Corbett, F. a. Valeriote, P. Crews, Asperazine, a Selective Cytotoxic Alkaloid from a Sponge-
Derived Culture of Aspergillus niger., J. Org. Chem. 62 (1997) 7078–7079. doi:10.1021/jo970568z. 
[19] 
C. Pérez-Balado, P. Rodríguez-Graña, Á.R. de Lera, Stereocontrolled and Versatile Total Synthesis of 
==PAGE:107==
Bispyrrolidinoindoline Diketopiperazine Alkaloids: Structural Revision of the Fungal Isolate (+)-Asperdimin, 
Chem. - A Eur. J. 15 (2009) 9928–9937. doi:10.1002/chem.200901056. 
[20] 
T. Hamasaki, K. Nagayama, Y. Hatsuda, Two new metabolites, sydonic acid and hydroxysydonic acid, from 
aspergillus sydowi, Agric. Biol. Chem. 42 (1978) 37–40. doi:10.1080/00021369.1978.10862919. 
[21] 
A.Z. Ansari, Chemical crosshairs on the central dogma, Nat. Chem. Biol. 3 (2007) 2–7. 
doi:10.1038/nchembio0107-2. 
[22] 
E. V Koonin, Does the central dogma still stand?, Biol. Direct. 7 (2012) 27. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-7-27. 
[23] 
K. Blin, M.H. Medema, D. Kazempour, M.A. Fischbach, R. Breitling, E. Takano, T. Weber, antiSMASH 2.0--a 
versatile platform for genome mining of secondary metabolite producers., Nucleic Acids Res. 41 (2013) W204–
W212. doi:10.1093/nar/gkt449. 
[24] 
D.S. Goodsell, The Central Dogma, in: At. Evid., Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016: pp. 25–31. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_5. 
[25] 
B.Y.B. Hirt, Evidence for Seahconservateve Replication of Circular Polyoma DNA, (1966). 
[26] 
M. Nomura, Ribosomes, Sci. Am. 221 (1969). http://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2242111367 (accessed December 
29, 2017). 
[27] 
E. Morita, W.I. Sundquist, Retrovirus budding, Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 20 (2004) 395–425. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.cellbio.20.010403.102350. 
[28] 
L.M. Petersen, Linking fungal secondary metabolites and pathways to their genes in Aspergillus, PhD Thesis. 
(2014) 1–446. 
[29] 
G.F. Bills, Biologically Active Secondary Metabolites from the Fungi, in: The Fungal Kingdom, American Society 
of Microbiology, 2016: pp. 1087–1119. doi:10.1128/microbiolspec.FUNK-0009-2016. 
[30] 
J. O’Brien, G.D. Wright, An ecological perspective of microbial secondary metabolism, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 
22 (2011) 552–558. doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2011.03.010. 
[31] 
P. Vaishnav, A.L. Demain, Unexpected applications of secondary metabolites, Biotechnol. Adv. 29 (2011) 223–
229. doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2010.11.006. 
[32] 
M.V. Cañamares, J.V. Garcia-Ramos, C. Domingo, S. Sanchez-Cortes, Surface-enhanced Raman scattering study 
of the anthraquinone red pigment carminic acid, Vib. Spectrosc. 40 (2006) 161–167. 
doi:10.1016/j.vibspec.2005.08.002. 
[33] 
J. Spížek, K. Sigler, T. Řezanka, A. Demain, Biogenesis of antibiotics—viewing its history and glimpses of the 
future, Folia Microbiol. (Praha). 61 (2016) 347–358. doi:10.1007/s12223-016-0462-y. 
[34] 
M.O. Griffin, E. Fricovsky, G. Ceballos, F. Villarreal, Tetracyclines: a pleitropic family of compounds with 
promising therapeutic properties. Review of the literature, Am. J. Physiol. - Cell Physiol. 299 (2010). 
http://ajpcell.physiology.org/content/299/3/C539.short (accessed August 24, 2017). 
[35] 
I. Chopra, M. Roberts, Tetracycline antibiotics: mode of action, applications, molecular biology, and 
epidemiology of bacterial resistance., Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 65 (2001) 232–60 ; second page, table of 
contents. doi:10.1128/MMBR.65.2.232-260.2001. 
[36] 
Y. Li, Y.-H. Chooi, Y. Sheng, J.S. Valentine, Y. Tang, Comparative Characterization of Fungal Anthracenone and 
Naphthacenedione Biosynthetic Pathways Reveals an α-Hydroxylation-Dependent Claisen-like Cyclization 
Catalyzed by a Dimanganese Thioesterase, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133 (2011) 15773–15785. 
doi:10.1021/ja206906d. 
[37] 
Y.-H. Chooi, R. Cacho, Y. Tang, Identification of the Viridicatumtoxin and Griseofulvin Gene Clusters from 
Penicillium aethiopicum, Chem. Biol. 17 (2010) 483–494. doi:10.1016/j.chembiol.2010.03.015. 
[38] 
R.D. Hutchison, P.S. Steyn, S.J. van Rensburg, Viridicatumtoxin, a new mycotoxin from Penicillium viridicatum 
westling, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 24 (1973) 507–509. doi:10.1016/0041-008X(73)90057-4. 
[39] 
Y.H. Chooi, R. Cacho, Y. Tang, Identification of the Viridicatumtoxin and Griseofulvin Gene Clusters from 
Penicillium aethiopicum, Chem. Biol. 17 (2010) 483–494. doi:10.1016/j.chembiol.2010.03.015. 
[40] 
C.J. Zheng, H.E. Yu, E.H. Kim, W.G. Kim, Viridicatumtoxin B, a new anti-MRSA agent from Penicillium sp. FR11, 
J. Antibiot. (Tokyo). 61 (2008) 633–637. doi:10.1038/ja.2008.84. 
[41] 
M.A. Fischbach, C.T. Walsh, Assembly-Line Enzymology for Polyketide and Nonribosomal Peptide 
Antibiotics:  Logic, Machinery, and Mechanisms, Chem. Rev. 106 (2006) 3468–3496. doi:10.1021/cr0503097. 
[42] 
H.M. Miziorko, Enzymes of the mevalonate pathway of isoprenoid biosynthesis, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 505 
(2011) 131–143. doi:10.1016/j.abb.2010.09.028. 
[43] 
M.B. Quin, C.M. Flynn, C. Schmidt-Dannert, Traversing the fungal terpenome, Nat. Prod. Rep. 31 (2014) 1449–
1473. doi:10.1039/C4NP00075G. 
[44] 
J. Staunton, K.J. Weissman, Polyketide biosynthesis: a millennium review, Nat. Prod. Rep. 18 (2001) 380–416. 
==PAGE:108==
doi:10.1039/a909079g. 
[45] 
L. Du, L. Lou, PKS and NRPS release mechanisms, Nat. Prod. Rep. 27 (2010) 255–278. doi:10.1039/B912037H. 
[46] 
J.M. Crawford, C.A. Townsend, New insights into the formation of fungal aromatic polyketides., Nat. Rev. 
Microbiol. 8 (2010) 879–89. doi:10.1038/nrmicro2465. 
[47] 
R.J. Cox, T.J. Simpson, Chapter 3 Fungal Type I Polyketide Synthases, in: Methods Enzymol., 2009: pp. 49–78. 
doi:10.1016/S0076-6879(09)04603-5. 
[48] 
J.M. Crawford, B.C.R. Dancy, E.A. Hill, D.W. Udwary, C.A. Townsend, Identification of a starter unit acyl-carrier 
protein transacylase domain in an iterative type I polyketide synthase, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 103 (2006) 16728–
16733. doi:10.1073/pnas.0604112103. 
[49] 
M. Moir, Hops - A millennium review, J. Am. Soc. Brew. Chem. 58 (2000) 131–146. 
[50] 
K.J. Weissman, Polyketide biosynthesis: understanding and exploiting modularity, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A 
Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 362 (2004) 2671–2690. doi:10.1098/rsta.2004.1470. 
[51] 
Y.-M. Chiang, B.R. Oakley, N.P. Keller, C.C.C. Wang, Unraveling polyketide synthesis in members of the genus 
Aspergillus, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 86 (2010) 1719–1736. doi:10.1007/s00253-010-2525-3. 
[52] 
J.M. Crawford, T.P. Korman, J.W. Labonte, A.L. Vagstad, E.A. Hill, O. Kamari-Bidkorpeh, S.-C. Tsai, C.A. 
Townsend, Structural basis for biosynthetic programming of fungal aromatic polyketide cyclization, Nature. 
461 (2009) 1139–1143. doi:10.1038/nature08475. 
[53] 
J.M. Crawford, P.M. Thomas, J.R. Scheerer, A.L. Vagstad, N.L. Kelleher, C.A. Townsend, Deconstruction of 
iterative multidomain polyketide synthase function, Science (80-. ). 320 (2008) 243–246. 
doi:10.1126/science.1154711. 
[54] 
P.M. Dewick, Medicinal Natural Products: A Biosynthetic Approach: Third Edition, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 
Chichester, UK, 2009. doi:10.1002/9780470742761. 
[55] 
R. Thomas, A Biosynthetic Classification of Fungal and Streptomycete Fused-Ring Aromatic Polyketides, 
ChemBioChem. 2 (2001) 612–627. doi:10.1002/1439-7633(20010903)2:9<612::AID-CBIC612>3.0.CO;2-Z. 
[56] 
S.H. Jørgensen, R.J.N. Frandsen, K.F. Nielsen, E. Lysøe, T.E. Sondergaard, R. Wimmer, H. Giese, J.L. Sørensen, 
Fusarium graminearum PKS14 is involved in orsellinic acid and orcinol synthesis, Fungal Genet. Biol. 70 (2014) 
24–31. doi:10.1016/j.fgb.2014.06.008. 
[57] 
S. Gaisser, A. Trefzer, S. Stockert, A. Kirschning, A. Bechthold, Cloning of an avilamycin biosynthetic gene 
cluster from Streptomyces viridochromogenes Tü57., J. Bacteriol. 179 (1997) 6271–8. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9335272 (accessed December 16, 2017). 
[58] 
M.E. Rateb, R. Ebel, Secondary metabolites of fungi from marine habitats, Nat. Prod. Rep. 28 (2011) 290. 
doi:10.1039/c0np00061b. 
[59] 
Y. Li, W. Xu, Y. Tang, Classification, prediction, and verification of the regioselectivity of fungal polyketide 
synthase product template domains, J. Biol. Chem. 285 (2010) 22764–22773. doi:10.1074/jbc.M110.128504. 
[60] 
T. Awakawa, K. Yokota, N. Funa, F. Doi, N. Mori, H. Watanabe, S. Horinouchi, Physically Discrete β-Lactamase-
Type Thioesterase Catalyzes Product Release in Atrochrysone Synthesis by Iterative Type I Polyketide 
Synthase, Chem. Biol. 16 (2009) 613–623. doi:10.1016/j.chembiol.2009.04.004. 
[61] 
Y. Li, Y.H. Chooi, Y. Sheng, J.S. Valentine, Y. Tang, Comparative characterization of fungal anthracenone and 
naphthacenedione biosynthetic pathways reveals an α-hydroxylation-dependent claisen-like cyclization 
catalyzed by a dimanganese thioesterase, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133 (2011) 15773–15785. doi:10.1021/ja206906d. 
[62] 
J.W. Bok, N.P. Keller, LaeA, a regulator of secondary metabolism in Aspergillus spp., Eukaryot. Cell. 3 (2004) 
527–535. doi:10.1128/EC.3.2.527-535.2004. 
[63] 
A.A. Brakhage, V. Schroeckh, Fungal secondary metabolites – Strategies to activate silent gene clusters, Fungal 
Genet. Biol. 48 (2011) 15–22. doi:10.1016/j.fgb.2010.04.004. 
[64] 
N. Ziemert, M. Alanjary, T. Weber, The evolution of genome mining in microbes – a review, Nat. Prod. Rep. 33 
(2016) 988–1005. doi:10.1039/C6NP00025H. 
[65] 
T. Weber, H.U. Kim, The secondary metabolite bioinformatics portal: Computational tools to facilitate 
synthetic biology of secondary metabolite production, Synth. Syst. Biotechnol. 1 (2016) 69–79. 
doi:10.1016/j.synbio.2015.12.002. 
[66] 
J. Yaegashi, B.R. Oakley, C.C.C. Wang, Recent advances in genome mining of secondary metabolite 
biosynthetic gene clusters and the development of heterologous expression systems in Aspergillus nidulans, J. 
Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 41 (2014) 433–442. doi:10.1007/s10295-013-1386-z. 
[67] 
M.J. Sullivan, N.K. Petty, S.A. Beatson, Easyfig: A genome comparison visualizer, Bioinformatics. 27 (2011) 
1009–1010. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr039. 
[68] 
C.S. Nødvig, J.B. Nielsen, M.E. Kogle, U.H. Mortensen, A CRISPR-Cas9 System for Genetic Engineering of 
==PAGE:109==
Filamentous Fungi, PLoS One. 10 (2015) e0133085. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0133085. 
[69] 
M.C. Canver, D.E. Bauer, A. Dass, Y.Y. Yien, J. Chung, T. Masuda, T. Maeda, B.H. Paw, S.H. Orkin, 
Characterization of genomic deletion efficiency mediated by clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic 
repeats (CRISPR)/Cas9 nuclease system in mammalian cells., J. Biol. Chem. 289 (2014) 21312–24. 
doi:10.1074/jbc.M114.564625. 
[70] 
L. Schena, F. Nigro, A. Ippolito, D. Gallitelli, Real-time quantitative PCR: a new technology to detect and study 
phytopathogenic and antagonistic fungi, Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 110 (2004) 893–908. doi:10.1007/s10658-004-
4842-9. 
[71] 
V.R. Meyer, Molecular Biology Techniques, in: Pract. Methods Cardiovasc. Res., Springer-Verlag, 2005: pp. 
889–958. 
[72] 
B.G. Hansen, B. Salomonsen, M.T. Nielsen, J.B. Nielsen, N.B. Hansen, K.F. Nielsen, T.B. Regueira, J. Nielsen, K.R. 
Patil, U.H. Mortensen, Versatile enzyme expression and characterization system for Aspergillus nidulans, with 
the Penicillium brevicompactum polyketide synthase gene from the mycophenolic acid gene cluster as a test 
case, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77 (2011) 3044–3051. doi:10.1128/AEM.01768-10. 
[73] 
K.F. Nielsen, M. Månsson, C. Rank, J.C. Frisvad, T.O. Larsen, Dereplication of microbial natural products by LC-
DAD-TOFMS, J. Nat. Prod. 74 (2011) 2338–2348. doi:10.1021/np200254t. 
[74] 
L.R. Synder, J.J. Kirkland, J.W. Dolan, The Column, in: Introd. to Mod. Liq. Chromatogr., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2010: pp. 199–252. doi:10.1002/9780470508183.ch5. 
[75] 
V.R. Meyer, High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), in: Pract. Methods Cardiovasc. Res., Springer-
Verlag, Berlin/Heidelberg, 2005: pp. 661–685. doi:10.1007/3-540-26574-0_35. 
[76] 
L.R. Synder, J.J. Kirkland, J.W. Dolan, Introduction to Modern Liquid Chromatography, Wiley, 2010. 
[77] 
L.R. Synder, J.J. Kirkland, J.W. Dolan, Reversed-Phase Chromatography for Neutral Samples, in: Introd. to Mod. 
Liq. Chromatogr., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2010: pp. 253–301. 
doi:10.1002/9780470508183.ch6. 
[78] 
K.F. Nielsen, T.O. Larsen, The importance of mass spectrometric dereplication in fungal secondary metabolite 
analysis, Front. Microbiol. 6 (2015). doi:10.3389/fmicb.2015.00071. 
[79] 
P.Y. Bruice, Chapter 14 Mass Spectrometry, Infrared Spectroscopy, and Ultraviolet/Visible Spectroscopy, in: 
Org. Chem., Seventh, Pearson, 2014: pp. 615–670. 
[80] 
L. Almela, J.A. Fernández-López, J.M. López-Roca, High-performance liquid chromatography-diode-array 
detection of photosynthetic pigments, J. Chromatogr. A. 607 (1992) 215–219. doi:10.1016/0021-
9673(92)87078-M. 
[81] 
G.P. Rozing, Diode array detection, Methods Enzymol. 270 (1996) 201–233. 
[82] 
L.R. Synder, J.J. Kirkland, J.W. Dolan, Detection, in: Introd. to Mod. Liq. Chromatogr., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2010: pp. 147–197. doi:10.1002/9780470508183.ch4. 
[83] 
M.L. Nielsen, J.B. Nielsen, C. Rank, M.L. Klejnstrup, D.K. Holm, K.H. Brogaard, B.G. Hansen, J.C. Frisvad, T.O. 
Larsen, U.H. Mortensen, A genome-wide polyketide synthase deletion library uncovers novel genetic links to 
polyketides and meroterpenoids in Aspergillus nidulans, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 321 (2011) 157–166. 
doi:10.1111/j.1574-6968.2011.02327.x. 
[84] 
B.A. P., Mechanistic aspects of electrospray ionization, J. Chromatogr., A. 794 (1998) 345. 
http://production.datastore.cvt.dk/filestore?oid=53a83b088b7104bf72087c81&targetid=53a83b088b7104bf7
2087c83 (accessed January 14, 2018). 
[85] 
W.M.A. (Wilfried M.A.. Niessen, Liquid chromatography--mass spectrometry., CRC/Taylor & Francis, 2006. 
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2305102706 (accessed January 14, 2018). 
[86] 
C.S. Ho, C.W.K. Lam, M.H.M. Chan, R.C.K. Cheung, L.K. Law, L.C.W. Lit, K.F. Ng, M.W.M. Suen, H.L. Tai, 
Electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry: principles and clinical applications., Clin. Biochem. 24 (2003) 3–12. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.bi.64.070195.001531. 
[87] 
D. Harris, Quantitative Chemical Analysis, W.H. Freeman and Co, 2010. 
http://www.academicbooks.dk/quantitative-chemical-analysis/daniel-c-harris/9781429239899 (accessed 
January 17, 2018). 
[88] 
M. Guilhaus, D. Selby, V. Mlynski, Orthogonal acceleration time-of-flight mass spectrometry, Mass Spectrom. 
Rev. 19 (2000) 65–107. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1098-2787(2000)19:2<65::AID-MAS1>3.0.CO;2-E. 
[89] 
I. V. Chernushevich, A. V. Loboda, B.A. Thomson, An introduction to quadrupole-time-of-flight mass 
spectrometry, J. Mass Spectrom. 36 (2001) 849–865. doi:10.1002/jms.207. 
[90] 
M. Guilhaus, D. Selby, V. Mlynski, Orthogonal acceleration time-of-flight mass spectrometry, Mass Spectrom. 
Rev. 19 (2000) 65–107. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1098-2787(2000)19:2<65::AID-MAS1>3.0.CO;2-E. 
==PAGE:110==
[91] 
Agilent, Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry Technical Overview This overview describes :, Agil. User Man. 
(2011) 16. 
[92] 
W.M.A. (Wilfried M.A.. Niessen, Liquid chromatography--mass spectrometry., CRC/Taylor & Francis, 2006. 
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2305102706 (accessed January 9, 2018). 
[93] 
A. Klitgaard, A. Iversen, M.R. Andersen, T.O. Larsen, J.C. Frisvad, K.F. Nielsen, Aggressive dereplication using 
UHPLC-DAD-QTOF: Screening extracts for up to 3000 fungal secondary metabolites, Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 406 
(2014) 1933–1943. doi:10.1007/s00216-013-7582-x. 
[94] 
H. Laatsch, Wiley-VCH - AntiBase, (2012). https://application.wiley-vch.de/stmdata/antibase.php (accessed 
February 7, 2018). 
[95] 
M.B. Arnaud, G.C. Cerqueira, D.O. Inglis, M.S. Skrzypek, J. Binkley, M.C. Chibucos, J. Crabtree, C. Howarth, J. 
Orvis, P. Shah, F. Wymore, G. Binkley, S.R. Miyasato, M. Simison, G. Sherlock, J.R. Wortman, The Aspergillus 
Genome Database (AspGD): Recent developments in comprehensive multispecies curation, comparative 
genomics and community resources, Nucleic Acids Res. 40 (2012) D653–D659. doi:10.1093/nar/gkr875. 
[96] 
R.P. de Vries, R. Riley, A. Wiebenga, G. Aguilar-Osorio, S. Amillis, C.A. Uchima, G. Anderluh, M. Asadollahi, M. 
Askin, K. Barry, E. Battaglia, Ö. Bayram, T. Benocci, S.A. Braus-Stromeyer, C. Caldana, D. Cánovas, G.C. 
Cerqueira, F. Chen, W. Chen, C. Choi, A. Clum, R.A.C. dos Santos, A.R. de Lima Damásio, G. Diallinas, T. Emri, E. 
Fekete, M. Flipphi, S. Freyberg, A. Gallo, C. Gournas, R. Habgood, M. Hainaut, M.L. Harispe, B. Henrissat, K.S. 
Hildén, R. Hope, A. Hossain, E. Karabika, L. Karaffa, Z. Karányi, N. Kraševec, A. Kuo, H. Kusch, K. LaButti, E.L. 
Lagendijk, A. Lapidus, A. Levasseur, E. Lindquist, A. Lipzen, A.F. Logrieco, A. MacCabe, M.R. Mäkelä, I. Malavazi, 
P. Melin, V. Meyer, N. Mielnichuk, M. Miskei, Á.P. Molnár, G. Mulé, C.Y. Ngan, M. Orejas, E. Orosz, J.P. 
Ouedraogo, K.M. Overkamp, H.S. Park, G. Perrone, F. Piumi, P.J. Punt, A.F.J. Ram, A. Ramón, S. Rauscher, E. 
Record, D.M. Riaño-Pachón, V. Robert, J. Röhrig, R. Ruller, A. Salamov, N.S. Salih, R.A. Samson, E. Sándor, M. 
Sanguinetti, T. Schütze, K. Sepčić, E. Shelest, G. Sherlock, V. Sophianopoulou, F.M. Squina, H. Sun, A. Susca, 
R.B. Todd, A. Tsang, S.E. Unkles, N. van de Wiele, D. van Rossen-Uffink, J.V. de Castro Oliveira, T.C. Vesth, J. 
Visser, J.H. Yu, M. Zhou, M.R. Andersen, D.B. Archer, S.E. Baker, I. Benoit, A.A. Brakhage, G.H. Braus, R. Fischer, 
J.C. Frisvad, G.H. Goldman, J. Houbraken, B. Oakley, I. Pócsi, C. Scazzocchio, B. Seiboth, P.A. VanKuyk, J. 
Wortman, P.S. Dyer, I. V. Grigoriev, Comparative genomics reveals high biological diversity and specific 
adaptations in the industrially and medically important fungal genus Aspergillus, Genome Biol. 18 (2017) 28. 
doi:10.1186/s13059-017-1151-0. 
[97] 
G.G. Moore, B.M. Mack, S.B. Beltz, M.K. Gilbert, Draft Genome Sequence of an Aflatoxigenic Aspergillus 
Species, A. bombycis, Genome Biol. Evol. 8 (2016) 3297–3300. doi:10.1093/gbe/evw238. 
[98] 
J. Malmstrom, S.C. Polson, S.W. Polson, G.W. Smith, J.C. Frisvad, Study of secondary metabolites associated 
with virulent and non-virulent strains of Aspergillus sydowii: sea fan pathogen, Proceeding 8th Symp. Nat. 
Histroy Bahamas. 154 (2001) 48–52. 
http://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&btnG=Search&q=intitle:Study+of+secondary+metabolites+associate
d+with+virulent+and+non-virulent+strains+of+aspergillus+sydowii+sea+fan+pathogen#0. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
Appendix I Amino acid sequence of AdaA, AdaB, and AdaC 
AdaA NR-PKS 
>AEN83889.1 AdaA [Aspergillus niger] 
MSAPTKLVFFGNEFPNDDLKALFRGLHRHGKDRRFRQLATFLEESTRVLQNEVAQLPEPLKKLVPHFENL 
MPLTEVDFRQGPLGAAMESALLTILELGMFIGHYEAEERVWDLSADRATLAGLSIGLLAAAGVALSTHLA 
EVVQNGAECVRVSFRLGVYVHDISRKLEAPQADGSLLSWAHVVTGETASDLQEELSRYNTETGTPELLKV 
FISAADKTSVSVSGPPSRIRAAFRASQRLRYSKSLALPVYDGLCHAAHLYDEETIHRVLHPDGSVIPTSR 
PVQLALLSSRSGQPFEATTAAELFRAISTELLTGTIFLDNITAGILDRTERCADATQCQIETYRTSLVFK 
GLLKALEACFPDRTISTTDLIPWVFQDYGARQPKSCADSKLAIVGMACRMPGGANDLDLFWELLAQGRDT 
HTTVPADRFDLETHYDPTGETENATRTPFGNFIDQPGLFDAGFFNMSPREAEQTDPMHRLALVTAYEALE 
MAGIVSGRTPSSNPKRIATFYGQASDDWRELNASQNIGTYAVPGGERAFANGRINYFFKFGGPSFNLDTA 
CSSGLAAVQAACSALWAGEADTVLAGGLNIITDPDNYAGLGNGHFLSRTGQCKVWDQSADGYCRADGVGS 
VVIKRLEDAEADNDNILAVVLSAATNHSAEAISITHPHAGAQKENYTQVLHQAAVNPLDISYVELHGTGT 
QAGDAQEAESVLDIFAPRNHRRRADQPLHLGAVKSNIGHGEAAAGIASLLKVLLMYQKNEIPAHIGIPTV 
INPAIPTDLEQRKVYLPRTKTAWPRAAGQIRRAIVNSFGAHGGNTTLVLEDAPEKQVTVAREERSTHPVV 
ISAKSKKSLAANVETLLAYLDENPETDLGDLSYTTCARRMHHSWRLATAVSDIPALQKFLRNAVSNDAVS 
QTRPIPTEAPPVVFTFTGQGAYYAGLAQGLFQALPFFRAEVRQLDHLSQRLGFPSIVPVILGEVEEGTAT 
ALVTQLSIVIVEIALARLWLLLLGIPAPHAVIGHSLGEYAALAVAGVLSTADALYLVGHRAQLIEEHCTP 
GSHAMLSVRATIADIERLVGTGSDAPTYELSCQNTHQDTVIGGSIQDLNAIREKLEHEGIKCVNVDVPFA 
FHTAQMDAVRERLAKAVAAVPFKTPSVPVLSPLLGSVVFDGKSINPEYIVRATREPVQFATAIDAAQELG 
IVNSQTLWVDIGPHPICASFVRSLVPGARIVSSCRRNEDNFATMAKSLCTLHLAGRTPSWAEYFRPDEQA 
YSLLRLPKYRWNEVNYWIQYLGTWTLDKAHLKNGGSQKRAITDVPSISSLRTSLIHQVTEETVDKTTATL 
KAISDIQHPDFLEAVHGHTMNNCGVATSSIWTDMAMTVGEHLYRRLVPGTDHVLMDLCDFEVQHAQVANT 
NSNTPQPLALEAHLDLPTRHMSLAWYDVNATTNQRADAPFATGSIKYPADPTGAAWSIEWSRITHLIQGR 
IEALQHLAAENKASTLSKPLAYALFKNVVDYAPRYRGMDRVVIHDHEAFSDITLTTDRHGTWHTPPHWID 
SVSHLAGLVMNGSDASNTRDFFYVTPGCSSCRMAEPLIAGGKYRNYVRMFPMPDEAHMYAGDLYILREDK 
IIGVVEQLKFRRVPRLLMDRFFSPNKNAAAHAAPAPAPAAVPAVKKQPPTETIQPQAPKTEQKQDQLQLP 
NLASAAPSTASSSSSPSSSGVATPTTEQEAPGADASAVTGVAGKCLELIANETGLGVAELTADATFVQLG 
VDSLMSLVLSEKLRSEMGLEIKSSLFLECPTVGDLTGWLEQYC 
 
AdaB Metallo-β-lactamase 
>AEN83888.1 AdaB [Aspergillus niger] 
MAFRIPFAQSFWQEYLSGQEANLPRLPEVEQVTETVMRILGGNPGRMQLQGTNTYLVGTGKFRILIDTGQ 
GEASWIEALTKQLEANGLEISHVLLTHWHGDHTGGVPDLITYNPELSSRVYKNTPDLGQQAIHDGQKFHV 
EGATIRAVFTPGHAFDHMCFLLEEENALFTGDNVLGHGYSVVEDLGTYMTSLTRMADLNCALGYPAHGTR 
IEDLPAKMKEYIQHKESRMRQVLAALERSRARMTATGGGRRAGALTFPELINSMYGGIPDEIEQALTPFL 
SQVLWKLAEDRKVGFEGEPSQRRWFAVGPPAATAVRL 
 
AdaC FAD-dependent oxidoreductase  
>AEN83887.1 AdaC [Aspergillus niger] 
MTPPILIIGAGLSGLTISRILTNASIPNIVFEASTPDRSQGYAISLREWGYTSLLTALGDLPLRSLTRGV 
APDRILGGTGWIDQALRDNHTGNLLVAPDPEAKQCIVRANRNALRTWIADSGDEEVDIRYGHRLRSVQGS 
MGNVTATFDNGAKYQGSLVIAADGVHSSVRSQILPHVSPDIVPVVVYHGELELPRKEFDNLIRPHSGPSN 
ILAGVGDGFNTPITVCNITPTHVHLDWSYSRPSTENKENKDPLYRPHVSAAEAKQIPPALLEEIASRDLA 
RPWSQLLNAEALPTHRVFNWVSRCVSVTREDVNAAQKQGVVFIGDSWHAMPIFGGEGGNHALVDAVELAE 
ALTGKEGNLDAAVTGYYDRAWRRCQEAVRRSRQRFFQLHRPMREWMEIAEKKKMMAAMKGVEAH 
 
 
 
==PAGE:112==
Appendix II - Annotated theocratic gene clusters  
A. aculeatus 
  
A. brasiliensis 
 
A. luchuensis 
 
A. nidulans 
 
 
A. sydowii 
 
A. versicolor 
 
A. wentii 
 
A. zonatus 
 
==PAGE:113==
Appendix III Media  
Luria-Bertani medium (LB) with ampicillin (amp) 
Chemical 
Amount pr. L 
Bacto Tryptone 
10 g 
Bacto yeast extract 
5 g 
NaCL 
10 g 
H2O 
Up to 1 L 
Ampicillin (100mg/ml)  (after autocalving) 
1000 µl 
 
Adjust pH to 7 with NaOH/HCL 
 With 5-fluoro-orotic acid (5-FOA) 
Chemical 
Amount pr. L 
Flask A 
 
Sc powder 
7.25 g 
Glucose 
20 g 
Bacto agar 
20 g 
H2O 
900 ml 
Flask B 
 
5-FOA 
740 
H2O 
100 ml 
Flask A: Adjust pH to 7 with NaOH/HCL before adding agar. Flask B sterilierd filterd into Flask 
A.  
Yeast extract peptone dextrose (YPD) media with/without Uridine 
Chemical 
Amount pr. L 
Flask A 
 
Bacto Yeast Extract 
10 g 
Bacto Peptone 
20 g 
H2O 
900 ml 
Flask B 
 
Glucose 
12 g 
H2O 
100 ml 
After autoclaving mix flask A and B.  
Transformation Media (TM) 
Chemical 
Amount pr. L 
Sucrose 
342.30 
Nitrate salts 20 x 
50 ml 
Trace elements 1000 x 
1 ml 
Thermine 1 % 
1 ml 
Agar 
20 g 
H2O 
Up to 1 L 
 
 
 
==PAGE:114==
Minimum media (MM) with/without Uridine 
Chemical 
Amount pr. L 
D-glucose 20 % w/V 
50 ml 
Nitrate salts 20 x 
50 ml 
Trace elements 1000 x 
1 ml 
Thermine 1 % 
1 ml 
Possible Uridine 
2.44 g 
H2O 
Up to 1 L 
1000 x Trace elements solution 
Chemical 
Amount pr. L 
Na2B4O7 • 10H2O 
40 mg 
CuSO4 • 5H2O 
400 mg 
FeSO4 • 7H2O 
1.2 g 
MnSO4• 1H2O 
700 mg 
NaMoO2 • 2H2O 
800 mg 
ZnSO4• 7H2O 
10 g 
H2O 
Up to 1 L 
YES  
Chemical 
Amount pr. L 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H2O 
Up to 1 L 
Czapek Yeast Agar (CYA) 
Chemical 
Amount pr. L 
Sucrose  
30 g 
Bacto yeast extract 
5 g 
NaNO3 
3 g 
K2HPO4 
1 g 
MgSO4 • 7H2O 
0.5 g 
KCl 
0.5 g 
FeSO4 • 7 H2O 
1 ml 
H2O 
Up to 1 L 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
Appendix IV Plasmid maps  
Plasmid pU2002 used for deletion plasmids  
 
Plasmid FMOΔ  
 
 
CRISPR plasmid pFC322-FMO  
==PAGE:116==
 
 
 
==PAGE:117==
Appendix V primers and DNA fragments 
DNA Fragments 
Description 
Forward primers 
Reverse primers 
MβL-TE Up 
For 92454 deletion 
M-beta-L UP FU 
M-beta-L UP RU 
MβL-TE Down 
M-beta-L DW FU 
M-beta-L DW RU 
FMO Up 
For 1394988 deletion 
FMO UP FU 
FMO UP RU 
FMO Down 
FMO DW FU 
FMO DW RU 
PTA Up 
For 48554 deletion 
Tapen UP FU 
Tapen UP RU 
PTA Down 
Tapen DW FU 
Tapen DW RU 
58 Up 
For 34258 deletion 
ASYD34258-UP-FU 
ASYD34258-UP-RU 
58 Down 
ASYD34258-DW-FU 
ASYD34258-DW-RU 
50 Up 
For 48550 deletion 
ASYD48550-UP-FU 
ASYD48550-UP-RU 
50 Down 
ASYD48550-DW-FU 
ASYD48550-DW-RU 
CRI-1-MβL 
Protospacers for CRSIPR-
plasmid pFC332- MβL 
CSN438 
CIS-SYD92454-RU 
CRI-2-MβL 
CIS-SYD92454-F1U 
CIS-SYD92454-R1U 
CRI-2-MβL 
CIS-SYD92454-F2U 
CSN790 
CRI-1-FMO 
Protospacers for CRSIPR-
plasmid pFC332- FMO 
CSN438 
CIS-SYD1394988 -RU 
CRI-2-FMO 
CIS-SYD1394988 -F1U 
CIS-SYD1394988 -R1U 
CRI-2-FMO 
CIS-SYD1394988 -F2U 
CSN790 
CRI-1-PTA 
Protospacers for CRSIPR-
plasmid pFC332- PTA 
CSN438 
CIS-SYD48554 -RU 
CRI-2-PTA 
CIS-SYD48554-F1U 
CIS-SYD48554-R1U 
CRI-2-PTA 
CIS-SYD48554-F2U 
CSN790 
CRI-1-50 
Protospacers for CRSIPR-
plasmid pFC332-50 
CSN438 
CIS-SYD34258-RU 
CRI-2-50 
CIS-SYD34258-F1U 
CIS-SYD34258-R1U 
CRI-2-50 
CIS-SYD34258-F2U 
CSN790 
CRI-1-58 
Protospacers for CRSIPR-
plasmid pFC332-58 
CSN438 
CIS-SYD48550-RU 
CRI-2-58 
CIS-SYD48550 -F1U 
CIS-SYD1394988 -R1U 
CRI-2-58 
CIS-SYD48550-F2U 
CSN790 
 
PW272 
M-beta-L UP FU  
GGTTTAAUTCCAAACATACCGAAGATGA 
PW273 
M-beta-L UP RU  
GGACTTAAUTAGTGAATAGAGCACGTCTTG 
PW274 
M-beta-L DW FU  
GGCATTAAUTGGTGGTGAACTTTTTGTGTC 
PW275 
M-beta-L DW RU  
GGTCTTAAUTCCAACATAGACAATAGCACC 
PW276 
FMO UP FU  
GGTTTAAUTATGTGACCAATGCGAATGT 
PW277 
FMO UP RU  
GGACTTAAUTAAGACCGGAGAAGAATGTGG 
PW278 
FMO DW FU  
GGCATTAAUTGTCTATACGTTCCCGCTTCC 
PW279 
FMO DW RU  
GGTCTTAAUTGCCTGGAGAATGGAAAGAAT 
PW280 
Tapen UP FU  
GGTTTAAUTCGAAGAGGAAAGAGAAGGTG 
PW281 
Tapen UP RU  
GGACTTAAUTATAGTTGGTAAGTCCGGAGC 
PW282 
Tapen DW FU  
GGCATTAAUTCGTCCTTCTCGCTTTTTCGG 
PW283 
Tapen DW RU  
GGTCTTAAUTCGCCTGTCCGTAAAATGTCC 
PW305 
ASYD34258-UP-FU 
GGGTTTAAUTCTCCCTTTATATGCCCATGC 
PW306 
ASYD34258-UP-RU 
GGACTTAAUTCTTCGGTGTAATTCGTGTGG  
PW307 
ASYD34258-DW-FU 
GGCATTAAUTTCATCTCCGCTACACTTGTC  
PW308 
ASYD34258-DW-RU 
GGTCTTAAUTCAGTCACCAAACCTCATCG  
PW309 
ASYD48550-UP-FU 
GGGTTTAAUTCCAGCAGCAAGCACATTC  
PW310 
ASYD48550-UP-RU 
GGACTTAAUCTGGTTAATTCTGGCAATGCG  
PW311 
ASYD48550-DW-FU 
GGCATTAAUTCCAGCTCTTCATTATGTCAC  
==PAGE:118==
PW312 
ASYD48550-DW-RU 
GGTCTTAAUAAATGGGAATTGAAGCTGAC  
PW322 
CIS-SYD48554-RU 
ATTGACAAUACTGTGCATCATCCGTGAATCGAAC 
PW323 
CIS-SYD48554-F1U 
ATTGTCAAUGACAGCAGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG 
PW324 
CIS-SYD48554-R1U 
ATCGGCGAUAAATTTGCTGCATCATCCGTGAATCGAAC 
PW325 
CIS-SYD48554-F2U 
ATCGCCGAUTTGGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG 
PW326 
CIS-SYD134988-RU 
AGGGCGGAUAGCAGCGCCTTTGCATCATCCGTGAATCGAAC 
PW327 
CIS-SYD134988-F1U 
ATCCGCCCUGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAGTTAAAATAAG 
PW328 
CIS-SYD134988-R1U 
AAAGTCAGUACGATTATCCTGCATCATCCGTGAATCGAAC 
PW329 
CIS-SYD134988-F2U 
ACTGACTTUAGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAGTTAAAATAAG 
PW330 
CIS-SYD92454-RU 
ATTTCTATUGCCTGGAAAGATGCATCATCCGTGAATCG 
PW331 
CIS-SYD92454-F1U 
AATAGAAAUGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAGTTAAAATAAG 
PW332 
CIS-SYD92454-R1U 
AGAGCGCGUTTTCCTCTTGCATCATCCGTGAATCGAAC 
PW333 
CIS-SYD92454-F2U 
ACGCGCTCUTCAGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG 
PW334 
CIS-SYD34258-RU 
ACGTGCAGUTGCTTCTTGCATCATCCGTGAATCGAAC 
PW335 
CIS-SYD34258-F1U 
ACTGCACGUTGCCGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG 
PW336 
CIS-SYD34258-R1U 
AGAGGTAAUACTACCTGTGCATCATCCGTGAATCGAAC 
PW337 
CIS-SYD34258-F2U 
ATTACCTCUACGGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG 
PW338 
CIS-SYD48550-RU 
ATCTGATAUGTCAGTCCGTGCATCATCCGTGAATCG 
PW339 
CIS-SYD48550-F1U 
ATATCAGAUGCGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG 
PW340 
CIS-SYD48550-R1U 
AGAACGTGUTCGCAGCAATGCATCATCCGTGAATCG 
PW341 
CIS-SYD48550-F2U 
ACACGTTCUGCGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG 
PW358 
CIS-SYD157033-RU 
ATGCGTCGUGGTACCAGGTGCATCATCCGTGAATCGAAC 
PW359 
CIS-SYD157033-F1U 
ACAGTGAAUGGGACTGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG 
PW360 
CIS-SYD157033-R1U 
ATGCGTCGUGGTACCAGGTGCATCATCCGTGAATCGAAC 
PW361 
CIS-SYD157033-F2U 
ACAGTGAAUGGGACTGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAGTTAAA 
PW362 
CIS-SYD92454-F1U-2 
AATAGAAAUGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAGTTAAAATAAGG 
PW363 
CIS-SYD92454-R1U-2 
AGAGCGCGUTTTCCTCTTGCATCATCCGTGAATCGAAC 
PW364 
ASYD48550-chkup-F 
ACTGATAGCGAGAAAGGCCC 
PW365 
ASYD48550-chkgap-F 
ATAAAGGCGGTTTGCTGCTC 
PW366 
ASYD48550-chkgap-R 
ACTTCACAACGCCCTACCTG 
PW367 
ASYD34258-chkup-F 
TGTTCTCACCTTCACCGGTC 
PW368 
ASYD34258-chkgap-F 
TTCGCGTGTCGTTTCATCTG 
PW369 
ASYD34258-chkgap-R 
GAAGCAGCGAGACGAGTAAC 
 
 
 
==PAGE:119==
Appendix VI PCR Protocols  
DNA fragments: 
Chemical 
Amount [µL] 
H2O 
18.5 
Phsier buffer 
8 
dNTP 
4 
DMSO 
2 
MgCl2 
2 
gDNA 
1 
Forward primere 
2 
Reverse Primer 
2 
X7 
0.5 
Protocol:  98°C/3 min 35x (98°C/30 sek (angling after primers)/ 30 sek 72/(0.5 minutes pr. 1 kb)) 72°C/5 min   
Spore PCR: 
Chemical 
Amount [µL] 
H2O 
15 
Phsier buffer 
8 
dNTP 
4 
DMSO 
4 
MgCl2 
4 
gDNA 
Scrape  
Forward primere 
2 
Reverse Primer 
2 
X7 
1 
Protocol:  98°C/30 min 35x (98°C/45 sek (angling after primers)/ 30 sek 72/(0.5 minutes pr. 1 kb)) 72°C/5 
min   
Spore PCR on gDNA: 
Chemical 
Amount [µL] 
H2O 
14.5 
Phsier buffer 
8 
dNTP 
4 
DMSO 
4 
MgCl2 
4 
gDNA 
1 
Forward primere 
2 
Reverse Primer 
2 
X7 
0.5 
Protocol:  98°C/3 min 35x (98°C/30 sek (angling after primers)/ 30 sek 72/(0.5 minutes pr. 1 kb)) 72°C/5 min   
 
 
==PAGE:120==
Appendix VII USER-cloning 
For deletion plasmids 1 µl digested plasmid was mixed with 4 µl Up fragment, 4 µl Down fragment, and 1 µl 
USER-enzyme (New England BioLabs). For CRISPR plasmids 1 µl digested plasmid was mixed with 2 µl of 
each CRI fragment, 1 µ of water, CutSmat buffer and USER-enzyme. 
USER-protocol: 
• 
USER-mix 35 minutes at 37 °C 
• 
USER-mix 35 minutes at 25 °C 
• 
On ice, add 40 µl DH5α E. coli 
• 
Cells 10 minute on ice 
• 
Cells 75 seconds at 42 °C 
 
 
 
==PAGE:121==
Appendix VIII Transformation of A. sydowii  
 
Transformation protocol.  
 
100 µl protoplasts 
 
20 µl deletion-plasmid, 10 µl deletion-plasmid + 10 µl CRISPR-plasmid, or 1 µ ml pPLAT 
 
150 µl PCT 
 
Incubate at room temperature for exactly 10 minutes  
 
Add 250 µl ATP 
 
Primers used for spore PCR 
PW166 
ASYD157033-up-FU 
GGGTTTAAUTCTTGTACGCTTGCTCCTCG 
PW167 
ASYD157033-up-RU 
GGACTTAAUGCTTGGTTGTTGTTGAGGGT 
PW168 
ASYD157033-dw-FU 
GGCATTAAUGTTGGTTGTGCTTCTTCTGT 
PW169 
ASYD157033-dw-RU 
GGTCTTAAUGGTCCGTCCTTTGCTGCAT 
PW170 
ASYD157033-chkup-F 
TGTCAAGGAAGTAGAGGCAAG 
PW171 
ASYD157033-chkgap-F 
CGAAGTGAGCTAAAGGGAGG 
PW172 
ASYD157033-chkgap-R 
GCGAAGTTCATGGGTCGGAT 
PW286 
pyrG-fum-R 
CAGCCTTCCTCCACAACACTC 
PW296 
ASYD134988-chkgap-F 
CCACATTCTTCTCCGGTCT  
PW297 
ASYD134988-chkgap-R 
CTTGCCTCTACTTCCTTGAC  
PW298 
ASYD134988-chkup-F 
TTGAGGGTGAGGTGGAGAACC 
PW299 
ASYD92454-chkgap-F 
TACATCACACATACACACAG    
PW300 
ASYD92454-chkgap-R 
CCTTGTAATCATGAACCTAC  
PW301 
ASYD92454-chkup-F 
CACCGCAGAAGAAGCGACAG  
PW302 
ASYD48554-chkgap-F 
GCTCCGGACTTACCAACTA  
PW303 
ASYD48554-chkgap-R 
TTGCTGTCTTGTGGCTGTC  
PW304 
ASYD48554-chkup-F 
GTGGAGTGGGTGTTTGTCGAG  
PW305 
ASYD34258-UP-FU 
GGGTTTAAUTCTCCCTTTATATGCCCATGC 
PW306 
ASYD34258-UP-RU 
GGACTTAAUTCTTCGGTGTAATTCGTGTGG  
PW307 
ASYD34258-DW-FU 
GGCATTAAUTTCATCTCCGCTACACTTGTC  
PW308 
ASYD34258-DW-RU 
GGTCTTAAUTCAGTCACCAAACCTCATCG  
PW309 
ASYD48550-UP-FU 
GGGTTTAAUTCCAGCAGCAAGCACATTC  
PW310 
ASYD48550-UP-RU 
GGACTTAAUCTGGTTAATTCTGGCAATGCG  
PW311 
ASYD48550-DW-FU 
GGCATTAAUTCCAGCTCTTCATTATGTCAC  
PW312 
ASYD48550-DW-RU 
GGTCTTAAUAAATGGGAATTGAAGCTGAC  
MS001 
ASYDpks033-ChkUP-F2 
GAACAAGAGAGAGGGCGCG 
MS002 
ASYDpks033-ChkGap-F2 
GTTGGGTCGGAGGAGCTAG 
MS003 
ASYDpks033-ChkGap-R2 
GCATGTTGAGGTCGATTGTGG  
MS004 
ASYDpks033-ChkIntR2 
GCAGGACAGGAGAGTGCTG 
MS005 
ASYDpks033-ChK-ChkDw-R3 GGTCAATTGGCAGTGAGCGG 
 
 
==PAGE:122==
Appendix IX qPCR 
qPCR mix: 
Chemical 
Amount [µL] 
SensiFast 
10 
H2O 
4 
gDNA 
2 
Forward primere 
2 
Reverse Primer 
2 
 
List of primers: 
PW206 
208061 qPCR FU 
AGATGCAAGGTACCGAAGT 
PW207 
208061 qPCR RU 
CAATAAATGGGCGACCGAG 
PW208 
34262 qPCR FU 
GCTCTCCATCTGCTCCTCT 
PW209 
34262 qPCR RU 
GGTGGTCCCATTTGCATTT 
PW210 
80817 qPCR FU 
CTGGAGCGACTGGGATTGT 
PW211 
80817 qPCR RU 
GGTCGATTTTTCTCTGTCGG 
PW212 
134993 qPCR FU 
CCATGTTGGTGATATGCGCT 
PW213 
134993 qPCR RU 
AATTCTTGATCGTCGGTGC 
PW214 
34258 qPCR FU 
CGCGTCAATTCCCAGATGT 
PW215 
34258 qPCR RU 
CGATAGTTGAGGCCCATGC 
PW216 
157033 qPCR FU 
CAAAGAGGAGGCAGCGAAG 
PW217 
157033 qPCR RU 
TGCTGGATAAGGCGAGAGC 
PW218 
48554 qPCR FU 
CGGAAGGGATCTGGTGAAC 
PW219 
48554 qPCR RU 
GTTTGCTCTTCCATCGCTT 
PW220 
134988 qPCR RU 
GCCGAAACAGCCGGTCAAA 
PW221 
134988 qPCR RU 
CATGGACATCGACTCAAGAG 
PW222 
183300 qPCR FU 
GCGTCCAGATTTCCCCAGA 
PW223 
183300 qPCR RU 
GACAGCAGAAGCCAAAGCC 
PW224 
92454 qPCR FU 
GTCCGTCATCAATCGCATT 
PW225 
92454 qPCR RU 
GCATTTCAACTCTCAGCGG 
PW226 
34253 qPCR FU 
GCAAGTGGTGGAAGTTGTT 
PW227 
34253 qPCR RU 
GCCGCAGTATCCCTTGTTA 
PW228 
48550 qPCR FU 
GGCCAACGCCGAAATAAGT 
PW229 
48550 qPCR RU 
GACCATCCAAGCTGCCACT 
PW230 
408188 qPCR FU 
GGCGACTGATAGCGAGAAA 
PW231 
408188 qPCR RU 
GAAGAAACGGGGACAGGCCA 
 
 
 
==PAGE:123==
Appendix X red pigments in MM liquid 
From OxeTF grown in liquid MM for 11 days. UV/Vis spectrums  
 
 
