==PAGE:1==
Coupled- and Integrated C-sleeve
Wedge Anchorage used for CFRP
Post-tensioning
Master’s Thesis, 23. February 2018
Mehmet Kaan Tural s092918
Naqaash Shabbir Ahmad s122990
Rachel Haikal Saliba s113759
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Coupled- and Integrated C-sleeve Wedge Anchorage used for CFRP Post-tensioning
Authors:
Mehmet Kaan Tural s092918
Naqaash Shabbir Ahmad s122990
Rachel Haikal Saliba s113759
Supervisors:
Jacob Wittrup Schmidt, Associate Professor, Department of Civil Engineering
Per Goltermann, Professor, Department of Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Structural Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
28. August 2017- 23. February 2018
ECTS:
32.5
Education:
M.Sc.Eng.
Field:
Structural Engineering
Class:
Conﬁdential
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of Master of
Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The project is credited
to 32.5 ECTS points and written by Mehmet Kaan Tural, Naqaash Shabbir Ahmad and Rachel
Haikal Saliba. The work on this thesis started in Aug 2017 and ended in Feb 2018. Through this
period, theory has been analyzed and experiments have been executed.
First and foremost, we would like to thank our supervisor Jacob Wittrup Schmidt for help and
guidance throughout the project. We would also like to thank research student Christian Over-
gaard Christensen for assisting the experimental work.
There are no secrets to success. It is the result of preparation, hard work and learning from
failure.
Colin Powell
Kgs. Lyngby February 23, 2018
Mehmet Kaan Tural (s092918)
Naqaash Shabbir Ahmad (s122990)
Rachel Haikal Saliba (s113759)
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Structural capacity strengthening of existing structures is hypothesized to be achieved through
application of CFRP external post tensioning systems. As opposed to external strengthening sys-
tems using steel, undesired corrosion is through application of CFRP ensured to be avoided. The
ending goal in this thesis was to achieve a system response reminiscent of the working curve for
steel when externally reinforcing a HE240B beam with an 8 mm CFRP tendon anchored at both
one, two and three locations along the beam. An ultimate capacity of 160.85 kN was aimed for
during post tensioning of a serial coupled anchorage system. However, major challenges such as
brittleness and proper anchorage difﬁculties are despite preliminary efforts still associated with
the use of CFRP. Reliable components capable of making the system reach the desired ultimate
capacity were thereby proposed and evaluated both numerically and experimentally in this thesis
before their application in the global system.
The sensitive anchorage areas were dealt with through an anchor newly developed by the As-
sociate Professor, Jacob Wittrup Schmidt. Compared to the previous design minimized premature
ﬁber damage as well as a better load distribution along the new wedge due to both a longer and
well seated wedge inside the barrel were expected to be ensured. Six tensile tests of the rod-anchor
system performed in this thesis revealed an average ultimate capacity of 2714 MPa corresponding
to a 5% fractile of 2638 MPa. One of the test outputs revealed the importance of realizing that pre-
setting of an anchor actually reaches a load level where it damages the rod instead of beneﬁting it -
In this case, above 130-140 kN. Three additional tests, where tendons with a diameter of only 7.8
mm were utilized, reached a capacity of only 2358 MPa. This premature failure revealed that even
such tiny manufacture errors managed to make the anchor, which was designed to grab around an
8 mm rod, incapable of ensuring sufﬁcient contact with the tendon. The brittleness of the CFRP
and thereby its incapability of ensuring the desired warning (like yielding steel) before failure, was
dealt with through a ductile mechanism design proposed in this thesis. Numerical evaluations of
sixteen different ductile mechanism designs leading to the ﬁnal one were performed through the
use of ABAQUS. The ﬁrst part of the ﬁnal design is a hollow core aluminum cylinder designed
to provide ductility to the system and to yield before rupture in the rod occurs. The other part,
which is referred to in this thesis as a stabilizing response pin is made of a high strength steel
where any yielding is ensured to e avoided. It was inserted inside the mechanism to control and
iii
==PAGE:8==
iv
ABSTRACT
cancel out any possible deﬂections causing the undesired contact between the ductile mechanism
and the rod. Compression tests of the ﬁnal design indicated the effectiveness of the stabilizing
response pin and revealed the values 68.5 kN, 80 kN and 95.3 kN corresponding to depletion of
the elastic regime, yielding point and average ultimate capacity, respectively. The fact that both
the CFRP tendon and the utilized HE240B beam remained in the linear elastic regime during the
entire CFRP post-tensioning process allowed the ductile mechanism to regulate the response and
desired ductility of the system. This was indicated through the single anchored full scale tests
where both the beam an rod responses imitated the tendency of the ductile mechanism response.
The stability of both the anchor and the ductile mechanism was shown through the local tests.
Based on these the global system behaviour were predicted.
A speciﬁc post-tensioning approach is required in order for the serial coupled system to reach
the desired capacity without any premature failure incident. This made it necessary to test and
evaluate four different conﬁgurations each revealing how the load is distributed between the an-
chors. However an ultimate system capacity of only 112 kN was reached due to tensioning chal-
lenges and stiffness in the system.
==PAGE:9==
List of Abbreviations
CFRP
Carbon Fibre Reinforced Polymers
DM
Ductile Mechanism
FRP
Fibre Reinforced Polymers
LVDT
Linear Variable Displacement Transformers
S
Switch Spectrum
SG
Strain Gauges
v
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
List of Symbols
A
Cross-section area
d
Diameter
E
Elastic modulus
e
Eccentricity
F
Force
fy
Yield Strength
fyd
Design Yield Strength
fu
Ultimate Stress
g
Gravity
h
Height
I
Moment of Inertia
L
Length
M
Moment
N
Normal force/Axial force
n
Sample size/Number of the anchors
P
Load
s
Sample Standard Deviation
vii
==PAGE:12==
viii
LIST OF SYMBOLS
T
t-distribution Deviation
t
Thickness
U, u
Displacement/Deﬂection
V
Shear Force
W
Weight
X
Fractile Value
x
Samples
x
Mean Value
z
Compression Zone
γ
Partial Coefﬁcient
δ
Compression
ϵ
Error
ε
Strain
ν
Degrees of Freedom
ρ
Density
σ
Stress
==PAGE:13==
Table of Content
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
List of Abbreviations
v
List of Symbols
vii
1
Introduction and Background
1
1.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.1
Additional Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Preliminary Work Completed at DTU – Department of Civil Engineering
. . . .
5
1.3
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theory and Project Basis
7
2.1
Carbon Fiber Reinforcement Polymer Rod . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Anchor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Purpose of the Ductile Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Anchor Block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Anchorage Failure Modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
Serial Coupled Anchorage System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6.1
The Theory Behind a Serial Coupled System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6.2
Calculation Procedure for Serial Coupled Anchorage System . . . . . . .
19
2.6.3
Theoretical Calculation Results of Serial Coupled Anchorage System . .
23
3
Modeling and Design of Ductile Mechanism
25
3.1
Applied Procedure and Inputs in ABAQUS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Design Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Final Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.1
Experiments and Test Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
ix
==PAGE:14==
x
TABLE OF CONTENT
4
Theoretical Investigation of Serial Coupled Anchorage System
39
4.1
Hypothesis on Load Distribution Between Anchors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Full Scale Testing of a CFRP Reinforced Steel Beam
43
5.1
Single Anchored CFRP Tendon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.1
Test Setup and Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.2
Static System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.3
Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.1.4
Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
Serial Coupled Anchorage of CFRP Tendon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2.1
Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2.2
Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2.3
Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6
Discussion and Conclusion
69
Bibliography
73
Appendices
75
A Tensile Test Analysis of Anchors
77
A.1
Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.2
Mathematical Theory for Experiment Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.3
Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.3.1
First Tensile Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.3.2
Second Tensile Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
B
Preset Performance Steps
81
C Ductile Mechanisms
85
C.1
Design Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
C.2
Dimensions of the Stability Response Pin and Corresponding Block . . . . . . .
105
D Anchor Block
109
E
Matlab Script for Serial Coupled Anchorage System
113
F
Monitoring of the Full Scale Tests During Their Performance
117
G Cross Section Calculations of the HE240B Beam
121
G.1
Beam Theory and Calculation Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
G.2
Calculation Process and Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
H Static System Hand Calculations
127
==PAGE:15==
TABLE OF CONTENT
xi
I
HE240B Beam Preparation Steps
131
I.1
Supports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
131
I.2
Drilling Holes in Test Beam
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
131
I.3
LVDT Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
I.4
Strain Gauges on Beam and CFRP Tendon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
134
I.4.1
Steel Beam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
134
I.4.2
CFRP Tendon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
136
I.4.3
Conversion Formula
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
137
I.5
Presetting Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
138
I.6
Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
140
J
Single Anchored Full Scale Testing
143
J.1
Ductile Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143
J.2
Rod . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143
J.3
Beam
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
144
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction and Background
Besides reaching the end of its serviceability lifetime a building structure tends to either corrode,
deteriorate, or be exposed to increasing live load as well as design and construction errors.
Due to these structural issues a building structure will, over time, be unable to reach a speciﬁc re-
quired capacity level. The potential fatal accidents and huge damages associated with these issues
can be signiﬁcantly minimized by increasing the structural capacity of the existing structure. This
can be achieved through application of post tensioning systems.
Fast mounting process, easy inspection, reduced friction losses, optimal utilization of moment and
shear capacity, increase of bending capacity and reduced deﬂection are the main advantages asso-
ciated with both passive and active external post tensioning systems using steel. These strength-
ening techniques have been utilized for half a century.
However, besides being relatively heavy, steel is a material provided with almost none resistance
towards corrosion. This major disadvantage makes it a necessity to search for appropriate alterna-
tives to steel.
CFRP (Carbon ﬁber reinforced polymers) tendons which have been investigated since the
1970s, are seen as an appropriate replacement.
The main advantage associated with the use of such material is its high resistance towards corro-
sion. Moreover, CFRP is provided with a tensile strength, which is minimum ﬁve times higher
than the one for conventional steel. Furthermore, the weight of CFRP represents only 20% of the
steel weight. While the elasticity modulus of steel is constant, the one for CFRP varies depending
on the ﬁber matrix ratio. (Schmidt et al. 2010), (Schmidt 2011)
However, some major challenges are associated with the use of CFRP and should not be
ignored in order for the above mentioned advantages to be optimally utilized.
Firstly, the CFRP tendon is quite challenging to anchor, due to its weak transverse properties. This
may consequently lead to undesired premature brittle failure modes of the CFRP tendon.
Secondly, CFRP is a brittle material which contrary to yielding steel does not provide a warning
before failure. The CFRP material has no plastic regime since it tends to fail immediately after its
elasticity is depleted.
One of the main goals in this thesis is to achieve a response reminiscent of the working curve
for steel where a plastic regime exists, when testing and investigating a steel beam externally
1
==PAGE:18==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
reinforced with an 8 mm CFRP rod anchored at both two, three and four locations along the rod.
This goal forms the future work for the preliminary investigations and research already performed
in (Schmidt 2011), (Vasconcelos 2016), (Jebanesan 2017), (Christensen 2017) and (Sørensen &
Krabbe 2017).
In which extend these desired responses will be achieved depend primarily on the behaviour of
the global systems individual components, hereunder the anchorage system as well as a ductile
mechanism.
The thesis therefore initiates with some local analysis and optimization of these components.
In this context, the previously mentioned challenges associated with the use of CFRP will be
addressed.
The role of the anchorage zones, according to the theory of post tensioning systems, is to transfer
the loads arising from the tensioning of the CFRP rod to the main structure. This load transfer
will according to the preliminary research performed in (Schmidt 2011) lead to quite sensitive
anchorage areas in relation to the other locations throughout the system. The behaviour of the
global system is therefore dependent on the load transfer ability of the anchors. It is therefore a
decisive factor to develop an anchorage system which ensures to utilize the full tensile capacity
of the applied 8 mm CFRP rod and at the same time make sure that a safe and controlled failure
occurs.
The newest developed anchor, which is the one utilized in this thesis is designed by the Associate
Professor, Jacob Wittrup Schmidt. Its concept resembles the integrated sleeve wedge system with
an angle difference between barrel and wedge designed and documented in (Schmidt 2011). It is
a further developed version though.
The distribution of the tensile load between the anchorages is comparable to the load distri-
bution in a group of bolt joints applied in a serial coupled linear elastic system (Thomsen 1987).
Based on that theory it is expected that the anchor closest to the tensioning will be subjected to
the majority of the resulting tensile load. With this concept, there is a risk of the other anchors
receiving a too small portion of the load. The idea of the anchors relieving each other in order for
the full capacity of the system to be governed by the strength of the rod instead of the anchor itself
will in that case most likely not take effect. A system where the load distribution to the anchors
can be controlled exactly as desired and at the same time ensure the desired warned failure is
thereby a necessity. This can according to the preliminary research done in (Schmidt 2011), (Vas-
concelos 2016) and (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017) be achieved by introducing a ductile mechanism
to the system located in between each anchor and corresponding anchor block. The design of the
mechanism should comply with the idea of ensuring a speciﬁc non-inward and axially straight
compression of the ductile mechanisms before failure of the anchors and CFRP rod take place.
Despite preliminary efforts towards reaching that design an optimal one is still not invented. The
main focus point throughout this thesis is thereby to propose such a ductile mechanism design.
It is known in advance that the outer anchor in the investigated serial coupled global system is
weaker than the inner one. This strength difference between the anchors makes it favourable to
introduce a strong and a weak ductile mechanism design. The design process of the ductile mech-
anism is thereby based on developing both a weak and a strong one both complying with the idea
==PAGE:19==
3
of ensuring an axial deformation.
According to previous experiences and investigations (Christensen 2017), the ultimate capac-
ity of the CFRP rod is expected to reach a load level above 2500 MPa which is the average capacity
according to the supplier. The aim of this thesis is thereby to reach a higher load level, during post
tensioning of the rod. It is investigated whether or not an ultimate system capacity of 3200 MPa
(160.850 kN) can be reached.
A veriﬁcation of all these investigations will be obtained through a combination of beam test-
ing, advanced monitoring as well as theoretical veriﬁcation.
==PAGE:20==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
1.1
Hypothesis
The following hypothesis is formulated in collaboration with the supervisor.
In this thesis, it is hypothesized that the novel anchorage systems can ensure a sufﬁcient and
sustained high stress and enable control of stresses in the anchorage by changing the response of
the ductile mechanisms. The post-tensioning systems with these anchorages applied, will be tested
on a steel beam where the stress transfer is investigated. One- and two post-tensioning systems
will be mounted on a steel beam and tensioned providing a desired equilibrium. Following will
therefore be investigated in the project:
• Level of failure control in the anchorage systems and related reliability.
• Evaluation of the local stress transfer in the anchorage- and anchorage zone.
• Investigation of the ultimate capacity.
• Investigation of the system at several tensioning levels.
• Evaluation of the failure modes and level of failure control related to the systems.
Beam testing, advanced monitoring and theoretical veriﬁcations will be combined to verify
these investigations.
1.1.1
Additional Goals
Additionally the following goals have been investigated:
• An ultimate tensile capacity of the rod-anchor system higher than the one according to the
CFRP manufacturer (2500 MPa) is desired.
• Behaviour of the global system reminiscent to the one for steel where a plastic regime is
existing.
• A total load capacity of 160.85 kN (3200 MPa) is desired to be achieved in a serial coupled
system.
==PAGE:21==
1.2. PRELIMINARY WORK COMPLETED AT DTU – DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL
ENGINEERING
5
1.2
Preliminary Work Completed at DTU – Department of Civil
Engineering
The following timeline presents the preliminary research performed and completed at DTU regard-
ing external reinforced concrete structures. This research process was initiated by Jacob Wittrup
Schmidth in connection with the Ph.d. thesis which covers a research about External Strengthen-
ing of Building Structure with Prestressed CFRP. The thesis was defended as well as published in
2011.
2011
Anchorage of external post-tensioning systems were developed to utilize the high lon-
gitudinal capacity of the CFRP rods (Schmidt 2011).
2016
Different designs of ductile mechanisms were investigated. Both theoretical and ex-
perimental investigations were accomplished in order to achieve the desired ductile be-
haviour. (Vasconcelos 2016)
2017
The anchorage system was tested. It was found that the capacity of the anchor was
increased when using a speciﬁc type of glue. A long term testing was done for the
anchorage system, over 14 days only small stress reductions were seen. Experiments
show that the ductility increases signiﬁcantly by introducing the ductile mechanism. It
was concluded that the deformation of the ductile mechanism needs to be controlled in
order to protect the CFRP rod when the ductile mechanism breaks. (Jebanesan 2017)
2017
Various anchors with an integrated sleeve were investigated in order to achieve the high-
est tensile capacity of an 8 mm CFRP tendon. Two different mechanical anchor designs
were used, one with alu-bronze in which both wedge and barrel were made of, while
the second design consists of a wedge made of aluminum and a barrel made of steel. A
mean tensile capacity of 2021 MPa and 2456 MPa was obtained for the ﬁrst and second
design, respectively. Besides, two different ductile mechanisms were designed and cal-
culated numerically with ABAQUS. A compression test was conducted for the ductile
mechanism, where an elastic response of 88 kN was obtained. In addition an ultimate
capacity between 107 kN and 118 kN was reached. (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017)
2017
Concrete beams were tested with the external post tensioning system. The main focus
was on the ductile tests. It was seen that extra deformation capacity was added to the
system by introducing the ductile mechanism.
Furthermore, the CFRP tendon strain was measured to be higher than the capacity given
by the supplier. It was declared that a stable anchor and a ductile mechanism with stable
responses is a necessity for using the system and utilizing the full strength of the CFRP.
(Christensen 2017)
==PAGE:22==
6
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
1.3
Report Structure
This section provides an overview on how the report is structured. All chapters are outlined and
their content brieﬂy introduced.
2. Theory and Project Basis
The chapter covers a thorough description of basic information and already veriﬁed developments
regarding the thesis subject. Hereunder, a description of the project components, such as the CFRP
tendon, anchor, ductile mechanism and anchor block, are available. Furthermore, preliminary es-
timations of the principles behind a serial coupled anchorage system are presented. Theoretical
investigations of the responses relevant for the serial coupled systems analyzed in this thesis are
documented here as well.
The content is a mixture of both background theory as well as knowledge obtained from prelimi-
nary work done at DTU and experimental evaluations performed throughout this thesis.
3. Modeling and Design of Ductile Mechanism
The ductile mechanism, which plays an essential role for externally reinforced CFRP systems is
dealt with in this chapter. The chapter initiates with the modeling and design process associated
with the mechanism. Finally, the obtained ﬁnal ductile mechanism design and its corresponding
experimental responses are analyzed and estimated.
4. Theoretical Investigation of Serial Coupled Anchorage System
This chapter provides a description and illustration of the expected load distribution occurring
between the anchors and associated ductile mechanisms when applied in a serial coupled CFRP
anchorage system.
5. Full Scale Testing of a CFRP Reinforced Steel Beam
The essential components have so far been investigated and analyzed locally. This chapter will
contribute to further understanding of these components when working together in a global HE240B
beam system externally reinforced with a CFRP tendon. Hereunder, the experimentally investiga-
tions and analyses performed for both a single as well as a serial coupled anchorage system are
provided. Comparisons with the corresponding theoretical investigations described in the previous
chapter are also available here.
6. Discussion and Conclusion
This chapter discusses and concludes the obtained observations and estimations that ensures an
answer to the project hypothesis. Ideas for the future work are also provided.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Theory and Project Basis
The content is a mixture of both background theory as well as knowledge obtained from prelimi-
nary work done at DTU and experimental evaluations performed throughout this thesis.
2.1
Carbon Fiber Reinforcement Polymer Rod
Fiber reinforced polymers (FRP) is a composite material which is generally utilized in the aerospace,
automotive, marine, and construction industries. The pros and cons concerning the FRP material
are summarized in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Pros & Cons of FRP rod (Schmidt 2011)
Advantages
Disadvantages
High corrosion resistance
Low ductility
Low thermal conductivity
Creep rupture
Fast and easier retroﬁtting
Brittle material
Lightweight with high tensile strength
Weak transverse stiffness
One of the predominant ﬁbers utilized in FRP, related to structure strengthening, is the carbon
ﬁber. Carbon ﬁber reinforced polymers (CFRP) has become a notable orthotropic material in
structural engineering applications due to its high longitudinal tensile strength compared to pre-
stressing steel. Retroﬁtting with CFRP tendon, for instance on old bridges, has potential beneﬁts
when it comes to repair of damages. However, anchoring with CFRP tendons often result in big
challenges due to its poor transverse compressive strength. The tendon fails when it is exposed to
too much radial stresses.
Figure 2.1 illustrates the poor ductility of a CFRP tendon compared to pre-stressing steel.
Ductile materials such as steel are characterized by their ability to yield, whereas CFRP tendon
behaves linearly until fracture happens. Furthermore, it is seen that the ultimate capacity of the
CFRP is considerably greater than pre-stressing steel. Table 2.2 indicates the mechanical proper-
ties of CFRP tendon compared with steel tendon.
7
==PAGE:24==
8
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND PROJECT BASIS
Figure 2.1: Representative constitutive models for prestressing steel and CFRP tendons, from (Bennitz
2011).
Table 2.2: Mechanical properties (Schmidt 2011)
CFRP
Steel
[MPa]
[MPa]
Longitudinal tensile strength
2250 – 2550
1860
Transverse compressive strength
228
1860
In-plane shear strength
71
-
2.2
Anchor
The current section introduces the role of a mechanical anchor used for CFRP post-tensioning.
Furthermore, the preliminary investigations performed with respect to the anchorage system are
summarized as well. This is followed by an introduction to the latest developed anchor design
and its response in a tension subjected system consisting of a CFRP rod being anchored at one
location in each end.
An anchorage system with a sufﬁcient capacity is essential in order to avoid failure of the
anchor before utilizing the full longitudinal tensile strength of the rod (2500 MPa in average ac-
cording to the supplier).
A successful anchorage and thereby a reliable tendon-system assembly is in practical terms achieved
when the premature failure modes described in Section 2.5 are replaced with a failure mode where
the rod fails due to a rupture in between the anchorages. Due to its tendency of reaching load lev-
els near the ultimate capacity of the rod itself power slip can also be considered as a favourable
failure mode.
However, as indicated in (Schmidt et al. 2010) the failure margins between a successful and
an unsuccessful anchorage system are quite small.
Furthermore, the creation of a completely mechanical anchorage for CFRP tendons is according
==PAGE:25==
2.2. ANCHOR
9
to (Schmidt et al. 2010) a challenge.
Application of a thin layered fast curing glue is proved in (Schmidt et al. 2010) to increase the
friction coefﬁcient between the rod and the wedge.
Despite preliminary efforts done in (Schmidt 2011) (Jebanesan 2017) and (Sørensen & Krabbe
2017) the appropriate anchorage system has not been developed yet.
(Jebanesan 2017) has evaluated an ultimate tensile load of 112.50 kN (ultimate tensile stress at
2238.12 MPa) with an aluminum bronze anchor without a ductile mechanism included, whereas
(Sørensen & Krabbe 2017) observed a mean tensile ultimate capacity of 123.5 kN (2456 MPa)
with a steel aluminum anchor without a ductile mechanism included.
The newest developed anchor, which is the one mainly utilized in this thesis is designed by
the Associated Professor, Jacob Wittrup Schmidt. This anchor consists of the wedge and barrel
shown in Figure 2.2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: a) Newest developed integrated wedge-sleeve anchorage with an oblique gap and corresponding
barrel b) illustration of the wedge inside the barrel.
Its concept resembles the integrated sleeve wedge system with an angle difference between
barrel and wedge designed in 2011 and documented in (Schmidt 2011). It is a further developed
version.
Compared to the previous design a better load distribution is ensured along the new wedge due to
both a longer and well seated wedge inside the barrel.
Moreover, the two slits and one gap (present in the wedge designed in 2011) which all are parallel
to the longitudinal direction of the CFRP rod are in the newest developed design replaced with an
oblique gap. (Figure 2.2a).
The purpose of the oblique gap is to minimize the premature damage of the ﬁbers in the rod
occurring due to the contact between the rod and the edge of the anchor gap.
The straight gap introduced in the previous anchor design will result in all the pressure being taken
by only the ﬁber parallel to the gap. This will most likely, as already experienced in the previous
==PAGE:26==
10
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND PROJECT BASIS
studies and during the anchor presetting performed in this thesis, result in fracture of the ﬁbers
and thereby premature failure of the entire rod (Figure 2.3). By introducing the oblique gap the
same pressure is instead expected to be distributed more equally to several ﬁbers.
The signiﬁcant length difference between the barrel and the wedge, which is clearly observed in
Figure 2.2a is expected to ensure an increased ductility in the anchor system. This ductility is not
taken into consideration in order to remain on the safe side.
Figure 2.3: Fracture of a rod ﬁber being subjected to a high pressure by the straight gap edge of the previous
anchor design.
The material types utilized for the wedge and the barrel belonging to the new anchor are
indicated in Table 2.3. Their corresponding strengths and elasticity modulus according to the
supplier are given as well.
Table 2.3: Material properties
Anchorage components
Material
fy
fu
E
[MPa]
[MPa]
[GPa]
Barrel
Steel
464’
512’
210”
Wedge
EN-AW-6262-T9
358’
372’
70
’Mean values, from (Schmidt, 2011), ”Provided by the manufacturer (mean value).
In order to either verify or falsify the above mentioned expectations of the new anchor, six
independent tensile tests have been performed in this thesis. The setup and process of the tensile
tests as well as the presetting procedure are explained and illustrated in Appendix A.
The graph shown in Figure 2.4 (enlarged in Appendix A) and the values presented in Table
2.4 represent the responses obtained from the performed tensile tests.
However, the failure magnitude of one of the specimens is not included in the values indicated
in Table 2.4. This is due to its failure happening at a load level signiﬁcantly lower than the mean
value of the ﬁve other test specimens (approximately 103 kN).
The 150 kN that this anchor was preset to was most likely the reason of the premature failure.
This may give an indication of the importance of realizing that presetting of an anchor actually
==PAGE:27==
2.2. ANCHOR
11
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Displacement [mm]
0
50
100
150
Load [kN]
Test 1 preset 130 kN
Test 2 preset 130 kN
Test 1 preset 140 kN
Test 2 preset 140 kN
Test 3 preset 140 kN
Test preset 150 kN
Figure 2.4: Responses of the tensile tests performed on the rod-anchor systems where the anchors were
presetted to 130, 140 and 150 kN.
Table 2.4: Mean value and 5 % fractile of the ultimate capacities obtained from the ﬁve successful tensile
tests performed on CFRP tendons each anchored with the newest developed anchor on each side.
fum
fu5%
[MPa]
[MPa]
Failure capacity
2714
2638
reaches a load level where it damages the rod instead of beneﬁting it.
Hence for the case of the newest developed anchor this critical value can be partly trusted to be 150
kN. Common for the ﬁve successful test specimens were their presetting level laying in between
130 and 140 kN. Hence it can be concluded as a necessity to preset the new anchors to a load level
laying in between this interval in order to achieve values near the ones indicated in Table 2.4.
The performed presetting procedure for the tensile tests is available in Appendix B.
However, three other performed tensile tests indicated that the presetting level is not the only
factor playing a role when it comes to an anchor-rod system being tensioned.
These are illustrated in Figure A.5 under Appendix A.3. All three systems, having the anchors
preset to a level between 130 and 140 kN reached a capacity of only 2358 MPa (112.5 kN) on
average. Furthermore, the capacity of one of the systems was governed by premature rupture in
the middle of the rod, while power slip represented the capacity of the other two test specimens.
These premature failures occurred most likely due to the rod diameter later found out to be 7.8
mm instead of the desired 8 mm.
The powerslip indicates that even this tiny manufacture error apparently managed to make the an-
chor, which is designed to grab around an 8 mm tendon, incapable of ensuring a sufﬁcient contact
with the tendon.
==PAGE:28==
12
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND PROJECT BASIS
2.3
Purpose of the Ductile Mechanism
One of the main purposes of introducing a ductile mechanism in front of the anchor in the CFRP
post-tensioning system is to ensure a structural behaviour approximately similar to the working
curve for prestressing steel. Otherwise the failure of the system will occur unannounced due to
the brittle behaviour of the CFRP rod, where no plastic regime exists. It tends to fail immediately
after its elasticity is depleted, as shown in Figure 2.1.
The ductile mechanism is thereby expected to ensure the desired warning and time to escape
before collapsing of the structure as well as increase the ductility of the system as investigated in
(Jebanesan 2017) and illustrated in Figure 2.5
Figure 2.5: Load/Deformation response of anchorage mechanism, ductile mechanism and the combined
system taken from Figure 43 in (Jebanesan 2017). It is observed how the experimental system with the
anchorage and ductile mechanism combined imitate the tendency of the ductile mechanism itself.
It is observed in Figure 2.5 how the ductility of the combined anchorage and ductile mecha-
nism system preferably converges towards the ductility of the ductile mechanism itself, but with a
lower strength.
According to (Jebanesan 2017) the ductility of the combined system, when the ductile mechanism
is included is estimated to be 34% better than with the anchor working alone.
Additionally, another main reason of introducing a ductile mechanism is to be able to regulate
and control the natural load distribution occurring in a linear elastic serial coupled system, which
is described in Section 2.6. The ductile mechanism is in that way expected to ensure that the
anchors relieve one another optimally ensuring a system capacity governed by the rod strength
instead of the anchor capacity. From an ideal point of view, the failure of the system can be con-
trolled by changing the ductile mechanism dimensions.
In order for the ductile mechanism to withstand the compression happening when the CFRP rod
is post-tensioned it should be made of a metal with a relatively high malleability. Malleability
deﬁnes the ability of a metal to withstand cracking and rupturing when exposed to compression.
This desired property can be achieved through the use of mild steel, which at the same time has
a high yield strength. But due to the undesired corrosion problems associated with steel, another
==PAGE:29==
2.3. PURPOSE OF THE DUCTILE MECHANISM
13
alternative must be found.
Despite its relatively low Youngs modulus and unique lightweight property due to its low mass
density (see Table 3.1) aluminum is known for being the second most malleable metal (Bell 2017)
(Prabhat 2018). Furthermore, it is resistant towards corrosion. All these properties make alu-
minum an appropriate material choice for the ductile mechanisms. However, it should still be
taken into account that aluminum’s relatively low yield strength compared to the one for steel is
going to limit the design possibilities of strong ductile mechanisms.
Moreover, the weak transverse properties of the CFRP tendon should be taken into consider-
ation by ensuring a failure mode where any contact between the ductile mechanism and the rod
is prevented. Even though an outer deformation of the ductile mechanism is preferable, it should
be minimized due to the limited space in the slider, wherein it is going to be mounted. One of
the anchors in the coupled global anchorage system is expected to be subjected to the majority of
the incoming tensile load, resulting in a greater compression of the adjacent ductile mechanism
in relation to the second one. Hence, when taking the coupled global system into consideration
it seems preferable to use two ductile mechanisms with a signiﬁcant strength difference between
them. It is therefore aimed for a design and thereby production of both a strong and a weak ductile
mechanism.
Another important factor that should be considered during the design phase of the ductile mecha-
nisms is their product-ability.
So far (Jebanesan 2017) proposed the ductile mechanism designs shown in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Ductile mechanism designs made of aluminum bronze and proposed in (Jebanesan 2017), from
Figure 27 in (Jebanesan 2017).
The material choice, which was aluminum bronze turned out to be more brittle than accounted
for.
Optimized designs, which are shown in Figure 2.7 were thereby proposed in (Sørensen & Krabbe
2017).
Both ductile mechanisms are made of regular aluminum. According to ABAQUS, where
both mechanisms were constrained at the top surface, Type_7X9 (seven holes in nine columns)
turned out to be a more appropriate design than Type_7x2 (seven holes in two columns) due to
Type_7x2 introducing an undesired column like behaviour, as observed from Figure 2.7a . This
lateral displacement was conﬁrmed experimentally as well.
Furthermore, the response changes obtained when increasing the inner diameter of the ductile
==PAGE:30==
14
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND PROJECT BASIS
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.7: Ductile mechanism designs proposed in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017). a) Deﬂection mode after 0
mm and 15 mm of Type_7x2 (seven holes in two columns) from Figure 5.10 in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017).
b) Deﬂection mode after 0 mm and 15 mm of Type_7x9 (seven holes in nine columns) from Figure 5.11 in
(Sørensen & Krabbe 2017)
Figure 2.8: Obtained effect of changing the inner diameter of Type_7x2, according to experiments per-
formed in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017)
mechanism were investigated as well. These tendencies are documented in Figure 2.8 and used
later on in this thesis in connection with the ﬁnal developed ductile mechanism design.
Type_7x9 has not been analyzed experimentally. But according to ABAQUS the desired axis-
symmetric deformation, illustrated in Figure 2.7b is only achieved when the top surface is re-
strained against any lateral movement. Otherwise the ductile mechanism will, according to FEM
modeling performed in this thesis and documented under Figure 3.4, introduce the undesired sec-
ond order effect. A second order effect indicates a s-shaped deformation.
A completely restrained top surface (surface between the ductile mechanism and the anchor) of
the ductile mechanism cannot be guaranteed in reality. Hence a ductile mechanism design should
only be considered appropriate if the second order effect can be avoided without the top surface
being constrained at all.
==PAGE:31==
2.4. ANCHOR BLOCK
15
Despite these preliminary efforts towards reaching an appropriate design an optimal one is
still not invented.
It is settled so far that the design of the mechanism should comply with the idea of ensuring a
speciﬁc non-inward and axially straight compression of the only partly constrained ductile mech-
anisms before failure of the anchors and CFRP rod take place.
2.4
Anchor Block
The anchor block is the component wherein the anchor and associated ductile mechanism are
mounted. The anchor block plays an essential role when externally post-tensioning both steel,
concrete and wooden structures. This is due to the fact that the loads initiated by the post tension-
ing are transferred to the main structure through the anchor block itself. Hence there will be a risk
of major issues occurring in the global system if the anchor block is subjected to failure.
The anchor block used in this thesis and shown in Figure 2.9 is expected to resist the load with
a large safety margin. The design is reminiscent to the one proposed by Jacob Wittrup Schmidt,
Associated Professor at DTU-BYG and utilized during the preliminary work done in (Sørensen
& Krabbe 2017). Few regulations have been made in this thesis. The dimensions of the utilized
anchor block, slider and threaded rod are all available in Appendix D. The same Appendix also
provides an explanation of the regulations made compared to the previous design.
The main constituents of the anchor block are the slider and threaded rod. The threaded rod
ensures sufﬁcient contact between the anchor and the slider. Furthermore, the desired prestressing
of the CFRP tendon is expected to be achieved by screwing mechanically on the threaded rod with
an adjustable wrench. The resulting tensile force in the tendon will pull the anchor and associated
ductile mechanism against the slider wall, leading to compression of the ductile mechanism. This
process is expected to create tension in the slider. These tensile forces are then transferred to the
anchor block, through the threaded rod, whereon compression will initiate. The parts of the anchor
block being closest to the threaded rod are the ones subjected to the majority of the compression.
These compression forces are then transferred to the main steel beam through six pieces of 16mm
bolts. The ideal load distribution and path are illustrated in Figure 2.9.
The analytical bearing capacity veriﬁcation of the anchor block and its corresponding con-
stituents is based on the one performed in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017). Despite the regulations
made on the current design the calculations will remain the same due to the unchanged cross
sections. The bearing capacity veriﬁcations have been performed in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017)
for a prestressing load equal to F = 196 kN. This load magnitude corresponds to application of
a CFRP rod with a diameter equal to 10 mm. Their aim of using a bigger diameter than the one
actually utilized (d = 8 mm) was to ensure a sufﬁcient safety margin of the capacity. According
to the calculations performed in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017), the bearing capacity of the anchor
block system is determined to 203 kN representing the tensile resistance of the threaded rod. The
capacity is considered sufﬁcient compared to 160.85 kN which is the maximum prestressing force
expected to subject the CFRP tendon with in this thesis. Hence a re-veriﬁcation of the bearing
capacity is assessed to be redundant.
==PAGE:32==
16
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND PROJECT BASIS
Figure 2.9: Anchor block and corresponding components utilized for the CFRP anchoring. The ideal load
path is indicated as well.
2.5
Anchorage Failure Modes
During testing of anchored CFRP tendons (Schmidt et al. 2010) observed the anchorage failure
modes described below.
Crushing of the rod
Crushing of the CFRP rod was the only failure mode that occurred in the commencement of the
anchorage design, where separate wedges were used. The integrated sleeve anchorage was not in
deliberation during that time. It is indicated that this failure mode splintering the rod due to the
sharp edges of the wedge. The wedge shatters the matrix as well as the ﬁber in longitudinal di-
rection thus the ruptured matrix and ﬁbre separates from the main CFRP rod if the bonded sleeve
does not perform its functionality but holding the main rod tight.
Soft slip
This failure mode drags the CFRP rod from the anchor in a gentle way. The main reason is the
inner connection between the wedge and rod.This leads to poor pressure around the rod which
causes friction stage change - static friction to kinetic friction.
==PAGE:33==
2.5. ANCHORAGE FAILURE MODES
17
Power slip
Power slip failure is the reverse failure mode to Soft slip. This means that the rod is pulled out
from wedge with an extreme tensile force leading to fracture (both ends splintering into each
other) along the free length of the CFRP rod. As opposed to soft slip power slip is assumed as a
desired and successful failure mode.
Frontal overload
Frontal overload failure concerns the principal stresses as well as force transfer along the tendon.
The tensile stresses, which extends longitudinal within the CFRP rod, are greatest at front of the
anchorage and lowest at the back (becomes zero). This is due to the angle, if barrels outer surface
has the same angle as the inner surface of the wedge then the radial stresses become greater. Such
a failure is prevented by changing the angle between the barrel and wedge.
Successfull anchorage
A successfull anchorage is characterized by rupture along the free length between the 2 anchor-
ages. This kind of failure happens explosively where the tendon immediately releases all the
interior energy and achieves the full capacity of the tendon.
Posterior overload
This failure mode occurs in a serial coupled anchorage system and is identical to Frontal overload.
The principal stresses in a serial system is greater compared to Frontal overload, this is due to the
tensile stresses which are no longer equal to zero in the unloaded area (back side of the anchor).
(Sørensen & Krabbe 2017).
==PAGE:34==
18
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND PROJECT BASIS
2.6
Serial Coupled Anchorage System
The ﬁrst subsection describes the theory behind a serial coupled system, which takes a starting
point on a serial coupled bolt joints from (Thomsen 1987). The second part provides a description
of the proposal made in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017) regarding the theoretical concept behind a
serial coupled anchorage system. This is followed by some mathematical expressions providing
a theoretical proposal of the load distribution among the anchors, elongation of the rod between
anchor as well as the compression magnitude initiating in the ductile mechanisms. This theory has
been utilized for the ﬁnal ductile mechanism design in this thesis through modeling in MATLAB.
The corresponding responses are summarized in Section 2.6.3.
2.6.1
The Theory Behind a Serial Coupled System
If every single anchor block was alike in the system, the block nearest the middle would carry a
bigger part of the load and the second block would carry the rest. This phenomena is seen in bolt
joints in a row. Taken a given joint with several bolts, the bolt nearest to the load is highly subjected
compared to the remaining bolts (Thomsen 1987). Hence the load is not equally distributed among
the bolts as shown in Figure 2.10
Figure 2.10: Bolts in a row, from (Thrane & Huslid 1985)
The introduction of the ductile mechanism makes it possible to control the distribution of the
load in every single anchor block. Depending on the load capacity of the mechanism, the anchor
will carry a load that is similar to the yield point of the ductile mechanism. Once the mechanism
reaches the yield point, the excess load is transferred to the secondary anchor block.
Loading Methods
The serial coupled system is loaded either by manual loading at each anchor, or by external load-
ing. The manual loading is applied when it is desired to tension the system internally. This implies
that the anchor block, which obtains the loading from the system and transfers it to the main beam,
is tensioned itself. When the anchor is pulled by fastening the bolt on the threaded rod, tension
occurs in the CFRP rod. In this case, the anchor block functions as both the anchorage system and
the loading system.
==PAGE:35==
2.6. SERIAL COUPLED ANCHORAGE SYSTEM
19
The external loading process resembles the system when the load applied on the beam is
coming from an external source and not by tensioning the anchor blocks. The force F shown in
Figure 2.10 is an external force, thus the theory behind a serial coupled system and the natural
load distribution implies most appropriately when the loading is external.
Both loading methods are applied in this thesis when the tests are performed. However, only a
calculation procedure for the external loading method is treated whilst a non-numerical hypothesis
on how the load distributes at the manual loading method is described in Section 4.1. For the
upcoming section, the external loading method is utilized.
2.6.2
Calculation Procedure for Serial Coupled Anchorage System
In this chapter the theoretical calculation process behind the double anchorage system with two
ductile mechanisms is introduced from (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017). The background for the cal-
culation procedure takes the starting-point on Figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11: Serial coupled system set-up, from Figure 3.4 in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017).
The system is assumed as pure linear-elastic with elastic modulus E and cross-section area A.
The preset is assumed perfect, which means that the tendon and wedge are not slipping from one
another, and compression of the anchor is neglected. The anchor block will not deform or translate,
and non initial stresses in tendon are present. The connection between load and compression
of each ductile mechanism is clear and each anchor is in contact with their respective ductile
mechanisms.
Mathematical Expressions
The mathematical background for the serial coupled system initiates with the applied force in
CFRP tendon F0 which should be in equilibrium with the load obtained from the ductile mech-
anisms. n is the number of anchors and Pi is the obtained load in the anchor with the mounted
ductile mechanism i.
==PAGE:36==
20
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND PROJECT BASIS
F0 =
n
X
i=1
Pi
(2.1)
The elongation of CFRP tendon is based on examining the Equation 2.2 (Hooke’s laws linear
elastic stress-strain ratio):
σ = Eε
⇔
F
A = E
∆L
L

(2.2)
By rearranging Equation 2.2, an expression of the passed on force to the next anchor ∆Fi→i+1
is presented.
∆Fi→i+1 = ∆Li→i+1
Li→i+1
(EA)
(2.3)
∆Li→i+1 is the elongation of the CFRP tendon, where (i →i + 1) indicates middle stage
between two neighboring anchors, i and i + 1
The elongation of the tendon between each anchor is expressed in the following Equation 2.4.
δi is the compression resulted from the obtained load Pi in the ductile mechanism.
∆Li→i+1 = δi −δi+1,
δi > δi+1
(2.4)
Equation 2.4 states that the elongation of the CFRP tendon is equal to the difference between
two neighboured ductile mechanism, the expression also states the compression of the next ductile
mechanism δi+1 must be less or equal to the ductile mechanism before, otherwise the elongation
cannot be known.
The obtained load in one anchor Pi is equal to the difference between applied force Pi−1 and
the passed load Fi→i+1.
Pi = Pi−1 −∆Fi→i+1
(2.5)
The applied load is equal to the external force, P0 = F0 for i = 1.
The working-curve for the obtained load in function of compression, is based on Equation
2.6. It states the connection between the obtained load and the compression δi of the ductile
mechanism.
Pi(δi) = Pi
(2.6)
The passed load Pi+1 will be obtained partially or fully by the next anchor.
On the basis of the mathematical theory from (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017) the calculation pro-
cedure is demonstrated in 10 steps:
==PAGE:37==
2.6. SERIAL COUPLED ANCHORAGE SYSTEM
21
Step 1
Initially, the length between the anchors Li→i+1 must be chosen, see Figure 2.11. The number of
the anchors and ductile type which shall be used at each anchor must be chosen as well.
Step 2
Compression of the ﬁrst ductile mechanism δ1 is selected.
Step 3
Estimate the load obtained by the ﬁrst ductile mechanism P1(δ1)
Step 4
External force F0 which will attain global equilibrium (i.e. Equation 2.1) is selected
Step 5
By rearranging the Equation 2.5 the passed on load to the next anchor is estimated with the fol-
lowing expression
∆Fi→i+1 = Pi−1 −Pi
(2.7)
Step 6
The elongation of the CFRP tendon is calculated by rearranging the Equation 2.3
∆Li→i+1 = ∆Fi→i+1
(EA)
Li→i+1
(2.8)
Step 7
The compression of the next ductile mechanism is expressed from Equation 2.4.
δi+1 = δi −∆Li→i+1
(2.9)
Step 8
Estimate the load obtained in the next anchor Pi+1(δi+1) If the system uses more than 2 anchors
repeat from step 5 to step 8, (n-2) times.
Step 9
Last, estimate the error ϵ
F0 −
n
X
i=1
Pi(δi)
 = ϵ
(2.10)
Step 10
By changing the external force F0 the error ϵ is minimized. In order to do that repeat step 4 to step
9 until satisfying accuracy is reached.
==PAGE:38==
22
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND PROJECT BASIS
The calculation procedure can be repeated until the compression of the ﬁrst ductile reaches the
ultimate capacity δ1 = [0, δ1,u] in order to attain the response of the system at each ductile (2.11).
δi(F0)
(2.11)
And also the load distribution between every anchor (2.12)
Pi(F0)
(2.12)
(Sørensen & Krabbe 2017) indicated in Equation 2.4 that the compression of the next duc-
tile mechanism must be equal or less than ductile mechanism before, thus the CFRP tendon is
managed by δi(F0) and the response of the CFRP can be expressed as:
∆L(F0) =
F0
(EA)L + δ1(F0)
(2.13)
Three different regime situations are observed, where the response of the system is plotted for
Equation 2.12 in Figure 2.12 (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017)
Figure 2.12: Response and visualisation of the three regimes in the serial coupled anchorage system, from
(Sørensen & Krabbe 2017).
Elastic regime – All mounted ductile mechanisms behave elastically when the components
are exposed to the external load F0. The deformations of the ductile mechanisms are non-
permanent when the unloading is completed.
Elastic - Ductile (Plastic) regime – The external load F0 causes at least one ductile mech-
anism to behave ductile and at least one to remain its elastic behavior.
Ductile (Plastic) regime – All ductile mechanisms behave ductile.
==PAGE:39==
2.6. SERIAL COUPLED ANCHORAGE SYSTEM
23
2.6.3
Theoretical Calculation Results of Serial Coupled Anchorage System
In this section the calculation results of the double anchored serial system are evaluated. The
calculation procedure takes the starting-point on the 10 steps, which were introduced in section
2.6.2. The calculation results are based on the response of the ﬁnal designed ductile mechanism
analyzed later in Section 3.3.1 and shown in Figure 3.13. The chosen ductile mechanism repre-
sents the "mean response" of several mechanisms tested under same conditions.
The computational set-up for the double anchored serial system with two ductile mechanisms
is indicated in Table 2.5. The calculation procedure is carried out with MATLAB and the MAT-
LAB script is shown in Appendix E.
Table 2.5: Dimensions used for theoretical computational of two serial anchored system
Symbols
Dimensions
Units
Obtained load in Anchor 1
P1
Final designed DM
-
Obtained load in Anchor 2
P2
Final designed DM
-
Diameter of CFRP
d
8
[mm]
Elastic modulus of CFRP
E
165
[GPa]
Distance between 2 anchors
L1→2
500
[mm]
Figure 2.13 shows the load distribution between Anchor 1 and 2 as a function of the applied
external force. The x-axis indicates the applied external force F0 in the CFRP tendon, and y-axis
indicates the obtained load between the anchors P1 and P2. In this thesis, it is investigated whether
or not an ultimate capacity of 3200 MPa (160.85 kN) can be reached. These 160.85 kN thereby
represents the end of the response shown in Figure 2.13.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Applied external force F0 [kN]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Load in anchor P1 & P2 [kN]
Anchor 1
Anchor 2
Elastic regime ends for Anchor 1
Elastic regime ends for Anchor 2
Anchor 2 activated with 10 kN
Figure 2.13: Load distribution between Anchor 1 and 2 as a function of the applied external force F0,
obtained from the response of the ﬁnal designed ductile mechanism.
It is seen from Figure 2.13 that the serial coupled system should stay in elastic regime until
Anchor 1 reaches at least P1 = 70 kN (black circle). It is noted that the elastic regime for Anchor
==PAGE:40==
24
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND PROJECT BASIS
1 ends at F0 = 80 kN and not at F0 = 70 kN. This is due to Anchor 2 which has been activated
with 10 kN (red square), and thus brings the system in equilibrium.
It is expected that Anchor 1 and 2 will obtain a load corresponding to P1 = 92 kN and P2 = 68.5
kN, respectively when the system is tensioned with the desired 160.805 kN. The system is thereby
expected not to reach the ductile(plastic) stage, marked as a red cross in Figure 2.13 but will re-
main at the elastic - ductile(plastic) regime.
The response shown in Figure 2.13 is reminiscent to the natural load distribution described in
Section 2.6.1. This means:
In Elastic regime – As mentioned in section 2.6.1, Anchor 1, which is the nearest anchor
to the applied external force F0, obtains more load magnitude than Anchor 2.
In Elastic - Ductile (Plastic) regime – Anchor 1 starts to yield at F0 = 80 kN and transfers
the load to Anchor 2, which activates it.
In Ductile (Plastic) regime – According to Figure 2.13, a load of 160.85 kN is not enough
to make the system reach the ductile(plastic) regime. However, it is expected, due to the
natural load distribution that once this stage is reached the anchors will obtain similar loads
and the graphs will converge towards the same value.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3
Modeling and Design of Ductile
Mechanism
The fact that both the CFRP tendon and the utilized HE240B beam will remain in the linear elastic
regime during the entire CFRP post-tensioning process allows the ductile mechanism to regulate
the response and desired ductility of the global system. Due to the crucial role it plays in the global
system where ductility and warned failure is a necessity to be ensured the ductile mechanism is
one of the main focus points in this thesis. Since an appropriate ductile mechanism design has not
been developed yet, as already mentioned under Section 2.3, several designs have been proposed,
analyzed and evaluated in this thesis. These are processed and documented in this current chapter.
It is known in advance that the outer anchor in the investigated serial coupled global system
is weaker than the inner one. This strength difference between the anchors makes it favourable
to introduce a strong and a weak ductile mechanism design. The design process of the ductile
mechanism is thereby based on developing both a weak and a strong one both complying with the
idea of ensuring an axial deformation.
The sixteen proposed designs (introduced in Figure C.1 under Appendix C) all being drawn
in Autocad were exported to the ﬁnite element method program ABAQUS where they have been
analyzed. The modeling procedure in ABAQUS as well as the inputs applied are identical for all
the ductile mechanisms investigated. These are described brieﬂy in Section 3.1.
This is followed by Section 3.2 where the design process and mindset behind the sixteen proposed
designs leading to the ﬁnal one are explained and evaluated. The section is based on the three
designs which mindsets represent the entire design process most appropriately. The remaining
thirteen proposed designs and the mindset associated with them are presented and explained under
Appendix C.
Finally, the design process led to the ﬁnal model which has been utilized in all the performed
full scale tests, both the single anchored as well as the serial coupled ones.
This ﬁnal design has been tested experimentally, as described, analyzed and documented under
Section 3.3.1.
These performed local analyses of the ductile mechanism have been necessary to investigate in
25
==PAGE:42==
26
CHAPTER 3. MODELING AND DESIGN OF DUCTILE MECHANISM
order to prepare a proper manual post-tensioning procedure of the global system making it possible
to utilize the desired full longitudinal rod capacity.
Note that even though the design process proposes several ideas to both strong and weak duc-
tile mechanisms only one ductile mechanism ended up representing the ﬁnal design and thereby
being used in all investigated global systems.
3.1
Applied Procedure and Inputs in ABAQUS
Following section is based on knowledge achieved through (ABAQUS 2014)
Initially, the material properties which are summarized in Table 3.1 were deﬁned in ABAQUS.
Table 3.1: Material properties of EN AW-6082-T6 from (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017)
General properties:
Mass density ρ
2700
[kg/m3]
Elastic properties:
Young’s Modulus E
69
[GPa]
Poissons ratio v
0.33
[−]
Plastic properties:
Yield strength fyk
260
[MPa]
Ultimate plastic strain εuk
10
[%]
The signiﬁcantly high amount of round edges present in all the ductile mechanisms made it
desirable to perform the mesh with triangles. Hence, the element type in ABAQUS for all the
regions of the ductile mechanism is chosen to be C3D4. This corresponds to a 4-node linear tetra-
hedron with a node at each corner, like the one illustrated in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: 4-node linear tetrahedron element type used to the mesh of the ductile mechanisms.
These meshes are generated based on the choice of seeds. Those seeds are markers, which
speciﬁes the mesh density around the edges of the element regions. ABAQUS aims for matching
those seeds as closely as possible. The number of seeds for all the proposed ductile mechanisms
are chosen to be 1.
==PAGE:43==
3.2. DESIGN PROCESS
27
An optimal way to manage the desired large deﬂections of the ductile mechanism in ABAQUS
is assessed to be through deformation controlled loading. Hence the ductile mechanism has been
investigated after applying the axial deformations, −5mm, −10mm, and −15mm, one at a time.
The global CFRP post-tensioning system will hopefully ensure that the surface of the ductile
mechanism which is in contact with the slider is restrained against translation in any direction. The
anchor itself, which the other ductile mechanism surface is in contact with will introduce an axial
deformation of the ductile mechanism and only predominantly constrain it against movement in
the transverse direction. It is assessed that the most appropriate and safe way to handle this partly
constrained end with is by making it completely unconstrained in ABAQUS. These two boundary
conditions are applied in ABAQUS through the procedure illustrated in Figure 3.2
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: Boundary conditions applied to the a) bottom of the ductile mechanism and b) top of the ductile
mechanism
The step type chosen in ABAQUS is General Static. Hereunder the available large-displacement
formulation, NLgeom is activated so that the expected geometrically nonlinear behaviour as well
as large displacement effects of the ductile mechanism are taken into consideration. Furthermore,
the incrementation is set to default so that increment sizes based on computational efﬁciency will
be obtained.
3.2
Design Process
Sixteen different ductile mechanisms have been proposed before reaching the ﬁnal design. These
are illustrated in Figure C.1 shown in Appendix C. Only design 1, 4 and 15 are being presented
and analyzed in the upcoming section (Figure 3.3a). Especially these particular designs represent
the main mindset behind the design process leading to the ﬁnal design, shown in Figure 3.3b.
==PAGE:44==
28
CHAPTER 3. MODELING AND DESIGN OF DUCTILE MECHANISM
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: a) Overview of the three proposed designs representing the main mindset behind the design
process leading to the ﬁnal design. b) Final design utilized in all the full scale tests performed in this thesis.
The ﬁrst of the 16 proposed ductile mechanism designs shown in Figure 3.3a is identical
with Type_7X9 proposed in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017) and presented brieﬂy under Section 2.3.
(Sørensen & Krabbe 2017) managed to achieve an appropriate axial deﬂection and corresponding
strength of Type_7X9 by constraining the bottom against translation in any direction and by en-
suring a boundary condition on the top surface where a potential column effect is avoided. The
deﬂection mode and stress distribution obtained with these above mentioned boundary conditions,
an applied axial deformation on the top surface equal to -15 mm and the material properties stated
in Table 3.1 are shown in the second illustration in Figure 3.4.
The purpose of reanalyzing that design in this thesis is to investigate the responses obtained
by applying the desired boundary conditions speciﬁed in Figure 3.2. The third model shown in
Figure 3.4 illustrates the deﬂection mode and corresponding stress distribution when applying the
desired conditions.
The boundary conditions applied on the top surface of the ductile mechanism are through the
==PAGE:45==
3.2. DESIGN PROCESS
29
Figure 3.4: Deﬂection mode and distribution of the stresses in the ﬁrst proposed ductile mechanism design
according to ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm for both the constrained (middle) and
unconstrained (right) design.
third illustration in Figure 3.4 observed to initiate the second order effect that (Sørensen & Krabbe
2017) ensured to avoid.
Since it is desired in this thesis to avoid second order effects and at the same time not to compro-
mise on the boundary conditions speciﬁed in Figure 3.2, design one is excluded and new designs
are investigated.
The answer on how to obtain the desired axial deformation of the ductile mechanisms without
compromising the boundary conditions given in Figure 3.2 lays in the geometry of the inner walls.
Hence, the second design (Design 4 illustrated in Figure 3.3a) was proposed. The bend in the
middle of the web is expected to provoke an outer deformation of both the inner and the outer
walls. This principle is shown in the ﬁrst illustration of Figure 3.5.
The stress distribution, ABAQUS-estimated deﬂection mode and load-displacement curve of
design 4 are illustrated in Figure 3.5.
As observed from Figure 3.5b design 4 is expected to yield when a displacement of 0.35 mm
and a corresponding load of 53.9 kN is achieved. Taking this yield load into account, application
of design 4 in the global system together with design 3 (yield load equal to 110 kN ) from Figure
C.1 shown in Appendix C seems quite reasonable. In that way, the desired global system with
both a strong and a weak ductile mechanism would be achieved.
Furthermore, at ﬁrst sight, the deﬂection mode of both ductile mechanisms seemed appropriate due
to their desired outward axial bending preventing the design from colliding with the rod. But an
investigation of the actual resulting deformation of both designs made it clear that the narrow slider
was not capable of accommodating them in their deformed shape. Already after an applied axial
deformation of 5 mm in ABAQUS the numerical deﬂection in the two main directions, U1 and
U2 were observed to 5.38 mm and 4.87 mm for design 4. According to the theory of Pythagoras
this corresponds to a resulting deﬂection of U = 7.3 mm. Additionally, the midpoint of the outer
wall of the design was already provided with an initial outward bending of approximately 2 mm.
Taking these considerations into account it is clear that the slider is too narrow to accommodate
==PAGE:46==
30
CHAPTER 3. MODELING AND DESIGN OF DUCTILE MECHANISM
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
(b)
Figure 3.5: a) Principal of the fourth proposed ductile mechanism design leading to the illustrated deﬂection
mode and stress distribution according to ABAQUS. An axial displacement of -15 mm is applied at the top
surface. (b) Load/displacement curve for the fourth ductile mechanism
the deformed stage of both ductile mechanisms.
Furthermore, the angle change along the inner walls made them inappropriate and tedious in terms
of their production. These two above mentioned observations made it necessary to search for new
more optimal ductile mechanism designs.
Afterwards, twelve more designs (5-16 in Figure C.1) have been proposed and analyzed in
ABAQUS before reaching the ﬁnal design. Their responses and the main reasons making them
inappropriate to use in the global system are brieﬂy described in section C.1 under Appendix C.1.
Design 15 is described further in the current section since it represents quite well the mindset
behind all these twelve designs. The design is inspired by the telescope effect illustrated in Figure
3.7a. Its corresponding responses according to ABAQUS when applying an axial deformation of
15 mm at the top surface is illustrated both in Figure 3.7a and 3.6b.
Both the deﬂection mode as well as the 73 kN representing the depletion of the elastic regime
seem quite reasonable. In order to conservatively assess to which extent these responses reﬂect
reality, before even thinking about sending this speciﬁc design to production, two further investi-
gations have been performed.
First of all the obtained yield load from ABAQUS is compared with an analytical value. This
==PAGE:47==
3.2. DESIGN PROCESS
31
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b)
Figure 3.6: a) Principal of the ﬁfteenth proposed ductile mechanism design leading to the illustrated deﬂec-
tion mode and stress distribution according to ABAQUS. An axial displacement of -15 mm is applied at the
top surface. (b) Load/displacement curve for the ﬁfteenth ductile mechanism
value is achieved by estimating the yield load of the narrowest cross section throughout the de-
sign. With a yield strength equal to 260 MPa and the smallest cross section area equal to 205
mm2 a yield load of 53.3 kN is obtained. The difference between this load and the one obtained
through ABAQUS is signiﬁcant and should not be ignored.
Furthermore, the ductile mechanism has so far been provided with an ideal plastic regime in
ABAQUS. With this assumption follows a risk of obtaining outputs being signiﬁcantly far from
reality. Hence, design 15 has been reanalyzed using the more realistic plastic material proper-
ties for aluminum given in Table 2 in (Schmidt et al. 2011). The corresponding responses are
illustrated in Figure 3.7b.
Even with realistic inputs the deﬂection mode seems quite reasonable. The elastic regime de-
pletes at a load corresponding to 95 kN which is even better than before. However, the fact that
the analytical conservative yield load (53 kN) deviates signiﬁcantly from the yield load of design
15 (101.5 kN) makes the ductile mechanism untrustworthy and inconsistent in term of strength.
Another factor making the thought of producing design 15 more distant is the lack of appropriate
==PAGE:48==
32
CHAPTER 3. MODELING AND DESIGN OF DUCTILE MECHANISM
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
50
100
150
200
(b)
Figure 3.7: Responses of the ﬁfteenth proposed ductile mechanism design according to ABAQUS, when
applying an axial displacement of -15 mm and replacing the ideal plastic regime with the more realistic
ones given in Table 2 in (Schmidt et al. 2011).
stability considerations.
In the meantime Jacob Schmidt, Associate Professor at DTU-Byg managed to implement a ductile
mechanism design expected to have both the desired deﬂection mode, a signiﬁcant yield strength
as well as appropriate stability considerations included. The model was initially considered as the
ﬁnal design in this thesis but due to major production delays it was a necessity to search for an
alternative ﬁnal design.
Despite limited design possibilities due to the combination of thesis time limitations and produc-
tion delays the alternative solution, presented in the upcoming section, was found.
3.3
Final Design
The ductile mechanism utilized in connection with the ﬁnal design is presented in Figure 3.8.
The ductile mechanism itself (the component in the middle of Figure 3.8a) partly represents
one of the designs already developed and investigated in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017) (Figure 2.7a).
The only difference between them lays in the inner diameter. The mechanism was originally pro-
duced with an inner diameter of 15 mm corresponding to a yield load of 125 kN according to the
==PAGE:49==
3.3. FINAL DESIGN
33
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: a) Ductile mechanism, hollow cylinder and corresponding block illustrated as three separate
components. b)The three components assembled to one component.
experiments performed in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017).
At the time period of this thesis where the experimental ductile mechanism evaluations initiated it
was assessed that the desired global system with application of two different ductile mechanism
should be left for future analysis, due to lack of time. The goal instead became to apply two ductile
mechanisms both ending their elastic response at approximately 70 kN. Hence the inner diameter
of the original ductile mechanism was increased to 22.5 mm. This decision is based on experi-
ments summarized in Figure 2.8 where the elastic regime ended at a load level corresponding to
88 kN for an inner diameter equal to 20.5 mm.
Due to its tendency of introducing the undesired column effect when being subjected to compres-
sion (as previously investigated in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017)) the stability solution presented in
Figure 3.8 has been developed in this thesis.
The stability system consists of the two components presented in Figure 3.8a having the geometry
and dimensions speciﬁed in Appendix C.2.
In order to fully utilize their stability effect both components are made of a steel type making
them capable of withstanding the compression they are being subjected to, without yielding.
The hollow core cylinder, which is the component shown on the rightmost of Figure 3.8a is re-
ferred to as a stabilizing response pin. As its name indicates its purpose is to control and cancel out
any possible second order effects causing the undesired contact between the ductile mechanism
and the rod.
Sufﬁcient fastening between the ductile mechanism and the stabilizing response pin is ensured
through the circular plate on the top, resting on the entire ductile mechanism top.
Furthermore, the corresponding block, shown on the left of Figure 3.8a is designed to ensure the
desired uninterrupted movement of the stability pin during compression of the ductile mecha-
==PAGE:50==
34
CHAPTER 3. MODELING AND DESIGN OF DUCTILE MECHANISM
nism. Application of this block is furthermore expected to ensure a proper load transfer between
the slider (Figure 2.9) and the ductile mechanism when the ductile mechanism is applied in the
global system.
The block is designed so that the diameters of its outer and inner circles corresponds to the ductile
mechanisms outer and inner diameter, respectively.
The concept of the stability response system is illustrated in Figure 3.9. It is observed how the
block tends to lead the stability pin in the desired direction.
Figure 3.9: Concept of the stability pin, where the ductile mechanism itself is not shown. The block leads
the stability pin in the desired direction
3.3.1
Experiments and Test Results
The ﬁnal ductile mechanism design, and thereby the efﬁciency of the stabilizing response pin has
been analyzed experimentally and the obtained responses are documented in the current section.
The section initiates with a description of the test setup utilized for the performed compression
tests.
This is followed by Section Test Results which covers the veriﬁcation of the stabilizing response
pin and summarizes the obtained responses of all ﬁve test specimens.
Test Setup
The desired response of the ductile mechanisms are obtained through investigation of the relation
between the compressive load and corresponding deﬂection they are being subjected to. The test
machine utilized for the compression tests is an INSTRON 8502 hydraulic machine consisting of
the components shown in Figure 3.10a
==PAGE:51==
3.3. FINAL DESIGN
35
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.10: Test setup for the compression tests performed on the ductile mechanisms where an INSTRON
8502 hydraulic machine is utilized. The ﬂexible compression heads used at the top of the ductile mechanism
is indicated by the red circle
The load cell and the hydraulic piston pointed out on Figure 3.10a provide the ductile mecha-
nism with force and displacement respectively.
The ductile mechanism is placed in between two compression heads.
Even though the ductile mechanisms during the full scale test are expected to be restrained due to
the friction between the ductile mechanism and the anchor, an assumption of the mechanism not
being constrained at the top is assessed to be more safe. Hence ﬂexible compression heads are be-
ing used instead of one restraining the top of the ductile mechanism against any lateral movement.
These ﬂexible compression heads are shown in Figure 3.10b.
Test Results
The ductile mechanism shown in Figure 3.8b will according to the ABAQUS response illustrated
in Figure 2.7a introduce a second order effect.
It was therefore expected with the experiments to observe a clear difference between the ductile
mechanism including the stability pin and the one without. Indeed the ductile mechanism com-
pressed without a stability pin inserted introduced a signiﬁcantly bigger lateral displacement in
relation to all three specimens tested with the cylinder introduced. This is conﬁrmed in Figure
3.11 showing the deﬂection modes for the ﬁve tested specimens all having an inner diameter of
22.5 mm.
Starting from the left, the ﬁrst deﬂection mode represents a specimen tested without the sta-
bility pin under a non-ﬂexible compression head. This is followed by one tested under a ﬂexible
compression head without the stability pin inserted. The three last specimens were each tested
==PAGE:52==
36
CHAPTER 3. MODELING AND DESIGN OF DUCTILE MECHANISM
Figure 3.11: Failure modes of the ﬁve performed compression tests. Specimen one was constrained at the
top against the second one, which was not. The last three specimens were not constrained at the top but had
their corresponding stability response pins included.
under the ﬂexible compression head with the stability pin included. It is observed how these three
last deﬂection modes converge towards the ﬁrst one.
The effectiveness of the stability pin system is thereby conﬁrmed since it tends to limit the second
order moment developed in the ductile mechanism when it is partly constrained.
While subjecting the fourth of the ductile mechanisms shown in Figure 3.11 to compression with
a ﬂexible compression head a slightly eccentric load was observed. The deﬂection mode turned
out to be approximately as appropriate as the ones where no eccentricity was introduced. Hence
the stability pin turned out to be effective for an eccentrically loaded ductile mechanism as well.
Furthermore, the corresponding block (ﬁrst component shown in Figure (3.8a)) ensured the
desired uninterrupted movement of the stability pin during compression of the ductile mechanism.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12: a) Deﬂection mode for a partly constrained ductile mechanism with the stability system in-
cluded (right) versus deﬂection mode for a partly constrained one without the pin included (left). It is
observed how the inner diameter decreases when second order effects are introduced. b) Illustration of a
scratch (indicated with a red circle) on the stability pin conﬁrming its effectivity and the importance of
introducing it to the ductile mechanism.
Figure 3.12a illustrates from two perspectives the difference between application and no ap-
plication of the stability system. The second order effect resulting in a signiﬁcant bend to one side
and thereby an inner diameter reduction throughout the mechanism is especially observed from
==PAGE:53==
3.3. FINAL DESIGN
37
the deﬂection mode seen from above. The scratch observed in the stability pin (Figure 3.12b)
conﬁrms its efﬁciency of preventing the ductile mechanism from introducing its column effect
tendency and thereby to collide with the CFRP tendon.
The responses obtained during the compression of the ﬁve ductile mechanisms shown in Fig-
ure 3.11 are illustrated in Figure 3.13. Common for all ductile mechanisms is the fact that their
elastic regime depletes at approximately 68.5 kN, as desired.
Moreover, irreversible deformations of the mechanism is according to the graphs expected to be
observed from approximately 80 kN. The average ultimate capacity of the three ductile mecha-
nisms representing the ﬁnal design (those with the stability pin inserted) is 95.3 kN.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Displacement [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Load [kN]
Ductile mechanism constrained
Ductile mechanism not constrained
Ductile mechanism with stability pin 1
Ductile mechanism with stability pin 2
Ductile mechanism with stability pin 3
Figure 3.13: Responses of the ﬁve test specimens. The average ultimate capacity of ductile mechanisms
having the stability pin applied (Final design) are observed to be 95.3 kN.
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4
Theoretical Investigation of Serial
Coupled Anchorage System
A hypothesis on how the load is distributed and obtained in the anchors, is described in the fol-
lowing section. The hypothesis is based on theoretical thoughts behind manual loading of each
anchor. Imagine a manual loading done by hand with a wrench at a respective anchor. Every an-
chor block is ﬁtted with a threaded rod which is tensioned when the corresponding bolt is fastened.
A diagram of the anchor block is shown in Figure 2.9.
4.1
Hypothesis on Load Distribution Between Anchors
The purpose of introducing a serial coupled system is to utilize the full capacity of the rod by
distributing the resulting load between several anchors. Hence, it is ensured that the bearing
capacity of the global system is governed by the rod instead of the anchor, which has been an
issue previously, as described in chapter 2.5. The current section provides a description of how
the load distribution to the respective anchors is controlled by the user of this system.
In a given set up with two anchors on both sides, anchor block one is ﬁtted with a weak ductile
mechanism and the second block is ﬁtted with a high strength mechanism. The ﬁrst anchor block
will absorb a less signiﬁcant part of the load. The main part is thereby carried by anchor block
two. Experiment with the serial coupled anchors should show that the distribution is governed by
the strength of the ductile mechanism.
However, one ductile mechanism is not designed to withstand the full load of the system.
Because of this, the load is applied in a gradually manner to every single anchor. In the above
mentioned example with two anchors on both sides, the scenario will appear like shown in Figure
4.1.
The following describes the process of applying the load to a serial coupled system with two
anchor blocks on each side. The ﬁrst block is installed with a weak ductile mechanism and the
second is installed with a strong mechanism.
One anchor block is tensioned at a time. Block 2 is tensioned to a level of tension force
that is lower than the maximum ductile mechanism’s elastic capacity, where after Block 1 is
39
==PAGE:56==
40
CHAPTER 4. THEORETICAL INVESTIGATION OF SERIAL COUPLED ANCHORAGE
SYSTEM
Figure 4.1: Beam with two anchors on one side. Block one (right) and block two (left) are shown
Figure 4.2: Loading process in elastic regime. Block 1 to the right with a weak DM and block 2 to the left
with a strong DM
==PAGE:57==
4.1. HYPOTHESIS ON LOAD DISTRIBUTION BETWEEN ANCHORS
41
tensioned. The tension in block one should be lower than the yield point of the corresponding
ductile mechanism. The amount of tension force in block 1 is now deductible from the tension
level in block 2 i.e. if block 2 was tensioned up to 90% of its capacity than the tension level taken
by block 1 e.g. 40% can be deducted from block 2 such that block 2 is now only tensioned to 50%
of its capacity. Now there is room for further tensioning of block 2. This load application is shown
on the yield graphs for aluminum in Figure 4.2. The loaded area is marked as a hatch. In Figure
4.2 the loading procedure is shown in three steps, this is done in order to show the principle in a
simple way. However, to reach the full capacity of the ductile mechanism in every block, there has
to be done an iteration process where a bit load is applied at a time to every anchor. This means
that an application process is done back and forth while monitoring the loading level between step
2 and step 3. Deformation in the ductile mechanism is not desired when in any anchor block while
the loading process is going on. It is not possible to load one anchor to its full capacity at once
because of the relieve effect that occurs.
Under the loading procedure, the ductile mechanism is kept in the elastic regime in order not
to provoke any plastic deformation in the mechanism. This is controlled by not exceeding the
loading above 90% of the ductile mechanism’s yield point load.
Figure 4.3: When the loading has reached the elastic-plastic regime after an iteration process
Later it is possible to load the system to the point where the mechanism starts to deform. In
Figure 4.3, block one is loaded more than the yield point of the ductile mechanism. Block two is
not loaded further and is still in the elastic regime. Hence, the system is now in a so called “elastic
– plastic regime”
==PAGE:58==
42
CHAPTER 4. THEORETICAL INVESTIGATION OF SERIAL COUPLED ANCHORAGE
SYSTEM
Figure 4.4: When the loading process has reached the plastic regime
When block 2 is loaded above the yield point, both ductile mechanisms are yielding. This
stage is called the “Plastic regime” and both mechanisms are exposed to their maximum bearing
capacity regarding the yielding point. As the load exceeds the yield point, the ductile mechanism
starts to deform and gives an indication of the fact that that the maximum tensile strength of the
CFRP is soon reached.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Full Scale Testing of a CFRP
Reinforced Steel Beam
The anchors, ductile mechanisms and CFRP rod have so far been presented and analyzed as in-
dividual components. The following chapter will contribute to further understanding of these
components when working together in a global HE240B beam system externally reinforced with
an anchored CFRP tendon.
The following two variations of full scale testing have been performed and analyzed:
1. The HE240B beam was here externally reinforced with a single anchored CFRP tendon
using the previously designed anchors. As soon as the newly developed anchor design
arrived a fourth similar full scale test was decided to be performed and analyzed, in order to
strengthen the reliability of the other three responses.
2. The same beam type as the one used for the single anchored full scale test was prestressed
but with a serial coupled anchored CFRP tendon using the latest developed anchors. The
serial coupled system evaluation was divided into four conﬁgurations indicating the distri-
bution between the anchors in four different tensioning situations.
Switching from the ﬁrst test type to the second one an increase of the overall system bearing
capacity and ductility were expected to be observed. Moreover, a better utilization of the tendons
longitudinal capacity (2500 MPa according to the supplier) was expected due to the signiﬁcantly
higher load level, in which anchor failure happened during the already performed tensile tests
summarized in Table 2.3.
The intention with both full scale test was to either verify or falsify the expectation of the
ductile mechanism being capable of controlling the entire system through its strength and ductility.
Whether or not the insertion of the stability pin (Figure 3.9) in the ductile mechanism is as effective
to the global system as indicated by the responses from the compression tests in Section 3.3.1 will
also be discovered in both test situations.
How the anchor blocks have been placed along the HE240B beam, the chosen way to monitor
the system as well as a documentation and discussion of the obtained test results are for the two
full scale test types speciﬁed in Section 5.1 and 5.2, respectively.
43
==PAGE:60==
44
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
The analytically estimated distributions of the section forces and the displacement of the steel
beam used for the single anchored system are summarized in Section 5.1.2. The structural be-
haviour of the beam according to the performed experiments are summarized in Section 5.1.4.
These experimental estimations are afterward compared to the analytical ones.
Being able to follow the load level introduced in the rod, while the test is running is a necessity
so that the process can be interrupted immediately at any preferred load level. The calculation
sheet which enables the user to thoroughly monitor the load distribution throughout the rod during
the test is available in Appendix F.
The preparation steps of the HE240B beam before being tested is available in Appendix I.
5.1
Single Anchored CFRP Tendon
5.1.1
Test Setup and Procedure
Three independent full scale tests of a HE240B steel beam externally prestressed with a single
anchored CFRP tendon using old anchors and ductile mechanisms were performed.
The ductile mechanism type utilized in that speciﬁc case is the one shown in Figure 3.8b, where
the newly developed stability system is introduced.
The integrated wedge-sleeve anchorage developed in (Schmidt 2011) is the anchorage type used
for that particular full scale testing. This is due to the fact that the newest developed ones were
not produced yet.
In order to strengthen the credibility of the responses obtained from those tests a fourth similar
full scale test was decided to be performed and analyzed. The old anchor was here replaced by the
newest developed anchor type shown in Figure 2.2. The capacity of the new anchor is according to
Table 2.4 signiﬁcantly higher and should thereby ensure the entire plastic response of the ductile
mechanism.
The test setup which is similar for all four performed full scale tests is illustrated in Figure 5.1
Figure 5.1: Test setup of the global system where the CFRP tendon is anchored at two locations in total.
The single spanned and simply supported steel beam shown in Figure 5.1 has a total length of
7000 mm. The free length of the tendon, corresponding to the distance between the two anchor
blocks is equal to 5780 mm. Moreover, the beam end and the nearest anchor block are on both
beam sides located 200 mm from one another.
==PAGE:61==
5.1. SINGLE ANCHORED CFRP TENDON
45
Similar for all four experiments the CFRP tendon was anchored with one anchor and corre-
sponding anchor block in each end, as illustrated in Figure 5.1. A ductile mechanism was only
introduced in the anchor block in one of the ends, making the end where the anchor was working
alone, a "dead end".
The entire post-tensioning procedure was performed manually using body weight and an ad-
justable wrench.
5.1.2
Static System
In the following section, the static system with one anchor applied at each side is described. The
system consists of a beam that is simply supported. One end is constrained in the vertical and
horizontal direction while the other end is free to move horizontally but not vertically. The loads
acting on the system are the dead load from the beam and the normal force from the post tensioned
CFRP rod. The force from the CFRP is acting on the system through anchor blocks that are bolted
to the beam. The system is shown in Figure 5.2
Figure 5.2: Static system
The maximum moment, axial and shear force are extracted from the system. Calculations are
cross checked with the hand calculations shown in Appendix H together with the respective force
distribution diagrams.
Figure 5.3: Axial force distribution
The axial force occurs in one anchor and counteracted in the opposite anchor. The maximum
axial force is 160850 N as shown in Figure 5.3
The maximum shear force occurs at the beam ends with a numerical value of 2855.69 N. The
distribution is shown in Figure 5.4
==PAGE:62==
46
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
Figure 5.4: Shear force distribution
Figure 5.5: Moment distribution
The maximum moment which occurs in the middle of the beam is analytically estimated to
28803267 Nmm as indicated from the moment distribution shown in Figure 5.5. This value repre-
sents the sum of the moment arising from the self-weight of the beam and the one occurring due
to the distance between the CFRP rod and the midpoint of the undeformed beam.
This resulting moment is expected to be underestimated compared to reality since the moment
contribution arising due to the distance between the midpoint of the undeformed beam and the de-
formed one is excluded in the calculations. Hence the second order effect arising when the beam
is deﬂected is not taking into consideration.
Figure 5.6: Displacement of the HE240B
Table 5.1 summarizes the magnitudes of the analytically determined section forces and dis-
placement.
==PAGE:63==
5.1. SINGLE ANCHORED CFRP TENDON
47
Table 5.1: Section forces and displacement
Axial force
Shear force
Moment
Displacement
N [kN]
V [kN]
M [kNm]
u [mm]
160.85
2.86
28.80
7.16
5.1.3
Monitoring
The current section provides a description and illustration of how the anchorage system with
one anchor on each side is being monitored. More speciﬁcally the behaviour of the individual
components in the global system are investigated and compared with analytical estimations. For
this purpose Strain Gauges (SG) and Linear Variable Displacement Transformers (LVDT) are
mounted on relevant locations throughout the CFRP tendon and the steel beam. These locations
are illustrated in Figure 5.7.
Both the LVDT and SG are connected through cables to a datalogger.
The mounting process of LVDT and SG are speciﬁed as a step by step procedure in Appendix I.3
and I.4, respectively.
Furthermore, the formula (Formula I.1) utilized in order to convert the voltage differences obtained
directly from the strain gauges to the desired strain values is explained under Appendix I.4.3.
Besides these strain values the desired displacements, stresses and loads are estimated based on
the speciﬁc components free length, modulus of elasticity and cross sectional area, respectively.
The processing of the data obtained from a LVDT is based on the slope of the displacement/voltage
relation (calibration factor) obtained by pre-calibration of the LVDT. This is explained further in
Appendix I.3.
Figure 5.7: Monitoring of the full scale testing of a HE240 beam externally reinforced with a CFRP
tendon anchored at three locations on each side of the beam.
Besides being subjected to a moment due to its own dead load, the beam is subjected to a nor-
mal force initiated by the prestressing of the tendon as well as a moment due to the eccentrically
==PAGE:64==
48
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
point of attack of the normal force. Thereby the vertical deﬂection of the beam is theoretically
expected to be zero at the supports. By applying a LVDT on the upper ﬂange of the beam at the
location of each support (LVDT 1) this expectation is either veriﬁed or falsiﬁed. In case falsiﬁca-
tion is obtained the remaining displacement values will be withdrawn this nonzero value.
Furthermore, in order to either verify or falsify the analytical estimations of maximum moment
and thereby maximum vertical displacement at the beam midpoint (5.1.2) one piece of LVDT are
mounted at the lower ﬂange of the beam midpoint (LVDT 5).
Moreover, a LVDT is applied on each quarter point. (LVDT 2).
In the analytical calculations regarding the cross section analysis (Appendix G) the location
change of the center of gravity, due to the axial force, is assumed to be negligible. Whether
or not this assumption is appropriate for the current system is investigated through application of
a SG at both the upper and lower ﬂange of the beam (SG 1, SG 2 and SG 4). In case the values ob-
tained experimentally turn out to be almost identical to the strains and thereby stresses estimated
analytically the assumption can be concluded acceptable.
The strain and thereby load/stress observed through application of SG 3 located in the midpoint of
the rod is expected to be identical to the total tensile load applied to the system.
A compression proﬁle of the ﬁnal ductile mechanism has already been proposed through the per-
formed compression tests analyzed in Section 3.3.1. The reliability of this compression proﬁle
when applied in the global system is chosen to be investigated through a setup with both a caliper
and a LVDT. The idea is to follow the compression of the ductile mechanism step by step through
both its linear elastic stage as well as after reaching its plastic regime, where irreversible deforma-
tions are obtained.
5.1.4
Test Results
The following section provides and discusses the responses achieved from the four performed
independent full scale tests mentioned under Section 5.1.1.
Due to lack of space in the main report, all the experimentally obtained responses summa-
rized in the current section (Figure 5.9 and Figure 5.14 to 5.17) are presented as bigger and more
readable versions under Appendix J.
The section initiates with a brief description of all four test outcomes.
Afterwards, each components role in the global system is being analyzed and estimated based on
the outputs obtained from the monitoring described in Section 5.1.3. Comparisons with analytical
calculations are also made.
A sudden disconnection of the strain gauge located in the middle of the rod at a load level
corresponding to approximately 101 kN was experienced during the ﬁrst performed full scale test.
Furthermore, the ductile mechanism was compressed to failure.
The disconnection of the rod is in that speciﬁc case most likely an indication of the deformed
ductile mechanism pulling in the rod resulting in disconnection of the strain gauge located in the
middle of the rod. Hence, the capacity of the global system turned out to be controlled by the
failure of the ductile mechanism.
==PAGE:65==
5.1. SINGLE ANCHORED CFRP TENDON
49
The failure of the second performed full scale test, which was reached at approximately the
same capacity level as the ﬁrst one (101 kN) was caused by the rod suddenly slipping out from the
anchorage. This sudden and extremely powerful failure, which to the observer seemed like the rod
was shot out of the wedge, corresponds to the powerslip phenomenon described in Section 2.5. In
addition to the slip rupture along the tendons free length took place, leading to the rod exploding
and splintering into many pieces as shown in Figure 5.8
Figure 5.8: Powerslip
Similar to the previous full scale test the ductile mechanism was compressed to failure at that
load level. Together with the responses obtained from the performed compression tests (Figure
3.13) this conﬁrms that a load level of approximately 101 kN represents the ultimate capacity of
that ductile mechanism type.
While a power slip initiated at a load level corresponding to approximately 101 kN during the
second performed full scale test, another power slip was experienced during the third full scale
test, but at a signiﬁcantly lower load level (80 kN).
This signiﬁcant deviation conﬁrms the unreliability of the anchor and thereby the necessity of
exchanging it with a more appropriate one.
Due to the system failure happening before irreversible and thereby measurable deformations of
the ductile mechanism took place this test was not data processed.
However, it is used as an indication of the importance of applying a more appropriate anchor
which is actually capable of utilizing the capacity of the rod.
In the ﬁnal performed single anchored full scale test, referred to as test 3 in the upcoming
sections, the newest developed anchors were applied.
Based on the responses obtained from the tensile tests summarized in Table 2.4 the anchorage
capacity was expected to be high enough to ensure an overall system capacity governed by the
ductile mechanism, without any risk of premature power slip.
In that way a complete response curve of the ductile mechanism would be ensured, making the
already obtained ones from Test 2 stand stronger.
Indeed, the test turned out as expected and the overall system capacity seemed to be governed by
==PAGE:66==
50
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
the ductile mechanism strength, being 98.7 kN in that case.
This output seems reliable since it corresponds fairly to the ductile mechanism strengths estimated
in both test 2 as well as the already performed compression tests summarized in Figure 3.13.
Despite the fact that the anchor seemed to subject the ductile mechanism with an eccentric load
during the entire post tensioning process, as illustrated in Figure 5.13, the desired axial compres-
sion of the ductile mechanism was maintained, ensuring no harm to the tendon. This conﬁrms the
efﬁciency of the applied stability response pin.
Behaviour of the Ductile Mechanism when Applied in the Global System
The full ductile mechanism response during post tensioning of the CFRP rod was directly mon-
itored in two of the performed full scale tests. Its deﬂection process was monitored through a
caliper in both tests and through a LVDT in only one of them. All three obtained responses are
illustrated in Figure J.8. Especially the response according to the applied LVDT seem to match
reasonably well with the responses obtained during the performed compression tests documented
in Figure 3.13. The development of the deﬂection modes and magnitudes which was monitored
throughout the entire pre-stressing process is documented graphically for both test 2 and 3 under
Figure 5.10 to 5.11 and Figure 5.12 to 5.13, respectively.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Displacement [mm]
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Load [kN]
Calliper Test 2
Calliper Test 3
LVDT Test 3
Figure 5.9: Ductile mechanism response when applied in a single anchored system according to the calipers
applied in test 2 and 3 and the LVDT mounted in connection with test 3.
The expected efﬁciency of the stability pin is veriﬁed through both Figure 5.11 and 5.13 be-
longing to full scale test 2 and 3, respectively. It is seen in both situations how the pin succeeded
in preventing the ductile mechanism from introducing a second order moment that would lead to
premature failure of the rod. Even during test 3 where the anchor subjected the ductile mechanism
with eccentricity (Figure 5.13 illustration 2), the stability pin ensured the desired axial deformation
of the ductile mechanism.
==PAGE:67==
5.1. SINGLE ANCHORED CFRP TENDON
51
Figure 5.10: Compression process of the ductile mechanism during post-tensioning of a single anchored
CFRP rod system where the old anchors are applied (Test 2). It is observed how the irreversible
deﬂections of the ductile mechanism increases with increased applied system load.
Figure 5.11: Failure mode of the ductile mechanism when reaching its ultimate capacity (Test 2)
Figure 5.12: Compression process of the ductile mechanism during post-tensioning of a single anchored
CFRP rod system where the newest developed anchor is applied. (Test 3) Similar to test 2, it is observed
how the irreversible deﬂections of the ductile mechanism increases with increased applied system load.
==PAGE:68==
52
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
Figure 5.13: Failure mode of the ductile mechanism when reaching its ultimate capacity (Test 3). The
anchor subjecting the ductile mechanism with an eccentric load is shown as well.
Behaviour of the CFRP Rod when Applied in the Global System
The stress and strain development over time in the CFRP rod are illustrated in Figure 5.14a and
5.14b, respectively. The average ultimate stress and strain along the entire free length of the rod
achieved from the three tests are estimated to σ = 1999 MPa (F = 100.5 kN) and ε = 0.012, as
indicated in Table 5.2.
This achieved ultimate stress deviating signiﬁcantly from the rod strength according to the supplier
(2500 MPa) clariﬁes that neither of the tests managed to utilize the longitudinal capacity of the
rod. The system capacity was either governed by the deﬂection of the ductile mechanism or by
the rod slipping out from the anchor wedge (power slip).
First of all, this conﬁrms the unreliability of the previously developed anchor as already assessed
through the preliminary work performed in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017) and (Christensen 2017).
Secondly, it indicates the importance of serial coupling another anchor and corresponding ductile
mechanism to the system so that they can relieve one another, as assessed through the theory
presented in 2.6.
Table 5.2: Overview of the estimated responses associated with the CFRP rods behaviour during the three
single anchored full scale tests.
Strain
Displacement
Load
Stress
ε [-]
∆L [mm]
F [kN]
σ [MPa]
Test 1
0.0122
70.62
101.34
2016.1
Test 2
0.0123
71.29
102.3
2035.2
Test 3
0.0118
68.17
97.82
1945.98
Average
0.0121
70.03
100.5
1999.1
A rod-anchor system without a ductile mechanism applied will according to the responses
illustrated in Figure 2.4 deform without a warning, immediately after its elasticity is depleted.
This is due to the brittleness of the rod.
==PAGE:69==
5.1. SINGLE ANCHORED CFRP TENDON
53
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
Time [s]
-500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Stress [MPa]
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
(a)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
Time [s]
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Strain [-]
×10-3
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
(b)
Figure 5.14: a) Stress development of the rod as a function of time for all three performed full scale tests.
b) Strain in the rod as a function of time for all three performed full scale tests
However, the responses obtained in Figure 5.14a and 5.14b emphasized that introduction of the
ductile mechanism to a system being in the linear elastic regime (like the rod) will provide the
system with the desired ductility and make it imitate the ductile mechanism response.
The tendencies observed in the graphs above can thereby directly be related to the obtained ductile
mechanism responses presented in Figure 5.9. This conﬁrms the hypothesis claiming that the
ductile mechanism is the one controlling the linear elastic system and providing it with the desired
ductility.
Structural Behaviour of HE240B Beam
Figure 5.15a to 5.16b illustrate the stress and strain development over time of both the upper
and lower ﬂange of the beam for 3/4 of the performed full scale test where appropriate data were
available. The maximum obtained stresses are summarized in Table 5.3 where they are being com-
pared to corresponding analytical values obtained from the cross section calculations performed
and explained in Appendix G . The analytical calculations are based on the assumption that the
downwards shift of the neutral axis initiating due to the axial force applied to the system is small
enough to be neglected.
This explains the overestimated theoretical values compared to the experimental ones, as observed
==PAGE:70==
54
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
from Table 5.3. However, the deviations seem signiﬁcantly small making the assumption reliable
and reasonable enough.
Moreover, negligible deviations of the beam responses in between the three full scale tests seem
to occur making the obtained estimations trustworthy.
Note that the response of the lower ﬂange obtained in test 2 is excluded due to a disconnected
strain gauge.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Time [s]
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Stress [MPa]
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
(a)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Time [s]
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Strain [-]
×10-5
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
(b)
Figure 5.15: a) Stress development in the upper ﬂange of the beam as a function of time for all 3 performed
full scale tests b) Strain development in the upper ﬂange of the beam as a function of time for all 3 performed
full scale tests
The obtained cross sectional stresses, which are summarized in Table 5.3 are insigniﬁcant
compared to the high yield strength of the beam. This deﬁnitely conﬁrms the expectation about
the beam remaining in the linear elastic regime during the entire CFRP post-tensioning process. It
was expected in advance that the beam remaining in the linear elastic regime during the entire post
tensioning process would make it possible for the user of the system to freely control its behaviour
and response. The ductile mechanism is the component introduced to act as the system regulator
and the ductility distributor.
These hypotheses are clearly conﬁrmed through the responses illustrated in Figure 5.15a - 5.16b.
The ductility tendency and behaviour of the ductile mechanism shown in Figure 5.9 seem to be
fairly reﬂected in both the upper and lower ﬂange of the beam. This tendency is expected to be
even more clear when neglecting the pauses indicated with horizontal lines throughout the graphs.
==PAGE:71==
5.1. SINGLE ANCHORED CFRP TENDON
55
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Time [s]
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Stress [MPa]
Test 1
Test 3
(a)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Strain [-]
×10-5
Test 1
Test 3
(b)
Figure 5.16: a) Stress development in the lower ﬂange of the beam as a function of time for test one and
three. b) Strain development in the lower ﬂange of the beam as a function of time for test one and three.
The strain gauge on the lower beam ﬂange was disconnected during test 2.
The post-tensioning of the CFRP tendon resulted in the vertical beam deﬂections speciﬁed in
both Figure 5.17 and Table 5.3. The deviations from one another as well as from the estimated
analytical values summarized in Table 5.3 are observed to be signiﬁcantly small. The obtained
deﬂection magnitudes are thereby assessed to be reliable enough.
Note that the analytical magnitudes are obtained based on Section 5.1.2.
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Load [kN]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Deﬂection [mm]
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Figure 5.17: Max deﬂection in the beam midpoint
==PAGE:72==
56
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
Table 5.3: Theoretical versus experimental values indicating the structural behaviour of the HE240 beam
utilized in a single anchored CFRP post-tensioning system.
Max applied load
Experimental stress
Theoretical stress
Deﬂection
Deﬂection
P [kN]
σ [MPa]
σ [MPa]
Exp [mm]
uanl [mm]
Test 1
101.34
Upper ﬂange
26.17
30.87
Lower ﬂange
5.3
8.73
3.82
3.89
Test 2
102.3
Upper ﬂange
26.44
31.11
Lower ﬂange
-
8.77
3.66
3.92
Test 3
97.82
Upper ﬂange
26.33
29.31
Lower ﬂange
6.25
8.59
3.62
3.75
5.2
Serial Coupled Anchorage of CFRP Tendon
The purpose of these tests was to investigate the behavior of every single anchor when working
together in a serial coupled system. Answers on how an anchor reveals another anchor were to be
answered. Initially, four conﬁgurations were set to be tested in order to investigate the behavior
and load distribution in the anchors. The ﬁrst three conﬁgurations had the same set up but were
tested with different aims. These set ups implied one side of the beam with only one anchor and
no ductile mechanism, referred as the “dead end”. The other beam end was mounted with two
anchors in a serial, both ﬁtted with a ductile mechanism each. The fourth conﬁguration had a
serial coupling on both sides, one with ductile mechanisms and one “dead end”.
Aim of the Conﬁgurations
• Conﬁguration 1 & 2: To see how anchor one and two relieve each other when they are
tensioned.
• Conﬁguration 3: To investigate the natural load distribution when externally loading is
applied.
• Conﬁguration 4: To investigate the load distribution when the ductile mechanism enters
the plastic regime and to push the entire setup to its ultimate limit.
==PAGE:73==
5.2. SERIAL COUPLED ANCHORAGE OF CFRP TENDON
57
5.2.1
Test Setup
The current section provides a brief description of the test setups used in connection with all four
conﬁgurations performed to analyze the serial coupled anchorage system.
Conﬁguration 1, 2 and 3
The ﬁrst three test conﬁgurations utilize the test setup illustrated in Figure 5.18. The CFRP tendon
is anchored with two serial coupled anchors and associated ductile mechanisms on one side and
one anchor without application of a ductile mechanism on the other side ("dead end"). The serial
coupled anchors are located at a distance of 500 mm from one another leaving 4870 mm of free
rod length.
Figure 5.18: Test setup of the coupled global system
Conﬁguration 4
The test setup shown in Figure 5.19 is the one used in connection with the fourth test conﬁguration.
The CFRP tendon is in this case anchored with a serial coupling on both sides each having a
distance of 500 mm in between the anchors. One of the sides has no ductile mechanisms mounted
making it function as a "dead end". The free rod length is 3960 mm.
Figure 5.19: Test setup of the global system where the CFRP tendon is anchored at four locations in total.
5.2.2
Monitoring
The current section provides a description and illustration of how all four performed serial coupled
full scale test conﬁgurations are being monitored. The mounting process of SG and LVDT are
identical to the ones performed during monitoring of the single anchored full scale tests and are
speciﬁed as a step by step procedure in Appendix I.
==PAGE:74==
58
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
The ﬁrst three investigated conﬁgurations all having two anchors and corresponding ductile
mechanisms on one beam side and a "dead" anchor on the other side are being monitored identi-
cally. For this purpose, SG and LVDT are mounted on the locations indicated in Figure 5.20.
Figure 5.20: Monitoring of the full scale testing of a HE240 beam externally reinforced with a CFRP
tendon anchored at three locations along the beam.
The fourth conﬁguration where another "dead anchor" is being serial coupled to the "dead
anchor" already present from the previous conﬁgurations is monitored through the LVDT and SG
located as indicated in Figure 5.21.
Figure 5.21: Monitoring of the full scale testing of a HE240 beam externally reinforced with a CFRP
tendon anchored at four locations along the beam.
The mounting of the second "dead anchor" makes it a necessity to add a strain gauge in be-
==PAGE:75==
5.2. SERIAL COUPLED ANCHORAGE OF CFRP TENDON
59
tween the serial coupled anchors located in the "dead end" (SG 6). With application of SG 6 the
load portion not being taken by anchor 3 but instead handed over to anchor 4 is expected to be
estimated.
Besides this alteration, both systems are being monitored identically.
It was experienced already during the single anchored full scale tests that the LVDTs both at
the end points as well as the quarter points were constantly disturbed and pulled out from their
original positions during prestressing of the rod.
Hence, a LVDT is only mounted on the lower ﬂange of the rod middle, which is the location on
the beam being less subjected to tensioning disturbances.
Through that LVDT mounting (LVDT 1) it is expected to experimentally estimate the maximum
vertical deﬂection of the beam midpoint.
Both SG 1, SG 2 and SG 4 are applied for the same purpose as in monitoring of the single
anchored CFRP tendon (Figure 5.7)
Common for both the systems illustrated in Figure 5.20 and 5.21 the load distribution between
the anchors on each beam side should comply with the equilibrium theory stating that the sum of
the load portions obtained in the anchors and associated ductile mechanisms must correspond to
the total incoming load.
Initially, a strain gauge has been applied directly on each barrel side leaning towards the ductile
mechanism with the purpose of directly achieving the load portions obtained there. However, their
outputs turned out to be unreliable due to the poor contact between the barrel and the slider.
Thereby, the load portions obtained by each anchor were instead monitored through application of
SG 3, SG 5 and SG 6. By applying a strain gauge on the rod in between Anchor 1 and 2 (SG 5) the
load portion passed on to Anchor 2 is expected to be obtained. Subtraction of the load magnitude
obtained by SG 3 with the one achieved from SG 5 is expected to reveal the load portion taken by
Anchor 1.
The same concept applies to Figure 5.21 at the beam side where the "dead" anchors are applied.
A compression proﬁle of the ductile mechanisms has already been investigated and estimated
through the single anchored full scale tests. Having a LVDT or caliper mounted would thereby be
redundant for all four serial coupled full scale test conﬁgurations.
5.2.3
Test Results
Conﬁguration 1
The aim of the ﬁrst conﬁguration was to test if an anchor could relieve another anchor from the
rear side. The set up is shown in Figure 5.22 with one dead end on the right side (anchor 3 ) and
an active left side having two anchors and associated ductile mechanisms included.
The idea behind this conﬁguration was to load anchor 1 to a certain level, and observe its
behavior when tensioning anchor 2. As a starting point, the entire system was tensioned to a load
corresponding to 25% of the ductile mechanism’s yield strength. Hence, the system was pre-
tensioned to 20 kN to ensure that anchor 1 and 3 had a grip on the CFRP rod. Then anchor 1 was
==PAGE:76==
60
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
Figure 5.22: Conﬁguration 1: Serial coupled with two anchors and one anchor in the dead end
tensioned up to 30 kN whereafter the loading was switched to anchor 2. The loading is shown in
Figure 5.23.
Figure 5.23: Conﬁguration 1: Load obtained by the serial coupled anchors.
It was observed that the tensioning level in anchor 2 continuously remained zero until anchor
2 started pulling in the CFRP rod and overtook the entire load from anchor 1. The load is taken
from anchor 1 and given to anchor 2 suddenly. This indicates that the point where the two anchors
shares the total load is very small. Hence, anchor 2 instantly reveals anchor 1 with 100%.
Table 5.4: Values where the anchors switches loads
Load [kN]
Start
Switch start
Anchor equilibrium
Switch end
Total load
0
29.7
30
Data missing
Anchor 1
0
29.6
15
Data missing
Ancor 2
0
0.1
15
Data missing
==PAGE:77==
5.2. SERIAL COUPLED ANCHORAGE OF CFRP TENDON
61
The instant load drop in anchor 1 is visible in Figure 5.23. The drop starts at “Switch start”
and is halfway through at “Anchor equilibrium”. The exact load values are presented in Table 5.4.
Equilibrium in the anchors is achieved when the total load is 30 kN in the system and both anchors
are obtaining 15 kN each. A malfunction in the data logging machine caused the data missing at
the end of the experiment. Because of the missing data it is not known when exactly the switching
between anchors ends and when anchor 2 has overtaken all the load from anchor 1. Because of the
linear tendency it is assumed that the total load at “switch end” is 30.3 kN. Hence, the spectrum
from the start of the switching till the end of the switching is:
Sconfiguration1 = 30.3kN −29.7kN = 0.6kN
(5.1)
Conﬁguration 2
As observed previously, anchor 2 relieved anchor 1 instantly when tensioning at anchor 2. In
conﬁguration 2, it was tested if the concept applies when anchor 2 is pre-tensioned and anchor 1
is used as the relieving factor.
Figure 5.24: Conﬁguration 2: Serial coupled with two anchors and one anchor in the dead end
Again, the entire system was pre-tensioned to 20 kN to ensure grip at anchor 2 and anchor 3.
For a greater margin, anchor 2 was then tension to 30 kN. Then the tensioning was switched to
anchor 1.
Anchor 1 was loaded to 45 kN. By this time 100% of the load in anchor 2 was taken over
by anchor 1. Although the phenomena imitates the happening in conﬁguration 1, a difference is
seen at the point when switching from one anchor to the other. It is seen, that when the total load
applied, is between 30 kN and 36 kN, both anchors are sharing the load in a greater extent or a
longer interval than observed previously. This interval is referred to as "Switch Spectrum" in the
following. The steepness of the loading slope is less signiﬁcant in conﬁguration 2 at the switching
spectrum as seen in Figure 5.25. Hence, the load is not overtaken instantly when using anchor 1
as the relieving anchor.
The two anchors are in equilibrium when the total load is 32.6 kN and each anchor is obtaining
16.3 kN. The total load presented in Table 5.5 at switch start to switch end indicates the spectrum
between the switching anchors. The greater the spectrum is, the more gradually the delivery of
the load has been.
==PAGE:78==
62
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
Figure 5.25: Conﬁguration 2: Load obtained by the serial coupled anchors. The interval where the graphs
are crossing each other indicates the "switch spectrum" where the load is transferred from anchor 2 to
anchor 1.
Table 5.5: Values where the anchors switches loads
Load [kN]
Start
Switch start
Anchor equilibrium
Switch end
Total load
0
30.3
32.6
35.9
Anchor 1
0
0,6
16.3
35.4
Ancor 2
0
29.7
16.3
0.5
Sconfiguration2 = 35.9kN −30.3kN = 5.6kN
(5.2)
The difference lays in the stiffness of both anchors. Anchor 2 has a greater stiffness than
anchor 1, which leads to an instant load shift from anchor 1 to anchor 2. On the contrary, anchor
1 and the CFRP rod in front of it (free length) is less stiff because of the rod length. When anchor
1 is tensioned to relieve anchor 2, some of the load is overtaken from anchor 2 while some load
is obtained by tensioning the free length of the rod, this gives more ﬂexibility, or less stiffness, to
the system. That is why the switching spectrum is greater in conﬁguration 2 than in conﬁguration
1.
Sconfiguration2 > Sconfiguration1
(5.3)
Although a difference is visible in the data sets and on the graphs, it is noted that whether
conﬁguration 1 is applied or conﬁguration 2, the load distribution is very difﬁcult to control man-
ually. In both conﬁgurations, when switching the loading from one anchor to another, it requires
a precision that is difﬁcult to achieve by hand.
==PAGE:79==
5.2. SERIAL COUPLED ANCHORAGE OF CFRP TENDON
63
Common for both tests is that the load distribution is controlled manually and that either, the
ﬁrst anchor obtains the entire load or the seconds does. A load sharing point is possible to achieve
manually but needs high precision, which seems to be inconvenient. A more optimal practice
would be not to tension the system at the anchors with ductile mechanisms, but instead at the dead
end. This is described further under conﬁguration 3.
Conﬁguration 3
The purpose of conﬁguration 3 was to investigate how the natural load distribution obtained by
tensioning from the dead anchor, contemporary verify and falsify the mathematical theory pro-
posed in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017) (see Section 2.6.2). In total one experiment was performed,
the utilized 2 ductile mechanisms were Type_7x2 with the new anchors, see Figure 5.26. However,
due to lack of ductile mechanisms, the system was not tensioned greater than the elastic regime.
The loading in the dead anchor imitates an "external loading" described in Section 2.6.1.
Figure 5.26: Serial coupled anchorage system with two Type_7x2 ductile mechanisms and two new
designed anchors.
The experiment results, compared with the theoretical calculations in Section 2.6.3, are shown
in Figure 5.28. In the beginning of the experiment, the system was tensioned to F0 = 8 kN, as a
starting point. The procedure of the starting point was carried out as follows: Initially, Anchor 1
was untensioned, subsequently from Anchor 2 the whole system was prestressed to 8 kN, which
corresponds to 10% load, see Figure 5.27. At last, Anchor 1 was activated by tensioning. Figure
5.28 indicates Anchor 2 was stretched with PExp2 = 7 kN and Anchor 1 with PExp1 = 1 kN. The
reason for prestressing the system to a beginning point is to obtain a well-deﬁned load level to
make sure the contact between the ductile mechanisms and anchors are sufﬁcient. In this way, the
natural load distribution will be initiated.
==PAGE:80==
64
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
Figure 5.27: Conﬁguration 3: serial coupled with two anchors and one anchor in the dead end
It is seen in Figure 5.28 that the tendency of the experimental response correlates satisfyingly
with the theoretical one. The system was tensioned to F0 = 57 kN and the obtained load between
the anchors are PExp1 = 43 kN and PExp2 = 14 kN. Furthermore, it is observed in Figure 5.28
how Anchor 2 is carrying a lower load magnitude than Anchor 1. This is due to both the stiffness
variation in the system as well as the natural load distribution, which was already explained ini-
tially in Section 2.6.1 and 2.6.3.
The mathematical theory behind serial coupled anchorage is veriﬁed for this experiment, it
would be interesting to see more from conﬁguration 3 since the system did not reach the elastic –
ductile (plastic) regime. Consequently, more experiments are needed to evaluate further about the
natural load distribution.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Applied external force F0 [kN]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Load in anchor P1 & P2 [kN]
Anchor 1 Theoretical
Anchor 2 Theoretical
Anchor 1 Experimental
Anchor 2 Experimental
Elastic regime ends for Anchor 1
Elastic regime ends for Anchor 2
Anchor 2 activated with 10 kN
Figure 5.28: Comparison between the theoretical and the experimental investigation of the obtained load
between 2 anchors as a function of the applied external force.
==PAGE:81==
5.2. SERIAL COUPLED ANCHORAGE OF CFRP TENDON
65
Conﬁguration 4
The hypothesis on load distribution between anchors described in Section 4.1 was checked in
conﬁguration 4. Although it was seen in conﬁguration 1 and 2, that the anchors do not share the
load in a remarkable extend in the elastic regime, the plastic regime still needed to be tested. The
aim of conﬁguration 4 was to load the entire system to 160.85 kN, by loading anchor 1 till 90 kN
and anchor 2 to 70 kN. The anchors used in this set up had a capacity of 130 kN. The dead end
was therefore supplemented with an extra anchor. The setup is shown in Figure 5.29.
Figure 5.29: Conﬁguration 4: Serial coupled with two anchors in the ductile end and two anchor in the
dead end
At ﬁrst, the aim was to bring the anchors in a state of equilibrium, in which 70 kN were
distributed to anchor 1 and 70 kN were distributed to anchor 2. The desired loading conﬁguration
is shown in Figure 5.30 taken from Section 4.1 The section describes the system with a weak and
strong ductile mechanism, due to time shortage it was not possible to produce ductile mechanisms
with different strengths. In the following, the ductile mechanisms are of the same strength in both
anchors.
Figure 5.30: Loading process
However, when loading in anchor 2 (step 3 in Figure 5.30) the test showed that anchor 1 do
not retain the loading of 70 kN. As seen in conﬁguration 1 and 2, anchor 2 overtakes the entire
==PAGE:82==
66
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
load and instantly enters the plastic regime of the ductile mechanism. The actual loading is shown
in Figure 5.31 and Figure 5.32.
Figure 5.31: Conﬁguration 4: Response of obtained load in the ductile serial coupled side. The second
"switch spectrum" is wider than the ﬁrst switch, meaning, the anchors are sharing the load in a wider extent
when the ductile mechanism is in the plastic regime. The experiment ended at 100 kN applied load.
Figure 5.32: Conﬁguration 4: Response of obtained load in the serial coupled dead end
Figure 5.32 is showing the loading response of the dead end. It is clear that the same amount
of load is obtained in either end. There is a difference in the load distribution in the local systems.
The local system consisting of anchor 1 and 2 is in total obtaining the same load level as the
dead end local system. But how the load distributes internally, differs. An assumption on the
distribution says that two inner anchors are going to obtain the same amount of load on each side,
and the same goes for the outer anchors. This assumption is veriﬁed until 70 kN, after this level,
it is seen that the dead end, accordingly to the shift of loading anchor gives all the load to the
outer anchor (anchor 4). In the ductile end, it is seen that although anchor 2 is tensioned, all the
load is obtained in anchor 1. At 80 kN the ductile mechanism in anchor 1 has reached its yield
capacity and the load bearing is then transferred to anchor 2. When the load switched to anchor
2 the magnitude of the loading was 80 kN and going towards 90 kN, hence, ductile mechanism 2
also started to yield instantly.
The magnitude of the yielding in anchor 2 was unwanted; this yielding was desired at anchor
==PAGE:83==
5.2. SERIAL COUPLED ANCHORAGE OF CFRP TENDON
67
Figure 5.33: Ductile 1 entering the plastic regime at 80 kN, ductile 2 in elastic regime at 0 kN
Figure 5.34: Ductile 1 revealed from loading and ductile 2 in plastic regime at 90 kN
1. After noticing the unwanted yielding, the loading was switched back to anchor 1 in order to
make this yield and retain the load level at 80 kN. As Figure 5.31 shows, none of the anchors
retained the loading level whilst both ductile mechanisms were yielding. Figure 5.35 shows the
yielding of the ductile mechanisms at a total load of 100 kN.
Figure 5.35: Both ductile yielding, total load of 100 kN in the system at this point
Further testing of conﬁguration 4 stopped at 100 kN as the strain gauge measuring the total
load failed. Because of the failure, only results up to 100 kN are analyzed.
To substitute the dead strain gauge, anchor 3 was deactivated by revealing it. The strain gauge
mounted between the two dead end anchors was supposed to give a measure of the total load
applied to the system. Unfortunately, as the rear anchor is weaker than the inner anchor, a power
slip occurred as soon anchor 3 was revealed to zero. The last measurement from the strain gauge
between the two dead end anchors showed a total load of 112 kN applied to the system.
==PAGE:84==
68
CHAPTER 5. FULL SCALE TESTING OF A CFRP REINFORCED STEEL BEAM
The load level in each anchor before anchor 4 overtook 100% of the load is not visible due to the
unknown obtained load in anchor 1 and 3.
Table 5.6: Values where the anchors switches loads
Load [kN]
Switch start
Anchor
Switch end
Switch start
Anchor
Switch end
equilibrium
equilibrium
Total load
79.2
79.7
80.9
88.8
96.6
Data missing
Anchor 1
78.5
39.86
0.1
0.3
48.3
Data missing
Anchor 2
0.7
39.86
80.8
88.5
48.3
Data missing
Elastic regime
Plastic regime
The switch spectrum in both the elastic and plastic regime is presented in numbers in Table
5.6. Because of the linear tendency, the total load at “switch end” in plastic regime is assumed to
be 104.4 kN.
SElastic = 80.9kN −79.2kN = 1.7kN
(5.4)
SPlastic = 104.4kN −88.8kN = 15.6kN
(5.5)
SPlastic > SElastic
(5.6)
Before power slip, both ductile mechanisms had deformed as shown in Figure 5.36:
Figure 5.36: Both ductile in the plastic regime obtaining 112 kN in total
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion and Conclusion
Analysis and investigations performed on the different components of the anchorage system ver-
iﬁed their capability of ensuring sufﬁcient and sustained high stresses. By implementing ductile
mechanisms with desired responses, the anchorage system proved that the load applied to the
system can be distributed and controlled.
Overall, every component was treated. The new anchor developed by Associate Professor,
Jacob Wittrup Schmidt, gave a better load distribution due to both a longer and well seated wedge
inside the barrel. Premature damage on the CFRP caused by the older anchor wedge was avoided
with the newly implemented oblique gap. Six independent tensile tests of the rod-anchor system
were carried out. The average failure capacity turned out to reach 2714 kN corresponding to a 5%
fractile of 2638 MPa. This achievement is considered successful since it exceeds the 2500 MPa
representing the mean capacity of an 8 mm CFRP rod according to the supplier. It was concluded
that presetting the anchors should not exceed the interval of 130 kN to 140 kN. A CFRP rod preset
to 150 kN led to premature failure because of the high pre-setting value. This speciﬁc CFRP
rod was not included in the calculation of the average failure capacity. Three other unsuccessful
tensile tests were performed, all three resulted in either early power slip or premature rupture in
the middle of the rod. It turned out to be a manufacturing fault in the CFRP causing these failures.
The new anchor is designed to grip an 8 mm CFRP rod. The rods utilized in the unsuccessful tests
turned out to be 7.8 mm leading to insufﬁcient contact with the tendon. Only rod diameters having
a diameter of precisely 8 mm were thereby utilized for all performed full scale tests in order to
minimize the risk of premature anchor failure.
However, the new anchor seems to be reliable and provide a high anchorage capacity when
taking the successful tests into account. The capacities of all ﬁve test specimens were quite close
to one another with an average of 136.4 kN. Some conﬁgurations had to be done on the anchor
block since the new anchor is longer and the insertion of the ductile mechanism required more
space in the longitudinal direction of the slider. The local stress transfer through the anchor block
was evaluated and conﬁrmed to be sufﬁcient.
One of the main purposes of this thesis was to investigate the ultimate capacity of the system,
which was hypothesized to be governed by the ductile mechanism. A ﬁnal ductile mechanism
design was thereby proposed based on the desired 160.85 kN (3200 MPa) representing the ulti-
69
==PAGE:86==
70
CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
mate capacity aimed to be reached during full scale testing of a serial anchored CFRP rod. The
responses and efﬁciency of the ﬁnal ductile mechanism design were discovered locally through
several compression tests before their application in the global system. The aim was initially to
design a strong and a weak ductile mechanism. Due to production delays and thereby limited
time, the ﬁnal design was instead based on application of two identical ductile mechanisms, both
in terms of geometry, strength and failure mode. It was aimed for its elastic regime to deplete at
a local load level corresponding to approximately 70 kN. The ﬁnal design consists of two main
parts; The ductile mechanism itself and a stability system made of steel ensuring a sufﬁcient yield
capacity. The mechanism itself is identical to the one referred to as Type_7x2 in (Sørensen &
Krabbe 2017), but with a bigger inner diameter (22.5 mm). The stability system consists of a
stability response pin, controlling and canceling out any possible second order effects causing the
undesired contact between the ductile mechanism and the rod. Its efﬁciency turned out to be veri-
ﬁed even under eccentric loads. The desired uninterrupted movement of the stability pin as well as
a proper load transfer between the slider and the ductile mechanism seemed indeed to be ensured
through the corresponding block.
The global system was tested with the ductile mechanism and both the old- and newly devel-
oped anchor.
2/3 of the single anchored tests performed with the old anchor led to power-slip at load levels
lower than the ductile mechanism capacity. This conﬁrmed the necessity of introducing an anchor
that utilizes the longitudinal bearing capacity of the rod more optimally.
The load levels in which the power-slip took place varied signiﬁcantly in the tests. That conﬁrmed
the unreliability of the old anchor.
The full scale test performed with the new anchor indicated that the risk of power-slip leading
to the overall system capacity being governed by the anchor strength will indeed be minimized
signiﬁcantly by replacing the old anchor with the newest developed one.
Indeed, the stability response pin applied inside the ductile mechanism overcame its discov-
ered tendency of introducing undesired second order effects when being partly constrained.
Desired axial deformations of the ductile mechanism were achieved in all the performed single
anchored full scale tests.
As observed in the testing the stability pin even turned out to be effective in ensuring axial defor-
mations in situations where the ductile mechanism is being eccentrically loaded.
It is thereby veriﬁed that second order effects leading to cutting and thereby premature failure of
the rod will be prevented when introducing the stability response pin.
One of the main hypotheses in the thesis claims that application of a ductile mechanism in
linear elastic systems (like the HE240B beam in question), will increase the desired ductility of
the global system, by controlling the overall system response and pass on ductility to it.
This is veriﬁed through the obtained responses showing how the ductile mechanism provides both
the beam and the CFRP rod with ductility by making them imitate its own response.
In the tests where the anchor did not fail due to power-slip at load levels lower than the ductile
mechanism (half of the tests) the overall system capacity seemed to be governed by the ductile
==PAGE:87==
71
mechanism strength.
This establishes that the overall bearing capacity of the system can be regulated through the ductile
mechanisms as long as the anchors have the necessary strength and reliability.
Moreover, the ductile mechanism deforming before crushing of the rod provided the system with
the desired warning before failure. Behaviour of the global system reminiscent to the one for steel
where a plastic regime is existing was thereby achieved.
Tests on the serial coupled system with multiple anchors were also executed. It turned out not
to be possible for the global system to reach the desired loading level (160.85 kN).
Conﬁguration 1, 2 and 4 veriﬁed that it is possible to distribute the global load to different
anchors in a serial coupled system manually. The procedure of manually loading the different
anchors has proven to be difﬁcult to control even when the system is entering the plastic regime.
Due to the stiffness in the system, the loading switches instantly from one anchor to another in the
elastic regime. In the plastic regime, the load is not delivered instantly but gradually as indicated
by a greater spectrum. A more desirable response of the system is expected when the external load
is applied either as shown in conﬁguration 3 or as an "external loading" on the beam. The expected
tendency in conﬁguration 3 correlated perfectly with the theoretical investigation. Unfortunately,
the experimental system did not reach the elastic - ductile (plastic) regime. The experiment was
stopped at elastic regime due to shortage of ductile mechanisms. This led to some unanswered
questions on how the system behaves in the elastic - ductile (plastic) regime as well as ductile
(plastic) regime.
Future Work
Besides the work done in this thesis, some further work needs to be performed in order to improve
the CFRP system. So far the serial coupled system has been tested with two anchors on both sides
of the beam. In order to maximize the efﬁciency and the bearing capacity, a serial coupled system
with three anchors on both sides needs to be tested.
Figure 6.1: Test setup of the global system where the CFRP tendon is anchored at six locations in total.
Under testing of both the single and double anchored system it was experienced that the anchor
wedge is too tight to mount and install on the CFRP. This issue could be solved by increasing the
oblique gap width. The system seems to be stable during short time testing, however, when the
system is used in the ﬁeld, it is necessary to conﬁrm the bearing capacity from a long term test for
the single and serial coupled system.
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
ABAQUS (2014), Abaqus/CAE User’s Manual, Dassault Systèmes and SIMULIA, 6.14 edition.
Bell, T. (2017), ‘Ductility explained: Tensile stress and metals’.
URL: https://www.thebalance.com/ductility-metallurgy-4019295
Bennitz, A. (2011), Externally Unbonded Post-tensioned CFRP Tendons - A System Solution,
Luleå University of Technology, pp. 3.
Christensen, C. O. (2017), CFRP Post-Tensioning of RC Beams Using Ductile Anchorage Systems,
Technical University of Denmark – Department of Civil Engineering.
Faber, M. H. (2012), Statistics and Probability Theory, In Pursuit of Engineering Decision Sup-
port, Springer.
Jebanesan, C. (2017), Ductile Response of Anchored CFRP Rod System, Technical University of
Denmark – Department of Civil Engineering.
Jensen, B. C. (2013), Teknisk ståbi, Nyt Teknisk forslag, ISBN: 9788757127751, 22. edition.
Prabhat, S. (2018), ‘Difference between iron and aluminium’.
URL: http://www.differencebetween.net/object/difference-between-iron-and-aluminium/
Schmidt, J. W. (2011), External Strengthening of Building Structures with Prestressed CFRP,
Ph.D. thesis, Technical University of Denmark – Department of Civil Engineering.
Schmidt, J. W., Bennitz, A., Täljsten, B. & Pedersen, H. (2010), Development of Mechanical
Anchor for CFRP Tendons Using Integrated Sleeve, Journal of Composite for Construction, pp.
397-405.
Schmidt, J. W., Scott T. Smith, M., Täljsten, B., Bennitz, A., Per Goltermann, P. & Pedersen,
H. (2011), Numerical Simulation and Experimental Validation of an Integrated Sleeve-Wedge
Anchorage for CFRP Rods, Journal of Composite for Construction.
Standard, D. (2007), Eurocode 3: Design of steel structures – Part 1-8: Design of joints, Dansk
standard: DS/EN: 1993-1-8 + AC, 2. edition.
73
==PAGE:90==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Standard, D. (2016), Metallic materials – Tensile testing – Part 1: Method of test at room temper-
ature, Dansk standard: DS/EN ISO 6892-1:2016, 3. edition, page 14.
Sørensen, N. O. & Krabbe, J. (2017), Investigation of High Capacity Coupled CFRP Anchorage
System, Technical University of Denmark – Department of Civil Engineering.
Thomsen, K. (1987), Stålkonstruktioner, Polyteknisk forlag, pp. 36-41.
Thrane, E. J. & Huslid, J. M. (1985), Konstruksjioner i stål, TAPIR forlag Universitetet i Trond-
heim, pp. 77.
Vasconcelos, M. (2016), Frp anchorage and relative ductility, Technical University of Denmark –
Department of Civil Engineering.
==PAGE:91==
Appendices
75
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX A
Tensile Test Analysis of Anchors
In Appendix A, the tensile test setup is described, performed with the new anchors. It is followed
by an introduction of mathematical equations to calculate 5
A.1
Test Setup
Tensile tests of the new anchor and CFRP tendon system was performed in order to investigate the
anchors ultimate load as well as evaluate the fracture.
The anchors were tested on INSTRON 8502 hydraulic test machine. The machine was equipped
with hydraulic wedge grips and had a tensile capacity of 250 kN, Figure A.1 gives an illustration
of the test setup and Figure A.2 shows a closer detail of the setup. The lower cross-head (load
cell) applies force by pulling the test rig downward, until the fracture was attained.
Figure A.1: Test setup from (Sørensen &
Krabbe 2017).
Figure A.2: Test rig with the new anchor.
Cross-head separation rate was set to 2mm/min, since standard testing for CFRP tendon is not
77
==PAGE:94==
78
APPENDIX A. TENSILE TEST ANALYSIS OF ANCHORS
available. (Standard 2016)
A.2
Mathematical Theory for Experiment Analysis
In this section introduces the mathematical (statistical) theory, utilized to analyze the new anchors.
Equation A.1 is the sample mean value x and Equation A.2 is the sample standard deviation s.
x = 1
n
n
X
i=1
xi
(A.1)
s =
sPn
i=1(xi −x)2
n −1
(A.2)
The 5% fractile value was calculated based on the t-distribution. By rearranging the Equation
A.3 the 5% fractile value has been found from Equation A.4.
T = X −x
s
√n
(A.3)
X = x + T5%,ν · s
√n
(A.4)
Where T is the t-distribution deviation, X is the fractile value, x is the mean ultimate stress
capacity, s is the corresponding sample standard deviation and ν = n-1 is the degrees of freedom
where n is the sample size. T was read to be T5%,4 = -2.132 for the ﬁrst tensile test and T5%,2 =
-2.920 for the second tensile test, from Table C.2 in (Faber 2012).
A.3
Test Results
A.3.1
First Tensile Test
In total, 6 tests were performed and 5 anchors were representative, where all the anchors failed
due to power slip. The ultimate load of the 5 anchors is shown in Table A.1 and the response of
the anchors are shown in Figure A.1.
Table A.1: Ultimate loads of the anchor-tendon system
Test numbers
Test 1 130
Test 2 130
Test 1 140
Test 2 140
Test 3 140
Test 150
Ultimate load, Pu[kN]
136.6
134.9
130.7
141.3
138.5
112.6
==PAGE:95==
A.3. TEST RESULTS
79
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Displacement [mm]
0
50
100
150
Load [kN]
Test 1 preset 130 kN
Test 2 preset 130 kN
Test 1 preset 140 kN
Test 2 preset 140 kN
Test 3 preset 140 kN
Test preset 150 kN
Figure A.3: Response of the new anchors
A.3.2
Second Tensile Test
In the second tensile test 3 specimens were tested, the ﬁrst 2 specimens failed because of power
slip and the last specimen i.e. Test 3 failed due to rupture of the tendon, see Figure A.4. In Table
A.2 the ultimate loads are indicated and Figure A.5 shows the response of the anchors.
Figure A.4: Rupture of the tendon occurred during Test 3
Table A.2: Ultimate loads
Test numbers
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Ultimate load, Pu[kN]
110.2
113.1
114.3
==PAGE:96==
80
APPENDIX A. TENSILE TEST ANALYSIS OF ANCHORS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Deﬂection [mm]
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Load [kN]
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Figure A.5: Response of the 3 tests performed with a 7.8 mm rod
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX B
Preset Performance Steps
Step 1
Initially, 100 cm carbon ﬁber tendons were cut with a hacksaw, see Figure B.1.
Figure B.1: Two times 100 cm carbon ﬁber tendons with a hacksaw.
Step 2
The tendon was covered with white protective ﬁlm and in order to make sure that the anchor gets
more contact with the ﬁbers, the ﬁlm was removed with a utility knife. Figure B.2 shows how the
ﬁlm were removed from the tendon.
81
==PAGE:98==
82
APPENDIX B. PRESET PERFORMANCE STEPS
Figure B.2: Removing the white protective ﬁlm.
Step 3
In order to ensure an optimal cohesion between the CFRP rod and the anchor, glue is applied on
the rod. Superglue is applied as shown in Figure B.3. The glue reacts immediately after contact
with the sleeve, thus it is important to place the sleeve at the right position in a fast and steady
movement. When positioning the sleeve it is beneﬁcial to twist the sleeve around the rod, this
twist will distribute the glue evenly in between.
Figure B.3: Applying the superglue on CFRP rod.
==PAGE:99==
83
Step 4
The correctly placed sleeve is shown in Figure B.4. The next step is to clamp the sleeve to the rod.
Grease is applied to the sleeve to make it easy for the barrel to slide on.
Figure B.4: Applying the grease on sleeve.
Step 5
When the barrel is slid on, it needs to be pressed/preset on the sleeve. This can not be done in
hand, hence a hydraulic jack is used. The jack presses the sleeve and rod further into the barrel.
The newly designed anchor makes it possible for the sleeve to slide further inside the barrel, so that
the edges are not aligned. An iron collar (hollow iron rod) is placed between the jacking piston
and the sleeve. This collar is not a part of the anchorage system. The presetting is demonstrated
in Figure B.5
Figure B.5: Pressing the sleeve in to the barrel with jacking force.
==PAGE:100==
84
APPENDIX B. PRESET PERFORMANCE STEPS
Step 6
Now the anchor-rod-system is removed from the jacking machine and the collar is removed as
well. The connection between the sleeve and the barrel is shown in Figure B.6. A sufﬁcient
connection is characterized by a well seated sleeve in the barrel. No space is visible between the
barrel and the sleeve.
Figure B.6: Sleeve in barrel, grease is pushed out under the presetting and can be seen along the sleeve
edge.
Step 7
Figure B.7 is showing the ﬁnal presetted CFRP rod with anchor.
Figure B.7: Anchor with rod.
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX C
Ductile Mechanisms
The following appendix initiates with a detailed description of all sixteen proposed ductile mech-
anism designs (section C.1). This includes an explanation of the mindset behind each design,
as well as illustrations of their corresponding responses according to ABAQUS. This is followed
by section C.2 containing the dimensions of the stability response pin and corresponding block,
associated with the ﬁnal ductile mechanism design.
C.1
Design Process
The current section covers the design process of the sixteen proposed ductile mechanisms leading
to the achieved ﬁnal design. These designs are presented in Figure C.1
85
==PAGE:102==
86
APPENDIX C. DUCTILE MECHANISMS
(a)
(b)
Figure C.1: a) The ﬁrst 8 Design proposals for the ductile mechanism designs. (b) The last 8 design
proposals for the ductile mechanism designs.
==PAGE:103==
C.1. DESIGN PROCESS
87
Design 1 and 2
The ﬁrst two designs of the ductile mechanisms illustrated in Figure C.1 are inspired by Type_7X9
proposed in (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017). Design 1 is completely identical with Type_7X9 and was
initially thought of as the desired strong ductile mechanism in this thesis. The second design,
which internal diameter is signiﬁcantly bigger than design 1 was meant to represent the desired
weak ductile mechanism. The authors of (Sørensen & Krabbe 2017) managed to achieve an
appropriate axial deﬂection and corresponding strength of Type_7X9 by constraining the bottom
against translation in any direction and by ensuring a boundary condition on the top surface where
a potential column effect is avoided. The corresponding deﬂection mode and stress distribution are
illustrated in Figure C.2. These responses are based on the above mentioned boundary conditions,
an applied axial deformation on the top surface (-15 mm) and the material properties stated in
Table 3.1.
Figure C.2: Deﬂection mode and distribution of the stresses in the ﬁrst proposed ductile mechanism design
according to ABAQUS, when using boundary conditions identical to the ones used in (Sørensen & Krabbe
2017)
The purpose of re-analyzing these two designs in this thesis is to investigate the responses
obtained by applying the desired boundary conditions speciﬁed in Figure 3.2. Figure C.3 and
Figure C.4 illustrate the deﬂection mode and corresponding stress distribution of design 1 and 2
respectively, when applying the desired conditions.
The boundary conditions applied on the top surface of the ductile mechanisms are especially
on the last stages of Figure C.3 and C.4 observed to initiate the second order effect that (Sørensen
& Krabbe 2017) ensured to avoid. Since it is desired in this thesis to avoid second order effects
and at the same time not to compromise on the boundary conditions speciﬁed in Figure 3.2, design
one and two are excluded and new designs are investigated.
==PAGE:104==
88
APPENDIX C. DUCTILE MECHANISMS
Figure C.3: Distribution of the stresses in the ﬁrst proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm
Figure C.4: Distribution of the stresses in the second proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm
Design 3 and 4
The answer on how to obtain the desired axial deformation of the ductile mechanisms without
compromising the desired boundary conditions lays in the geometry of the inner walls. Hence
design 3 and 4 from Figure C.1 were proposed. The bend in the middle of the web is expected to
provoke an outer deformation of both the inner and the outer walls.
The gaps present in the fourth design were meant to make it weaker than the third one. In that
way, a strong and a weak ductile mechanism were proposed. Their corresponding deﬂection mode,
stress distribution and load-displacement curve according to ABAQUS are illustrated in Figure C.5
and C.7.
As observed from Figure C.5b design 3 is expected to yield when a displacement of 0.398 mm
and a corresponding load of 117.9 kN are achieved. On the other hand the yielding point of design
4 is already reached at a displacement of 0.35 mm and a corresponding load with a magnitude of
53.9 kN, according to Figure C.7b.
==PAGE:105==
C.1. DESIGN PROCESS
89
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b)
Figure C.5: a) Distribution of the stresses in the third proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the third ductile
mechanism
Figure C.6: The deﬂection mode and deﬂection distribution of design 3 after application of an axial deﬂec-
tion equal to 5 mm. The corresponding maximum deﬂection values, U1 and U2 are provided as well.
==PAGE:106==
90
APPENDIX C. DUCTILE MECHANISMS
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
(b)
Figure C.7: a) Distribution of the stresses in the fourth proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the fourth ductile
mechanism
Figure C.8: The deﬂection mode and deﬂection distribution of design 4 after application of an axial deﬂec-
tion equal to 5 mm. The corresponding maximum deﬂection values, U1 and U2 are provided as well.
==PAGE:107==
C.1. DESIGN PROCESS
91
Design 3 is thereby as expected estimated by ABAQUS to yield at a signiﬁcantly higher load than
design 4. Taking their yield load magnitudes into account it seems quite reasonable to include
design 3 and 4 in the global system with 2 anchors on each side and a prestressing force of 160.85
kN.
At ﬁrst sight the deﬂection mode of both ductile mechanisms seemed appropriate due to their
desired outward axial bending, preventing the design from colliding with the rod. But an investi-
gation of the actual resulting outward deformation of both designs made it clear that the narrow
slider was not capable of accommodating them in their deformed shape. Already after an applied
axial deformation of 5 mm in ABAQUS the numerical outward deﬂection in the two main hori-
zontal directions, U1 and U2 were observed to 1.97 mm and 1.96 mm for design 3 and 5.38 mm
and 4.87 mm for design 4. These deﬂection modes and corresponding values are illustrated in
Figure C.6 and C.8.
According to the theory of Pythagoras this corresponds to a resulting deﬂection of U =
p
(1.97mm)2 + (1.96mm)2 = 2.8mm and U =
p
(5.38mm)2 + (4.87mm)2 = 7.3mm re-
spectively.
Additionally, the midpoint of the outer wall of both designs was already provided with an initial
outward bending of approximately 2 mm. Taking these considerations into account it is clear that
the slider is too narrow to accommodate the deformed stage of both ductile mechanisms.
Furthermore the angle change along the inner walls made them inappropriate and tedious in terms
of their production. These two above mentioned observations made it necessary to search for new
more appropriate ductile mechanisms designs.
Design 5
After discovering the limits associated with angle changes along the inner walls the ﬁfth design
from Figure C.1 was proposed. Despite the insurance of no angle changes of the inner walls, the
proposal was based on two main considerations.
First of all, it was clear that the desired outward deformation would be impossible to provoke with
straight inner walls. Furthermore, the opportunity of creating a diameter difference between the
top and the bottom surface could be utilized. That was expected to create the desired provoked
outward deformation. However, the diameter of 30 mm of the top surface had to be ensured due
to the anchor having a diameter with that magnitude.
These considerations resulted in a design with corresponding ABAQUS responses.
As expected the design ensures an outward deformation with a second order effect small
enough to be neglected. Based on that observation this proposal seems quite reasonable. But
when taking the relatively small yield load (Figure C.9b) into consideration the efﬁciency of the
design was doubted.
The search for other more appropriate designs therefore continued. The design was not neglected
completely though, in case a weak ductile mechanism was needed later.
==PAGE:108==
92
APPENDIX C. DUCTILE MECHANISMS
(a)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
20
40
60
80
(b)
Figure C.9: a) Distribution of the stresses in the ﬁfth proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the ﬁfth ductile
mechanism
Design 6
The undesired second order effect was obtained with the sixth ductile mechanism of the ones
shown in Figure C.1 . The design was therefore excluded immediately.
Design 7 and 8
After canceling out the six above mentioned ductile mechanism proposals, the ones shown in Fig-
ure C.10 and C.11 were modeled and evaluated. They represent the ﬁrst out of several designs
which were inspired by the telescope effect illustrated in Figure 3.7a. Their responses seem quite
reasonable both deﬂection- as well as strength wise. While design seven has an elastic regime de-
pleting at 47.38 kN the elastic regime of design eight depletes at 68.7 kN. Taking their responses
into account they seemed as optimal candidates to the ﬁnal ductile mechanism designs. How-
ever, it was later found that their bottom outer diameter were 40 mm instead of the required 30
mm, corresponding to the outer diameter of the anchor. Further design proposals were thereby a
necessity.
==PAGE:109==
C.1. DESIGN PROCESS
93
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
(b)
Figure C.10: a) Distribution of the stresses in the seventh proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the seventh ductile
mechanism
==PAGE:110==
94
APPENDIX C. DUCTILE MECHANISMS
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
(b)
Figure C.11: a) Distribution of the stresses in the eighth proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the eighth ductile
mechanism
==PAGE:111==
C.1. DESIGN PROCESS
95
Design 9
The following design was like the two previous ones, inspired by the telescope effect. This time
the outer bottom diameter complied with the 30 mm corresponding to the outer diameter of the
anchor. With an elastic regime depleting at 111 kN, as observed in Figure C.12b the design
seemed to comply fairly to the desired "strong ductile mechanism". At ﬁrst sight the deﬂection
mode of both ductile mechanisms seemed appropriate due to their desired outward axial bending,
preventing the design from colliding with the rod. But an investigation of the actual resulting
outward deformation made it clear that the narrow slider was not capable of accommodating it in
their deformed shape. After an applied axial deformation of 15 mm in ABAQUS the numerical
outward deﬂection in the two main horizontal directions were observed to U1 = 4.2 mm and U2 =
2.9 mm corresponding to a resulting deﬂection of U = 5.1 mm.
The search for appropriate ductile mechanism designs thereby continued.
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
50
100
150
200
(b)
Figure C.12: a) Distribution of the stresses in the ninth proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the ninth ductile
mechanism
Design 10 and 11
The following two designs were also inspired by the telescope effect. The inner diameters of both
designs were increased from 10 mm to 15 mm compared to design 9. Besides making the ductile
==PAGE:112==
96
APPENDIX C. DUCTILE MECHANISMS
mechanisms signiﬁcantly "weaker", as observed from Figure C.13b and C.14b, their deﬂections
introduced the undesired second order effects as observed in Figure C.13a and C.14a The designs
were thereby not considered any furher.
(a)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
0
20
40
60
80
100
(b)
Figure C.13: a) Distribution of the stresses in the tenth proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the tenth ductile
mechanism
==PAGE:113==
C.1. DESIGN PROCESS
97
(a)
(b)
Figure C.14: a) Distribution of the stresses in the eleventh proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the eleventh ductile
mechanism
==PAGE:114==
98
APPENDIX C. DUCTILE MECHANISMS
Design 12 and 13
The following two ductile mechanism proposals seem according to ABAQUS to have the desired
axial deﬂection even when a displacement of 15 mm is applied (Figure C.15a and C.16a). Their
elastic regime is observed in Figure C.15b and C.16b to deplete at approximately 35 and 30 kN,
respectively. These values seem appropriate for a low ductile mechanism strength. However, at
the time of these proposals the high and low strength ductile mechanism pair aimed for, were
exchanged with two identical ductile mechanisms, each having a yield strength corresponding to
approximately 70 kN. This was due to lack of time.
Based on that the proposals were thereby canceled
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
(b)
Figure C.15: a) Distribution of the stresses in the twelfth proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the twelfth ductile
mechanism
==PAGE:115==
C.1. DESIGN PROCESS
99
(a)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
20
40
60
80
100
(b)
Figure C.16: a) Distribution of the stresses in the thirteenth proposed ductile mechanism design according
to ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the thirteenth
ductile mechanism
Design 14-16
Both design 14, 15 and 16 are inspired by the telescope effect. Their corresponding responses
according to ABAQUS when applying an axial deformation of 15 mm at the top surface are il-
lustrated in Figure C.17, C.18 and C.20, respectively. As observed, all three designs behave quite
similar both strength- and deﬂection wise. All three deﬂection modes seem quite reasonable due
to their desired axial deﬂections, ensuring no contact with the rod, and thereby premature fail-
ure. The deﬂection modes of the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth design even converges quite reasonably
towards their deﬂection modes when being constrained at both bottom and top (Figure C.19a and
C.21a, respectively).
Their elasticity regimes seem to deplete at approximately similar load levels. Furthermore, their
ultimate capacities are quite similar as well. However, the ﬁfteenth design is observed to be a bit
stronger than the fourteenth design and at the same time more reliable than the sixteenth one. At
ﬁrst sight, the sixteenth proposed design seems more optimal than design 15, in terms of strength.
However, the response changes happening already at both 22 kN as well as 51 kN make the out-
puts unsafe to rely on. The ﬁfteenth design was thereby an optimal candidate for the ﬁnal ductile
==PAGE:116==
100
APPENDIX C. DUCTILE MECHANISMS
mechanism design until analytical evaluations were performed. They revealed the yield load 53.3
kN corresponding to an area of 205 mm2 representing the smallest cross section along the ductile
mechanism. This yield load varies signiﬁcantly from the one according to ABAQUS (73 kN) and
should not be ignored. Together with insufﬁcient stability considerations this realization made it
risky to apply in the global systems performed in this thesis.
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b)
Figure C.17: a) Distribution of the stresses in the fourteenth proposed ductile mechanism design according
to ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the fourteenth
ductile mechanism
==PAGE:117==
C.1. DESIGN PROCESS
101
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b)
Figure C.18: a) Distribution of the stresses in the ﬁfteenth proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the ﬁfteenth ductile
mechanism
==PAGE:118==
102
APPENDIX C. DUCTILE MECHANISMS
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b)
Figure C.19: a) Distribution of the stresses in the ﬁfteenth proposed ductile mechanism design according
to ABAQUS, when constraining both top and bottom as well as applying an axial displacement of -15 mm
b) Load/displacement curve for the ﬁfteenth ductile mechanism being constrained both at top and bottom
==PAGE:119==
C.1. DESIGN PROCESS
103
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b)
Figure C.20: a) Distribution of the stresses in the sixteenth proposed ductile mechanism design according to
ABAQUS, when applying a displacement of -15 mm (b) Load/displacement curve for the sixteenth ductile
mechanism
==PAGE:120==
104
APPENDIX C. DUCTILE MECHANISMS
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(b)
Figure C.21: a) Distribution of the stresses in the sixteenth proposed ductile mechanism design according
to ABAQUS, when constraining both top and bottom as well as applying an axial displacement of -15 mm
b) Load/displacement curve for the sixteenth ductile mechanism being constrained both at top and bottom
==PAGE:121==
C.2. DIMENSIONS OF THE STABILITY RESPONSE PIN AND CORRESPONDING
BLOCK
105
C.2
Dimensions of the Stability Response Pin and Corresponding
Block
The section provides the dimensions of the stability response pin and its corresponding block,
both associated with the ﬁnal ductile mechanism design.
==PAGE:122==
Steel rod hollow with end plate
Type: 2-           Dimensions: mm
Date: 29-11-2017
Project: Master thesis
Drawn by: Naqaash Shabbir A.
Ressourceno.: 26642
1125-010
Contact:
s122990@student.dtu.dk
Tlf: 26960503
21
10
37
4
8
55
R5
R10,5
R18,5
==PAGE:123==
Plate for ductile mechanism
Type: O-Edge       Dimenssions: mm
Date: 29-11-2017
Project: Master thesis
Drawn by: Naqaash Shabbir A.
Ressourceno.: 26642
1125-010
Contact:
s122990@student.dtu.dk
Tlf: 26960503
46,5
47
R11,25
R17,25
24
23,25
23,25
23,25
R8,1
R8,1
1
11,75
22,5
12,75
13
5,75
6
22,5
6
6,75
34,5
==PAGE:124==
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX D
Anchor Block
The following section provides the dimensions of the slider, threaded rod as well as the An-
chor block itself. The designs correspond to the ones utilized during preliminary work done in
(Sørensen & Krabbe 2017) but with few regulations. In order for the newest developed anchor
to ﬁt in, an extension of the slider in the longitudinal direction was a necessity. The signiﬁcantly
longer slider limited the prestressing length. Hence the block end not contributing to the load
distribution was completely opened up.
109
==PAGE:126==
==PAGE:127==
A 
B 
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
SHEET 1  OF 1 
DRAWN
CHECKED
QA
MFG
APPROVED
jwsc
23-04-2017
DWG NO
Ankerblok_slide
TITLE
SIZE
A3
SCALE
REV
1 : 1,1
A
B
Mål i [mm], Materiale: Toollox 33, Afrundeinger r=3mm
30,00
R6,50
23,33
63
330
20,00
290,00
47,00
8,00
13,00
R8,10
50,33
330,00
47,33
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX E
Matlab Script for Serial Coupled
Anchorage System
In Appendix E the MATLAB script, prepared for section 2.6.3, is introduced.
113
==PAGE:130==
%_____________________________Description_________________________________%  
% 
% The MATLAB script calculates the load distribution between 2 serial 
% coupled anchorage system, where the obtained load in both anchors P_i,  
% the corresponding external force F_0. 
% 
% The calculations are based on Excel file containing load-deformation 
% data from the Type_7x2 ductile mechanism. 
% 
% 
%________________________________Plot____________________________________% 
% 
% Plot - Load obtained between 2 anchors as a function of  
% the applied external force. 
% 
% 
% 
%__________________________Authors and period_____________________________% 
% Prepared by: Mehmet Kaan Tural, Naqaash Shabbir Ahmad & Rachel Haikal Saliba 
% Project period: 28. August 2017 - 23. February 2018 
% Structural Engineering, Technical University of Denmark. 
% 
% 
%% 
clc; clear; close all; 
set(0,'defaulttextinterpreter','latex') 
set(0,'defaultaxesfontname','times') 
set(0,'defaultlinelinewidth',1.5) 
set(0,'DefaultAxesFontSize',20) 
set(0,'DefaultAxesXGrid','on','DefaultAxesYGrid','on') 
  
_____________________________________________________________________ 
  
%% Step 1 
  
% Distance between 2 anchors 
  
L_1to2 = 500;  % [mm] 
  
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
  
%% Step 2 & 3 
  
% Reading the Excel file "Serial Coupled Theoretical Calculation.xls" 
filename = 'Serial Coupled Theoretical Calculation.xls'; 
A = xlsread(filename); 
  
% Defining 2 data columns from "Serial Coupled Theoretical Calculation.xls" 
x = A(1:3286,1); 
y = A(1:3286,2); 
len=length(x); 
for i=1:len 
==PAGE:131==
  
% The compression of the first ductile mechanism   
delta_1(i)=x(i); %[mm] 
     
  
% The load obtained by the first ductile mechanism 
P_1(i) = y(i);   % [kN] 
  
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
  
%% Step 4 
  
% Corresponding external force 
F_0(i) = 0;   % [kN] 
  
% Choosing the Error for Step 10. 
Error(i) = 0.1; 
while abs(Error(i)) >= 0.1; 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
%% Step 5 
  
% Estimating the passed force on to the next anchor 
Delta_F_2(i) = F_0(i) - P_1(i); 
  
_____________________________________________________________________ 
  
%% Step 6 
  
  
% Elastic modulus for CFRP tendon 
E = 165;    %[GPa] 
  
  
% Cross-section area for CFRP tendon: 
A_CFRP = (8/2)^2*pi;  % [m^2] 
  
  
% Calculating the elongation of the CFRP: 
Delta_L_2(i) = (Delta_F_2(i)/(E*A_CFRP))*L_1to2; 
  
_____________________________________________________________________ 
  
%% Step 7 
  
% Calculating the compression of the next ductile mechanism 
delta_2(i) = delta_1(i) -  Delta_L_2(i); 
==PAGE:132==
 
%% Step 8 
  
% Estimating the load obtained in the next anchor by interpolating between 
% x = Compression of the first ductile mechanism 
% y = Load obtained by the first ductile mechanism 
% delta_2 = Compression of the second ductile mechanism 
  
P_2(i) = interp1(x,y,delta_2(i)); 
  
___________________________________________________________________________________ 
  
%% Step 9 
  
% Solving the Error. 
Error(i) =  (F_0(i) - (P_2(i) + P_1(i))); 
 
___________________________________________________________________________________        
        
%% Step 10 
     
% Minimizing the Error until chosen Error = 0.1 in Step 4 is achieved, 
% and calculating the corresponding External force F_0 which will obtain  
% global equilbrium. 
  
       if abs(Error(i)) >= 0.1 
           F_0(i) = F_0(i)- Error(i)/10; 
       end 
        
     
  
end 
end 
  
___________________________________________________________________________________ 
  
%%%%%%%%%%%%% Plot %%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
figure(1) 
plot(F_0(1:1290),P_1(1:1290),'k') 
hold on 
plot(F_0(1:1290),P_2(1:1290),'r') 
plot(F_0(190),P_1(190),'ko','MarkerSize', 10) 
plot(F_0(1316),P_2(1316),'rx','MarkerSize', 10) 
plot(F_0(192),P_2(192),'rs','MarkerSize', 12) 
xlabel('Applied external force $F_0$ [kN]');  
ylabel('Load in anchor $P_1$ $\&$ $P_2$ [kN]'); 
legend('Anchor 1','Anchor 2','Elastic regime ends for Anchor 1'... 
    ,'Elastic regime ends for Anchor 2'... 
    ,'Anchor 2 activated with 10 kN','Location','southeast') 
xlim([0 190]) 
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX F
Monitoring of the Full Scale Tests
During Their Performance
The following section presents the calculation sheet which enables the user to thoroughly follow
the load distribution throughout the rod, while the test is running. Being able to follow the load
level introduced in the rod, once in a while is a necessity so that the process can be interrupted
immediately at any load level needed. Especially in the test conﬁgurations where reaching load
levels corresponding to the plastic regime of the ductile mechanisms is undesired.
The calculation procedure is basically based on the strain gauge conversion formula presented and
explained in Appendix I.4.3.
The ﬁrst part of the sheet determines the voltage difference expected to be registered directly on the
datalogger when subjecting the rod to a speciﬁc load. The second part, on the other hand, converts
the magnitudes directly registered from the data logger to the desired strains and corresponding
stresses.
117
==PAGE:134==
 Monitoring during both the single anchored and serial coupled full scale tests
The stress in the rod is given as: 
σ
E ε

=
ε
σ
E
=
The strain is obtained through the following simplified conversion formula
ε
ΔU
Us
4
k

=
Strain gauge factor:
k
2.05

(Provided by the SG supplier)
Supply voltage:
Us
5V

(Constant) 
Elasticity modulus of the rod:
Erod
165 103MPa


Diameter of the rod:
Drod
8mm

Area of the rod:
Arod
Drod
2




2
π

50.265mm2



Question: Which voltage difference is expected to be obtained when a specific load is 
applied to the rod
Load in the rod: 
F1
100kN

(Variable)
Corresponding stress in the rod
σ1
F1
Arod
1989.437MPa



The actual voltage differrence is then: 
dU1
σ1
Erod
Us k




4
30.897 mV



Starting point of the voltage difference:
U0
7.94mV

Voltage difference observed from the logger:
dUlog
U0
dU1

38.837 mV



This corresponds to the following strain in the rod: 
ε
dU1
Us
4
k

0.012


==PAGE:135==
Question: Which stress is reached in the rod for a specific voltage difference shown on the 
screen 
Starting point:
U0.
7.15mV

Datalogger
Voltage difference observed:
dU2
41mV

(Variable)
Actual voltage difference:
dUa
dU2
U0.

0.034 V


Corresponding stress in the rod
σ2
Erod
dUa 4

Us k


2179.61 MPa



Load in the rod: 
F2
σ2 Arod

109.559 kN



==PAGE:136==
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX G
Cross Section Calculations of the
HE240B Beam
In this appendix, the theory behind beam design, assumptions of the beam properties and beam
dimension results are described. All the equations utilized in this appendix are based on (Standard
2007)
Figure G.1: Cross-section of the HE240B beam with mounted anchorage and 8 mm CFRP rod
G.1
Beam Theory and Calculation Steps
The height of the compression zone z, is assumed half of the beam, where the height from top
ﬂange to the center of the CFRP rod is neglected. h is the height of the HE240B beam. Figure
G.1 gives an illustration of the beam cross-section with symbols.
121
==PAGE:138==
122
APPENDIX G. CROSS SECTION CALCULATIONS OF THE HE240B BEAM
z = h
2
(G.1)
The eccentricity e in CFRP rod is determined from Equation G.2. h2 is indicated as the height
from top ﬂange to the bottom of the rod (see Figure G.1), drod is the diameter of CFRP rod.
eRod = z + h2 +
drod
2

(G.2)
Moment contribution from the beam self-weight is determined from Equation G.3.
Mg = 1
8WgL2
(G.3)
Where, W is the self-weight of the beam, L is the length of the beam and g is the gravity.
The applied tensile force on the CFRP rod FT times the rod eccentricity contributes to bending
moment.
MRod = FT eRod
(G.4)
The bending stress distribution in a beam is determined with Navier’s Equation G.5. Abeam is
the cross-section area of the beam, while I is the moment of inertia.
σy =
FT
Abeam
± Mg + MRod
I
z
(G.5)
The bending stress σy must be less or equal to the beam design yield strength fyd (Equation
G.6), otherwise the corresponding beam will yield.
σy ≤fyd
(G.6)
==PAGE:139==
Cross section analysis of HE240B beam
Following cross section analysis of the utilized beam is based on Naviers formula, where
compression is defined as positive and tension as negative: 
 Properies of the rod
Diameter of the rod:
drod
8mm

Area of the rod:
Arod
drod
2




2
π

50.265mm2



Applied tensile force on the CFRP rod:
NT2
102kN

(Variable)
 Properties of the steel beam
Area of the steel beam:
Abeam
10.6 103

mm2

Moment of inertia
I
112.6106

mm4

Selfweight of the beam: 
W1
83.2 kg
m

Thickness of the beam:
t
17mm

Height of beam:
h
240mm

Length of the beam:
L
7m

moment of resistance:
Wy
938
103

mm3

Height from center of gravity to the point where the stress is to be found 
z
h
2
0.12 m


Characteristic yield strength: 
fyk
235MPa
t
16mm

if
225MPa
16mm
t

40mm

if
215MPa
40mm
t

63mm

if
225 MPa



Partial coefficient:
γ
1.2

Design yield strength of the beam
fyd
fyk
γ
187.5 MPa



G.2
Calculation Process and Results
==PAGE:140==
 Moment contributions
Selfweight of the beam:
Mg
1
8
W1

g

L2

4.997
103

N m




CFRP rod: 
Distance from the top flange to the bottom of the rod:
distrod
0.024m

diameter of the rod:
drod
8mm

Rod excentricity:
e
h
2
distrod

drod
2





0.148 m


Mr
NT2 e
15.096 kN m




 Stress that the post-tension of the CFRP rod subjects the steel beam with (Naviers): 
Compression at top flange (positive):
σy.comp
NT2
Abeam
Mg
Mr

I
z

31.037 MPa



Tension at bottom flange (negative):
σy.tens
NT2
Abeam
Mg
Mr

I
z
t

(
)


8.758

MPa



 Capacity verification:
σy.comp
fyd

1

The beam will remain in the linear elastic regime during the entire posttensioning, as desired
_________________________________________________________________________________
 Comparison with the stress distributions achieved experimentally:
 Test 1
 Test 2
Max applied load to the system:
Max applied load to the system:
NT.t1
101.34kN

NT.t2
102.3kN

 Upper flange average
 Upper flange average
 Upper flange 1 (SG1): 
 Upper flange 1 (SG1): 
σUF1.t1
26.22MPa

σUF1.t2
27.21MPa

 Upper flange 2 (SG2) 
 Upper flange 2 (SG2) 
σUF2.t1
26.11MPa

σUF2.t2
25.67MPa

==PAGE:141==
 Test 3
Max applied load to the system:
NT.t3
97.82kN

 Upper flange average
 Upper flange 1 (SG1): 
σUF1.t3
26.9MPa

 Upper flange 2 (SG2) 
σUF2.t3
25.76MPa

 Average 
 Average 
σUF.t1
σUF1.t1
σUF2.t1

2
26.165 MPa



σUF.t2
σUF1.t2
σUF2.t2

2
26.44 MPa



 Lower flange average
 Lower flange average
 Lower flange (SG_lower): 
 Lower flange (SG_lower): 
σLF.t1
5.3MPa

No value
 Average 
σUF.t3
σUF1.t3
σUF2.t3

2
26.33 MPa



 Lower flange average
 Lower flange (SG_lower): 
σLF.t3
6.25MPa

==PAGE:142==
==PAGE:143==
APPENDIX H
Static System Hand Calculations
The values taken from the statical system are cross-checked with hand calculations. The graphs
for axial forces, shear forces and moment distribution are shown on the following pages.
To simplify the calculations, the beam subjected to dead load only is calculated separately
and the beam subjected to tendon force is evaluated for itself. The maximum values from both
systems are then super-positioned to end up with a ﬁnal total value that is acting on the beam. In
the following, the ﬁrst beam is subjected to a dead load of q = 0.8159 N/mm on the entire 7 meter
span. The beam is simply supported.
The maximum shear force is seen at the supports with a value of 2855.69 N. Maximum mo-
ment occurs at mid-span with a value of 4997467 Nmm. There is no Axial force acting on the
beam when it is only subjected to a dead load.
The next scenario is the beam with two anchor blocks and a tendon force of 160850 N. The
dead load is neglected. As no vertical load is seen, the Shear force is equal to zero. The Axial
force starts from one anchor block and ends in the other. The Axial force value is 160850 N.
Due to the eccentricity of the tendon e = 148 mm a moment occurs at the blocks. The moment
is calculated to be 23805800 Nmm.
When super-positioning the forces from both beams and the loadings, the values presented in
Table H.1 are obtained. The hand calculations are based on (Jensen 2013)
Table H.1: Section forces
Axial force
Shear force
Moment
Displacement
N [kN]
V [kN]
M [kNm]
u [mm]
160.85
2.855
28.803
7.23
127
==PAGE:144==
==PAGE:145==
==PAGE:146==
==PAGE:147==
APPENDIX I
HE240B Beam Preparation Steps
In Appendix I the preparation of the test beam is described.
I.1
Supports
One end is supported by a roller support and the other end is supported by a pinned support i.e.
simple supported beam. These 2 supports are shown in Figure I.1 and I.2.
Figure I.1: Roller support
Figure I.2: Pinned support
I.2
Drilling Holes in Test Beam
2x36 holes were drilled on the beam (top and bottom) where a mechanical drilling machine called
OYA RE-1250A was utilized for the drilling process.
Initially, an anchorage block with 18mm holes was placed and located correctly on the beam,
where after a 18mm drill head was used to drill the holes, see Figure I.3 and I.4 .
131
==PAGE:148==
132
APPENDIX I. HE240B BEAM PREPARATION STEPS
Figure I.3: Marking the holes
Figure I.4: Drilling process
Holes are drilled for 6 anchor blocks on both sides of the beam, wherein each anchor block
accommodates 6 holes. Figure I.5 shows the drilled holes in the test beam. The whole drilling
process was done by Keld Plougmann, Machinist and Engineer Assistant.
Figure I.5
==PAGE:149==
I.3. LVDT SETUP
133
I.3
LVDT Setup
For the linear displacement measurement, ﬁve Linear variable displacement transformers were
installed on the test beam as shown in Figure I.6 and I.7. The LVDTs were connected to the
datalog computer, see Figure I.8. Before test measuring the LVDTs were calibrated in order to
achieve the correct calibrating factor.
Figure I.6: A LVDT measures the vertical
displacements at the roller support.
Figure I.7: LVDT equipment positioned
perpendicular to the test beam.
Figure I.9 shows the calibration setup for LVDT number 2. Number 2 is indicated by the
selected and connected channel on the datalogger. The following steps describe the calibration
process:
1. Mounting and positioning the LVDT on gauge stand. The connection between the tip of the
LVDT and gauge stand must be done carefully, otherwise, measurement errors can occur.
2. The displacement measuring equipment – black colored with a red button – is set to zero.
3. Starting the datalog to measure the voltage. First, the voltage value which corresponds to
the zero displacement is read and written down.
4. Moving the displacement gauge equipment upward to a random value, and reading the
corresponding voltage value from the datalog. This can be done 3-4 times until the end of
the movable core in LVDT is reached.
5. If the measured displacement values from the gauge stand and the corresponding voltage
values are consistent with the data from datalog, then the calibrated LVDT is approved to
be used. Small variations will occur, which can be ignored.
==PAGE:150==
134
APPENDIX I. HE240B BEAM PREPARATION STEPS
Figure I.8: Datalog computer.
Figure I.9: Calibrating LVDT number 2
I.4
Strain Gauges on Beam and CFRP Tendon
Strain gauges have been applied at several locations along both the steel beam as well as the
CFRP tendon in order for the corresponding strains to be measured. For both situations a speciﬁc
mounting process has been followed closely in order to minimize the disturbances and sources of
errors normally associated with the mounting of strain gauges.
I.4.1
Steel Beam
Initially, the steel beam surfaces where the strain gauges are going to be mounted were grinded and
polished until a corrosion free, blank, smooth and regular surface was achieved. Each polished
surface was then cleaned with acetone. The cleaning paper was frequently changed in order to
remove both dust and pencil residues from the marking.
Figure I.10: Grinding the steel beam
with a grinder to obtain a smooth sur-
face.
Figure I.11: Cleaning the smooth surface
with acetone(spirit).
==PAGE:151==
I.4. STRAIN GAUGES ON BEAM AND CFRP TENDON
135
The strain gauge which is wrapped in protective plastic was taken out with a tweezer and
placed, with its gluing area downwards, on a glass plate cleaned with acetone. A sticky tape was
applied directly over the strain gauge, Figure I.12.
Figure I.12: Applying sticky tape on strain gauge
The tape with the gauge underneath was then applied on the marked area on the beam.
Through the marking on the beam surface and the line guides on the strain gauge it was ensured
that the strain gauge was placed parallel to the beam, if the angle is not precise than the mounted
strain gauge output will be affected. Figure I.13 illustrates the way to mound the strain gauge on
the beam.
Figure I.13: Placing the strain gauge with tape
Afterwards, the tape is lifted up in order to glue the strain gauge’s back side to make sure
the strain gauge is ﬁxed during the test. The strain gauge and the tape is pressed by sliding one
ﬁnger from left to right until gauge is reached, thus the glue gets better in contact with the whole
gauge area. Afterwards the gauge is pressed for approximately one-two minutes to make sure the
glue catches. The ﬁnger sliding Figure I.14 illustrates the process. The tape was removed after 24
hours to ensure that the strain gauge is not pulled off while removing the tape.
==PAGE:152==
136
APPENDIX I. HE240B BEAM PREPARATION STEPS
Figure I.14: Gluing and pressing the strain gauge
The tinned parts of the strain gauge are soldered with wires, one must be careful that the two
tinned parts are not in contact during soldering. Figure I.15 shows the ﬁnal step where the soldered
strain gauge is connected to the datalog wire.
Figure I.15: Mounted and soldered strain gauge on steel beam
I.4.2
CFRP Tendon
The procedure is similar to the one for the steel beam. The process initiates with polishing the
tendon with a sandpaper until the surface is smooth, see Figure I.17. Afterwards, the polished area
is cleaned and mounted, where after the wires are soldered to the strain gauge, see Figure I.18.
The connected plug device, from strain gauge to the logging computer, is shown in Figure I.16.
It is an advantage to check the wires with a multimeter before attaching to the plug device. The
system can be concluded apprpriate if the mounted strain gauge provides 120 Ω. In that way it is
ensured that the mounted strain gauge will measure correctly.
==PAGE:153==
I.4. STRAIN GAUGES ON BEAM AND CFRP TENDON
137
Figure I.16: Mounted and soldered strain gauge on steel beam
Figure I.17: Polished CFRP tendon.
Figure I.18:
Mounted and soldered
strain gauge on CFRP tendon
I.4.3
Conversion Formula
The data obtained from the strain gauges are processed through the following conversion formula
(Formula I.1)
ε = ∆U
Us
· 4
k
(I.1)
ε represents the desired strain which is estimated through the ratio between four times the
measured voltage, ∆U and the product of the supply voltage, Us and the strain gauge factor, k.
The supply voltage is estimated to be constant around 5 V. According to the strain gauge supplier
the strain gauge factor is 2.05.
The conversion formula is a simpliﬁed version of a more complicated expression. As long as the
strain does not exceed 1% the uncertainty arising due to this simpliﬁcation is signiﬁcantly small
(under 1%).
==PAGE:154==
138
APPENDIX I. HE240B BEAM PREPARATION STEPS
I.5
Presetting Procedure
The presetting of the CFRP tendon into an anchor follows the process shown in Figure I.19
Figure I.19: Installation of the CFRP tendon into the anchor. From Figure 3.3 in (Schmidt 2011)
This is done by pressing the wedge into the barrel with a hand pumped piston shown in Figure
I.20 and I.21.
Figure I.20: Hand pumped piston utilized
for presetting CFRP tendon into the anchor
Figure I.21: The hand pump
The presetting process begins with opening the wedge with a screwdriver in order to make
sure the wedge moves easily around the CFRP tendon, see Figure I.22, then a super glue is used to
ﬁx the wedge around the tendon. The glue dries quite fast which makes it important to move the
wedge fast around the tendon. Afterwards, metal assembly paste is lubricated on wedge to reduce
the friction when the wedge is pressed into barrel, see Figure I.23.
==PAGE:155==
I.5. PRESETTING PROCEDURE
139
Figure I.22: Opening the wedge
Figure I.23:
Applying metal assembly
paste on wedge.
The anchor is preset until one millimeter of the wedge is seen. Figure I.24 shows the presetting
process and Figure I.25 shows the ﬁnal stage as seen in Figure I.19.
Figure I.24: Pressing the wedge into the
barrel
Figure I.25: Final stage, preset
anchor.
New Anchor
The new anchor was preset with the same hand pumped piston, where the procedure was a bit
different. The new wedge is designed to press the CFRP tendon inside and thus no screwdriver
was utilized to open the wedge. Super glue and metal assembly paste were applied the same way.
An iron collar was used to push the wedge into the barrel, see Figure I.26, until the pressure gauge
showed approximately 135 kN. The ﬁnal stage of the presetting process is shown in Figure I.27.
==PAGE:156==
140
APPENDIX I. HE240B BEAM PREPARATION STEPS
Figure I.26: Presetting the new wedge into the bar-
rel with an iron collar.
Figure I.27: Final stage.
I.6
Protection
The beam system is sheltered with transparent shields in order to protect the surroundings when
failure modes happens. The shield will keep the CFRP tendon splinters inside when a powerful
failure occurs. Figure I.28 and I.29 shows the sheltered system.
Figure I.28: Shielded beam system.
Figure I.29:
Closer detail of the
shielded anchorblock and the CFRP
tendon.
==PAGE:157==
I.6. PROTECTION
141
Wood panel shown in Figure I.30 is used as well to protect the surroundings. Especially
protects the one who is tensioning the system.
Figure I.30: Wood panel seen on both side.
==PAGE:158==
==PAGE:159==
APPENDIX J
Single Anchored Full Scale Testing
The following chapter provides bigger versions of the response ﬁgures obtained in connection
with the single anchored full scale tests. Smaller versions are already available in the main report.
J.1
Ductile Mechanism
The following section provides the behaviour of the ductile mechanism when applied in the single
anchored global system.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Displacement [mm]
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Load [kN]
Calliper Test 2
Calliper Test 3
LVDT Test 3
Figure J.1: Ductile mechanism response when applied in a single anchored system according to the calipers
applied in test 2 and 3 and the LVDT mounted in connection with test 3.
J.2
Rod
This section illustrates both the stress and strain development of the rod as a function of time for
all three performed full scale tests.
143
==PAGE:160==
144
APPENDIX J. SINGLE ANCHORED FULL SCALE TESTING
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
Time [s]
-500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Stress [MPa]
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Figure J.2: Stress development of the rod as a function of time for all three performed full scale test
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
Time [s]
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Strain [-]
×10-3
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Figure J.3: Strain in the rod as a function of time for all three performed full scale tests
J.3
Beam
The section presents the stress and strain development in both the upper and lower ﬂange of the
beam as a function of time for all three performed full scale tests. Furthermore, a ﬁgure showing
the vertical deﬂection development with time in the beam midpoint is presented.
==PAGE:161==
J.3. BEAM
145
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Time [s]
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Stress [MPa]
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Figure J.4: Stress development in the upper ﬂange of the beam as a function of time for all 3 performed full
scale test.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Time [s]
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Strain [-]
×10-5
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Figure J.5: Strain development in the upper ﬂange of the beam as a function of time for all 3 performed full
scale test
==PAGE:162==
146
APPENDIX J. SINGLE ANCHORED FULL SCALE TESTING
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Time [s]
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Stress [MPa]
Test 1
Test 3
Figure J.6: Stress development in the lower ﬂange of the beam as a function of time for all 3 performed full
scale tests
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Time [s]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Strain [-]
×10-5
Test 1
Test 3
Figure J.7: Strain development in the lower ﬂange of the beam as a function of time for all 3 performed full
scale test
==PAGE:163==
J.3. BEAM
147
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Load [kN]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Deﬂection [mm]
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Figure J.8: Vertical deﬂection of the beam midpoint as a function of the applied load to the system.
==PAGE:164==
