==PAGE:1==
An Evaluation of Fractionated Brewers’
Spent Grain in Wheat Based Dough
Katrine Kiib Rørby, s156001
Master’s Thesis, Food Technology
February 2018
Advisor: Timothy John Hobley, Nina Gringer, and Jacob Lerce
Skytte
==PAGE:2==
ii
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Brewers’ spent grain is a by-product of beer production. It is usually either
thrown away or used as cattle feed by local farmers. It is produced in large
scale all around the world. The primary type of grain used in beer production
is barley. The spent grain consists mainly of the hull and bran of the malted
barley, which has a large amount of proteins, dietary ﬁbres, and starch.
Brewers’ spent grain was acquired from the DTU and Braunstein brewery.
The spent grain was pressed and divided up into two fractions using a ﬁlter press
from Dacoﬁ. These consist of a liquid fraction ﬁltered through a 300µm ﬁlter,
and a solid fraction of pressed spent grain. The liquid fraction, sedimented for
24 hours, was then used in experiments, together with the dried solid fraction,
in dough and bread. The concentrations of sugar, protein, and phenolic content
were measured before and after press. Results showed that the spent grain from
DTU contained a higher amount of sugars and phenols than the spent grain
from Braunstein, whereas the dried spent grain from Braunstein had a higher
amount of protein.
The impacts on wheat dough from spent grain were evaluated using diﬀerent
texture analyses. Analyses showed that spent grain gives a denser crumb, lower
volume of bread, and a darker colour. All of the results from dough and bread
with spent grain were compared to a control wheat dough. It showed that when
substituting water and some of the ﬂour in the dough with 50% of the liquid
fraction, the dough was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control.
The crumb with the most similar results to the control was found when
mixing ratios of the liquid and solid fractions. A texture analysis simulating
cutting of the crust, showed that the dough with 50% added liquid fraction had
the highest similarity to the control. Another experiment evaluated the storage
of the bread. Results from this experiment showed that after 48 hours, the
bread with an 80% added liquid fraction and a 10% solid fraction, was most
similar to the control.
Dry matter content measurements of the crusts and
crumbs showed no diﬀerence between the control and breads with added spent
grain.
A 3D surface imaging scanning evaluated how the doughs were aﬀected
by the added spent grain during development.
It showed that added spent
grain inhibits the development, slows the expansion rate, and results in a lower
volume after an hour.
In conclusion the most similar substitute was the liquid fraction for the
dough, and a mix of the two fractions for the crumb.
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Mask er et biprodukt af øl produktion, som normalt enten bliver behandlet
som aﬀald eller givet videre til lokale landmænd, som bruger det som foder til
deres køer. Byg er den kornsort som normalt bliver brugt til øl produktion, dog
kan andre kornsorter også bruges. Hovedparten af masken består af skallen på
malten sammen med kliden, hvor de primære komponenter er protein, ﬁbre og
kulhydrater.
Masken var erhvervet fra DTUs bryggeri og Braunstein bryggeri, hvorefter
det var presset ved brugen af en ﬁlter presse fra Dacoﬁ. Denne pres resulterede i
to fraktioner, en væske og en fast fraktion. Væske delen sedimeterede i 24t, hvor
sedimentet blev brugt til eksperimenter med brød og dej sammen med en tørret
fast fraktion. Koncentrationer af sukker, protein og fenol målt i de to fraktioner.
Målingerne viste at mask fra DTU havde en højere concentration af sukker og
phenoler end mask fra Braunstein, men det tørrede mask fra Braunstein havde
et højere inhold af proteiner.
Påvirkningen af mask på en hvede dej var evalueret ved hjælp af forskellige
tekstur analyser. Disse analyser viste at hvede dej med tilført mask ender ud i et
brød med en tættere krumme, mindre volume og mørkere farve. Alle resultater
fra dej og brød var sammenlignet med en kontrol med kun hvede mel. Når man
erstater mask med vand og mel i dej, var det en erstatning med 50% af den
våde fraktion, der lignede kontrollen mest.
Den krumme som viste den største lighed med controllen var et mix af den
våde og tørre fraktion. En simulering af at skære skorpen viste at det var en
erstatning med 50% af den våde fraktion, der havde den største lighed med
kontrollen. Et eksperiment blev lavet for at evaluere opbevaringen af brød ved
24 timer, 48 timer og 14 dage. Dette resulterede i at efter 48 timer var det
brød med en erstatning med med 80% af den våde fraktion og 10% af den tørre
fraktion, som viste størst lighed med kontrollen. Tørstofsindholdet af skorpen
og krummen blev målt og viste, at der ikke var nogen stor forskel imellem
kontrollen og brød med mask.
For at se om mask havde en indﬂydelse på udviklingen af dejene, blev der
lavet en 3D overﬂade skanninger.
Denne skanning viste at mask begrænser
udviklingen af dejen og derfor har en langsommere ekspansions hastighed.
For at konkludere var det en erstatning med 50% af den våde fraktion, der
lignede kontrol dejen mest og et mix af de to fraktioner som lignede krummen
af kontrollen mest.
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
==PAGE:7==
Preface
My journey of writing a thesis of 30 ECTS points have been an experience
with ups and downs. First I was afraid, I was petriﬁed as all other projects
I have done at DTU have been together or in collaboration with others. The
project I was given by Timothy Hobley was an investigation of pressed brewers’
spent grain cereals other tan barley. On the ﬁrst day he came up with another
project which was more relatable to my studies within food technology. His new
proposal was to try and ﬁgure out how brewers’ spent grain when fractionated
by the press eﬀects dough and bread. I accepted his new idea as this was a
project more up my alley.
Now I just needed an extra supervisor, who knew more about testing of
foodstuﬀ. The choice fell on Nina Gringer as she already had a bachelor stu-
dent under her, who were incorporating fractionated brewers’ spent grain into
sausage. Jacob Skytte Lerche also became a member of the supervisor team to
help incorporate a new technology of testing development of dough.
The ﬁrst weeks were used to determine what type of experiments where
going to be used to investigate both the raw material of the fractionated brewers’
spent grain. How to test the diﬀerences between a control dough made with
wheat and the doughs with the fractions of brewers’ spent grain incorporated
was also researched. I tested many recipes, mixing times, prooﬁng times and at
what time and temperature the breads should bake as a reference was needed
as a control.
Somehow I pushed through and I can thank my supervisors Timothy Hobley,
Nina Gringer, and Jacob Skytte Lerche for good advice and support together
with the Division of Food Technology in building 227 who were always ready
with a smile and a helping hand when needed.
My thanks also goes to Rasmus Frøding and Preben Høje Hansen for their
help in acquiring the raw materials to this project and my boyfriend Peter
Gabrielsen who supported and helped me through my writing process.
Katrine Kiib Rørby,
Kongens Lyngby, February 16, 2018.
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
iii
Resumé
v
Preface
vii
Abbreviations
xi
1
Introduction
1
2
Objective of the project
5
3
Theory
7
3.1
Brewing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
The Dacoﬁﬁlter machine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Dough and bread . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3.1
Ingredients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3.1.1
Brewers’ spent grain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3.2
The dough
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Analytical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4.1
The Dumas combustion method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4.2
Bradford protein assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4.3
Texture analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4.4
VideometerLab multispectral imaging system . . . . . . .
16
3.4.5
Structured-light 3D surface imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Materials and Methods
21
4.1
Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.1
Raw materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.2
Drying of the BSG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.3
Recipe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Description of experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Analytical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.1
HPLC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.2
Phenolic content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.3
The Dumas combustion method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.4
Bradford protein assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
ix
==PAGE:10==
4.3.5
Amino acid proﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.6
Texture analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.7
Dry matter content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.8
VideometerLab multi spectral imaging system . . . . . . .
29
4.3.9
Structured-light 3D surface imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Results
31
5.1
Characteristics of BSG fractions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.1
Sugar content of the fractionated BSG . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.2
Phenolic content of the fractionated BSG . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.3
Protein content of the fractionated BSG . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.4
Soluble protein content of the fractionated BSG . . . . . .
37
5.1.5
Amino acid proﬁle of BSG fractions from DTU . . . . . .
37
5.2
Characteristics of bread dough containing BSG fractions . . . . .
39
5.2.1
Texture analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.1.1
Texture proﬁle analysis on dough
. . . . . . . .
39
5.2.1.2
Texture proﬁle analysis on crumb
. . . . . . . .
50
5.2.1.3
Texture analysis of crust
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2.1.4
Texture proﬁle analysis on stored bread . . . . .
55
5.3
Dry matter content of crumbs and crusts
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.4
Colour diﬀerences in the crust and crumb of breads with BSG
fractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.5
Expansion rate of dough development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
General discussion
67
7
Conclusion
69
8
Future work
71
Primary Bibliography
72
Appendices
81
A Dry matter content
83
B Amino acid proﬁle
89
x
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
50%/10%
50% of L-BSG and 10% of D-BSG
80%/10%
80% of L-BSG and 10% of D-BSG
A
Adhesiveness
ANOVA
Analysis of variance
BSA
Bovine serum albumin
BSG
Brewers’ spent grain
CBB
Coomassie Brilliant Blue
Chew
Chewiness
Co
Cohesiveness
D-BSG
Dried fraction of brewers’ spent grain
DA
Dry matter content taken into account
DN
Dry matter content not taken into account
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
H
Hardness
L
Made to resemble the same dry matter content as L-BSG from DTU
L-BSG
Liquid fraction of brewers’ spent grain
R
Resilience
RT
Room temperature
S
Springiness
TPAW
TPA with lid
TPAWOL
TPA without lid
(B)
Braunstein
(D)
DTU
(L)
Liquid
(S)
Solid
xi
==PAGE:12==
xii
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Beer is produced and enjoyed all over the world. The annual amount of beer
produced is 1.96 billion hectolitres [Statista, 2018].
This production results in about 0.4 billion hectolitres of waste in the form
of brewers’ spent grain, often abbreviated in literature as BSG. Europe is pro-
ducing around 9 percent of it [Plaza et al., 2017]. As BSG is considered waste
to the beer industry it is often given for free to local farmers even though the
general market value was 35 euros per ton in 2016 [Lynch et al., 2016]. The
farmers use it as feed for cattle or in general ruminants because of the high
content of proteins and carbohydrates.
BSG mainly consists of the hull and bran of the barley grain which consists
of proteins, pentosans, lignin, starch, cellulose, lipids, and ash. It also contains
a high amount of dietary ﬁbres such as β-glucan together with Arabinoxylan is
starting to be as considered a dietary ﬁbre because of its ability to be fermented
by micro ﬂora in the colon [Santos et al., 2003, Hartikainen and Katina, 2012].
High-ﬁbre cereal products are becoming more popular as the life expectancy is
increasing in Western countries and therefore people are more focused on their
health. Adding dietary ﬁbres to food could help as the intake of dietary ﬁbres
can be positively related to obesity control and it is associated with a reduction
in risk of certain cancer types, promotes a positive eﬀect on the gastrointestinal
tract, beneﬁts diabetics by reducing the requirement for insulin, and by im-
proving glycemic control [Almeida et al., 2013, Hartikainen and Katina, 2012].
To be classiﬁed as a dietary ﬁbre a compound usually only needs to exhibit
one beneﬁcial eﬀect such as either improve bowel function, lower blood glucose
and cholesterol or it can be fermented by micro organisms in the colon [Har-
tikainen and Katina, 2012]. Dietary ﬁbres are resistant to digestion in the small
intestines but can be fermented in the large intestines [Coultate, 2009].
As the brewing industry uses materials for human consumption and there is
a trend for ﬁnding new functional ingredients, BSG has a potential to be used as
a funtional ingredient in foodstuﬀwith full regulatory approval [Stojceska and
Ainsworth, 2008]. As BSG is a by-product it can help minimize environmental
impact, improve value of products and beneﬁt businesses close to breweries,
because BSG is a cheap or a non-cost material at this point and bread containing
Making high-ﬁbre enriched bread have been researched both in the terms
1
==PAGE:14==
of how much whole-grain or bran can be added and how to improve the bread
quality. [Koletta et al., 2014] found that substituting 60% whole-grain barley
ﬂour with wheat ﬂour, increased the water absorption and development time
of the dough together with a resistance to extensibility and stretching energy.
The crumb when using barley ﬂour increased in ﬁrmness most likely due to
a decrease in gas cells and decrease in speciﬁc volume.
In addition to that
[Al-Attabi et al., 2017] together with [Mariotti et al., 2014] found that higher
amount of barley can cause collapse in crumb pores and thereby give a somewhat
broken structure and denser crumb and a lower speciﬁc volume1.
A greater rate of moisture loss was seen in breads with barley ﬂour but over
all it had a similar or higher moisture content than the control which was bread
made with only wheat ﬂour [Koletta et al., 2014]. To improve the processing
of high-ﬁbre breads [Linko et al., 1984] tested what eﬀects salt could have
on the processing. The study showed that 2% salt increased the loaf volume
and decreased the development time for bread made with 40% barley ﬂour but
decreased the volume for wheat bread. The amount of salt also decreased water
absorption.
When researcing for this thesis, articles within many diﬀerent areas were
found. Some of these articles are about using BSG in food while others are
about general uses for BSG. Plaza et al researches BSG for the production of
biobutanol using Clostridium beijerinckii [Plaza et al., 2017], and Lu et al uses
BSG as a biosorbent for removal of Cu(II) ions from aquas solutions such as
waste water [Lu and Gibb, 2008].
Researchers also look into using BSG as
bioﬁlter media for denitriﬁcation of groundwater [Benyoucef et al., 2013].
Another focus has been to utilize the BSG in food as the cost is low, it is
high in nutrients, and because of the bioactive components, which naturally
occur in plant products.
One of these components are phenolic compounds
which comprise of tannins, ﬂavonoids, and phenolic acids. These are considered
natural antioxidants [Ikram et al., 2017]. Articles such as [Jay et al., 2008] and
[Ikram et al., 2017], are looking closer into what components BSG consists of.
Especially [Jay et al., 2008] has done thorough research on not just the main
components but also what type of sugars and what type of phenolic acids are
in the BSG whereas [Ikram et al., 2017] gives more of a overview of what other
researchers have found that BSG consists of in regards of proteins, cellulose,
hemicellulose, minerals, phenols and dietary ﬁbres.
As BSG consists of all
these good components others have researched how and how much BSG can be
incorporated into baked goods.
In an article by Stojceska and Ainsworth [Stojceska and Ainsworth, 2008]
they investigate the incorporation of BSG into wheat ﬂour breads with an
addition of enzymes. Before incorporation of the BSG into the dough, it was
dried at 150◦C for 4 hours to a moisture content of 5−7%. The dried BSG was
milled using 0.5 mesh screens. They look at both the textural and nutritional
properties of the ﬁnished product and found that a higher amount of dietary
ﬁbre resulted in an increase in stability, development time, ﬁrmness of the
dough, and a decrease of the loaf volume. The investigation was with 0, 10, 20,
1The number of e.g. cubic meters that is occupied by one kg of a speciﬁc substance
2
==PAGE:15==
and 30 percent of BSG and the conclusion was that the BSG could be added
up to the 30 percent level when using the right enzyme as this improved the
texture, loaf volume, and the shelf life. They did not test it on a sensory panel.
Other articles such as [Ktenioudaki et al., 2013], [Steinmacher et al., 2012],
and [Ktenioudaki et al., 2015] has also been focusing on incorporating BSG into
baked goods. [Ktenioudaki et al., 2013] tested diﬀerent levels of BSG. This it
was in a baked snack and without the usage of enzymes. This study showed that
the crispiness of the baked snack was not aﬀected negatively, however it aﬀected
the texture and the crumb structure. The baked snacks with a level of 10% was
acceptable to a sensory panel and showed a similarity to the snack without
BSG. In this investigation, the BSG was pressed and dried in a vacuum oven at
80◦C for 60 minutes. [Steinmacher et al., 2012] used enzymes as [Stojceska and
Ainsworth, 2008] but they modiﬁed the BSG with enzymes before baking the
bread. The structure of Arabinoxylans, a hemicellulose which is present in the
cell wall of plants, was modiﬁed and thereby allowing formation of water-soluble
Arabinoxylans. The modiﬁcation did not aﬀect the bread in comparison with
bread made from untreated BSG. The untreated BSG together with enzymes
gave a better texture and volume than bread with BSG without the usage of
enzymes. In a prior study they found 12g of BSG per 100g had the best eﬀect,
as higher amounts aﬀected the quality of the bread too much which aligns with
the results [Ktenioudaki et al., 2013] got from their experiments.
[Prentice and D’appolonia, 1977] looked into what diﬀerence it would make
if the BSG was dried at diﬀerent temperatures. A main diﬀerence from the
other studies is that their BSG contains an amount of both hops and trub
as these are normally discarded together in the US. They substituted 5, 10,
and 15% of ﬂour with BSG dried at 45◦C, 100◦C, and 150◦C and found that
BSG reduces loaf volume, increases dough stability, and that a sensory panel
liked the breads with 5% and 10% substitution of BSG dried at 45◦C. [Dreese
and Hoseney, 2018] took another route and only used the bran fraction of the
BSG as they deemed the husk unusable as an ingredients in food for humans.
15% of BSG bran increased water absorption. It decreased the loaf volume
as other studies, and that it has a negative eﬀect on the crumb, which is an
overall trend in regards to the use of both whole-grain and BSG in bread. An
addition of shortening and/or sodium stearoyl lactylate2 could minimize some
of the negative eﬀects the bran had on the volume of the bread. The study also
showed that if the bran from the BSG was soaked before mixing, the mixing
time decreased.
To diﬀerentiate itself the article [Ktenioudaki et al., 2015] focused on biopro-
cessing techniques to improve sensory, nutritional, and technological properties
of bread with BSG incorporated. They used sour dough fermentation and tech-
nological aids such as dough conditioner to improve dough with 15% of BSG.
They found that it could improve sensory properties, increase the antioxidant
capacity, potentially increase bioavailability, improve speciﬁc volume, and tex-
ture of the breads together with delay of staling.
Not all studies are about using the BSG in a dough for bread. The arti-
2Sodium stearoyl lactylate is a food additive that improve mixing tolerance
3
==PAGE:16==
cle [Cappa and Alamprese, 2017] tries to valorize BSG by adding it to fresh egg
pasta. The BSG is dried in a vacuum oven at 60◦C for 48 hours to reach a dry
matter content of 3g/100g. It was then milled to a particle size of 500µm. They
added 3-25g/g and found that the BSG impairs the gluten network formation
and lowers the ﬁrmness of the fresh pasta. The impaired gluten network re-
sulted in a decreased elasticity of the pasta and a higher loss of matter due to a
higher starch swelling together with the increased solubility of the added ﬁbres
from the BSG. They found that 6.2g/100g was the highest amount of BSG they
could add in their optimized formulation.
The article by [Öztürk et al., 2002] tested to see the eﬀect of BSG on the
quality of cookies. The BSG was dried and milled to three diﬀerent particle
sizes and found that the ﬁner particle size at <212µm had a more negative
eﬀect on the spread ratio and sensory score when compared to the particle size
in the range of 212 −850µm. They could add up to 15% of BSG with when
using particle size bigger than 212µm.
[Stojceska et al., 2008] investigated the use of BSG in ready-to-eat expanded
products. The BSG was milled an dried before and added in the range from
10-30%. They tested the processing of the extrudates at 80-120◦C and speeds
at 150-350 rpm. Addition of 10-30% of BSG reduced the expansion, reduced
cell size of the extrudates, gave a slightly darker colour and also increased the
hardness of the extrudates.
Another way to utilize the BSG was suggested by [Spinelli et al., 2016].
They extracted bioactive compounds such as polyphenols and ﬂavonoids from
the BSG and microencapsulate this extract to reduce bitter and unpleasant
taste. Before the extraction the BSG was dried overight at 35◦C and had a
particle size of 500µm. The bioactive compounds were extracted by critical
CO2 at 40◦C at a pressure of 35MPa. A spray dryer were used to encapsu-
lated the compounds. Diﬀerent ratios of encapsulation material and extracted
together with temperature were tested. The best extract to encapsulation ma-
terial was 1:2 at 150◦C spray drying, as a positive sensory evaluation of the ﬁsh
burgers was obtained. The microencapsulation also protects the extract from
high temperature exposure during cooking.
BSG is prone to spoilage and microbial growth as it has a high water content
of 70 −80% and is rich in polysaccharides and proteins [Lynch et al., 2016]. If
BSG is stored for up to 30 days [Mussatto et al., 2006] writes that fungi from
eight isolates of Aspergillus, Fusarium, Mucor Penicillium, and Rhizopus were
found.
Several suggestions for methods to prolong the storage life of BSG
have been made. Mixtures of BSG, water, and acids held in plastic containers
for three months preserved the BSG storage time. The acid that worked the
best was benzoic and formic acid.
They are both used as preservatives in
food [Acidpedia.org, 2018, Cummins, 2005]. Another way to preserve it is to
dry it which reduces the volume of BSG and therefore decreases transportation
and storage costs [Mussatto et al., 2006].
4
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Objective of the project
This thesis has an overall focus on using brewers’ spent grain in bread and is
diﬀerentiating itself from other studies, as it divides the brewers’ spent grain
into two fractions by the usage of the Dacoﬁﬁlter machine. These fractions
consists of a solid and a liquid part.
The brewers’ spent grain used in the
experiments are from DTU’s brewery and Braunstein’s brewery.
The main objectives of this thesis are:
• To investigate diﬀerences in brewers’ spent grain from DTU and Braun-
stein.
• To study how the brewers’ spent grain aﬀects a wheat dough.
• To characterize the usage of brewers’ spent grain as a substitute for ﬂour.
• To characterize the usage of brewers’ spent grain as a substitute for water.
The general aim of this Master’s thesis is to investigate what the fractionated
brewers’ spent grain might give bread in both dough and ﬁnished bread in terms
of changes to texture, dry matter content, and appearance. This investigation
will enable us to see if this method of handling brewers spent grain has a
diﬀerent impact on how the bread changes in comparison to a traditional wheat
dough.
The two fractions from pressing with the DacoﬁFilter machine, will be pre-
pared for experiments by drying the solid part and leave the liquid part to sed-
iment over a period of 24 hours to minimize water content and up-concentrate
valuable components. Samples are taken from the fractions to measure concen-
trations of glucose, maltose, fructose, total protein content, soluble proteins,
phenols, and ﬁnally to do an amino acid proﬁle Bread will be made from the
two fractions by substituting out water with the liquid fraction and ﬂour with
the solid fraction. A mix of these will also be tested in diﬀerent ratios. This is
done to see if the spent grain gives an enhancing eﬀect to dough or bread. This
is tested by the use of texture analysis, colour analysis, 3D surface scanning,
and dry matter content analysis.
5
==PAGE:18==
6
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Theory
This chapter introduces subjects that are important for the overall understand-
ing of this thesis. In Section 3.1 a brief examination of brewing is given. Sec-
tion 3.2 introduces the Dacoﬁﬁlter machine - a de-watering press. In Section 3.3
a thorough examination of dough and bread is given, and ﬁnally in Section 3.4
an introduction to the analytical methods used throughout the conducted ex-
periments.
3.1
Brewing
Malt is needed in order to make beer and it is often produced of the cereal
barley. The ﬁrst thing to do when making malt is to clean, grade, and weigh
the barley. After that the steeping begins. The steeping has two main functions:
one is to wash the barley to ensure that the barley is clean and that nothing can
inhibit the germination of the barley grain, and the second function is to ensure
an increase in moisture content, from around 12% to around 40%. This is done
to initiate the germination. The germination starts at moisture contents over
30% [Esslinger, 2009].
Germination is where grain chit, which is a rupture in the seed coat of
the grain. The cell wall and proteins of the barley break down, an optimal
production of hydrolytic enzymes happens, and hydrolysis of protein reserves
located inside the grain.
The kilning is the step after germination where the modiﬁcation process
is terminated together with the growth of the grain. Kilning is also done to
reduce the water content, conserve enzymes, and to develop ﬂavour and color
required for the speciﬁc brew [Gupta et al., 2010]. The temperature is slowly
raised to prevent any destruction of enzymes. The water content ends at lower
than 20%. After the kilning the malt is cooled and cleaned. The malt is then
stored for a minimum of 2 weeks as the enzymatic activity needs to restore.
When the malt has rested for 2 weeks, the production of wort is started.
First the malt is grinded, then the mashing starts. The malt is added to wa-
ter and through often 3 mashing steps, the diﬀerent enzymes in the malt is
activated. At diﬀerent temperatures the enzymes breakdown starch to sugars,
which the yeast easily convert to alcohol and CO2. After mashing, the malt is
7
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.1: The Dacoﬁﬁlter machine [Meister, 2016].
lautered to get more sugars out, thereafter it it removed together with other
solids from the liquid wort. The malt is now known as spent grain or brewers’
spent grain [Esslinger, 2009].
3.2
The Dacoﬁﬁlter machine
The Dacoﬁﬁlter machine is a rotary de-watering press used to press BSG and
other products where water needs to be removed. Dewatering of BSG allows for
the use of the nutrients that are still in the wet grain. The Dacoﬁﬁlter machine
consists of four cylindrical rollers where two of them are made of a food graded
rubber and the other two are custom made ﬁlters. As depicted in Figure 3.1 it
can be seen that the four rollers make a hole in the middle where the BSG is
fed into. It uses a roller principle making it a gentle method as the four rollers
creates a chamber in the middle where the pressure is low and thereby forces
the liquid fraction through the ﬁlters meanwhile the solid fraction is scraped
of the ﬁlter rollers.
Two types of ﬁlters are used 100µm and 300µm.
This
method can give up to 45% of solids and is a way to up-concentrate proteins,
ﬁbres, vitamins, and antioxidants, where the rest is a liquid fraction [Meister,
2016, Dacoﬁ, 2014].
3.3
Dough and bread
3.3.1
Ingredients
A grain consists of three main parts: the endosperm, the germ, and the cover of
the grain. The cover of the grain which is the hull and bran consists mainly of
starch, proteins, and ﬁbres where the endosperm is the component which during
the malting is degraded, which results in release of fermentables such as mal-
tose, maltotriose, and non-fermentables such as soluble proteins, polypeptides,
carbohydrates, and amino acids. The germ consists mostly of vitamins, lipids,
and enzymes [Lynch et al., 2016]. The construction of the grain is depicted in
Figure 3.2.
In beer production the main ingredient is barley but, depending on the type
of beer, diﬀerent types of cereal is used such as oat, wheat, or rye.
8
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2:
A cross section of a grain showing the location of the diﬀerent con-
stituents of the grain [National barley foods council, 2018].
Today wheat is one of the main ingredients when baking bread and in general
one of the most used cereals world wide [De Gobba et al., 2016]. Commercial
wheat is divided into diﬀerent classes: durum, hard red spring, hard red winter,
hard white, soft red winter, soft white and club wheat. Where the hard red
spring wheat is often used for bread ﬂours and has a protein content of 12−13%.
Hard red winter wheat is used as an all-purpose ﬂour together with soft red
wheat. Hard white and soft white wheat are speciality ﬂours. Club wheat is
for cakes and durum is often used for semolina dried pasta. The kernels are
milled into ﬂour and depending on the type of ﬂour, the bran and the germ can
be removed using sieves. Whole grain ﬂours often make a darker and denser
bread as the bran and germ can chemically and physically interfere with the
formation of gluten networks [McGee, 2004].
Starch make up around 70%of the ﬂour and serves diﬀerent functions. The
starch interpenetrates the gluten network where it breaks it up and tenderizes
it. When the starch undergo baking the starch granules absorbs water and swell
and surrounds the gas bubbles of carbon dioxide made by the yeast. They stop
the gas bubbles from expanding too much and also forces the water vapour to
escape from the baking bread [McGee, 2004].
The amount of fat, fat fragments, and phospholipids in white ﬂour is 1%
and are essential for a well-raised bread. Some say that they help by stabilizing
the walls of starch that encapsulates the gas bubbles and also helps soften the
structure [McGee, 2004].
There are many types of sugar but the most common one added to bread
is sucrose which normally is extracted from either sugar canes or sugar beets.
Sucrose is a disaccharide and consists of the two monosaccharides glucose and
fructose. Though sugar is often added to the bread it is not essential but there
are some beneﬁts such as: tenderization, moisture preservation – as the sugar
absorbs the moisture, brown colour to to the surface, sweetness, and an amount
9
==PAGE:22==
of 1−2% sugar can accelerate the production of carbon dioxide by yeast [Trinh
et al., 2014]. However, a concentration of higher than 10% of the weight of
the ﬂour can weaken the gluten network. Proteins are not hydrated suﬃciently
by the competition with sugar for the water and no entanglement cross-linking
happens and thereby the formation of the gluten network is inhibited [Pareyt
et al., 2009].
Sugars are an important part in the browning and ﬂavour development of
the bread as they participate in the Maillard reaction. The Maillard reaction
is a form of non-enzymatic browning and melanoid formation where heat is
required from around a 100◦C [Newton et al., 2012]. It is a chemical reaction
between a carbonyl group coming from a reducing sugar, which can either have
a side chain of an aldehyde or a ketone, and a amino group from an amino
acid or peptide. Reducing sugars are often monosaccharides such as glucose
and fructose but the disaccharide maltose is also a reducing sugar [Manley,
2011]. It is often said that there is three steps in the Maillard reaction: The
initial, intermediate, and the ﬁnal step. The initial step in the Maillard reaction
is when the amino group comes in contact with the carbonyl group from the
reducing sugar, this forms an imine or otherwise known as a Shiﬀbase [Biosyn,
2018]. A Shiﬀbase is a double bond between a nitrogen from the amino group
and the carbon atom in the carbonyl group. The imine is then rearranged and
depending on whether the reducing sugars side chain is a ketone or an aldehyde
either the Heyn or Amadori product is formed [Shipar, 2011]. The initial step
in the Maillard reaction is seen Figure 3.3, with lactose forming the Amadori
product.
Figure 3.3: The initial step in the Maillard reaction. Here shown with the disac-
charide Lactose forming the Amadori product [Newton et al., 2012].
Diﬀerent factors aﬀect the product and decides which way the reaction goes
when it enters the intermediary state. The pH has an impact on the pathway
undertaken towards the melanoidin formation. Melanoidin is responsible for
the brown colour in foods. A high pH value increases the rate of reaction. The
type of reducing sugar together with the temperature also aﬀects which way the
reaction goes. A Polymerization of low molecular-weight carbonyls with amines
is said to be the ﬁnal stage of the Maillard reaction, where a range of melanoidins
are formed together with various other compounds such as ketones, aldehydes,
and amines which contributes to ﬂavour and smell [Wang et al., 2011]. The
products from the reactions depends on the diﬀerent compounds with amino
acids, these can be both good and bad ﬂavous e.g. proline can give a fruity
ﬂavour or bitter taste. These diﬀerent products do not in general pose a threat,
other than giving a bad taste, texture or smell [Skibsted et al., 2010] but there
10
==PAGE:23==
is a risk of formation of toxicants of furan and acrylamid if products are exposed
to too much heat.
3.3.1.1
Brewers’ spent grain
The BSG consists of the cover from the grain: bran and the hull. It is basically
plant dry matter also called lignocellulosic material, where the main components
are ﬁbres (hemicellulose and cellulose), protein, and lignin. Hemicellulose is a
mixture of polymers and is a generic term which covers a wide variety of non-
cellulose polysaccharides which is found in the cell wall of plants. Arabinoxylan
is a insoluble component of hemicellulose whereas arabinogalactan is a soluble
together with xylan, as they can form highly viscous gels. Sometimes these non-
starch polysaccharides can be referred to as pentosan [Hartikainen and Katina,
2012]. Arabinoxylan is increasingly considered a dietary ﬁber as it can act as a
prebiotic being fermented by the micro ﬂora in the colon. β-glucan is also part
of the bran and is a soluble dietary ﬁbre which can easily form gels [Hartikainen
and Katina, 2012]. Lignin is a poly-phenolic macro molecule which protects the
plant against external aggression, such as insects, weather, and fungi. Lignin is
also seen as a dietary ﬁbre and said to have anti-microbial properties [García
et al., 2017].
BSG is a valuable source of phenolic compounds. BSG from light malt has
a higher amount of phenolics than the darker ones [Lynch et al., 2016]. It have
been reported that plant phenols have both antioxidant and anti-carcinogenic
eﬀects. They also have an inﬂuence on food quality. Ferulic acid has many
physiological functions such as being antioxidative, antimicrobial, and anti-
carcinogenic. It is considered to be one of the most important phenolic acids.
It can also increase sperm viability, lower cholesterol levels, and protect against
coronary diseases. As lignin is a poly-phenolic macro molecule, phenolic acids
can be isolated from it [Mussatto et al., 2007].
The proteins in BSG includes hordeins, glutelins, globulins, and albumins.
Hordein is a prolamin which is also called a gluten-like protein and is a major
storage protein located in the endosperm [Arendt and Zannini, 2013]. Hordein
and glutelins are both insoluble in water whereas albumins are water soluble.
Globulins are a classiﬁcation of proteins that are both soluble and insoluble in
water [Britannica.com, 2018, Colgrave et al., 2011]. Around 30% of the protein
consists of essential amino acids [Lynch et al., 2016]. [Lynch et al., 2016] states
that lysine is the most abundant amino acid at around 14.3% and [Gupta et al.,
2010] states that it is only present in small amounts.
For dried BSG [Gupta et al., 2010], [Stojceska and Ainsworth, 2008], and [Kte-
nioudaki et al., 2013] found the same amount of proteins and ﬁbres ranging from
20 −24% in protein and from 53 −70% in ﬁbres but diﬀer when looking at the
lipids and carbohydrates. BSG also contains minerals such as calcium, cobalt,
copper, iron, magnesium, manganese, phosphorus, potasium, selenium, sodium,
and sulfur all in a lower concentration than 0.5%. The vitamins biotin, cholin,
folic acid, niacin, pantothenic acid, riboﬂavin, thiamine, and pyridoxine are
also in the BSG together with protein-bound amino acids such as leucine, va-
line, two essential amino acids and the non essential alanine, serine, glycine,
11
==PAGE:24==
glutamic acid, and aspartic acid in the largest amounts.
Tyrosine, proline,
threonine, arginine, and together with the essential amino acid lysine is only
present in smaller amounts. Cystine and the ﬁve essential histidine, isoleucine,
methionine, phenylalanine, and tryptophan are also present but only in minor
amounts [Gupta et al., 2010].
3.3.2
The dough
Bread dough is mainly composed of lipids, carbohydrates, air, proteins, and
water. Often when talking about making a dough, two types of methods can be
used; either the sponge-and-dough method or the straight-dough method. The
sponge-and-dough method has two stages. The ﬁrst step is mixing the sponge,
which often consists of some of the ﬂour, all the yeast, yeast foods(e.g. sugar),
and water.
These ingredients are mixed to develop gluten and to homogenize the blend.
This blend is then fermented. The fermentation time depends on temperature,
the type, and amount of ingredients used. After fermentation the sponge is
transferred back to the mixer and the rest of the ingredients are added to the
sponge. It is now called a dough and is left to develop to optimum consistency.
The straight-dough method is to mix all of the ingredients at the same time and
then let it ferment and develop. The advantages of sponge-and-dough method
is less yeast is required and a greater volume of product is obtained, when com-
pared to the straight-dough method [Britannica, 2018a].
When making a dough by mixing and kneading ingredients such as water,
ﬂour, salt and yeast, the proteins are stretched and organized into an elastic
network called a gluten network [McGee, 2004]. This network is said to give
the dough a viscoelastic matrix network which captures and retains bubbles
of gas. The viscous property is said to originate from the monomeric gliadin
whereas the elastic properties comes from the polymeric glutenin, which are
the water-insoluble proteins gluten consists of. The gliadin and glutenin can be
seen individually and together formed as a network in Figure 3.4.
Mixing of a dough has three main functions when looking at structure forma-
tion; air inclusion, development of gluten, and homogenization by mechanical
energy input. At the start of the mixing the surface of the ﬂour particles are
hydrated and the interaction between the water and ﬂour starts to build the
gluten network [Peighambardoust et al., 2010]. The formation of the gluten
network takes place over a period of ﬁve minutes of mixing [Cauvain, 2012].
The amount of retained gas bubbles is one of the key factors in how the baked
product is in the end, in regards to quality, volume and texture. If the dough is
mixed too much there is a risk of destroying the gluten network together with
increasing the solubility of proteins. Overmixing often gives a sticky dough [Au-
tio and Laurikainen, 1997].
Salt strengthens the network, as the positively charged sodium and nega-
tively charged chlorine cluster around glutenin at the few places where it is
charged. This helps the proteins from repelling each other and thereby bond
12
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.4:
A simple rendering of the polymeric glutenin and monomeric gliadin
and how the gluten network is made up of these to molecules [Sciprose, 2018].
more extensively. Added salt is also responsible for the formation of a even
crumb and decreases the water absorption. So a too small of amount of salt
can give a sticky dough with a gluten network with less connected protein par-
ticles [Silow et al., 2016]. The normal amount of salt added to a dough is about
2% of the weight of the ﬂour [Linko et al., 1984].
Dough contains two phases: one containing water-soluble components and
starch granules and the other - the gluten phase - contains dispersed gas bubbles.
The fermenting of the dough is often done by yeast, and the most com-
mon one used is Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as it is a multipurpose [Cukier de
Aquino et al., 2012]. It is available in diﬀerent forms such as dry yeast with
a water content of around 8%, compressed where the yeast is pressed in small
squares containing around 70% of water, and the commercial form, cream yeast,
which is the same as the compressed but with extra water, as it is easier to dis-
pense [Britannica, 2018b].
The fermentation is an anaerobic metabolism of fermentable sugars such as
the disaccharides sucrose and maltose and the two monosaccharides fructose and
glucose that are present in the ﬂour from nature’s side. The yeast releases CO2
which is captured in the gluten network. Products from secondary metabolites
can give wanted aroma and ﬂavour compounds [Cukier de Aquino et al., 2012].
When the dough is baking, the starch gelatinize which dewaters the gluten
phase, proteins cross-link and the properties of the dough goes from being
viscoelastic to just being elastic as it transforms into a solid state [Autio and
Laurikainen, 1997].
3.4
Analytical methods
To evaluate the raw material, dough and bread, diﬀerent analytical methods
were used to characterize diﬀerences and the impact of replacing regularly ﬂour
13
==PAGE:26==
with BSG. Some of these methods are explained in detail, for a better under-
standing of why these are used.
3.4.1
The Dumas combustion method
The Dumas combustion method can be used to measure the total nitrogen
content in samples. There are three steps to the Dumas method. The ﬁrst step
is the combustion of the sample, where the atmospheric gases are removed. This
is done by heating the sample to around 1000◦C with the presence of pure O2
and it leads to a release of gas-products such as water, nitrogen dioxide, carbon
dioxide, sulphur dioxide, and nitrogen as diﬀerent oxides. The second step is
the reduction and separation where these gas-products from the combustion
are collected to allow them to equilibrate.
The gas-products then exposed
to hot copper, which removes the oxygen and convert the nitrogen oxides to
N2. After the removal of oxygen and conversion of nitrogen, the water and
carbon dioxide is removed by traps. The last step is the detection, here the
N2 is measured using a thermal conductivity detector. To calculate the protein
content a nitrogen-protein conversion factor is used [Velp Scientiﬁca, 2017]. The
nitrogen-protein conversion factor depends on the type of sample measured
as it depends on the amino acid composition of the protein measured, e.g.
the nitrogen-protein conversion factor for barley is 6.25 whereas it is 6.38 for
milk [Buchi, 2018].
3.4.2
Bradford protein assay
To measure the amount of soluble proteins in a sample the Bradford protein
assay can be used. It is a colorimetric assay which is based on the fact that
the Coomassie Brilliant Blue(CBB) dye and the protein is forming a color com-
plex. The CBB is positively charged which binds to the proteins. The binding
causes a shift in the equilibrium and the CBB change charge to negative which
increases the intensity of the blue colour in a mixture. This blue colour can be
measured at 595nm. The colour development depends on the ratio between the
concentration of colour and protein. This method can detect protein concen-
tration down to 10µg/ml [Kielberg and Rasmussen, 2012].
3.4.3
Texture analysis
Texture proﬁle analysis, often referred to as TPA, is a double compression test,
used for determining textural properties of food. The double compression is
done to mimic the action of the mouth, and thereby provide knowledge about
how foods behave when chewed. When using TPA on food, diﬀerent param-
eters can be found such as: hardness, fracturability, cohesiveness, springiness,
gumminess, chewiness, adhesion, and resilience. These are diﬀerent aspects on
how to describe the food.
Fracturability is the force at the ﬁrst peak whereas hardness is the maximum
force used to compress the food during the ﬁrst compression - not all products
show fracturability. Hardness can be seen on a typical TPA graph in Figure 3.5.
14
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.5: The typical output of a texture proﬁle analysis.
The ﬁgure depicts
the diﬀerent measurements used to calculate the parameters are outlined [Texture
Technologies Corp., 2017].
Cohesiveness tells something about how well the structural integrity of a
food product can withstand tensile or compressive stress. For example, when
a loaf of bread is produced, it will experience diﬀerent stress depending on
where in the product line it is. If it has a high cohesiveness, it will be able to
withstand the stress and be in the state that the consumer is expecting [Texture
Technologies Corp., 2017]. This parameter is found by taking the area of work
during the second compression, seen as Area 2 in Figure 3.5, and dividing it
by the work during the ﬁrst compression seen as Area 1. Cohesiveness is often
unitless or viewed in percent.
Springiness is a ratio of a foods original height to the height after compres-
sion. This can tell how good the food is at returning to its original height after
being deformed by the ﬁrst compression. Springiness is calculated by taking
the second distance (Distance 2) and dividing it by the distance the probe trav-
els on the ﬁrst compression (Distance 1). The unit of springiness is given in
percent.
A food can either be gummy of chewy as a food cannot be both a semi-solid
and a solid. Gumminess relates only to semi-solid foods and is the hardness of
the food multiplied with the cohesiveness, whereas chewiness relates to solids
and is calculated by multiplying: springiness, hardness and cohesiveness of the
food. Chewiness can have the unit Newton but is also often unitless. Adhe-
siveness is the negative force measured between the two cycles and is given in
N/sec.
Resilience is the last parameter and is how much force the food gives to
regain its former height during the withdrawel on the ﬁrst compression. This
can be calculated by dividing the force the food gives under withdrawel, by the
compression force during the ﬁrst compression [Texture Technologies Corp.,
2017].
15
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.6: The coating of the sphere ensures optimal conditions for the lighting.
The lighting is reﬂected up to the detector under the camera [Analytik Ltd., 2018].
3.4.4
VideometerLab multispectral imaging system
A VideometerLab is a spectral imaging instrument that can make quantitative
measurements of both the visual and chemical properties of a product. It uses
strobed LED technology which combines measurements into a high resolution
spectral image from up to 20 diﬀerent wavelengths in the range from 375 to 1050
nm [Videometer A/S, 2018]. The object or sample is placed inside a integrating
sphere otherwise known as an Ulbricht sphere. An Ulbricht sphere is a hollow
sphere which is coated with a highly diﬀuse material, which reﬂects the light. It
is only the light that is diﬀused which reaches the detector. A uniform reﬂection
or diﬀusion of the light is accomplished by the curvature of the sphere. The
light source is LEDs positioned beside each other at the rim of the sphere. A
principal set-up of the instrument can be seen in Figure 3.6.
From the Videometer it is possible to get data in the CIE L∗a∗b∗colour
space. The L∗a∗b∗colour space was modelled after a theory which states that
a colour cannot be both red and green, at the same time. The same applies for
yellow and blue. L∗indicates the lightness of the colour, a∗the red/green, and
b∗is the coordinates showing the yellow/blue of the colour. In Figure 3.7 the
L∗a∗b∗colour space is depicted [Sensing, 2018].
The total diﬀerence ∆E∗is always positive. However the deltas for the three
coordinates, may be either positive or negative. How to calculate the deltas can
be seen in Equation 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4.
16
==PAGE:29==
∆L∗= (L∗sample −L∗standard) ⇒+ = Lighter
−= Darker
(3.1)
∆a∗= (a∗sample −a∗standard) ⇒
+ = More red
−= More green
(3.2)
∆b∗= (b∗sample −b∗standard) ⇒+ = More yellow
−= More blue
(3.3)
∆E∗=
q
(∆L∗)2 + (∆a∗)2 + (∆b∗)2
(3.4)
Figure 3.7: A 3D model of the L∗a∗b∗color space [Adobe, 2018]
3.4.5
Structured-light 3D surface imaging
Structured-light 3D surface imaging is measurements of (x, y, z) coordinates of
points on the surface of an object. It is called 3D surface imaging as it is the
surface in general which is described in a 3D space, where the measurements
can be seen as a map of the range or depth, z, and as a function of (x, y) [Geng,
2011]. Structured-light is a scene, see Figure 3.8, with a specially designed 2D
pattern made with varying intensity that is made by a special projector.
The digital signal for each of the pixels is represented by x,y, and z. An
imaging sensor such as a video camera is used to capture an image of the
scene.
When there is nothing in the scene the surface is planar but when
there is an object present the pattern is distorted. This distortion can give
information about the 3D surface shape of the object [Geng, 2011]. For every
3D measurement a standard colour frame and depth frame is logged which can
be seen in Figure 3.9 and
3.10. The colour frame is used to make a mask.
This mask seen in Figure 3.11 is used to isolate the desired part of the depth
frame and thereby sum up the depth information for each of the pixels inside
the mask. This can give an estimate of the objects volume.
17
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.8: An illustration of how a structured-light can look for a 3D surface
imaging scanner, and how a object can distort the light [Geng, 2011].
Figure 3.9:
The colour frame captured by the camera and used to make the
mask(provided by Jacob Lerce Skytte).
Figure 3.10:
Depth frame which shows how far the dough is from the camera is
away in mm(provided by Jacob Lerce Skytte).
18
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.11:
The mask used to isolate the dough(provided by Jacob Lerce Skytte).
19
==PAGE:32==
20
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
Materials and Methods
The methods and details on how to execute them are described in this chapter.
The methods are tests used to measure concentration of sugars, amino acids,
phenols, and proteins in the raw materials. This is done with the use of HPLC,
Dumas combustion method, total phenolic content assay, amino acid proﬁle,
and a Bradford protein assay. The experiments on the dough and bread are
texture analysis, structured-light 3D surface imaging, and VideometerLab multi
spectral imaging system.
4.1
Sample preparation
4.1.1
Raw materials
To produce BSG from DTU, two types of pilsner malt was used: 2-row spring
from Fuglsang and Pilsner malt from Weyermann. 15 kg of the 2-row spring
malt and 75kg of the pilsner malt. Information of the two types of malt can
be seen in Table 4.1 and 4.2. The malt was milled on a Sommer Piccolo 15 S
two-roller mill at setting 6.0 which equals to a grounding of the grain to a size
of around 1.25mm.
The mashing proﬁles used can be seen in Table 4.3.
At the end of the
mashing, a measurement of the wort estimated the brix to be 17, which cor-
responds to around 190 grams of sugar per litre. This was measured using an
optic refractometer from Elma.
After the mashing the BSG was pressed using the Dacoﬁﬁlter machine. It
was only the two fractions from the 300µm ﬁlter that was used in this thesis.
Table
4.1:
Content
of
malt
from
Fuglsang [Maltbazaren.dk, 2017].
Information
Amount [%]
Usage rate
100%
Dry matter content
81.4%
Protein content
9.7%
Table 4.2:
Content of Pilsner malt
from
Weyermann
[Bsgcraftbrew-
ing.com, 2017].
Information
Amount [%]
Usage rate
100%
Dry matter content
> 95%
Protein content
9.5 −12.0%
21
==PAGE:34==
Table 4.3: Mashing proﬁle used in the making of the BSG from DTUs brewery.
Time [min]
Temperature[◦C]
15
57 −58
60
63 −68
5
75 −78
The liquid fraction sedimented for 24 hours to remove water and in order to
get a higher dry matter content of the sediment, which is referred to as L-BSG
(liquid brewers’ spent grain) in the experiments with dough and bread.
BSG was also acquired from Braunstein which is a brewery located in Køge,
Denmark. Here the BSG was from an Indian pale ale using the organic 2-row
spring from Fuglsang. No information of the mashing proﬁle or sugar content
was given.
4.1.2
Drying of the BSG
The BSG was dried to lower the water content to 5 −7% [Stojceska and Ains-
worth, 2008], it was dried at 90◦C, for 23 hours in pans at a height at 2.5 cm,
in a Rational 10 tray combi oven.
The temperature at 90◦C was chosen to ensure that no Maillard reactions
would start, well below 100◦C where the reactions occurs [Newton et al., 2012].
After the BSG was dried it was milled on a DeLonghi KG40 coﬀee grinder for 20
seconds and then sieved through an ISO 3310 sieve with 0.500mm mesh from
JEL [Stojceska and Ainsworth, 2008]. After drying the BSG is abbreviated
D-BSG for dried brewers’ spent grain. For all the experiments performed with
D-BSG, it was only the D-BSG sieved through the 0.500mm sieve, that was
used.
4.1.3
Recipe
The recipe used for the control dough consists of only four ingredients in order to
make it as simple as possible. This was done to see if the BSG has any eﬀect on
the functionality of the dough and bread as a simple recipe with few ingredients
would minimize the parameters. These four ingredients are wheat ﬂour, salt,
water, and yeast. To ﬁnd a recipe which was simple to reproduce, diﬀerent
Table 4.4: The ingredients used in the control dough together with the amount used
of each ingredient for one batch.
Ingredient
Amount [g]
Manufacture
Wheat ﬂour
550
Bagerens Hvedemel
Yeast
34.4
De Danske Gærfabrikker
Water
232.1
Tap water
Fine salt
13.8
Salina
22
==PAGE:35==
Table 4.5: The ingredients used in the control dough together with the amount used
of each ingredient for one batch.
Component
Amount [g/100g]
Carbohydrates
69.3
Protein
12
Fat
1.5
ratios in regards to the amount of ﬂour and water was tested together with
mixing time, baking time, and temperature. The parameters used to establish
the best recipe was that the dough should not be too sticky to handle and be
to hard after baking. The best recipe was found to be the one in Table 4.4.
The yeast from De Danske Gærfabrikker was kept at 5◦C before use, tap
water was used at 22◦C, the wheat ﬂour used is from the brand Bagerens
Hvedemel and ﬁne salt used was from Salina. The components in the wheat
ﬂour can be seen in Table 4.5.
The straight-dough method were used to have as few steps as possible. First
yeast and water was mixed together for one minute before adding the rest of
the ingredients. The ingredients was mixed using a varimixer Teddy 5L mixer
for four minutes at an average of 170 rounds per minute [Varimixer, 2018].
After four minutes of mixing, the dough was divided into small portions of 50g
and 30g. The portions raised in a Unox xvc 705 combi oven set to 30◦C and
a relative humidity of 80% for an hour [Stojceska and Ainsworth, 2008]. The
portions of 50g were baked in a preheated Rational 10 tray combi oven at 230◦C
for 20 minutes [Stojceska and Ainsworth, 2008]. The 30g of proofed dough was
tested using TPA without being baked.
23
==PAGE:36==
4.2
Description of experiments
The experiments performed in this thesis can be viewed in Table 4.6, where the
x identiﬁes which experiments are performed on the speciﬁc type of sample.
Table 4.6: The types of method used to analyse both sample and products. The x
marks the methods used on the speciﬁc type of sample or product. It is not all raw
material samples that were tested for dry matter content together with Videometer-
Lab2 multi spectral imaging and amino acid proﬁle.
Method
Dough
Bread
Raw material
Texture analysis
x
x
-
Dry matter content
x
x
x
VideometerLab multi spectral imaging
-
x
x
HPLC
-
-
x
Total phenolic content
-
-
x
Amino acid proﬁle
-
-
x
Dumas combustion method
-
-
x
The Bradford protein assay
-
-
x
Table 4.7: The diﬀerent raw materials from DTU and Braunstein, used in experi-
ments.
DTU Brewery
Braunstein
D-BSG(S)
Dried BSG(S)
D-BSG, ﬁne(S)
Dried BSG, ﬁne(S)
D-BSG, coarse(S)
Dried BSG, coarse(S)
Before press(S)
Before press(S)
Start press (S)
-
Mid press(S)
-
End press(S)
End press(S)
Start press(L)
-
Mid press(L)
-
End press(L)
End press(L)
Sediment(L)
Sediment(L)
Supernatant(L)
Supernatant(L)
Flour(S)
-
S=solid sample, L=liquid sample, D-BSG=dried solide fraction.
In Table 4.7, the samples for the raw materials are represented. They are
divided up into samples from DTU and Braunstein with a S if it is solid and
L if it is liquid. Samples of BSG from DTU were taken before, at the start,
during, and at the end, from both the liquid fraction and the ﬁlter cake. This
was done to see if there was a diﬀerence in the BSG during the pressing. This
24
==PAGE:37==
was not done for the BSG from Braunstein, as it was only done out curiosity
for the BSG from DTU and not the general scope of the project.
There are three main types of dough made from the BSG, one was made
only with D-BSG as a substitution, one with only L-BSG as the substitution,
and the last was with a mix of the D-BSG and L-BSG. It was both D-BSG and
L-BSG from Braunstein and DTU which were used in the experiments. The
speciﬁc types of dough can be seen in Table 4.8.
Table 4.8: Types of dough made with BSG from Braunstein(B) and DTU(D).
Dough type
Flour[%]
D-BSG[%]
Water[%]
L-BSG[%]
Raw material
Control
100
0
100
0
-
D-BSG 10%
90
0
100
0
(B),(D)
D-BSG 15%
85
0
100
0
(B),(D)
L-BSG 50DN%
100
0
50
50
(D)
L-BSG 80DN%
100
0
20
80
(D)
L-BSG 50DA%
100α
0
50
50
(B),(D)
L-BSG 80DA%
100α
0
20
80
(B),(D)
L-BSG 50L%
100α
0
50
50
(B)
L-BSG 100%
100α
0
20
80
(B)
L-BSG(50%)+D-BSG(10%)
90α
10
50
50
(B),(D)
L-BSG(80%)+D-BSG(10%)
90α
10
20
80
(B),(D)
DA=Dry matter content taken into account, DN=dry matter content not taken into
account, L=made to resemble DTU, L-BSG=liquid fraction, D-BSG=dried solid
fraction. Values marked with α is adjusted to the dry matter content in L-BSG.
4.3
Analytical methods
In the experiments two types of BSG were used: D-BSG and L-BSG. D-BSG
were kept at room temperature, where L-BSG was kept at −30◦C and thawed
before use in the experiments with dough and then kept at 5◦C. All samples of
raw material containing more water than 5 −7% were kept at −20◦C prior to
analysis, and were thawed in a refrigerator at 5◦C before analysis. The freezing
of samples and raw material was done to minimize spoiling of the product. The
freezing could aﬀect the samples and raw material but as these were not stored
for long this change is assumed not to have an eﬀect.
The following sections describe the methods used in this thesis.
4.3.1
HPLC
An Ultimate 3000 HPLC from Thermo Fisher scientiﬁc with an Organic Acid
Analysis Column(Aminex, HPX-87H Ion Exclusion Column. 300mmx7.8mm)
were used to measure concentrations of fructose, glucose, and maltose. The
settings were 36bar, temperature at 30◦C, the ﬂow was set to 0.5ml/min and
25
==PAGE:38==
the injection volume was set to 20µl. Each sample was run for 30 minutes with
5M H2SO4 as the mobile phase.
The standards used are from Sigma Aldrich: D-(+)-maltose monohydrate,
D-(-)-fructose, and D-(+)-glucose monohydrate. Before the samples were anal-
ysed they were centrifuged in a Biofuge pico from Heraeus in 1.5ml tubes at
4000rpm for four minutes (1520 × g). The supernatant were removed and ﬁl-
tered using a sterile syringe ﬁlter with a 0.2µm Cellulose acetate membrane,
from VWR.
A concentration of 10mM of fructose, glucose, and maltose were made to
identify the retention time. A master mix of the sugars togehter with a dilutions
of this were used as a calibration curve to calculate the concentration of each
sugar in the sample. The dilutions for the calibration curve were as follows:
100mM, 75mM, 25mM, 12.5mM, and 1mM.
4.3.2
Phenolic content
The analysis of the total phenolic content were performed by making a 1 : 10
dilution of Folin-Ciocalteu.
0.75 of this dilution were mixed with 100µl of
liquid sample and then incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes. After
the 5 minutes, a solution of 6% Sodium Bicarbonate was added to the mixture,
and then incubated for 90 minutes at room temperature. After 90 minutes of
incubation, the absorption of the sample were measured using a Genesys 10S
UV-Vis spectrophotometer from Thermo Scientiﬁc set at 725nm wavelength.
The liquid samples were centrifuged at 2800rpm (745 × g) for 10 minutes in a
Biofuge pico from Heraeus in 1.5ml tubes, before adding the Folin-Ciocalteu and
sodium bicarbonate to the supernatant. To test the solid samples an extraction
were made with 100ml of room temperature water to 5g of sample over night.
They were then centrifuged at 2800rpm for 10 minutes and the supernatant
were treated as liquid sample. A calibration curve were made using diﬀerent
concentrations of gallic acid from Sigma Aldrich. The blank was demineralised
water for the samples, and demineralised water together with gallic acid for the
calibration curve [Sabeena Farvin and Jacobsen, 2013]. Each of the samples
was measure in duplicates. The liquid samples were calculated by putting the
measured absorbance from each sample in the place of the x, and then multiplied
by 100, to get the unit mg/100ml. For the solid samples the calculations is as
seen in Equation 4.1 through 4.7, D-BSG from DTU was used as an example.
The measured absorbance was then replaced by the x, and a concentration in
mg/ml was calculated which thereafter was changed to mg/100ml
absorbance = x
(4.1)
x = 0.169
(4.2)
y = 0.1899x + 0.0007
(4.3)
0.1899 · +0.0007 = 0.0327mg/ml
(4.4)
0.0327mg/ml = 3.2mg/100ml
(4.5)
Now that the concentration is in mg/100ml it can be put as in Equation 4.5
26
==PAGE:39==
as the concentration is per 100ml, that was used to extract phenols from the
5g. It is then multiplied by 20 to get the concentration in mg/100 g of BSG,
as seen in Equation 4.7.
3.27mg/5g BSG
(4.6)
3.27mg/5gBSG · 20 = 65.6mg/100g BSG
(4.7)
4.3.3
The Dumas combustion method
Testing of the protein content was done using the Rapid MAX N exceed(R)
by Elementar. Three empty wells were placed as blanks and ﬁve wells with
around 250mg of aspartic acid are run before samples. The samples are weighed
in the wells. Dry samples were weighed to at around 200mg and the wet at
around 300mg. The furnace is set at 950◦C and the nitrogen-protein conversion
factor used was 6.25, as it is the conversion factor of nitrogen in protein for
barley [Buchi, 2018].
4.3.4
Bradford protein assay
The Bradford protein assay is used to measure the concentration of soluble pro-
tein. The samples are centrifuged using a Biofuge pico from Heraeus in 1.5ml
tubes at 4000rpm for four minutes(1520 × g).
50µl of the supernatant and
1.5ml of Bradford (Coomassie) reagent were added to a tube and mixed well.
The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes. After the
10 minutes the mixture were measured on a Genesys 10S UV-Vis spectropho-
tometer from Thermo Scientiﬁc set to 595nm. Water was used as the blank. A
calibration curve was made in the range 2mg/ml −0.025mg/ml using Bovine
serum albumin(BSA) as the protein standard [Thermo Scientiﬁc, 2018].
4.3.5
Amino acid proﬁle
The amino acid proﬁle were done by the Department of Plant and Environ-
mental Sciences where they hydrolysis the protein with 6 M HCl.
If it is
free amino acids they use a method based on coupling of the amino acids
with aminoquinolyl-N-hydroxysuccinimidyl carbamate (AQC). The samples are
then analysed on a UPLC with a Cortecs UPLC C18 (1.6µm particle size,
2.1 × 150mm) column and detection is with a single quadrupole mass detector.
Tryptophan was not measured as it does not survive the two diﬀerent methods.
Prior to analysis the samples were freeze dried.
4.3.6
Texture analysis
A texture proﬁle analysis was done on both dough and bread with the use of
a 5kg TA.XT plus texturometer from Stable Micro Systems, England. For the
TPA on dough, 30g of sample were used. The probe used were a SMS P/50
(Figure 4.1) and the test speeds were set to 1mm/s and a compression of 60%.
Two types of TPA were done on the dough where the ﬁrst one was done with a
plastic lid(TPAW) to avoid any dough sticking to the probe(Figure 4.2). The
27
==PAGE:40==
second TPA where done without lid(TPAWOL) to see the adhesiveness of the
dough.
The method used were as in [Razavizadegan Jahromi et al., 2013].
However the recovery time were changed to 5 seconds instead of 75 seconds as
you would not leave a dough to stand for 75 seconds and then handle it again.
The dough were tested directly after one hour of raising and done in sextuplets.
The top was cut oﬀthe breads for TPA performed on the crumb such that
the height of the bottom bread was 1 cm.
The probe used can be seen in
Figure 4.3. The probe pressed down 0.5cm in the bun with tests speeds of
1mm/s and recovery time at 5 seconds. The setup for the method can be seen
in Figure 4.4.
A 30kg TA.XT plus texturometer from Stable Micro Systems were used to
test the crust of the baked product. The setup to analyse the crust of the bread
were a knife probe and a metal plate with a hole such that the probe could cut
all the way through the crust. The probe and setup are depicted in Figure 4.5
and 4.6. The settings on the texturometer were: pre-test speed of 2.0mm/s,
test speed of 4mm/s, and a post-test speed of 10.0mm/s. The target mode was
set to 30mm to ensure that the knife went all the through the crust.
A small storage test were made. The breads cooled down for an hour, put
into vacuum bags and using a multivac set at 450mbar to remove air. The
breads were left for 24 hours, 48 hours and 14 days in a dark cupboard at
around 21◦C. They were tested the same way as the other breads, a TPA on
the crumb, and cutting of the crust.
Figure 4.1: The probe SMS P/50 used
for the TPA on dough.
Figure 4.2: The setup for the TPAW,
where a plastic lid is between the probe
and dough.
28
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.3: The probe used for the TPA
on the crumb.
Figure 4.4: The setup for the TPA on
the crumb.
Figure 4.5: The probe used to mimic a
person cutting through bread.
Figure 4.6: The setup for the cutting of
the crust using a knife probe.
4.3.7
Dry matter content
The analysis of the dry matter content of the bread were done to see if BSG
had an eﬀect on the amount of water in the bread.
An aluminium tray were weighed using a Mettler AT261 DeltaRange weight
with four signiﬁcant ﬁgures. 3 −4g of sample were weighed and added to the
tray. The trays were moved to a Jouan 391 oven, and kept for 24 hours at
105◦C.
After 24 hours the trays were weighed and the dry matter content
calculated by dividing the weight of the sample after drying by the samples
weight before it is dried and the multiplying by 100.
4.3.8
VideometerLab multi spectral imaging system
The instrument used for measuring the colour of the bread was the instrument
VideometerLab2. For a measurement a sample were prepared by slicing the
bread, such that both the crust and the crumb could be analysed. Before the
samples were analysed a light-calibration were made for the both the crumb
29
==PAGE:42==
and the crust. This sets the brightness for every wavelength to avoid over and
under exposure and thereby get a noise free picture.
4.3.9
Structured-light 3D surface imaging
The newly made dough were weighed to 50g and placed on a black piece of
paper and scanned for one hour at room temperature. All the types of doughs
tested were tested in triplicates. The raising temperature were diﬀerent from
the other experiments as it was not possible to get the temperature to 30◦C
and a relative humidity at 80%. It could be suggested that it be put in an
incubation cupboard but this was not an option. The setup of the experiment
can be seen in Figure 4.7. Two types of experiments were made: one where the
dough were pressed and had an almost planar surface and another where the
dough were not pressed.
Figure 4.7: The setup used when making the 3D surface image scanning. Showing
the light projector and camera. When a scanning is running a black linen is covering
it, to shelter the equipment from light.
30
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Results
Results regarding the raw materials are reviewed in Section 5.1.1 ﬁrst, before
the analysis of the dough and bread in Section. This is done to get a better
understanding of the impact the BSG has on dough and bread.
5.1
Characteristics of BSG fractions
The BSG was fractionated using a ﬁlter press from Dacoﬁ.
The BSG was
divided into two fractions: one liquid and one solid. The BSG from DTU was
sampled during the pressing. Samples where taken before the pressing, at the
start, mid press and at the end, to see if the two fractions diﬀerentiate over time
when pressed. The BSG from Braunstein was only sampled before the start of
pressing and after the press was done.
The liquid fractions from DTU and Braunstein sedimented for 24 hours and
samples were taken of the sediment and the supernatant.
5.1.1
Sugar content of the fractionated BSG
The sugar content in the fractionated BSG is important to know, as sugar
is one of the components that when incorporated could eﬀect a dough. The
concentration of maltose, fructose, and glucose in the liquid samples from both
DTU and Braunstein with the use of HPLC. The data for the content of glucose
is depicted in Figure 5.1, where the highest amount of glucose at 9.7g/L was
seen in the sample taken during the press from DTU. The lowest value was
found in the press of BSG from Braunstein at 0.63g/L. Some of the glucose
remains in the supernatant after sedimentation in both DTU and Braunstein
samples. The overall trend for the glucose was that samples from DTU had
a higher concentration of glucose than samples from Braunstein. The highest
concentration of glucose in DTU samples were around 15 times higher than the
lowest value from Braunstein. The sediment from DTU had a concentration of
5.7g/L and Braunstein had 0.72g/L.
The fructose concentration in Figure 5.2, the sediment from DTU showed
the highest amount of fructose, where the lowest was found in both the press and
supernatant from Braunstein. The sediment samples were 3.2g/L of fructose for
31
==PAGE:44==
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
Start press (D)
Mid press (D)
End press (D)
Sediment (D)
Supernatant (D)
End press (B)
Supernatant (B)
Sediment (B)
Glucose [g/L]
Figure 5.1: HPLC data for glucose concentrations measured for liquid raw material
samples from DTU(D) and Braunstein(B).
DTU and 1.2g/L for Braunstein. The overall trend was again that samples from
DTU had a higher concentration of fructose, than the ones from Braunstein.
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
Start press (D)
Mid press (D)
End press (D)
Sediment (D)
Supernatant (D)
End press (B)
Supernatant (B)
Sediment (B)
Fructose [g/L]
Figure 5.2:
HPLC data for fructose concentrations measured for liquid raw mate-
rial samples from DTU(D) and Braunstein(B)
The last sugar tested was maltose, where the highest value found was in
samples taken mid press from DTU, as can be seen in Figure 5.3. The con-
centration of maltose in the sediment from DTU was at 36.7g/L where the
sediment from Brainstein was only 15.8g/L.
The higher concentration of sugar in the samples from DTU was most likely
caused by an insuﬃcient utilization of the malt under the mashing and lautering
step. From this it can be suggested that BSG from Braunstein can be a better
representation of BSG from other breweries. The amount of sugar can lead to
a darker crust as sugars are a part of the Maillard reaction and the sugar also
32
==PAGE:45==
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
Start press (D)
Mid press (D)
End press (D)
Sediment (D)
Supernatant (D)
End press (B)
Supernatant (B)
Sediment (B)
Maltose [g/L]
Figure 5.3: HPLC data for maltose concentrations measured for liquid raw material
samples from DTU(D) and Braunstein(B)
eﬀects the raising of the dough as it provide as food for the yeast. However a
too high of an amount could inhibit the development of a gluten network as the
sugar competes for the water with the starch and proteins [Pareyt et al., 2009].
5.1.2
Phenolic content of the fractionated BSG
A measurement of the concentration of phenols were made to see the diﬀerence
between the acquired BSG from DTU and Braunstein as these could have an
impact on the characteristics of the ﬂavour and bioactive properties of the
ﬁnished bread as the phenols can be ﬂavonoids and antioxidants [Abdel-Aal
and Rabalski, 2013, Acosta-Estrada et al., 2014]
The calculated data for both DTU and Braunstein, solid samples can be
seen in Figure 5.4 and the liquid samples in Figure 5.5. Samples from DTU
had a higher content of phenols than samples from Braunstein. The highest
amount of phenols for the solid samples were in the ﬁne milled D-BSG
The wheat ﬂour used for the controls in the baking process was also tested
for phenols, which gave a result of 42.7mg/100g(Figure5.4 ). The article [Georgé
et al., 2005] states that the Folin-Ciocalteu reagent can interact with diﬀerent
reducing nonphenolic substances and therefore lead to an overestimated amount
of polyphenols. The article [Koletta et al., 2014] found that commercial wheat
ﬂour contains around 62mg/100g and barley ﬂour 148mg/100g, which ﬁts in
the range of the results found in this experiment.
The higher content of phenols [Koletta et al., 2014] found can be related
to the fact that they extracted the phenols using methanol rather than water,
which was used in this experiment.
The highest amount of phenols were found in the ﬁne milled BSG. This is
most likely due to a higher amount of bran, whereas the coarse D-BSG had a
higher amount of the hull of the grain. The ﬁnely milled sample from DTU had
74mg/100gD −BSG and the one from Braunstein had 29mg/100gD −BSG.
33
==PAGE:46==
The reason why the D-BSG from DTU, which is not milled, might be lower
than the ﬁne, can be that the bran was more intact and therefore the phenols
was not as easy to extract or it could be that there was less as there was more
hull present.
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
Start press(D)
Mid press(D)
End press(D)
Sediment(D)
Supernatant(D)
End press(B)
Sediment(B)
Supernatant(B)
Phenols [mg/100g BSG]
Figure 5.4:
Data for the total phenolic content in the solid samples for both
DTU(D) and Braunstein(B) raw material. The highest concentration of phenols
was found in the ﬁne milled D-BSG from DTU.
The highest concentration of phenols found in liquid samples were both the
sediment and mid press from DTU. Samples from DTU had a higher concen-
tration of phenols than samples from Braunstein. The sediment from DTU had
a content of 12.5mg/100ml of phenols, where sediment from Braunstein had a
content of 9.3mg/100ml.
Braunstein’s results were generally lower than the DTUs which might be
related to utilization of the malt or that Braunstein only used one type of
malt from Fuglsang and DTU used both a pilsner malt from Weyermann and
malt from Fuglsang. There could be a diﬀerence in the components in the two
types of malt, which causes the diﬀerence in phenolic content. The phenolic
content can have an impact on the ﬂavour of the ﬁnished product both positive
or negative, however this impact is not tested. The phenols can also have a
positive eﬀect on the ﬁnished bread as they can be antioxidant and therefore
reduce the amount of radicals and inhibit oxidation of lipids [Abdel-Aal and
Rabalski, 2013].
34
==PAGE:47==
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
Before press (D)
Mid press(D)
End press (D)
D-BSG(D)
D-BSG, fine(D)
D-BSG, coarse(D)
Before press (B)
End press(B)
D-BSG(B)
D-BSG, fine(B)
D-BSG, coarse(B)
Wheat flour
Phenols [mg/100g sample]
Figure 5.5:
Data for the total phenolic content in the liquid samples for both
DTU(D) and Braunstein(B) raw material. The highest concentration of phenols
were found in the sediment and mid press from DTU.
5.1.3
Protein content of the fractionated BSG
The protein content of the fractionated BSG from DTU and Braunstein was
estimated using the Dumas method as the amount of proteins can have an eﬀect
on the development of the gluten network of the dough.
The protein content of the BSG was calculated using the protein factor 6.25
and 5.70 for wheat [Buchi, 2018], and the results are illustrated in Figure 5.6
and 5.7. For both DTU and Braunstein, the highest amount of protein per
g dry matter was found in the ﬁnely milled D-BSG. The ﬁnely milled, might
have had a higher content of bran whereas the coarse milled D-BSG contained
more hull and therefore had a higher content of proteins. Finely milled D-BSG
from DTU had a protein content of 17.9% and Braunstein had a slightly higher
amount at 20.8%. The not milled D-BSG was just in between the ﬁne and
coarse. This can be as it might have contained a higher amount of the hull
than the ﬁnely milled, and a higher amount of the bran than the coarse milled.
The protein content of wheat ﬂour was measured to 9.5% per g dry matter
where it states on the packaging it has 12g of protein per 100g ﬂour.
The
high amount of protein in the D-BSG corresponds with the articles [Lynch
et al., 2016] which states that dried BSG can consist of up to 30% of protein
and
[Prentice and D’appolonia, 1977] which found 34% of protein per dry
matter. [Stojceska and Ainsworth, 2008], [Gupta et al., 2010], and [Ktenioudaki
et al., 2013] found protein in dried BSG in the range from 20 −24%.
The highest concentration of protein in the liquid sediment samples were
from DTU at 2.2% and 1.4% for the sediment from Braunstein.
The concentration of proteins in the ﬁne milled D-BSG from both DTU and
Braunstein can eﬀect the dough and bread by inhibiting the gluten network by
diluting the proteins from wheat, as the barley do not contain gliadin which
make up gluten, together with glutenin [Arendt and Zannini, 2013].
35
==PAGE:48==
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
Start press(D)
Mid press(D)
End press (D)
Sediment(D)
Supernatant(D)
End press (B)
Sediment(B)
Supernatant(B)
Protein content [%]
Figure 5.6:
Protein content of solid samples from DTU(D) and Braunstein(B)
measured with Dumas combustion method. The results are in percent per g dry
matter.
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
Before press(D)
Start press(D)
Mid press(D)
End press (D)
D-BSG(D)
D-BSG, fine(D)
D-BSG, coarse(D)
Before press(B)
End press (B)
D-BSG(B)
D-BSG, coarse(B)
D-BSG, fine(B)
Wheat flour
Protein content [%]
Figure 5.7:
Protein content of liquid samples from DTU(D) and Braunstein(B),
measured with Dumas combustion method. The results are in percent per g dry
matter.
36
==PAGE:49==
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0.35
 0.4
 0.45
Start press (D)
Mid press (D)
End press (D)
Supernatant (D)
Sediment (D)
End press (B)
Supernatant (B)
Sediment (B)
Protein [mg/ml]
Figure 5.8:
Soluble protein content, for liquid samples from DTU(D) and Braun-
stein(B), measured with a Bradford protein assay.
5.1.4
Soluble protein content of the fractionated BSG
The liquid samples measured using Bradford protein assay, showed that samples
from DTU had a higher content of soluble proteins, than the samples from
Braunstein.
It can be seen in Figure 5.8 that some of the soluble proteins
remained in the supernatant. A concentration of 0.4mg/ml, remained in the
supernatant from DTU, whereas the amount of proteins in the supernatant from
Braunstein was 0.19mg/ml. The diﬀerence between the sediment from DTU
and Braunstein was at 0.02mg/ml, 0.24mg/ml for the DTU and 0.22mg/ml
for the Braunstein sample.
5.1.5
Amino acid proﬁle of BSG fractions from DTU
To see how the composition of essential and nonessential amino acids is in the
BSG from DTU. The amino acid proﬁle was only made on three samples from
DTU, Before press(S), End press(S), and End press(L). It is only the amino
acid proﬁle made on the solid sample of the End press which is represented in
Figure 5.9, as the other two samples showed almost identical amounts. These
are depicted in Appendix B. Glutamic acid was the amino acid which had the
highest concentration at 18mg/g dry matter, this might be because glutamine
was converted into glutamic acid when hydrolysed for the measurement. As-
paragine was also converted during hydrolyses to aspartic acid.
The non essential amino acid proline was present in second place at 10mg/g
dry matter.
Leucine which is a essential amino acid was present at 8mg/g
dry matter. The other essential amino acids: isoleusine, lysine, histidine, me-
thionine, valin, threonine, and phenylalanine were present in the range from
1.6 −6mg/g dry matter.
The article [Prentice and D’appolonia, 1977] also
found that glutamic acid was present in the highest amount together with pro-
line in second and leucine in third.
37
==PAGE:50==
Alanine
5.21%
Arginine
6.07%
Glycine
4.88%
Isoleucine
4.58%
Leucine
8.18%
Lysine
4.93%
Methionine sulfone
Hydroxyproline
Histidine
Cysteic acid
6.08%
Phenylalanine
5.76%
Proline
10.27%
Serine
4.96%
Threonine
4.21%
Tyrosine
3.71%
Valine
6.07%
Aspartic acid
6.70%
Glutamic acid
18.40%
Figure 5.9: Amino acid proﬁle of the solid sample of BSG after pressing with the
Dacoﬁﬁlter press. Each amino acid is shown in percent to give a better under-
standing of how they compare to each other. The value is also in the unit mg/g dry
matter
38
==PAGE:51==
It was seen for the samples from DTU start, mid and end of the press
showed diﬀerent values in sugar, protein and phenolic content which could give
a picture of how the BSG can diﬀer when pressed. This could be a problem if
the press was a part of a continuous production as these diﬀerences could give
a non homogeneous product.
5.2
Characteristics of bread dough containing BSG
fractions
5.2.1
Texture analysis
The texture proﬁle analysis was done to see if there was a diﬀerence between the
doughs and breads containing BSG, compared with the controls. The diﬀerent
dough types can be seen in Table 4.8 in Section 4.2. Two diﬀerent TPAs were
used: one with a lid(TPAW) to minimize the inﬂuence of adhesiveness and one
without the use of a lid(TPAWOL).
It was expected that there would be a diﬀerence between the samples,
as D-BSG have a diﬀerent composition than ﬂour and L-BSG than water.
The parameters investigated was; hardness, resilience, cohesiveness, springi-
ness, chewiness, and adhesiveness. However, adhesiveness was not considered
for the TPAW and TPA on the crumb as the lid on the TPAW inhibits the
measurements and it is very low for the crumb.
Each type of dough was made three times over three diﬀerent day and
each day six samples were tested for each texture proﬁle. The control with
only wheat, was made each day. The data from the TPAs were subjected to
an analysis of variance(ANOVA) to determine signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the
dough types. A conﬁdence interval of 95% was used and therefore the diﬀerence
was seen signiﬁcant if the p-value was lower than 0.05.
It is only the doughs containing D-BSG from DTU where data from the
three days are both showed as a mean from each day, in graphs and tables. The
reason for the data to be both showed in graph and tables for the three days is
to show the standard deviations for each parameter from the TPAs. The other
types of dough are means of the three days in tables to make the data easier to
overview. One average of the control was made from of all days.
All the parameters are abbreviated in tables as followed: Hardness = H,
Resilience = R, cohesiveness = Co, Springiness = S, Chewiness = Chew, and
Adhesiveness = A.
5.2.1.1
Texture proﬁle analysis on dough
5.2.1.1.1
TPA on doughs made with D-BSG
The ﬁrst experiments were made with the D-BSG from DTU, where 10% and
15% of D-BSG was substituted with wheat ﬂour. The parameter hardness which
is depicted in Figure 5.10 and 5.11. The three days for he TPAW had a higher
diﬀerence between days than the TPAWOL but the standard deviations are
high for both experiments. This diﬀerence between days can be resul of that
39
==PAGE:52==
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
Control
10%
15%
Hardness [N]
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Figure 5.10:
The results of the TPAW
for the parameter hardness for three
days, for the control, 10% D-BSG and
15% D-BSG from DTU. Where each
day is a mean of six samples.
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
Control
10%
15%
Hardness [N]
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Figure 5.11:
The results of the TPA-
WOL for the parameter hardness for
three days, for the control, 10% D-BSG
and 15% D-BSG from DTU. Where
each day is a mean of six samples.
the D-BSG was not homogeneous and therefore the dough behaved diﬀerent
from day to day, even within the same batch.
The dough containing 10% D-BSG ad 15% D-BSG had higher values in
hardness than the control for both of the TPAs. This suggests that the D-BSG
adds to a harder dough as it contains more ﬁbres and had a higher dry matter
content. The higher dry matter content together with the ﬁbres can cause a
less developed gluten network as it takes water from the proteins and starch,
hence a more compact and hard dough. The small diﬀerences seen in the dough
within the same day can also be caused by small diﬀerences in the shape of the
doughs when it is measured.
In Table 5.1 and 5.2 the 15% D-BSG was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
control in two out of three days. All the three days showed that the control
was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the 10% D-BSG for the TPAW, whereas the
TPAWOL the control was diﬀerent from 10% D-BSG and 15% D-BSG on all
days.
When taking the average of all three days together the same trend is seen
for each of the three days. This trend was the the 10% D-BSG and 15% D-BSG
were harder than the control, that the 10% D-BSG as not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from the control with the TPAW but the 10% D-BSG and 15% D-BSG was
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control with the TPAWO(Table 5.3).
Data from TPAW and TPAWOL measurements, for the parameter resilience
for the three days, are depicted in Figure 5.12 and 5.13. This parameter was
not as diﬀerent between the days which is illustrated by the lower standard
deviation for each day. This lower diﬀerence can be as it depends on both com-
pressions made by the probe in the TPA. The same pattern for the TPAWOL
for hardness was seen on resilience, where the control had a lower value than
the 10% D-BSG and 15% D-BSG(Table 5.3). If one looks at the standard devi-
ations in Figure 5.12 and 5.13, one could argue that all the three days showed
a similar result. However two of the three days for the TPAW had the control
as not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the 10% D-BSG, whereas all three days for
the TPAWOL, showed the control was not similar to the 10% D-BSG(Table 5.1
40
==PAGE:53==
Table 5.1: Average values for each of the three days for the TPAW on doughs with
10% D-BSG and 15% D-BSG from DTU.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chew
Day 1 Control
9.5
6.8
0.25
10.0
23.9
Day 1 10%
10.9β
7.3β
0.32
14.4
48.8
Day 1 15%
14.2
7.8
0.31
16.1
71.0
Day 2 Control
10.3
6.6
0.22
10.4
22.5
Day 2 10%
9.7β
7.1β
0.32
14.6
44.7
Day 2 15%
8.8β
6.7β
0.30
14.6
38.4
Day 3 Control
7.1
6.0
0.25
9.7
17.3
Day 3 10%
9.0β
7.0
0.32
14.5
40.8
Day 3 15%
11.0
6.8
0.29
14.7
47.5
Hardness=H, Resilience=R, Cohesiveness=Co, Springiness=S, Chewiness=Chew,
TPAW=Texture proﬁle analysis with lid, TPAWOL=Texture proﬁle analysis with-
out lid. Values marked with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
control as the p-value < 0.05.
Table 5.2: Average values for each of the three days for the TPAW on doughs with
10% D-BSG and 15% D-BSG from DTU.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chew
A[N · sec]
Day 1 Control
3.5
4.6
0.32
26.7
29.9
-0.074
Day 1 10%
8.9
6.6
0.33β
23.8β
70.5
−0.022β
Day 1 15%
13.0
6.8
0.30
21.4β
82.0
−0.53β
Day 2 Control
3.8
4.5
0.44
35.7
59.1
-4.98
Day 2 10%
9.0
6.3
0.33
25.2
80.8β
-0.079
Day 2 15%
9.2
6.2
0.30
20.4
57.2β
-0.14
Day 3 Control
4.2
4.7
0.34
28.4
39.5
-0.36
Day 3 10%
8.3
6.5
0.33β
22.0
59.6
−0.76β
Day 3 15%
9.6
6.5
0.30
16.8
48.8
-0.0065
Hardness=H, Resilience=R, Cohesiveness=Co, Springiness=S, Chewiness=Chew,
Adhesiveness=A, TPAW=Texture proﬁle analysis with lid, TPAWOL=Texture pro-
ﬁle analysis without lid.
Values marked with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the control as p > 0.05.
41
==PAGE:54==
Table 5.3: Average values for all three days for the TPAs on doughs with 10%
D-BSG and 15% D-BSG from DTU.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chew
A[N · sec]
TPAW Control
9.2
6.5
0.26
10.7
25.8
-
TPAW 10%
9.9β
7.1
0.32
14.5
44.8
-
TPAW 15%
11.2
7.0
0.30
15.1
51.2
-
TPAWOL Control
4.2
4.6
0.33
27.9
39.4
-0.68
TPAWOL 10%
8.8
6.5
0.33β
23.7
70.3
−0.24β
TPAWOL 15%
10.6
6.5
0.30
19.5
62.7
−0.26β
Hardness=H, Resilience=R, Cohesiveness=Co, Springiness=S, Chewiness=Chew,
Adhesiveness=A, TPAW=Texture proﬁle analysis with lid, TPAWOL=Texture pro-
ﬁle analysis without lid.
Values marked with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the control as the p-value < 0.05.
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
Control
10%
15%
Resilience [%]
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Figure 5.12:
The results of the TPAW
for the parameter resilience for three
days, for the control, 10% D-BSG and
15% D-BSG from DTU. Where each
day is a mean of six samples.
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
Control
10%
15%
Resilience [%]
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Figure 5.13:
The results of the TPA-
WOL for the parameter resilience for
three days, for the control, 10% D-BSG
and 15% D-BSG from DTU. Where
each day is a mean of six samples.
and 5.2). The control was only similar to the 15% D-BSG on day 2 for the
TPAW. The average of all the three days together for the two dough with D-
BSG, had higher values in resilience for both the TPAW and TPAWOL, than
the control. Table 5.3 shows that the two dough types were signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent from the control.
The less water in the dough could make it harder
to compress and therefore a more dense and resilient dough, hence the higher
value.
The data from the three days, for the parameter cohesiveness in Figure 5.14
and 5.15, looks more identical, than some of the other parameters as it has
low standard deviations. However day 2 for the control had a high standard
deviation which was most likely due to an error made that day rather than an
actual picture of how the dough behaves.
The TPAW have a lower value for the control which could be caused by the
extra weight of the lid. This weight could hinder the doughs recovering from
the deformation of the ﬁrst compression in the TPA. This could suggests that
42
==PAGE:55==
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0.35
Control
10%
15%
Cohesiveness [Unitless]
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Figure 5.14:
The results of the TPAW
for the parameter cohesiveness for three
days, for the control, 10% D-BSG and
15% D-BSG from DTU. Where each
day is a mean of six samples.
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
Control
10%
15%
Cohesiveness [Unitless]
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Figure 5.15:
The results of the TPA-
WOL for the parameter cohesiveness
for three days, for the control, 10%
D-BSG and 15% D-BSG from DTU.
Where each day is a mean of six sam-
ples.
the TPAWOL showed a more accurate picture of the cohesion of the doughs.
The control was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the 10% D-BSG and 15% D-BSG
for the TPAW, which is seen in Table 5.1 whereas seen in the TPAWOL in
Table 5.2 two out of three days ﬁnds the 10% D-BSG similar to the control.
The 15% D-BSG was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control for all the days for
both TPAs.
When looking at the average of all the three days for cohesiveness the same
tendency was seen. The control showed the highest cohesiveness for the TPA-
WOL and the lowest for the TPAW(Table 5.3) when comparing it to the 10%
D-BSG and 15% D-BSG. The TPAW for the average of all the three day showed
that the control was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from both the 10% D-BSG and 15%
D-BSG, whereas the TPAWOL showed that the control was similar to the 10%
D-BSG in Table 5.3. A reason why the TPAWOL showed a higher cohesiveness
for the control than the 10% D-BSG and 15% D-BSG can be that the D-BSG
takes water from the proteins which gives a less stable gluten network and more
weak structure of the dough.
The TPAW and TPAWOL for the parameter springiness are depicted in
Figure 5.16 and 5.17. The TPAW for the three days had lower standard de-
viation than that of the TPAWOL which might be because the lid minimizes
the diﬀerence the probe might feel on the surface of the dough, and thereby
give a more uniform measurement. The two TPAs showed the opposite of each
other as seen for the parameter cohesiveness, where the the value of the control
was lower than the other two for the TPAW and higher for the TPAWOL. The
average for the TPAW and TPAWOL in Table 5.3 also shows the opposite of
each other, where the control had a lower value in springiness for the TPAW
than the TPAWOL. This can again be related to the weight of the lids hinder-
ing the recovering of the dough. In Table 5.1 the control was not similar to
either the 10% D-BSG or 15% D-BSG. The TPAWOL in Table 5.2 shows that
on one of the three days the control was similar to both the 10% D-BSG and
15% D-BSG.
43
==PAGE:56==
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
Control
10%
15%
Springiness [%]
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Figure 5.16:
The results of the TPAW
for the parameter springiness over three
days for the control, 10% D-BSG and
15% D-BSG from DTU.
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
Control
10%
15%
Springiness [%]
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Figure 5.17:
The results of the TPA-
WOL for the parameter springiness
over three days for the control, 10% D-
BSG and 15% D-BSG from DTU.
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
Control
10%
15%
Chewiness [Unitless]
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Figure 5.18:
The results of the TPAW
for the parameter chewiness over three
days for the control, 10% D-BSG and
15% D-BSG from DTU.
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
Control
10%
15%
Chewiness [Unitless]
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Figure 5.19:
The results of the TPA-
WOL for the parameter chewiness over
three days for the control, 10% D-BSG
and 15% D-BSG from DTU.
The second last parameter is chewiness which can be seen in Figure 5.18
and 5.19 for the mean of each of the three days for the TPAW and TPAWOL. As
the chewiness is the product of hardness, cohesiveness and springiness it could
be inﬂuenced by the diﬀerences seen between the two types of experiments,
however both of the TPAs showed that addition of D-BSG gave the dough a
higher value in chewiness. The control was diﬀerent from the 10% D-BSG and
15% D-BSG on all three days for the TPAW(Table 5.1), where it was on two
out of three days, for the TPAWOL(Table 5.2). The average of the three days
for chewiness showed the same trend as the individual days(Table 5.3).
The last parameter is adhesiveness and is not shown in a ﬁgure as the results
was hard to illustrate as of the low values and high standard deviations. The
control had a overall higher adhesiveness than the 10% D-BSG and 15% D-
BSG. One of the three days showed a adhesiveness at -4.98 which is probably
due to the dough sticking too much to the probe and therefore it was lifted by
the probe. Two out of three days showed that the control was not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the 10% D-BSG and 15% D-BSG(Table 5.2). The average shows
the same and it is showed in Table 5.3. To get a real picture of how sticky the
dough is, another type of setup and probe should have been used.
44
==PAGE:57==
Table 5.4: Average values for all three days for the TPAs on doughs with 10%
D-BSG and 15% D-BSG from Braunstein.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chew
A[N · sec]
TPAW Control
9.2
6.5
0.26
10.7
25.8
-
TPAW 10%
10.8
7.3
0.31
14.6
48.7
-
TPAW 15%
13.9
7.4
0.30
14.9
62.8
-
TPAWOL Control
4.2
4.6
0.33
27.9
39.4
-0.68
TPAWOL 10%
8.9
6.3
0.31β
18.4
51.4
−0.19β
TPAWOL 15%
12.6
6.6
0.29β
19.0
70.0
−0.12β
Hardness=H, Resilience=R, Cohesiveness=Co, Springiness=S, Chewiness=Chew,
Adhesiveness=A, TPAW=Texture proﬁle analysis with lid, TPAWOL=Texture pro-
ﬁle analysis without lid.
Values marked with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the control as p > 0.05.
The results for experiments where D-BSG from Braunstein was used, can
be seen in the Table 5.4 for both the TPAW and the TPAWOL. The general
pattern for the TPAW on Braunstein showed that the control was signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the 10% D-BSG and the 15% D-BSG. The TPAWOL and TPAW
were only alike for the control compared to the 10% D-BSG and 15% D-BSG
in the parameters hardness, resilience, springiness and chewiness.
5.2.1.1.2
TPA on doughs made with L-BSG, where the dry matter
content was not considered
The next type of dough made, was substituting L-BSG with water in the recipe.
It was substituted out with 50% and 80% of the water without considering the
dry matter(DN). This experiment was only made with the L-BSG from DTU.
Table 5.5: Average values for all three days for the TPAs on doughs with 50DN%
L-BSG and 80DN% L-BSG from DTU.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chew
A[N · sec]
TPAW Control
9.2
6.5
0.26
10.7
25.8
-
TPAW 50DN%
8.1
7.6
0.34
15.3
40.4
-
TPAW 80DN%
9.2β
8.1
0.35
17.3
54.5
-
TPAWOL Control
4.2
4.6
0.33
27.9
39.4
-0.68
TPAWOL 50DN%
5.7
6.6
0.39
27.8β
63.5
−0.53β
TPAWOL 80DN%
9.2
7.7
0.38
25.1β
98.1
−0.33β
Hardness=H, Resilience=R, Cohesiveness=Co, Springiness=S, Chewiness=Chew,
Adhesiveness=A, TPAW=Texture proﬁle analysis with lid, TPAWOL=Texture pro-
ﬁle analysis without lid, DN=dry matter content not taken into account. Values
marked with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control as p >
0.05.
45
==PAGE:58==
The parameter hardness for the TPAW seen in Table 5.5, the control was
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the 50DN% L-BSG but not from the 80DN% L-
BSG, however for the TPAWOL all three were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each
other. The data for the parameter resilience and cohesiveness for the TPAW and
the TPAWOL showed the same pattern in regard to which ones were diﬀerent
from each other or not. The control was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the 50DN%
L-BSG and 80DN% L-BSG in the parameter springiness, when looking at the
TPAW and all three were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each other for the
TPAWOL. The TPAW and TPAWOL showed the same result for chewiness,
which was that the control was diﬀerent from the 50DN% L-BSG and 80DN%
L-BSG. The adhesiveness for the TPAWOL shows no diﬀerence between the
three.
5.2.1.1.3
TPA on doughs made with L-BSG, where the dry matter
content was considered
After the experiment with the L-BSG where the dry matter content was not
considered, another one was made where the dry matter content was considered
to see if there would be a diﬀerence. The dry matter content is shown in a
later(Section 5.3)
The ANOVA test data for the DTU data for both the TPAW and TPAWOL
can be seen in Table 5.6. In general the two tests only showed the same pattern
for resilience but they did show some of the same results for the other parameters
as well, e.g they both agreed that the control was diﬀerent from the 80DA%,
when looking at the parameters cohesiveness and chewiness.
Table 5.6: Average values for all three days for the TPAs on doughs with 50DA%
L-BSG and 80DA% L-BSG from DTU.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chew
A[N · sec]
TPAW Control
9.2
6.5
0.26
10.7
25.8
-
TPAW 50DA%
10.3β
7.1
0.29
12.3
35.4
-
TPAW 80DA%
10.7
8.0
0.33
16.3
59.7
-
TPAWOL Control
4.2
4.6
0.33
27.9
39.4
-0.68
TPAWOL 50DA%
4.9
5.1
0.34β
27.5β
45.4β
−0.11β
TPAWOL 80DA%
7.8
6.8
0.36
25.1β
68.8
−0.23β
Hardness=H, Resilience=R, Cohesiveness=Co, Springiness=S, Chewiness=Chew,
Adhesiveness=A, TPAW=Texture proﬁle analysis with lid, TPAWOL=Texture pro-
ﬁle analysis without lid, DA=Dry matter content taken into account. Values marked
with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control as p > 0.05.
When looking at the TPAW and TPAWOL results from Braunstein, which
is seen in Table 5.7, it almost showed the same for the TPAW as the L-BSG
DA from DTU. The only diﬀerence found was in the parameter hardness, while
Braunstein 50DA% L-BSG was not diﬀerent from the control. It was only the
parameters hardness, resilience and springiness which was the same between
46
==PAGE:59==
Table 5.7: Average values for all three days for the TPAs on doughs with 50DA%
L-BSG and 80DA% L-BSG from Braunstein.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chew
A[N · sec]
TPAW Control
9.2
6.5
0.26
10.7
25.8
-
TPAW 50DA%
10.0β
6.9
0.29
12.2
35.2
-
TPAW 80DA%
9.4β
7.3
0.32
14.3
42.0
-
TPAWOL Control%
4.2
4.6
0.33
27.9
39.4
-0.68
TPAWOL 50DA%
5.0
5.2
0.34β
25.0β
42.9β
−0.09β
TPAWOL 80DA%
6.4
6.4
0.36
24.5β
55.7
-0.04
Hardness=H, Resilience=R, Cohesiveness=Co, Springiness=S, Chewiness=Chew,
Adhesiveness=A, TPAW=Texture proﬁle analysis with lid, TPAWOL=Texture pro-
ﬁle analysis without lid, DA=Dry matter content taken into account. Values marked
with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control as p > 0.05.
Table 5.8: Average values for all three days for the TPAs on doughs with 50L%
L-BSG and 100% L-BSG from Braunstein.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chew
A[N · sec]
TPAW Control
9.2
6.5
0.26
10.7
25.8
-
TPAW 50L%
9.6β
7.7
0.32
14.9
45.4
-
TPAW 100%
9.6β
8.2
0.33β
15.5
50.2
-
TPAWOL Control
4.2
4.6
0.33
27.9
39.4
-0.68
TPAWOL 50L%
7.2
6.6
0.34β
26.1β
64.1
−0.04β
TPAWOL 100%
7.3
7.2
0.36β
24.9β
63.7
−0.26β
Hardness=H, Resilience=R, Cohesiveness=Co, Springiness=S, Chewiness=Chew,
Adhesiveness=A, TPAW=Texture proﬁle analysis with lid, TPAWOL=Texture pro-
ﬁle analysis without lid, L=made to resemble DTU. Values marked with an β are
deemed not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control as p > 0.05.
the Braunstein and the DTU, for the TPAWOL.
An extra experiment with L-BSG from Braunstein was made, as it had a
diﬀerent dry matter content than the L-BSG from DTU, as can be seen in
Section 5.3. The dough with 50% L-BSG was made to have the same amount
of dry matter content, as the L-BSG from DTU. A dough with 100% of the
water substituted with L-BSG from Braunstein was also made. The TPAW
and TPAWOL data are presented in Table 5.8. The control was only similar
to the 50L% L-BSG and 100% L-BSG in hardness for the TPAW and to the
100% L-BSG in cohesiveness.
The TPAWOL had the control as similar to
50L% L-BSG and 100% L-BSG in the parameters cohesiveness, springiness and
adhesiveness. The TPAWOL showed lower values in hardness and resilience
but had higher values in chewiness and springiness.
47
==PAGE:60==
5.2.1.1.4
TPA on doughs made with L-BSG and D-BSG
After the tests with the two fractions separately a new experiment was con-
ducted to see if the D-BSG and L-BSG would give another impact on dough,
together. Only 10% of D-BSG was used and 50% and 80% for the L-BSG. The
10% was chosen as earlier results showed that the 10% of D-BSG had a slightly
higher similarity to the control than the 15% D-BSG and another article stated
that a 12% was accepted by a sensory panel [Ktenioudaki et al., 2013].
When looking at the data from the TPAW and TPAWOL with DTU BSG,
seen in Table 5.9, the two tests agreed that the control was not similar to the
50%/10% BSG and 80%/10% BSG, when looking at the parameters hardness,
resilience, springiness and chewiness.
Table 5.9: Average values for all three days for the TPAs on doughs with 50%/10%
BSG and 80%/10% BSG from DTU.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chew
A[N · sec]
TPAW Control
9.2
6.5
0.26
10.7
25.8
-
TPAW 50%/10%
11.0
7.5
0.31
13.9
47.4
-
TPAW 80%/10%
10.1
7.3
0.30
13.6
41.0
-
TPAWOL Control
4.2
4.6
0.33
27.9
39.4
-0.68
TPAWOL 50%/10%
8.5
6.3
0.32β
21.1
56.6
−0.06β
TPAWOL 80%/10%
8.9
6.4
0.31β
21.8
60.5
−0.13β
Hardness=H, Resilience=R, Cohesiveness=Co, Springiness=S, Chewiness=Chew,
Adhesiveness=A, TPAW=Texture proﬁle analysis with lid, TPAWOL=Texture pro-
ﬁle analysis without lid.
Values marked with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the control as p > 0.05.
Almost the same pattern can be seen in Table 5.10 showing data for dough
with BSG from Braunstein. The TPAW and TPAWOL agreed that the 50%/10%
BSG and 80%/10% BSG were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control, however
the 50%/10% BSG was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control in cohesiveness.
48
==PAGE:61==
Table 5.10: Average values for all three days for the TPAs on doughs with 50%/10%
BSG and 80%/10% BSG from Braunstein.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chew
A[N · sec]
TPAW Control
9.2
6.5
0.3
10.7
25.8
-
TPAW 50%/10%
11.5
7.2
0.3
14.7
51.8
-
TPAW 80%/10%
11.8
7.4
0.3
15.0
53.2
-
TPAWOL Control
4.2
4.6
0.3
27.9
39.4
-0.68
TPAWOL 50%/10%
10.5
6.7
0.3β
18.9
62.2
−0.01β
TPAWOL 80%/10%
11.3
6.7
0.3
19.7
67.2
−0.02β
Hardness=H, Resilience=R, Cohesiveness=Co, Springiness=S, Chewiness=Chew,
Adhesiveness=A, TPAW=Texture proﬁle analysis with lid, TPAWOL=Texture pro-
ﬁle analysis without lid.
Values marked with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the control as p > 0.05.
When looking at all the data from using BSG in dough, a general pattern
was that the addition of BSG changed the dough when comparing it to the
control. The addition of D-BSG to dough gives a harder, more resilient and
more chewy dough, looking at both the TPAWs and TPAWOLs. The two types
of TPAs give a diﬀerent result in cohesiveness and springiness. The TPAW
measured a higher value in both, whereas the TPAWOL had lower values than
the control. This might be because the plastic lid in the TPAW weighs down
on the dough and therefore the dough had an extra weight it needed to lift.
The TPAW showed that it was easier to compress the control than the dough
with added D-BSG as the lid helped pressing the dough and therefore giving
a lower cohesiveness, spriginess and chewiness.
A reason why using the D-
BSG maked the doughs signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control in most of the
parameters might have something to do with that the D-BSG gived the dough a
higher content of ﬁbres, which can disrupt the gluten network, both in terms of
absorbing water and physically hinder the cross linking of proteins, and thereby
hinder development of a gluten network [Khalid et al., 2017]. Even though the
BSG also added to the amount of pentosans which can increase the volume and
the moisture content [Michniewicz et al., 1992]. The TPAWOL also measured
the adhesiveness of the dough which was lower for both doughs with D-BSG
and can be related back to that the D-BSG might absorb some of the water.
The two experiments only involving the L-BSG from DTU all gave a higher
value than the control in the parameters hardness, resilience, cohesiveness and
chewiness for both TPAs. For the TPAWOL both of the 50% L-BSG shows
almost the same value in springiness and the 80% L-BSG was not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the control either.
The TPAW showed higher value for the
springiness. In general considering the dry matter content when adding the
L-BSG did not make a big diﬀerence regarding the 80% addition of L-BSG but
the 50DA% L-BSG showed a higher similarity to the control than the 50DN%.
A reason why it did not aﬀect the 80% can be that the amount was already
so high that the diﬀerence in dry matter content was not noticeable. The L-
BSG from Braunstein showed also a higher value in all the parameters when
49
==PAGE:62==
compared to the control. The 50% was also not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
control in the same parameters as the DTU.
As the dry matter content was not the same in the L-BSG from DTU
and Braunstein the extra experiment was made to see if there would be a
diﬀerence when having the same contribution of dry matter coming from the
L-BSG. It was higher than the control in hardness, resilience, cohesiveness and
chewiness but not the Springiness and adhesiveness for the TPAWOL. Only one
parameters diﬀers from the DTU 50DA% L-BSG and that was the chewiness.
The one with 100% of L-BSG showed the same pattern as the 50L% L-BSG.
For both the DTU and Braunstein, the two types of doughs 50%/10% BSG
and 80%/10% BSG both showed a higher value in hardness, resilience and
chewiness for the TPAW and the TPAWOL than the control. Cohesiveness
and springiness for the TPAW was higher and cohesiveness, springiness and
adhesiveness was lower than the control for the TPAWOL. Overall there was
not much if any diﬀerence when using both the D-BSG and L-BSG than when
it was only the D-BSG. The one type of dough that was the most similar to the
control was the 50DA% for the DTU and the 50% for the Braunstein.
5.2.1.2
Texture proﬁle analysis on crumb
After the samples had been baked a TPA was done after an hour of resting and
cooling oﬀ.
When looking at the data in Table 5.11, it is noticeable that the samples
with both L-BSG and D-BSG seemed to be most similar to the control whereas
the least similar was the one with only the L-BSG DN.
Table 5.11: Average values of all three days for the TPA on crumbs with BSG from
DTU.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chewi
Control%
6.3
52.3
0.84
94.3
483.4
10%
17.6
41.6
0.75
89.5
1167.9
15%
20.4
41.9
0.71
77.4
1101.8
50DN%
11.8
42.3
0.77
89.8
810.9
80DN%
15.8
37.2
0.73
83.3
955.1
50DA%
3.5
56.3
0.86
91.6
280.4
80DA%
5.3β
53.3β
0.85β
87.5
386.9β
50%/10%
5.9β
53.1β
0.83β
87.3
433.8β
80%/10%
6.1β
51.1β
0.80β
83.3
414.7β
Hardness = H, Resilience = R, cohesiveness = Co, Springiness = S, and Chewiness
= Chew, DA=Dry matter content taken into account, DN=dry matter content not
taken into account. Values marked with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from the control as p > 0.05.
The TPA done on the Braunstein crumbs showed another pattern than
the DTU. The data can be seen in Table 5.12. The crumb showing the most
50
==PAGE:63==
similarity to the control was the crumb, where 10% of the D-BSG was used.
Using a lower amount of BSG showed a general higher similarity to the control.
A reason why the L-BSG DN was so diﬀerent from the control might be due to
the higher amount of dry matter content together with that the L-BSG from
DTU have a high content of sugar. When L-BSG was together with the D-BSG
the sugar content inﬂuence was reduced.
Table 5.12: Average values of all three days for the TPA on crumbs with BSG from
Braunstein.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chew
Control%
6.310
52.3
0.84
94.28
483.4
10%
6.95β
53.89β
0.81β
86.71
523.69β
15%
9.69
56.2
0.84β
88.25
723.99β
50DA%
3.75
57.2
0.87
94.53a
306.77
80DA%
5.1β
58.3
0.87
91.8
406.68β
50L%
6.1β
58.5
0.87
91.9
484.27β
100%
6.2β
60.1
0.88
88.9
485.73β
50%/10%
7.2β
57.8
0.86
88.9
551.79β
80%/10%
8.6
57.5
0.86
84.6
632.4
Hardness = H, Resilience = R, cohesiveness = Co, Springiness = S, and Chewiness
= Chew, DA=Dry matter content taken into account, L=made to resemble DTU.
Values marked with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control as
p > 0.05.
5.2.1.3
Texture analysis of crust
The top of the bread was cut through to see how much force and work that
was required to cut it. The peak force [N] is the greatest force needed to cut
through the crust whereas the work [N/mm] is how much work required to cut
through the crust, including the amount of crumb in the top of the bread.
Data for the cut is illustrated using a graph where time[s] is on the x-axis
and force[N] is on the y-axis it can be seen that they look one way when it is
the control and another way when it is the L-BSG from DTU. These diﬀerent
trends are depicted in the Figure 5.22 through 5.25. These are only a selection
of the tested crusts.
The cutting of the 50DA% from DTU seen in Figure 5.21, had a lot of small
peaks at the beginning. The small peaks can be due to the amount of sugars
in the L-BSG from DTU, which can cause the surface to become more crisp
and therefore the crust fractures when it was cut. The control is illustrated in
Figure 5.22 where no fractures of the crust was seen only one main peak was
visible. This peak was most likely caused by the probe pushing through the
crust, rather than cutting through it, and the small bump seen at the end of
the graph was where the probe was cutting through the rest of the crust.
51
==PAGE:64==
-10
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Force [N]
Time [s]
50% LSG DTU
Figure 5.20:
The force used over time
to cut through the crust of the 50DA%
L-BSG from DTU
-20
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Force [N]
Time [s]
50% LSG Braunstein
Figure 5.21:
The force used over time
to cut through the crust of the 50L% L-
BSG from Braunstein
-20
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Force [N]
Time [s]
Control
Figure 5.22:
The force used over time
to cut through the crust of the control
-10
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Force [N]
Time [s]
10% DTU
Figure 5.23:
The force used over time
to cut through the crust of 10% D-BSG
from DTU
-20
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Force [N]
Time [s]
80%/10% DTU
Figure 5.24:
The force used over time
to cut through the crust of the 80%/10%
BSG from DTU
-10
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Force [N]
Time [s]
80%/10% Braunstein
Figure 5.25:
The force used over time
to cut through the crust of the 80%/10%
BSG from Braunstein
In Figure 5.24 for the 80%/10% BSG and 5.21 for the 50L% L-BSG, a big
main peak and a small increase can be seen where the rest of the crust was cut
through. The 80%/10% BSG from Braunstein in Figure 5.25 showed the same
trend as the 50DA% L-BSG from DTU together with the 10% D-BSG from
DTU in Figure 5.23, where a lot of small peaks were seen at the start.
Most of the data from cutting of the crust had so high standard deviations
52
==PAGE:65==
that they all could be said not to be diﬀerent from the control, when the focus
is on the experiments from DTU in Figure 5.26. When looking at the ones with
BSG from Brauntein, the 100% was not within the standard deviation of the
control as can be seen in Figure 5.27. As the standard deviations was so high,
the ANOVA test was also used on the data for the crusts.
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
Control
10%
15%
50DN
80DN
50DA
80DA
50%/10%
80%/10%
Force [N]
Figure 5.26:
The force used to cut
through the crust of breads with BSG
from DTU
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 180
Control
10%
15%
50DA
80DA
50L
100
50%/10%
80%/10%
Force [N]
Figure 5.27:
The force used to cut
through the crust of breads with BSG
from Braunstein.
The experiments with BSG from DTU the 80DA% at 150N had the highest
force used to cut through the crust where the control was only at 127N. The
reason why 80DA% might be higher than the control, can be because of the
formation of a more crisp crust, due the a higher amount of sugar coming from
L-BSG. The lowest force used was for the 80%/10% which was only at 81.5N.
It can also be seen that overall the more BSG added the less force was needed
beside the 80DA%.
Table 5.13: Average values for force and work used to cut the crust of breads with
BSG from DTU.
Sample
Force [N]
Work[N/mm]
Control
127.5
1848.7
10%
91.1
1058.2
15%
81.8
965.4
50DN%
125.3
1700.7
80DN%
151.0
1403.8
50DA%
83.8β
1318.2β
80DA%
83.2β
1116.4
50%/10%
101.6
1421.7
80%/10%
81.5
1109.2
DA=Dry matter content taken into account, DN=dry matter content not taken
into account.Values marked with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from
the control as p > 0.05.
When you look at the ANOVA, seen in Table 5.13, it shows that the 80DA%
and 50DA% were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control. The other exper-
53
==PAGE:66==
Table 5.14: Average values for force and work used to cut the crust of breads with
BSG from Braunstein.
Sample
Force [N]
Work[N/mm]
Control
127.5
1848.7
10%
104.1
1373.4
15%
92.1
1219.8
50DA%
111.7β
1407.7
80DA%
121.7β
1534.4
50L%
82.2
1287.6
100%
71.5
1009.5
50%/10%
84.4
1257.8
80%/10%
75.1
882.5
DA=Dry matter content taken into account, L=made to resemble DTU.Values
marked with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control as p >
0.05.
iments with D-BSG, D-BSG+L-BSG and the L-BSG DN were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the control. Table 5.14 shows the result of the ANOVA for the
Braunstein experiments. The Braunstein experiments showed the same results
for the force as the DTU. It is only the L-BSG DA which was similar to the
control. Work performed when cutting the crusts do not necessarily correlate
with the value of the peak force. When looking at the data from the DTU ex-
periments, illustrated in Table 5.13 it can be seen that the control had a higher
work in total compared to the 80DA%, which had the highest peak force.
The standard deviations were big, when looking at the work performed.
The 80DN% L-BSG, 10% D-BSG, 15% D-BSG and 80%/10% BSG can be
said to be diﬀerent, from the control as these were not in the range of the
standard deviation of the control. In Figure 5.29, which showed the data for
the Braunsteins experiments, it was only the 100% L-BSG and 80%/10% BSG
which was not similar to the control. Data for the ANOVA test is located in
Table 5.13 and 5.13 where the DTU and Braunstein showed the same results
for all except the 50DA% using L-BSG from DTU, which was not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the control.
54
==PAGE:67==
 0
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
 2500
Control
50
100
50DN
80DN
50DA
80DA
50%/10%
80%/10%
Work [N/mm]
Figure 5.28: The work performed when
cutting through the crust from bread
made with BSG from DTU
 0
 500
 1000
 1500
 2000
 2500
Control
50
100
50DA
80DA
50L
100
50%/10%
80%/10%
Work [N/mm]
Figure 5.29: The work performed when
cutting through the crust from bread
made with BSG from Braunstein.
5.2.1.4
Texture proﬁle analysis on stored bread
An experiment was made to see if there would be a diﬀerence in breads after
24 hours, 48 hours and 14 days. The breads tested were 50L% and 100% using
L-BSG from Braunstein, which were tested after 14 days and 50%/10% and
80%/10% with L-BSG and D-BSG from DTU tested after 24 and 48 hours.
The crumbs of the breads where tested the same way as the other experi-
ments however breads kept for 14 days, were tested on a 30kg texturometer, as
the 5kg could not give the needed compression. The data is presented in Ta-
ble 5.15. The 24 hours and 48 hours showed the same, that the control had the
highest value in the parameters resilience, cohesiveness and springiness which
is seen in Table 5.15, this can be because the gluten structure was better de-
veloped in the control before baking. There was a shift between the 50%/10%
BSG and 80%/10% BSG for the parameters hardness and chewiness, where
50%/10% BSG had the highest values after 48 hours and the 80%/10% BSG
had the highest after 24 hours. After 24 hours the control was signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from both the 50%/10% BSG and 80%/10% BSG but after 48 hours
the control was similar to the 80%/10% BSG in resilience, cohesiveness and
springiness.
After 14 days the control had the highest value in resilience and cohesiveness
as for the 24 hours and 48 hours, but in the other parameters it was the 100% L-
BSG that had the highest value. The ANOVA test data showed that the 50L%
L-BSG and 100% L-BSG were similar to the control in resilience, cohesiveness
and springiness and in chewiness for the 50L%.
55
==PAGE:68==
Table 5.15: Average values for the TPA of Crumb after 24 hours, 48 hours, and
14 days, respectively.
Sample
H[N]
R[%]
Co
S[%]
Chew
Control 24 hours
8.3
53.1
0.85
92.2
645.0
50%/10% 24 hours
14.1
45.1
0.80
81.1
914.4
80%/10% 24 hours
15.2
45.0
0.78
89.5
1055.7
Control 48 hours
18.4
52.7
0.83
93.2
1427.6
50%/10% 48 hours
28.4
42.4
0.76
88.7
1913.2
80%/10% 48 hours
23.1β
43.6
0.77
90.4β
1571.6β
Control 14 days
42.6
48.4
0.84
61.2
2167.5
50L% 14 days
72.3
47.2β
0.83β
62.4β
3884.3β
100% 14 days
83.7
47.9β
0.83β
64.2β
4495.0
Hardness = H, Resilience = R, cohesiveness = Co, Springiness = S, and Chewiness
= Chew, L=made to resemble DTU. Values marked with an β are deemed not
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control as p > 0.05.
The diﬀerent trends for the crusts are depicted in the Figures 5.30 through 5.35.
Looking at the control after 24 hours(Figure 5.30) there were two main peaks,
where the ﬁrst one was most likely the cut of the crust and the last was when
the probe were all the way through.
For the 48 hours control(Figure 5.31), the crust started to resemble the
trend seen for the fresh control seen in Figure 5.22, where it had one main peak
and decreased only a little before the crust was cut all the way, the same was
seen for the 14 days(Figure 5.34). The 24 hours and 48 hours for the 80%/10%
BSG seen in Figure 5.32 and 5.33 showed a similar graph to the control at
48 hours. The 100% L-BSG also showed a similar course(Figure 5.35) as the
control kept for 14 days.
-50
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Force [N]
Time [s]
Control - 24h
Figure 5.30:
The force used over time
to cut through the crust of the control
after 24 hours
-20
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Force [N]
Time [s]
Control - 48h
Figure 5.31:
The force used over time
to cut through the crust of the control
after 48 hours
56
==PAGE:69==
-20
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 180
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Force [N]
Time [s]
80%/10% - 24h
Figure 5.32:
The force used over time
to cut through the crust of the 80%/10%
BSG from DTU after 24 hours
-20
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Force [N]
Time [s]
80%/10% - 48h
Figure 5.33:
The force used over time
to cut through the crust of the 80%/10%
BSG from DTU after 48 hours
-20
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Force [N]
Time [s]
Control - 14d
Figure 5.34:
The force used over time
to cut through the crust of the control
after 14 days
-20
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Force [N]
Time [s]
100 - 14d
Figure 5.35:
The force used over time
to cut through the crust of the 100%
BSG from Braunstein after 14 days
In Table 5.16 it can be seen that the control was not deemed signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from either of the 50%/10% BSG and 80%/10% BSG after 24 hours in
both peak force and work performed. After 48 hours the control was no longer
similar to the 80%/10% BSG in both parameters. It was also the one containing
the most L-BSG that after 14 days was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control.
A reason why that after 24 hours both the 50%/10% BSG and 80%/10% BSG
were similar to the control, can be that they all took in moisture and got soft.
After 48 hours the 80%/10% BSG, as it had a higher amount of ﬁbres, had taken
up more water and therefore got dryer and harder as the polysaccharides in the
gelatinized starch recrystallises, which could resulte in water migration and
increases in ﬁrmness of the crumb [Kilcast and Subramaniam, 2011]. The same
can be said when looking at data from the crumb where over time the control
starts to look like the others as it reaches the same amount of recrystallised
polysaccharides as the others. After 14 days the control started to show signs
of micro organism, as there were small areas with white. These areas could be
fungus growing. None of the others showed any signs of activity. This was not
investigated further.
57
==PAGE:70==
Table 5.16: Average values for force and work used to cut the crust of breads after
stored for 24 hours, 48 hours and 14 days.
Sample
Force [N]
Work[N/mm]
Control 24 hours
165.7
2132.6
50%/10% 24 hours
183.3β
1980.0β
80%/10% 24 hours
154.8β
1738.5β
Control 48 hours
137.7
1653.1
50%/10% 48 hours
133.5β
1491.1β
80%/10% 48 hours
101.5
1277.1
Control 14 days
116.4
1725.0
50L% 14 days
131.7β
1880.5β
100% 14 days
129.5
2056.2
L=made to resemble DTU. Values marked with an β are deemed not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the control as p > 0.05.
5.3
Dry matter content of crumbs and crusts
The dry matter content was measured to see if there was a diﬀerence in the
water content of the diﬀerent types of bread made. The raw materials from
both DTU and Braunstein were also measured and are illustrated in Figure
5.36. Here it can be seen that the D-BSG from DTU had a higher dry matter
content of 96.8%, where D-BSG from Braunstein was at 94.8%. The wheat ﬂour
had the lowest at 86.3%. The sediment from DTU had the highest content of
dry matter at 12.2% where Braunstein had 9.4%. All of the data from testing
dry matter showed the same which was that the dry matter content did not
change regardless of the amount of D-BSG or L-BSG used. The crusts had a
dry matter content between 76-79% and the crumb in the range 55-58%. It is
only L-BSG from Braunstein that is depicted in Figure 5.37, the rest can be
seen in Appendix A. A reason for that the dry matter content did not change
can be that they bind that same amount of water, even though the doughs with
BSG seems more dry.
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
D-BSG(D)
D-BSG(B)
Sediment[D]
Sediment[B]
Flour
Dry matter content [%]
Figure 5.36:
Dry matter content of
raw materials from DTU and Braun-
stein and wheat ﬂour.
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
Control Crust
50DA% Crust
80DA% Crust
Control Crumb
50DA% Crumb
80DA% Crumb
Dry matter content [%]
Figure 5.37:
Dry matter content of
both the crumb and crust of bread made
with L-BSGDA from Braunstein.
58
==PAGE:71==
5.4
Colour diﬀerences in the crust and crumb of
breads with BSG fractions
For the videometer data the diﬀerences(∆L∗, ∆a∗, ∆b∗and ∆E∗) between the
control and the breads with D-BSG and L-BSG were calculated using Equa-
tion 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 in Section 3.4.4. D-BSG from DTU and Braunstein
was compared to the ﬂour used for the control. The data can be seen in Ta-
ble 5.17. Both of the D-BSG had a negative ∆L∗, which indicates that they
were darker than the wheat ﬂour. They were also both more red and yellow,
compared to the wheat ﬂour. This suggests that when substituting the D-BSG
with ﬂour would give a darker product.
Table 5.17: ∆L∗, ∆a∗, ∆b∗and ∆E∗D-BSG from the DTU brew and D-BSG from
Braunstein.
Sample
∆L∗
∆a∗
∆b∗
∆E∗
D-BSG from DTU%
-41.53
7.59
11.90
43.86
D-BSG from Braunstein
-39.54
6.69
11.72
41.78
D-BSG=dried solid fraction
Every time a measurement was made with the Videometer a picture of
the sample was saved.
To show the diﬀerences between crumbs and crusts
some of these saved pictures can be seen in Figures 5.38 through 5.43. The
accentuated are the control and breads with 15% of D-BSG and 80DA% of
L-BSG from DTU. The red line seen on all the ﬁgures are a mask used to
isolate the desired area of the crust or crumb, to get the L∗, a∗and b∗. The
control in Figure 5.38 contains visual bubbles of trapped air, whereas both the
15%(Figure 5.40) and 80DA%(Figure 5.42) show a more dense crumb with less
bubbles of trapped air. The dense crumb structure and also visibly low volume
correlates with what [Khalid et al., 2017] found in their study. For the crust
one would think that the control would look lightest as the ﬂour had a lighter
colour than the D-BSG but the 15% in Figure 5.41 looked more pale than the
control in Figure 5.39, however the 80DA% had the darkest crust, which can
be related to the high amount of sugars found in L-BSG from DTU.
59
==PAGE:72==
Figure 5.42:
A picture taken by the
Videometer of the 80DA% L-BSG. The
red line is used to isolate the crumb.
Figure 5.43:
A picture taken by the
Videometer of the 80DA% L-BSG. The
red line is used to isolate the crust.
Darker areas occur from Maillard reac-
tions.
Figure 5.38:
A picture taken by the
Videometer of the control. The red line
is used to isolate the crumb
Figure 5.39:
A picture taken by the
Videometer of the control. The red line
is used to isolate the crust
Figure 5.40:
A picture taken by the
Videometer of the 15% D-BSG. The red
line is used to isolate the crumb
Figure 5.41:
A picture taken by the
Videometer of the 15% D-BSG. The red
line is used to isolate the crust.
60
==PAGE:73==
All the data from the Videometer was held up against the control as a
standard. When ﬁrst looking at the color of the crust with BSG from DTU
seen in Table 5.18, all the crusts had a negative ∆L∗, which refers to a darker
colour. The darkest one in regard to the control was the crust of 80DA% with
a diﬀerence of -15.3 from the control.
This darkness can be related to the
amount of sugar in the L-BSG as the sugars are a part of the Maillard reaction.
In general the crusts with L-BSG had a more dark colour than the control.
When looking at the ∆E∗, the biggest colour diﬀerence was seen in the crust
of 80DA% L-BSG and this might be due to the amount of sugars causing the
Maillard reaction to be more prominent. The crust with the colour closest to
the control, was the 10% of D-BSG. This might be because the D-BSG, does
not contain the amount of sugars the L-BSG does, and therefore the presence
of the Maillard reaction was not visible in the same amount. It looks like crusts
with both L-BSG and D-BSG somehow inhibits or cancels out the Maillard
reactions.
Table 5.18: Values for the crust colours of the breads where the BSG from the DTU
was used. Values are viewed in the L∗a∗b∗colour space.
Sample
∆L∗
∆a∗
∆b∗
∆E∗
10%
-3.24
-2.43
-4.87
6.34
15%
-5.79
-2.23
-5.81
8.45
50DN%
-12.31
2.06
-3.87
13.06
80DN%
-12.93
1.99
-4.22
13.75
50DA%
-11.35
1.46
-4.30
12.22
80DA%
-15.27
1.57
-6.32
16.60
50%/10%
-13.5
0.026
-6.86
15.2
80%/10%
-12.49
-0.44
-6.06
13.89
DA=Dry matter content taken into account, DN=dry matter content not taken into
account.
The colours of the crust for the Braunstein BSG, can be seen in Table 5.19.
The ∆L∗for the crusts showed an higher darkness than the control, as for the
crusts with BSG from DTU. However the diﬀerence was not as big between
the control and the crusts with BSG from Braunstein, this can because L-BSG
from Braunstein contains a lower concentration of sugars than the L-BSG from
DTU. The darkest one was the 50L% L-BSG with a diﬀerence at -4.98 and the
least dark was the 80DA% L-BSG with a diﬀerence at -2.3.
The ∆E∗was generally lower for the crusts with BSG from Braunstein when
compared to the ∆E∗for the crusts from DTU. The one with the lowest colour
diﬀerence was the 80DA% L-BSG and the biggest diﬀerence was seen in the
15% D-BSG.
61
==PAGE:74==
Table 5.19: Values for the crust colours of the breads where the BSG from the
Braunstein was used. Values are viewed in the L∗a∗b∗colour space.
Sample
∆L∗
∆a∗
∆b∗
∆E∗
10%
-3.21
-2.30
-5.00
6.38
15%
-3.09
-3.87
-7.66
9.12
50DA%
-3.72
0.74
-0.37
3.81
80DA%
-2.30
-0.17
-1.01
2.52
50L%
-4.98
0.08
-2.21
5.45
100%
-4.78
-0.40
-2.55
5.43
50%/10%
-4.15
-2.81
-5.67
7.57
80%/10%
-4.07
-3.37
-6.15
8.11
DA=Dry matter content taken into account, L=made to resemble DTU.
The data for the crumbs with BSG from DTU are presented in Table 5.20.
All the crumbs were darker than the control which is caused by the darker
colour of the BSG. The darkest crumbs were the ones where the D-BSG was
incorporated. This might be because that the D-BSG was darker than the ﬂour
used. The darkest crumb was seen for the 80%/10% BSG with a diﬀerence at
-17.13. The reason why it was darker than the 15% can be that the L-BSG also
had a brownish colour which added to a darker hue.
The greatest overall colour diﬀerence was found for the 80%/10% BSG at
19.1, where the 50DN% L-BSG had the colour most similar to the control with a
diﬀerence at 3.9. It can also be seen that the L-BSG adds to the colour diﬀerence
as the 50DA% L-BSG and 80DA% L-BSG had a higher colour diﬀerence to the
control compared to the 50DN% L-BSG and 80DN% L-BSG, as some of the
ﬂour was removed to make up for the dry matter content in the L-BSG.
Table 5.20: Values for the colours of the crumbs where BSG from DTU was used.
Sample
∆L∗
∆a∗
∆b∗
∆E∗
10%
-15.52
2.61
-3.11
16.04
15%
-15.51
2.51
-3.20
16.03
50DN%
-3.43
0.05
-1.78
3.86
80DN%
-4.73
0.32
-1.77
5.06
50DA%
-7.41
0.24
-2.48
7.82
80DA%
-7.42
0.49
-2.62
7.88
50%/10%
-17.13
2.71
-2.63
17.54
80%/10%
-18.64
2.80
-2.76
19.05
DA=Dry matter content taken into account, DN=dry matter content not taken into
account.
The crumbs with the Braunstein BSG were all darker than the control. The
darkest was the crumb with 80%/10% BSG which was the same for crumbs
62
==PAGE:75==
Table 5.21: Values for the colours of the crumb of the breads where BSG from
Braunstein was used.
Sample
∆L∗
∆a∗
∆b∗
∆E∗
10%
-15.36
2.50
-4.10
16.09
15%
-18.10
3.00
-4.27
18.84
50DA%
-5.18
0.73
-2.0
5.6
80DA%
-5.94
0.99
-2.16
6.4
50L%
-8.55
1.38
-2.21
8.94
100%
-10.01
1.84
-1.72
10.32
50%/10%
-17.79
3.06
-3.69
18.42
80%/10%
-18.93
3.22
-3.31
19.49
DA=Dry matter content taken into account, L=made to resemble DTU.
from DTU, though the value for Braunstein was a bit higher at -18.93 as seen
in Table 5.21.
When looking at the overall diﬀerence in colour the most diﬀerent from the
control was the crumb with both 80%/10% BSG with a diﬀerence at 19.5 and
the one closest to the control was 50DA% L-BSG which also applied to the
crumb from DTU using 50DN%.
5.5
Expansion rate of dough development
A 3D surface imaging experiment was conducted to see if there would be a mea-
surable diﬀerence in how much the dough raised in regard to what ingredients
were in it. Two rounds of experiments were made: one using the D-BSG from
DTU and another with both the D-BSG and L-BSG from DTU. A picture of
each setup can be seen in Figure 5.44 and 5.45. In the ﬁrst round the dough
was weighed and put on the black background and in the second round of ex-
periments the dough was pressed ﬂat to avoid any areas, where the 3D scanner
could not measure. This was done to minimize irregular shapes which could
create shadows and hinder exact measurement to the changes the dough over
time.
Figure 5.44:
The not compressed con-
trol before raising.
Figure 5.45:
The compressed control
before raising.
63
==PAGE:76==
The data from the 3D scanner is how much the dough changed in volume
in percentage, where 100% is the start value. A graph from each type of dough
from each of the experiments can be seen in Figure 5.46. The experiments where
the dough was not pressed showed a bigger change in volume and they all curve
slightly at the end.
This could mean that they were reaching a maximum
expansion rate or that the expansion rate slowly decreases over time as the
yeast did not have enough sugar to make more CO2. The 10% D-BSG and
15% D-BSG follow the same rate as the control but they reach a somewhat
stationary phase before the control, which can be related to less sugar due to
the D-BSG substituting out the wheat ﬂour.
 100
 110
 120
 130
 140
 150
 160
 170
 180
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
Volume [%]
Time [min]
Control
10%%
15%%
Figure 5.46:
The expansion of vol-
ume in percent over time for the not
compressed samples 10% D-BSG, 15%
DBSG, and the control.
 100
 105
 110
 115
 120
 125
 130
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
Volume [%]
Time [min]
Control
50%%/10%%
80%%/10%%
Figure 5.47:
The expansion of vol-
ume
in
percent
over
time
for
the
compressed samples 50%/10% BSG,
80%/10% BSG, and the control
The second experiment in Figure 5.47, did not reach the same expansion
in volume. The measurements did not show the same curve at the end as in
the other experiment. This can indicate that they were not done raising after
the one hour of prooﬁng, as the L-BSG have more sugar that the yeast can
use to produce more CO2. The diﬀerence in volume expansion can be that the
dough which was not compressed had a larger surface area and thereby had a
higher increase in the area that was measured, whereas the compressed had a
ﬂat surface area and thereby a lower area which could expand as a sphere have
a larger surface area than a cylinder.
Table 5.22: Values for the from the 3D scanning of the control, 10%, and 15%
D-BSG from DTU where the dough was not pressed.
Sample
Average expansion rate[%/min]
Maximum expansion rate[%/min]
Control%
1.27
1.98
10%
1.08
1.55
15%
0.94
1.62
First a average expansion rate was found by taking the diﬀerence in percent
and divide it by the time used. Thereafter a maximum expansion rate was
estimated. To ﬁnd the maximum expansion rate, a third degree polynomial
64
==PAGE:77==
was ﬁtted to the curve, as this had the highest accuracy in regards to the
R2. The equations from the ﬁtting were diﬀerentiated to ﬁnd the maximum
slope and thereby the maximum expansion rate. The results are represented in
Table 5.22 and 5.23
Table 5.23: Values for the from the 3D scanning of the control, 50%/10%, and
80%/10% BSG from DTU where the dough was pressed.
Sample
Average expansion rate[%/min]
Maximum expansion rate[%/min]
Control%
0.55
1.02
50%/10%
0.31
0.76
80%/10%
0.28
0.70
For both the experiments the control showed both the highest value in av-
erage expansion rate and also the maximum expansion rate. The BSG hinders
the development of the gluten network together with that the dough was dryer
and therefore it could be harder for the dough to expand. The more BSG added
to the dough the lower the average expansion rate becomes except for the 15%
D-BSG, the maximum expansion rate was higher than that of the 10% D-BSG.
The texture analyses showed that there were a big diﬀerence between days
when looking at the dough, even though the exact same type of dough was
produced. Within the same day, the same type of dough could show diﬀerence
in measurements. This was also evident in the standard deviations. The general
trends for the ANOVA tests for the average of all three days showed almost
the same, as the ANOVA tests for each day. The two types of TPAs used,
had diﬀerent outcomes when the doughs were compared to the control. The
main concern with the TPAW was that the extra weight from the lid, used to
exclude the interference of the adhesiveness, could give a wrong picture of the
parameters. When the TPAWOL was used on doughs it generally showed a
higher similarity to the control than when using the TPAW.
The substitution of ﬂour with the D-BSG from both Braunstein and DTU
resulted in signiﬁcant diﬀerence when testing with TPAW between the doughs
when compared to the control. The TPAWOL showed that the 10% was not
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control for when using D-BSG from Braunstein
and both 10% and 15% with D-BSG from DTU were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent.
The exact same was seen when both L-BSG and D-BSG was used.The DTU
had both 50%/10% and 80%/10% similar to the control and Braunstein only
the 50%/10%, in cohesiveness. All of the parameters from the TPAs on breads
with BSG were held up against the control and it was therefore not considered
whether or not a sensory panel would prefer the breads containing BSG rather
than the control.
The crumbs with 10% of D-BSG from Braunstein showed the highest sim-
ilarity to the control, whereas it was both the 50%/10% and 80%/10% with
L-BSG and D-BSG from DTU.
The crust with 50DA% and 80DA% from both DTU and Braunstein were
65
==PAGE:78==
not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control regarding the force need to break
through the crust. The work through the crust, the 50DA% from DTU was the
one similar to the control.
Storing the breads for 24 hours, 48 hours, and 14 days showed that it was
only the 80%/10% after 48 that had a similar crumb to the control together
with 50L% after 14 days. The crust after 24 hours and 48 hours the 50%/10%
was still not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control, and the 50L% was still
similar to the control after 14 days
66
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6
General discussion
The analyses of the brewers’ spent grain from DTU and Braunstein uncovered
many diﬀerences. One of the main diﬀerences was the sugar content measure.
The spent grain from DTU showed a higher amount of sugar than Braunstein
which can be related to the utilization of the malt during mashing and lautering.
The total phenolic content of the spent grain from DTU was higher, which
can be due to the fact that the spent grain from Braunstein was not pressed
directly after the mashing step and thereby some of the components could have
degraded.
The amount of sugars in the liquid fraction of the spent grain from DTU
and Braunstein impacts the dough in diﬀerent ways.
One of the ways are
by helping the development of the dough by providing nutrition to the yeast,
and thus resulting in a higher production of CO2, to be trapped in the gluten
network. The dietary ﬁbres also competes for the water in the dough, which
could give a harder and more resilient dough.
The amount of sugar in the liquid fraction also had an impact on the colour
of the crust, since sugars are a part of the production of melanoids through the
Maillard reaction. Furthermore, the sugar can change the taste of the bread by
adding sweetness or enhancing other tastes and ﬂavours. It was visible that the
higher sugar content in the liquid fraction from DTU gave a much darker and
crispier crust than when the liquid fraction from Braunstein was used. However,
they both seemed to develop a dough with a similar crumb. The concentration
of proteins were relatively low in the liquid fraction and it did not seem to aﬀect
the development of the dough. A reason for this could be that it did not dilute
the gluten proteins.
The use of both fractions in the same dough almost had the same outcome
as dough with only the dried solid fraction. The dried solid fraction masks
the positive impact of the liquid fraction in dough.
This masking could be
related to the fact that the dried solid fraction had a 10% higher dry matter
content than the ﬂour. The higher dry matter content together with a higher
amount of proteins can lead to a higher competition for water. This results in
a weaker gluten network since the gluten proteins are diluted and might not
be provided with enough water [Stojceska, 2011]. The amount of sugars in the
liquid fraction from DTU could also have a negative eﬀect on the dough. Sugars
67
==PAGE:80==
also in compete for water and thus leaves even less water to develop a gluten
network [Pareyt et al., 2009]. The bread with a mix of liquid and solid fractions
from DTU had the highest similarity to the control. This could be due to the
fact that the amount of sugar in the liquid fraction had a positive inﬂuence on
the yeasts’ production of CO2 and that amount of dietary ﬁbres takes up more
water, and give a softer crumb.
The impact that the amount of phenols had was not observed as the bread
was not evaluated by a sensory panel. Nevertheless there was an indication of
antimicrobial eﬀects on the bread by the phenols, as only the control showed
microbial growth after 14 days.
The dry matter content did not change signiﬁcantly when adding spent grain
even though with the dried solid fraction had a higher dry matter content than
the ﬂour. It did not seem to aﬀect the dry matter content in any of the crusts or
crumbs even though the dough was drier than the control when handled. This
can be due to the dietary ﬁbres in the dried solid fraction binds more water
than the ﬂour, and thereby making up for the diﬀerence in water content when
baked.
The colour of the dried solid fraction from DTU and Braunstein were both
darker than the ﬂour. This is because barley makes for a darker colour ﬂour and
that the kilning during malting makes the grain darker. The darkest crumbs
were the ones containing the dried solid fraction, which relates back to that the
dried solid fraction had a darker colour than the ﬂour. The darkest crust was
seen when the liquid fraction from DTU was used, which was caused by the high
amount of sugars which leads to a higher production of melanoids [Wang et al.,
2011]. The higher production of melanoids gives the crust a more dark and
brown surface. The diﬀerence compared to the control in darkness of crusts with
an added liquid fraction from Braunstein was lower due to the lower amount of
sugars present. When the fractions from DTU were used together, the colour of
the crust was lighter than if only liquid fraction was used. This could be caused
by the lower amount of water available for the Maillard reaction [Skibsted et al.,
2010]. The darkness of the spent grain gives the bread a feeling of being whole-
grain and healthy.
The 3D scanning of the raising dough showed a higher average and maximum
expansion rate for the control than the other, whether or not of the doughs
were compressed. This might be because the spent grain inﬂuenced the gluten
network either by taking the water from the protein and starch or by physically
inhibiting the network from forming.
68
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The investigation of the fractionated brewers’ spent grain from DTU and Braun-
stein revealed a diﬀerence in sugar, phenolic and protein content. These dif-
ferences had an impact on the characteristics of the doughs compared to the
control. The substitution of the dried solid fraction from the spent grain with
regular wheat ﬂour resulted in a less developed gluten network, and a lower
amount of gas bubbles were retained in it. The under developed gluten net-
work was most likely caused by a dilution of the gliadin protein. Less water
were available for the hydration of the gluten and starch, as the ﬁbres and other
proteins also competes for the water. The approximately 10% diﬀerence in dry
matter content between wheat ﬂour and the dried spent grain could also have
aﬀected the amount of water available for the gluten proteins. The dough be-
came harder, more resilient, and more chewy than the control. The same was
observed for the crumb.
The doughs with an added liquid fraction showed the highest similarity to
the control. This was even though some of the ﬂour was removed and thereby
some of the gluten proteins. The dough still showed the same trend as with the
dried spent grain: a harder, more resilient, and chewier dough. A higher amount
of sugars were present when adding the liquid fraction of the spent grain to the
dough instead of water. This higher amount gave more nutrition to the yeast
and thereby more CO2 could be produced and trapped in the gluten network,
and thereby make up for the less ﬂour. The sugar content also inﬂuenced the
production of melanoids which resulted in a darker and more crisp crust of the
bread.
Hardness, resilience, and chewiness when both of the fractions were added
to the dough were the same as for doughs with only the dried solid fraction.
The dark colour of the crust when using the liquid fraction from DTU was
reduced when a mix of the dried solid fraction from DTU was introduced. The
dried solid fraction could have inﬂuenced the Maillard reaction as less water
were present.
The addition of the dried solid fraction to a wheat dough also negatively
inﬂuenced the expansion rate of the dough. The gluten proteins were diluted
and not hydrated enough to build a strong network to trap gas bubbles produced
by the yeast.
69
==PAGE:82==
70
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 8
Future work
There are still a lot to investigate into how pressed and fractionated BSG af-
fects wheat dough and to determine in which quantities and ratios gives the
best result A very simple recipe for the control dough was used in this project
which could make it hard to compare the ﬁndings to commercially baked bread.
Therefore an investigation with another type of reference dough could be used,
which could include sugar, fat, milk, enzymes or other ingredients which could
improve the use of BSG in bread. It could also be that the control should have
been made with either only whole-grain wheat ﬂour or as a mix of regular wheat
ﬂour and whole-grain wheat ﬂour.
The treatment of the solid and liquid fraction after pressing is interesting
as this could eﬀect the production of dough. The solid fraction could be tested
with diﬀerent drying methods and the degree of drying and thereby try and
make it easier to substitute it with ﬂour. A diﬀerent milling method and level
of milling could impact the dough in another way, as some found that ﬁner
milled BSG had a more negative eﬀect than coarser milled BSG [Öztürk et al.,
2002]. The liquid fraction could be tested by removing diﬀerent amounts of
water from.
A diﬀerent approach to this project could be to try and optimise a recipe
with BSG, in regard to mixing, prooﬁng time, prooﬁng temperature, oven tem-
perature and time, test it with a sensory panel and thereby try to make a
product that could be sold in stores.
The addition of BSG to bread changes the sensory characteristics of the
bread such as colour, smell, taste and mouth feel.
These changes could be
investigated by either using a trained panel to characterise speciﬁc changes or a
consumer panel to knowledge into how consumers would react to the product.
The two fractions of BSG could also be tested in other products than a
wheat based bread such as the Danish rye bread or crispbread. The taste of
BSG might suit this type of product better as the BSG gives a feeling of whole
grain and more healthy look to a product which people might not be looking
for, when bying a wheat based product. It is also important to know how the
BSG is when used in commercial production as the BSG might give some new
issues in comparison with other whole-grain products.
For BSG to be used in bread, a way to implement treatment of it at the
71
==PAGE:84==
breweries is needed, as the BSG spoil very easy. At this time the BSG is just
left in big containers which are not food graded together with that they are out
in the open and not in a closed system.
72
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[Abdel-Aal and Rabalski, 2013] Abdel-Aal, E.-S. M. and Rabalski, I. (2013).
Eﬀect of baking on free and bound phenolic acids in wholegrain bakery prod-
ucts. Journal of Cereal Science, 57(3):312–318.
[Acidpedia.org, 2018] Acidpedia.org (2018).
http://acidpedia.org/formic_
acid/. [Online; accessed 4-February-2018].
[Acosta-Estrada et al., 2014] Acosta-Estrada, B. A., Gutiérrez-Uribe, J. A.,
and Serna-Saldívar, S. O. (2014). Bound phenolics in foods, a review. Food
Chemistry, 152:46–55.
[Adobe, 2018] Adobe (2018).
http://dba.med.sc.edu/price/irf/Adobe_tg/
models/cielab.html. [Online; accessed 4-February-2018].
[Al-Attabi et al., 2017] Al-Attabi, Z. H., Merghani, T. M., Ali, A., and Rah-
man, M. S. (2017). Eﬀect of barley ﬂour addition on the physico-chemical
properties of dough and structure of bread. Journal of Cereal Science, 75:61–
68.
[Almeida et al., 2013] Almeida, E. L., Chang, Y. K., and Steel, C. J. (2013).
Dietary ﬁbre sources in bread: Inﬂuence on technological quality. LWT -
Food Science and Technology, 50(2):545–553.
[Analytik Ltd., 2018] Analytik Ltd. (2018). http://analytik.co.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/10/VL3-Schematic.jpg. [Online; accessed 4-February-2018].
[Arendt and Zannini, 2013] Arendt, E. and Zannini, E. (2013). Cereal grains
for the food and beverage industries. Woodhead Pub.
[Autio and Laurikainen, 1997] Autio, K. and Laurikainen, T. (1997). Relation-
ships between ﬂour/dough microstructure and dough handling and baking
properties. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 8(6):181–185.
[Benyoucef et al., 2013] Benyoucef, N., Cheikh, A., Drouiche, N., Lounici, H.,
Mameri, N., and Abdi, N. (2013).
Denitriﬁcation of groundwater using
brewer’s spent grain as bioﬁlter media. Ecological Engineering, 52:70–74.
[Biosyn, 2018] Biosyn
(2018).
http://www.biosyn.com/tew/
The-Maillard-reaction-and-Amadori-rearrangement.aspx.
[Online;
ac-
cessed 4-February-2018].
73
==PAGE:86==
[Britannica, 2018a] Britannica (2018a).
https://www.britannica.com/topic/
baking/The-sponge-and-dough-method. [Online; accessed 4-February-2018].
[Britannica, 2018b] Britannica (2018b).
https://www.britannica.com/topic/
baking/Flour#ref501365. [Online; accessed 4-February-2018].
[Britannica.com, 2018] Britannica.com (2018).
https://www.britannica.com/
science/globulin. [Online; accessed 14-January-2018].
[Bsgcraftbrewing.com, 2017] Bsgcraftbrewing.com
(2017).
https://www.
bsgcraftbrewing.com/weyermann-pilsner-25-kg.
[Online;
accessed
14-
January-2018].
[Buchi, 2018] Buchi
(2018).
https://static1.buchi.com/sites/default/ﬁles/
downloads/PO_nitrogen_Protein_determination_A0_en.pdf. [Online; ac-
cessed 4-February-2018].
[Cappa and Alamprese, 2017] Cappa, C. and Alamprese, C. (2017). Brewer’s
spent grain valorization in ﬁber-enriched fresh egg pasta production: Mod-
elling and optimization study. LWT - Food Science and Technology, 82:464–
470.
[Cauvain, 2012] Cauvain, S. P. (2012). Breadmaking - Improving quality. Wood-
head Publishing, 2 edition.
[Colgrave et al., 2011] Colgrave, M. L., Goswami, H., Howitt, C. A., and Tan-
ner, G. J. (2011). What is in a beer? proteomic characterization and relative
quantiﬁcation of hordein (gluten) in beer. Journal of Proteome Research,
11(1):386–396.
[Coultate, 2009] Coultate, T. (2009). Food. Royal Society of Chemistry.
[Cukier de Aquino et al., 2012] Cukier de Aquino, V., Converti, A., Perego, P.,
and Caetano da Silva Lannes, S. (2012). Leavening bread dough. Current
Nutrition and Food Science, 8(2):131–138.
[Cummins, 2005] Cummins, E. J. (2005). Emerging technologies in meat pro-
cessing. Academic Press.
[Dacoﬁ, 2014] Dacoﬁ(2014). http://www.dacoﬁ.com/technology/. [Online; ac-
cessed 4-February-2018].
[De Gobba et al., 2016] De Gobba, C., Olsen, K., and Skibsted, L. H. (2016).
Components of wheat ﬂour as activator of commercial enzymes for bread
improvement. European Food Research and Technology, 242(10):1647–1654.
[Dreese and Hoseney, 2018] Dreese, P. C. and Hoseney, R. C. (2018). Baking
properties of the bran fraction from brewer’s spent grain. Cereal chemistry,
59(2):89–91.
[Esslinger, 2009] Esslinger, H. M. (2009). Handbook of brewing. Wiley-VCH.
74
==PAGE:87==
[García et al., 2017] García, A., Spigno, G., and Labidi, J. (2017). Antioxidant
and biocide behaviour of lignin fractions from apple tree pruning residues.
Industrial Crops and Products, 104:242–252.
[Geng, 2011] Geng, J. (2011). Structured-light 3d surface imaging: a tutorial.
Advances in Optics and Photonics, 3(2):128.
[Georgé et al., 2005] Georgé, S., Brat, P., Alter, P., and Amiot, M. J. (2005).
Rapid determination of polyphenols and vitamin c in plant-derived products.
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 53(5):1370–1373.
[Gupta et al., 2010] Gupta, M., Abu-Ghannam, N., and Gallaghar, E. (2010).
Barley for brewing: Characteristic changes during malting, brewing and ap-
plications of its by-products. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and
Food Safety, 9(3):318–328.
[Hartikainen and Katina, 2012] Hartikainen, K. and Katina, K. (2012).
Im-
proving the quality of high-ﬁbre breads. Breadmaking, pages 736–753.
[Ikram et al., 2017] Ikram, S., Huang, L., Zhang, H., Wang, J., and Yin, M.
(2017). Composition and nutrient value proposition of brewers spent grain.
Journal of Food Science, 82(10):2232–2242.
[Jay et al., 2008] Jay, A. J., Parker, M. L., Faulks, R., Husband, F., Wilde, P.,
Smith, A. C., Faulds, C. B., and Waldron, K. W. (2008). A systematic micro-
dissection of brewers spent grain. Journal of Cereal Science, 47(2):357–364.
[Khalid et al., 2017] Khalid, K. H., Ohm, J.-B., and Simsek, S. (2017). Whole
wheat bread: Eﬀect of bran fractions on dough and end-product quality.
Journal of Cereal Science, 78:48–56.
[Kielberg and Rasmussen, 2012] Kielberg, V. and Rasmussen, L. (2012). Pro-
teiner. Gyldendal.
[Kilcast and Subramaniam, 2011] Kilcast, D. and Subramaniam, P. (2011).
Food and beverage stability and shelf life. Woodhead Pub.
[Koletta et al., 2014] Koletta, P., Irakli, M., Papageorgiou, M., and Skendi,
A. (2014). Physicochemical and technological properties of highly enriched
wheat breads with wholegrain non wheat ﬂours. Journal of Cereal Science,
60(3):561–568.
[Ktenioudaki et al., 2015] Ktenioudaki, A., Alvarez-Jubete, L., Smyth, T. J.,
Kilcawley, K., Rai, D. K., and Gallagher, E. (2015).
Application of bio-
processing techniques (sourdough fermentation and technological aids) for
brewer’s spent grain breads. Food Research International, 73:107–116.
[Ktenioudaki et al., 2013] Ktenioudaki, A., Crofton, E., Scannell, A. G., Han-
non, J. A., Kilcawley, K. N., and Gallagher, E. (2013). Sensory properties
and aromatic composition of baked snacks containing brewer’s spent grain.
Journal of Cereal Science, 57(3):384–390.
75
==PAGE:88==
[Linko et al., 1984] Linko, P., Härkönen, H., and Linko, Y.-Y. (1984). Eﬀects of
sodium chloride in the processing of bread baked from wheat, rye and barley
ﬂours. Journal of Cereal Science, 2(1):53–62.
[Lu and Gibb, 2008] Lu,
S. and Gibb,
S. W. (2008).
Copper removal
from wastewater using spent-grain as biosorbent. Bioresource Technology,
99(6):1509–1517.
[Lynch et al., 2016] Lynch, K. M., Steﬀen, E. J., and Arendt, E. K. (2016).
Brewers’ spent grain: a review with an emphasis on food and health. Journal
of the Institute of Brewing, 122(4):553–568.
[Maltbazaren.dk, 2017] Maltbazaren.dk (2017).
maltbazaren.
https://www.
maltbazaren.dk/shop/fuglsang-pilsner-malt-1536p.html. [Online; accessed 4-
February-2018].
[Manley, 2011] Manley, D. (2011). Technology of Biscuits, Crackers and Cook-
ies. Woodhead Pub, 4 edition.
[Mariotti et al., 2014] Mariotti, M., Garofalo, C., Aquilanti, L., Osimani, A.,
Fongaro, L., Tavoletti, S., Hager, A.-S., and Clementi, F. (2014). Barley
ﬂour exploitation in sourdough bread-making: A technological, nutritional
and sensory evaluation. LWT - Food Science and Technology, 59(2):973–980.
[McGee, 2004] McGee, H. (2004). On food and cooking. Scribner.
[Meister, 2016] Meister,
M.
(2016).
http://www.food.dtu.dk/english/
news/2016/12/making-a-proﬁt-from-brewery-waste-streams?id=
9c6d10b9-b477-4e81-9de6-8dd87f887153.
[Online;
accessed 4-February-
2018].
[Michniewicz et al., 1992] Michniewicz, J., Biliaderis, G., and Bushuk, W.
(1992). Eﬀect of added pentosans on some properties of wheat bread. Food
Chemistry, 43(4):251–257.
[Mussatto et al., 2006] Mussatto, S., Dragone, G., and Roberto, I. (2006).
Brewers’ spent grain: generation, characteristics and potential applications.
Journal of Cereal Science, 43(1):1–14.
[Mussatto et al., 2007] Mussatto, S., Dragone, G., and Roberto, I. (2007). Fer-
ulic and p-coumaric acids extraction by alkaline hydrolysis of brewer’s spent
grain. Industrial Crops and Products, 25(2):231–237.
[National barley foods council, 2018] National barley foods council (2018).
http://www.barleyfoods.org/article-12-2004-2.html.
[Online; accessed 1-
February-2018].
[Newton et al., 2012] Newton, A. E., Fairbanks, A. J., Golding, M., Andrewes,
P., and Gerrard, J. A. (2012).
The role of the maillard reaction in the
formation of ﬂavour compounds in dairy products - not only a deleterious
reaction but also a rich source of ﬂavour compounds. Food and Function,
3(12):1231.
76
==PAGE:89==
[Pareyt et al., 2009] Pareyt, B., Brijs, K., and Delcour, J. A. (2009). Sugar-
snap cookie dough setting: The impact of sucrose on gluten functionality.
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 57(17):7814–7818.
[Peighambardoust et al., 2010] Peighambardoust, S., Fallah, E., Hamer, R.,
and van der Goot, A. (2010). Aeration of bread dough inﬂuenced by dif-
ferent way of processing. Journal of Cereal Science, 51(1):89–95.
[Plaza et al., 2017] Plaza, P. E., Gallego-Morales, L. J., Peñuela-Vásquez, M.,
Lucas, S., García-Cubero, M. T., and Coca, M. (2017).
Biobutanol pro-
duction from brewer’s spent grain hydrolysates by Clostridium beijerinckii.
Bioresource Technology, 244:166–174.
[Prentice and D’appolonia, 1977] Prentice, N. and D’appolonia, B. (1977).
High-ﬁber bread containing brewer’s spent grain. Cereal chemistry, 54:1084–
1095.
[Razavizadegan Jahromi et al., 2013] Razavizadegan
Jahromi,
S.
H.,
Tabatabaee Yazdi, F., Karimi, M., and Mortazavi, S. A. (2013).
Bread-
making process optimization:
Staling kinetics,
relationship of batter
rheology, shelf life, quality and sensory characteristics of barbari bread.
Journal of Food Processing and Preservation, 38(4):1447–1460.
[Sabeena Farvin and Jacobsen, 2013] Sabeena Farvin, K. and Jacobsen, C.
(2013). Phenolic compounds and antioxidant activities of selected species
of seaweeds from danish coast. Food Chemistry, 138(2-3):1670–1681.
[Santos et al., 2003] Santos, M., Jiménez, J., Bartolomé, B., Gómez-Cordovés,
C., and del Nozal, M. (2003). Variability of brewer’s spent grain within a
brewery. Food Chemistry, 80(1):17–21.
[Sciprose, 2018] Sciprose
(2018).
http://sciprose.blogspot.dk/2014/04/
keep-your-fad-diets-out-of-my-body-and.html. [Online; accessed 4-February-
2018].
[Sensing, 2018] Sensing,
K.
(2018).
Identifying
color
diﬀerences
using
l*a*b*
or
l*c*h*
coordinates.
https://sensing.konicaminolta.us/blog/
identifying-color-diﬀerences-using-l-a-b-or-l-c-h-coordinates/.
[Online; ac-
cessed 4-February-2018].
[Shipar, 2011] Shipar, M. A. H. (2011). Dft studies on fructose and glycine
maillard reaction: Formation of the heyns rearrangement products in the
initial stage. Journal of the Iranian Chemical Society, 8(2):433–448.
[Silow et al., 2016] Silow, C., Axel, C., Zannini, E., and Arendt, E. K. (2016).
Current status of salt reduction in bread and bakery products – a review.
Journal of Cereal Science, 72:135–145.
[Skibsted et al., 2010] Skibsted, L. H., Risbo, J., and Andersen, M. L. (2010).
Chemical deterioration and physical instability of food and beverages. Wood-
head Pub.
77
==PAGE:90==
[Spinelli et al., 2016] Spinelli, S., Conte, A., and Del Nobile, M. A. (2016).
Microencapsulation of extracted bioactive compounds from brewer’s spent
grain to enrich ﬁsh-burgers. Food and Bioproducts Processing, 100:450–456.
[Statista, 2018] Statista (2018).
2016 statistic 2018.
https://www.statista.
com/statistics/270275/worldwide-beer-production/.
[Online; accessed 4-
February-2018].
[Steinmacher et al., 2012] Steinmacher, N. C., Honna, F. A., Gasparetto, A. V.,
Anibal, D., and Grossmann, M. V. (2012). Bioconversion of brewer’s spent
grains by reactive extrusion and their application in bread-making. LWT -
Food Science and Technology, 46(2):542–547.
[Stojceska, 2011] Stojceska, V. (2011). Dietary ﬁber from brewer’s spent grain
as a functional ingredient in bread making technology. Flour and Breads and
their Fortiﬁcation in Health and Disease Prevention, pages 171–181.
[Stojceska et al., 2008] Stojceska,
V.,
Ainsworth,
P.,
Plunkett,
A.,
and
Ibanog?lu, S. (2008). The recycling of brewer’s processing by-product into
ready-to-eat snacks using extrusion technology. Journal of Cereal Science,
47(3):469–479.
[Stojceska and Ainsworth, 2008] Stojceska, V.-t. and Ainsworth, P. (2008).
The eﬀect of diﬀerent enzymes on the quality of high-ﬁbre enriched brewer’s
spent grain breads. Food Chemistry, 110(4):865–872.
[Texture Technologies Corp., 2017] Texture Technologies Corp. (2017). http://
texturetechnologies.com/resources/texture-proﬁle-analysis#overview.
[On-
line; accessed 4-February-2018].
[Thermo Scientiﬁc, 2018] Thermo
Scientiﬁc
(2018).
https://
assets.thermoﬁsher.com/TFS-Assets/LSG/manuals/MAN0011203_
CoomassiePlus_Bradford_Asy_UG.pdf.
[Online;
accessed 4-February-
2018].
[Trinh et al., 2014] Trinh, L., Lowe, T., Campbell, G., Withers, P., and Martin,
P. (2014). Eﬀect of sugar on bread dough aeration during mixing. Journal
of Food Engineering, 150:9–18.
[Varimixer, 2018] Varimixer (2018). http://varimixer.com/downloads/. [On-
line; accessed 4-February-2018].
[Velp Scientiﬁca, 2017] Velp Scientiﬁca (2017).
http://www.velp.com/en/
service_support/dumas_nitrogen. [Online; accessed 4-February-2018].
[Videometer A/S, 2018] Videometer
A/S
(2018).
http://videometerlab.
videometer.com/Portals/0/Brochures/VideometerLab%202.pdf. [Online; ac-
cessed 4-February-2018].
[Wang et al., 2011] Wang, H.-Y., Qian, H., and Yao, W.-R. (2011). Melanoidins
produced by the maillard reaction: Structure and biological activity. Food
Chemistry, 128(3):573–584.
78
==PAGE:91==
[Öztürk et al., 2002] Öztürk, S., Özboy, , Cavidoglu, I., and Köksel, H. (2002).
Eﬀects of brewer’s spent grain on the quality and dietary ﬁbre content of
cookies. Journal of the Institute of Brewing, 108(1):23–27.
79
==PAGE:92==
80
==PAGE:93==
Appendices
81
==PAGE:94==
==PAGE:95==
Appendix A
Dry matter content
The measurements of dry matter content of crust and crumb of bread with BSG
in comparison with the control.
83
==PAGE:96==
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
Control Crust
10% Crust
15% Crust
Control Crumb
10% Crumb
15% Crumb
Dry matter content [%]
Figure A.1:
Dry matter content of both the crumb and crust of bread made with
D-BSG from DTU.
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
Control Crust
50WA% Crust
80WA% Crust
Control Crumb
50WA% Crumb
80WA% Crumb
Dry matter content [%]
Figure A.2:
Dry matter content of both the crumb and crust of bread made with
L-BSGWA from DTU.
84
==PAGE:97==
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
Control Crust
50DA% Crust
80DA% Crust
Control Crumb
50DA% Crumb
80DA% Crumb
Dry matter content [%]
Figure A.3:
Dry matter content of both the crumb and crust of bread made with
L-BSGDA from DTU.
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
Control Crust
50%/10% Crust
80%/10% Crust
Control Crumb
50%/10% Crumb
80%/10% Crumb
Dry matter content [%]
Figure A.4:
Dry matter content of both the crumb and crust of bread made with
L-BSG and D-BSG from DTU.
85
==PAGE:98==
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
Control Crust
10% Crust
15% Crust
Control Crumb
10% Crumb
15% Crumb
Dry matter content [%]
Figure A.5:
Dry matter content of both the crumb and crust of bread made with
D-BSG from Braunstein.
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
Control Crust
50L% Crust
100% Crust
Control Crumb
50L% Crumb
100% Crumb
Dry matter content [%]
Figure A.6:
Dry matter content of both the crumb and crust of bread made with
L-BSG L from Braunstein.
86
==PAGE:99==
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
Control Crust
50%/10% Crust
80%/10% Crust
Control Crumb
50%/10% Crumb
80%/10% Crumb
Dry matter content [%]
Figure A.7:
Dry matter content of both the crumb and crust of bread made with
L-BSG and D-BSG from Braunstein.
87
==PAGE:100==
88
==PAGE:101==
Appendix B
Amino acid proﬁle
Pie charts of amino acid proﬁles on BSG before it is pressed with the Dacoﬁin
Figure B.1 and the liquid BSG after press seen in Figure B.2
Alanine
4.7%
Arginine
5.79%
Glycine
4.38%
Isoleucine
4.47%
Leucine
8.07%
Lysine
4.38%
Methionine sulfone
Hydroxyproline
Histidine
Cysteic acid
6.24%
Phenylalanine
6.02%
Proline
11.46%
Serine
4.69%
Threonine
3.8%
Tyrosine
3.71%
Valine
5.82%
Aspartic acid
6.14%
Glutamic acid
20.14%
Figure B.1: Amino acid proﬁle for the BSG before pressing with the Dacoﬁ
89
==PAGE:102==
Alanine
4.57%
Arginine
5.42%
Glycine
4.18%
Isoleucine
4.47%
Leucine
7.86%
Lysine
4.17%
Methionine sulfone
Histidine
Cysteic acid
5.78%
Phenylalanine
6.10%
Proline
12.16%
Serine
4.68%
Threonine
3.77%
Tyrosine
3.99%
Valine
5.74%
Aspartic acid
6.23%
Glutamic acid
20.89%
Figure B.2: Amino acid proﬁle for the liquid after pressing with the Dacoﬁ
90
