==PAGE:1==
Mining a Developer’s Workﬂow
from IDE Usage
Constantina Ioannou
Kongens Lyngby 2018
MSc-2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Compute
Matematiktorvet, building 303B, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031, Fax +45 4588 1399
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk MSc-2018
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Software developers interact with the Integrated Development Environment
(IDE) by issuing commands that execute various programming tools from source
code formatters to build tools. The aim of this thesis is to collect data on how
developers interact with the IDE while developing software, and to mine devel-
opers’ workﬂow from IDE usage using process mining techniques. To pursue
this goal research was conducted to investigate available IDE and tools. A com-
parison was made based on this research and a promising tool was selected. The
tool was capable of capturing developers’ interactions within IDE. However, it
had some limitations which needed to be overcome to change the perception on
usage data and to determine the requirements for improvement.
The ﬁrst requirement was the enablement of the collection of developers’ in-
teractions within an IDE regarding inﬂuenced ﬁles and the enablement of the
collection of developers’ interactions through their source code. A further re-
quirement was to activate process mining. The desired improvements for the
tool to meet these requirements were designed and implemented. Finally, the
developed software was evaluated throughout a test case scenario which was
given to developers. The methodology to reﬁne the retrieved experimental data
required was illustrated. The results of the methodology revealed an accurate
depiction of developers’ interactions and the analysis proved that mining devel-
opers’ workﬂow through their interactions within IDE is possible.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Abstract
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was carried out at the department of DTU Compute, at the Technical
University of Denmark, in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Computer Science and Engineering.
The goal of this project was to collect data on how developers interact with
an IDE while developing software and to mine developers’ workﬂows from IDE
usage using process mining techniques.
This report describes the project itself and discusses concepts involved. It anal-
yses in detail the software which was selected for expansion and features that
were developed during this project. In the end it presents the results of mining
developers’ interactions according to their IDE usage.
==PAGE:6==
iv
Preface
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
My deepest thanks go to my advisor, Barbara Weber. Throughout these months,
Barbara gave me the freedom for exploring an unknown ﬁeld, challenged my
ﬁndings, and oﬀered valuable advice whenever needed. Barbara taught me the
importance of software methodologies and helped me to evolve my experience
with agile environments: by narrowing down ideas and being selective over the
most feasible ones.
I also thank my co-supervisor Andrea Burattin for his time and feedback. An-
drea shared his knowledge regarding process mining and his questions and sug-
gestions have enabled me to pursue this work from a wider perspective.
Furthermore, I would like to express my gratitude to my family and friends who
showed patience and were supportive during moments of frustrations.
A great thank you to everyone who believed in me! This thesis is dedicated to
my best friend Alexis Charalambous who had a unique developing workﬂow.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Structure of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background and Theory
5
2.1
Integrated Development Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Overview of IDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Interactions within IDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Eclipse IDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Overview of Eclipse
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Plug-in Development in Eclipse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Plugin Availability and Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
The focal plug-in - Rabbit Eclipse
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.1
Overview of Rabbit Eclipse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.2
Architecture of Rabbit Eclipse
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
Process Mining and Disco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4.1
Overview of Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.4.2
Overview of Disco
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Problem Deﬁnition
31
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Design and Implementation
35
4.1
Design for Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.1
Include Timing interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.2
Include Developer’s id . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.3
Include Command categories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Design for Locating command - resource interaction
. . . . . . .
38
4.3
Design for Analyzing Java element interactions . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3.1
Detecting Java element interaction - Design 1 . . . . . . .
43
4.3.2
Detecting Java element interaction - Design 2 . . . . . . .
44
4.3.3
Comparison of Design 1 and Design 2
. . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Process Mining Analysis
49
5.1
Disco Requirements Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
Mining Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3
Results from Disco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3.1
Result 1 - Most Commonly used Commands . . . . . . . .
54
5.3.2
Result 2 - Developers workﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.3.3
Result 3 - Compare Developers workﬂow between two classes 57
5.3.4
Result 4 - Compare Developers workﬂow in a speciﬁc class
60
5.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Conclusion
63
A Appendix 1: Rabbit Eclipse
67
A.1 Commands
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
B Appendix 2
81
B.1
Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B.2
Disco Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Programming is not a way of implementing a solution, but it is a way of think-
ing. This intricate procedure requires a great amount of human memory and
cognition; thus, developers make use of IDEs which are environments responsi-
ble to ease software developing workﬂow. But, would it be possible to develop
huge software only by using a compiler and a code editor? If so, how would
development workﬂow be impacted if IDE did not exist and how long it would
take to develop software?
Developers’ workﬂow without an IDE becomes extremely slow and developers’
eﬃciency is notably decreased. Other remarkable advantages of using IDEs are
listed in [Ver17] and [Tra17].
Nevertheless, it seems that the process of software development has stagnated.
This is since IDEs usually tend to overload developers by providing a consid-
erable number of tools which result in a chaotic state as studies have shown
[MMRL16], [PR12]. Based on these, several researchers ([KMCA06], [FKA+05],
[MML15], [ZH13]), focused on understanding how developers operate to com-
plete their jobs: how they structure their tasks, how they apply their strategies
and how they use their tools.
Their ﬁndings allowed modern IDE to begin
recognizing the complexity and the memory requirements for developers. How-
ever, despite these ﬁndings none of these tools can as yet take the developer’s
cognition into account [PR12].
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
In addition, developers’ interactions have frequently been used by researchers
to examine developers’ behaviour, including [MKF06] which highlights the most
commonly used tools and [ML13a] which activated understanding of develop-
ers’ workﬂow. More speciﬁcally, researchers in [ML13a], developed DFlow for
recording development interactions within Pharo IDE.
Based on the afore-mentioned literature, it may be concluded that there was con-
siderable potential in exploring developers’ workﬂow within an IDE throughout
their interactions and way of thinking. Consequently, it was decided to further
investigate how the extraction of these interactions in a widely used IDE could
be executed.
1.1
Contributions
The following contributions to the body of knowledge that concern process min-
ing of developers’ workﬂow through IDE usage are:
• a proposal for diﬀerent perception on usage data to relate developers’
interactions with inﬂuenced resources
• a design model and implementation of a tool capable of detecting and
recording developers’ interaction within a widely known IDE in regards to
inﬂuenced resources.
1.2
Structure of thesis
To begin with, Chapter 2 provides a more speciﬁc background on the prob-
lem and its origin. It goes through previous related studies within the area of
IDEs and the connection between a developer and an IDE. Next, knowledge
for available IDEs and plug-ins is captured unravelling their capabilities and
limitations. Selection between the most promising plug-ins is performed and
the selected plugin is deeper analyzed. In the end, a background regarding the
principles of process mining is provided.
Further, in Chapter 3 the goals are clearly stated and questions are raised re-
garding the current perception on usage data logs. An innovative perception
of process mining usage data is suggested. Improvements required to meet the
perception proposed on the chosen tool are described.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Structure of thesis
3
Later on, the design decisions which were made to fulﬁll requirements stated
are deﬁned and illustrated in Chapter 4. The design decisions can be sorted
in: design decisions for allowing process mining, for giving a new perception
on developers’ interaction within an IDE and also for giving a perception on
developers’ source code interactions.
Thereafter, in Chapter 5, an experiment is materialized to record a data set
with event logs derived from the improved version of the tool. These event logs
are being reﬁned to be able to be imported in process mining tool. Afterwards,
the results accomplished are demonstrate and discussed in detail.
Finally in chapter 6, the thesis is concluded and an extensive look at future
work is taken.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background and Theory
Since an IDE is very personal and is accustomed to developers’ preferences, gath-
ering information regarding interactions within an IDE is promising to reveal
developers’ workﬂow.
Before proceeding any further, it is absolutely required to build a solid back-
ground behind concepts used throughout the thesis related to IDE.
This chapter begins with section 2.1, which gives an introduction to how IDE
evolved through time i including the reasons proving IDE’s signiﬁcance.
In
addition this section describes the possible interactions of a developer within an
IDE.
Among the various IDE mentioned in section 2.1, Eclipse was selected for further
investigation in section 2.2. The capabilities of Eclipse and its advantages are
elucidated.
Further, the nature of Eclipse plug-in development is enhanced
including an oveview on Eclipse available plug-ins
After conducting a research on plug-ins, Rabbit Eclipse high potential was no-
table and the decision to give a great amount of focus on that speciﬁc plug-in
was taken. In section 2.3 the architecture of the plug-in is presented to provide
a mutual understanding.
==PAGE:16==
6
Background and Theory
Finally, a research is contained, in section 2.4, in regards to process mining
techniques and what was required in order for it to be enabled.
2.1
Integrated Development Environment
An IDE is a software application which aims to improve developers’ productivity
by facilitating application development.
It consolidates the Basic tools (f.x.
source code editor, a compiler, debugger, etc) that developers need in order to
write and test software. To further understand capabilities and to gain insights
regarding IDEs availability, an investigation was carried out and is described
throughout this section.
Section 2.1.1 primarily consists of a brief historical description on how IDEs
evolved through time, and their major advantages. Next, section 2.1.2 analyzes
the possible interactions within IDE.
2.1.1
Overview of IDE
When the development via a console or a terminal became possible, ideas re-
garding IDE arose. The ﬁrst steps towards IDE is traced back to Dartmouth
Basic which was the ﬁrst language to be created with an IDE in 1964 [oDC18].
Dartmouth Basic IDE was command based, and without a graphical user inter-
face. However, it integrated editing, ﬁle management, compilation, debugging
and execution which are the necessary components to deﬁne an IDE.
According to [Ver17] Turbo Pascal, which was released in 1983 which integrated
an editor and a compiler for Pascal. Later on Microsoft’s Visual Basic (VB),
launched in 1991 and made the process learning programming relatively easy
and was used for teaching purposes. Further, followed Delphi in 1995,[Wik17]
which could run on 16-bit Windows and it could provide Object Pascal.
Throughout the years several IDE where developed (Codelite, Codeblocks, di-
alogblocks, Netbeans, Komodo, Xamarin) [pWT14]. Nowadays, the most known
and highly used nowadays are Visual Studio released in 1997 [Mic18] and Eclipse
released in 2006 [Fou18a]. Today, Top IDE index [Car16], which is a ranking
created by analysing how often IDEs are searched on Google, supports that the
three most used tools employed to develop source code are Eclipse released in
2004, Visual Studio released in 1997, Android Studio released in 2013 [Fou18a]
[Mic18] [2.518] .
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Integrated Development Environment
7
Although IDEs are striking through the top three, it is noticeable that a signiﬁ-
cant amount of developers prefer to use highly conﬁgurable text editors such as
Vim and Sublime Text.
The diﬀerent types of code, speciﬁc languages, cloud based, mobile application,
Apple or Microsoft development, led IDEs to expand in a variety of directions.
Consequently not all IDEs oﬀer the same capabilities and the same collection
of tools. Therefore one must be selective when choosing an IDE, in accordance
to its development task and requirements.
Over the years, IDE have oﬀered remarkable advantages to developers as men-
tioned in [Ver17] and [Tra17]. Some of these advantages for example are:
• Reduction of the setup up time required to conﬁgure multiple development
tools,
• Increment of development speed and eﬃciency by providing instant feed-
back for syntax errors or code insights,
• Improvement of program management by organizing resources, providing
a virtual representation of the project, and automatically adding appro-
priate imports.
• Increased the quality of programs by oﬀering the ability for debugging,
testing and source control.
Overall these advantages of using an IDE have endorsed the productivity of
a developer and increased the number of possible interactions within an IDE
signiﬁcantly. However the usefulness of interactions which are further described
in Section 2.1.2, IDEs lack eﬀective support to browse between complex rela-
tionships of source code elements. This implies that developers spend 30% their
time navigating through a chaotic environment, thus, their productivity is being
reduced as supported by [MMRL16] [RND09] and [KMCA06]
2.1.2
Interactions within IDE
IDEs are highly used by developers these days to produce and maintain software.
Developers use IDE to read, navigate, understand and write code. In more detail
the developer interacts with IDE through low level events: mouse clicks and
keyboard shortcuts but also high level events which are facilitated by context
menus existing within IDE as mentioned in [KMCA06] and [ZH13].
A high
==PAGE:18==
8
Background and Theory
level event is a series of low level events and it allows the developer to re-factor,
debug, navigate, test, and so forth without having to execute manually these
steps. These interactions are referred as usage data in [SMHF+15] and they
are an essential element of this thesis. Figure 2.1 represents the exchange of
usage data (high and low level events) produced by developer’s interactions and
corresponding logs are reported back from IDE.
Figure 2.1: Flow of usage data between developer and IDE.
An example to emphasize on what high and low level events mean as well as to
show the convenience IDE oﬀer is the following The renaming of a class within a
large project. IDE provides contextual menus enabling fast and eﬃcient changes.
Otherwise a series of low level events such as editing several ﬁles, compiling and
error seeking, executing and testing the correctness after the change will have
to be done manually.
According to [ML13b] and [Gu12] gathering all the IDE usage data provides
an additional perception on developers’ workﬂow. Analyzing and tracing the
workﬂow of a developer throughout usage data is a challenging matter which at-
tracted many researchers before, for example DFlow [USI14] [SMHF+15] [KMCA06].
To understand and investigate further developers’ workﬂow through their inter-
actions within an IDE the selection of an appropriate IDE was required and is
further described in Section 2.2.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Eclipse IDE
9
2.2
Eclipse IDE
Eclipse is undoubtedly one of the most powerful currently available IDE and this
is why it was selected as the IDE for this thesis. Eclipse oﬀers various sub-project
development environments, i.e., IDE and Plugin Developer Environment (PDE)
and along with its structured framework it allows extensions and optimization
for tools to be easily applied.
The ﬁrst part section 2.2.1 presents the Eclipse IDE with a brief introduction
of its capabilities including the major reasons for selecting this IDE. A basic
vocabulary was provided in regards to Eclipse IDE artifacts. Adding, the next
Section 2.2.2 gives an introduction to the highly adaptable Eclipse IDE and
the various approaches for developing plug-in tools.
Attention is then given
on statistical existing plug-ins so as to select a base plug-in which allows the
captivity of developer’s interactions. Such plug-ins are analyzed thoroughly and
presented in Section 2.2.3.
2.2.1
Overview of Eclipse
Eclipse IDE is a powerful UI framework used by a respectively vast amount of
developers: to primarily develop Java applications or even to develop in other
programming languages, and to also develop documents and packages for other
software.
The standard SDK Eclipse distribution contains a base workspace with cer-
tain operations for Java development tooling plug-ins and layout. Thereafter
additional plug-ins can be included or created to allow the extension of the
workspace. As a result Eclipse can become a multi-function framework to be
used for: Embedded programming, C++ programming, javaBeans, Java appli-
cation, websites, or even develop additional Eclipse plug-ins and more [Wik18].
Even though Eclipse framework started as a replacement for visual age for Java
from IBM [Wik18], it became an open platform for integrating tools, editors,
views and plug-ins. Its source code is freely available and anyone can contribute
by building their own new plug-ins or by engaging in discussions regarding
integrated tools.
The most signiﬁcant reasons for selecting the Eclipse IDE to analyze developers’
workﬂow are :
• It is the top ranked used IDE by developers [Bur09] and [Car16]
==PAGE:20==
10
Background and Theory
• It is a home for tools, where you can build and integrate your own [Bur09]
• It is highly adjustable and enables the developers to construct its workspace
according to their preferences [Bur09]
• It is an open source framework where features and plug-ins are available
online so are the execution and source code ﬁles [Bur09]
• It is an open source Community [Fou18a], collection of technical profes-
sionals with a common interest in both using and contributing in the
evolution of the platform
Having these reasons in mind the framework of Eclipse was chosen as the IDE
for this thesis. Figure 2.2 illustrates Eclipse workspace and its surroundings,
to oﬀer understanding for the various artifacts and also to deﬁne a common
vocabulary. Eclipse framework is consisted of a workbench window, which has
integrated basic elements such as views, text editors, menus and active perspec-
tives. [Fou18a]
Figure 2.2: A standard Eclipse workspace setup for a Java developer
A view is a window that enables the developer to observe and examine ﬁles
or projects, like Package Explorer, Outline and Console. In general, Eclipse
is in general ﬁlled up with
context menus, the main menu is at the top of
the screen while views and explorers usually provide their own context menus.
Context menus enable the developer to customize the appearance of relevant
information or to provide supplementary capabilities.
A text editor is a smart editor which recognizes the programming language,
markups the syntax and allows the developer to easily modify and save ﬁles.
Editors share characteristics with views, but unlike views, editors do not have
context menus.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Eclipse IDE
11
A perspective has its own a set of elements views and editors and menus along
with an adaptable personalized layout for speciﬁc tasks such as debugging a
program.
To summarize these are the main artifacts usually provided by Eclipse initial
workspace setup for a java developer. These vocabulary terms are a starting
point to understand concepts of IDE as well as concepts supporting plug-in de-
velopment PDE. The real power of Eclipse lies within its capability of developing
plug-ins for itself and is presented in the following Section 2.2.2.
2.2.2
Plug-in Development in Eclipse
Eclipse oﬀers the capability of developing or evolving additional tools for itself.
The PDE is based on the Open Services Gateway initiative (OSGi) technology,
and the software components are usually packaged and distributed as OSGi
bundles. OSGi bundles are very similar to standard JAR packages. An OSGi
bundle must contain a manifest ﬁle with the mandatory meta-data.1 This meta-
data includes a name, version, activator, dependencies, API and more.
Due to this technology, a good architecture is established for Eclipse. This is
why developers are easily able to extend their Eclipse IDE by creating new
additional operations or even improve the capabilities of already implemented
plug-ins. Based on this, a thumping range of plug-in tools are available in Eclipse
Marketplace client. These plug-ins can be classiﬁed in three categories according
to what they oﬀer to a developer: assistance, customization/management and
statistics.
Assistance plug-ins can oﬀer assistance to a developer while implementing a
software system, like in the instance of JRebel [Zer18] which allows developer’s
to reload code changes instantly or, the instance of Bytecode Outline [Los17]
which shows disassembled byte code of current java editor and allows developer’s
to have an inside look in the stack.
Moreover, there are customization and management plug-ins for example: Code-
Bubbles [Rei18] which is a front end of Eclipse designed to simplify programming
by generating working sets and grouping together related source fragments, or
Darkest Dark [Gen18] which simply enhance and changes the user interface color
to black.
Lastly, we have statistical plug-ins which provide statistics by gathering informa-
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSGi
==PAGE:22==
12
Background and Theory
tion from Eclipse IDE and by using graphical representations. A representative
example is Metrics which calculates various statistics for your code [Flo16], or
Usage data collector which captures data to help understanding how developers
are using eclipse [Fou18b].
Although, as described above, Eclipse provides a variety of plug-ins to support
developers, usually this results in a chaotic environment.
In an attempt to
reduce frustration created by the variety of plug-ins oﬀered and in an eﬀort
to improve a developer’s productivity, researchers in [GMR17] are aspiring to
understand the developers’ workﬂow by using statistical plug-ins and thereafter
developing Recommendation System in Software Engineers (RSSE)s. Following
ideas and concepts presented in [GMR17] the next Section 2.2.3 analyzes what
available plug-ins can contribute.
2.2.3
Plugin Availability and Analysis
Throughout research [GMR17] the need of developing context models that can
go beyond interaction events and common project artifacts is highlighted. A
model consisting of thirteen contextual factors is suggested in [GMR17]. Con-
textual factors are variables with precise domains of possible values that are
used to identify the context. The model characterizes developer situations from
several perspectives, namely who, what, when and where. Using this model of
Table 2 
Context model. 
Category 
Contextual factor 
Contextual factor domain 
Who 
Developer unique identiﬁer 
{Developer A, Developer B, ...} a 
Developer general experience 
{novice, competent, expert} 
Developer IDE experience 
{novice, expert} 
What 
Current activity 
{reading, editing, navigating, debugging, using version control, reviewing code, other} 
Previous activity 
{reading, editing, navigating, debugging, using version control, reviewing code, break, 
other} 
Type of the artifact under development 
{JavaScript ﬁle, XML ﬁle, Java class, Java method, ...} a 
Length of the artifact under development 
{short, medium, long} 
Complexity of the artifact under development 
{simple, medium, complex} 
When 
Time of the day 
{morning, afternoon, evening, night} 
Day of the week 
{Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday} 
Where 
IDE instance 
{Eclipse Luna, Subclipse, oXygen, ...} a 
Active user interface elements 
{{Java editor, XML editor, Project Explorer view}, {Java editor, Console view, Outline 
view, Project Explorer view}, ...} a 
User interface element with focus 
{Java editor, XML editor, Project Explorer, ...} a 
a actual domain depends on the collected data and cannot be predeﬁned. 
Figure 2.3: Context Model [GMR17]
contextual factors (see in Figure 2.3), as a main criteria along with taking into
account the maintainability and adaptability of the plug-in, an evaluation for
the capabilities of plug-ins can be derived.
Concerning the plug-ins mentioned before, they are mostly directed in gath-
ering statistics and observing the usage of artifacts by recording activity and
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Eclipse IDE
13
interactions of a developer while developing a software system.
After conducting a research on available plug-in tools, through GitHub and
the Eclipse Market, the most similar which could be used as a basis and/or be
combined here are listed below and an evaluation with regards to the set criteria
is done.
• Fluorite
• Rabbit
• Metrics
• Mylyn
• Time Keeper
• ITrace
• Usage Data Collector
Fluorite is a plug-in developed in the School of Computer Science at Carnegie
Mellon university [YM11].
Its purpose is low level event logging for Eclipse
when using the code editor. In other words, events such as: character type, text
cursor movement, selected text modiﬁcation, as well as, all the other available
Eclipse commands that can be called for an editor.
In Figure 2.4 an example representing the data from Fluorite depicted from
[YM11] is shown. By using the logged data, Fluorite can provide full reproduc-
tion of each source code ﬁle that has been used during a programming session.
Fluorite could potentially be used to extract developers’ source coding activity
since it enables the detection and measurement of time for various usage patterns
or events of interest like "typo correction". Among their ﬁndings, the authors
provided empirical evidence that editing source code is diﬀerent from editing
textual documents.
The authors also studied the distribution of keystrokes
reporting that backspace and arrows are the most frequent keys pressed by
developers.
However, this plug-in seemed promising for investigating sequences of low level
events and detecting coding strategies for code editor, it was not selected for
further exploitation. The main reason for not selecting this tool was its disabil-
ity of recording interactions of the developer with an IDE since this tool only
focused in capturing code editor interactions. A less important reason causing
the rejection of this plug-in was the massive amounts of low level events which
were generated and the unobtainable source code.
==PAGE:24==
14
Background and Theory
<Command __id="2" _type="MoveCaretCommand" caretOffset="142" docOffset="142" timestamp="3977"/> 
<Command __id="3" _type="EclipseCommand" commandID="eventLogger.styledTextCommand.SELECT_LINE_DOWN" 
timestamp="5598"/> 
<DocumentChange __id="4" _type="Delete" docASTNodeCount="22" docActiveCodeLength="125" docExpression-
Count="10" docLength="151" endLine="9" length="39" offset="142" startLine="8" timestamp="7186"> 
  <text> 
    <![CDATA[  
System.out.println("Hello World!"); 
 
]]> 
  </text> 
</DocumentChange> 
<Command __id="5" _type="EclipseCommand" commandID="org.eclipse.ui.edit.delete" timestamp="7202"/> 
<Command __id="6" _type="EclipseCommand" commandID="org.eclipse.ui.file.save" timestamp="8099"/> 
Figure 2.4: Fluorite: Example of data log collected
Usage Data collector is a framework for collecting information regarding
usage data of Eclipse IDE.
It was originally build by the Eclipse Foundation, as a way to measure how
the community was using the IDE. Information for views usage, editor usage,
changes of perspectives and actions invoked are recorded by monitors which
also use a time-stamp. In Figure 2.5 an example of a data log entry is shown
[SMHF+15]. Moreover this plug-in also collects basic information about the
run-time environment (OS, system architecture, window system, locale, etc).
This information are uploaded periodically to servers hosted by The Eclipse
Foundation with the purpose to be processed in a later stage [Fou18b]. This
project was shut down eventually due to resource constraints since hundreds of
thousands of Eclipse users uploaded data, the executable code for this plug-in
remains available as well as the collected data is available upon request.
what
kind
bundleId
bundleVersion
description
time
xecuted
command
org.eclipse.ui
3.7.0.v20110928-1505
org.eclipse.ui.edit.paste
1389111843130
Figure 2.5: Usage data collector: Example of data log collected [SMHF+15]
This plug-in tool records relevant information required for this thesis and for
this reason is valid and useful candidate by achieving a signiﬁcant amount of
contextual factors 2.3. The source code was not obtainable and therefore the
usage of this plug-in as a basis for this research was rejected.
According to
[SMHF+15] another inconvenience of this tool, is the fact that sometimes in-
complete data are captured. This is because not all key bindings, menu or main
toolbar bindings are addressed.
Metrics [Flo16] is a plug-in that calculates around 20 metrics for your code dur-
ing build cycles, warns the developer of range violations for each metric, plus,
it provides an XML ﬁle that contains the information. What is more, it pro-
vides representation of these metrics in tables inside the Eclipse IDE and also
generates dependency graphs. The mentioned calculated metrics for instance
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Eclipse IDE
15
are McCabe’s cyclomatic complexity, number of elements (classes, children,
interfaces,statements, ﬁelds), depth of inheritance,etc. These metrics provide
information related to experience and to programming style of a developer as
referenced and further explained in [LW05].
This plug-in source code can be found online in [Git18] and in the Figure 2.6 a
representation of the mentioned calculated metrics is illustrated.
Figure 2.6: Metrics: Example of data collected [LWH05]
Metrics is analysing static code and although it can oﬀer a perception of the
experience of the developer and the complexity of the current implemented
software system, it is not able to capture developers’ current activity, therefore
it was not selected.
Mylyn is a subsystem in Eclipse used for task management.[Com18] The orig-
inal name of this project is Mylar, and was used in studies such as [MKF06].
Mylyn oﬀers a task-focused interface shown in ﬁgure 2.7 (f.x. ﬁxing bugs, new
features, problem reports) to reduce irrelevant information to a task and makes
multitasking easier. Mylyn monitors programming activity to create a "task
context" in relation to workspace and automatically links all relevant artifacts
to the task-at-hand. Mylyn allows developers’ tasks to be organized and moni-
tors its activity. It provides awareness for the progress of tasks, and increases the
productivity by reducing unnecessary navigation, searching and scrolling. Fur-
ther Mylyn allows the creation of graph elements and relationships of program
artifacts.
As an addition to Mylyn plug-in, was TimeKeeper which is responsible to
track time, and report how long a developer worked on a certain task, and
open a workweek view. Together these two plug-ins form a strong organiza-
tion and management of working environment. The source code for Mylyn and
Timekeeper plug-ins are available online and located at [Git11] and [Git17] re-
spectively.
==PAGE:26==
16
Background and Theory
Figure 2.7: Mylyn: Example of provided interface
Even though Mylyn integrated with TimeKeeper tool and they seemed promis-
ing, the main disadvantage of using this project was that important information
of developers’ interaction with IDE were not captured. These information are for
example: switching between views or switching between perspective. Therefore
this tool was not selected.
iTrace is a tool integrated with an eye tracker to determine the type of element
one is looking at. iTrace was released as open source project in June 7th 2015.
[Uni15] While the user is reading a source code ﬁle, the tools is recording the
eye movement and ﬁxations and is able to identify the source code element for
example if the user is looking at a method, or an if statement, etc. iTrace allows
horizontal and vertical scrolling and is able to retrieve information only when
the code is static and no interactions with the IDE through keyboard or mouse
are happening. After a recording session of iTrace a data log with the ﬁxations
on the current java editor is provided in an XML form (see ﬁgure 2.8).
iTrace capability to identify source code elements by using eye movement is
remarkable and the source code is available online [Git15a].
However, since
developers’ current activity is required to be captured to understand developers’
workﬂow, tracking only when user is reading results is a great limitation.
Rabbit Eclipse is a statistics tracking tool which provides developers with
information regarding their interactions within Eclipse IDE by recording low
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Eclipse IDE
17
Figure 2.8: iTrace: Example of logged data [SWW+15]
and high level events. The information is then displayed to developers by using a
graphical representation and also data logs. (see ﬁgure 2.9 and 2.10). Therefore,
tracking current activity of a developer within the IDE is possible.[Cod11]
 
Figure 2.9: Rabbit Eclipse UI
Rabbit eclipse carries similar ideas to Usage data collector mentioned before.
Even though that its development was terminated, the source code was available
on git-hub [Git15b].
Rabbit proved to be a good candidate for this thesis by achieving also a sig-
niﬁcant amount of contextual factors 2.3. The source code was obtainable and
==PAGE:28==
18
Background and Theory
Figure 2.10: Rabbit Eclipse: Sample of recorded event logs
easily adaptable therefore the usage of this plug-in as a basis for this research
was accepted. Further reasons behind this decision, as well as how the plug-in
operates, are explored and more detailed analyzed in section 2.3.
2.3
The focal plug-in - Rabbit Eclipse
This section aims to provide understanding regarding how Rabbit Eclipse plug-
in operates. Firstly, an overview is contacted providing the plug-in’s capabilities
and limitations in Section 2.3.1. Then, an eﬀort to establish mutual concrete
understanding for plug-in’s architecture is analyzed in Section 2.3.2. To achieve
that, common usage scenarios for the plug-in and the main actors to the system
are described. Further, the architecture of Rabbit Eclipse is depicted and the
functionality of the main components is discussed.
2.3.1
Overview of Rabbit Eclipse
Rabbit Eclipse is a statistics plug-in and is responsible to collect the various
usage data from the interactions performed by a developer in Eclipse IDE over
a period of time. [Cod11] [jax10]
Rabbit Eclipse is a semi-dynamic recording tool which means that even though
it silently runs in the background and gathers usage data these are only avail-
able when requested. The usage data become visible in log ﬁles, or graphical
representation. These logs contain diﬀerent types of interactions which are com-
mand usage; and time spent using tools such as: resources, perspectives, java
elements, sessions, editors and views, launches and tasks within Eclipse.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 The focal plug-in - Rabbit Eclipse
19
Rabbit Eclipse in an eﬀort to be more precise, it collects usage data only when
Eclipse is active. In other words, if the window of Eclipse is not focused or no
keyboard/mouse event has occurred during a particular amount of time then
Rabbit tool consider the developer as idle and pauses tracking activities. In this
way Rabbit provides more accurate data.
Due to the mentioned capabilities of deriving event logs with regards to devel-
opers’ activity as well as detecting when a developer is idle led to the choice of
modifying and extending this plug-in.
The main advantages behind the selection of Rabbit Eclipse as a base plug-in
were:
• the well-structured provided online source code which could be easily un-
derstood and interpreted [Git15b]
• the availability of the main developer who willingly responded to emails.
Rabbit Eclipse oﬀers these advantages and proves to be a valuable base for
gathering usage data, but it also had some particular limitations.
Command’s interactions within Eclipse IDE can be triggered in various ways,
either by key-bindings, by contextual menus or mouse clicks. These command’s
interactions are further analysed by Eclipse [Bur09]. Using the information from
the book an analysis in regards to which command interactions are covered by
Rabbit Eclipse was undertaken. The results were satisfying sinceRabbit Eclipse
was able to capture the most commonly used commands [SMHF+15] A further
analysis of the results regarding this procedure is presented in Appendix A.1.
Today’s developers as mentioned in [MKF06], are using only a small portion of
commands available by Eclipse. Therefore, this limitation was neglected.
Moreover, Rabbit Eclipse was not able not recognize adjustments in terms of
layout. Interactions such as maximizing window, minimizing window and ad-
justing workspace are not recorded. However, this limitation was not an issue,
since interactions concerned with layout adjustments where out of the scope for
this thesis.
As a result these limitation did not overshadow the Rabbit Eclipse advantages
and therefore it was selected as the base plug-in for the thesis. Further, in the
next section 2.3.2 the architecture of the plug-in is elaborated.
==PAGE:30==
20
Background and Theory
2.3.2
Architecture of Rabbit Eclipse
This section is destined to accomplish a mutual understanding of how Rabbit
Eclipse operates, since no particular documentation of the plug-in’s architecture
was provided. An advantage of using Rabbit Eclipse was the well-structured
open source code provided which enabled the ease of carrying out a study on
its source code. Throughout this study the creation of a model presenting the
ﬂow of the system was possible and is displayed in Figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11: Model: Rabbit-Eclipse
The general followed scenario is that a developer is implementing a software
within Eclipse IDE, and generates various interactions of low and high level
events as described in section 2.1.2. When an interaction is initiated, Rabbit
Eclipse is triggered to capture, and analyse the interaction. These interactions
are then stored in event logs while they are exported and upon request of a
developer Rabbit Eclipse provides captured events in a graphical view.
To analyse further the system, two kind of actors interacting with the Eclipse
IDE, i.e., developer and plug-in are deﬁned.
Developer: is a person who uses Eclipse IDE and could be running the envi-
ronment through any of available operating systems (Windows, Linux, MAC).
The developer does not know how to interact directly with plug-in for recording
but it is only capable of obtaining through the provided UI the metrics captured.
A developer can be an amateur or an expert who would like to get insights in
regards to its own development workﬂow.
Rabbit Eclipse is a plug-in on the other hand, which was created to capture
==PAGE:31==
2.3 The focal plug-in - Rabbit Eclipse
21
activities within Eclipse IDE. The tool is built to communicate and record the
data inserted in the Eclipse IDE by keeping a data structure which will then be
used to output the information.
In Figure 2.12 aims to provide an idea of the most signiﬁcant use cases which
are accounted, for the two actors are demonstrated. The use cases for develop-
ers’ interactions within Eclipse IDE are for example: execute commands, run
program, debug a program,etc. On the other hand the use cases in regards to
Rabbit Eclipse are detected user idle, track usage data, present usage data, etc.
Figure 2.12: This ﬁgure represents an abstracted overview of use cases.
Using this information of the general scenario and how actors interact with the
system the Figure 2.13 was created to represent Rabbit Eclipse architecture. The
depicted architecture is divided into unit sections: data structure, interaction
with developer, interaction with Eclipse IDE, interaction with output logs, an
XML output organizers and connecting handlers. Subsequently, these units are
further analyzed to explain the system thoroughly.
The data structure of Rabbit Eclipse is composed of the data and event units
shown in Figure 2.13. The selected data structure is arranged with Immutable
objects 2 and using Key Map Builder3 which provides consistency of information
2https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/concurrency/immutable.html
3http://lkumarjain.blogspot.dk/2013/03/why-map-key-should-be-immutable-object.
html
==PAGE:32==
22
Background and Theory
Figure 2.13: Architecture of Rabbit - Eclipse plug-in
by enabling the defensive programming technique which provides a safe usage
from multiple threads. This means the objects won’t run in race conditions
resulting modiﬁed/corrupted states and also the objects can be easily shared by
references.
The data unit contains information for interactions which has already been
recorded from a previous session, whereas the event unit contains information
which has just been recorded from developer’s current activity. The structure of
event unit is shown in the Figure 2.14. This unit consists of a variety of classes.
At the top of the hierarchy is DiscreteEvent class and ContinuousEvent class
which distinguish between the main types of interactions recorded, i,e. instant
and continuous interactions. Command and Breakpoint are listed as Discrete
interactions. On the other hand, interactions such as switching between ﬁles,
views, perspectives, launching, java elements and session inherit from Continu-
ousEvent since the duration for such activities is relevant.
Further, the most important represented unit in Figure 2.13 is called Trackers.
These units run silently in the background and record developer’s interaction
within Eclipse IDE.
Due to this, and as displayed in ﬁgure 2.15 recorder, observer and listener classes
are used in order for tracker units to be notiﬁed when changes occur.
==PAGE:33==
2.3 The focal plug-in - Rabbit Eclipse
23
Figure 2.14: Event Classes
At the top of the hierarchy lies the AbstractTracker class which deﬁnes the nec-
essary abilities of each tracker. These abilities are the collection of interactions,
their analysis, ﬁltering and storage.
Each tracker unit is responsible to record a diﬀerent type of interaction and
these types were described previously by the events structure.
For example
the Command tracker is responsible to explore how often each command is
used (cut, copy, paste etc.), whereas, Part tracker handles time spent using
diﬀerent artifact within Eclipse (Java Editor, Outline View, Project Explore
etc.)
Also, perspective tracker is estimating how long diﬀerent perspectives
have been used such as Debug, Java Browsing, GitHub etc. Moreover, launch
tracker is related to activities as application runs and debug runs, all relevant
ﬁles to these activities are recorded as well. Sessions tracks down how much time
was spent using Eclipse in total. Further, File tracker focuses on how long each
ﬁle, project and other resources have been used. Rabbit Eclipse tracker units
integrate also with Mylyn and as a result they also keep track of tasks that are
listed in Mylyn. Lastly the time spent on Java Elements (classes, methods) is
also captured.
These tracker units along with data handlers as presented in Figure 2.13 when a
developer requests or when eclipse is open/closed will collaborate to access/store
the usage data. Data handlers are in charge of keeping separated the current
changes and stored changes; this means that whenever Trackers acquires that
data should be updated a relevant handler is called.
==PAGE:34==
24
Background and Theory
Figure 2.15: Tracker Classes
Handler units are then communicating with XML unit as it appears in Fig-
ure 2.13 to either access or store usage data. When storing information Event
objects will be merged, converted and serialized using an XML schema to be
exported into event logs. A depicted model to demonstrate how logs are con-
structed from XML writer is shown in Figures 2.16 and 2.17.
Figure 2.16: Model of usage Data log
When accessing information from logs, the usage data are de-serialized and Data
objects are created and will be represented on rabbit user interface.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Process Mining and Disco
25
Figure 2.17: Model of usage Data log
Throughout this section, the architecture of the plug-in at-hand was analyzed,
and the capabilities of the tool were detailed. Even thought that Rabbit Eclipse
seems like a promising tool and was selected as a base, the current version of
the plug-in does not yet enable process mining. In the next section 2.4 a closer
look to requirements for process mining is given.
2.4
Process Mining and Disco
Process mining is the bridge between model-based process analysis and data-
oriented analysis techniques such as machine learning and data mining. 4. Pro-
cess mining is remarkable because it automatically allows the identiﬁcation and
visualization of processes. As supported by [RMLvdA14] and [Say14] process
mining can also be used for software development and testing process.
Section 2.4.1 gives an overview of the Process mining, describing its importance
as well as its application. The diﬀerent types of process mining are mention and
also its application to software engineering is analyzed. Further, the section
2.4.2 investigates the process mining tool Disco. A short explanation of how
it works and which aspects can be used to derive analysis of collected data log
events are elaborated.
4https://www.coursera.org/learn/process-mining
==PAGE:36==
26
Background and Theory
2.4.1
Overview of Process Mining
Process mining is a relatively new and emerging art of using a family of tech-
niques which automatically observe and identify trends, patterns and sequences
from collected event logs to understand and produce non-trivial useful insights
regarding processes.
Today, various information systems (f.x. healthcare systems, business,etc) gen-
erate multitudes of event data. This causes organizations to have a struggle with
understanding the collected events. Therefore, the desirability of improving ef-
ﬁciency of processes as well as availability of data enhanced the integration of
process mining with data science [vdAETUETN16]. Moreover, process mining
can be used for conformance of processes, identiﬁcation of bottlenecks, and also
prediction of execution problems [Rud15].
There are three main types of process mining 5 :
• Discovery: where the tool receives as input an event log and produces a
process model (Petri net) explaining the behavior of the recorded log.
• Conformance: where the tool receives an input an existing process model
with an event log of the same process and produces a comparison revealing
whether the event log conforms the process model.
• Enhancement: where the tool receives as input an existing process model
and an event log with the actual process recorded and produces an im-
proved or extended model.
Researchers in [RMLvdA14] and [Say14] proved that process mining can be
used for software development. According to this, the decision to apply process
mining was taken and the most suitable type is discovery since this project aims
to discover and understand the workﬂow of a developer within an IDE.
Since process mining is a cutting edge technology, several process mining tools
were invented for example most common are ProM [vDAV+05], Disco 6, Celonis
7.
Disco tool was proposed by the supervisors and used throughout this thesis, in
the next section 2.4.2 a further description on how the tool works is provided.
5https://www.coursera.org/learn/process-mining
6https://fluxicon.com/disco/
7https://www.celonis.com/?gclid=EAIaIQobChMI2fWo3fan2QIVFyjTCh17xQ_
vEAAYASAAEgK5q_D_BwE
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Process Mining and Disco
27
2.4.2
Overview of Disco
Disco is a complete process mining toolkit that makes process mining rapid,
ﬂexible and easy. Disco helps to process raw data provided in event logs using
visual maps, providing metrics and statistics, as well as ﬁltering from activities
or paths.
8 Moreover, despite the fact that Disco oﬀers graphical representa-
tion of the raw data, it also allows the creation of animation to visualize the
process at-hand with a video animating the process. The visualisation feature
is relatively helpful to identify bottlenecks of the process.
An overview of the most signiﬁcant parts of Disco depicted from 9 follows, since
the knowledge behind how Disco operates was a crucial part for this thesis.
The ﬁrst step to process mining is to organize the raw data sets which will be
used. Disco tool was designed to allow the user to import data easily. The tool
allows to open a CSV or Excel ﬁle with the raw data sets in a read-only format.
In ﬁgure 2.18 and 2.19 the 3 steps to follow when importing the raw data sets
are shown. Firstly, the selection of each column and secondly conﬁguration of
each column according to what is representing is possible.
The conﬁguration categories are deﬁned as follows:
• case ID, which determines the scope of the process. Using that the process
mining tool can compare several execution of the process to one another,
it uniquely identiﬁes a single execution of the process.
• activities, which determines the level of detail for the process steps. Using
that, each step of the process is described, some of these steps might occur
more than once for a single case.
• time-stamps, which determines when the activity took place. This is im-
portant to analyze timing behavior and also to provide a sequence between
the activities.
• additional attributes are deﬁned as either resources or attributes and
they are optional. They are helpful to ﬁlter the analysis to become more
precise.
It is mandatory to have at least one case id, and for the activities and also a
time-stamp are prerequisites for the tool to be able to process mine the given
8https://fluxicon.com/disco/
9https://fluxicon.com/disco/files/Disco-User-Guide.pdf
==PAGE:38==
28
Background and Theory
Figure 2.18: Steps 1 and 2 required to insert raw data sets into disco
event logs. The third step is to import the data as shown in 2.19. Once the
event log is imported, an automatic process discovery mapping is provided by
Disco and graphical representation and other statistics are generated.
Figure 2.19: Step 3 required to insert raw data into disco
Furthermore, there are 6 diﬀerent types of ﬁlters provided in Disco which are
highly helpful and allow the ease of interaction, ﬁltration and inspection of the
event log( see Figure 2.20).
The time frame ﬁlter which enables to focus on apart of a log executed in a
certain period of time. Next is the variation ﬁlter which enables the ﬁltering
either the most common or exceptional behavior in a process. The performance
ﬁlter which is ﬁltering in relation to a speciﬁc set of performance criteria. These
performance criteria could be case duration, number of events, case utilization,
active time, or waiting time. Following is the end point ﬁlter which trims out
events that are not in the boundary of the beginning and ﬁnishing activity. Also
the attribute ﬁlter which allows the selection of events based on activity and
resources. Last but not least the followers ﬁlter which ﬁlters by sub-sequences.
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Process Mining and Disco
29
Figure 2.20: Available ﬁltering from Disco
This ﬁltering capability of Disco provides all the information required to anal-
yse more eﬃciently the process. While process discovery Disco oﬀers automatic
process discovery by providing information regarding an activity for Frequency
and Performance as appeared in ﬁgure 2.21. Moreover, Disco allows the regula-
tion of how detailed the mapping solution should be by providing the option to
set the percentage of activities and paths to be shown.
Figure 2.21: Available ﬁltering from Disco
Using this tool in a later stage of this thesis will provide understanding for
developers’ workﬂow.
==PAGE:40==
30
Background and Theory
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3
Problem Deﬁnition
The purpose of this thesis is to capture data on how developers interact with
IDE while developing software and to mine developers’ work-ﬂows from IDE
usage using process mining techniques.
To detect available and potential technology candidates that can oﬀer recording
of developers activity within IDE, a research was carried out and is presented in
chapter 2. The selection of Eclipse IDE and Rabbit Eclipse as the tools at-hand
was made and the reasons behind this decision are analyzed in previous sections
2.2 and 2.3, respectively.
Although, the chosen technologies could provide broad and profound informa-
tion regarding developers’ interactions within Eclipse IDE, deriving any further
conclusions using process mining tool Disco regarding developers’ workﬂow was
rather inconvenient.
Therefore in order to pursue the purpose of this thesis, modiﬁcations on how the
selected tools operate were applied and also the perception of captured events
was changed. This means that the tools had to be modiﬁed from asking how
many times an interaction occurred or how long did it last, to ask:
1. when the interaction occurred
==PAGE:42==
32
Problem Deﬁnition
2. which resource or resources were inﬂuenced during the interaction
Further, in order to enable process mining of the event logs, they are required
to have a case id and time-stamps, as mentioned in Section 2.4. In addition, to
provide process mining in a more abstract level, a classiﬁcation of commands
was also a requirement.
Moreover, since Java events have been recorded before from Rabbit Eclipse, as
mentioned in Section 2.3.2, exploring the ability to process mine source code
was set as a secondary goal.
Figure 3.1 depicts a new use case diagram which highlights the modiﬁed and
added use cases required to enable process mining for Rabbit Eclipse.
Figure 3.1: Use case diagram showing new use cases (purple), modiﬁed uses
cases (green), and unchanged use cases (grey)
The modiﬁed use cases presented in the diagram are related to how data and
log events are captured by Rabbit Eclipse.
The use case Export usage data log ﬁles refers to the modiﬁcations made to
XML schema constructing event logs and the use case Organize usage data was
modiﬁed to record also when an interaction occurred, instead of only estimating
duration by merging and converting usage data.
The new use cases created are related to how interactions are interpreted by
Rabbit Eclipse. The use case Categorize Commands provides a classiﬁcation for
==PAGE:43==
33
available command events. Further, the use case Analyze Commands serves the
purpose of identifying resources inﬂuenced by an interaction.
Lastly, Analyze Java elements use case identiﬁes details in regards to recording
source code interactions.
These mentioned use cases are vital to the modiﬁcations made in the architecture
and components of Rabbit Eclipse and the design in regards to them is further
elucidated in the next chapter 4.
==PAGE:44==
34
Problem Deﬁnition
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Design and Implementation
In this chapter the mandatory modiﬁcations for achieving the requirements de-
scribed in Chapter 3, are modeled and analyzed thoroughly.
The design derived to accommodate the requirements set is described through-
out the next sections. In the ﬁrst Section 4.1 of this chapter, the design which
is required to enable process mining is described. Further, the next section 4.2
provides a model suggesting the correlation of command and ﬁle interactions.
Last but not least, the section 4.3 provides two design solutions which enable
process mining of source code.
To start with, Figure 4.1 represents the architecture of Rabbit Eclipse and high-
lights units which will be modiﬁed. In a ﬁrst glance, the modiﬁed units are:
XML unit which is used during storage or accessing of event logs, Data and
Event units which contain information for interactions, and also Trackers which
are responsible to record developers’ interactions. On the other hand Handler
units and the Rabbit UI unit remain unchanged.
==PAGE:46==
36
Design and Implementation
Figure 4.1: Architecture of Rabbit - Eclipse plugin diagram showing modiﬁed
units (green) and unchanged units(grey)
4.1
Design for Process Mining
This section presents the modeling steps towards process mining. Firstly, at-
tention is given to model timing interactions in section 4.1.1, developers id in
section 4.1.2 and classiﬁcation of commands in section 4.1.3.
4.1.1
Include Timing interactions
The ﬁrst requirement is to gather timing information and more speciﬁcally to
obtain when a developer interacted with IDE.
Based on the previous version of Rabbit Eclipse plugin, elaborated in Section
2.3, interactions were collected and the total duration of an interaction was
calculated. XML units, were responsible to register one entry per interaction in
the event log with only the total duration of the interaction.
To approach this situation, Rabbit Eclipse plugin was modiﬁed. The modiﬁca-
tion made was in accordance to XML units which were directed not to merge
the events but to generate and register new entry for every interaction that took
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Design for Process Mining
37
place. As it is visible in Figure 4.2, the exported usage data logs have been en-
dorsed with ﬁelds addressing the time. A time-stamp of when an interaction was
started and also a time-stamp when an interaction was ended, (TS_START)
and (TS_END) respectively, were added. The time registered is standardized
to follow the SQL format time-stamp (YYYY - MM - DD HH:MM:SS).
Figure 4.2: Models of event logs
4.1.2
Include Developer’s id
A requirement to allow process mining, as mentioned in Section 2.4, is to have
a case id. In order to provide a case id, the addition of a ﬁeld representing the
id to all entries in event logs exported by Rabbit Eclipse was mandatory and is
visible in Figure 4.2.
The case id was designed to enable two approaches for process mining. These
==PAGE:48==
38
Design and Implementation
approaches are (a) mining interaction of an individual developer over diﬀerent
development stages such as implementing, debugging and testing and (b) mining
interaction of a developers group executing the same task.
To enable both, the refresh button which is visible on the interface of Rabbit
Eclipse was enhanced. In the ﬁrst case, to allow process mining of diﬀerent
development stages, the refresh button was designed so that when a developer
presses the button a new development stage would be identiﬁed, and therefore
the case id would increase to indicate the stage change. However, this provides
inaccuracies since, the judgment of changing the sessions is based on the human
factor.
On the other hand, to fulﬁll the second case the refresh button is not taken into
consideration and the software assigns a constant number in the ﬁeld of case id.
4.1.3
Include Command categories
To accompany further process mining, as described in Chapter 3, an abstrac-
tion level of command interactions was required. Command interactions were
classiﬁed by following the origin categories contained in the book [Bur09]. In
relation to this Categorize Commands use case was realized.
The previous version of Rabbit Eclipse gathered origin category for every com-
mand interaction. However, it was not registered in the exported event logs,
mentioned in Section 2.3.2. To realize this the data structure along with the
related XML schema of Rabbit Eclipse, were modiﬁed to accommodate the re-
quired ﬁeld to include category in command interaction logs.
4.2
Design for Locating command - resource in-
teraction
A signiﬁcant requirement which was deﬁned in Chapter 3 was to locate which
resource is inﬂuenced by a developer’s interaction within IDE.
The previous version of Rabbit Eclipse provided captivity of File events and
Command events by using File and Command tracker units, which were ana-
lyzed in Section 2.3.2. File tracker unit was responsible to capture the duration
of interaction with a ﬁle, whereas Command tracker unit was responsible to
explore metrics regarding the usage of commands. However the fact that both
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Design for Locating command - resource interaction
39
type of events were captured, the tool did not provide any correlation between
them. Therefore, this inconvenience limits the capabilities of the tool towards
process mining.
To resolve the limitation and pursue the requirement of locating which resource
was inﬂuenced by developers’ interaction, major changes have been made on
Command tracker unit to allow the combination of these two interaction types,
i,e. File and Command.
In order to combine these two interaction events, File and Command a sequence
of several steps were followed.
Step 1: command inﬂuence classiﬁcation
To begin with, a list with available standard command interactions was obtained
from [Bur09]. Going through the list, as mentioned in Section 2.3.2, it revealed
all combinations of keyboard bindings and menu bindings which Rabbit Eclipse
can capture. Using this information the realization of what inﬂuence a captured
command interaction can have on diﬀerent resources, i.e. ﬁles or projects, was
possible. Therefore, all commands could be characterized by their inﬂuence on
resources, and these are detailed in Appendix A.1.
This led the decision to distinguish between categories of command interactions.
These categories, demonstrated in Figure 4.3, are single resource inﬂuence which
refers to the inﬂuence a command has its only on a single ﬁle (f.x. copy, end
line) and group resource inﬂuence which refers to the inﬂuence a command has
on a project, or a group of ﬁles (f.x. move ﬁle, rename).
This procedure distinguished the categories regarding inﬂuence command in-
teractions have on resources, and therefore provided knowledge in how many
resources a command can inﬂuence. The next step to accomplish combination
of the File and Commands interactions is to determine the speciﬁc resources
that are inﬂuenced.
==PAGE:50==
40
Design and Implementation
Figure 4.3: Examples of the two categories distinguished are single resource
inﬂuence and group resource inﬂuence
Step 2: inﬂuenced resource detection
In order to support the need of determining the speciﬁc resources which were
inﬂuenced by a command interaction, was to create a new tracker unit, specif-
ically focusing on resource changes(i,e, an addition, a removal or an edition).
This tracker unit was responsible for keeping track of when and which resources
have been changed.
In Figure 4.4 a behavioral state machine to describe the behavior for this unit
is depicted. The state machine is using the design patterns of a listener and
a visitor [SS03]. The listener is waiting until a command execution interaction
occurred which caused the change for resources. When the listener detects this
interaction then it collects a resource event and triggers a visitor. A visitor is
responsible to go through the resource event in order to determine what was the
type of change (addition, removal, edition) and most importantly to determine
the name of the resource inﬂuenced.
After the visitor processes the resource event, the relevant interaction informa-
tion captured which are the name of the resource inﬂuence, the type of change on
the resource and a time-stamp are stored. To accommodate this, a data struc-
ture to maintain the interaction is required was created following the Rabbit
Eclipse data structures, mentioned in Section 2.3.2.
The described procedure explains how the resource names which were inﬂuenced
by a command interaction are gathered.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Design for Locating command - resource interaction
41
Figure 4.4: Behavioral state diagram, to show the relation between the listener
and the visitor
Step 3: Combination of command interaction and inﬂuenced resource
At last, in order to realize the combination of ﬁle and command interactions,
there are two aspects to be considered.
These aspects are how a command
interaction is captured and how a command interaction is stored.
To start with, Figure 4.5 demonstrates the use case Analyze Command which
realizes the ﬁrst aspect of how a command interaction will be captured.
In detail, once a command interaction is detected, the details(command name,
time stamp, etc.) for that interaction are gathered. Then, the command inter-
action is being processed to identify in which inﬂuence category it belongs to,
single or group resource inﬂuence. According to which inﬂuence category the
command belongs to, the inﬂuenced resources are captured. In case of group
resource inﬂuence, for each resource a new command interaction is registered,
otherwise only one new command interaction is registered.
Further, to realize the second aspect, of how a command interaction is registered,
data structure along with the related XML schemas of Rabbit Eclipse, mentioned
in Section 2.3.2, were modiﬁed to accommodate the required ﬁeld to include ﬁle
name.
An example of a common command - ﬁle interaction entry is shown in Figure
4.6
==PAGE:52==
42
Design and Implementation
Figure 4.5: Activity diagram - Analyze Command describes the functionality
required to capture a command-ﬁle interaction
Figure 4.6: Command - ﬁle interaction entry
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Design for Analyzing Java element interactions
43
4.3
Design for Analyzing Java element interac-
tions
As a secondary purpose of this thesis as mentioned in Chapter 3, the requirement
of analyzing Java element interactions was set to enable process mining of source
code.
Based on the previous version of Rabbit Eclipse plugin, elaborated in Section
2.3.2, java element interactions were recorded. Java Element interactions are
interactions on source code elements, (f.x a change of method signature or the
class). Although Rabbit Eclipse recorded information in regards to these inter-
actions, only an identiﬁer and duration for each element was exported into the
event logs.
To undertake this situation, currently there are two methodologies that can be
followed.
4.3.1
Detecting Java element interaction - Design 1
The ﬁrst methodology was to modify the data structure along with the related
XML schema of Rabbit Eclipse, to accommodate the additional required infor-
mation. The addressed additional information ﬁelds are shown in Figure 4.7.
The ﬁelds included are listed:
• JE_ID which is the handle identiﬁer id
• FILE_NAME which is simply the name of the resource which contains
the element
• PARENT which resource is the parent of the current resource
• FILE_TYPE which indicates whether the resource is a class or an inter-
face (5 - class, 9 - interface)
• TS_START which indicates when this java element interaction started
• TS_END which indicates when this java element interaction ﬁnished
• DURATION for how long this element has been modiﬁed
==PAGE:54==
44
Design and Implementation
Figure 4.7: Java Element - Java interaction entry
4.3.2
Detecting Java element interaction - Design 2
The second methodology was to built another tracker responsible to retrieve
java element interactions through the Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) constructed
by Eclipse [SS03].
In order to do that several steps were followed. Firstly, the detection of when
a java element interaction occurred, and secondly to deﬁne information for the
interaction are required.
To start with, a java element interaction implies a change of source code element,
within a resource ﬁle.
Therefore, to detect when a java element interaction
occurred, recording when a resource ﬁle was modiﬁed is suﬃcient. The design
from the previous Section 4.2 for detecting updated ﬁles is used.
In order to deﬁne information for the interaction, the AST is used. The AST
is a detailed tree representing the Java source code. For each project inside a
workspace the AST is able to recognize the java elements, as mentioned in the
book [SS03]
Further, the AST is updated when a resource ﬁle has been modiﬁed.
The
structure of AST is demonstrated in Figure 4.8, and it suggests that to retrieve
information for a java element resource from AST, is required to iterate the tree.
By using the AST to retrieve information for java element interaction and the
resource ﬁle, the diagram represented in Figure 4.9 demonstrates the use case
Analyze Java Elements.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Design for Analyzing Java element interactions
45
Figure 4.8: AST example
In detail once a resource change is detected, timing information and resource
name are gathered for the java interaction. If the resource was added/removed
then identiﬁcation of what was added/removed is done (ﬁle, folder) and these
events are registered. In case of an entire project deletion this branch of the dia-
gram will be executed several times. On the other hand, if the changed resource
was a type of java source code ﬁle then is further examined. An iteration of the
updated AST and the current methods of the java ﬁle at-hand are gathered.
Further, if the ﬁle was not previously modiﬁed, then the ﬁle at-hand is a new
entry. This means that all the methods detected from the previous stage need
to be stored and registered as new events. Otherwise, a comparison between the
newly retrieved methods and the stored methods for the ﬁle-at hand. Finally
the results from this comparison are registered as a new entry in the event log
for all methods added, removed or changed. Thereafter, the process awaits for
a next resource change.
==PAGE:56==
46
Design and Implementation
Figure 4.9: Activity Diagram: Analyze java elements
In addition the XML units had to be modiﬁed to accommodate this new type of
recording java element interactions. An additional data structure along with the
related schema for Rabbit Eclipse was created. In Figure4.10 shows the listed
ﬁelds:
• FUP_ID which is the full path to the corresponding resource ﬁle
• FILE_NAME which is simply the name of the resource
• FILE_TYPE which indicates whether the resource is a ﬁle, a folder, or a
project
• METHOD_NAME which is the name of the method
• METHOD_SIGN which is set as the signature of the method
• METHOD_TYPE which is set as the return type of the method
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Design for Analyzing Java element interactions
47
• METHOD_ACT which identiﬁes whether the method was added, re-
moved, or edited.
• TS_START which indicates when this java element interaction occurred
Figure 4.10: Fileupd - java interaction entry
4.3.3
Comparison of Design 1 and Design 2
To sum up, both designs mentioned in Section 4.3.1 and in Section 4.3.2 have
been implemented to enhance the secondary requirement this thesis, which was
to enable process mining of source code.
To pursue this, the exported event logs where built to server the minimum
requirements for process mining, case ID, activity and time-stamp as referenced
in Section 2.4.
The exported java and ﬁleupd event logs are similar, and serve the same purpose
of tracking a java element interaction. However, there are two fundamentals
diﬀerences. The ﬁrst diﬀerence is that Design 1 provides a compact version of
the java interaction, whereas Design 2 is more detailed and provides gathered
method information (i,e. sign, type, name, action). The other diﬀerence is that
Design 1 provides a starting time-stamp and ending time-stamp whereas Design
2 only provides a starting time-stamp.
Even though, both of the designs could be used to provide process mining for
java element interactions.
==PAGE:58==
48
Design and Implementation
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Process Mining Analysis
As discussed before in Section 2.4, process mining is an evolutionary technique
which can also be used to provide valuable knowledge for software engineering
[RMLvdA14] and [Say14]. This Chapter is dedicated to apply process mining on
the recorded event logs from the new implemented version of Rabbit Eclipse. The
attempt to reveal that process mining developers’ through interactions within
Eclipse IDE is possible is pursued by initiating an experiment.
During this
experiment, Rabbit Eclipse was able to retrieve the event logs from participants
and enable process mining successfully.
In the ﬁrst Section 5.1 of this Chapter the requirements to enable process min-
ing are analyzed. Further in Section 5.2, the approach followed to reﬁne the
raw event logs retrieved from Rabbit Eclipse plugin is explained. Thereafter,
the reﬁned event logs are imported into Disco and the derived conclusions are
presented in Section 5.3. Last but not least, Section 5.4 converse about the
overall results of this procedure.
==PAGE:60==
50
Process Mining Analysis
5.1
Disco Requirements Setup
To enable process mining using Disco, the selection among the three diﬀerent
techniques analyzed in Section 2.4 was required. Among them the most suitable
was the discovery technique. This technique is used when only an event log is
available for input and produces a process model explaining the behavior of the
recorded log.
Further, Disco requires the event log to be provided in a CSV or EXCEL format
and also to contain at least a case ID, an activity, and a time-stamp as mentioned
in Section 2.4.
For this reason, the most promising event logs generated by the Rabbit Eclipse,
modeled in the previous Chapter 4, are shown in Figure 5.1. These event logs
were modeled and implemented to meet the requirements for Disco.
These
logs precisely collect when (TS_START, TS_END) and where (FILENAME)
interactions have occurred.
Further, to establish a case ID the events were
provided with an identiﬁer (DEV_ID), where this identiﬁer is used to distinguish
which developer invoked the interaction.
Figure 5.1: The event logs used for process mining
Since, the modiﬁed version of Rabbit Eclipse can successfully retrieve these
organized event logs, the decision to retrieve a larger data set was taken. An
experiment to reveal developers’ workﬂow was designed and a plan of action
was constructed to reﬁne the raw event logs retrieved from the experiment. In
the following Section 5.2 the experiment and the plan of action are detailed.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Mining Approach
51
5.2
Mining Approach
In this section, the experiment to retrieve raw event logs from developers is de-
signed and the methodology to reﬁne the data set retrieved from Rabbit Eclipse
is indicated. The steps required to be followed in order to design and materialize
the experiment are shown in 5.2.
Collect Data
1
Prepare Data
2
Combine Data
3
Filter Data
4
Figure 5.2: Process Mining approach
Step 1: Collect data
The ﬁrst step in the approach is the collection of event logs to create a data
set. The current data set was derived from 6 participants who have an academic
==PAGE:62==
52
Process Mining Analysis
background. Most of the participants were familiar with Eclipse IDE, however,
their level of experience within Eclipse IDE diﬀers.
Participants were assigned a speciﬁc task and were given guidelines to setup
the tool in their Eclipse IDE. In Appendix B, the task and the guidelines are
presented in detail. Participants had to import the plugin to their Eclipse ﬁrst
and then follow the task. The task required the participant to create a small
project implementing an inheritance java example. A description as well as a
class diagram were provided, in order to clarify the task and to deﬁne names to
be used for classes and methods.
The reason behind requiring participants to follow the predeﬁned naming is to
allow feasibility of process mining with regards to aﬀected resources. Otherwise,
if participants were given the permission to use their own naming, then is highly
probable that a great variation between resources naming would be generated,
and therefore correlation of data would be hardly possible.
Step 2: Prepare data
Once the tool is established in Eclipse then it begins to capture interaction
events. This usually results the creation of noise events such as:
• data set information, (f.x. date see Figure 5.3), which is deﬁned when a
developer restarts Eclipse. This information is recorded, but is not useful,
since the desired event log is required to only contain the ﬁelds deﬁned
previously in Section 5.1.
• unrelated interactions, which are interactions with other projects existing
in the current workspace
• folder, project interactions (see Figure 5.4), which are out of the scope of
this analysis due to the nature of the assigned task.
Figure 5.3: Noise created by data set information
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Mining Approach
53
Figure 5.4: Noise created by interactions with folders and projects
These noise events are removed manually from event logs. The last modiﬁcation
to prepare the data set is to convert the exported XML format event logs to
CSV format. To make this possible a program which converts an XML ﬁle to a
CSV ﬁle was created.
At the end of this step, the noise have been removed and the XML logs have
been converted to CSV logs.
Step 3: Combine Data
The third step in the process as suggested in Figure 5.2 is to combine event logs
of the same type (Command logs, FileUpd logs, etc.). As a result one CSV ﬁle
for every type is created.
Step 4: Filter Data
The last step show in Figure 5.2, is to ﬁlter the data of CSV ﬁles. This means
that all entries generated which are invalid will be ﬁltered out. An invalid entry
is an entry which either it has been wrongly named or it has been marked with
the ﬁlename ﬁeld as invalid. A wrongly named entry is for example, when a
participant, instead of using correctly the requested naming "Test.java", used
"test.java". While the ﬁlename ﬁeld is marked as invalid when the participant
begins to interact with Eclipse IDE without initially selecting a ﬁle.
Furthermore, one of the participants produced a considerable amount of in-
teractions compared to the others. Consequently, the choice to ﬁlter out this
participant’s event logs was taken.
Step 5: Disco
The ﬁnal step is to access and shed more light into the data set which have been
captured and reﬁned. The data set is imported to Disco process mine tool and
the results obtained are elaborated in Section 5.3.
==PAGE:64==
54
Process Mining Analysis
5.3
Results from Disco
Throughout this section, the reﬁned event logs gathered as described in the pre-
vious Section 5.2 and are used to derive results for understanding of developers’
workﬂow within the environment of Eclipse. To do that, the reﬁned event logs
are imported to Disco. As introduced in Section 4.1, the option for case-id, ac-
tivity, time-stamp, resource are deﬁned and this enables the discovery process.
The derived disco diagrams are illustrated and discussed.
5.3.1
Result 1 - Most Commonly used Commands
The aim for this part is to reveal the most commonly used commands by devel-
opers.
To do that ﬁrstly, the command event log exported from Rabbit Eclipse was
imported to Disco. The selected options for the discovery process were: case-id
= developer id, activity = Command names, time-stamp = TS_START.
20
28
5
2
48
40
32
1
4
Undo
40
Save
82
Paste
32
Figure 5.5: The most commonly used commands.
Figure 5.5 shows that the most common commands used by participants, are
Save, Undo, Paste. Similarly, in a previous study [MKF06] which was related
to Java developers’ command usage within Eclipse, the most commonly used
commands were Save, Undo, Paste.
Secondly to investigate the commands further, the classiﬁcation of commands
was exploited, in Section 4.1.3. The command event log was used to derive this
result. The selected options for the discovery process were: case-id = developer
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Results from Disco
55
id, Activity = Categories, time-stamp = TS_START, Other Attributes = com-
mand names and Filenames. In Figure 5.6 the most commonly used categories
are demonstrated. These categories are Edit and Text-Editing which are related
to interactions of a developer within a java ﬁle.
4
1
1
5
7
104
8
7
1
3
3
1
10
39
2
2
3
2
2
1
Views
7
Edit
122
File
8
Text Editing
53
Source
16
Figure 5.6: The most commonly used categories of commands.
==PAGE:66==
56
Process Mining Analysis
5.3.2
Result 2 - Developers workﬂow
This part focuses on presenting the developers workﬂow within Eclipse IDE.
To start with, there are diﬀerent workﬂow techniques a developer can follow.
Two common workﬂow techniques for object oriented programming, addressed
in [DK03], are a top-down approach and a bottom up approach. In a top-down
approach, a developer begins with the main problem and then subdivides it
into sub-problems. Whereas, in a bottom-up approach, a developer begins with
sub-problems building up to the main problem. In relation to the assigned task,
Figure 5.7 displays the techniques.
In order to exploit these techniques, the command event log was used. The
selected options for the discovery process were: case-id = developer id, Activity
= File names, time-stamp = TS_START, Other Attributes = command names.
Figure 5.7: Class diagram related to bottom up and top down techniques for
the given task.
In Figure 5.8 the results generated from Disco are illustrated. Half of the partic-
ipants followed top down approach by selecting to begin with DessertItem.java
which was the superclass. The other half of the participants followed a bottom
up approach by selecting to begin implementation with Candy.java or Sun-
dae.java which inherit from the superclass DessertItem.java.
Moreover, from this ﬁgure 5.8 is also observable that Cookie.java is the ﬁle with
the most interactions in comparison to the IceCream.java ﬁle which had the
less interactions. This is due to the reason, that Cookie.java was slightly more
complicated that IceCream.java.
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Results from Disco
57
89
7
2
3
68
2
3
77
1
4
5
2
107
1
6
3
21
2
1
3
1
3
1
1
Candy.java
102
Sundae.java
79
DessertItem.java
86
Cookie.java
116
IceCream.java
30
Figure 5.8: The class ﬁles (Candy, Cookie, Sundae, DessertItem, IceCream)
which are requested to be created by the developer throughout the
given task
5.3.3
Result 3 - Compare Developers workﬂow between
two classes
With regards to the observation made in Section 5.3.2 for the amount of inter-
actions in Cookie.java and IceCream.java, an investigation was carried out on
these two ﬁles. Scope of this investigation is the comparison of how developers
treat ﬁles with diﬀerent diﬃculty level.
To make this possible the command event log was imported to Disco.
The
selected options for the discovery process were: case-id = developer id, activity
= Command names, time-stamp = TS_START and attributes = ﬁlename and
categories.
For Figure 5.9 a ﬁlter to keep only the interactions related to Cookie.java was
enabled and similarly for Figure 5.10 the ﬁlter was set to IceCream.java.
What is prominent in these Figures, 5.9 and 5.10, is the commands appeared
belong mainly to Edit and Text - Editing categories (see Appendix A.1). More
==PAGE:68==
58
Process Mining Analysis
1
5
4
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
Copy
6
Paste
10
Delete Line
1
Undo
1
Show Source Quick Menu
2
Content Assist
3
Generate Getters and Setters
2
Line End
1
Cut
1
Figure 5.9: The commands used during the implementation of Cookie.java
speciﬁcally, commands like Undo, Copy, Paste belong to Edit category and
commands like Line start, Line End, Previous word, Delete Line belong to Text
Editing category.
It is noteworthy that Cookie.java has more Edit commands than IceCream.java
whereas, IceCream.java has more Text-Editing commands than Cookie.java.
From these ﬁndings is shown that the developers’ workﬂow changes when dealing
with larger source ﬁles.
Another distinct observation drawn from Figure 5.9 is the implementation ap-
proaches for Cookie.java. One approach is, when participants used Edit com-
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Results from Disco
59
1
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Delete Line
1
Content Assist
1
Line End
2
Copy
1
Previous Word
4
Line Start
2
Paste
1
Figure 5.10: The commands used during the implementation of IceCream.java
mands (Copy, Paste, Cut) and the other approach is when participants used
Text Editing and Source commands (Quick Menu, Content Assist, Generate
getters and setters). The variation of participants’ experience within Eclipse
IDE is highlighted by the variety of usage of commands participants chose while
implementing the task.
==PAGE:70==
60
Process Mining Analysis
5.3.4
Result 4 - Compare Developers workﬂow in a spe-
ciﬁc class
In this part developers’ workﬂow through the implementation of a speciﬁc class
is studied.
The java event log was imported to Disco and the selected options for the dis-
covery process were: case-id = developer id, activity = method name and ﬁle-
name, time-stamp = TS_START and attributes = action (f.x. added, removed,
changed as described in Section 4.3).
Figure 5.11: Methods and main body of Cookie.java related to bottom up and
top down techniques
The workﬂow techniques top down and bottom up, as mentioned before in
Section 5.3.2, also apply for java source code. An example is shown in Figure
5.11, to illustrate that top down approach means implementing the main body of
the class ﬁrst and then implementing the methods in detail. Whereas, bottom
up approach, means implementing method by method the main body of the
class.
For Figure 5.12 a ﬁlter to keep only the interactions related to Cookie.java was
enabled and similarly for Figure 5.13 the ﬁlter was set to Sundae.java. These
ﬁgures clearly show the diﬀerent approach developers had while implementing
these ﬁles.
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Summary
61
2
2
2
2
4
1
2
2
3
Cookie.java-getCost
5
Cookie.java-Cookie
4
Cookie.java-getNumber
4
Cookie.java-getPricePerDozen
4
Figure 5.12: The java events interaction in regards to a speciﬁed class called
Cookie.java
5.4
Summary
Overall this experiment, Rabbit Eclipse was able to retrieve the event logs from
participants and enable process mining successfully.
An understanding of developers’ workﬂow throughout their interactions in Eclipse
IDE was accomplished by:
• Identifying the most commonly used commands and categories of com-
mands, (see result 1 in Section 5.3.1)
• Identifying the two object oriented programming techniques, top down
and bottom up (see result 2 in Section 5.3.2 and result 4 in Section 5.3.4)
• Identifying how developers’ workﬂow might diverse when building a small
or a large source code (see result 3 in Section 5.3.3)
==PAGE:72==
62
Process Mining Analysis
2
3
3
1
2
2
4
Sundae.java-getCost
5
Sundae.java-Sundae
4
Sundae.java-getTopping
4
Figure 5.13: The java events interaction in regards to a speciﬁed class called
Sundae.java
Nevertheless, while inspecting the retrieved interactions, the realization that the
particular given task to developers was relatively small came through. The ca-
pabilities of the implemented version of Rabbit Eclipse to capture the inﬂuenced
ﬁles were not fully exploited, since the task did not require any high re-factoring,
or navigation.
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
In this study, the approach towards mining developers’ workﬂow, throughout
their interactions within an IDE, was investigated. This topic was chosen due
to its considerable potentials and due to the fact that there was a notable room
for improvement. The methodology was structured in three main axes. Firstly,
the investigation, which contained the analysis and selection of potential tools,
suitable for the extraction developers’ interactions from IDE. Secondly, the de-
sign and implementation, which included the changes required for the enable-
ment of the collection of developers’ interactions within an IDE and process
mining. Thirdly, the process mining analysis, in which the implemented tool
was evaluated, by initiating an experiment with external users - developers, the
workﬂow of whom was revealed. Finally, conclusions were carried out examin-
ing to which extent the initial targets were accomplished and identifying future
improvements.
Throughout the conducted investigation, the most widely known IDEs were re-
viewed and the IDE with the most adjustable framework - Eclipse - was selected.
In more detail existing plug-ins provided by Eclipse were analyzed. In total 7
plug-ins capable to retrieve developers’ interaction were identiﬁed and com-
pared based on their capabilities and adaptability. With respect to this, Rabbit
Eclipse plugin was chosen to be further investigated for several reasons, most
important of which were its well-structured online provided source code includ-
ing its accuracy in recording developers’ interactions performed by a developer.
==PAGE:74==
64
Conclusion
Subsequently, the architecture of Rabbit Eclipse was overviewed thoroughly, in
order for its operation to be understood and its limitations to be detected. The
last part of the research contained the investigation of process mining technique
and what was required in order for it to be enabled.
Although, Rabbit Eclipse provided statistical results on developers’ interaction,
it did not enable process mining. Due to this limitation, two major modiﬁca-
tions were required on its operation in order to accommodate process mining.
The ﬁrst was the adjustment of the tool in order to record time-stamps, a case
id, and a classiﬁcation. The second regarded the revision of tool’s perception
on developers’ interactions. In order for the latter to be achieved, it was essen-
tial that developers’ interaction were combined with the inﬂuenced resources.
Furthermore, a change of secondary importance was made in order to provide
process mining on source code. Finally, since the guidelines for implementing
the modiﬁcations and the faced challenges for Rabbit Eclipse were designed, the
implementation was realized.
After the implementation of the mentioned modiﬁcations, Rabbit Eclipse was
capable of recording the developers’ interactions with respect to process mining
requirements as desired. To realize this, an experiment was initiated in order
to prove the valid functionality of the tool.
A data set was created, which
contained recorded developers’ interactions from six participants. This data set
was reﬁned following a created by the author methodology in order to remove
noise and enable the application of process mining.
Ultimately, three signiﬁcant derived results were analyzed and illustrated in
diagrams. The ﬁrst one was the successful identiﬁcation of the most commonly
used commands and categories. The second one was the identiﬁcation of two
object oriented programming techniques, which are top down and bottom up.
The last one was the identiﬁcation of how developers’ workﬂow might diverse
when implementing a small or a large source code. These results indicate that
ﬁnally it is possible to mine developers’ workﬂow from their interactions within
an IDE.
It is expected that this thesis work will inspire successors and encourage them
to conduct a further research towards mining developers’ workﬂow by means
of their interactions within an IDE. Being a promising, adaptable and easily
adjustable tool, Rabbit Eclipse can be utilized for further investigations with
regards to mining developers’ workﬂows.
It is proposed that a more elaborated research can be carried out in order to ex-
pose the full capabilities of the tool implemented during the thesis. Speciﬁcally,
an experiment that explores refactoring and correcting bugs via an unknown
code, could potentially reveal promising results in terms of the workﬂow.
==PAGE:75==
65
Another crucial feature embedded into the Rabbit Eclipse is the capability of
recording developers’ source code interactions. Hence, this feature enables an
onward investigation of the process mining source code.
==PAGE:76==
66
Conclusion
==PAGE:77==
Appendix A
Appendix 1: Rabbit Eclipse
In this appendix, additional information regarding the Rabbit Eclipse are pre-
sented.
A.1
Commands
Throughout this appendix section, tables representing the available commands
are gathered. These tables are separated according to [Bur09] diﬀerent cate-
gories. Each table contains 7 columns, command name, key binding, v, menu
binding, v and located. For each command, the key binding and menu binding
are retrieve from the book [Bur09]. Further these two columns are followed by
a column called V, which is indicating whether or not Rabbit Eclipse is capable
of capturing the information from the speciﬁed command. Last and most im-
portant the column Located deﬁnes on which ﬁles the command at-hand has an
eﬀect when executed.
==PAGE:78==
CMD Name  
Key Binding 
V 
Menu Binding 
V 
Located 
Add Bookmark 
 
- 
Edit-> add bookmark 
+ 
ON FILE 
Add Task 
 
- 
Edit-> add task 
+ 
ON FILE 
Content Assist 
ctrl+space 
+ 
Edit-> content assist 
+ 
ON FILE 
Context Information 
ctrl+shift+space 
+ 
Edit-> parameter hints 
+ 
ON FILE 
Copy 
ctrl+c | ctrl+Insert 
+ 
Edit->copy 
+ 
ON FILE 
Cut 
ctrl+x | shift+delete 
+ 
Edit->cut 
+ 
ON FILE 
Delete 
Delete 
+ 
Edit->Delete 
+ 
ON FILE 
Find and Replace 
Ctrl+F 
+ 
Edit->Find/Replace 
+ 
ON FILE 
Find Next 
ctrl+K 
+ 
Edit->Find Next 
+ 
ON FILE 
Find Previous 
ctrl+shift+K 
+ 
Edit->Find Previous 
+ 
ON FILE 
Incremental Find 
ctrl+J 
+ 
Edit-> Incremental Find Next 
+ 
ON FILE 
Incremental Find 
Reverse 
ctrl+shift+J 
+ 
Edit-> Incremental Find Previous 
+ 
ON FILE 
Paste 
ctrl+V | shift+Insert 
+ 
Edit-> Paste 
+ 
ON FILE 
Quick Diff Toggle 
ctrl+shift+Q 
+ 
 
+ 
ON FILE 
Quick Fix 
ctrl+1 
+ 
Edit->Quick Fix 
+ 
ON FILE 
Redo 
ctrl+Y 
+ 
Edit->Redo 
+ 
ON FILE 
Restore Last 
Selection 
alt+shift+down 
+ 
Edit->Expand Selection To -> 
Restore Last Selection 
+ 
ON FILE 
Revert Line 
 
- 
 
- 
 
Revert to Saved 
 
- 
File->Revert 
- 
 
Select All 
ctrl+A 
+ 
Edit->Select All 
+ 
ON FILE 
Select Enclosing 
Element 
alt+shift+up 
+ 
Edit->Expand Selection To -> 
Enclosing Element 
+ 
ON FILE 
Select Next Element 
alt+shift+right 
+ 
Edit->Expand Selection To -> Next 
Element 
+ 
ON FILE 
Select Previous 
Element 
alt+shift+left 
+ 
Edit->Expand Selection To -> 
Previous Element 
+ 
ON FILE 
Shift Left 
 
- 
Source->Shift Left 
+ 
ON FILE 
Shift Right 
 
- 
Source->Shift Right 
+ 
ON FILE 
Show Line Numbers 
 
- 
 
- 
 
Show Tooltip 
Description 
F2 
+ 
Edit->Show Tooltip Description 
+ 
ON FILE 
Toggle Insert Mode 
ctrl+shift+insert 
+ 
Edit->Smart Insert Mode 
+ 
ON FILE 
Undo 
ctrl+Z 
+ 
Edit->Undo 
+ 
ON FILE 
Word Completion 
alt+/ 
+ 
Edit->Word Completion 
+ 
ON FILE 
 
==PAGE:79==
CMD Name 
Key Binding 
V 
Menu Binding 
V 
Located 
Close 
ctrl+F4 | ctrl+W 
+ 
File->Close 
+ 
NEXT FILE 
Close All 
ctrl+shift+F4 | 
ctrl+shift+W 
! 
File->Close All 
! 
CLOSE ALL - ERROR 
Exit 
 
- 
File->Exit 
+ 
 
Export 
 
- 
File->Export 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Import 
 
- 
File->Import 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Move 
 
- 
File->Move 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
New 
ctrl+N 
+ 
File->New->Other 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
New Menu 
alt+shift+N 
+ 
File->New 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Open File 
 
- 
File->Open File 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Open Workspace 
 
- 
File->Switch 
Workspace 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Print 
ctrl+P 
+ 
File->Print 
+ 
ON FILE 
Properties 
alt+enter 
+ 
File->Properties 
+ 
ON FILE 
Refresh 
F5 
+ 
File->Refresh 
+ 
ON FILE 
Rename 
F2 
+ 
File->Rename 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Revert 
 
- 
File->Revert 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Save 
ctrl+S 
+ 
File->Save 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Save All 
ctrl+shift+S 
+ 
File->Save All 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Save As 
 
- 
File->Save As 
+ 
ON FILE 
 
==PAGE:80==
CMD Name 
Key Binding 
V 
Menu Binding 
V 
Located 
Back 
 
- 
Navigate -> Goto -> back 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
Backward History 
alt+left 
+ 
Navigate->Back 
+ 
ON FILE 
forward 
 
- 
Navigate ->Goto->Forward 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
Forward History 
alt+right 
+ 
Navigate->Forward 
+ 
ON FILE 
Go Into 
 
- 
Navigate->Go Into 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
 
Go to Line 
ctrl+l 
+ 
Navigate->GotoLine 
+ 
ON FILE 
Go to matching bracket 
ctrl+shift+P 
+ 
Navigate->Goto-> Matching 
Bracket 
+ 
ON FILE 
Go to Next member 
ctrl+shift+down 
+ 
Navigate-> Goto -> Next 
Member 
+ 
ON FILE 
Go to Package 
 
- 
Navigate-> Goto->Package 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
 
Go to Previous member 
ctrl+shift+up 
+ 
Navigate->Goto->Previous 
Member 
+ 
ON FILE 
Go to resource 
 
- 
Navigate->Goto->Resource 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
 
Go to Type 
 
- 
Navigate->Goto->Type 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
Next  
ctrl. 
+ 
Navigate->Next 
+ 
ON FILE 
Open external Javadoc 
shift+f2 
+ 
Navigate->Open External 
jJvadoc 
- 
 
Open Declaration 
f3 
+ 
Navigate->Open declaration 
+ 
ON FILE 
Open cAll Hierarchy 
ctrl+alt+h 
+ 
 
- 
ON FILE 
Last edit location ctrl+Q 
 
- 
Navigate->Last Edit Location 
+ 
ON FILE 
Open structure 
ctrl f3 
+ 
 
- 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Open super implementation 
 
- 
Navigate -> Open Super 
Implementation 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Open Type 
ctrl+shift+T 
+ 
Navigate->Open Type 
+ 
ON FILE 
Open Type Hierarchy 
f4 
+ 
Navigate->Open Type Hierarchy 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Open Type in Hierarchy 
ctrl+shift+H 
+ 
Navigate->Open Type in 
Hierarchy 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Previous 
ctrl, 
+ 
Navigate->Previous 
+ 
ON FILE 
Quick Hierarchy 
ctrl+T 
+ 
Navigate->Quick Type Hierarchy 
+ 
ON FILE 
Quick OutLine 
ctrl+O 
+ 
Navigate->Quick Outline 
+ 
ON FILE 
Show in Menu 
alt+shift+w 
+ 
Navigate->Show In 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Show in Package 
 
- 
Navigate->Show In ->Package 
explorer 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Up 
 
- 
Navigate->Goto->Up one level 
- 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
CMD Name 
Key Binding 
V 
Menu Binding 
V 
Located 
CSV Reprository Exploring 
 
- 
Window->Open Perspective->Other 
+ 
ON FILE 
Debug 
 
- 
Window->Open Perspective->Debug 
+ 
ON FILE 
Java 
 
- 
Window->Open Perspective->Java 
+ 
ON FILE 
Java Browsing 
 
- 
Window->Open Perspective->Java Browsing 
+ 
ON FILE 
Java Type Hierarchy 
 
- 
Window->Open Perspective->Java Type Hierarchy 
+ 
ON FILE 
Team Synchronizing 
 
- 
Window->Open Perspective->Team Synchronizing 
+ 
ON FILE 
 
==PAGE:82==
CMD Name 
Key Binding 
V 
Menu Binding 
V 
Located 
Build All 
ctrl+b 
+ 
Project->Build All 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
Build Clean 
 
- 
Project->Clean 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
Build Project 
 
- 
Project->Build Project 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
Close Project 
 
- 
Project->Close Project 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
Generate Javadoc 
 
- 
Project->Generate Javadoc 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
Open Project 
 
- 
Project->Open Project 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
Properties 
 
- 
Project->Properties 
+ 
ON PROJECT 
reBuild All 
 
- 
 
- 
 
reBuild Project 
 
- 
 
- 
 
repeat Working Set Build 
 
- 
 
- 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
CMD Name 
Key Binding 
V 
Menu Binding 
V 
Located 
Add Class Load Breakpoint 
 
- 
Run->Add Class Load Breakpoint 
+ 
ON FILE 
Add Java Exception Breakpoint 
 
- 
Run->Add Java Exception Breakpoint 
+ 
ON FILE 
Debug ant Build 
alt+shift+d | q 
+ 
Run->Debug ant Build 
+ 
ON FILE 
Debug Eclipse Application 
alt+shift+d | e 
+ 
Run->Debug Eclipse Application 
+ 
ON FILE 
Debug Java applet 
alt+shift+d | a 
+ 
Run->Debug Java applet 
+ 
ON FILE 
Debug Java Application 
alt+shift+d | j 
+ 
Run->Debug Java Application 
+ 
ON FILE 
Debug JUnit Plug-in Test 
alt+shift+d | p 
+ 
Run->Debug JUnit Plug-in Test 
+ 
ON FILE 
Debug JUnit Test 
alt+shift+d | t 
+ 
Run->Debug JUnit Test 
+ 
ON FILE 
Debug Last launched 
F11 
+ 
Run->Debug Last launched 
+ 
ON FILE 
Debug SWT Application 
alt+shift+d |s 
+ 
Run->Debug SWT Application 
+ 
ON FILE 
Debug 
 
- 
Run->Debug 
+ 
ON FILE 
Display 
alt+shift+d 
+ 
Run->Display 
+ 
ON FILE 
EOF 
ctrl+z 
+ 
console view only 
+ 
ON FILE 
Execute 
ctrl+u 
+ 
Run->Execute 
+ 
ON FILE 
External Tools 
 
- 
Run->External Tools 
+ 
ON FILE 
Inspect 
ctrl+shift+i 
+ 
Run->Inspect 
+ 
ON FILE 
Profile Last Launched 
 
- 
Run->Profile Last Launched 
+ 
ON FILE 
Profile 
 
- 
Run->Profile 
+ 
ON FILE 
Remove All Breakpoints 
 
- 
Run->Remove All Breakpoints 
+ 
ON FILE 
Resume 
F8 
+ 
Run->Resume 
+ 
ON FILE 
Run ant Build 
alt+shift+x | q 
+ 
Run->Run ant Build 
+ 
ON FILE 
Run Eclipse Application 
alt+shift+x | e 
+ 
Run->Run Eclipse Application 
+ 
ON FILE 
Run Java applet 
alt+shift+x | a 
+ 
Run->Run Java applet 
+ 
ON FILE 
Run Java Application 
alt+shift+x | j 
+ 
Run->Run Java Application 
+ 
ON FILE 
Run JUnit Plug-in Test 
alt+shift+x | p 
+ 
Run->Run JUnit Plug-in Test 
+ 
ON FILE 
Run JUnit Test 
alt+shift+x | t 
+ 
Run->Run JUnit Test 
+ 
ON FILE 
Run Last launched 
ctrl+F11 
+ 
Run->Run Last launched 
+ 
ON FILE 
Run Last launched external tool 
 
- 
Run->Run Last launched external tool 
+ 
ON FILE 
Run SWT Application 
alt+shift+x 
+ 
Run->Run SWT Application 
+ 
ON FILE 
Run to Line 
ctrl+R 
+ 
Run->Run to Line 
+ 
ON FILE 
Run 
 
- 
Run->Run 
+ 
ON FILE 
Skip All Breakpoints 
 
- 
Run->Skip All Breakpoints 
+ 
ON FILE 
Step Into 
F5 
+ 
Run->Step Into 
+ 
ON FILE 
Step Into selection 
ctrl+F5 
+ 
Run->Step Into selection 
+ 
ON FILE 
Step Over 
F6 
+ 
Run->Step Over 
+ 
ON FILE 
Step Return 
F7 
+ 
Run->Step Return 
+ 
ON FILE 
Suspend 
 
- 
Run->Suspend 
+ 
ON FILE 
Terminate 
 
- 
Run->Terminate 
+ 
ON FILE 
Terminate and Relaunch 
 
- 
Run->Terminate and Relaunch 
+ 
ON FILE 
Toggle Line Breakpoint 
ctrl+shift+b 
+ 
Run->Toggle Line Breakpoint 
+ 
ON FILE 
Toggle Method Breakpoint 
 
- 
Run->Toggle Method Breakpoint 
+ 
ON FILE 
Toggle Step Filters 
shift+F5 
+ 
Run->Toggle Step Filters 
+ 
ON FILE 
Toggle watchpoint 
 
- 
Run->Toggle watchpoint 
+ 
ON FILE 
 
==PAGE:84==
CMD Name 
Key Binding 
V 
Menu Binding 
V 
Located 
Change Method Signature 
alt+shift+c 
+ 
Refactor->Change Method 
Signature 
+ 
Active file but may 
affect another file 
Convert Anonymous Class to 
Nested 
 
- 
Refactor->Convert Anonymous 
Class to Nested 
+ 
ON FILE 
Convert Local Variable to Field 
alt+shift+f 
+ 
Refactor->Convert Local 
Variable to Field 
+ 
ON FILE 
Encapsulate Field 
 
- 
Refactor->Encapsulate Field 
+ 
ON FILE 
Extract Constant 
 
- 
Refactor->Extract Constant 
+ 
ON FILE 
Extract Interface 
 
- 
Refactor->Extract Interface 
+ 
ON FILE 
Extract Local Variable 
alt+shift+l 
+ 
Refactor->Extract Local Variable 
+ 
ON FILE 
Extract Method 
alt+shift+m 
+ 
Refactor->Extract Method 
+ 
ON FILE 
Generalize Type 
 
- 
Refactor->Generalize Type 
+ 
ON FILE 
Infer Generic Type Arguments 
 
- 
Refactor->Infer Generic Type 
Arguments 
+ 
ON FILE 
InLine 
alt+shift+i 
+ 
Refactor->Inline 
+ 
ON FILE 
Introduce Factory 
 
- 
Refactor->Introduce Factory 
+ 
ON FILE 
Introduce Parameter 
 
- 
Refactor->Introduce Parameter 
+ 
ON FILE 
Move Refactoring 
alt+shift+v 
+ 
Refactor->Move 
+ 
Active file and affects 
other files 
Move Member Type to New 
File 
 
- 
Refactor->Move Member Type 
to New File 
+ 
Active file and affects 
other files 
Pull Up 
 
- 
Refactor->Pull Up 
+ 
ON FILE 
Push Down 
 
- 
Refactor->Push Down 
+ 
ON FILE 
Rename 
alt+shift+r 
+ 
Refactor->Rename 
+ 
Active file and affects 
other files 
Show Refactor Quick Menu 
alt+shift+t 
+ 
 
- 
 
Use Supertype where possible 
 
- 
Refactor->Use Supertype where 
possible 
+ 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
CMD Name 
Key Binding 
V 
Menu Binding 
V 
Located 
Declaration in 
Hierarchy 
 
- 
Search->Declaration in 
Hierarchy 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Declaration in 
Project 
 
- 
Search->Declaration in 
Project 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Declaration in 
Working Set 
 
- 
Search->Declaration in 
Working Set 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Declaration in 
Workspace 
 
- 
Search->Declaration in 
Workspace 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
File Search 
 
- 
Search->File Search 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Implementors in 
Project 
 
- 
Search->Implementors 
in Project 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Implementors in 
Working Set 
 
- 
Search->Implementors 
in Working Set 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Implementors in 
Workspace 
ctrl+h 
+ 
Search->Implementors 
in Workspace 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Open Search 
dialog 
 
- 
Search->Open Search 
dialog 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Read Access 
Hierarchy 
 
- 
Search->Read Access 
Hierarchy 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Read Access in 
Project 
 
- 
Search->Read Access in 
Project 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Read Access in 
Working Set 
 
- 
Search->Read Access in 
Working Set 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Read Access in 
Workspace 
 
- 
Search->Read Access in 
Workspace 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
References in 
Hierarchy 
 
- 
Search->References in 
Hierarchy 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
References in 
Project 
 
- 
Search->References in 
Project 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
References in 
Working Set 
 
- 
Search->References in 
Working Set 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
References in 
Workspace 
 
- 
Search->References in 
Workspace 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Referring Tests 
 
- 
Search->Referring Tests 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Search All 
occurrences in 
File Identifier 
 
- 
Search->Search All 
occurrences in File 
Identifier 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Search All 
occurrences in 
Throwing 
Exception 
 
- 
Search->Search All 
occurrences in Throwing 
Exception 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Search All 
occurrences in 
Implementing 
Methods 
ctrl+shift+u 
+ 
Search->Search All 
occurrences in 
Implementing Methods 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Search All 
occurrences in 
File Quick Menu 
 
- 
Search->Search All 
occurrences in File Quick 
Menu 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Write Access in 
Hierarchy 
 
- 
Search->Write Access in 
Hierarchy 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Write Access in 
Project 
 
- 
Search->Write Access in 
Project 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Write Access in 
Working Set 
 
- 
Search->Write Access in 
Working Set 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
Write Access in 
Workspace 
 
- 
Search->Write Access in 
Workspace 
+ 
ON FILE BUT MIGHT NAVIGATE ELSE 
 
==PAGE:86==
CMD Name 
Key Binding 
V 
Located 
Clear Mark 
 
- 
NOT CAPTURED 
Collapse 
ctrl+numpad_substract 
+ 
ON FILE 
Copy Lines 
ctrl+alt+down 
- 
NOT CAPTURED 
Cut Line 
 
- 
NOT CAPTURED 
Cut to Beginning of Line 
 
- 
NOT CAPTURED 
Cut to End of Line 
 
- 
NOT CAPTURED 
Delete Line 
ctrl+D 
+ 
ON FILE 
Delete Next 
Delete 
+ 
ON FILE 
Delete Next Word 
ctrl+Delete 
+ 
ON FILE 
Delete Previous 
 
- 
NOT CAPTURED 
Delete Previous Word 
ctrl+Backspace 
+ 
ON FILE 
Delete to Beginning of Line 
 
- 
NOT CAPTURED 
Delete to End of Line 
ctrl+shift+Delete 
+ 
ON FILE 
Duplicate Lines 
ctrl+alt+up 
+ 
ON FILE 
Expand 
ctrl+Numpad_add 
+ 
ON FILE 
Expand All 
ctrl+numpad_multiply 
+ 
ON FILE 
Insert Line Above Current Line 
ctrl+shift+enter 
+ 
ON FILE 
Insert Line Below Current Line 
shift+enter 
+ 
ON FILE 
Line Down 
Down 
+ 
ON FILE 
Line End 
End 
+ 
ON FILE 
Line Start 
Home 
+ 
ON FILE 
Line Up 
Up 
+ 
ON FILE 
Move Lines Down 
alt+down 
+ 
ON FILE 
Move Lines Up 
alt+up 
+ 
ON FILE 
Next Column 
 
- 
NOT CAPTURED 
Next Word 
ctrl+right 
+ 
ON FILE 
Page Down 
Page Down 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Page Up 
Page Up 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Previous Column 
 
+ 
ON FILE 
Previous Word 
ctrl+left 
+ 
ON FILE 
Scroll Line Down 
ctrl+Down 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Scroll Line Up 
ctrl+up 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Select Line Down 
shit+down 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Select Line End 
shift+end 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Select Line Start 
shift+home 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Select Line Up 
shift+up 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Select Next Column 
 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Select Next Word 
ctrl+shift+right 
+ 
ON FILE 
Select Page Down 
shift+Page Down 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Select Page Up 
shift+Page Up 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Select Previous Column 
 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Select Previous Word 
ctrl+shift+left 
+ 
ON FILE 
Select Text End 
ctrl+shift+End 
+ 
ON FILE 
Select Text Start 
ctrl+shift+home 
+ 
ON FILE 
Select Window End 
 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Select Window Start 
 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Set Mark 
 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Swap Mark 
 
 
NOT CAPTURED 
Text End 
ctrl+End 
+ 
ON FILE 
Text Start 
ctrl+home 
+ 
ON FILE 
To Lower Case 
ctrl+shift+Y 
+ 
ON FILE 
To Upper Case 
ctrl+shift+X 
+ 
ON FILE 
Toggle Folding 
ctrl+numpad_divide 
+ 
ON FILE 
Toggle Overwrite 
Insert 
+ 
ON FILE 
Window End 
 
- 
NOT CAPTURED 
Window Start 
 
- 
NOT CAPTURED 
 
==PAGE:87==
CMD Name 
Key Binding 
V 
Menu Binding 
V 
Located 
Ant 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Ant 
+ 
ON FILE 
Breakpoints 
alt+shift+Q,B 
+ 
Window->Show View->Breakpoints 
+ 
ON FILE 
Cheat Sheets 
alt+shift+Q,H 
+ 
Window->Show View->Other->Cheat Sheets 
+ 
ON FILE 
Classic Search 
 
- 
Window->Show View-> Other->Basic->Classic 
Search 
+ 
ON FILE 
Console 
alt+shift+Q,C 
+ 
Window->Show View->Console 
+ 
ON FILE 
CVS Annotate 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->CVS Annotate 
+ 
ON FILE 
CVS Editors 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->CVS Editors 
+ 
ON FILE 
CVS Repositories 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->CVS Repositories 
+ 
ON FILE 
CVS Resource History 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->CVS Resource 
History 
+ 
ON FILE 
Debug 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Debug 
+ 
ON FILE 
Display 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Display 
+ 
ON FILE 
Error Log 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Error Log 
+ 
ON FILE 
Expressions 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Expressions 
+ 
ON FILE 
Java Call Hierarchy 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other-> Java-> Call 
Hierarchy 
+ 
ON FILE 
Java Declaration 
alt+shift+Q,D 
+ 
Window->Show View->Java Declaration 
+ 
ON FILE 
Java Members 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->Java Browsing-
>Members 
+ 
ON FILE 
Java Package Explorer 
alt+shift+Q,P 
+ 
Window->Show View->Package Explorer 
+ 
ON FILE 
Java Packages 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->Java Browsing-
>Packages 
+ 
ON FILE 
Java Projects 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->Java Browsing-
>Projects 
+ 
ON FILE 
Java Type Hierarchy 
alt+shift+Q,T 
+ 
Window->Show View->Type Hierarchy 
+ 
ON FILE 
Java Types 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->Java Browsing-
>Types 
+ 
ON FILE 
Javadoc 
alt+shift+Q,J 
+ 
Window->Show View->Javadoc 
+ 
ON FILE 
Junit 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->Java->Junit 
+ 
ON FILE 
Memory 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->Debug->Memory 
+ 
ON FILE 
Outline 
alt+shift+Q,O 
+ 
Window->Show View->Outline 
+ 
ON FILE 
Plug-in Dependencies 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->PDE->Plug-in 
Dependencies 
+ 
ON FILE 
Plug-in Registry 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->PDE Runtime-
>Registry 
+ 
ON FILE 
Plug-ins 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->PDE->Plug-ins 
+ 
ON FILE 
Problems 
alt+shift+Q,X 
+ 
Window->Show View->Problems 
+ 
ON FILE 
Registers 
 
- 
Window->Show View->Other->Debug->Registers 
+ 
ON FILE 
Search 
alt+shift+Q,S 
+ 
Window->Show View->Search 
+ 
ON FILE 
Synchronize 
alt+shift+Q,Y 
+ 
Window->Show View->Other->Team-
>Synchronize 
+ 
ON FILE 
Variables 
alt+shift+Q,V 
+ 
Window->Show View->Variables 
+ 
ON FILE 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
CMD Name 
Key Binding 
V 
Menu Binding 
V 
Located 
Active Editor 
F12 
+ 
Window->Navigation->Active Editor 
+ 
ON FILE 
Close All Perspectives 
 
- 
Window->Close All Perspectives 
+ 
ON FILE 
Close Perspective 
 
- 
Window->Close Perspective 
+ 
ON FILE 
Customize Perspective 
 
- 
Window->Customize Perspective 
+ 
ON FILE 
Hide Editors 
 
- 
 
 
 
Lock the Toolbars 
 
- 
 
 
 
Maximize Active View or 
Editor 
ctrl+M 
+ 
Window->Navigation->Maximize Active View or 
Editor 
+ 
ON FILE 
Minimize Active View or 
Editor 
 
- 
Window->Navigation->Minimize Active View or 
Editor 
+ 
ON FILE 
New Editor 
 
- 
Window->New Editor 
+ 
ON FILE 
New Window 
 
- 
Window->New Window 
+ 
ON FILE 
Next Editor 
ctrl+F6 
+ 
Window->Navigation->Next Editor 
+ 
ON FILE 
Next Perspective 
ctrl+F8 
+ 
Window->Navigation->Next Perspective 
+ 
ON FILE 
Next View 
ctrl+F7 
+ 
Window->Navigation->Next View 
+ 
ON FILE 
Open Editor Drop Down 
ctrl+E 
+ 
Window->Navigation->Switch to Editor 
+ 
ON FILE 
Pin Editor 
 
- 
 
 
 
Preferences 
 
- 
Window->Preferences 
+ 
ON FILE 
Previous Editor 
ctrl+shift+F6 
+ 
Window->Navigation->Previous Editor 
+ 
ON FILE 
Previous Perspectivve 
ctrl+shift+F8 
+ 
Window->Navigation->Previous Perspectivve 
+ 
ON FILE 
Previous View 
ctrl+shift+F7 
+ 
Window->Navigation->Previous View 
+ 
ON FILE 
Reset Perspective 
 
- 
Window->Reset Perspective 
+ 
ON FILE 
Save Perspective As 
 
- 
Window->Save Perspective As 
+ 
ON FILE 
Show Key Assist 
ctrl+shift+L 
+ 
Help->Show Key Assist 
 
 
Show Ruler Context Menu 
ctrl+F10 
+ 
 
 
 
Show Selected Element Only 
 
 
 
 
 
Show System Menu 
alt+- 
+ 
Window->Navigation->Show System Menu 
 
 
Show View Menu 
ctrl+F10 
+ 
Window->Navigation->Show View Menu 
 
 
Switch to Editor 
ctrl+shift+E 
+ 
Window->Navigation->Switch to Editor 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
CMD Name 
Key Binding 
V 
Menu Binding 
V 
Located 
Add Block Comment 
ctrl+shift+/ 
+ 
Source->Add Block Comment 
+ 
ON FILE 
Add Constructors from Superclass 
 
- 
Source->Add Constructors from Superclass 
+ 
ON FILE 
Add Import 
ctrl+shift+M 
+ 
Source->Add Import 
+ 
ON FILE 
Add Javadoc Comment 
alt+shift+J 
+ 
Source->Add Comment 
+ 
ON FILE 
Comment 
 
- 
 
- 
ON FILE 
Externalize Strings 
 
- 
Source->Externalize Strings 
+ 
ON FILE 
Find Strings to Externalize 
 
- 
Source->Find Strings to Externalize 
+ 
ON FILE 
Format 
ctrl+shift+F 
+ 
Source->Format 
+ 
ON FILE 
Format Element 
 
- 
Source->Format Element 
+ 
ON FILE 
Generate Constructor using Fields 
 
- 
Source->Generate Constructor using Fields 
+ 
ON FILE 
Generate Delegate Methods 
 
- 
Source->Generate Delegate Methods 
+ 
ON FILE 
Generate Getters and Setters 
 
- 
Source->Generate Getters and Setters 
+ 
ON FILE 
Indent Line 
 
- 
Source->Correnct Indentation 
+ 
ON FILE 
Organize Imports 
ctrl+shift+O 
+ 
Source->Organize Imports 
+ 
ON FILE 
Override/Implement Methods 
 
- 
Source->Override/Implement Methods 
+ 
ON FILE 
Quick Assist - Assign parameter to 
field 
 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
Quick Assist - Assign to field 
ctrl+2,F 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
Quick Assist - Assign to local 
variable 
ctrl+2,L 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
Quick Assist - Rename in file 
ctrl+2,R 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
Quick Assist - Replace statement 
with block 
 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
Quick Fix - Add cast 
 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
Quick Fix - Add import 
 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
Quick Fix - Add non -NLS tag 
 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
Quick Fix - Add throws declaration 
 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
Quick Fix Change to static access 
 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
Quick Fix Quality field access 
 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
Remove Block Comment 
ctrl+shift+/ 
+ 
Source->Remove Block Comment 
+ 
ON FILE 
Remove Occurrence Annotations 
alt+shift+U 
+ 
 
- 
ON FILE 
Show Source Quick Menu 
 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
Sort Members 
 
- 
Source->Sort Members 
+ 
ON FILE 
Surround with try/catch Block 
 
- 
Source->Surround with try/catch Block 
+ 
ON FILE 
Toggle Comment 
ctrl+/ 
|ctrl+7|ctrl+shift+C 
+ 
Source->Toggle Comment 
+ 
ON FILE 
Toggle Mark Occurrences 
alt+shift+O 
+ 
 
+ 
ON FILE 
Uncomment 
 
- 
 
- 
NOT 
CAPTURED 
==PAGE:90==
 
==PAGE:91==
Appendix B
Appendix 2
This appendix includes the experiment applied for process mining: the given
installation guide, the given guidelines, and the main class for their task and
also it includes the diagrams produced by the process mining tool.
B.1
Experiment
Instalation guide
This text contains installation instructions. After the installation, start Eclipse
and you will see a new view (named Rabbit) under the "Rabbit" category in
the show views dialog in Eclipse. A folder also named Rabbit will appear under
your home folder, it’s used as the XML database, it’s important that you don’t
modify ﬁles under this directory.
=== System Requirements: === * Eclipse 3.4, 3.5, or higher * JavaSE 1.6 or
higher * Mac, Linux, or Windows
=== Windows, Linux, Mac: === To install, unzip the zip ﬁle, then move the
two jar ﬁles into the *dropins* (or *plugins*) folder under your Eclipse’s folder,
==PAGE:92==
82
Appendix 2
you may create the *dropins* folder if it’s not already created.
Note: The plug-in will not be loaded if the Eclipse is placed under a system
folder, for example, the "Program Files" directory under Windows Vista/7, the
simplest way to ﬁx this is to move your Eclipse to another location such as your
home user folder, or see the alternative below.
=== Linux Alternative: === If you’ve installed Eclipse through the command
line (such as _"sudo apt-get install eclipse"_ on Ubuntu), then you can install
the plug-in by moving the two jar ﬁles into:
/.eclipse/_-your-current-version-
_/dropins (or *plugins*).
==PAGE:93==
The purpose of this short experiment is to gather data with regards to Developers' workflow in the 
Eclipse IDE. Therefore, please follow the task carefully and develop the required units. It is 
important to follow the given steps to setup the environment properly. It is crucial to follow the 
given naming for your variables methods and classes. 
 
 
Step 1 : Download  
 
• Download the jar files provided on the google drive. 
• Follow InstallationGuide.txt 
 
• Create a new workspace inside folder “Test”  
 
 
 
Figure 1: Create Workspace “Test” 
 
 
Step 2: The main task 
 
At this point you are ready to start. The tool is represented in the Figure 2. You can see 
information regarding the different activities being recorded if you press button refresh on the 
tool. Keep in mind that is highly important to follow the naming notations provided.  
To obtain valid results is expected that you follow (see Figure 3) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Rabbit Eclipse tool 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Class Diagram 
 
 
Create a project named Test. To activate and see the results of your programming session Follow 
the steps in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Activate Rabbit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
The task is fairly simple, the purpose is the implementation of inheritance hierarchy of classes 
derive from an abstract superclass.  
DessertShop class is given to you and contains the main functions of the shop and the test for 
your classes. Further your task is to implement: 
 
1. DessertItem abstract superclass.  
2. Candy, Cookie, IceCream classes which derive from DessertItem superclass 
3. Sundae class which derives from IceCream class 
 
The Candy class should be derived from the DessertItem class. A Candy item has a weight and a 
price per pound which are used to determine its cost. The cost should be calculated as (cost) * 
(price per pound).  
 
The Cookie class should be derived from the DessertItem class. A Cookie item has a number and a 
price per dozen which are used to determine its cost. The cost should be calculated as (cost) * 
(price per dozen). 
 
The IceCream class should be derived from the DessertItem class. An IceCream item simply has a 
cost. 
 
The Sundae class should be derived from the IceCream class. The cost of a Sundae is the cost of 
the IceCream plus the cost of the topping. 
 
 
Step 4: Extracting Data 
 
Your last step before finishing is to press the button refresh.  
The Plugin has now recorded your activity. The documents created can be found in Rabbit folders. 
For both mac and windows users, the data files will be found in /Users/<UserName>/Rabbit/<. 
Users. <username>. runtime-New_configuration>. 
 
Mac users might not be able to see these documents because they are considered as hidden files, 
therefore you'll need to enable hidden files. 
 
Please zip all the files created and send them to s150954@student.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:96==
86
Appendix 2
The main ﬁle given to developers was Dessertshop.java
1
2 public
c l a s s
DessertShop {
3
private
DessertItem [ ]
myDessertItems ;
4
private
i n t
numberOfItems ;
5
private
f i n a l
i n t RECEIPT_WIDTH = 30;
6
7
public
DessertShop ()
{
8
myDessertItems = new DessertItem [ 1 0 0 ] ;
9
numberOfItems = 0;
10
}
11
12
public
i n t
numberOfItems ()
{
13
return
numberOfItems ;
14
}
15
16
public
void
enterItem ( DessertItem
item )
{
17
t h i s . myDessertItems [ numberOfItems ] = item ;
18
numberOfItems++;
19
}
20
21
public
void
c l e a r ()
{
22
f o r ( i n t
i = 0;
i < numberOfItems ;
i++)
23
t h i s . myDessertItems [ i ] = n u l l ;
24
numberOfItems = 0;
25
}
26
27
public
i n t
totalCost ()
{
28
i n t sum = 0;
29
f o r ( i n t
i = 0;
i < numberOfItems ;
i++)
30
sum += myDessertItems [ i ] . getCost () ;
31
return sum ;
32
}
33
34
public
f i n a l
s t a t i c
double TAX_RATE = 6 . 5 ;
// 6.5%
35
public
f i n a l
s t a t i c
i n t COST_WIDTH = 6 ;
36
37
public
String
cents2dollarsAndCents ( i n t
cents )
{
38
String
s = "";
39
40
i f
( cents < 0)
{
41
s += "−";
42
cents ∗= −1;
43
}
44
45
i n t
d o l l a r s = cents
/
100;
46
cents = cents % 100;
47
48
i f
( d o l l a r s > 0)
49
s += d o l l a r s ;
50
51
s += " . " ;
==PAGE:97==
B.1 Experiment
87
52
53
i f
( cents < 10)
54
s += "0";
55
56
s += cents ;
57
58
return
s ;
59
}
60
61
public
i n t
totalTax ()
{
62
return
( i n t )Math . round ( t h i s . totalCost ()
∗TAX_RATE /
100.00) ;
63
}
64
65
public
String
toString ()
{
66
String
s = "";
//
r e c e i p t
67
68
69
s += "
" + " D e r l i c i o u s ! ! !
"+ "\n " ;
70
s += "
" + "−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−" + "\n " ;
71
72
f o r ( i n t
j = 0;
j < numberOfItems ;
j++){
73
74
String
l = myDessertItems [ j ] . getName () ;
//
items
of
every
l i n e
75
76 //
String
item = myDessertItems [ j ] . getClass () . toString ( ) .
substring (6) ;
//
get
the
item
category
77
78
String
p = cents2dollarsAndCents ( myDessertItems [ j ] . getCost () )
;
//
p r i c e
of
every
item
79
i f
(p . length () > COST_WIDTH)
//
v e r i f y
the
p r i c e
i s
within
length
80
p = p . substring (0 , COST_WIDTH) ;
81
82
i f
( myDessertItems [ j ]
i n s t a n c e o f
IceCream )
{
//
print
i f
i c e
cream
83
while ( l . length () < RECEIPT_WIDTH −p . length () ) {
84
l += "
";
85
}
86
s += l + p + "\n ";
87
}
88
e l s e
i f
( myDessertItems [ j ]
i n s t a n c e o f
Sundae )
{
//
print
i f
Sundae
89
90
s += (( Sundae ) myDessertItems [ j ] ) . getTopping ( ) + " Sundae
with\n ";
91
92
while ( l . length () < RECEIPT_WIDTH −p . length () ) {
93
l += "
";
94
}
95
s += l + p + "\n ";
96
}
97
e l s e
i f
( myDessertItems [ j ]
i n s t a n c e o f
Candy) {
//
print
i f
Candy
98
s += (( Candy)
myDessertItems [ j ] ) . getWeight () + "
l b s @ " +
==PAGE:98==
88
Appendix 2
99
cents2dollarsAndCents ( ( ( Candy)
myDessertItems [ j ] ) .
getPricePerPound () ) + " / lb . \ n " ;
100
101
while ( l . length () < RECEIPT_WIDTH −p . length () ) {
102
l += "
";
103
}
104
s += l + p + "\n ";
105
}
106
e l s e
{
//
print
i f
Cookie
107
s += (( Cookie ) myDessertItems [ j ] ) . getNumber () + " @ " +
108
cents2dollarsAndCents ( ( ( Cookie ) myDessertItems [ j ] ) .
getPricePerDozen () ) + " /dz\n ";
109
110
while ( l . length () < RECEIPT_WIDTH −p . length () ) {
111
l += "
";
112
}
113
s += l + p + "\n ";
114
}
115
}
116
117
String
l i n e = "\nTax ";
118
String
tax = cents2dollarsAndCents ( t h i s . totalTax ( ) ) ;
//
print
tax
119
while ( l i n e . length () <= RECEIPT_WIDTH −tax . length () )
120
l i n e += "
";
121
s += l i n e + tax ;
122
123
String
totalCost = cents2dollarsAndCents ( t h i s . totalCost () +
t h i s . totalTax () ) ;
//
print
t o t a l
cost
124
l i n e = "\ nTotal
Cost ";
125
while ( l i n e . length () <= RECEIPT_WIDTH −totalCost . length ( ) )
126
l i n e += "
";
127
s += l i n e + totalCost ;
128
129
return
s ;
130
}
131
public
s t a t i c
void
main ( String [ ]
args )
{
132
133
DessertShop
checkout = new DessertShop ( ) ;
134
135
checkout . enterItem (new Candy(" Peanut
Butter Fudge " ,
2.25 ,
399) ) ;
136
checkout . enterItem (new IceCream (" Vanilla
Ice
Cream" ,105) ) ;
137
checkout . enterItem (new Sundae ("Choc .
Chip
Ice
Cream" ,145 ,
"
Hot Fudge " ,
50) ) ;
138
checkout . enterItem (new Cookie (" Oatmeal
Raisin
Cookies " ,
4 ,
399) ) ;
139
140
System . out . p r i n t l n ("\nNumber of
items :
" + checkout .
numberOfItems () + "\n") ;
141
System . out . p r i n t l n ("\ nTotal
cost :
" + checkout . totalCost ()
+ "\n") ;
142
System . out . p r i n t l n ("\ nTotal
tax :
" + checkout . totalTax ( ) +
"\n") ;
143
System . out . p r i n t l n ("\ nCost + Tax :
" + ( checkout . totalCost ( )
==PAGE:99==
B.2 Disco Results
89
+ checkout . totalTax () ) + "\n") ;
144
System . out . p r i n t l n ( checkout ) ;
145
146
checkout . c l e a r () ;
147
148
checkout . enterItem (new IceCream (" Strawberry
Ice
Cream" ,145)
) ;
149
checkout . enterItem (new Sundae (" Vanilla
Ice
Cream" ,105 ,
"
Caramel " ,
50) ) ;
150
checkout . enterItem (new Candy("Gummy Worms" ,
1.33 ,
89) ) ;
151
checkout . enterItem (new Cookie (" Chocolate
Chip
Cookies " ,
4 ,
399) ) ;
152
checkout . enterItem (new Candy(" Salt
Water Taffy " ,
1. 5 ,
209) )
;
153
checkout . enterItem (new Candy("Candy Corn " ,3 .0 ,
109) ) ;
154
155
System . out . p r i n t l n ("\nNumber of
items :
" + checkout .
numberOfItems () + "\n") ;
156
System . out . p r i n t l n ("\ nTotal
cost :
" + checkout . totalCost ()
+ "\n") ;
157
System . out . p r i n t l n ("\ nTotal
tax :
" + checkout . totalTax ( ) +
"\n") ;
158
System . out . p r i n t l n ("\ nCost + Tax :
" + ( checkout . totalCost ( )
+ checkout . totalTax () ) + "\n") ;
159
System . out . p r i n t l n ( checkout ) ;
160
}
161 }
B.2
Disco Results
==PAGE:100==
1
11
1
19
1
9
4
3
1
1
3
2
1
1
1
1
48
2
6
4
2
2
6
4
Show View
8
Undo
40
Open File...
4
Delete Resources
6
Save
82
Previous Word
19
Next Word
12
Copy
22
Paste
32
Generate Getters and Setters
6
Content Assist
20
New
10
Line Start
6
Line End
6
==PAGE:101==
4
1
1
5
1
1
7
104
8
7
2
3
1
1
3
1
1
1
10
39
2
2
3
2
2
1
Views
7
Edit
122
Uncategorized
4
File
8
Refactoring
2
Text Editing
53
Source
16
Help
1
==PAGE:102==
20
28
5
2
48
40
32
1
4
Undo
40
Save
82
Paste
32
==PAGE:103==
4
1
1
5
7
104
8
7
1
3
3
1
10
39
2
2
3
2
2
1
Views
7
Edit
122
File
8
Text Editing
53
Source
16
==PAGE:104==
89
7
2
3
68
2
3
77
1
4
5
2
107
1
6
3
21
2
1
3
1
3
1
1
Candy.java
102
Sundae.java
79
DessertItem.java
86
Cookie.java
116
IceCream.java
30
==PAGE:105==
1
5
4
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
Copy
6
Paste
10
Delete Line
1
Undo
1
Show Source Quick Menu
2
Content Assist
3
Generate Getters and Setters
2
Line End
1
Cut
1
==PAGE:106==
1
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Delete Line
1
Content Assist
1
Line End
2
Copy
1
Previous Word
4
Line Start
2
Paste
1
==PAGE:107==
1
1
2
3
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
Candy.java-Candy
4
Candy.java-getWeight
4
Candy.java-getPricePerPound
5
Candy.java-getCost
6
==PAGE:108==
2
2
2
2
4
1
2
2
3
Cookie.java-getCost
5
Cookie.java-Cookie
4
Cookie.java-getNumber
4
Cookie.java-getPricePerDozen
4
==PAGE:109==
2
3
3
2
2
3
1
IceCream.java-getCost
5
IceCream.java-IceCream
7
==PAGE:110==
2
3
3
1
2
2
4
Sundae.java-getCost
5
Sundae.java-Sundae
4
Sundae.java-getTopping
4
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[2.518]
Creative
Commons
Attribution
2.5.
Android
Stu-
dio.
https://developer.android.com/studio/index.
html, 2018. [Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[Bur09]
Ed Burnette. Eclipse IDE Pocket Guide. O’Reilly Media,
Inc., 2009.
[Car16]
Pierre Carbonnelle.
Top IDE index is created by analyz-
ing how often ides are searched on google. https://pypl.
github.io/IDE.html, 2016.
[Online; accessed March 1,
2018].
[Cod11]
Google Code. Rabbit Eclipse Description. https://code.
google.com/archive/p/rabbit-eclipse/, 2011.
[Online;
accessed March 1, 2018].
[Com18]
Eclipse Community.
Mylyn Description.
https://www.
eclipse.org/mylyn/, 2018.
[Online; accessed March 1,
2018].
[DK03]
Yves
Pigneur
Shusma
Patel
Dimitri
Konstantas,
Michel Leonard.
Object-Oriented Information Systems.
Springer, Geneva, Switzerland, 2003.
[FKA+05]
James Fogarty, Andrew J. Ko, Htet Htet Aung, Elspeth
Golden, Karen P. Tang, and Scott E. Hudson. Examining
task engagement in sensor-based statistical models of human
interruptibility.
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
==PAGE:112==
102
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’05, page 331,
2005.
[Flo16]
State Of Flow.
Eclipse Metrics.
https://marketplace.
eclipse.org/content/eclipse-metrics, 2016.
[Online;
accessed March 1, 2018].
[Fou18a]
Eclipse Foundation. Eclipse IDE. https://www.eclipse.
org/, 2018. [Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[Fou18b]
Eclipse Foundation.
Usage Data Collector.
https://
www.eclipse.org/org/usagedata/, 2018. [Online; accessed
March 1, 2018].
[Gen18]
LLC
Genuitec.
Darkest
Dark
Theme
w/De-
vStyle.
https://marketplace.eclipse.org/content/
darkest-dark-theme-wdevstyle, 2018.
[Online; accessed
March 1, 2018].
[Git11]
GitHub.
Mylyn
Repository.
https://github.com/
smilebase/org.eclipse.mylyn.github, 2011. [Online; ac-
cessed March 1, 2018].
[Git15a]
GitHub.
iTrace
Repository.
https://github.com/
trshaffer/iTrace/blob/master/README.md, 2015.
[On-
line; accessed March 1, 2018].
[Git15b]
GitHub. Rabbit Eclipse Repository. https://github.com/
aronlurie/rabbit-eclipse, 2015. [Online; accessed March
1, 2018].
[Git17]
GitHub.
TimeKeeper Repository.
https://github.com/
turesheim/eclipse-timekeeper, 2017.
[Online; accessed
March 1, 2018].
[Git18]
GitHub.
Metrics
Repository.
https://github.com/
qxo/eclipse-metrics-plugin/tree/master/net.
sourceforge.metrics,
2018.
[Online;
accessed March
1, 2018].
[GMR17]
Marko Gasparic, Gail C. Murphy, and Francesco Ricci. A
context model for IDE-based recommendation systems. Jour-
nal of Systems and Software, 128:200–219, 2017.
[Gu12]
Zhongxian Gu. Capturing and exploiting ﬁne-grained IDE
interactions. Proceedings - International Conference on Soft-
ware Engineering, pages 1630–1631, 2012.
==PAGE:113==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
103
[jax10]
jaxenter.
New
Time-Tracking
Plugin
For
Eclipse.
https://jaxenter.com/
new-time-tracking-plugin-for-eclipse-100491.html,
2010. [Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[KMCA06]
Andrew J. Ko, Brad A. Myers, Michael J. Coblenz, and
Htet Htet Aung. An exploratory study of how developers
seek, relate, and collect relevant information during software
maintenance tasks.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engi-
neering, 32(12):971–987, 2006.
[Los17]
Andrey
Loskutov.
Bytecode
Outline.
https://
marketplace.eclipse.org/content/bytecode-outline,
2017. [Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[LW05]
Channing Walton Lance Walton.
State of ﬂow, Eclipse
Metrics.
http://www.stateofflow.com/projects/16/
eclipsemetrics, 2005. [Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[LWH05]
Dright Ho Laurie Williams and Sarah Heckman.
Met-
rics Tutorial. http://realsearchgroup.org/SEMaterials/
tutorials/metrics/, 2005.
[Online; accessed March 1,
2018].
[Mic18]
Microsoft.
Visual Studio.
https://www.visualstudio.
com/, 2018. [Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[MKF06]
G.C. Murphy, M. Kersten, and L. Findlater. How are Java
software developers using the Elipse IDE? IEEE Software,
23(4):76–83, 2006.
[ML13a]
Roberto Minelli and Michele Lanza. Visualizing the workﬂow
of developers. 2013 1st IEEE Working Conference on Soft-
ware Visualization - Proceedings of VISSOFT 2013, pages
2–5, 2013.
[ML13b]
Roberto Minelli and Michele Lanza. Visualizing the workﬂow
of developers. 2013 1st IEEE Working Conference on Soft-
ware Visualization - Proceedings of VISSOFT 2013, pages
2–5, 2013.
[MML15]
Roberto Minelli, Andrea Mocci, and Michele Lanza. I Know
What You Did Last Summer - An Investigation of How De-
velopers Spend Their Time. IEEE International Conference
on Program Comprehension, 2015-Augus:25–35, 2015.
==PAGE:114==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[MMRL16]
Roberto Minelli,
Andrea Mocci,
Romain Robbes,
and
Michele Lanza. Taming the IDE with ﬁne-grained interaction
data. IEEE International Conference on Program Compre-
hension, 2016-July(Dcc):1–10, 2016.
[oDC18]
Trustees of Dartmouth College.
BASIC Begins at Dart-
mouth.
http://www.dartmouth.edu/basicfifty/basic.
html, 2018. [Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[PR12]
Chris Parnin and Spencer Rugaber. Programmer information
needs after memory failure. 2012 20th IEEE International
Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC), pages 123–
132, 2012.
[pWT14]
proﬁtbricks
William
Toll.
Top
48
Integrated
Developer
Environments
(IDEs)
&
Code
Ed-
itors.
https://blog.profitbricks.com/
top-integrated-developer-environments-ides/,
2014.
[Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[Rei18]
Steve Reiss. Code Bubbles. http://cs.brown.edu/~spr/
codebubbles/, 2018. [Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[RMLvdA14]
Vladimir A. Rubin, Alexey A. Mitsyuk, Irina A. Lomazova,
and Wil M. P. van der Aalst. Process mining can be applied
to software too!
Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement - ESEM ’14, pages 1–8, 2014.
[RND09]
David
Rathlisberger,
Oscar
Nierstrasz,
and
Stephane
Ducasse. Autumn leaves: Curing the window plague in IDEs.
Proceedings - Working Conference on Reverse Engineering,
WCRE, pages 237–246, 2009.
[Rud15]
Julia Rudnitckaia. Process Mining - Data Science in Action.
2015.
[Say14]
O. K. Sayiam, R., Sahingoz.
A process mining approach
in Software Development and Testing Process:
A case
study. World Congress on Engineering and Computer Sci-
ence, 1:407–411, 2014.
[SMHF+15]
Will Snipes, Emerson Murphy-Hill, Thomas Fritz, Mohsen
Vakilian, Kostadin Damevski, Anil R. Nair, and David Shep-
herd. A Practical Guide to Analyzing IDE Usage Data. The
Art and Science of Analyzing Software Data, pages 85–138,
2015.
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
105
[SS03]
Scott Fairbrother Dan Kehn John Kellerman Pat McCarthy
Sherry Shavor, Jim D’Anjou. The Java Developer’s Guide to
Eclipse. Addison - Wesley, 2003.
[SWW+15]
Timothy R. Shaﬀer, Jenna L. Wise, Braden M. Walters,
Sebastian C. Müller, Michael Falcone, and Bonita Sharif.
iTrace: enabling eye tracking on software artifacts within
the IDE to support software engineering tasks. Proceedings
of the 2015 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software
Engineering - ESEC/FSE 2015, pages 954–957, 2015.
[Tra17]
Vantage One Sam Travarca. Reasons for an Integrated Devel-
opment Environment.
http://vantageonesoftware.com/
advantages-disadvantages-integrated-development-environment/,
2017. [Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[Uni15]
Youngstown State University. iTrace – Tracking Eye Move-
ments on Software Artifacts in the Eclipse IDE.
http:
//seresl.csis.ysu.edu/iTrace/, 2015. [Online; accessed
March 1, 2018].
[USI14]
Lugano. USI.
DFlow.
http://dflow.inf.usi.ch/, 2014.
[Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[vdAETUETN16] Wil van der Aalst Eindhoven Technical University Eindhoven
The Netherlands. Process Mining. Springer, Berlin, Heidel-
berg, 2016.
[vDAV+05]
B. van Dongen, a K Alves de Medeiros, H M W Verbeek, a J
M M Weijters, and Will van der Aalst. The ProM framework:
A new era in process mining tool support. Application and
Theory of Petri Nets 2005, (3536):444–454, 2005.
[Ver17]
Veracode.
APPSEC
knowledge
base.
https://www.veracode.com/security/
integrated-development-environments,
2017.
[On-
line; accessed March 1, 2018].
[Wik17]
Wikipedia.
Delphi (IDE).
https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Delphi_(IDE), 2017. [Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[Wik18]
Wikipedia.
Eclipse (IDE).
https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Eclipse_(software), 2018. [Online; accessed March
1, 2018].
[YM11]
YoungSeok Yoon and Brad a. Myers. Capturing and analyz-
ing low-level events from the code editor. Proceedings of the
==PAGE:116==
106
BIBLIOGRAPHY
3rd ACM SIGPLAN workshop on Evaluation and usability of
programming languages and tools - PLATEAU ’11, page 25,
2011.
[Zer18]
ZeroTurnaround.
PDE.
https://zeroturnaround.com/
software/jrebel/, 2018. [Online; accessed March 1, 2018].
[ZH13]
Iyad Zayour and Hassan Hajjdiab. How much integrated de-
velopment environments (IDEs) improve productivity? Jour-
nal of Software, 8(10):2425–2431, 2013.
