==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Heuristic Estimation For Pukoban Through
Deep Learning
Jon Capion (s123989) &
Søren Jesper Bloch (s123809)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The goal of this thesis is to implement and teach a convolutional neural network to be
capable of receiving a pokuban level map and return a heuristic that indicates the
number of steps needed to complete the given level. The system is using a C# project
created for the course 02285 Artiﬁcial intelligence and multi-agent systems at DTU
in cooperation with Emil Mathias Heje Munch, which takes the raw level data and
transforms it into an internal structure allowing an implementation of a tensorﬂow
network setup in python. This network would work as a proof of concept and could
be expanded upon to cover other kinds of pathﬁnding such as the ones found in the
real world, video games and maybe even multi-agent variations of these, which would
be impressive as multi-agent solutions often are quite diﬃcult to calculate due to the
size of the branching factor.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring a Masters degree in Digital Media Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, February 28, 2018
Jon Capion (s123989) &
Søren Jesper Bloch (s123809)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We’d like to thank our supervisor Ole Winther for consultancy and guidance through
the project period, while also helping us shape the project. Furthermore we’d like to
thank Andrea for giving us tips and advice on how to improve our network, while also
giving us insight in his own thesis which was worked as a building block when coming
up with our thesis. Then we’d like to thank Cogsys at DTU for allowing us to use
their computer clusters, mainly the computer Mnemosyne, as training the network
would had taken a lot longer to do on our own computers. And last but not least,
we’d like to thank pizza, for making it bearable to watch the code run for hours.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
The Pukoban game
3
2.1
Move Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Multi-agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Multi-Color . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Branching Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Level Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Automated Planning
5
3.1
Search Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Search Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Weaknesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Deep Learning
9
4.1
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Implementation
17
5.1
Flowchart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
The Reader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.3
The Action Finder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.4
Action Performer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.5
ConvNet Converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.6
Heuristic Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.7
Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.8
Planner
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.9
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.10 Convnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.11 Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.12 Creation of levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Results
27
6.1
The Training Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
Vs. Manhattan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.4
Run
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7
Discussion
33
7.1
Named pipes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.2
Memory usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.3
Increase the dataset size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.4
Classiﬁer vs. Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.5
Mistakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.6
Improve the structure of the network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.7
Larger Maps/Longer Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8
Conclusion
37
A An Appendix
39
A.1 examples of running levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
A.2 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
When working with automated planning in artiﬁcial intelligence you most of the time
end up requiring a heuristic to smooth out the calculations and make it go faster.
Working without a heuristic can be tedious and make your code unable to solve your
problem without running out of memory. But sometimes it can be a hassle to come
up with the heuristic itself. Which leads us to the main topic of this thesis. What
we propose is training a convolutional neural network to give us an usable heuristic
without actually telling the network about the domain itself. To do this we use the
Pukoban domain, a variation of the Sokoban game often used in AI tasks.
Pukoban and Sokoban, are both games about pushing boxes into their correspond-
ing goal spot. The diﬀerence between the two games are that in Pukoban you can
also pull boxes with you instead of only pushing them. This makes the number of
states obtainable a lot higher, thus making it more complex for a computer to solve
it. Another reason why this game type has been chosen, is that it is relative easy
for a human to solve while a computer can run into problems and thus struggle.
Furthermore, both of the games can in a sense be translated to use in real life as well,
if you for example replace the boxes with objects at a hospital that has to be moved
by the nurse from one place to another.
In this thesis we seek to create a neural network that is capable of predicting the
heuristic of a pokuban game, in the hopes that it’s capable of doing this in a way that
is more precise than the more standard Manhattan distance.
By training the network on a set of levels with already known length, the network
becomes able to tell us the length of other Pukoban levels and thus this solution length
can be used as a heuristic for a tree search algorithm to solve the level.
The structure of this thesis is as following:
• An explanation of the Pukoban game.
• Automated planning chapter in which search algorithms and the likes are covered.
• Deep learning chapter that explains the main ideas of how a convolutional neural
networks diﬀerent parts work.
• Implementation chapter, which covers how these theory has been put into action
with a showcase of how the data changes through the diﬀerent steps of our code.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
• Result chapter which describes what results were reached given the setup men-
tioned in the implementation chapter.
• Discussion chapter that talks about the issues encountered through out the
development of the thesis
• The conclusion
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER2
The Pukoban game
The Pukoban domain used for this thesis, consists of an agent (or multiple) which
goal consists of moving boxes into their goal cells until every goal cell has a correct
box type on them. For a goal cell to have a correct box type on them, the box and the
goal cell need to have the same letter assigned to them. All the objects are placed in
a 2D grid, where walls are encapsulating the level, while also providing non-passable
terrain for agent and boxes alike.
2.1
Move Types
In the Pukoban domain there exists four types of actions that an agent can perform:
Move, moving the agent to an adjacent and non-occupied spot. Push, moves the agent
to the spot of an adjacent box while moving the box to a new non-occupied adjacent
spot. Pull, where an adjacent box is pulled into the spot of the current agent while
the agent is moved to an adjacent non-occupied spot. And ﬁnally Wait, where the
agent does nothing for this step (only relevant in multi-agent variations of Pukoban),
2.2
Multi-agent
In some variations of Pukoban, multiple agents are in a level at the same time and
have to cooperate in order to complete the task, these are multi-agent systems, here
the problem becomes much larger because of the increase in possible moves, making
them rather large and heavy to calculate and store the explored nodes and the frontier,
making the use of heuristics that much more important.
2.3
Multi-Color
The complexity of Pukoban levels can be further increased by adding colors to the
domain, that limit the agents ability to interact with boxes of diﬀerent colors. The
colors are implemented by having each box and each agent have a predesignated color
that is immutable. An agent can then only interact with boxes of their own color,
thus making it possible to create even more complex levels. Adding multiple colors to
==PAGE:14==
4
2 The Pukoban game
the domain only make sense in a multi-agent environment, as wrongly colored boxes,
in comparison to the agent, in a single agent environment could just as well be walls.
2.4
Branching Factor
If we look at any map we see that there are
N!
(N−V )! possible states where N is the
number of reachable spaces of the map and V is the number of movable objects (boxes
and agents), while this is not a direct indicator of the number of possible branches,
unless the entire network is reached, it is a worst case indicator. Since each agent has
between 1 and 14 possible moves (the agent will always be able to wait and if the
agent is surrounded by 3 boxes with the same color as the agent and one empty space
and the only occupied space near each box is the agent. Then each box has 3 possible
push moves and 1 pull move, the agent has one available move and one wait move
available, resulting in 14 diﬀerent moves) it is fairly useful to indicate the full size of
the problem we seek to solve. Because of the large amount of possible moves of each
agent the branching factor is even bigger in cases of multi-agent since we then have
up to 14A moves each step where A is the number of agents.
2.5
Level Design
A level is designed in simple ".txt" format with each line representing a row of the
actual level, each slot in these rows then represent a point in the level by being either
a capital letter (A or B) which indicates it is a movable box, a non-capital letter (a
or b) which indicates it is a goal, a single digit number which indicates an agent (for
example 0), a + indicating a wall, or simply a blank space indicating either that it
is outside the level or that it is an area which it is possible to move to. If there are
colors involved, the name of the colors is written in the top rows with the names of
the agents and blocks that are of said color.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER3
Automated Planning
In Artiﬁcial intelligence, Automated planning consist of one or multiple agents that
seek to create a plan that solves a problem, usually by reaching some sort of predeﬁned
goal state. In the following we assume that the whole environment of any given level
is fully observable and deterministic and a limited amount of possible agents, boxes
and goals in each map.
3.1
Search Tree
While the full scale of states is an undirected graph we seek to ﬁnd a solution that
goes from our initial known start state s0 to our partially known goal state, of which
there may exists multiple. To do this, rather than using the full graph where each
state has to be known along with each connecting edge, we create a searchable tree
where the root is the initial state and we can then generate the adjacent states as they
are encountered rather than store them all, checking that each state is a new one and
discarding the connection if it isn’t, thereby creating a tree from the graph.
3.2
Search Algorithm
There exists multiple algorithms to traverse a search Tree, the most basic of which are
DFS, Depth First Search[Ski10, Chapter 5.8], and BFS, Breadth First Search[RN16,
Chapter 3.4][Ski10, Chapter 5.6], DFS starts at the root of the tree, and then it
explores the tree by moving in one direction until a new node no longer exists then
going back until an unexplored node can be found and looping like this until either aa
goal state is found or no more unexplored nodes exists, BFS however allows for a bit
more system as it explores the nodes in the order they where found in generating a
spiral of exploring outward, expanding until all nodes have been explored or an goal
states have been found. See 3.1 as example.
Neither of these are very eﬃcient on a large scale, as they will either run across
previous states and states other branches have reached or it will be necessary to store
previously explored nodes, and storing all these nodes takes a lot of memory. To reduce
the amount of nodes necessary to explore, algorithms like A* and greedy are used, A*
works via a priority system using the number of steps from the root plus an heuristic
==PAGE:16==
6
3 Automated Planning
Figure 3.1: Demonstrating the order of adding to the tree from the graph for BFS
and DFS.
that estimates the distance to the goal from the current state, where as greedy only
uses the heuristic and not the number of steps from root.[RN16, Chapter 3.5] See 3.2
as example.
3.2.1
Heuristic
A heuristic can for example be an estimate of the distance to goal, heuristics takes
many shapes and sizes a typical example of this is the euclidean distance to the goal
or the Manhattan distance, but these are often not very precise on maps that contain
a large amount of walk around.[RN16, Chapter 3.6]
3.2.1.1
Valid Heuristic
A valid heuristic has in addition to being an estimate to the solution is also required to
be give an estimate of the distance to goal that is always less than or equal to the best
solutions, which allows an A* to always reach a perfect solution.[RN16, Chapter 3.6.3]
==PAGE:17==
3.3 Weaknesses
7
Figure 3.2: Greedy vs. A* from start to end.
3.3
Weaknesses
Most heuristics have issue handling spacial bends such as short cuts between any two
points that is shorter than the distance in between. as most heuristics depend on the
distance between any two points as a necessary indicator to the distance between any
two points connected by any third point.
3.4
Related Work
3.4.1
Direct Distance
Direct Distance is the euclidean distance between the start and goal state. This is
generally considered the basic heuristic as it almost always gives an basic indication
to the distance from start to goal, but because it is capable of such a broad use is
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Automated Planning
that it is not always the best indicator as the environment might have restrictions we
can use, such as a block structure that can only be traversed on one axis at a time.
3.4.2
Manhattan Distance
The Manhattan distance heuristic is the sum of the vector between the start and goal
state. Manhattan distance is useful as a heuristic in grid based systems such as the
one you are likely to ﬁnd in Manhattan, it is however only a valid heuristic if it is
only possible to move in such a grid based system or a similarly limited way, as there
otherwise may be shorter paths to the goal.
3.4.3
vector based ﬂow-ﬁeld
Vector based ﬂow ﬁelds is another method for pathﬁnding designed to help make paths
between large amounts of agents and can be used to simulate large crowds interacting,
this is because it is designed fairly similar to how people react in crowds by following
4 hypothesis, 1. everyone has a geographical goal to try and reach, 2. everyone tries
moves at the maximum speed they can, 3. everyone has a discomfort ﬁeld so that each
person would prefer to be further away rather than closer to other people and 4. a
path can be found where we seek to minimize the the heuristic of 1-3.[Gam10][APwn]
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER4
Deep Learning
In this chapter we provide the basic theories and information needed to understand
the Convolutional Neural Networks used in this thesis.
In particular The input,
Feature, The convolution operation, Pooling, ReLu, Fully connected/Dense layers
and Backpropagation. The notions in the following sections are mainly based on the
Deep Learning book by Goodfellow, Bengio and Courville [GBC16] and on [Des16].
Furthermore a running example like the one on [Bra16] has been used.
4.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional Neural Networks, also known as CNNs or ConvNets are a
variant of neural networks made to be specialized in processing data with a known
grid-like topology. Some scenarios where ConvNets are currently being used includes:
Time series data, which can be seen as a 1D grid taking samples at regular time
intervals. Image data, which can be represented as a 2D grid of pixels.
As the name indicates, a ConvNet uses a mathematical operation called Convolu-
tion as its main feature, which we will dive deeper into in the following sections. To
put it simple, Convolutional networks are simply neural networks that use convolution
in place of general matrix multiplication in at least one of their layers. [GBC16, Page
326]
Before diving into the theories of the network, we need to mention a few things
ﬁrst. When using the word convolution in neural networks, we almost all the time, use
it in the sense of having multiple kernels and thus multiple applications of convolution
done in parallel instead of having a single kernel and convolution combination. This
allows us to ﬁnd multiple features at various locations while a single application with
a single kernel would only allow us to ﬁnd one type of feature but also at various
locations.
To explain the use of ConvNets we setup a very simple scenario of classifying
binary images as containing an X or an O, see ﬁgure 4.1
4.1.1
The input
The input for a ConvNet consists of a grid of vector-valued observations. For example,
if you have a monochrome image, then it’s just a grid of real-values, this is said to
==PAGE:20==
10
4 Deep Learning
Figure 4.1: O and X being classiﬁed by a ConvNet.
use a single channel. When you instead have a coloured image, you instead have a
total of three channels, one for red,green and blue respectively. Looking at our simple
aforementioned scenario, input images can look like ﬁgure 4.2, normally a binary
image has values 0 for black and 1 for white, but to showcase one of the later steps of
ConvNet we instead use -1 for black and 1 for white. Binary images like these uses
also a single channel as its basically a variation of monochrome image.
Figure 4.2: Example of input images, with -1 being black and 1 signifying white.
4.1.2
Feature
When using a ConvNet, we often speak of features. A feature in an image is often
described as a smaller sub-image, which as it’s name suggests, is used to identify if
they are present in an image. Looking at our running example, a feature of an X
could be the diagonal lines, or the smaller x in the middle. While for an O it could be
==PAGE:21==
4.1 Convolutional Neural Networks
11
the curves or the straight sides see ﬁgure 4.3 These features are essentially what is
used in the ConvNet as kernels.
Figure 4.3: Four examples of features for an O.
4.1.3
The Convolution operation
To check if the desired features are present in a new image, we use convolution. When
you have an image I, a two dimensional array, and a kernel K of a corresponding
dimension, you calculate the convolution S through the following equation
S(i, j) = (I ∗K)(i, j) =
X
m
X
n
I(m, n)K(i −m, j −n)
(4.1)
The equation can also be written as
S(i, j) = (K ∗I)(i, j) =
X
m
X
n
I(i −m, j −n)K(m, n)
(4.2)
The reason why the convolution operation can be written in both ways is because
it is commutative, this is obtained by ﬂipping the kernel in such a way that when
m increases then the input index increases while the kernel’s index decreases. The
commutative property doesn’t actually have much of a use outside of creating proofs.
This leads to what is called Cross-correlation, which is basically convolution without
ﬂipping the kernel. Cross-correlation is often used instead of convolution in machine
learning libraries while still being called convolution, this is for example done in
Tensorﬂow [Ten18b]. The equation for Cross-correlation is as follows
S(i, j) = (I ∗K)(i, j) =
X
m
X
n
I(i + m, j + n)K(m, n)
(4.3)
But before performing the convolution, one thing needs to be considered ﬁrst. And
that is what type of zero padding should be used. The reason to zero pad is because
otherwise the image would shrink each layer by one pixel less than the size of the
kernel used. There is mainly three ways to zero pad.
The ﬁrst one is known in Matlab and Tensorﬂow as Valid and consists of not
padding at all. When using this, the kernel can only be applied where ever the entire
kernel is contained by the image.
==PAGE:22==
12
4 Deep Learning
The second one is in Matlab and Tensorﬂow known as Same and consists of adding
just enough zeroes at the edge, thus that the output size is equivalent to the original
input size. By using this method, the corner pixels of the image ends up having lower
inﬂuence than the center pixels, thus they might end up underrepresented.
The third, and last method, is known as Full in Matlab. In this variant, zeroes are
added for each pixel such that they can be visited in each direction a number of times
equal to the width of the kernel. This gives an output size of the width of the input
plus the width of the kernel minus one. This method often struggles with learning a
single kernel to perform well at all positions in the convolution feature map.
In our tensorﬂow implementation we use Same zero padding, so we will apply
that to our running X and O example as well. The convolution of the ﬁrst of the
O features from ﬁgure 4.3 together with the image of O can be seen in ﬁgure 4.4.
On the output, values are coloured for easy observation, The higher the number the
closer it is to having the chosen feature being present at that location in the image,
thus two places of this example have the value of 1. In a ConvNet this operation
of convolution is then done in parallel in each layer for each chosen feature kernel,
outputting multiple diﬀerent matrices that can be used for the next layer. When
moving along in a ConvNet, there is quite often a few things done to this output
before putting it through the convolution operation again, this leads us to Pooling.
Figure 4.4: Example of a feature from an O convoluted with the O input image with
"same" zero padding .
4.1.4
Pooling
There exists quite a few diﬀerent ways to perform pooling. One of the most used
ones is called Max pooling and is the one we will explain as it’s the one used in our
thesis. Other popular pooling functions consists of the likes of Average of a rectangular
neighbourhood, L2 norm of a rectangular neighbourhood or a weighted average based
on the distance from the central pixel.
Pooling is mainly used to reduce the size of the image while preserving the most
important information. Pooling, is as its names implies, done by taking a window with
==PAGE:23==
4.1 Convolutional Neural Networks
13
a chosen size, and moving it across the image and then performing the chosen pooling
operation to "pool" together that data. When doing max pooling, this is simply done
by taking the highest value in the current window, and let that value identify that
coordinate in the image. Often when performing pooling, a stride size is also chosen.
Choosing for example a stride of two, means that after one pooling operation has been
done, the window is moved two pixels to the right, where the next value is calculated.
An example of Max pooling with a window and stride size of two can be seen in 4.5
Figure 4.5: Max pooling done on the output from ﬁgure 4.4 with a window and
stride size of two .
4.1.5
ReLu
Another type of function used in ConvNets is the nonlinear activation function called
Rectiﬁed Linear Units, or also known as ReLu. The usage of ReLu is very simple,
going over an image set the value to 0 if a negative value is present at that location,
otherwise set it to the actual value. This can be expressed as max(features, 0). An
example of using ReLu can be seen in ﬁgure 4.6. It should be noted that with max
pooling and ReLu it doesnt matter which order you do the operations in, as the result
will be the same, thus it is said to be commutative. The reason to use a function like
ReLu is to keep the values in the ConvNet from being stuck at zero or blowing up
towards inﬁnity.
In the same way as for pooling there is actually multiple diﬀerent functions that
can be used, each having diﬀerent advantages and disadvantages. To name a few,
there is:
Concatenated ReLu (CReLu), which selects only the positive part of the activation
with a ReLU which selects only the negative part of the activation.
Exponential Linear Units (ELU), which computes efeatures −1 if less than zero,
otherwise the value returned is just the features’ value.
4.1.6
Fully Connected/Dense Layers
The last and maybe one of the most important layers for human understanding is
the fully connected layer, also sometimes called a dense layer. Unlike the other
==PAGE:24==
14
4 Deep Learning
Figure 4.6: ReLu done on the output from ﬁgure 4.4 .
layers which perform valuable calculations on the data, this layer outputs our ﬁnal
result (or could be ﬁnal result depending on the structure of the ConvNet). If for
example we look at the running example of classifying X and O, this is the layer that
would output which class our input image has.
The way the fully connected layer works, is by taking the input from the layer
before it, which should be a representation of the activation maps of high level features,
and determines which features correlates the most to a particular class. So looking
at an input in our example being an O, it should have high values in the activation
maps that represent the features of an O from ﬁgure 4.3.
So to put it simple, the fully connected layer, through training, sets up weights
in such a way, that computing the product between said weights and the input from
the previous layer, that the probabilities for the image to be of the diﬀerent classes is
output. And if this is done well enough, the correct class for the image should have
the highest probability.
4.1.7
Backpropagation
Throughout all the previous subsections, one question still stands. How do we get the
best features to use for the convolutional layer? How does the fully connected layer
get its weights? This is all done by training, and the training process used is called
Backpropagation.
The process of backpropagation can be split into four separate parts. They are:
Forward pass, Loss function, Backward pass and Weight update.
Before going into the Forward pass, the input data set is split into a training
set and a test set. The training set which is used to train the ConvNet through the
backpropagation, while the test set is used to evaluate how well the model works.
Both the test set and the training set have labels assigned to them based on what they
truly depict, in our running example, that would either be a X or O label. During the
forward pass, the training set is sent through the whole network. At this time all the
weights and ﬁlter values haven’t really been set, other than how they are initialized,
which is often random, so the output is most likely without preference to any of the
possible classes, so in our running example, the output could be something along the
==PAGE:25==
4.1 Convolutional Neural Networks
15
lines of [0.5, 0.5]. Which means that there is a 50% chance for either of the two classes.
This is sent to the Loss function part of backpropagation.
There is a lot of diﬀerent ways to calculate the loss, but two of the more common
ones to use, and the ones used in in our network is the Mean Squared Error(MSE) and
Cross Entropy(CE). Calling the correct labels of our training set y and the outputs
of the network for y′ and writing the labels in the one-shot format, the MSE can be
calculated as in 4.4.
errorMSE =
X
j
(yj −y′
j)2
2
(4.4)
To calculate the Cross entropy, a softmax has to be done on the output ﬁrst to provide
us with the probability distribution of the output, this is done by using 4.5
σ(x)j =
exj
PK
k=1 exk
for
j = 1...K
(4.5)
Where K is the number of diﬀerent classes of our labels and j is the speciﬁc class, so
in the case of the X and O example K = 2. The cross entropy can then be calculated
with 4.6 where j is still the individual classes.
errorCE = −
X
j
yj log(y′
j)
(4.6)
No matter which loss function is used, we want to lower the loss as much as possible
as that puts us closer to the real label. To do this, we move on to the Backward
pass of backpropagation.
As the name suggests, we now move backwards through the network looking at
what weights contributes the most to the loss, and then changing these to values that
lowers the loss. To do this, we basically deal with an optimization problem, where
each weight is an independent variable and the loss/error is the dependent variable. If
we’re then able to ﬁnd the global minimum of this "object", then we have achieved the
best possible weights. To do this we calculate the derivative
dL
dW where L is the loss
function and W is the weights at a particular layer, this gives us the slope in every
direction thus providing us information about which weight has the most impact from
that layer and how adjustments to the weights will aﬀect the loss. We then use that
information for the last stage of backpropagation, which is Weight update.
As the name indicates, in this part of backpropagation we update the weights in
the diﬀerent layers based on the opposite of the gradient. That means we are updating
both the weights of the fully connected layer, and the kernels that are used in the
convolutional layer here. To do this, we introduce a thing called Learning rate η,
which is a value chosen by the programmer of the network and indicates how big steps
should be used in the weight update. A too high learning rate and it will most likely
not reach the optimal point and may even diverge, a too low learning rate and it will
simply take too long for the model to reach the optimal point. Then for every weight
==PAGE:26==
16
4 Deep Learning
W through the network, the equation in 4.7 is calculated, where Wi is the weight
before the update
W = Wi −η dL
dW
(4.7)
4.1.8
Testing the network
The only thing left now is to test the network, this is done by using the whole network
on the data set which was separated from the training set before training. And see
how well the real, already known, label compares to the newly calculated one from the
network. There is a chance that the network ends up over ﬁtting on the training data,
to counter this diﬀerent methods, such as dropout and regularization can be used.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER5
Implementation
The Model contains several modules, The Reader, The Action Finder, Action
Performer, ConvNet Converter, Heuristic Network, Search and Planner,
which will take in the level and ﬁnd a solution.
5.1
Flowchart
Figure 5.1: Flowchart of the process.
5.2
The Reader
The Reader takes the initial input(see section 5.9.1 and ﬁgure 5.4 as example), and
converts the data into a more manageable internal data structure for the main
application to use, which is divided into the static parts; the walls and the goals, and
the mutable parts; the agents and the blocks, this allows us to utilize the data without
having to search through strings during our runtime.
==PAGE:28==
18
5 Implementation
5.3
The Action Finder
The action ﬁnder checks to see what actions that are available for each agent creating
a list of possible actions for each of the agents. this is done by checking the area
around the agent for empty spots that can be moved to or boxes that can be moved
and where these boxes can be moved to. This way of "move" detection however has
limitations, as one box or agent cannot move to the spot of where a agent or box was
in the previous step, another limitation is if two agents may be able to move to the
same spot, in which case the action performer takes over.
Figure 5.2: example of possible action given the state on the left.
5.4
Action Performer
The Action Performer takes the list or lists of actions of each individual agents checks
for possible action conﬂicts such as two objects moving to the same spot or two agents
seeking to move the same box, if no such conﬂicts arise, a new map (or state) is
generated and stored in the frontier and explored storage of our search algorithm, this
is then repeated for each combination of action, weeding out the impossible states
leaving only the states, that we can move to.
5.5
ConvNet Converter
The ConvNet Converter takes all the relevant static and mutable variables of the
current state and reduces it into a series of binary values in a 3d array, the dimensions
representing the x and y axis and the type located at the coordinate. This array is
then collapsed into a single string or in the case of generating training data 8 strings
representing each possible rotation and/or ﬂipped version or the current state.
==PAGE:29==
5.6 Heuristic Network
19
5.6
Heuristic Network
The heuristic network is an external python application utilizing the tensorﬂow library
to train and use a convolutional neural network.
As of current there is a total of three diﬀerent implementations for said network: A
2D variant, where the input given to the network is treated as being two dimensional.
A 3D variant, where as the name suggests, has the input treated as 3D. And then
the last version which is the 2.5D version, which consists of a mix between the 2D
and 3D versions. All three versions use the Tensorﬂow Layers module to implement
the diﬀerent layers of the network, and the setup of the networks are based on the
example on [Ten18a]
5.6.1
2D implementation
The 2D implementation consists of an input layer, three convolutional layers, three
pooling layers, two dense layers and a logits layer. To start out with, the input layer
takes the input data and converts it to a four dimensional tensor, where the ﬁrst value
is the batch size, second value is the width, third the height and the fourth value is
the number of channels. So for our implementation the input gets converted to a
[-1,16,16,16] tensor, where the −1 indicates the batchsize having a dynamic size.
This tensor is sent to the ﬁrst convolutional layer, implemented with tf.layers.conv2d,
which applies "Same" zeropadding followed by convolution with 32 ﬁlters with a kernel
size of [5,5] followed by ReLu activation. This provides us with a tensor of the shape
[batchsize,16,16,32].
Then comes the ﬁrst pooling layer, implemented with tf.layers.max_pooling2d,
which applies max pooling to the tensor with a pooling size of [2,2] and a stride
of 2. This halves the width and height in the tensor, so our output has the size
[batchsize,8,8,32].
The tensor is then sent through another convolutional layer identical to the ﬁrst
one, except for the fact that it now uses 64 ﬁlters with the [5,5] kernel size, outputting
a tensor of shape [batchsize,8,8,64]. Which is sent through the second pooling layer,
with identical hyperparamters compared to the ﬁrst one, giving us an output tensor
of shape [batchsize,4,4,64].
The tensor is then sent through the last convolutional layer, close to identical to
previous, this time with 128 ﬁlters with the [5,5] kernel size. Making the tensor have
the shape [batchsize,4,4,128]. Which is then sent to the last pooling layer with identical
setup to the previous ones, leaving us with a tensor of the shape [batchsize,2,2,128].
The tensor is then ﬂattened to two dimensions, giving us the shape [batchsize,2 ·
2 · 128] before being fed to the next layer type. Which is the dense layer. In the dense
layer, we connect the tensor with 1024 neurons followed up by applying dropout with
a 40% dropout rate. The output after the dropout is then sent to two diﬀerent dense
layers in parallel. This is done to create your two diﬀerent models, which we call
Classiﬁcation and Regression.
==PAGE:30==
20
5 Implementation
In the classiﬁcation model, the dense layer gets linked to 102 units (the number of
diﬀerent classes for the network), using the diﬀerent weights for each class a weighted
mean is calculated to provide a singular value to classify the level.
In the regression model, the dense layer gets linked to a single unit which classiﬁes
the value for the input level.
Calculating the loss for the network is then done by two diﬀerent methods, cross
entropy is used for the classiﬁcation part and mean squared error is used for the
regression model.
After these two values are calculated, a singular total loss is
calculated by taking the mean of the two losses. This total loss is the one used for
training the network.
To train the network, gradient descent with a starting learning rate of 0.0005 has
been chosen, with a decay of 0.9 per 100000 steps to keep the training semi healthy.
The chosen hyper parameters were chosen based on testing, but a problem with
these parameters are discussed in the chapter 7. Discussion.
The Tensorboard graph of the 2D implementation can be seen in ﬁgure 5.3
5.6.2
3D implementation
Compared to the 2D version explained above, the 3D implementation uses the input as
if it was 3D with a single channel instead of being 2D with 16 channels. Obviously this
isn’t correct by normal logic, but it gives an interesting result. With the 3D version,
all the hyper parameters and the setup is almost identical to the 2D version except
for the fact that tf.layers.conv3d is used instead of 2d and the same goes for the max
pooling where tf.layers.max_pooling3d is used. The main other diﬀerence lies in the
shape of the tensor throughout the whole network, as it has an extra dimension added.
This extra dimension is also added to the diﬀerent kernels and pooling windows. So
for example, the 5x5 kernel used in the 2D version is instead a 5x5x5 kernel. The split
into two models and the calculation of loss is identical to the 2D version.
The Tensorboard graph of the 2.5D implementation can be seen in ﬁgure A.58
5.6.3
2.5D implementation
At some points the 3D implementation had some of the best results, but logic wise it
didn’t make a lot of sense to be using 2D input as if it was 3D. This is where the 2.5D
implementation gets into play. The overall idea of the 2.5D version, is to take the the
input as it was done for the 2D version, do the ﬁrst convolution with conv2d and then
reshape that output to something that ﬁts being used for the 3D functions, and from
that point onwards the code is basically the same as the 3D implementation.
The Tensorboard graph of the 3D implementation can be seen in ﬁgure A.57
==PAGE:31==
5.6 Heuristic Network
21
Figure 5.3: 2D Tensorboard graph.
==PAGE:32==
22
5 Implementation
5.7
Search
The searchers job is to select the node with the lowest estimated distance in the case
of greedy model and the lowest estimated total distance in the case of A* from the
frontier, in order to provide the best possible next node for the action ﬁnder. If goal
is found it stops and moves on to planner.
5.8
Planner
The Planner looks at the steps taken to reach the goal and reverse calculates the
necessary actions in order for it to reach the goal state from the initial state, to store
the plan for execution.
5.9
Dataset
In order for our data to remain eﬃcient it becomes necessary to convert it into multiple
structures during the process of solving the level
5.9.1
Input Data
The initial structure our program receives is created simple to make the creation of
levels easier, this is done by using separate symbols for each kind of element in the
game. The structure is quite simple such that each row of the map is ended by a
new line, a wall is marked by a "+", the agents are numbers and blocks are named by
capital letters where their matching goals are non-capital letters. this has however
a range of limitations such as there can only exist 10 agents in any given map and
blocks are limited by the alphabet, the greatest limitation however is that no position
can contain more than one object in this shape, meaning that no block or agent can
be on top of a goal in this structure. see ﬁgure 5.4 for example
5.9.2
internal data structure
Inside the program itself it can’t be tolerated that a box or agent can’t be on top of a
goal as the only way for a map to be completed is if all goals have the correct box on
top, so the map is split into parts, the walls, the agents, the boxes and the goals are
separated into their respectful groups.
5.10
Convnet
The data set is a series of 0 and 1 representing true and false states of each cell of
the Pukoban game in a structure of [Wall,Walkable,Actor,Block,Goal,Color] of a size,
==PAGE:33==
5.10 Convnet
23
Figure 5.4: The Raw data is used to show the problem it has to solve.
Figure 5.5: the internal data matching ﬁgure 5.4.
==PAGE:34==
24
5 Implementation
where the number of actors, blocks goals and colors may depend on which version is
run to minimize processing time. This change in data structure makes it a lot easier to
teach the AI about the structure of the map as well as allowing the case of overlapping
data pointers such as a box and goal in same position. The current version while only
trained in single agent, single box the structure used allows for 4 agents, 4 blocks, 4
goals and 2 colors, giving us 16 ﬁelds.
5.11
Training
In order to generate large amounts of training data to train the neural network,
multiple methods has been created.
5.11.1
Trainer
Trainer is the basic data generator, it takes in one or several folder containing of
levels in their raw form see ﬁgure 5.4 and the solves these one by one using simple
search tree, it then converts the map into a 16x16x16 bit array, the ﬁrst 2 dimensions
marking which grid position is currently in question, the last dimension marks what is
in said position(see section 5.10). The data can then be reduced to a readable string
in the text ﬁle accompanied by its solution size. In order to increase the amount of
training data, the ﬁnal bit array is then also rotated and reprinted 3 times and ﬂipped
each time generating 8 training scenarios for each level.
5.11.2
Instance Creator
Instance creator takes trainer a step further by ﬁrst running a BFS on the level with
it’s goal state deactivated, each state is then in addition to being added to the frontier
also run through the same process as trainer, enabling the generation of many states
for a single instance.
5.12
Creation of levels
To create the data set used for the ﬁnal version of the network, we ﬁrst split our
level types into four categories: SABoxOnly, SABoxOnlyWalls, SANotSquare and
SANotSquareWalls.
The levels in SABoxOnly have been created with the logic of only using a
square/rectangle shape for the level, with no walls placed inside of said square/rectangle.
The ﬁrst few levels start out small like level 1 seen on the far left on ﬁgure 5.6 and
then incrementally increased in size to the side until the size of lvl 12 is achieved, and
then it shrinks down in the length on the side but another row is added like in level
13, this is done all the way up until the size of level 168 is achieved.
==PAGE:35==
5.12 Creation of levels
25
Figure 5.6: level 1, 12, 13, 157 and 168 of SABoxOnly.
SABoxOnlyWalls is then created from using the levels in SABoxOnly, but by
adding walls into them. So the frame of the level is kept the same, the only diﬀerence
is the manually added walls inside of said frame, or reposition of the goal location,
and for a few of the smaller levels an extra thick wall. This can be seen in ﬁgure 5.7,
which showcases the changes to the levels from SABoxOnly.
Figure 5.7: level 1, 12, 13, 157 and 168 of SABoxOnlyWalls.
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Implementation
Using a similar kind of logic as in SABoxOnly, we create levels that aren’t the
shape of a square for the category SANotSquare. In these levels though, we do
move the goal around the level. And we don’t cover anywhere close to the maximum
possible shapes as that simply wouldn’t be feasible by hand. Examples of these levels
can be seen in ﬁgure 5.8
Figure 5.8: level 169, 175, 181, 185 and 206 of SANotSquare.
SANotSquareWalls is made from SANotSquare just like how SABoxOnly was
made from SABoxOnlyWalls examples of the same levels shown in ﬁgure 5.8 can be
seen in 5.9.
Figure 5.9: level 169, 175, 181, 185 and 206 of SANotSquareWalls.
Putting together all four of these groups creates our current data set of levels. The
reason for their simplicity is covered in the chapter 7. Discussion.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER6
Results
In order to review the result, several metrics have been used in order to give a wide
spread and general overview of the diﬀerent aspects of the result
• Training Evaluation
• Vs. Manhattan
• Run of Maps
6.1
The Training Data
The training data is in the same format as the runtime data that is used to send the
map from our runtime environment to our map, but with a few changes, in order
to create a large and diverse data set all the maps are rotated and ﬂipped, making
each state into a total of eight diﬀerent states for the trainer to handle, there is then
the additional option of generating all the diﬀerent states possible for a map, which
results in
n!
(n−c)! · 8 states where n is the amount of places the agent and boxes can
be located at and c is the number of movable objects, this amount however quickly
becomes too much and it is necessary to reduce the numbers, in our case only 1% of
the total states is added to the ﬁnal training data batch.
6.2
Training
In order to diversify the test results, the test has been divided into two categories,
Instance Left Out and State Left Out these are then trained in each of our three levels
of dimensions (2D, 2.5D and 3D) and both as a classiﬁer and regression model, the
results are then further divided into Large Levels and Small levels.
6.2.1
Instance Left Out
Instance Left Out or ILO is when the level layout, considering walls and size, has
yet to appear in our training scenarios, this helps indicate the lower bound of the
networks ability to solve a level as it shows what the network ﬁnds when the type of
level is unknown.
==PAGE:38==
28
6 Results
6.2.2
Learning rate
Figure 6.1: Summary of the result of the ILO of the small eval maps followed by
the large eval maps.
From the graphs in ﬁgure 6.1 we see that the network is much better at estimating
a heuristic for small maps, but it also has capabilities in larger maps that it has never
==PAGE:39==
6.2 Training
29
seen before. It should however be noted, that it doesn’t seem very reliable, specially
on the larger maps as we see that it is almost more than 70% of the cases that result
in an error above 10. For more detailed view see ﬁgure A.1-A.14
6.2.3
State Left Out
State Left Out or SLO is where, as the name suggests, a number of states are
removed from the training set and is instead used to evaluate the network. So the level
type is still in the training set, but the exact state of having agent and box at a speciﬁc
location is not. This helps indicate the upper bound of what the network is capable
of learning although it is not deﬁnite as it might have found a local approximation or
the step size may have been too big to ﬁnd the best variables for the training scenario.
6.2.4
Learning rate
In these graphs 6.2 we see much better results, as the level itself is the same as it
was trained on, except for the diﬀerence of having agent and box at "not seen before"
locations. Which means that the network is capable of seeing the connection between
two states of the same level. For more detailed se ﬁgures A.15-A.28
==PAGE:40==
30
6 Results
Figure 6.2: Summary of the result of the SLO of the small eval maps followed by
the large eval maps.
==PAGE:41==
6.3 Vs. Manhattan
31
6.3
Vs. Manhattan
If we compare to what the more standard Manhattan distance would ﬁnd, something
interesting happens, we ﬁnd that the classiﬁer network has a higher tendency to
surpass the Manhattan score.
The scores in ﬁgure 6.3 are the result of calculating the diﬀerence of tendencies
between the result of the Manhattan distance results and the ﬁnal results subtracted
with the networks results and the ﬁnal results, giving the following formula
diff = |Rnetwork −Rreal| −|RManhattan −Rreal|
(6.1)
this means that if the values are below 0, the network has managed to ﬁnd a more
precise solution than the ones with Manhattan distance and the more negative the
number the better the diﬀerence, while positive numbers indicate that Manhattan
distance has provided a better answer where higher numbers indicate the network
doing even worse. See Figure A.29-A.56 for more cases
6.4
Run
Perhaps a more direct way to measure the result of the training, is to utilize the
networks to solve levels, and compare the number of steps, the size of the frontier
and the number of explored nodes between the best solution and the solution found
with the network’s heuristic. Because of the large amount of work involved, only the
greedy algorithm is used, which if given a perfect heuristic would still give the desired
result, although going by the results from the training scenarios this is highly unlikely,
it should still demonstrate the capabilities of the current network.
The result seen in ﬁgure A.1 are based on instances used in training taken at
random from the eval scenario, some states may also be encountered during the search,
but as the training states is 1% of the total possible states there is a very minor chance
for overlaps between training set and test set.
==PAGE:42==
32
6 Results
Figure 6.3: Summary of comparison of Manhattan and our results on ILO small
maps followed by comparison to ILO large maps.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER7
Discussion
In this chapter we go through what some of the issues faced, the limitations of the
current version, alternate solutions that are also very likely possible solve the problem
and what possible further work that might help improve the solution.
7.1
Named pipes
Because the project is divided into a compiled C# program and a python script
using the network the program can’t interface with each others memory directly,
which that there are two options, the ﬁrst of which is using feeding the script the
input as a program argument in starting the python script and having the result as a
return argument which is the current implementation, this has the major draw back
of the script needing to start up and load all the necessary data to run making it
a rather slow option, the other option is to create a buﬀer of data either through
ROM or by using a named pipe creating a common access area in the ram, the rea-
son why a named pipe is not setup is simply the time limitations of this project.[Mic18]
7.2
Memory usage
One key issue with searching large networks of data is memory usage due to storing a
list of the nodes previously visited to avoid rechecking previously explored states. One
way to reduce the amount of data stored is to remove the explored nodes that are no
longer connected to the search frontier as these will have been fully explored and in
order to revisit them one would have to go through the explored nodes, assuming that
the search tree is bidirectional all over, if there exist one-way paths this is not viable
as there are return paths that is not necessarily connected when exploring the state.
7.3
Increase the dataset size
There are several ways to help create a better ﬁt, one key way is to increase the
amount of scenarios in the training set, thus teaching the network to handle a wider
array of unseen scenarios. Another way to training the network mode although by the
==PAGE:44==
34
7 Discussion
trend of data, it reaches a convergence point that is lower than 100%, meaning that it
would probably also require more levels to help it ﬁnd a better solution.
7.4
Classiﬁer vs. Regression
One of the earlier versions of the classiﬁer model, did not calculate a weighted mean
as its ﬁnal output. Instead it just returned the class with the highest probability.
Because of the nature of classiﬁer networks, classiﬁer networks has a hard time with
the continuity, meaning that it may ﬁnd the odds of a completely wrong option just
a little higher than the correct one and its neighbours who may also have a high
probability, resulting in a network that can’t tell the diﬀerence between being oﬀby
one and missing completely, regression however does not have this issue as it views
the result as a continuing number and are therefore trained via the distance to the
result rather than if one is correct or incorrect.
7.5
Mistakes
After a split and rotation of the convnet dataset there was an initial bug, that caused
parts of the data to be corrupted, this resulted in the network, unbeknownst to us,
having a lot of trouble ﬁguring out the solutions, because this was discovered very late
it delayed the progress of our network development by quite a lot and for a greater
while, up until near the end of the project, it was believed that it wasn’t possible for
the network of this structure to learn to calculate the heuristic, additionally a newer
set of levels was made, the ones mentioned in the implementation chapter, which are
more similar in layout in order to increase the odds of them ﬁnding a solution, to give
some indicator to how much it was able to learn if anything. Before ﬁxing the bug,
the network was working phenomenally giving upwards to 90% accuracy with the 3D
version and classiﬁcation variant, so it’s obviously sad noticing the mistake so late in
the process.
7.6
Improve the structure of the network
Obviously there are many things which can be changed when working with ConvNets,
some of the most important ones to look into are mentioned here.
7.6.1
Hyper parameters and number of layers
Although it is one of the things that can almost always be improved, there is an extra
reason to look into changing the hyperparameters of the current networks. This is due
to what was shortly mentioned in the above section about mistakes. The fact that
we were getting closer to deadline, meant that there wasn’t time to run the network
==PAGE:45==
7.7 Larger Maps/Longer Solutions
35
multiple times to test hyperparameters again. Thus both these and the number of
layers were kept the same as when there was a bug in the code, ultimately giving us a
large chance to not have the most optimal network.
7.6.2
Change layout, to for example Inception
In the current version, the networks’ layout is very simple and is thus also easily
subject to change. There is multiple ways the network could be changed, and one of
the main ways to achieve that is by trying something already tried before by other
people, or contrary trying something new.
Obviously using old ideas and layouts isn’t a bad thing, and it’s almost always
the smartest thing to start out with to get a feel for the data, and a feel for how
the chosen libraries work. Which was the case for us never having used Tensorﬂow
before. And sometimes these already tried before variants of ConvNets turn out to
work just ﬁne for the task. But sometimes they don’t, and sometimes we want better
results than what is just "ﬁne". This is where we can look towards things like the
inception module used in [Sze+15] or the likes and learn that experimenting with
diﬀerent layouts, instead of just stacking layers on top of each other, can optimize the
results. Or you can achieve better results by lucky mistakes, such as our 3D version,
which was made by initially misunderstanding the layers module in tensorﬂow, giving
better results than the 2D and 2.5D versions.
If changing the hyperparameters and/or the layout doesn’t provide suﬃcient results,
then it might be viable to look towards changing the actual outcome of the network.
This could for example be by changing it from trying to estimate the heuristic for
the whole level, to instead identify regions in a level and then estimate the length
of solving said region. And if that doesn’t sound appealing, then trying to use a
convolutional neural network to say what move in the current state would be the
most eﬃcient could be of interest. It could also be a thing to consider, that instead of
calculating a heuristic which describes the length of the total solution, to instead just
calculate the length between objects of interest, thus providing the data to perform
an all-pairs shortest path solution instead. Objects of interest being agent, boxes and
goals.
7.7
Larger Maps/Longer Solutions
The current iteration of the networks is limited to solutions shorter than or equal
to 102 because of the part that handles classiﬁer only divides into 102 classes and
because the longest training level has a length of 102. But it is fairly easy to increase
the amount of classes. Another of the current limitations is that the map size is a
static 16x16 size, although changing this is a little more complex as both the C#
application as well as the python tensorﬂow network would need to be modiﬁed to
handle data of a larger size.
==PAGE:46==
36
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER8
Conclusion
In this thesis we looked at creating a convolutional neural network which seeks to
calculate an output which is an estimate of the length of a pukoban level’s solution.
Three versions of the neural network has been implemented, a 2D implementation
which takes the input as of being 2D, a 3D version which takes the input as being 3D
(although logically not correct) and a 2.5D version which creates a mix between 2D
and 3D. All three variations also outputting two results, both a "classiﬁcation" and a
"regression" model output.
Based on the results when utilizing the network to run on several levels, we can
conclude that the idea does work and is viable to be used as a heuristic to solve
pukoban levels, but with the current version there is no saying that the solution of a
pukoban level with our heuristic is going to give the shortest solution. It is seen that
our heuristic is best estimated when the network is given level types that the network
has seen before (State Left Out) rather than when a completely unknown level type
is encountered, and that out of the three the 3D implementation with "Regression"
worked the best.
It should be mentioned though, that the current network is in no way optimal, and
various modiﬁcations should be done in order to make it "safer" to use the heuristic to
solve pukoban levels, by either ﬁxing the hyperparameters or changing the layout of
the network itself, or by training on an even more diverse/bigger amount of levels.
But compared to just using the Manhattan distance as the heuristic, our heuristic
comes out on top in most scenarios, mainly when there is an obstacle is in the path
of the agent, which is at least something considering the late discovery of a serious
mistake in the code.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
APPENDIXA
An Appendix
A.1
examples of running levels
By utilizing the network we are able to ﬁnd solutions by using greedy search. the data
is 5 part ﬁrst level name, then number of explored, frontier and solution size, which if
the solution is perfect the frontier and solution size is one shy of the explored size.
this is followed by the solution, which is followed by an array displaying how many
steps the agent was observed in each spot, and ﬁnally we have a similar array of the
box’s position.
Levels\SABoxOnly\lvl70.lvl
102 86 15
[Push(E,S)] [Push(S,E)] [Push(E,S)]
[Push(S,E)] [Push(E,S)] [Push(S,E)]
[Push(E,E)] [Push(E,S)] [Push(S,E)]
[Push(E,S)] [Push(S,E)] [Push(E,E)]
[Push(E,E)] [Push(E,E)] [Push(E,E)]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,1,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1,1,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,1,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1,1,1,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
Levels\SANotSquareWalls\205walls.lvl
61 39 20
[Move(N)] [Move(N)] [Move(E)] [Move(N)]
[Move(N)] [Move(N)] [Move(N)] [Move(E)]
[Move(E)] [Move(E)] [Move(N)] [Move(E)]
[Move(E)] [Pull(W,E)] [Push(E,S)]
==PAGE:50==
40
A An Appendix
[Push(S,S)] [Push(S,S)] [Push(S,S)]
[Push(S,S)] [Push(S,W)]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,1,2,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,1,1,1,1,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,1,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,1,0,0,0,0,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,1,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,1,1,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,14,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,1,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
Levels\SANotSquareWalls\206walls.lvl
53 23 24
[Move(N)] [Move(N)] [Move(N)]
[Move(N)] [Move(E)] [Move(E)]
[Move(E)] [Move(S)] [Move(S)]
[Move(E)] [Move(E)] [Move(E)]
[Move(N)] [Move(N)] [Move(N)]
[Move(N)] [Move(N)] [Pull(W,E)]
[Push(E,S)] [Push(S,S)] [Push(S,S)]
[Push(S,S)] [Push(S,S)] [Push(S,S)]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,1,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,3,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,1,1,1,1,1,0,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,1,0,0,1,0,0,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,1,0,1,1,1,1,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,1,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,2,22,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
==PAGE:51==
A.1 examples of running levels
41
Figure A.1: 2D ILO Classiﬁer on Small Levels.
Figure A.2: 2D ILO Classiﬁer on Large Levels.
==PAGE:52==
42
A An Appendix
Figure A.3: 2D ILO Regression on Small Levels.
Figure A.4: 2D ILO Regression on Large Levels.
==PAGE:53==
A.1 examples of running levels
43
Figure A.5: 2.5D ILO Classiﬁer on Small Levels.
Figure A.6: 2.5D ILO Classiﬁer on Large Levels.
==PAGE:54==
44
A An Appendix
Figure A.7: 2.5D ILO Regression on Small Levels.
Figure A.8: 2.5D ILO Regression on Large Levels.
==PAGE:55==
A.1 examples of running levels
45
Figure A.9: 3D ILO Classiﬁer on Small Levels.
Figure A.10: 3D ILO Classiﬁer on Large Levels.
==PAGE:56==
46
A An Appendix
Figure A.11: 3D ILO Regression on Small Levels.
Figure A.12: 3D ILO Regression on Large Levels.
==PAGE:57==
A.1 examples of running levels
47
Figure A.13: Summary of the diﬀerent networks on ILO Small Levels.
Figure A.14: Summary of the diﬀerent networks on ILO Small Levels.
==PAGE:58==
48
A An Appendix
Figure A.15: 2D SLO Classiﬁer on Small Levels.
Figure A.16: 2D SLO Classiﬁer on Large Levels.
==PAGE:59==
A.1 examples of running levels
49
Figure A.17: 2D SLO Regression on Small Levels.
Figure A.18: 2D SLO Regression on Large Levels.
==PAGE:60==
50
A An Appendix
Figure A.19: 2.5D SLO Classiﬁer on Small Levels.
Figure A.20: 2.5D SLO Classiﬁer on Large Levels.
==PAGE:61==
A.1 examples of running levels
51
Figure A.21: 2.5D SLO Regression on Small Levels.
Figure A.22: 2.5D SLO Regression on Large Levels.
==PAGE:62==
52
A An Appendix
Figure A.23: 3D SLO Classiﬁer on Small Levels.
Figure A.24: 3D SLO Classiﬁer on Large Levels.
==PAGE:63==
A.1 examples of running levels
53
Figure A.25: 3D SLO Regression on Small Levels.
Figure A.26: 3D SLO Regression on Large Levels.
==PAGE:64==
54
A An Appendix
Figure A.27: Summary of the diﬀerent networks on SLO Small Levels.
Figure A.28: Summary of the diﬀerent networks on SLO Small Levels.
==PAGE:65==
A.1 examples of running levels
55
Figure A.29: Comparison of the result of 2D Classiﬁer and Manhattan on the Small
ILO level set.
==PAGE:66==
56
A An Appendix
Figure A.30: Comparison of the result of 2D Classiﬁer and Manhattan on the Large
ILO level set.
Figure A.31: Comparison of the result of 2D Regression and Manhattan on the
Small ILO level set.
==PAGE:67==
A.1 examples of running levels
57
Figure A.32: Comparison of the result of 2D Regression and Manhattan on the
Large ILO level set.
Figure A.33: Comparison of the result of 2.5D Classiﬁer and Manhattan on the
Small ILO level set.
==PAGE:68==
58
A An Appendix
Figure A.34: Comparison of the result of 2.5D Classiﬁer and Manhattan on the
Large ILO level set.
Figure A.35: Comparison of the result of 2.5D Regression and Manhattan on the
Small ILO level set.
==PAGE:69==
A.1 examples of running levels
59
Figure A.36: Comparison of the result of 2.5D Regression and Manhattan on the
Large ILO level set.
Figure A.37: Comparison of the result of 3D Classiﬁer and Manhattan on the Small
ILO level set.
==PAGE:70==
60
A An Appendix
Figure A.38: Comparison of the result of 3D Classiﬁer and Manhattan on the Large
ILO level set.
Figure A.39: Comparison of the result of 3D Regression and Manhattan on the
Small ILO level set.
==PAGE:71==
A.1 examples of running levels
61
Figure A.40: Comparison of the result of 3D Regression and Manhattan on the
Large ILO level set.
Figure A.41: Comparison of the diﬀerent networks compared to Manhattan on the
Small ILO level set.
==PAGE:72==
62
A An Appendix
Figure A.42: Comparison of the diﬀerent networks compared to Manhattan on the
Large ILO level set.
Figure A.43: Comparison of the result of 2D Classiﬁer and Manhattan on the Small
SLO level set.
==PAGE:73==
A.1 examples of running levels
63
Figure A.44: Comparison of the result of 2D Classiﬁer and Manhattan on the Large
SLO level set.
Figure A.45: Comparison of the result of 2D Regression and Manhattan on the
Small SLO level set.
==PAGE:74==
64
A An Appendix
Figure A.46: Comparison of the result of 2D Regression and Manhattan on the
Large SLO level set.
Figure A.47: Comparison of the result of 2.5D Classiﬁer and Manhattan on the
Small SLO level set.
==PAGE:75==
A.1 examples of running levels
65
Figure A.48: Comparison of the result of 2.5D Classiﬁer and Manhattan on the
Large SLO level set.
Figure A.49: Comparison of the result of 2.5D Regression and Manhattan on the
Small SLO level set.
==PAGE:76==
66
A An Appendix
Figure A.50: Comparison of the result of 2.5D Regression and Manhattan on the
Large SLO level set.
Figure A.51: Comparison of the result of 3D Classiﬁer and Manhattan on the Small
SLO level set.
==PAGE:77==
A.1 examples of running levels
67
Figure A.52: Comparison of the result of 3D Classiﬁer and Manhattan on the Large
SLO level set.
Figure A.53: Comparison of the result of 3D Regression and Manhattan on the
Small SLO level set.
==PAGE:78==
68
A An Appendix
Figure A.54: Comparison of the result of 3D Regression and Manhattan on the
Large SLO level set.
Figure A.55: Comparison of the diﬀerent networks compared to Manhattan on the
Small SLO level set.
==PAGE:79==
A.1 examples of running levels
69
Figure A.56: Comparison of the diﬀerent networks compared to Manhattan on the
Large SLO level set.
==PAGE:80==
70
A An Appendix
A.2
Code
for a full list and description visit https://github.com/neroes/DL-for-auto-planning
==PAGE:81==
A.2 Code
71
Figure A.57: 3D Tensorboard graph.
==PAGE:82==
72
A An Appendix
Figure A.58: 2.5D Tensorboard graph.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[APwn]
Seth Cooper Adrien Treuille and Zoran Popovi. Continuum Crowds. Article.
Retrieved February 17, 2018 from http://grail.cs.washington.edu/projects/crowd-
ﬂows/continuum-crowds.pdf. Unknown.
[Bra16]
Brandon. How do Convolutional neural networks work? Site. Retrieved
February 17, 2018 from https://brohrer.github.io/how_convolutional_neural_networks_w
2016.
[Des16]
Adit Deshpande. A Beginner’s Guide To Understanding Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks. Site. Retrieved February 17, 2018 from https://adeshpande3.github.io/adesh
Beginner%27s-Guide-To-Understanding-Convolutional-Neural-Networks/. 2016.
[Gam10]
Gas Powered Games. Supreme Commander 2 - Flowﬁeld. Video. Retrieved
February 17, 2018 from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jA2epda-
RkM. 2010.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning.
http://www.deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[Mic18]
Microsoft. Named Pipes (Windows). Site. Retrieved February 2, 2018 from
https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/aa365590%28v=vs.85%29.a
2147217396. 2018.
[RN16]
Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artiﬁcial Intelligence - A Modern Ap-
proach. Third Edition. Pearson, 2016.
[Ski10]
Steven S. Skiena. The Algorithm Design Manual. Second Edition. Springer,
2010.
[Sze+15]
Christian Szegedy et al. Going Deeper with Convolutions. Article. Retrieved
February 25, 2018 from https://www.cv-foundation.org/openaccess/content_cvpr_2015/p
2015.
[Ten18a]
Tensorﬂow. A Guide to TF Layers: Building a Convolutional Neural Net-
work. Site. Retrieved February 22, 2018 from https://www.tensorﬂow.org/tutorials/layer.
2018.
[Ten18b]
Tensorﬂow. Cross-correlation tensorﬂow. Site. Retrieved February 5, 2018
from https://www.tensorﬂow.org/api_docs/python/tf/layers/conv2d. 2018.
==PAGE:84==
