==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Purification, Stabilization and Crystallization
of Tryptophan Hydroxylase Variants
Gurið Kallsberg Kristiansen (s123926)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Author:
Gurið Kallsberg Kristiansen (s123926)
Supervisor:
Associate Professor: Hans Erik Mølager Christensen
Information:
Master’s Thesis: 30 ECTS
Metalloprotein Chemistry & Engineering Group
Department of Chemistry
Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby
Start and completion date:
September 2017 – March 2018
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) is the first and rate limiting step in the synthesis of
serotonin. TPH belongs to a superfamily called the aromatic amino acid hydroxylases
(AAAH) together with phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) and tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH). TPH exists as two isomers, TPH isoform 1 (TPH1) and TPH isoform 2 (TPH2).
Up to now, eight crystal structures of truncated TPH1 and one crystal structure of
truncated TPH2 exist. However, none of these truncated crystal structures include
the regulatory domain due to its poor stability, and thereby the regulatory mechanism
of TPH is still unknown.
In this thesis, the current purification strategy used by the Metalloprotein Chem-
istry and Engineering Group has been optimized to include two affinity chromatogra-
phy steps and two gel filtration steps. This resulted in a purer and more homogeneous
protein sample. Three TPH variants are investigated - the truncated human TPH2
(NΔ52-hTPH2), methylated NΔ52-hTPH2 and full-length TPH1 from a rat organism
(rnTPH1).
NΔ52-hTPH2 was purified using the optimized purification strategy, but there
were difficulties in concentrating the sample to a concentration suitable for crystal-
lization.
The addition of the reducing agent TCEP did not show any stabilizing
effect.
The methylated NΔ52-hTPH2 was obtained by introducing a methylation step
between the second affinity chromatography and the first gel filtration in the opti-
mized purification strategy. The methylation reaction methylated the surface lysines
of the protein. This resulted in alterations of the protein, which caused the protein
to be more prone to aggregate to high molecular weight compounds.
rnTPH1 was found to be more stable than NΔ52-hTPH2. With the addition of
10 mM DTT, the PCT showed that a concentration of 5.2 mg/mL was suitable for
crystallization. Vapor-diffusion crystallization experiments were performed on four
different commercial screens from Molecular Dimensions. The commercial screens
varied the pH, precipitating agent and additives. After 30 days, some interesting
crystal-like structures were observed, which could be used for further investigation.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Dansk resumé
Tryptophanhydroxylase (TPH) er det første og hastighedsbestemmende trin i sero-
tonin syntesen. TPH hører til en superfamilie som kaldes de aromatiske aminosyre
hydroxylaser (AAAH) sammen med phenylalaninhydroxylase (PAH) og tyrosinhy-
droxylase (TH). TPH eksisterer som to isomerer, TPH isoform 1 (TPH1) og TPH
isoform 2 (TPH2).
I dag findes otte krystal strukturer af trunkeret TPH1 og en
krystal struktur af trunkeret TPH2, men ingen af disse trunkerede krystal strukturer
inkluderer det regulatoriske domæne på grund af dets dårlige stabilitet, og derved er
den regulatoriske mekanisme af TPH stadig ukendt.
I dette speciale bliver den nuværende oprensnings strategi som bruges af Metallo-
protein Kemi og Ingeniør Gruppen optimeret, således at den inkluderer to affinitet-
skromatografi trin og to gelfiltrerings trin.
Dette resulterede i en renere og mere
homogen protein opløsning.
Tre TPH varianter undersøges - trunkeret menneske
TPH2 (NΔ52-hTPH2), metyleret NΔ52-hTPH2 og fuldlængde TPH1 fra en rotte
organisme (rnTPH1).
NΔ52-hTPH2 blev oprenset ved brug af den optimerede oprensnings strategi.
Oprensningen var vellykket, men der var vanskeligheder når opløsningen skulle op-
koncentreres til enkoncentration, som var egnet til krystallisation. Tilføjelse af reduc-
eringsmiddlet TCEP resulterede ikke i nogen ændring af stabiliteten.
Ved at introducere et metyleringstrin ind i mellem den næste affinitetkromatografi
og den første gelfiltrering blev det metylerede NΔ52-hTPH2 opnået. Metyleringsreak-
tionen metylerede overflade lysinerne af proteinet.
Dette resulterede i ændringer
af proteinet, hvilket medførte at proteinet var mere tilbøjelig til at aggregere til
molekyler af høj molarmasse.
rnTPH1 var mere stabilt end NΔ52-hTPH2. Ved tilsættelse af 10 mM DTT til
protein opløsningen, viste før-krystallisations-testen (PCT) at en koncentration på 5.2
mg/mL var egnet til krystallisation. Damp diffusion krystallisations eksperimenter
udføres på fire forskellige kommercielle screeninger fra Molecular Dimension. I disse
kommercielle screeninger bliver pH, udfældningsmiddel og additiver varierede. Efter
30 dage observeres nogle interessante krystal-lignende strukturer, som kan bruges til
yderligere undersøgelser.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis was prepared at the department of Chemistry at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of
Science degree in Engineering.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my thesis advisor Associate Professor Hans E. M.
Christensen for the opportunity to work on this project. He has provided help and
guidance throughout the project, and the door to his office was always open whenever
I had questions.
Thanks to laboratory technician David Frej Nielsen for his help in the laboratory.
I would like to thank Maria Gourdon at the Lund Protein Purification Platform
at Lund University for her help with the crystallization setup.
Lastly, a special thank you to Associate Professor Pernille Harris and Associate
Professor Günther H. Peters for functioning as thesis advisors in the last weeks of the
project.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
3CP
Human rhinovirus 3C protease
5HTP
5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan
AAAD
Aromatic amino acid decarboxylase
AAAH
Aromatic amino acid hydroxylase
AC1
The first affinity chromatography
AC2
The second affinity chromatography
AC
Affinity chromatography
ACT
Aspartokinase, Chorismate mustase and TyrA (Prephenate de-
hydrogenase)
BH4
5,6,7,8-tetrahydro-L-biopterin
CIPP
Capture, Intermediate Purification and Polishing
DTT
Dithiothreitol
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
GF1
The first gel filtration
GF2
The second gel filtration
GF
Gel filtration
GI
Gastrointestinal
Glu
Glutamate
GST
Glutathione S-transferase
HEPES
4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid
His
Histidine
hTPH1
Human tryptophan hydroxylase isoform 1
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Abbreviations
hTPH2
Human tryptophan hydroxylase isofrom 2
hTPH
Human tryptophan hydroxylase
MBP
Maltose binding protein
OCD
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
oxDTT
Oxidized DTT
PAH
Phenylalanine hydroxylase
PCT
Pre-crystallisation test
PDB
Protein data bank
PEG
Polyethylene glycol
Phe
Phenylalanine
rcTPH2
Regulatory and catalytic domains of TPH2
rnTPH1
Rat tryptophan hydroxylase isoform 1
SDS-PAGE
Sodium dodecyl sulfate - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
SEC
Size exclusion chromatography
TCEP
Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
TH
Tyrosine hydroxylase
TPH1
Tryptophan hydroxylase isoform 1
TPH2
Tryptophan hydroxylase isoform 2
TPH
Tryptophan hydroxylase
Tris
2-amino-2-(hydroxymethyl)-1,3-propanediol,
UPW
Ultrapure water
UV-VIS
Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy
UV
Ultraviolet light
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Abstract
i
Dansk resumé
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
List of Abbreviations
ix
Contents
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Outline of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Tryptophan Hydroxylase
3
2.1
Serotonin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The Two Isoforms of Tryptophan Hydroxylase . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Aromatic Amino Acid Hydroxylases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Tryptophan Hydroxylase . . . . .
6
2.5
Oxidation of Tryptophan Hydroxylase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Project Background
11
3.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Project Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Chromatographic Protein Purification
15
4.1
Affinity Chromatography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Gel Filtration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Methylation of Lysines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Characterization with SDS-PAGE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5
Stabilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Protein Crystallization
25
5.1
Crystal Formation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
5.2
Screening and Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Crystallizing Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4
Pre-Crystallization Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5
Testing for Protein Crystals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Experimental Procedures
33
6.1
Protein Purification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2
Characterization with SDS-PAGE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Reducing Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Pre-Crystallization Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.5
Crystallization of rnTPH1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Results
43
7.1
General Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Chromatographic Optimization of NΔ52-hTPH2
. . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.3
A Different Variant – Methylated NΔ52-hTPH2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.4
A Different Variant – rnTPH1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8
Overall Discussion and Future Perspective
67
9
Conclusion
69
Appendices
71
A
Amino Acid Sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
B
Sequence Alignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
C
3D Structures of PAH and TH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
D
Purification of 3CP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
E
Optimization of Purification Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
F
Purification of rnTPH1 with 10 mM DTT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
G
Crystallization Screens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
H
Crystallization Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
I
Interesting Crystal-Like Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
Bibliography
107
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This thesis deals with the purification, stabilization and crystallization of the enzyme
tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH). TPH catalyzes the reaction of L-tryptophan to 5-
hydroxy-L-tryptophan (5HTP) [1], which is the first and rate-limiting step in the
biosynthesis of serotonin. The second step produces serotonin by decarboxylation of
5HTP by aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AAAD) [2]. The reaction is shown in
Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Biosynthesis of serotonin. Made with ChemDraw.
Serotonin is a hormone and an important neurotransmitter [1]. Dysfunction of
the serotoninergic system in the brain is observed in psychiatric disorders such as
schizophrenia and depression [3]. In Denmark, there are about 43.000 people that
suffer from schizophrenia [4] and about 300.000 people that suffer from depression
[5]. Each year, these two psychiatric disorders cost the danish government DKK ∼9
million for lost production and DKK ∼4 million for treatment and care [4]. Due to
the role of TPH in the synthesis of serotonin, the investigations of the enzyme are
very important as TPH could be a possible target for medicine against the psychiatric
disorders discussed. However, a full-length crystal structure is yet to be determine
for TPH.
As the determination of the crystal structure for TPH could have a great impact
on the well-being of millions of people, an attempt is made in this thesis to crystallize
different TPH variants. A great obstacle in reaching this goal is the instability of TPH
- especially of the regulatory domain. If the TPH variants are successfully purified
with chromatographic techniques such as affinity chromatography and gel filtration,
the focus lies on stabilizing the protein in order to reach a concentration suitable for
crystallization. Different methods will be used for stabilization of the TPH variants
such as methylation of the surface lysines of TPH and by adding reducing agents to
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
the TPH samples. If the stabilization of TPH is successful, an attempt will be made
to crystallize the TPH variants.
1.1
Outline of Thesis
Chapter 2 gives an introduction to the enzyme under investigation - TPH. Chapter
3 summarizes previous conducted relevant studies in the research group on TPH
and provides a description of the project strategy. In Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 an
introduction is given of the methods used in this project for purification, stabilization
and crystallization of TPH variants.
Chapter 6 describes the experimental work
performed in this thesis, and in Chapter 7 the results are presented and discussed.
Chapter 8 contains an overall discussion, where also future possibilities are discussed.
Finally, Chapter 9 presents a conclusion, where the results are summerized.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Tryptophan
Hydroxylase
2.1
Serotonin
Serotonin is synthesized in two steps from L-tryptophan by the two enzymes TPH
and AAAD. The reaction between L-tryptophan, (6R)-5,6,7,8-tetrahydro-L-biopterin
(BH4) and O2 catalyzed by TPH gives 4α-hydroxy-BH4 and 5HTP [1]. This reaction
is the first and rate limiting step in the biosynthesis of serotonin and is followed by
decarboxylation of 5HTP by AAAD whereby serotonin is synthesized [2].
In order for serotonin to be synthesized, tryptophan must be supplied in the diet.
When tryptophan is absorbed from the gut and enters the blood circulation, it can
pass the blood-brain-barrier via the large amino acid transporter, where it participates
in the serotonin synthesis in the central nervous system [6]. The tryptophan that
remains in the gut participates in the serotonin synthesis in the gastrointestinal (GI)
tract [6].
Serotonin was firstly discovered in the GI tract as a contractile substance. This
was followed by the discovery of serotonin in the blood as a potent vasoconstrictive
substance, in the nervous system as a neurotransmitter and in the pineal gland, where
it is a precursor in the synthesis of melatonin [7].
Around 95% of the total serotonin in the human body is located in the GI tract.
The serotonin from the GI tract acts either locally or it is distributed into the blood
stream, where it is stored in platelets [7]. Dysfunction in the serotonin in the GI tract
has been observed to be implicated in GI diseases such as irritable bowel syndrome
[7].
The remainder of serotonin in the human body (5%) is distributed throughout
the brain. Here, the neurons of the mid-brain raphe nuclei are the principal source
of serotonin synthesis [7]. The neural serotonin has diverse physiological functions,
which include regulation of sleep, emotion, mood and appetite, as well as cognitive
functions such as memory and learning [7]. Dysfunction of the serotoninergic system
in the brain is observed in psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, depression and
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) [3].
==PAGE:18==
4
2 Tryptophan Hydroxylase
2.2
The Two Isoforms of Tryptophan Hydroxylase
TPH was characterized for the first time in the late 1960s [8], but it was not until
recently it was discovered that TPH exists as two isoforms with two different amino
acid sequences. The discovery of the second isoform was made by Walter et al. in
2003, where TPH was purified and characterized from different tissues [9]. The two
isoforms are named TPH isoform 1 (TPH1) and TPH isoform 2 (TPH2), after the
chronological order they were discovered. TPH1 is mainly found in the pineal gland
and in the peripheral parts of the body such as skin cells, intestinal muscosa and
enterochromaffin cells, whereas TPH2 is primarily expressed in the serotonergic neu-
rons of the brain [1, 10]. The two isoforms are encoded by two different genes [11]. In
human TPH1 (hTPH1) and human TPH2 (hTPH2), the genes are located on chro-
mosomes 11 and 12, respectively [7]. A sequence alignment of hTPH1 and hTPH2
has been performed in NCBI Blast [12] giving a sequence identity of 72%, showing
that TPH1 and TPH2 are highly homologous proteins. The residues that have been
discovered to be important for the structural and functional properties of TPH1 are
conserved in TPH2 [9]. One noticeable difference between hTPH1 and hTPH2 is that
the N-terminal is extended with 46 residues in hTPH2 [9], see Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: The number of amino acids in each domain for hTPH1 and hTPH2,
where orange is the regulatory domain, yellow the catalytic domain and green is the
tetramerization domain. Made with Google Drawings.
2.3
Aromatic Amino Acid Hydroxylases
TPH (EC 1.14.16.4) belongs to the small enzyme superfamily of aromatic amino acid
hydroxylases (AAAH) together with phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH, EC 1.14.16.1)
and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH, EC 1.14.16.2) [13]. This family requires an aromatic
amino acid and oxygen as substrates, as well as a ferrous ion and BH4 as cofactor
[7]. Each of the other AAAHs catalyzes the hydroxylation of the respective amino
acid. PAH catalyzes the hydroxylation of L-phenylalanine to L-tyrosine [14], and TH
catalyses L-tyrosine to L-DOPA, which is a precursor of dopamine, norepinephrine
and epinephrine [15].
All eukaryotic AAAHs form homotetramers, where each monomer consists of three
distinct structural and functional domains – a N-terminal regulatory domain, a cat-
alytic domain and a C-terminal tetramerization domain [7, 9, 11].
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Aromatic Amino Acid Hydroxylases
5
The AAAHs are all believed to follow the same reaction mechanism [16], which
will be described in the following. The general reactions of the AAAHs are shown in
Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: The conversion of amino acids catalyzed by AAAHs. Made in ChemDraw.
2.3.1
Mechanism of the Enzymatic Reaction
The current understanding of the enzymatic reaction mechanism is limited. A hy-
pothesis by Roberts et al. describes the enzymatic reaction as two partial reactions,
where first a reactive hydroxylating intermediate is formed followed by insertion of
oxygen to the amino acid substrate [11]. This reactive hydroxylating intermediate has
not yet been proven to exist. In this section, the hypothesized reaction mechanism
for the AAAHs will be described with TPH as an example.
The first partial reaction takes place in the active site and is shown in Figure 2.3.
For this reaction to proceed, an iron ion, BH4 and O2 are needed. The iron ion must
be in its active oxidation state +2 in order for the enzymatic reaction to occur [11].
Firstly, the oxygen reacts with FeII and forms an intermediate. This intermediate
further reacts with BH4 that donates two electrons, whereby a FeII-peroxypterin
intermediate is formed. By cleavage of the O2 bond, 4α-hydroxy-BH4 and a FeIVO
intermediate are formed. The reaction is shown in Figure 2.3.
==PAGE:20==
6
2 Tryptophan Hydroxylase
Figure 2.3:
The first partial reaction of the enzymatic reaction of the AAAHs.
Adapted from [11].
In the second partial reaction, the FeIVO intermediate reacts with the aromatic
ring of tryptophan and a new C–O bond is formed, which leads to loss of aromaticity
in the ring. The aromaticity is restored by a 1,2-hydride shift and the loss of either
of the two hydrogens on the carbon adjacent to the site of oxygen addition results in
the formation of 5-HTP, see Figure 2.4 [11].
Figure 2.4: The second partial reaction of the enzymatic reaction of the AAAHs.
Adapted from [11].
2.4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Tryptophan
Hydroxylase
Due to instability, it has been a challenge to determine the full-length structure of
the TPH isoforms. Throughout the years, truncated versions of the structure have
been crystallized and published.
Up until now, eight X-ray crystal structures for
the catalytic domain for TPH1 have been published and one X-ray crystal structure
containing both the catalytic and tetramerization domains has been published for
TPH2. All the published crystal structures of TPH are listed in Table 2.1.
As only the catalytic and tetramerization domains have been crystallized, discov-
eries from TH and PAH are used to give an overview of the TPH structure, as the
AAAHs share a high degree of sequence identity [22]. The crystal structures pub-
lished for TH and PAH are listed in Appendix C. Only two full-length structures are
published of the AAAHs, and both structures are of PAH (PDB entries 5DEN and
5FGJ). The crystal structure with the highest resolution has the PDB entry 5DEN,
and this structure is shown in its monomeric form in Figure 2.5 where the domains
are represented in different colors. Each of the three domains will be explained in the
following.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 The Three-Dimensional Structure of Tryptophan Hydroxylase
7
Table 2.1: The PDB entries of the three-dimensional structures of TPH determined
by X-ray crystallography.
PDB ID
Organism
Domains
Resolution
Comments
Released
Ref.
Tryptophan hydroxylase isoform 1
3E2T
Chicken
c 101-414
1.9 Å
Fe(III), tryptophan,
imidazole, SO4,
triethylene glycol
2008
[3]
1MLW
Human
c 102-402
1.71 Å
Fe(III), BH2
2002
[17]
3HF6
Human
c 105-393
1.8 Å
Fe(III), LP-521834
2009
[18]
3HFB
Human
c 104-393
1.92 Å
Fe(III), LP-534193
2010
[18]
3HF8
Human
c 105-393
1.85 Å
Fe(III), LP-533401
2010
[18]
5J6D
Human
c 102-402
1.90 Å
Inhibitor 6H5, Glycerol,
Fe(III), Tris
2016
[19]
5L01
Human
c 104-394
1.9 Å
Inhibitor 6Z4, Fe(III)
2017
[20]
5TPG
Human
c 104-402
1.5 Å
Inhibitor 7H5,
acetonitrile, Tris, Fe(III)
2017
[20]
Tryptophan hydroxylase isoform 2
4V06
Human
ct 148-490
2.63 Å
Fe(III), imidazole
2014
[21]
Figure 2.5: Monomeric structure of PAH (PDB: 5DEN). Each domain is represented
in different colors, where the regulatory domain is orange, catalytical domain is yellow
and the tetramization domain is green. The orange sphere in the catalytic domain is
the iron ion. Made with PyMOL.
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Tryptophan Hydroxylase
2.4.1
Regulatory Domain
The three-dimensional structure of the regulatory domain for TPH has not yet been
determined. Therefore, this domain is described based on experiments performed by
Tidemand et al. as well as on structures of the regulatory domains of TH and PAH.
The experiments by Tidemand et al. performed on TPH2 containing the regula-
tory and the catalytic domain (rcTPH2) have shown that TPH2 is in a concentration-
dependent monomer-dimer equilibrium caused by the regulatory domain. The binding
of L-phenylalanin (L-Phe) to monomeric rcTPH2 induces a shift in the equilibrium
to favor dimerization [23]. In PAH, an allosteric site has been identified in the regu-
latory domain. This site has been found to increase the activity and stability of PAH
and to induce conformational changes. It is possible that L-Phe could bind to such
an allosteric site in TPH2 [23]. TPH1 does not seem to contain this allosteric site in
the regulatory domain, as L-Phe did not induce dimerization [24].
From sequence analysis, a sequence segment of the regulatory domain of the
AAAHs belongs to the ACT domain. The three-dimensional structure of the reg-
ulatory domains of PAH and TH are similar, where both contain a core ACT domain
with a flexible N-terminal tail [24]. The main core of the regulatory domains consist
of a βαββαβ-fold [25]. The ACT domain of TPH1 and TPH2 are predicted to be
located on residues 19-94 [26] and residues 65-140 [27], respectively. The terminal
amino acid residues are predicted to be a flexible N-terminal tail [24]. The tetramer
arrangement in the AAAHs is organized as a dimer of dimers, where the interaction
between the two dimers takes place through the tetramerization motif [25].
2.4.2
Catalytic Domain
The catalytic domain of TPH is mainly composed of mixed α and β secondary struc-
ture [17] and consists of 314 residues [16].
All the residues that are required for
activity and substrate binding are within this domain [11].
The active site consists of a cavity that is approximately 9 Å deep and 10 Å wide.
A channel, which is approximately 12 Å long and 7 Å wide, is connected to the active
site opening, and two loops are lining this active site channel (residue 263-269 and
residue 363-372). Studies have shown that the substrate, tryptophan, most likely
binds in this channel [17].
TPH contains a catalytic iron atom which is located in the active site opening,
whereto the channel is connected [17]. In the absent of substrate, iron(III) is approxi-
mately octahedrally coordinated by His272, His277, one of the carboxyl oxygen atoms
of Glu317 and three water molecules [17]. When substrate is bound, the iron(III) is
reduced to iron(II) resulting in a conformational change.
Two of the three water
molecules dissociate and the glutamate changes from monodentate to bidentate lig-
and [11]. This results in a more open five-coordinate iron site with an open site for
O2 [3]. The binding of O2 is an important part for the catalytic mechanism of TPH.
The iron binding is distinctive in TPH1 and TPH2, as it is relatively strong in TPH2
while very weak in TPH1 [28].
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Oxidation of Tryptophan Hydroxylase
9
The cofactor binding region is located in residues 123-129 [17] and is distinct from
the tryptophan binding pocket [3]. BH4 is the first substrate to bind which does
not result in any major structural changes [3]. The binding of tryptophan causes
conformational changes to a more closed and compact structure where two loops are
closing around the active site [3].
2.4.3
Tetramerization Domain
The C-terminal tetramerization domain is the smallest of the three domains and
consists of 31 residues. It includes an α-helix with the length of 25-27 residues which
is responsible for tetramerization of the monomers. Truncations of the regulatory
domain do not have an effect on the tetrameric assembly of TPH1 and TPH2 [23].
The tetrameric structure of PAH shows that the tetramerization motifs of the four
monomers are arranged in a bundle of α-helices that are arranged in antiparallel
orientation [25], see Figure 2.6.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.6: (a) The tetrameric form of PDB ID: 5DEN. The monomers are colored
with different nuances of gray, and the orange spheres are the iron ions. (b) A zoom
of the tetramerization motif. Made with PyMOL.
2.5
Oxidation of Tryptophan Hydroxylase
TPH2 is shown to be extremely labile to oxidation [29].
The oxidation leads to
inhibition of enzyme activity and formation of high molecular weight aggregates, due
to cross-linking of the cysteines. Each monomer contains 13 cysteines, where 2 are
in the regulatory domain and remaining 11 are in the catalytic domain. Experiments
performed by Kuhn et al. show that as long as a single cysteine remains in TPH2,
it will cross-link upon oxidation [29]. Due to the high sequence similarity between
TPH1 and TPH2, this is believed to apply for TPH1 as well.
==PAGE:24==
10
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Project Background
3.1
Background
The work previously done to reach the goal of obtaining an X-ray crystal structure
of TPH will be described in this section. Since 2003, the Metalloprotein Chemistry
and Engineering Group at DTU Chemistry has been working on the purification,
characterization and crystallization of TPH.
The group succeeded in simplifying the purification of TPH1 variants to consist
of only two steps: anion exchange chromatography and gel filtration [1].
The in-
stability of TPH is well-known and this has led to great difficulties in obtaining a
crystal structure. The work of Moran and coworkers showed that when the enzyme
was maintained in a minimum of 100 mM (NH4)2SO4 during purification, the recov-
ery was greatly enhanced from each chromatographic step [30]. This discovery led
to a substitution of anion exchange chromatography for affinity chromatography as
the high salt concentration was not suitable for anion exchange. TPH1 was firstly
fused with gluthatione S-transferase (GST) [31], which was later substituted with a
maltose binding protein (MBP) tag due to a more pure, active and stable TPH1 [32].
This purification procedure was however very time consuming. To shorten the purifi-
cation time, on-column cleavage was introduced [32]. The optimized procedure by
the Metalloprotein Chemistry and Engineering Group has resulted in the publication
of the crystal structure of the catalytic domain of TPH1 (cTPH1) with amino acid
substrate bound [3]. Later, the group purified the catalytic domain of both isoforms
and showed that the enzymatic parameters of the two isoforms are different [16].
The stability of TPH has been further optimized in terms of buffer. The pH was
adjusted after the findings of Windahl et al. [16], where cTPH2 can be purified at
pH above 8 but a tendency to precipitate was observed, which was not the case at
pH 7.2.
The Metalloprotein Chemistry and Engineering Group has furthermore discovered
that in the presence of L-Phe there is a significant increase in purification yields of
TPH2 variants that contain the regulatory domain [23].
In the last project of the Metalloprotein Chemistry and Engineering Group con-
cerning hTPH2 variants, the truncated NΔ52-hTPH2 showed to be more stable than
the truncated NΔ47-hTPH2. NΔ52-hTPH2 had less protein in higher oliogomeric
state than NΔ47-hTPH2 [33]. The purification of the NΔ52-hTPH2 variant resulted
in the chromatogram shown in Figure 3.1. The peak TP2 was collected and screened
==PAGE:26==
12
3 Project Background
for crystallization, but no crystals of the desired protein were obtained [33]. As there
is no base-peak separation in the chromatogram in Figure 3.1, it could be a possibility
that the sample was not homogeneous but contained both tetramers and octamers.
This could affect the crystal formation. In previously theses, the protein concentra-
tion that was found suitable for crystallization by PCT was approximately 2 mg/mL
and 3 mg/mL [33, 34, 35].
Figure 3.1: Gel filtration chromatogram from the purification of NΔ52-hTPH2 on a
Superdex 200 pg 26/600 HL column performed by Helena Glud. The chromatogram
is taken from [33]. The curve shows the absorbance in mAU at 280 nm as a function
of the volume in mL. G1 and G2 are peaks from the protein in higher oligomeric
states, TP2 is the target protein and E2 is small particle impurities [33].
3.2
Project Strategy
The aim of this thesis is to obtain TPH in a form suitable for crystallization. Four
different strategies will be applied:
1. Chromatographic separation of the gel filtration peaks of NΔ52-hTPH2
2. Methylation of the surface lysines of NΔ52-hTPH2
3. Full-length TPH1 from a different organism
4. Addition of reducing agents
An overview of the project strategy is shown in Figure 3.2. The first strategy that
is investigated is the chromatographic separation of the peaks of NΔ52-hTPH2, as
the primary focus of this thesis is to obtain a crystal structure of TPH2 containing
the regulatory domain. To optimize the chromatographic separation of the peaks,
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Project Strategy
13
purification parameters are varied and more purification steps are introduced to the
protocol used by Helena Glud. These extra purification steps include an extra affinity
chromatography to ensure that all MBP-tags are removed and an extra gel filtration
to ensure that all octamers are removed.
The methylation of NΔ52-hTPH2 was investigated parallel to TPH1 from a rat
organism (rnTPH1), as the time was short and it was not possible to know which or
if any of the two strategies would work.
The methylation of the surface lysines of NΔ52-hTPH2 would most likely alter
the surface of NΔ52-hTPH2. The nature of this surface alteration is investigated in
the hope that a more stable enzyme is obtained.
From the overview of the published structures for TH and PAH in Appendix C,
it is apparent that the rat organism is the only organism to have a full-length AAAH
structure discovered. Therefore, in the hope of obtaining a full-length structure of
TPH, the rnTPH1 is investigated.
The enzyme is prone to aggregation through disulfide bridges. Therefore, the re-
ducing agents TCEP and DTT are added to the protein solutions where the desired
effect would be stabilization of the proteins. The purification of NΔ52-hTPH2 in-
cludes only the addition of TCEP, while in the purification of rnTPH1 both TCEP
and DTT are individually investigated.
==PAGE:28==
14
3 Project Background
Figure 3.2: Overview of the project strategy. 3C Protease is purified for on-column
cleavage.
NΔ52-hTPH2, methylated NΔ52-hTPH2 and rnTPH1 are purified and
characterized. This is followed by stabilization of NΔ52-hTPH2 and rnTPH1. Lastly,
an attempt is made to crystallize rnTPH1.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Chromatographic
Protein Purification
Protein purification has existed for more than 200 years and has evolved from meth-
ods such as filtration, precipitation and crystallization to the reproducible chromato-
graphic techniques used today [36].
Chromatographic techniques are used for purification of proteins as they separate
proteins according to differences in their specific properties. The purification can be
divided into three stages – capture, intermediate purification and polishing (CIPP).
The capture step isolates, concentrates and stabilizes the target protein. The focus
in this step are the parameters speed and capacity, as the protein sample contains
much material that quickly should be separated from the protein. In the intermediate
purification, most of the bulk impurities are removed. This step focuses on the param-
eters resolution and capacity. Lastly, in the polishing step, the trace elements and
closely related substances are removed. This step focuses on resolution and recovery,
as a pure protein sample is desired [36]. This three-stage purification strategy does
not mean that there must be three purification steps in the protocols. The number
of purification steps depends on how the protein will be used as well as on the pu-
rity requirements for the protein. However, when the number of purification steps
is increased, the overall recovery of protein is decreased and the purification time is
increased. The increase in purification time can have an effect on protein activity
[36].
The protocol for the purification of NΔ52-hTPH2, full-length rnTPH1 and methy-
lated NΔ52-hTPH2 includes affinity chromatography (AC) and gel filtration (GF).
4.1
Affinity Chromatography
In AC, proteins are separated based on a reversible interaction between the target
protein and a biospecific ligand attached to a chromatographic matrix. Due to this
specific interaction, AC offers high selectivity, high resolution and usually high ca-
pacity. This makes AC an ideal technique for a capture or intermediate purification
step in the purification protocol [37].
==PAGE:30==
16
4 Chromatographic Protein Purification
The biological interaction between the protein and the biospecific ligand can be
a result of electrostatic or hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen bonding and/or van
der Waals’ forces [37]. In order to elute the target protein, the interaction with the
ligand must be reversed by changing the conditions to favor elution. The elution can
be performed specifically by using a competitive ligand, or nonspecific by changing
pH, ionic strength or polarity [37].
AC can be divided into a few steps. The medium is equilibrated with binding
buffer, followed by applying sample under conditions that favor the specific binding
between the target protein and the ligand.
The unbound material is washed out
of the column, and in order to elute the bound target protein, the conditions are
changed to favor elution. Lastly, the medium is regenerated. These steps result in a
chromatogram as the one shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: A schematic chromatogram of AC. The abbreviation CV is short for
column volume [37].
4.1.1
Affinity Tags
Affinity tags enable recombinant proteins to be purified by AC based on biorecognition
of the tag [38]. An affinity tag is a specific protein or peptide that has been engineered
to be included in a recombinant protein, thus enabling the recombinant protein to
be retained in the affinity medium [39]. This results in that the same purification
platform can be used for different recombinant proteins, and AC methods have been
developed for each of the commonly used tags [40]. There are a number of different
affinity tags that can be used to simplify a protein purification, such as the histidine
(His) tag, Glutathione S-transferase (GST) tag and maltose binding protein (MBP)
tag.
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Affinity Chromatography
17
In this thesis, a Dextrin Sepharose column is used. Dextrin is a polymer composed
of glucose units.
Dextrin Sepharose High Performance is a medium for purifying
recombinant proteins tagged with MBP [41], as MBP binds specifically to maltose
and amylose, which both are composed of glucose units [42]. The medium is based
on 34 µm Sepharose High Performance matrix. The MBP tagged proteins elute in
narrow peaks due to the small evenly sized beads. When proteins are tagged with
MBP, increased expression levels and higher solubility of the target protein are often
seen.
Furthermore, proper folding of the attached protein has been shown to be
promoted by the MBP tag [38].
4.1.2
On-Column Cleavage
The affinity tag can interfere with the activity and folding of the protein, so it is often
useful to remove the tag from the recombinant protein after or during the purification
[42]. When a recombinant protein includes a tag, it usually also includes a cleavage
site with a specific recognition sequence which enables the removal of the tag by
using recombinant endoproteases [39, 42]. One of these endoproteases is the human
rhinovirus 3C protease (3CP). 3CP is a site specific protease with the recognition
sequence LEVLFQ↓GP [43], where the arrow marks the cleavage site.
From the
recognition sequence, it is apparent that the glycine (G) and proline (P) will remain
attached to the N-terminus of the recombinant protein after removal of 3CP [43].
In this thesis, 3CP fused with a MBP tag is used for on-column cleavage, see
Figure 4.2. After the protein is loaded onto the column and retained by the dextrin
ligand, the cell material is washed out. The protease that is loaded onto the column
also interacts with the dextrin ligand and is retained. The protease then recognizes
the cleavage sequence, and cleaves the target protein from the MBP tag. The target
protein elutes from the column as it no longer is retained by the dextrin ligand. The
MBP tag and MBP-3CP are eluted by changing the condition to favor elution.
Figure 4.2: An AC with on-column cleavage. Made with Google Drawings.
==PAGE:32==
18
4 Chromatographic Protein Purification
4.2
Gel Filtration
GF separates molecules based on differences in molecular size and is a unique tech-
nique compared to other chromatographic methods as the protein is not adsorbed to
the gel [44]. This technique is also known as size exclusion chromatography (SEC).
GF is usually used for purification of proteins after they have been through one or
several purification steps, where the sample has been concentrated and bulk impurities
have been removed. GF is best suited for the polishing step, where the remaining
impurities and aggregates of the target protein are removed [44].
The separation of molecules takes place as they pass through the stationary phase,
which consists of a porous matrix of spherical particles that are both chemically and
physically stable as well as inert. The selectivity of the medium depends solely on its
pore size distribution [44].
The principal of GF can be described by a few steps.
Firstly, the column is
equilibrated with buffer where the pores and the space between the particles is filled,
bringing the liquid both inside and outside the pores into equilibrium. The smaller
the molecule the better the access to the pores; this results in later elution. Molecules
that do not enter the pores of the matrix elute from the column in the void volume
together with the buffer, as they pass straight through the column. Molecules that
have partial access to the pores elute in order of decreasing size. The small molecules
have full access to the pores, and elute just before the total column volume, see
Figure 4.3 [44].
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: (a) A schematic of the proteins flowing through the column.
(b) A
schematic chromatogram showing that the molecules elute in order of decreasing size.
Vo is the void volume and Vt is the total volume [44].
In this thesis, a Superdex 200 pg 26/600 HL column is used. The total volume of
the column is 320 mL [45]. The void volume of a well-packed column is approximately
30 % of the total column volume [44] resulting in a void volume of approximately 106
mL.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Methylation of Lysines
19
4.3
Methylation of Lysines
Lysine residues have long mobile side chains. The purified proteins may resist crystal-
lization due to the flexibility of these residues, when they are located on the protein
surface. Addition of methyl groups to the amines of the lysines immobilizes the side
chains, which has shown to promote crystallization [46]. Furthermore, it is expected
that the protein surface will change, and this could have an effect on the stability of
TPH.
The procedure used for the methylation experiment is based on the procedure
developed by Walter et al. [47] and Shaw et al. [46]. Dimethylamine-borane complex
(DMAB) and formaldehyde are added to the protein solution and this results in
dimethylation of free amino groups. These free amino groups include the lysines as
well as the N-terminal amine [46]. This leads to an increase in molecular weight, which
further would lead to a qualitative shift in GF. The reaction for the methylation is
shown in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: The dimethylation of lysines. DMAB is short for dimethylamine-borane.
Made in ChemDraw.
It is expected that the methylated protein behaves differently than the non-
methylated protein during crystallization. Experiments have shown that the methy-
lated protein might not crystallize under the same conditions as previously. If this is
the case, the methylated proteins need to be screened again for crystallization [46].
4.3.1
Buffer Composition
During methylation, all primary amines in the protein solution are methylated - this
includes the primary amines in the buffer. In order to avoid competition, the buffer
must not contain any primary amines.
The buffer used by Walter et al. is 50 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 250 mM NaCl [47].
In order to follow the protocol as closely as possible, the same components are used
for the buffer in this thesis. However, TPH variants have shown to have increased
stability when the buffer contains 300 mM (NH4)2SO4. By exchanging (NH4)2SO4
to NaCl, it is important to maintain the ionic strength where the protein is most
==PAGE:34==
20
4 Chromatographic Protein Purification
stable. Therefore, the ionic strength is calculated in order to see which concentration
of NaCl corresponds to 300 mM (NH4)2SO4. The ionic strength is calculated using
the following formula
I = 1
2
∑
i
ciz2
i
where c is the concentration of the individual ion, i, z is the individual charge of the
ion. The ionic strength of the two salts is:
I(NH4)2SO4 = 1
2(0.6 ∗12 + 0.3 ∗22) = 0.9
INaCl = 1
2(0.3 ∗12 + 0.3 ∗12) = 0.3
This results in that there must be a 3-fold increase in salt concentration when the
buffer contains NaCl instead of (NH4)2SO4. The binding buffer that is used for the
methylation of TPH is composed of 50 mM Hepes (pH 7.5) and 900 mM NaCl.
4.4
Characterization with SDS-PAGE
Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) is a com-
monly used analytical method to identify components in a sample based on their
size [48]. In order to determine the molecular weight of the components in a protein
sample, the protein sample is separated on the same gel as a set of molecular weight
standards [48].
A sample buffer is used to solubilize the proteins. This sample buffer contains
reducing agents to break the disulfide bonds to minimize the effect of the secondary
structure on migration, and a strong ionic detergent such as sodium dodecyl sulfate
(SDS) that denatures the secondary and tertiary structure. The SDS furthermore
binds to the protein whereby a net negative charge is added to the protein in a
constant charge-to-mass-ratio of 1.4 g SDS per 1 g protein. The proteins are separated
according to their mass in a polyacrylamide gel when an electrical field is applied [48].
4.5
Stabilization
The thermodynamic stability of a protein depends on the difference in Gibbs free
energy, ∆Gunfolded-native referred to as ∆Gu, between the native and unfolded states.
The greater the value of ∆Gu is, the more stable is the native state of the protein
[49].
==PAGE:35==
4.5 Stabilization
21
Figure 4.5: Gibbs free energy diagrams of protein with (A and B) and without (mid-
dle) additives [49].
The value of ∆Gu can be increased by two mechanisms.
One mechanism de-
creases the Gibbs free energy of the native state by binding protein-specific ligands
to the native state, see Figure 4.5A. These ligands include among others substrates,
inhibitors and co-factors, and upon binding they stabilize the protein. However, as
the ligands are protein-specific, it is not always easy to determine, which ligands sta-
bilize the protein. In the other mechanism, the Gibbs free energy of the unfolded
state is increased by adding additives that do not bind to the protein surface, but
instead repulse the protein surface, see Figure 4.5B. As the surface area is larger for
the unfolded state of the protein than for the native, the repulsion is even greater,
and this induces a greater increase in Gibbs free energy of the unfolded state. The
value of ∆Gu increases, and the native state of the protein is stabilized [49].
Up until now, salt is shown to stabilize both TPH isoforms, while L-Phe is found
to only stabilize TPH2. The stabilizing effect by reducing agents on both isoforms
will be investigated in this thesis. These three components will be described in the
following.
4.5.1
Salts
Proteins in aqueous solution exist in an equilibrium between a native state and a
partially unfolded state. For the protein to be active, it must be in its native state. By
adding additives in form of salts, a shift is induced in the conformational equilibration.
Some of the ions used as additives are classified in a series that describes their ability
to salt-out (kosmotropes) or salt-in (chaotropes) proteins. This series of ions is known
as the Hofmeister series. When proteins are in the presence of chaotropes the proteins
denaturate, while when proteins are in the presence of kosmotropes, the native states
are stabilized [50].
==PAGE:36==
22
4 Chromatographic Protein Purification
Figure 4.6: The Hofmeister Series [50].
The purification of the TPH variants uses a high concentration of (NH4)2SO4 as
this has shown to stabilize TPH and thereby a higher yield has been achieved. Both
NH4
+ and SO42- are kosmotropic ions, which could describe the stabilization effect,
but it is not yet completely known, how (NH4)2SO4 stabilizes the protein. The effect
of changing (NH4)2SO4 to NaCl might have a destabilizing effect on the stability of
the TPH variant, as both Na+ and Cl- are more chaotropic than NH4
+ and SO42-.
4.5.2
Aromatic Amino Acids
As described in section 2.4.1, L-Phe is believed to bind in an allosteric site in the
regulatory domain of hTPH2 where it induces a stabilizing effect and a shift in the
monomer-dimer equilibrium towards dimer [23].
Increased purification yields are
obtained with the addition of L-Phe to hTPH2 variants containing the regulatory
domain [23].
4.5.3
Reduction of Disulfide Bridges
As previously mentioned, TPH2 is shown to be extremely labile to oxidation. The ox-
idation leads to the formation of high molecular weight aggregates through formation
of disulfide bridges [29]. Reducing agents such as dithiothreitol (DTT) and tris(2-
carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) have shown to reduce disulfide bonds in proteins.
DTT is a strong reducing agent and is typically used at 1-10 mM for reduction of
disulfide bridges. DTT prevents the formation of intramolecular and intermolecular
disulfide bonds between the cysteine residues located on the protein surfaces. The
reaction is shown in Figure 4.7. A thiol group on DTT forms a disulfide bond with
one of the cysteins parcipitating in a disulfide bond whereby the remaining cysteine
is reduced.
The second thiol of DTT reduces the disulfide brigde formed on the
first thiol of DTT, whereby a closed ring is formed. In this reaction, oxidized DTT
(oxDTT) is formed while a disulfide bond is reduced [51].
==PAGE:37==
4.5 Stabilization
23
Figure 4.7: Reduction of a disulfide bond by DTT. Made in ChemDraw.
The reaction in Figure 4.7 is almost irreversible, so by estimating the amount of
oxDTT, the number of reduced disulfide bridges is known. OxDTT absorbs UV light
at 283 nm, while this absorption band is completely absent in the reduced DTT. [52].
As proteins absorb UV light at 280 nm, the two peaks overlap, making it difficult to
trace the protein and oxDTT amount. Iyer et al. have shown that it is possible to
measure the amount of DTT by direct spectrophotometry. At 310 nm, the amount of
oxDTT is great enough to be measured directly and at this wavelength, the protein
amount is small enough to be neglected [52]. The extinction coefficient of oxDTT at
310 nm is approximately 110 M-1cm-1. This is approximately 40% of the maximum
absorption, which is 273 M-1cm-1 at 283 nm [52].
TCEP reduces disulfide bonds effectively within a few minutes and is essentially
unreactive toward other functional groups that are found in proteins [53]. Apart from
the fact that TCEP is oderless, it is also more stable and effective than DTT [53].
However, one of the disadvantages by using TCEP has been the difficulty in finding
a method for monitoring the amount of oxidized TCEP.
The phosphor of TCEP forms a bond with one of the cysteines whereby the second
cysteine is reduced. The cysteine binding to phosphor is reduced in the presence of
water and the phosphor is oxidized. In this reaction, oxidized TCEP is formed while
a disulfide bond is reduced, see Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Reduction of a disulfide bond by TCEP. Made in ChemDraw.
==PAGE:38==
24
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Protein Crystallization
Protein crystallization appeared for the first time in 1840 with the initial publication
of hemoglobin crystals [54]. At this time, crystallization was used as a means for pro-
tein purification and characterization. This changed when X-ray crystallography was
introduced in 1934, when the first X-ray photograph of a protein crystal was taken
[54]. In the 1950/60s, the first protein structures were solved [54], and since then
thousands of macromolecular structures have been solved. The protein data bank
(PDB) was established in 1971 with seven structures [55].
Throughout the years,
there has been an exponential growth of the number of structures deposited in the
PDB. As the technology became more advanced, the rate of structure determinations
began to increase noticable [55]. In the 1980s, there was a fundamental change in
protein crystallization, and the number of structures in the PDB began to increase
dramatically. The development of recombinant DNA technology made it possible to
prepare sufficient amounts of proteins that otherwise were rare [56]. Crystallization
methods as well as detection methods began to evolve. Computer speed and stor-
age capacities increased, and it became possible to visualize molecules and electron
density. Furthermore, methods to refine structures evolved [55]. As the structure
determination became easier, more and more structures were published. Today, the
PDB archive has a total of 134.983 structures, where 120.836 are solved with X-ray
[57].
5.1
Crystal Formation
Crystallization of a protein can occur when the protein is in a state of supersaturation
[56]. The supersaturated state is a non-equilibrium condition where the amount of
protein is in excess of the solubility limit [56]. All crystals grow from this displaced
system, as the equilibrium is restored by the formation of a solid [58]. Supersaturation
is achieved by altering the properties of the protein solution, such as the protein
concentration, pH, temperature etc. [59].
The crystallization is a phase transition and can be illustrated by a phase diagram.
In Figure 5.2, the four zones represent different degrees of saturation. The precipi-
tation zone is of high supersaturation and in this zone, the protein will precipitate.
The nucleation zone is of moderate supersaturation, where spontaneous nucleation
will take place. The metastable zone is of low supersaturation; in this zone, crystals
==PAGE:40==
26
5 Protein Crystallization
are stable and may grow, but no further nucleation will take place. Lastly, there is a
zone of undersaturation, where the protein is fully dissolved and will never crystallize
[59].
Figure 5.1: A schematic phase diagram.
The y-axis is the protein concentration
and the x-axis is the concentration of a parameter such as pH, temperature, etc.
The supersaturation can be divided into three zones: precipitation, nucleation and
metastable. Below the solubility curve is the undersaturation zone [60].
The crystallization process can be divided into two rather distinct but inseparable
steps - nucleation and growth [56]. The nucleation step is the first to take place. In
this step, protein molecules associate in three dimensions and a thermodynamically
stable assemble is formed. The protein molecules orient in such a manner that in-
teractions, which tend to order and stabilize the assemble are formed. The assembe
is known as the critical nucleus, and on its surfaces there is a possibility for crystal
growth. The nucleation step can only occur when the protein concentration is in the
nucleation zone [61].
The growth step follows the nucleation step. Protein molecules are adsorbed to
the surface of the critical nuclei and are assembled in an ordered way onto the growing
crystal to produce a periodically repeating three-dimensional array [58, 61, 62]. This
step can occur in both the metastable and the nucleation zones [61]. The crystal
continues to take protein from the solution as it grows. This goes on until saturation
is reached, where the crystal is in equilibrium with the surrounding solution [63].
The best crystallization strategy is to induce nucleation just within the nucleation
zone. When critical nuclei form, the protein concentration and the level of supersatu-
ration decrease, and move into the metastable zone [62]. As mentioned, critical nuclei
can not form in the metastable zone. This prevents formation of an excessive number
of nuclei, and thereby prevents competition for the limited amount of protein in the
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Screening and Optimization
27
solution [60]. In the metastable zone, growth occurs slowly. Slow crystal growth leads
to the formation of more ordered crystals, thus better diffracting crystals [60].
5.2
Screening and Optimization
The pursuit of obtaining protein crystals for X-ray diffraction can be divided into
two main phases, where firstly a rough screening is performed to identify the initial
crystallization conditions, followed by the optimization of these conditions [56, 62].
Once some protein crystals are observed in the screening, the optimization begins
[56].
There are two approaches that are used to screen for crystallization conditions.
The first approach is a systematic variation of the most important parameters that
are believed to yield initial crystals [56, 62]. These parameters include pH, tempera-
ture, etc. A disadvantage with this approach is that it uses a relative large amount of
protein sample, which is not always available. The second approach is a shot-gun ap-
proach that uses only some conditions that from experience have shown to crystallize
other proteins. This approach requires less protein sample, but has the disadvantage
that useful conditions might not be discovered. An advantage is that there are a wide
variety of useful kits for crystallization screening on the commercial market [56, 62].
Once protein crystals are observed in the screening, the parameters that define
the initial conditions are identified. Each of these parameters is gradually and sys-
tematically varied in a range about the initial values. The optimization might require
a relative large amount of sample [56, 64].
5.2.1
Crystallization Screens
More than 120 commercial screens exist [65]. In this thesis, four screens are used for
the crystallization experiment: JCSG+, PACT Premier, Structure Screen 1+2 and
Stura FootPrint.
JCSG+ is usually used for initial screening experiments as it offers the most
complete sparse matrix that is based on crystallization conditions that previously have
shown to be successful [66]. It is complimented by PACT Premier. PACT Premier
uses polyethylene glycol (PEG) as precipitant, and the effects of pH, anions and
cations are systematically tested [65, 67]. Structure Screen 1+2 uses salts, polymers,
organics and pH. This screen enables determination of initial crystallization conditions
and establishes the protein solubility [68]. Stura FootPrint analyses the crystallization
potential of the protein sample and determines the protein solubility with a number
of precipitants that have been used in the crystallization of many proteins [69].
==PAGE:42==
28
5 Protein Crystallization
5.3
Crystallizing Methods
Different techniques for bringing the protein solution into a supersaturated state have
been developed [62]. The most commonly used in the crystallization of proteins is
vapor diffusion, as this technique is simple [63] and optimal to screen a large number
of conditions [62].
5.3.1
Vapor Diffusion
In vapor diffusion, a crystallization drop ranging from nanoliters to milliliters and
a reservoir solution are sealed within a closed system [62, 63]. The purpose of the
reservoir solution is to dehydrate the drop, and it is therefore important that the
components of the reservoir solution have lower vapor pressure of water than those
in the drop [63]. One way to obtain this, is for the reservoir solution to be composed
of the same components as the crystallization reagent added to the drop, resulting
in a lower concentration in the drop [62]. Equilibrium within the closed system is
achieved when water evaporates from the drop and condenses on the surface of the
reservoir [63]. Equilibrium is reached when the vapor pressure of water is equalized
between the two whereby the reagent concentration in the drop becomes the same
as in the reservoir.
A good starting point is for the protein solution in the drop
to be unsaturated. The nonvolatile chemicals, such as protein and precipitate will
remain in the drop, and as the system equilibrates the concentration increases, and
the protein sample is driven to a state of supersaturation due to the lowered protein
solubility [61, 62, 63, 70, 71]. The time course of the experiments depends on the
chemical composition of the reservoir solution [63].
Two of the most common vapour diffusion techniques are hanging-drop and sitting-
drop.
In both, the drop is placed over a well containing the reservoir.
The well
Figure 5.2: A schematic illustration of two vapour diffusion techniques - hanging-drop
(left) and sitting-drop (right). The crystallization drop contains protein solution and
reservoir solution and is sealed in an airtight chamber containing reservoir solution.
Made with Google Drawings.
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Crystallizing Methods
29
is sealed to prevent evaporation and to allow vapor equilibration of the drop and
reservoir. In the hanging-drop method, the drop is placed on a siliconized glass cover
slide, which is inverted and functions as a seal for the well. In the sitting-drop method,
the drop is placed above the surface of the reservoir on a small bridge, see Figure 5.2
[62]. In an equivalent experiment, the sitting-drop method will equilibrate the drop
at a slower rate than the hanging-drop method [63].
5.3.2
Parameters Affecting Crystal Formation
In order to achieve a successful crystallization, the appropriate reagents and condi-
tions must be determined. The appropriate reagents and conditions are where the
protein molecules arrange themselves in an ordered fashion, and where the protein
concentration is held in the supersaturated state, so that crystals can form [61].
Crystallization reagents are precipitants, buffers and additives [61]. The precipi-
tants are used in high concentrations and they push the proteins into the supersatu-
rated state by reducing the protein solubility. These include among others salts and
PEG. The buffers are used at low concentrations and maintain pH stability in the
crystallization system. The additives are used in low concentrations, as they do not
affect the saturation of the proteins but rather the protein-protein and protein-solvent
interactions. These include among others organics, salts, polymers, reducing agents
and amino acids [56, 61, 62].
5.3.2.1
Precipitants
Macromolecular precipitants can be divided into three categories: 1) salts, 2) organic
solvents and 3) polymers [56].
Salt ions compete with proteins for binding of water molecules [56]. The protein
solubility depends on the ionic strength, see Figure 5.3. At a specific ionic strength,
the protein solubility will be at its maximum. At sufficiently high salt concentra-
tion, the proteins become so dehydrated that they aggregate in order to satisfy their
electrostatic requirement. This dehydration effect is known as salting-out. In this
environment crystals may form. At very low ionic strength, the salt ion availability
is insufficient to maintain protein solubility. This is known as salting-in. Also under
these conditions crystals may form [56]. A variation among the different salts should
be expected [56], see section 4.5.1.
Organic solvents reduce the dielectric constant of the solvent. This screens the
electric interactions between protein and solvent. As the concentration of organic
solvent is increased, the interactions between proteins are more favorable, and a solid
state is formed [56].
Polymers, e.g. PEG, exhibit volume-exclusion effects, which result in the proteins
separating from the solvent. These precipitants do not have any consistent confor-
mation, and as they twist randomly in the solution, they occupy much more space,
resulting in less solvent available space for proteins. This leads to aggregation of
proteins, which ultimately leads to the formation of a solid state [56].
==PAGE:44==
30
5 Protein Crystallization
Figure 5.3: A representation of the ionic strength as a function of the protein solubility.
The salting-in region is on the left side of the maximum solubility, and the salting-out
region is on the right [72].
5.4
Pre-Crystallization Test
The pre-crystallization test (PCT) is a method that determines the appropriate pro-
tein concentration and is used prior to the crystallization screening.
The concen-
tration of a sample is an important crystallization variable.
If the sample is too
concentrated, amorphous precipitation may occur, and if the sample is too diluted it
will result in clear drops [73]. Amorphous precipitation and clear drops are typical
screening results for reagent conditions. However, the number of precipitation and
clear drops can be reduced by optimizing the protein concentration for the screen, re-
sulting in more efficient sample utilization as well as a better chance for crystallization
[73].
5.5
Testing for Protein Crystals
When the crystallization results are obtained, it is important to distinguish low-
molecular weight crystals from protein crystals. Low-molecular weight crystals are
physically hard and brittle. Furthermore, they are highly ordered and have intense
diffraction patterns from X-ray experiments, whereas protein crystals are very soft,
crush easily and diffract X-rays poorly.
The primary reasons for the poor X-ray
diffraction are the liquid channels and the solvent cavities within protein crystals
[56].
The most direct approach to determine if a certain crystal is protein or salt is to
obtain an X-ray diffraction pattern [74]. There are however other approaches such as
==PAGE:45==
5.5 Testing for Protein Crystals
31
dehydration of the crystal, crushing the crystal and using dye to determine the crystal
type [74]. Another approach is to use sample buffer as a control, where the sample
buffer is exposed to exactly the same surroundings as the protein solution. If a crystal
appears in the protein sample, the sample buffer is examined. If a crystal also appears
in the sample buffer, the crystal is not a result of the protein sample, while if no crystal
appears, there is a great likelihood that the crystal formed in the protein sample is
protein [74]. Ultraviolet light (UV) imaging of protein crystallization experiments
enables distinction between protein crystals and salt crystals. UV imaging visualizes
protein crystals as it is based on tryptophan fluorescence [75].
==PAGE:46==
32
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6
Experimental
Procedures
6.1
Protein Purification
The protein purifications were performed using columns and an ÄKTA Start from
GE Healtcare. All protein solutions were kept on ice at all times except during the
chromatographic steps, which were carried out at room temperature.
The cells used in this project were expressed according to protocols developed by
the Metalloprotein Chemistry and Engineering Group.
6.1.1
Purification of MBP-3CP
The experimental procedures concerning the purification of MBP-3CP were performed
according to a protocol that has been developed and optimized in the Metalloprotein
Chemistry and Engineering Group. The steps in the purification are shown in Fig-
ure 6.1, and the buffers used for the purification are listed in Table 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Flowchart of the purification strategy of MBP-3CP.
Table 6.1: Buffers used for MBP-3CP purification.
Buffer
Composition
Binding Buffer
20 mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 8, 70 mM (NH4)2SO4
Elution Buffer
20 mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 8, 50 mM (NH4)2SO4, 0.1 mM maltose
Storage Buffer
50 mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 8, 50 mM (NH4)2SO4, 1 mM DTT (add just before use)
10 mM EDTA, 20 % glycerol
==PAGE:48==
34
6 Experimental Procedures
The cells from the 650 mL culture were resuspended with binding buffer to a
volume of 40 mL. The cells were lysed by sonication in Satorius Labsonic with am-
plitude 80% in 1 cycle 3x30 seconds with a 1 min pause between each round. Lastly,
the cells were centrifuged at 4 °C and 12000 rpm (∼18500 g) for 2x20 minutes. The
sample was loaded onto a Dextrin Sepharose HP column, and the column was washed
with 5 CV binding buffer. The protein was eluted with elution buffer, and the eluted
fractions were recovered. The volume was reduced to 3 mL using a 200 mL stirring
amicon cell fitted with a 30 kDa membrane. The buffer was exchanged by adding
storage buffer to a volume of 30 mL. This was repeated twice giving a 1000 times dilu-
tion of the elution buffer, and the final volume was reduced to 3 mL. The sample was
divided into portions each containing 80 nmol MBP-3CP in 1.5 mL microcentrifuge
tube and stored at -20 °C.
6.1.2
Purification of N∆52-hTPH2
A schematic representation of the purification steps for N∆52-hTPH2 is shown in
Figure 6.2, and the buffers used are listed in Table 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Flowchart of the purification strategy of N∆52-hTPH2.
Table 6.2: Buffers used for purification of N∆52-hTPH2.
Buffer
Composition
Binding/GF Buffer
20 mM Hepes/NH4OH, pH 7, 300 mM (NH4)2SO4, 3 mM L-Phe
Elution Buffer
20 mM Hepes/NH4OH, pH 7, 300 mM (NH4)2SO4, 3 mM L-Phe, 1 mM maltose
6.1.2.1
Sample Preparation
The cells from the 650 mL culture were resuspended with binding buffer to a volume
of 40 mL, and were lysed by sonication in Satorius Labsonic with amplitude 80% in
1 cycle 3x30 seconds with a 1 min pause between each round. 2x20 µL SDS-PAGE
samples were taken aside (R). Lastly, the cells were centrifuged at 4 °C and 12000 rpm
(∼18500 g) for 20 minutes and the supernatant was decanted in to a new centrifuge
tube. The pellet was resuspended with binding buffer to a volume of 40 mL, and 2x20
µL of the resuspension was taken aside for SDS-PAGE (P). The supernatant was again
centrifuged at 4 °C and 12000 rpm (∼18500 g) for 20 minutes and afterwards decanted
to a new centrifuge tube. 2x20 µL of the supernatant was taken aside for SDS-PAGE
(S). The supernatant was filtered through GHP ACRODISC 0.45 µm filter.
==PAGE:49==
6.1 Protein Purification
35
6.1.2.2
Affinity Chromatography 1
Affinity chromatography 1 (AC1) uses a Dextrin Sepharose HP 16/14 column with a
flow rate of 5.0 mL/min for the first purification step. The column was equilibrated
with 5 CV binding buffer. The sample was loaded onto the column, and the column
was washed with 5 CV binding buffer to elute unbound material. 2x20 µL of the flow
through was collected for SDS-PAGE (FT). The MBP-3CP solution was prepared by
diluting MBP-3CP to a concentration of 2.2 µM in a volume of 35 mL and was filtered
through a GHP ACRODISC 0.45 µm filter. 30 mL of the 2.2 µM MBP-3CP solution
was loaded onto the column. The purification was incubated for 1 hour. The protein
was eluted with 5 CV binding buffer, and the protein eluted after approximately 8 mL,
and the following 10 mL were collected. 2x20 µL was collected from the target protein
(TP1) for SDS-PAGE. The proteins that were retained on the column were eluted
with 3 CV elution buffer. 2x20 µL was collected for SDS-PAGE from the eluting
peak (E1). The concentration was measured by NanoDrop Spectrophotometer. The
column was regenerated by 3 CV ultrapure water (UPW), 3 CV 0.5 M NaOH, 5 CV
UPW and 3 CV 20% ethanol.
6.1.2.3
Affinity Chromatography 2
Affinity chromatography 2 (AC2) uses a second Dextrin Sepharose HP 16/14 column
that was equilibrated with 5 CV binding buffer. The 10 mL protein solution was
filtered through GHP ACRODISC 0.45 µm filter and loaded onto the column. The
protein was eluted with 5 CV binding buffer, and the eluted fractions were recovered.
2x20 µL was collected from the target protein (TP2) for SDS-PAGE. The protein
with remaining MBP tags was eluted with 3 CV elution buffer. 2x20 µL were col-
lected for SDS-PAGE from the eluting peak (E2). The concentration was measured
by NanoDrop Spectrophotometer. The column was regenerated by 3 CV UPW, 3 CV
0.5 M NaOH, 5 CV UPW and 3 CV 20% ethanol.
A 5 mM (NH4)2Fe(II)(SO4)2 .6 H2O solution (Fe(II) solution) was prepared. This
solution needed to be freshly made, as Fe(II) would be oxidized to Fe(III) by the
oxygen in the air.
The Fe(II) solution was added in a 1.5x molar excess to the
protein solution and incubated for 15 min in an ice bath. The protein sample was
concentrated on a 30 kDa cut-off Vivaspin turbo 15 centrifuge device. The protein
solution was ultrafiltrated in the device at 4000 g at 4 °C to a concentration of 1-2
mg/mL. The sample was homogenized between each fifth minute as a concentration
gradient was formed in the ultrafiltration device.
6.1.2.4
Gel Filtration 1
Gel filtration 1 (GF1) uses a Superdex 200 pg 26/600 HL column with a flow rate
of 1.2 mL/min. The column was equilibrated overnight with 1 CV UPW and 2 CV
GF buffer. The protein solution was filtered through GHP ACRODISC 0.45 µm and
==PAGE:50==
36
6 Experimental Procedures
loaded onto the column. 2x20 µL samples of each peak were taken aside for SDS-
PAGE (G). The concentration was measured on NanoDrop Spectrophotometer. The
protein sample was concentrated to 1-2 mg/mL.
6.1.2.5
Gel filtration 2
The protein solution was filtered through GHP ACRODISC 0.45 µm and loaded onto
the Superdex 200 pg 26/600 HL column for a second gel filtration (GF2) with a
flow rate of 1.2 mL/min. The target protein was collected, and 2x20 µL SDS-PAGE
samples was collected for each eluting peak (G). The column was regenerated with 1
CV UPW and 2 CV 20% ethanol overnight. The protein sample was ultrafiltrated.
6.1.3
Purification of Methylated N∆52-hTPH2
The purification strategy for methylated N∆52-hTPH2 followed the purification strat-
egy for N∆52-hTPH2 with the exception of an extra purification step. This extra
purification step was the methylation of the surface lysines of N∆52-hTPH2, and it
was performed just after the protein elutes from AC2. The methylation reaction was
done accordingly to protocols developed by Walther et al. [47] and Shaw et al. [46].
Figure 6.3: Flowchart of the purification strategy of methylated N∆52-hTPH2.
After AC2, the protein concentration was measured by NanoDrop Spectropho-
tometer. For the methylation, the protein concentration should not be higher than
1 mg/mL to minimize precipitation [47]. If the concentration was higher, binding
buffer was added in such an amount that the sample was diluted to the appropriate
concentration. The buffer composition differed from N∆52-hTPH2, as no primary
amines sould be included in the buffer. The buffer composition is listed in Table 6.3.
20 µL of 1 M dimethylamine-borane complex (DMAB) (freshly made and kept in
a dark Eppendorf tube) and 40 µL of 1 M formaldehyde were added per 1 mL protein
solution. The reaction was mixed at 100 rpm on a gel shaker at 4 °C in the dark for
2 hours. In order to keep the reaction in the dark, the falcon tube was covered with
tinfoil. Another 20 µL of 1 M DMAB and 40 µL of 1 M formaldehyde were added
per 1 mL protein solution, and the reaction was then mixed at the same conditions
for 2 hours. Lastly, 10 µL of DMAB was added per 1 mL protein solution, and the
reaction was incubated under the same conditions over night. The methylation was
stopped with 10 mL gel filtration buffer used for the purification of N∆52-hTPH2,
see Table 6.2. 2x20 µL was collected for SDS-PAGE (Me). The reaction might lead
to a significant amount of precipitation. If this was the case, centrifugation was used
to remove the precipitation before further purification [47]. The protein sample was
==PAGE:51==
6.1 Protein Purification
37
Table 6.3: Buffers used for purification of methylated N∆52-hTPH2.
Buffer
Composition
Methylation 1
Binding Buffer
50 mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 7.5, 900 mM NaCl
Elution Buffer
20 mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 7.5, 900 mM NaCl, 1 mM maltose
GF Buffer
50 mM Hepes/NH4OH, pH 7, 300 mM (NH4)2SO4, 3 mM L-Phe
Methylation 2
Binding Buffer
50 mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 7.5, pH 7.5, 900 mM NaCl
Elution Buffer
20 mM Tris/H2SO4, 900 mM NaCl, 1 mM maltose
GF Buffer
50 mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 7.5, 900 mM NaCl
centrifuged at 4 °C and 12000 rpm (∼18500 g) for 20 minutes. The Fe(II)-solution is
added to the protein sample in an 1.5 excess concentration. After 15 min incubation
time, 2x20 µL samples were collected for SDS-PAGE (MFe). For this experiment, a
blank composed of binding buffer was treated just the same as the protein solution.
The protein sample was then ultrafiltrated to a concentration of 1-2 mg/mL, and
filtrated through a GHP ACRODISC 0.45 µm filter. 2x20 µL was collected for SDS-
PAGE (Mfil). The sample was loaded onto the GF column, where the purification
strategy developed for N∆52-hTPH2 was continued.
6.1.4
Purification of rnTPH1
The purification strategy for rnTPH1 follows the purification strategy for N∆52-
hTPH2, with the exception of different buffer composition and the concentration
the protein sample was ultrafiltrated to. The protein sample was ultrafiltrated to 3
mg/mL after AC2 and GF1. The buffer composition is shown in Table 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Flowchart of the purification strategy of rnTPH1.
Table 6.4: Buffers used for purification of rnTPH1.
Buffer
Composition
Binding/GF Buffer
20 mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 8, 300 mM (NH4)2SO4
Elution Buffer
20 mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 8, 300 mM (NH4)2SO4, 1 mM maltose
==PAGE:52==
38
6 Experimental Procedures
6.2
Characterization with SDS-PAGE
The samples used for SDS-PAGE have been collected during the protein purification.
The samples were stored at -20 °C and thawed prior to the SDS-PAGE. The buffers
used for SDS-PAGE are listed in Table 6.5.
Table 6.5: Buffers used for SDS-PAGE.
Buffer
Composition
10x Running buffer
25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, 0.1% SDS
5x Sample buffer
200 mM Tris/HCl, 2% SDS, 40% glycerol,
0.04% Coomassie G-250, pH 6.8
Fixative solution
10% glacial acetic acid, 38.4% ethanol
Staining solution
0.25 g/L Coomassie blue G-250, 10% glacial acetic acid
Destaining solution
10% glacial acetic acid
The SDS-PAGE was performed according to a procedure from the Metalloprotein
Chemistry and Engineering group [76].
The samples R, P and S were diluted 1:10 before they were used for SDS-PAGE, as
these samples otherwise would be too concentrated. The marker was prepared by mix-
ing 0.5 µL standard (BIO RAD SDS-PAGE standard low range no.161-0304) and 19.5
µL water. The sample buffer was prepared by mixing 28 µL beta-mercaptoethanol
(βME) and 190 µL 5x sample buffer in a fume hood. 5 µL of sample buffer was added
to the marker and the samples, which were mixed and then heated at 80 °C for 5-10
min. The marker and samples were kept at room temperature. The samples were
centrifuged and mixed thoroughly and mixed again immediately before loading. A
Mini-PROTEAN TGX gel 7.5% from Bio-Rad was prepared. This gel gives the best
overall separation for TPH as the molecular weight is approximately 50 kDA. The
wells in the gel were rinsed with 1x running buffer to remove the glycerol before 20
µL sample was loaded into each well. The holder was placed in the electrophoresis
cell, and 1x running buffer was poured outside the holder to the appropriate mark
on the cell and inside the holder just above the wells in the gel. A 250 V current
was applied to the gel for approximately 20-25 min. The plastic around the gel was
removed inside a fume hood, and the gel was placed in fixation buffer for 30 min
under shaking on a stirring-table. The gel was transferred to staining buffer where it
was kept for 1 hour under shaking and lastly, the gel was transferred to destaining
buffer and left overnight. After destaining, the gel was washed with water and sealed
in a plastic pocket.
==PAGE:53==
6.3 Reducing Agents
39
6.3
Reducing Agents
6.3.1
Stabilization by Reducing Agents
Reducing agents were used to stabilize the protein during ultrafiltration for the purifi-
cation of N∆52-hTPH2 and rnTPH1. A 200 mM TCEP solution and a 250 mM DTT
solution were freshly prepared just before use. A reducing agent was added to the
protein sample prior to ultrafiltration, i.e. after AC2, GF1 and GF2. The reducing
agent was added to the protein sample resulting in a final concentration of 2 mM if
TCEP was used and 10 mM if DTT was used.
6.3.2
The Effect of Reducing Agents Investigated with SDS-PAGE
6.3.2.1
TCEP
200 µL of protein solution was added to two Eppendorf tubes. The tubes were labeled
1 and 2. A 200 mM TCEP solution was prepared and from this 2 µL were added to
tube 1, resulting in a final TCEP concentration of 2 mM. The two Eppendorf tubes
were left for 14 days in room temperature. As heavy precipitation was visible, it was
assumed that all protein had precipitated. The tubes were centrifuged. Each tube
was treated in the same way. The volume of the supernatant was measured prior to
its removal. The pellet was resuspended in gel filtration buffer of the same volume
as the removed supernatant. 2x20 µL were transferred from tube 1 to Eppendorf
tubes. 5 µL sample buffer containing βME was added to one tube, and 5 µL sample
buffer without βME was added to the other. 2x2 µL were transferred from tube 1 to
Eppendorf tubes. 5 µL sample buffer containing βME was added to one tube and 5
µL sample buffer without βME was added to the other. This was repeated for tube
2. The samples were loaded into the wells of the 7.5% gel with one well separating
the samples containing βME from those not containing βME.
6.3.2.2
DTT
As DTT is oxidized more quickly than TCEP [77], the sample was used for SDS-
PAGE after 7 and 14 days. However, this sample was kept at 4 °C. 2x20 µL were
transferred to Eppendorf tubes. 5 µL sample buffer containing βME was added to
one tube and 5 µL sample buffer without βME was added to the other. This was
repeated for 2x2 µL. The samples were loaded into the wells of the 7.5% gel with one
well separating the samples containing βME from those not containing βME.
6.4
Pre-Crystallization Test
The pre-crystallization tests (PCT) have been made based on a protocol developed
by Hampton Research [73]. The PCT reagents have been made prior to the test by
==PAGE:54==
40
6 Experimental Procedures
Helena Glud, B.Sc. student at DTU, and are listed in Table 6.6.
Table 6.6: Buffers used for PCT [73].
Reagents
Composition
Reagent A1
0.1 M Tris/NH4OH, 2.0 M (NH4)2SO4, pH 8.5
Reagent A2
0.1 M Tris/NH4OH, pH 8.5, 0.2 M MgCl2 · 6 H2O,
30% w/v PEG 4,000
Reagent B1
0.1 M Tris/NH4OH, pH 8.5, 1.0 M (NH4)2SO4
Reagent B2
0.1 M Tris/NH4OH, pH 8.5, 0.2 M MgCl2 · 6 H2O,
15% w/v PEG 4,000
500 µL of PCT Reagent A1 was pipetted into reservoir A1 of a VDX Plate. 1
µL of the protein sample was pipetted onto the center of a single glass cover slide.
1 µL of PCT Reagent A1 was pipetted from reservoir A1 onto the sample drop on
the siliconized cover slide. The cover slide with the drop was inverted over reservoir
A1 and sealed with silicon. The same steps were repeated for reservoir A2, and if
necessary for B1 and B2. After 30 minutes, the two drops were viewed using a light
microscope. The results were compared with results from Hampton Research, and
were analyzed accordingly to their recommendations as listed in Table 6.7.
Table 6.7: Recommended action by Hampton Research [73].
PCT Reagent A1/B1 Results
PCT Reagent A2/B2 Results
Recommended Action
Heavy amorphous precipitate
Heavy amorphous precipitate
Dilute sample 1:1,
repeat procedure
Clear
Clear
Concentrate sample to half
the original volume
repeat procedure
Light granular precipitate
Clear
Perform Screen
Clear
Light granular precipitate
Perform Screen
Heavy amorphous precipitate
Light granular precipitate
Perform Screen
Heavy amorphous precipitate
Clear
Perform PCT with B1 & B2
Clear
Heavy amorphous precipitate
Perform PCT with B1 & B2
6.5
Crystallization of rnTPH1
The protein sample was filtrated with a Ultrafree MC GV Centrifugal Filter with a
0.22 µm Durapore PVDF Membrane from Millipore to remove contaminating particles
present in the protein sample. The filter was washed with 0.5 mL binding buffer before
use. Furthermore, binding buffer of the same volume as the protein sample was also
filtrated and used as a control in the crystallization.
==PAGE:55==
6.5 Crystallization of rnTPH1
41
The crystallization of rnTPH1 was performed at Lund Protein Purification Plat-
form at Lund University located in Sweden. A mosquito robot from TTP Labtech
was used to set up the drops. The pipetting and the sealing was done manually.
6.5.1
Screen Setup
Four screens from Molecular Dimensions were used for the crystallization.
These
screens were PACT Premier, JCSG+, Structure Screen 1+2 and Stura Footprint.
Swissci plates were used, and these contain 96 wells where each well contains a reser-
voir well and three subwells for crystallization samples. The screens were setup as
sitting drops.
Table 6.8: The samples used for crystallization.
Protein
5.47 mg/mL rnTPH1 in 10 mM DTT, 20 mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 8, 300 mM (NH4)2SO4
Buffer
10 mM DTT, 20 mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 8, 300 mM (NH4)2SO4
The protein and buffer solutions were added to strips containing 8 wells. To the
first strip, 1.8 µL buffer was added, to the second strip 1.8 µL protein was added,
and to the third strip 3 µL protein was added.
The mosquito robot distributed
the solutions as well as the reservoir solution to the wells of the Swissci plate. 40
µL reservoir solution was added to the reservoir. The first subwell contained buffer
and reservoir where the drop ratio is 100 nL buffer:100 nL reservoir. The second
subwell contained protein and reservoir where the drop ratio is 100 nL protein:100 nL
reservoir. The third subwell also contained protein and reservoir but in a drop ratio
of 200 nL protein:100 nL reservoir. See Figure 6.5 for an overview of the well setup.
The Swissci plates were sealed with UV transparent ClearVue sheets from Molecular
Dimensions and then stored in the plate hotel.
Figure 6.5: The well setup on the Swissci plate. Made with Google Drawings.
6.5.2
Inspection of Drops
The Minstrel HT UV imaging system, Rigaku, took high resolution images of the
crystallization experiments using visible and UV illumination. The UV imaging al-
lowed identification of crystals hidden in precipitate as well as distinction of protein
==PAGE:56==
42
6 Experimental Procedures
crystals from salt crystals. These images could be looked at over the internet through
the CrystalTrak software [78]. Images were taken after 0, 1 and 3 days, as well as 1,
2 and 3 weeks, as well as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 months [79].
6.5.3
Analysis of Drops
The drops on the images from Rigaku were inspected and scored as clear drops, phase
separation, precipitate, salt crystals or interesting crystal-like structures.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 7
Results
7.1
General Information
Purification experiments have been performed on three variants of TPH - NΔ52-
hTPH2, rnTPH1 and the methylated NΔ52-hTPH2.
NΔ52-hTPH2 and rnTPH1
have been fused with MBP tag with a linker that contains a 3CP cleavage recognition
site. Table 7.1 contains the internal ID numbers, the monomeric molecular weights
and monomeric extinction coefficients at 280 nm. This information was obtained with
the ProtParam tool on the ExPASy webpage [80]. The amino acid sequences of the
proteins are shown in Appendix A.
Table 7.1: An overview of the proteins and parameters used in this thesis [80].
Protein
Internal ID no.
Molecular weight
Extinction coefficient
[Da]
at 280 nm [M-1cm-1]
MBP-tag
42756.3
MBP-3CP
HC3430
62816.0
87780
MBP-rnTPH1
HC3541
93960.61
105200
rnTPH1
51068.11
38850
MBP-NΔ52-hTPH2
HC3519
93234.85
112650
NΔ52-hTPH2
50496.52
46300
Throughout this thesis, NΔ52-hTPH2 has been purified ten times, rnTPH1 five
times and the methylated NΔ52-hTPH2 two times. For some of the results, only
minor changes have been observed.
Therefore, representative chromatograms and
SDS-PAGE have been selected to describe the purifications.
The results obtained in this thesis are not presented in a chronological order, but
divided into sections for the different TPH variants.
7.2
Chromatographic Optimization of NΔ52-hTPH2
In the bachelor thesis by Helena Glud [33], a method for purification of NΔ52-hTPH2
was used, which resulted in the chromatogram for GF shown in Figure 3.1. In this
chromatogram, there is no baseline separation, as the two peaks, G1 and TP2, overlap.
==PAGE:58==
44
7 Results
From this, it could be a possibility that the purified protein is not pure, but contains
both some octamer and tetramer. This could be the reason why no usable crystals
where produced. In this section, the purification strategy that was used for NΔ52-
hTPH2 by Helena Glud is optimized in order to hopefully achieve the goal of a baseline
separation.
In the GF chromatogram in Figure 3.1, a 10 mL protein sample was loaded onto
the column, and the column had a flow rate of 2.5 mL/min. These factors were firstly
varied in order to optimize the purification.
In order to follow the separation of the peaks of the tetramer and octamer, the
resolution is calculated based on the formula
RS = 2 ∗(V2 −V1)
W1 + W2
where V2-V1 is the distance between the two peaks on the chromatogram, and
W1+W2 is the sum of widths of the two peaks, where each is measured between
the peak’s intersection between the baseline and the deflection tangent. For a base-
line separation, RS = 1.5 [81]. Only the results from the calculations will be included;
for the chromatograms and calculations see Appendix E. As no tool for these calcula-
tions is available, the calculations are performed manually and therefore, the values
presented should merely work as a guideline to follow the improvements in the sep-
aration. The resolution in the GF chromatogram from Figure 3.1 was calculated to
RS = 0.73.
7.2.1
Sample Volume
The first parameter that was varied was the sample volume. Gel filtration is, up to
a limit, independent of the samples viscosity. So by concentrating the sample before
loading it onto the column, a higher performance may be achieved. As a rule, the
sample that is added should be no more than 2% of the volume of the column [81].
The smaller the volume, the greater the impact on the resolution. The reduction of
the sample volume had an impact on the resolution, as the peak separation improved.
The resolution was calculated to RS = 0.89. For following experiments, the sample
volume was reduced. However, the stability of NΔ52-hTPH2 is greatly affected when
concentrating the protein sample. In order to avoid precipitation, the protein sample
was concentrated to 1-2 mg/mL.
7.2.2
Flow Rate
The diffusion rate can be optimized by decreasing the flow rate.
When the flow
rate is decreased, the proteins will have better time to diffuse in and out of the gel
particles. However, the diffusion rate should not be extremely low, as this could result
in diffusion across the column and thereby poorer separation [81]. The decrease in
flow rate from 2.5 mL/min to 1.2 mL/min resulted in a better separation with a
resolution of RS = 1.16.
==PAGE:59==
7.2 Chromatographic Optimization of NΔ52-hTPH2
45
From the chromatogram in Figure E.4, it is noticeable that the octamer peak is
tailing and there is a peak at the beginning of the tetramer peak. This could be
an indication of that there are impurities that have a smaller size than the octamer
but larger size than the tetramer. This could be explained by that all MBP tags
were not removed.
The MBP tag has approximately the same weight as a TPH
monomer, meaning that three peaks could lie between the tetramer ((TPH)4) peak
and the octamer ((TPH)8) peak. These three peaks could have 1-3 MBP tags still
attached to the tetramer – (MBP-TPH)(TPH)3, (MBP-TPH)2(TPH)2 and (MBP-
TPH)3(TPH)1.
7.2.3
Increasing the amount of 3C-Protease
The peaks between the tetramer and the octamer were examined by adding twice
the amount, 160 nmol, of 3CP onto the AC column for on-column cleavage. This,
however, resulted in the same chromatogram as when only 80 nmol was used for on-
column cleavage. This gave an inconclusive result, as it was not clear if the protease
had removed all MBP tags or if the efficiency of the protease cannot be optimized
further as there was no more capacity on the column.
7.2.4
Introducing a Second AC
If it is the case that not all MBP tags are removed from the TPH, these need to
be separated from the TPH proteins that do not have any MBP tags attached. A
second AC is introduced, so that the TPH proteins still attached to MBP tags will be
retained on the column, while the TPH where the MBP tags successfully have been
removed will flow through the column with the binding buffer. When elution buffer
was used, a peak was eluted. This showed that the protease did not work optimal
during the on-column cleavage. Therefore, AC has to be performed twice. The GF
chromatogram performed after the second AC resulted in a resolution of RS = 1.18.
7.2.5
Introducing a Second GF
The efficiency of the column can be increased by using a longer column, as the number
of theoretical plates is dependent on the length of the column [81]. However, due to
the fact that no longer column was available, the protein solution was loaded onto the
GF column for a second run. The sample that eluted from the first run on the GF
column was concentrated to 1-2 mg/mL, and added to the GF column again. This
time only a few impurities had to be separated from the sample as the large impurities
were sorted from the protein sample in the first GF run. This resulted in a resolution
of RS = 1.09. Even though this is a poorer resolution, this extra purification step gav
the opportunity to obtain a purer and more homogenous sample, as octamers still
remained after the GF1.
==PAGE:60==
46
7 Results
All improvements have been included in the strategy for the purification of NΔ52-
hTPH2.
7.2.6
The Optimized Method
The sonication released the cytoplasm containing the MBP tagged NΔ52-hTPH2 and
by centifugation the cell membranes were removed. This resulted in a supernatant
containing the soluble proteins. From the SDS-PAGE in Figure 7.3, the resuspension
(R), pellet (P) and supernatant (S) are shown. It can be seen that all three contain
MBP-NΔ52-hTPH2. The supernatant is loaded onto the AC column, and proteins
that do not have a MBP tag flow through the column and result in the peak FT,
see Figure 7.1. From the SDS-PAGE, the FT contains a number of different proteins
from the cell material. After the column had been washed with binding buffer, MBP-
3CP was loaded onto the column. MBP-3CP removed the MBP-tag from the NΔ52-
hTPH2. When the column was washed with binding buffer, the NΔ52-hTPH2 eluted
from the column, and this resulted in the peak TP1. This peak was collected and used
for AC2. The target protein (TP1) shows a dominant SDS-PAGE band for NΔ52-
hTPH2. When the column was washed with elution buffer, the remaining proteins
which were tagged with MBP, eluted from the column (peak E1). From SDS-PAGE,
in the eluting peak (E1) the MBP tag is eluted together with the protease as well as
MBP-NΔ52-hTPH2 where the protease has not cut the MBP tag off.
Figure 7.1: Affinity chromatogram from the purification of NΔ52-hTPH2 on a Dextrin
Sepharose HP 16/14 column. The black curve shows the absorbance as a function
of volume. The orange dotted-line is the loading of the sample, the blue one is the
loading of MBP-3CP, the red one is where the protein is collected, and the green line
is the elution buffer in %. The peaks in the chromatogram are the flow through (FT),
the target protein (TP1) and the elution (E1).
==PAGE:61==
7.2 Chromatographic Optimization of NΔ52-hTPH2
47
Figure 7.2: Affinity chromatogram from the purification of NΔ52-hTPH2 on a Dextrin
Sepharose HP 16/14 column. The black curve shows the absorbance as a function of
volume. The orange dotted-line is the loading of the sample, the red one is where the
protein is collected, and the green line is the elution buffer in %. The peaks in the
chromatogram are the target protein (TP2) and the elution (E2).
Figure 7.3: SDS-PAGE form the purification of NΔ52-hTPH2. M: molecular weight
standard, R: raw extract, P: pellet, FT: flow through, TP1: target protein after AC1,
E1: elution of remaining material after AC1, TP2: target protein after AC2, E2:
elution of remaining material after AC2. x10 indicates that the SDS-PAGE sample
has been diluted 10 times.
A second AC step was included in the strategy to remove the remaining MBP-
NΔ52-hTPH2. The collected peak was loaded onto the column, where NΔ52-hTPH2
==PAGE:62==
48
7 Results
eluted in the flow through. This peak was collected. The SDS-PAGE sample from
this peak, TP2, shows only one peak namely NΔ52-hTPH2. The MBP-NΔ52-hTPH2
was eluted with elution buffer and resulted in the peak E2. The SDS-PAGE sample
for this peak is too diluted to show any peaks, see Figure 7.3.
The collected peak from the second AC was concentrated to 1-2 mg/mL and loaded
onto the GF column. The chromatogram for the first GF is shown in Figure 7.4. The
first eluting peak, G1, is in the void volume. This peak was too diluted for any bands
to appear in the SDS-PAGE. The second eluting peak, G2, contains NΔ52-hTPH2.
This peak is believed to be the octamer of NΔ52-hTPH2. The third eluting peak, G3,
is believed to be the tetramer of NΔ52-hTPH2. The last eluting peak contains small
molecules, but no band appeared for this peak in the SDS-PAGE. The SDS-PAGE is
shown in Figure 7.6.
Figure 7.4: Gel filtration from the purification of NΔ52-hTPH2 on a Superdex 200 pg
26/600 HL column. The black curve shows the absorbance as a function of volume.
The orange dotted-line is the loading of the sample, and the red one is where the
protein is collected. The peaks in the chromatogram elute in order of decresing size.
The two peaks for the octamer and the tetramer in Figure 7.4 are overlapping.
When the target protein was collected, it was important to get a minimal amount
of the octamer while still collecting a large amount of the tetramer. The collected
protein was concentrated to 1-2 mg/mL and loaded onto the gel filtration column for
a second run.
The target protein was filtrated prior to loading onto the GF column. In GF2
one major peak, G5, is visible; see Figure 7.5. However, there seems to be a small
peak eluting just prior to G5. This is most likely some of the octamer that was not
separated from the target protein in GF1. Again, when collecting the target protein,
focus was on collecting the largest amount of tetramer without getting any octamer.
==PAGE:63==
7.2 Chromatographic Optimization of NΔ52-hTPH2
49
Figure 7.5: Gel filtration from the purification of NΔ52-hTPH2 on a Superdex 200 pg
26/600 HL column. The black curve shows the absorbance as a function of volume.
The orange dotted-line is the loading of the sample, and the red one is where the
protein is collected.
Figure 7.6: SDS-PAGE from the purification of NΔ52-hTPH2. M: molecular weight
standard, G1: first peak from GF1, G2: second peak from GF1, G3: third peak from
GF1, G4: fourth peak from GF2, G5: peak from GF2.
7.2.7
Concentration of NΔ52-hTPH2
Throughout the experiments, protein has disappeared during ultrafiltration. When a
concentration of approximately 2-3 mg/mL is achieved, the protein amount decreases
and the concentration does not exceed 3 mg/mL. In order to crystallize the protein,
a concentration of minimum 5 mg/mL is recommended [73]. There are three reasons
that could explain why the protein amount decreases: 1) adsorption on the plastic, 2)
fouling on the membrane and 3) the protein gets to concentrated whereby it denatures
==PAGE:64==
50
7 Results
[82]. If 1) and 2) would be the case, then only a certain amount of protein would be
used until the membrane and the plastic in the ultrafiltration tube would be filled
up. Meaning that the protein amount would not keep decreasing. An experiment was
made to test if there is fouling on the membrane. A 6 mL 0.3 mg/mL protein sample
was divided into two, where 3 mL were left in the membrane and the other 3 mL
where left in a polypropylene tube. Both tubes where kept at 4 °C. After an hour,
the concentration was measured. The concentration had not changed for either of
the two samples. This confirms that membrane fouling is not the case. Furthermore,
the experiment confirms that there is no sample loss due to adsorption to plastic, as
there was no protein loss after one hour. This makes 3) the most likely to be the case
to why the protein amount decreases after reaching a concentration of 2-3 mg/mL.
During the ultrafiltration, UV-VIS measurements have been made to determine the
concentration. As the ultrafiltration proceeds, the protein amount decreases. This
observation is valid for all of the experiments and on that account, 3) is believed to
be the reason to loss of protein.
7.2.8
Reduction of Cysteines with TCEP
When a successful purification is achieved, the goal is to stabilize the protein and
thereby enabling stability at a higher concentration. TCEP is used to reduce the
cysteines. However, the addition of TCEP did not show any difference on the stability
of the protein as the protein amount decreased, see Figure 7.7.
The protein still
precipitated at a concentration between 0.87 mg/mL (1.13 mg/1.3 mL) and 2.36
mg/mL (0.59 mg/0.25 mL). However, nothing conclusive can be determined from
this experiment, as the stability of the protein is low and precipitation may have
already started prior to the addition of TCEP.
Figure 7.7: UV-VIS measurements of NΔ52-hTPH2 with 2 mM TCEP performed on
NanoDrop. The protein solution is ultrafiltrated between each measurement. The
curves show the amount of soluble protein in the protein solution at the different
volumes.
==PAGE:65==
7.3 A Different Variant – Methylated NΔ52-hTPH2
51
7.3
A Different Variant – Methylated NΔ52-hTPH2
The methylation is a technique that is used in this thesis to alter the surface of the
enzyme, making it hopefully less prone to aggregation. In NΔ52-hTPH2 there are 30
lysines in each monomer, where 8 are in the regulatory domain, 21 in the catalytic
domain and 1 in the tetramerization domain. As no full-length 3D structure is solved
for the protein, it is not known how many of the lysines are located on the surface
of the protein and therefore, it is uncertain, how many of the lysines undergo the
methylation reaction.
A purification was performed with NΔ52-hTPH2. After the methylation, it is not
unusual for some of the protein to precipitate [47]. However, this was not the case
as no precipitation was visible when the protein was centrifuged. The chromatogram
for the gel filtration for NΔ52-hTPH2 resulted in a very little amount of protein, see
Figure 7.8.
Figure 7.8: Gel filtration from the purification of methylated NΔ52-hTPH2 on a
Superdex 200 pg 26/600 HL column. The black curve shows the absorbance as a
function of volume. The orange dotted-line is the loading of the sample. The peaks
in the chromatogram elute in an order of decreasing size.
SDS-PAGE samples were taken out during the purification. These were used to
examine what had happen to the protein. The SDS-PAGE samples showed that the
protein was still present after the methylation. The following SDS-PAGE samples
were too diluted for a clear band to appear, but G2, G3 and G4 show a faint band
corresponding to NΔ52-hTPH2.
It is first when the protein is added to the GF
column, when it becomes unstable and most likely precipitates on the column. This
could be due a change in the properties of the protein, where the protein is no longer
stable in the GF buffer containing (NH4)2SO4 and L-Phe.
==PAGE:66==
52
7 Results
Figure 7.9: SDS-PAGE from the methylation and gel filtration of methylated NΔ52-
hTPH2. M: molecular weight standard, Me: after methylation, MU: after ultrafiltra-
tion, G1: first peak, G2: second peak, G3: third peak, G4: fourth peak, G5: fifth
peak.
A new purification was performed, where the only difference was that the buffer
that did not include any primary amines was used for the whole purification. The
GF chromatogram for this purification is shown in Figure 7.10.
Figure 7.10: Gel filtration from the purification of methylated NΔ52-hTPH2 on a
Superdex 200 pg 26/600 HL column. The black curve shows the absorbance as a
function of volume. The orange dotted-line is the loading of the sample. The peaks
in the chromatogram elute in an order of decreasing size.
From the chromatogram, it appears that the protein did not precipitate on the
column. However, the protein eluted together with the buffer in the void volume
(Figure 7.10, peak G1) indicating that the protein has aggregated to high molecular
weight compounds. The SDS-PAGE shows that the high molecular weight compound
==PAGE:67==
7.4 A Different Variant – rnTPH1
53
is aggregates of NΔ52-hTPH2, as a band corresponding to NΔ52-hTPH2 monomer
appears in Figure 7.11. From this, it can be concluded that the methylation of the
lysines in NΔ52-hTPH2 does not alter the surface in such a manner that aggregation
is prevented, but rather more favorable.
Figure 7.11: SDS-PAGE from the methylation and gel filtration of methylated NΔ52-
hTPH2. M: molecular weight standard, Me: after methylation, MFe: after addition
of Fe(II)-solution, MU: after ultrafiltration, Mfil: after filtration, G1: first peak, G2:
second peak.
7.4
A Different Variant – rnTPH1
As NΔ52-hTPH2 could not achieve a higher concentration than approximately 2-3
mg/mL, a new variant was examined. From the overview of the published hydroxy-
lases, Appendix C, it is apparent that the full-length structures solved are from the
rat organism. The rnTPH1 has a 91% sequence identity to hTPH1 (sequence align-
ment in NCBI Blast), and the rat organism is an excellent model system for studying
as 15 of the most common disease-associated amino acids are fully conserved between
rat and human [83].
In this section, the TPH1 from a rat organism is investigated.
7.4.1
Purification of rnTPH1
The purification strategy follows the optimized purification strategy developed for
NΔ52-hTPH2. The SDS-PAGE results from the resuspension, pellet and supernatant
show that all contain concentrated MBP-rnTPH1. As in the chromatogram for NΔ52-
hTPH2 (Figure 7.1), the first peak is the flow through (FT), followed by the target
protein (TP1) and the last peak appears after elution buffer is added (E1); see Fig-
ure 7.12. It is noticeable that the target protein from rnTPH1 has a significantly
==PAGE:68==
54
7 Results
greater absorbance than the equivalent peak for NΔ52-hTPH2.
The SDS-PAGE
sample of TP1 shows a broad band for rnTPH1. The E1 contains mostly MBP tags.
Figure 7.12: Affinity chromatogram from the purification of rnTPH1 on a Dextrin
Sepharose HP 16/14 column. The black curve shows the absorbance as a function
of volume. The orange dotted-line is the loading of the sample, the blue one is the
loading of MBP-3CP, the red one is where the protein is collected, and the green line
is the elution buffer in %. The peaks in the chromatogram are the flow through (FT),
the target protein (TP1) and the elution (E1).
Figure 7.13: SDS-PAGE from the purification of rnTPH1.
M: molecular weight
standard, R: raw extract, P: pellet, FT: flow through, TP1: target protein after AC1,
E1: elution of remaining material after AC1, TP2: target protein after AC2, E2:
elution of remaining material after AC2. x10 indicates a 10 times dilution.
The target protein (TP1) was collected, and loaded onto a second AC. The flow
through contained the target protein (TP2).
The SDS-PAGE validates that the
==PAGE:69==
7.4 A Different Variant – rnTPH1
55
collected protein is rnTPH1. When elution buffer was added, E2 eluted. The E2
peak had a higher absorbance than the equivalent peak in NΔ52-hTPH2 and was
visible in the SDS-PAGE. The SDS-PAGE sample for E2 shows three faint bands
that could be uncleaved MBP-rnTPH1, MBP tag and rnTPH1.
Figure 7.14: Affinity chromatogram from the purification of rnTPH1 on a Dextrin
Sepharose HP 16/14 column. The black curve shows the absorbance as a function of
volume. The yellow dotted-line is the loading of the sample, the red one is where the
protein is collected, and the green line is the elution buffer in %. The peaks in the
chromatogram are the target protein (TP2) and the elution (E2).
The target protein was concentrated to approximately 3 mg/mL and loaded onto
the GF column. The chromatogram for the first GF is shown in Figure 7.15. The
chromatogram resembles the one for NΔ52-hTPH2. The first eluting peak, G1, eluted
together with the void volume and from the SDS-PAGE band, it includes larger
aggregates of rnTPH1, see SDS-PAGE in Figure 7.17. The second eluting peak, G2,
contains rnTPH1 in its octameric form. The third eluting peak, G3, is the tetramer
of rnTPH1. The last eluting peak contains small molecules, but no band is visible
for this peak in the SDS-PAGE.
As the two peaks for the octamer and the tetramer were overlapping, focus was
on getting a minimal amount of the octamer while still collecting a large amount of
the tetramer. The collected protein was concentrated to approximately 3 mg/mL and
loaded onto the gel filtration column for a second run.
The target protein was filtrated prior to loading onto the GF column. In the
second GF run two peaks elute, see Figure 7.16. The first eluting peak, G5, is the
octamer and the second eluting peak, G6, is the tetramer. Again, when collecting
the target protein, focus was on collecting the largest amount of tetramer without
getting any octamer.
==PAGE:70==
56
7 Results
Figure 7.15: Gel filtration from the purification of rnTPH1 on a Superdex 200 pg
26/600 HL column. The black curve shows the absorbance as a function of volume.
The orange dotted-line is the loading of the sample, and the red one is where the
protein is collected. The peaks in the chromatogram elute in an order of decreasing
size.
Figure 7.16: Gel filtration from the purification of rnTPH1 on a Superdex 200 pg
26/600 HL column. The black curve shows the absorbance as a function of volume.
The orange dotted-line is the loading of the sample, and the red one is where the
protein is collected. The peaks in the chromatogram elute in an order of decreasing
size.
==PAGE:71==
7.4 A Different Variant – rnTPH1
57
Figure 7.17: SDS-PAGE from the purification of rnTPH1.
M: molecular weight
standard, G1: first peak from GF1, G2: second peak from GF1, G3: third peak from
GF1, G4: first peak from GF2, G5: second peak from GF2. The SDS-PAGE for peak
G3 was performed on a second gel.
The protein purification of rnTPH1 gave a higher yield than NΔ52-hTPH2. Fur-
thermore, it was possible to concentrate the protein sample to a concentration of
approximately 6 mg/mL in between each purification step. However, due to the poor
stability seen in NΔ52-hTPH2, the sample was only concentrated to 3 mg/mL. From
this, it can be concluded that rnTPH1 is more stable than hTPH2.
In the first purification, the stability of the protein was examined by concentrating
the final protein sample. The protein sample was concentrated to 10 mg/mL with
minimal precipitation. However, already after one day, there was heavy precipitation,
indicating that the protein is not stable at this concentration.
7.4.2
Pre-Crystallization Test of rnTPH1
In the second purification, the final protein sample was concentrated to 5.9 mg/mL.
The day after the 5.9 mg/mL protein sample was purified, a PCT was performed.
The results from the PCT are shown in the Table 7.2.
The initial screening results for reservoir A1 and A2 showed both amorphous pre-
cipitation, whereby the protein sample was diluted 1:1. This indicates that rnTPH1
is not stable at a concentration of 5.9 mg/mL. The results from the concentration of
3.0 mg/mL showed light granular precipitation and amorphous precipitation. As the
recommendations from Hampton Research do not include this result, the two reser-
voir B1 and B2 were screened with the two concentration 3.0 mg/mL and 5.9 mg/mL.
The protein sample with the concentration of 5.9 mg/mL showed a clear drop and
amorphous precipitation in B1 and B2, respectively. The protein sample with the
concentration of 3 mg/mL resulted in two clear drops, where the recommendation
from Table 6.7 was to concentrate the sample to the half.
==PAGE:72==
58
7 Results
Table 7.2: PCT results for 5.9 mg/mL rnTPH1. A1, A2, B1 and B2 are PCT reagents
and their composition is listed in Table 6.6. The recommendations are from Hampton
Research [73].
A1
A2
Recommendation
5.9 mg
mL
Dilute sample 1:1
Amorphous
Amorphous
3.0 mg
mL
Not defined
Light granular
Amorphous
B1
B2
Recommendation
5.9 mg
mL
Perform diagnostic testing
Clear
Amorphous
3.0 mg
mL
Concentrate to half the
original volume
Clear
Clear
==PAGE:73==
7.4 A Different Variant – rnTPH1
59
From these results, it is not sensible to perform a crystallization, as the recom-
mended requirement for crystallization is a minimum of 5 mg/mL protein [73].
7.4.3
Reduction of Cysteines with TCEP
An experiment was performed on the 5.9 mg/mL protein sample. 200 µL were taken
from the protein sample and added to two Eppendorf tubes. To one of the tube, TCEP
was added to a concentration of 2 mM. The tubes were left at room temperature. After
two days, some precipitation was already visible. After 14 days, heavy precipitation
was formed.
The concentration was measured after the centrifugation, where the
concentration of the supernatant was approximately equal to zero, indicating that
all the protein has precipitated. A SDS-PAGE experiment has been performed in
order to see what has caused the heavy precipitation. With the addition of βME, the
disulfide bridges in the protein are reduced, resulting in monomers, see Figure 7.18.
When βME is not added, there is no diffusion through the gel. This indicates that
TCEP does not reduce the disulfide bridges after 14 days, whereby the protein is in
its aggregated form.
TCEP should have lasted for 2-3 weeks [77].
Due to that all the protein has
precipitated after 14 days, it can be concluded that the effect of TCEP has not
worked in this experiment.
Figure 7.18: SDS-PAGE from the purification of rnTPH1 with and without 2 mM
TCEP. M: molecular weight standard. βME is added to half the samples. The samples
containing βME are separated from those not containing βME by an empty well to
avoid possible diffusion of βME into the -βME well.
==PAGE:74==
60
7 Results
7.4.4
Reduction of Cysteines with DTT
A third purification of rnTPH1 was performed. This time DTT was added to the
protein sample after AC2 and prior to the ultrafiltration.
This was done in the
hope that a more stable protein is obtained, as DTT might prevent the formation
of disulfide bridges.
The concentrated protein was loaded onto the column.
The
chromatogram is shown in Figure F.7.
The chromatogram resembles Figure 7.15
with the exception of the DTT peak eluting from the GF. DTT was again added to
the collected protein, resulting in a DTT concentration of 10 mM. After the protein
was concentrated, it was loaded onto the GF column for a second GF, see Figure F.8.
Also this chromatogram resembles the chromatogram where the DTT was not added.
Again, DTT was added to the collected protein prior to the ultrafiltration.
The
ultrafiltration resulted in a concentration of 5.2 mg/mL.
7.4.4.1
Pre-Crystallization Test of rnTPH1 with 10 mM DTT
A PCT was performed on the 5.2 mg/mL protein sample with 10 mM DTT from the
third purification, see Table 7.3.
In the results from the A1 and A2 reagents a clear drop and a drop with amorphous
precipitation were obtained, respectively. From this, the B1 and B2 reagents should
be used. The result from B1 and B2 were inconclusive according to the results from
Hampton Research in Table 6.7. However, as the B1 resulted in granular precipitation
and B2 in amorphous precipitation, it was decided to send a protein sample of the
same composition with similar concentration for crystallization.
It is an advantage to use fresh protein for crystallization, as most proteins degrade
over time and aggregates are formed. These aggregates can affect the crystallization
[71]. Due to this, a new purification was performed, where DTT was added prior to
each ultrafiltration. The final protein concentration was 5.4 mg/mL. This sample was
sent for crystallization, see section 7.4.6.
7.4.5
The Stability of rnTPH1 with 10 mM DTT
The sample that remained from the crystallization was investigated. The effect of
DTT was measured after 7 and 14 days. Four samples were prepared, half included
βME.
After 7 days, there was a mild degree of precipitation visible. From the SDS-
PAGE in Figure 7.19, it is visible that DTT still keeps the protein soluble and reduced.
However, there are two bands visible with a significant higher molecular weight in the
samples where no βME is added, and absent in the samples where βME is added. A
theory is that disulfide brigdes are formed between adjacent tetramers, resulting in
higher molecular weight compounds in the protein sample after 7 days. The reasoning
for this theory is that SDS denaturates the protein, but it is first when βME is added
that the disulfide bridges are reduced.
If it is the case that disulfide bridges are
formed, it can be concluded that DTT does not work optimal after 7 days.
==PAGE:75==
7.4 A Different Variant – rnTPH1
61
Table 7.3: PCT results for 5.2 mg/mL rnTPH1 with 10 mM DTT. A1, A2, B1 and
B2 are PCT reagents. The recommendations are from Hampton Research [73].
A1
A2
Recommendation
5.2 mg
mL
Perform B1 & B2
Clear
Amorphous
B1
B2
Recommendation
5.2 mg
mL
Not defined
Light granular
Amorphous
After 14 days a moderate degree of precipitation was visible. The SDS-PAGE
is shown in Figure 7.20. The intensity of the bands is decreased compared to Fig-
ure 7.19. This was expected as it confirms the moderate precipitation. The position
of the bands has not changed. This validates that the protein aggregates through
oligomerization, which causes the protein to increase in molecular size, whereby it
finally reaches insolubility.
7.4.5.1
Concentration of oxidized DTT
The concentration of DTT is measured, in order to see how much DTT is oxidized.
The method developed by Iyer et al. is used to give an estimate of the oxDTT concen-
tration. From the UV-VIS spectrum in Figure 7.21, there is a small amount of protein
present at 310 nm. The absorbance from the DTT-free protein sample was subtracted
from the protein sample containing 10 mM DTT. This gave a concentration of 10.0
mM and 10.1 mM oxDTT after 7 and 14 days respectively, indicating that all the
DTT in the protein sample is oxidized already after 7 days. Furthermore, it is visible
from Figure 7.21 that the concentration in the protein sample has decreased after 14
==PAGE:76==
62
7 Results
Figure 7.19: SDS-PAGE from the purification of rnTPH1 with 10 mM DTT after 7
days. M: molecular weight standard. βME is added to half the samples. The samples
containing βME are separated from those not containing βME by an empty well to
avoid possible diffusion of βME into the -βME well.
Figure 7.20: SDS-PAGE from the purification of rnTPH1 with 10 mM DTT after 14
days. M: molecular weight standard. βME is added to half the samples. The samples
containing βME are separated from those not containing βME by an empty well to
avoid possible diffusion of βME into the -βME well.
==PAGE:77==
7.4 A Different Variant – rnTPH1
63
days. The DTT no longer stabilizes the protein after the oxDTT concentration has
reached 10 mM, and the protein starts to precipitate.
Figure 7.21: UV-VIS measurements performed on NanoDrop of rnTPH1 sample con-
taining 10 mM DTT after 0, 7 and 14 days.
7.4.6
Crystallization of rnTPH1
The 5.4 mg/mL rnTPH1 sample was setup for crystallization at Lund Protein Pu-
rification Platform with the protocol described in section 6.8. The composition of
the protein sample is shown in Table 7.4. The commercial crystallization screens are
listed in Appendix G.
Table 7.4: The composition of the protein sample that was set-up for crystallization.
Protein
Buffer composition
Concentration
rnTPH1
20 mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 8, 300 mM (NH4)2SO4, 10 mM DTT
5.4 mg/mL
In this section, the interesting results from the crystallization are presented. The
results that were obtained 30 days after the drop was setup for crystallization are
shown in Appendix H, where the color coding indicates a subjective evaluation of each
drop. All drops were imaged with visible and UV illumination, and if the crystal-like
structure is visible with UV illumination it could be an indication of protein crystal.
All crystal-like structures visible in UV illumination are shown in Table 7.5. The
subwells are referred to as: well number.subwell number. E.g. well A1, subwell 1 is
referred to as A1.1.
==PAGE:78==
64
7 Results
Table 7.5: Interesting crystal-like structures.
Screen
Subwell
Salt
Buffer
pH
Precipitant
Structure Screen
1+2
B3.2
0.2 M Magnesium acetate
tetrahydrate
0.1 M Sodium
cacodylate
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 8000
Screen Structure
1+2
B11.3
0.2 M Calcium chloride
dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium
HEPES
7.5
28 % v/v PEG 400
Structure Screen
1+2
C1.3
0.2 M Tri-sodium citrate
0.1 M Sodium
HEPES
7.5
20 % v/v 2-propanol
Structure Screen
1+2
C9.2
0.2 M Magnesium
chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Tris
8.5
30 % w/v PEG 4000
Structure Screen
1+2
C10.3
0.2 M Tri-sodium citrate
0.1 M Tris
hydrochloride
8.5
30 % v/v PEG 400
Structure Screen
1+2
D12.3
0.2 M Magnesium
formate
Structure Screen
1+2
H6.3
25 % v/v Ethylene
glycol
JCSG+
A10.3
0.2 M Potassium formate
20 % w/v PEG 3350
JCSG+
B1.3
0.8 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M Citrate
4.0
JCSG+
B12.3
0.2 M Potassium citrate
tribasic monohydrate
20 % w/v PEG 3350
PACT Premier
B4.2
0.1 M Malonate-
Imidazole-Borate
7.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
PACT Premier
H6.2
0.2 M Sodium formate
0.1 M Bis-Tris
propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
Stura Footprint
D4.3
0.2 M Imidazole
malate
6.0
30 % w/v PEG 4000
Stura Footprint
E11.2
0.2 M Ammonium acetate
0.1 M Sodium
acetate
4.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
A control containing only buffer is setup in subwell 1 in all the commercial screens,
see Appendix H. The interesting crystal-like drops are compared to their respective
control in order to determine whether the interesting crystal-like structure is a result
of the protein solution or of the buffer solution. The control was clear for all the
interesting crystal-like drops, with the exception of the control for subwell B11.3 on
the Structure Screen 1+2. From Table 7.5, the composition in this well includes CaCl2.
The buffer composition of the protein sample includes (NH4)2SO4. Therefore, this
result could be salt crystals of CaSO4. The control is examined and from Table I.5
it is visible that crystals have formed in the control. This supports that the crystals
in Table I.4 are indeed salt crystals. There is a tendency for crystal formation in the
subwells containing Ca2+. The UV illumination for subwell B11.3 on the Structure
screen 1+2 is therefore a false positive, which could be a result of protein being
adsorbed onto the salt crystal [75].
Most of the wells that gave interesting crystal-like structures have a salt concen-
tration of 0.2 M. The salt concentration of (NH4)2SO4 used in the protein buffer is 0.3
M. Katrine Øgendahl [35] investigated if this high salt concentration could result in
a salting-in experiment where the water vapor diffuses from the reservoir to the drop,
whereby the drop size increases, rather than the intended salting-out experiment,.
The results showed that no salting-in effect was observed for 300 mM (NH4)2SO4,
thus the vapor-diffusion experiment is indeed a salting-out experiment [35]. However,
==PAGE:79==
7.4 A Different Variant – rnTPH1
65
the salt concentration of 300 mM (NH4)2SO4 resulted in a higher degree of precipita-
tion in the crystallization drops than by using a 150 mM (NH4)2SO4 concentration
[35].
The results from the four different commercial screens in Appendix H show a high
degree of precipitation, see Table 7.6. The average precipitation for subwell 2 is 83.3
% and for subwell 3 it is 88.3 %. In an ideal crystallization experiment, the amount of
drops with heavy precipitation should be reduced. The high degree of precipitation
could be due to the high salt concentration or that the protein concentration is too
high.
Table 7.6: The degree of precipitation in each subwell.
Screen
Subwell 2
Subwell 3
Structure Screen 1+2
77.7%
84.0%
JCSG+
90.4%
94.7%
PACT Premier
79.8%
81.9%
Stura Footprint
85.1%
92.6%
Average
83.3%
88.3%
7.4.6.1
Potential crystals
In this section, the interesting crystal-like drops will be examined. Visible and UV
images from the day of the crystallization setup, referred to as day 0, are compared to
images of the drop after 30 days to see the drop’s development over time. These images
are shown in Appendix I. Due to poor image quality in the webpage CrystalTrak
Web, it was not possible to show close-ups of the crystal-like structures obtained
in the drops. Furthermore, it was not possible to determine the dimensions of the
crystal-like structures, as the time limit did not allow going to Lund to look at the
crystal-like structures though a microscope.
Table I.6 shows how the drop in subwell C1.3 on the Structure Screen 1+2 changes
over 30 days.
On day 0, a phase separation is observed.
After 30 days, the UV
illumination indicated that the phase separation has transformed to an assembly of
proteins - whether or not there is crystal formation is hard to see. Furthermore, there
is a growth of small crystal-like structures observed in the drop.
In subwell B4.2 on the PACT Premier, there is precipitation visible at day 0,
but after about 14 days protein start assembling to a dark shaped structure, see
Table I.13. As protein crystals are transparent and have visible edges, this might just
be an assembly of denaturated protein.
The drops from subwell C10.3 and D12.3 on the Structure Screen 1+2 show for-
mation of crystal-like structures, see Table I.8 and Table I.9 respectively. In D12.3,
it is visible on the UV image that protein has assembled on day 0. After some days,
a crystal-like structure starts growing from this protein assembly. This crystal-like
==PAGE:80==
66
7 Results
structure grows fast, and might therefore lead to a disordered crystal structure. Be-
sides from this fast growing crystal-like structure, small crystal-like structures also
grow in the drop. The shape of the small crystal-like structures indicates that this
very well might be protein crystals, e.g. needle shape.
In some drops, crystal-like structures are visible already from day 0. When com-
paring day 0 to day 30, a slow growth is observed in subwell H6.3 on Structure
Screen 1+2 (Table I.10) and subwell D4.3 on Stura Footprint (Table I.15). The well
composition of subwell D4.3 is especially interesting as it includes 0.2 M imidazole
malate, which is the same condition that chicken cTPH1 was successfully crystallized
under [3]. In other drops, crystal-like structures were visible already the day of the
setup, but no further growth was seen over the time-span of the crystallization exper-
iment, and neither were more crystal-like structures formed. This was seen in subwell
C9.2 on the structure screen 1+2 (Table I.7), subwells A10.3 (Table I.11) and B1.3
(Table I.12) on JCGS+ and subwell H6.2 on PACT Premier (Table I.14).
It could be interesting to determine if these crystal-like structures are of protein
origin by applying the Izit dye (Izit Crystal Dye HR4-710) to the drop. This dye
contains small molecules that travel into the solvent channels of the protein crystals
[74] and thereby dye the protein crystals blue. The crystals that do not posses these
solvent channels will not dye [74]. The crystals that are of protein origin could then
be tested by X-ray diffraction.
By comparing the reservoir solutions from the Table 7.5, it can be determined if
the drops containing interesting crystal-like structures do have any thing in common,
which later could be optimized. PEG is used in many of the screens. It is hard to
deduce the optimal pH based on the reservoir solutions from the screening, as these
range from 4.0 to 8.5. Another factor that also is interesting to look at is that the
majority of the interesting crystal-like structures are in subwell 3, where the drop
ratio is 200 protein:100 reservoir solution.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 8
Overall Discussion and
Future Perspective
From the purifications of NΔ52-hTPH2 and rnTPH1 it has become apparent that the
stability is dependent on the concentration of the protein. When the concentration
exceeds a certain concentration limit, the protein starts to aggregate. This concentra-
tion limit is different for NΔ52-hTPH2 and rnTPH1. rnTPH1 can be maintained at
a significantly higher concentration than NΔ52-hTPH2, making rnTPH1 the more
stable variant. Furthermore, the experiments performed in section 7.4.3 and 7.4.4
have lead to the theory that rnTPH1 aggregates in form of oligomerization by in-
termolecular disulfide bridges. At higher concentrations, the protein molecules are
closer together in the solution, and thereby the cysteines come in contact and form
disulfide bonds. For future work, the surface cysteines could be mutated to serines
to eliminate the possibility of the formation of disulfide bridges.
The formation of intermolecular disulfide brigdes in protein solution could be
an explanation to the increased protein stability in buffers containing a high salt
concentration, as the salt ions might have a screening effect for the formation of
disulfide bridges.
Reducing agents have been used in order to counteract the formation of disulfide
bonds. TCEP did not show a great effect, but by the addition of DTT, the protein
stability increased. TCEP was added in a concentration of 2 mM, whereas DTT was
10 mM. This could be a factor to why only an effect was visible for DTT. In a future
project, a TCEP concentration of 10 mM could be used to see if this would have the
same effect as 10 mM DTT. Furthermore, it was not known prior to the experiments
concerning TCEP that when TCEP is directly dissolved in water, the pH value is
2.5 [53]. This low pH value could have an effect on the protein stability. For future
experiments, the pH value of the TCEP solution should be adjusted prior to addition
to the protein sample.
The addition of 10 mM DTT to rnTPH1 had a stabilization effect that lead to
a concentration of 5.2 mg/mL to be approved by PCT for crystallization.
For a
future project, it would be interesting to investigate if 10 mM DTT has the same
stabilization effects on NΔ52-hTPH2 or full-length hTPH2, as it might lead a step
closer in the determination of a crystal structure for a TPH2 variant containing the
==PAGE:82==
68
8 Overall Discussion and Future Perspective
regulatory domain.
The rnTPH1 sample that was sent for vapor diffusion crystallization resulted in
some promising crystal-like structures. The average degree of precipitation was 83.3%
for subwell 2 and 88.3% for subwell 3. As mentioned, the experiment by Katrine
Øgendahl [35] showed that 300 mM (NH4)2SO4 resulted in a significantly higher
degree of precipitation than when the salt concentration was halved. For a future
crystallization the high degree of precipitation should be taken into consideration by
lowering the salt concentration.
In a previous master thesis by Martin Pedersen [84], an attempt was made to
crystallize hTPH1 in two concentrations, 2.0 mg/mL and 4.0 mg/mL. The buffer
used was 20mM Tris/H2SO4, pH 8.0, 300mM (NH4)2SO4, 0.1 mM L-tryptophan.
The same commercial screens that are used in this thesis were used. No potential
crystal-like structures were obtained, and the average degree of precipitation was 90%
and 95% for the 2 mg/mL and 4 mg/mL protein solutions, respectively [84]. When
these results are compared to those obtained in this thesis, one can conclude that the
5.4 mg/mL rnTPH1 with 10 mM DTT is more stable than both concentrations of
hTPH1. Furthermore, in this thesis potential crystal structures are obtained.
The methylation of NΔ52-hTPH2 did not result in a more stable variant, but
rather the opposite. From the SDS-PAGE in Figure 7.9 and Figure 7.11, the protein
is still present after the methylation. The properties of the protein have changed
based on the data obtained from the purifications. The methylated protein is no longer
stable in the same buffer as prior to the methylation and precipitates when it comes in
contact with the buffer containing primary amines, see buffer in Table 6.3. The results
from the second methylation of NΔ52-hTPH2 shown in Figure 7.10 and Figure 7.11
indicate that the properties of the protein have changed in such a manner that the
protein is more prone to aggregate. One explanation could be that the changes in the
properties of the protein have left the cysteines more accessible, whereby it is easier
to form disulfide bridges. Furthermore, the salt used in the methylation buffer has
been exchanged from (NH4)2SO4 to NaCl. From the Hofmeister series, NaCl is less
kosmotropic than (NH4)2SO4. This might also be a contributing factor to why the
protein in Figure 7.10 elutes in a higher molecular state.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to purify, stabilize and crystallize three TPH variants -
NΔ52-hTPH2, full-length rnTPH1 and methylated NΔ52-hTPH2.
The purification of methylated NΔ52-hTPH2 included two affinity chromatogra-
phy, a methylation step and a gel filtration. This did not result in a stable variant.
The purification of NΔ52-hTPH2 and full-length rnTPH1 were done in four steps:
first by two affinity chromatography subsequent to two gel filtrations resulting in
a more homogeneous and purer protein sample. From the purifications, it became
apparent that the stability of the protein is dependant on the concentration of the
protein sample. A theory for the protein aggregation is that at relatively high con-
centrations, high molecular weight oligomers form through disulfide bonds.
NΔ52-hTPH2 was stabilized with a high salt concentration and L-Phe, whereas
rnTPH1 was stabilized merely with a high salt concentration. A theory to account for
the yet unknown stabilization effect of the high salt concentration is that the high salt
concentration stabilizes the protein by screening the cysteines so that disulfide bridges
do not form easily. The stabilization effect of reducing agents was investigated. The
addition of 2 mM TCEP did not have any stabilizing effect on the enzyme. However,
the addition of 10 mM DTT to rnTPH1 allowed a higher concentration and the PCT
showed a suitable concentration of 5.2 mg/mL for the crystallization experiment.
In the vapor diffusion crystallization experiment, four commercial screens were
used. After 30 days, the screens showed promising results as crystal-like structures
were obtained. Some of the drops grew crystal-like structures on the day of the setup,
while other crystal-like structures grew over time. Due to the time-span of this thesis,
it was not possible to determine if the crystal-like structures were protein crystals.
==PAGE:84==
70
==PAGE:85==
Appendices
A
Amino Acid Sequences
The color coding for the amino acid sequences is as follows:
MBP
Linker
3CP
3CP regoconition sequence, and the ↓is the cleavage site
Regulatory domain of TPH
Catalytical domain of TPH
Tetramerization domain of TPH
MBP-3CP
MKIEEGKLVIWINGDKGYNGLAEVGKKFEKDTGIKVTVEHPDKLEEKFPQVAATGDGPDIIFWAHDRFGG
YAQSGLLAEITPDKAFQDKLYPFTWDAVRYNGKLIAYPIAVEALSLIYNKDLLPNPPKTWEEIPALDKEL
KAKGKSALMFNLQEPYFTWPLIAADGGYAFKYENGKYDIKDVGVDNAGAKAGLTFLVDLIKNKHMNADTD
YSIAEAAFNKGETAMTINGPWAWSNIDTSKVNYGVTVLPTFKGQPSKPFVGVLSAGINAASPNKELAKEF
LENYLLTDEGLEAVNKDKPLGAVALKSYEEELAKDPRIAATMENAQKGEIMPNIPQMSAFWYAVRTAVIN
AASGRQTVDEALKDAQTNSSSNNNNNNNNNNLGGIPGPEHEFLNALIRRNCHIITTDKGEFNLLGIYSNC
AVVPTHAEPGDVVDIDGRLVRVLKQQVLTDMNDVDTEVTVLWLDQNEKFRDIRRFIPEHQQDWHNIHLAT
NVTKFPMLNVEVGHTVPYGEINLSGNATCRLYKYDYPTQPGQCGAVLANTGNIIGIHVGGNGRVGYAAAL
LRKYFAEEQ
MBP-NΔ52-hTPH2
MKIEEGKLVIWINGDKGYNGLAEVGKKFEKDTGIKVTVEHPDKLEEKFPQVAATGDGPDIIFWAHDRFGG
YAQSGLLAEITPDKAFQDKLYPFTWDAVRYNGKLIAYPIAVEALSLIYNKDLLPNPPKTWEEIPALDKEL
KAKGKSALMFNLQEPYFTWPLIAADGGYAFKYENGKYDIKDVGVDNAGAKAGLTFLVDLIKNKHMNADTD
YSIAEAAFNKGETAMTINGPWAWSNIDTSKVNYGVTVLPTFKGQPSKPFVGVLSAGINAASPNKELAKEF
LENYLLTDEGLEAVNKDKPLGAVALKSYEEELAKDPRIAATMENAQKGEIMPNIPQMSAFWYAVRTAVIN
AASGRQTVDEALKDAQTNSSSNNNNNNNNNNLGLEVLFQ↓GPSKREAATESGKTAVVFSLKNEVGGLVKA
LRLFQEKRVNMVHIESRKSRRRSSEVEIFVDCECGKTEFNELIQLLKFQTTIVTLNPPENIWTEEEELED
VPWFPRKISELDKCSHRVLMYGSELDADHPGFKDNVYRQRRKYFVDVAMGYKYGQPIPRVEYTEEETKTW
GVVFRELSKLYPTHACREYLKNFPLLTKYCGYREDNVPQLEDVSMFLKERSGFTVRPVAGYLSPRDFLAG
==PAGE:86==
72
Appendices
LAYRVFHCTQYIRHGSDPLYTPEPDTCHELLGHVPLLADPKFAQFSQEIGLASLGASDEDVQKLATCYFF
TIEFGLCKQEGQLRAYGAGLLSSIGELKHALSDKACVKAFDPKTTCLQECLITTFQEAYFVSESFEEAKE
KMRDFAKSITRPFSVYFNPYTQSIEILKDTRSIENVVQDLRSDLNTVCDALNKMNQYLGI
NΔ52-hTPH2 cleaved
GPSKREAATESGKTAVVFSLKNEVGGLVKALRLFQEKRVNMVHIESRKSRRRSSEVEIFVDCECGKTEFN
ELIQLLKFQTTIVTLNPPENIWTEEEELEDVPWFPRKISELDKCSHRVLMYGSELDADHPGFKDNVYRQR
RKYFVDVAMGYKYGQPIPRVEYTEEETKTWGVVFRELSKLYPTHACREYLKNFPLLTKYCGYREDNVPQL
EDVSMFLKERSGFTVRPVAGYLSPRDFLAGLAYRVFHCTQYIRHGSDPLYTPEPDTCHELLGHVPLLADP
KFAQFSQEIGLASLGASDEDVQKLATCYFFTIEFGLCKQEGQLRAYGAGLLSSIGELKHALSDKACVKAF
DPKTTCLQECLITTFQEAYFVSESFEEAKEKMRDFAKSITRPFSVYFNPYTQSIEILKDTRSIENVVQDL
RSDLNTVCDALNKMNQYLGI
MBP-rnTPH1
MKIEEGKLVIWINGDKGYNGLAEVGKKFEKDTGIKVTVEHPDKLEEKFPQVAATGDGPDIIFWAHDRFGG
YAQSGLLAEITPDKAFQDKLYPFTWDAVRYNGKLIAYPIAVEALSLIYNKDLLPNPPKTWEEIPALDKEL
KAKGKSALMFNLQEPYFTWPLIAADGGYAFKYENGKYDIKDVGVDNAGAKAGLTFLVDLIKNKHMNADTD
YSIAEAAFNKGETAMTINGPWAWSNIDTSKVNYGVTVLPTFKGQPSKPFVGVLSAGINAASPNKELAKEF
LENYLLTDEGLEAVNKDKPLGAVALKSYEEELAKDPRIAATMENAQKGEIMPNIPQMSAFWYAVRTAVIN
AASGRQTVDEALKDAQTNSSSNNNNNNNNNNLGLEVLFQ↓GPMIEDNKENKDHSSERGRVTLIFSLKNEV
GGLIKALKIFQENHVNLLHIESRKSKRRNSEFEIFVDCDINREQLNDIFPLLKSHTTVLSVDSPDQLPEK
EDVMETVPWFPKKISDLDFCANRVLLYGSELDADHPGFKDNVYRRRRKYFAELAMNYKHGDPIPKIEFTE
EEIKTWGTIFRELNKLYPTHACREYLRNLPLLSKYCGYREDNVPQLEDVSNFLKERTGFSIRPVAGYLSP
RDFLSGLAFRVFHCTQYVRHSSDPLYTPEPDTCHELLGHVPLLAEPSFAQFSQEIGLASLGASEETVQKL
ATCYFFTVEFGLCKQDGQLRVFGAGLLSSISELRHALSGHAKVKPFDPKVACKQECLITSFQDVYFVSES
FEDAKEKMREFAKTVKRPFGVKYNPYTQSIQVLRDSKSITSAMNELRHDLDVVNDALARVSRWPSV
MBP-rnTPH1 cleaved
GPMIEDNKENKDHSSERGRVTLIFSLKNEVGGLIKALKIFQENHVNLLHIESRKSKRRNSEFEIFVDCDI
NREQLNDIFPLLKSHTTVLSVDSPDQLPEKEDVMETVPWFPKKISDLDFCANRVLLYGSELDADHPGFKD
NVYRRRRKYFAELAMNYKHGDPIPKIEFTEEEIKTWGTIFRELNKLYPTHACREYLRNLPLLSKYCGYRE
DNVPQLEDVSNFLKERTGFSIRPVAGYLSPRDFLSGLAFRVFHCTQYVRHSSDPLYTPEPDTCHELLGHV
PLLAEPSFAQFSQEIGLASLGASEETVQKLATCYFFTVEFGLCKQDGQLRVFGAGLLSSISELRHALSGH
AKVKPFDPKVACKQECLITSFQDVYFVSESFEDAKEKMREFAKTVKRPFGVKYNPYTQSIQVLRDSKSIT
SAMNELRHDLDVVNDALARVSRWPSV
==PAGE:87==
B Sequence Alignment
73
B
Sequence Alignment
Figure B.1: Sequence alignment with Clustal Omega [85]. * indicates that the residue
is fully conserved. : indicates that the residues have strongly similar properties. .
indicates that the residues have weakly similar properties
==PAGE:88==
74
Appendices
==PAGE:89==
C 3D Structures of PAH and TH
75
C
3D Structures of PAH and TH
Table C.1: The PDB enteries of the three-dimensional structures of PAH determined
by X-ray crystallography.
PDB ID
Organism
Domains
Resolution
Comments
Released
Ref.
Phenylalanine Hydroxylase
1PHZ
Rat
rc 1-429
2.2 Å
Fe(III),
phosphorylated
1999
[86]
2PHM
Rat
rc 1-429
2.6 Å
Fe(III), dephos-
phorylated
1999
[86]
5DEN
Rat
rct 1-453
2.9 Å
Fe(III)
2016
[83]
5EGQ
Rat
rct 25-453
2.5 Å
SO4, R270K
mutation
2016
[87]
5FGJ
Rat
rct 1-453
3.6 Å
Fe(III), Mg(II)
2016
[87]
1PAH
Human
c 117-424
2.0 Å
Fe(III)
1999
[88]
2PAH
Human
ct 118-452
3.1 Å
Fe(III)
1999
[88]
3PAH
Human
c 117-424
2.0 Å
Fe(III),
adrenaline
inhibitor
1999
[89]
4PAH
Human
c 117-424
2.0 Å
Fe(III),
noradrenaline
inhibitor
1999
[89]
5PAH
Human
c 117-424
2.1 Å
Fe(III),
dopamine
inhibitor
1999
[89]
6PAH
Human
c 117-424
2.15 Å
Fe(III),
dopamine
inhibitor
1999
[89]
1DMW
Human
c 118-424
2.0 Å
Fe(III), BH2
2000
[90]
1J8T
Human
c 118-424
1.7 Å
Fe(II)
2002
[91]
1J8U
Human
c 118-424
1.5 Å
Fe(II), BH4
2002
[91]
1LRM
Human
c 118-424
2.1 Å
Fe(III), BH2
2002
[92]
1KW0
Human
c 118-424
2.5 Å
Fe(II), BH4,
thienylalanine
2003
[93]
1MMK
Human
c 117-424
2.0 Å
Fe(II), BH4,
SO4,
thienylalanine
2003
[94]
1MMT
Human
c 117-424
2.0 Å
Fe(II), BH4,
SO4, norleucine
2003
[94]
1TDW
Human
c 117-424
2.1 Å
Fe(III), A313T
mutation
2004
[95]
1TG2
Human
c 117-424
2.2 Å
Fe(III), BH2,
A313T
mutation
2004
[95]
4ANP
Human
c 104-427
2.11 Å
Fe(III),
complexed with
pharmacological
chaperone (3QI)
2012
[96]
==PAGE:90==
76
Appendices
Table C.2: The PDB enteries of the three-dimensional structures of TH determined
by X-ray crystallography.
PDB ID
Organism
Domains
Resolution
Comments
Released
Ref.
Tyrosine Hydroxylase
1TOH
Rat
ct 156-498
2.3 Å
Fe(III)
1998
[97]
2TOH
Rat
ct 160-498
2.3 Å
Fe(III), BH2, Cl
1999
[98]
2XSN
Human
c 193-528
2.68 Å
Zn(II)
2010
[99]
4J6S
Human
N-terminal 1-43
3.08 Å
14-3-3￿
complexed,
phosphoserine
2013
[100]
==PAGE:91==
D Purification of 3CP
77
D
Purification of 3CP
Figure D.2: The purification of 3CP is performed on a Dextrin Sepharose HP 16/14
column. The black curve is the absorbance as a function of volume. The orange
dotted-line is the sample loading, the green line is the elution buffer in % and the red
dotted-line is the collection of 3CP.
==PAGE:92==
78
Appendices
E
Optimization of Purification Strategy
Figure E.3: Sample optimization. The black curve is the absorbance as a function of
volume, and the red lines mark the octamer and the green lines mark the tetramer.
RS =
2 ∗(163.78 −142.93)
(155.47 −130.44) + (175.26 −153.56) = 0.89
Figure E.4: Flow rate optimization. The black curve is the absorbance as a function
of volume, and the red lines mark the octamer and the green lines mark the tetramer.
RS =
2 ∗(167.08 −144.90)
(157.00 −135.93) + (176.62 −159.54) = 1.16
==PAGE:93==
E Optimization of Purification Strategy
79
Figure E.5: After two affinity chromatographies. The black curve is the absorbance
as a function of volume, and the red lines mark the octamer and the green lines mark
the tetramer.
RS =
2 ∗(166.34 −143.44)
(155.05 −135.30) + (178.51 −159.36) = 1.18
Figure E.6: After two gel filtrations. The black curve is the absorbance as a function
of volume, and the red lines mark the octamer and the green lines mark the tetramer.
RS =
2 ∗(160.52 −139.65)
(152.76 −130.22) + (170.40 −154.60) = 1.09
==PAGE:94==
80
Appendices
F
Purification of rnTPH1 with 10 mM DTT
Figure F.7: The first gel filtration from the purification of rnTPH1 with 10 mM DTT
on a Superdex 200 pg 26/600 HL column. The black curve shows the absorbance as
a function of volume. The orange dotted-line is the loading of the sample, and the
red one is where the protein is collected. The peaks in the chromatogram elute in an
order of decreasing size.
Figure F.8: The second gel filtration from the purification of rnTPH1 with 10 mM
DTT on a Superdex 200 pg 26/600 HL column. The black curve shows the absorbance
as a function of volume. The orange dotted-line is the loading of the sample, and the
red one is where the protein is collected. The peaks in the chromatogram elute in an
order of decreasing size.
==PAGE:95==
G Crystallization Screens
81
G
Crystallization Screens
Structure Screen 1 + 2  
Conditions A1 – D12 
 
MD1-30 
 
Well #
Conc. Units Salt 1
Conc. Units Buffer
pH Conc. Units
Precipitant 1
Conc. Units
Precipitant 2
A1
0.02 M
Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.1 M
Sodium acetate
4.6
30 % v/v MPD
A2
0.2 M
Ammonium acetate
0.1 M
Sodium acetate
4.6
30 % w/v PEG 4000
A3
0.2 M
Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M
Sodium acetate
4.6
25 % w/v PEG 4000
A4
2.0 M
Sodium formate
0.1 M
Sodium acetate
4.6
A5
2.0 M
Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M
Sodium acetate
4.6
A6
0.1 M
Sodium acetate
4.6
8 % w/v PEG 4000
A7
0.2 M
Ammonium acetate
0.1 M
Sodium citrate
5.6
30 % w/v PEG 4000
A8
0.2 M
Ammonium acetate
0.1 M
Sodium citrate
5.6
30 % v/v MPD
A9
0.1 M
Sodium citrate
5.6
20 % w/v PEG 4000
20 % v/v 2-Propanol
A10
1.0 M
Ammonium phosphate monobasic
0.1 M
Sodium citrate
5.6
A11
0.2 M
Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.1 M
Sodium acetate
4.6
20 % v/v 2-Propanol
A12
1.4 M
Sodium acetate trihydrate
0.1 M
Sodium cacodylate
6.5
B1
0.2 M
Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.1 M
Sodium cacodylate
6.5
30 % v/v 2-Propanol
B2
0.2 M
Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M
Sodium cacodylate
6.5
30 % w/v PEG 8000
B3
0.2 M
Magnesium acetate tetrahydrate
0.1 M
Sodium cacodylate
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 8000
B4
0.2 M
Magnesium acetate tetrahydrate
0.1 M
Sodium cacodylate
6.5
30 % v/v MPD
B5
1.0 M
Sodium acetate trihydrate
0.1 M
Imidazole
6.5
B6
0.2 M
Sodium acetate trihydrate
0.1 M
Sodium cacodylate
6.5
30 % w/v PEG 8000
B7
0.2 M
Zinc acetate dihydrate
0.1 M
Sodium cacodylate
6.5
18 % w/v PEG 8000
B8
0.2 M
Calcium acetate hydrate
0.1 M
Sodium cacodylate
6.5
18 % w/v PEG 8000
B9
0.2 M
Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
30 % v/v MPD
B10
0.2 M
Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
30 % v/v 2-Propanol
B11
0.2 M
Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
28 % v/v PEG 400
B12
0.2 M
Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
30 % v/v PEG 400
C1
0.2 M
Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
20 % v/v 2-Propanol
C2
0.8 M
Potasium sodium tartrate tetrahydrate
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
C3
1.5 M
Lithium sulfate
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
C4
0.8 M
Sodium phosphate monobasic monohydrate/
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
0.8 M
Potasium phosphate monobasic
C5
1.4 M
Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
C6
2.0 M
Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
2 % v/v PEG 400
C7
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 4000
10 % v/v 2-Propanol
C8
2.0 M
Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
C9
0.2 M
Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
30 % w/v PEG 4000
C10
0.2 M
Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
30 % v/v PEG 400
C11
0.2 M
Lithium sulfate
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
30 % w/v PEG 4000
C12
0.2 M
Ammonium acetate
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
30 % v/v 2-Propanol
D1
0.2 M
Sodium acetate trihydrate
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
30 % w/v PEG 4000
D2
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
8 % w/v PEG 8000
D3
2.0 M
Ammonium phosphate monobasic
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
D4
0.4 M
Potasium sodium tartrate tetrahydrate
D5
0.4 M
Ammonium phosphate monobasic
D6
0.2 M
Ammonium sulfate
30 % w/v PEG 8000
D7
0.2 M
Ammonium sulfate
30 % w/v PEG 4000
D8
2.0 M
Ammonium sulfate
D9
4.0 M
Sodium formate
D10
0.05 M
Potassium phosphate monobasic
20 % w/v PEG 8000
D11
30 % w/v PEG 1500
D12
0.2 M
Magnesium formate dihydrate
Figure G.9: Structure Screen 1+2, wells A1-D12 [68].
==PAGE:96==
82
Appendices
 
Structure Screen 1 + 2  
 
Conditions E1 – H12 
 
MD1-30 
 
 
Well #
Conc. Units Salt 1
Conc. Units Buffer
pH Conc. Units
Precipitant 1
Conc. Units
Precipitant 2
E1
0.1 M
Sodium chloride
0.1 M
BICINE
9.0
30 % v/v PEG 500 MME
E2
2.0 M
Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M
BICINE
9.0
E3
0.1 M
BICINE
9.0
10 % w/v PEG 20000
2 % v/v 1,4-Dioxane
E4
0.2 M
Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
3.4 M
1,6-Hexanediol
E5
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
25 % v/v tert-Butanol
E6
1.0 M
Lithium sulfate/
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
0.01 M
Nickel(II) chloride hexahydrate
E7
1.5 M
Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
12 % v/v Glycerol
E8
0.2 M
Ammonium phosphate monobasic
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
50 % v/v MPD
E9
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
20 % v/v Ethanol
E10
0.01 M
Nickel(II) chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M
Tris
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 2000 MME
E11
0.5 M
Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
30 % v/v MPD
E12
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
10 % w/v PEG 6000
5 % v/v MPD
F1
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
20 % v/v Jeffamine® M-600
F2
1.6 M
Ammonium sulfate/
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
0.1 M
Sodium chloride
F3
2.0 M
Ammonium formate
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
F4
1.0 M
Sodium acetate trihydrate
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
0.05 M
Cadmium sulfate 8/3-hydrate
F5
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
70 % v/v MPD
F6
4.3 M
Sodium chloride
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
F7
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
10 % w/v PEG 8000
8 % v/v Ethylene glycol
F8
1.6 M
Magnesium sulfate heptahydrate
0.1 M
MES
6.5
F9
2.0 M
Sodium chloride/
0.1 M
MES
6.5
0.1 M
Potassium phosphate monobasic/
0.1 M
Sodium phosphate monobasic monohydrate
F10
0.1 M
MES
6.5
12 % w/v PEG 20000
F11
1.6 M
Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M
MES
6.5
10 % v/v 1,4-Dioxane
F12
0.05 M
Cesium chloride
0.1 M
MES
6.5
30 % v/v Jeffamine® M-600
G1
0.01 M
Cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M
MES
6.5
1.8 M
Ammonium sulfate
G2
0.2 M
Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M
MES
6.5
30 % w/v PEG 5000 MME
G3
0.01 M
Zinc sulfate heptahydrate
0.1 M
MES
6.5
25 % v/v PEG 500 MME
G4
0.1 M
Sodium HEPES
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 10000
G5
2.0 M
Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M
Sodium citrate
5.6
0.2 M
Potassium sodium tartrate tetrahydrate
G6
1.0 M
Lithium sulfate
0.1 M
Sodium citrate
5.6
0.5 M
Ammonium sulfate
G7
0.5 M
Sodium chloride
0.1 M
Sodium citrate
5.6
4 % v/v Polyethyleneimine
G8
0.1 M
Sodium citrate
5.6
35 % v/v tert-Butanol
G9
0.01 M
Iron(III) chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M
Sodium citrate
5.6
10 % v/v Jeffamine® M-600
G10
0.01 M
Manganese(II) chloride tetrahydrate
0.1 M
Sodium citrate
5.6
2.5 M
1,6-Hexanediol
G11
2.0 M
Sodium chloride
0.1 M
Sodium acetate
4.6
G12
0.2 M
Sodium chloride
0.1 M
Sodium acetate
4.6
30 % v/v MPD
H1
0.01 M
Cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M
Sodium acetate
4.6
1.0 M
1,6-Hexanediol
H2
0.1 M
Cadmium chloride hemi(pentahydrate)
0.1 M
Sodium acetate
4.6
30 % v/v PEG 400
H3
0.2 M
Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M
Sodium acetate
4.6
30 % w/v PEG 2000 MME
H4
2.0 M
Sodium chloride
10 % w/v PEG 6000
H5
0.5 M
Sodium chloride/
0.1 M
Magnesium chloride hexahydrate/
0.01 M
CTAB
H6
25 % v/v Ethylene glycol
H7
35 % v/v 1,4-Dioxane
H8
2.0 M
Ammonium sulfate
5 % v/v 2-Propanol
H9
1.0 M
Imidazole
7.0
H10
10 % w/v PEG 1000
10 % w/v PEG 8000
H11
1.5 M
Sodium chloride
10 % v/v Ethanol
H12
1.6 M
Sodium citrate
6.5
Figure G.10: Structure Screen 1+2, wells E1-H12 [68].
==PAGE:97==
G Crystallization Screens
83
JCSG-plus™ HT-96 / FX-96 Wells A1-D12 
 
MD1-40/MD1-40-FX 
Well #
Salt 
Buffer
pH
Precipitant 
A1
0.2 M Lithium sulfate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.5
50 % w/v PEG 400
A2
None
0.1 M Sodium citrate
5.5
20 % w/v PEG 3000
A3
0.2 M Ammonium citrate dibasic
None
20 % w/v PEG 3350
A4
0.02 M Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.6
30 % v/v MPD
A5
0.2 M Magnesium formate dihydrate
None
20 % w/v PEG 3350
A6
0.2 M Lithium sulfate
0.1 M Phosphate/citrate
4.2
20 % w/v PEG 1000
A7
None
0.1 M CHES
9.5
20 % w/v PEG 8000
A8
0.2 M Ammonium formate
None
20 % w/v PEG 3350
A9
0.2 M Ammonium chloride
None
20 % w/v PEG 3350
A10
0.2 M Potassium formate
None
20 % w/v PEG 3350
A11
0.2 M Ammonium phosphate monobasic
0.1 M Tris
8.5
50 % v/v MPD
A12
0.2 M Potassium nitrate
None
20 % w/v PEG 3350
B1
0.8 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M Citrate
4.0
None
B2
0.2 M Sodium thiocyanate
None
20 % w/v PEG 3350
B3
None
0.1 M BICINE
9.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
B4
None
0.1 M HEPES 
7.5
10 % w/v PEG 8000
8 % v/v Ethylene glycol
B5
None
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
40 % v/v MPD
5 % w/v PEG 8000
B6
None
0.1 M Phosphate/citrate
4.2
40 % v/v Ethanol
5 % w/v PEG 1000
B7
None
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.6
8 % w/v PEG 4000
B8
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Tris
7.0
10 % w/v PEG 8000
B9
None
0.1 M Citrate
5.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
B10
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
50 % v/v PEG 200
B11
1.6 M Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate pH 6.5
None
None
B12
0.2 M Potassium citrate tribasic monohydrate
None
20 % w/v PEG 3350
C1
0.2 M Sodium chloride
0.1 M Phosphate/citrate
4.2
20 % w/v PEG 8000
C2
1.0 M Lithium chloride
0.1 M Citrate
4.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
C3
0.2 M Ammonium nitrate
None
20 % w/v PEG 3350
C4
None
0.1 M HEPES 
7.0
10 % w/v PEG 6000
C5
0.8 M Sodium phosphate monobasic monohydrate
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5
None
0.8 M Potassium phosphate monobasic
None
C6
None
0.1 M Phosphate/citrate
4.2
40 % v/v PEG 300
C7
0.2 M Zinc acetate dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.5
10 % w/v PEG 3000
C8
None
0.1 M Tris
8.5
20 % v/v Ethanol
C9
None
0.1 M Sodium/potassium phosphate
6.2
25 % v/v 1,2-Propandiol
10 %v/v
Glycerol
C10
None
0.1 M BICINE
9.0
10 % w/v PEG 20,000
2 % v/v 1,4-Dioxane
C11
2.0 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.6
None
C12
None
None
10 % w/v PEG 1000
10 % w/v PEG 8000
D1
None
None
24 % w/v PEG 1500
20 % v/v Glycerol
D2
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5
30 % v/v PEG 400
D3
0.2 M Sodium chloride
0.1 M Sodium/potassium phosphate
6.2
50 % v/v PEG 200
D4
0.2 M Lithium sulfate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.5
30 % w/v PEG 8000
D5
None
0.1 M HEPES
7.5
70 % v/v MPD
D6
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Tris
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 8000
D7
0.2 M Lithium sulfate
0.1 M Tris
8.5
40 % v/v PEG 400
D8
None
0.1 M Tris
8.0
40 % v/v MPD
D9
0.17 M Ammonium sulfate
None
25.5 % w/v PEG 4000
15 % v/v Glycerol
D10
0.2 M Calcium acetate hydrate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
40 % v/v PEG 300
D11
0.14 M Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.07 M Sodium acetate
4.6
14 % v/v 2-Propanol
30 % v/v Glycerol
D12
0.04 M Potassium phosphate monobasic
None
16 % w/v PEG 8000
20 % v/v Glycerol
Conc.
Conc.
Conc.
Figure G.11: JCSG+, wells A1-D12 [66].
==PAGE:98==
84
Appendices
JCSG-plus™ HT-96 / FX-96 Wells E1-H12 
 
MD1-40/MD1-40-FX 
Well #
Salt 
Buffer
pH
Precipitant 
E1
1.0 M Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
None
E2
2.0 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
None
0.2 M Sodium chloride
E3
0.2 M Sodium chloride
0.1 M HEPES
7.5
10 % v/v 2-Propanol
E4
1.26 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M Tris
8.5
None
0.2 M Lithium sulfate
E5
None
0.1 M CAPS
10.5
40 % v/v MPD
E6
0.2 M Zinc acetate dihydrate
0.1 M Imidazole
8.0
20 % w/v PEG 3000
E7
0.2 M Zinc acetate dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
10 % v/v 2-Propanol
E8
1.0 M Ammonium phosphate dibasic
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.5
None
E9
1.6 M Magneisum sulfate heptahydrate
0.1 M MES
6.5
None
E10
None
0.1 M BICINE
9.0
10 % w/v PEG 6000
E11
0.16 M Calcium acetate hydrate
0.08 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5 14.4 % w/v PEG 8000
20 % v/v Glycerol
E12
None
0.1 M Imidazole
8.0
10 % w/v PEG 8000
F1
0.05 M Cesium chloride
0.1 M MES
6.5
30 % v/v Jeffamine® M-600
F2
3.2 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M Citrate
5.0
None
F3
None
0.1 M Tris
8.0
20 % v/v MPD
F4
None
0.1 M HEPES
7.5
20 % v/v Jeffamine® M-600
F5
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Tris
8.5
50 % v/v Ethylene glycol
F6
None
0.1 M BICINE
9.0
10 % v/v MPD
F7
0.8 M Succinic acid pH 7.0
None
None
F8
2.1 M DL-Malic acid pH 7.0
None
None
F9
2.4 M Sodium malonate dibasic monohydrate pH 7.0
None
None
F10
1.1 M Sodium malonate dibasic monohydrate
0.1 M HEPES
7.0
0.5 % v/v Jeffamine® ED-2003
F11
1.0 M Succinic acid
0.1 M HEPES
7.0
1 % w/v PEG 2000 MME
F12
None
0.1 M HEPES
7.0
30 % v/v Jeffamine® M-600
G1
None
0.1 M HEPES
7.0
30 % v/v Jeffamine® ED-2003
G2
0.02 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M HEPES
7.5
22 % w/v Poly(acrylic acid sodium salt) 5100
G3
0.01 M Cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Tris
8.5
20 % w/v Polyvinylpyrrolidone
G4
0.2 M TMAO
0.1 M Tris
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 2000 MME
G5
0.005 M Cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M HEPES
7.5
12 % w/v PEG 3350
0.005 M Cadmium chloride hemi(pentahydrate)
0.005 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.005 M Nickel(II) chloride hexahydrate
G6
0.2 M Sodium malonate dibasic monohydrate
None
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G7
0.1 M Succinic acid
None
15 % w/v PEG 3350
G8
0.15 M DL-Malic acid
None
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G9
0.1 M Potassium thiocyanate
None
30 % w/v PEG 2000 MME
G10
0.15 M Potassium bromide
None
30 % w/v PEG 2000 MME
G11
2.0 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
None
G12
3.0 M Sodium chloride
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
None
H1
0.3 M Magnesium formate dihydrate
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
None
H2
1.0 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
1 % w/v PEG 3350
H3
None
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
25 % w/v PEG 3350
H4
0.2 M Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
45 % v/v MPD
H5
0.2 M Ammonium acetate
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
45 % v/v MPD
H6
0.1 M Ammonium acetate
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
17 % w/v PEG 10,000
H7
0.2 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
25 % w/v PEG 3350
H8
0.2 M Sodium chloride
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
25 % w/v PEG 3350
H9
0.2 M Lithium sulfate
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
25 % w/v PEG 3350
H10
0.2 M Ammonium acetate
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
25 % w/v PEG 3350
H11
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M BIS-Tris
5.5
25 % w/v PEG 3350
H12
0.2 M Ammonium acetate
0.1 M HEPES
7.5
45 % v/v MPD
Conc.
Conc.
Conc.
Figure G.12: JCSG+, wells E1-H12 [66].
==PAGE:99==
G Crystallization Screens
85
PACT premier™ HT-96 / FX-96  
Conditions A1-D12 
 
MD1-36 / MD1-36-FX 
Well #
Salt 
Buffer
pH
Precipitant
A1
0.1 M SPG
4.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
A2
0.1 M SPG
5.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
A3
0.1 M SPG
6.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
A4
0.1 M SPG
7.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
A5
0.1 M SPG
8.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
A6
0.1 M SPG
9.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
A7
0.2 M Sodium chloride
0.1 M Sodium acetate
5.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
A8
0.2 M Ammonium chloride
0.1 M Sodium acetate
5.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
A9
0.2 M Lithium chloride
0.1 M Sodium acetate
5.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
A10
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
5.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
A11
0.2 M Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
5.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
A12
0.01 M Zinc chloride
0.1 M Sodium acetate
5.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
B1
0.1 M MIB
4.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
B2
0.1 M MIB
5.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
B3
0.1 M MIB
6.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
B4
0.1 M MIB
7.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
B5
0.1 M MIB
8.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
B6
0.1 M MIB
9.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
B7
0.2 M Sodium chloride
0.1 M MES
6.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
B8
0.2 M Ammonium chloride
0.1 M MES
6.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
B9
0.2 M Lithium chloride
0.1 M MES
6.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
B10
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M MES
6.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
B11
0.2 M Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.1 M MES
6.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
B12
0.01 M Zinc chloride
0.1 M MES
6.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
C1
0.1 M PCTP
4.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
C2
0.1 M PCTP
5.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
C3
0.1 M PCTP
6.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
C4
0.1 M PCTP
7.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
C5
0.1 M PCTP
8.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
C6
0.1 M PCTP
9.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
C7
0.2 M Sodium chloride
0.1 M HEPES
7.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
C8
0.2 M Ammonium chloride
0.1 M HEPES
7.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
C9
0.2 M Lithium chloride
0.1 M HEPES
7.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
C10
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M HEPES
7.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
C11
0.2 M Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.1 M HEPES
7.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
C12
0.01 M Zinc chloride
0.1 M HEPES
7.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
D1
0.1 M MMT
4.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
D2
0.1 M MMT
5.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
D3
0.1 M MMT
6.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
D4
0.1 M MMT
7.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
D5
0.1 M MMT
8.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
D6
0.1 M MMT
9.0
25 % w/v PEG 1500
D7
0.2 M Sodium chloride
0.1 M Tris
8.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
D8
0.2 M Ammonium chloride
0.1 M Tris
8.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
D9
0.2 M Lithium chloride
0.1 M Tris
8.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
D10
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Tris
8.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
D11
0.2 M Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.1 M Tris
8.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
D12
0.002 M Zinc chloride
0.1 M Tris
8.0
20 % w/v PEG 6000
Conc.
Conc.
Conc.
Figure G.13: PACT premier, wells A1-D12 [67].
==PAGE:100==
86
Appendices
PACT premier™ HT-96 / FX-96  
Conditions E1-H12 
MD1-36 / MD1-36-FX 
Well #
Salt 
Buffer
pH
Precipitant
E1
0.2 M Sodium fluoride
20 % w/v PEG 3350
E2
0.2 M Sodium bromide
20 % w/v PEG 3350
E3
0.2 M Sodium iodide
20 % w/v PEG 3350
E4
0.2 M Potassium thiocyanate
20 % w/v PEG 3350
E5
0.2 M Sodium nitrate
20 % w/v PEG 3350
E6
0.2 M Sodium formate
20 % w/v PEG 3350
E7
0.2 M Sodium acetate trihydrate
20 % w/v PEG 3350
E8
0.2 M Sodium sulfate
20 % w/v PEG 3350
E9
0.2 M Potassium sodium tartrate tetrahydrate
20 % w/v PEG 3350
E10
0.02 M Sodium/potassium phosphate
20 % w/v PEG 3350
E11
0.2 M Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
20 % w/v PEG 3350
E12
0.2 M Sodium malonate dibasic monohydrate
20 % w/v PEG 3350
F1
0.2 M Sodium fluoride
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
F2
0.2 M Sodium bromide
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
F3
0.2 M Sodium iodide
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
F4
0.2 M Potassium thiocyanate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
F5
0.2 M Sodium nitrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
F6
0.2 M Sodium formate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
F7
0.2 M Sodium acetate trihydrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
F8
0.2 M Sodium sulfate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
F9
0.2 M Potassium sodium tartrate tetrahydrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
F10
0.02 M Sodium/potassium phosphate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
F11
0.2 M Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
F12
0.2 M Sodium malonate dibasic monohydrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
6.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G1
0.2 M Sodium fluoride
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G2
0.2 M Sodium bromide
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G3
0.2 M Sodium iodide
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G4
0.2 M Potassium thiocyanate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G5
0.2 M Sodium nitrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G6
0.2 M Sodium formate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G7
0.2 M Sodium acetate trihydrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G8
0.2 M Sodium sulfate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G9
0.2 M Potassium sodium tartrate tetrahydrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G10
0.02 M Sodium/potassium phosphate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G11
0.2 M Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
G12
0.2 M Sodium malonate dibasic monohydrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
7.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
H1
0.2 M Sodium fluoride
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
H2
0.2 M Sodium bromide
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
H3
0.2 M Sodium iodide
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
H4
0.2 M Potassium thiocyanate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
H5
0.2 M Sodium nitrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
H6
0.2 M Sodium formate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
H7
0.2 M Sodium acetate trihydrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
H8
0.2 M Sodium sulfate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
H9
0.2 M Potassium sodium tartrate tetrahydrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
H10
0.02 M Sodium/potassium phosphate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
H11
0.2 M Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
H12
0.2 M Sodium malonate dibasic monohydrate
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane
8.5
20 % w/v PEG 3350
Conc.
Conc.
Conc.
Figure G.14: PACT premier, wells E1-H12 [67].
==PAGE:101==
G Crystallization Screens
87
Stura FootPrint Combination HT-96 / FX-96        Rows A1 - D12  
MD1-43 / MD1-43-FX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Well #
Salt
Buffer
pH
Precipitant
A1
0.2 M Imidazole malate
5.5
15 % v/v PEG 600
A2
0.2 M Imidazole malate
5.5
24 % v/v PEG 600
A3
0.2 M Imidazole malate
5.5
33 % v/v PEG 600
A4
0.2 M Imidazole malate
5.5
42 % v/v PEG 600
A5
0.2 M Imidazole malate
7.0
10 % w/v PEG 4000
A6
0.2 M Imidazole malate
7.0
15 % w/v PEG 4000
A7
0.2 M Imidazole malate
7.0
20 % w/v PEG 4000
A8
0.2 M Imidazole malate
7.0
25 % w/v PEG 4000
A9
0.2 M Imidazole malate
8.5
7.5 % w/v PEG 10,000
A10
0.2 M Imidazole malate
8.5 12.5 % w/v PEG 10,000
A11
0.2 M Imidazole malate
8.5 17.5 % w/v PEG 10,000
A12
0.2 M Imidazole malate
8.5 22.5 % w/v PEG 10,000
B1
0.75 M Ammonium sulfate
0.15 M Sodium citrate
5.5
B2
1.0 M Ammonium sulfate
0.15 M Sodium citrate
5.5
B3
1.5 M Ammonium sulfate
0.15 M Sodium citrate
5.5
B4
2.0 M Ammonium sulfate
0.15 M Sodium citrate
5.5
B5
0.8 M Potassium/sodium phosphate
7.0
B6
1.32 M Potassium/sodium phosphate
7.0
B7
1.6 M Potassium/sodium phosphate
7.0
B8
2.0 M Potassium/sodium phosphate
7.0
B9
0.75 M Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.01 M Sodium borate
8.5
B10
1.0 M Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.01 M Sodium borate
8.5
B11
1.2 M Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.01 M Sodium borate
8.5
B12
1.5 M Sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate
0.01 M Sodium borate
8.5
C1
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
8.2
30 % v/v PEG 500 MME
C2
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
8.2
40 % v/v PEG 500 MME
C3
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
8.2
50 % v/v PEG 500 MME
C4
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
8.2
60 % v/v PEG 500 MME
C5
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5
18 % v/v PEG 600
C6
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5
27 % v/v PEG 600
C7
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5
36 % v/v PEG 600
C8
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5
45 % v/v PEG 600
C9
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
18 % w/v PEG 2000 MME
C10
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
27 % w/v PEG 2000 MME
C11
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
36 % w/v PEG 2000 MME
C12
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
45 % w/v PEG 2000 MME
D1
0.2 M Imidazole malate
6.0
8 % w/v PEG 4000
D2
0.2 M Imidazole malate
6.0
15 % w/v PEG 4000
D3
0.2 M Imidazole malate
6.0
20 % w/v PEG 4000
D4
0.2 M Imidazole malate
6.0
30 % w/v PEG 4000
D5
0.1 M Sodium acetate
5.5
12 % w/v PEG 5000 MME
D6
0.1 M Sodium acetate
5.5
18 % w/v PEG 5000 MME
D7
0.1 M Sodium acetate
5.5
24 % w/v PEG 5000 MME
D8
0.1 M Sodium acetate
5.5
36 % w/v PEG 5000 MME
D9
0.1 M Ammonium acetate
4.5
9 % w/v PEG 10,000
D10
0.1 M Ammonium acetate
4.5
15 % w/v PEG 10,000
D11
0.1 M Ammonium acetate
4.5 22.5 % w/v PEG 10,000
D12
0.1 M Ammonium acetate
4.5
27 % w/v PEG 10,000
Conc.
Conc.
Conc.
Figure G.15: Stura, wells A1-D12 [69].
==PAGE:102==
88
Appendices
Stura FootPrint Combination HT-96 / FX-96  
Rows E1 - H12 
MD1-43 / MD1-43-FX 
Well #
Salt1
Salt2
Buffer
pH
Precipitant1
Precipitant2
E1
0.02 M Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.5 10 % v/v MPD
E2
0.02 M Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.5 20 % v/v MPD
E3
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.5 30 % v/v MPD
E4
0.02 M Calcium chloride dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.5 30 % v/v MPD
E5
0.1 M Sodium phosphate monobasic monohydrate
1.0 M Sodium acetate trihydrate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
E6
0.1 M Sodium phosphate monobasic monohydrate
1.4 M Sodium acetate trihydrate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
E7
0.1 M Sodium phosphate monobasic monohydrate
1.7 M Sodium acetate trihydrate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
E8
1.7 M Sodium acetate trihydrate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
E9
0.2 M Ammonium acetate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.5
8 % w/v PEG 3350
E10
0.2 M Ammonium acetate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.5 15 % w/v PEG 3350
E11
0.2 M Ammonium acetate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.5 20 % w/v PEG 3350
E12
0.2 M Ammonium acetate
0.1 M Sodium acetate
4.5 30 % w/v PEG 3350
F1
0.75 M Ammonium phosphate monobasic
0.1 M Sodium citrate
5.5
F2
1.0 M Ammonium phosphate monobasic
0.1 M Sodium citrate
5.5
F3
1.5 M Ammonium phosphate monobasic
0.1 M Sodium citrate
5.5
F4
2.0 M Ammonium phosphate monobasic
0.1 M Sodium citrate
5.5
F5
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5 10 % v/v 2-Propanol
F6
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5 15 % v/v 2-Propanol
F7
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5 20 % v/v 2-Propanol
F8
0.2 M Magnesium chloride hexahydrate
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5 30 % v/v 2-Propanol
F9
0.2 M Lithium sulfate
0.1 M Tris
8.5 16 % w/v PEG 3350
F10
0.2 M Lithium sulfate
0.1 M Tris
8.5 25 % w/v PEG 3350
F11
0.2 M Lithium sulfate
0.1 M Tris
8.5 30 % w/v PEG 3350
F12
0.5 M Lithium sulfate
0.1 M Tris
8.5 25 % w/v PEG 3350
G1
1.0 M Lithium sulfate
2 % w/v PEG 8000
G2
1.0 M Lithium sulfate
0.1 M Imidazole malate
5.5
2 % w/v PEG 8000
G3
1.0 M Lithium sulfate
0.1 M Imidazole malate
6.5
2 % w/v PEG 8000
G4
1.0 M Lithium sulfate
0.1 M Imidazole malate
7.5
2 % w/v PEG 8000
G5
0.2 M Ammonium sulfate
12 % w/v PEG 8000
G6
0.2 M Ammonium sulfate
18 % w/v PEG 8000
G7
0.2 M Ammonium sulfate
24 % w/v PEG 8000
G8
0.2 M Ammonium sulfate
30 % w/v PEG 8000
G9
0.5 M Ammonium sulfate
10 % w/v PEG 4000
G10
0.3 M Ammonium sulfate
20 % w/v PEG 4000
G11
0.2 M Ammonium sulfate
30 % w/v PEG 4000
G12
0.2 M Ammonium sulfate
36 % w/v PEG 4000
H1
1.0 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5
2 % v/v PEG 400
H2
1.5 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5
2 % v/v PEG 400
H3
2.0 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5
2 % v/v PEG 400
H4
2.0 M Ammonium sulfate
0.1 M Sodium HEPES
7.5
5 % v/v PEG 400
H5
0.1 M Sodium citrate
5.5 12 % w/v PEG 4000
5 % v/v 2-Propanol
H6
0.1 M Sodium citrate
5.5 16 % w/v PEG 4000
10 % v/v 2-Propanol
H7
0.1 M Sodium citrate
5.5 20 % w/v PEG 4000
15 % v/v 2-Propanol
H8
0.1 M Sodium citrate
5.5 20 % w/v PEG 4000
20 % v/v 2-Propanol
H9
0.005 M Zinc acetate dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5
9 % w/v PEG 8000
H10
0.005 M Zinc acetate dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5 12 % w/v PEG 8000
H11
0.005 M Zinc acetate dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5 18 % w/v PEG 8000
H12
0.005 M Zinc acetate dihydrate
0.1 M Sodium cacodylate
6.5 24 % w/v PEG 8000
Conc.
Conc.
Conc.
Conc.
Conc.
Figure G.16: Stura, wells E1-H12 [69].
==PAGE:103==
H Crystallization Results
89
H
Crystallization Results
Structure Screen 1+2
(a) Subwell 1: 100nL buffer:100nL reservoir
(b) Color Coding
(c) Subwell 2: 100nL protein:100nL reservoir
(d) Subwell 3: 200nL protein:100nL reservoir
Figure H.17: The crystallization results from Structure Screen 1+2 after 30 days.
==PAGE:104==
90
Appendices
JCSG+
(a) Subwell 1: 100nL buffer:100nL reservoir
(b) Color Coding
(c) Subwell 2: 100nL protein:100nL reservoir
(d) Subwell 3: 200nL protein:100nL reservoir
Figure H.18: The crystallization results from JCSG+ screen after 30 days.
==PAGE:105==
H Crystallization Results
91
PACT Premier
(a) Subwell 1: 100nL buffer:100nL reservoir
(b) Color Coding
(c) Subwell 2: 100nL protein:100nL reservoir
(d) Subwell 3: 200nL protein:100nL reservoir
Figure H.19: The crystallization results from PACT Premier screen after 30 days.
==PAGE:106==
92
Appendices
Stura Footprint
(a) Subwell 1: 100nL buffer:100nL reservoir
(b) Color Coding
(c) Subwell 2: 100nL protein:100nL reservoir
(d) Subwell 3: 200nL protein:100nL reservoir
Figure H.20: The crystallization results from Stura Footprint screen after 30 days.
==PAGE:107==
I Interesting Crystal-Like Structures
93
I
Interesting Crystal-Like Structures
Table I.3: Structure Screen 1+2 Subwell B3.2. Well composition: 0.2 M magnesium
acetate tetrahydrate, 0.1 M sodium cacodylate, pH 6.5, 20 % w/v PEG 8000
Visible
UV
Day 0
Day 30
==PAGE:108==
94
Appendices
Table I.4: Structure Screen 1+2 Subwell B11.3. Well composition: 0.2 M Calcium
chloride dihydrate, 0.1 M Sodium HEPES, pH 7.5, 28 % v/v PEG 400
Visible
UV
Day 0
==PAGE:109==
I Interesting Crystal-Like Structures
95
Table I.5: Structure Screen 1+2 Subwell B11.1. Well composition: 0.2 M Calcium
chloride dihydrate, 0.1 M Sodium HEPES, pH 7.5, 28 % v/v PEG 400
Visible
UV
Day 0
==PAGE:110==
96
Appendices
Table I.6: Structure Screen 1+2 Subwell C1.3. Well composition: 0.2 M tri-sodium
citrate, 0.1 M sodium HEPES, pH 7.5, 20 % v/v 2-propanol
Visible
UV
Day 0
Day 30
==PAGE:111==
I Interesting Crystal-Like Structures
97
Table I.7: Structure Screen 1+2 Subwell C9.2. Well composition: 0.2 M magnesium
chloride hexahydrate, 0.1 M tris, pH 8.5, 30 % w/v PEG 4000
Visible
UV
Day 0
Day 30
==PAGE:112==
98
Appendices
Table I.8: Structure Screen 1+2 Subwell C10.3. Well composition: 0.2 M tri-sodium
citrate, 0.1 M tris hydrochloride, pH 8.5, 30 % v/v PEG 400
Visible
UV
Day 0
Day 30
==PAGE:113==
I Interesting Crystal-Like Structures
99
Table I.9: Structure Screen 1+2 Subwell D12.3. Well composition: 0.2 M magnesium
formate
Visible
UV
Day 0
Day 30
==PAGE:114==
100
Appendices
Table I.10: Structure Screen 1+2 Subwell H6.3. Well composition: 25 % v/v ethylene
glycol
Visible
UV
Day 0
Day 30
==PAGE:115==
I Interesting Crystal-Like Structures
101
Table I.11: JCSG+ Subwell A10.3. Well composition: 0.2 M potassium formate, 20
% w/v PEG 3350
Visible
UV
Day 0
Day 30
==PAGE:116==
102
Appendices
Table I.12: JCSG+ Subwell B1.3. Well composition: 0.8 M ammonium sulfate, 0.1
M citrate, pH 4.0
Visible
UV
Day 0
Day 30
==PAGE:117==
I Interesting Crystal-Like Structures
103
Table I.13:
PACT Premier Subwell B4.2.
Well composition:
0.1 M Malonate-
Imidazole-Borate, pH 7.0, 25 % w/v PEG 1500
Visible
UV
Day 0
Day 30
==PAGE:118==
104
Appendices
Table I.14: PACT Premier Subwell H6.2. Well composition: 0.2 M Sodium formate,
0.1 M Bis-Tris propane, pH 8.5, 20 % w/v PEG 3350
Visible
UV
Day 0
Day 30
==PAGE:119==
I Interesting Crystal-Like Structures
105
Table I.15: Stura Subwell D4.3. Well composition: 0.2 M Imidazole malate, pH 6.0,
30 % w/v PEG 4000
Visible
UV
Day 0
Day 30
==PAGE:120==
106
Appendices
Table I.16: Stura Subwell E11.2. Well composition: 0.2 M ammonium acetate, 0.1 M
Sodium acetate, pH 4.5, 20 % w/v PEG 3350
Visible
UV
Day 0
Day 30
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
[1]
M. S. Nielsen, C. R. Petersen, A. Munch, T. V. Vendelboe, J. Boesen, P. Harris,
and H. E. M. Christensen, “A simple two step procedure for purification of the
catalytic domain of chicken tryptophan hydroxylase 1 in a form suitable for
crystallization,” Protein Expression and Purification, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 116–
126, 2008.
[2]
N. Carkaci-Salli, J. M. Flanagan, M. K. Martz, U. Salli, D. J. Walther, M. Bader,
and K. E. Vrana, “Functional domains of human tryptophan hydroxylase 2
(hTPH2),” Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 281, no. 38, pp. 28 105–28 112,
2006.
[3]
M. S. Windahl, C. R. Petersen, H. E. M. Christensen, and P. Harris, “Crystal
structure of tryptophan hydroxylase with bound amino acid substrate,” Bio-
chemistry, vol. 47, no. 46, pp. 12 087–12 094, 2008.
[4]
Sundhedsstyrelsen, “Sygdomsbyrden i Danmark,” Sygdomsbyrden i Danmark,
no. 2, p. 384, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.sst.dk/da/sygdom-og-
behandling/~/media/00C6825B11BD46F9B064536C6E7DFBA0.ashx
[5]
“Fakta | Psykiatrifonden.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.psykiatrifonden.
dk/viden/fakta.aspx
[6]
S. M. O’Mahony, G. Clarke, Y. E. Borre, T. G. Dinan, and J. F. Cryan,
“Serotonin,
tryptophan metabolism and the brain-gut-microbiome axis,”
Behavioural Brain Research, vol. 277, pp. 32–48, 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.027
[7]
Y. Nawa, L. C.-d. Amato, and H. Matsui, “Tryptophan Hydroxylase 2,” Ency-
clopedia of Signaling Molecules, pp. 1–10, 2016.
[8]
W. Lovenberg, R. Levine, and A. Sjoerdsma, “A tryptophan hydroxylase in
cell-free extracts of malignant mouse mast cells,” Biochemical Pharmacology,
vol. 14, pp. 887–9, 1965.
[9]
D. J. Walther and M. Bader, “A unique central tryptophan hydroxylase iso-
form,” Biochemical Pharmacology, vol. 66, no. 9, pp. 1673–1680, 2003.
==PAGE:122==
108
Bibliography
[10]
P. Zill,
A. Buttner,
W. Eisenmenger,
H. Moller,
M. Ackenheil,
and
B. Bondy, “Analysis of tryptophan hydroxylase I and II mRNA expression
in
the
human
brain:
A
post-mortem
study,”
Journal
of
Psychiatric
Research,
vol.
41,
no.
1-2,
pp.
168–173,
2007.
[Online].
Available:
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0022395605000683
[11]
K. M. Roberts and P. F. Fitzpatrick, “Mechanisms of tryptophan and tyrosine
hydroxylase,” IUBMB Life, vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 350–357, 2013.
[12]
“Protein BLAST: Align two or more sequences using BLAST.” [Online]. Avail-
able:
https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PROGRAM=blastp&PAGE_
TYPE=BlastSearch&BLAST_SPEC=blast2seq&LINK_LOC=blasttab
[13]
D. J. Walther, “Synthesis of Serotonin by a Second Tryptophan Hydroxylase
Isoform,”
Science,
vol. 299,
no. 5603,
p. 76,
2003. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.1078197
[14]
O. A. Andersen, T. Flatmark, and E. Hough, “Crystal structure of the ternary
complex of the catalytic domain of human phenylalanine hydroxylase with
tetrahydrobiopterin and 3-(2-thienyl)-l-alanine, and its implications for the
mechanism of catalysis and substrate activation,” Journal of Molecular Biol-
ogy, vol. 320, no. 5, pp. 1095–1108, 2002.
[15]
K. Waløen, R. Kleppe, A. Martinez, and J. Haavik, “Tyrosine and tryptophan
hydroxylases as therapeutic targets in human disease,” Expert Opinion on
Therapeutic Targets, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 167–180, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14728222.2017.1272581
[16]
M. S. Windahl, J. Boesen, P. E. Karlsen, and H. E. M. Christensen, “Expression,
purification and enzymatic characterization of the catalytic domains of human
tryptophan hydroxylase isoforms,” Protein Journal, vol. 28, no. 9-10, pp. 400–
406, 2009.
[17]
L. Wang, H. Erlandsen, J. Haavik, P. M. Knappskog, and R. C. Stevens, “Three-
dimensional structure of human tryptophan hydroxylase and its implications for
the biosynthesis of the neurotransmitters serotonin and melatonin,” Biochem-
istry, vol. 41, no. 42, pp. 12 569–12 574, 2002.
[18]
G. Cianchetta, T. Stouch, W. Yu, Z.-C. Shi, L. W. Tari, R. V. Swanson, M. J.
Hunter, I. D. Hoffman, and Q. Liu, “Mechanism of Inhibition of Novel Tryp-
tophan Hydroxylase Inhibitors Revealed by Co-crystal Structures and Kinetic
Analysis.” Current chemical genomics, vol. 4, no. 609, pp. 19–26, 2010.
[19]
D. Goldberg, S. De Lombaert, R. Aiello, P. Bourassa, N. Barucci, Q. Zhang,
V. Paralkar, A. Stein, J. Valentine, and W. Zavadoski, “Discovery of acyl
guanidine tryptophan hydroxylase-1 inhibitors.” Bioorg.Med.Chem.Lett., vol. 26,
pp. 2855–2860, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.rcsb.org/structure/5j6d
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
109
[20]
D.
Goldberg,
S.
De
Lombaert,
R.
Aiello,
P.
Bourassa,
N.
Barucci,
Q. Zhang, V. Paralkar, A. Stein, M. Holt, J. Valentine, and W. Zavadoski,
“Optimization of spirocyclic proline tryptophan hydroxylase-1 inhibitors.”
Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., vol. 27, pp. 413–419, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.rcsb.org/structure/5L01
[21]
J. Kopec, A. Oberholzer, F. Fitzpatrick, J. Newman, C. Tallant, L. Shrestha,
N. Burgess-Brown, F. von Delft, C. Arrowsmith, A. Edwards, C. Bountra,
and
W.
Yue,
“Crystal
Structure
of
Human
Tryptophane
Hydroxylase
2 (Tph2), Catalytic Domain,” TO BE PUBLISHED. [Online]. Available:
https://www.rcsb.org/structure/4V06
[22]
G. C. Jiang, G. J. Yohrling, J. D. Schmitt, K. E. Vrana, and I. V.
Schmitt, “Identification of substrate orienting and phosphorylation sites within
tryptophan hydroxylase using homology-based molecular modeling.” Journal
of molecular biology, vol. 302, no. 4, pp. 1005–1017, 2000. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10993738
[23]
K. D. Tidemand, H. E. M. Christensen, N. Hoeck, P. Harris, J. Boesen, and
G. H. Peters, “Stabilization of tryptophan hydroxylase 2 by l-phenylalanine-
induced dimerization,” FEBS Open Bio, vol. 6, no. 10, pp. 987–999, 2016.
[24]
S. Zhang, C. S. Hinck, and P. F. Fitzpatrick, “The regulatory domain of
human tryptophan hydroxylase 1 forms a stable dimer,” Biochemical and
Biophysical Research Communications, vol. 476, no. 4, pp. 457–461, 2016.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.05.144
[25]
J. S. Liberles, M. Thórólfsson, and A. Martínez, “Allosteric mechanisms in ACT
domain containing enzymes involved in amino acid metabolism,” Amino Acids,
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2005.
[26]
“UniprotKB - TPH1_human.” [Online]. Available: http://www.uniprot.org/
uniprot/P17752
[27]
“UniprotKB - TPH2_human.” [Online]. Available: http://www.uniprot.org/
uniprot/Q8IWU9
[28]
H. Hasegawa and K. Nakamura, “Tryptophan Hydroxylase and Serotonin Syn-
thesis Regulation,” Handbook of Behavioral Neuroscience, vol. 21, no. C, pp.
183–202, 2010.
[29]
D. M. Kuhn, C. E. Sykes, T. J. Geddes, K. L. E. Jaunarajs, and C. Bishop,
“Tryptophan hydroxylase 2 aggregates through disulfide cross-linking upon ox-
idation: Possible link to serotonin deficits and non-motor symptoms in Parkin-
son’s disease,” Journal of Neurochemistry, vol. 116, no. 3, pp. 426–437, 2011.
==PAGE:124==
110
Bibliography
[30]
G.
R.
Moran,
S.
C.
Daubner,
and
P.
F.
Fitzpatrick,
“Expression
and Characterization of the Catalytic Core of Tryptophan Hydroxylase,”
Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 273, no. 20, pp. 12 259–12 266, 1998.
[Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9575176%5Cnhttp:
//www.jbc.org/cgi/doi/10.1074/jbc.273.20.12259
[31]
J. Boesen, “Cloning, expression, purification and characterization of tryptophan
hydroxylase variants, Ph.D. thesis. Department of Chemistry,” no. June 2010,
2010.
[32]
L. T. Haahr, “Purification and Characterization of Tryptophan Hydroxylase,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Technical University of Denmark, 2012.
[33]
H. Glud, “Purification and Crystallization of Human Tryptophan Hydroxylase,”
Technical University of Denmark, Tech. Rep. June, 2017.
[34]
L. A. Andersen, “Purification and Crystallization of Human Tryptophan Hy-
droxylase,” Technical University of Denmark, Tech. Rep. June, 2016.
[35]
K. K. Øgendahl, “Purification and crystallisation of brain-specific human tryp-
tophan hydroxylase,” Technical University of DTU, Tech. Rep. December, 2016.
[36]
GE Healthcare, “Strategies for Protein Purification Handbook,” GE HealtCare
Handbooks, 2010.
[37]
Ge Healthcare, “Affinity Chromatography,” GE HealtCare Handbooks, pp. 1–
160, 2002.
[38]
GE Healthcare, “Affinity Chromatography Vol.2 Tagged Proteins,” GE Healt-
Care Handbooks, vol. 2, no. 2, 2016.
[39]
“Tagged Protein Purification - GE Healthcare Life Sciences.” [Online]. Avail-
able:
https://www.gelifesciences.com/solutions/protein-research/knowledge-
center/protein-purification-methods/tagged-protein-purification
[40]
C. Bourbousse, I. Ahmed, F. Roudier, G. Zabulon, E. Blondet, S. Balzergue,
V. Colot, C. Bowler, F. Barneche, M. B. P. Stop, I. Atg, G. E. Healthcare,
and L. Sciences, “Recombinant Protein Purification, Principles and Methods,”
PLoS Genetics, vol. 7843, no. 7, pp. 1 – 308, 2012.
[41]
GE Healthcare, “Dextrin Sepharose High Performance MBPTrap HP,” GE
HealtCare Handbooks, vol. 1, 2007.
[42]
A. Malhotra, Chapter 16 Tagging for Protein Expression, 1st ed.
Elsevier Inc.,
2009, vol. 463, no. C. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0076-
6879(09)63016-0
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
111
[43]
D. S. Waugh, “An overview of enzymatic reagents for the removal of affinity
tags,” Protein Expression and Purification, vol. 80, no. 2, pp. 283–293, 2011.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pep.2011.08.005
[44]
GE Healthcare, “Size exclusion chromatography: Principles and Methods,” GE
HealtCare Handbooks, 2012.
[45]
“HiLoad
Superdex
200
pg
preparative
size
exclusion
chromatogra-
phy
columns
-
GE
Healthcare
Life
Sciences.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.gelifesciences.com/en/dk/shop/chromatography/prepacked-
columns/size-exclusion/hiload-superdex-200-pg-preparative-size-exclusion-
chromatography-columns-p-06283?current=28989336
[46]
N. Shaw, C. Cheng, and Z.-J. Liu, “Procedure for reductive methylation
of protein to improve crystallizability ,” 2007. [Online]. Available:
http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2007.287
[47]
T. S. Walter, C. Meier, R. Assenberg, K. F. Au, J. Ren, A. Verma, J. E. E.
Nettleship, R. J. Owens, D. I. I. Stuart, and J. M. Grimes, “Lysine Methylation
as a Routine Rescue Strategy for Protein Crystallization,” Structure, vol. 14,
no. 11, pp. 1617–1622, 2006.
[48]
BioRad, “Molecular Weight Determination by SDS-PAGE,” Electrophoresis,
BioRad Manual, pp. 1–4, 2004.
[49]
T. Arakawa, K. Tsumoto, Y. Kita, B. Chang, and D. Ejima, “Biotechnology
applications of amino acids in protein purification and formulations,” Amino
Acids, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 587–605, 2007.
[50]
M. G. Cacace, E. M. Landau, and J. J. Ramsden, “The Hofmesiter series: salt
and solvent effects on interfacial phenomena,” Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics,
vol. 3, pp. 241–277, 1997.
[51]
Uptima, “DTT (DithioThreitol).” [Online]. Available: http://www.interchim.
fr/ft/0/054721.pdf
[52]
K. Subramonia and A. Klee,
“Direct Spectrophotometric of Reduction
Measurement of Disulfide the Rate,” The Journal of Biological Chemistry,
vol. 248, no. 2, pp. 707–710, 1973. [Online]. Available: http://www.jbc.org/
content/248/2/707.abstract
[53]
“TCEP hydrochloride.” [Online]. Available:
https://hamptonresearch.com/
product_detail.aspx?cid=4&sid=47&pid=47
[54]
R. Giegé, “A historical perspective on protein crystallization from 1840 to the
present day,” FEBS Journal, vol. 280, no. 24, pp. 6456–6497, 2013.
==PAGE:126==
112
Bibliography
[55]
H. M. Berman, “The Protein Data Bank: A historical perspective,” Acta Crys-
tallographica Section A: Foundations of Crystallography, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 88–95,
2008.
[56]
A. McPherson and J. A. Gavira, “Introduction to protein crystallization,” Acta
Crystallographica Section F:Structural Biology Communications, vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 2–20, 2014.
[57]
“RCSB PDB - Holdings Report.” [Online]. Available: http://www.rcsb.org/
pdb/statistics/holdings.do
[58]
A. McPherson, “Some Words of Advice from an Old Hand,” in Protein Crys-
tallization, 2nd ed., T. Bergfors, Ed.
Irvine, California, USA: International
University Line, 2009, ch. 1, pp. 5–9.
[59]
N. E. Chayen, “Turning protein crystallisation from an art into a science,”
Current Opinion in Structural Biology, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 577–583, 2004.
[60]
S. Khurshid, E. Saridakis, L. Govada, and N. E. Chayen, “Porous nucleating
agents for protein crystallization,”
Nature Protocols,
vol. 9,
no. 7,
pp.
1621–1633, 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.
1038/nprot.2014.109
[61]
M. Li and W.-r. Chang, “Protein crystallization,” Photosynthesis Research, pp.
223–229, 2009.
[62]
I. R. Krauss, A. Merlino, A. Vergara, and F. Sica, “An overview of biological
macromolecule crystallization,” International Journal of Molecular Sciences,
vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 11 643–11 691, 2013.
[63]
J. R. Luft and G. T. DeTitta, “Rational Selection of Crystallization Techniques,”
in Protein Crystallization, 2nd ed., T. Bergfors, Ed.
Buffalo, New York, USA:
International University Line, 2009, ch. 2, pp. 13–45.
[64]
A. McPherson and B. Cudney, “Optimization of crystallization conditions for
biological macromolecules,” Acta Crystallographica Section F:Structural Biology
Communications, vol. 70, pp. 1445–1467, 2014.
[65]
J. Newman, “Two Approaches for Initial Screening: Evolution and Intelligent
Design,” in Protein Crystallization, 2nd ed., T. Bergfors, Ed.
Parkvillr, Victo-
ria, Australia: International University Line, 2009, ch. 15, pp. 293–308.
[66]
“JCSG-plus,” Molecular Dimensions, pp. 1–5. [Online]. Available:
https:
//www.moleculardimensions.com/applications/upload/MD1-40.pdf
[67]
“PACT
premier,”
Molecular
Dimensions,
pp.
1–5.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.moleculardimensions.com/applications/upload/MD1-
36PACTpremierHT-96.pdf
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
113
[68]
“Structure
Screen
1
&
2,”
Molecular
Dimensions,
pp.
1–5.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.moleculardimensions.com/applications/upload/MD1-
30-HTStructureScreen1&2HTScreen.pdf
[69]
“Stura FootPrint Combination,” Molecular Dimensions, pp. 1–5. [Online].
Available:
https://www.moleculardimensions.com/applications/upload/MD1-
43SturaFootprintScreenMacroSolHT96.pdf
[70]
“Hanging Drop Vapor Diffusion Crystallization,” Hampton research, vol. 1,
pp. 1–2, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://hamptonresearch.com/documents/
growth_101/3.pdf
[71]
B. Rupp, “Strategies for Protein Crystallization Screening,” in Protein Crystal-
lization, 2nd ed., T. M. Bergfors, Ed. Livermore, California, USA: International
University Line, 2009, ch. 16, pp. 311–330.
[72]
C. Arentoft, “Mass Spectrometric Analysis and Crystallization of Human Tryp-
tophan Hydroxylase,” Technical University of Denmark, Tech. Rep., 2014.
[73]
“Pre-Crystallization
Test,”
Hampton
research,
pp.
1–2,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://hamptonresearch.com/documents/product/hr009498_2-
140_142_user_guide.pdf
[74]
“Salt or Protein
Crystals?”
Hampton
research,
pp.
1–2,
2016.
[On-
line]. Available: https://hamptonresearch.com/documents/product/hr007641_
cg101_salt_or_protein_crystals.pdf
[75]
S. Desbois, S. A. Seabrook, and J. Newman, “Some practical guidelines for UV
imaging in the protein crystallization laboratory,” Acta Crystallographica Sec-
tion F: Structural Biology and Crystallization Communications, vol. 69, no. 2,
pp. 201–208, 2013.
[76]
“SDS-Page concept - DTU Kemi.” [Online]. Available: http://www.kemi.dtu.
dk/Forskning/Organisk-Uorganisk-Kemi/MetalloproteinKemi/Kursussider/
Kursus26125_ChromatographicPurPro/SDSpageConcept
[77]
“Reducing Agents.” [Online]. Available:
https://hamptonresearch.com/tip_
detail.aspx?id=215
[78]
“Protein
crystallization
and
characterization
|
Department
of
Biol-
ogy.” [Online]. Available: https://www.biology.lu.se/services/lp3-lund-protein-
production-platform/protein-crystallization-and-characterization
[79]
“Minstrel HT -Rigaku equipment,” 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://www.
biology.lu.se/sites/biology.lu.se/files/minstrel_ht-rigaku_equipment-2015.pdf
[80]
“ExPASy - ProtParam tool.” [Online]. Available:
https://web.expasy.org/
protparam/
==PAGE:128==
114
Bibliography
[81]
V. Kielberg and L. Rasmussen, Proteiner - oprensning og karakterisering, 3rd ed.
Gylling: Gyldendal, 2005.
[82]
J. Haberkamp,
M. Ernst,
G. Makdissy,
P. M. Huck,
and M. Jekel,
“Protein fouling of ultrafiltration membranes — investigation of several
factors relevant for tertiary wastewater treatment,” Journal of Environmental
Engineering and Science, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 651–660, 2008. [Online]. Available:
http://www.icevirtuallibrary.com/content/article/10.1139/s08-038
[83]
E. C. Arturo, K. Gupta, A. Héroux, L. Stith, P. J. Cross, E. J. Parker,
P. J. Loll, and E. K. Jaffe, “First structure of full-length mammalian
phenylalanine
hydroxylase
reveals
the
architecture
of
an
autoinhibited
tetramer,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 113, no. 9,
pp. 2394–2399, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.pnas.org/lookup/doi/10.
1073/pnas.1516967113
[84]
M. E. Pedersen, “Purification and Crystallization of Human Tryptophan Hy-
droxylase,” Technical University of Denmark, Tech. Rep., 2014.
[85]
“Results
from
Clustal
Omega
by
Multiple
Sequence
Align-
ment,
EMBL-EBI.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/
services/web/toolresult.ebi?jobId=clustalo-I20180308-141012-0252-60379160-
p2m&showColors=true&tool=clustalo
[86]
B. Kobe, I. G. Jennings, C. M. House, B. J. Michell, K. E. Goodwill, B. D.
Santarsiero, R. C. Stevens, R. G. Cotton, and B. E. Kemp, “Structural basis of
autoregulation of phenylalanine hydroxylase.” Nature structural biology, vol. 6,
no. 5, pp. 442–448, 1999.
[87]
S. P. Meisburger, A. B. Taylor, C. A. Khan, S. Zhang, P. F. Fitzpatrick, and
N. Ando, “Domain Movements upon Activation of Phenylalanine Hydroxylase
Characterized by Crystallography and Chromatography-Coupled Small-Angle
X-ray Scattering,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 138, no. 20,
pp. 6506–6516, 2016.
[88]
F. Fusetti, H. Erlandsen, T. Flatmark, and R. C. Stevens, “Structure of
tetrameric human phenylalanine hydroxylase and its implications for phenylke-
tonuria,” Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 273, no. 27, pp. 16 962–16 967,
1998.
[89]
H. Erlandsen, T. Flatmark, R. C. Stevens, and E. Hough, “Crystallographic
analysis of the human phenylalanine hydroxylase catalytic domain with bound
catechol inhibitors at 2.0 Åresolution,” Biochemistry, vol. 37, no. 45, pp. 15 638–
15 646, 1998.
[90]
H. Erlandsen, E. Bjørgo, T. Flatmark, and R. C. Stevens, “Crystal structure and
site-specific mutagenesis of pterin-bound human phenylalanine hydroxylase,”
Biochemistry, vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 2208–2217, 2000.
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
115
[91]
O. Andersen, T. Flatmark, and E. Hough, “High resolution crystal structures
of the catalytic domain of human phenylalanine hydroxylase in its catalytically
active Fe(II) form and binary complex with tetrahydrobiopterin.” Journal of
molecular biology, vol. 314, no. 2, pp. 279–291, 2001.
[92]
K. Stierand and M. Rarey, “Drawing the PDB: Protein−Ligand Complexes in
Two Dimensions,” ACS Medicinal Chemistry Letters, vol. 1, no. 9, pp. 540–545,
12 2010. [Online]. Available: http://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/ml100164p
[93]
O. Andersen, T. Flatmark, and E. Hough, “Crystal structure of the ternary com-
plex of the catalytic domain of human phenylalanine hydroxylase with tetrahy-
drobiopterin and 3-(2-thienyl)-l-alanine, and its implications for the mechanism
of catalysis and substrate activation,” Journal of Molecular Biology, vol. 320,
no. 5, pp. 1095–1108, 2002.
[94]
O. A. Andersen, A. J. Stokka, T. Flatmark, and E. Hough, “2.0 Å resolution
crystal structures of the ternary complexes of human phenylalanine hydroxy-
lase catalytic domain with tetrahydrobiopterin and 3-(2-thienyl)-L-alanine or
L-norleucine: Substrate specificity and molecular motions related to substrate
binding,” Journal of Molecular Biology, vol. 333, no. 4, pp. 747–757, 2003.
[95]
H. Erlandsen, A. L. Pey, A. Gámez, B. Pérez, L. R. Desviat, C. Aguado,
R. Koch, S. Surendran, S. Tyring, R. Matalon, C. R. Scriver, M. Ugarte,
A. Martínez, and R. C. Stevens, “Correction of kinetic and stability defects
by tetrahydrobiopterin in phenylketonuria patients with certain phenylalanine
hydroxylase mutations.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America,
vol. 101,
no. 48,
pp. 16 903–16 908,
2004. [Online]. Available:
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.
fcgi?artid=534739&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract
[96]
R. Torreblanca, E. Lira-Navarrete, J. Sancho, and R. Hurtado-Guerrero, “Struc-
tural and Mechanistic Basis of the Interaction between a Pharmacological Chap-
erone and Human Phenylalanine Hydroxylase,” ChemBioChem, vol. 13, no. 9,
pp. 1266–1269, 2012.
[97]
K. Goodwill, C. Sabatier, C. Marks, R. Raag, P. Fitzpatrick, and R. Stevens,
“Crystal structure of tyrosine hydroxylase at 2.3 A and its implications for
inherited neurodegenerative diseases.” Nat.Struct.Mol.Biol., vol. 4, pp. 578–585,
1997. [Online]. Available: https://www.rcsb.org/structure/1toh
[98]
K. Goodwill, C. Sabatier, and R. Stevens, “Crystal structure of tyrosine
hydroxylase with bound cofactor analogue and iron at 2.3 A resolution:
self-hydroxylation of Phe300 and the pterin-binding site.” Biochemistry, vol. 37,
pp. 13 437–13 445, 1998. [Online]. Available: https://www.rcsb.org/structure/
2TOH
==PAGE:130==
116
Bibliography
[99]
J. Muniz, C. Cooper, W. Yue, E. Krysztofinska, F. von Delft, S. Knapp,
O.
Gileadi,
C.
Arrowsmith,
A.
Edwards,
J.
Weigelt,
C.
Bountra,
K. Kavanagh, and U. Oppermann, “Crystal Structure of Human Tyrosine
Hydroxylase Catalytic Domain,” TO BE PUBLISHED. [Online]. Available:
https://www.rcsb.org/structure/2XSN
[100] A. Skjevik, M. Mileni, A. Baumann, O. Halskau, K. Teigen, R. Stevens,
and
A.
Martinez,
“The
N-terminal
sequence
of
tyrosine
hydroxylase
is
a
conformationally
versatile
motif
that
binds
14-3-3
proteins
and
membranes.” J.Mol.Biol., vol. 426, pp. 150–168, 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://www.rcsb.org/structure/4J6S
