==PAGE:1==
Properties of Float Glass at High
Strain Rates
– Experimental and Numerical Investigation of Strength
and Stiffness
Master’s Thesis, July 2017
Casper Kirkeberg Tchu Bønding, s123260
Martin Jensen Meyland, s123090
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Properties of Float Glass at High Strain Rates
– Experimental and Numerical Investigation of Strength and Stiffness
This report was prepared by:
Casper Kirkeberg Tchu Bønding, s123260
Martin Jensen Meyland, s123090
Advisors:
Jens Henrik Nielsen, Associate Professor, DTU Civil Engineering
Henrik Stang, Professor, DTU Civil Engineering
Rasmus Normann Wilken Eriksen, Postdoc, DTU Mechanical Engineering
DTU Civil Engineering
Structural Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
January 2017 – July 2017
ECTS:
2×32.5
Education:
MSc
Field:
Structural Engineering
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁlment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for the degree of Master
of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The project was
devised from 23/1-2017 to 8/7-2017 and is credited to 2×32.5 ECTS points.
Several persons have contributed in the making of this project, both academically and
practically. We would therefore like to thank our supervisors Jens Henrik Nielsen, Hen-
rik Stang and Ramsus Normann Wilken Eriksen for their valuable input throughout the
project. Also, thanks to Jens Schneider’s research team from the Institute of Structural
Mechanics and Design at Technische Universität Darmstadt, who have prepared some of
our test specimens. In addition, special thanks go to the employees from the structural lab
at DTU Civil Engineering for technical assistance and setting-up test equipment.
Kongens Lyngby
8 July 2017
Casper Kirkeberg Tchu Bønding, s123260
Martin Jensen Meyland, s123090
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
This study has evaluated the stress rate dependency of the ﬂexural strength and stiffness
of soda lime silica glass (ﬂoat glass) at stress rates from 2 MPa/s to 5.8·106 MPa/s.
An experimental setup was developed, supported by FEM models and considerations
regarding the brittle nature of glass. The setup consisted of a high-speed hydraulic test
machine in combination with a small double-ring test, where circular glass specimens
were tested. In addition, high-speed recordings and fractography were utilised to validate
that the test specimens failed due to biaxial bending.
Results showed a clear stress rate dependency of the ﬂexural strength, where an in-
crease of 87 % was observed at the highest tested rate, compared to the static strength.
The maximum failure stress was found to 510 MPa. However, very large scattering was
obtained since the tensile strength of glass is highly dependent on mechanical surface
defects.
To circumvent the large scattering, a series of intentionally scratched glass specimens
were tested. These tests showed remarkable lower scattering compared to test specimens
without any surface treatment. It was found that the ﬂexural strength increased up to
60 % at one of the highest tested rates. In general, the behaviour of the ﬂexural strength
increased as function of stress rate, but some inconsistencies were observed.
A stiffness investigation at varying stress rates indicated an increase of the E-modulus.
However, tolerances were present during the tests. This have led to a description of how
the tests could have been conducted in a more accurate manner.
Keywords
ﬂoat glass · soda lime silica glass · high strain rates · experiments · double-
ring test · modelling
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Sammenfatning
I dette projekt er indﬂydelsen af spændingshastigheden på bøjningsstyrken og stivhe-
den af soda-kalk-silikatglas (ﬂoatglas) blevet undersøgt ved spændingshastigheder fra
2 MPa/s til 5.8·106 MPa/s.
En eksperimentel forsøgsopstilling er blevet udviklet på baggrund af FEM-modeller
samt overvejelser vedrørende glassets sprødhed. Opstillingen bestod af en højhastigheds-
trykprøvemaskine i kombination med en lille dobbelt-ring test, hvor cirkulære glasprøver
er blevet testet. Herudover er højhastighedsoptagelser og analyser af brudmønstrer blevet
anvendt til at validere, at testprøverne gik i brud under de rigtige spændingsforhold.
Resultaterne viste at spændingshastigheden havde stor indﬂydelse på bøjningsstyrken,
da denne sammenlignet med den statiske styrke steg med 87 % ved den højeste spænd-
ingshastighed. Den maksimale bøjningsstyrke blev fundet til 510 MPa. Dog var forsø-
gene forbundet med meget stor spredning, da trækstyrken af glas er stærkt afhængig af
mekaniske overﬂadefejl.
For at minimere den relative store spredning blev en serie af ridsede glasprøver testet.
Disse forsøg viste sig at have en betydelig lavere spredning sammenlignet med testprøver
uden overﬂadebehandling. Det kunne konkluderes, at bøjningsstyrken steg med op til
60 % ved nogle af de højest testede spændingshastigheder. Generelt var tendensen, at
bøjningsstyrken steg som funktion af spændingshastigheden, men der kunne dog ob-
serveres visse undtagelser.
En stivhedsundersøgelse ved varierende spændingshastigheder er ligeledes blevet ud-
ført. Denne undersøgelse indikerede at stivheden steg ved at øge spændingshastigheden.
Store tolerancer var dog tilstede under disse forsøg. Et andet forslag til hvordan forsøgene
kunne have blevet udført mere præcist er derfor blevet præsenteret.
Nøgleord
ﬂoatglas · soda-kalk-silikatglas · høje tøjningshastigheder · eksperimenter ·
dobbelt-ring test · modellering
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
State of the Art
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Aim of Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theoretical Framework
5
2.1
Glass in General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Material Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Chemical Composition and Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Physical Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Production of Float Glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Glass Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.1
Tempered Glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.2
Laminated Glass
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Blast Waves on Glass Structures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Fracture Strength of Glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6.1
Short-Term Strength of Glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.7
Dynamic Testing of Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Experimental Setup and Test Procedures
23
3.1
High-speed Hydraulic Test Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Double-Ring Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Test Specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.1
Scratching of Test Specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.2
Chemical Elemental Composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Static Testing Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Quasi-static and Dynamic Testing Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5.1
High-speed Data-acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.5.2
Loading Histories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Numerical Investigation of Test Setup
39
==PAGE:12==
viii
Contents
4.1
Stresses in Circular Test Specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
FEM-Model of Double-Ring Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Analysis of Alignment Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Test Results and Discussion
49
5.1
Flexural Strength at Varying Stress Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.1.1
Static Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.1.2
Quasi-static and Dynamic Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Thickness Variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3
Scratched Specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.4
Stress Rate Dependency of Stiffness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.5
Comparison with Existing Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6
Conclusion
61
6.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
Bibliography
65
Appendices
69
A Applied FEM-Models
73
B
Calibration of Measuring Equipment
101
C Scratched Test Specimens
115
D Individual Test Results
119
E
Annex – USB Stick
127
Nomenclature
129
==PAGE:13==
C H A P T E R
1
Introduction
Glass has been known to mankind for thousands of years. The ﬁrst man-made glass
objects can be traced back to 2500 BCE in Syria (Rasmussen, 2012). In ancient times,
glass bowls, vases and bottles were very expensive due to the labour-intensive production
making it only available for the most wealthiest people. It was ﬁrst until the discovery of
the glassblowing technique that it became available to the public. The Romans were the
ﬁrst to produce windows of glass which have been used excessively ever since (CMOG,
2017).
In recent years, the use of glass in construction has increased signiﬁcantly. Especially
in modern corporate buildings, the use of façade glazing has been a design feature for
years. The demand for daylight and transparency to the surroundings have constantly
pushed the boundaries making it possible to incorporate glass in the structural parts of the
buildings, e.g. ﬂoors, ﬁns, beams and columns. However, the large amount of glass in
modern buildings give rise to safety issues regarding bombings due to the current level of
terror attacks which have increased in recent years (see Fig. 1.1(a)).
Bombings have been a tactic for terrorists for many years and it is by far the most used.
The latest annual report on terrorism ’Country Reports on Terrorism 2015’ by Bureau of
Counterterrorism and Countering Violent Extremism (2016), shows that 52 % of all terror
attacks in 2015 were carried out as bombings/explosions. Fig. 1.1(b) shows the distribu-
tion of the different types of attacks used by terrorists. Countries like Iraq, Afghanistan,
Nigeria, Syria, and Pakistan are the most exposed countries to terror attacks. However,
numerous of bombings have been targeted against the western part of the world during
recent years, for instance Madrid train bombings (11th March 2004), London bombings
(7th July 2005) and Brussels Airport bombings (22th March 2016), killing hundreds of
==PAGE:14==
2
Chapter 1. Introduction
people.
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Year
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Number of bombings
(a)
Bombing/
Explosion
52%
Armed Assault
23%
Hostage Taking
9%
Facility/
Infrastructure Attack
8%
Assassination
8%
(b)
Fig. 1.1: Terror attacks worldwide: (a) Number of bombings over the years (GTD, 2017); (b)
tactics used in terrorist attacks in 2015 (Bureau of Counterterrorism and Countering Violent Ex-
tremism, 2016).
In 1995 a truck containing a large amount of ammonium nitrate/fuel oil (ANFO) det-
onated outside the Alfred P. Murrah Building in Oklahoma. The bomb killed 167 and
injured 673 people. 88 % of all people inside the building were either killed or injured dur-
ing the attack and many were injured in more distant buildings (OCNM, 2017; Norville
et al., 1999).
Fig. 1.2: Alfred P. Murrah Building in Oklahoma after the bombing in 1995. (Photo credits: AP)
Extensive data was collected after the bombing by Oklahoma State Department of
Health through hospital medical reports, physician reports, interviews etc. This data was
used by Norville et al. (1999) to estimate how many glass-related injuries the bombing
==PAGE:15==
1.1. State of the Art
3
had caused. Victims in Alfred P. Murrah Building were excluded from the study since
ﬂying glass shards only constituted a minor portion to the overall hazard level, due to
the size and the closeness of the bomb. Moreover, it should not be expected that façade
glazing should be able to withstand such a violent bomb so close to ground zero. The
study showed that 39 % (200/508) of the remaining victims had stated in their follow-up
interview that glass contributed or directly caused their injuries. Smith (2001) even states
that some historic bombings have shown that up to 80 % of the injuries have been caused
by glass fragments.
This justiﬁes the need for proper blast resistant glazing. To this day, no calcula-
tion tools are available for architects and engineers to ensure sufﬁcient capacity of glass
façades and windows under blast loads. Often costly full-scale testing is required to pro-
vide the documentation to ensure the glazing provides adequate safety to occupants under
an explosion. Two standards are used to classify the blast resistance of windows and glaz-
ing, EN 13123-1 (2001) and EN 13123-2 (2004). The tested elements are classiﬁed in 4-5
different categories depending on the type of test. The ﬁrst standard considers shock-tube
testing, but restrictions regarding the dimensions of the tested elements exist due to the
size of the shock-tubes. The second standard uses real life ﬁeld explosions to classify the
elements. Nonetheless, both testing methods rely purely on empiric data and are costly in
practice.
Attempts to develop calculation tools have been made by Norville and Conrath (2001)
and Smith (2001) based on empirical data. Both methods have very restricted application
and uses the static strength of glass to calculate the capacity. However, it is commonly
known that the strength of rock, steel and concrete (Frew et al., 2001; Lambert and Ross,
2000; Boyce and Dilmore, 2009), increases signiﬁcantly when exposed to high strain
rates, but the dynamic strength of soda lime silica glass (normally used in construction)
is nowhere to be found in the literature.
1.1
State of the Art
Until today only a limited amount of experimental work has been made to quantify the
quasi static and dynamic ﬂexural strength of ﬂoat glass. Nie et al. (2010) have made some
investigations on borosilicate glass but conventional soda lime silica glass has not been
tested yet. They conducted their tests using a small double-ring test, which subjected
circular glass specimens to biaxial bending until failure. The glass specimens were tested
at four different loading rates where the ﬁrst three were tested in a conventional hydraulic
test machine and the last in a Split-Hopkinson pressure bar test. In the experiments the
following three different surface conditions were tested: HF etched, as-polished and sand-
==PAGE:16==
4
Chapter 1. Introduction
paper ground. The results were based on 10 valid tests for each stress rate and surface
condition. All three surface conditions turned out to have remarkable higher ﬂexural
strength at high stress rates.
In addition, Peroni et al. (2011) tested the compression and tensile strength of soda
lime silica glass subjected to high strain rates in a Split-Hopkinson pressure bar test. Only
the tensile behaviour showed appreciable sensitivity to strain rates. The compression tests
were carried out by subjecting the specimens to pure compression, whereas tensile tests
were conducted as a splitting tensile test (Brazilian test), as commonly used for cylindrical
concrete specimens.
Schneider (2001) have moreover conducted some pendulum tests of completely new
soda lime silica glass panes and concluded that the strength had increased compared to
the static strength. However, a complete investigation of how glass behaves at varying
stress rates has not been made.
1.2
Aim of Study
The lack of research on the dynamic ﬂexural strength of soda lime silica glass has been a
motivation for this study. It is an important part in understanding the dynamic behaviour
of glass and in designing blast resistant glazing without the costly full-scale tests used
today. This study aims to experimentally test and document the ﬂexural strength and
stiffness of soda lime silica glass subjected to high strain rates, and to investigate whether
the hypothesis of the ﬂexural strength increases at high strain rates can be accepted.
==PAGE:17==
C H A P T E R
2
Theoretical Framework
Glass is a challenging material due to its brittleness. Using glass for structural applica-
tions requires an in-depth understanding of its behaviour and properties. This chapter will
explain the most important aspects within the structural use of glass. Besides the general
understanding of the material, a theoretical approach is given to describe the fracture
strength. In addition, an explanation of already conducted investigations on the dynamic
strength is given as well as several testing methods for dynamic testing of materials.
2.1
Glass in General
In the last decades, glass has become popular among architects. It is no longer possible to
imagine modern architecture without the use of glazing covering a building. Not only the
amount of glazing used in façades has increased, but also the shapes, sizes, connection
types and application areas are in steady development. The current trend is going to
larger glass panes. Formerly, its function as a transparent window element was sufﬁcient.
Nowadays, glass is also used in the building sector as a structural material for primary and
secondary bearing structures replacing some of the well-known materials steel, concrete
and wood. By way of example, glass can be used as a load-bearing element in the form
of beams and ﬁns, but also in the form of columns and rooﬁng.
Typical glass products used for structural purposes in civil engineering are ﬂoat glass
(FG), heat strengthened glass (HSG) and fully tempered glass (FTG). Especially the re-
ﬁnement of glass elements has made it possible to be able to design structures applying
only glass. In general, it is important for all structures made of glass that requirements
regarding the serviceability are met together with principal safety requirements by con-
==PAGE:18==
6
Chapter 2. Theoretical Framework
sidering the characteristics of the brittle material, the type of impact and the resulting
loading.
In recent years, a number of exciting buildings have been built using glass as a con-
struction material. One of the most known glass buildings is the cube entrance of the
Apple Store in Manhattan/New York at the Fifth Avenue, where the entire bearing struc-
ture is made of glass beams and ﬁns (Fig. 2.1(a)) covering an area of about 9.75×9.75m
(32 × 32 feet). In 2007, BMW’s new multi-use exhibition centre BMW Welt was built
in Munich (Fig. 2.1(b)). A total of 900 different glass elements were used for the double
cone unit alone, which consists of triangular ﬁelds with a side length of 5.5 m. The worlds
highest and longest glass-bottomed bridge in central China was completed in 2017 and
has a span of 430 m (Fig. 2.1(c)). It connects two mountain cliffs, also known as the
Avatar Mountains, in Zhangjiajie, Hunan province with 99 panes of three-layered trans-
parent glass. The curved geometry of an egg was used to design the National Grand
Theatre of China giving it the name The Giant Egg (Fig. 2.1(d)). The curved shell is
made of titanium and glass covering a total area of 149 500 m2. All these mentioned
buildings represents the wide range of the applicability of glass.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 2.1: Examples of structural use of glass: (a) Apple’s glass cube on Fifth Avenue in New
York/USA (2006); (b) BMW World in Munich/Germany (2007); (c) Zhangjiajie Grand Canyon
Glass Bridge in China (2017); (d) The National Grand Theatre The Giant Egg in Beijing/China
(2008). (Photo credits: (a) Mark Lennihan/Associated Press; (b) Schott AG, Mainz; (c) Haim
Dotan Architects, Tel-Aviv; (d) Paul Andreu with ADPi and BIAD, Paris)
==PAGE:19==
2.2. Material Properties
7
2.2
Material Properties
2.2.1
Chemical Composition and Properties
Glass is an inorganic and amorphous material, which has been cooled from a liquid to
a non-crystalline solid. The most common types of ﬂoat glass used in the industry are
borosilicate glass (BSG) and soda lime silica glass (SLSG).
BSG has a very low thermal expansion coefﬁcient making it capable of resisting large
temperature differences without shattering. This glass type also demonstrates good hy-
drolytic and acid resistance and is therefore often used for laboratory equipment and heat
resistant glazing. SLSG is the most widely used type of glass in construction. Glass
Façades, glazing and windowpanes are typically made of SLSG due to its relative low
cost and good transparency. The chemical compositions of the two glass types according
to the European standards are given in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Chemical composition in mass-% of SLSG and BSG according to DS/EN 572-1 (2012)
and DS/EN 1748-1-1 (2004).
Soda lime
silica glass
Borosilicate
glass
Silica sand
SiO2
69−74%
70−87%
Lime (calcium oxide)
CaO
5−14%
-
Soda
Na2O
10−16%
0−8%
Boron-oxide
B2O3
-
7−15%
Potassium oxide
K2O
-
0−8%
Magnesia
MgO
0−6%
-
Alumina
Al2O3
0−3%
0−8%
Others
0−5%
0−8%
As shown in Fig. 2.2, the crystals in glass consist of an irregular network of silicon
and oxygen atoms with alkaline parts in between, which have an important inﬂuence
on the viscosity, the melting temperature Tm and the thermal expansion coefﬁcient αT.
Normally, the melting temperature is about 1710◦C for pure silica oxide, but it drops to
1300 −1600◦C when adding alkali to the composition. It also has an inﬂuence on the
thermal expansion coefﬁcient, where the value is about 0.5·10−6 K−1 for pure silica glass
and 9·10−6 K−1 for SLSG (Haldimann et al., 2008).
As a solid, glass can be considered as a linear elastic material even for temperatures
above 100 ◦C, where the correlation between the strain ε and the stress σ can be described
by Hooke’s Law
σ = ε ·E ,
(2.1)
==PAGE:20==
8
Chapter 2. Theoretical Framework
Oxygen (O)
Silicone (Si)
Sodium (Na)
Calcium (Ca)
Na
Ca
Ca
Na
Ca
Fig. 2.2: Sketch of the atomic irregular network of soda lime silica glass.
by means of the stiffness of glass, E, also known as the modulus of elasticity. However,
glass also passes temperatures way above 500 ◦C during the production and tempering
process. At this point glass can no longer be considered as an elastic solid, but more
like a viscous liquid. Decreasing the temperature results in increasing viscosity. But at a
certain point the viscosity becomes so high that glass can be considered as a linear elastic
solid again. The melt undergoes different temperature stages during the cooling which
can be deﬁned by the viscosity of the material. A plot of the (log10) viscosity as function
of temperature is given in Fig. 2.3.
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Temperature [°C]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Log10 Viscosity [Pa s]
Tm - Melting point
Tw - Working point
Tsoft - Softening point
Tg - Glass Transition
Ta - Annealing point
T  - Strain point
Fig. 2.3: Viscosity of soda lime silica glass as function of temperature according to Shelby (2005).
The term practical melting point (Tm) is used to distinguish between the melting point
of crystals and the temperature of glass deﬁned for a certain viscosity. At the working
point (Tw), the glass has reached a viscosity at which it can be deformed without intro-
ducing large stresses. As soon as the glass can carry its own weight, it has reached the
==PAGE:21==
2.2. Material Properties
9
softening point (Tsoft). The range between the working and softening point is also referred
to as the working range. The temperature at which the glass solidiﬁes is called the glass
transition temperature (Tg). Since this temperature depends on several conditions, such
as the cooling rate and the sample size, it is more common to deﬁne it within a range in-
stead of using one precise temperature. The annealing point (Ta) deﬁnes the temperature
at which residual stresses due to the cooling process are relieved within a few minutes
and the strain point (Tε) is deﬁned as the point where these stresses are relieved within
several hours.
The most important property of glass is its great ability to withstand many aggressive
substances, which is the reason why it is a popular material in the chemical industry and
makes it one of the most durable materials in construction.
2.2.2
Physical Properties
The properties of glass are characterised through a high compression strength and a low
tensile strength, which is very sensitive to surface ﬂaws. Hence, the strength of glass
is governed by its brittleness. The fracture of an overloaded glass element occur in the
elastic deformation range of the material. Therefore, it is not possible to achieve plastic
yielding due to a mechanical overloading, as it is for steel, which is why glass also is
classiﬁed as an ideal-elastic material. Due to the brittleness and the resulting low tensile
strength, glass was not used for anything other than window glazing up to the 1990’s.
Intensive research work has so far made it realisable to use glass in a structural perspective
as well. The most important physical properties of SLSG and BSG are given in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Physical properties of SLSG and BSG according to DS/EN 572-1 (2012) and DS/EN
1748-1-1 (2004).
Soda lime
silica glass
Borosilicate
glass
Density
ρ
kg/m3
2500
2200-2500
Knoop hardness
HK0,1/20
GPa
6
4.5-6
Young’s modulus
E
MPa
70000
60000-70000
Poisson’s ratio
ν
-
0.23
0.2
Coefﬁcient of thermal
expansion
αT
10−6K−1
9
Class 1: 3.1-4.0
Class 2: 4.1-5.0
Class 3: 5.1-6.0
Speciﬁc thermal capacity
cp
J kg−1 K−1
720
800
thermal conductivity
λ
W m−1 K−1
1
1
Average refractive index
(visible spectrum)
n
-
1.52
1.5
Emissivity
ε
-
0.837
0.837
Glass has a theoretical tensile strength of 32 GPa, which is based on molecular forces
==PAGE:22==
10
Chapter 2. Theoretical Framework
(Haldimann et al., 2008). However, this value is not valid for structural applications since
it is much lower in reality. The reason is that the tensile strength of glass (and other brittle
materials) depends on mechanical ﬂaws on the surface, which may not be visible to the
naked eye. A glass element will fail as soon as the stress intensity at the tip of one ﬂaw
reaches a critical value due to tensile stresses. However, the tensile strength of glass can
not be deﬁned as one speciﬁc material constant, since it depends on several aspects, such
as the condition of the surface, the size of the glass element, the load history, the residual
stresses and the environmental conditions. The larger the glass element is, the higher is
the likelihood of more ﬂaws on the surface. That, combined with high loads and long
load durations, will reduce the tensile strength of glass signiﬁcantly. The actual short-
term strength of ﬂoat glass with an unprotected surface condition is found in the range of
30 MPa to 100 MPa at normal ambient conditions, which is about 400 times smaller than
the theoretical strength. Typical short-term strengths as function of ﬂaw depth are given
in Fig. 2.4. In addition to possible errors in the material structure, the glass surface is also
damaged during production and handling. A more detailed discussion about the inﬂuence
of surface ﬂaws on the strength is given in section 2.6.
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
Effective flaw depth [ m]
101
102
103
104
Tensile strength [MPa]
sub-micro-cracks
in the material structure
micro-cracks
from
processing
micro-cracks
visual flaws
flat glass after production
flat glass after thermal tempering
glass fibres
molecular strength
3
104
104
5
103
103
250
120100
50
Fig. 2.4: Short-term strength of glass as function of ﬂaw depth after Petzold et al. (1990).
The compression strength of glass is much larger than the tensile strength, as surface
ﬂaws will not grow or fail in compression. It is, however, not an applicable strength for
structural applications. Structural elements loaded in compression will always develop
tensile stresses due to buckling in case of instability, which are reached way before the
compression strength is met.
==PAGE:23==
2.3. Production of Float Glass
11
2.3
Production of Float Glass
The term ﬂoat glass is derived from the manufacturing process of the same name. Ac-
cording to DS/EN 572-1 (2012) ﬂoat glass (FG) is deﬁned as »ﬂat, transparent, clear or
tinted soda-lime silicate glass having parallel and polished faces obtained by continuous
casting and ﬂoatation on a metal bath«. Nearly every ﬂat glass products used in the build-
ing sector are ﬂoat glass. The ﬂoat process is the most popular manufacturing process
and accounts for about 90 % of today’s ﬂat glass production worldwide. This is caused
by its low cost, wide availability, the superior optical quality and the large size of panes
that can be reliably produced.
Float glass is produced in large manufacturing plants that operate continuously. A
schematic drawing of the production process is given in Fig. 2.5. The raw materials are
heated and melted at temperatures up to 1550 ◦C. The molten glass is then poured onto
a bath of molten tin which cools the melt down to approximately 1000 ◦C. Tin is used
because of its large temperature range in the liquid phase (232 −2270◦C) and its high
density secures that the molten glass ﬂoats on the top, resulting in a smooth surface with
a constant thickness of 6 −7mm. Oxidation of the tin is prevented by the presence of
an inert atmosphere consisting of hydrogen and nitrogen. The temperature of the glass is
then further lowered to 600 ◦C. Finally, the glass is drawn onto rollers placed in a long
oven, called a lehr, which slowly cools it to around 100 ◦C to prevent residual stresses.
1550◦C
1000◦C
600◦C
500◦C
100◦C
raw materials
melting furnace
tin bath
annealing lehr
Fig. 2.5: Production process of ﬂoat glass.
Depending on the speed of the rollers, the glass thickness can be controlled in the
range of 2 −25mm by increasing or decreasing the speed of the rollers. Normally the
glass is then cut into pieces of 3.21m×6.00m before being stored. The available nominal
thicknesses are presented in Table 2.3 together with permitted tolerances according to
DS/EN 572-2 (2012).
Due to the production process, the two faces of the produced glass sheets are not
completely identical. The surface structure on the tin side has changed after having been
in contact with the tin bath for several minutes, which may have an inﬂuence on the
condition of the surface. Moreover, the mechanical strength of the tin side has been
==PAGE:24==
12
Chapter 2. Theoretical Framework
Table 2.3: Nominal thicknesses and permitted tolerances for SLSG according to DS/EN 572-2
(2012).
Nominal thickness
Tolerances
[mm]
[mm]
2, 3, 4, 5 and 6
±0.2
8, 10 and 12
±0.3
15
±0.5
19 and 25
±1.0
found to be marginally lower than that of the air side. However, this is not caused by the
contact with the tin bath, but by the contact with the transport rollers in the cooling area.
These rollers damage the surface reducing the strength of the tin side (Haldimann et al.,
2008).
2.4
Glass Products
Most often, the manufactured ﬂoat glass is processed further to produce glass products
with different properties that meet particular needs, like for instances the shape, the per-
formance or the appearance. Some of the processing types includes the assembling of
several glass panes. That is why one single glass pane also is referred to as monolithic
glass. The most common applied glass units are illustrated in Fig. 2.6.
monolithic
glass
insulating glass
unit
laminated
(safety) glass
ﬁre protection
glass
air or gas
PVB-foil
intumescent
interlayers
Fig. 2.6: Typically applied glass units.
A description of the most important glass products and processing methods used for
structural applications is given in the following sections.
2.4.1
Tempered Glass
Tempered glass is one of the most applied glass units within the structural use of glass
due to its high strength. The idea of the tempering process is to create a favourable
residual stress ﬁeld with compression stresses in the area around the surfaces and tensile
stresses in the core of the glass pane. The stress ﬁeld can be approached by a second-
order parabola, where the height of the compression zone corresponds to approximately
==PAGE:25==
2.4. Glass Products
13
20 % of the glass thickness (Nielsen, 2009). Compression stresses at the surfaces are
favourable because they will close unavoidable ﬂaws. They can only grow if a surface is
exposed to an effective tensile stress. However, the opening of cracks will not happen as
long as the tensile surface stress due to a loading is smaller than the residual compressive
stress. Typical residual compressive surface stresses varies between 80 MPa and 170 MPa
for fully tempered SLSG and between 40 MPa and 80 MPa for heat strengthened glass of
the same type.
The fracture pattern depends on the elastic energy stored in the glass caused by resid-
ual stresses and stresses from loads. The higher the stored energy is, the smaller the glass
fragments become when failure occurs. Fully tempered glass has the highest residual
stress level resulting in the smallest glass fragments. This is also why fully tempered
glass is referred to as safety glass. However, the tiny glass pieces can still be very harm-
ful when falling down from heights of several meters or ﬂying due to an explosion. Fully
tempered glass has the highest structural capacity off all glass types, but the post-failure
performance is very bad because of the tiny glass fragments. A better post-failure perfor-
mance is provided by heat strengthened glass due to a sufﬁciently larger fragmentation
pattern. The largest fragmentation pattern is seen for annealed glass, which is standard
ﬂoat glass without any tempering.
2.4.2
Laminated Glass
Once ﬂoat glass is manufactured and further heat-treated, laminated glass can be produced
by combining two or more panes with an interlayer, typically of polyvinyl butyral (PVB)
or ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA). The different glass panes do not necessarily have to be
of equal thickness or may have the same heat treatment. The most common lamination
process is autoclaving with temperatures at approximately 140 ◦C and a pressure up to
14 bar, which ensures no air inclusions between the glass and the interlayer.
Laminated glass is of major interest in structural applications, such as beams and ﬁns
or large glass panes used for façades, as its post-breakage behaviour has been improved
signiﬁcant due to the lamination process. After a breakage, the glass fragments adhere to
the interlayer which prevents them from falling down. This is also why laminated glass is
referred to as safety glass. Moreover, laminated glass may still have a structural capacity
after the breakage due to ’arched’ or locked glass fragments. This remaining capacity is
controlled by the size of the glass fragments, as it will increase when increasing the frag-
ment size. Thus, the highest capacities can be obtained for laminated glass produced with
annealed or heat strengthened glass. However, the post-failure behaviour also depends on
the applied interlayer material.
Other types of laminated glass are ﬁre protection glass and bullet-resistant and blast-
==PAGE:26==
14
Chapter 2. Theoretical Framework
resistant glasses. The ﬁre protection glass uses a transparent intumescent interlayer, which
foams up when exposed to ﬁre and thereby forms an insulating shield blocking the heat of
the blaze. The bullet-resistant and blast-resistant glasses are using various impact energy
absorbing interlayers. Sometimes it is required to replace some of the intermediate glass
panes by polycarbonate panes.
2.5
Blast Waves on Glass Structures
When a bomb detonates, a large amount of energy is released at a rapid pace. The ex-
panding gases from the explosion pushes the atmosphere back, forming a blast wave of
compressed air which propagates spherically in space as illustrated in Fig. 2.7.
Fig. 2.7: Formation of blast wave after explosion. (Photo credit: BBC)
Blast waves can be very devastating, and is one of the most important aspects of an
explosion. When a blast wave is formed, a sudden overpressure, p0, is experienced when
the wave front hits a ﬁxed point in space. Immediately afterwards, the overpressure starts
decaying until it reaches a level below the atmospheric pressure. This negative phase
has a lower amplitude but is longer than the positive phase. The pressure over time of a
generalised blast wave at a ﬁxed point in space is illustrated in Fig. 2.8.
From the arrival time, ta, to the blast wave has passed, only takes a fraction of a sec-
ond. This leaves persons inside nearby buildings no time to react, and changes normality
to disaster almost instantaneously. As the blast wave travels away from the source the
overpressure gradually decreases and the duration of the wave increases until it behaves
like a sound wave.
Three characteristic parameters are needed to fully deﬁne an explosion. One is the
initial shock intensity speciﬁed by e.g. the peak overpressure, the Mach number or the
particle velocity. The two others are the wave duration and the impulse per unit area. An
analytical approach to estimate the mentioned characteristic parameters can be found in
==PAGE:27==
2.6. Fracture Strength of Glass
15
Time
Pressure
Atmospheric pressure
Positive phase
Negative phase
Pa
Py
p0
ta
+
−
Fig. 2.8: Pressure as function of time of a generalised blast wave at a ﬁxed point in space.
Kinney and Graham (1985) based on the distance, the equivalent amount of TNT and the
density of the atmosphere through which the blast wave travels.
The positive phase is normally the most devastating part of the blast wave due to the
sudden rise in pressure, resulting in shattered windows and possible building collapses.
However, some damage can be observed from the negative phase. If a glass panel is not
shattered by the positive phase the elastic rebound may be enhanced by the following
negative phase causing the glass to have a dominating outward response. This could
potentially make the glass panel fail, ripping the glass out of its frame in the direction
opposite to the incoming blast wave. This phenomenon has been widely observed and
numerically analysed by Krauthammer and Altenberg (2000). Moreover, blast waves are
reﬂected from obstacles. This means that if an explosion takes place in an urban area,
the reﬂected pressure from nearby buildings can increase the amplitude of the blast wave
making the impact on buildings even more severe. When a shock front from an explosion
hits a window pane, the glass itself is subjected to a very high strain rate. Not much
research have been made on the strength and stiffness parameters when glass is subjected
to these highly dynamic impact loads.
2.6
Fracture Strength of Glass
Like other brittle materials, glass will suddenly fail without noticeable warnings as stress
concentrations in surface ﬂaws have reached a critical value. The strength of glass can not
be deﬁned as an absolute material parameter since it is affected by sub-micro-cracks and
micro-cracks on the surface (Fig. 2.4). The linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM) is
a widely used model describing the local condition in the area of a crack tip. The fracture
mechanics distinguish in principal between three different types of crack openings also
==PAGE:28==
16
Chapter 2. Theoretical Framework
referred to as opening modes which are illustrated in Fig. 2.9. Mode I is an opening mode
where the tensile stress is normal to the crack face. As soon as a shear stress is acting
parallel to the crack face and perpendicular to the crack front the opening mode is called
mode II. The last opening mode, mode III, occurs when a shear stress acts parallel to the
crack face and to the crack front. Surface ﬂaws on glass used in construction and façades
as well as the glass applied in this thesis are primary exposed to normal stresses, which is
why mode I can be considered as the dominating opening mode and mode II and III can
be neglected.
Mode I
Mode II
Mode III
Fig. 2.9: Illustration of fracture opening modes: Mode I tensile stress normal to the crack face;
Mode II shear stress parallel to the crack face and normal to the crack front; Mode III shear stress
parallel to the crack face and parallel to the crack front.
Irwin (1957) provided a concept that characterised a material in terms of its brittleness
or fracture toughness. The concept deﬁnes a stress intensity factor K, representing the
elastic stress intensity near a crack tip. For a mode I loading the stress intensity factor,
KI, is given by
KI = Y ·σn ·√πa ,
(2.2)
which deﬁnes the stress intensity at a crack tip in the depth of a by means of a nomi-
nal tensile stress, σn, normal to the crack face. The correction factor, Y, describes the
geometry of the surface ﬂaw and is therefore also called the geometry factor. A long,
straight-fronted plane edge crack in a semi-inﬁnite specimen will have a geometry factor
Y = 1.12, whereas a half-penny shaped crack will have a geometry factor in the range of
0.637 and 0.713 (Haldimann, 2006).
A glass element will fail as the stress intensity factor reaches or exceeds a critical
value, which is a material constant known as the fracture toughness KIc. The failure
criterion, also called Irwin’s fracture criterion, can be expressed as
KI ≥KIc .
(2.3)
==PAGE:29==
2.6. Fracture Strength of Glass
17
The material speciﬁc parameter KIc can be found through experimental investigations
using special specimens where the crack length and the crack geometry is known. The
values of the fracture toughness of SLSG given in the literature varies due to the applied
investigation methods. However, a value of KIc = 0.75MPam1/2 is commonly used for
practical purposes when considering static loads (Haldimann et al., 2008).
Irwin’s fracture criterion states that stress intensities above the fracture toughness will
result in an unstable crack growth and lead to failure. But it is also possible that a stable
crack growth occurs in glass below this limit. This phenomenon is called sub-critical
crack growth, slow crack growth (SCG) or stress corrosion cracking (SCC). In this thesis
the phenomenon will be referred to as sub-critical crack growth. Due to the presence of
humidity, stress corrosion cracking causes ﬂaws to grow slowly when they are exposed
to a positive crack opening stress. A simpliﬁed, schematic relationship between crack
velocity v and stress intensity factor KI is given in Fig. 2.10. The different indicated zones
on the graph can be described by empirical derived equations, which are commonly used
for the glass lifetime prediction where the time dependent crack growth can be calculated
by means of the stress intensity and the initial crack depth.
logv
logKI
threshold
Kth
KIB
KIc
I
II
III
vacuum
environment
Stress intensity factor, KI
Crack velocity, v
0
Fig. 2.10: Idealised relationship between crack velocity and stress intensity factor.
Zone 0
Below a certain threshold stress intensity Kth, no measurable crack growth will
occur.
Zone I
This zone is actually referred as the sub-critical crack growth. The dependency
v(K) can be described via an empirical relationship provided by Evans and Wiederhorn
==PAGE:30==
18
Chapter 2. Theoretical Framework
(1974). As the value range of K is very small, the following equivalent formulation is
applicable (Haldimann et al., 2008)
v = da
dt = v0
 KI
KIc
n
,
(2.4)
where v0 is a factor describing the position of the v-KI-curve plotted on a logarithmic
scale and n is the appertaining slope (dimensionless).
The principles of the sub-critical crack growth on a molecular scale are illustrated
in Fig. 2.11. Water molecules from the air humidity are transported by diffusion to the
crack tip and starts a chemical reaction with the glass. During the reaction, the molecule
network of the glass will be split and thus initiate the crack growth. The amount of the
present air humidity have a great inﬂuence on this reaction (Wiederhorn, 1967). A high
relative humidity catalyses the process and vice versa.
Glass network:
O
Si
Humidity:
O
H
Crack face
Detail
O
Si
Si
H
O
H
Si
Si
O
H
O
H
Si
O
H
Si
O
H
1
2
3
Detail:
Fig. 2.11: Model used to describe the principles of sub-critical crack growth (after Michalske and
Freiman (1983)).
In addition to the humidity dependency, the sub-critical crack growth also depends on
the temperature, the pH-value, the chemical composition and the loading rate (Haldimann
et al., 2008). According to the investigations of Haldimann (2006), the v-KI-relationship
is highly load rate dependent as rapid loading shortens the water supply and thereby slows
down the corrosion process at the crack tip.
Zone II
The crack velocity will in this zone be governed by the supply rate of water
molecules as it takes time for them to reach the crack tip. This results in a plateau between
zone I and III.
Zone III
The crack velocity is faster than the corrosion process as it in this zone will
have a steep increase independent on the environmental conditions. The stress intensity
==PAGE:31==
2.6. Fracture Strength of Glass
19
factor KI will here be close to the fracture toughness KIc where the transition from a sta-
ble crack growth to a unstable will happen. The crack propagation speed spans between
10−3 m/s and 1 m/s. The maximum crack propagation speed for SLSG has been found to
v ≈1500m/s (Nielsen et al., 2009).
By means of the aforementioned linear elastic fracture mechanics, it is possible to
describe the crack growth dependent on the stress intensity factor, KI, at a crack tip. At
the time where the fracture toughness is reached, this model is not applicable any more
and a dynamic fracture mechanics is required to describe the glass fracture after the frac-
ture strength is exceeded. This, however, demands a complex theoretical understanding
which can be found in Freund (1990).
2.6.1
Short-Term Strength of Glass
In the case of constant loading, the lifetime of a single ﬂaw can be estimated by integrating
the ordinary differential equation of crack growth Eq. (2.4) in combination with Eq. (2.2).
Assuming that KI is valid over the full range, i.e. neglecting the crack growth threshold
and zone II and III, the time to failure tf for a constant load σ and an initial crack depth
ai can be found from
tf =
2KIcn
(n−2)v0 σn (Y√π)n a(n−2)/2
i
.
(2.5)
Likewise the resistance of a single ﬂaw σ f for a given loading time t and an initial
crack depth ai can be expressed as
σ f =
 
2KIcn
(n−2)v0t (Y√π)n a(n−2)/2
i
!1/n
.
(2.6)
However, the prediction of a single ﬂaws lifetime (Eq. (2.5)) and resistance (Eq. (2.6))
has only a limited applicability as a crack’s strength will converge on inﬁnity for very
short loading times and/or slow crack velocities.
A normative interpretation of the short-term strength of ﬂoat glass is provided by
prEN 13474-3 (2009), where the sub-critical crack growth is taken into account by means
of the load duration dependent reduction factor kmod. Hence, the allowable stress for ﬂoat
glass is expressed as
fg;d = kmod ksp fg;k
γM;A
,
(2.7)
==PAGE:32==
20
Chapter 2. Theoretical Framework
where fg;k is the characteristic value of the bending strength (fg;k = 45MPa), γM;A is the
material partial safety factor for ﬂoat glass, ksp is the factor for the glass surface proﬁle
and kmod is the factor for the load duration.
Schneider (2001) has investigated the strength of ﬂoat glass at soft impacts with load-
ing times between 40 ms and 100 ms considering a single impact from a pendulum test.
By means of the life time prediction based on Eq. (2.4) for zone I, a theoretical strength
increase was found between 30% and 50% for the characteristic strength (fk = 45MPa)
and between 40% and 60% for the mean value of completely new glasses (fm = 115MPa).
From Irwin’s fracture criterion (Eq. (2.3)) a strength increase of 56% was found for the
characteristic value and 97% for the mean value. Same tendency has been validated ex-
perimentally, though with a large scattering. The achieved results are incorporated in the
present German standard DIN 18008-4 (2013) for designing barrier glazing. The design
values are presented in Table 2.4 for the different glass types.
Table 2.4: Design guidelines for impact loaded glass elements at soft impacts according to DIN
18008-4 (2013).
Glass type
Modiﬁcation factor
Resistance
kmod
Rd
[-]
[MPa]
Float glass (FG)
1.8
81
Heat strengthened glass (HSG)
1.7
119
Fully tempered glass (FTG)
1.4
168
Nie et al. (2010) have investigated the ﬂexural strength of BSG at four different stress
rates using a small double-ring test and circular glass specimens (Ø 45 mm) with three dif-
ferent surface treatments: HF-etched, as-polished and sandpaper grounded. Their results
are summarized in Fig. 2.12.
For all three surface treatments a strength increase can be observed for increasing
stress rate. Furthermore, it has been found that the strengths seems to form a plateau
between the last two tested stress rates. The largest strength increase was found for the
HF-etched specimens due to a reduction in surface ﬂaws.
All presented investigations are based on a very small number of experiments, which
is why it is difﬁcult to predict the exact strength of glass under dynamic loading.
2.7
Dynamic Testing of Materials
It is rather difﬁcult to measure the strength of materials at high strain rates in a controlled
environment. Dynamic phenomena, like resonance and inertia forces, can inﬂuence re-
sults, and high speed data-logging is needed to collect the necessary data within a very
==PAGE:33==
2.7. Dynamic Testing of Materials
21
100
102
104
106
Loading rate [MPa/s]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Strength [MPa]
HF-etched
As-polished
Sandpaper ground
Fig. 2.12: Flexural strength of BSG as function of stress rate for three different surface treatments
investigated by Nie et al. (2010).
limited amount of time. Table 2.5 shows the common testing methods and important
aspects to consider when testing at different strain-rates.
Previous research have shown that many materials, like steel, rock and concrete, in-
creases in strength when exposed to high strain rates (Boyce and Dilmore, 2009; Frew
et al., 2001; Lambert and Ross, 2000). Some of the earliest research regarding dynamic
strength goes all the way back to 1905, where Bertram Hopkinson through experiments
concluded that the dynamic strength of steel was at least twice as high compared to the
static strength. Despite not having any sophisticated measuring techniques his results
turned out to be true.
Dynamic strength of materials are normally tested in a Split-Hopkinson pressure bar
(SHPB) test also called a Kolsky bar test, but also drop tower tests, pendulum tests, high-
speed hydraulic test machines, and others are used.
The SHPB test consists of a striker bar and an incident bar with a test specimen in
between as illustrated in Fig. 2.13. A pulse is initiated from the gas gun through the striker
bar and into the incident bar. By measuring the strains before and after the specimen a
failure stress of the specimen can be calculated. However, some issues regarding this
test method can be addressed. To produce and reproduce a constant strain rate in the test
specimens can be difﬁcult. A special technique called pulse shaping is used by plastically
deforming a copper disk between the striker bar and the incident bar when initiating the
force wave.
In pendulum testing, a mass attached to a chain is swung into the tested specimen
subjecting it to an impact load. The decrease of kinetic energy after impact can then
==PAGE:34==
22
Chapter 2. Theoretical Framework
Table 2.5: Common testing methods and dynamic considerations for different strain rates (Mey-
ers, 1994).
Common testing methods
Dynamic considerations
107
106
105
104
103
102
101
100
10−1
10−2
10−3
10−4
10−5
10−6
10−7
10−8
10−9
High velocity impact
-Explosives
Dynamic-High
-Split-Hopkinson
Dynamic-Low
-High-velocity hydraulic machines
Quasi-Static
-Hydraulic machines
-Screw-driven testing machines
Creep and Stress-Relaxation
-Conventional testing machines
-Creep testers
Shock-Wave Propagation
Plastic-Wave Propagation
Mechanical Resonance in
specimen and machine is
important
Constant cross head
velocity throughout
the whole test
Visco-plastic response
of metals
Strain-Rate
s−1
Inertial forces important
Inertial forces negligible
Incident bar
Transmitter bar
Input
strain
gauge
Output
strain
gauge
Striker bar
Gas gun
Pulse
shaping
Momentum
trap
Specimen
Fig. 2.13: Illustration of a Split-Hopkinson pressure bar test.
afterwards be calculated into a failure load. Drop tower testing uses the same concept,
were a mass is released and accelerated by gravity. The mass can further be accelerated by
pre-compressed springs to vary the impact velocity. High-speed hydraulic test machines
can also be used, and has the advantage of controlled piston velocity, which makes it
easier to reproduce the load histories and vary the load rate on the specimens.
==PAGE:35==
C H A P T E R
3
Experimental Setup and Test
Procedures
The following chapter contains a detailed description of the experimental setup including
the used hydraulic test machine, the double-ring test and the test specimens. In addition,
the test procedures used for the static and dynamic testing are outlined together with
a description of the data-acquisition. In continuation hereof relevant load histories of
conducted tests at different load rates are presented and analysed.
3.1
High-speed Hydraulic Test Machine
In relation to this project, an in-house made high-speed hydraulic test machine was used
with the purpose of achieving high piston velocities in a closed controlled loop. The ve-
locity of the piston is decisive for how fast strains can be introduced in the test specimens.
It was therefore essential that the hydraulic test machine was able to reach the desired ve-
locities when performing the tests. As mentioned in section 2.7, materials subjected to
high strain rates are normally tested in a SHPB test, but to produce and reproduce a con-
stant strain rate in the specimen can be challenging. This issue is not present when using
a hydraulic test machine, which is why this testing equipment was chosen. However,
reaching comparable strain rates can be difﬁcult.
The hydraulic test machine is shown in Fig. 3.1. The frame of the machine consisted
of two steel columns bolted together with an upper and a lower crosshead. The actuator
was bolted to the top of the upper crosshead together with two accumulators. The piston
of the actuator was extended through the upper crosshead, to have enough piston travel
==PAGE:36==
24
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup and Test Procedures
for the test setup. The actuator had a maximum capacity of ±50 kN. Around the test
setup was a circular screen enclosure that secured ﬂying glass debris stayed within the
machine.
Fig. 3.1: Applied high-speed hydraulic test machine.
The machine was equipped with two accumulators to ensure that the actuator had
sufﬁcient oil pressure when accelerating the piston, and was capable of diverting the oil
out of the actuator when decelerating the piston. An illustration of how the hydraulic
system worked is shown in Fig. 3.2.
Inside accumulator 1, was a pre-pressurised gasbag ﬁlled with 165 bars of nitrogen.
When the oil pressure was activated, the accumulator was partly ﬁlled with oil until equi-
librium was attained at approximately 200 bar, equal to the static oil pressure. This
minimised the drop in pressure when the valve into the actuator was opened, making
a faster oil supply possible and thereby higher piston velocities. Accumulator 2 was pre-
pressurised with only 3 bars. This secured that pressure was not built up on the way out
of the machine making it possible to decelerate the piston at a faster rate. A three-stage
servo valve controlled the amount of oil released into the actuator, which was able to
release a large amount of oil into the actuator at a high rate.
The actuator had a built-in LVDT capable of measuring the position of the piston.
Its position when fully extended was set to 136 mm, 0 mm at the centre position and
−136mm when the piston was pulled fully back. Detailed calibration of the LVDT can
==PAGE:37==
3.1. High-speed Hydraulic Test Machine
25
Oil in
205 bar
Oil out
Accumulator 1
Pre-pressurised with
nitrogen to 165 bar
Accumulator 2
Pre-pressurised with
nitrogen to 3 bar
3 stage servo valve
Piston
50 kN Actuator
Fig. 3.2: Sketch of the hydraulic system.
be seen in Appendix B section B.1. A performance test has reviled that the machine was
capable of reaching piston velocities over 5 m/s. Fig. 3.3 shows the piston velocity as
function of piston location for six different target velocities. The piston was set to keep a
velocity constant between −125mm to 125 mm.
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Piston Position [mm]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Piston Velocity [mm/s]
vtarget = 1000 mm/s
vtarget = 2000 mm/s
vtarget = 3000 mm/s
vtarget = 4000 mm/s
vtarget = 5000 mm/s
vtarget = 6000 mm/s
Fig. 3.3: Performance test of high-speed hydraulic test machine.
==PAGE:38==
26
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup and Test Procedures
It is seen from Fig. 3.3 that the machine performed well for velocities up to 3 m/s.
For higher velocities, it started to lack behind and had difﬁculties of keeping the velocity
constant.
3.2
Double-Ring Test Setup
An equibiaxial double-ring test setup was developed in accordance with the require-
ments stated in the American standard, ASTM C1499 (2015), regarding design criteria for
double-ring tests. The dimensions of the rings were decided to be of similar magnitudes
as used by Nie et al. (2010) in their investigations of BSG.
The setup consisted of a small load ring with an outer diameter of 12.5 mm attached
to the piston of the high-speed hydraulic test machine. The bottom part of the test setup
consisted of a larger support ring with an outer diameter of 30 mm and a base attached
to the load cell. Between the two parts a spherical washer with a diameter of 36 mm
was mounted to ensure a uniform pressure distribution at the contact surfaces between
the rings and the specimen. Potential stress concentrations were thereby minimised that
could inﬂuence the results in a harmful way due to the brittleness of glass. The load
ring and the support ring were both produced with a tip-radius of 2.5 mm, resulting in a
contact diameter of 7.5 mm and 25 mm, respectively. A detailed drawing and a picture of
the whole test setup is shown in Fig. 3.4.
To prevent permanent damages to the experimental setup during tests, the design al-
lowed the load ring to penetrate the bottom part with a depth of 50 mm. This was also the
maximum distance the test machine could utilise to decelerate after hitting the glass. As
an extra precaution, the test machine was adjusted in a way so the load ring was not able
to hit the bottom part when the piston was extended to its full length.
The specimens were tested by placing them on the top of the support ring surrounded
by a steel ring in order to centralise them correctly in each test as shown in Fig. 3.4.
All parts of the experimental setup were spun from a steel rod with steel quality
34CrNiMo6, which is a high-strength alloy engineering steel grade with high tough-
ness and good hardenability. The outer tip-radius of the load ring and the whole support
ring were produced with a CNC lathe, whereas the inner tip-radius of the load ring were
produced by using the lower-sparking procedure. The steel quality has a typical tensile
strength range of 1000−1300MPa (Saarstahl AG, 2017) after quenching and tempering,
which was required to prevent plastic deformations of the rings during the loading phase.
To obtain this strength, both rings were locally heated to 830−860◦C and then quenched
in water. As soon as the steel parts had reached room temperature, they were tempered
by heating them uniformly to 540−660◦C followed by air-cooling.
==PAGE:39==
3.3. Test Specimens
27
25
7.5
R = 2.5
45
75
50
Top attachment
Load ring
Glass specimen
Support ring
Spherical washer
Base attachment
Wire exit
(strain gauge)
Piezoelectric load cell
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3.4: Illustration of the double-ring test setup: (a) production drawings indicating the main
dimensions; (b) a picture of mounted test setup.
3.3
Test Specimens
The glass specimens, made out of SLSG, were cut into circular disks with a diameter of
45 mm by a waterjet cutter machine1. The majority of the test specimens were 3 mm glass
but also 2 mm and 4 mm glass specimens have been tested. The primary thickness of 3
mm was chosen in order to achieve the highest possible strain rate without damaging the
tip of the rings.
Glass with a thickness of 2 −6mm is permitted to have a tolerance of ±0.2 mm
as stated in Table 2.3. However, an investigation regarding the thickness of the glass
specimens has shown that the actual thickness was in the lower allowable limit of the
permitted tolerance for all measured specimens. Schneider and Wörner (2001) obtained
1The glass specimens were produced by Mirit Glas A/S.
==PAGE:40==
28
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup and Test Procedures
similar results, where over 400 glass sheets were measured.
Fig. 3.5(a) shows the individual thickness of each of the 215 measured specimens
with a nominal thickness of 3 mm. All measured specimens had a thickness between
2.82−2.90mm, which is in the acceptable range. The same investigation was conducted
for the glass specimens with a nominal thickness of 2 mm and 4 mm shown in Fig. 3.5(b)
and Fig. 3.5(c), where the same tendency was found.
2.7
2.75
2.8
2.85
2.9
2.95
Thickness [mm]
215 Specimens
Mean = 2.85 mm
Std. dev. = 
0.02 mm
(a)
1.7
1.75
1.8
1.85
1.9
Thickness [mm]
15 Specimens
Mean = 1.85 mm
Std. dev. = 
0.01 mm
(b)
3.7
3.75
3.8
3.85
3.9
Thickness [mm]
15 Specimens
Mean = 3.83 mm
Std. dev. = 
0.01 mm
(c)
Fig. 3.5: Distribution of measured specimen thicknesses: (a) 3 mm specimens; (b) 2 mm speci-
mens; (c) 4 mm specimens.
In all, 250 glass specimens were received, where some were used in pilot tests. Ta-
ble 3.1 shows an overview of the tested specimens excluding the ones used for pilot tests.
Some of the specimens were intentionally ﬂawed with a single scratch over the centre
of the specimen, which is explained in more detail in the following.
==PAGE:41==
3.3. Test Specimens
29
Table 3.1: Overview of tested glass specimens.
Nominal
thickness
Number of
specimens
Surface
treatment
Mean
thickness
Standard
deviation
[mm]
[-]
[-]
[mm]
[mm]
2±0.2
15
None
1.85
±0.01
3±0.2
165
None
2.85
±0.02
3±0.2
25
Flaw
2.85
±0.02
4±0.2
15
None
3.83
±0.01
3.3.1
Scratching of Test Specimens
A small series of the aforementioned test specimens was scratched with a well-deﬁned
ﬂaw2 using a Universal Surface Tester (UST-1000, see Fig. 3.6) from the company In-
nowep. The UST-1000 is a surface testing device, which can perform three-dimensional
surface scans with a precision of 60 nm. It consists of a very precise X-Y-table and a
scanner, which can be equipped with different scanner tips and can be loaded with loads
between 10 mN and 1000 mN. Hereby, it is possible to perform topographic measure-
ments as well as hardness- and roughness measurements, but also produce ﬂaws in sur-
faces. When scratching glass, a so-called scratch furrow will be created. Under it, much
deeper and very pointed ﬂaws and lateral ﬂaws will arise, which can not be measured
mechanically (see Fig. 3.6).
Test specimen
120°-Diamond
Find
Flaw
Plastic zone
Lateral flaw
Flaw
Scratch mark
Test specimen
Lateral flaw
Scratch mark
vK
Scratch mark
Scratch mark
Fig. 3.6: Scratching of test specimens with the surface testing device UST-1000 (adapted from
Hilcken (2015)).
Schula (2015) and Hilcken (2015) have both conducted a careful investigation of
scratches simulating realistic ﬂaws in glass panes used for construction. The specimen
was placed centrally under the scanner tip and held in place with vacuum on the X-Y-
table. A conically shaped diamond with an aperture angle of 120◦was then used to
2Prepared by the Institute of Structural Mechanics and Design at TU Darmstadt (Germany).
==PAGE:42==
30
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup and Test Procedures
perform the damage to the surface with a load of Find = 500mN. According to their
investigations a ﬂaw length of 2 mm was chosen together with a scratching velocity of
vK = 1mm/s. The stated parameters used for the deﬁned scratch on the glass specimens
were chosen so that the ﬂexural failure stress corresponded to the characteristic strength
of ﬂoat glass (fk = 45MPa). Moreover, it was shown that this type of ﬂaw had a very
good reproducibility that was beneﬁcial when comparing several tests of the same type.
Similar ﬂaw properties have been applied to the specimens used in this thesis. How-
ever, after measuring the length of the applied ﬂaws it was proven that they had an aver-
aged length of 2.5 mm as indicated in Fig. 3.7. Each individual ﬂaw and their correspond-
ing lengths can be seen in Appendix C.
Length = 2497.03 µm
Fig. 3.7: Microscopic image of one of the applied scratches.
Two reference specimens were tested with this ﬂaw at the TU Darmstadt after 7 days
of storage resulting in ﬂexural strengths of 51.6 MPa and 59.9 MPa. The delivered speci-
mens, however, had a storage time of approximately 26 days before they were tested due
to the delivery time. But according to the investigations of Hilcken (2015), the effect of
crack healing has only a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the failure stress at storage times up to
7 days, which is why the delivered specimens were considered to be comparable with the
tested reference specimens.
3.3.2
Chemical Elemental Composition
The manufacturer of the circular test specimens was not able to provide a technical data
sheet of the applied glass. To ensure that the correct glass was tested, a single specimen
was used to check the chemical elemental composition under the assumption that the
results were representative for all delivered specimens.
A scanning electron microscope (SEM) from DTU CEN3 was utilised together with
an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The SEM is an electron microscope that
produces images of a sample by scanning the surface with a focused beam of electrons.
The interaction between the electrons and the atoms in the sample will thus emit X-rays
that are characteristic of the elements present in the sample. An EDS analysis can then
3Center for Electron Nanoscopy at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:43==
3.3. Test Specimens
31
be used to determine the elemental composition at different areas on the sample surface
since each element has a unique atomic structure resulting in a unique set of peaks on its
electromagnetic emission spectrum. However, the sample material needs to be conductive
to be able to utilise this microscope system. This is not the case for glass, which is why
the conductivity was improved by applying a surface coating of gold (Au).
Four different areas on the considered glass specimen was analysed resulting in four
spectra as shown in Fig. 3.8, where the X-ray counts are plotted as function of the energy
(in keV).
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Energy [keV]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Counts
C
O
Na
Mg
Al
Si
Au Au
K
Ca
Ca
C 
 Carbon
O 
 Oxygen
Na 
 Sodium
Mg 
 Magnesium
Al 
 Aluminium
Si 
 Silicon
K 
 Potassium
Ca 
 Calcium
Au 
 Gold
Spectrum 1
Spectrum 2
Spectrum 3
Spectrum 4
Fig. 3.8: EDS spectrum of the considered glass specimen, taken at four different areas on the
surface.
It is clearly seen that the four measured spectra are coincident indicating that the
material composition of the specimen is homogeneous. Large peaks can be observed for
silicon (Si), oxygen (O), sodium (Na) and calcium (Ca) that according to DS/EN 572-
1 (2012) are the main chemical elemental components in SLSG. Also smaller peaks of
magnesium (Mg) and aluminium (Al) can be found. These, are also in agreement with
the standards. The small peaks indicating gold is due to the surface coating. It is not
possible to make a direct comparison with the values given in Table 2.1 as this requires
a standardised method where the considered specimen should be held against a reference
sample in order to be able to determine the actual mass percent’s of each component.
However, such reference sample was not available. As no boron (B), which is one of
the main components in borosilicate glass, was detected by the EDS analysis it can be
concluded that the delivered specimens were SLSG.
==PAGE:44==
32
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup and Test Procedures
3.4
Static Testing Procedure
A series of static tests have been conducted to estimate the static strength of the glass
specimens. In all, 30 glass specimens plus 5 scratched with a nominal thickness of 3 mm
were tested, where the force have been measured through the strain gauge based load
cell attached to the lower crosshead of the hydraulic test machine. The calibration of the
load cell can be seen in Appendix B section B.2. The piston velocity was in all tests
set to 0.1 mm/min , resulting in a loading time of approximately 100 s, depending on the
failure load of the specimen. Fig. 3.9 shows a representative loading history of one of the
conducted tests.
0
50
100
150
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Force [N]
Load Cell
Load rate = 16.62 N/s
R2 = 0.9948
Fig. 3.9: Representative load history of a static test with a piston velocity of 0.1 mm/min .
In all static tests, a single strip of adhesive tape was placed on the compression surface
of the specimen to study the fractography and ensure that the origin of the crack was
initiated by bending and not by edge ﬂaws.
3.5
Quasi-static and Dynamic Testing Procedure
A slightly different procedure was used in the quasi-static and dynamic tests. The glass
specimens were initially pre-loaded to around 100 N before running the test, to secure
perfect contact between load ring and glass specimen. The load ring was then lifted up to
a start position, where the test machine was able to reach the target velocity at impact.
When conducting the test, the actuator accelerated the load ring up to the desired
velocity, resulting in a constant loading rate on the specimen. When testing at high-speed
some dynamic phenomena need to be considered such as resonance and inertia forces.
==PAGE:45==
3.5. Quasi-static and Dynamic Testing Procedure
33
Static equilibrium is therefore no longer a matter of cause and needs to be investigated to
make sure that the right stress condition in the specimen is present. The methods of how
this was investigated is explained in more detail in the following together with the applied
data-acquisition technique.
3.5.1
High-speed Data-acquisition
Due to the short test durations, conventional data-acquisition methods were not applicable
for the conducted tests. A test with a piston-velocity of 2 m/s had an actual loading time
of less than 100 µs. To ensure that the data was sampled at a sufﬁcient rate a high-speed
data logger was used, capable of sampling from 20kHz −10MHz on each of its four
analogue channels. However, initial investigations showed that the load cell did not meet
the requirements regarding the frequency of the output signal, which were sampled. The
issue is illustrated in Fig. 3.10.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time [ms]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Load [kN]
Fig. 3.10: Sampled signal from strain gauge based load cell. Output frequency 1024 Hz.
Even though the high-speed data logger was capable of sampling the data at a sufﬁ-
cient rate, the output signal from the load cell, received by the high-speed data logger,
was only updated at a frequency of 1024 Hz. The limitation was caused by the control-
ling system, which the load signal went through before it was sampled. As a result only
very few samples were collected when running tests at high velocities. The maximum
frequency could possibly be increased to 6 kHz by implementing some software changes,
but this would still not satisfy the needs regarding sampling rate.
Instead a smaller piezoelectric load cell was installed in the test setup as shown in
Fig. 3.4 and calibrated up against the load cell used in the static tests as shown in Ap-
==PAGE:46==
34
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup and Test Procedures
pendix B section B.2.1. The piezoelectric load cell was connected directly to a signal
ampliﬁer with a max output frequency of 200 kHz and directly sampled through the high-
speed datalogger. An overview of the ﬁnal data acquisition setup is shown in Fig. 3.11.
Strain Gauge
1 2 3
PC
High-speed
datalogger
BNC
adapter
board
Kistler
amp.
High-speed
transducer
amp.
Piezoelectric
load cell
Trigger
Fig. 3.11: Setup for high-speed data acquisition.
To prove that force equilibrium was present during the tests, three linear strain gauges
were glued on the load ring with mutual angles of 120◦to measure the force transmitted
to the glass which was compared to the signal from the piezoelectric load cell. The signal
from the strain gauges was ampliﬁed by a high-speed transducer ampliﬁer and collected in
an analogue converter board together with the signal from the piezoelectric load cell. The
high-speed data logger was controlled by a computer where different settings regarding
input signals, sampling rate etc. were adjusted. At lower speeds up to 100 mm/s, a
sampling rate of 400 kHz was chosen. At higher speeds above 100 mm/s, the sampling
rate was changed to 1-2 MHz in order to sample enough data. An example of the collected
data from the strain gauge signal zoomed in on the area where the failure occurs can be
seen in Fig. 3.12.
As seen the loading of the specimen is well deﬁned and even after failure some points
are sampled during the sudden decrease in load. The sampling rate could be further
increased up to 10 MHz but this has not been found necessary.
Inside the data logger was a ring buffer, which would overwrite its sampled data after
each round. The data logger was therefore only able to sample the data over a limited
amount of time depending on the sampling rate. It was therefore necessary to trig the
data logger at the correct time in order to sample the relevant data. This was done by an
external trigger that were manually activated around the time of impact. Fig. 3.13 shows
an example of the collected data from a test with a piston velocity of 10 mm/s.
The three individual strain gauge signals did not have the same responses, which
indicated that some bending was introduced in the load ring during testing. This was ac-
counted for by averaging the strain gauge signals resulting in a loading history, coincident
==PAGE:47==
3.5. Quasi-static and Dynamic Testing Procedure
35
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
Time [ s]
2.5
3
3.5
4
Load [kN]
Fig. 3.12: Failure of a glass specimen sampled with a rate of 1 MHz and a piston velocity of 1000
mm/s (zoomed).
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [ms]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Load [kN]
Piezoelectric LC
Strain gauge 1
Strain gauge 2
Strain gauge 3
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [ms]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Load [kN]
Piezoelectric LC
Average strain gauge
(b)
Fig. 3.13: Sampled data from a test with a piston velocity of 10 mm/s: (a) signal from all 3 strain
gauges compared to the piezoelectric load cell; (b) averaged strain gauge signal compared to the
piezoelectric load cell.
==PAGE:48==
36
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup and Test Procedures
with the one from the piezoelectric load cell as illustrated in Fig. 3.13(b). In this way the
force equilibrium was checked in each test.
By examining the signals just before impact, it can be seen that there is an offset
between zero and the actual signals. This offset is caused by a small non-linearity between
the load cell and the piezoelectric load cell and to get the correct failure load a small offset
correction was made equal to 49 N. The calibration of the strain gauges can be seen in
Appendix B section B.3.
3.5.2
Loading Histories
Representative loading histories of six different loading rates are given in Fig. 3.14, where
applied load is plotted as function of time. Observations have revealed a problem regard-
ing resonance in the lower part of the test setup. When reaching a certain piston velocity,
the piezoelectric load cell started to pick up vibrations initiated by the impact on the glass
specimen. This phenomenon, also called ringing, became more severe for increasing
piston velocities.
At approximately 100 mm/s ringing started to occur but the vibrations gradually died
out, as the specimen was loaded. At 200 mm/s the oscillations were so severe that it was
hard to prove that force equilibrium was present during the test, even though it might
have been. At higher velocities, the amplitude of the vibrations became so large that a
comparison between the forces was not possible. Due to this phenomenon all failure loads
were estimated on basis of the average strain gauge signal.
By looking at the averaged strain gauge signals, relative linear loading can be ob-
served for all tested piston velocities, though two loading curves divert a bit from the rest.
Fig. 3.14(a) has a lower initial loading rate in the lower range than in the upper loading
range, which was seen in the majority of the tests at this velocity. Fig. 3.14(c) on the
other hand, tends to decrease its loading rate in the higher load range. However, the tests
in general showed good linear loading rates, and were all ﬁtted by linear regressions to
estimate the loading rate as best as possible.
==PAGE:49==
3.5. Quasi-static and Dynamic Testing Procedure
37
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Time [ms]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Load [kN]
Load Cell (Support Ring)
Strain Gauge (Load Ring)
Load rate = 13.53 kN/s
R2 = 0.9901
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Time [ms]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Load [kN]
Load Cell (Support Ring)
Strain Gauge (Load Ring)
Load rate = 75.21 kN/s
R2 = 0.9944
(b)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Time [ms]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Load [kN]
Load Cell (Support Ring)
Strain Gauge (Load Ring)
Load rate = 1362.02 kN/s
R2 = 0.9750
(c)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Time [µs]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Load [kN]
Load Cell (Support Ring)
Strain Gauge (Load Ring)
Load rate = 3560.71 kN/s
R2 = 0.9882
(d)
0
50
100
150
200
Time [ s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Load [kN]
Load Cell (Support Ring)
Strain Gauge (Load Ring)
Load rate = 20232.28 kN/s
R2 = 0.9901
(e)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time [µs]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Load [kN]
Load Cell (Support Ring)
Strain Gauge (Load Ring)
Load rate = 71616.31 kN/s
R2 = 0.9878
(f)
Fig. 3.14: Piezoelectric load cell compared to averaged strain gauge signal at different piston
velocities: (a) 1 mm/s; (b) 10 mm/s; (c) 100 mm/s; (d) 200 mm/s; (e) 1000 mm/s; (f) 3000 mm/s.
==PAGE:50==
==PAGE:51==
C H A P T E R
4
Numerical Investigation of Test
Setup
An investigation of the stresses in the test specimens introduced by the double-ring test
is presented in this chapter. First, an analytical solution is explained to give a general
understanding of the present stresses. This is followed by a detailed description of the
applied numerical models of the double-ring test, which are validated against the ana-
lytical approach. An axisymmetric FEM-model was used for the determination of the
failure stresses and a half-symmetric 3D FEM-model was used to analyse the inﬂuence
of alignment errors.
4.1
Stresses in Circular Test Specimens
Due to the circular geometry of the double-ring test setup, the out of plane bending results
in constant tensile stresses in all directions (in-plane) at the tensile surface of the spec-
imen. The relationship between strains and stresses in polar coordinates for the biaxial
stress state in an isotropic material, e.g. glass, can be described by
εr = 1
E (σr −ν σθ) ,
(4.1)
where εr is the radial strain, σr is the radial stress, σθ is the tangential stress and E is the
E-modulus. The stress distribution within the load ring will be rotationally symmetrical.
This implies that the radial and tangential stresses, stated in Eq. (4.1), will be of equal
==PAGE:52==
40
Chapter 4. Numerical Investigation of Test Setup
magnitude. It is therefore possible to express the stresses within the area of the load ring
through the measured strains by
σr = σθ = E εr
1−ν .
(4.2)
When the failure load of the test specimen is known, it is possible to calculate the ﬂex-
ural stresses, σr and σθ, in the area limited by the load ring of the double-ring test setup
by using circular plate theory deﬁned by Timoshenko and Woinowsky-Krieger (1964)
σr = σθ = 3F
2πh2

(1−ν) D2
S −D2
L
2D2
+(1+ν) ln DS
DL

,
(4.3)
where DS is the diameter of the support ring, DL is the diameter of the load ring, D
is the diameter of the test specimen, F is the failure load and h is the thickness of the
test specimen. The principal stress in the area of the load ring is equal to the radial
and tangential stress due to the rotationally symmetrical stress state, i.e. σ1 = σr = σθ.
Eq. (4.3) is an analytical solution based on simple plate theory, which does not account
for thin plates with large deﬂections or membrane stresses due to a geometrical non-linear
behaviour. To include these effects in the determination of the failure stresses of the
specimens, a numerical model of the double-ring test was set up by using ﬁnite element
method (FEM). Furthermore, the numerical model was used to analyse the distribution of
the stresses in the specimens. The following sections will explain the applied models in
detail.
4.2
FEM-Model of Double-Ring Test
A numerical model was set up in the commercial ﬁnite element analysis (FEA) software
SIMULIA ABAQUS/CAE 2016, which was used to determine the failure stresses of the
tested glass specimens. Due to a rotationally symmetrical stress state in the specimens the
advantages of an axisymmetric model was applied in order to minimise the total number
of nodes and thereby the computational power when running the simulations. To simplify
parametric variations in the model, an ABAQUS script was written using the programming
language Python. The entire script can be seen in Appendix A section A.1.1. The content
of the script and the choices made throughout the scripting are explained in the following.
The model is made of three parts, a glass specimen, a load ring, and a support ring,
using 6- and 8-node axisymmetric elements (CAX6 and CAX8). A sketch of the axisym-
metric model of the double-ring test is given in Fig. 4.1.
The boundary conditions of the support ring do not allow any displacements or rota-
tions, whereas the load ring can move in the vertical direction in order to load the glass
==PAGE:53==
4.2. FEM-Model of Double-Ring Test
41
DL/2
DS/2
D/2
Load ring
Support ring
Glass Specimen
h
x
y
z
F
Fig. 4.1: Geometry and mesh of the axisymmetric FEM-model.
specimen with a pressure applied to the top of the ring. To obtain axisymmetric con-
ditions in the model, the boundary conditions of the glass specimen only allow vertical
displacements about the rotation axis at the centre of the specimen.
One could have omitted to model the rings and instead just model the supports as sin-
gle nodes equal to the contact points between the rings and the specimen. However, the
glass specimens are subjected to a biaxial out of plane bending resulting in a change of
radii of the contact surfaces. To include this effect in the calculations, the whole rounding
off of the rings was modelled. This required a deﬁnition of the contact properties between
the surfaces of the specimen and the rings. A tangential behaviour with a frictionless fric-
tion formulation was chosen (ABAQUS Manual, 2015), as the contact friction between
the materials glass and steel was assumed to be zero.
Since the rings were made of steel and the specimen of glass, both material types are
considered to behave linear elastic and isotropic. The material properties are deﬁned by
an E-modulus and a Poisson’s ratio in the FEM model. It is commonly known that the
modulus of elasticity of glass varies compared to the value stated in Table 2.2. Therefore,
an investigation of the stiffness of the applied glass specimens was conducted using a
strain gauge rosette1 glued to the centre of the tensile surface of a circular specimen
(Fig. 4.2(a)), which was used to measure the in-plane strains during a static test with a
piston velocity of 0.1 mm/min. Fortunately, it was possible to perform three comparable
measurements with the same strain gauge without damaging the glass specimen. The
last one with the highest load was used to determine the correct E-modulus my means
of an iterative procedure, where the measured strains were compared with the calculated
1Strain gauge type: HBM 1-RY41-6/120
==PAGE:54==
42
Chapter 4. Numerical Investigation of Test Setup
ones until they were coincident. Under the assumption that Poisson’s ratio of SLSG is
ν = 0.23 and the E-modulus remains constant for varying strain rates, the E-modulus was
iteratively found to E = 67GPa. The measured strains are shown in Fig. 4.2(b) together
with the calculated ones.
HBM Strain Gauge
Type 6/120 RY41
(a)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Load [N]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Strain [ m m-1]
E = 67.0 GPa
1,SG; 2.84 mm
1,num; 2.84 mm
(b)
1088.29µm/m
(c)
Fig. 4.2: Calibration of FEM-model by determining a proper E-modulus of the glass: (a) specimen
with a thickness of 2.84 mm equipped with a strain gauge rosette; (b) measured strains compared
with calculated ones; (c) calibrated distribution of principal strains with an applied load of 1000 N.
In summary, the applied material parameters can be seen in Table 4.1. Since only the
stresses and the strains in the glass specimen are of mainly interest, no further investi-
gation on the stiffness of the steel rings were made and the known standard values were
applied according to Teknisk Ståbi (2013).
Table 4.1: Material properties used for the FEM-model.
Material
E-modulus
Poisson’s Ratio
E
ν
[GPa]
[-]
Glass
67
0.23
Steel
210
0.30
==PAGE:55==
4.2. FEM-Model of Double-Ring Test
43
The analysis was treated as a static, general procedure where the geometrical non-
linear behaviour was included in the calculation by Nlgeom = ON, which is a calcula-
tion option in ABAQUS/CAE.
With the above mentioned model properties a convergence analysis of the stresses in
the glass specimen was carried out for a specimen with a thickness of 3 mm by increasing
the number of nodes in the part representing the glass specimen. The max principal stress
at the bottom surface located under the load ring, also classiﬁed as the failure stress, was
checked for convergence. The results of the conducted convergence analysis, performed
for a load spanning from 1 kN to 4 kN, can be seen in Appendix A section A.2.1. The
proper element size of the glass specimen part in the model was found to be 0.15 mm,
resulting in 9341 nodes.
Before using the FEM model for the calculation of the ﬂexural stresses in the glass
specimens, a validation was conducted by comparing the results from the numerical cal-
culations with the analytical solution given in Eq. (4.3). The results of the comparison
can be seen in Fig. 4.3, where the calculations have been made for loads up to 5 kN and
for a specimen with a thickness of 3 mm. The calculated stresses are plotted together with
the relative deviation between the analytical and the numerical solution.
0
1
2
3
4
5
Load [kN]
0
100
200
300
400
500
Max principal stress [MPa]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Rel. deviation [%]
Analytical solution
FEM Model
Rel. deviation
Fig. 4.3: Validation of the axisymmetric FEM-model, where the max principal stresses calculated
by the numerical approach are compared with the analytical solution for a specimen thickness of
3 mm. The principal stresses are plotted together with the relative deviation.
Fig. 4.3 shows a slight difference between the analytical calculated stresses and the
numerical ones with a relative deviation of 3.0−3.5%. The inﬂuence of the geometrical
non-linear behaviour is therefore almost insigniﬁcant in this load range. Even so, the
FEM model of the double-ring test can be considered applicable for the calculations of
the ﬂexural stresses, since it follows the analytical solution quite well.
==PAGE:56==
44
Chapter 4. Numerical Investigation of Test Setup
Since the nominal thickness of ﬂoat glass varies due to the permitted tolerances stated
in Table 2.3 and the standard deviations of the measured thicknesses are relatively small
(cf. section 3.3), the averaged thickness of each specimen type was used for the cal-
culation of the failure stress. The numerical calculated radial and tangential stress- and
strain distributions along the bottom surface of the glass specimen for the three averaged
thicknesses are shown in Fig. 4.4 for different loads. It can be observed that the radial
stresses σr in the area of the load ring have a small peak corresponding to an increase
of maximum 2.5 %. However, it is still reasonable to assume that the stresses within the
area of the load ring are plane hydrostatic. At the support ring, a sharp peak in stresses is
observed due to singularity which is caused by the contact between the glass and the ring,
as the load is transferred through a single node.
4.3
Analysis of Alignment Errors
The double-ring test setup consisted of several parts, which required a horizontal align-
ment when mounting them to the hydraulic test machine. This alignment could have an
inﬂuence on the failure stresses of the test specimens. Therefore, an analysis of alignment
errors was conducted, which is presented in this section.
The standard ASTM C1499 (2015) recommends that the load ring and support ring
shall be aligned concentrically to 0.5 % of the support ring diameter which corresponds to
0.125 mm. Furthermore, the test specimen shall be concentric with the load and support
rings to 2 % of the support ring diameter corresponding to 0.5 mm. To check the align-
ment of the test setup a dial gauge was used as shown in Fig. 4.5 mounted via a magnet
arm to the bottom part of the setup. By turning the load ring 360 degrees the total offset
between the support ring and load ring was found to 0.15 mm which is slightly larger than
the recommended value. The glass specimen placed on the top of the support ring was
surrounded by a steel ring (Fig. 3.4) limiting the max offset between the rings and the
specimen to 1 mm which is twice as high as the recommended value.
As the recommended alignment limits were not met, a numerical study of the fail-
ure stress dependency on the alignment was made. The stress distribution in the glass
specimen will no longer be axisymmetric when shifting one part of the test setup in the
horizontal direction, which is why a half-symmetric three-dimensional FEM-model of
the double-ring test in SIMULIA ABAQUS/CAE 2016 was used. The entire script of the
model can be seen in Appendix A section A.1.2.
Each part of the model used quadratic brick elements with 15 and 20 nodes (C3D15
and C3D20). From a convergence analysis (Appendix A section A.2.2) the proper element
sizes for the glass specimen were found to 1 mm for the global part size, 0.5 mm along
==PAGE:57==
4.3. Analysis of Alignment Errors
45
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
12.5
15
17.5
20
22.5
Radius [mm]
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Stress [MPa]
1000 N
2000 N
3000 N
4000 N
h = 1.85 mm
Tangential stress, 
Radial stress, 
r
(a)
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
12.5
15
17.5
20
22.5
Radius [mm]
-4000
-2000
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Strain [ m m-1]
1000 N
2000 N
3000 N
4000 N
h = 1.85 mm
Tangential strain, 
Radial strain, 
r
(b)
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
12.5
15
17.5
20
22.5
Radius [mm]
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
Stress [MPa]
1000 N
2000 N
3000 N
4000 N
h = 2.85 mm
Tangential stress, 
Radial stress, 
r
(c)
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
12.5
15
17.5
20
22.5
Radius [mm]
-4000
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Strain [ m m-1]
1000 N
2000 N
3000 N
4000 N
h = 2.85 mm
Tangential strain, 
Radial strain, 
r
(d)
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
12.5
15
17.5
20
22.5
Radius [mm]
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
Stress [MPa]
1000 N
2000 N
3000 N
4000 N
h = 3.83 mm
Tangential stress, 
Radial stress, 
r
(e)
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
12.5
15
17.5
20
22.5
Radius [mm]
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
Strain [ m m-1]
1000 N
2000 N
3000 N
4000 N
h = 3.83 mm
Tangential strain, 
Radial strain, 
r
(f)
Fig. 4.4: Stress and strain distributions at the bottom surface of a glass specimen calculated with
the FEM-model. Tangential and radial stress and strain distribution: (a)-(b) thickness = 1.85 mm;
(c)-(d) thickness = 2.85 mm; (e)-(f) thickness = 3.83 mm; E = 67 GPa and ν = 0.23; geometrical
non-linear behaviour included.
==PAGE:58==
46
Chapter 4. Numerical Investigation of Test Setup
Fig. 4.5: Measurement of the alignment accuracy between the support ring and load ring using a
dial gauge mounted to a magnet arm.
the horizontal edges of the symmetry plane and 1/4 of the specimen thickness along the
vertical edges, resulting in 37572 nodes for a specimen thickness of 3 mm. A sketch of
the geometry and the ﬁnal mesh is given in Fig. 4.6.
The same material properties as stated in Table 4.1 was applied. Moreover, the as-
signed boundary conditions and contact properties were similar to the ones from the ax-
isymmetric model. It was, however, necessary to add a nodal support to the glass speci-
men to avoid a rigid body displacement in the y-direction. The nodal support is indicated
in Fig. 4.6 as well. Since the displacement of the specimen was smallest at the contact
point between the glass and the support ring, the location of the nodal support was chosen
to be there as it should inﬂuence the stresses as little as possible.
Glass specimen 
Support ring
Load ring
x
y
z
Nodal support
Fig. 4.6: Geometry and mesh of the half-symmetric 3D FEM-model.
==PAGE:59==
4.3. Analysis of Alignment Errors
47
A validation of the applied model was made by comparing numerical calculated
stresses with the analytical solution (Eq. (4.3)) for a specimen thickness of 3 mm and
loads up to 5 kN. The results are given in Fig. 4.7 together with the relative deviation
between the two approaches. A geometrical non-linear behaviour was included as well.
0
1
2
3
4
5
Load [kN]
0
100
200
300
400
500
Max principal stress [MPa]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Rel. deviation [%]
Analytical solution
FEM Model
Rel. deviation
Fig. 4.7: Validation of the half-symmetric 3D FEM-model, where the max principal stresses cal-
culated by the numerical approach are compared with the analytical solution for a specimen thick-
ness of 3 mm. The principal stresses are plotted together with the relative deviation.
A small difference is seen between the analytical solution and the numerical approach
with a relative deviation varying between 3 % and 6 %, which is slightly larger than for the
axisymmetric model. Nevertheless, the model was assumed applicable for the calculation
of ﬂexural stresses when analysing the inﬂuence of alignment errors.
Due to the design of the double-ring test setup the maximum obtainable offset between
the load ring and support ring was 3.75 mm. Within this range, the load ring was still able
to penetrate the support ring. In Table 4.2 the numerical calculated failure stresses are
given along with the appertaining load ring offsets. A similar analysis was made for
alignment errors between the specimen and the rings which were limited to 1 mm due to
a surrounding steel ring. The results are listed in Table 4.3. In both analysis only one part
of the test setup was shifted from the centre while the other parts remained in their centre
position. The considered specimen thickness was 3 mm together with an applied load of
2 kN.
It follows from both investigations that an alignment error within the considered
ranges between the different parts of the double-ring test setup had no signiﬁcant in-
ﬂuence on the failure stress, since the deviation relative to zero offset spans from 0 %
to about 1.5 % according to Table 4.2 and 4.3. Therefore, the measured alignment er-
==PAGE:60==
48
Chapter 4. Numerical Investigation of Test Setup
Table 4.2:
Analysis of alignment errors be-
tween load ring and support ring; F = 2 kN and
h = 3 mm.
Offset of
load ring
Failure stress
Rel. dev.
[mm]
[MPa]
[%]
0.00
175.6
0.00
0.50
178.1
1.43
1.00
177.7
1.18
2.00
177.0
0.78
3.00
178.2
1.51
3.75
176.2
0.34
Table 4.3:
Analysis of alignment errors be-
tween glass specimen and rings; F = 2 kN and
h = 3 mm.
Offset of
specimen
Failure stress
Rel. dev.
[mm]
[MPa]
[%]
0.0
175.6
0.00
0.2
177.2
0.92
0.4
176.0
0.24
0.6
176.8
0.67
0.8
175.2
-0.23
1.0
176.5
0.53
rors were considered acceptable even though they differ slightly from the recommended
alignment limits.
==PAGE:61==
C H A P T E R
5
Test Results and Discussion
In this chapter, obtained results regarding the ﬂexural strength of ﬂoat glass at varying
stress rates are presented together with an elaborate discussion about their behaviour. In
continuation hereof, the inﬂuence of the specimen thickness is investigated and brieﬂy
discussed. This is followed by an analysis concerning the ﬂexural strength of scratched
specimens at varying stress rates, and lastly an investigation of the stress rate dependency
of the stiffness is analysed. All tests have been conducted at an ambient temperature of
22 ◦C and a humidity of 30 %.
5.1
Flexural Strength at Varying Stress Rate
The ﬂexural strength of 3 mm glass specimens were tested at stress rates in the range of
2 −5.8·106 MPa/s. In all 129 tests were made including static tests. All test results are
presented as function of stress rate, ˙σ, and not in the more commonly used strain rate, ˙ε,
because the behaviour of the stiffness under dynamic loading is unknown.
5.1.1
Static Tests
To quantify the static ﬂexural strength of the glass specimens, 30 static tests were con-
ducted at a stress rate of approximately 2 MPa/s equal of a piston velocity of 0.1 mm/min.
The measured failure load was converted into a failure stress by applying it to the axisym-
metric FEM-model described in section 4.2. Results are shown in Fig. 5.1.
As seen from the plot the mean ﬂexural strength was found to 174 ± 41MPa, which
by ﬁrst impression may seem high in comparison with the normally applied character-
==PAGE:62==
50
Chapter 5. Test Results and Discussion
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number [-]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Failure Stress [MPa]
30 Specimens
Mean = 173.93 MPa
Std. Dev. = 
40.64 MPa
Fig. 5.1: Distribution of failure stresses from 30 static tests.
istic strength of glass of 45 MPa. However, this can be explained by some of the more
interesting features of glass.
It is commonly known that the ﬂexural strength of glass is highly dependent on surface
ﬂaws as illustrated in Fig. 2.4. Even a micro crack, not visible to the human eye, on the
glass surface can have huge inﬂuence on the failure strength, and likewise the absence of
one can increase the strength signiﬁcantly. This is also why relatively high scattering of
the static test results were observed, even though no visible surface ﬂaws could be seen
on the test specimens.
According to Fig. 2.4 the strength of glass after production is varying from 50 −
100MPa. The reason why the mean static ﬂexural strength in the tests was so high is due
to the relative small area which is subjected to critical tensile stresses. This phenomenon
is normally referred to in the literature as the size effect (Haldimann et al., 2008). All
failures originated from a location within the area of the load ring equal of 0.44 cm2 as
illustrated in Fig. 5.2. Small areas minimises the probability of having critical ﬂaws which
thereby will lead to a higher failure stress. This is the reason why the higher static failure
stresses were achieved. Similar static failure stresses where attained by Nie et al. (2010).
A primary crack of where all other cracks originated along can be spotted in the test
specimen with the lowest failure stress (Fig. 5.2(a)). This primary crack becomes less
distinct for the higher failure stresses, where the majority of cracks converges back to the
initial crack origin.
By comparing the different fracture patterns in Fig. 5.2, a clear tendency regarding the
size of the fragments at the different failure stresses can be seen. Higher failure stresses
==PAGE:63==
5.1. Flexural Strength at Varying Stress Rate
51
Primary crack
(a)
(b)
(c)
Load ring (Ø = 7.5 mm)
Likely origin
(d)
Likely origin
Load ring (Ø =7.5 mm)
(e)
Load ring (Ø = 7.5 mm)
Likely origin
(f)
Fig. 5.2: Fracture patterns of tested glass specimens with different failure stresses: (a)+(d) σ f
= 89 MPa; (b)+(e) σf = 135 MPa; (c)+(f) σ f = 259 MPa. The likely origins are indicated on the
zoomed images underneath.
and thereby higher failure loads resulted in a larger amount of elastic energy stored in
the specimen, leading to fracture patterns with smaller glass fragments. The same phe-
nomenon can be observed by comparing fragment sizes from annealed an tempered glass
as described in section 2.4.1.
5.1.2
Quasi-static and Dynamic Tests
Six different stress rates have been tested in the quasi-static to dynamic range. Results
including static tests are shown in Table 5.1 and Fig. 5.3. During testing, force equilibrium
have been checked to secure that the right stress distribution was present. However, it has
not been possible to check force equilibrium at piston velocities higher than 100 mm/s
due to ringing in the piezoelectric load cell. Tests with higher piston velocities should
therefore be treated with caution, although force equilibrium may have been present.
From Fig. 5.3 a clear tendency regarding the ﬂexural strength as function of stress
rate is seen. All the quasi-static and dynamic tests showed larger ﬂexural strengths than
the static tests, and tends to further increase for larger stress rates. However, the exact
behaviour is disrupted by the large scattering of the test results. For instance, a sudden
peak in strength is seen at a stress rate around 1311 MPa/s. This is most likely caused by
a small amount of test specimens showing appreciable higher ﬂexural strengths than the
==PAGE:64==
52
Chapter 5. Test Results and Discussion
Table 5.1: Overview of test results including the static tests.
Piston
Velocity
Number of
tests
Stress Rate
Failure stress
[mm/s]
[-]
[MPa/s]
[MPa]
1.7·10−3
30
2 ± 0.2
174 ± 41
0.05
10
78 ± 7
217 ± 52
1
15
1311 ± 146
271 ± 89
10
28
7645 ± 504
236 ± 65
100
15
1.2·105 ± 2.6·104
255 ± 94
1000
16
1.9·106 ± 4.8·104
306 ± 75
3000
15
5.7·106 ± 6.5·105
321 ± 75
100
102
104
106
Stress rate [MPa/s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Failure stress [MPa]
Force equilibrium checked
Force equilibrium not checked
Max: y = 40 log(x) + 247
Min: y = 20 log(x) + 75
Fig. 5.3: Failure stress as function of stress rate for both static, quasi static and dynamic tests.
The results are plotted together with the mean value, standard deviation and linear logarithmic
regressions of max/min values of each stress rate.
others did at this stress rate. More tests at this stress rate would properly produce a lower
mean value, but this has not been possible due to lack of specimens.
As seen in Fig. 2.4, the ﬂexural strength of glass is highly dependent on the surface
condition. The used specimens were all produced and handled in the same way but no
additional surface treatment were added, since preliminary considerations did not expect
scattering of these magnitudes. However, the results have shown remarkable differences
in ﬂexural strengths at the same stress rates, even though no visual ﬂaws were present.
In the extreme case the maximum value were over 3.5 times larger than the minimum
value. Nevertheless, the magnitude of the scattering does not disturb the overall picture
that the ﬂexural strength increases for high stress rates, but smaller deviations would have
==PAGE:65==
5.1. Flexural Strength at Varying Stress Rate
53
been preferable. By comparing the mean value from static tests and the mean value from
the highest stress rate, where force equilibrium was checked, gives an increase of 47 %
in strength. At the highest tested stress rate this number increases to 85 % but should
be treated with caution since force equilibrium was not checked. However, these results
still seem to appear reliable since they follow the trend quite well and no remarkable
indication of no force equilibrium can be observed.
The inﬂuence of sub-critical crack growth may be a part of the explanation of why
an increase of ﬂexural strength is noticed. According to results presented by Haldimann
(2006) the effect of sub-critical crack growth is decreased when loading glass rapidly.
As mentioned in section 2.6 the phenomenon needs humidity to occur, and when glass
is subjected to high stress rates the sub-critical crack growth is not able to fully develop
due to a shortage of water supply to the crack tip. This prevents the development of
sub-critical cracks and thereby increases the ﬂexural strength. Haldimann (2006) further
states that the ﬂexural strength converges with the stress rate at some point and thereby
will represent the inert strength. However, no noticeable convergence of the ﬂexural
strength can be observed in Fig. 5.3, but again the large scattering makes it difﬁcult to
predict the exact behaviour.
Some recent research indicates that the fracture toughness increases signiﬁcantly for
glass subjected to dynamic loading. Nyounguè et al. (2016) have conducted tests by
subjecting small scale ﬂoat glass beams with a range of notch geometries to both static
and dynamic loading. The results showed that the dynamic fracture toughness, Kdyn
Ic , was
30 % higher compared to the static fracture toughness, Ksta
Ic . This is in good agreement
with the obtained results, and may explain why convergence of the failure strength is
not achieved. The combination of the two aforementioned phenomena is thought to have
caused the behaviour of the achieved results.
The effect of scattering can be circumvented by interpreting the maximum values, and
thereby only looking at the most ﬂawless sample of each tested stress rate. By doing so,
a clear linear logarithmic tendency can observed with a regression of
σ1,max = 40 log( ˙σ)+247
[MPa]
(R2 = 0.97) ,
(5.1)
where the stress rate, ˙σ, is inserted in MPa/s. A Similar regression can be made for the
lower bound values
σ1,min = 20 log( ˙σ)+75
[MPa]
(R2 = 0.65) ,
(5.2)
though the regression does not ﬁt the minimum values as accurate compared to the maxi-
mum values. A possible explanation may be that there is no lower bound for how severe
==PAGE:66==
54
Chapter 5. Test Results and Discussion
the surface ﬂaw can be. Whereas for the maximum values there is a physical limit to
how perfect a glass surface can be produced. This means that the specimens producing
the maximum strengths are more alike compared to the specimens with the minimum
strengths.
Additionally, high-speed recordings with a Photron FastCam-APX RS were made
to verify that the fracture origin was located at the right location, since it has not been
possible to maintain the fracture patterns after quasi-static and dynamic tests. Fig. 5.4
presents three frames from one of the high-speed recordings.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5.4: Extracted frames from a high-speed recording (50.000 fps, shutter 4.1 µs, resolution 256
× 128 pixels). A specimen thickness of 3 mm was tested with a piston velocity of 1000 mm/s: (a)
loading of specimen before failure; (b) crack initiation under the load ring; (c) full fracture pattern.
The ﬁrst shows the specimen under loading before fracture. At the second frame
initial cracking can be spotted on the left side of load ring starting from somewhere under
the load ring, and the third frame shows a full fracture pattern. All high-speed recordings
showed that the initial crack would start from somewhere under the load ring. It was
therefore concluded that failure happened under the intentioned stress condition.
5.2
Thickness Variation
Two different thicknesses have been tested at the same piston velocity of 10 mm/s. The
actual mean thickness of the two specimen types have been measured to 1.85 mm and
3.83 mm, but in the following they are referred to by means of their nominal thicknesses
2 mm and 4 mm respectively. In total 30 specimens have been tested, 15 of each thickness.
Fig. 5.5 shows the failure stresses of each test plotted together with the mean value and
the standard deviation.
==PAGE:67==
5.2. Thickness Variation
55
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Failure stress [MPa]
 Stress rate = 10889±436MPa
Mean = 226.91 MPa
Std. Dev. = 
51.07 MPa
(a)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Failure Stress [MPa]
 Stress rate = 6205±618MPa
Mean = 260.09 MPa
Std. Dev. = 
121.07 MPa
(b)
Fig. 5.5: Failure stresses of specimens with two different thicknesses: (a) h = 2 mm; (b) h = 4 mm.
A large difference in the scattering is seen by comparing the two types of tests. The
2 mm specimens produced a much lower standard deviation than the 4 mm specimens
did, which is over twice as high. In addition, a slight increase in failure strength can
be observed by comparing the mean values. The trend is further supported by including
the results from the 3 mm specimens, where the same piston velocity was applied. Test
results from all three thicknesses are shown in Table 5.2 and Fig. 5.6.
Table 5.2: Overview of test results with varying thicknesses including 3 mm test specimens.
Nominal
thicknesss
Actual
thickness
Piston
velocity
Stress rate
Failure stress
[mm]
[mm]
[mm/s]
[MPa/s]
[MPa]
2
1.85
10
10889 ± 436
227 ± 51
3
2.85
10
7645 ± 504
236 ± 65
4
3.83
10
6205 ± 618
260 ± 121
It is seen that the stress rate is lowered as the thickness increases. This behaviour
is the exact opposite of what were expected. Numerical calculations predicted that the
stress rate would increase with increasing specimen thickness, if the piston was able to
maintain its velocity of 10 mm/s during the impact (see Appendix A section A.3). The
results indicate that the piston velocity was lowered depending on the stiffness of the
specimens. Due to the extremely short loading time, the hydraulic test machine was not
==PAGE:68==
56
Chapter 5. Test Results and Discussion
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Stress rate [MPa/s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Failure stress [MPa]
h = 2 mm
h = 3 mm
h = 4 mm
Fig. 5.6: Failure stress as function of stress rate for specimens with varying thicknesses.
able to adjust the piston velocity according to the met resistance before the specimen had
failed. This resulted in a small variation of piston velocities between the three types of
specimens. Nonetheless, the stress rates are still of similar magnitudes, but it should be
kept in mind when comparing the failure stresses. The difference in stress rate could have
been avoided by running some pilot tests with different thicknesses to adjust the piston
velocity, so that all types of specimens were subjected to the same stress rate. But due to
a limited number of specimens this was not done.
The inclusion of the results from the 3 mm specimens in Fig. 5.6 are in good a agree-
ment with the already discussed results. A clear reduction of the scattering is achieved
by minimizing the specimen thickness and an increase of failure stress is achieved by
increasing it. However, a more in-depth investigation is needed to ﬁnally validate the
thickness dependency of the failure strength at varying stress rates.
5.3
Scratched Specimens
In an attempt to reduce the scattering of the failure stresses, 25 specimens have been
scratched with a well-deﬁned ﬂaw (see section 3.3.1) and tested at various stress rates.
Two tests were discarded due to technical issues regarding the data logging. Results from
the scratched specimens are presented in Table 5.3 and Fig. 5.7.
A clear reduction in the scattering was achieved, however the two highest stress rates
produced remarkable larger standard deviation than the others. Again, the failure strength
==PAGE:69==
5.3. Scratched Specimens
57
Table 5.3: Overview of test results from scratched specimens.
Piston
Velocity
Number of
tests
Stress Rate
Failure stress
[mm/s]
[-]
[MPa/s]
[MPa]
1.7·10−3
5
1 ± 0.3
57 ± 6
0.05
3
62 ± 6
74 ± 1
1
3
1356 ± 213
85 ± 3
10
4
8269 ± 272
73 ± 6
100
4
1.4·105 ± 1.6·104
91 ± 19
1000
3
1.5·106 ± 1.4·105
88 ± 14
100
102
104
106
Stress rate [MPa/s]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Failure stress [MPa]
Force equilibrium checked
Force equilibrium not checked
Max: y = 8 log(x) + 62
Min: y = 4 log(x) + 58
Fig. 5.7: Failure stress as function of stress rate for scratched specimens. The results are plotted
together with the mean value, standard deviation and linear logarithmic regressions of max/min
values of each stress rate.
seems to increase with the stress rate and shows the same behaviour when comparing with
Fig. 5.3. The maximum increase in ﬂexural strength was found to 60 %. Furthermore, the
static tests shows the same failure strengths as tested at TU Darmstadt, which indicate
that the test setup worked as intended.
It is notable that Fig. 5.3 and Fig. 5.7 both show a drop in failure strength between tests
conducted at 1 mm/s and 10 mm/s. An explanation have been searched for by looking at
their loading curves, Fig. 3.14(a) and Fig. 3.14(b). The only apparent difference is that
Fig. 3.14(a) has a lower load rate at loads less than 0.5 kN, mainly caused by the sudden
stiffness experienced by the test machine. However, this does not explain the deviation
in failure strengths and no reliable explanation have been found other than the material
behaves differently at these load rates. More tests would therefore be beneﬁcial to fully
==PAGE:70==
58
Chapter 5. Test Results and Discussion
describe the behaviour, and thereby validate if a small drop in failure strength is present.
5.4
Stress Rate Dependency of Stiffness
An investigation regarding the stiffness behaviour of SLSG at varying stress rates has
been carried out. The tests where conducted by putting strain gauge rosettes, consisting
of three linear strain gauges with mutual angles of 120◦, on 3 mm test specimens. The
tests where conducted at four different stress rates, where the strain signals from the three
strain gauges were averaged.
According to theory and numerical calculations the specimen is subjected to an almost
hydrostatic plane strain condition on the tensile surface under the load ring (see Fig. 4.4).
This entails that all strain gauges in the rosette ideally should give the same strain signal.
However, due to the small ring dimensions and the small misalignment of the setup, it was
difﬁcult to ensure that the strain gauge rosettes were placed within the plane hydrostatic
strain zone. This have led to deviation between the signals. The individual strain gauge
signals can be seen in Appendix B section D.5. The test results are shown in Fig. 5.8.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Load [N]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
Strain [ m m-1]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
E = 67.0 GPa;
E = 68.0 GPa;
E = 70.5 GPa;
E = 82.0 GPa;
= 2 MPa/s
= 66 MPa/s
= 1244 MPa/s
= 43928 MPa/s
Fig. 5.8: Measured strains as function of applied load at different stress rates.
The linear curves show the measured averaged in-plane strain as function of applied
load. The stiffnesses have been estimated by adjusting the E-modulus in the axisymmetric
FEM-model described in section 4.2 until the same load-strain relationship was obtained
at a load of 1200 N.
==PAGE:71==
5.5. Comparison with Existing Results
59
On the three lowest stress rates, the individual strain gauge signals showed reasonably
coincident signals, but relative large deviations was observed at the highest stress rate, and
should therefore be treated with caution when interpreting Fig. 5.8.
It is seen that the strains gradually decreases, when the stress rate is increased resulting
in larger stiffnesses for a constant Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.23. This indicates that the stiffness
of SLSG shows some sensitivity to applied stress rate. However, some questions can be
ask regarding the quality of the obtained results due to high tolerances. Zhang et al.
(2012) have investigated in their study the dynamic E-modulus of annealed ﬂoat glass
and concluded that no noticeable sensitivity to stress rate was observed.
A more accurate and elaborate investigation is therefore needed to ﬁnally conclude the
behaviour. To comprehend the relative high tolerances of the location of strain gauges,
larger ring dimensions and specimens could have been used. This would have increased
the size of the hydrostatic plane strain zone, making it easier to place the strain gauges.
This setup would also have minimised eventual reinforcing effect from the strain gauge.
However, larger ring dimensions would also lower the maximum achievable stress rate.
5.5
Comparison with Existing Results
A comparison with existing results for BSG has been made to see whether the results are
in agreement. The comparison is shown in Fig. 5.9 where obtained results are plotted
together with results obtained by Nie et al. (2010).
100
102
104
106
Loading rate [MPa/s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Failure stress [MPa]
Sandpaper grounded
Scratched
Polished
No treatment
BSG
SLSG
Fig. 5.9: Comparison between results from Nie et al. (2010) for BSG and obtained results for
SLSG, where the applied surface treatments are assumed to be comparable.
==PAGE:72==
60
Chapter 5. Test Results and Discussion
The conducted quasi-static and dynamic tests all showed remarkable higher ﬂexural
strengths than the static tests, and the scratched specimens produced much less scattering
compared to the tests without any surface condition. These conclusions are consistent
with the results obtained for BSG. However, convergence was not obtained at high stress
rates for samples without any surface treatment, as it was seen for the polished BSG
samples.
Nie et al. (2010) conducted their tests at the three lowest stress rate on a traditional
hydraulic test machine, whereas a SHPB test was used at the highest stress rate. This rises
some questions regarding the obtained plateau since two different testing methods were
used. The scratched samples however showed some indications of a plateau, though more
tests are needed to ﬁnally validate the behaviour.
During the tests, it has been proven that the experimental setup is capable of reaching
similar or even higher stress rates compared to the SHPB test with similar ring dimen-
sions. The highest tested stress rate was measured to 5.8·106 MPa/s. Nie et al. (2010)
reached in their SHPB test a stress rate of 5·106 MPa/s which is 14 % lower.
==PAGE:73==
C H A P T E R
6
Conclusion
A successful experimental setup has been developed for testing the stress rate dependency
of the ﬂexural strength of ﬂoat glass. The test setup consisted of a high-speed hydraulic
test machine in combination with a small double-ring test. Moreover, high-speed record-
ings and fractography have been utilised to identify the crack origin and to ensure that
the failure happened under the right conditions, which could be conﬁrmed for all tests. A
method for measuring the force in the load and support ring was also developed to ensure
force equilibrium was present. However, tests showed that ringing of the lower part of the
test setup occurred at piston velocities above 100 mm/s, and at 200 mm/s it was no longer
possible to conclude that force equilibrium was present, even though it might have been.
Results conducted at higher piston velocities should therefore be treated with caution.
A stiffness investigation indicated that the E-modulus of ﬂoat glass increases with
the stress rate. However, due to tolerances and the small geometric dimensions of the
double-ring test setup, it was difﬁcult to place the strain gauge rosettes inside the plane
hydrostatic strain zone, which may have inﬂuenced the results. A description of how the
tests could have been conducted more accurately was therefore presented.
Results regarding the ﬂexural strength of ﬂoat glass, showed remarkable stress rate
sensitivity. An increase of 47 % in ﬂexural strength, compared to static tested values,
was observed at stress rates where force equilibrium was checked. However, a maximum
increase of 85 % was found at the highest tested stress rate, though it was not possible
to check whether force equilibrium was present. It was further noticed that the results
showed very large scattering due to the dependency of surface defects. A detailed discus-
sion regarding the behaviour of the results concluded, through research in the literature,
that the increase in ﬂexural strength was caused by a combination of the decreasing inﬂu-
==PAGE:74==
62
Chapter 6. Conclusion
ence of sub-critical crack growth and an increase of the fracture toughness under dynamic
loading.
An investigation of varying specimen thicknesses at a constant piston velocity was
carried out where three different thicknesses, 2, 3 and 4 mm, were tested. It was found
that increasing the specimen thickness would result in a slightly larger failure strength,
but also much larger scattering. Same investigation at different piston velocities would
have been preferred to support the obtained result, but this has not been possible.
A test series of intentionally scratched specimens was also tested at varying stress
rates. These results showed remarkable lower scattering compared to specimens without
any surface treatment. The results showed similar stress rate sensitivity with a maxi-
mum increase in strength of 60 %, although some inconsistencies at some of the tested
stress rates were observed. However, more tests are required to ﬁnally conﬁrm the exact
behaviour.
6.1
Future Work
This thesis has focused on estimating the properties of ﬂoat glass at high strain rates.
However, some investigations were not fully covered and requires further attention. The
following describes relevant topics to be concerned for future work.
Improvement of experimental setup
An issue regarding ringing in the lower part of the test setup, at piston velocities
above 100 mm/s, made it difﬁcult to verify whether force equilibrium was present
during testing. For future studies it is advised to come up with a redesign of the
bottom part of the setup to reduce this effect.
Surface treatment of specimens
Only a small selection of the tested glass specimens has been surface treated with
a well-deﬁned scratch resulting in remarkable lower scattering compared to the un-
treated ones. Furthermore, it was possible to show the same stress rate dependency.
Due to the small amount of specimens, it would be desirable to extend this investi-
gation ﬁrstly with more specimens in order to get a statistical signiﬁcant outcome,
but also with different surface treatments to ensure that the properties of ﬂoat glass
are the same independent on treatment.
Very important is that the surface treatment should be reproducible to secure com-
parable test results. For instance, it could be done by using a diamond-coated drill
to drill a hole in the centre of the specimen with known depth and diameter. This
will give a mechanical surface ﬂaw that is much larger than already existing micro-
==PAGE:75==
6.1. Future Work
63
cracks and thus will control the failure of the specimen. It is a method, which is
quite similar to the already applied one, but it can be made in-house and is much
simpler to apply. One could also imagine applying the same treatments as Nie et al.
(2010), using a method where the surface is scratched with sandpaper.
Thickness dependency
Results indicated that the ﬂexural failure strength of ﬂoat glass showed some sensi-
tivity to the specimen thickness, but a more in-depth investigation at multiple stress
rates is needed to validate the behaviour.
Stiffness investigation
A larger double ring test is needed to test the stiffness of ﬂoat glass at high stress
rates, in order to minimise tolerances and errors when testing. The larger ring di-
mensions will reduce the maximum achievable stress rate and a compromise should
therefore be used to get low tolerances and high stress rates.
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
ABAQUS Manual (2015). Abaqus 2016/CAE User’s Manual. Dassault Systèmes, France.
ASTM C1499 (2015). Test Method for Monotonic Equibiaxial Flexural Strength of Ad-
vanced Ceramics at Ambient Temperature. Annual Book of ASTM Standards C1499 –
15. ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA.
Boyce, B. and Dilmore, M. (2009). The dynamic tensile behavior of tough, ultrahigh-
strength steels at strain-rates from 0.0002s-1 to 200s-1. International Journal of Impact
Engineering, 36(2):263–271.
Bureau of Counterterrorism and Countering Violent Extremism (2016). Country Reports
on Terrorism 2015. United States Department of State Publication.
CMOG (2017). Corning Museum of Glasss: Glass through the Ages - An Interactive
Journey. http://www.cmog.org. Accessed: 09-03-2017.
DIN 18008-4 (2013). Glass in Building – Design and construction rules – Part 4: Ad-
ditional requirements for barrier glazing. Normenausschuss Bauwesen (NABau) im
DIN, Am DIN-Platz, Burggrafenstraße 6, 10787 Berlin.
DS/EN 1748-1-1 (2004). Glass in building – Special basic products – Borosilicate glasses
– Part 1-1: Deﬁnition and general physical and mechanical properties. Danish Stan-
dards Association, Kollegievej 6, 2920 Charlottenlund, Denmark, 1. edition.
DS/EN 572-1 (2012). Glass in building – Basic soda lime silicate glass products – Part
1: Deﬁnitions and generel physical and mechanical properties. Danish Standards As-
sociation, Kollegievej 6, 2920 Charlottenlund, Denmark, 3. edition.
DS/EN 572-2 (2012). Glass in building – Basic soda lime silicate glass products – Part
2: Float glass. Danish Standards Association, Kollegievej 6, 2920 Charlottenlund,
Denmark, 3. edition.
EN 13123-1 (2001). Windows, doors and shutters – Explosion resistance – Requirements
and classiﬁcation – Part 1: Shock tube.
European Committee for Standardization
(CEN), rue de Stassart, 36 B-1050 Brussels.
==PAGE:78==
66
Bibliography
EN 13123-2 (2004). Windows, doors, and shutters – Explosion resistance – Require-
ments and classiﬁcation – Part 2: Range test. European Committee for Standardization
(CEN), rue de Stassart, 36 B-1050 Brussels.
Evans, A. G. and Wiederhorn, S. M. (1974). Proof testing of ceramic materials – an
analytical basis for failure prediction. International Journal of Fracture, 10:379–392.
Freund, L. B. (1990). Dynamic Fracture Mechanics. Cambridge University Press.
Frew, D. J., Forrestal, M. J., and Chen, W. (2001). A split Hopkinson pressure bar tech-
nique to determine compressive stress-strain data for rock materials. Experimental
Mechanics, 41(1):40–46.
FYLDE Electronic Laboratories Ltd. (2007). Handbook: FE-H379-TA High Speed Trans-
ducer Ampliﬁer. FYLDE Electronic Laboratories Ltd., 49-51 Fylde Road Preston PR1
2XQ, England.
GTD (2017). Global Terrorism Database. https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/.
Accessed: 05-07-2017.
Haldimann, M. (2006). Fracture Strength of Structural Glass Elements – Analytical and
Numerical Modelling, Testing and Design. PhD thesis, École Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne.
Haldimann, M., Luible, A., and Overend, M. (2008). Structural Use of Glass. Interna-
tional Association for Bridge and Structural Engineering.
Hilcken, J. (2015).
Zyklische Ermüdung von thermisch entspanntem und thermisch
vorgespanntem Kalk-Natron-Silikatglas. Springer Vieweg, Berlin Heidelberg.
Irwin, G. R. (1957). Analysis of Stresses and Strains near the End of a Crack Traversing
a Plate. Journal of Applied Mechanics, 24:361–364.
Kinney, G. F. and Graham, K. J. E. (1985). Explosive Shocks in Air. Springer-Verlag.
Kistler Group (2013). Force Measurement with Load Washers – Type 9001A ... 9051A.
Kistler Group, Eulachstrasse 22, 8408 Winterthur, Switzerland.
Kistler Group (2016). Charge Ampliﬁer – Single-Channel Laboratory Charge Ampliﬁer
(Type 5018A). Kistler Group, Eulachstrasse 22, 8408 Winterthur, Switzerland.
Krauthammer, T. and Altenberg, A. (2000). Negative phase blast effects on glass panels.
International Journal of Impact Engineering, 24(1):1–17.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
67
Lambert, D. E. and Ross, C. A. (2000).
Strain rate effects on dynamic fracture and
strength. International Journal of Impact Engineering.
Meyers, M. A. (1994). Dynamic Behavior of Materials. JOHN WILEY & SONS INC.
Michalske, T. A. and Freiman, S. W. (1983). A Molecular Mechanism for Stress Corro-
sion in Vitreous Silica. Journal of the American Ceramic Society, 66:284–288.
Nie, X., Chen, W. W., and Templeton, D. W. (2010). Dynamic Ring-on-Ring Equibiaxial
Flexural Strength of Borosilicate Glass.
International Journal of Applied Ceramic
Technology, 7(5):616–624.
Nielsen, J. H. (2009). Tempered Glass – Bolted Connections and Related Problems. PhD
thesis, Technical University of Denmark.
Nielsen, J. H., Olesen, J. F., and Stang, H. (2009). The Fracture Process of Tempered
Soda-Lime-Silica Glass. Experimental Mechanics, 49:855–870.
Norville, D. H. S. and Conrath, E. J. (2001).
Simpliﬁed Design Procedure for Blast
Resistant Glazing. Glass Processing Days.
Norville, H. S., Harvill, N., Conrath, E. J., Shariat, S., and Mallonee, S. (1999). Glass-
Related Injuries in Oklahoma City Bombing. Journal of Performance of Constructed
Facilities, 13(2):50–56.
Nyounguè, A., Bouzid, S., Dossou, E., and Azari, Z. (2016). Fracture characterisation
of ﬂoat glass under static and dynamic loading. Journal of Asian Ceramic Societies,
4:371–380.
OCNM (2017). Oklahoma City National Memorial: Those Who Were Killed. https:
//oklahomacitynationalmemorial.org/people/.
Accessed:
06-03-
2017.
Peroni, M., Solomos, G., Pizzinato, V., and Larcher, M. (2011). Experimental investiga-
tion of high strain-rate behaviour of glass. Applied Mechanics and Materials, 82:63–68.
Petzold, A., Marusch, H., and Schramm, B. (1990). Der Baustoff Glas: Grundlagen,
Eigenschaften, Erzeugnisse, Glasbauelemente, Anwendungen. Verlag Karl Hofmann,
Schorndorf, 3. edition.
prEN 13474-3 (2009). Glass in building – Determination of the strength of glass panes
– Part 3: General method of calculation and determination of strength of glass by
testing. European Committee for Standardisation, Central Secretariat: rue de Stassart
36, B-1050 Brussels.
==PAGE:80==
68
Bibliography
Rasmussen, S. C. (2012). How Glass Changed the World. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Saarstahl AG (2017).
Material speciﬁcation sheet:
Saarstahl - 34CrNiMo6.
http://www.saarstahl.com/sag/downloads/download/13048#
search="34CrNiMo6". Accessed: 06-03-2017.
Schneider,
J. (2001).
Festigkeit und Bemessung punktgelagerter Gläser und
stoßbeanspruchter Gläser. PhD thesis, Technische Universität Darmstadt.
Schneider, J. and Wörner, J.-D. (2001). Glass Strength of Annealed and Tempered Struc-
tural Glass in the Area of Drilled Holes. Glass Processing Days, pages 193–198.
Schula, S. (2015). Charakterisierung der Kratzanfälligkeit von Gläsern im Bauwesen.
PhD thesis, TU Darmstadt.
Shelby, J. E. (2005). Introduction to Glass Science and Technology. Royal Society Of
Chemistry.
Smith, D. (2001). Glazing for Injury Alleviation Under Blast Loading – United Kingdom
Practice. Glass Processing Days, pages 335–340.
Teknisk Ståbi (2013). Teknisk Ståbi. Nyt Teknisk Forlag, Ny Vestergade 17, Copenhagen,
Denmark, 22. edition.
Timoshenko, S. and Woinowsky-Krieger, S. (1964). The Theory of Plates and Shells.
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company.
Wiederhorn, S. M. (1967). Inﬂuence of Water Vapor on Crack Propagation in Soda-Lime
Glass. Journal of the American Ceramic Society, 50:407–414.
Zhang, X., Zou, Y., Hao, H., Li, X., Ma, G., and Liu, K. (2012). Laboratory Test on Dy-
namic Material Properties of Annealed Float Glass. International Journal of Protective
Structures, 3(4):407–430.
==PAGE:81==
Appendices
69
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
List of Appendices
A
Applied FEM-Models
73
A.1
Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
73
A.1.1
Axisymmetric FEM-Model
73
A.1.1.1
Model Database (MDB)
73
A.1.1.2
Output Database (ODB)
82
A.1.2
Half-Symmetric 3D FEM-Model
84
A.1.2.1
Model Database (MDB)
84
A.1.2.2
Output Database (ODB)
95
A.2
Convergence Analysis
96
A.2.1
Axisymmetric FEM-Model
96
A.2.2
Half-Symmetric 3D FEM-Model
97
A.3
Thickness Dependency of Stresses
99
B
Calibration of Measuring Equipment
101
B.1
Built-In LVDT
101
B.2
Load Cell
104
B.2.1
Piezoelectric Load Cell
108
B.3
Linear Strain Gauges at Load Ring
110
B.4
Strain Gauge Rosette at Glass Specimens
112
C
Scratched Test Specimens
115
C.1
Measured Scratch Lengths
115
C.2
Images of all Scratches
116
D
Individual Test Results
119
D.1
Static Loading Rates
120
D.2
Quasi-Static and Dynamic Loading Rates
121
D.3
Thickness Variation at Constant Loading Rate
124
D.4
Scratched Specimens at Varying Loading Rates
125
==PAGE:84==
72
List of Appendices
D.5
Specimens Equipped with Strain Gauges
126
E
Annex – USB Stick
127
==PAGE:85==
A P P E N D I X
A
Applied FEM-Models
A.1
Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
To simplify the use of FEM-models in the commercial software SIMULIA ABAQUS/CAE
2016 when performing parametric analysis, the graphical user interface (GUI) was used
to create scripts which deﬁnes the model of the double-ring test and the output of the
calculations. The scripts were written in the programming language Python, which is a
widely used high-level language, and are divided into two parts: a model database (MDB)
and an output database (ODB). The following subsections contains the Python scripts
made for the axisymmetric model and the half symmetric 3D-model of the double-ring
test.
A.1.1
Axisymmetric FEM-Model
The script made for the axisymmetric FEM-model of the double-ring test was used to
calculate the failure stress of all tested glass specimens by using the failure load from the
conducted experiments.
A.1.1.1
Model Database (MDB)
1
# load modulus
2
from part import *
3
from material import *
4
from section import *
5
from assembly import *
6
from step import *
7
from interaction import *
==PAGE:86==
74
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
8
from load import *
9
from mesh import *
10
from optimization import *
11
from job import *
12
from sketch import *
13
from visualization import *
14
from connectorBehavior import *
15
from math import *
16
17
import numpy as np
18
19
### DIMENSIONS ###
20
RL=0.00625
# Radius load ring
21
RS=0.015
# Radius support ring
22
RT=0.0025
# Tip radius
23
AL=(pow(RL, 2)-pow((RL-2*RT), 2))*pi
# Cross sectional area of load ring
24
H=0.00251
# Height of ring
25
RG=0.0225
# Radius of glass specimen
26
27
### GLASS THICKNESS ###
28
T=[0.003]
29
30
### LOAD DEFINITION ###
31
magLoad=[2e3]
32
33
### ELEMENT SIZE ###
34
elSize=[0.00015]
35
36
### FRICTION COEFFICIENT ###
37
friction = 0.0
38
39
#################################
40
numbering1=range(0,len(T))
41
numbering2=range(0,len(magLoad))
42
numbering3=range(0,len(elSize))
43
44
for number1 in numbering1:
45
print ’=========================================================’
46
print ’Glass thickness = %.2f mm’ % (T[number1]*1000)
47
48
for number2 in numbering2:
49
print ’=========================================================’
50
print ’Magnitude of load = %.2f kN’ % (magLoad[number2]/1000)
51
print ’Magnitude of pressure = %.2f MPa’ % (magLoad[number2]/AL*1e-6)
52
53
for number3 in numbering3:
54
print ’=========================================================
,→’
55
print ’Mesh Nr. %.0f:’ % (number3+1)
56
print ’=========================================================
,→’
57
58
### PART - LoadingRing ###
59
mdb.models[’Model-1’].ConstrainedSketch(name=’__profile__’,
,→sheetSize=0.1)
60
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].sketchOptions.
,→setValues(
==PAGE:87==
A.1. Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
75
61
decimalPlaces=3, viewStyle=AXISYM)
62
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].ConstructionLine(
,→point1=(0.0,
63
-0.05), point2=(0.0, 0.05))
64
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt
,→((0.0, 0.0))
65
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].FixedConstraint(
,→entity=
66
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((0.0, 0.0),
67
))
68
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(point1=(RL-2*
,→RT, RT),
69
point2=(RL-2*RT, H))
70
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RL-2*RT,
71
RL))
72
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].VerticalConstraint
,→(addUndoState=
73
False, entity=
74
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RL-2*RT,
75
RT), ))
76
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(point1=(RL-2*
,→RT, H),
77
point2=(RL, H))
78
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RL-RT, H))
79
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→HorizontalConstraint(
80
addUndoState=False, entity=
81
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RL-RT,
82
H), ))
83
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RL-2*RT,
84
RT))
85
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RL-RT, H))
86
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→PerpendicularConstraint(
87
addUndoState=False, entity1=
88
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RL-2*RT,
89
RT), ), entity2=
90
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RL-RT,
91
H), ))
92
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(point1=(RL, H
,→),
93
point2=(RL, RT))
94
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RL,
95
RT))
96
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].VerticalConstraint
,→(addUndoState=
97
False, entity=
==PAGE:88==
76
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
98
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RL,
99
RT), ))
100
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RL-RT, H))
101
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RL,
102
RT))
103
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→PerpendicularConstraint(
104
addUndoState=False, entity1=
105
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RL-RT,
106
H), ), entity2=
107
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RL,
108
RT), ))
109
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].ArcByCenterEnds(
,→center=(RL-RT,
110
RT), direction=CLOCKWISE, point1=(RL, RT), point2=(RL-2*
,→RT,
111
RT))
112
mdb.models[’Model-1’].Part(dimensionality=AXISYMMETRIC, name=’
,→LoadingRing’,
113
type=DEFORMABLE_BODY)
114
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].BaseShell(sketch=
115
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’])
116
del mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’]
117
118
### PART - SupportingRing ###
119
mdb.models[’Model-1’].ConstrainedSketch(name=’__profile__’,
,→sheetSize=0.1)
120
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].sketchOptions.
,→setValues(
121
decimalPlaces=3, viewStyle=AXISYM)
122
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].ConstructionLine(
,→point1=(0.0,
123
-0.05), point2=(0.0, 0.05))
124
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt
,→((0.0, 0.0))
125
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].FixedConstraint(
,→entity=
126
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((0.0, 0.0),
127
))
128
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(point1=(RS-2*
,→RT, H-RT),
129
point2=(RS-2*RT, 0.0))
130
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RS-2*RT,
131
(H-RT)/2))
132
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].VerticalConstraint
,→(addUndoState=
133
False, entity=
134
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RS-2*RT,
135
(H-RT)/2), ))
==PAGE:89==
A.1. Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
77
136
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(point1=(RS-2*
,→RT, 0.0),
137
point2=(RS, 0.0))
138
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RS-RT, 0.0))
139
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→HorizontalConstraint(
140
addUndoState=False, entity=
141
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RS-RT, 0.0),
142
))
143
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RS-2*RT,
144
(H-RT)/2))
145
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RS-RT, 0.0))
146
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→PerpendicularConstraint(
147
addUndoState=False, entity1=
148
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RS-2*RT,
149
(H-RT)/2), ), entity2=
150
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RS-RT, 0.0),
151
))
152
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(point1=(RS,
,→0.0),
153
point2=(RS, H-RT))
154
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RS,
155
(H-RT)/2))
156
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].VerticalConstraint
,→(addUndoState=
157
False, entity=
158
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RS,
159
(H-RT)/2), ))
160
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RS-RT, 0.0))
161
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt((
,→RS,
162
(H-RT)/2))
163
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→PerpendicularConstraint(
164
addUndoState=False, entity1=
165
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((RS-RT, 0.0),
166
), entity2=mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’
,→].geometry.findAt((
167
RS, (H-RT)/2), ))
168
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].ArcByCenterEnds(
,→center=(RS-RT,
169
H-RT), direction=CLOCKWISE, point1=(RS-2*RT, H-RT),
,→point2=(RS,
170
H-RT))
171
mdb.models[’Model-1’].Part(dimensionality=AXISYMMETRIC, name=’
,→SupportingRing’,
==PAGE:90==
78
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
172
type=DEFORMABLE_BODY)
173
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].BaseShell(sketch=
174
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’])
175
del mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’]
176
177
### PART - GlassSpecimen ###
178
mdb.models[’Model-1’].ConstrainedSketch(name=’__profile__’,
,→sheetSize=0.1)
179
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].sketchOptions.
,→setValues(
180
decimalPlaces=3, viewStyle=AXISYM)
181
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].ConstructionLine(
,→point1=(0.0,
182
-0.05), point2=(0.0, 0.05))
183
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.findAt
,→((0.0, 0.0))
184
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].FixedConstraint(
,→entity=
185
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((0.0, 0.0),
186
))
187
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].rectangle(point1
,→=(0.0, 0.0),
188
point2=(RG, T[number1]))
189
mdb.models[’Model-1’].Part(dimensionality=AXISYMMETRIC, name=’
,→GlassSpecimen’,
190
type=DEFORMABLE_BODY)
191
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].BaseShell(sketch=
192
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’])
193
del mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’]
194
195
### MATERIALS ###
196
mdb.models[’Model-1’].Material(name=’Glass’)
197
mdb.models[’Model-1’].materials[’Glass’].Elastic(table
,→=((70000000000.0, 0.23),
198
))
199
mdb.models[’Model-1’].Material(name=’Steel’)
200
mdb.models[’Model-1’].materials[’Steel’].Elastic(table
,→=((210000000000.0, 0.3),
201
))
202
203
### SECTIONS ###
204
mdb.models[’Model-1’].HomogeneousSolidSection(material=’Glass’,
,→name=
205
’GlassSpecimen’, thickness=None)
206
mdb.models[’Model-1’].HomogeneousSolidSection(material=’Steel’,
,→name=
207
’SteelRing’, thickness=None)
208
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].SectionAssignment(
,→offset=0.0,
209
offsetField=’’, offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE, region=Region
,→(
210
faces=mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].faces
,→.findAt(((RG/2,
211
T[number1]/2, 0.0), (0.0, 0.0, 1.0)), )), sectionName=’
,→GlassSpecimen’,
212
thicknessAssignment=FROM_SECTION)
==PAGE:91==
A.1. Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
79
213
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].SectionAssignment(
,→offset=0.0,
214
offsetField=’’, offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE, region=Region
,→(
215
faces=mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].faces.
,→findAt(((RL-RT,
216
H/2, 0.0), (0.0, 0.0, 1.0)), )), sectionName=’SteelRing’
,→,
217
thicknessAssignment=FROM_SECTION)
218
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].SectionAssignment(
,→offset=0.0,
219
offsetField=’’, offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE, region=Region
,→(
220
faces=mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].
,→faces.findAt(((
221
RS-RT, H/2, 0.0), (0.0, 0.0, 1.0)), )), sectionName=’
,→SteelRing’,
222
thicknessAssignment=FROM_SECTION)
223
224
### SET & SURFACE ###
225
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].Set(faces=
226
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].faces.
,→getSequenceFromMask((
227
’[#1 ]’, ), ), name=’GlassNodes’)
228
229
### MESH - GlassSpecimen ###
230
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].setMeshControls(
,→elemShape=QUAD,
231
regions=mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→faces.findAt(((RG/2,
232
T[number1]/2, 0.0), )), technique=STRUCTURED)
233
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].setElementType(
,→elemTypes=(
234
ElemType(elemCode=CAX8, elemLibrary=STANDARD), ElemType(
,→elemCode=CAX6,
235
elemLibrary=STANDARD)), regions=(
236
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].faces.
,→findAt(((RG/2,
237
T[number1]/2, 0.0), )), ))
238
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].deleteMesh()
239
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].seedPart(
,→deviationFactor=0.1,
240
minSizeFactor=0.1, size=elSize[number3])
241
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].generateMesh()
242
243
### MESH - LoadingRing ###
244
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].setMeshControls(
,→elemShape=
245
QUAD_DOMINATED, regions=
246
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].faces.findAt
,→(((RL-RT,
247
H/2, 0.0), )))
248
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].setElementType(
,→elemTypes=(ElemType(
249
elemCode=CAX8, elemLibrary=STANDARD), ElemType(elemCode=
,→CAX6,
250
elemLibrary=STANDARD)), regions=(
==PAGE:92==
80
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
251
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].faces.findAt
,→(((RL-RT,
252
H/2, 0.0), )), ))
253
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].seedPart(
,→deviationFactor=0.1,
254
minSizeFactor=0.1, size=0.00025) #0.00025
255
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].generateMesh()
256
257
### MESH - SupportingRing ###
258
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].setMeshControls(
,→elemShape=
259
QUAD_DOMINATED, regions=
260
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].faces.
,→findAt(((RS-RT,
261
H/2, 0.0), )))
262
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].setElementType(
,→elemTypes=(
263
ElemType(elemCode=CAX8, elemLibrary=STANDARD), ElemType(
,→elemCode=CAX6,
264
elemLibrary=STANDARD)), regions=(
265
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].faces.
,→findAt(((RS-RT,
266
H/2, 0.0), )), ))
267
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].seedPart(
,→deviationFactor=0.1,
268
minSizeFactor=0.1, size=0.00025)
269
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].generateMesh()
270
271
### ASSEMBLY ###
272
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.DatumCsysByThreePoints(
,→coordSysType=
273
CYLINDRICAL, origin=(0.0, 0.0, 0.0), point1=(1.0, 0.0,
,→0.0), point2=(0.0,
274
0.0, -1.0))
275
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=ON, name=
276
’GlassSpecimen-1’, part=mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’
,→GlassSpecimen’])
277
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=ON, name=’
,→LoadingRing-1’,
278
part=mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’])
279
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=ON, name=
280
’SupportingRing-1’, part=mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’
,→SupportingRing’])
281
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.translate(instanceList=(’
,→LoadingRing-1’, ),
282
vector=(0.0, T[number1], 0.0))
283
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.translate(instanceList=(’
,→SupportingRing-1’,
284
), vector=(0.0, -H, 0.0))
285
286
### INTERACTION - Contact ###
287
mdb.models[’Model-1’].ContactProperty(’IntProp-1’)
288
mdb.models[’Model-1’].interactionProperties[’IntProp-1’].
,→TangentialBehavior(
289
dependencies=0, directionality=ISOTROPIC,
,→elasticSlipStiffness=None,
==PAGE:93==
A.1. Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
81
290
formulation=LAGRANGE, fraction=0.005, maximumElasticSlip
,→=FRACTION,
291
pressureDependency=OFF, shearStressLimit=None,
,→slipRateDependency=OFF,
292
table=((friction, ), ), temperatureDependency=OFF)
293
mdb.models[’Model-1’].ContactStd(createStepName=’Initial’, name=
,→’Int-1’)
294
mdb.models[’Model-1’].interactions[’Int-1’].includedPairs.
,→setValuesInStep(
295
stepName=’Initial’, useAllstar=ON)
296
mdb.models[’Model-1’].interactions[’Int-1’].
,→contactPropertyAssignments.appendInStep(
297
assignments=((GLOBAL, SELF, ’IntProp-1’), ), stepName=’
,→Initial’)
298
299
### STEP, BC & LOAD ###
300
mdb.models[’Model-1’].StaticStep(name=’Loading’, nlgeom=OFF,
,→previous=’Initial’)
301
mdb.models[’Model-1’].steps[’Loading’].setValues(minInc=1e-5)
302
mdb.models[’Model-1’].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET,
,→createStepName=’Initial’,
303
distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName=’’, localCsys=None,
,→name=
304
’BCLoadingRing’, region=Region(
305
edges=mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.instances[’
,→LoadingRing-1’].edges.findAt(
306
((RL-RT, H+T[number1], 0.0), ), )), u1=SET, u2=UNSET,
,→ur3=SET)
307
mdb.models[’Model-1’].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET,
,→createStepName=’Initial’,
308
distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName=’’, localCsys=None,
,→name=
309
’BCSupportingRing’, region=Region(
310
edges=mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.instances[’
,→SupportingRing-1’].edges.findAt(
311
((RS-RT, -H, 0.0), ), )), u1=SET, u2=SET, ur3=SET)
312
mdb.models[’Model-1’].Pressure(amplitude=UNSET, createStepName=’
,→Loading’,
313
distributionType=UNIFORM, field=’’, magnitude=magLoad[
,→number2]/AL, name=’Load’,
314
region=Region(
315
side1Edges=mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.instances[
,→’LoadingRing-1’].edges.findAt(
316
((RL-RT, H+T[number1], 0.0), ), )))
317
318
### TIME INCREMENTATION ###
319
mdb.models[’Model-1’].steps[’Loading’].control.setValues(
,→allowPropagation=OFF,
320
resetDefaultValues=OFF, timeIncrementation=(4.0, 8.0,
,→9.0, 16.0, 10.0, 4.0,
321
12.0, 5.0, 6.0, 3.0, 50.0))
322
323
### FIELD OUTPUT ###
324
mdb.models[’Model-1’].fieldOutputRequests[’F-Output-1’].
,→setValues(variables=(
325
’E’,’S’, ’U’, ’RF’))
326
==PAGE:94==
82
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
327
### JOB & CALCULATE ###
328
mdb.Job(atTime=None, contactPrint=OFF, description=’’, echoPrint
,→=OFF,
329
explicitPrecision=SINGLE, getMemoryFromAnalysis=True,
,→historyPrint=OFF,
330
memory=90, memoryUnits=PERCENTAGE, model=’Model-1’,
,→modelPrint=OFF,
331
multiprocessingMode=DEFAULT, name=’RingOnRing’,
,→nodalOutputPrecision=SINGLE
332
, numCpus=4, numDomains=4, numGPUs=0, queue=None,
,→resultsFormat=ODB,
333
scratch=’’, type=ANALYSIS, userSubroutine=’’, waitHours
,→=0, waitMinutes=0)
334
mdb.jobs[’RingOnRing’].submit(consistencyChecking=OFF)
335
mdb.jobs[’RingOnRing’].waitForCompletion()
336
337
### OUTPUT ###
338
execfile(’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc Thesis/
,→Abaqus/RingOnRing/Python/RingOnRing_ODB.py’)
A.1.1.2
Output Database (ODB)
1
# open modulus, create viewport and open odb
2
import os
3
from abaqus import *
4
from abaqusConstants import *
5
session.Viewport(name=’Viewport: 1’, origin=(0.0, 0.0), width=200.0,
6
height=200.0)
7
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].makeCurrent()
8
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].maximize()
9
from caeModules import *
10
from driverUtils import executeOnCaeStartup
11
executeOnCaeStartup()
12
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].partDisplay.geometryOptions.setValues(
13
referenceRepresentation=ON)
14
15
a = mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly
16
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].setValues(displayedObject=a)
17
o3 = session.openOdb(
18
name=’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc Thesis/Abaqus/RingOnRing/
,→Calculation/RingOnRing.odb’)
19
20
### CREATE OUTPUT ###
21
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].setValues(displayedObject=o3)
22
a = mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly
23
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].setValues(displayedObject=a)
24
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].setValues(
25
displayedObject=session.odbs[’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc Thesis/
,→Abaqus/RingOnRing/Calculation/RingOnRing.odb’])
26
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].assemblyDisplay.setValues(
27
optimizationTasks=OFF, geometricRestrictions=OFF, stopConditions=OFF)
28
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].odbDisplay.setPrimaryVariable(
29
variableLabel=’S’, outputPosition=INTEGRATION_POINT, refinement=(INVARIANT,
30
’Max. Principal’), )
31
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].odbDisplay.display.setValues(
32
plotState=CONTOURS_ON_DEF)
33
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].odbDisplay.commonOptions.setValues(
==PAGE:95==
A.1. Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
83
34
visibleEdges=FREE, deformationScaling=UNIFORM, uniformScaleFactor=1)
35
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].odbDisplay.contourOptions.setValues(
36
showMaxLocation=ON)
37
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].viewportAnnotationOptions.setValues(
38
legendBackgroundStyle=OTHER, legendBackgroundColor=’#848484’)
39
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].view.setValues(nearPlane=0.0695763,
40
farPlane=0.112435, width=0.0322029, height=0.0224281,
41
viewOffsetX=-0.00530675, viewOffsetY=-0.00220554)
42
43
### FILE NAMES ###
44
fileName1 = ’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc Thesis/Abaqus/RingOnRing/
,→Calculation/Stress_Thickness’+str(number1+1)+’_Load’+str(number2+1)+’_Mesh’+str(
,→number3+1)+’.png’
45
fileName2 = ’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc Thesis/Abaqus/RingOnRing/
,→Calculation/Stress_Thickness’+str(number1+1)+’_Load’+str(number2+1)+’_Mesh’+str(
,→number3+1)+’.txt’
46
fileName3 = ’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc Thesis/Abaqus/RingOnRing/
,→Calculation/StressRate_SL-3-’+str(number2+1)+’.txt’
47
48
### PRINT STRESS DISTRIBUTION TO PNG FILE ###
49
# session.printToFile(
50
# fileName=fileName1,
51
# format=PNG, canvasObjects=(session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’], ))
52
53
### PRINT MAX PRINCIPAL STRESSES TO A FILE ###
54
leaf = dgo.LeafFromPartInstance(partInstanceName=(’GLASSSPECIMEN-1’, ))
55
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].odbDisplay.displayGroup.replace(leaf=leaf)
56
odb = session.odbs[’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc Thesis/Abaqus/
,→RingOnRing/Calculation/RingOnRing.odb’]
57
58
lastStep = odb.steps[’Loading’]
59
lastFrame = lastStep.frames[-1]
60
61
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].odbDisplay.setPrimaryVariable(
62
variableLabel=’S’, outputPosition=INTEGRATION_POINT, refinement=(INVARIANT,
63
’Max. Principal’), )
64
65
session.Path(name=’Bottom_Surface’, type=EDGE_LIST, expression=((
66
’GLASSSPECIMEN-1’, ((1, 1, 1, 1), (2, 1, 1, 1), (3, 1, 1, 1), (4, 1, 1, 1),
67
(5, 1, 1, 1), (6, 1, 1, 1), (7, 1, 1, 1), (8, 1, 1, 1), (9, 1, 1, 1), (10,
68
1, 1, 1), (11, 1, 1, 1), (12, 1, 1, 1), (13, 1, 1, 1), (14, 1, 1, 1), (15,
69
1, 1, 1), (16, 1, 1, 1), (17, 1, 1, 1), (18, 1, 1, 1), (19, 1, 1, 1), (20,
70
1, 1, 1), (21, 1, 1, 1), (22, 1, 1, 1), (23, 1, 1, 1), (24, 1, 1, 1), (25,
71
1, 1, 1), (26, 1, 1, 1), (27, 1, 1, 1), (28, 1, 1, 1), (29, 1, 1, 1), (30,
72
1, 1, 1), (31, 1, 1, 1), (32, 1, 1, 1), (33, 1, 1, 1), (34, 1, 1, 1), (35,
73
1, 1, 1), (36, 1, 1, 1), (37, 1, 1, 1), (38, 1, 1, 1), (39, 1, 1, 1), (40,
74
1, 1, 1), (41, 1, 1, 1), (42, 1, 1, 1), (43, 1, 1, 1), (44, 1, 1, 1), (45,
75
1, 1, 1), (46, 1, 1, 1), (47, 1, 1, 1), (48, 1, 1, 1), (49, 1, 1, 1), (50,
76
1, 1, 1), (51, 1, 1, 1), (52, 1, 1, 1), (53, 1, 1, 1), (54, 1, 1, 1), (55,
77
1, 1, 1), (56, 1, 1, 1), (57, 1, 1, 1), (58, 1, 1, 1), (59, 1, 1, 1), (60,
78
1, 1, 1), (61, 1, 1, 1), (62, 1, 1, 1), (63, 1, 1, 1), (64, 1, 1, 1), (65,
79
1, 1, 1), (66, 1, 1, 1), (67, 1, 1, 1), (68, 1, 1, 1), (69, 1, 1, 1), (70,
80
1, 1, 1), (71, 1, 1, 1), (72, 1, 1, 1), (73, 1, 1, 1), (74, 1, 1, 1), (75,
81
1, 1, 1), (76, 1, 1, 1), (77, 1, 1, 1), (78, 1, 1, 1), (79, 1, 1, 1), (80,
82
1, 1, 1), (81, 1, 1, 1), (82, 1, 1, 1), (83, 1, 1, 1), (84, 1, 1, 1), (85,
83
1, 1, 1), (86, 1, 1, 1), (87, 1, 1, 1), (88, 1, 1, 1), (89, 1, 1, 1), (90,
84
1, 1, 1), (91, 1, 1, 1), (92, 1, 1, 1), (93, 1, 1, 1), (94, 1, 1, 1), (95,
==PAGE:96==
84
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
85
1, 1, 1), (96, 1, 1, 1), (97, 1, 1, 1), (98, 1, 1, 1), (99, 1, 1, 1), (100,
86
1, 1, 1), (101, 1, 1, 1), (102, 1, 1, 1), (103, 1, 1, 1), (104, 1, 1, 1), (
87
105, 1, 1, 1), (106, 1, 1, 1), (107, 1, 1, 1), (108, 1, 1, 1), (109, 1, 1,
88
1), (110, 1, 1, 1), (111, 1, 1, 1), (112, 1, 1, 1), (113, 1, 1, 1), (114,
89
1, 1, 1), (115, 1, 1, 1), (116, 1, 1, 1), (117, 1, 1, 1), (118, 1, 1, 1), (
90
119, 1, 1, 1), (120, 1, 1, 1), (121, 1, 1, 1), (122, 1, 1, 1), (123, 1, 1,
91
1), (124, 1, 1, 1), (125, 1, 1, 1), (126, 1, 1, 1), (127, 1, 1, 1), (128,
92
1, 1, 1), (129, 1, 1, 1), (130, 1, 1, 1), (131, 1, 1, 1), (132, 1, 1, 1), (
93
133, 1, 1, 1), (134, 1, 1, 1), (135, 1, 1, 1), (136, 1, 1, 1), (137, 1, 1,
94
1), (138, 1, 1, 1), (139, 1, 1, 1), (140, 1, 1, 1), (141, 1, 1, 1), (142,
95
1, 1, 1), (143, 1, 1, 1), (144, 1, 1, 1), (145, 1, 1, 1), (146, 1, 1, 1), (
96
147, 1, 1, 1), (148, 1, 1, 1), (149, 1, 1, 1), (150, 1, 1, 1), )), ))
97
98
pth = session.paths[’Bottom_Surface’]
99
100
session.XYDataFromPath(name=’Stresses_Bottom_Surface’, path=pth,
101
includeIntersections=False, projectOntoMesh=False, pathStyle=PATH_POINTS,
102
numIntervals=10, projectionTolerance=0, shape=DEFORMED,
103
labelType=TRUE_DISTANCE)
104
105
x0 = session.xyDataObjects[’Stresses_Bottom_Surface’]
106
107
session.writeXYReport(
108
fileName=fileName2,
109
xyData=(x0, ))
A.1.2
Half-Symmetric 3D FEM-Model
The script made for the half-symmetric 3D FEM-model of the double-ring test was used
to analyse the alignment requirements between the glass specimen and the double-ring
test setup and between the load ring and support ring by checking the variation in failure
stresses.
A.1.2.1
Model Database (MDB)
1
# load modulus
2
from part import *
3
from material import *
4
from section import *
5
from assembly import *
6
from step import *
7
from interaction import *
8
from load import *
9
from mesh import *
10
from optimization import *
11
from job import *
12
from sketch import *
13
from visualization import *
14
from connectorBehavior import *
15
16
### DIMENSIONS ###
17
RL=0.00625
# Radius loading ring
18
RS=0.015
# Radius supporting ring
19
RT=0.0025
# Tip radius
==PAGE:97==
A.1. Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
85
20
AL=(pow(RL, 2)-pow((RL-2*RT), 2))*pi
# Area of loading ring
21
H=0.0025
# Height of rings
22
RG=0.0225
# Radius of glass specimen
23
24
### GLASS THICKNESS ###
25
T=0.003
26
27
### LOAD DEFINITION ###
28
magLoad=[1.0e3]
29
30
### ELEMENT SIZE ###
31
ringSize=0.0005
32
partSize=0.001
33
edgeSizeH=[0.0005]
34
edgeSizeV=[T/4]
35
36
### OFFSETTING LOADING RING & GLASS SPECIMEN ###
37
offRing=[0.0, 0.0005, 0.001, 0.0015, 0.002, 0.0025, 0.003, 0.0035, 0.00375]
38
offGlass=[0.0000, 0.0002, 0.0004, 0.0006, 0.0008, 0.001]
39
40
### FRICTION SETTINGS ###
41
friction = 0
42
43
#################################################################
44
numbering1=range(0, len(magLoad))
45
numbering2=range(0, len(edgeSizeH))
46
numbering3=range(0, len(offRing))
47
numbering4=range(0, len(offGlass))
48
49
for number1 in numbering1:
50
print ’=========================================================’
51
print ’Magnitude of load = %.2f kN’ % (magLoad[number1]/1000)
52
print ’Magnitude of pressure = %.2f MPa’ % (magLoad[number1]/AL*1e-6)
53
54
for number2 in numbering2:
55
print ’=========================================================’
56
print ’Mesh Nr. %.0f:’ % (number2+1)
57
58
for number3 in numbering3:
59
print ’=========================================================
,→’
60
print ’Offset of load ring = %.2f mm’ % (offRing[number3]*1000)
61
62
for number4 in numbering4:
63
print ’
,→=========================================================
,→’
64
print ’Offset of glass specimen = %.2f mm’ % (offGlass[
,→number4]*1000)
65
print ’
,→=========================================================
,→’
66
67
### PART - GlassSpecimen ###
68
mdb.models[’Model-1’].ConstrainedSketch(name=’
,→__profile__’, sheetSize=0.1)
==PAGE:98==
86
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
69
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→sketchOptions.setValues(
70
decimalPlaces=3)
71
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→ArcByCenterEnds(center=(0.0, 0.0)
72
, direction=COUNTERCLOCKWISE, point1=(0.0, -RG),
,→
point2=(0.0, RG))
73
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(
,→point1=(0.0, RG),
74
point2=(0.0, -RG))
75
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((0.0, 0.0))
76
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→VerticalConstraint(addUndoState=
77
False, entity=
78
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((0.0, 0.0),
79
))
80
mdb.models[’Model-1’].Part(dimensionality=THREE_D, name=
,→’GlassSpecimen’, type=
81
DEFORMABLE_BODY)
82
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→BaseSolidExtrude(depth=T,
83
sketch=mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’
,→__profile__’])
84
del mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’]
85
86
### PART - LoadingRing ###
87
mdb.models[’Model-1’].ConstrainedSketch(name=’__sweep__’
,→, sheetSize=0.1)
88
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__sweep__’].
,→sketchOptions.setValues(
89
decimalPlaces=3)
90
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__sweep__’].
,→ArcByCenterEnds(center=(0.0, 0.0),
91
direction=COUNTERCLOCKWISE, point1=(0.0, -RL),
,→point2=(0.0, RL))
92
mdb.models[’Model-1’].ConstrainedSketch(name=’
,→__profile__’, sheetSize=0.1,
93
transform=(0.0, -1.0, 0.0, -0.0, 0.0, 1.0, -1.0,
94
-0.0, -0.0, -0.0, -RL, 0.0))
95
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→sketchOptions.setValues(
96
decimalPlaces=3)
97
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→ConstructionLine(point1=(-0.05,
98
0.0), point2=(0.05, 0.0))
99
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→ConstructionLine(point1=(0.0,
100
-0.05), point2=(0.0, 0.05))
101
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(
,→point1=(0.0, RT),
102
point2=(0.0, H))
103
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((0.0, H-0.001))
104
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→VerticalConstraint(addUndoState=
==PAGE:99==
A.1. Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
87
105
False, entity=
106
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((0.0,
107
H-0.001), ))
108
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(
,→point1=(0.0, H), point2=(
109
-2*RT, H))
110
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((-RT, H))
111
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→HorizontalConstraint(
112
addUndoState=False, entity=
113
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((-RT,
114
H), ))
115
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((0.0, H-0.001))
116
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((-RT, H))
117
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→PerpendicularConstraint(
118
addUndoState=False, entity1=
119
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((0.0,
120
H-0.001), ), entity2=
121
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((-RT,
122
H), ))
123
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(
,→point1=(-2*RT, H),
124
point2=(-2*RT, RT))
125
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((-2*RT,
126
RT))
127
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→VerticalConstraint(addUndoState=
128
False, entity=
129
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((-2*RT,
130
RT), ))
131
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((-RT, H))
132
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((-2*RT,
133
RT))
134
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→PerpendicularConstraint(
135
addUndoState=False, entity1=
136
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((-RT,
137
H), ), entity2=
138
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((-2*RT,
139
RT), ))
140
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→ArcByCenterEnds(center=(-RT,
==PAGE:100==
88
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
141
RT), direction=CLOCKWISE, point1=(0.0, RT),
,→point2=(-2*RT,
142
RT))
143
mdb.models[’Model-1’].Part(dimensionality=THREE_D, name=
,→’LoadingRing’, type=
144
DEFORMABLE_BODY)
145
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].
,→BaseSolidSweep(path=
146
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__sweep__’],
,→sketch=
147
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’])
148
del mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’]
149
del mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__sweep__’]
150
151
### PART - SupportingRing ###
152
mdb.models[’Model-1’].ConstrainedSketch(name=’__sweep__’
,→, sheetSize=0.1)
153
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__sweep__’].
,→sketchOptions.setValues(
154
decimalPlaces=3)
155
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__sweep__’].
,→ArcByCenterEnds(center=(0.0, 0.0),
156
direction=COUNTERCLOCKWISE, point1=(0.0, -RS),
,→point2=(0.0, RS))
157
mdb.models[’Model-1’].ConstrainedSketch(name=’
,→__profile__’, sheetSize=0.1,
158
transform=(0.0, -1.0, 0.0, -0.0, 0.0, 1.0, -1.0,
159
-0.0, -0.0, -0.0, -RS, 0.0))
160
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→sketchOptions.setValues(
161
decimalPlaces=3)
162
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→ConstructionLine(point1=(-0.05,
163
0.0), point2=(0.05, 0.0))
164
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→ConstructionLine(point1=(0.0,
165
-0.05), point2=(0.0, 0.05))
166
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(
,→point1=(0.0, H-RT),
167
point2=(0.0, 0.0))
168
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((0.0, (H-RT)/2))
169
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→VerticalConstraint(addUndoState=
170
False, entity=
171
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((0.0,
172
(H-RT)/2), ))
173
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(
,→point1=(0.0, 0.0), point2=(
174
-2*RT, 0.0))
175
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((-RT, 0.0))
176
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→HorizontalConstraint(
177
addUndoState=False, entity=
==PAGE:101==
A.1. Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
89
178
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((-RT,
179
0.0), ))
180
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((0.0, (H-RT)/2))
181
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((-RT, 0.0))
182
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→PerpendicularConstraint(
183
addUndoState=False, entity1=
184
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((0.0,
185
(H-RT)/2), ), entity2=
186
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((-RT,
187
0.0), ))
188
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].Line(
,→point1=(-2*RT, 0.0),
189
point2=(-2*RT, H-RT))
190
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((-2*RT,
191
(H-RT)/2))
192
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→VerticalConstraint(addUndoState=
193
False, entity=
194
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((-2*RT,
195
(H-RT)/2), ))
196
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((-RT, 0.0))
197
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].geometry.
,→findAt((-2*RT,
198
(H-RT)/2))
199
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→PerpendicularConstraint(
200
addUndoState=False, entity1=
201
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((-RT,
202
0.0), ), entity2=
203
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→geometry.findAt((-2*RT,
204
(H-RT)/2), ))
205
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’].
,→ArcByCenterEnds(center=(-RT,
206
H-RT), direction=CLOCKWISE, point1=(-2*RT, H-RT)
,→, point2=(0.0,
207
H-RT))
208
mdb.models[’Model-1’].Part(dimensionality=THREE_D, name=
,→’SupportingRing’, type=
209
DEFORMABLE_BODY)
210
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].
,→BaseSolidSweep(path=
211
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__sweep__’],
,→sketch=
212
mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’])
213
del mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__profile__’]
214
del mdb.models[’Model-1’].sketches[’__sweep__’]
==PAGE:102==
90
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
215
216
### MATERIALS ###
217
mdb.models[’Model-1’].Material(name=’Glass’)
218
mdb.models[’Model-1’].materials[’Glass’].Elastic(table
,→=((67000000000.0, 0.23),
219
))
220
mdb.models[’Model-1’].Material(name=’Steel’)
221
mdb.models[’Model-1’].materials[’Steel’].Elastic(table
,→=((210000000000.0, 0.3),
222
))
223
224
### SECTIONS ###
225
mdb.models[’Model-1’].HomogeneousSolidSection(material=’
,→Glass’, name=’Specimen’
226
, thickness=None)
227
mdb.models[’Model-1’].HomogeneousSolidSection(material=’
,→Steel’, name=’Ring’,
228
thickness=None)
229
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→SectionAssignment(offset=0.0,
230
offsetField=’’, offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE,
,→region=Region(
231
cells=mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen
,→’].cells.findAt(((0.0,
232
0.0, T/2), ), )), sectionName=’Specimen’,
,→thicknessAssignment=
233
FROM_SECTION)
234
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].
,→SectionAssignment(offset=0.0,
235
offsetField=’’, offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE,
,→region=Region(
236
cells=mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’
,→].cells.findAt(((RL-RT,
237
0.0, H/2), ), )), sectionName=’Ring’,
,→thicknessAssignment=
238
FROM_SECTION)
239
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].
,→SectionAssignment(offset=0.0,
240
offsetField=’’, offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE,
,→region=Region(
241
cells=mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’
,→SupportingRing’].cells.findAt(((
242
RS-RT, 0.0, H/2), ), )), sectionName=’Ring’,
,→thicknessAssignment=
243
FROM_SECTION)
244
245
### SET ###
246
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].Set(cells=
247
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→cells.findAt(((0,
248
0, T/2), )), name=’Glass’)
249
250
### PARTITION ###
251
# Bottom edge:
252
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→PartitionEdgeByParam(edges=
==PAGE:103==
A.1. Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
91
253
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→edges.findAt(((0.0, 0.0,
254
0.0), )), parameter=((RG+offGlass[number4])-(RS-
,→RT))/(2*RG))
255
256
# Top edge:
257
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→PartitionEdgeByParam(edges=
258
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→edges.findAt(((0.0, 0.0,
259
T), )), parameter=(2*RG-((RG+offGlass[number4])
,→-(RS-RT)))/(2*RG))
260
261
### MESH - GlassSpecimen ###
262
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→setMeshControls(elemShape=HEX_DOMINATED,
263
regions=mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’
,→GlassSpecimen’].cells.findAt(((
264
0.0, 0.0, T/2), )))
265
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→setElementType(elemTypes=(
266
ElemType(elemCode=C3D20, elemLibrary=STANDARD),
,→ElemType(elemCode=C3D15,
267
elemLibrary=STANDARD, secondOrderAccuracy=OFF,
,→distortionControl=DEFAULT),
268
ElemType(elemCode=C3D10, elemLibrary=STANDARD)),
,→
regions=(
269
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→cells.findAt(((0.0,
270
0.0, T/2), )), ))
271
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].seedPart(
,→deviationFactor=0.1,
272
minSizeFactor=0.1, size=partSize)
273
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→seedEdgeBySize(constraint=FINER,
274
deviationFactor=0.1, edges=
275
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→edges.findAt(((0.0, 0.0,
276
T), ), ((0.0, RS, T), ), ((0.0, 0.0, 0.0), ),
,→((0.0, RS,
277
0.0), ), ), size=edgeSizeH[number2])
278
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→seedEdgeBySize(constraint=FINER,
279
deviationFactor=0.1, edges=
280
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→edges.findAt(((0.0, -RG,
281
T/2), ), ((0.0, RG, T/2), ), )
282
, minSizeFactor=0.1, size=edgeSizeV[number2])
283
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’GlassSpecimen’].
,→generateMesh()
284
285
### MESH - LoadingRing ###
286
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].
,→setElementType(elemTypes=(ElemType(
287
elemCode=C3D8, elemLibrary=STANDARD,
,→secondOrderAccuracy=OFF,
==PAGE:104==
92
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
288
distortionControl=DEFAULT), ElemType(elemCode=
,→C3D6, elemLibrary=STANDARD),
289
ElemType(elemCode=C3D4, elemLibrary=STANDARD)),
,→regions=(
290
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].cells
,→.findAt(((RL-RT,
291
0.0, H/2), )), ))
292
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].seedPart(
,→deviationFactor=0.1,
293
minSizeFactor=0.1, size=ringSize)
294
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’].generateMesh
,→()
295
296
### MESH - SupportingRing ###
297
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].
,→setElementType(elemTypes=(
298
ElemType(elemCode=C3D8, elemLibrary=STANDARD,
,→secondOrderAccuracy=OFF,
299
distortionControl=DEFAULT), ElemType(elemCode=
,→C3D6, elemLibrary=STANDARD,
300
secondOrderAccuracy=OFF, distortionControl=
,→DEFAULT), ElemType(
301
elemCode=C3D4, elemLibrary=STANDARD)), regions=(
302
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].
,→cells.findAt(((RS-RT,
303
0.0, H/2), )), ))
304
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].seedPart(
,→deviationFactor=0.1,
305
minSizeFactor=0.1, size=ringSize)
306
mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’SupportingRing’].
,→generateMesh()
307
308
### ASSEMBLY ###
309
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.DatumCsysByDefault(
,→CARTESIAN)
310
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=ON
,→, name=
311
’GlassSpecimen-1’, part=mdb.models[’Model-1’].
,→parts[’GlassSpecimen’])
312
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=ON
,→, name=’LoadingRing-1’,
313
part=mdb.models[’Model-1’].parts[’LoadingRing’])
314
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=ON
,→, name=
315
’SupportingRing-1’, part=mdb.models[’Model-1’].
,→parts[’SupportingRing’])
316
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.translate(
,→instanceList=(’LoadingRing-1’, ),
317
vector=(0.0, offRing[number3], T))
318
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.translate(
,→instanceList=(’SupportingRing-1’,
319
), vector=(0.0, 0.0, -H))
320
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.translate(
,→instanceList=(’GlassSpecimen-1’,
321
), vector=(0.0, offGlass[number4], 0.0))
322
323
### INTERACTION - CONTACT ###
==PAGE:105==
A.1. Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
93
324
mdb.models[’Model-1’].ContactProperty(’IntProp-1’)
325
mdb.models[’Model-1’].interactionProperties[’IntProp-1’
,→].TangentialBehavior(
326
dependencies=0, directionality=ISOTROPIC,
,→elasticSlipStiffness=None,
327
formulation=FRICTIONLESS, fraction=0.005,
,→maximumElasticSlip=FRACTION,
328
pressureDependency=OFF, shearStressLimit=None,
,→slipRateDependency=OFF,
329
table=((friction, ), ), temperatureDependency=
,→OFF)
330
mdb.models[’Model-1’].ContactStd(createStepName=’Initial
,→’, name=’Int-1’)
331
mdb.models[’Model-1’].interactions[’Int-1’].
,→includedPairs.setValuesInStep(
332
stepName=’Initial’, useAllstar=ON)
333
mdb.models[’Model-1’].interactions[’Int-1’].
,→contactPropertyAssignments.appendInStep(
334
assignments=((GLOBAL, SELF, ’IntProp-1’), ),
,→stepName=’Initial’)
335
336
### STEP, BC & LOAD ###
337
mdb.models[’Model-1’].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET,
,→createStepName=’Initial’,
338
distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName=’’,
,→localCsys=None, name=’SYM’, region=
339
Region(
340
faces=mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.
,→instances[’LoadingRing-1’].faces.findAt(
341
((0.0, RL-RT+offRing[number3], T+H/2), ), ((0.0,
,→
-(RL-RT)+offRing[number3], T+H/2), ), )
,→+\
342
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.instances[’
,→GlassSpecimen-1’].faces.findAt(
343
((0.0, 0.0, T/2), ), )+\
344
mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.instances[’
,→SupportingRing-1’].faces.findAt(
345
((0.0, RS-RT, -H/2), ), ((0.0, -(RS-RT), -H/2),
,→), )), u1=SET, u2=
346
UNSET, u3=UNSET, ur1=UNSET, ur2=SET, ur3=SET)
347
mdb.models[’Model-1’].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET,
,→createStepName=’Initial’,
348
distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName=’’,
,→localCsys=None, name=’Load’,
349
region=Region(
350
faces=mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.
,→instances[’LoadingRing-1’].faces.findAt(
351
((RL-RT, 0.0, T+H), ), )), u1=SET, u2=SET, u3=
,→UNSET, ur1=SET,
352
ur2=SET, ur3=SET)
353
mdb.models[’Model-1’].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET,
,→createStepName=’Initial’,
354
distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName=’’,
,→localCsys=None, name=’Support’,
355
region=Region(
356
faces=mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.
,→instances[’SupportingRing-1’].faces.
==PAGE:106==
94
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
,→findAt(
357
((RS-RT, 0.0, -H), ), )), u1=SET, u2=SET, u3=SET
,→, ur1=SET, ur2=
358
SET, ur3=SET)
359
mdb.models[’Model-1’].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET,
,→createStepName=’Initial’,
360
distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName=’’,
,→localCsys=None, name=’GlassSupport’
361
, region=Region(
362
vertices=mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.
,→instances[’GlassSpecimen-1’].vertices.
,→findAt(
363
((0.0, RS-RT, 0.0), ), )), u1=UNSET, u2=SET, u3=
,→UNSET, ur1=UNSET, ur2=UNSET,
364
ur3=UNSET)
365
mdb.models[’Model-1’].StaticStep(name=’Loading’, nlgeom=
,→ON, previous=’Initial’)
366
mdb.models[’Model-1’].steps[’Loading’].setValues(minInc
,→=1e-12)
367
mdb.models[’Model-1’].Pressure(amplitude=UNSET,
,→createStepName=’Loading’,
368
distributionType=UNIFORM, field=’’, magnitude=
,→magLoad[number1]/AL, name=’Load’,
369
region=Region(
370
side1Faces=mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly.
,→instances[’LoadingRing-1’].faces.findAt(
371
((RL-RT, offRing[number3], T+H), ), )))
372
373
### FIELD OUTPUT ###
374
mdb.models[’Model-1’].fieldOutputRequests[’F-Output-1’].
,→setValues(variables=(
375
’S’, ’U’, ’RF’))
376
377
### JOB & CALCULATE ###
378
mdb.models[’Model-1’].steps[’Loading’].control.setValues
,→(allowPropagation=OFF,
379
resetDefaultValues=OFF, timeIncrementation=(4.0,
,→
8.0, 9.0, 16.0, 10.0, 4.0,
380
12.0, 30.0, 6.0, 3.0, 50.0))
381
##########----##################
382
383
mdb.Job(atTime=None, contactPrint=OFF, description=’’,
,→echoPrint=OFF,
384
explicitPrecision=SINGLE, getMemoryFromAnalysis=
,→True, historyPrint=OFF,
385
memory=90, memoryUnits=PERCENTAGE, model=’Model
,→-1’, modelPrint=OFF,
386
multiprocessingMode=DEFAULT, name=’RingOnRing3D’
,→, nodalOutputPrecision=
387
SINGLE, numCpus=4, numDomains=4, numGPUs=0,
,→queue=None, resultsFormat=ODB,
388
scratch=’’, type=ANALYSIS, userSubroutine=’’,
,→waitHours=0, waitMinutes=0)
389
mdb.jobs[’RingOnRing3D’].submit(consistencyChecking=OFF)
390
mdb.jobs[’RingOnRing3D’].waitForCompletion()
391
392
### OUTPUT ###
==PAGE:107==
A.1. Abaqus Scripts of FEM-models
95
393
execfile(’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc
,→Thesis/Abaqus/RingOnRing3D/Python/
,→RingOnRing3D_ODB.py’)
A.1.2.2
Output Database (ODB)
1
# open modulus, create viewport and open odb
2
from abaqus import *
3
from abaqusConstants import *
4
session.Viewport(name=’Viewport: 1’, origin=(0.0, 0.0), width=156.190475463867,
5
height=137.828567504883)
6
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].makeCurrent()
7
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].maximize()
8
from caeModules import *
9
from driverUtils import executeOnCaeStartup
10
executeOnCaeStartup()
11
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].partDisplay.geometryOptions.setValues(
12
referenceRepresentation=ON)
13
14
a = mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly
15
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].setValues(displayedObject=a)
16
o3 = session.openOdb(
17
name=’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc Thesis/Abaqus/RingOnRing3D/
,→Calculation/RingOnRing3D.odb’)
18
19
### CREATE OUTPUT ###
20
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].setValues(displayedObject=o3)
21
a = mdb.models[’Model-1’].rootAssembly
22
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].setValues(displayedObject=a)
23
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].setValues(
24
displayedObject=session.odbs[’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc Thesis/
,→Abaqus/RingOnRing3D/Calculation/RingOnRing3D.odb’])
25
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].assemblyDisplay.setValues(
26
optimizationTasks=OFF, geometricRestrictions=OFF, stopConditions=OFF)
27
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].odbDisplay.setPrimaryVariable(
28
variableLabel=’S’, outputPosition=INTEGRATION_POINT, refinement=(INVARIANT,
29
’Max. Principal’), )
30
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].odbDisplay.display.setValues(
31
plotState=CONTOURS_ON_DEF)
32
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].odbDisplay.commonOptions.setValues(
33
visibleEdges=FREE, deformationScaling=UNIFORM, uniformScaleFactor=1)
34
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].odbDisplay.contourOptions.setValues(
35
showMaxLocation=ON)
36
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].viewportAnnotationOptions.setValues(
37
legendBackgroundStyle=OTHER, legendBackgroundColor=’#848484’)
38
39
### FILE NAME ###
40
#fileName1 = ’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc Thesis/Abaqus/RingOnRing3D/
,→Calculation/Stress_Load’+str(number1+1)+’_Mesh’+str(number2+1)+’.txt’
41
fileName1 = ’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc Thesis/Abaqus/RingOnRing3D/
,→Calculation/Stress_Load’+str(number1+1)+’_Offset’+str(number3+1)+’.txt’
42
43
### PRINT MAX PRINCIPAL STRESSES TO A FILE ###
44
leaf = dgo.LeafFromPartInstance(partInstanceName=(’GLASSSPECIMEN-1’, ))
45
session.viewports[’Viewport: 1’].odbDisplay.displayGroup.replace(leaf=leaf)
46
odb = session.odbs[’C:/Users/s123090/Dropbox/DTU/10. Semester/MSc Thesis/Abaqus/
,→RingOnRing3D/Calculation/RingOnRing3D.odb’]
==PAGE:108==
96
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
47
48
lastStep = odb.steps[’Loading’]
49
lastFrame = lastStep.frames[-1]
50
51
session.fieldReportOptions.setValues(printTotal=OFF, printMinMax=OFF,
52
columnLayout=SEPARATE_TABLES)
53
session.writeFieldReport(
54
fileName=fileName1,
55
append=ON, sortItem=’Node Label’, odb=odb, step=0, frame=lastFrame,
56
outputPosition=NODAL, variable=((’S’, INTEGRATION_POINT, ((INVARIANT,
57
’Max. Principal’), )), ))
A.2
Convergence Analysis
A convergence analysis of the applied meshes was conducted in order to check when the
stresses converged. Only the part representing the glass specimen was considered, since
this was used to determine the failure stress of all tested specimens. In the following the
results for both applied models are presented.
A.2.1
Axisymmetric FEM-Model
As the stress distribution in the glass specimen in a double-ring test can be considered
axisymmetric when neglecting alignment errors, the FEM-model was built up by 8-node
axisymmetric elements (CAX8). By increasing the number of nodes, the convergence of
the max principal stress was checked. This analysis has been done for 4 different applied
loads and a specimen thickness of 3 mm. The results are shown in Fig. A.1.
==PAGE:109==
A.2. Convergence Analysis
97
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Number of Nodes
104
86
87
88
89
90
91
1,max [MPa]
(a) Applied load = 1 kN
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Number of Nodes
104
172
174
176
178
180
182
1,max [MPa]
(b) Applied load = 2 kN
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Number of Nodes
104
260
265
270
275
1,max [MPa]
(c) Applied load = 3 kN
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Number of Nodes
104
345
350
355
360
365
1,max [MPa]
(d) Applied load = 4 kN
Fig. A.1: Convergence analysis of max principal stresses in glass specimen in the axisymmetric
FEM-model for different applied loads. The considered element type was CAX8, which is an
8-node axisymmetric element in SIMULIA ABAQUS/CAE 2016.
The mesh resulting in 9341 nodes with an element size of 0.15 mm was chosen as
sufﬁcient.
A.2.2
Half-Symmetric 3D FEM-Model
The half-symmetric 3D FEM-model was used to analyse the inﬂuence of alignment errors
by shifting one part of the double-ring test setup in the horizontal direction. By doing so,
the stress distribution in the glass specimen will no longer be axisymmetric, which is why
a half-symmetric model was set up using 20-node brick elements (C3D20). Again, the
convergence of the max principal stress was checked by increasing the number of nodes
in the part representing the glass specimen. The same specimen thickness as for the
axisymmetric analysis was considered together with the same applied loads. The results
from this analysis are shown in Fig. A.2.
==PAGE:110==
98
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
0
5
10
Number of Nodes
104
86
87
88
89
90
91
1,max [MPa]
(a) Applied load = 1 kN
0
5
10
Number of Nodes
104
172
174
176
178
180
1,max [MPa]
(b) Applied load = 2 kN
0
5
10
Number of Nodes
104
255
260
265
270
1,max [MPa]
(c) Applied load = 3 kN
0
5
10
Number of Nodes
104
340
345
350
355
360
1,max [MPa]
(d) Applied load = 4 kN
Fig. A.2: Convergence analysis of max principal stresses in glass specimen in the symmetric
3D FEM-model for different applied loads. The considered element type was C3D20, which is an
20-node brick element in SIMULIA ABAQUS/CAE 2016.
A mesh with 37572 nodes was chosen as sufﬁcient for the half-symmetric 3D FEM-
model, which was constructed by elements with a global part size of 1 mm, a size of
0.5 mm along the horizontal edges of the symmetry plane and a size of 1/4 of the specimen
thickness along the vertical edges.
==PAGE:111==
A.3. Thickness Dependency of Stresses
99
A.3
Thickness Dependency of Stresses
The stress development in the specimen at varying thicknesses have been analysed. This
was done by displacing the load ring towards the specimen, in the vertical direction, u2.
Results are shown in Fig. A.3 and Fig. A.4. As illustrated larger stresses will occur in
the specimen when increasing the thickness, but still keeping the displacement constant.
This means that thicker specimens will be subjected to larger stress rates at the same
piston velocity.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Displacement, u2 [mm]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Max principal stress [MPa]
h = 2 mm
h = 3 mm
h = 4 mm
Fig. A.3: Max principal stress as function of vertical displacement for the three considered speci-
men thicknesses.
==PAGE:112==
100
Appendix A. Applied FEM-Models
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. A.4: Distribution of max principal stresses for a downwards displacement of 0.2 mm: (a)
thickness = 2 mm, (b) thickness = 3 mm and (c) thickness = 4 mm (c); E = 67 GPa and ν = 0.23;
geometrical non-linear behaviour included.
==PAGE:113==
A P P E N D I X
B
Calibration of Measuring Equipment
The measuring equipment used in the test setup has been carefully calibrated, to obtain
the most precise measurements during experiments.
One of the calibrated devices was the built-in linear variable differential transformer
(LVDT) in the actuator. This LVDT was used to control the displacement of the piston. In
addition, the bottom part of the double-ring test setup was attached to a load cell, which
also was calibrated. Both calibration adjustments are made in the control software MTS
Station Manager provided by MTS Systems Corporation.
Preliminary tests showed that it was not possible to collect usable load histories with
this load cell when subjecting the glass specimens to high stress rates. Therefore, a mod-
iﬁcation was made to the bottom part of the experimental setup to allow implementation
of a small piezoelectric load cell. This load cell was calibrated against the initial load cell
based on strain gauges.
To ensure load equilibrium between the load and support ring of the double-ring test
setup, three strain gauges were glued to the load ring and calibrated against the piezo-
electric load cell. Furthermore, some of the glass specimens, ﬁve in total, were equipped
with a strain gauge rosette consisting of three linear strain gauges to measure the in-plane
strains as function of the applied load. These also required a calibration. All types of
calibration and the appertaining procedures are described in detail in the following.
B.1
Built-In LVDT
The actuator of the hydraulic test machine had a built-in LVDT which was used to control
the displacement and to measure the position of the piston to which the load ring was at-
==PAGE:114==
102
Appendix B. Calibration of Measuring Equipment
tached. To ensure an accurate control of the outer loop, the LVDT was calibrated against
a reference position measured by an external position meter as shown in Fig. B.1. The
piston had a total displacement of about 272 mm measured from the top position to the
bottom position. The middle position was set to 0 mm, which implies that the piston can
be moved ±136mm from there. A negative value will result in a upward going displace-
ment contrary to a positive value, which will result in a downward going displacement.
Position Meter
Piston
Fig. B.1: Placement of the external position meter relative to the piston, which was used to
calibrate the built-in LVDT of the actuator.
In the calibration settings in the control software of MTS an excitation voltage of
±10V was chosen. This means that the displacement signal from the LVDT had to gain
this voltage in the outer positions of the piston after ampliﬁcation. To obtain this re-
quirement the ampliﬁcation of the signal was calibrated, which was done by calculating
a proper total gain. To ﬁnd the proper total gain the calibration was conducted with three
repetitions in order to minimise the error. Each calibration used 11 different piston po-
sitions, where the position detected with the MTS control software was held against a
reference position measured by the position meter. A corrected total gain could then be
found by ﬁtting these points with a linear ﬁt and dividing the previous total gain with the
==PAGE:115==
B.1. Built-In LVDT
103
slope of this ﬁt:
Corrected gain = Previous gain
(∆y/∆x)cor.
(B.1)
Fig. B.2 to B.4 shows the results of all three conducted calibrations, where the position
detected with the MTS control software was plotted together with the target position.
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Ref. position [mm]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
MTS position [mm]
1. Calibration
Previous gain = 4.3342
Corrected gain = 4.4182
Error = -1.90 %
Target
MTS Station
Linear Fit
y = 0.9810x + 0.0923
Fig. B.2: Initial calibration of the built-in LVDT with an initial total gain of 4.3342. The corrected
total gain was found to 4.4182
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Ref. position [mm]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
MTS position [mm]
2. Calibration
Previous gain = 4.4182
Corrected gain = 4.4149
Error = 0.07 %
Target
MTS Station
Linear Fit
y = 1.0007x + 0.0664
Fig. B.3: Second calibration of the built-in LVDT where the corrected total gain was found to
4.4149.
==PAGE:116==
104
Appendix B. Calibration of Measuring Equipment
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Ref. position [mm]
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
MTS position [mm]
3. Calibration
Previous gain = 4.4149
Corrected gain = 4.4154
Error = -0.01 %
Target
MTS Station
Linear Fit
y = 0.9999x + 0.1489
Fig. B.4: Final calibration of the built-in LVDT where the corrected total gain was found to 4.4154.
From the third and last calibration a total gain of 4.4154 was found with an error of
0.01%, which was chosen as the proper total gain for the built-in LVDT of the actuator.
B.2
Load Cell
The load cell attached to the bottom of the hydraulic test machine had a capacity of
±225kN depending on whether it was loaded in tension or compression. To obtain the
most precise measurements of the loads which the test specimens were subjected to, the
load cell was calibrated against a reference load cell. This reference load cell was attached
to the piston of the test machine as shown in Fig. B.5. The output signal of the load
cell was governed by four built-in strain gauges in a Wheatstone bridge conﬁguration.
Again an excitation voltage of ±10V was chosen in the calibration settings in the control
software of MTS. This implied that the output signal needed to be ampliﬁed so that the
maximum of the load capacity range corresponded to the chosen excitation voltage. This
was done by calculating a proper total gain as for the built-in LVDT in section B.1 by
using Eq. (B.1). Since the actuator of the test machine had a capacity of 50 kN, the
calibration was only done for 80% of this capacity, i.e. up to 40 kN.
==PAGE:117==
B.2. Load Cell
105
Reference Load Cell
(Capacity = 222 kN)
Load Cell
(Capacity = 225 kN)
Fig. B.5: Placement of the reference load cell relative to the load cell, which needed to be cali-
brated.
Due to the calibration setup, the calibration was only made for load in compression.
To minimise the error two calibrations were performed, where each calibration used 9
measurement points ﬁtted by a linear regression. The slope of the linear ﬁt was then
used to calculate a corrected total gain. Fig. B.6 and B.7 shows the results of the two
conducted calibrations, where the load measured by the MTS control software is plotted
together with the target load.
==PAGE:118==
106
Appendix B. Calibration of Measuring Equipment
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Ref. Load [kN]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
MTS Load [kN]
1. Calibration
Previous gain = 495.0509
Corrected gain = 492.5937
Error = 0.50 %
Target
MTS Station
Linear Fit
y = 1.0050x + 0.3759
Fig. B.6: First calibration of the load cell with an initial total gain of 495.05. The corrected total
gain was found to 492.59.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Ref. Load [kN]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
MTS Load [kN]
2. Calibration
Previous gain = 492.5937
Corrected gain = 493.7895
Error = -0.24 %
Target
MTS Station
Linear Fit
y = 0.9976x + 0.4897
Fig. B.7: Final calibration of the load cell where the corrected total gain was found to 493.79.
From the second and last calibration a total gain of 493.7895 was found with an error
of −0.24%. A slight offset between the target load and the measured load can be noticed
on both plots which is caused by an initial load on the load cell which was not zeroed
before starting the calibration.
==PAGE:119==
B.2. Load Cell
107
However, some tests had shown that the conducted calibration was not accurate enough
in the lower load range up to 10 kN. Therefore, a new calibration for this range was per-
formed where a reference load cell with a capacity of 44 kN was used in the same calibra-
tion setup as shown in Fig. B.5. Fig. B.8 and B.9 shows the results of the recalibration.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Ref. Load [kN]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
MTS Load [kN]
1. Calibration
Previous gain = 493.7895
Corrected gain = 507.7360
Error = -2.75 %
Target
MTS Station
Linear Fit
y = 0.9725x - 0.0115
Fig. B.8: First recalibration of the load cell with an initial total gain of 493.7895. The corrected
total gain was found to 507.7360.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Ref. Load [kN]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
MTS Load [kN]
2. Calibration
Previous gain = 507.7360
Corrected gain = 507.6685
Error = 0.01 %
Target
MTS Station
Linear Fit
y = 1.0001x - 0.0044
Fig. B.9: Final recalibration of the load cell where the corrected total gain was found to 507.6685.
==PAGE:120==
108
Appendix B. Calibration of Measuring Equipment
From the ﬁnal calibration a total gain of 507.6685 was found with an error of 0.01%,
which is chosen as the proper total gain for the load cell of the hydraulic test machine.
B.2.1
Piezoelectric Load Cell
Preliminary test conducted with the aforementioned load cell showed that it was not pos-
sible to get usable results from the strain-gauge based load cell, when subjecting the glass
specimens to high stress rates. This was caused by the output signal from the Digital Uni-
versal Conditioner1 (DUC) to which the load cell was connected. The DUC only had an
excitation frequency of 1 kHz, which was far from sufﬁcient. To obtain much higher ex-
citation frequencies an external single-channel laboratory charge ampliﬁer (Type 5018A)
from Kistler was used together with a piezoelectric load washer (Type 9051A) from the
same manufacturer. The ampliﬁer, as shown in Fig. B.10, had an excitation frequency
of 200 kHz (Kistler Group, 2016) and the measuring range was set to 10 kN together
with a sensor sensitivity of 4.335 pC/N. The appertaining load cell, which can be seen in
Fig. B.11, is originally intended for dynamic load measurements and had a compression
capacity of 120 kN.
Charge Ampliﬁer
Type 5018
Fig. B.10: Technical drawing of the applied single-channel laboratory charge ampliﬁer Type
5018A from Kistler Group (2016).
The mobile high-speed data acquisition system, with a max sample rate of 10 MHz,
was used to calibrate the piezoelectric load cell against the load cell of the hydraulic test
machine by running 4 static tests on glass with a piston velocity of 0.1 mm/min. The
results can be seen in Table B.1.
1A built-in module in the MTS Flex Test 100 controller which was used to convert an analogue signal
to a digital signal.
==PAGE:121==
B.2. Load Cell
109
Fig. B.11: Picture of the applied piezoelectric load cell taken from Kistler Group (2013).
Table B.1: Calibration results used for the piezoelectric load cell.
Test Nr.
Ref. Load
Output Kistler
[kN]
[V]
1
1.758
1.425
2
2.484
2.043
3
2.721
2.252
4
3.834
3.204
In order to measure the right loads with the piezoelectric load cell when using the
mobile data acquisition system, a proper scale and offset needs to be implemented in the
acquisition software. Both values were found from the data stated in Table B.1 by a linear
ﬁt as shown in Fig. B.12.
1.5
2
2.5
3
Output Kistler Amplifier [V]
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Ref. Load [kN]
Linear Fit:
y = 1.1663 x + 0.0975
R2 = 1.0000
Fig. B.12: Plot of calibration results which are ﬁtted with a linear regression.
It follows from Fig. B.12 that the output voltage of the ampliﬁer must be scaled with a
factor of 1.1663 kN/V and the offset must be set to 0.0975 kN in order to obtain coincident
loads between the reference load cell and the piezoelectric load cell.
==PAGE:122==
110
Appendix B. Calibration of Measuring Equipment
After running all planned tests on the glass specimens a check of the above mentioned
calibration has been made to ﬁnd out if it still was valid. The data of the calibration check
are shown in Fig. B.13 for four different points, where the reference load is plotted as
function of the output voltage of the ampliﬁer.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Output Kistler Amplifier [V]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Ref. Load [kN]
Linear Fit:
y = 1.1733 x - 0.0066
R2 = 1.0000
Fig. B.13: Plot of calibration results which are ﬁtted with a linear regression used to check the
initial calibration of the piezoelectric load cell.
The load scale has a slight increase of about 0.6 % resulting in a scale of 1.1733 kN/V
which is not of great importance. However, the load offset has been decreased to about
zero. Due to a change in the load offset, a mean of 0.048 75 kN was chosen for all per-
formed tests to compensate for this decrease.
B.3
Linear Strain Gauges at Load Ring
Three linear strain gauges2 with a length of 6 mm were glued to the top of the load ring in
order to measure the load and thereby be able to ensure force equilibrium between both
rings during the tests. These strain gauges were calibrated against the piezoelectric load
cell by running a test on a glass specimen with a piston velocity of 2 mm/s. A high-speed
transducer ampliﬁer type FE-H379-TA from Fylde was used to amplify the signal of all
three strain gauges which were connected as 1-gage systems resulting in three 1/4-bridges.
The sensitivity of the ampliﬁer was estimated for a load range up to 15 kN. The applied
strain gauges had a gauge factor, K, of 2.02 ± 1% and the maximum bridge supply, E,
was chosen to 8 V. Assuming the E-modulus of the steel to be 195 GPa, the output, e, of
2Strain gauge type: HBM 6/120LY61.
==PAGE:123==
B.3. Linear Strain Gauges at Load Ring
111
one 1/4-bridge was found to:
e = 1
4 ·K ·ε ·E = 2.53mV
(B.2)
where ε is the strain in the load ring according to the maximum of the considered load
range. The control board of the applied ampliﬁer can be seen in Fig. B.14, where the
coarse gain switch and the ﬁne gain control were used to adjust the ampliﬁcation of the
output signal of the strain gauges.
Coarse gain switch
Fine gain control
Fig. B.14: Detailed drawing of the control board of the applied high-speed transducer ampliﬁer
type FE-H379-TA. (FYLDE Electronic Laboratories Ltd., 2007)
Since the estimated output voltage of the 1/4-bridges is a fraction of 10 mV, the coarse
gain switch was chosen to that. To obtain the most optimal sensitivity for the considered
load range the ﬁne gain control was set to 250/1000. This will amplify an input signal of
2.50 mV to 10 V, which is the maximum output of the ampliﬁer.
The results of the double-ring test performed on a glass specimen can be seen in
Fig. B.15, which shows that the output signal of the strain gauge ampliﬁers needed to be
scaled in order to get the right loads compared to the piezoelectric load cell. The offset
from zero is due to the offset calculated from the calibration of the load cell.
Fig. B.15 also shows that the load ring bends during the test since the signals from all
three strain gauges are different. Therefore, a proper load scale was calculated by using
the average of all three strain gauges in the time span between 0.22 s and 0.25 s to avoid
the oscillations after the failure of the glass specimen. By dividing the signal of the load
cell by the averaged signal of the strain gauges, the load scale was found to 1.4995 kN/V.
==PAGE:124==
112
Appendix B. Calibration of Measuring Equipment
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Time [s]
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Load [kN]
Piezoelectric LC
Strain gauge 1
Strain gauge 2
Strain gauge 3
Fig. B.15: Results from a double-ring test performed on a glass specimen, which was used to
ﬁnd a proper load scale for the output signal of strain gauges.
B.4
Strain Gauge Rosette at Glass Specimens
Five glass specimens were equipped with a strain gauge rosette3 to be able to measure
the in-plane strains within the area of the load ring as function of the applied load. One
specimen was used for a static test with a piston velocity of 0.1 mm/min. Due to the long
loading time the high-speed data acquisition was not applicable, which is why a regular
data logger from the structural lab with an acquisition frequency of 1 kHz was used for
the single specimen. All three transducers in the strain gauge rosette were connected to
a 1/4-bridge with a bridge supply, E, of 3 V. The output of all three transducers were
recorded together with the excitation voltage, making it possible to transform them into
strains as the strain gauge factor, K, of each transducer is known with the value 1.94:
εi = 4·e
K ·E
(B.3)
The last four specimens were tested with piston velocities in the range of 0.05 mm/s
to 50 mm/s which required the high-speed data acquisition system together with the high-
speed transducer ampliﬁer from Fylde. Again a proper ampliﬁcation of the output signal
was chosen by adjusting the coarse gain switch and the ﬁne gain control (Fig. B.14). A
maximum output of 10 000 µm/m was assumed by which the electrical output, e, of the
3Strain gauge type: HBM 1-RY41-6/120.
==PAGE:125==
B.4. Strain Gauge Rosette at Glass Specimens
113
1/4-bridge can be estimated by Eq. (B.2). A bridge voltage of 3 V and a gauge factor of
1.94 results in an electrical output of 14.55 mV. This led to a coarse gain of 100 mV and a
ﬁne gain of 150/1000. To measure proper strains a bridge calibration was performed with
a built-in shunt calibration, Rcal (see Fig. B.14), which determines the full-scale output of
a transducer by electrically simulating a full-scale load. Each transducer was calibrated
with a shunt resistance of 350 kΩ, a transducer resistance of 120 Ωand a gauge factor of
1.94.
==PAGE:126==
==PAGE:127==
A P P E N D I X
C
Scratched Test Specimens
A small series of test specimens, 25 in total, were intentionally scratched with a well-
deﬁned ﬂaw to minimise scattering of test results. This appendix gives an overview over
the dimensions of the applied scratches.
C.1
Measured Scratch Lengths
The distribution of the individual measured scratch lengths is shown in Fig. C.1. A digital
microscope was used to measure the lengths. The average length was found to 2.49 mm.
FL-3-1
FL-3-2
FL-3-3
FL-3-4
FL-3-5
FL-3-6
FL-3-7
FL-3-8
FL-3-9
FL-3-10
FL-3-11
FL-3-12
FL-3-13
FL-3-14
FL-3-15
FL-3-16
FL-3-17
FL-3-18
FL-3-19
FL-3-20
FL-3-21
FL-3-22
FL-3-23
FL-3-24
FL-3-25
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
Scratch length [mm]
25 Specimens
Mean = 2.49 mm
Std. dev. = 
0.03 mm
Fig. C.1: Distribution of measured scratch lengths.
==PAGE:128==
116
Appendix C. Scratched Test Specimens
C.2
Images of all Scratches
Digital microscope images of each individual scratch are shown in Fig. C.2.
(a) FL-3-1
(b) FL-3-2
(c) FL-3-3
(d) FL-3-4
(e) FL-3-5
(f) FL-3-6
(g) FL-3-7
(h) FL-3-8
(i) FL-3-9
(j) FL-3-10
Fig. C.2: Microscopic images of each individual scratch applied to 25 specimens.
==PAGE:129==
C.2. Images of all Scratches
117
(k) FL-3-11
(l) FL-3-12
(m) FL-3-13
(n) FL-3-14
(o) FL-3-15
(p) FL-3-16
(q) FL-3-17
(r) FL-3-18
(s) FL-3-19
(t) FL-3-20
(u) FL-3-21
(v) FL-3-22
Fig. C.2: Microscopic images of each individual scratch applied to 25 specimens (continued).
==PAGE:130==
118
Appendix C. Scratched Test Specimens
(w) FL-3-23
(x) FL-3-24
(y) FL-3-25
Fig. C.2: Microscopic images of each individual scratch applied to 25 specimens (continued).
==PAGE:131==
A P P E N D I X
D
Individual Test Results
The following sections present the individual obtained test results for each tested glass
specimen. Each table contains the specimen number, the specimen thickness, the test
date and time, the target piston velocity and the failure load. The stated specimen num-
bers correspond to the assigned ﬁle names of the raw data placed on the USB stick (see
Appendix E). The ﬁrst two letters of the number represent the type of test: ST →Static
Test; DT →Dynamic Test; FL →Flawed. The subsequent number indicates the speci-
men thickness and the last number is a sequential number.
Some of the following results are marked with a grey bar, indicating that the test either
was not successful or the sampled data were unfortunately deleted.
==PAGE:132==
120
Appendix D. Individual Test Results
D.1
Static Loading Rates
Table D.1: Achieved results for specimens tested at static loading rates.
Specimen Nr.
Thickness
Date
Time
Piston velocity
Failure load
[-]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
[mm/s]
[N]
ST-3-1
2.90
25-04-2017
13:54
1.7·10−3
1609.0
ST-3-2
2.88
25-04-2017
14:03
1.7·10−3
1504.2
ST-3-3
2.85
25-04-2017
14:17
1.7·10−3
2253.2
ST-3-4
2.83
25-04-2017
14:26
1.7·10−3
2090.5
ST-3-5
2.86
25-04-2017
14:33
1.7·10−3
1967.1
ST-3-6
2.84
25-04-2017
14:42
1.7·10−3
2373.7
ST-3-7
2.86
25-04-2017
14:56
1.7·10−3
1842.0
ST-3-8
2.87
25-04-2017
15:05
1.7·10−3
1820.5
ST-3-9
2.89
25-04-2017
15:12
1.7·10−3
1290.4
ST-3-10
2.83
25-04-2017
15:20
1.7·10−3
2033.7
ST-3-11
2.86
25-04-2017
15:27
1.7·10−3
2627.1
ST-3-12
2.85
25-04-2017
15:34
1.7·10−3
1073.5
ST-3-13
2.83
25-04-2017
15:41
1.7·10−3
1914.4
ST-3-14
2.86
25-04-2017
15:46
1.7·10−3
1469.0
ST-3-15
2.89
25-04-2017
15:52
1.7·10−3
1485.8
ST-3-16
2.84
25-04-2017
16:00
1.7·10−3
2197.4
ST-3-17
2.84
25-04-2017
16:07
1.7·10−3
1958.5
ST-3-18
2.85
25-04-2017
16:15
1.7·10−3
2285.1
ST-3-19
2.86
25-04-2017
16:22
1.7·10−3
1127.6
ST-3-20
2.89
25-04-2017
16:29
1.7·10−3
1929.1
ST-3-21
2.84
26-04-2017
09:50
1.7·10−3
1881.3
ST-3-22
2.84
26-04-2017
09:58
1.7·10−3
1724.5
ST-3-23
2.84
26-04-2017
10:16
1.7·10−3
2189.5
ST-3-24
2.84
26-04-2017
10:22
1.7·10−3
1621.9
ST-3-25
2.87
26-04-2017
10:30
1.7·10−3
1585.8
ST-3-26
2.83
26-04-2017
10:37
1.7·10−3
1751.7
ST-3-27
2.83
26-04-2017
10:45
1.7·10−3
1370.8
ST-3-28
2.89
26-04-2017
10:51
1.7·10−3
900.5
ST-3-29
2.84
26-04-2017
10:58
1.7·10−3
1859.0
ST-3-30
2.88
26-04-2017
11:11
1.7·10−3
1458.3
==PAGE:133==
D.2. Quasi-Static and Dynamic Loading Rates
121
D.2
Quasi-Static and Dynamic Loading Rates
Table D.2: Achieved results for specimens tested at quasi-static and dynamic loading rates.
Specimen Nr.
Thickness
Date
Time
Piston velocity
Failure load
[-]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
[mm/s]
[N]
DT-3-1
2.86
11-05-2017
13:02
50
2951.4
DT-3-2
2.88
11-05-2017
13:06
100
1973.6
DT-3-3
2.83
11-05-2017
13:11
200
4170.2
DT-3-4
2.83
11-05-2017
13:17
400
2655.2
DT-3-5
2.82
11-05-2017
13:21
2000
3117.2
DT-3-6
2.82
18-05-2017
10:20
50
1751.5
DT-3-7
2.82
18-05-2017
10:27
200
2967.9
DT-3-8
2.84
18-05-2017
12:53
1
2238.2
DT-3-9
2.88
18-05-2017
12:58
1
2592.0
DT-3-10
2.87
18-05-2017
13:01
1
3715.3
DT-3-11
2.88
18-05-2017
13:05
1
1589.9
DT-3-12
2.85
18-05-2017
13:14
1
3829.2
DT-3-13
2.84
18-05-2017
13:18
10
2699.7
DT-3-14
2.90
18-05-2017
13:21
10
2466.3
DT-3-15
2.88
18-05-2017
13:24
10
2765.7
DT-3-16
2.88
18-05-2017
13:26
10
2412.0
DT-3-17
2.89
18-05-2017
13:31
10
1930.1
DT-3-18
2.85
18-05-2017
13:48
50
3831.7
DT-3-19
2.85
18-05-2017
13:52
50
3614.5
DT-3-20
2.85
DT-3-21
2.86
18-05-2017
14:04
50
2630.1
DT-3-22
2.84
18-05-2017
14:11
50
3570.3
DT-3-23
2.86
18-05-2017
14:15
100
3323.8
DT-3-24
2.83
18-05-2017
14:18
100
3021.0
DT-3-25
2.89
18-05-2017
14:21
100
1367.1
DT-3-26
2.89
18-05-2017
14:26
100
3432.3
DT-3-27
2.89
18-05-2017
14:38
200
2392.8
DT-3-28
2.87
18-05-2017
14:42
200
1750.0
DT-3-29
2.86
18-05-2017
14:45
200
1977.5
DT-3-30
2.84
19-05-2017
09:44
100
1421.7
DT-3-31
2.87
DT-3-32
2.84
DT-3-33
2.84
19-05-2017
09:53
100
2918.3
DT-3-34
2.85
19-05-2017
09:56
100
1230.8
DT-3-35
2.85
19-05-2017
09:59
100
3508.7
DT-3-36
2.84
19-05-2017
10:03
100
3577.9
DT-3-37
2.83
19-05-2017
10:11
1
2257.8
DT-3-38
2.85
19-05-2017
10:16
1
3639.5
DT-3-39
2.86
19-05-2017
10:23
1
3479.2
DT-3-40
2.86
DT-3-41
2.85
19-05-2017
10:37
1
1515.3
DT-3-42
2.83
19-05-2017
10:45
10
1253.9
DT-3-43
2.87
19-05-2017
10:51
10
1397.1
DT-3-44
2.84
19-05-2017
10:57
10
2387.5
DT-3-45
2.85
19-05-2017
11:02
10
1548.8
==PAGE:134==
122
Appendix D. Individual Test Results
Specimen Nr.
Thickness
Date
Time
Piston velocity
Failure load
[-]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
[mm/s]
[N]
DT-3-46
2.84
19-05-2017
11:04
10
2734.4
DT-3-47
2.85
19-05-2017
11:08
10
1727.8
DT-3-48
2.86
19-05-2017
11:13
10
2232.4
DT-3-49
2.84
19-05-2017
11:15
10
2065.0
DT-3-50
2.87
19-05-2017
12:59
10
3203.2
DT-3-51
2.88
19-05-2017
13:02
10
3231.8
DT-3-52
2.87
19-05-2017
13:06
10
2169.6
DT-3-53
2.88
19-05-2017
13:12
1000
3711.9
DT-3-54
2.84
19-05-2017
13:16
1000
2964.7
DT-3-55
2.82
19-05-2017
13:20
1000
2385.2
DT-3-56
2.83
19-05-2017
13:24
1000
3724.5
DT-3-57
2.82
19-05-2017
13:28
1000
2925.9
DT-3-58
2.83
22-05-2017
10:08
0.05
1929.4
DT-3-59
2.85
22-05-2017
10:11
0.05
1786.7
DT-3-60
2.88
22-05-2017
10:16
0.05
1392.3
DT-3-61
2.88
22-05-2017
10:20
0.05
2097.7
DT-3-62
2.84
22-05-2017
10:24
0.05
2443.4
DT-3-63
2.83
22-05-2017
10:30
0.05
2972.2
DT-3-64
2.82
22-05-2017
10:43
0.05
1959.7
DT-3-65
2.84
22-05-2017
10:46
0.05
2530.5
DT-3-66
2.86
22-05-2017
10:50
0.05
3154.4
DT-3-67
2.82
22-05-2017
10:59
0.05
2285.0
DT-3-68
2.82
22-05-2017
11:02
10
1743.9
DT-3-69
2.82
22-05-2017
11:05
10
2806.8
DT-3-70
2.84
22-05-2017
11:09
10
3209.5
DT-3-71
2.87
22-05-2017
11:14
10
2554.4
DT-3-72
2.84
22-05-2017
11:16
1
1971.8
DT-3-73
2.85
22-05-2017
11:21
1
3843.8
DT-3-74
2.87
22-05-2017
11:23
10
2924.4
DT-3-75
2.85
DT-3-76
2.86
22-05-2017
11:31
1
3693.7
DT-3-77
2.85
22-05-2017
11:36
1
2422.7
DT-3-78
2.85
22-05-2017
11:40
1
3861.7
DT-3-79
2.85
22-05-2017
11:46
1
1649.8
DT-3-80
2.85
22-05-2017
13:04
100
1992.3
DT-3-81
2.88
22-05-2017
13:07
100
2743.4
DT-3-82
2.86
22-05-2017
13:11
100
4514.0
DT-3-83
2.86
22-05-2017
13:15
100
3070.2
DT-3-84
2.87
22-05-2017
13:22
100
1731.8
DT-3-85
2.83
22-05-2017
13:28
1000
2191.2
DT-3-86
2.87
22-05-2017
13:33
1000
2235.2
DT-3-87
2.84
22-05-2017
13:35
1000
3289.5
DT-3-88
2.82
22-05-2017
13:40
1000
2511.7
DT-3-89
2.82
22-05-2017
13:48
1000
3437.6
DT-3-90
2.87
22-05-2017
13:55
3000
3078.4
DT-3-91
2.82
22-05-2017
14:01
3000
3001.2
DT-3-92
2.83
22-05-2017
14:09
3000
2849.7
DT-3-93
2.83
22-05-2017
14:11
3000
2789.3
DT-3-94
2.83
22-05-2017
14:23
3000
5324.5
DT-3-95
2.84
22-05-2017
14:25
3000
3045.3
DT-3-96
2.86
24-05-2017
11:07
3000
2850.2
DT-3-97
2.82
24-05-2017
11:11
3000
2844.6
DT-3-98
2.83
24-05-2017
11:15
3000
2786.7
DT-3-99
2.84
24-05-2017
11:18
3000
3376.1
==PAGE:135==
D.2. Quasi-Static and Dynamic Loading Rates
123
Specimen Nr.
Thickness
Date
Time
Piston velocity
Failure load
[-]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
[mm/s]
[N]
DT-3-100
2.85
24-05-2017
11:24
3000
2720.7
DT-3-101
2.85
24-05-2017
11:26
1000
3183.7
DT-3-102
2.85
24-05-2017
11:31
1000
5128.1
DT-3-103
2.85
24-05-2017
11:40
1000
2895.4
DT-3-104
2.85
24-05-2017
11:46
1000
4258.6
DT-3-105
2.84
DT-3-106
2.85
24-05-2017
13:42
1000
3518.2
DT-3-107
2.85
24-05-2017
14:20
10
4503.0
DT-3-108
2.86
24-05-2017
14:23
10
2867.1
DT-3-109
2.86
24-05-2017
14:41
10
2270.1
DT-3-110
2.83
24-05-2017
14:47
10
2965.8
DT-3-111
2.84
24-05-2017
14:50
10
2097.3
DT-3-112
2.84
DT-3-113
2.86
08-06-2017
11:38
1000
2565.6
DT-3-114
2.89
DT-3-115
2.89
DT-3-116
2.87
12-06-2017
09:00
2
2560.9
DT-3-117
2.87
12-06-2017
13:14
10
2067.5
DT-3-118
2.87
13-06-2017
15:01
3000
2998.0
DT-3-119
2.89
13-06-2017
15:08
3000
4125.2
DT-3-120
2.85
13-06-2017
15:10
3000
3773.4
DT-3-121
2.87
12-06-2017
16:13
10
2520.6
DT-3-122
2.86
13-06-2017
15:18
3000
4634.1
==PAGE:136==
124
Appendix D. Individual Test Results
D.3
Thickness Variation at Constant Loading Rate
Table D.3: Achieved results for 2 mm specimens tested at constant loading rates.
Specimen Nr.
Thickness
Date
Time
Piston velocity
Failure load
[-]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
[mm/s]
[N]
DT-2-1
1.85
12-06-2017
13:38
10
665.0
DT-2-2
1.85
12-06-2017
13:39
10
831.4
DT-2-3
1.85
12-06-2017
13:42
10
1235.8
DT-2-4
1.85
12-06-2017
13:44
10
588.9
DT-2-5
1.85
12-06-2017
13:46
10
1036.0
DT-2-6
1.85
12-06-2017
13:49
10
1215.6
DT-2-7
1.85
12-06-2017
13:51
10
1368.5
DT-2-8
1.85
12-06-2017
13:53
10
1123.2
DT-2-9
1.85
12-06-2017
13:56
10
1199.5
DT-2-10
1.85
12-06-2017
14:01
10
694.7
DT-2-11
1.83
12-06-2017
14:04
10
1079.2
DT-2-12
1.85
12-06-2017
14:06
10
937.1
DT-2-13
1.84
12-06-2017
14:09
10
1060.0
DT-2-14
1.84
12-06-2017
14:11
10
997.3
DT-2-15
1.84
12-06-2017
16:28
10
941.1
Table D.4: Achieved results for 4 mm specimens tested at constant loading rates.
Specimen Nr.
Thickness
Date
Time
Piston velocity
Failure load
[-]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
[mm/s]
[N]
DT-4-1
3.85
12-06-2017
14:19
10
2782.7
DT-4-2
3.84
12-06-2017
14:23
10
6174.1
DT-4-3
3.84
12-06-2017
14:27
10
3152.5
DT-4-4
3.82
12-06-2017
14:30
10
1739.3
DT-4-5
3.81
12-06-2017
14:37
10
7457.3
DT-4-6
3.82
12-06-2017
14:41
10
4764.2
DT-4-7
3.81
12-06-2017
14:44
10
5889.5
DT-4-8
3.82
12-06-2017
14:48
10
4472.6
DT-4-9
3.82
12-06-2017
14:52
10
2693.1
DT-4-10
3.83
12-06-2017
14:58
10
7875.1
DT-4-11
3.84
12-06-2017
15:03
10
6120.7
DT-4-12
3.84
12-06-2017
15:07
10
1809.4
DT-4-13
3.84
12-06-2017
15:12
10
9293.8
DT-4-14
3.83
12-06-2017
15:18
10
3921.2
DT-4-15
3.84
12-06-2017
16:38
10
4649.3
==PAGE:137==
D.4. Scratched Specimens at Varying Loading Rates
125
D.4
Scratched Specimens at Varying Loading Rates
Table D.5: Achieved results for scratched specimens tested at varying loading rates.
Specimen Nr.
Thickness
Date
Time
Piston velocity
Failure load
[-]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
[mm/s]
[N]
FL-3-1
2.86
09-06-2017
10:26
1.7·10−3
648.0
FL-3-2
2.86
09-06-2017
10:34
1.7·10−3
550.5
FL-3-3
2.82
09-06-2017
10:44
1.7·10−3
641.3
FL-3-4
2.87
09-06-2017
10:50
1.7·10−3
627.4
FL-3-5
2.84
09-06-2017
10:55
1.7·10−3
505.0
FL-3-6
2.85
09-06-2017
11:07
10
838.5
FL-3-7
2.83
09-06-2017
11:16
10
763.9
FL-3-8
2.84
09-06-2017
11:21
10
712.2
FL-3-9
2.86
09-06-2017
11:29
10
705.2
FL-3-10
2.85
12-06-2017
09:47
100
1203.2
FL-3-11
2.84
12-06-2017
09:51
100
956.8
FL-3-12
2.84
12-06-2017
09:55
100
866.0
FL-3-13
2.88
12-06-2017
10:00
100
733.4
FL-3-14
2.85
12-06-2017
10:04
1000
1071.9
FL-3-15
2.85
12-06-2017
10:09
1000
820.8
FL-3-16
2.87
FL-3-17
2.85
12-06-2017
10:23
1000
833.3
FL-3-18
2.86
FL-3-19
2.88
12-06-2017
10:35
1
912.8
FL-3-20
2.84
12-06-2017
10:39
1
882.0
FL-3-21
2.84
12-06-2017
10:42
1
851.5
FL-3-22
2.89
FL-3-23
2.84
12-06-2017
10:59
0.05
774.9
FL-3-24
2.86
12-06-2017
11:03
0.05
777.4
FL-3-25
2.84
12-06-2017
11:09
0.05
752.9
==PAGE:138==
126
Appendix D. Individual Test Results
D.5
Specimens Equipped with Strain Gauges
A single specimen has been used twice for two different loading rates, which is why the
ﬁrst two specimen numbers in Table D.6 are extended with an extra number. This was
possible because the static test could be conducted without failure. The individual strain
gauge signals are shown in Fig. D.1 for all four tested specimens.
Table D.6: Achieved results for specimens equipped with strain gauges tested at varying loading
rates.
Specimen Nr.
Thickness
Date
Time
Piston velocity
Failure load
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm/s]
[N]
DT-3-131-1
2.84
01-06-2017
12:00
1.7·10−3
2216.5
DT-3-131-2
2.84
14-06-2017
10:56
0.05
2687.6
DT-3-132
2.83
14-06-2017
11:48
1
2534.8
DT-3-133
2.86
DT-3-134
2.86
14-06-2017
14:19
50
2107.1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Strain [ m m-1]
Strain gauge 1
Strain gauge 2
Strain gauge 3
(a) DT-3-131-1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Strain [ m m-1]
Strain gauge 1
Strain gauge 2
Strain gauge 3
(b) DT-3-131-2
0
50
100
150
200
250
Time [ms]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Strain [ m m-1]
Strain gauge 1
Strain gauge 2
Strain gauge 3
(c) DT-3-132
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time [ms]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Strain [ m m-1]
Strain gauge 1
Strain gauge 2
Strain gauge 3
(d) DT-3-134
Fig. D.1: Individual measured strains for each tested specimen.
==PAGE:139==
A P P E N D I X
E
Annex – USB Stick
Content
E.1
Project Report
E.1.1
LATEX
E.1.2
PDF
E.2
Experimental Work
E.2.1
Static Tests
E.2.2
Quasi-static and Dynamic Tests
E.2.3
Thickness Variation
E.2.3.1
Specimen Thickness 2 mm
E.2.3.2
Specimen Thickness 4 mm
E.2.4
Scratched Specimens
E.2.5
Stiffness Investigation
E.2.6
High-speed Recordings
E.2.6.1
Specimen Thickness 2 mm
E.2.6.2
Specimen Thickness 3 mm
E.2.6.3
Specimen Thickness 4 mm
E.3
FEM-Models
E.3.1
Python - Axisymmetric FEM-Model
E.3.2
Python - Half-symmetric 3D FEM-Model
==PAGE:140==
==PAGE:141==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
BSG
Borosilicate glass, page 7
DUC
Digital universal conditioner, page 108
EDS
Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, page 30
EVA
Ethylene-vinyl acetate, page 13
FEA
Finite element analysis, page 40
FEM
Finite element method, page 40
FG
Float glass, page 5
FTG
Fully tempered glass, page 5
GUI
Graphical user interface, page 73
HSG
Heat strengthened glass, page 5
LEFM
Linear elastic fracture mechanics, page 15
LVDT
Linear variable differential transformer, page 101
PVB
Polyvinyl butyral, page 13
SCC
Stress corrosion cracking, page 17
SCG
Slow crack growth, page 17
SEM
Scanning electron microscope, page 30
SHPB
Split-Hopkinson pressure bar, page 21
SLSG
Soda lime silica glass, page 7
==PAGE:142==
130
Nomenclature
Symbols – Greek
αT
Expansion coefﬁcient of glass, page 7
λ
Thermal conductivity, page 9
ν
Poisson’s ratio, page 9
ρ
Density, page 9
σ1
First principal stress, page 40
σ f
Resistance of a single ﬂaw, page 19
σn
Nominal tensile stress normal to a crack face, page 16
σθ
Tangential stress in polar coordinates, page 39
σr
Radial stress in polar coordinates, page 39
ε
Emissivity, page 9
εr
Radial strain in polar coordinates, page 39
Symbols – Latin
a
Crack depth, page 16
ai
Initial crack depth, page 19
cp
Speciﬁc thermal capacity, page 9
D
Diameter of the test specimen, page 40
DL
Diameter of the load ring, page 40
DS
Diameter of the support ring, page 40
E
Young’s modulus, page 9
F
Failure load of the test specimen, page 40
h
Thickness of the test specimen, page 40
HK0,1/20
Knoop hardness, page 9
KIc
Fracture toughness for mode I loading, page 16
Kdyn
Ic
Dynamic fracture toughness, page 53
==PAGE:143==
Nomenclature
131
Ksta
Ic
Static fracture toughness, page 53
KI
Stress intensity factor for mode I loading, page 16
n
Average refractive index (visible spectrum), page 9
p0
Overpressure from blast wave, page 14
Ta
Annealing point of glass, page 9
ta
Arrival time of blast wave, page 14
t f
Time to failure of a single ﬂaw, page 19
Tg
Transition temperature of glass, page 9
Tm
Melting temperature of glass, page 7
Tw
Working point of glass, page 8
Tε
Strain point of glass, page 9
Tso ft
Softening point of glass, page 9
v
Crack velocity, page 17
Y
Correction factor (geometry factor), page 16
