==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Street Light Measuring System 
- Mobile, automatized light measurement system for characterizing road lighting 
 
 
 
 
 
Emil Geurtze Høgskilde 
S103662 
23. June 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
PREFACE 
In the summer of 2015, a group of scientists from DTU was asked to collect and process light data from an 
area where several lighting companies had installed different street lamps. The scientists researched the task 
and found that the only existing way of getting the desired information was by walking around at night and 
collect the data manually. They realized that the assignment was too large for them to do manually and 
decided to work on a system that could be mounted on a car and collect data while driving down the street.  
The scientists succeeded in developing a system that works. They patented the design and DTU decided to 
create a spin-out company that can profit from the newly invented system.  
Establishing a spin-out company that could create a viable business, was however still a long way from the 
prototype system that the scientists had developed. A business developer was hired in, Nicklas Jarnel, who 
contacted the people responsible for the DTU course 41633, Innovation and Product Development, to get a 
group working on a business case and a prototype.  
This is where I, Emil Høgskilde, joined the process. I was part of the group assigned to the spin-out. When the 
course ended in June 2016, Nicklas invited me to join the project. I have since then been working on the 
project parallel to my studies as a co-owner of the company.  
This report is the documentation of my master thesis where I have re-developed a part of the system using 
open-source development tools. The rationale for re-developing the system in open-source is to save money. 
The original system is implemented using costly software the company does not have capital for. Another 
reason for re-developing the system is that DTU owns the source code. This can result in complicated 
negotiation of the rights to the source code in the future and further development of the code.   
The scope was limited to the most “essential parts” of the system stretching from acquiring and processing 
data to producing a product consumers would buy. ”Essential parts” is in this context, are the parts that are 
needed for a standard straight road with street lamps on one side. 
It was decided to split the report into two main sections: data collection and data processing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
Content 
PREFACE ............................................................................................................................................................. 2 
1. 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 4 
2. 
Hardware ................................................................................................................................................... 7 
3. 
Data acquisition ......................................................................................................................................... 9 
3.1 
User interface .................................................................................................................................. 11 
3.2 
Lamp-image detection ..................................................................................................................... 12 
3.3 
Blinking lamp ................................................................................................................................... 13 
3.4 
Timing .............................................................................................................................................. 19 
4. 
Data Processing ....................................................................................................................................... 22 
4.1 
Mapping the route........................................................................................................................... 22 
4.2 
Locating the Lamps .......................................................................................................................... 24 
4.3 
Light from each lamp ....................................................................................................................... 26 
4.4 
Final output ..................................................................................................................................... 27 
5. 
Future work ............................................................................................................................................. 29 
6. 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................................... 32 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
1. Introduction  
Two of the main topics at this age in time are climate change and smart cities. We want to optimize and 
tweak every single climate changing parameter and keep evolving our infrastructure and the way we live 
together. Street lighting is an area where both topics are of central importance. 
Denmark’s largest lighting consultancy, Kenneth Munck. ÅF Lighting Denmark, have stressed the importance 
of optimizing the street lights and recommend that the street lamps performance get measured when the 
lamps are installed and then again after five years.    
The demand for information on how the street lamps perform and their location is growing, but there is 
presently no viable way of locating the lamps and checking their performance. This project is a step on a long 
road to provide a commercial system, which efficiently collects, process and presents the necessary data to 
evaluate the quality of street lighting in a consumer-friendly report.  
1.1 Difficulties verifying the Danish street light  
The directive “Vejregler for vejbelysning”, 
Vejdirektoratet, 1999 has guidelines for 
the light performance on ground levels 
and the light levels between pairs of 
lamps.   
One must measure the illuminance (lux) in 
a grid of 5X10 points as shown in figure 1. 
The illumination must fulfil these two 
requirements: 
𝐸𝑚= 2.5 𝑙𝑢𝑥 
𝑈0 = 0.15 
Where 𝐸𝑚 is the mean of the sample points and 𝑈0 is the ratio between the minimum value to the mean 
value. 
To check if the street light meets the directive, a municipality or company would have to go through a very 
cumbersome proces. First, they would have to measure the length and width of the road to enable the 
calculation of the grid. Then they would have to start placing a luxmeter on the first spot, step away from the 
luxmeter, note the value and continue to the next spot. While measuring the light, they would also have to 
measure the distance between the spots or start by marking all spots on the ground. 
This would take a long time and in addition they would have to stop and wait every time a car passes by or 
they would have to block all traffic while measuring the light 
Figure 1 Lamp pair and the grid on the road. The standard for how the light is 
described between two lampposts are a 5 X 10 grind on the road. 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
1.2 Street light basic assumptions  
The light from a street lamp, lights up in a cone shape where the 
light intensity decreases depending on the distance to the light 
source. The light from a streetlamp is illustrated in Figure 2. 
The values we are interested in are the illuminance on ground 
level. Based on the grid measurements we can create an 
interpolated function 𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦) which returns the lux value of the 
point. The coordinates are called illumination points (lux-points). 
The illuminance at a given point on the ground is the sum of 
illuminance from all the lamps shining on that point, as seen in 
Figure 3.   
So the general aim is to find the function 𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦) for each lamp and 
then calculate the total illuminance at the desired grid coordinates.  
Based on experience, we made the assumption that only two 
lamps will be contributing to a point at any given time. The rationale 
behind the assumption can be seen in Figure 4. Lamps are 
expensive and the lights from street lamps are not supposed to 
blind the drivers. To avoid light going directly into the eyes of a 
driver in a car, the street lamps angle of diffusion must be limited. 
To save money the lamps are placed as far apart as possible which 
indirectly implies that the light from each lamps should only reach 
as far as to the next lamp.  
 
 
 
Figure 2 The light from each street lamp can be 
expressed as a function, where I is the 
illuminance and x and y are surface coordinates. 
Figure 3 If several lamps shine on the same spot,
the total amount of illuminance on that spot is
the sum of the illuminance from each lamp.  
Figure 4 A maximum of two lamps will be illuminating at any given point on a road with lamps placed on one side. If this isn’t the case 
the lamps are either placed too close to each other or the angle of diffusion is too wide. 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
1.3 Basic principles of the measurement system  
The goal is to provide a solution which can quickly 
and easily map the light distribution and the exact 
position of street lamps. 
When designing the system two requirements, 
besides being accurate, are essential. The first 
requirement is the speed of the system: the system 
must be significantly faster than the manual 
process. The second requirement is that the system 
must be able to collect data while other cars are 
driving on the road. 
To fulfill the requirements the system is put on top 
of a car, clear of other cars head lights. The idea is 
to measure the light on the roof of the car, use an 
accurate GPS to get the location of the car and then 
calculate where the light hits and the illuminance 
when it reaches ground.  
To calculate where the light hits the ground, two cameras 
are used to triangulate the lamps position. Based on the 
position of the light source a vector from the light source to 
the detectors is calculated. The vector is then extended to 
the ground where the light would have hit the ground, see 
figure 5. 
If two lamps are both shining on the detectors at the same 
time the measured values from the detectors need to be 
split up. Two sensors with a shield in between enables the 
system to differentiate between the amounts of light 
originating from each light source, see figure 6.  
 
Figure 5 Cameras at the ends of the roof rack are used to detect the
location of a light source. 
Figure 6 Ratio sensors. Two light detectors are placed on 
each side of a screen to determine the ratio between light 
from the front and the back of the car. 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
  
2. Hardware 
The system can be split into the parts, inside and outside the car. The hardware inside the car acts as the 
brain of the system and the hardware outside as its sensors. 
Apart from the GPS-antennas the hardware outside the car is mounted on a car roof rack. The roof rack is 
shown in figure 7. 
 All components mounted on the roof rack are well attached so the distance between the components does 
not change. The detectors 1 – 8 are used to measure light. Detectors 1 to 5 are placed with even spacing of 
0.5 meters. Det6 is mounted on an extension bar that can be elongated if the side walk needs to be measured.  
Det7 and Det8 are the ratio sensors. They are placed adjacent to each other with a separation screen in 
between.
 
Figure 7 Top view schematics and image of the roof rack. The roof rack is mounted on top of the car and enables the system to detect 
the information needed for finding the illuminance of the road. The roof rack contains 11 sensors: two cameras, eight gain detectors 
and a luxmeter. The cameras are equipped with fisheye lenses giving them 180 degree vision, of the sky. The detectors measures the 
illuminance but they do not have the correct cosine correction or the wavelength response as the human eye, so the RefLux is placed 
adjacent to Det2 to enable the corrections for the cosine correction and wavelength response. 
The detector output is in mV and the final data must be lux. The RefLux is a very precise luxmeter but 
expensive. It is attached adjacent to Det2 to enable the conversion from mV to lux.  
The cameras are placed as far apart as possible to reduce the error margin for the triangulation of the light 
source. To guarantee that the cameras can see the lamps without having to be turned, the cameras have also 
been equipped with a fish eye lens.  
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
The three main components inside the car is the GNSS (GPS), a PC and a multifunctional I/O device (MF-IO). 
The cabling between the components can be seen figure 8. 
 
The GNSS will be referred to as GPS, because it is the term used 
colloquially. The device also uses Galileo and GLONASS which are 
the EU and Russian versions of GNSS where GPS is American. The 
GPS has several features assisting in finding the exact location, and 
delivers precise coordinates even if it is without a GPS signal for 
several seconds. One feature is an inertial measurement unit 
(IMU). The IMU measures acceleration and angular velocity. To 
prevent the GPS from sending false locations it must move exactly 
as the car. It has therefore been mounted on a metal plate and the 
plate is fixed to the floor of the car. A picture of the GPS is shown 
in Figure 9. 
The GPS is connected to the PC and sends a coordinate every second. The PC used is a laptop with 16GB ram 
and intel i7 core. The PC is also connected to the cameras and the multi I/O device. The PC is connected to 
the cameras with high quality USB 3 cables to minimize data loss.  
The Multifunctional I/O device, shown in Figure 10, is connected 
to everything except the GPS. It converts the analog signals from 
the detectors to digital values through its Analog to Digital 
Converter (ADC). The triggering of the cameras are also sent 
through the device. The MF-IO is configured from the PC.  
Key numbers regarding the components can be found in 
appendix 1 
 
 
 
Antennas 
Cameras 
Detectors 
GPS 
PC 
MF-IO 
USB 3 
Trigger 
RG-58U 
USB 
RefLux 
Router 
Figure 8 Schematics of how the components are connected inside the car. Power supplies have been left out to simplify 
the drawing. The GPS is connected to the PC through the router. The cameras and MF-IO is configured from the PC, but 
when the system starts acquiring data, the PC becomes the recipient. 
Figure 9 GPS mounted to the floor of the car. 
Figure 10 The multifunctional I/O device inside the
car. 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
3. Data acquisition 
When all components are mounted and powered up, three programs are launched. One program is used to 
connect to the GPS (comes with the GPS) and two programs developed as part of this project called Ortus 
and Particle Detector. The Ortus is the main data acquiring software and the Particle Detector is an image 
processing program. 
When the GPS has found a new position, a telegram is sent to a COM-port. The telegram contains several 
information but only the position is used. Figure 11 outlines the system. In the figure the GPS and the 
accompanying program is shown as one entity because the remaining system views them as one. The GPS in 
the figure contains a buffer to illustrate that the GPS position can be delayed by the GPS and the GPS driver.   
Ortus and Particle Detector have a few things in common, as can be seen in figure 11. Both programs receive 
data from the hardware, processes and ID’s the data and then save the data in the same database. The 
database is a MS SQL Database. The data is saved in four tables: GPS data (GNSS), detector/RefLux data (ADC) 
and a table for each camera (PeakLeft and PeakRight). 
Ortus 
The Ortus runs two threads while acquiring data, illustrated with a dotted line in figure 11. One thread 
receives the string from the GPS and saves the coordinates in the database. The other thread receives data 
from the ADC, which is the data from the detectors and the reference luxmeter. The Ortus creates an object 
for each of the specified ADC inputs. The objects contains a series of buffers which will be explained in the 
section “Blinking Lamps”, together with how the signal processing works. When the data is received from the 
ADC it is distributed between the objects and data in each object is processed individually. When the data 
has been processed it is given an ID and stored in the database.  Finally, the processed detector data is 
displayed to the operator, as can be seen in Figure 16 in the “User Interface” section.  
Figure 11 Overview of key element in the data collection system and their relations while acquiring data. All data goes through a FiFO
buffer and is given an ID and goes through some processing before ending up in the database. The Ortus is a python program that 
receive data from the GPS and the ADC. The Particle detector is a program written in C++, which receives images from the cameras.
The dotted lines in both of the program boxes represents sub-systems that are run in individual system threads.  
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
Before the Ortus can begin to acquire data, it has to configure 
the ADC and the Trigger generator. Except for a few 
configurations all configurations are gathered in one file (e.g. 
sample rate and detector input channels). The configuration 
file is in the format YAML which is a markup language similar 
to XML. When the Ortus is started the first thing it does is to 
write the configurations to a log file for future references. A 
snippet of the log file is shown in Figure 12 Log . Some errors 
and selected messages are also written to the log file. Having 
the configuration and errors in the same file is very useful for 
debugging if an error was unnoticed while collecting the data. 
The Ortus software is developed in Python 2.7, due to  personal positive experiences with processing data 
using Python 2.7 and because there is a large “python community” creating documentation and answering 
questions online regarding data processing.  
Particle detector 
The Particle Detector program’s main function, is to process images from the cameras and detect where the 
lamps are located. It is called particle detector, because the bright spots on an image created by a light source 
is labeled particles. The program runs four threads while acquiring data, two for each camera. In figure 11 
only two threads are shown because two of the threads run in the database layer of the program and do not 
add functionality to the program besides storing data. The two threads represented in figure 11 receive 
images from the cameras and detect if a light source is present in the image. Images are not processed equally 
fast so a large buffer is implemented for each processing thread. 
If a light source is present in an image, the thread processing the image creates an object with information 
regarding which images it was present in and its position and size. If an image contains several light sources 
an object is created for each of them. Each object is added to one of the two buffers depending on from 
which camera it was captured. The buffers acts as a waiting room, before the database. When a buffer is 
more than half way full a flag is set. The database threads then empties the buffer and stores the data while 
the next image is being processed. Using two threads for each camera enables the system to process images 
at a higher rate.   
The lamp detection software is implemented in C++. Originally a version of the software was implemented 
in python as part of the Ortus. In the beginning of the project the system was tested with hardware parts 
that resemble the hardware used when acquiring data on the road. The cameras mounted on the roof rack 
uses a different driver than the cameras used in the beginning of the development and it turned out that 
there was not a fully developed interface in python for the roof rack cameras. Another difference was that 
the hardware first used for testing did not have a hardware trigger generator. The presence of a hardware 
trigger generator meant that the originally implemented python system could be split up, because a software 
trigger was no longer needed to make the ADC and cameras run in parallel.  
The python implementation used OpenCV1 for the particle detection. OpenCV is aimage processing library 
implemented in C but with interfaces for java, C, python and C++. C++ was selected because the C++ code for 
OpenCV is all most one to one with python. 
                                                          
1 http://opencv.org/ 
Figure 12 Log file used by the Ortus. Settings and errors 
are saved in the log file.  
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
Image processing takes up a lot of the computer's processing power and ram. C++ is fast and lightweight and 
ideal for the job. Splitting the system up also meant that the particle detection part can run on a separate 
processer core, which was not achieved in the python program. Python’s most well documented thread 
library resembles threads, but is in fact run on one processor core. So as an added bonus the C++ 
implementation is able to utilize more than one core and therefore handle a higher framerate. 
3.1 User interface  
The final user interface must be simple, intuitive 
and user friendly, so a user with minimal expertise 
does not need hours of training. Recognizing exactly 
what is needed is an extensive process and the 
system is still in this process right now.   
Presently everything is mainly text based,  due to 
the speed of development. New functionality can 
be added and removed without having to think 
about how it looks in a graphical user interface 
(GUI). 
The Ortus and the Particle Detector both run from 
the console and prints out data and error messages 
while running. Both need a few inputs before they 
can start acquiring data. 
Figure 13 is from Particle Detector where one of the 
questions shown is if the user wants to calibrate the 
camera. In this context calibration means to change 
the camera’s area of interest. If the user answers 
yes, a new window is opened which can be seen in 
Figure 14. It may be needed to change the area of 
interest because the lamps position relative to the 
road may change. Some lamps are right next to the 
road others have a side walk and/or a bike lane in 
between and it is difficult to specify which section 
of the cameras images the lamp will be visual in 
without a GUI. 
Besides the consoles three windows are opened 
while driving, one for each of the cameras and one 
for the detectors. Figure 15 shows the window from 
a camera. The window display the original images but after they have been processed. On the original images 
a red circle is drawn if a street lamp was detected.  
Figure 13 Text based interface for Particle detector. The user is 
shown the status of the cameras and are asked two questions. Use 
external trigger and Do you wish to calibrate cams. The first 
question is strictly for the development phase and the second is a
function that most likely will go into the final product. 
Figure 14 The window shown when selecting the area of interest. 
This is done for each camera. The user can use two slide bars to move 
the window around to make sure the light source is with in the area
of interest. 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
The detectors window seen in visualizes the data in 
a graph for each detector. The x-axis move while 
driving, so the user is shown the current processed 
data. The two graphs in the top of Figure 16 is from 
the ratio sensors. If examined it appears that when 
input 7 peaks, input 8 is low and when input 7 drops 
input 8 goes up. 
Monitoring the processed output of the detectors 
and cameras is especially useful in the development 
phase, where several unpredictable errors may 
occur or unanticipated data is collected. The 
interface enables the operator of the system to 
compare the real world surroundings with the data.  
3.2 Lamp-image detection 
 The cameras are used to locate the position of 
street lamps relative to the car. To find the 
location of a lamp on an image, each image is 
processed to detect if there is a lamp present in 
the form of a light-spot. The pixel at the center of 
the spot defines its location in the image. How the 
system defines a lamp can be seen in Figure 17. 
The image feature defining a street lamp is a 
cluster of pixels with bright values (monochrome 
image) and the cluster must be within the defined 
size boundary. A cluster of bright adjacent pixels 
is called a particle. 
Figure 17 A light source/ Street lamp is recognized as a bright spot
with a defined size. The center pixel is used later for the positioning of 
the lamps.   
Figure 15 While measuring a live feed of the processed images is 
shown to the operator. The images is from one of the cameras, the
other is identical. A red circle is drawn around the particles perceived 
as streetlamps, in this way the operator confirm that the particle 
settings are correct. 
Figure 16 Visual display of data from detectors. The data from each detector is displayed in its own plot. The x-axis is the time in
second from the start.  The x-axis moves so only a few second is displayed at any given time.  
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
To speed up the detection of a particle, the image is converted in to a binary image by setting a threshold on 
the pixel values. Every pixel with an intensity below the threshold is seen as black and every pixel above is 
white. Detecting the particle is done using OpenCV.  OpenCV is a powerfull, open-source image processing 
library that contain a class called SimpleBlobDetector which is optimized to detect clusters of pixels. 
SimpleBlobDetector takes several parameters that define for the search target. In our case it is the total 
number of pixels in a particle (blob).  
3.3 Blinking lamp 
All around the world, older light sources are changed to 
LED’s, so the system must be able to measure the light from 
an LED. 
LED’s needs a DC current but the power grid delivers an AC 
current. So power converters are needed. Figure 18 
illustrates an example of how the current can be converted. 
First the AC is converted to DC using a rectifier. To deliver 
the constant current required by an LED, a DC to DC convert 
is used. This converter is using switch-mode technology in 
order to give high efficiency. Its raw unfiltered output will 
consist of regular pulses of current alternating between a 
fixed value and 0. Filtering is typical, but not always added.  
LED’s are based on a completely different principles than the 
traditional incandescent lamps. For instance, the LED’s have 
a very fast current to light response time as opposed to 
incandescent lamps which have a cooldown time. So if an 
incandescent lamp was to be turned on and off continually the light 
source would never become completely dark. Because LED’s turns off 
instantly, the LEDs will blink if driven by a current which is switching 
on and off.   
As previously mentioned, to counteract this a filter is inserted before 
the LED to smoothen out the current making it constant. However not 
all manufacturers of LED drivers insert this filter or the filter is only 
partial effective – so the fact is that some LED streetlamps are blinking. 
The frequency is so high that it is not noticed by the normal eye but 
the optical detectors and in particular the camera can detect this.  
One of the requirements for the system is that it needs to be able to 
measure while the car is moving, which leads to the need of a high 
sample frequency and short sample time. Taking a short sample of light 
from a LED lamp that is blinking will give either a sample that is taken 
while the lamp is fully on or while it is fully off. There is of course 
intermediate cases, but at short sample times relative to the LED’s 
rise/fall time as it is here these case will be rare. The blinking impacts 
the light detectors, but it is in particular a problem for the cameras, so 
we need to deal with both. This effect is a consequence of the aliasing. 
Aliasing occurs when the sample frequency is lower than twice the 
Samples 
On 
Off 
Figure 19 Samples retrieved only while
the LED is in the off state will result in the
system seeing the lamp as turned off. 
Samples 
On 
Off 
Figure 20  Samples retrieved only while 
the LED is on will result in the system
receives to high values. 
Figure 18 Current conversion for LED’s. Some companies
decide not to use a filter which results in blinking lamps.
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
analog bandwidth of the signal (Nyquist frequency). An example of extreme aliasing is shown in Figure 19 
and Figure 20. Here it is clear that the measured amplitude is either the peak value or 0 – only depending on 
which phase the sample has relative to the light pulses – clearly a situation which has to be dealt with - 
Light Detectors antialiasing 
An illustration of blinking light from a street lamp measured from a moving 
car can be seen in Figure 21. The goal of the system is to get to the blue 
line which is the average. One way of getting to the blue line is by sampling 
at a high frequency – significantly higher than twice the bandwidth and 
calculate the average value digitally. 
Based on experiences from the original system combined with the Nyquist 
frequency, the sample rate needs to be at least 10 kHz to get sufficient 
data.   
Over sampling at 10 kHz will increase the amount of storage needed.   
The data is stored in float32 to get sufficient accuracy. This means that the amount of data stored in just one 
hour is 1.2 GB and a night of measuring can take several hours. 
𝐹𝑟𝑒𝑞∗𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒∗𝑛𝑟𝑂𝑓𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑟𝑠∗𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑃𝑟𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 =  10000 ∗3600 ∗9 ∗32 = 1.206995 𝐺𝑖𝑔𝑎𝑏𝑦𝑡𝑒𝑠 (𝐺𝐵) 
To improve on the efficiency of the data storage, the data is decimated while sampling. Decimation is a signal 
processing algorithm which lowers the sample rate by a factor of M. This is done by: 
1. Removing all signal power at frequencies above half of the decimated sample rate fs/M 
2. Retaining only every M’th sample of the filtered signal – all other are simply discarded 
 
Filtering is done with a low pass filter. Such filter can be implemented as an infinite impulse response filter 
(IIR). The IIR filter is implemented with a low pass Bessel filter transfer characteristic. The Bessel filter is 
selected because it has a very linear phase response that results in a good time domain response without 
overshoot. This will smooth out the data but still keeps the shape of the curve. 
To determine the factor M of the decimation we need to look at what is needed to create the light grid for 
the end result. There is approximately 30 meters between street lamps and we need at least 10 samples from 
each detector between the poles. To avoid a chance of a dangerous situation on highways to the goal is to 
acquire data while driving at 80km/h. Acquiring sufficient data while driving 80km/h, the sample rate needs 
to be at least 7.4 Hz. 
𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠∗𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑛𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑠= 10 ∗80𝑘𝑚/ℎ 
30𝑚
= 10 ∗22.22𝑚/𝑠 
30𝑚
= 7.4𝐻𝑧 
7Hz is the minimum, but to have some safety margin the samples are decimated down to 50Hz. Because we 
decimate the sampled data the storage space does not depend on the sample rate, so again to create a 
margin and exploit the hardware capability, the sample rate is increased to 20 kHz. The used decimation 
factor M is then 400. 
Implementation and Test 
When the data is decimated, the values intertwine. The calculated values of i will depend on values calculated 
previous to i and the values calculated post i. 
True 
Light 
Value 
Figure 21 Light while passing LED. The
blue line is what the eye registers
which is what is desired in most 
scenarios. 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
When implementing the filters in python a problem arose. Scipy2, the python library used for signal 
processing process a continous stream of data (real time) but only a complete block of data. The python filter 
can not receive data continuously, it can only handle complete data sets. This is an issue, because the reason 
for decimating the data while driving, was to reduce the amount of data stored.   
To overcome this problem and enable the system to decimate in real time the samples are divided into blocks. 
These blocks are then decimated three at a time. Figure 22 illustrates how the block system works. The raw 
data is collected in a pre-buffer equivalent to one second of sampling, this collection of samples is what we 
call a block. When the pre-buffer is full it is emptyed into the Raw data buffer. The Raw data buffer is a FIFO 
buffer with a fixed size of 3 times the Pre-buffer size i.e. 3 seconds of data. When the data from the Pre-
buffer is moved into the Raw data buffer an equivelent amount of data is pushed out of the buffer, so when 
a block is added the oldest block in the raw data buffer is pushed out and discarded.  
The entire Raw data buffer is then decimated. From the decimated data only the center part  𝐵𝑘 is stored in 
the database. 𝐵𝑘−1and  𝐵𝑘+1 are thrown away. The data representing 𝐵𝑘+1 has already been stored one 
second ago and and the data representing 𝐵𝑘−1 will be stored the next time a new block is read into the Raw 
data buffer. Continuous repeatition of this proceedure will result in all data being decimated three times but 
the decimated values representing  a block will only be saved when it is the center block.  
A lab test was made to verify the buffer system. The setup 
can be seen in Figure 23. A sensor was placed directly under 
a LED spot in a well-lit room. Data was sampled for 60 
seconds and a hand was waved in front of the detector for a 
few seconds during the sampling. Figure 24 shows the 
sampled raw data.  
                                                          
2 https://docs.scipy.org 
 
 
1.2m 
2.0m 
Figure 23 Setup for testing the block system. 
Figure 22 Block system for decimation. The data is collected in blocks. Three blocks are decimated at a time but only the data 
from the center block is saved. When the data is saved the oldest block is pushed out and a new block is put in. In ehis way all 
block are decimated three times but the decimated values are only saved when the block is the center block. 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
In the main part of the plot where the raw data values 
are stable, the values fluctuate≈10%. 10% error 
margin, might be close to acceptable, but the reason 
why fluctuation it is not larger is due to the nearby 
lamps. 
Because there is no data before 0 and after 60 
seconds, the values in the beginning and in the end 
will always be unreliable. To check if the block system 
works, we must compare with values in the middle of 
the data set. Figure 25 shows the data 25 seconds 
into the dataset. The same filter is applied in four 
different timespans, one is filtered for the full period 
(the red line) and the three remaining have been 
filtered in periods representing the length (timespan) 
of 1, 2 and 3 blocks. The plots are applied in the order 
they are listed and the black dots are the raw data. 
 
𝑩𝒌−𝟏 
𝑩𝒌 
𝑩𝒌+𝟏 
Figure 24 Raw data collected in the time span of one minute with
the test setup. The section where the values drops is because a 
hand was waved in front of the detector to see how the block 
system handles irregularities.  
Figure 25 Comparison of the influence of the block size with respect to the accuracy of the decimated data. The curves are plotted in 
the order they are listed and the black dots are the raw data. The red curve is the ideal case where all 60 seconds of data is decimated 
in one block. The blue, green and yellow curves was decimated respectively in 1, 2 and 3 second. The blue curve ends where the green 
is visible and the green starts the same place as the yellow plot. The aim is to decide the least amount of time which is sufficient to 
insure the same section of the curve covers the red curve. For the most part of the blue curve it does not match the red curve so one 
second is not an adequate amount of time. The green curve does match the red for the most part but it does end with a fairly large 
distance to the red curve at a time where there is no extreme fluctuation. The yellow line has a good fit for the red line, and is why 3 
second are used on the block system when decimating.   
Decimated 60 seconds  
Decimation of complete set 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
It is noticeable that the block system needs data from the neighbor blocks to calculate correct values of light. 
The blue one block plot terminates the same place as the green and only the center of the plot is close to the 
decimation using the full time period. The green plot includes data from 𝐵𝑘−1 and 𝐵𝑘. The 𝐵𝑘−1 part is hidden 
behind the yellow plot which follows the red plot except at the very beginning, but the green plot fails at the 
end. The center of the green plot could be used but the ratio between reliable and unreliable values makes 
it inefficient because the same data will need to be decimated many of times. The yellow 3 block plot follows 
the red plot perfectly during the 𝐵𝑘blockperiod. It is only that part that is saved to the data base and the 
amount of times the same data needs to be decimated can be kept at a constant of three times. Larger blocks 
could be used which would effectively reduce the processing needed, but would have undesirable side 
effects, such as larger memory usage and larger delay in the data displayed while acquiring the data (Figure 
16). 
Figure 26 shows a comparison between results using the filter for the full period (red plot) and data stored 
by the 3-block system (yellow plot). There is a difference between the two approaches when closely 
examined, but it is not much. The measured values are from 1.5 to 3.15 mV and the largest difference is 
0.0002 mV or approximately 0.01% which is an acceptable error margin.  
 
Figure 26 Difference between each decimated value from the block system and the data filtered in one complete block. The y-axis is 
in mV and the x-axis is the sample number. The largest deviation is where a hand was waved in front of the detector but it only 0.01%    
Cameras aliasing 
The fact that the lamps are blinking is in particular a challenge to the cameras. 
The sample rate of the camera and image processing system cannot exceed the maximum image rate of the 
camera which is in the order of a few 100Hz, this is not meeting the Nyquist requirement for most blinking 
lamps. So, aliasing is an effect which has to be dealt with in a different way. 
The total image sample rate is limited by both the camera and the processing algorithm. In order to maximize 
the sample rate, the number of pixels processed from each image must be minimized. This can efficiently be 
done by selecting a sub region of the image, an area of interest.  
To get as precise a lamp position as possible the exposure time of the camera must be as short as possible. 
The short exposure time is important because it limit the amount of light captured by the camera, so that 
the pixel that reaches the maximum value is limited. This enables the pixel value threshold when processing 
the image, to filter out weak undesired light sources in the background and only use the most intense lit 
pixels which will typically be from the center of a light source. The image processing is also made faster 
because the fewer and the smaller the clusters of pixels are that passes the threshold, the shorter is 
processing time of an image.  
Decimation of complete set 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
The exposure time used is 7 µs. This means that there is a risk that a lamp may not emit light for the entire 
time period an image is captured. If the lamp blinks at the same frequency as the images are captures all 
images could be captured while the light source is without light, in the same way as the detectors, seen in 
figure 19.   
Using a fisheye lens one could argue that using a high frequency the light source will most likely be captured 
during the time span it is within the camera angle while driving back and forth covering the road. Processing 
the in entire image takes up way too much processing power for the onboard laptop to keep up. A solution 
is to cut down the width of the image so that the processing only looks at a specified area of pixels and then 
the driver of the car must driving very straight to make sure that all lamps are within the frame , as illustrated 
in Figure 27. 
 
Figure 27 The red box is where lights source moves across the images from the camera if the car drives strait. Everything outside the 
red box is unnecessary for the location of a light source. 
The issues with this solution is that tests have shown that using the images from directly next to the lamp 
gives the most precise locations, due to the tiny irregularities in the camera's lens (e.i. The further the light 
source is away from the center of the image, the larger error margin). With the most reliable images captured 
when the cameras are aligned with the light source, the area of interest can be reduced even further to the 
region where the lamp is visible when the car passes the lamp, as seen in Figure 28.  
 
Figure 28 The red box is the final area of interest for the cameras. (The red box can be moved to the sides because the location of the 
white dot depends on the lamps distain to the road) 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
Now we are back to the problem with aliasing due to the sampling frequency of the image capture being 
lower than the blinking frequency of the lamps  
Even with the area of interest cut down to a fraction of the original image the detection of the particles uses 
a lot of processing power. The limited processing capacity of the onboard pc’s results in the system not being 
able to comply with Nyquist rate. 
The final solution to handle the blinking lamps has been a combination of a few things. First the area of 
interest has been cut down. Secondly the user can define an upper and lower bound of the size of the particle. 
Giving a tight upper and lower size bound speeds up the particle detection significantly. This enables the 
particle detection to run at 50Hz which is pretty good for image processing software. The human visual 
system can process 10 to 12 images per second and perceive them individually.  
The original system has experienced lamps blinking with almost exactly a multiple of 50Hz, so for that specific 
scenario the sample rate must be changed. The frame rate can be increased slightly and lowered. If the user 
decides to increase the frame rate, the image buffer can also be expanded but eventually the processing will 
not be able to keep up, which can result in the system losing frames or crashing. The user can also decide to 
lower the frame rate, and reduce the driving speed.  
The sample rate can be changed in the configuration file. The standard configuration is 50Hz which has been 
tested on the road as well as in a lab with multiple light sources in the area of interest.  
3.4 Timing  
One of the challenges when collecting data is relating data 
between components. The time/timestamps are the only thing 
that enables the data from different components to be linked 
together. Figure 29 illustrates how time links the data together. 
Given a time 𝑡𝑖 the system must be able to match what the 
position was and what the cameras and the detectors record at 
that time. 
 The ideal scenario is that all components used the same clock and 
run at the same frequency, but that is not possible with the 
hardware available. Each part of the system runs with different 
frequencies, (detectors, cameras and the GPS).   
The heart of the timing issue is the pc clock. The pc clock drifts 
compared to the MF-IO clock and the GPS clock. It is known that 
the GPS clock is very precise, better than 100ns in short and in 
long term (precise timing is an inherent part of the GNSS system). 
The datasheet for the MF-IO specifies the clock frequency to be 
accurate to 50ppm. This means that the sample instant may drift 
50ppm of the time since start of the measurement. For example, 
if the measurement period is 15minutes, the drift can be up to 
15 ∗60 ∗50𝑢𝑠= 45𝑚𝑠 at the end of the measurement. 
Figure 30 shows the time difference between timestamps given by the PC clock to received GPS data and 
ADC data by the Ortus program. The timestamps were given to all GPS coordinates and to every twenty 
Figure 29 Samples from all components need to relate
and one way of relating them is in the time domain. To 
enable the relation the system need to know which 
sample was measured at what time. 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
thousand row of detector data (equal to the amount of data sampled every second). Ideally the time 
difference between two timestamps should be exactly one second.  
 
Looking at the plot in Figure 30, the differences in the timestamps are not exactly 1 second apart but deviate 
up to 0.03 seconds between two timestamps. The main reason for the deviation is most likely caused by a 
software buffer. All data have to go through a buffer before given a timestamp and the buffers cannot be 
removed as they are a part of the drivers and software libraries. There is no obvious pattern between the 
two plots i.e. the GPS differences do not follow the same pattern as the ADC differences. Without coherence 
between the timestamps, the position of a sample from a detector can be pushed more than a meter.  
For example, 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑛 and 𝐴𝐷𝐶𝑛 is sampled at the same time and given the same timestamp. 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑛+1 is then 
given a timestamp 1.03s from 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑛 and 𝐴𝐷𝐶𝑛+20000 is given a timestamp 0.97s from 𝐴𝐷𝐶𝑛. 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑛+1 and 
𝐴𝐷𝐶𝑛+20000 is then timestamped 0.06s apart although sampled at the same time. If the car was 
going 80𝑘𝑚/ℎ, which is the speed the system aim to handle, the position of the sample from the ADC will 
be of by 80𝑘𝑚/ℎ∗0.06𝑠= 22.22𝑚/𝑠∗0.06𝑠= 1.33𝑚. 
So it is clear that the PC timestamp given after the buffer cannot be trusted and using the GPS and the MF-
IO timestamp is not possible as the MF-IO cannot deliver a timestamp.  
The solution is to eliminate timestamps and use incrementing ID’s instead. If a component C collects n 
samples and the samples are given ID’s from 0 to n-1 in the order they are collected, we know the exact 
frequency of C so the relative time of sample i to sample 0 can be calculated as: 
1
𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑞∗𝐼𝐷𝑖= 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑖−𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒0 
This method is used for all components (Decimated detector data, GPS positions and camera frames).  
When we know the relative time for each component it only remains to match the relation between the 
components Time0. The easiest solution is if all components start sampling at the exact same time.  
Figure 30 Difference between pc timestamps from data samples exactly one second
apart.   
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
The MF-IO has a build-in trigger that can output a digital signal with a specified frequency. The trigger is 
connected to the cameras enabling the cameras and the ADC to use the same clock and have the 
same 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒0.  
To allow the cameras and ADC to have the same 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒0, the cameras and the particle detection program is 
launched shortly before the Ortus. This lead time is made so large that the program is loaded and running 
and the cameras are ready to capture images as soon as the triggers starts. In the same way the Ortus also 
has to configure the ADC before triggers start.  
It would be ideal if the GPS could use the same trigger signal as the cameras and the ADC. The GPS cannot 
however be triggered. To minimize the time difference between the GPS 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒0 and the rest of the system 
we use the GPS to trigger the MF-trigger. Figure 31 shows a sequence diagram of how sampling is started, 
leaving out the Particle Detector and the camera configuration. When the Ortus is started it configures the 
ADC and the MF-Trigger, then it waits for the user to give the instruction to start sampling. The Ortus then 
starts listening for the GPS telegrams and waits for the first GPS position. As soon as the first position is 
received the MF-trigger is started. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Even by using the first GPS position to trigger the rest of the system, 
there is a difference between GPS 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒0  and the rest of the 
components. The time difference or the delay is the time it takes from 
GPS sends the first position to the StartTask() is called. The delay can 
vary but it should be so small that it does not influence the data 
processing.  
To be completely sure of the delay, the car can stop right next to a 
lamp post and start the system getting the GPS position parallel to the 
post.  Getting the position relative to one lamp is enough because 
all timestamps are calculated which means that if the lamppost 
Figure 31 Simplified Sequence diagram over the data collection stat up, only including functions that is important for the timing 
(leaving out the particle detector software). The systems delay is between P(x,y,z) and StartTask(). 
Figure 32 One of the indicators of a wrong delay value 
that can be seen in the data processing. The green 
and blue lines are data plotted from the ratio sensors.
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
the car was positioned next to is not at the correct position it is easy to change all timestamps by adding to 
the delay. When the post has been positioned by using the data set with particles detected the delay for the 
rest of the data sets can be found by comparing the data from detector 7 and 8 (the ratio sensors) with the 
position of the poles. This can be seen in figure 32. 
4. Data Processing  
The desired data is a tight grid of 5 by 10 illumination points on the ground level between each pair of lamps. 
The raw data that have been acquired is from a roof rack of a moving car which means that the data needs 
to be transformed.  
This section is about the transformation of the raw data into what the customer needs and how it can be 
presented in a user-friendly way. 
The road where data has been acquired can be seen in figure 33 
and 34. It is a private road at DTU Risø with no close buildings 
or other interfering light sources. The road is well lit, by eight 
modern streetlamps. The lamps are all functioning optimally and 
do not blink.  
Data has been acquired manually to control that the system 
works. Data regarding the height of the lamps, the distance 
between lamps and the luminance between one pair of lamps 
has been measured. The heights and distances can be seen in 
Figure 35, where the lamps are list in the same order as in figure 
33. The luminance was manually measured between 
lamp 3 and 4. 
 
Lamp 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
Height (m) 
6.72 
6.73 
6.74 
6.65 
6.67 
6.77 
6.63 
6.69 
Distance between poles (m) 
 
33.35 
33.25 
33.4 
33.4 
35.1 
30.75 
32.3 
 
Figure 35 Table with manually measured heights and distances between lamps on the road where data has been acquired. The lamps 
have even heights with 9 cm between the tallest and shortest. They are close to being evenly distributed with one exception lamp 3 
has been placed two meters closer to lamp 2. The displacement of lamp 3 is because of an adjacent road, which can be seen in figure 
33.  
4.1 Mapping the route  
An essential part of calculating the position of the lamps and how the light is distributed on the road is the 
position and direction of the car. The GPS has a sampling frequency of 1Hz whereas the rest of the 
components sample at a much higher frequency. To get the position at any given time the functions 
𝑓𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐿𝑎𝑡 and 𝑓𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 is found by interpolating (time, latitude) and (time, longitude) from the GPS data. 
Figure 33 + 34 The road where data has been acquired. The image on the left is from google earth and blue dots has been placed at
the position of the streetlamps by looking at the image. The image on the right is from the road the night the manually reference data
was collected. The lamps are tall with a wide angle of diffusion, illuminating all the way into the field on the opposite side of the road.
1 
2
3 
4
5 
6
7 
8
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
The direction for a given time t can then be found by taking the derivative of 𝑓𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐿𝑎𝑡(𝑡) and 
𝑓𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔(𝑡). 
𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑡) = [𝑓𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐿𝑎𝑡(𝑡), 𝐹𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔(𝑡)] 
𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑡) = [𝑓𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐿𝑎𝑡′(𝑡), 𝐹𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔′(𝑡)] 
The black line on Figure 36 is made up of icons placed at the GPS coordinates. This is also very use full while 
measuring is performed to check if the GPS is functioning properly.    
 
Figure 36 The cars position driving down the road the first time have been plotted with small icons, to check if there was any 
inaccuracies with the GPS coordinates.   
With 𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑡) calculated the unit vectors 
for the cars x and y direction can be found. This 
enables the conversion from the local to the 
global coordinate set. In Figure 37 the local 
coordinates set is red and the global is green.  
The global position of each component can be 
found by applying the unit vectors to the known 
vector between the GPS and a component and 
then add the GPS position to the result. 
An example can be seen in figure 37, where the 
right cameras global position is found. The 
vector 𝐺𝑅𝑣𝑒𝑐𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 is the cameras position in the 
local coordinate set relative to the GPS. To get 
the relative position in the global coordinate set 
the unit vectors are applied (𝐺𝑅𝑣𝑒𝑐𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙[1] ∙
𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑥+ 𝐺𝑅𝑣𝑒𝑐𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙[2] ∙𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑦). To get the 
position in the global coordinates the relative 
position is added to the GPS position.   
 
 
Figure 37 to enable the calculations of the positions in latitude and
longitude the local coordinates have to be converted to global
coordinates. 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
4.2 Locating the Lamps 
After finding the position and direction of the car the street lamp are located. Without the exact position of 
the light sources the light on the road can’t be computed. The first step is to convert the camera pixels to 
angles. 
From light partials to tangent to theta    
To enable the conversion of a pixel coordinate 
to an angle, reference tables are made. These 
tables are made in the lab by placing the roof 
rack on a rail and mounting a lamp directly 
above the rail, this setup can be seen in Figure 
38. The center pixel of the light particle and the 
position of the camera in the y-direction is noted 
while sliding the rack along the rail.  
Knowing the position in the Y direction and the 
height of the light source we can now calculate 
the tangent to the angle. 
𝑡𝑎𝑛𝜃𝑅=
𝐿𝑎𝑚𝑝𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡
𝐿𝑎𝑚𝑝𝐻𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 
These values are then interpolated to a general function 𝑓𝑇𝑎𝑛𝑇𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑌𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 (𝑌𝑝𝑖𝑥). 
With a tangent function for each camera the system can now take two pixel coordinates and calculate a light 
source position relative to the cameras.  
Positioning the lamps 
The positioning of the lamps can be divided into two steps.  
In step 1 the height and position is found for each time t. This results in a lot of different heights and positions 
of the lamps. 
Step 2 collects data from step 1 in groups and calculate the exact height and positions of the lamps. 
Step 1. 
The best results in positioning the lamps, is achieved by using the particles with a center pixel coordinate 
close to the camera’s center in the x direction, therefore all particles more than 20 pixels away from the 
camera’s center x-pixel filtered out. With the relevant data selected, the height (h) of the light source can be 
found. 
ℎ=
𝐶𝑎𝑚𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡
𝑓𝑇𝑎𝑛𝑇𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑌𝐿𝑒𝑓𝑡 (𝑌𝑝𝑖𝑥𝐿) −𝑓𝑇𝑎𝑛𝑇𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑌𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡(𝑌𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑅)  + 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑇𝑜𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 
Figure 39 shows a plot of all the heights in the order that they are calculated. Several collections of point 
clouds are apparent, where each point cloud is most likely a single lamp.  
The lamp position relative to the right camera is calculated as: 
𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑅𝑒𝑙𝐶𝑎𝑚= 𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑦∗𝑓𝑇𝑎𝑛𝑇𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑌𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡(𝑌𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑅) ∗(ℎ−𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑇𝑜𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑) 
The data is then grouped based on the distance between the estimated locations.  
Figure 38 Setup used to convert pixel coordinates from the cameras into 
angles. The cameras are placed on a rail and is moved n times along the 
rail. Every time the cameras are moved the distance to the vertical line 
going down from the lamp (y=0) is measured and the center pixel of the 
particle noted for each camera. Knowing the lamps height above the 
cameras, tangents can be calculated. 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
Step 2. Final positioning of the lamps 
Figure 39 indicates that there is not a lot variance in the heights of each of the final calculated groups. The 
largest differences between the tallest and shortest 
calculated height of each lamp is 4 cm. With all the 
lamps standing between 6.6 and 6.8 meters tall, 4 cm 
is ≈0.5% of the total height. The final height of a post 
is the mean of the heights in its group. The differences 
between the heights measured manually and the final 
calculated heights are within 1%. 
When 
creating 
the 
function 
converting 
pixel 
coordinate into angles, a key factor was left out, the 
particles x-coordinate. Now the x-coordinate is used to 
find the best fit for the latitude and longitude.  
Using the distance from the particles x-coordinate to 
the middle of the cameras x-axis a linear regression is 
made for latitude and longitude.  
The final position of a lamp is the value where the line 
crosses the center x-coordinate. Figure 40 illustrates 
the linear regression and the red dot is the final 
position. 
The final positions of the lamps can be seen in Figure 41, where the lamps position on the ground have been 
plotted in Google Earth. The table above the image is the calculated and manually measured distances 
between the lamps. The only noteworthy difference is between lamp 3 and 4 where the distance found 
manually is 42 cm larger.  
Figure 39 For each set of pixel coordinates a height have been
calculated. A set of pixel coordinates is two coordinates captured
at the same time, one from each camera. The blue plot is 
calculated heights and the green triangles are the manually 
measured heights and the red circles surround points from each 
lamp.  The sets are plotted in the order they are captured while
driving. The plot are grouped in small point clouds indicating that 
no other light sources then street lamps have been captured in 
an images.  
Figure 40 The calculated positions of each lamp pole is used together with the x pixel coordinate of the image they were 
calculated from to find the final position. A plot and linear regression is done for each direction in the global coordinate 
system. The red dot is where the lamp post where aligned with the cameras and the final position of the lamp post. 
Figure 41 Final placement of street lamps. The green icons in the image are the street lamps placed in Google Earth. Table above is 
the distances between the lampposts in meters where the first row is manually measured distances and second row is the calculated. 
Google Earth file (kml file) used in the image can be found in appendix 2.  
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
4.3 Light from each lamp 
When calculating the light from each lamp you must know which lamps are shining on the detectors and in 
what direction the lamps were passed. From each dataset (each “drive”) the first coordinates in the set is 
used to calculate the distance to the position of the first and last pole. Detecting which pole is the closest in 
the beginning, identifies to the system in which sequence the car passes the poles and the direction of the 
drive. The system finds the street lamps that are shining light on the detectors by using Pythagoras to 
calculate which two poles are closest, which are the street lamps that are shining light on the detectors. 
Knowing which lamps the light is originating from and which of the two lamps are in front of the car, we can 
now calculate the share of light from the street lamp in front of the car and from the lamp behind the car. 
The calculated share of light can be seen in Figure 42. The lines keep crossing each other as the car drives 
past the lamps. The point where the lines crosses in an X shape is where the car is in between lamps and the 
point where they cross in a vertical line is the exact moment the car passes a street lamp. 
 
Figure 42 Ratio from 0 to 1 of light originating from the front and the back of the car. The blue line is the share of light coming from 
the front of the car and green line is the light from the back. 
The transformation from the light on a detector to the light on the ground is the same for all detectors. 
First we find the global position of a detector and calculate the vectors to the poles. Then vectors are 
extended all the way to the ground as seen in Figure 43. The point where the vectors hits the ground is where 
the light shining from the poles through the detectors hits the ground.        
Using the inverse square law, we do an intensity reduction, as the light spreads out the further it get from 
the light source. The illuminance for a lux-point is calculated as: 
𝐼𝑙𝑢𝑥−𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡= (
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝐿𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 𝑡𝑜 𝑙𝑢𝑥−𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡 
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝐿𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 𝑡𝑜 𝑙𝑢𝑥−𝐷𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟
)
−2
∗𝐼𝐷𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 
Between lamps 
Passing lamp 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
The final lux values between two lamps, PoleA and PoleB, depends on the cars position relative to PoleA. If 
the car is facing PoleA the ratio of light is detriment by detector 7:  
𝐼𝐴(𝑥𝑙𝑢𝑥−𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡 𝐴, 𝑦𝑙𝑢𝑥−𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡 𝐴) = 𝐼𝐷𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟∗𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝐷𝑒𝑡7
𝐼𝑙𝑢𝑥−𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡 𝐴
 
If the car is facing PoleB, the ratio from detector 8 is used to calculate the final luminance of PoleA.  
4.4 Final output 
The lux-points from each street lamp are composed into individual data sets. The lux-points from a single 
lamp can be seen in Figure 44 displayed as a heat map in google earth. 
 
Figure 44 Calculated data from a single street lamp displayed as a heat map in Google Earth. Google Earth file (kml file) used in the 
image can be found in appendix 3. 
To get the final light distribution a specific set 
of coordinates are required. The lux-points 
calculated are most likely not located in the 
required grid of coordinates. To get the 
required values the data is interpolated to get 
function 
𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦) 
for 
each 
lamp. 
The 
interpolation is done using the library SciPy’s 
interpolate module that contains a class 
called Rbf. Rbf takes several parameters one of 
which is “function” where cubic is selected. 
Figure 45 Light between a pair of street lamps. The final value of points 
(𝑥1, 𝑦1) which receives light from both lamps is: 𝐼𝐴(𝑥1, 𝑦1)+𝐼𝐵(𝑥1, 𝑦1)   
Figure 43 Vectors from light sources through a detector and extended to the ground. Where the vectors touch the ground is 
where the light going through the detector hits the ground. 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
Figure 45 is an arbitrary pair of lamps called PoleA and PoleB. To get the final light distribution between PoleA 
and PoleB, a grid of coordinates is computed. The coordinates are then run through functions 𝐼𝐴(𝑥, 𝑦)  
and 𝐼𝐵(𝑥, 𝑦). The results from the functions are then added to get the final set of values.  
From final grid of the values, a kml file is created. Double clicking on the file, data is displayed in Google Earth 
where the lux-points are given a color based on their value. The colors are given on a ladder where each step 
is one lux, the ladder have 5 steps and all values above 5 lux are given the same color. The resulting kml file 
can be seen in figure 46.  
Figure 46 The light calculated between two poles displayed on google earth. The purple area is between 1 and 2 lux, and for each 
color going into yellow the values increase one lux. Yellow is above 5 lux. 
The final 5X10 grid of values between two street lamps can then be found by calculating the exact coordinates 
of the grid and add results from the two lamp functions together in the fashion as seen above.  
Figure 47 Reference data collected on road level with luxmeter and the final grid of calculated illuminance values .The green columns
are the illuminance values calculated by the system and correspond to the manually measured data on its left side.  
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
To verify if the calculation are correct, reference data have been collected on ground level, between two 
streetlamps. The data was collected in a grid of 4X8 which can be seen in Figure 47 together with the calculate 
values. 
The largest differences, 3.92, 3.51 and 3.50 are the lux-points closest to the lamps and they are all positive. 
The results of the lux-points in the center rows are all to low but they do not deviate as much in lux.   
There are several reasons why errors may occur. Two factors, pointing to where the error occurs, can be 
found in Figure 44. Farthest from the lamppost in both ends of the plot, is a purple area which is an obvious 
error and the figure also shows several misplaced lux-points. The purple zones in the ends of the plot can be 
cut out, but errors also occur in the center of the final grid, so it does not fix the problem. The distance 
between the misplaced lux-points seem to have a pattern, indicating that that they are caused by a faulty 
loop in the code. 
Unfortunately, locating and fixing the error have not been achieved at this time. 
Figure 48 shows an image from Google Earth where the kml file for all pairs of lamps has been opened. The 
distribution of the illuminance looks correct. There is a clear correlation between the illuminance and the 
distance between the lamps, with the lowest illuminance value calculated between the pair of lamps with 
the greatest distance apart.  
5. Future work 
The acquisition of data has been road tested one time. The results are promising and all parts of the system 
worked as expected. The data from all components where collected and saved in the database without any 
system crashes. The road where the data was collected was short and the system needs testing on longer 
roads where there is a larger possibility that parts of the system could crash due to data overflow. There has 
however been no indications with the current system settings that any part of the system will fall behind and 
cause a crash.  
The road test was conducted at 20km/h, so the conclusion regarding acquiring data with high speeds is 
inconclusive. Driving at high speeds would result in less captured images of the light sources, which would 
influence the reliability of the positioning of the lamps. There is however a few places where particle 
detection can be made more efficient. The data acquiring showed that the particles was smaller than 
expected. The diameter of the particles was always significantly less than 20 pixels. If this trend continues in 
future, it will be possible to cut down the frame of interest significantly, which would speed up the particle 
detection. The upper bound of the size parameter when detecting the lamps, can also be minimized which 
will speed up detection. Cutting down the size of the area of interest and minimizing the size of the particles 
even further have not been tested, but the correlation between speed and image size has been found to be 
close to linear when going from the entire image to a sub region of the image.  Acquiring data with 20km/h 
will be possible on the majority of roads, and the results shown in Figure 41 are very promising. Speeding up 
the particle detection is not a high priority, but is a welcome improvement.  
Figure 48 Heat map of the entire road. The distance between lamp 2 and 3 (from the right) is the shortest and have the highest values 
in between them so the color remains a bright orange. Lamp 3 and 4 has the greatest distance between them and are the only pair of 
lamp separated by a purple area. The kml files used are appendix 4 to 10. 
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
The reference road is located on an open field without interference from artificial light sources. Roads near 
buildings will most likely have some light sources above car roof level (1.90 meters) which can prove to be a 
challenge. The particle detection worked as intended on the reference road, but it was not challenged by the 
presence of other light sources. The current detection of light sources will most likely be able to handle 
interfering light sources with a little extra post processing. The reason why the captured particles was less 
than 20 pixels in diameter was because only the pixels at the center of the lamp was it above the pixel value 
threshold, due to the cameras short exposure time. The combination of the short exposure time and the pixel 
value threshold will most likely be efficient in filtering out undesired light sources, because it is rare that an 
undesired light source will reach the same intensity as a streetlamp.  
In cases where the streetlamp’s light source is weak and the threshold therefore must be lowered, the 
possibility for wrongly detected particles will increase. Identifying an undesired light source as a streetlamp, 
would however still be unlikely, because the area of interest is small and both cameras have to detect a 
particle at the same time otherwise they are dismissed in the data processing.   
There is a chance that an undesired light source could be detected in the same image as a streetlamp, but 
the probability that it will be shining bright enough to reach the threshold and the size, to be seen as a street 
lamp, is small. A few functions will be added to the data processing program to insure that a light source 
behind a streetlamp does not influence the final result. 
Before a false light source can be dismissed it needs to be detected. There are several techniques, that 
combined will almost certainly detect such errors. The system can check if there is any particles that have 
the same frame ID, if one of the lamps heights is out of proportion and if the linear regression of the position 
is a bad fit. Selecting which particle is the correct will also be a combination of techniques using the height 
and the position of the lamp, as well as the detector data e.g. is the pole positioned in front of a light peak 
and where the ratio between light from the front and back is crossing. 
Using only the ID’s and the specified frequency to calculate the timestamps are not a long sighted solution. 
At the moment only short distances are measured and the system is restarted every time the car is turned 
around, so the MF-IO clock is very limited. Ideally the system should not be restarted every time the car is 
turned around. As a result of not restarting the system the drift of the MF-IO clock increases. A more 
sustainable solution is to buy a very precise external clock which can 
deliver a timestamp every time the MF-trigger sends a signal. The GPS 
can deliver an accurate timestamp and if the rest of the data is given 
precise timestamps the only challenge is to relate the timestamps. 
Relating the timestamps can be done once in a night of measuring.  
Relating the times can then be done by driving back and forth in front 
of a lamp. The light peaks should be at the same position every time 
the car moves by and the particle should pass the center pixel of a 
camera as well.  One timestamp from each clock is selected 
as 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒0and the relation between the two times can be expressed 
as 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒0  = ∆+ 𝐴𝐷𝐶𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒0. The output from the detectors are 
then plotted as a function of the position, see Figure 49. The red arrow 
shows the direction the car was moving in, when the peak was 
measured. Delta is then adjusted until the peaks are at the same 
position. In the figure 49 delta should be adjusted in the positive 
direction. Values measured while driving forward be will be moved 
Figure 49 The graph is an illustration of how 
the position and the detector outputs can be 
used to find the relation between the 
timestamps. Both peaks are from the same 
lamp but have been measured driving in 
opposite direction. If the time the detector 
output was measured is added by a constant 
the position where it was measured will also 
change. The two peaks will move in opposite
directions when the time is changed. The 
positions and detectors timestamps are 
perfectly matched when peaks are on top of 
each other. 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
forward if they are changed to a later time and vice versa when going backwards. When delta is raised the 
orange peak will move forward and the yellow will move backwards. This is done until they are perfectly 
aligned. 
The implemented system could use this technique. It is however too time consuming, because it would have 
to be used every time the system is restarted. 
 When selecting which lampposts the 
light originates from, the distance to 
the lamps was used and the two closest 
lamps were selected. Using the two 
closest lamps can result in errors, if the 
lamps are not evenly distributed or a 
light source has died, as seen in Figure 
50 where PoleB do not work. The 
system cannot detect a street lamp if it 
is turned off. Because the distance to 
PoleC and PoleD is shorter than to 
PoleA, the system would select PoleC 
and PoleD as the sources the light 
originates from. At the cars location in 
the figure, the ratio sensors would claim that all light originates from behind the car, which is true, but 
because it thinks that PoleC is in front of the car, lux-point LuxC will be calculated using the ration from the 
front of the car. LuxD will then be given all the ratio from the behind the car. Using the wrong ratios will 
produce faulty results. 
The original system checked which side of the closest street lamp it was at and then selected the second 
closest pole as the other light source. The result would be that PoleD would also receive the ratio of light 
from the front of the car, because the original system do not know the sequence the car is supposed to pass 
the poles. The original system would not get faulty results in the scenario shown Figure 50, but it might in 
other similar situations.  
A combination of the two methods will be used in the future.  The system will check if the car is behind or in 
front of the closest street lamp and then select the second lamp depending of the sequence they are passed. 
In Figure 50, PoleC will be selected as the closest lamp and PoleA will be selected as the second because the 
car is passing the lamps in descending order.   
The lamppost on the reference road are close to evenly distributed but the error will occur with tiny 
differences in the distance between the poles. To avoid errors, the current implementation do not use the 
ratio sensors if the car is within an area of 5 meters before or after the closest lamp. The ratio sensors are 
not used, because it can be assumed that all luminance measured on the roof of a car in that area originates 
from the closest street lamp otherwise the angle of diffusion are too great and the light will cross over 
between lamps.  
In figure 44, a few points are shown in the field behind the lamps, but this looks like a systematic error that 
can be located. In general the position of the lux-points relative to the lamps appears correct.  
The lux values seen in Figure 47 are not perfect but this is most likely partly due to a programming error as t 
is most likely a programming error because the original system gets a much smaller error margin when 
Figure 50 Unevenly distributed streetlamps may curse errors. Because PoleB is 
emitting light, the system does not know it exists, so the system thinks it is closest 
to PoleC and PoleD. The system assumes that it is in between the nearest lamps 
which will course LuxC to be calculated using the ratio of illuminance from the front. 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
processing the same data. The original system and the data processing program implemented in this project 
uses the same principles to convert the measured values to lux values on the road.  
At the moment the system has only been tested on a straight road with lamps on one side. When verifying 
the light on a road that curves most of the same principles apply. When acquiring data the operator of the 
system has however to be aware of two things. To handle road curves away from a lamp the car have to drive 
slow so the cameras can capture sufficient images of the light source. The detector on the extension arm 
(Det6) needs to be pulled out over the side of the road, on the side of the lamps, if the road curves around 
the lamps. If the detector is not pulled over the side a blank spot will appear between two lamps on the side 
of the road where the lamps are located.  
If the road curves the final grid needs to be modified to follow the road. A linear regression was used to place 
the streetlamps when the road was straight. Linear regression would apply also when the road curves. In the 
specific scenario where the road curves away from a lamppost and tangent a latitude or longitude value and 
goes in the opposite direction, the position of the lamp would be moved a few centimeters closer to the road.  
This could be corrected by checking for the specific scenario and then use second degree polynomial fit.  
If the streetlamps are on both sides of the road several changes need to be 
made. The first step to accommodate lamps on both sides of the road, is to 
create a solution for dividing the light between more than two light sources. 
One way of dividing the light is to acquire data twice on the same road using 
baffles, mounted as seen in Figure 51. The baffles must be placed so they 
screen out light from one side of the road the first time the road is measured 
and screen out light from the other side of the road the second time. 
Without the baffles more than two light sources will most likely be shining 
on the detectors in several areas of the road, preventing the ratio sensors 
from dividing the ratio between all the lamps shining on the detectors. At 
some point, ratio sensors dividing the light crossing the road could solve 
the problem, but this is a much more expensive and time consuming 
solution to implement than the baffles. 
Using the baffles it is possible to find the function 𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦) for each lamp and 
then its will be possible to modify the data processing to calculate the sum 
of light between more than two lamps.  
6. Conclusion 
The scope of the project, was to create a system that can acquire the necessary data from a straight road 
with street lamps on one side, and then calculate the position of the lamps and how the light is distributed 
on the road. The system was divided into two part. The main objective of the first part was to acquire data, 
enabling the second part to process the data into a grid specified by the streetlight directives and create a 
visual representation of the light distribution.  
The results from both parts of the system are promising.  The data acquisition system has been able to 
configure the hardware and receive data from all components. The system has acquire data and saved it in a 
data base, regarding its own position, the light at the position and from which direction the light originates 
from. Data has also been acquired that enables locating the position of streetlamps lamps. The data from 
each component can be related using a system of ID’s and the components sample frequency. Signal 
processing have been implemented that can handle the alias effect from blinking lamps. A configuration file, 
Figure 51 Baffles mounted on the
detectors blocking light from the 
opposite side of the road will allow the
system to receive data from one side
of the road at a time. The data can 
then be combined to give the complete
picture of the light on a road with 
lamps on both sides.   
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
a log file and interfaces have been implemented which enables more efficient testing, debugging and further 
development of the system.   
From the data acquired from the roof rack, the second part of the system can position the street lamp with 
a minor error margin. Calculations of how the light would be distributed on the ground from each streetlamp 
has been achieved. The illuminance values of the light distribution has been compared to values measured 
on the ground level and the error margin is close to acceptable and the difference is believed to be a result 
of a programming error. The grid required by the directives can be calculated and a user friendly visualization 
of the light has been achieved.  
 
