==PAGE:1==
KYb,Y i@3cCc
Kcj3a R8 b,C3N,3 CN 2N<CN33aCN<
i@3 TC,GnU N0 /3ICq3aw TaR$I3L
sCj@ QUjCRNI +aRcc /R,GCN<
HCN3 rRaL +@aCcjCNc3N
bnU3aqCc30 $w `nN3 Hac3N  bj38N `ǹUG3
==PAGE:2==
KN<3L3Nj b,C3N,3
/3UajL3Nj R8 KN<3L3Nj 2N<CN33aCN<
i3,@NC,I mNCq3acCjw R8 /3NLaG
TaR0nGjCRNcjRaq3j
#nCI0CN< :l:
l4zz FRN<3Nc HwN<$w. /3NLaG
T@RN3 Z:9 :9l9:4zz
@jjU-ggsssYLcYLNY0jnY0G
==PAGE:3==
i
Abstract
We present a pickup and delivery problem with optional cross-docking considering multiple cross-dock
facilities and discuss an adaptive large neighbourhood search heuristic with a simulated annealing frame-
work designed to solve this problem. Efﬁcient delta cost functions are used for swift evaluation of new
solutions and slack values are implemented for faster determination of feasible solutions. The implemen-
tation is parameter tuned and tested on several industrial scale instances and the results are analysed and
compared with other results found in the literature. Based on this analysis some suggestions are made
on how to improve the heuristic further.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was carried out at the Department of Management Engineering at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU). It was conducted in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science
degree in Transport and Logistics.
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my advisors Rune Larsen and Stefan Røpke for their patient guidance and support
throughout the thesis. Furthermore, I would also like to thank AMCS, and in particular Emil Krapper,
for providing the data behind our problem and answering several questions. Finally I would like to thank
my family, friends and patient boyfriend for their support during the project.
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Deﬁnition
3
2.1
Basic Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Classiﬁcation of Problems with Intermediate Facilities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Terminology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
The problem to be studied
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
Problem Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4.1
Objective Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4.2
Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Cross-docking in the literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6.1
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Implementation
13
3.1
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
Solution Representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
The change in cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.3
An example of calculating the change in cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
ALNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Choosing heuristics in the ALNS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.2
Destruction Neighbourhoods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.3
Repair Neighbourhoods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.4
Acceptance and stopping criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.5
Minimising Number of Routes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Feasibility of Inserting Orders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.1
Slack Values for a pickup and delivery problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.2
Time dependency between Routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.3
Updating slack times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.4
Finding an Insertion for a Request . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.5
Finding an Insertion for a Cross-docked Request
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.6
Infeasible cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Computational Results
35
4.1
Tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.1
The irace Package
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.2
Tuning instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.3
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.1.4
Small tuning test using irace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.5
Results of Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.1
Real life instances solved as PDPCD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.2
Real life instances solved as PDP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Conclusion
45
Appendix
49
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Throughout the years, vehicle routing problems have received a lot of attention within operation research.
Their attractiveness stems from the fact that they on the one hand arise naturally from real-life logistical
problems but on the other hand allow a very simple and abstract problem description that can be explained
and understood by researchers with little or no experience within the ﬁelds of logistics or optimisation.
Even though routing problems admit very simple and elegant problem descriptions, solving them is a
very complicated and time consuming matter.
In this thesis we consider the operational decision aspects of the vehicle routing problem. A detailed
problem description will be presented in Chapter 2. In layman terms, the problem at hand is the follow-
ing. We are given a list of orders. Each order speciﬁes that a certain package must be picked up at one
location and delivered at some other location within a certain time frame. Our job is to come up with a
pickup and delivery schedule that solves this problem in an efﬁcient way. A schedule is nothing more
than a list of routes assigned to a list of vehicles. A route consists of the speciﬁc pickups and deliveries
that the associated vehicle must perform. The end result must be that all packages are picked up and de-
livered on time. With an efﬁcient schedule we mean a schedule with a cost that is as low as possible. The
most important factors that control the cost of a schedule are the salaries of the drivers of the vehicles,
the cost of the fuel for the vehicles and the vehicles themselves. Hence, we need to ﬁnd a schedule that
has as few vehicles (and hence routes) as possible, takes as little time as possible, and such that the total
distance travelled is a small as possible.
Within the context of vehicle routing problems, the use of cross-docking terminals has received increas-
ing attention during the last decade. A cross-dock is an intermediate facility where a vehicle can dock
at some point during its route and drop of a certain amount of cargo. This cargo is then at a later point
in time picked up by another vehicle on its route and delivered to its actual destination. It might seem
counterintuitive that adding cross-docks can lower the cost of a schedule, since adding an extra facility
where goods need to be shipped to and from seems to add time and distance to the solution. But in fact,
quite the opposite is true as economies of scale often arise by exchanging goods across routes. As the
title of this thesis suggest, we will also incorporate the use of cross-docks in our approach to the vehicle
routing problem.
There exist many different variations of the vehicle routing problem with cross docking. In Chapter 2 we
will also discuss a classiﬁcation scheme for such problems, introduced in the survey paper [Guastaroba
et al., 2016], and give an overview of the known research literature on this subject. As discussed in
[Pisinger and Ropke, 2007] the use of heuristics is often preferred when tackling real-life vehicle routing
problem as industrial routing problems demand robust algorithms for large-sized instances.
The particular problem that we will study is based on a actual transportation optimisation case, whose
1
==PAGE:12==
2
1. Introduction
data has been provided by the company AMCS. In Chapter 3, we explain in detail the heuristic that
we will use to solve our problem. An important part of the heuristic involves the use of slack values.
Slack values were introduced by [Savelsbergh, 1992] and have been used for the faster determination of
feasible solutions when solving a pickup and delivery problem without cross-docking. To the best of our
knowledge, no previous paper has tried implementing slack values for solving the pickup and delivery
problem with cross-docking.
We have implemented our heuristic in Java and used a parameter tuning program called irace to ﬁnd a
suitable parameter conﬁguration. This tuning process and its results are presented in Chapter 4, section
1. After the tuning process, we tested our program on ﬁve real-life size instances with 500-1000 orders.
The results of these tests are presented and analysed in Chapter 4, section 2.
Finally, in Chapter 5 we summarize the main achievements, results and conclusion of thesis and suggest
some possible directions for future research.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Problem Deﬁnition
In the ﬁrst section of this chapter we describe a basic Pickup and Delivery Problem (PDP) and explain
how it is transformed into the Pickup and Delivery problem with optional Cross-Docking (PDPCD).
In the next sections we describe a classiﬁcation scheme and the terminology we will use for deﬁning
the PDPCD. Section 2.3 then deﬁnes the problem treated in this thesis. The last section in this chapter
presents data and the data processing.
2.1
Basic Problem
The basic problem that we solve in this thesis is the pickup and delivery problem with optional cross-
docking. A solution to the problem is a set of routes that is as efﬁcient as possible in handling a number
of orders. This section will describe the problem in details.
Orders and depots
For the PDP, each instance of the problem contains a set of n request, R = {1, . . . , n}, where each
request i ∈R has a pickup node p(i), a delivery node d(i) and a demand q(i). The sets of pickup and
delivery nodes are denoted P and D. For every request the pickup is planned before the delivery, and
both are visited by the same vehicle in a PDP. Note that in what follows, the terms order and request will
be used interchangeably. The term visit will be used to refer to either a pickup or a delivery.
Each request has an associated service time that applies to each visit of the request. All visits have a time
window [ai, bi] in which the service of the visit must start.
A route for a vehicle starts and ends at a depot. We therefore deﬁne a set of depot nodes, which we
denote C. An instance must have at least one depot and a route must start and end at the same depot.
To expand the problem to a PDPCD, we allow for cross-docking by allowing requests to be transformed
into cross-docked requests. A cross-dock request contains a pickup node, a dummy delivery node, a
dummy pickup node and delivery node. The ﬁrst and the last are the original visits. The two dummy
visits are located at the same cross-dock location and they are denoted DP and DD.
A cross-dock request can be viewed as two requests, with a pickup order consisting of the original pickup
and the dummy delivery, and a delivery order consisting of the dummy pickup and the original delivery.
The pickup order and delivery order are planned on two different routes, so the original pickup and
delivery visits are no longer performed by the same vehicle. The two orders are time wise dependent.
The problem can be modeled on a weighted directed graph G = (N, A) . Here
N = P ∪D ∪C ∪DP ∪DD
3
==PAGE:14==
4
2. Problem Deﬁnition
is the set of nodes associated with locations for pickups, deliveries, depots, and dummy pickups and
deliveries. Note that more visits can share the same physical location, but in the graph there will be a
node for each of the visits. The set A is deﬁned as the set of all arcs between each pair of nodes in both
directions, so
A = {(i, j) : i ̸= j, i, j ∈N}.
The weight of an arc is given by two parts, a driving distance and a driving time. The weight indicates a
temporal separation of the nodes. The values of the weights satisfy the triangle inequality. The driving
distance and time are calculated in non-symmetric way when deﬁned on the road network.
Vehicles and Capacity
A set K of homogeneous vehicles with a maximum capacity of Q is available for servicing the requests.
Every pickup is associated with a positive load equal to demand of the request, q(i). A delivery then has
a load equal to the negative value of the demand. The vehicle capacity is decreased with the value of the
load, so when a vehicle picks up a request the capacity of the request is reduced by q(i) until the request
is delivered. As far as capacity is concerned, a dummy pickup (delivery) has the same properties as a
pickup (delivery).
In the basic PDP it is not possible to transfer a request from one vehicle to another. When introducing
cross-docking, we allow for transfers between vehicles but only at the cross-dock terminals. The transfer
does not need to be synchronised, meaning that the vehicles do not need to be at the cross-dock terminal
at the same time. A vehicle can start loading an order as soon as it is unloaded at the cross-dock, and
does not need to wait for the all orders to be collected at the cross-dock.
Routes
A route always starts and ends at the same depot and contains a sequence of visits that handle certain
requests. A route can contain both visits from cross-docked requests and from directly shipped requests.
A schedule for the routes is made for a planning window of one or multiple days. The PDP can include
downtimes for the vehicles where they can not be used and likewise routes can have a maximum allowed
duration. In this thesis, we assume that the vehicles are available throughout the planning window and
that their are no restrictions on the duration of a route.
2.2
Classiﬁcation of Problems with Intermediate Facilities
A general classiﬁcation for problems with intermediate facilities is given in [Guastaroba et al., 2016].
In this thesis we will freely make use of the terminology from [Guastaroba et al., 2016] and argue that
the problem under consideration falls within the ﬁrst category "Intermediate facilities in vehicle routing
problems". Note that [Guastaroba et al., 2016] splits this category into two classes: the two-echelon
vehicle routing problem (2E-VRP) and the pickup and delivery problem with cross-dock (PDPCD). The
ﬁrst class divides a VRP into two phases: the ﬁrst phase spans from from origin to the cross-docks (in
the paper called satellites) and the second phase spans the from the satellites to the destination. The
problem considers two vehicle ﬂeets to each perform one of the phases. This class ﬁnds its usage within
city logistics and is considered out of the scope of this thesis. This thesis focuses instead on the second
class which will be described in more details in the coming sections.
2.2.1
Terminology
In this section we will provide a description of following features; number of facilities, type of network,
origin-destination structure, number of commodities and additional characteristics.
==PAGE:15==
2.3. The problem to be studied
5
A problem can be a single facility problem or it can have multiple facilities for cross-docking. The type
of a network can either be pure or hybrid. In pure networks all deliveries are transferred through an
intermediate facility. In a hybrid network, direct shipments are allowed as well as usage of one or more
intermediate facilities.
We deﬁne three types of origin-destination structures, one-to-one (1-1), many-to-many (M-M) and one-
to-many (1-M). For the 1-1 structure, a set of origin-destination pairs is given such that freights always
have one origin and one destination in the network. The M-M structure is deﬁned as a problem where
the commodities to be transported have multiple origins and destinations. Hence, a demand can be
served from multiple origins and origins can serve multiple destinations. Lastly, the 1-M is a structure
where only one origin can serve each destination but each origin might serve multiple destinations. This
structure is typically found in the 2E-VRP (see table 2 from [Guastaroba et al., 2016]).
A problem is also characterised by how many commodities that move in the network: A problem can
either have a single commodity or multiple commodities. Here, multiple commodities should be under-
stood in the vehicle routing context as products that require different means of transportation, whereas
single commodities can be different products as long as they can be transported in an equivalent way.
The deﬁnition of multi commodities is further elaborated upon in [Archetti et al., 2016]. An example of
a multiple commodity problem, could be waste management, where plastic and general waste can not be
mixed in the same container. A vehicle might be ﬂexible and able to handle both commodities but it has
assigned space for each of the commodities.
Additional characteristics are deﬁned as further constraints are added to the problem. Such constraints
are usually associated with the number or size of the vehicles, or with limitations on the facilities such
as the number of vehicles able to dock at the same time or the temporary storage space. Other often
included constraints are time restrictions, like time windows for location and the cross-dock. Other time
related constraints could be a maximum duration of a route. Most of the literature makes considerations
about the possibility of storage in the facilities. Assumptions range from no storage at any time [Lee
et al., 2006] to unlimited storage during the day but no overnight storage [Petersen and Ropke, 2011].
2.3
The problem to be studied
In this section we will ﬁrst categorize the case provided by AMCS, using the terminology presented
above. Secondly, we will describe the parameters and how they relate to the case. Then we will discuss
the objective function and ﬁnally we will outline the constraints considered when solving the problem.
2.3.1
Problem Classiﬁcation
The problem is deﬁned on a hybrid network, allowing orders to be shipped directly between pickup and
delivery locations and to include transfer via a cross-dock if it is found beneﬁcial. We chose not to use a
pure network since it did not comply with the focus of the thesis.
The origin/destination structure is 1-1, due to information available in the provided data: a request is
denoted on one line with a pickup location and a delivery location.
The problem is considered a single commodity problem, since we assume that all products can be trans-
ported by the same kind of vehicle, with the only restriction being the capacity of the vehicle.
From the data it can be deduced that the problem contains more than one cross-dock and the problem is
therefore classiﬁed as a problem with multiple facilities, with a ﬁxed location for each. For simplicity, we
assume that a request can be cross-docked at most once. Even though, for requests with a long distance
between the origin and destination, it could be reasonable to cross-dock that request more than once.
Vehicles have a ﬁxed capacity but the number of vehicles is unlimited. Deliveries feature a desired
delivery time and have a tight time window for service start. Pickups have a less tight time window
==PAGE:16==
6
2. Problem Deﬁnition
and are only restricted by the latest pickup date. The assumptions above were made partly based on
information provided by AMCS.
Finally, when solving the problem we deﬁne a planning horizon by which all requests must be delivered
and the vehicles returned to the depots. During the planning horizon it is assumed that we have unlimited
storage available at the cross-dock facilities and unlimited access to the facilities. Hence, the cross-docks
can handle all the goods stored and are able to service all vehicles at the same time.
2.4
Model
From the problem description we create a model which we will described in this section. We start by
deﬁning the objective function of the model and then we list the constraints of the problem.
2.4.1
Objective Function
Given a solution s to our problem, our objective is to minimize the transportation cost f(s). This cost
is split into three elements: a ﬁxed cost for using each vehicle, a cost per minute for using each vehicle
and a cost per km driven. The ﬁxed cost for using a vehicle, cv, is associated with the cost of having a
vehicle available. The cost per minute for using a vehicle, ct, is the salary of the drivers of the vehicles.
The cost per km driven, ckm, is the fuel cost for all vehicles. Altogether, our objective function f(s) is
given by
f(s) = cv · V ehicles(s) + ckm · Distance(s) + ct · Time(s)
(2.1)
In this heuristic, time used is measured as service time and driving time. We do not ﬁx a start time for
visits on the route but calculate a ﬂexible time window for when a visit can happen, see section 3.3.1.
When solving the problem heuristically, we add an extra element of cost: the cost of having unplaced
request. This encourages the algorithm to plan all requests, to ensure a feasible solution. The element
added is cu · Unplaced(s), where cu is the artiﬁcial cost of having an unplaced request. The evaluation
function, E(s),
E(s) = cu · Unplaced(s) + ckm · Distance(s) + ct · Time(s)
(2.2)
used in the heuristic does not include the cost of a vehicle since a separate stage of heuristic takes care
of minimising the number of vehicles, see section 3.2.5.
2.4.2
Constraints
The constraints described in this section are the hard constraints of the problem. They must be respected
in order to achieve a feasible solution.
• All the requests of an instance have to be planned. A request should be planned either as a normal
request with a pickup and a delivery on the same route, or as a cross-docked request with the
pickup order on one route and the delivery order on another route.
• Every route starts at time 0 or later and ﬁnishes at the latest at the end of the planning horizon.
• A visit i needs to be planned within its given time window [ai, bi]. That is, the service can not be
started before ai or later than bi. The service of a visit is allowed to ﬁnish after bi.
• A visit can never be planned earlier than the route allows. The earliest possible start time is apart
from the time window also restricted by the previous planned visit on the route. In order words
we need to be able to service the previous visit i −1 and drive from i −1 to i before we start the
service of visit i.
==PAGE:17==
2.5. Cross-docking in the literature
7
• The pickup visit must always be planned before the delivery. For cross-docked request we more-
over have that the pickup order must be delivered to the cross-dock before the delivery order is
picked up at the cross-dock. Hence, the dummy delivery must be planned earlier than the dummy
pickup.
• Every vehicle has a maximum capacity of Q, this is the maximum amount of freight a vehicle
can carry at any given time in a route. The demanded quantity of a request is subtracted from the
remaining capacity when the request is picked up and added when the request is delivered, this
applies to dummy visits as well.
2.5
Cross-docking in the literature
In this section we will discuss some of the most relevant research articles that focus on problems similar
to the one treated in this thesis. For further information about the current literature concerning cross-dock
operations and other intermediate transfers we refer to the survey paper [Guastaroba et al., 2016].
The aforementioned survey paper reviews 25 research articles with routing problems that consider inter-
mediate facilities. Just over half of the problems consider the PDPCD as opposed to the 2E-VRP. Around
half of the papers on PDPCD consider a hybrid network and almost all of them a 1-1 origin/destination
structure. Both exact methods and heuristic approaches have been applied for solving the PDPCD. The
ﬁrst paper to solve the PDPCD on a hybrid network was [Liu et al., 2003].
The PDPCD without time-windows was studied in [Santos et al., 2013]. The objective was to minimise
the transportation cost together with an additional cost of cross-docking requests. They have developed
a branch-and-cut method and applied it to problem instances of up to 30 requests.
In [Mitrovi´c-Mini´c and Laporte, 2006] and [Bouros et al., 2011], routing problems on a hybrid network
using transshipment points are studied. Transshipment points differ from cross-docks in the sense that
they can be located at any given location visited by a pair of vehicles and where goods can be moved
from one to the other. In [Mitrovi´c-Mini´c and Laporte, 2006], they study a problem called the PDP with
transfers and time windows (PDPTWT). The main difference between PDPCD and PDPTWT models
is that PDPCP considers transfer of cargo while PDPTWT considers the transfer of passengers. This
difference inﬂuences the amount of intermediate facilities and how the objective function is determined.
Indeed, the PDPTWT is solved with respect to the objective of maximising service and user convenience
as well as minimising costs. In the paper, a local search method is presented for solving a non-capacitated
version of the problem. A dymnamic PDP with transshipments was solved by [Bouros et al., 2011] using
a heuristic.
In the remainder of this section we will discuss the papers [Petersen and Ropke, 2011] (also reviewed in
[Guastaroba et al., 2016]) and [Repoussis et al., 2017] in greater detail, since we consider them to be the
most relevant for this thesis.
In [Petersen and Ropke, 2011] the considered PDPCD is based on the routing problem faced by a Dan-
ish ﬂower transporter. The problem is formulated on a hybrid network, with a single cross-dock, 1-1
origin/destination structure, a single commodity, hard time windows, a limit on the vehicle capacity and
on the number of vehicles available. Moreover the problem considers service time. The objective of
the problem is to minimize the cost of transportation and handling cost at the cross-dock. The handling
cost is caused by the unloading and loading service at the cross-dock and a charge per container handled
at the cross-dock terminal. The transport cost consist of daily cost of vehicles, driver salary, fuel cost
and road tolls. The solution method implemented consist of a specialised construction heuristic adapted
to the PDPCD. The construction heuristic starts by determining for each request whether it should be
cross-docked in the initial solution or not. The decision is based on at most three checks. The ﬁrst check
veriﬁes if it is feasible to ship the request via a cross-dock terminal, subject to the time restrictions. If
==PAGE:18==
8
2. Problem Deﬁnition
not it is classiﬁed as a normal request. The second check selects the requests that due of a large gap
between the pickup and the delivery time windows, would be unlikely to be pickup and delivered by
the same vehicle and thereby have good properties for being shipped via a cross-dock. The last check
examines the ratio between the driving distance for shipping the request directly and via a cross-dock.
If the ratio is above some given threshold then the request will be cross-docked. After going through all
request, the authors start constructing the solution by inserting all directly shipped requests ﬁrst and then
adding the cross-docked requests. The initial solution is then improved by using the metaheuristic large
neighbourhood search (LNS) proposed in [Shaw, 1998]. The heuristic iteratively destroys and repairs
a part of the solution in order to achieve new better solutions. They have implemented a variant that is
called adaptive LNS (ALNS) that uses multiple methods for destroying and repairing the solution where
the employment of each method is adapted throughout the heuristic with respect to the performance of
the methods. The authors have implemented a parallel ALNS. The parallel feature makes it possible
for the heuristic to use all the computational power of the computer and enables the heuristic to search
for and ﬁnd more solutions within the time limit. No parameter tuning or values was documented for
the ALNS parameters. The heuristic is used for solving real-life problem instances of 585-982 request
within a time limit of 90 minutes. The tests show considerable variation in the number of iterations
for the different instances that seems partly related to the size of the instances. The biggest difference
between the best and the average solution is around 3%. The variation of the objective function is also
analysed. A mean-value of 560, 314 and a standard deviation of 11, 101 was found in a test of 50 runs
on the same instance. The problem deﬁnition differs from the one treated in this thesis, by having a ﬁxed
amount of vehicles and a single cross-dock. Moreover, the objective function considered has more real
life details than the problem of this thesis.
In [Repoussis et al., 2017] different shipping strategies are compared. Namely, direct-shipping and a
strategy using cross-docking formulated as the PDP and the VRPCD. The primary aim of the paper is
to evaluate the sustainability of each strategy under various network options and operational settings,
and analyse how these variations affect the transportation cost. The analysis of network option and
operational setting are made based on a number of computational experiments. Where the role of sev-
eral spatial and temporal characteristics are tested, such as the supplier-costumer pair proximity, the
geographical distribution of suppliers and customers, the vehicle capacity, the tightness of the maxi-
mum route duration constraint, the depot positioning and time required for cross-dock consolidation.
A hybrid strategy of direct-shipping and cross-dock consolidation is also implemented and separately
examined. A solution for the hybrid strategy consists of routes either using a direct-shipping strategy,
which corresponds to a normal PDP or routes based on the VRPCD, where all request are consolidated
at a cross-dock. The later routes will therefore either be pure pickup routes or pure delivery routes. The
solution method used in [Repoussis et al., 2017] is a heuristic approach. It is based on a construction
heuristic followed by a Tabu Search equipped with arc-exchange neighbourhood structures. They have
implemented a relocation operator, an exchange operator and a 2-opt operator. The relocation operator
corresponds to the moving of a request from one position in a route to another position, possibly in an-
other route. The exchange operator is able to exchange two or four visits on the routes, depending on
which kind of route we are considering. In the PDP case it exchanges two request, and hence four visits,
and in the VRPCD case it exchanges two visits of the same type, so either two pickups or two deliveries.
The last implemented operator is the 2-opt operator, that is an exchange of two sequences of visits. For
the PDP this is only done between routes, due to the precedence constraint. Furthermore, the exchange
is only possible to do at times where the vehicle is empty, since requests must have all their visit served
by the same vehicle. For the VRPCD, the operator can be used both between routes and within the same
route. The implemented solution method for the PDPCD, includes three more operators: two relocation
operators that can move a visit from one type of routes to the other kind (basically either changing the
request from being shipped directly to be transported via a cross-dock or vice versa) and a third which is
an exchange operator that can exchange requests between the two types of routes.
==PAGE:19==
2.6. Data
9
The authors then start by testing each heuristic on well-studied benchmark instances, for respectively
PDP and VRPCD, in order to be able to compare the performance of the heuristic to previous heuristics
found in the literature. The implemented heuristics solves the benchmark instances in level with results
of previous implemented heuristics and are found suitable for performing a comparison study of the two
shipping strategies. The performance of the two shipping strategies are evaluated on two constructed
benchmark data sets. The direct shipping strategy using PDP formulation implies a lower cost in most
of the test cases. Though, the test results indicates that VRPCD has good properties compared to the
PDP, for remotely positioned supplier-customer pairs and clustered node distribution. Since the hybrid
strategy can use both strategies, it is always able to achieve the same solutions as the pure strategies in
the cases where one of them outperforms the other. On instances where both of the pure strategies had
comparable objective scores, the hybrid strategy were able to achieve better results by mixing the two
strategies. Note that the formulated PDPCD from [Repoussis et al., 2017] is different from the PDPCD
treated in this thesis, since we allow mixing cross-docked request and directly shipped request on the
same route and do not restrict the routes to a pure direct shipping strategy or being a pure pickup or
delivery route.
2.6
Data
A real-life dataset was provided by AMCS together with some further speciﬁcations about the problem at
hand. Moreover, some extra assumption were made, most of them based on information available from
our advisers, who have been working on a similar problem.
The distance and driving times between locations used in the heuristic are pre-calculated using the Open
Source Routing Machine, from the [OSRM], that uses OpenStreetMap data to ﬁnd the best route between
two locations. The resulting matrices are an input to the heuristic. The advantages is that the heuristic
will run slightly faster, due to fact these measures are not being calculated within the heuristic. Moreover,
the pre-calculated distances are far more realistic than any calculations we could make in the heuristic
since they are calculated based on the road network. The same applies to the driving times, since speed
limitation on different road types can be included.
The data implies multiple cross-docks, for simplicity we choose three. The cross-docks were chosen
such that they are equally geographically distributed in area deﬁned by the data. We also assume that the
vehicles start and end at the cross-docks.
The data has columns that state the latest day of pickup and the day of delivery together with a desired
time of delivery. It was suggested by AMCS to work with a tight time window for the delivery of ±1
hour unless the delivery is at one of the cross-docks, in which case the delivery is considered free within
the day. The decision for the cross-docks was made in order to increase the change of making good
routes.
The geographical locations of all the request considered in this project are shown in ﬁgure 2.1 and ﬁgure
2.2. Both the pickup locations and the delivery locations are situated all over Denmark.
2.6.1
Data Processing
The data includes more than one unit type for the demand. The most frequent type is CC, which denotes
a ﬂower container wagon as the one in ﬁgure 2.3. A converting scheme was provided from a similar
project, [Petersen and Ropke, 2011]. The demand is converted in to CC units using the converting
scheme in table 2.1. The capacity of a vehicle is 49 CC. Some of the requests in the data have demands
that when converted exceed this limit, with less than 1CC. A typical example is a request with demand
90 of type 1
2CC. When we convert the demand we get 90 · 0.55 = 49.5CC which is just above 49. Since
in the cases where this happens the capacity is only exceeded by a very small amount we assume that
in reality the vehicles can somehow still be packed in a reasonable way. Moreover, we assume that the
==PAGE:20==
10
2. Problem Deﬁnition
Figure 2.1: Pickup locations in Denmark
Figure 2.2: Delivery locations in Denmark
items can be unloaded and reloaded into the vehicles without concern for the placement of the items in
the vehicles.
The service time for a request is determined in a discrete way using table 2.2, which is similar to the
staircase function used in Petersen and Ropke [2011] for the service time. Some data entries were
missing the GPS-coordinates used for calculating the distances and driving time. The data includes
addresses and the GPS-coordinates were added manually by looking up the addresses online in Google
Maps.
The original data included the same request multiple times, and there seemed to be some route informa-
tion available concerning some cross-dock operations. Some request appeared up to three times. The
data ﬁle was cleaned up such that each request only occurs one time in the data.
==PAGE:21==
2.6. Data
11
Figure 2.3: The standard danish ﬂower container, denoted CC [danishtrolley.com]
Code
Volume Factor
CBM.
0, 65
CC
1, 00
EUPL
1, 40
EURO-CC
0, 70
LDM
3, 25
LAES
43, 00
MASK.
1, 00
MIN.
1, 00
ONEWAY
1, 40
PLANTER
1, 00
STPL
2, 00
1/4 PLL
0, 35
1/2 CC
0, 55
1/2 PLL
0, 70
KASSE
1, 00
LAG
0, 00
Table 2.1: Table used for conversion of demand
Number of Containers
Service Time (in min)
[0 −3]
15
]3 −15]
25
]15 −28]
35
]28 −49]
50
Table 2.2: Service time for servicing a given amount of CC containers
By studying the previous paper on the same topic, [Petersen and Ropke, 2011], we found that previously
solved industrial instances have had a size between 500 and a 1000 request. With this aim in mind the
bigger industrial instances were created by analysing the dataset provided by AMCS. We found that
==PAGE:22==
12
2. Problem Deﬁnition
by pairing two consecutive day of pickup and having the last day as the delivery day, we could create
instances within the range of 387-912 request. An overview over the data is shown in table 2.4.
We end up with ﬁve big instances with the following combination of dates. Instance 1 includes requests
with pickups on the 20th and the 21st and delivery on the 21st, in total 729 requests. Instance 2 includes
requests with pickups on the 21st and the 22nd and delivery on the 22nd, in total 743 requests. Instance
3 includes requests with pickups on the 22nd and the 23rd and delivery on the 23rd, in total 912 requests.
Instance 4 includes requests with pickups on the 23rd and the 24th and delivery on the 24th, in total 832
requests. Instance 5 includes requests with pickups on the 24th and the 25th and delivery on the 25th, in
total 387 requests.
Figure 2.4: Pivot table with an overview of data. The data are paired together by latest pickup date and
delivery date.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Implementation
In this chapter we will ﬁrst present an overview of the heuristics implemented in this project. Then we
will describe the local search heuristic in detail. Finally, we will discuss the process of ﬁnding a feasible
insertion of a request, both as a normal request and as cross-docked request.
3.1
Algorithm
A common optimization framework for solving vehicle routing problems has been implemented for solv-
ing the PDPCD. First, a simple construction heuristic algorithm is applied to generate an initial feasible
solution. Then a local search is applied to ﬁnd new feasible solutions with a lower cost. Algorithm 1
describes the high level steps of the heuristic.
Algorithm 1: Overview of algorithm
Input : Instance I
1 s = initialiseAndConstructSolution(I)
2 stemp = copy(s)
3 boolean routeMin = true
4 while unplaced list of stemp is empty do
5
s = copy(stemp)
6
destroyRoute(stemp)
7
while unplaced list of stemp not empty And time1 < maxTime do
8
stemp = localSearch(stemp, routeMin)
9
end
10 end
11 routeMin = false
12 while time2 < maxTime do
13
s = localSearch(s, routeMin)
14 end
15 return s
First a solution is initialised, by reading in an instance and placing all request on the unplaced list. Then
the construction of a feasible solution is performed by using a greedy insertion method. The method
takes the last request in the list of unplanned requests and adds the request to the solution in the current
best position as a direct shipment. That is the position which at the current state implies the lowest cost
of insertion. If no possible insertion can be found in the current routes of the solution, then a new route is
added and the request is planned in the new route. This process repeats until the unplanned list is empty.
13
==PAGE:24==
14
3. Implementation
After initialising a solution in line 1 we use a two-stage algorithm to improve the solution. The boolean
routeMin is used for keeping track of which stage of the algorithm we are in and for controlling the
updating procedures within the local search heuristic. The ﬁrst stage on line 3-10 is minimising the
number of routes in the solution. The overall best solution s is only undated to the temporary solution
stemp if the local search procedure in line 8 has been able to ﬁnd a stemp without unplaced requests after
destroying and removing a route (see line 6). The second stage on line 11-14 strives to minimize the cost
of driven km and time, given a ﬁxed number of routes. Both stages use a local search procedure called
adaptive large neighbourhood search (ALNS), which was ﬁrst implemented by [Ropke and Pisinger,
2006]. ALNS is explained in detail in section 3.2. The ﬁrst stage of minimising the number of routes is
elaborated upon in section 3.2.5.
3.1.1
Solution Representation
A solution consists of a set of routes. A route starts at a depot, then visits a number of locations and
ﬁnally returns to the same depot. When a request is placed on a route, two visits are planned: a pickup
and a delivery (where one could potentially be a dummy visit). When a request is shipped via a cross-
dock, a route will either contain the pickup order, which is the original pickup and a dummy delivery to
a cross-dock, or the delivery order, which is a dummy pickup at a cross-dock and the original delivery.
An example of a small solution is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.1, with two routes and four requests.
Depot
P1
P3
P2
D2
DD1
D3
Depot
Depot
DP1
P4
D4
D1
Depot
V1
V2
Route
Route
Solution
Figure 3.1: A solution consists of routes and a route consists of pickup and delivery visits. Pickups are
denoted as circles and deliveries as diamonds.
Vehicle 1 starts at a depot and then picks up request 1 followed by the pickup of request 2. Then vehicle
1 drives to a cross-dock facility where it drops off request 1. Later, it picks up request 3 and deliver
request 3 and 2 after which it returns to the start depot. Vehicle 2 leaves from the depot where vehicle 1
dropped of request 1 and hence starts with the dummy pickup of request 1. Next, request 4 is picked up
after which request 1 is delivered followed by the delivery of request 4. Finally, the vehicle returns to its
starting depot. A 2-d illustration of the two routes is shown in ﬁgure 3.2.
==PAGE:25==
3.1. Algorithm
15
 
 
Depot
Depot
1
P4
D1
D4
P3
D3
D2
P2
P1
Figure 3.2: The blue route of vehicle 1 starts in the morning at depot to the right. The green route of
vehicle 2 starts later in the day at the depot to the left, since vehicle 1 needs to deliver request 1 to the
cross-dock before vehicle 2 can depart.
The very basic problem structure has similarities to the Dial-a-Ride problem, which the authors have been
working on in a previous project. The implementation of the problem structure was initially inspired by
code from this project, see [Larsen, 2017].
3.1.2
The change in cost
Given a solution s, an unplanned request i and a certain insertion of this request in the solution s, one
can consider the change in cost achieved by this particular insertion. This change in cost is by deﬁnition
the difference
∆Ei = E(si) −E(s)
between the evaluation function of the solution si obtained by inserting the unplanned request in s, and
the evaluation function of s. Note that ∆Ei depends one the speciﬁc way the request i is inserted in s,
even though this is not reﬂected in the notation.
If we were to compute ∆Ei the naive way, by ﬁrst computing E(si) and E(s) and then making the
subtraction we would end up with a method that has linear complexity in terms of the total number of
requests. Even though in general linear complexity is very good, this method would nonetheless slow
down our heuristic signiﬁcantly since the change in cost will be computed a huge number of times and
the total number of requests is large. It is therefore very important that we compute the change of cost as
efﬁciently as possible.
The change in cost will therefore be calculated using the delta cost function. The delta cost function
considers only the necessary change in the solution and calculates the cost of this change. Recall that the
evaluation function E consists of elements describing the time, the driven km and unplaced visits. We do
not consider the vehicles in the delta cost function since we have a two-stage algorithm that minimises
the usage of vehicles. The delta cost function, calculates the change in cost by ﬁrst calculating the change
in driving time by insertion of the pickup and delivery on two speciﬁed positions in the route. Since we
know the sequence of the visits on the route, we calculate the added driving time by insertion of the two
visits in the speciﬁed positions between the other visits. Then we add the cost of service time twice since
we insert two visits from the same request. The driven km is also calculated by using the two speciﬁed
==PAGE:26==
16
3. Implementation
positions on the route. Lastly, the cost of having an unplaced request is retracted since if we choose this
insertion, the request is no longer unplaced. The method that computes the change in cost using the delta
cost function has constant complexity in terms of the total number of requests, because we can just look
up the relevant distance, driving time and service time.
3.1.3
An example of calculating the change in cost
We found a feasible insertion of a request R, with pickup P and delivery D, into a route with the
following sequence of visits = {v1, v2, v3, v4, v5, v6}, where v1 and v6 are visits at the depot. The
pickup is to be inserted after v2 and the delivery after v4. We reuse the notation from 2.4.1 for the cost.
∆distance
= distance(v2, P) + distance(P, v3) + distance(v4, D) + distance(D, v5)
(3.1)
−distance(v2, v3) −distance(v4, v5)
∆time
= time(v2, P) + time(P, v3) + time(v4, D) + time(D, v5)
(3.2)
+ 2 · serviceTime(R)
−time(v2, v3) −time(v4, v5)
∆cost
= ckm∆distance + ct∆time −cu.
(3.3)
If the delivery visit is positioned right after the pickup, ∆distance and ∆time change to,
∆distance
= distance(v2, P) + distance(P, D) + distance(D, v3)
(3.4)
−distance(v2, v3)
∆time
= time(v2, P) + time(P, D) + time(D, v3)
(3.5)
+ 2 · serviceTime(R)
−time(v2, v3).
(3.6)
3.2
ALNS
The idea behind the large neighbourhood search (LNS) is to destroy and reconstruct a solution iteratively
in the hope of reaching a better solution. The adaptive large neighbourhood search (ALNS) approach
we will use is inspired by [Ropke and Pisinger, 2006]. They extended the ideas of [Shaw, 1997], [Shaw,
1998] and [Bent and Van Hentenryck, 2004] and developed the ALNS. The heuristic uses several destroy
and repair methods, which are described in section 3.2.2 and 3.2.3.
The heuristic is called adaptive, since it adapts the selection of methods for destroying and repairing the
solution to the instance. The choice is based on statistical information of how the methods have been
doing in previous iterations. It is believed that being able to alternate between methods and adapt to each
speciﬁc instance will result in a more robust heuristic. Indeed, a method for repairing the solution might
work well for one speciﬁc instance, but not as good compared to other methods on other instances.
Pseudo code for the ALNS is presented in algorithm 2. The heuristic takes a feasible solution as input.
This input is used to initialise sbest and scurrent, which respectively are the best found solution during
the search and the current solution from where we search the neighbourhood. In line 4 and 5 we select
==PAGE:27==
3.2. ALNS
17
a destroy and repair method based on their performance (see section 3.2.1 for detailed description of
how this is done). In line 6 we then ﬁrst apply the chosen destroy heuristic on the current solution and
afterwards the chosen repair heuristic is used for reconstructing a solution. If the new solution is better
than the best found solution so far, it overwrites sbest and scurrent in line 8-9. If it is not better than the
best, we check if it can be accepted as the new current solution, given the acceptance criteria. If a given
criteria is fulﬁlled then we will let the current solution be updated with the global best solution in line
14. Line 3-15 is repeated until the stop criteria is met. The ALNS uses a simulated annealing acceptance
and stopping criteria, which will be described in section 3.2.4.
The feature added in line 14 is based on the implementation in [Petersen and Ropke, 2011], where with
a given probability the current solution is updated to the best solution. By testing different probabilities,
the authors of [Petersen and Ropke, 2011] found that implementing this step in the ALNS improved
the ﬁnal solution of the PDPCD. We have therefore included a similar feature in this implementation of
ALNS for the PDPCD. Note, that in our implementation the criteria is updating the solution after every
1000 iterations, in order to allow some diversiﬁcation of the search.
Algorithm 2: ALNS
Input : feasible solution s0
1 sbest = s0
2 scurrent = s0
3 while stop criteria not met do
4
select destroy ∈D
5
select repair ∈R
6
stemporary = repair(destroy(scurrent))
7
if f(stemporary) < f(sbest) then
8
sbest = stemporary
9
scurrent = stemporary
10
else if accept(stemporary, scurrent) then
11
scurrent = stemporary
12
end
13
if return to best criteria met then
14
scurrent = sbest
15
end
16 end
17 return sbest
3.2.1
Choosing heuristics in the ALNS
Each method for destroying and repairing has a weight assigned to it and these weights are used in a
roulette wheel selections principle. Choosing between k methods with weight wi, i ∈{1, . . . , k}, the
j-th method is selected with probability
wj
Pk
i=1 wi
.
(3.7)
The selection of repair methods is made independent from the selection of destroy methods.
The weight are assigned based on the historical value of the weight and the recent performance of the
method. The search is divided into a number of segments. A segment is (as in [Ropke and Pisinger,
2006]) deﬁned as 100 iteration of the ALNS heuristic. Apart from a weight each method also has a score
and a count assigned to it, which all together make up the performance of the method in a segment.
==PAGE:28==
18
3. Implementation
Parameter
Description
σ1
The last destroy-repair iteration resulted in a new
global best solution.
σ2
The last destroy-repair iteration resulted in a new so-
lution better than the cost of the current solution.
σ3
The last remove-insert operation resulted in a new
solution, with a cost that is worse than the cost of the
current solution, but the new solution was accepted.
Table 3.1: The three cases where points are given to a repair or destroy heuristic
The score is set to zero when a new segment starts and is updated with the points described in Table 3.1.
There are three cases: The method is rewarded with σ1, if a new solution that dominates all previous
solutions is found. Remember that due to the simulated annealing framework we accept non-improving
solutions. Hence, if a solution is better than the current best, σ2 is added to the score. Lastly, if we accept
and update the current with a non-improving solution, the score is increased with σ3. This last score
adjustment is there in order to encourage the heuristic to diversify the solution. To go from one solution
to another we apply both a destroy and a repair method and both methods are rewarded equally if the
new solution was accepted.
The problem treated in this thesis has many solutions that are very similar but not the same. This is
for example due to the fact that the wide time windows of the pickup visits give us many options for
relocating the pickup visit in a feasible manner without impacting the cost very much. This huge amount
of solutions makes it unlikely that the heuristic will encounter exactly the same solution several times.
For this reason we have , unlike in [Ropke and Pisinger, 2006], chosen not to keep track of whether we
have encountered a given solution before.
The count is used when updating the weights at the end of the segment and ensures that the evaluation
of the performance of the method is fair. The count, θi keeps track of how many time we have used the
method i during the recent segment. The value πi is the score of the method i during the last segment.
A reaction factor µ regulates the adjustment of the weight wi,j, by dictating much the last segment, j,
should affect the weights wi,j+1 for the new segment j + 1. All together we have that
wi,j+1 = wi,j(1 −µ) + µπi
θi
.
(3.8)
If µ is set to 1, we update the weight based only on the performance of the method in the last segment. If
µ is 0 we do not take the performance of the methods into account but keep the initial weights throughout
the search.
3.2.2
Destruction Neighbourhoods
The ALNS has two removal heuristics implemented, which are described in this section. Both heuristics
need two inputs: an integer n and a solution. The heuristics outputs a solution where n requests have
been removed from the routes and added to the list of unplanned requests. The heuristic related removal
(see below) is given an additional parameter ρdestroy, that determines the degree of randomisation in the
heuristic.
The number of request to be removed, denoted n, is a number chosen randomly between 4 and an integer
parameter η, which is the maximum number of requests we are allowed to remove. The minimum is set
to 4 based on the observation in [Ropke and Pisinger, 2006] and η will be ﬁxed in section 4.1 as a result
of a parameter tuning process.
==PAGE:29==
3.2. ALNS
19
Related removal
The related removal heuristic is a heuristic proposed in [Shaw, 1997] and [Shaw, 1998], and further
developed in [Ropke and Pisinger, 2006]. The main idea is to remove requests that are similar in a certain
sense. The motivation to do this is the following. We want to remove requests and thereby create holes
in the solution in which the unplanned requests ﬁt. To increase our changes of making new solutions we
need to make sure a given unplanned request ﬁts in several of the created holes (otherwise we have a high
probability of inserting a request back to its original position). This is achieved by removing request that
are similar.
The similarity of two request i and j is deﬁned by using a relatedness measure R(i, j). The lower the
value of R(i, j), the more related i and j are. The requests relatedness is obtained from three static terms
deﬁned by the instances: a distance term, a time term and a demand term. Each term has an associated
weight, ϕ, χ, ψ, that determines how important a term is when comparing requests. The relatedness
measure is given by,
R(i, j) = ϕ · distancei,j + χ · timei,j + ψ · demandi,j.
The distance term is measuring the distance between the visits of the two requests
distancei,j = 1
4 · (|pi, pj| + |di, dj| + |di, pj| + |pi, dj|).
(3.9)
The time term is measuring the difference between the start of the time window for the delivery visit,
since the time window of the delivery is the tightest. The demand term is measuring the difference
between the capacity demand of the two requests. It is assumed that each term is scaled such that is only
take values in [0, 1], in order to let the weights determine the relative importance of the terms.
The weights are scaled using a known maximum value for the difference. For example, in the time term
the instances are deﬁned such that all deliveries are on the last day of the two-days planning period.
Hence, there can at maximum be 23 hours and 59 minutes between two requests that are compared.
The related removal heuristic is described in pseudo code in algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3: Related Removal Heuristic
Input : An array of routes, s
Input : A list of unplanned requests, D
Input : Number of visit to be removed, n
1 remove a randomly selected request from s and add to D
2 Integer: nRemoved = 1
3 while nRemoved < n do
4
r0 = randomly selected request from D
5
Array: L = an array containing all request from s
6
sort L such that, i < j ⇐R(r0, L[i]) < R(r0, L[j])
7
choose a random number y from the interval [0,1)
8
Request: r = L[yρdestroy · |L|]
9
remove r from s
10
set D = D ∪{r}
11
nRemoved++
12 end
13 return s and D
==PAGE:30==
20
3. Implementation
First a random request in the solution is selected, removed and put on the unplanned list. Then until
n requests have been removed the procedure chooses a request similar to an already removed request
based on the relatedness measure and a deterministic parameter ρdestroy ≥1. This is done by randomly
selecting an unplanned request r0 and then sorting the list of all possible removable requests according
to the relatedness measure with respect to the selected unplanned request r0. The to be removed requests
is then randomly selected among a certain range of entries with low index in the sorted list (and hence
high similarity with r0). A low value of ρdestroy makes this range wider and hence increases random
selection.
Random Removal
The random removal algorithm removes n request selected randomly in the solution. It is possible to used
the related removal heuristic with ρdestroy = 1, since that would make a the heuristic choose a request
with uniform probability. Though, to speed up the random removal a simpler algorithm is implemented.
3.2.3
Repair Neighbourhoods
Insertion methods are divided into two categories for vehicle routing problems: sequential and parallel
insertion heuristics. Parallel methods constructs multiple routes at the same time, while sequential meth-
ods builds the routes one by one. More details and a discussion of when to use which heuristic can be
found in [Potvin and Rousseau, 1993]. The heuristics implemented in this project are all parallel.
Best List Heuristic
This heuristic is described in pseudo code in algorithm 4. The best list heuristic takes the last request
from the unplaced list in line 3-4 and makes a list of insertions based on the change in objective value in
line 5. Insertions that are less than ωworse % worse than the best insertion found are collected in the list.
The insertion are found by ﬁrst looking at each route and ﬁnding the best insertion of a normal request.
Moreover, all possible route pairs for inserting the request as a cross-docked request are also found. The
list of insertions is sorted such that the best insertion, determined by the lowest cost, is the ﬁrst on the
list. Then we eliminate all the insertions that are ωworse % worse than the best found insertion. When
the ﬁnal list is created a decision method is used for selecting an insertion from the list of insertions in
line 6-9.
The decision method is based on the selection method in the Shaw removal heuristic. As in Shaw
removal, the best list heuristic has a randomness parameter, ρrepair, used for selecting an index on the
list. The greater the value of the parameter ρrepair ≥1, the more likely it is that we always select the
best insertion. If ρrepair = 1, the selection is purely random.
If no insertion exists then the request is added to a temporary unplaced list until the original list is empty
in line 11. When the unplaced list is empty, the temporary unplaced requests are added back to the
==PAGE:31==
3.2. ALNS
21
original list and we return the solution of routes and the list of unplaced requests.
Algorithm 4: Best List Heuristic
Input : An array of routes, s
Input : A list of unplanned requests, D
1 Dtemp ←an empty list for temporary unplanned request
2 while D is not empty do
3
r = last request on D
4
remove r from D
5
Array B = A list of the best insertion of r into s
6
if B is not empty then
7
choose a random number y from the interval [0,1)
8
select insertion i = B[yρrepair · |B|]
9
add r to s at position given by i
10
else
11
add r to Dtemp
12
end
13 end
14 add request from Dtemp to D
15 return s and D
Regret 2 Heuristic
The regret heuristic is a repair heuristic that uses look-ahead information to detect requests that could be
expensive to insert at a later point. With a greedy insertion heuristic that chooses the cheapest insertion
among all possible insertion, we risk that the chosen insertion makes all future insertions a lot worse,
leading to a worse overall solution then if we had not made the greedy choice.
One deﬁnes the regret value of a given solution s and request i on the unplaced list as
ci = ∆Ei
2 −∆Ei
1
(3.10)
where ∆Ei
1 is the best insertion of i on s and ∆Ei
2 is the second best insertion of i on s. The (second) best
insertion is the insertion that yields the (second) most optimal change of cost ∆Ei, calculated using the
delta cost function. Hence, the regret value ci, is the difference in cost between the two best insertions.
For a normal request it would be the difference between insertion a request in its best route and its second
best route.
A request from the unplaced list is selected such that it maximizes the regret values, maxi∈Uci. Then
this request is inserted in the least costly position.
Due to the search for cross-dock insertion of a request being computationally very heavy, we do not look
for cross-dock options when the regret value is calculated, but when a request is selected for insertion,
we check if there exists a better insertion using cross-docking.
Note that the regret heuristic formulated here differs from the usual regret heuristic for a vehicle routing
problem in the sense that we do not save and reuse the found insertions of a request (also called caching).
This is because in our setup, we can not assume that the other found insertions are still feasible even
if they are in other routes. This is due to the fact that the introduction of cross-docked requests creates
scheduling dependencies between different routes.
==PAGE:32==
22
3. Implementation
3.2.4
Acceptance and stopping criteria
One of the most straightforward acceptance criteria is to only accept a solution better than the current
solution: a greedy local search. A general concern with a greedy search is its tendency to get trapped in
a local minimum. Though, as shown in [Shaw, 1997], this can be partly avoided by choosing the size of
the neighbourhood in a LNS appropriately.
In this thesis we choose a simulated annealing (SA) framework with linear cooling schedule and ﬁxed end
temperature. This decision was based on a recommendation from recent work in the area of acceptance
criteria for ALNS frameworks in the capacitated vehicle routing problem (among others), see [Santini
et al., 2017]. As explained in this paper, the best approach would be to try a few other acceptance criteria
as well, like threshold acceptance or record-to-record travel, but unfortunately time did not permit us to
explore this.
The setup is inspired by the annealing of metals, and the terminology used here comes from this ﬁeld.
The SA framework is build on the idea that in the beginning of the search we have a lot of time and we
should search in a wide neighbourhood around the current solution in order to ﬁnd good candidates for
new solutions. Hence, that could imply that we have to visit a solution worse than our current solution
in order the reach better solutions. The likelihood of a new solution being accepted will depend on how
much worse this new solution is compared to our current solution and how far in the search we are. The
closer we get to the end of the search the more reluctant we will be to accept a worse solution. To be
more precise, the probability that a new solution with objective value f(stemporary) is accepted will be
controlled by the function
e
f(scurrent)−f(stemporary)
T
where the temperature T decreases over time and indicates how far in the search we are.
The start temperature is set by using the objective value of the initial solution s0 and a parameter h
that determines that a solution with objective value f(stemporary) = h · f(s0) will be accepted with
probability 0.5 at the start of the procedure. Using 3.11, the start temperature can now be calculated
Tstart = f(s0)(1 −h)
ln 0.5
.
(3.11)
The update of the temperature, T, is done by using time as the deciding factor for the decrease of the
temperature. The reason for this is that we want to be in control of how long it approximately takes to
run the heuristic. Indeed, in a real life application it is certainly preferable to have a time limit for the
heuristic instead of a upper bound on the amount of iterations. In papers one often sees that an upper
bound on amount of iterations is set. This is merely done so other researcher can duplicate the results by
running the heuristic on their computer. Indeed, in order to compare results done on different computers
with different conﬁgurations, an amount of iteration is the better choice.
The update function for T is linear in time t and given by
T(t) = Tstart · maxTime −t
maxTime
.
(3.12)
The procedure for the SA with ﬁxed end and linear cooling schedule is described in pseudo code in
algorithm 5.
==PAGE:33==
3.2. ALNS
23
Algorithm 5: Simulated annealing
Input : Initial solution s0
1 Initialise T
2 sbest = s0
3 scurrent = s0
4 start a time t
5 while t < maxTime do
6
pick stemporary ∈Neigh(scurrent)
7
if random(0,1) ≤ef(scurrent)−f(stemporary)
T
then
8
scurrent = stemporary
9
end
10
if f(scurrent) < f(sbest) then
11
sbest = scurrent
12
end
13
Update(T)
14 end
15 return sbest
3.2.5
Minimising Number of Routes
The ALNS heuristic suggested in section 3.2 is not able to meet all the requirements of the problem
at the same time. Moreover since the construction heuristic is very simple, we might end up with an
overuse of vehicles since we have an unlimited amount available. Minimisation of the number of vehicles
is often considered the most important objective in vehicle route literature according to [Ropke and
Pisinger, 2006], and it is also considered important by our date provider AMCS. Hence, there is a need
for minimising the number of vehicles before starting the optimisation of the other transportation costs.
The vehicle minimisation stage of the heuristic is based on the approach from [Ropke and Pisinger,
2006], which only works for a homogeneous ﬂeet.
The vehicle minimisation is performed after establishing a feasible solution, which means that all re-
quests are planned and other constraints are respected. This initial solution provides the upper bound for
how many vehicles are needed.
The ﬁrst step of the algorithm is to remove one route from the list, and place the request from that route
on the unplaced list. The solution is then given to the ALNS heuristic with a high cost for unplaced
requests, favouring solutions with few unplanned requests. If the heuristic ﬁnds a solution where all
request are planned, the heuristic is paused and the weights of the repair and destroy functions are saved,
along with time usage. The best solution is updated to the newly found feasible solution. Then a new
route is removed and we start the search for a new candidate. If the ALNS terminates with a request on
the unplaced list, the last solution found is not upgraded to the overall best solution.
The last found solution with an empty list of unplaced request is used for the second stage of the im-
provement phase, where the ALNS is used with the normal stopping criteria mentioned in section 3.2.4.
This ﬁrst of stage of the heuristic is important for the overall cost minimisation and we therefore allow
the same running time as in the second stage, as long as it seems promising that new feasible solutions
will be found. Hence, an extra stopping criteria is added to the ALNS when it is running at the ﬁrst
stage. The idea is retrieved from [Ropke and Pisinger, 2006] and slightly modiﬁed. The stopping criteria
terminates the search if ﬁve or more visits are unplaced after a lap of ALNS that last more than γ of
the maximum runtime, γ being a percentile. Where a lap is the time after the ALNS is restarted. After
analysing some of the computational experiments γ was set to 0.25.
==PAGE:34==
24
3. Implementation
3.3
Feasibility of Inserting Orders
Modifying the solution can be a very slow process if requests would have to be inserted every time in
order to check whether the new solution would be feasible. In order to modify the solution faster we
add some guidance to the solution by introducing slack values described in section 3.3.1 and 3.3.2. The
general procedure used for ﬁnding a feasible insertion is described in section 3.3.4. When introducing
cross-docking, the feasibility check of insertions gets even more complicated due to dependency between
routes. A description of how this is dealt with can be found in section 3.3.5. In section 3.3.6, we have
analysed some of the pitfalls which occur when introducing slack values for PDPCD.
3.3.1
Slack Values for a pickup and delivery problem
The paper [Savelsbergh, 1992] introduces the concept of slack values. This paper deﬁnes forward slack
and backward slack values, which provide information about how much an action in a sequence of actions
(in our case a visits), can be shifted forward or backwards while maintaining feasibility.
In this thesis slack values are used to quickly determine, if a visit can be inserted on a speciﬁc position
in a route or not. In this section we describe the two derived slack times we will use: earliest start-time
and latest start-time for the service of a visit in the PDP.
Earliest and latest start time
The earliest and latest start time are determining when it is possible to start servicing a visit, with respect
to the planned sequence of visits on the route and the time window for the visit. Remember that the time
window end for a visit indicates the latest time it is possible to start the service of a visit, it does not
indicate when the service needs to be ﬁnished.
The earliest and latest starting times (EST and LST) of the service time of a visit are calculated based on
the time window of the visit i, the times for the visits that are planned on the same route before and after
visit i, travel times and service times. Earliest start time is calculated with forward recursion and latest
start time with backward recursion
ESTi
=
(
twsi,
if i is the ﬁrst visit on the route
max{ESTi−1 + sti−1 + tti−1,i, twsi},
otherwise
(3.13)
LSTi
=
(
twei,
if i is the last visit on the route
min{LSTi+1 −tti,i+1 −sti, twei},
otherwise.
(3.14)
Here i is the index of a visit on the route, twsi is the time window start, twei is the time window end,
sti−1 is the service time of the previous visit on the route and tti−1,i is the travel time between visit i −1
and i on the route.
When a change in a route of a PDP are made, such as inserting or removing a visit, the starting times are
updated for all visits on the route.
3.3.2
Time dependency between Routes
When introducing cross-docking, a request is divided in two and placed on two routes. This results
in dependency between routes, due to the ordering constraint introduced in section 2.4.2. Hence, the
calculations of the slack times changes, since a dummy pickup visit is dependent on when the dummy
delivery is made to the cross-dock and vice versa.
In terms of slacks values this means that the earliest start for the dummy pickup is calculated using both
the previous visit on the route as in the normal case (3.13), and the earliest start for the dummy delivery.
==PAGE:35==
3.3. Feasibility of Inserting Orders
25
In other words, ESTi for the dummy pickup calculated as in 3.15 restricts the dummy pickup from being
planned before the earliest time the dummy delivery is delivered at the cross-dock
ESTi =
(
max{ESTdummyD + sti, ESTiroute},
if i is a dummy pickup
ESTiroute,
otherwise.
(3.15)
Here, ESTdummyD is the earliest start for the dummy delivery, ESTiroute is the earliest start determined
as in (3.13) from the route, sti is the service time of the request.
For the dummy delivery visit, the dependency means that the latest start is calculated using both the latest
start from route as in (3.14), but also using the latest start from the dummy pickup
LSTi =
(
min{LSTdummyP −sti, LSTiroute},
if i is a dummy delivery
LSTiroute,
otherwise.
(3.16)
Here, LSTdummyP is the latest start for the dummy pickup, LSTiroute is the latest start determined as in
(3.14) from the route, sti is the service time of the request.
3.3.3
Updating slack times
With the introduction of cross-docking, we also introduce time dependencies between the routes. Hence,
we might need to update more than one route since time can propagate through the routes. We will
illustrate how the update function works with a small example of two routes and four request. Recall
that the weights on the arcs in the graph deﬁned in section 2.1, are service time and driving time (in
minutes). The numbers written above a visit are EST and LST. Numbers that are not important for
the calculations are omitted from the illustrations. To simplify the example, the planning window is
shortened to one day. The pickup can therefore be made at any time within the day. The time windows
for the deliveries are,
TW D1 = [630, 750], TW D2 = [630, 750], TW D3 = [800, 920], TW D4 = [780, 900].
The updating procedure is done for one route at a time. First, we update the earliest start of each visit by
using the forward recursion (3.15). An example of updating the earliest start for route 1 is given in ﬁgure
3.3.
Depot
P1
P3
P2
D2
DD1
D3
Depot
R1:
50
50,-
200,-
350,-
500,-
650,-
800,-
150
150
150
150
150
Figure 3.3: Updating earliest start times using forward recursion.
Then we update the latest start of each visit by using the backward recursion (3.16) (see 3.4). If the visit
is a dummy delivery, we check if the dummy pickups earliest start is correct, if not we mark that the
route of the dummy pickup needs to be updated. If the visit is a dummy pickup we likewise check if
the latest start for the dummy delivery is still correct, and if not we mark that the route of the dummy
delivery needs to be updated. To ease the search for a dummy partner visit, a solution keeps a record of
the routes where the pickup and delivery order of a cross-docked request are planned. Furthermore, the
derived slack times for dummy visits from their partner route, are stored in a vector in the solution.
==PAGE:36==
26
3. Implementation
Depot
P1
P3
P2
D2
DD1
D3
Depot
50
50,150
200,300
350,450
500,600
650,750
800,920
150
150
150
150
150
R1:
Figure 3.4: Updating latest start times using backward recursion.
In the example, the derived earliest start for dummy pickups was updated to
EST DP = [400, −, −, −]
when we calculated the earliest start of route 1. The derived latest start for dummy deliveries is currently
empty,
LST DD = [−, −, −, −]
Depot
DP1
P4
D4
D1
Depot
R2:
400,-
550,-
700,-
850,-
0
150
150
150
Figure 3.5: Updating earliest start times using forward recursion.
Depot
DP1
P4
D4
D1
Depot
400,450
550,600
700,750
850,900
0
150
150
150
R2:
Figure 3.6: Updating latest start times using backward recursion.
We have ﬁnished the update of route 1 and can start updating route 2. We start by setting ESTDP1 = 400
using the EST DP
1
. The rest of the update is given in ﬁgure 3.5 and 3.6. While updating the derived slack
times are updated to
EST DP = [400, −, −, −] and LST DD = [400, −, −, −]
So route 1 is marked to be updated again since the latest start of dummy delivery 1 is bigger than the
derived latest start time coming from the dummy pickup, LSTDD1 = 450 > 400 = LST DD
1
. See ﬁgure
3.7 for the updated route 1.
Depot
P1
P3
P2
D2
DD1
D3
Depot
50
50,100
200,250
350,400
500,600
650,750
800,920
150
150
150
150
150
R1:
Figure 3.7: Route 1 after updating with derived slack times from route 2.
==PAGE:37==
3.3. Feasibility of Inserting Orders
27
Inserting a request can only make the time bounds tighter since the times between visits satisfy the
triangle inequality. Hence, we do not have to update all slack times when inserting. We start by updating
the route in which the request was inserted. For a cross-docked request, we update both routes inserted
into. After updating the route(s), other routes that were marked during the process are updated starting
from the lowest route index of the solution.
Removing a request, makes the time bounds less tight and might change the dependency between routes.
When removing a request we reset the stored derived slack times and update all the routes one at a time.
A route might be updated more that once, if it is dependent on one or more other routes. Hence, removing
a visit becomes a very costly operation and in the heuristic we wait with updating the solution until we
are done with removing requests and then we make one big update. This is possible since none of the
implemented destroy methods depends on the structure of the solution.
The number of operations required by the update procedure of one single route, without cross-docks, is
bounded above by 2v, where v is the number of visits on the route. If cross-docks are allowed, then 2v2
is an upper bounded for the number of iterations that the update procedure needs to deal with one route
of v visits. When updating the entire solution on the other hand, the dependencies between the routes,
caused by cross-docking, might force us the update the same route several times. For example, we start
by updating route 1 and at a later time we update route 10 which has a cross-dock exchange with route 1.
The update of route 10 might require us the update route 1 again which in turn may trigger the update of
other previously updated routes, and so on. This potentially intricate web of time dependencies causes
the update produce for the entire solution to have a very bad worst-case time complexity. However, in
practice it seems that we very rarely end up in a worst-case scenario. Indeed, by proﬁling the heuristic
we found that less than 0.9% of the total time was used on updating the slack times (see output from
proﬁling in ﬁgure 3.8). Hence, the heuristic does not seem to be constrained by the update function on
the big instances that we test on.
Figure 3.8: Results of proﬁling the code for 120 minutes on instance 1
3.3.4
Finding an Insertion for a Request
Updating a solution by inserting a request is a computationally very demanding procedure. Therefore,
when trying to ﬁnd an insertion of a request using the repair heuristics, we do not test potential candidates
by inserting the request. Instead, we have implemented an algorithm that checks whether an insertion
seems promising. The algorithm outputs the position in the solution and the change in cost implied by
==PAGE:38==
28
3. Implementation
this insertion. This algorithm has been implemented in two versions, one that ﬁnds the best insertion in
the whole set of routes and a second one that ﬁnds the best insertion in a given route.
The algorithm implemented to ﬁnd a feasible insertion starts by ﬁnding an insertion for the pickup visit.
First a simple capacity check is made to make sure that the vehicle has enough spare capacity at this
point in the route to accommodate the demand of the request. Since this is such a simple check we save
a lot of computation time by doing this ﬁrst, as opposed to postponing it and discovering later on that the
spare capacity is too small. Then we check if the pickup visit ﬁts here with respect to the time constraints
both imposed by the route and the time window for the visit itself. If the pickup visit ﬁts, we make a
more extensive check of capacity while trying to ﬁnd a position in the route for the delivery visit (which
of course must occur after the pickup). This more extensive check involves seeing if pickups after our
found insertion for the pickup do not cause the vehicle capacity to be exceeded, thereby making the
insertion infeasible. If the capacity is found infeasible at this point, we start over and continue to look for
a possible insertion for the pickup. When a possible insertion is found for the pickup after the extensive
check of capacity, we check if the delivery visit ﬁts with respect to time in a similar manner as we did
for the pickup visit. If it ﬁts, we have found a promising insertion. Then we calculate the change in cost
implied by inserting the request at these given positions in the route.
3.3.5
Finding an Insertion for a Cross-docked Request
A similar approach for ﬁnding the best insertion of a cross-docked requests in a solution could be im-
plemented but computationally it would be much too expensive. Given a solution with r routes and the
maximum number of visits on a route, v. The method has a complexity that is O(r2v4), compared to the
O(rv2) for ﬁnding insertion the best insertion of a normal request. For ﬁnding the best insertion given
two routes, one get a complexity that is O(v4), compared to the O(v2) for a normal request. Hence, we
have implemented another method for ﬁnding insertion of a cross-dock request, that uses the method for
ﬁnding insertions of a normal request on a single route.
The approach for ﬁnding good cross-docking insertions for a request uses a simple procedure that trans-
form the request into a cross-dock request with a pickup order and a delivery order. Then for each half
of the request it reuses the algorithm, described in the previous section, that ﬁnds the best insertion in a
route. It ﬁnds the best insertion for the pickup order into each route, and saves it to a list if the insertion
seems promising, meaning that it is not proven infeasible yet. Likewise it ﬁnds a list of insertions for the
delivery order.
In the next step the algorithm ﬁnds feasible pairs of routes. Feasible pairs in this case are pairs of an
pickup insertion and a delivery insertion into two different routes, using the same cross-dock terminal
and with a feasible time between the dummy visits. This is checked by making sure that the earliest start
of the dummy delivery plus service time is smaller or equal than the latest start of the dummy pickup
at the terminal. In other words, checking that there is time for making the transfer on the cross-dock
terminal.
Since we only ﬁnd the best insertion of the considered part of the request into a route, we might overlook
a good option for cross-docking a request.
We consider three cross-dock terminals, which are all tested as cross-dock transfer point for a request
unless the request has its original pickup or delivered at that terminal.
It is important to note that after introducing a cross-dock request, it is no longer possible with the im-
plemented algorithm to guarantee that the insertion is feasible. Since the algorithm only checks if the
insertion is feasible with respect to the current solution. It uses the current slack times from partner
dummy visits on other routes when it checks the slack time for the route, but it is not able to propagate
the slack values to other routes and back to the current route.
==PAGE:39==
3.3. Feasibility of Inserting Orders
29
In theory it would be possible to make such a check, where we follow the propagation of slack times
through the solution. Though, this is not desirable to implement since it would make the check of
insertion too slow. Instead the implemented check is reduced to a check of potential feasible insertion.
Examples of where the potential check fails are given in section 3.3.6. In the rare case were an infeasible
insertion gets approved by the potential check, the infeasibility will be discovered after insertion when
updating slack times. At this point we have implemented a fall back solution that will turn back the
infeasible insertion (see the end of Section 3.3.6).
When planning PDP, a delivery might happen at the same location as a pickup. In this case it is often
desirable to unload the relevant deliveries before loading the pickups. This is implemented into our
feasibility check: we simply check whether the next visit is a delivery at the same location, and if so we
move on and check insertion feasibility after the delivery.
Due to the computational intensiveness of ﬁnding good insertions for cross-docked request, we have
limited the parts of the overall heuristic that look for cross-dock options.
3.3.6
Infeasible cases
Since the insertions options are checked heuristically and the insertion of visits for a request is done
simultaneously, there are some infeasible insertion cases that are not possible to detect with our methods,
before the request is inserted. Two examples of such cases a given below. These are simple cases
involving only two routes, similar problems can occur involving more routes.
Example 1 - Slack times changed from both ends
This problem can occur both when inserting a cross-docked request but also when inserting a normal
request. We will describe an example where the feasible check for inserting a normal request fails. It
fails since we are not able to propagate the change in slack time from the considered route R1 to route
R2 and back to R1, which is needed for checking feasibility on connected routes.
Before inserting we have two routes with feasible slack times as shown in ﬁgure 3.9. To emphasize
the problematic area of the solution we have only drawn the dummy visits. On route R1 we see the
dummy delivery of the pickup order from a cross-dock request, coloured green and a dummy pickup of
a delivery order from another cross-dock request, coloured blue. On route R2 we have the partner parts
of both cross-dock requests. The red arrows illustrate the slack time dependency between the routes.
Depot
DD
Depot
Depot
Depot
…..
…..
…..
DP
…..
DD
…..
R1:
R2:
DP
100,750
350,1000
100
50
50
150
150,800
300,950
Figure 3.9: Two feasible routes before insertion
On route R1 the two dummy visits are not tightly connected time wise, illustrated by the dots between
the arrows. Hence, when checking for insertion of a request into route R1, we ﬁnd that it is feasible to
add the request as a normal request, see ﬁgure 3.10.
==PAGE:40==
30
3. Implementation
Depot
DD
Depot
DP
…..
…..
…..
R1:
P
D
LST
EST
150
150,200
250,350
350,450
500,600
100
100
150
Figure 3.10: Route 1, when checking that insertion of pink pickup and delivery is feasible
By inserting the pink pickup into R1 just before the green dummy delivery, we push the earliest start
time of the green dummy delivery forward, but this does not affect the earliest start of the blue dummy
pickup on the route.
We inserted the pink delivery just after the blue dummy delivery, at the same time as we inserted the
pickup. The latest start of the delivery, d(i), is in this case equal to TWEd(i) = 600. When inserting
the pink delivery it pushes the latest start time for the blue dummy pickup back in time from 1000 to
600 −150 = 450.
On route R2, we have that the visit between the green dummy pickup and the blue dummy delivery are
tightly connected, indicated by a single arrow between the visits and no dots. After inserting the request
we update all routes, including route R2, see ﬁgure 3.11.
 
 
Depot
Depot
DP
…..
DD
…..
R2:
EST > LST
EST
LST
Depot
DD
Depot
DP
…..
…..
…..
P
D
LST
EST
150
150,200
250,350
350,450
500,600
100
100
150
R1:
50
50
150
300,- 
450,400
Figure 3.11: Infeasible solution after inserting the pink request and updating route 2.
The earliest start time from the green dummy delivery propagates to the green dummy pickup on R2 and
further to the blue dummy delivery on R2. Likewise, has the latest start from the blue dummy pickup
propagated to the blue dummy delivery on route R2. We now ﬁnd that the earliest start time is bigger
than the latest start time for the blue dummy delivery. This situation occurred due to a large discrepancy
in time-ﬂexibility between route 1 and 2.
Example 2 - Cycle in the graph
This problem can occur when inserting a cross-docked request. It is caused by having very ﬂexible slack
time on multiple routes, partly due to the wide time windows of the pickup visits.
In section 2.3 where the problem description was given, we presented ordering constraints between the
pickup and delivery on one route and between the two dummy visits of a cross-docked request located
on two different routes. The order on one route is ensured by the method for ﬁnding an insertion. On the
other hand, we are not checking the order between visits on the involved routes when ﬁnding an insertion
for a cross-dock request.
In section 2.1 we introduced a graph representing the problem. Every arc in the graph has a positive
non-zero value assigned to it, since every visit has a service time. The only exceptions are the arcs going
from the depot to a pickup visit on the cross-dock, since the service time of the depot is 0 and the driving
==PAGE:41==
3.3. Feasibility of Inserting Orders
31
time is 0 as well. To begin with, we have a feasible solution with feasible slack times on two involved
routes (see ﬁgure 3.12).
Depot
Depot
Depot
Depot
…..
…..
DP
DD
…..
D
P
…..
400
550,1330
300
1480,1600
50
300
…..
300,1050
200
500,1250
R1:
R2:
Figure 3.12: Two feasible routes before insertion.
When searching for insertions for a cross-dock request, coloured pink in this example, we found that
insertion of the pickup order is feasible in route route R1 (see ﬁgure 3.13).
Depot
DD
Depot
…..
…..
DP
P
D
400
550,1100
100
650,1200
800,1350
250
1480,1600
R1:
150
Figure 3.13: Slack time values when checking that insertion of the pink pickup order is feasible.
Likewise, we ﬁnd that the insertion of the delivery order by itself is feasible in route R2 (see ﬁgure 3.14).
Depot
DP
Depot
DD
…..
P
D
…..
300
100
300,750
400,850
200
600,1050
550
1480,1600
R2:
Figure 3.14: Slack time values when checking that insertion of the pink delivery order is feasible.
Together, the two routes also look like a potential insertion. Indeed, when we check that
ESTDD + stDD ≤LSTDP
we get 800 + 50 ≤850. Assume, that this is the selected insertion of the pink request. Then we insert
the request in the two routes and start updating the slack times for the whole solution. First, we update
R1 and get the slack times stated in 3.13. Then we update R2 and obtain the slack times illustrated in
ﬁgure 3.15.
==PAGE:42==
32
3. Implementation
 
 
Depot
DD
Depot
Depot
DP
Depot
…..
…..
DP
DD
P
D
EST
LST
LST
…..
P
D
…..
400
550,1100
100
650,1200
800,1350
250
1480,1600
300
100
300,750
850,850
200
50
50
1050,1050
550
1600,1600
R1:
R2:
150
Figure 3.15: The two routes after each being updated once.
So far the insertion seems feasible, but we are not done updating. When we updated R2, we marked that
R1 needs to be updated again since when updating the earliest start time of the green dummy delivery
because 1050 + 50 > 550. Then when we update R1 we ﬁnd that the solution is infeasible, since
EST = 1350 ≰800 = LST (see ﬁgure 3.16).
 
 
Depot
DD
Depot
Depot
DP
Depot
…..
…..
DP
DD
P
D
LST
LST
…..
P
D
EST > LST
…..
400
1100,1100
100
1200,1200
1350,800
250
1600,1600
300
100
300,750
850,850
200
50
50
1050,1050
550
1600,1600
R1:
R2:
150
Figure 3.16: The two routes after route 1 was update for the second time.
Because of the created positive length cycle in the graph, we get an absurd solution. The orange arrows
in ﬁgure 3.16 indicate the positive length cycle in the graph.
Fall back solution
As explained in the 3.3.5 it is possible to implement premature detection to avoid infeasible insertions like
the two examples explained above. But, as we also mentioned, this a costly procedure. Hence, whether a
premature detection would make sense to implement or not depends on the size of the instances that we
want to solve and on how often we experience the infeasibility cases. If the solution is small, meaning
few routes and requests, and we often experience the infeasible insertions then it might make sense
to implement the premature detection scheme. Though, when the instances get bigger the premature
detection scheme becomes very slow, making it undesirable to use since we will in any case detect the
infeasibility when we actually insert the request. Hence, in these cases where we solve the problem
for bigger instances or the infeasibility only happens occasionally it makes more sense to implement
correction actions.
By analysing the output of the heuristic, set up such that we can remove up to 34 requests in each
iteration and running on the industrial instances, we have found that undetected infeasibility (meaning,
not detected before insertion) occurs in less than 0.25 −0.6% of the iterations. It can happen more than
once in an iteration. If we purely analyse the industrial instances the number of errors seem to increase
when the size of the instance decrease. The count can be found in table 3.2. The column n denotes
==PAGE:43==
3.3. Feasibility of Inserting Orders
33
the number of requests in the instance. The column CD errors shows the number of failing attempts of
inserting a cross-dock request (as in the two examples above). The column N errors shows the number
are failing attempts of inserting a normal request (as in the ﬁrst example above, but not the second).
Table 3.2: The total number of iteration for 10 run of each instances for 360 minutes, and the number of
failing attempts where a fall back solution was called.
Instance
n
Total iterations
CD errors
N errors
1
729
1 116 403
3 795
18
2
743
1 311 803
5 049
98
3
912
1 129 883
3 826
13
4
832
1 546 184
3 840
6
5
387
3 448 050
20 811
447
Depending on how we tried to insert the request, we have two different fall back solutions if we get
infeasible time values. If we tried to insert the request via a cross-dock, the fall back solution is to use
the best insertion of the request as a normal request. For an insertion of a normal request, we do not know
whether it was the best insertion that was chosen, therefore we can not use the same approach as before
as it could be the best insertion that failed. Hence, we choose to add it to the unplaced list. Hereby we
risk, especially in the second stage of the ALNS, of making the solution unattractive. When analysing
table 3.2, we ﬁnd that we only experience very few fails when inserting a normal request, making this
approach reasonable in our case.
==PAGE:44==
34
3. Implementation
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Computational Results
The heuristic was implemented in Java and the tests were carried out on the HPC of DTU. The exact
machine for every run is unknown, but the available machines of the HPC consist of three different
types. An Intel Xeon X5550 with 8 cores and 2.66GHz, an Intel Xeon E5-2680v2 with 20 cores and
2.80GHz and an Intel Xeon E5-2660v3 with 20 cores and 2.60GHz.
4.1
Tuning
The various heuristics described in the previous chapter have parameters that control their behavior. In
order to ﬁnd a conﬁguration of parameters that leads to good performance when applied to our problem,
we use a parameter tuning program.
4.1.1
The irace Package
Most algorithms have parameters that need tuning in order to reach the best performing version of the
algorithm. In the past, most of the tuning of algorithms was done manually and included some level of
subjectiveness when choosing parameters. By using procedures stemming from the theory of machine
learning, fast and objective tools have been created for parameter tuning. In thesis we will use irace for
the parameter tuning of our heuristics. The irace package is a software package for automatic algorithm
conﬁguration. The software package is coded in
and implements a number of automatic conﬁguration
procedures that we will not elaborate upon here. We will on the other hand give a general explanation of
how to use irace.
Setup
When setting up irace we create a folder where we put three essential ﬁles for running the irace package,
a target-runner, a scenario ﬁle, and a parameter ﬁle. The parameter ﬁle contains a list of parameters
and their conﬁgurations. Any restrictions to when the parameter is utilized is also described in this
ﬁle. An extra ﬁle named forbidden can be included if there exist forbidden combinations of parameter
conﬁgurations. If the forbidden ﬁle is employed, then this should be denoted in the scenario ﬁle.
The scenario ﬁle contains the scenario for the irace test. It holds information such as where to ﬁnd the
parameter conﬁgurations, the forbidden conﬁgurations, the directory in where the program should be
executed and where to ﬁnd the instances that we want to use for tuning. Here we also determine the
budget for the tuning by stating how many experiments we at most want to run or what the maximal
running time is. The scenario ﬁle also carries information about what the decimal precision of the to be
tuned real parameters is and a debug level. Moreover, various irace options can be speciﬁed by the user
in the ﬁle. We have speciﬁed the options mentioned here and the rest of the options are set to default.
35
==PAGE:46==
36
4. Computational Results
The target-runner is the executable ﬁle of irace. It holds information about which ﬁle you want to run
and which software is needed to run it. In our case it is a runnable JAR ﬁle and we want to run it with
Java. The target-runner states how the program should be executed. It does this by stating the order of
the input, as if we would execute our program from the terminal. If we have ﬁxed inputs, such as runtime
and/or iterations, that we want the program to run, we also state them here.
Procedure
The irace package is an implementation of iterated racing, a concept coming from machine learning.
Racing should be taking here in the literal meaning of racing a ﬁnite number of competitors against each
other to ﬁnd the best candidate.
The iterated race consist of three steps:
1. sampling of new conﬁgurations with respect to a certain distribution
2. racing the sampled conﬁgurations and selecting the best candidates
3. updating the sampling distribution to bias the best conﬁgurations found in step 2.
The three steps are repeated until the procedure reaches selected stopping criterion.
The distribution used for sampling is a truncated normal distribution for numerical parameters, and a
discrete distribution for categorical parameters. In step 3 the procedure increases the probability of
sampling the parameter values found in the best conﬁgurations so far. In a normal distribution this is
done by modifying the mean and the standard deviation.
In our case, determining the best candidate conﬁgurations is done by outputting the best found objective
value for the particular run of the heuristic to the output stream, from where irace detects it by ﬁnding a
pre-speciﬁed keyword.
Output
In each iteration of the irace test, a table like the one in 4.1 is printed to the output ﬁle. The table denotes
which instance was run and how many conﬁguration are still in the race. The column Best denotes the
ID of the best conﬁguration seen so far in the iteration. The next column Mean best is the mean value
on all instances of the best conﬁguration. The next column is the number of runs of the algorithm in this
iteration. The W time column is the wall-clock time spent on the instance.
The last three columns can be used to analyse how consistent the performance is across the instances so
far in the iteration. The ﬁrst of the three, ρ is Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient. The second, KenW,
is Kendall’s concordance coefﬁcient W, and Qvar is a variance measure described Schneider and Hoos
[2012]. Values for ρ and KenW close to 1 and values for Qvar is close to 0, indicates that the scenario is
highly homogeneous.
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
| |
Instance|
Alive|
Best|
Mean best| Exp so far|
W time|
rho|KenW|
Qvar|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
|x|
1|
527|
117|1.400012955e+10|
527|01:32:23|
NA|
NA|
NA|
|x|
2|
527|
74|1.400014692e+10|
1054|01:32:23|+0.09|0.55|1.0230|
|x|
3|
527|
74|1.466681066e+10|
1581|01:32:24|+0.12|0.41|0.9580|
|x|
4|
527|
150|1.575014865e+10|
2108|01:32:23|+0.10|0.32|0.9610|
|-|
5|
217|
422|1.500014339e+10|
2635|01:32:21|-0.12|0.11|1.0679|
|=|
6|
217|
422|1.533347785e+10|
2852|00:37:48|-0.08|0.10|1.0494|
|=|
7|
217|
137|1.542871430e+10|
3069|00:37:51|-0.05|0.10|1.0383|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
Figure 4.1: Output of an iteration in irace
==PAGE:47==
4.1. Tuning
37
After each iteration irace outputs the best conﬁguration found and a list of elite conﬁgurations. The elite
list, which has a limited length, either by default or speciﬁed in the options, consists of conﬁgurations
that did not show statistically signiﬁcant difference during the iteration. The list of elite conﬁguration is
ordered with respect to their mean performance in the iteration. An illustration of the complete output is
available in Appendix.
4.1.2
Tuning instances
The real life instances are too big to use for tuning, since the smallest real life instance does not converge
within reasonable time, see ﬁgure 4.2. Hence, we tune on small problem instances.
Figure 4.2: Development of the solution value for 5 runs on real life instance 5.
The small test instances are created from within each of the big ﬁve real life instances. By using random
sampling of all the request in one real life instances new smaller instances are created. We did three ran-
dom samplings of each instance: one that created instances of 50 requests, the second created instances
of 100 requests and the third created instances of 200 requests.
As ALNS has a lot of parameters, the process of tuning the heuristic is a very time consuming affair.
To determine the size of the tuning instances, we analyse the convergence of the heuristic. Figure 4.3
illustrates the development of the solution value in a graph of ﬁve different instances during the second
stage of the ALNS, after we have determined the number of routes. The same conﬁguration is used in all
ﬁve runs of the heuristic.
By analysing the graph in ﬁgure 4.3, we see that with the three instances of 50 requests, only very few
improvements are found after 60 seconds. The bigger instances of 100 requests converge slower, but are
still ﬁnding a few better solutions after 1000 seconds. On the other hand, the biggest improvement is
already found after 90 seconds.
The development of the solution value (meaning the value of the evaluation function E with no unplaced
requests) for ﬁve instances of size 200 is shown ﬁgure 4.4. The largest improvements are found after 10
minutes. For four out of ﬁve instances stable behaviour is seen after 20 minutes. Though, for instance5_1
we see a big change in solution value around 38 minutes. Since we consider 20 minutes too long a
runtime for a single run, instances of size 200 are deselected for the tuning of the heuristic.
==PAGE:48==
38
4. Computational Results
It should be emphasized, that ﬁgure 4.3 and 4.4 only show the solution value of the second stage where
we search for improvements of the operations cost. The ﬁrst stage has maximum runtime equal to the
runtime of the second stage. Hence, in order to keep the total runtime down we chose to use the instances
of size 100, making sure that the total runtime is kept under 4 minutes for each run of a conﬁguration.
Figure 4.3: Development of solution value over time for instances with 50 and 100 requests.
Figure 4.4: Development of solution value over time for instances with 200 requests.
In order to not bias the tuning towards a speciﬁc big instance, the tuning test was conducted using 7
tuning instances from multiple of the ﬁve big instances.
If more time had been available, it would have been interesting to make a more sophisticated method for
sampling, in order to capture more of the potential different characteristics of the ﬁve big instances.
==PAGE:49==
4.1. Tuning
39
4.1.3
Parameters
An overview of the parameters that can be tuned in the implemented heuristic is given in table 4.1. Before
starting the tuning process, we conducted pre-test runs in order to ensure that reasonable intervals and
categories were chosen for each parameter.
Table 4.1: Parameters in heuristic
Parameter
Description
η
The maximum number of request that can be removed in a destroy
ρdestroy
Randomness parameter used in the related removal heuristic
ρrepair
Randomness parameter used in the best list repair
σ1
Point given in the ALNS for a new overall best solution
σ2
Point given in the ALNS for a new current best solution
σ3
Point given in the ALNS for a new accepted current solution
µ
ReactionFactor, determines weight on the historical vs last performance
λ
Used for initialising the start temperature of ALNS, λ = h −1
ϕ
Weight of distance in relatedness measure
χ
Weight of time in relatedness measure
φ
Weight of capacity in relatedness measure
4.1.4
Small tuning test using irace
To illustrate how irace works we provide a small example of a limited parameter tuning of the heuristic.
In this example we have only allowed irace to vary the conﬁguration/setting of two parameters, η and λ,
which through theoretical considerations and the pre-test runs have shown to be inﬂuential. Recall that
η is the maximum number of requests that the destroy heuristics can remove from a solution and λ is the
parameter that is used for setting the start temperature of the SA. The remaining parameters were ﬁxed
to value based on the better conﬁgurations found in the pre-tests.
Table 4.2: Parameter settings of small tuning test
Parameter
Values
η
{15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40}
ρdestroy
{4}
ρrepair
{3}
σ1
{38}
σ2
{26}
σ3
{15}
µ
{0.1}
λ
{0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2}
ϕ
{9}
χ
{4}
φ
{9}
In the scenario ﬁle we have provided the irace procedure with 9500 experiments. The parameter setting
for the small tuning test is shown in table 4.2. From these settings, 24 different conﬁgurations arise.
The output of the irace test can be found in the Appendix. In the ﬁrst iteration, 527 conﬁgurations are
created and the ﬁrst round was given a budget of 3166 experiments. After four runs of each conﬁguration,
irace was able to eliminate 310 conﬁguration (see ﬁgure 4.1).
==PAGE:50==
40
4. Computational Results
After 6 iterations, where the last iteration included four conﬁguratiosn, irace terminates and outputs the
three best conﬁguration found. The best combinations of (η, λ) are
(25, 0.05), (40, 0.05) and (35, 0.1)
.
We can therefore eliminated all values of η below 20, and we can exclude values of λ lower than 0.01
and higher than 0.2. η, is the maximum number of requests we remove from a solution. It determines
how many requests we will try to move around in an iteration of the algorithm and thereby determines
the size of the neighbourhood of a current solution. Hence, low values of η limits the heuristics ability to
move around in the solution space. It therefore makes sense that irace found that we can eliminate low
values of η in order to diversify the search. λ is related to the acceptance criteria and the guidance of the
search between intensiﬁcation and diversiﬁcation. Low values of the parameter will cause us to reject
many solution and thereby limit the diversiﬁcation of our search in the solution space. High values will
diversify the search a lot in the beginning by allowing us to accept solution with worse cost. But it will
perhaps restrict us from intensifying the search at the right moment.
4.1.5
Results of Tuning
The parameter setting for the ﬁnal tuning is shown in table 4.3. The number of experiments was set to
11 000 and run on a 20 core machine.
Table 4.3: Parameter settings of the ﬁnal tuning
Parameter
Values
η
i∈(24, 40)
ρdestroy
i∈(1, 7)
ρrepair
i∈(1, 7)
σ1
i∈(5, 50)
σ2
i∈(5, 50)
σ3
i∈(5, 15)
µ
r∈(0.01, 0.2)
λ
r∈(0.01, 0.2)
ϕ
i∈(1, 10)
χ
i∈(1, 10)
φ
i∈(1, 10)
The output of the ﬁnal tuning can be found in Appendix B. When analysing the output of irace we
found that the results were inconclusive since irace was not able to eliminate many conﬁgurations in
each iteration. We see two possible explanation for this. The ﬁrst comes from the fact that our heuristics
contain many random choices and it is therefore possible that the program run with the same speciﬁc
parameter conﬁguration produces too large a variation of results. This would make it difﬁcult for irace
to detect the good conﬁgurations. Such variation in the objective values was also observed in previous
research using ALNS (see Petersen and Ropke [2011]). A second explanation could be that the choice of
parameters only plays a small role in the overall performance of the heuristic. Meaning that a very wide
range of conﬁgurations leads to similar results. In this case we can of course also not expect that irace is
able to delete many conﬁgurations.
==PAGE:51==
4.2. Results
41
# Best configurations (first number is the configuration ID)
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 reactionFactor worseAccept phi zeta gamma
1037
36
4
3
38
26
15
0.04
0.05
10
4
10
1078
33
7
1
20
23
10
0.20
0.05
4
6
7
1117
34
7
1
9
23
9
0.14
0.05
5
3
4
1033
34
5
2
49
28
15
0.04
0.05
9
5
9
1265
37
4
3
35
30
15
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
Figure 4.5: The best conﬁguration found in the ﬁnal tuning.
In the following section we choose a parameter setting (see table 4.4) based on the best conﬁguration
found in the ﬁnal tuning (see ﬁgure 4.5). The parameter µ (reactionsFactor) varied a lot in the ﬁnal output
and was therefore chosen using results from the literature, see [Ropke and Pisinger, 2006].
Table 4.4: Parameter settings used in following sections
Parameter
Values
η
{34}
ρdestroy
{4}
ρrepair
{3}
σ1
{38}
σ2
{26}
σ3
{15}
µ
{0.1}
λ
{0.05}
ϕ
{9}
χ
{4}
φ
{9}
4.2
Results
In this section we present and analyse the results found using the implemented algorithm to solve the
ﬁve real life instances. Results are reported for solving the instances as PDPCD and with the cross-dock
option disabled.
4.2.1
Real life instances solved as PDPCD
In table 4.5 we present the performance of the heuristic on the ﬁve real life instances presented in section
2.6. The maximum running time of each stage of ALNS was set to 180 minutes, the maximum total
runtime is therefore 360 minutes. The 180 minutes was chosen since [Petersen and Ropke, 2011] have a
run time of 90 minutes per instance but with a parallel ALNS running on 8 cores. If we were to match
the search time of the parallel run we would have to run 12 hours for the second stage alone, implying
24 hours for one full run of the heuristic. In a real life situation this does not seem reasonable. Hence, in
order to have a realistic time setting were we are able to run the heuristic between two work days (and
preferably twice to avoid errors and deal with variation) we have set the run time for the whole heuristic
to 6 hours.
==PAGE:52==
42
4. Computational Results
Table 4.5: Results obtained on real-life instances with PDPCD (averages over 10 runs of 360 minutes)
Instance
n
avg. sol
best sol.
avg. gap.
avg. iter.
avg. veh.
std.veh.
avg. cd%
1
729
817 374.4
801 584
1.97%
111 640
75.0
0
5.37%
2
743
870 638.4
861 456
1.07%
131 180
75.5
0.92
5.08%
3
912
1 058 702.4
1 040 000
1.80%
112 988
91.0
1.34
4.35%
4
832
1 040 292.8
1 026 704
1.32%
154 618
106.8
0.98
5.03%
5
387
569 046.4
551 264
3.23%
344 805
42.6
0.66
5.93%
Table 4.5 shows the number of requests in each instance. Then it reports the average solution value over
10 runs on an instance, the best solution seen and the gap between the best and the average solution.
The average number of iterations is the total amount of iteration made in step 3-10 and step 11-14 of
algorithm 1. The average solution, best solution and average gap are based only on the operation cost
and do not include the cost of vehicles. Therefore, the table also states the mean value and the standard
deviation of the number of vehicles.
For instance 5, we found that the solution with the most vehicles also was the one with the smallest
operation cost. Analysing all 10 runs for all ﬁve instances, we ﬁnd no obvious link between the number
of vehicles and the operation cost.
Comparing to [Petersen and Ropke, 2011] we are running almost ﬁve times as many iterations in half
the time. Our limitation of check of cross-dock insertions and the implementation of a delta cost has
therefore succeeded in speeding up each iteration of ALNS. It would be interesting to study whether our
heuristic is able to achieve the same results as in this paper or better, if adapted to their problem approach.
In order to evaluate the robustness of the algorithm we compare the results with results obtained by
[Petersen and Ropke, 2011]. They reported a short statistical analysis on the instance where they found
the second greatest gap between the best and average solution and found a mean value of 560 314 and a
standard deviation of 11 101. For the instances with the greatest gap we found a mean value of 569 046
and a standard deviation of 9 797. Hence, the performance of the algorithm seems slightly more robust
based on this small comparison.
Cross-dock results
In table 4.5 one can also see the cross-docked percentage, which is the percentage of requests that are
cross-docked. The number is not very high compared to what was achieved by [Petersen and Ropke,
2011], who were working with similar data sets. A reason for this could be that we have not limited
the duration of the routes. Therefore we do not necessarily cross-dock request that are transported far
across the country, which is the case in [Petersen and Ropke, 2011]. They consider a problem with a
single cross-dock facility which might make it easy to achieve economy of scale, due to the limitation of
consolidation point. Another reason could be that the repair methods are not very well suited for ﬁnding
good cross-dock options, due to the fact that we often need more than one request to be cross-docked
before it is beneﬁcial to do so. The implemented repair methods only consider inserting one request
at a time and are therefore not able to foresee the beneﬁts of cross-docking multiple requests. Possible
improvements might be to force the heuristic to insert a cross-dock a certain percentage of the time, or
to allow multiple insertions at a time in order to improve prediction capabilities.
When analysing the output of the heuristic from a single run of instance 5 (see ﬁgure 4.6) and compare it
with the cross-dock percentage of the same run (see ﬁgure 4.7), we in the beginning see a big drop in both
cost and CD percentage. This is explained by the fact that our heuristic starts by working on the solution
received by stage one where only vehicle minimisation (and not cost) is taking into account. The heuristic
therefore ﬁnds it easy to lower the cost in the beginning and does this by randomly destroying parts of
==PAGE:53==
4.2. Results
43
the solution and rebuilding them with cost minimisation in mind. Since one starts with a quite high cross
dock percentage, lots of cross-docks will be selected for deletion. However, our repair method seems to
heavily favour inserting normal requests instead of cross-docks which explains the drop in cross-dock
percentage. This again suggest that the repair method, as we have set it up now, might not be the best
tool for incorporation a good cross-dock structure into the solution. Finally, a notable drop in cost is seen
around a runtime of 140 minutes. At the same time a ﬂuctuation in cross-dock percentage is observed,
indicating that at this point in time ALNS ﬁnds a differently structured solution.
Figure 4.6: Development of the solution value on a single run of instance 5
==PAGE:54==
44
4. Computational Results
Figure 4.7: Development of the CD percentage over time
4.2.2
Real life instances solved as PDP
In this section, we present results obtained on the ﬁve real life instances by running the implemented
heuristic with the cross-dock option disabled. Note, that the heuristic is not implemented as optimal as
possible for a PDP since we do not use caching in the regret heuristic. In order to compare the results
with the results obtained for the PDPCD in table 4.5, we use the same running time. When the cross-dock
option is disabled, the heuristic is able to run more than double as many iterations. This is due to the fact
that the amount of insertion possibilities has been reduced and fewer insertion checks are performed in
each iteration. The results of the PDP version is shown in table 4.6.
Table 4.6: Results obtained on real-life instances with PDP (averages over 10 runs of 360 minutes)
Instance
n
avg. sol
best sol.
avg. gap.
avg. iter.
avg veh.
std.veh
1
729
842 371
834 432
0.95%
381 173
74.9
0.54
2
743
901 800
890 800
1.23%
349 900
75.8
1.08
3
912
1 092 045
1 082 272
0.90%
295 669
91.1
1.22
4
832
1 066 510
1 061 472
0.47%
418 897
108.3
1.00
5
387
550 341
544 960
0.99%
898 493
48.4
0.50
We conclude that PDPCD obtains a lower average number of vehicles for four out of the ﬁve instances.
Moreover, PDPCD also obtains a lower best found solution and a lower average solution cost. Ignoring
speed for a moment, one can argue that the fact that PDPCD is able to obtain these results in less than
half the number of iterations as PDP, provides experimental evidence that cross-docking is indeed a good
approach for ﬁndings low cost solutions. However, it is clear that more research needs to be done to
enable us to implement these cross-docks more efﬁciently.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
In this thesis we deﬁned and classiﬁed a pickup and delivery problem with optional cross-docking con-
sidering multiple cross-dock facilities. The problem was based on data provided by AMCS. We discussed
an adaptive large neighbourhood search heuristic that can solve the problem and implemented it in Java.
The heuristic includes a delta cost function that is used to efﬁciently evaluate new solutions. Moreover,
the notion of slack values was successfully used and implemented in the heuristic. We also analysed
and documented some interesting cases where the use of slack values fails due to the introduction of
cross-docking. Finally, we discussed a parameter tuning program called irace and went over its usage
and how its output can be analysed in our context.
After parameter tuning with irace on a small scale sample data set and testing our implementation on ﬁve
real-life size instances with 500-1000 requests, provided by AMCS, we make the following conclusions.
• Irace was not able to eliminate a large amount of parameter conﬁgurations. Further investigation
is required to understand exactly why this happened. Two possible explanation could be that since
our heuristic contains many random choices, the program run with the same speciﬁc parameter
conﬁguration produces too large a variation of results. A second explanation could be that the
choice of parameters only plays a small role in the overall performance of the heuristic. Meaning
that a very wide range of conﬁgurations leads to similar results.
• From the test cases we conclude that our heuristic produces, in the same time frame, better re-
sults when cross-docking is allowed than when cross-docking is not allowed. The heuristic with
cross-docking enabled moreover achieves this in less then half as many iterations as when cross-
docking is disabled. Furthermore, our test results reveal similar robustness properties as previous
implemented methods for similar problems. We conclude that the cross-docking approach shows
potential for providing better solutions to the pickup and delivery problem but further improve-
ments need to be made to allow faster and more efﬁcient insertion of cross-dock request into the
solution.
• Our test results also revealed that the implemented heuristic produces solutions that tend to a
cross-dock request percentage of around 5%, which is not very high. As we explained before, this
is due to the fact that the heuristic destroys parts of the solution in a random way while the repair
method seems to heavily favor inserting normal requests instead of cross-docks. Cross-docking
often seems beneﬁcial only when several cross-docks are inserted. Since our repair method only
inserts one request at a time, it is therefore often not able to foresee the potential beneﬁt of a
cross-docked request. Possible improvements might be to force the heuristic to insert a cross-dock
a certain percentage of the time, or to allow multiple insertions at a time in order to improve the
heuristics understanding of the beneﬁts of cross-docks.
45
==PAGE:56==
46
5. Conclusion
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
Claudia Archetti, Ann Melissa Campbell, and M. Grazia Speranza.
Multicommodity vs. single-
commodity routing. Transportation Science, 50(2):461–472, 2016. ISSN 15265447, 00411655. doi:
10.1287/trsc.2014.0528.
Russell Bent and Pascal Van Hentenryck. A two-stage hybrid local search for the vehicle routing problem
with time windows. Transportation Science, 38(4):515–530, 2004.
Panagiotis Bouros, Dimitris Sacharidis, Theodore Dalamagas, and Timos Sellis. Dynamic pickup and
delivery with transfers. In Pfoser D. et al. (eds) Advances in Spatial and Temporal Databases. SSTD
2011. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 6849., pages 112–129. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2011.
danishtrolley.com. http://www.danishtrolley.com/cc-containers-trolleys.html.
Accessed: 10-05-2017.
Gianfranco Guastaroba, Maria Grazia Speranza, and Daniele Vigo. Intermediate facilities in freight
transportation planning: a survey. Transportation Science, 50(3):763–789, 2016.
Rune Larsen. Ddarp. GitHub repository, 2017. https://github.com/enuren/DDARP.
Young Hae Lee, Jung Woo Jung, and Kyong Min Lee. Vehicle routing scheduling for cross-docking in
the supply chain. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 51(2):247–256, 2006.
Jiyin Liu, Chung-Lun Li, and Chun-Yan Chan. Mixed truck delivery systems with both hub-and-spoke
and direct shipment. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 39(4):
325–339, 2003.
Snežana Mitrovi´c-Mini´c and Gilbert Laporte. The pickup and delivery problem with time windows and
transshipment. INFOR: Information Systems and Operational Research, 44(3):217–227, 2006.
OSRM.
Project osrm, modern c++ routing engine for shortest paths in road networks.
http:
//project-osrm.org/. Accessed: 10-05-2017.
Hanne L Petersen and Stefan Ropke. The pickup and delivery problem with cross-docking opportunity.
pages 101–113, 2011.
David Pisinger and Stefan Ropke.
A general heuristic for vehicle routing problems.
Computers &
operations research, 34(8):2403–2435, 2007.
Jean-Yves Potvin and Jean-Marc Rousseau. A parallel route building algorithm for the vehicle routing
and scheduling problem with time windows. European Journal of Operational Research, 66(3):331
– 340, 1993. ISSN 0377-2217. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0377-2217(93)90221-8. URL http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0377221793902218.
Panagiotis P Repoussis, Christos D Tarantilis, Emmanouil E Zachariadis, et al. Moving products between
47
==PAGE:58==
48
BIBLIOGRAPHY
location pairs: Cross-docking versus direct-shippingauthor-name: Nikolopoulou, amalia i. European
Journal of Operational Research, 256(3):803–819, 2017.
Stefan Ropke and David Pisinger. An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the pickup and
delivery problem with time windows. Transportation Science, 40(4):455–472, 2006. ISSN 15265447,
00411655. doi: 10.1287/trsc.1050.0135.
Alberto Santini, Stefan Røpke, and Lars Magnus. A comparison of acceptance criteria for the adaptive
large neighbourhood search metaheuristic. Submitted to Journal of Heuristics, under ﬁrst revision,
2017. Under review.
Fernando Afonso Santos, Geraldo Robson Mateus, and Alexandre Salles Da Cunha. The pickup and
delivery problem with cross-docking. Computers & Operations Research, 40(4):1085–1093, 2013.
Martin WP Savelsbergh. The vehicle routing problem with time windows: Minimizing route duration.
ORSA journal on computing, 4(2):146–154, 1992.
Marius Schneider and Holger Hoos. Quantifying homogeneity of instance sets for algorithm conﬁgura-
tion. Learning and Intelligent Optimization, pages 190–204, 2012.
Paul Shaw. A new local search algorithm providing high quality solutions to vehicle routing problems.
APES Group, Dept of Computer Science, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland, UK, 1997.
Paul Shaw. Using constraint programming and local search methods to solve vehicle routing problems.
In International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming, pages 417–431.
Springer, 1998.
==PAGE:59==
Appendix
A - Output from irace from a simple run
*******************************************************************************
* irace: An implementation in R of Iterated Race
* Version: 2.3.1807
* Copyright (C) 2010-2016
* Manuel Lopez-Ibanez
<manuel.lopez-ibanez@manchester.ac.uk>
* Jeremie Dubois-Lacoste
<jeremie.dubois-lacoste@ulb.ac.be>
* Leslie Perez Caceres
<leslie.perez.caceres@ulb.ac.be>
*
* This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it under certain
* conditions.
See the GNU General Public License for details. There is NO
* WARRANTY; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
*
* irace builds upon previous code from the race package:
*
* race: Racing methods for the selection of the best
* Copyright (C) 2003 Mauro Birattari
*******************************************************************************
# installed at: /zhome/75/e/107023/R/x86_64-pc-linux-gnu-library/3.2/irace
# called with: -s scenario.txt -p parameters-alns.txt --parallel 20
# 2 expression(s) specifying forbidden configurations read from ’/zhome/75/e/107023/SpecialeJava/iraceSmall100/forbidden.txt’
# 2017-06-27 10:30:15 CEST: Initialization
# Elitist race
# Elitist new instances: 1
# Elitist limit: 2
# nbIterations: 3
# minNbSurvival: 3
# nbParameters: 2
# seed: 1157868425
# confidence level: 0.95
# budget: 9500
# mu: 5
# deterministic: FALSE
# 2017-06-27 10:30:15 CEST: Iteration 1 of 3
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 0
# remainingBudget: 9500
# currentBudget: 3166
# nbConfigurations: 527
Markers:
x No test is performed.
- The test is performed and some configurations are discarded.
= The test is performed but no configuration is discarded.
! The test is performed and configurations could be discarded but elite configurations are preserved.
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
| |
Instance|
Alive|
Best|
Mean best| Exp so far|
W time|
rho|KenW|
Qvar|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
|x|
1|
527|
117|1.400012955e+10|
527|01:32:23|
NA|
NA|
NA|
|x|
2|
527|
74|1.400014692e+10|
1054|01:32:23|+0.09|0.55|1.0230|
|x|
3|
527|
74|1.466681066e+10|
1581|01:32:24|+0.12|0.41|0.9580|
|x|
4|
527|
150|1.575014865e+10|
2108|01:32:23|+0.10|0.32|0.9610|
|-|
5|
217|
422|1.500014339e+10|
2635|01:32:21|-0.12|0.11|1.0679|
|=|
6|
217|
422|1.533347785e+10|
2852|00:37:48|-0.08|0.10|1.0494|
|=|
7|
217|
137|1.542871430e+10|
3069|00:37:51|-0.05|0.10|1.0383|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
Best configuration:
137
mean value: 1.542871430e+10
Description of the best configuration:
.ID. maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma .PARENT.
137
137
30
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
NA
# 2017-06-27 19:27:53 CEST: Elite configurations (first number is the configuration ID):
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
137
30
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
381
40
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
300
30
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.01
0.05
9
4
9
# 2017-06-27 19:27:53 CEST: Iteration 2 of 3
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 3069
# remainingBudget: 6431
# currentBudget: 3215
# nbConfigurations: 404
Markers:
x No test is performed.
- The test is performed and some configurations are discarded.
49
==PAGE:60==
50
5. Appendix
= The test is performed but no configuration is discarded.
! The test is performed and configurations could be discarded but elite configurations are preserved.
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
| |
Instance|
Alive|
Best|
Mean best| Exp so far|
W time|
rho|KenW|
Qvar|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
|x|
8|
404|
811|1.700014838e+10|
404|01:11:49|
NA|
NA|
NA|
|x|
5|
404|
616|1.450013502e+10|
805|01:11:47|+0.09|0.55|0.8974|
|x|
1|
404|
616|1.433346792e+10|
1206|01:12:02|+0.04|0.36|0.9955|
|x|
3|
404|
838|1.475013584e+10|
1607|01:12:10|+0.04|0.28|0.9939|
|=|
4|
404|
616|1.580013832e+10|
2008|01:11:39|+0.02|0.22|0.9996|
|-|
7|
131|
787|1.566680501e+10|
2409|01:11:41|-0.11|0.07|1.0815|
|=|
6|
131|
784|1.571442787e+10|
2537|00:23:58|-0.09|0.06|1.0584|
|=|
2|
131|
616|1.562514356e+10|
2665|00:24:01|-0.06|0.07|1.0389|
|=|
9|
131|
381|1.566680996e+10|
2796|00:24:31|-0.04|0.07|1.0228|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
Best configuration:
381
mean value: 1.566680996e+10
Description of the best configuration:
.ID. maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma .PARENT.
381
381
40
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
NA
# 2017-06-28 03:51:37 CEST: Elite configurations (first number is the configuration ID):
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
381
40
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
582
30
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.01
0.05
9
4
9
616
40
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.01
0.05
9
4
9
# 2017-06-28 03:51:37 CEST: Iteration 3 of 3
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 5865
# remainingBudget: 3635
# currentBudget: 3635
# nbConfigurations: 366
Markers:
x No test is performed.
- The test is performed and some configurations are discarded.
= The test is performed but no configuration is discarded.
! The test is performed and configurations could be discarded but elite configurations are preserved.
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
| |
Instance|
Alive|
Best|
Mean best| Exp so far|
W time|
rho|KenW|
Qvar|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
|x|
10|
366|
1281|1.900015229e+10|
366|01:05:16|
NA|
NA|
NA|
|x|
4|
366|
1061|1.900015620e+10|
729|01:04:56|+0.01|0.50|0.9611|
|x|
3|
366|
1178|1.800015111e+10|
1092|01:04:55|+0.04|0.36|0.9181|
|x|
2|
366|
1191|1.750014985e+10|
1455|01:04:55|+0.02|0.27|0.9421|
|-|
1|
167|
1239|1.660014810e+10|
1818|01:04:55|-0.12|0.10|1.0034|
|=|
7|
167|
1239|1.633348004e+10|
1982|00:30:46|-0.09|0.09|0.9955|
|=|
9|
167|
1191|1.642871671e+10|
2146|00:30:47|-0.07|0.08|0.9955|
|=|
5|
167|
616|1.575014377e+10|
2310|00:30:45|-0.05|0.08|1.0100|
|=|
8|
167|
616|1.588903319e+10|
2474|00:30:45|-0.03|0.08|1.0031|
|=|
6|
167|
1278|1.600014484e+10|
2638|00:30:48|-0.02|0.08|1.0005|
|=|
11|
167|
1165|1.581832604e+10|
2805|00:30:50|-0.02|0.07|0.9989|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
Best configuration:
1165
mean value: 1.581832604e+10
Description of the best configuration:
.ID. maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma .PARENT.
1165 1165
25
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
381
# 2017-06-28 12:21:21 CEST: Elite configurations (first number is the configuration ID):
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
1165
25
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
1278
35
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.01
0.05
9
4
9
1090
40
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
# 2017-06-28 12:21:21 CEST: Iteration 4 of 4
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 8670
# remainingBudget: 830
# currentBudget: 830
# nbConfigurations: 71
Markers:
x No test is performed.
- The test is performed and some configurations are discarded.
= The test is performed but no configuration is discarded.
! The test is performed and configurations could be discarded but elite configurations are preserved.
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
| |
Instance|
Alive|
Best|
Mean best| Exp so far|
W time|
rho|KenW|
Qvar|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
|x|
12|
71|
1331|1.200012218e+10|
71|00:13:41|
NA|
NA|
NA|
|x|
8|
71|
1302|1.450013592e+10|
139|00:13:40|+0.09|0.54|0.8695|
|x|
2|
71|
1313|1.433347879e+10|
207|00:13:41|+0.11|0.41|0.8599|
|x|
10|
71|
1313|1.575014641e+10|
275|00:13:40|+0.07|0.30|0.9267|
|-|
5|
42|
1313|1.500014208e+10|
343|00:13:40|-0.12|0.10|1.0677|
|=|
4|
42|
1278|1.566681175e+10|
382|00:06:52|-0.08|0.10|1.0293|
|=|
11|
42|
1165|1.542871522e+10|
421|00:06:53|-0.05|0.10|1.0219|
|=|
6|
42|
1165|1.562514448e+10|
460|00:06:52|-0.04|0.09|1.0087|
|=|
9|
42|
1165|1.566681056e+10|
499|00:06:52|-0.03|0.09|1.0001|
|=|
7|
42|
1165|1.560014359e+10|
538|00:06:52|-0.02|0.09|0.9950|
|=|
1|
42|
1165|1.545468827e+10|
577|00:06:52|-0.00|0.09|0.9894|
|=|
3|
42|
1165|1.550014257e+10|
616|00:06:53|+0.01|0.09|0.9800|
|=|
13|
42|
1278|1.553860292e+10|
658|00:10:14|+0.01|0.08|0.9733|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
Best configuration:
1278
mean value: 1.553860292e+10
Description of the best configuration:
.ID. maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma .PARENT.
1278 1278
35
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.01
0.05
9
4
9
616
# 2017-06-28 14:28:10 CEST: Elite configurations (first number is the configuration ID):
==PAGE:61==
51
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
1278
35
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.01
0.05
9
4
9
1090
40
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
1165
25
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
# 2017-06-28 14:28:10 CEST: Iteration 5 of 5
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 9328
# remainingBudget: 172
# currentBudget: 172
# nbConfigurations: 15
Markers:
x No test is performed.
- The test is performed and some configurations are discarded.
= The test is performed but no configuration is discarded.
! The test is performed and configurations could be discarded but elite configurations are preserved.
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
| |
Instance|
Alive|
Best|
Mean best| Exp so far|
W time|
rho|KenW|
Qvar|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
|x|
14|
15|
1090|1.400016325e+10|
15|00:03:25|
NA|
NA|
NA|
|x|
4|
15|
1090|1.700015550e+10|
27|00:03:24|+0.23|0.61|1.1014|
|x|
9|
15|
1090|1.666681683e+10|
39|00:03:24|+0.12|0.41|1.0885|
|x|
12|
15|
1090|1.550014372e+10|
51|00:03:24|+0.12|0.34|0.9825|
|=|
7|
15|
1090|1.540014238e+10|
63|00:03:25|+0.07|0.26|0.9144|
|=|
1|
15|
1090|1.516680723e+10|
75|00:03:24|+0.14|0.28|0.8280|
|=|
3|
15|
1090|1.528585488e+10|
87|00:03:24|+0.08|0.21|0.7695|
|-|
6|
10|
1090|1.550014165e+10|
99|00:03:24|-0.05|0.08|0.9637|
|=|
2|
10|
1090|1.533347811e+10|
106|00:03:24|-0.06|0.06|0.9681|
|=|
13|
10|
1090|1.530014419e+10|
113|00:03:24|-0.05|0.06|0.9409|
|=|
5|
10|
1090|1.500014228e+10|
120|00:03:24|-0.03|0.06|0.9253|
|=|
10|
10|
1090|1.541680969e+10|
127|00:03:24|-0.06|0.03|0.9199|
|=|
8|
10|
1090|1.553860515e+10|
134|00:03:24|-0.04|0.04|0.9240|
|=|
11|
10|
1090|1.542871429e+10|
141|00:03:24|-0.02|0.05|0.9135|
|=|
15|
10|
1090|1.533347786e+10|
151|00:03:24|-0.01|0.06|0.9135|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
Best configuration:
1090
mean value: 1.533347786e+10
Description of the best configuration:
.ID. maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma .PARENT.
1090 1090
40
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
381
# 2017-06-28 15:19:17 CEST: Elite configurations (first number is the configuration ID):
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
1090
40
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
1165
25
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
1367
35
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.1
0.05
9
4
9
# 2017-06-28 15:19:17 CEST: Iteration 6 of 6
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 9479
# remainingBudget: 21
# currentBudget: 21
# nbConfigurations: 4
Markers:
x No test is performed.
- The test is performed and some configurations are discarded.
= The test is performed but no configuration is discarded.
! The test is performed and configurations could be discarded but elite configurations are preserved.
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
| |
Instance|
Alive|
Best|
Mean best| Exp so far|
W time|
rho|KenW|
Qvar|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
|x|
16|
4|
1165|1.500014232e+10|
4|00:03:23|
NA|
NA|
NA|
|x|
13|
4|
1090|1.550013761e+10|
5|00:03:23|-1.00|0.00|1.4579|
|x|
14|
4|
1090|1.500014615e+10|
6|00:03:23|-0.33|0.11|1.0335|
|x|
2|
4|
1090|1.475015205e+10|
7|00:03:23|-0.07|0.20|0.8477|
|=|
3|
4|
1165|1.480015081e+10|
8|00:03:23|-0.12|0.10|0.8404|
|=|
12|
4|
1165|1.433347974e+10|
9|00:03:23|-0.12|0.06|0.8234|
|=|
7|
4|
1090|1.457157291e+10|
10|00:03:23|-0.09|0.07|0.8449|
|=|
1|
4|
1090|1.450014273e+10|
11|00:03:23|-0.04|0.09|0.7957|
|=|
11|
4|
1090|1.444458611e+10|
12|00:03:23|+0.03|0.13|0.7556|
|=|
6|
4|
1090|1.470014241e+10|
13|00:03:23|+0.03|0.12|0.7339|
|=|
4|
4|
1090|1.518196107e+10|
14|00:03:24|+0.09|0.17|0.6946|
|=|
5|
4|
1090|1.491680791e+10|
15|00:03:23|+0.13|0.20|0.6725|
|=|
8|
4|
1090|1.507706505e+10|
16|00:03:23|+0.05|0.12|0.7128|
|=|
9|
4|
1090|1.514299894e+10|
17|00:03:23|+0.05|0.12|0.6921|
|=|
15|
4|
1090|1.506681019e+10|
18|00:03:23|+0.07|0.13|0.6687|
|=|
10|
4|
1165|1.525014533e+10|
19|00:03:23|+0.04|0.10|0.6605|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
Best configuration:
1165
mean value: 1.525014533e+10
Description of the best configuration:
.ID. maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma .PARENT.
1165 1165
25
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
381
# 2017-06-28 16:13:38 CEST: Elite configurations (first number is the configuration ID):
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
1165
25
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
1090
40
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
1367
35
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.1
0.05
9
4
9
# 2017-06-28 16:13:38 CEST: Stopped because there is not enough budget left to race more than the minimum (3)
# You may either increase the budget or set ’minNbSurvival’ to a lower value
# Iteration: 7
# nbIterations: 7
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 9498
# timeUsed: 0
# remainingBudget: 2
# currentBudget: 2
# number of elites: 3
# nbConfigurations: 2
# Best configurations (first number is the configuration ID)
==PAGE:62==
52
5. Appendix
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
1165
25
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
1090
40
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
1367
35
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.1
0.1
0.05
9
4
9
# Best configurations as commandlines (first number is the configuration ID)
1165
25 4 3 38 26 15 1000 0.25 0.1 0.05 0.05 9 4 9
1090
40 4 3 38 26 15 1000 0.25 0.1 0.05 0.05 9 4 9
1367
35 4 3 38 26 15 1000 0.25 0.1 0.1 0.05 9 4 9
==PAGE:63==
53
B - Output from irace tuning
*******************************************************************************
* irace: An implementation in R of Iterated Race
* Version: 2.3.1807
* Copyright (C) 2010-2016
* Manuel Lopez-Ibanez
<manuel.lopez-ibanez@manchester.ac.uk>
* Jeremie Dubois-Lacoste
<jeremie.dubois-lacoste@ulb.ac.be>
* Leslie Perez Caceres
<leslie.perez.caceres@ulb.ac.be>
*
* This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it under certain
* conditions.
See the GNU General Public License for details. There is NO
* WARRANTY; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
*
* irace builds upon previous code from the race package:
*
* race: Racing methods for the selection of the best
* Copyright (C) 2003 Mauro Birattari
*******************************************************************************
# installed at: /zhome/75/e/107023/R/x86_64-pc-linux-gnu-library/3.2/irace
# called with: -s scenario.txt -p parameters-alns.txt --parallel 20
# 2 expression(s) specifying forbidden configurations read from ’/zhome/75/e/107023/SpecialeJava/iraceBig100S/forbidden.txt’
# 2017-06-24 10:22:07 CEST: Initialization
# Elitist race
# Elitist new instances: 1
# Elitist limit: 2
# nbIterations: 5
# minNbSurvival: 5
# nbParameters: 11
# seed: 439482264
# confidence level: 0.95
# budget: 11000
# mu: 5
# deterministic: FALSE
# 2017-06-24 10:22:07 CEST: Iteration 1 of 5
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 0
# remainingBudget: 11000
# currentBudget: 2200
# nbConfigurations: 366
Markers:
x No test is performed.
- The test is performed and some configurations are discarded.
= The test is performed but no configuration is discarded.
! The test is performed and configurations could be discarded but elite configurations are preserved.
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
| |
Instance|
Alive|
Best|
Mean best| Exp so far|
W time|
rho|KenW|
Qvar|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
|x|
1|
366|
33|1.400016205e+10|
366|01:05:02|
NA|
NA|
NA|
|x|
2|
366|
342|1.500015030e+10|
732|01:05:00|+0.01|0.50|0.9651|
|x|
3|
366|
202|1.400014167e+10|
1098|01:04:59|+0.05|0.36|0.9745|
|x|
4|
366|
202|1.425014047e+10|
1464|01:05:25|+0.02|0.27|0.9734|
|=|
5|
366|
42|1.480014302e+10|
1830|01:05:05|+0.02|0.21|0.9857|
|=|
6|
366|
65|1.466680860e+10|
2196|01:05:00|+0.02|0.18|0.9815|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
Best configuration:
65
mean value: 1.466680860e+10
Description of the best configuration:
.ID. maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma .PARENT.
65
65
30
5
2
35
9
15
1000
0.25
0.08
0.05
0.05
9
3
8
NA
# 2017-06-24 16:52:41 CEST: Elite configurations (first number is the configuration ID):
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
65
30
5
2
35
9
15
1000
0.25
0.08
0.05
0.05
9
3
8
89
33
7
1
5
34
14
1000
0.25
0.10
0.01
0.05
4
2
10
172
38
6
1
28
49
12
1000
0.25
0.12
0.05
0.05
6
9
8
42
31
6
2
29
45
13
1000
0.25
0.17
0.01
0.05
9
8
10
293
28
2
4
40
9
15
1000
0.25
0.13
0.05
0.05
7
5
1
# 2017-06-24 16:52:41 CEST: Iteration 2 of 5
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 2196
# remainingBudget: 8804
# currentBudget: 2201
# nbConfigurations: 318
Markers:
x No test is performed.
- The test is performed and some configurations are discarded.
= The test is performed but no configuration is discarded.
! The test is performed and configurations could be discarded but elite configurations are preserved.
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
| |
Instance|
Alive|
Best|
Mean best| Exp so far|
W time|
rho|KenW|
Qvar|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
|x|
7|
318|
477|1.900015477e+10|
318|00:54:59|
NA|
NA|
NA|
|x|
5|
318|
665|1.800015306e+10|
631|00:55:06|+0.01|0.50|0.9824|
|x|
6|
318|
635|1.700014354e+10|
944|00:54:51|-0.01|0.32|1.0087|
|x|
2|
318|
423|1.675014206e+10|
1257|00:54:57|+0.02|0.26|0.9997|
|=|
3|
318|
462|1.580013879e+10|
1570|00:54:54|+0.01|0.21|1.0052|
|=|
1|
318|
369|1.550014291e+10|
1883|00:54:55|+0.02|0.18|1.0111|
|=|
4|
318|
619|1.542871389e+10|
2196|00:55:03|+0.02|0.16|1.0137|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
Best configuration:
619
mean value: 1.542871389e+10
Description of the best configuration:
.ID. maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma .PARENT.
619
619
39
4
2
27
44
14
1000
0.25
0.12
0.01
0.05
6
6
9
42
# 2017-06-24 23:17:32 CEST: Elite configurations (first number is the configuration ID):
==PAGE:64==
54
5. Appendix
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
619
39
4
2
27
44
14
1000
0.25
0.12
0.01
0.05
6
6
9
472
35
4
3
40
23
15
1000
0.25
0.04
0.05
0.05
9
4
10
369
34
7
1
10
23
11
1000
0.25
0.15
0.05
0.05
5
3
5
590
34
5
1
25
25
12
1000
0.25
0.13
0.01
0.05
6
8
8
415
34
3
3
8
33
12
1000
0.25
0.12
0.05
0.05
5
2
8
# 2017-06-24 23:17:32 CEST: Iteration 3 of 5
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 4392
# remainingBudget: 6608
# currentBudget: 2202
# nbConfigurations: 279
Markers:
x No test is performed.
- The test is performed and some configurations are discarded.
= The test is performed but no configuration is discarded.
! The test is performed and configurations could be discarded but elite configurations are preserved.
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
| |
Instance|
Alive|
Best|
Mean best| Exp so far|
W time|
rho|KenW|
Qvar|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
|x|
8|
279|
811|1.700014792e+10|
279|00:48:08|
NA|
NA|
NA|
|x|
1|
279|
687|1.550015616e+10|
553|00:48:03|-0.04|0.48|0.9976|
|x|
3|
279|
856|1.433347869e+10|
827|00:48:02|+0.01|0.34|0.9824|
|x|
2|
279|
369|1.475014331e+10|
1101|00:48:04|+0.01|0.26|0.9941|
|=|
6|
279|
369|1.460014097e+10|
1375|00:48:05|+0.04|0.23|0.9706|
|=|
7|
279|
926|1.550014307e+10|
1649|00:48:03|+0.03|0.19|0.9695|
|=|
5|
279|
369|1.571442965e+10|
1923|00:48:04|+0.02|0.16|0.9745|
|=|
4|
279|
472|1.562514373e+10|
2197|00:48:06|+0.01|0.13|0.9887|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
Best configuration:
472
mean value: 1.562514373e+10
Description of the best configuration:
.ID. maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma .PARENT.
472
472
35
4
3
40
23
15
1000
0.25
0.04
0.05
0.05
9
4
10
65
# 2017-06-25 05:42:12 CEST: Elite configurations (first number is the configuration ID):
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
472
35
4
3
40
23
15
1000
0.25
0.04
0.05
0.05
9
4
10
369
34
7
1
10
23
11
1000
0.25
0.15
0.05
0.05
5
3
5
943
33
7
1
16
25
10
1000
0.25
0.18
0.01
0.05
6
4
7
942
35
6
1
26
29
11
1000
0.25
0.08
0.05
0.05
5
3
5
619
39
4
2
27
44
14
1000
0.25
0.12
0.01
0.05
6
6
9
# 2017-06-25 05:42:12 CEST: Iteration 4 of 5
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 6589
# remainingBudget: 4411
# currentBudget: 2205
# nbConfigurations: 249
Markers:
x No test is performed.
- The test is performed and some configurations are discarded.
= The test is performed but no configuration is discarded.
! The test is performed and configurations could be discarded but elite configurations are preserved.
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
| |
Instance|
Alive|
Best|
Mean best| Exp so far|
W time|
rho|KenW|
Qvar|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
|x|
9|
249|
1063|1.600013578e+10|
249|00:44:34|
NA|
NA|
NA|
|x|
2|
249|
1063|1.600013645e+10|
493|00:44:27|+0.13|0.56|0.9475|
|x|
4|
249|
1190|1.566680416e+10|
737|00:44:28|+0.05|0.37|0.9637|
|x|
3|
249|
1037|1.475013339e+10|
981|00:44:26|+0.07|0.30|0.9459|
|-|
5|
84|
1037|1.520013651e+10|
1225|00:44:24|-0.11|0.11|1.0337|
|=|
8|
84|
1037|1.550013873e+10|
1304|00:14:08|-0.04|0.13|0.9805|
|=|
1|
84|
1037|1.528585657e+10|
1383|00:13:47|-0.02|0.13|0.9902|
|=|
6|
84|
1037|1.512514111e+10|
1462|00:13:46|-0.01|0.12|0.9787|
|=|
7|
84|
1037|1.566680884e+10|
1541|00:13:48|-0.01|0.11|0.9804|
|=|
10|
84|
1037|1.550014494e+10|
1625|00:17:05|-0.00|0.10|0.9824|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
Best configuration:
1037
mean value: 1.550014494e+10
Description of the best configuration:
.ID. maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma .PARENT.
1037 1037
36
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.04
0.05
0.05
10
4
10
472
# 2017-06-25 10:37:10 CEST: Elite configurations (first number is the configuration ID):
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
1037
36
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.04
0.05
0.05
10
4
10
1033
34
5
2
49
28
15
1000
0.25
0.04
0.05
0.05
9
5
9
1117
34
7
1
9
23
9
1000
0.25
0.14
0.05
0.05
5
3
4
1078
33
7
1
20
23
10
1000
0.25
0.20
0.05
0.05
4
6
7
1190
34
5
3
44
20
15
1000
0.25
0.05
0.05
0.05
9
3
9
# 2017-06-25 10:37:10 CEST: Iteration 5 of 5
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 8214
# remainingBudget: 2786
# currentBudget: 2786
# nbConfigurations: 257
Markers:
x No test is performed.
- The test is performed and some configurations are discarded.
= The test is performed but no configuration is discarded.
! The test is performed and configurations could be discarded but elite configurations are preserved.
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
| |
Instance|
Alive|
Best|
Mean best| Exp so far|
W time|
rho|KenW|
Qvar|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
|x|
11|
257|
1448|1.400013006e+10|
257|00:44:41|
NA|
NA|
NA|
|x|
2|
257|
1404|1.500013345e+10|
509|00:44:36|-0.01|0.49|0.9978|
|x|
9|
257|
1437|1.533346890e+10|
761|00:44:35|+0.03|0.36|0.9658|
|x|
6|
257|
1404|1.500013430e+10|
1013|00:44:37|+0.03|0.27|0.9422|
==PAGE:65==
55
|=|
4|
257|
1404|1.500013486e+10|
1265|00:44:38|+0.02|0.21|0.9703|
|=|
3|
257|
1404|1.450013288e+10|
1517|00:44:34|+0.01|0.17|0.9761|
|=|
1|
257|
1404|1.442870915e+10|
1769|00:44:36|+0.00|0.14|0.9836|
|=|
10|
257|
1404|1.437514140e+10|
2021|00:44:35|+0.01|0.13|0.9897|
|=|
5|
257|
1037|1.477791946e+10|
2273|00:44:37|+0.00|0.12|0.9932|
|=|
8|
257|
1037|1.500014250e+10|
2525|00:44:36|+0.01|0.11|0.9984|
|=|
7|
257|
1037|1.545468870e+10|
2777|00:44:37|+0.01|0.10|0.9973|
+-+-----------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-----------+--------+-----+----+------+
Best configuration:
1037
mean value: 1.545468870e+10
Description of the best configuration:
.ID. maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma .PARENT.
1037 1037
36
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.04
0.05
0.05
10
4
10
472
# 2017-06-25 18:47:58 CEST: Elite configurations (first number is the configuration ID):
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
1037
36
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.04
0.05
0.05
10
4
10
1078
33
7
1
20
23
10
1000
0.25
0.20
0.05
0.05
4
6
7
1117
34
7
1
9
23
9
1000
0.25
0.14
0.05
0.05
5
3
4
1033
34
5
2
49
28
15
1000
0.25
0.04
0.05
0.05
9
5
9
1265
37
4
3
35
30
15
1000
0.25
0.05
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
# 2017-06-25 18:47:58 CEST: Stopped because there is not enough budget left to race more than the minimum (5)
# You may either increase the budget or set ’minNbSurvival’ to a lower value
# Iteration: 6
# nbIterations: 6
# experimentsUsedSoFar: 10991
# timeUsed: 0
# remainingBudget: 9
# currentBudget: 9
# number of elites: 5
# nbConfigurations: 5
# Best configurations (first number is the configuration ID)
maxRemove shawPara repairPara point1 point2 point3 iterReturnBest routeQuitTimeP reactionFactor worseAccept worsePerRepair phi zeta gamma
1037
36
4
3
38
26
15
1000
0.25
0.04
0.05
0.05
10
4
10
1078
33
7
1
20
23
10
1000
0.25
0.20
0.05
0.05
4
6
7
1117
34
7
1
9
23
9
1000
0.25
0.14
0.05
0.05
5
3
4
1033
34
5
2
49
28
15
1000
0.25
0.04
0.05
0.05
9
5
9
1265
37
4
3
35
30
15
1000
0.25
0.05
0.05
0.05
9
4
9
# Best configurations as commandlines (first number is the configuration ID)
1037
36 4 3 38 26 15 1000 0.25 0.04 0.05 0.05 10 4 10
1078
33 7 1 20 23 10 1000 0.25 0.2 0.05 0.05 4 6 7
1117
34 7 1 9 23 9 1000 0.25 0.14 0.05 0.05 5 3 4
1033
34 5 2 49 28 15 1000 0.25 0.04 0.05 0.05 9 5 9
1265
37 4 3 35 30 15 1000 0.25 0.05 0.05 0.05 9 4 9
==PAGE:66==
