==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
1
A Metaheuristic Approach for the
Cardinality Constrained Shift Design Problem
with Meal Break Placement
Daniele Lubrano, M.Sc. Candidate in Industrial Engineering and Management,
Richard M. Lusby, Supervisor, and Charlotte Vilhelmsen, Co-Supervisor
Abstract—The Cardinality Constrained Shift Design Problem
(CCSDP) is a common combinatorial optimization problem where
a given demand curve has to be fulﬁlled with a limited number
of shift types and employees. Since little research has been done
to include meal breaks in the shift design process (with limited
number of shift types), we present new methods able to solve this
extension while remaining competitive in terms of performance.
CCSDP’s original mathematical model is revisited and incorpo-
rated into different metaheuristics, leading to remarkable results;
in particular, a commercial MIP solver - together with state of
the art heuristics - have been outperformed in multiple instances
by the methods developed throughout our research.
Keywords—Adaptive large neighborhood search, meal break
placement, metaheuristic, shift design, workforce planning
I.
INTRODUCTION
Virtually every company faces the challenge of planning its
workforce in both an efﬁcient and effective manner. Given the
huge number of employees necessary in most sectors to run
a business, non optimized schedules often lead to signiﬁcant
opportunity costs. This idea is conﬁrmed by the considerable
number of consulting ﬁrms that are working in this area, in
addition to the increasing number of specialized tools which
are being constantly developed to ease this process.
In this study we will tackle the workforce planning
problem from a shift design perspective, developing different
metaheuristic-based frameworks competitive to the current
best methodologies. Furthermore, the standard version of the
problem will be extended to include efﬁcient meal breaks
placements within the workforce schedule. This will be proven
to be crucial for a better covering of demand requirements,
otherwise unstable with only the use of a standard approach.
Numerical tests will show considerable savings in the
time necessary to ﬁnd good solutions thanks to the use
of new developed approaches; for example by replicating
the results obtained via 20 minute runs of the current best
known methodologies, in only 2 to 6 minutes. In addition
Daniele Lubrano is a graduate student at the Technical University of
Denmark, e-mail: lubrano93@gmail.com.
Richard M. Lusby and Charlotte Vilhelmsen are with the DTU Manage-
ment Engineering Department, Associate Professor and Assistant Professor
respectively.
Master Thesis hand-in: July 8, 2017; defense: August 11, 2017.
to the increase in speed, (A)LNS will provide objective
values approximately 13% better than the best performing
Benders matheuristic in the available datasets, together with
a 10% objective value improvement compared to the best
combination of four Benders matheuristics and a commercial
MIP solver. Note that ’four Benders matheuristics’ refers to
the different number of dual alternative optimal solutions
used by Lusby, Range and Larsen in their experiments. [12]
Furthermore, Pippo (a solution method for the CCDSP
meal break extension) will also be tested on the available data
and will construct solutions by starting from several thousands
of possible shift types that one can design while including
meal breaks, and then picking a good combination among
them which ﬁts all the requirements in terms of allowed
number of employees and maximum shift cardinality. Results
will show that the approach used by Pippo is preferable to
the one where shift design and meal break placement are
considered as two different processes. In this case ﬁgures are
not as accurate as we would like them to be; however, from
a qualitative point of view the takeaway is unequivocal.
Findings are reported with the following structure. Section
II gives an overview and a theoretical base about previous
research work on this topic, in addition to a summary of
the different methodologies used. Following is Section III,
which describes assumptions and features for the cardinality
constrained shift design problem. Then, Section IV showcases
the data used to build our algorithms on real life scenarios,
with the help of Copenhagen Airport’s statistics. Details about
algorithmic development and implementation are contained in
Section V and Section VI, which cover the standard problem
and the extended version respectively. Section VII dives into
the speciﬁcs and explains the different choices taken in regards
to parameter tuning. Section VIII exhibits the competitive
results obtained, ﬁrst by pairing them with previous studies
outcomes and then against an artiﬁcial benchmark appositely
created for the meal breaks extension of the CCSDP. Finally,
Section IX contains concluding remarks.
==PAGE:2==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
2
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
The cardinality constrained shift design problem is one of
the possible variations included in the category of personnel
scheduling problems. Below we will present a list containing
some of the most important related work developed in the
past years. Moreover, we will touch upon different extensions
of the problem (in particular the inclusion of meal breaks)
and various solution approaches used throughout the years.
Dantzig
(1954)
originally
proposed
a
set-covering
formulation
to
solve
a
shift
scheduling
problem.
This
formulation suffers from the quick increase for the number
of decision variables since it enumerates all possible shifts. [3]
Moondra (1976) developed a model that considers part-time
and full-time shifts. The ﬁrst shift type does not have meal
breaks, whereas the second type allows for two possible
meal break placements: half of the full-time employees are
assigned to an early meal break, and the remaining half to a
late meal break. [15]
Aykin
(1996)
transitions
from
Dantzig’s
set-covering
approach to a new formulation, which is able to solve large
shift scheduling problems to optimality within reasonable
time. This paper considers a formulation where multiple
breaks inside certain time windows are allowed. [20]
G¨artner, Musliu and Slany (2005) extend the shift design
problem to include breaks. They solve a weekly instance for
a large European airport through a heuristic algorithm based
on a mix of greedy assignments and repair steps that try to
optimize the break positions. [5]
G¨artner et al. (2006), one year later, improve the results
recently obtained. They change their previous algorithm
and test a series of different approaches, among which: an
integer programming formulation (based on Dantzig original
formulation) and a new hybrid approach that combines Tabu
Search with other local search heuristics. [6]
Beer at. al (2008) publish a paper about a real-life
application of the break scheduling problem to a call center.
In their study they show the performance of two approaches:
a min-conﬂicts based search algorithm and a tabu search
metaheuristic. This paper’s results display the effectiveness of
heuristics-based methods for break scheduling problems. [1]
Widl (2010) develops a set of memetic algorithms for the
classical break scheduling problem. In her master thesis,
Widl argues that the use of genetic operators combined
with local search is superior to the use of only local search.
Moreover, new upper bounds to public benchmarks for the
break scheduling problems are discovered. [8]
Rekik, Cordeau and Soumis (2010) consider different forms
of ﬂexibility in regards to the shift scheduling problem. In
their two implicit models, they utilize ’forward and backward
constraints’ to solve work stretch duration restrictions. In
addition, they also include fractionable breaks. I.e. breaks
which are not required to be assigned as a whole. [9]
Clausen (2010) presents a dynamic programming-based
heuristic for the heterogeneous shift design problem. He
considers undercoverage and overcoverage, as well as shift
cost. A high focus is put on building solutions that are robust
to irregular demand proﬁles. [21]
Lusby, Range and Larsen (May 2016) introduce the
cardinality constrained shift design problem (CCSDP) and
develop a Benders decomposition-based matheuristic. They
solve various instances of personnel scheduling, based on the
demand requirements of security staff for a European airport.
[12]
Lusby, Schwierz, Range and Larsen (October 2016) pa-
per is an example of a adaptive large neighborhood search
application to a scheduling problem. Their implementations
obtains competitive results to the dynamic patient admission
scheduling problem and shows that ALNS is often an effective
method for solving large instances of combinatorial problems.
[13]
III.
PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
The aim of a generic shift design problem is to deﬁne the
characteristics for a set of shifts capable to match a demand
curve as closely as possible with the available workforce.
When we transition to the cardinality constrained problem,
there is an additional restriction which limits the maximum
number of shift types that one can design. Note that the terms
’shift’ and ’shift type’ will be used interchangeably in this
study.
In this section we will start with the latter version of the
problem, already studied by Lusby et al. [12], and later extend
it to incorporate meal breaks. Most of the assumptions used
in their model will also be used in our study, among which:
•
shifts must be continuous in time
•
shifts cannot span between days
Naturally, the ﬁrst point will be twisted to accept meal
breaks.
In order to slowly build up all the information necessary for
the mathematical model, we will start by discussing on what
the objective function should focus on.
A. Objective function
The process of shifts designing for a company is strongly
connected to its strategy and the active regulations. Some
sectors often have (or set internally) a guaranteed service level
and try to minimize costs from there. A common illustration
for this case are service industries regulated by governments;
in fact, their leverages to increase proﬁts are limited if they
affect the service level offered to customers. On the contrary,
==PAGE:3==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
3
some other areas have ﬁrms which simply aim to maximize
their revenues while minimizing the total cost.
In our study we will use an objective function able to consider
both factors, namely service level and costs. These two factors
are not measured directly; however, the equation below helps
towards a good balance between the two.
min
X
k∈K

cU X
t∈T
ukt + cO X
t∈T
okt

P
t∈T ukt and P
t∈T okt sum up the total undercoverage
and overcoverage in a given day/scenario. Then, cU and
cO deﬁne how severe it is to have a different staff quantity
than required. By adjusting these two weights one obtains a
spectrum of behaviors where one tail puts no importance on
servicing customers with enough personnel, while the other
tail tries to completely fulﬁll demand without paying attention
to shifts placement inefﬁciency. To reiterate, this expression
does not include the actual employees cost but instead it tries
to use, in the best possible way, the available workforce.
Similarly to Lusby et al., we will consider undercoverage
much less desirable than overcoverage [12]. In particular: cU =
10 · cO.
B. Mathematical Model - Standard Problem
Now that the objective function has been discussed and is
clearly deﬁned, we can introduce a mathematical model for
the standard version of the cardinality constrained shift design
problem.
Firstly, we deﬁne a number of different sets.
T
is made of 96 time periods, one per each quarter-hour
of the day.
K
contains all days of the week, from Monday to Sunday.
S
consists
of
every
possible
shift
that
can
be
se-
lected/designed. A more detailed explanation can be
found later in the data section.
St
is a subset of S which lists every shift available in a
speciﬁc time period t.
Ts
is a subset of T containing all the time periods covered
by shift s.
Secondly, we deﬁne some variables that will help to develop
Model 1.
xks
is a variable that counts how many employees of shift s
are working during day k.
okt
is a measure of how many employees are in excess with
respect to the demand of day k, also called overcoverage.
ukt
is similar to okt with the only difference that counts lack
instead of excess of personnel. This will also be referred
to as undercoverage.
ys
is a binary variable which deﬁnes whether shift s is
selected or not.
min
X
k∈K
 X
t∈T
cUukt +
X
t∈T
cOokt

s.t.
X
s∈ST
xks + ukt −okt = dkt,
∀k ∈K, ∀t ∈T
(1a)
X
s∈S
xks ≤Emax,
∀k ∈K
(1b)
X
s∈S
ys ≤|Ssol|
(1c)
xks −Mksys ≤0,
∀k ∈K, ∀s ∈S
(1d)
xks ∈Z+
∀k ∈K, ∀s ∈S
ukt ∈R+
∀k ∈K, ∀t ∈T
okt ∈R+
∀k ∈K, ∀t ∈T
ys ∈{0, 1}
∀s ∈S
(1)
Constraint 1a deﬁnes the relation between the number of
employees, undercoverage and overcoverage with respect to
the demand dkt during time period t in day k.
Constraint 1b ensures that the number of employees used does
not exceed the total workforce Emax.
In a similar way, constraint 1c checks that the limit for the
total number of shifts |Ssol| is followed.
Constraint 1d is a typical way to link a variable to its
respective ”activation” binary variable. Mks should be as
small as possible because it tightens the formulation; hence,
we will set it equal to the maximal demand seen in any
of the time periods covered by shift s during day k. I.e.
Mks = max{dkt|t ∈Ts}. Finally, the last constraints set every
variable domain. As already proven by Lusby et al., the matrix
deﬁning this problem has a totally unimodular structure and
therefore xks will naturally lead themselves to integer values
without the need of limiting them [12]. Consequently, uks and
oks also assume integer values automatically.
C. Meal breaks placement
One relevant assumption for the standard problem is that
shifts are always continuous in time. This restriction is
loosened for the meal break extension of the problem and
becomes the following: a shift always include two continuous
time spans of work, exactly divided by a break of 45 minutes.
Meal breaks for workers in Denmark tend to be between half
an hour and one hour long, hence the choice of 45 minutes
for our model.
Another important decision is where the meal breaks
are allowed to be placed. Different rules apply to different
workplaces and they are inﬂuenced by labor unions, country
legislation etc. Moreover, every single employee will probably
have different preferences in this regard.
The initial idea for this study was to consider two different
options:
==PAGE:4==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
4
•
schedule meal breaks to be within a certain range from
the center of a shift duration,
•
schedule breaks to match pre-deﬁned meal hours.
After some evaluation we have decided to only model the
ﬁrst option and discard the second one because it is less
realistic. An example in support of this argument would be
the case where employees are forced to take a break just after
their shift starts, in order to match the canteen opening hours.
This can easily result in workers’ dissatisfaction and a lower
productivity due to a longer period without breaks for the
second part of their shift duration. [2]
In order to showcase a possible scenario, some assumptions
are taken when designing the shift break possibilities. These
can be easily twisted to suit each practical application since
the overall solution methods would not be especially affected.
Here each shift has strongly centralized breaks and therefore
cannot have more than three different combinations of breaks
assignment. The reason behind this is that a wider range
might encounter the same challenges as the already discarded
assignation method that aims to match pre-deﬁned meal hours.
Shifts are ﬁrstly split into two groups according to their
duration. In practice, when the number of intervals covered
by a shift is even it will belong to one group, otherwise it will
be considered part of the second group. Then, shifts within
the even group can be assigned two types of breaks whereas
the other shifts have three different possibilities.
A more precise way to look into the previous problem is to
deﬁne a break length Blen as the number of periods where
a shift is inactive or, in other words, does not contribute to
reach the required stafﬁng even within its end and start time.
Given that each time period is 15 minutes long and that
breaks should have a ﬁxed duration of 45 minutes, the value
of Blen becomes equal to 3 (as long as the assumptions just
listed hold).
The next value to deﬁne is Slen which, analogously to Blen,
can be measured as the total number of time units covered by
a shift, breaks included. Since we consider time as discrete
and Blen = 3, only odd Slen values allow for a perfectly
centered break placement.
Figure 1 helps to visualize what just discussed. Shifts are
represented as green LEGO bricks where each circle stands
for an additional 15 minutes duration in the shifts length. Red
bricks show all the possible break placements and have a ﬁxed
duration of 3 time units. As we will detail in the next sections,
odd duration shifts can have a centralized break or slide it to
the sides in order to cover all the range allowed. Even duration
shifts are similar, except for the missing centralized break. In
this case, meal breaks are off-set only once per side due to our
initial assumptions.
Fig. 1. Meal breaks placement visualization. On the left side: an even duration
shift with two possible breaks allocation. On the right side: odd duration shift
and three breaks combinations.
IV.
DATA
Copenhagen Airport has provided us with an example of
the average demand of security staff during high season. This
is our only external dataset and it consists of seven different
demand curves: one per day of the week. A reasonable
assumption is that the same day of the week repeats its
requirements throughout the entire season. For example, the
last Monday of July requires a similar level of security staff
compared to the second Monday of August since both are
in high season and with akin ﬂights schedule. In contrast, a
Monday and a Friday of the same week can have different
demand curves because the service is used by different
passenger segments in divers proportions. E.g. business vs
leisure.
Each curve is expressed as a series of positive integer
numbers, representing how many employees are necessary to
satisfy a certain demand, connected to a time of the day.
Demand is measured with a quarter-hour frequency and results
in 96 values per day; however, the solution method will be
designed to work for any frequency. Figure 2 gives an example
of the differences in demand requirements among different
days.
Fig. 2.
Example of demand proﬁles in three different days. Each colored
area is a representation of the required demand at any given point in time.
In addition to the demand curves, it is necessary to have a
list of possible shifts to select from. This list is affected by
several regulations and should try to reﬂect the real world
==PAGE:5==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
5
scenario as closely as possible. For the purpose here and
an easier benchmark process, datasets and instances will be
the same as those used in Lusby’s paper [12]. Nevertheless,
it is advisable to review this information before a real life
implementation.
These datasets include many shifts, each of them charac-
terized by a list of values describing which time periods are
covered. The total number of shifts |S| was chosen to be either
1241 or 2145, based on the desired problem difﬁculty. 1241 is
the number of every possible shift combination with a duration
between 4 and 8 hours, while 2145 shifts also include those
between 8 and 12 hours. Increasing the number of shifts allows
for more ﬂexibility in the shifts design but makes the problem
harder to solve due to the growth of both the number of
variables and the number of constraints. Moreover, the dataset
with 2145 shifts already contains several impractical shifts,
e.g. 11 or 12 hours long shifts, so it would not make sense to
increase this value even further.
Fig. 3.
Shift dataset: example of four 4-hours shifts. Every number represents
a 15 minutes time period covered by the corresponding shift.
Figure 3 is an example of 4 shifts read from one of the two
shifts datasets. Each row contains the time periods covered
by the corresponding shift. Number sequences are ordered
and consecutive because breaks are not allowed at this stage.
At this point it is possible to create multiple instances by
combining our two shifts datasets with different values for
|Ssol| and Emax. It is reasonable to assume that the shift
cardinality for Copenhagen Airport’s security staff is relatively
small since otherwise it would be difﬁcult to manage. Similarly
to Lusby’s paper, we consider 16 possible values for |Ssol|
[12].
6 ≤|Ssol| ≤21
Note that demand curves will remain unchanged for every
instance.
Each instance will then be labeled with this notation:
Emax |S| |Ssol|.
Hence an instance with 200 available employees, 1241
possible shifts types and a cardinality of 18 shifts will be
called 200 1241 18. The table below gives an overview of
the 96 possible instances (2·2·16), the same as the ones used
by Richard et al. [12].
TABLE I.
EXTERNAL PARAMETERS VALUES
Parameter
Allowed values
Emax
160, 180, 200
|S|
1241 or 2145
|Ssol|
From 6 to 21 (included)
V.
SOLUTION METHODS: STANDARD PROBLEM
In this section we will present two metaheuristic-based ap-
proaches to solve the standard CCSDP. Both solution methods
start from a solution returned by a construction heuristic (later
referred as construction algorithm) and search the solution
space, until the alloted time expires, to ﬁnd alternative so-
lutions that can guarantee an objective value improvement.
The developed construction algorithm builds random solutions
which often have a high objective value; whereas a specialized
heuristic would allow our solution methods to start from a
better initial solution. As we will see in Figure 9, this gap
is closed so quickly that we do not consider the increased
complexity and development time to build a specialized con-
struction algorithm justiﬁed.
A. Descending Hill Climber
Hill climbing algorithms are among the simplest forms of
metaheuristics and they rely on the concept of gradient ascent
(or descent, for minimization problems). [16]
The choice to develop a solution method (HC) based on the hill
climbing algorithm features is justiﬁed by its implementation
simplicity, often accompanied by good solutions retrieved in
reasonable time. The essential components of the algorithms
are outlined in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Hill Climbing algorithm pseudocode
1: procedure HC
2:
Solbest, Zbest ←Construction algorithm
3:
4:
while timeNotExpired() do
5:
Ssol ←randomSwap(Ssol, S)
6:
Solcand, Zcand ←CPLEX(Model 2)
7:
8:
if Zcand < Zbest then
9:
Solbest ←Solcand
10:
Zbest ←Zcand
11:
end if
12:
end while
13:
14: end procedure
First, the construction algorithm returns an initial solution
made of a series of random shifts; the number of shifts is
equal to the maximum cardinality allowed. Given the structure
of the mathematical model, our construction algorithm ensures
feasibility because a set of random shifts is likely to have a
high objective value but it always satisﬁes all the constraints.
In fact, when a certain required staff level is not reached for
a period, the corresponding demand constraint is not violated
==PAGE:6==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
6
but will increase the overcoverage.
Secondly, the algorithm moves through the search space
by looking for a better solution than the best one found until
that moment. Each move is dictated by two steps: a selection
of candidate shifts and a CPLEX run.
1) Candidate shifts selection: The candidate shifts are se-
lected by swapping one random shift already present in the
solution with a random shift from the full list of remaining
existing shifts. A shift cannot be removed and reinserted in
the same iteration.
Example of random swap:
Solution vector: [S1, S3, S4].
Full list of remaining shifts: [S2, S5, S6, S7, S8].
Random ID to remove: 3.
Random ID to insert: 5.
New solution vector: [S1, S5, S4].
2) CPLEX run: Here the list of shifts returned by the
previous step deﬁnes Ssol, a new subset of S. Its purpose is to
considerably reduce the size of Model 1 by allowing CPLEX
to only work on a limited number of shift types, which will
be changed after each randomSwap. Since the shift cardinality
is managed externally by the algorithm, the ys variables,
constraint 1c and constraint 1d can be dropped without any
negative impact. I.e. The initial solution starts from the
maximum cardinality and neighborhood operators do not
increase it. Moreover, the matrix deﬁning this mathematical
model is totally unimodular [12]; consequently, we can relax
the integer requirement for xks present in Model 1.
When the previous assumptions hold, we can transition
to a linear relaxed version of the model and, by using a LP
solver instead of a MIP one, the time necessary to solve each
sub-problem is drastically reduced: in this case by a factor of
three. The resulting simpliﬁed model is described in Model 2.
min
X
k∈K
 X
t∈T
cUukt +
X
t∈T
cOokt

s.t.
X
s∈ST
sol
xks + ukt −okt = dkt,
∀k ∈K, ∀t ∈T
(2a)
X
s∈Ssol
xks ≤Emax,
∀k ∈K
(2b)
xks ∈R+
∀k ∈K, ∀s ∈Ssol
ukt ∈R+
∀k ∈K, ∀t ∈T
okt ∈R+
∀k ∈K, ∀t ∈T
(2)
After the candidate shift selection step, Model 2 is solved
via CPLEX and an optimal solution is provided for that
speciﬁc subset of shifts. An optimal solution is characterized
by a list of active shifts and how many employees are assigned.
At this point the algorithm computes a new objective value
Zcand and compares it with the best one found Zbest. When
the candidate solution improves the objective value, namely
Zcand < Zbest, we move to a new point in the search space
and update the best solution to reﬂect this. The previous steps
are iterated until the termination criteria is met. Hence, when
we run out of time the algorithm stops and returns the best
solution. The Hill Climbing algorithm is an anytime algorithm
and therefore we are guaranteed to have a feasible solution no
matter when the termination criteria is met and the algorithm
stopped. [14]
B. (Adaptive) Large Neighborhood Search
The term adaptive large neighborhood search was ﬁrst
introduced by Røpke and Pisinger in a paper that studies a
variation of the pickup and delivery problem. [18]
This framework has later been applied to solve optimization
problems of different nature and has often obtained impressive
results. This motivated us to build a second solution method
for the CCSDP, inspired by the ALNS framework. The goal
is to achieve better results than HC, given the increased
complexity of the new approach. An in-depth analysis and
comparison of the two solution methods performances will be
presented in Section VIII.
While developing Algorithm 2, one of the early steps
was to deﬁne different types of destroy and repair methods.
Before we delve into the metaheuristic behavior it is helpful
to understand how each mechanism works.
1) Destroy - smallRandom, mediumRandom, largeRandom:
Three of the destroy methods can be grouped into a single
cluster because of their similar nature. Small, medium and
large random destroy are the most simple of the destroy
methods; they simply randomly select a number of shifts from
the current solution and mark them as removed. The quantity
of removed shifts is governed via three parameters λS, λM, λL
==PAGE:7==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
7
Algorithm 2 Large Neighborhood Search pseudocode
1: procedure LNS
2:
Solcur, Zcur ←Construction algorithm
3:
Solbest ←Solcur
4:
5:
while timeNotExpired() do
6:
d ←pickDestroy()
7:
r ←pickRepair()
8:
9:
DSol ←Destroyd(Solcur)
10:
Ssol ←Repairr(DSol)
11:
12:
Solcand, Zcand ←CPLEX(Model 2)
13:
14:
if Zcand < Zbest then
15:
Solbest ←Solcand
16:
Solcurr ←Solcand
17:
Zbest ←Zcand
18:
Zcurr ←Zcand
19:
else
20:
if thresholdAcceptance(Zcand, Zcurr) then
21:
Solcurr ←Solcand
22:
Zcurr ←Zcand
23:
end if
24:
end if
25:
end while
26:
27: end procedure
and their values will be discussed in Section VII. As one might
expect:
λS < λM < λL.
2) Destroy - endTime, startTime: The second cluster of
destroy methods contains endTime and startTime destroy.
All the shifts’ end or start time interval are sequentially
investigated
and,
whenever
there
is
a
repetition,
the
corresponding shifts are removed. Therefore, each time
interval will never have more than one shift which ends/starts
there. For simplicity and given that the shift IDs are stored
without any speciﬁc order, the surviving shifts are the ﬁrst
to be analyzed. Alternatively, one could group all the shifts
which start or end simultaneously and then randomly pick the
ID to be maintained.
3) Destroy - singleEndTime, singleStartTime:
Our ﬁnal
cluster is composed of singleEndTime and singleStartTime.
They are built on the same rationale as the previous two
methods, with one main difference: as soon as one shift is
removed from the list, the method stops and one of the repair
methods is called. I.e. at most one shift is removed.
4) Repair - Random: As the name suggests, randomRepair
checks for the removed shifts and iteratively replaces them
with a random one from the list of all the possible shifts that
are not already in use. It is important to mention that a shift
cannot be inserted twice during the same repair operation. In
practice, once a shift is inserted to repair part of the solution,
it is immediately removed from the availability list before the
algorithm starts to repair the remaining parts.
This method is fairly simple, yet crucial for a good
performance since it ensures a valuable level of diversiﬁcation.
5) Repair - Score: scoreRepair selects a subset of possible
shifts from the full list S (shifts already in use are excluded
from this selection). Afterwords, every shift in the subset
is evaluated and assigned a score. The score is computed
by
checking,
time
period
by
time
period,
how
much
undercoverage and overcoverage are present in the current
solution. When the evaluated shift covers a time period with
undercoverage, it is rewarded cU points. Whereas, when that
shift covers a time period already overcovered, it is penalized
by cO points. The ﬁnal score for that shift is the sum of
all the rewards minus all the penalties. After scoring every
shift in the subset, the one with the best score is inserted
as replacement for one of the shifts removed in the destroy
phase. When multiple shifts need to be replaced, the process
is repeated - from the start - for each of them. Scores are
recomputed for every insertion in order to avoid too many
selection of the same type.
Note that the list of shifts to be evaluated is chosen to be
the same size as the maximum cardinality. If we compare an
iteration of scoreRepair on the full list of shift types S to an
iteration on a subset with size |Ssol|, the ﬁrst choice produces
on average better results. However, when we consider the
time per iteration, reducing the subset size to |Ssol| (or similar
values) provides a good balance between speed and objective
value improvement.
Now that we have identiﬁed the different neighborhood
operators, we can proceed with the metaheuristic description.
At ﬁrst it randomly identiﬁes a subset of shifts from the
complete list of available shifts S; then, CPLEX is called to
solve a linear relaxation of the mathematical model based
on those shifts (Model 2). This process is analogous at what
explain for HC.
At this point an initial solution is created and used to
initialize the best solution Solbest. Similarly to the Hill
Climbing algorithm, LNS is run until a certain time limit is
met and the best solution can be retrieved immediately after.
Each iteration consists of a local search which: updates the
current and the best solution whenever a candidate solution
has the minimum objective value until that point in time,
or updates the current solution when a certain acceptance
criterion is met. The acceptance criterion used for this
metaheuristic is inspired by the threshold accepting algorithm,
namely a minor deterioration on the objective value is still
accepted (when inferior to a certain threshold ψ) to allow for
a wider exploration of the search space. [4]
Alternatively,
one
of
the
popular
Simulated
Annealing
acceptance criteria could be used. [10]
However, during preliminary tests, both the Metropolis and
the Barker criterion have been outperformed by the threshold
acceptance criterion.
==PAGE:8==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
8
Each local search iteration starts by choosing one destroy
and one repair method among the possible types previously
described; this choice consists of a weighted random selection
on υd and γr respectively. To decide a good range for
these parameters, we have enhanced the LNS to become
an Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search and studied the
performance of the different neighborhood operators. For
example, smallDestroy was often chosen over largeDestroy
and hence we have decided to set a much higher weight
range to the ﬁrst method. After the range was set, we have
ﬁne-tuned all the parameters in a standard way as will be
described in the tuning section.
One question might arise: why do we manually tune with
the support of an adaptive method instead of just using
the latter? The argument is that, at least for this problem,
ALNS often shew cyclic behaviors and a slower convergence
time compared to LNS with ﬁxed parameter values (from
now on referred to as (A)LNS). In particular, ALNS tried
every method several time before reaching a stable weight
assignation and, every time a local optimum was met, it
tended to overestimate the utility of some destroy methods. An
alternative solution to these issues would be, instead of using
(A)LNS, to initialize the ALNS weights in a different way
(they are currently set to have each method equally liked to be
picked at the start) and to have a more accurate set of rewards.
In summary, (A)LNS moves through the search space
via combinations of destroy and repair methods, followed
by
CPLEX
runs.
A
good
mix
of
diversiﬁcation
and
intensiﬁcation, necessary for good results, is provided by the
numerous neighborhood operators and the use of a threshold
acceptance criteria. Finally, the solution is available when
the algorithm is stopped or as soon as the allotted time is over.
VI.
SOLUTION METHODS: EXTENDED PROBLEM
When meal breaks are taken into consideration, both of the
two previous metaheuristics require some adjustment before
being able to handle them. This section proposes two methods
which attack the meal break allocation problem in different
ways.
The ﬁrst method tries to exploit what was developed for
the metaheuristics used in the standard CCSDP problem.
The second method displays how an intuitive approach,
similar to what is currently done by most managers, performs
on the same problem.
The main intention for this section is to analyze both ap-
proaches to understand if one method can be considered better
than the other. In that case, further studies could immediately
discard the poor performing algorithm and utilize all the
resources to improve the best one.
A. Meal breaks method: Pippo
Our ﬁrst method to allocate breaks - Pippo - is built on top
of the (A)LNS metaheuristic recently described.
Pippo starts by creating a new dataset that afterwards will
allow (A)LNS to ﬁnd a solution for the meal breaks problem
variation. This is automated via Excel VBA macros capable
of reading our initial shift datasets retrieved from Richard
et al. initial work [12] and manipulate data to reﬂect each
possible meal break type.
These scripts analyze row by row each shift and label them
as odd or even according to their duration. Subsequently, each
odd shift is replaced by three new shifts. Similarly, even shifts
are replaced by two new shifts as summarized in the table
below. The process to replace a shift begins with a search for
Sstart: the lowest time period covered by that shift. After that,
macros will duplicate/triplicate that shift and assign a different
break type for each of the formula listed below. Equation A,
B and C correspond to a possible break combination and
return a value for every time period where that break is active.
Therefore, shift mutations will cover the same time periods as
their original copy except for the break time periods.
TABLE II.
OVERVIEW OF MEAL BREAK ALLOCATION
Formula
Shift type
Odd length
Even length
A
Left offset
Left offset
B
Centered
Right offset
C
Right offset
X
A)
Sstart +
Slen
2

−
Blen
2

+ i,
i = 0 . . . Blen −1
B)
Sstart +
Slen
2

−
Blen
2

+ i,
i = 0 . . . Blen −1
C)
Sstart +
Slen
2

−
Blen −2
2

+ i,
i = 0 . . . Blen −1
Both shifts dataset have been edited to incorporate our
meal breaks logic and we can notice a growth by a factor
of approximately 2.5, as expected since each shift can have
either two or three different breaks. In particular, the number
of shifts for the given datasets increased from 1241 and 2145
to 3066 and 5330 respectively.
This shows that the problem size grows linearly with respect
to the number of possible meal break types and Pippo is able
to deal with it when this value is reasonably small, which is
true for our application.
After the new dataset is prepared in accordance to our
breaks deﬁnition, one of the two metaheuristics for the
standard problem can be used to ﬁnd a new solution with
meal breaks.
The choice of using (A)LNS over HC is justiﬁed by its better
performance on the standard problem and the possibility
to include additional destroy or repair methods, ideally
==PAGE:9==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
9
ﬁne-tuned for hypothetical meal breaks extra-requirements.
For the sake of this example, assume that a break type
is suddenly less desired than the others because of a new
union rule. This revision can be modeled by penalizing the
objective function each time that a shift is assigned such a
break. A natural twist for the (A)LNS metaheuristic would be
to reduce the probability of assigning this break type via a
new destroy or repair method. The same can potentially be
done on HC, but it would require far more changes on the
algorithm structure, with a higher risk of negatively impacting
the overall performance.
In conclusion, Pippo allows for a high level of ﬂexibility:
it only requires a one-off data manipulation and then it is
able to run for different instances without additional setup
work. Moreover, one can look at it as a set of interchangeable
modules because, once data is ready for use, it is possible to
try variations of the (A)LNS or even different metaheuristics
with little to no effort.
B. Meal breaks method: Pluto
Pluto aims to optimize the meal break allocation for all
the shifts present in a starting solution returned by one of the
standard problem solution methods. This can be achieved in
at least three different ways. Here we will present all of them
and discuss which ones ﬁt best for our study.
1) Brute force: Brute forcing consists of systematically
trying every possible candidate solution until the desired one
is found. However, before applying a brute force algorithm it
is wise to understand how complex the combinatorial problem
to solve is. For this purpose we have to deﬁne a pair of key
values: how many shifts are contained in a solution (|Ssol|)
and how many meal break combinations are possible for each
of those (|B|).
The ﬁrst set of values, |Ssol|, can be any number between
6 and 21 included, as introduced in Section IV. Previously
we have also discussed how each shift has only two or three
meal break placement possibilities. Accordingly, calculations
will be based on a worst case scenario where every shift
has an odd duration and therefore three different meal break
options: |B| = 3.
A simple way to ﬁnd a formula to compute the total
number of meal break allocation combinations C is to look at
it as a variation of combination locks cracking. In this case,
the lock has |Ssol| digits and each of them is not a standard
decimal digit but a letter/code which represents a certain meal
break allocation. E.g. A, B and C as the meal break allocation
formulas shown in Table II.
At this point one can calculate C as:
C = |B||Ssol|
Now we can estimate a lower bound CL and CU of
combinations by using the shift cardinality extreme points.
CL = 26 ≈102 combinations
CU = 321 ≈1010 combinations
Fig. 4.
Number of combinations to be evaluated by the brute force algorithm.
It is hard to estimate an accurate value for the number
of combinations per seconds that one can compute because
they depend on many factors such as computing power,
programming
language
and
implementation
efﬁciency.
Nevertheless it is clear that high values of |Ssol| make the
problem impossible to solve via brute force in acceptable run
times.
Moreover, Figure 4 strengthens the idea that brute force is
an inefﬁcient algorithm by showing the exponential growth
for the number of combinations with respect to |B| and |Ssol|.
2) Mathematical optimization: A more formal approach is
to build a mathematical model capable of assigning breaks
to every shift contained in the solution found by CCSDP
solution methods.
Model 1 is a good starting point but there are some
important changes to consider.
Shifts are now ﬁxed and therefore the initial set S is shrunk
to Ssol. Moreover, the number of people assigned to a shift
in a certain day (xs,k) changes from variable to parameter.
Therefore, constraints regarding shift cardinality and total
number of employees can be dropped since not necessary
anymore.
Some new deﬁnition are also necessary to build Model 3.
St
sol
is a subset of S, having the same function as St in Model
1.
T B
s
is a subset of T that contains all the time periods where
shift s is allowed to have a break.
T N
s
is another subset deﬁned as T \ {Ts} and it has the sole
purpose to ease the notation to describe a list of time
periods where a shift is not active.
ast
is a new set of binary variables with a value of 1
whenever a shift s is active during time period t without
currently being on a break, and a value of 0 otherwise.
Notice that ast = 0 can both represent an active shift that
has a break during time period t, as well as an inactive
shift.
bst
is also a new set of binary variables equal to 1 when
shift s starts its break on time period t.
==PAGE:10==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
10
t′
is a placeholder for t + Blen −1 and will simplify the
notation.
min
X
k∈K
 X
t∈T
cUukt +
X
t∈T
cOokt

s.t.
X
s∈St
sol
Xksast + ukt −okt = dkt,
∀k ∈K, ∀t ∈T
(3a)
X
t∈T B
s
bst = 1,
∀s ∈Ssol
(3b)
t′
X
t
ast ≤M(1 −bst),
∀s ∈Ssol, ∀t′ ∈T B
s
(3c)
X
t∈Ts
ast = Slen,s −Blen,s,
∀s ∈Ssol,
(3d)
ast = 0,
∀s ∈Ssol, ∀t ∈T N
s ,
ast ∈{0, 1},
s ∈Ssol, t ∈T,
bst ∈{0, 1},
s ∈Ssol, t ∈T B
s ,
ukt ∈R+,
k ∈K, t ∈T,
okt ∈R+,
k ∈K, t ∈T
(3)
The objective function for Model 3 is equivalent to the
expression deﬁned in the standard version of the CCSDP
model.
Constraint (3a) forces okt and ukt to their correct values
of overcoverage and undercoverage as usual. Constraint (3b)
ensures that every shift has one and only one break. Constraint
(3c) is a common way to link values of sequential decision
variables. This constraint is built on the assumptions that
breaks should be continuous in time and cover Blen time
periods. M can be any large enough number but the tightest
formulation is given by M = Blen because the sum of Blen
binary variables can never exceed Blen. For the speciﬁc case
of Blen = 3, it becomes:
as,t + as,t+1 + as,t+2 ≤3(1 −bs,t),
∀s ∈S,
∀t′ ∈T B
s
Constraint
(3d)
speciﬁes
when
employees
are
to
be
considered as working: when the shift is active and the break
is not. This holds because ast is set to zero for T N
s , namely
for each time period t where a shift s is inactive by its
deﬁnition.
All the remaining constraints deﬁne variables domains.
3) Heuristic:
Our pick among the three choices just
presented is to use a simple heuristic because straightforward
and rapid to implement. This allows to quickly get a feeling
about Pluto’s potential and from there, either improve the
solution method or discard it for a better one.
Algorithm 3 Pluto pseudocode
1: procedure HC
2:
Solbest ←ALNS(runtime)
3:
Solbest, Zbest ←initializeBreaks(Solbest)
4:
5:
while timeNotExpired() do
6:
Solcand, Zcand ←alterBreaks(Solbest)
7:
if Zcand < Zbest then
8:
Solbest ←Solcand
9:
Zbest ←Zcand
10:
end if
11:
end while
12:
13: end procedure
Because of this, we have implemented a second hill
climbing algorithm. This time, what commonly referred as
construction algorithm, receives a starting solution from a run
of (A)LNS and then it arbitrarily applies a break to each shift.
For simplicity, formula A is always the initial break choice.
After breaks are initialized, the usual hill climbing logic
continues by altering the best solution Solbest and accepting a
change only when it would improve the objective value. This
metaheuristic uses only one neighborhood operation: it picks
a random shift and changes its break allocation to be any of
the other types allowed. E.g. Shift S13 is randomly selected
and its break changes from A to B because, being an even
duration shift, it only has two possible break combinations. If
S13 was an odd duration shift, the break could change from
A to B or from A to C.
When a break allocation changes, the objective value is
re-computed in such a way that only time periods affected
by this change are included in the calculations; this is done
to speed up the huge number of objective function evaluations.
It is transparent that this solution method has several
weaknesses with the main one being that it can easily get
stuck to a local optimum since breaks change one at a time
and only if they are part of an improvement. Moreover, we
are mostly relying on processing power rather than exploiting
a clever way to ﬁlter sub-optimal meal break allocation.
Nevertheless, from a practical point of view, this is ideal
because fast and good enough for our purpose: select or
discard the implementation of Pluto.
Results from method Pluto have been disappointing when
compared to Pippo. Even with an excellent starting solution
- close to the convergence point of (A)LNS - Pippo could
consistently produce better results than Pluto in a matter
of seconds. In Table III we can see, for six representative
instances, how quickly Pippo reaches a solution equivalent or
better than a 10 minutes run of Pluto (which started from
solutions obtained after 10 minutes runs of (A)LNS).
==PAGE:11==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
11
TABLE III.
TIME NECESSARY FOR PIPPO TO BEAT PLUTO’S 600
SECONDS RUNS.
Instance
Pippo (seconds)
160 1241 10
2.10
180 1241 15
0.20
200 1241 20
0.16
160 2145 10
3.04
180 2145 15
1.14
200 2145 20
0.18
The main takeaway is that even though Pluto might resemble
a standard manager approach better (ﬁrst choose promising
shifts and afterwards allow for breaks when they seem to ﬁt
better), a more analytical and somehow less intuitive approach
can be considerably more effective. Both methods have a lot
of room for improvement; however, given what just discussed,
it is advisable to work only on Pippo’s enhancement.
VII.
TUNING
In this section we will go through the process of tuning
the parameters used in the four solution methods presented:
HC, (A)LNS, Pippo and Pluto, which was discarded because
of poor results.
HC, given its simplicity, does not have any parameter to tune.
(A)LNS and Pippo currently have the same set of parameters
to tune. However, we will only look at (A)LNS with instances
without meal breaks because Pippo is more of a general
framework which should be tuned only when considerable
changes are applied to its metaheuristic module. An example
of this could be a specialized meal break destroy method
added to the destroy methods list.
A. Parameters overview and initial decisions
In order to avoid overﬁtting and to have a fair comparison
between
our
solution
methods
against
state-of-the-art
algorithms, we have decided to not tune parameters on the 96
initial instances. Instead, we have created artiﬁcial data with
similar characteristics to the original instances and they have
been used as training datasets. These training datasets are
built by varying the values of Emax and |Ssol| with the intent
of creating similar but not identical scenarios to the real data.
This might slightly affect the performance of our solution
methods when fed with the usual parameters but it allows for
more robustness to changes in the available resources.
The table below lists all the combination of parameters used
in the training data. |S| does not change from the original
instances because it is not exogenous. I.e. one can decide a
priori which shifts are allowed.
TABLE IV.
EXTERNAL PARAMETERS USED TO BUILD THE TRAINING
DATASET
Parameter
Allowed values
Emax
170, 190
|S|
1241, 2145
|Ssol|
8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15, 18, 19
Given that |S| is ﬁxed to either 1241 or 2145, the number of
allowed values for Emax and |Ssol| are selected in such a way
that the number of training instances becomes approximately
one third of the initial 96 instances. Hence, two values for
Emax and eight values for |Ssol| seem to be a good choice
since they sum up to 32 training instances. I.e. 2 · 2 · 8 = 32.
Such size gives a fairly representative dataset and at the same
time drastically reduce the time spent for parameters tuning.
Another important decision to take is how much time
each run should take. A short runtime would be ideal given
that there are several parameters to tune and consequently
several metaheuristics runs. However, when comparing the
performance of quick runs we might be more inclined to pick
combinations of parameters that quickly dig over the solution
space to obtain fairly good local optima without having the
right balance of diversiﬁcation and escape from there for even
better solutions. Given this and that the result section will have
both 600 and 1200 seconds runs, we have decided to settle for
a balanced 600 seconds run in every parameter tuning iteration.
Now that we know the number of training instances and the
runtime, it is easy to get an estimate about the time necessary
to test a single parameters combination: 320 minutes or
roughly 5.5 hours. Due to limited resources we have decided
to allocate not more than one and a half days for the entire
tuning phase, which results in a limit of 6 possible parameters
combinations to test.
At this point we can list every parameter used in the
solution methods and, after analyzing their importance, decide
a tuning prioritization. Table V shows all the initial 13 control
parameters and the group to which they belong. Note that
these parameters are the only ones that can be tuned, because
external parameters (i.e. Emax or |S|) are ﬁxed and only used
to deﬁne an instance.
TABLE V.
CONTROL PARAMETERS SUMMARY
Parameters
Group description
λS, λM, λL
Destruction methods size
ψ
Acceptance criteria threshold
υ(7)
Destruction methods probabilities
γS, γR
Repair methods probabilities
λS, λM and λL deﬁne how many shifts should be removed
by the ﬁrst cluster of the (A)LNS destruction methods:
smallDestroy,
mediumDestroy
and
largeDestroy.
After
preliminary testing, we have chosen to ﬁx these parameters to
==PAGE:12==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
12
1, 3 and 5 respectively since adequate for their use. However,
if time was an unlimited resource, one could perform a more
scrupulous test and probably discover an exact correlation
between the instance type and the optimal λ values. E.g.
|Ssol| ∝λ∗.
ψ is a threshold for the (A)LNS acceptance criteria. In other
words, a candidate solution is accepted when its objective
value is better or not worse than ψ units when compared to
the best solution objective value. Similarly to λ, we have set
this value to 15 after the results obtained during preliminary
testing.
γS and γR are the probabilities of picking randomRepair
or randomScore as repair methods. These two parameters,
together with υ, will have a separate tuning description in the
next paragraphs.
υ
consists
of
υS,
υM,
υL,
υET ,
υST ,
υSET
and
υSST , which set the selection frequency for the seven
corresponding (A)LNS destruction methods. One can link υ
to its corresponding method by looking at the subscript, e.g.
υSET stands for the probability of singleEndTime destroy.
B. Pre-tuning phase
In the section for the standard problem solution methods,
we brieﬂy touched upon the usage of an adaptive large
neighborhood search as support tool for tuning parameters.
This technique can be considered a pre-tuning phase which
slims down the list of parameters to be tuned by removing
the ones with a low expected beneﬁt.
The metaheuristic used for this purpose is built on top of
the standard (A)LNS method. However, it does not use ﬁxed
probabilities for the destruction and repair methods; instead, it
starts from an equal likelihood to select any of those methods
and then updates their probabilities based on a dynamic score
achieved throughout the run. To understand this, we ﬁrst have
to deﬁne some terms.
s
is a sequence of destroy and repair methods. In this case,
every segment has a length of 50, i.e. once destroy and
repair methods are alternated for 50 times, a segment s
is created.
α
or reaction factor, is a value between zero and one and it
selects how sensitive the weights adjustment should be.
This concept is analogous to Holt-Winters smoothing
parameter [11] or gradient descent learning rate [19].
Our reaction factor is set to 0.01 for a good balance
between speed and accuracy.
σs
is the score of a destruction or repair method in segment
s.
ωs
is a sum of all the rewards obtained by that destroy
or repair method throughout the duration of segment
s. A reward is assigned every time that a destruction
or repair method is selected and it varies based on the
obtained candidate solution performance.
Reward points are assigned in the following way:
50
candidate solution becomes the new best solution
20
candidate solution is better than the current one (but not
the new best)
5
candidate solution is accepted because of the threshold
acceptance criteria
1
candidate solution is rejected
The score for each method starts from zero and it is updated
every time that a new segment is created, i.e. after 50 iterations.
The updates use this formula:
σs =
0,
s = 0
(1 −α) · σs−1 + α · ωs,
s > 0
At any point in time the probability to select a method is
proportional to its score with respect to the other methods
in the same high level category (i.e. destroy or repair). By
analyzing the development of scores over time, we can
have a fairly good overview of methods utility and in the
end increase tuning accuracy only for the most important ones.
The ALNS metaheuristic has been run 10 times on randomly
selected instances; parameters were set to acceptable, although
not ﬁne-tuned, values. Figure 5 shows the scores trend over
time for our two repair methods.
Overall they seem to have similar performances, with
a marginally better one for scoreRepair. The reason for
such a similar outcome between a random method and a
problem-speciﬁc one is that scoreRepair evaluates only a
small subset from the full list of available shifts. As already
mentioned, one could increase the subset size or even score
every shift in |S|, however that would considerably slow
down the algorithm. Given that, we have decided to set both
repair methods to be equally likely and consume tuning time
for more valuable parameters. Hence, γS = γR = 0.5.
Similarly to the previous image, Figure 6 displays the aver-
age score over different instances for all the destroy methods.
Some methods have an extremely low score because their
corresponding candidate solution is usually discarded. Yet,
they should not be entirely removed from the portfolio of
destruction methods but instead be selected with a small
probability. The reason is that these methods still help (A)LNS
to escape from local optima and, as expected, the methods
with the worst scores are the ones with the largest destruction
size.
After further investigations, we have decided to divide our 7
methods in three groups: S, A and B. These groups can also
be conveniently identiﬁed by looking at Figure 6.
Group S is designed for the best performing and most
commonly picked algorithm. In this case, smallDestroy is
uncontested.
Group
A
contains
medium,
singleEndTime
and
singleStartTime destroy; they performed good but should be
==PAGE:13==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
13
Fig. 5.
Average score obtained by the 2 repair methods over time. A segment consists of 50 destroy-repair iterations.
Fig. 6.
Average score obtained by the 7 destroy methods over time. A segment consists of 50 destroy-repair iterations.
placed in a different tier than the smallDestroy method.
Group B is made of large, endTime and startTime destroy.
These methods should be picked the least and only used
for diversiﬁcation purposes because they heavily change a
solution shift structure and make it hard for the algorithm to
dig deeper into the solution space.
A decisive beneﬁt of this grouping is that we can tune
those clusters instead of the methods directly. This scales
down the total number of destruction method parameters from
7 to 3. Moreover, since the probability of selecting a method
should always sum up to one (it is not possible to have
an iteration without the destruction phase), the degrees of
freedom are only two. In other words, once two probabilities
are set, the third one will be a linear combinations of those
two. Finally, when all the groups selection probabilities are
tuned, each method within that cluster will be assigned an
equal probability since they all have very similar performance.
To simplify things even more and reduce the total tuning
time, we have decided to arbitrarily assign a value of 3%
for the probability of selecting group B (ξB), or 1% for each
destroy method in that group. Our thoughts behind this is that
==PAGE:14==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
14
group B is, by a considerable margin, the least likely to be
picked from the three groups and therefore a ﬁne tuning of this
parameter would only bring a minor beneﬁt when compared
to the other ones. Consequently, the probabilities of choosing
group S (ξS) over group A (ξA) are now explained by this
formula:
ξS = 1 −ξB −ξA,
where ξB = 0.03 because manually ﬁxed.
After this brief analysis we can conclude that the most im-
portant parameter to tune is the pair {ξS, ξA}, which given the
previous relation, can be consider as an individual parameter.
This will be done via a traditional way which is commonly
used for machine learning hyperparameter optimization: the
grid search algorithm.
C. Grid search
Grid search is a common way to perform parameter tuning.
It works by selecting a list of possible values for each
of the parameters to be tuned. Then, each combination is
evaluated through a validation error function and the best one
is selected. For this problem the validation error function is a
mix of different criteria, among them average objective value
and average percentage gap obtained throughout multiple runs
over the training datasets.
Nowadays there is a variety of different methods to achieve
the same goal of parameter tuning. Our choice has fallen
upon the grid search algorithm because of different reasons.
The ﬁrst one is that the datasets are limited in size and
each run is several minutes long, making other methods
like gradient-based optimization impractical to use. Another
reason is that each run with a speciﬁc parameter combination
is independent from other runs; hence, one could exploit that
these computations are perfectly parallel and divide them
among multiple clusters. High performance computing is
unnecessary for this study, yet it could become a valuable
asset for scenarios with a higher number of parameters to
be tuned or a greater necessary accuracy. Moreover, one
should always consider that parameter tuning suffers of
the diminishing returns law: after a certain point, even tiny
improvements require a huge amount of effort in terms of
resources.
Previously we have discussed that our resources allow us
to test not more than six different parameter combinations.
Yet, we will not test all of them directly but only a group of
ﬁve. This leaves some buffer which can be used to extend the
range of values in case the optimum seems to be one of the
extreme points. For example, if one is tuning ξS over a range
of discrete values [0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8] and 0.5 appears to be the
best, it is worth to investigate if values below that one would
improve the results.
Our initial choice for the ﬁve {ξS, ξA} values to test is:
C1 = (0.67, 0.3), C2 = (0.73, 0.24), C3 = (0.79, 0.18),
C4 = (0.85, 0.12), C5 = (0.91, 0.06). Each pair has been
used to feed the model and run it for ten minutes on all
the 32 training instances. The results were then stored and
summarized in Table VI.
TABLE VI.
EVALUATION OF DIFFERENT PARAMETER COMBINATIONS
Evaluation criteria
Parameter Combination
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
Average objective value
2171
2154
2171
2130
2166
Average gap
6.93%
6.06%
6.77%
5.11%
6.70%
Standard deviation
6.91
6.64
6.30
6.14
6.28
Times best
3
8
5
10
6
The ﬁrst row is a simple average of the objective values
obtained in all the instances. The second row is the average
percentage difference between the objective value obtained by
a parameter combination Ci and the best value among all
Cs. The third row is the standard deviation for the objective
value percentage gaps among the 32 instances. The last row
counts how many times a parameter combination Ci is the
best combination. Furthermore, Figure 7 graphically shows the
average objective value and the gap standard deviation among
the different {ξS, ξA} values.
Fig. 7.
Visualization of parameter combination scores over two evaluation
criteria: average objective value and standard deviation.
If we look at the scores obtained by the different parameter
combinations, C4 scores best in every criteria and this makes
all the other combinations dominated. Because of this it comes
natural to select C4 as optimal and therefore set ξS = 0.85,
ξA = 0.12 and ξB = 0.03. In addition, Figure 8 presents
another graphical example - in only two of the four dimensions
- of C4’s superiority.
==PAGE:15==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
15
Fig. 8.
Scatter plot to show C4’s dominance over the other parameter
combinations. Only two of the four evaluation criteria are included in this
image.
Unfortunately, parameter tuning does not always end up
with clear-cut choices. In that case, one has to take a decision
based on his or her preference about the different evaluation
criteria. The problem of picking the best combination based on
multiple criteria is a decision making optimization problem.
This area of study has a multitude of different approaches
and - for the sake of completeness of the parameter tuning
description - we present a no-preference method; in particular,
the method of global criterion. [7]
One possible form for the global criterion model is:
min
max
i=1,...,C fi(x) −z∗
i
s.t.
x ∈P
where
fi(x)
is
the
value
obtained
by
a
parameter
combination with respect to criteria i, e.g. average score of
C1, and z∗is a vector of desired objectives. In this case: a
low average score, average gap, standard deviation and a high
number of times where that combination is the best, ideally
32 times. Two important factors to consider in order to set
z∗correctly are the proper placement of fi(x) with respect
to z∗(depending if that difference should be minimized or
maximized in that criteria) and to scale values properly.
D. Tuning conclusions
Since only ﬁve parameter settings out of the six allowed
have been tested, we will make an attempt with an additional
parameter combination. By looking again at Figure 7 there
seems to be two desirable combinations: one between C3
and C4 and the other between C4 and C5. We will test a
parameter combination between the last two because the
respective values in Table VI are slightly better. However, if
time was not an issue, we would have preferred to divide
C3 - C5 into several smaller segments and test all of them
individually.
We have run again the 32 training instances with [ξS, ξA]
= [0.88, 0.09] but this unfortunately resulted in worse results
when compared to C4. Finally, we can assign each destroy
method within the same group an equally likely probability
and, together with the parameter settings already discussed,
we can have an overview of the optimal parameter values in
Table VII.
TABLE VII.
OVERVIEW OF THE VALUES ASSIGNED TO EACH CONTROL
PARAMETER
Parameters
Values
λS
1.00
λM
3.00
λL
5.00
ψ
15.00
υS
0.85
υM, υSET , υSST
0.04
υL, υST , υET
0.01
γS, γR
0.5
To conclude this section we can afﬁrm that the parameter
tuning has clearly brought value to the (A)LNS and Pippo
solution methods. It is difﬁcult to estimate a precise number but
after improving the results with the pre-analysis phase, we have
been able to reduce the objective value for a few additional
percentage points via the somehow limited grid search tuning.
This might sound as a small improvement; in reality, it is
extremely proﬁtable given that we are scheduling more than a
hundred employees.
VIII.
COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
In this section we will ﬁrstly present the effectiveness of
(A)LNS and HC for the standard cardinality constrained shift
design problem. Each of the 92 instances already presented
in the data section was run for 600 and 1200 seconds. Then
results were grouped by instance set, consisting of every
allowed cardinality |Ssol| for a ﬁxed pair of Emax and
|S| values. Hence, the 92 initial instances are encapsulated
into 6 instance sets which are ran twice (with different run
lengths) to show their development over time. Moreover,
we will benchmark our solution methods against the results
achieved by Richard et al with their four variations of
Bender’s matheuristics (B0, B1, B3 and B5) and the ones
obtainable with the use of Gurobi (GRB). Since they
prove that Model 1 has signiﬁcantly better solutions when
solved without any integer requirement on the x-variables, all
the Gurobi results presented here refer to that formulation [12].
The second part of this section will analyze Pippo’s
performance on the same instance sets, with the difference
that 45 minutes meal breaks are allowed for the security
staff. Unfortunately, the literature on the CCSDP does
not ease our benchmark process when meal breaks are
introduced. Nonetheless, we will compare Pippo’s results
with a deterministic approach which should give results fairly
similar to a scenario where meal breaks are not planned with
a dedicated tool but manually managed instead.
The machine used for all tests on (A)LNS, HC and Pippo
is an Intel Core i7-4720HQ CPU @ 2.60 GHz with 16 GB
==PAGE:16==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
16
TABLE VIII.
COUNTER OF HOW MANY TIMES A SOLUTION METHOD
HAS FOUND THE BEST SOLUTION
Instance set
Found best objective value
B0
B1
B3
B5
GRB
HC
(A)LNS
160 1241 [600]
0
0
0
0
0
7
9
180 1241 [600]
0
0
0
0
0
7
9
200 1241 [600]
0
0
2
1
0
9
5
160 1241 [1200]
0
0
0
0
0
5
11
180 1241 [1200]
0
0
0
0
0
3
13
200 1241 [1200]
0
0
0
0
1
5
10
160 2145 [600]
0
0
0
0
0
5
11
180 2145 [600]
0
0
0
0
0
3
13
200 2145 [600]
0
0
0
0
1
5
10
160 2145 [1200]
0
0
0
0
0
6
10
180 2145 [1200]
0
0
0
0
1
1
14
200 2145 [1200]
0
0
0
0
1
6
9
Total [600]
0
0
2
1
1
36
57
Total [1200]
0
0
0
0
3
26
67
Total
0
0
2
1
4
62
124
RAM and Windows 10 (64 bit) as operating system. These
technical speciﬁcations are only marginally inferior to the
setup used by Richard et al. and should therefore return
comparable results [12].
Table VIII summarizes the results obtained by our solution
methods,
the
Benders
matheuristics
and
Gurobi.
Every
columns represents a method used to solve the CCDSP and
rows are instance sets containing 16 instances each. Moreover,
numbers inside square brackets deﬁne the run time used for
each single instance in that set. Intersections in the table
count how many times a method has found the best objective
value compared to all the other methods. In the event of a tie,
all the methods with the best objective values are counted;
this is the reason why the sum of all the values in the third
row is greater than the 16 instances per set. Finally, at the
bottom of the table we can look at summary statistics, also
divided by run time.
At ﬁrst glance we notice that the majority of best solutions
are found by our two solution methods, with only a few cases
where Gurobi or the last two Benders matheuristics perform
better. Speciﬁcally, HC and (A)LNS retrieved the best value
in more than 95% of the total instances. When we compare
our two solution methods against each other, (A)LNS seems
to outperform HC by a big margin and this is even more
accentuated for longer run times. A possible explanation for
such behavior is that HC is more likely to get stuck in good
local optima, while (A)LNS trades speed for built-in escape
mechanisms which help to perform better in the long run.
Table IX is an additional tool in support of the benchmark
process for HC and (A)LNS. Here we have an overview of
all the benchmark methods against (one by one) the two
approaches proposed in this study. In addition, we compare
HC and (A)LNS with the best solutions known (BEST) for
each instance; namely the best outcome among the Benders
matheuristics and Gurobi, with equal runtime allowed. As
already done for Table VIII, results are grouped by instance
set and run time, followed by summary statistics.
Each entry in the table is the average objective value
improvement
between
our
solution
methods
and
the
benchmark methods, organized by instance set and run
time. For example, the average objective value within the
sixteen ”160 1241” instances obtained by a 600 seconds run
of HC was 14.62% better than what was produced by B0.
(A)LNS appears once again superior to all the other methods;
in fact, it consistently produces results approximately 10%
better
than
what
achievable
by
running
four
Bender’s
matheuristics, Gurobi and then picking the best solutions
among all of the ones found. Furthermore, in contrast to HC,
its results are not negatively affected by the run duration
but seem to constantly improve over time. Yet, there is an
exception to this when we look at Gurobi runs: the gap with
HC’s and (A)LNS’s objective values becomes tighter the more
run time is allowed. This fact aligns with the idea that a LP or
MIP solver is guaranteed to ﬁnd the optimum solution for a
problem if run for enough time; instead, metaheuristics based
approaches (expect for some cases of Simulated Annealing
[17]) might search the solution space forever without ﬁnding
an optimal solution.
From these tests it is clear that (A)LNS is currently the
best approach for the CCSDP if time is an issue. The next
analysis aims to visualize how fast this metaheuristic is
when compared to the previous studies on this problem and
hopefully convince readers that (A)LNS is a good start point
for future improvements.
Figure 9 (from run start until 2′) and Figure 10) (from
2′ to 6′) take every instance set, consisting of 16 instances
run for 600 seconds each, and compares (A)LNS average
objective value per instance set with the best value known for
runs not longer than 1200 seconds. 3600 seconds runs will
be analyzed separately because Benders matheuristics values
often do not improve quickly enough to justify a triplicated
run time, at least for the purpose of measuring (A)LNS speed
because it would inﬂate our results. E.g. Obtaining a speciﬁc
objective value in 4 minutes instead of 60 minutes might
seem much better than retrieving it in 4 minutes instead of
20. In reality, the objective value at the 20 minutes mark is
close (sometimes equal) to what achievable in 60 minutes;
hence the difference in speed is not that signiﬁcant.
It is interesting to notice how quickly (A)LNS converges.
For example, its worst case among the instance sets is only
roughly 50% away from the best value after just ten seconds.
The time frame in Figure 10 is intentionally cut to show that
(A)LNS is able to ﬁnd better solutions than the best ones
known, in up to approximately 360 seconds, with a best case
==PAGE:17==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
17
TABLE IX.
OBJECTIVE VALUE GAPS AMONG DIFFERENT SOLUTION METHODS
Instance set [time]
Percentage improvement for HC and (A)LNS against four Benders matheuristics, Gurobi and BEST
B0
B1
B3
B5
GRB
BEST
HC
(A)LNS
HC
(A)LNS
HC
(A)LNS
HC
(A)LNS
HC
(A)LNS
HC
(A)LNS
160 1241 [600]
14.62
16.37
12.85
14.74
11.21
13.26
11.12
13.13
42.93
44.25
9.08
11.08
180 1241 [600]
17.61
19.38
20.12
21.55
10.75
12.82
12.95
14.85
51.57
52.57
9.54
11.61
200 1241 [600]
19.96
19.08
20.17
19.20
12.99
12.05
13.22
12.18
51.61
51.39
11.92
10.93
160 1241 [1200]
10.89
16.64
9.59
15.33
9.34
15.08
8.84
14.65
35.35
38.88
6.24
12.10
180 1241 [1200]
15.08
17.40
17.17
19.50
10.37
12.85
12.43
14.89
40.63
42.50
8.07
10.60
200 1241 [1200]
14.68
17.71
14.73
17.97
8.20
11.64
6.78
10.36
34.95
37.03
5.19
8.76
160 2145 [600]
16.19
18.43
18.96
21.10
10.69
12.92
11.23
13.55
27.46
29.00
7.10
9.42
180 2145 [600]
18.72
17.34
19.69
18.30
15.14
13.55
12.77
11.10
28.38
27.10
10.02
8.37
200 2145 [600]
17.78
18.70
16.42
17.40
10.97
12.04
12.63
13.58
27.74
28.15
7.90
8.99
160 2145 [1200]
19.15
19.99
20.24
21.10
12.22
13.31
13.52
14.41
25.23
25.55
9.17
10.20
180 2145 [1200]
16.09
21.17
16.71
21.69
13.42
18.54
11.25
16.54
23.77
28.64
8.43
13.93
200 2145 [1200]
20.97
20.88
18.61
18.18
14.68
14.46
15.81
15.42
26.81
26.29
10.47
10.18
Average [600]
17.48
18.22
18.03
18.71
11.96
12.77
12.32
13.06
38.28
38.74
9.26
10.07
Average [1200]
16.14
18.96
16.17
18.96
11.37
14.31
11.44
14.38
31.12
33.15
7.93
10.96
Average [all]
16.81
18.59
17.10
18.83
11.67
13.54
11.88
13.72
34.70
35.95
8.59
10.51
Fig. 9.
Average objective value per instance set compared to best known. Development over the ﬁrst two minutes.
==PAGE:18==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
18
TABLE XI.
COMPARISON OF Pippo AGAINST AN ARTIFICIAL
BENCHMARK
Instance set
Average objective value
Pippo
LEF T
Gap %
160 1241 [600]
6045
28199
447
180 1241 [600]
5448
30402
635
200 1241 [600]
5067
31192
640
160 2145 [600]
4017
23209
573
180 2145 [600]
4006
24073
620
200 2145 [600]
4057
23539
601
Average
4774
26769
466
of only 120 seconds. Again, when we consider that these
values were found after long runs of Bender’s matheuristics
and/or Gurobi (mostly between 600 and 1200 seconds each),
(A)LNS’s speed is remarkable.
As a ﬁnal test, in Table X we compare again HC and
(A)LNS to Benders matheuristic. This time there is an
important difference: Benders have been run for 3600
seconds, whereas our methods are not allowed to exceed 1200
seconds. Note that Gurobi is not included in the table, as
well as in BEST’s results, because those values are currently
unavailable. However, they will be used in the future for
a more accurate comparison. The purpose of this test is to
analyze if long run times make a difference towards the
choice of the best performing algorithm. According to what
shown in Table X, (A)LNS is still the best performing among
the heuristics-based methods; in fact, even with a handicap in
terms of alloted time, it outperforms the other methods by a
few percentage points.
We know from Section V and Section VI that (A)LNS
can be considered as one of the modules contained in Pippo
framework. Because of this it is reasonably to assume similar
traits in their performances. Yet, we have still performed a
set of tests for our selected meal breaks solution method,
but restricted to 600 seconds runs due to time limitations.
Nevertheless, it would be interesting to investigate if the
objective values continue to improve after hitting the 10
minutes mark.
Since, to our knowledge, there is not any benchmark avail-
able for the meal break variation of the CCSDP, we have
constructed a heuristic (LEFT) which assigns meal breaks
in a deterministic fashion. In practice it starts from a solution
of the standard CCSDP obtained through a 20 minute run of
(A)LNS which, according to Table VIII, is likely to be close or
equal to the best solution known; then, it assigns meal breaks
by using ’formula A’ of Table II. I.e. every meal break is left
off-set from the center.
Similarly to previous tests, we have run each instance for
600 seconds and computed the average objective value for
every set. Remember that an instance set includes all allowed
|Ssol| while Emax and |S| are ﬁxed. Table XI stores all these
information and the last column measures how much better
Pippo performed against our benchmark tool LEFT, based
on this relation (to apply for every instance set):
Gap = 1
n ·
n
X
i=1
LEFTi −Pippoi
Pippoi
where LEFTi is the objective value obtained by the
benchmark method in instance i, Pippoi is the objective value
obtained by the homonym method in i and n is the number
of instances in that set.
We can see that the average gaps between Pippo and
the pseudo-manual approach are huge; in fact, LEFT ﬁnds
solutions with objective values roughly ﬁve times higher. This
demonstrates once again how the meal break variation of the
CCSDP is considerably more effective to solve when one starts
to consider meal break placements while designing shifts,
instead of forcing breaks within an already ﬁxed workforce
plan.
IX.
CONCLUSION
The initial motivation for this research was to gain insight
into the current issues with ﬁnding values close to the optima
rapidly, for instances of the CCSDP. Thanks to previous
researchers who have already worked hard on this problem,
we have been able to start from a solid base and experiment
with different approaches.
In the end, this has resulted in an excellent (A)LNS frame-
work capable of handling the process of shift design quicker
and more effectively (in terms of objective value) when com-
pared to state of the art methodologies. In fact, our (A)LNS
framework was able to reach solutions, at least as good
as the best known so far, considerably faster. For instance,
(A)LNS runs between 120 and 360 seconds performed, on
average, equally to the the best outcome of four Bender’s
matheuristics variations and Gurobi executed for 1200 seconds
each. Moreover, with the same allowed runtime, (A)LNS has
found solutions with objective values on average 10% better
than the best one found by its opponents.
Because of this, we have been able to add an additional
level of complexity to the problem; namely to also consider an
efﬁcient meal break placement for employees. Yet, according
to the values indicated by Richard et al. in their paper, we are
still far away from the actual optima. [12]
Since meal breaks are an undiscovered ﬁeld when it comes
to the CCSDP, we have developed and tested two methods
that rely on contrasting ideas: Pippo and Pluto. Pluto tries to
resemble a human approach by ﬁrst building a solution where
shifts are designed as good as possible and later aiming to
place meal breaks efﬁciently. Instead, Pippo approaches the
problem from a different angle and includes meal breaks
already from the ﬁrst phase of shift designing.
==PAGE:19==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
19
TABLE X.
A FINAL COMPARISON OF THE HEURISTICS-BASED SOLUTION METHODS
Instance set [time (A)LNS vs B]
Percentage improvement for HC and ALNS against Benders matheuristics and BEST
B0
B1
B3
B5
BEST
HC
(A)LNS
HC
(A)LNS
HC
(A)LNS
HC
(A)LNS
HC
(A)LNS
160 1241 [1200 vs 3600]
6.27
12.13
4.42
10.43
5.29
11.11
3.04
9.16
−0.59
5.75
180 1241 [1200 vs 3600]
9.28
11.70
10.35
12.71
6.16
8.69
5.65
8.15
2.10
4.71
200 1241 [1200 vs 3600]
7.90
11.27
6.49
10.13
2.50
6.16
2.96
6.62
0.06
3.84
160 2145 [1200 vs 3600]
15.88
16.81
15.74
16.64
9.44
10.56
10.68
11.67
7.56
8.69
180 2145 [1200 vs 3600]
11.48
16.75
13.09
18.26
8.14
13.64
8.47
14.01
5.15
10.81
200 2145 [1200 vs 3600]
17.67
17.61
14.11
13.66
10.83
10.70
12.12
11.82
7.77
7.64
Average
11.4
14.38
10.7
13.64
7.06
10.14
7.15
10.24
3.67
6.9
Fig. 10.
Average objective value per instance set compared to best known. Timeframe between two and six minutes.
During the testing phase we have discovered how the more
intuitive method, and most likely to be used in the industrial
world, seems to perform poorly if compared to Pippo, our
selected approach. After discarding Pluto, we have shown
Pippo’s performance by encapsulating (A)LNS within it and
later tested it against an artiﬁcial benchmark. Multiple tests
has shown an objective value improvement of 4 to 5 times
compared to what achievable by the artiﬁcial benchmark. Yet,
it is important to consider that these numbers are inﬂated
since the artiﬁcial benchmark does not consider that skilled
managers are unlikely to blindly assign meal breaks rather
than using their experience to adjust the schedule in real
time. Again, even though we cannot rely on exact numbers
from parallel studies for this variation of the CCSDP, we are
conﬁdent that Pippo is competitive for different needs and
for multiple scenarios thanks to being a particularly ﬂexible
framework.
Lusby, Range and Larsen already reported in their paper
various extensions to the standard CCSDP which are still
of interest after our development of new methodologies and
the inclusion of meal breaks
[12]. An example of this is to
change the objective function to become a piecewise linear
increasing function. This will allow to penalize undercoverage
and overcoverage according to their relative impact on that
time period requirements. With the current setup, a solution
where one time period is fully undercovered might be
considered equally good as another solution where multiple
time periods are only slightly undercovered. The reason
behind this is that when the two total undercoverage amounts
==PAGE:20==
MASTER THESIS, DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET, INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT, JULY 2017
20
to equal values, the model is not able to catch the different
impacts on the service level. Naturally, the same reasoning
applies to overcoverage or a mix of these two factors. In
addition to the previous extensions, it would be interesting
to consider a new problem where shifts do not include only
a single meal break; instead, each shift contains a long meal
break, and several minor breaks to reestablish the personnel’s
productivity level back to normal. A possible complication
related to this extension is the quick growth of the shift types
list, if Pippo is the selected approach for solving this problem
variation.
In conclusion, we are for the moment satisﬁed of the results
obtained and hope to make a concrete difference to the future
of workforce scheduling.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Beer et al., “Scheduling breaks in shift plans for call centers,”
Proc. of the 7th Int. Conf. on the Practice and Theory of Auto-
mated Timetabling, 2008. [Online]. Available: http://patatconference.org/
patat2008/proceedings/Schafhauser-HA3c.pdf
[2]
Arbejdstilsynet, H˚andbog om psykisk arbejdsmiljø, 3rd ed.
2004.
[3]
G. B. Dantzig, “Letter to the editor a comment on Edie’s Trafﬁc Delays
at Toll Booths,” Journal of the Operations Research Society of America,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 339–341, 1954. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1287/opre.2.3.339
[4]
G. Dueck and T. Scheuer, “Threshold accepting: A general pur-
pose optimization algorithm appearing superior to simulated annealing,”
Journal of Computational Physics, vol. 90, no. 1, pp. 161 – 175,
1990. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/002199919090201B
[5]
J. G¨artner et al., A Heuristic Based System for Generation of Shifts with
Breaks. London, Springer London, 2005, pp. 95–106. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/1-84628-103-2 7
[6]
J. G¨artner et al., Comparing mathematical and local search heuristic for
solving the minimum shift design problem with breaks..
2006.
[7]
K. Miettinen, No-Preference Methods.
Boston, MA: Springer
US, 1998, pp. 67–76. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4615-5563-6 3
[8]
M. Widl, “Memetic algorithms for break scheduling, ” Masters thesis.
Vienna University of Technology, 2010. [Online]. Available: http://www.
kr.tuwien.ac.at/staff/widl/publications/Masterthesis.pdf
[9]
M. Rekik, J. Cordeau and J. Soumis, “Implicit shift scheduling with mul-
tiple breaks and work stretch duration restrictions,” Journal of Scheduling,
vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 49–75, 2010. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s10951-009-0114-z
[10]
P. C. Schuur, “Classiﬁcation of acceptance criteria for the simulated
annealing algorithm,” Mathematics of Operations Research, vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 266–275, 1997. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1287/moor.22.
2.266
[11]
P. Goodwin et al., “The holt-winters approach to exponential smoothing:
50 years old and going strong,” Foresight, vol. 19, pp. 30–33, 2010.
[12]
R. Lusby, T. Range, and J. Larsen, “A benders decomposition-based
matheuristic for the cardinality constrained shift design problem,” Euro-
pean Journal of Operational Research, vol. 254, pp. 385–397, 2016.
[13]
R. M. Lusby, M. Schwierz, T. M. Range, and J. Larsen, “An adaptive
large neighborhood search procedure applied to the dynamic patient
admission scheduling problem,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 74,
pp. 21 – 31, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0933365716300926
[14]
S. J. Russel and P. Norvig, Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach,
2nd ed.
Pearson Education, 2003.
[15]
S. L. Moondra, “An L.P. model for workforce scheduling in banks,”
Journalof Bank Research, vol. 6, pp. 299 – 301, 1976.
[16]
S. Luke, Essentials of Metaheuristics, 2nd ed.
Lulu, 2013.
[17]
S. Rajasekaran, On the Convergence Time of Simulated Annealing,
November 1990.
[18]
S. Røpke and D. Pisinger, “An adaptive large neighborhood search
heuristic for the pickup and delivery problem with time windows,”
Transportation Science, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 455–472, 2006. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.1050.0135
[19]
S. Ruder, “An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1609.04747, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1609.04747
[20]
T. Aykin, “Optimal shift scheduling with multiple break windows,”
Management Science, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 591–602, 1996. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.42.4.591
[21]
T. Clausen, A Dynamic Programming-Based Heuristic for the Shift
Design Problem in Airport Ground Handling.
DTU Management, 2010.
