==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Constrained nearest neighbor search in
geometric space
A practical approach to deep search
Mikkel Vilstrup (s152181)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis introduces the notion Constrained Nearest Neighbors Search defined as
nearest neighbors search constrained by any meta data associated with the data points.
It shows constraining the data set on some extra information improves the quality of
the search results while speeding up the search time.
To do this, a Deep Learning model is trained to convert fashion images into descriptive
embeddings. These embeddings are inserted into a modified version of the nearest
neighbor algorithm: the Cover Tree. I call this modified version for a Constrained
Cover Tree or CC-Tree for simplicity. For the sake efficiency, this algorithm is imple-
mented in C++ in a multithreaded manner.
Both the model, the algorithm and the combination of the two are thoroughly ana-
lyzed and tested. The results of these test are promising, with a speed improvement
of a factor of 4 to 9 compared to the original algorithm on both random data and
the image embeddings. Furthermore, qualitative tests using the image embeddings
indicate improved quality of the search results.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a master degree in Information Technology.
Kongens Lyngby, January 16, 2018
Mikkel Vilstrup (s152181)
==PAGE:5==
Preface
iii
“What one fool can do, so can another”
— Ancient Simian Proverb
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This thesis is the result of an intensive period of five months of hard work. It has
been an great learning experience for me, not only in the scientifically, but also on a
personal level. Writing this dissertation has had a big personal impact. I would thus
like to reflect on the people who have supported and helped me so much throughout
this period.
I would first like to thank my supervisor Prof. Ole Winther, whom besides providing
me with a great many learning experiences, have been quick to answer every e-mail
and schedule meetings whenever requested.
Finally, I have to express my very profound gratitude to my parents, my girlfriend
and friends for providing me with unfailing support and continuous encouragement
throughout my many years of study and through the process of researching and writ-
ing this thesis. This accomplishment would not have been possible without them.
Thank you very much, everyone!
Mikkel Vilstrup
Kongens Lyngby, January 16, 2018
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iv
Contents
v
Glossary
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Why meta data matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Deep Learning
7
2.1
What is a neural network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
How a neural network learns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Embedding Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Literature Review: Deep Learning
21
3.1
Deep Learning for Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Deep Learning for Image Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Deep Learning for Fashion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Data
29
4.1
ShopStyle Data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Biases in fashion images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Models & Experiments
33
5.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Literature Review: Nearest Neighbors & Industry approaches
42
6.1
Nearest Neighbors Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
A popular approach to KNN search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
Curse of dimensionality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
6.4
Company Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Constrained Nearest Neighbor Search
60
7.1
Finding a starting point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.2
Cover Tree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.3
Constrained Cover Tree (CC-Tree) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8
Implementation & Tests
76
8.1
Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
8.2
Initial Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
8.3
Final Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
9
Future work
89
9.1
Improving the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
9.2
Improving the data structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
9.3
Perspective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
10 Conclusion
92
A Deep Learning
93
B Amazon Data Set
100
C Preliminary models
103
D Final Model
109
E Initial CC-Tree Implementation
120
F Final CC-Tree Implementation
125
Bibliography
130
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
==PAGE:10==
Glossary
activation function a non-linear function ”added” to each hidden layer in a neural
network to allow the network to approximate non-linear functions.. vii
activations the output of a particular unit in a layer or the layer as a whole, once
it has gone through a non-linerarity function. vii
CNN an acronym of a Convolutional Neural Network; a specific kind of neural net
architecture, which uses weight sharing to decrease the amount of parameters.
vii
cosine distance
1 −
u · v
∥u∥2 · ∥v∥2
a measure of similarity between two non-zero vectors. This distance represents
the cosine of the angle between the two vectors. vii, 49, 50
euclidean distance
∥u −v∥2
the straight-line distance between two points in Euclidean space. vii, 49, 50
feature maps A feature map, or activation map, is the output activations for a
given filter in a Convolutional Neural Network. vii, 97
FFN an acronym of a Feed Forward Neural Network; the first kind of neural network.
It is also known as Dense Network, Multi Layer Perceptron etc. vii
hamming distance
c01 + c10
n
a common distance measure for binary vectors calculating the minimum number
of substitutions required to change one string into the other. vii, 49–51
ImageNet a large labeled image data set with a million images divided almost uni-
formly between a thousand categories. It can be found here. vii
==PAGE:11==
Glossary
ix
Mean Squared Error
1
n
n
∑
i=1
(ui −vi)2
a function which measures the average of the squares of the errors or deviations.
In deep learning it is often used as the cost function for regression problems.
vii, 15, 19
MNIST A classical data set within computer vision containing thousands of labeled
handwritten digits found here. vii
one-hot a way to transform a discrete integer i ∈{1, 2, · · · , n} into a vector of size
n such that n[i] = 1 and all other values are 0. This allows us to differentiate
between each element in a set in a uniform manner. vii, 10
Relu function
max(0, x)
In the context of Deep Learning it is an activation function defined as the
positive part of its argument. vii, 93
sigmoid function
σ(x) =
1
1 + e−1 =
ex
1 + ex
a mathematical function having an ”S” shaped curve (sigmoid curve) in the
range from 0 to 1. vii, 16, 93
tanH function
sinh x
cosh x = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
the hyperbolic tangent is a widely used function which outputs values that range
from -1 to 1. vii, 93
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Search is fundamental to the modern society. Since the invention of the internet,
the amount of stored digital information has exploded. All over the world a continu-
ous stream of people and companies are connecting to the web. Each adding to the
global information pool in the process. For many years there has only been one way
of searching effectively in this information; describing what you are searching for in
a textual format.
Although this works fine, the increasing mobile usage have inspired research into new
ways of searching for information. For the last two years, more than half of all Google
searches has been from mobile devices [1]. Writing long queries on a small mobile
phones can be cumbersome for the users. More importantly these phones are packed
with sensors which might provide information about the query’s intention. On top of
this, the capabilities of machine learning algorithms have seen tremendous progress
and can now accept various kinds of raw data instead of manually constructed fea-
tures.
One of these machine learning techniques is Deep Learning. It can effectively trans-
form all sorts of data into vector representations called embeddings. This has proven
a great tool for various tasks here including image search. However, it is still far from
perfect. The embeddings can be noisy with overlapping categories and unintuitive
clusters.
This thesis will look into how to improve search based on these vector representations.
More specifically it will introduce a new way to utilize meta information associated
with the vectors to filter the data set. I call this approach for “Constrained Nearest
Neighbors Search” (CKNN) defined as nearest neighbors search (KNN) constrained
by any meta data associated with each data point. This new approach can improve
the quality of the results while also speeding up the query time. Since it relies on
vector embeddings, this method can be used with any input which a neural network
can handle.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Why meta data matters
2
1.1
Why meta data matters
More often than not, a lot of meta data is associated with the primary information
source. This could naturally occurring information such as the time of creation, when
it was last updated, just as how many times it has been updated in total. It could
also be additive information such as price, vendor etc. Although each particular kind
of meta data might be used seldom on its own, being able to use meta data in general
can help narrow down the search in ways otherwise impossible.
1.1.1
Reducing the search space
When searching in learned vector embeddings, filtering the search space is even more
important than in data base applications. A perfect model can create embeddings
where distances in vector space are equal to the perceived differences in the original
input. However, in practice this is far from the case. Instead, the model will typically
be better at discerning some subsets of the items, while others will be closer together
or even intermixed.
This is visualized in Figure 1.1. In the image on the left, the 4 categories are shown,
with a gray cross in the middle representing the item searched for. If Nearest Neighbor
Search is used for this particular point, it is clear to see that more points from category
2 (blue) will be returned than category 3 (gray). In this case only two options are
available:
1. Improve the model’s representation of the items
2. Reduce the search space by filtering out unwanted points
Trying to improve the model is always worth aiming for. However, this might be
too costly or difficult to achieve in practice. If the target category is known, simply
discarding all the other categories is a much simpler solution. The rightmost image of
Figure 1.1 shows the result of simply filtering out the other categories. Here it can be
seen there are actually a lot of gray points rather close to the point in question. How-
ever, these might not have been found if the search had happened on the full data set.
==PAGE:14==
1.1 Why meta data matters
3
Figure 1.1: Two images visualizing a two dimensional representation of some items.
The color of each point shows which class it belongs to. The gray cross
shows the query point which. On the left the full data set is shown, on
the right three of the four classes is filtered out.
1.1.2
Including search intention
Meta data have always been important in regards to product search. A lot of the
relevant information associated with a given product can typically not be found in the
image. For consumer electronics the internals of the product might be more impor-
tant than its appearance. For fashion products the brand, designer or price are very
hard to estimate directly from an image, but extremely important for the customer.
The importance of meta data has been known for a long time, and almost all online
web shops allow customers to use meta data to further specify what they are looking
for through filters, examples of these can be seen in Figure 1.2. Although these filters
might seem cumbersome, they encode the intention of the user much better than a
text query or an image. Although a text query such as ”red nike shoes” gives some
indication of what item is sought for. A lot of important details such as size, price,
rating, material etc. are not mentioned, yet are crucial factors in the decision on
whether or not to buy a specific item.
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Why meta data matters
4
Figure 1.2: Search filters for meta data at Amazon, Apple, Alibaba and Ebay.
Source:
Amazon, Apple, Alibaba, Ebay.
All data base solutions thus include a way to filter a given query by some other
information in the data base. Despite its obvious relevance, such filtering does not
seem to be included in any nearest neighbor data structures.
1.1.3
Handling catastrophic errors
In this thesis catastrophic errors are defined as errors so grave they undermine a users
trust in the system. Catastrophic errors are thus very domain specific. Results con-
sidered fine within one domain will be very unacceptable within another. Figure 1.3
& Figure 1.4 show examples of a couple of cats and some fashion images. Although
the two cats are objectively very different from each other, most people would say
they look similar. Given an image search engine for this domain, I would be satisfied
with the one of the cats as a result if I queried with the other.
In the fashion case on the other hand, the clothing appear similar on the images.
However, since the details matter much more in this domain, users searching for the
high end designer images will not be satisfied for the cheap mass manufactured ver-
sions and the other way around. This makes fashion a great domain to test machine
learning models for image retrieval since small errors seem much more grave than in
other domains.
==PAGE:16==
1.1 Why meta data matters
5
Figure 1.3: An example of two images of cats which given the domain will most
likely be deemed similar by most people.
Figure 1.4: Two examples of fashion image pairs which although “objectively” very
similar of appearance will be deemed very different in the fashion do-
main, since each pair consist of a cheap brand priced from 30 −60$ and
a designer brand priced thousands of dollars. The two images in the
center are designer brands, while the images on each side is from H&M
(Left) and Zara (Right).
If to many catastrophic errors occur, the user might completely stop using the search
functionality. Giving the user the ability to filter the search result in a more fine
grained manner, reduces the likelihood of these catastrophic errors while enhancing
the users’ sense of control. This of course comes with an added search complexity.
However, if the filters are made optional, the overall system is almost as simple, yet
much more capable than a system without such filters.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Overview
6
1.2
Overview
CKKN search can benefit a great many domains.
I have chosen to showcase its
benefits using fashion images. In order to fully show the potential of constrained
KNN search, I have gone through the process of:
1. Generating multiple fashion data sets
2. Training a neural network to generate image embeddings
3. Converting an existing KNN algorithm to handle constraints
4. Making an efficient implementation of the new algorithm in C++ to test its
performance
This process is documented in the following 9 chapters, with chapter 7 being the
main theoretical contribution of this thesis. The first half of the thesis is dedicated
to the work of converting images into embeddings, with the second half dedicated to
constrained search.
I start out with a chapter on deep learning, explaining how these neural networks can
be used to convert their inputs into embeddings. In chapter 3 I review the literature
related to Deep Learning specifically related to image search and fashion. This is
followed by a chapter on the data sets used in this thesis are reviewed. Here I explain
how I created them, what they consists of just as an analysis of how they could be
improved. I then briefly explain the models I have trained, followed by a thorough
analysis of the results.
Having explained how the images are converted to embeddings, the focus moves to
efficient search in this embedding space.
Chapter 6 reviews the literature related
to nearest neighbor search, and industry approaches to image search. In chapter 7
I introduce the new concept of constrained nearest neighbors search. I analyze the
fundamental algorithm I have build upon after which my alterations are explained.
I then briefly explain the software implementation of the algorithm after which the
results is analyzed in depth.
In chapter 9 I shortly go through how the current implementation could be improved
just as which other domains could benefit from Constrained Nearest Neighbor Search.
This is followed by a conclusion in chapter 10.
Throughout these chapters I will use images of cats where fashion images are not
necessary for understanding. This choice was made because it makes the figures more
interesting to look at (than say handwritten numbers from MNIST as an example)
and more fun to create.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2
Deep Learning
This chapter will introduce the underlying theory of Deep Learning. It will go through
the simplest architecture called Feed Forward Neural networks, and explain how a
neural network is constructed and trained. Finally it will show how a content em-
bedding can be extracted from the network as a byproduct this process. The general
nature of Deep Learning explained in this chapter shows its’ potential to be used in
potentially endless domains. Since a content vector can always be extracted from deep
classification models, the progress of deep learning makes nearest neighbor search and
thus constrained nearest neighbor search more important than ever before.
Deep Learning has gained a lot of traction since Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
created a deep learning model which beat all other approaches on the ImageNet data
set [2, 3]. Their models’ performance was so astounding that an otherwise ill seen field
of research suddenly gained interest from researchers all over the world. Within long
the field had the focus of the biggest companies in the world. Their computational
resources and big data sets proved fundamental for making great performing models.
In the span of a few years, deep learning thus grew from a niche within the machine
learning community to one of the hallmarks of the machine learning field.
2.1
What is a neural network
Neural networks are computing systems inspired by the biological neural networks
of biological brains. These systems learn to progressively improve performance on
tasks by considering lots of examples. While the main underlying theory is more
than 70 years old [4] this approach have gained a lot of traction in recent years due
to increased computational power and more available data.
Today various architectures exists, however most of these are either improvements
of or include parts of two fundamental architectures named ”Feed Forward Neural
Networks” (FFN) and ”Convolutional Neural Networks” (CNN). Of these two the
FFN is explained below, while a walk through of the CNN, used extensively for
image data, can be found in Section A.2.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 What is a neural network
8
2.1.1
Feed Forward Neural Networks
Feed Forward Neural Networks, also known as multi-layer perceptrons (MLP), are
the oldest neural network architecture. The main idea was originally developed by
Rosenblatt in 1958 [5]. In this paper he invented a unit called a perceptron, named
by its purpose of mimicking the way the brain processes visual stimuli. This unit
would be able to get information through multiple “features” as input, and learn to
weight the importance of each “feature” in order to return the right output.
This was a novel idea, however his approach was more computationally intensive than
the alternative approaches at the time. On top of this, he only worked with a few
of these units at a time, which meant the practical results were not that impressive.
The approach thus did not catch on in the general research community, and only a
few researchers found it intriguing and continued to improve on the idea.
In 1989 Hornik, Stinchcombe, and White proved a system consisting of layers of
perceptrons could approximate any function [6]. They furthermore showed it only
required a single of such layers to do so, as long as the outputs of this layer was
also weighted in a similar manner by an output layer. Since the output of each layer
was simply fed to the next, these networks became generally known as Feed Forward
Networks.
These modern day FFNs consists of a number of hidden layers as well as a single
input layer, and a single output layer (Figure 2.1). All units in each layer i has a
single connection to every unit in layer i −1. A single weight is attached to each
of these connections, and the output of a given unit is the sum of all its weighted
connections. In order to reduce variance of the learned function, a bias value is added
to the output of each unit. This output is sent through a non-linear function before
reaching any later layer. A thorough explanation of the typical non-linear functions
can be found in Section A.1.
==PAGE:20==
2.1 What is a neural network
9
Figure 2.1: A visualization of a Feed Forward Neural Network. The left most col-
umn is the input vector, given to the network. There are then n hidden
layers, followed by an output vector. For each unit in the hidden layers
a bias is added.
These ideas were originally expressed mathematically through summation. However,
it turned out they could just as easily be expressed through linear algebra. A prop-
erty which turned out to have astounding consequences for the field, because all the
equations could be turned into matrix operations. This meant the operations could be
parallelized by the Graphical Processing Unit (GPU). Today they GPU have become
a centerpiece of Deep Learning since it for decades has been optimized to calculate
the changes to the matrix of the computer screen’s pixels as quickly as possible. The
speedup from calculating the matrix operations on the GPU allowed for bigger models
trained on bigger data sets, which turned out to be fundamental for great performance
at a great range of tasks.
Expressed in linear algebra, the equation for calculating the output z of a Feed For-
ward layer, given the input x becomes:
z = xw + b
The equation above shows the simplicity of the process. In its essence, its a single
matrix multiplication followed by an addition. However, it is worth showing why this
is actually possible. Since every unit has one weight for each feature of the input, the
input and the weights can be stacked into two matrices sharing at least one dimension
==PAGE:21==
2.2 How a neural network learns
10
(Figure 2.2). The inputs are given as rows in batches of size b such that the input
is b × f with f being the amount of features. The weights of the units can then be
stacked as columns in a matrix of size f × u where u is the amount of units. The
result of a matrix multiplication will then be b × u which can then be added with the
bias vector which has size u since there is one bias per unit.
Figure 2.2: A visualization of a single step in the equation: z = xw + b.
2.2
How a neural network learns
It is not enough to know neural network consists of a lot of weights and biases. To
truly understand how these neural networks work, an understanding of how these
weights and biases are changed is needed as well. In other words, it is important
to understand how these networks learn. Two fundamental concepts are needed to
understand how a neural network learns. Firstly how the error of the predictions can
be minimized trough gradient descent (described in Section A.3) and secondly how
the gradient of the neural network can be found in a piece wise manner using the
backpropagation algorithm.
To explain the backpropagation algorithm an example is used. As is typically done
when training a neural network on classification tasks, the target categories in our
examples will be one-hot encoded. one-hot encoding is used to make each category as
distinct from the rest of the categories as possible, and to not encode some unwanted
relationship between the classes. If for example an image is from category 3 out of 4
possible categories. The one-hot encoding of this category would be a 4 dimensional
vector with the value 1 in the third position and 0 in the rest: onehot(3) = [0, 0, 1, 0].
==PAGE:22==
2.2 How a neural network learns
11
2.2.1
Backpropagation: The intuition
Backpropagation is the core algorithm defining how neural networks learn from data.
The algorithm was first described in a paper by Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams
in 1988 [7]. Simply put, the purpose of backpropagation is to compute the negative
gradient of the network’s entire weight matrix in a computationally efficient manner.
Before diving in to the mathematical details, a simple example will be used to get an
intuitive understanding of why this algorithm works so well.
In this example the goal is to classify images of cats belonging to one of four categories.
Let’s start out by looking at a completely untrained network, shown in Figure 2.3. If
the network is treated as a black box, fed an image of a cat it will give an estimate of
which category the image belongs to. In all neural networks the weights are initialized
randomly. Because of this, the prediction will initially be random as well. In this
example the network finds category 1 most likely, whereas the image actually belongs
to category 3.
Figure 2.3: An abstract visualization of a neural network. On the left we have the
input (a cute cat), in the middle we have black box representation of
a neural network and on the right we have the final layer along side
the target values.The arrows show the direction we want to change the
values of the final layer with their size indicating to what extend they
should be changed.
In order to improve this terrible result, the network should be trained to be more
==PAGE:23==
2.2 How a neural network learns
12
correct the next time it sees this particular image. In other words, the value of unit
uL
3 (third circle from the top) should be nudged up, while nudging the other values
down. However, the importance of each nudge is not equal. As the arrows show, it
is much more important to nudge the value of uL
1 down, than the values of uL
2 and
uL
4 . Ideally the network should end in such a state that given a similar image, it
returns a much higher value in the unit corresponding to the right category, than any
of the other units (as seen in Figure 2.4). In order to get there, the backpropagation
algorithm is used.
Figure 2.4: The same network as in Figure 2.3, now with a trained network, so the
values in the final layer are much closer to the target values. The arrows
show the direction we want to change the values of the final layer.
Lets zoom in on the third unit uL
3 in the untrained network (Figure 2.5) to see how
the value of this unit can be nudged up. This unit is connected to eight units in
the second to last layer (uL−1
1
, · · · , uL−1
8
). Each of these eight units result in either
a positive or negative value (indicated by a green and red color) when multiplied
with their associated weight. They also differ in their absolute value indicated by the
opacity of both the unit and its’ connection to uL
3 . On the right we show the function
used to calculate the value of uL
3 . Three overall things can be done to increase the
value of uL
3 .
1. Alter the weights
2. Increase the bias
3. Alter the activations of the second to last layer
Although increasing the bias would be a good solution for this particular image. It
is a very inflexible solution, since the unit will then always be very active.
==PAGE:24==
2.2 How a neural network learns
13
Figure 2.5: A close up of a single unit in the final layer of the network from Fig-
ure 2.3. We show this unit’s connection to the former layer’s activations.
The colors green and red shows whether the value of an activation is
positive or negative after being multiplied with the associated weight.
The opacity of the color shows the absolute value of the activation. On
the bottom right is the sigmoid equation we use to calculate the value
of the final unit in question.
If instead the weights are altered, this results in a linear scaling of the activation
values from the units in the second to last layer. Since these activations differ in their
absolute value, the importance of each weight change is unequal, just like before. In
this specific example the solution is to increase the weights related to units uL−1
3
,
uL−1
5
, uL−1
6
& uL−1
8
, while decreasing the rest. However, it is more important to in-
crease the weight of uL−1
8
than the rest, since the activation value of this unit is bigger.
Finally, the activation values of the units in the second to last layer can be altered.
To do this, the steps done up until this point can be applied recursively, for each unit
in all the layers throughout the network. In other words, the changes are propagated
from the last layer back through the network, in order to find the optimal configura-
tion of weights in each layer.
Before going further there is one obvious question which should be answered. At this
point, the focus has been on how to increase a single unit in the last layer. However,
the values of the 3 other units should simultaneously be decreased. To do this, the
aforementioned steps are used, here with the goal of minimizing the final value. Each
==PAGE:25==
2.2 How a neural network learns
14
of these steps can be viewed as representing a “change vector” for each unit in the
final layer [uL
1 , · · · , uL
n]. Each of these “change vectors” have a dimensionality equal
to the number of weights and biases in the network. Their values are the changes
which when applied to the corresponding weight or bias, results in a desired nudge
to a specific final unit. In order to make one general change to the network, which
alters all the final units in the right direction, The mean of all these “change vectors”
is calculated and added all the weights and biases.
It is easy to see the network would within long be able to classify the image perfectly,
if this process is continued with the same image as input. At every step the values in
the final layer would be nudged in the right direction until no improvements could be
made. However, the model should be able to classify all possible images of these four
kinds of cats. Simply optimizing on this single cat does not provide any promises the
model would be able to classify other images of cats. To be able to generalize it needs
to change its’ weights and biases based on the mean of the “change vectors” for as
many images as possible, as shown in Figure 2.6. If the resources were available, the
optimal solution would be to look at all the available images and take the mean of the
resulting “change vectors”, before taking a single step in that direction. This would
be done repeatedly until the there was no more improvement to be made. However,
this is far from feasible. So instead small random batches of images is used, and the
weights updated based on the mean of these batches.
Figure 2.6: The update matrix calculated by the back propagation. Each row is a
weight in the network, each column is a training image. The value in
each cell is the alteration to a given weight to increase the performance
for that image. On the right we calculate the mean of all the images in
order to find the values which we will actually add to the weights.
==PAGE:26==
2.2 How a neural network learns
15
2.2.2
Backpropagation: The details
With the intuition of back propagation in place, it is time to look at how backpropaga-
tion is implemented in practice. The equations for backpropagation quickly gets long
and cumbersome. Because of this, a simple feed forward network is used as example
(Figure 2.7). This example network, only has 3 hidden layers, with one unit in each
layer. Such a network would never be useful in practice, however, it makes it easier
to explain the details of the algorithm. Since backpropagation is defined recursively,
the same overall steps are needed whether the network has 3 units or millions.
When going through the mathematics of backpropagation, a lot of symbols is thrown
together, which can be confusing at first. To improve understanding, color coded
the symbols are used, each with same color as the computational graph shown in
Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: An image of a simple neural network with 3 hidden units. In the top
the network is shown as it is with its activation values for a a particular
input. Below it, the computational graph needed to do backpropagation
on this network is shown.
Backpropagation is a way to calculate the impact each weight and bias has on the
“cost” of the current “configuration” of the network. This cost is calculated using a
cost function. A cost function is essentially any differentiable function which takes a
the output of the neural network and the target values as input and produces a single
value as output. This value is considered the “cost” of the current “configuration” of
the networks weights and biases.
Since this is example network only have one unit in every layer, Mean Squared Error
(MSE) will simply be used. From the values in top most image in Figure 2.7 it can
==PAGE:27==
2.2 How a neural network learns
16
be seen MSE would be:
C = (a(L) −y)2
= (0.77 −1)2
= 0.1089
With the cost defined, it is time to find out which variables should be nudged in order
to minimize it. In this example the sigmoid function is used as activation function.
a(L) = σ(z(L))
which cannot be nudged by itself. The target variables must thus exist further back
in the computational graph. From Section 2.1.1, it be seen the function for our last
layer would:
z(L) = a(L−1)w(L) + b(L)
Here are some variables which can be altered.
To do so, each variable’s relative
importance on the loss function should be calculated. Since the whole network is
just one function, the solution is to find the derivative of C with respect to each
variable. Since the weights of the network have the biggest importance, these will be
the starting point of our analysis. The full function of the last layer in our network
currently looks like the following:
C = (a(L) −y)2
a(L) = σ(z(L))
z(L) = a(L−1)w(L) + b(L)
The goal is to find the partial derivative of C with respect to w(L),
∂C
∂w(L) . However,
since the loss function is obviously a composite function the chain rule is needed. The
“function chain” should thus be followed backwards which is done by multiplying the
derivative of the outer function with the derivative of the inner function recursively1.
∂C
∂w(L) = ∂z(L)
∂w(L)
∂a(L)
∂z(L)
∂C
∂a(L)
(2.1)
Each of these derivatives can be calculated independently:
∂C
∂a(L) = 2(a(L) −y)
∂a(L)
z(L) = σ(z(L))(1 −σ(z(L)))
z(L)
∂w(L) = a(L−1)
1We can write the partial derivatives in any order we want. This order is chosen to make the
equation resemble the network in Figure 2.7.
==PAGE:28==
2.2 How a neural network learns
17
This gives the final equation for figuring out how much a change to w(L) affects the
value of our loss functions C.
∂C
∂w(L) = a(L−1)σ(z(L))(1 −σ(z(L)))2(a(L) −y)
The derivatives for the bias b(L) is almost the same with the single difference:
z(L)
∂b(L) = 1
This means that the biases do not depend on the earlier layers directly in the same
way the weights do, which can be seen from the full equation:
∂C
∂b(L) = σ(z(L))(1 −σ(z(L)))2(a(L) −y)
Before going further, there are a few key observations that should be mentioned. First
of all, to find out the importance of weight w(L) access to the value of the a(L−1) is
needed. This might seem like a trivial observation, but this is the reason for Deep
Learning big memory demands which is one of biggest downside of training neural
networks.
Since all the activations from the forward pass need to be kept in the
computers memory until backpropagation has finished, a complete duplicate of our
model is needed for every input trained on in parallel. Since a model can easily be
more than 100mb in size, this sets a strict limit on the amount of parallelism possible
on a single computer.
Furthermore, the amount of influence w(L) has on the cost depends directly on how
strong the previous activation a(L−1) is. Since the weights with the biggest influence
will be changed the most, this implicitly leads to a specialization of each neuron.
Whenever an activation’s absolute value is big, the weights connected to that acti-
vation will be altered more than those connected to units with lower activation values.
Finally it should be noted the equation above only takes a single input into account.
In practice batches bigger than 1 is almost always used for each step. To do this we
simply average over all inputs in the batch:
∂C
∂w(L) = 1
n
n−1
∑
k=0
∂Ck
∂w(L)
∂C
∂b(L) = 1
n
n−1
∑
k=0
∂Ck
∂b(L)
==PAGE:29==
2.2 How a neural network learns
18
When propagating further back into the network, the size of the equations grows
quickly. However, the complexity stays more or less the same.
∂C
∂w(L−1) = ∂z(L−1)
∂w(L−1)
∂a(L−1)
∂z(L−1)
∂z(L)
∂a(L−1)
∂a(L)
∂z(L)
∂C
∂a(L)
= a(L−2)σ(z(L−1))(1 −σ(z(L−1)))w(L)σ(z(L))(1 −σ(z(L)))2(a(L) −y)
Since the algorithm propagates back through the network in a recursive manner, it
is basically the same operation at every layer. The only difference is the path from
the cost to the target weights, which get longer the deeper the target is in network.
Initially this was seen as a fundamental problem with the algorithm. It seemed to
make it impossible to make very deep networks, since a network of n layers would
have to recompute the layers between j to n for every layer Lj, j < n.
The solution to this problem can be found by looking closely on equation 2.1 and 2.2.2.
Since the last two derivatives are exactly the same, dynamic programming principles
can be used to simply store the result of these calculations in a cache along the way.
This way it only takes a single look-up instead of a full recalculation for each layer. If
we introduce such a cache Q0, ..., Qn storing the calculations already computed, the
equations becomes much simpler:
∂C
∂w(L) = a(L−1)σ(z(L))(1 −σ(z(L))) · Q1
∂C
∂w(L−1) = a(L−2)σ(z(L−1))(1 −σ(z(L−1)))w(L) · Q2 · Q1
∂C
∂w(L−2) = x · σ(z(L−2))(1 −σ(z(L−2)))w(L−1) · Q3 · Q2 · Q1
The final piece of the puzzle is how to scale up the networks to handle multiple units
in each layer. Luckily converting the equations in to handle multiple neurons is rather
trivial. However, all the variables will need to be indexed even further to take the
added dimensionality into account. In Figure 2.8 an example network is shown. Only
the two last layers are included, since this is enough to explain the concept.
==PAGE:30==
2.2 How a neural network learns
19
Figure 2.8: An image of the two last layers of a neural network with two of the
weights highlighted.
With multiple neurons in the last layer, the loss function need to take all the inputs
into account. Using Mean Squared Error once more, this becomes:
C = 1
n
nL−1
∑
j=0
(a(L)
j
−yj)2
The activation function in each neuron in the final layer is still just a(L)
j
= σ(z(L)
j
).
The weights are also the same, since they still only connect two neurons. However,
z(L)
j
needs to be changed in order to take all neurons from the earlier layer into
account:
z(L)
j
= a(L−1)
1
w(L)
j1 + a(L−1)
2
w(L)
j2 + · · · + a(L−1)
n−1 w(L)
jn−1 + a(L−1)
n
w(L)
jn + b(L)
j
With this in mind, the derivatives needed to update the weights can be found. In the
final layer, the derivative of C with regards to each weight is the same as before:
∂C
∂w(L)
jk
=
∂z(L)
j
∂w(L)
jk
∂a(L)
j
∂z(L)
j
∂C
∂a(L)
j
For earlier layers though, propagating through at least one activation function is
required. It is the derivative of these activation functions which changes when there
are multiple units per layer. In the earlier layers the value of the activation function
suddenly affect the cost in more than one way. This means the derivative of the loss
function with respect to an activation, needs to take into account all the ways an
activation affects the cost. In Figure 2.8 two of the n ways activation aL−1
k
affects
the cost is highlighted. Luckily all the ways an activation affects the cost can be
calculated independently, and the sum of these is its’ actual influence. The derivative
of C with respect to aL−1
k
thus becomes:
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Embedding Extraction
20
∂C
∂a(L−1)
k
=
nL−1
∑
j=0
∂z(L)
j
∂a(L−1)
k
∂a(L)
j
∂z(L)
j
∂C
∂a(L)
j
With this last piece, the backpropagation algorithm is explained in detail.
Hope-
fully it has been made clear why backpropagation is actually a simple solution to
a tough problem. Backpropagation is not perfect though, and even one of its’ in-
ventors Geoffrey Hinton have said backpropagation will never be enough to achieve
the goals of machine learning and Artificial Intelligence. According to him, the next
great algorithm pushing the field forward will come from some student which discards
backpropagation completely [8].
Backpropagation’s biggest limitation seems the requirement all functions inside the
network has to be differentiable and thus continuous. This is not a terrible limitation
as the progress within the field have shown, but one could easily imagine the useful-
ness of having discrete internal functions.
2.3
Embedding Extraction
Knowing how these deep networks work, is fundamental for understanding why the
progress of Deep Learning can influence the usefulness of nearest neighbor algorithms.
From the detailed explanation above, it should be clear the values of the last layer
are based fully on the values of the next to last layer. This means all the relevant
information about the input needs to be encoded / “embedded” in this next to last
layer in order for the final layer to output the right values. Given the next to last
layer is a fully connected layer, its output is a vector with a dimensionality equal
to the amount of unites. This means the output of the second to last layer can be
extracted from the network and act as an vector embedding of the content of the
input.
In practice these values are typically not representative enough to act as a reliable
description of the image content. Much research have thus gone into improving neural
networks ability to handle images and produce high quality embeddings. This research
will be explained in detail in the following chapter.
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3
Literature Review:
Deep Learning
In this chapter the latest research on Deep Learning for image classification and re-
trieval will be reviewed. This is followed by a brief introduction to the use of Deep
Learning for more specific fashion related problems. Many of the approaches intro-
duced in this chapter are used in my work described in later chapters.
3.1
Deep Learning for Images
The use of Deep Learning methods on images really took of in 2012 when Krizhevsky
et al. outperformed the competitors in the ImageNet classification competition with
a large margin [2, 3]. Their network architecture was constrained by the hardware
available at the time, and was separated into two parts in order to divide the com-
putation between two GPUs. Two years later Simonyan and Zisserman created two
architectures called VGG16 and VGG19 with 16 and 19 layers respectively [9]. Both
of these performed much better than AlexNet, at the cost of a dramatic increase in
the amount of parameters.
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Deep Learning for Images
22
Figure 3.1: Plot showing the most popular models for image classification. The Y-
axis shows their classification accuracy on the ImageNet dataset. While
the X-axis shows the amount of operations needed to compute a single
forward propagation. The size of the circles shows the amount of pa-
rameters in the model.
Source: Eugenio Culurciello.
The next year Googles’ researchers Szegedy et al. introduced a novel network called
GoogLeNet [10]. With 22 layers, this was the deepest network trained so far. Despite
being deeper than the VGG networks, it had far fewer parameters since it consisted of
blocks called “inception modules”. Google have since continued relying on these mod-
ules, improving the performance in each architecture iteration [11][12]. In the first
two iterations, Google had some problems training the models. Due to the depth of
the models, propagating the cost all the way back through the network meant only
tiny changes were made to the weights in the first layers at each step. To get around
this, they calculated three similar classification losses at various layers of the network.
This ensured all layers would be significant to at least one of the losses, and would
thus have its weights updated in a meaningful manner.
Although using several cost functions worked, it was inelegant or unscalable. If three
cost functions were needed to train 22 layers, then how many would be needed to
train 100 layers? Luckily, the answer to this question was never needed, since He
et al. from Microsoft came up with a much more scalable approach. They called their
approach residual learning, and their general architecture was named ResNets [13].
They introduced efficient use of shortcut connection between the layers of their model,
==PAGE:34==
3.1 Deep Learning for Images
23
as can be seen in Figure 3.2. This simple change had dramatic effects, and have been
incorporated into the latest version of Google’s Inception networks as well [12]. Now
it was suddenly possible to train networks up to 150 layers deep, using only a single
loss function.
Figure 3.2: Image showcasing the shortcut connection in a residual network.
Source: Image from paper [13].
In “normal” neural networks, the input is completely transformed when going through
a layer. The layer thus have to learn a complete transformation, to reach a desired
output y given input x: y = F(x). The shortcuts in the ResNets changes this, so the
input is now added to the transformation. The function thus becomes: y = F(x) + x.
This means the layer no longer have to learn a complete transformation, but instead
only has to learn features which when added to the input gives a desired output.
On top of this, the addition term in each residual block distributes the gradient evenly
through and around each block. This means the gradient will flow undisturbed all
the way back to first layers in the network, which is why deeper networks can now
“easily” be trained. Finally, the additive term in each block potentially allows the
network to turn of layers. If at some point the network concludes that i layers is
enough for a given task, the weights of all layers j > i can be set to zero. This means
nothing will be added to xi while the skip connections ensures xi will be passed along
to the end of the network.
Recent work by Li et al. suggest these skip connections make it much easier to optimize
the cost function. In Figure 3.3 their visualization of the loss surface for ResNet-56
can be seen.
This visualization suggests skip connections affect the loss function
dramatically, leading to a much simpler function to optimize.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Deep Learning for Image Search
24
Figure 3.3: A visualization of the loss surface of ResNet-56 created with what they
call a filter normalization scheme. The smoother a function is, the easier
it is to optimize
Source: Image from paper [14].
3.2
Deep Learning for Image Search
VGG, Inception and ResNet have shown it is feasible to train neural networks to
handle classification with thousands of classes with great accuracy.
However, the
computational cost of training such models is not feasible for most researchers or
companies. VGG was trained with 4 GPUs for 2-3 weeks, Inception was trained with
50 high end GPUs and ResNet with 4 GPUs for an unspecified amount of time [9, 12,
13]. Luckily Yosinski et al. showed the early layers of neural networks tend to learn
very generalizable features [15].
This means the weights optimized for one image
task, will often be a great starting point for another image task. In other words, it
is possible to transfer some of what have been learned on a data set to a completely
new data set, hence the method’s name: transfer learning.
Transfer learning enables researchers to use big models, without the need for multiple
GPUs and weeks of training. Furthermore, it can be very effective if the new data
set does not contain many images. In such cases big models would otherwise tend to
overfit to the training data.
It seems two dominating approaches regarding Deep Learning for image search exists.
Of these, extracting a fully connected layer from the end of the network as a content
embedding of the image seems most widely used. Sometimes this content vector have
been hashed afterwards to speed up search algorithms. This has let a lot researchers
to look into training the network to make a hashed representation directly [16–22].
This seems to be an intriguing approach which gets fairly good results. However, since
==PAGE:36==
3.2 Deep Learning for Image Search
25
I had already decided to pursue the geometric embeddings, I did not dwell much on
these methods.
3.2.1
Cost Functions for deep search
Several cost functions have been invented in order to train a network specifically to
create embeddings E which represents the input I such that distance(Ea, Eb) ≈
perceivedDifference(Ia, Ib). The first of these was the contrastive loss introduced
by Chopra, Hadsell, and Y. in 2005 [23]. They improved on the idea of a siamese
network thought up by Bromley et al. in 1993 [24]. A siamese network is essentially
two identical copies of a neural network which shares all parameters at every step while
training (Figure 3.4). Since their parameters are shared, the difference of the output
can be actively used to update the weights in an appropriate manner. Although the
original goal was signature verification, Chopra et al. reasoned this could be used to
train the network to create good descriptive embeddings.
Figure 3.4: A visualization of a siamese network with two identical sub-networks
A and B sharing all their parameters. With an image fed into each of
these sub-networks, the corresponding outputs can be compared.
Knowing the category of a given image, they trained the model to guess if the two
images were from the same category y = 1 or not y = 0. They did so by passing two
images through the siamese network with the goal of reducing the distance between
same class image embeddings. The distance between two resulting embedding vectors
left and right calculated as d = ∥left −right∥2 is used in their cost function:
L = 1
2
(
y · d2 + (1 −y) · max(0, m −d)2)
The intuition is that if the two images are from the same class, the cost will be equal
to 1
2d2. Otherwise they force the network ensure a margin m between the two result-
ing vectors. This way the images from the same class are pulled towards each other,
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Deep Learning for Image Search
26
while images from different classes are pushed away.
Although contrastive loss works, it tend to work rather slowly since it only pulls or
pushes for every pair of images. If a cost function could decrease the distance between
some images, while increasing the distance between others, it might be faster. This
was at least the idea Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin had in 2015 when they
introduced the triplet loss [25]. As with contrastive loss, triplet loss relies on the idea
of a siamese network. However, here it was extended to include three copies of the
same network all sharing the same parameters: ankor, positive and negative. All
images are chosen in triplets with the ankor as the reference, the positive resembling
the ankor and a negative not resembling the other two. The cost function can then
be calculated as:
L = max
(
0, m + ∥ankor −positive∥2
2 −∥ankor −negative∥2
2
)
Once more the intuition is to insert a margin m between the images which should not
be close to one another. However, with triplet networks the distance to the positive
can be decreased in the same step as the distance to negative is increased, which
make the triplet loss more powerful.
In August 2017 Movshovitz-Attias et al. created a new approach to training deep
models for image retrieval [26]. In their paper they address the sampling problem
related to triplet loss. Since the triplets are sampled from the data set of size n,
the amount of possible combinations which potentially should be trained on is in the
order of O(n3). The solution Movshovitz-Attias et al. suggests is to include a set of
”proxy embeddings” of size p ≪n.
These proxies are initially just random vectors of a similar dimensionality of the
embeddings.
While used to improve the descriptiveness of the embeddings, they
are trained to resemble the embedding distribution. In their experiments they use
hundreds to few thousands proxies. They then train on single images, which means
no triplet sampling is required. The cost function is thus based on the distance from
an image embedding to these ”proxies” (Figure 3.5)):
L = −log
(
e−d(x,y)
∑
z∈Z e−d(x,z)
)
x is the image in question, y is the closest proxy to this image while Z is all the
other proxies. This cost function is almost identical to the cost function used in the
Neighborhood Component Analysis (NCA) algorithm defined by Goldberger et al.
[27], hence its name NCA loss. In their tests, using these proxies improved perfor-
mance by up to 15 percent points and training converged 3 times faster.
==PAGE:38==
3.3 Deep Learning for Fashion
27
Figure 3.5: A visualization of the learned proxies. There are 4 instances belonging
to two classes orange and green. Two proxies have been created, and
trained to represent the data such that one proxy represents the orange
cluster and the other the green. Because of this, these proxies can be
used to improve the embeddings in the data set instead of triplet loss.
Although there are other cost functions for training image retrieval models [28, 29],
the approach of Movshovitz-Attias et al. seems to be the the current state of the art.
However, since it was released in August I have not been able to find any papers
which confirms/disconfirms their claims.
3.3
Deep Learning for Fashion
Some work have focused specifically on using Deep Learning for fashion related prob-
lems. A lot of this focus directly on searching for similar fashion items from query
images [30–34]. Other researchers focus on segmenting the various pieces of clothing
from an image [35, 36], while still others work on learning which pieces of clothing
matches one another [37, 38] or forecasting fashion style changes over time [39].
In 2015 Kiapour et al. worked on how to find similar online-shop images given a real-
world example [33]. They focused on the challenges of matching online-shop images
with a white background, good lighting and professional camera with a real-world
cluttered image taken with a bad smart phone camera. They try to solve these issues,
by fine-tuning AlexNet [2] on their own data set. From here they find 100 object-
proposals from the image, which are to search for similar images. The result of this
search are then re-ranked using another small neural network. This smaller neural
network is their main contribution. It is a small 3-layer feed forward network trained
specifically to match the noisy real-world images with the online-shop images for each
category. This network is given positive/negative real-world and online-shop image
pairs and trained to estimate a score indicating how well the pair matches. It thus
learns to look past differences in image quality, in order to work as a ranking function
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Deep Learning for Fashion
28
in the overall setup.
Most of the fashion related papers I have read, use quite standard approaches with
only minor tweaks meant tackle the specific problems related to fashion data. Some
of these problems will be discussed as I describe the data sets I have created for this
thesis in the following chapter. In general it is my main take away that the Deep
Learning is far from being able to fully tackle fashion images.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4
Data
In this chapter I will briefly describe and analyze the main data set created for the
work in this thesis. I initially created another data set but it turned out to be too
messy. For more details of this data set see Chapter B.
4.1
ShopStyle Data set
The main data set used in this thesis was extracted through the API of ShopStyle a
company which curates items for sale from web shops all over the world. They have a
great API which they make available to all their affiliate partners, and a Terms of Use
which seems to permit training machine learning models on their data1. Examples of
the images from this data set can be seen in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Ten random example images from the ShopStyle data set.
This data set contains only 167 categories; 98 female and 69 male. No preprocessing
was done, besides dividing the images into folders corresponding. The data set con-
1https://www.shopstylecollective.com/help/terms
==PAGE:41==
4.1 ShopStyle Data set
30
tains 1.866.912 images in total. These are divided into a Train, Validation and Test
set with the following amount of images in each:
• Train set: 1.340.848 images
• Validation set: 149.677 images
• Test set: 376.387 images
These three subsets were created from the beginning and has been used in all exper-
iments throughout this thesis in order for the results to be comparable. The splits
were made on an item basis. This means all images associated with an item will be
in one and just one of these three sets. This is important because the model might
otherwise be taught on very similar images, which would make the validation and
test results less trustworthy.
4.1.1
Analysis
Dividing the data set on the items rather than images, could potentially skew the
category distributions in the three sets, since some items might have many more im-
ages than others. In Figure 4.2 the share of images for the three sub sets can be seen.
It shows there are only a few categories with skewed distribution between the three
sub sets which should not affect the analysis much.
Figure 4.2: A visualization of the percentage of images assigned to the three sets for
each category. The three sets have quite similar category distributions.
Had this not been the case, this plot would not resemble three rectangles
but be much more chaotic to look at (like the left most part of the plot).
Looking at the actual category distribution for the training data in Figure 4.3, it is
obvious the data set is quite imbalanced. First of all, there are a lot more images
==PAGE:42==
4.1 ShopStyle Data set
31
related to female categories than male. More importantly though, there are a lot
of categories in both the female and male group which have a minuscule amount of
images compared to the rest. Finally, there are lot more female than male images in
general, this might bias models towards female predictions in classification tasks.
Figure 4.3: A visualization of the category distribution of the training set. The red
columns are the female categories, and the blue columns are the male
categories.
4.1.2
Problems
From manual inspection of the data set, it seems there are a few important issues
with this data set. Although each category is very clean, my estimates suggest 60-70
percent of the images contain at least two pieces of clothing. For a lot of these it
is still obvious to humans where the focus should be. However, the appearance of
another type of clothing might affect the embedding and hinder training in regards
to image retrieval. Furthermore, some images contain up to 8 pieces of clothing, and
can seems rather impossible to classify, even for humans.
In Figure 4.4 a few examples of such tough samples are shown. The second image
from the left is actually a sample from the male t-shirt category. However, only a
tiny piece of the actual t-shirt is shown. The last image from the left is from the
category male pants, but contain 6 other pieces of clothing. It is almost impossible to
quantify how many of these tough images are present in the data set. However, from
manual inspection it seems there are quite a lot. Bounding box annotations stating
what parts of the image belong to the assigned category would be a great addition to
the data set. However, this was far to time consuming to do my self, and to expensive
to crowd source.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Biases in fashion images
32
Figure 4.4: Four tough images from the ShopStyle data set. It is very difficult to
discern the actual category of each of these images even for humans
(The first two images are male t-shirts and the last two are male
pants).
4.2
Biases in fashion images
From the manual inspection of both the Amazon (Chapter B) and ShopStyle data set
I was surprised to find almost all human models are Caucasian. The amount of non
Caucasian models I have seen in these two data sets containing more than 5 million
images combined seems to be in the order of 1 percent. This could have severe effects
for a production system, since the appearance of non Caucasian users could impact
the resulting embeddings and worsen the results.
The slimness of the female models is another obvious bias. I deem it quite likely a
system trained on these two data sets would provide much better results for queries
related to the lower end of the available clothing sizes. This might also be the case
for men, however, probably not to as great an extend.
Although this data set is not perfect, its’ size and clean nature make it a good data
set for training fashion retrieval models. In the following chapter I will review and
analyze the models I have trained using this data set.
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 5
Models & Experiments
In this chapter I will describe and analyze the final deep model. This model was
specifically trained to provide descriptive image embeddings.
Later it will be dis-
cussed how these embeddings were used with CKNN algorithm. This final model was
the result of a lot preliminary models described in Chapter C.
Initially I wanted to investigate whether a deep model for image retrieval could be
trained in an unsupervised manner. Krizhevsky and Hinton looked at this in 2011
[40], a year before they popularized Deep Learning with the supervised classification
model, AlexNet [2]. Since a lot of image data is not annotated, an unsupervised model
would be a great contribution to the field, and research thus continues along these
lines [41]. However, it seemed supervised models outperformed the unsupervised by
a large margin, so I instead chose supervised approach.
I knew from the beginning I would not have the computational resources to train a
good model from scratch. Transfer learning [15] was thus used from the start, which
left the two main questions:
1. Which base architecture should be used as a foundation?
2. What embedding dimensionality should be used?
No right answer to either of these questions seems to exist. The research on the area
tend to rely on one of the four dominating image classification models [2, 9, 12, 13]
without any consensus. Furthermore, the embedding dimensionalty of the various
papers range from 64 [26] to 4096 [42, 43].
I was very impressed by the results Movshovitz-Attias et al. achieved with only 64
dimensions. My own tests using Inception suggested this amount of dimensions might
be enough (Chapter C), so I decided to use a similar embeddings size for the rest of
the project.
Although Inception was used in the preliminary work, VGG seemed to be a better
option. Had there been more time, I would probably try and train a ResNet-56 model
to compare its performance with my current results. Since ResNet-56 seems to be a
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Results
34
very promising model in regards to the parameter amount / performance trade off.
The final architecture consists of the full VGG model with a single bottleneck layer of
64 dimensions inserted just before the softmax layer. The model was initialized with
parameters trained on ImageNet and then fine tuned on the ShopStyle data set using
a combination of cross entropy loss and center loss [44]. From here it was once more
fine tuned using a slightly modified version of triplet loss [25] using triplets chosen
via heuristics. For more details see Chapter D.
5.1
Results
One of the problems when training models for nearest neighbor search, is that per-
formance cannot really be measured while training. Instead some intermediary mea-
surements such as classification accuracy, cross entropy loss are needed (As shown
in Section D.2). However, these does not say much about how the model will per-
form when used for retrieval purposes. One could possibly keep a small data set in
memory, and continuously perform nearest neighbor searches as the embeddings are
updated. However, to do so efficiently the data set would either have too small to be
representative or too large slowing down the training process significantly.
In Figure 5.1 three plots showing the retrieval precision of the model can be seen. In
the left most plot, the item precision@k can be seen. This is defined as being 1 if
another image of the same item is present in the search results and 0 otherwise. The
plot is created through normal nearest neighbor searches on the image embeddings
from the entire test set. At least one image from the same item is present in the top
1000 search results only 80% of the time. This means 20% of the searches will not
include another images of the same item. This could obviously be improved quite a
lot. However, the data set includes a lot of close ups of the clothing material which
might be one of the cases where it goes wrong. On top of that the boots tend to
be photographed from all sides including the sole. It is rather understandable the if
actual shoe is not found given an image of its sole.
The top right plot shows the class precision@k. Here 1 indicates an image from
same class is present in the search result, while 0 indicates the opposite. Intuitively
the likelihood an image of same class is present in the search result is much higher
than an image from the same item. The curve thus quickly reaches almost a hundred
percent likelihood. However, it shows there are only ≈80% likelihood an image of
the same class is present in the top 40 results. This is could certainly be better.
The bottom most plot shows the class percentage@position indicating the likeli-
hood an image at position k is from the same class as the query image. From this,
it can be seen that on average only ≈33% of the embeddings have a nearest neigh-
bor which is of the same category. Furthermore, this class precision decreases rather
==PAGE:46==
5.1 Results
35
quickly with the 10th nearest neighbor only having ≈15% likelihood of being from
the same category.
Figure 5.1: Three plots showing the performance in regards to nearest neighbor
retrieval. On the top left the item precision at is shown as 1 if an image
of the same item is present in the result and 0 otherwise. The right most
plot shows the class precision with 1 being if an image is from the same
class and 0 otherwise. In the bottom the class percentage at position is
shown, indicating the likelihood the image at a given position is of the
same class as the query embedding.
In Figure 5.2 three examples of positive search results can be seen. All these examples
are generated with normal nearest neighbor search on embeddings of all the images
in the test set. In the first example the query image is a black sports t-shirt. Here the
first ten nearest neighbors are from the same category and resemble the query image
to a great extent. Furthermore, 19 out of 20 of the nearest neighbors are from Nike
which indicates the model have learned to specifically cluster Nike t-shirts together
in the same area.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Results
36
Figure 5.2: Three positive examples of the model. On the left is the query image,
while the 20 nearest neighbors are shown on the right with the nearest
neighbor in the top left and 20th nearest neighbor in the bottom right.
In the second example the query image is of female panties. The resulting images
are quite similar to the query image and a lot of them are either from the category
panties specifically or include panties in the image. Interestingly the skin color of
==PAGE:48==
5.1 Results
37
the models seem to match to a great extent. This indicates a bias is actually present
in the model. Had the query image been with the same clothing, but on a model with
darker skin, none of these images would likely have been returned. The final exam-
ple is of female sunglasses of an amber like material. Although not all the returned
results are sunglasses, they are all of contain amber and all the glasses returned are
from female categories.
All results are not as good as the examples from Figure 5.2. In Figure 5.3 four ex-
amples of negative results can be seen. These four examples are chosen because they
seem to represent the kind of errors which occur when using the model for normal
nearest neighbor searches. The first example is the worst of the four with none of
the results resembling the query what. This seems to be the case for queries of items
which are of rather unique appearance. These might be embedded far from the other
items of similar category, and thus be closer to a bunch of other categories affecting
retrieval.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Results
38
Figure 5.3: Four examples of the most typical errors of the model (based on man-
ual inspection). On the left is the query image, while the 20 nearest
neighbors are shown on the right with the nearest neighbor in the top
left and 20th nearest neighbor in the bottom right.
==PAGE:50==
5.1 Results
39
In the second example from the top it seems the network have captured the distinct
color of the bag on the query image rather than the bag itself. The results thus mostly
resemble the color. Interestingly a lot of the results are from the same brand, which
shows this brand uses this particular nuance and material in a lot of their products.
The third example seems to show the cases where the network captures the overall
style of the image instead of the items in it. Thus all the images are of a person with
black and gray clothing and with a light grey background.
The final example actually finds very similar looking images. All the resulting images
are of women standing upright with white clothing on. However, a this is far from
enough for fashion search. Six very different categories from swim suits to cocktail
dresses are present in the result. This would not be acceptable for most users. Once
more it seems to take the skin color into account which biases the model towards
Caucasian users.
To see which categories are most connected I developed the plot in Figure 5.4. First
of all this plot shows there are quite a lot of category confusion in regards to nearest
neighbor search. Had the model been perfect the graph in this plot would not have
any edges, only vertices. However, the categories are clustered together in relative
logical groups some of which are relatively gender dependent, while others have a mix
of both genders. For example, the top most group to the left consists of mostly pants
with the exception of ”long skirts” and ”denim jackets”.
It can also be seen there is a big difference in how many items from the same cat-
egory are typically returned. For some reason ”mens turtleneck sweaters” (Big
blue vertex in the bottom left) really stand out. When searching for an item from this
category a bigger percentage of the results will thus be from the same category with
the second most occurring category being ”mens cardigan sweaters”. Another cat-
egory which tend to return a lot of results from the same category is ”casual pants”
(Big red vertex top left). This category is closely connected to ”mens casual pants”
which also makes sense.
Interestingly three categories seem to differ from the rest. ”mens shorts”, ”mens
tees and t-shirts” and ”coats” seem connected to almost all other categories in
the data set. This means almost all search results will include some images from these
three categories.
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Results
40
Figure 5.4: A visualization of the nearest neighbor category confusion. The figure
is based on a normal nearest neighbor search with k = 1000 for every
embedding in the test set. Each vertex is a category c in the data set,
and is connected to the top ten most often occurring categories when
querying with an embedding from c. The edges are directed and their
size depict how strongly the two categories are connected. Both vertexes
and edges are colored by the category gender: blue for male categories
and red for female. The size of the vertex depict how big a share of the
result is from the same category as the query embedding.
==PAGE:52==
5.1 Results
41
The model I ended up with is still relatively simple, and a lot could be done to improve
it. As the results in this chapter shows, its performance is at most decent. However,
the purpose of this thesis is to see if the retrieval performance can be improved by
introducing constraints. Had the model been able to create perfect embeddings, it
could not have been used to test the CKKN algorithm properly. The model’s flaws
are thus good enough for the purpose of this thesis. Before going into depth with
the CKKN algorithm, the current state of the art within nearest neighbor search and
image search pipelines, will be discussed in detail in the following chapter.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6
Literature Review:
Nearest Neighbors &
Industry approaches
In this chapter I will go through the details of one of the most popular nearest
neighbor algorithm; the k-d tree. I will furthermore give a short overview of one
of the challenges of nearest neighbors search known as the curse of dimensionality.
A basic understanding of this concept is important to understand why embeddings
are needed, and why the dimensionality of the embedding is of great importance. I
will finish of by analyzing the in-production nearest neighbor based systems of three
major companies. Systems which to the best of my knowledge showcase the state of
the art in the industry.
6.1
Nearest Neighbors Search
Nearest Neighbor Search is a classical machine learning approach explained in many
introductions to machine learning [45]. In its essence, it’s an optimization problem
of finding the closest point in a set, given a reference point. The problem is easily
generalized to multiple points, by finding the ordered subset of points closest to the
reference point. This is called k nearest neighbor search (KNN), or simply nearest
neighbors search.
The simplest solution to KKN search is to calculate the distance from the reference
point p to all other points in the set, and sort the points in accordance to this dis-
tance in ascending order. With this done, the k first points is ensured to be the k
closest points in the set. This approach has a O(d · n) search time, where d is the
dimensionality of the points, and n the cardinality of the set. This approach is called
linear / brute force nearest neighbors search.
Many improvements to this simple approach exists, each with its own pros and cons
==PAGE:54==
6.2 A popular approach to KNN search
43
[46–54]. Some of these reduce the complexity of the problem by returning the ap-
proximate nearest neighbors instead. Such approximate methods returns k neighbors
which are bound to be close the actual nearest neighbors by some small maximum
margin ϵ. In this thesis I will not work a lot with approximate nearest neighbors.
I have found a couple of papers which to some extend work on constraining nearest
neighbor search in some form. In 2001 Ferhatosmanoglu et al. released a paper in
which they introduced the notion “constrained nearest neighbor queries” with the
abbreviation: CNN [55]. An abbreviation which today is in great conflict with the
terminology of Deep Learning, hence it will not be used in this thesis. They focus on
geospatial data, and thus define constrained nearest neighbor queries as being nearest
neighbor queries with range constraints. Since they are focused on two dimensional
data, the constraints can be seen as regions in a plane constraining the search to
the enclosed points (Figure 6.1). In the paper they provide several straight forward
algorithms as well as an extension to the R-tree to solve this problem [52].
Figure 6.1: Two example of range constrained nearest neighbors. In the leftmost
image the actual nearest neighbor is San Francisco, but the search is
constrained to cities in Nevada. In rightmost image, the search is con-
strained by two regions.
Source: Image from paper [55].
In 2015 Dolatshah, Hadian, and Minaei-Bidgoli extended the concept of constrained
nearest neighbors to more than two dimensions [56]. They did so through an extension
to the Ball-Tree algorithm [49].
However, their definition of constrained nearest
neighbor was also limited to a range constraint on all dimensions. In this thesis the
notion of constrained nearest neighbor search will be extended to nearest neighbor
search constrained by any available meta data associated with each data point.
6.2
A popular approach to KNN search
Of all the algorithms for nearest neighbors Search, the k-d tree is probably the most
popular [47]. Published in 1975 by Bentley it has become the text book example on
==PAGE:55==
6.2 A popular approach to KNN search
44
KNN search. At the time, it performed much better than the existing algorithms.
However, many algorithms with competitive performance have been invented since
then. The reason it is still relevant today is thus not due to its superior performance,
but due to it’s simplicity.
Figure 6.2: Two figures from the original paper on the k-d tree. On the left is an
drawing of an example data set partitioning up the space. On the right
is the same data set drawn as a binary tree.
Source: Image from paper [47].
In it’s essence a k-d tree is a binary tree. Every node in the tree is a k-dimensional
point and every non-leaf node can be thought-of as splitting the space into two parts
along a given axis (see Figure 6.2). This means that given a node n which splits
on axis i and contains point v. Any child in the right path of n will have a higher
value in axis i than vi. In the same way any child on the left path of n will have a
smaller value in axis i than vi. In a two dimensional case, this means the algorithm
will alternate between splitting the search space on the x-axis and y-axis as can be
seen in the left image in Figure 6.2. The algorithm for constructing this binary tree
is extremely elegant.
==PAGE:56==
6.2 A popular approach to KNN search
45
Algorithm 1 kdTree(PointList points, Integer depth)
1: // If there are more points, create a new node and add subtrees recursively
2: if points ̸= ∅then
3:
axis := depth % k
4:
median := median(points, axis)
5:
6:
smaller, bigger := splitOnMedian(points, median)
7:
Node node := new Node()
8:
node.location := median
9:
node.leftChild := kdTree(smaller, depth + 1)
10:
node.rightChild := kdTree(bigger, depth + 1)
11:
return node
12: else
13:
return ∅
14: end if
As can be seen in Algorithm 1, at every step a new axis is chosen. All points are then
sorted based on their value at this axis, and the median is chosen as the splitting point
of the new node. All points with a smaller value in this axis are inserted as sub tree
with the root as the node’s left child, after the sub tree is generated in a recursive
manner. The same happens for the points with a bigger value with the exception
these are inserted on right side. Bentley showed that building the k-d tree on ran-
dom data take O(n·log n) time. With d dimensions this is generalized to O(dn·log n).
Searching for nearest neighbors in the k-d tree is a bit more complex. As can be
seen in Algorithm 2, searching the tree can be defined recursively just as with it’s
construction. The first thing done in every step is to check whether the distance to
the current node is bigger than the distance to the current nearest neighbor. This is
an important step, added a couple of years after the original algorithm was invented
[57]. Because of its importance, the intuition behind it will be explained in more
detail.
==PAGE:57==
6.2 A popular approach to KNN search
46
Algorithm 2 Search(Node current, Point point, Integer depth, PointList
neighbors)
1: // If hypersphere does not cross the hyperplane return (see figure 6.3)
2: if distance(current, point) > distance(neighbors.first, point) then
3:
return
4: end if
5:
6: if distance(current, point) > distance(neighbors.last, point) then
7:
orderedInsert(current, neighbors)
8: end if
9:
10: // Visit subtrees in most promising order
11: axis := depth % k
12: if current[axis] < point[axis] then
13:
Search(current.leftChild, point, depth + 1, neighbors)
14:
Search(current.rightChild, point, depth + 1, neighbors)
15: else
16:
Search(current.rightChild, point, depth + 1, neighbors)
17:
Search(current.leftChild, point, depth + 1, neighbors)
18: end if
As can be seen in Figure 6.3, each non-leaf node in the tree acts as a hyperplane
cutting the space in half along a certain axis. The distance from the query point to
the nearest neighbor can be seen as representing a hypersphere. If the hypersphere
crosses the hyperplane, then there might be children of the node which are inside
the hypersphere and thus closer to the query point than the current nearest neighbor.
Otherwise it is certain no children of the node will be relevant for the search, and the
whole branch can be skipped.
==PAGE:58==
6.3 Curse of dimensionality
47
Figure 6.3: Two possible scenarios of line 1-4 in algorithm 2.
The slightly
opaque blue circle represents the hypersphere with a radius of
distance(point, nearestNeighbor) and the vertical line represents the
hyperplane created by the node. If the hypersphere crosses the hyper-
plane, then there might be a child of the node which is the actual nearest
neighbor. Hence the branched should be searched.
6.3
Curse of dimensionality
The curse of dimensionality is a general term, used to describe the unintuitive proper-
ties that arise when analyzing and organizing data in high-dimensional spaces. Since
the concept has been known for decades, the explicit details are outside the scope
of this thesis. However, because it has such big implications for nearest neighbors
search, a brief overview will be given in this section.
Just how unintuitive things get, when generalizing concepts from low dimensions, to
higher dimensions, can be shown with a simple example. If we take a unit circle and
place a unit square inside such that the two centers align (Figure 6.4). We can be
sure the unit square is fully enclosed by the circle, since the distance from the center
of the square to one of its sides will be 1
2 and the distance to one of its corners will
be
√
2
2 ≈0.7. If we generalize this concept to 3 dimensions, now with a unit sphere
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Curse of dimensionality
48
and a unit cube. The unit cube is still fully enclosed since distance to any side is 1
2
like before, whereas the distance to any corner is
√
3
2
≈0.86. So far so good, these
concepts work well within the dimensions we can perceive and thus naturally think of.
Figure 6.4: Three figures depicting the intuition of a unit square inside a unit circle
in 2, 4 and d dimensions. The 2 dimensional left-most visualization
is accurate, while the two other simply represent examples of how one
could think of it.
When moving beyond the natural dimensions, strange behaviour occurs. The dis-
tance from the center to any corner of a 4-dimensional unit hypercube inside a 4-
dimensional unit hypersphere now becomes
√
4
2
= 1. Its corners thus touches the
hypersphere, despite the distance to any side of the hypercube is still just 1
2. The
equation for calculating the distance from the center of the unit hypercube to it’s cor-
ner can be generalized to
√
d
2 . It is thus easy to see the distance to one of the corners
will continue to increase as we move up in dimensions, while the distance to any side
will remain constant. In just 5 dimensions the unit-hypercube will no longer be fully
enclosed by the unit-hypersphere since its corners will be outside
√
5
2
≈1.1. With
the continuously increasing distance to the corners and a constant distance to the
sides it can be shown the majority the unit-hypercube’s volume within long will lay
outside the hypersphere. This phenomenon is why the shapes in higher dimensions
are sometimes referred to being “spiky” by nature in the lack of a better word.
This unintuitive behavior of higher dimensions has great implications for the data
structures used to store the data.
Most data structures are conceived to handle
data in low dimensions, since this is what can easily be imagined [58].
However,
these data structures might break when dimensionality increases since the behaviour
==PAGE:60==
6.3 Curse of dimensionality
49
changes. The k-d tree is an example of this. Although it has great performance in
lower dimensions, its query performance can be shown to generalize to O
(
n1−1
d + k
)
in higher dimensions. The higher the dimensions the closer the query time thus gets
to simple linear search. This happens because the data set will be split along more
axis as the dimensionality increases, most of which has to be searched while querying.
It can furthermore be shown that data in higher dimensions will lie on a thin edge
of a hypersphere and thus be clustered in a small percentage of the “available” space
[59]. However, most importantly for nearest neighbors search, it is easy to show the
concept of distance looses its meaning if the dimensionality gets to high.
In Fig-
ure 6.5 three plots are shown each showing the distances to the nearest neighbor, the
100th neighbor and the furthest neighbor in the three most popular distance metrics:
Euclidean distance, Cosine distance and Hamming distance. In all three plots the x-
axis is in log-scale, and since the Euclidean distance is not upper bounded, the y-axis
is log-scaled here as well.
For each plot 20.000 random vectors is created in 2 to 16.384 dimensions (21 to 214).
Then 40 random vectors are chosen, and a brute force nearest neighbors search is
calculated. In each of the results the distance to the nearest, 100th and last of the
sorted vectors is extracted, and the mean of these plotted. From these it can be seen
these 3 distances although initially far apart becomes more and more alike as the
dimensions are increased. This means the relative distance between a query’s closest
and furthest neighbor will go towards 0 as the dimensionality increase. Since the
actual distances tend to matter less than the relative distances in nearest neighbors
search, this means searching for nearest neighbors looses its meaning.
==PAGE:61==
6.4 Company Cases
50
Figure 6.5: The curse of dimensionality informally shown for three key distance met-
rics: Euclidean distance (Top-Left), Cosine distance (Top-Right) and
Hamming distance (Bottom). In each plot the purple curve is the dis-
tance to the point furthest away from the query point. The blue curve
is the distance to the 100th neighbor, while the red curve is the distance
to the nearest neighbor.
This is a big reason why image embeddings are needed in the first place. One might
suggest calculating the difference on the images directly, instead of first transforming
them into lossy embeddings. However a moderate sized color image of size 256 × 256
would have a dimensionality of 256·256·3 = 196.608. Even if calculating the difference
between two images said something about how similar they are.
With such high
dimensionality the difference between the distances of the most similar images and
the most opposite images would be 0 in all practical sense.
6.4
Company Cases
Pinterest
Given image search’s growing popularity, many companies are starting to build prod-
ucts around such capability. Two of these companies have released papers describing
their approach. Both of these papers are from 2017, they should thus provide a good
insight into what the current state of the art is in the industry.
According to themselves, Pinterest is a visual bookmarking tool helping users dis-
cover and save creative ideas [60]. On their website users can pin images to boards,
==PAGE:62==
6.4 Company Cases
51
which are curated collections around particular themes or topics. While starting out
in the United States, its popularity has grown all over the world, and they now have
billions of images categorized and annotated by their users. Although a private com-
pany, their estimated value has soared to $12.3 Billion based on their image search
capabilities among other things [61].
When Pinterest first started out doing image search in 2015 they used AlexNet to
create embeddings of the images [2, 60]. Since then they have tested all the above
mentioned deep models on their data set (VGG, ResNet, Inception). In these tests
VGG16 performed the best, when fine tuned on their own data. Interestingly they
choose to use the first fully connected layer after the convolutions with its 4096 di-
mensions [9]. However, they apply binarization to this vector as recommended by
Agrawal, Girshick, and Malik and calculate the distance using the Hamming distance
[62]. This binarization is simply setting all values v ≤0 to 0 and the rest to 1.
They attribute a lot of their success to not searching for similar images, but instead
similar objects found on the image using object detectors such as the Single Shot
Multibox Detector (SSD) [63]. They have trained this object detector using a manu-
ally labelled data set of 2.399 images combined with a data set created by querying
their text search system [42, 60]. On top of this, they have an undisclosed amount
of people employed to manually create recommendations for similar images continu-
ously, which they use to improve the user experience as well as retrain the model.
This object detector is continuously running in the background, analyzing all images
uploaded to Pinterest providing search results for queries. When a user initiates an
image search, the query image is also classified, and the top-k predicted classes are
shown above the search result. If one of these classes is chosen, the result is re-ranked
based on what they call category conformity. They define category conformity as
the percentage of an image which is classified as belonging to a given class. They
conclude being able to re-rank based on this category conformity is critical for their
user engagement. An example of this search process is shown in Figure 6.6.
==PAGE:63==
6.4 Company Cases
52
Figure 6.6: An example of the search interface in Pinterest. In the left most image,
the cropping tool is shown. While the right most image showcases the
result of a query.
Source: Image from paper [42].
Due to Pinterest’s scale, they use a distributed system to handle the image queries
[60]. Based on the MD5 hash of every image, they divide all their images into N
shards with each shard containing approximately 200.000 images. Each shard creates
an index over its images, as well as an approximate nearest-neighbor data structure
called hierarchical clustering trees developed by Muja and Lowe in 2012 [51]. This
data structure works only for binary vectors, but is fast and very parallelizable.
A given query is distributed to all shards where a KNN search is made (Figure 6.7).
The results of each of these searches are then re-ranked based on associated meta
data in some unspecified manner. After this re-ranking the top candidates from each
shard is gathered on a single machine, merged together, and the k top candidates
from the total data set are then returned.
==PAGE:64==
6.4 Company Cases
53
Figure 6.7: A flow diagram of the search process at Pinterest.
Source: Images from paper [60].
Ebay
Ebay is an online auction and shopping website where millions of people and busi-
nesses buy and sell a broad variety of both used and new goods.
They recently
introduced an image search service in the attempt to increase user engagement [43].
Since Ebay acts as a dynamic marketplace where users can sell items to each other,
they have an extremely volatile inventory where items are listed and sold in the span
of minutes.
They use a ResNet-50 [13] model as the foundation of their approach. They have
trained this model from scratch on their own data set. In the end of the network
they attach two separate streams; one stream which do standard classification with
Softmax and cross entropy and a semantic hashing stream similar to the approach
defined by Lin et al. in 2015 [22]. Semantic hashing is achieved by inserting a fully
connected layer with a sigmoid activation function as the second to last layer of the
network. This truncates all embedding values to a range between 0 and 1, yet are
still differentiable (Figure 6.8). The network is then trained with cross-entropy based
on the Softmax values from the final layer of both streams. At inference time, the
final layer of the semantic hashing stream is discarded, and the output of the sigmoid
activations from the second to last layer is binarized by a threshold on 0.5. Like
==PAGE:65==
6.4 Company Cases
54
Pinterest the chosen size of their embedding is 4096.
Figure 6.8: The model Ebay is using to convert the images to binary embeddings.
After training the bottom rightmost fully connected layer is removed,
and the output of the sigmoid layer is binarized.
Source: Image from paper [43].
Based on this 4096-dimensional binary embedding, they train several gradient boosted
machines [64] to classify various meta data such as color or price. For each of these
types of meta data they have manually assigned a value. The score of each item of
a search result is based on how similar its meta data is to the estimated meta data
of the query item. This score is then used to re-rank the result, as can be seen in
Figure 6.9.
==PAGE:66==
6.4 Company Cases
55
Figure 6.9: Examples of the search results using the Ebay model. The query images
are placed on the left and the text below is the classifications from the
gradient boosted machines.
The top rows on the right are the top-
5 results from the deep model, while the bottom rows are the top-5
results when re-ranked.
Source: Image from paper [43].
Like Pinterest, Ebay also uses a distributed system to handle their massive amount of
search queries [43]. Unlike Pinterest, Ebay’s goal is to sell the search results. This is
problematic due to the volatility of their inventory, with multiple inventory updates
pr. second. This means updating the images and their associated data should happen
in near-real-time in order not to show already sold items etc.
All images are divided among the available servers using the MD5-hash of the image
bits. On each server they are furthermore divided into buckets containing images of
a particular class with some unspecified max-size. When searching with a particular
image. The query is first sent to a GPU-cluster, which classifies the image, while
also generating a semantic hash. The buckets corresponding to the estimated top N
classes are searched, seemingly in a brute force manner and the top k elements from
each bucket are chosen. These k elements from each bucket are then merged to a
list, which is re-ranked based on the labels from the gradient boosted machines as
mentioned above. It is worth noting such brute force methods have been found to be
a rather efficient method for memory constrained systems, if binary vectors are used
along with hamming distance [65].
==PAGE:67==
6.4 Company Cases
56
Facebook
Another company worth looking at is Facebook; the most prominent social network,
with billions of active users. Facebook have not released any papers on how they
use Deep Learning for search, but their researchers have released several papers on
Approximate Nearest Neighbors Search, as well as what seems to be the fastest Open-
Source library to date (Figure 6.13). The theoretical foundation of their approach is
the inverted index visualized in Figure 6.10. The general idea of an inverted index is
quite simple. Whereas a normal index typically consists of a set of values with one key
attached to each. The inverse index consists of a set of values treated as keys, each
pointing to all the places where this value is present. The inverted index is crucial in
many text search applications, where each word points to all the documents in which
it is present for example.
Figure 6.10: A simplified visualization of the difference between a normal index and
an inverted index.
However, real valued embeddings do not work well with inverted indexes by them-
selves, since each input tend to get a rather unique embedding. The researchers at
Facebook Jégou, Douze, and Schmid came up with a solution to this called product
quantization [66]. Formally Quantization is a process which reduces the cardinality
of the representation space. A quantizer is a function q which maps a D-dimensional
vector x ∈RD to a vector q(x) ∈C = {ci; i ∈I}, where I is a finite index set. The
reproduction values ci are called centroids. The set of reproduction values C is called
a codebook of size k, and the set of vectors Vi mapped to a given index i is called a
Voronoi cell.
Informally this means they use a function qc to map all vectors into one of k predefined
bins i with ci as its centroid. In two dimensions, this can be beautifully visualized
as a Voronoi diagram as shown in figure 6.11. In a Voronoi diagram all points are
associated with the nearest point from a predefined set. This quantizer thus converts
==PAGE:68==
6.4 Company Cases
57
any unique vector into a coarse representation in the form of the centroid for that
region. This coarse representation can then be used as the index value in an inverted
index which point to all the vectors in that region.
Figure 6.11: An example of a Voronoi diagram in 2D. Each predefined point is
noted as a black dot, and the colored region surrounding it are all the
points which are closer to it, than any of the other black dots.
To further improve precision, they include another quantizer, the product quantizer
qp with the purpose of encoding the residual r which is the distance from the original
vector, to the mapped centroid r(y) = y −qc(y). A diagram of how they use these
two quantizers for indexing and search can be seen in Figure 6.12. In this figure the
process of which the coarse quantizer is used to find the right Voronoi cell in the
inverted index can be seen. The product quantizer is used to encode the relative
position in the found cell.
When querying the data structure the coarse quantizer is once more used to find
the right cell ci. The distance from the direct residual of the query vector x to all
the product quantized residuals of y ∈ci is used to find the approximate nearest
neighbors distance(r(x), qp(r(y))).
==PAGE:69==
6.4 Company Cases
58
Figure 6.12: A diagram of how the quantizers can be used for approximate near-
est neighbors search. The top most diagram shows how new vectors
are inserted, the bottom most diagram shows how the index can be
queried.
Source: Image from paper [66].
This quantization-based method works well. However, Facebook found they needed
to speed up the retrieval further and produced a paper on how to utilize this process
in hamming space using what their call Polysemous codes [67]. With the same goal in
mind, they also defined algorithms to combine the use of CPUs and GPUs efficiently
[68].
In February 2017 they released a C++ implementation of these ideas called faiss.
Faiss works with and without GPU, and its performance relative to the previous
fastest Open-Source library can be seen in figure 6.13. Previously Non Metric Space
Library (nmslib) was the fastest library available [53]. This is still the case on the
CPU. However, it is clear to see there is a lot to be gained by including GPUs in
nearest neighbors search in general.
==PAGE:70==
6.4 Company Cases
59
Figure 6.13: A bar chart showcasing the performance of faiss and nmslib.
Two
Open-Source libraries for approximate nearest neighbors search.
Source: Ben Frederickson.
As explained in this chapter there are already a lot of algorithms for nearest neighbors
search. None of them seem to have overcome the basic issues surrounding the curse of
dimensionality which means no algorithm can be said to be truly better than the rest.
The three company cases shown in this paper show three very different approaches
all of which can be seen as state of the art.
All these algorithms have one thing in common. None of them can use meta data
associated with each vector to alter the search in any way. As a result, both Pinterest
and Ebay retrieves j ≫k items, re-ordering these based on some external metric and
then returning the top k items as the result. This does not provide any promises
of relevant items being in the search result and are slower than just searching for k
items in the first place.
What if meta data could be used to retrieve relevant items with certainty? If it could
be used to constrain the search space so only the right items were considered in the
first place. This would both speed up retrieval and ensure relevant items in the search
result. In the following chapter such an algorithm will be introduced.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Constrained Nearest
Neighbor Search
In this chapter the concept of “Constrained Nearest Neighbor Search” (CKNN) will
be introduced and explained in detail. The term will be used to denote nearest neigh-
bor search constrained by any available meta data associated with a given data point.
Since the approach seems to make the most sense when coupled with deep embed-
dings, another name could be ”Constrained Embedding Search”. First a brief section
will explain how I ended up choosing the main algorithm I use called a “Cover Tree”.
Then the Cover Tree will be explained in detail, followed by a thorough walk through
of the changes I made to allow for constraints. Finally, the resulting algorithm will
be analyzed to see to what extend these changes impact the performance.
7.1
Finding a starting point
My first plan was to base my solution on Facebook’s open-source library faiss since
this seemed to be the fastest approach so far. However, I quickly realized adding
these constraints was not as simple as first imagined. I could not come up with an
effective algorithm which could handle cases where no items in the resulting Voronoi
cell matched the constraint.
Although I still believe such an algorithm should be possible, I decided to focus on
tree based nearest neighbors algorithms instead. I concluded such algorithms would
be the easiest to constrain, since the trees could be pruned by the constraints during
a search. After looking at a few alternatives, I ended up using the ”Cover Tree” as
the foundation of my algorithm.
I chose the Cover Tree because I found the algorithm very elegant and because it
could both be used for normal and approximate nearest neighbor search. This made
it more flexible than most of the other algorithms which I considered, since these are
either fully approximate or not at all. Finally, it has a very general nature and can
==PAGE:72==
7.2 Cover Tree
61
handle all normal distance metrics.
It is important to note any other tree based algorithm should be possible to constrain
in almost the same manner as the Cover Tree. CKNN search should thus not be seen
as limited to the algorithm I describe in this chapter. Instead it should be seen as a
broader category where various algorithms could be invented.
Expansion Constant
Like any other nearest neighbor data structure, the Cover Tree struggles with higher
dimensional data. However, it is still performing much better than the k-d tree. More
importantly its performance is not dependent on the actual dimensions of the data,
but instead the expansion constant of the data set [69]. The specifics of the expansion
constant is outside the scope of this thesis. However, briefly explained the expansion
constant is the actual dimensionality of the manifold the data set lies within. This
means that if the data set lies in a manifold of lower dimensionality than the actual
dimensions of the embeddings, it is the dimensionality of this manifold which affects
the performance. It is my hypothesis deep models learn such a lower dimensional man-
ifolds when training on the data, which would make this data structure efficient even
with relatively high dimensional embeddings. The results in the following chapter
seem to fit nicely with this assumption.
7.2
Cover Tree
The Cover Tree is a data structure invented by Beygelzimer, Kakade, and Langford
in 2006 [46]. It is a fast data structure which could handle any kind of distance metric
which satisfies the four rules:
1. Non-negativity: d(x, y) ≥0
2. Identity of indiscernibles: d(x, y) = 0 ⇔x = y
3. Symmetry: d(x, y) = d(y, x)
4. Triangle inequality: d(x, z) ≤d(x, y) + d(y, z)
This is a really nice quality, since it makes the Cover Tree much more applicable to
various areas where the standard euclidean distance is not the most optimal. Many
vector representations work well with the cosine distance to give an example.
7.2.1
Overview
The Cover Tree a tree-based algorithm, with a few rules explaining how it should be
constructed in order to make efficient nearest neighbor queries. Formally the Cover
==PAGE:73==
7.2 Cover Tree
62
Tree is a leveled tree which given the data set S is structured in such a way each level
is a “cover” for the level beneath it. Each level in the tree is indexed by an integer i
which decreases by one as the tree is descended. With Ci denoting the set of nodes
at level i, the tree should to live up to three rules.
Nesting
Rule: Ci ⊂Ci−1
Simply put the nesting rule states all elements in layer i should also be present
in layer i −1. This rule, was necessary for the analysis of the original Cover Tree.
However, in 2015 Izbicki and Shelton showed the definition of the Cover Tree could
be simplified significantly [70]. Furthermore they showed the Nesting rule could be
discarded completely. In the rest of this chapter, all mentions of the Cover Tree will
be references to this simplified version.
Covering
Rule: For every p ∈Ci−1, there exists a q ∈Ci satisfying distance(p, q) ≤2i, and
exactly one of such q is a parent of p
The Covering rule states each layer should completely enclose the layers beneath it.
The root of the tree thus covers the entire data set. In Figure 7.1 a Cover Tree in one
and two dimensions are visualized with each layer of the tree having its own color.
In the two-dimensional case, it is clear how the total area covered by the lowermost
layers is much smaller than that of the higher layers. Furthermore, the Covering
rule states all children of overlapping covers will only have one parent.
==PAGE:74==
7.2 Cover Tree
63
Figure 7.1: A figure of the Cover Tree in one and two dimensions. In one dimension
the Cover Tree is seen from the side, and the links between each layers is
shown. Nb. the Cover Tree is not a binary tree, two links between each
node is simply chosen for convenience. In two dimensions it is shown
from the top with euclidean metric. The tendency for overlap in each
layer is visualized.
Separation
Rule: For all p, q ∈Ci, distance(p, q) > 2i
The Separation rule states that the distance between two nodes of the same layer
has to be greater than the distance from each individual nodes to its children (> 2i).
This rule is important in regards to proving the query time of the data structure.
7.2.2
How it works
From these three rules the underlying theory of the Cover Tree can be explained.
Where the k-d tree divides the data set with hyperplanes a the axes. The Cover Tree
divides the data set using hyperspheres of exponentially decreasing radius. The root
of the tree thus encloses the entire data set, with the nodes of each layer enclosing a
smaller and smaller sub set. It is important to note these hyperspheres will with a
high likelihood overlap in all layers but the root. Because of this many paths need to
==PAGE:75==
7.2 Cover Tree
64
be queried in order to ensure the nearest neighbors have been found.
The algorithm for constructing the cover tree is a bit more complex than the previ-
ously mentioned k-d tree. When inserting a new item the first step is to check the
root of the tree. Briefly explained a check to see whether the distance to the root is
bigger than 2level(root) is needed. If this is the case, this item should be the new root,
otherwise Algorithm 3 is called.
Algorithm 3 works in a recursive manner. First the children of the current node is
sorted in ascending order based on their distance to the item in question.
If the
distance to a child is 0, the item already exists in the tree, and the algorithms returns
False. If the distance to a child is less than 2level(current)−1 the item is recursively
inserted into this child. Finally if the item does not fit into covering areas of any of
the children, a new child of the current node is added to the tree.
Note that the separation rule is maintained when a new child is added, since it has
already been checked whether this child has a distance less than 2level(current) −1 to
the other children in this layer. The covering rule is maintained implicitly since the
algorithm is being called from the root. Here a check is made whether the distance
from the item is to the current node is less than 2level(current). Only in this case
Algorithm 3 is called. From here the algorithm continuously maintains the covering
rule with the check at line 5 before recursing.
Algorithm 3 insert(Node current, Item new)
1: C := sortedChildren(current, new); i := level(current)−1
2: for Node child ∈C do
3:
if distance(child, new) = 0 then
4:
return False
5:
else if distance(child, new) ≤2i then
6:
return insert(child, new)
7:
end if
8: end for
9: addChild(current, Node(new))
10: return True
When removing an item (Algorithm 4) a nearest neighbor search is used to find the
closest node to a given item. If the distance between the item and the nearest node is
bigger than 0, the item is not in the data set, and thus cannot be removed. Otherwise
the children of the found node is stored temporarily, the node deleted and the children
reinserted into the tree.
==PAGE:76==
7.2 Cover Tree
65
Algorithm 4 remove(Item item)
1: Node nn
2: nearestNeighbor(root, item, nn)
3: if distance(nn, item) = 0 then
4:
C := children(nn)
5:
delete(nn)
6:
for Node child ∈C do
7:
insert(child)
8:
end for
9: end if
Nearest neighbor search in the Cover Tree is also a recursive method. It starts by
finding the children of the current node, sorted by their distance to the item in as-
cending order. It then switches the current node and the current nearest neighbor
if the current node is closer to the item than the current nearest neighbor is. From
here, the algorithm iterates over all children and checks if the distance to the current
nearest neighbor is bigger than the distance to each child plus the covering distance
of this child. This step is a bit complex and is thus visualized in Figure 7.2.
Algorithm 5 nearestNeighbor(Node current, Item item, Node nn)
1: C := sortedChildren(current, new); i := level(current)−1
2: if distance(nn, item) > distance(current, item) then
3:
nn := current
4: end if
5: for Node child ∈C do
6:
if distance(nn, item) > distance(child, item)+2i then
7:
nearestNeighbor(child, item, nn)
8:
end if
9: end for
Figure 7.2 shows a single point in time of Algorithm 5 line 6. The blue circle is the
current item, the two orange circles are two items at level i, and their enclosing circles
are their covering span. The green circle is the current nearest neighbor found in level
i −1. The black arrows are the distances measured in order to figure out whether or
not to continue down the path of the two children. Since the the children are sorted
by their distance to the item, child 1 will be inspected before child 2. As can be seen
from the size of the arrows:
distance(Item, Child 2) > distance(Item, NN) > distance(Item, Child 1)
The algorithm will thus check all children of child 1, before judging whether to look at
child 2. In this example no children of child 2 would be closer to the item, than what
could be found in item 1. Had this not been the case, the algorithm would have found
==PAGE:77==
7.2 Cover Tree
66
a new nearest neighbor which would either be child 1 itself, or one of its children. It
would then check the distance to child 2 and compare it to the new nearest neighbor,
after which it might search child 2.
Figure 7.2: A figure of showcasing the decision process happening in a nearest neigh-
bor search. The goal is to figure out whether to continue searching in
the covering span of two children, given an item and a current nearest
neighbor. It can be seen that the algorithm will search child 1 and not
child 2.
The final algorithm which will be explained is how to generalize the nearest neighbor
search to multiple neighbors (Algorithm 6). Luckily, this is fairly easy. Instead of
a single neighbor, it now maintains a list of neighbors with a max size k ordered
by distance to the item. When finding a node closer than the last item in the list,
an ordered insert is then done, and if the size of the list gets longer than k, the
last element is dropped. The last element in the list is also used, when figuring out
whether to check a child.
==PAGE:78==
7.3 Constrained Cover Tree (CC-Tree)
67
Algorithm 6 kNearestNeighbors(Node current, Item item, List nns, k)
1: C := sortedChildren(current, new); i := level(current)−1
2: if distance(current, item) < distance(last(nns), item) then
3:
insertOrReplace(nns, current, k)
4: end if
5: for Node child ∈C do
6:
if distance(last(nns), item) > distance(child, item)+2i then
7:
kNearestNeighbors(child, item, nns)
8:
end if
9: end for
7.2.3
Analysis
Space Requirement
In the original Cover Tree implementation, all nodes were their own children, which
meant the space requirement was linear in the amount of items O(n) [46]. However,
this was improved by Izbicki and Shelton who showed only one node pr. item was
needed since they did not have to be their own children. This gave a strict upper
bound by the number of nodes O(n).
Insertion/Removal time
Having to maintain the relatively complicated structure is the Cover Tree’s biggest
disadvantage. A big part of the tree has to be queried in every insertion and removal.
This means each of these queries take O(c6 log n) time with c being the expansion
constant mentioned earlier [70].
Query time
Like insertion/removal time, the query time for nearest neighbor searches can be
shown to be O(c6 log n) [70].
7.3
Constrained Cover Tree (CC-Tree)
After a thorough explanation of the Cover Tree algorithm, it is time to show how
it can be modified to be able to handle constrained queries. In this section I will
introduced the Constrained Cover Tree (CC-Tree). Since this algorithm resembles
the original Cover Tree to a very high degree, I have chosen to highlight the changes
with Orange text.
==PAGE:79==
7.3 Constrained Cover Tree (CC-Tree)
68
7.3.1
Handling combinatorial complexity
When building a data structure capable of filtering the search based on some meta
data. It is important to consider what kinds of meta data this could be. If for exam-
ple the meta data would only be one kind of discrete categorical variable, then this
might be included directly in the main algorithm. In fact, this might even be the case
up to a few kinds of categorical data. However, this is no longer possible if the meta
data could contain continuous values or if it should be possible to use a combination
of meta data types. In these cases the combinatorial complexity simply grows too
large too quickly.
This is why most data base solutions use a set of index structures each referencing
the main data structure. These indexes can then be used to search for various items
based on certain conditions. Since this project aimed at making a data structure
capable of working with all kinds of meta data, such an index structures was needed.
The current index structure is of a very simple nature. However, this could easily be
switched with more advanced data structures to improve the overall solution.
7.3.2
How it works
Very few changes are needed in order to transform the Cover Tree into a constrained
version:
1. Every node in the tree has a unique ID.
2. Every node can have multiple items, but only if the distances between these are
all 0.0 and all have different meta data.
3. Every item contains a vector, and its associated meta data.
4. A separate index is used to keep track of which meta data is associated with
each item.
When inserting items into the CC-Tree (Algorithm 7) the first difference is that each
node now can have multiple items with the same vector, but different associated meta
data. This means a check to see whether the item is already in the node is needed.
Furthermore, instead of returning True or False to indicate whether an item has
been inserted, all Node IDs in the path from the root to the insertion node should be
returned. These IDs are associated with the meta information of the inserted item in
the index, and used when querying in Algorithm 9 & 10.
==PAGE:80==
7.3 Constrained Cover Tree (CC-Tree)
69
Algorithm 7 insert(Node current, Item new)
1: C = sortedChildren(current, new); i = level(current)−1
2: for Node child ∈C do
3:
if distance(child, new) = 0 then
4:
if hasItem(child, new) then
5:
return ∅
6:
else
7:
addItem(child, new)
8:
return path(child)
9:
end if
10:
else if distance(child, new) ≤2i then
11:
return insert(child, new)
12:
end if
13: end for
14: child = addChild(current, Node(new))
15: return path(child)
The changes needed when removing an item is even smaller. In Algorithm 8 it is no
longer enough to see whether the distance is 0.0 and a path from root to the deleted
node should be returned like in Algorithm 7.
Algorithm 8 remove(Item item)
1: Node nn
2: nearestNeighbor(root, item, nn)
3: if nn = item then
4:
C := children(nn)
5:
path := path(nn)
6:
delete(nn)
7:
for Node child ∈C do
8:
insert(child)
9:
end for
10:
return path
11: end if=0
The biggest difference between the Cover Tree and this proposed constrained version
comes to light in the algorithms for querying for nearest neighbors. With the above
mentioned alterations a constraint can now be provided along side the search. This
constraint should contain a way of checking if a given node either contains an item
or is a parent to a node containing an item living up to the constraints. A simple
way of doing this could be two dictionaries each containing a subset of the Node IDs
which meet the requirements. The check would then simply be whether the ID of the
==PAGE:81==
7.3 Constrained Cover Tree (CC-Tree)
70
current node was in this in one of these dictionaries or not.
Algorithm 9 shows the changes needed to constrain the nearest neighbor search. In
line 2 a check is included to see if the current node contains an item which meets
the constraint’s criteria. If this is the case, it might be the new nearest neighbor
otherwise it moves on to the loop.
Assuming the path from the root to the insertion node has been indexed while cre-
ating the tree. These Node IDs can be used to constrain the search to the relevant
parts of the tree leading to nodes containing items which meets the criteria (target
nodes). In line 8 a check thus reduces the search space by pruning the tree. It does
so by checking whether the the ID of the child is along a path leading to a target
node. If this is the case, the child might be traversed, otherwise the loop continues.
Note the actual paths are not needed, only the Node IDs belonging to a path. All
these IDs can thus be inserted in a dictionary and the check can happen in constant
time. These two changes are also the only changes when doing k nearest neighbor
search (Algorithm 10).
Algorithm 9 nearestNeighbor(Node current, Item item, Node nn, Constraint
constraint)
1: C := sortedChildren(current, new); i := level(current)−1
2: if containsCheck(constraint, current) then
3:
if distance(nn, item) > distance(current, item) then
4:
nn := current
5:
end if
6: end if
7: for Node child ∈C do
8:
if isParentCheck(constraint, child) then
9:
if distance(nn, item) > distance(child, item)+2i then
10:
nearestNeighbor(child, item, nn)
11:
end if
12:
end if
13: end for
==PAGE:82==
7.3 Constrained Cover Tree (CC-Tree)
71
Algorithm
10
kNearestNeighbors(Node
current, Item
item, List
nns,
k,
Constraint constraint)
1: C := sortedChildren(current, new); i := level(current)−1
2: if containsCheck(constraint, current) then
3:
if distance(current, item) < distance(last(nns), item) then
4:
insertOrReplace(nns, current, k)
5:
end if
6: end if
7: for Node child ∈C do
8:
if isParentCheck(constraint, child) then
9:
if distance(last(nns), item) > distance(child, item)+2i then
10:
kNearestNeighbors(child, item, nns)
11:
end if
12:
end if
13: end for
7.3.3
Handling the Index
So far an index keeping track of the meta data was simply assumed. However, the
implementation of such an index might have a great impact on the run time of the
algorithm and should thus be covered as well. The index proposed in this analysis
is extremely simple and could be improved in lots of ways without much effort. It
is meant to serve as a proof of concept only. It handles all values as discrete, which
means range specifications etc. are not possible.
Creating an index which does not take removal of elements into account is trivial.
Such an index could be implemented with a couple of dictionaries. However, in order
to accommodate removals things get just slightly more complex. Since a node can be
the parent of multiple children, and multiple items can be inserted into a node. A
counter needs to be included to figure out when a given id can safely be removed from
the index. As can be seen in Algorithm 11, most of the complexity lies in keeping
this counter up to date.
The algorithm relies on a few assumptions. The path consists of a list of parent IDs
corresponding to the path from the root to the parent of the insertion node. Fur-
thermore, the path contains a single ID of the insertion node.
Furthermore, the
“locationCounter” and “parentCounter” are both nested dictionary data structures
with the innermost dictionary initialized with a value of 0 for every new key.
==PAGE:83==
7.3 Constrained Cover Tree (CC-Tree)
72
Algorithm 11 insert(Meta info, Path path)
1: if path = ∅then return False
2: end if
3:
4: for key ∈meta do
5:
for parentID ∈path do
6:
parentCounter[key][parentID] += 1
7:
end for
8:
9:
ID insertLocation := insertedAt(path)
10:
locationCounter[key][insertLocation] += 1
11: end for
The algorithm for removing elements from the index (Algorithm 4), is almost the
same. The main difference is the counter which is now decremented. Furthermore a
check to see if the counter becomes 0 is included. If this is the case, the ID is removed
from the index.
Algorithm 12 remove(Meta info, Path path)
1: if path = ∅then return False
2: end if
3:
4: for key ∈meta do
5:
for parentID ∈path do
6:
parentCounter[key][parentID] −= 1
7:
if parentCounter[key][parentID] = 0 then
8:
erase(parentID, parentCounter[key])
9:
end if
10:
end for
11:
12:
ID insertLocation = insertedAt(path)
13:
locationCounter[key][insertLocation] −= 1
14:
if locationCounter[key][insertLocation] = 0 then
15:
erase(insertLocation, locationCounter[key])
16:
end if
17: end for
With the insertion and removal in place, a constraint can be calculated from the
index. Algorithm 13 shows how a constraint is retrieved given some meta data. Since
Algorithm 12 removes the ID from the set of keys in the innermost dictionary if the
counter goes to 0, all keys in inner most dictionary of locationCounter correspond
to Node IDs with a matching item. All keys in parentCounter correspond to all
==PAGE:84==
7.3 Constrained Cover Tree (CC-Tree)
73
Node IDs which are on paths to target nodes. The algorithm thus loops through
all the requirements in the meta data, and finds the set of IDs which matches a given
requirement. The Node IDs meeting all the constraint’s criteria will be in each of
these lists, while the rest will only be in a sub set. It is thus only the intersection of
all these sets of IDs which is used for the constraint.
Algorithm 13 getConstraint(Meta info)
1: List parents
2: List locations
3:
4: for requirement ∈meta do
5:
Set matchingParents = getIDs(parentCounter[requirement])
6:
insertList(parents, matchingParents)
7:
8:
Set matchingLocations = getIDs(locationCounter[requirement])
9:
insertList(locations, matchingLocations)
10: end for
11:
12: constraint = Constraint(intersection(parents), intersection(locations))
13: return constraint
7.3.4
Analysis
Since the CC-Tree is so closely linked to the normal Cover Tree, the purpose of this
analysis is simply to prove that its performance is not worse than that of the Cover
Tree.
Correctness
Firstly, it is in order to prove the algorithm is actually correct. Here two things should
be proven:
1. The index returns the right IDs
2. The constrained search on the tree does in fact return the nearest neighbors of
the subset of nodes specified by the IDs
From the algorithms it can be seen directly, the index returns the right IDs. On all
insertions (Algorithm 7), the IDs in the path from the root to the insertion node are
returned. In Algorithm 11 all Node IDs are matched with each item in the meta data.
Any ID is removed from the index as soon as this ID does not match a given meta
key in the CC-Tree (12). From this it can be seen that the IDs returned for each
meta data key in Algorithm 13 are correct. The intersection of these sets of IDs is the
subset of IDs which satisfies all the specified requirements. Thus the IDs returned by
==PAGE:85==
7.3 Constrained Cover Tree (CC-Tree)
74
the index are all correct.
Proving the constrained search yields the correct result is only slightly more complex.
From the algorithms the following can be seen. If an ID of a node nt is in the con-
strained subset, then all IDs in the path from nt to the root will also be present in
the subset. Thus all IDs in the subset can be reached from the root.
The rules of the original Cover Tree states all nodes in the tree should live up to the
Separation rule and thus have a distance larger than 2i to its neighbors. All nodes
also lives up to the Covering rule and thus have at maximum a distance of 2i to its
children. Since this is the case for all nodes, it is also the case for the subset specified
by the IDs in the constraint. In other words, any sub tree of a Cover Tree which
includes the root is itself a Cover Tree. Thus querying it, will give the right result.
Space
In the CC-Tree a node can now potentially store multiple items. This means it is
possible for the tree to have fewer nodes than items. However, in practice this will
seldom be the case since the embeddings tend to be rather unique, and the worst case
space requirement stays the same: O(n).
The space requirement for the index depends on the amount of unique keys k in the
meta data. In the worst case scenario each item would be associated with all meta
data keys k and the space requirement for the index would thus be: O(kn). Yet it can
be expected there will be much fewer keys than items, which means that k ≪n. On
top of that each item will only be associated with a small subset of k, which means
that in practice the space requirement will be O(n).
Insertion / Removal time
Very few changes have been made to the insertion and removal algorithms.
The
biggest difference is backward traversal from the node in question to the root in order
to collect the IDs in the path. However, the longest path in a Cover Tree is at most
O(c2 log n) [70]. This path is inserted in the index. Each insertion is in a dictionary,
which takes O(1) time. In the worst case the path should be inserted for all k keys,
which gives a total insertion/removal time of O(k · c2 log n + c6 log n). However, as
before, in practice this will never happen. More likely the amount of meta data for
each item will be O(1) which means the insertion and removal time continues to be
O(c6 log n).
Query time
When querying for nearest neighbor, the constraint should first be extracted from
the index. Calculating the intersection of the found sets is the main task in this
==PAGE:86==
7.3 Constrained Cover Tree (CC-Tree)
75
process. Finding the intersection requires an iteration over the shortest list, as well
as a look-up for each of the other lists. This means the worst case run time for finding
the intersection would be O(kn). In this worst case, the list of IDs would include
all nodes in the CC-Tree, which would give the full query time of O(kn + c6 log n.
However, in practice the amount of constraints would be O(1), and would lead to a
shortest list m where m ≪n. This in turn would reduce the amount of nodes queried,
which gives the query time of O(m + c6 log m).
Through this brief analysis it can be seen adding an index could potentially worsen
the performance of the algorithm. However, in practice the performance should either
remain the same or improve the performance significantly.
In order to test this
assumption I created and tested two different implementations of the algorithm in
C++, which will be explained and analyzed in the following chapter.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 8
Implementation &
Tests
In this chapter I will go through some of the practical details of how the CC-Tree was
implemented. To not burden the reader with too many details, a lot of the details
regarding the early work have been moved to appendix (Chapter E and F) and will
only be referenced here.
8.1
Process
To implement the CC-Tree I decided to use the programming language C++. This de-
cision was chosen even with an efficient algorithm, the great amount of computation
needed to match hundreds of thousands of high-dimensional vectors. Such a system
would almost be impossible to build efficiently with a high-level language such as
Python. The second reason was that I had never had the opportunity to work with
C++ before, and I knew this project was my last opportunity to get hands on experi-
ence with the language while being a student.
This choice thus had quite a big impact on the project, since I had to learn a new
language while implementing the algorithm. Since the outcome was rather uncertain
I decided to divide the project into two phases:
1. Build the simplest possible system to check if the algorithm worked
2. Build an efficient system, to showcase the potential of the algorithm
This way I would be able to learn C++ in the first phase and be “certain” to have
something to show if everything went wrong. If the first phase was a success I would
have a better understanding of the problem and the language to build an efficient
system. Although this process turned out great, it also meant I have spent time on
implementing two very different versions of the same algorithm. Time I might other
wise have used to further increase the scope of the project.
==PAGE:88==
8.2 Initial Results
77
8.2
Initial Results
The first system was single-threaded, and thus could not use all the resources avail-
able on the computer. It was based on the original Cover Tree algorithm [46], and
used a simple dictionary to constrain the search. It could thus only handle a single
constraint, which was the category of the image. The rest of the implementation
details can be found in Chapter E.
I first tested the implementation with random vectors since these should have the
highest expansion constant, and thus be the worst case scenario for the data struc-
ture. I generated a 10.000 random vectors of various dimensions, and assigned them
to one of either 10 or 100 categories in a uniform manner. These vectors were inserted
into the data structure in a sequential manner and at every 1000th inserted vector
the data structure was queried a thousand times with k = 100 both with and without
category constraints. The 10.000 vectors were chosen because of time limitations. I
had attempted with 100.000 vectors earlier, and here it took ≈3.5 hours pr. run if
the dimensionality was above 250.
In Figure 8.1 the build time is shown for vectors of various dimensionality. It is obvi-
ous the dimensionality of the vectors is extremely important for this data structure.
Inserting 10.000 vectors with 64 dimensions is more than 5 times as fast as inserting
the same amount of vectors with 1024 dimensions. However, this is not solely because
of the data structure, since calculating the distance in 1024 dimensions takes quite a
lot more time than that of 64 dimensions.
==PAGE:89==
8.2 Initial Results
78
Figure 8.1: The build time for the single-threaded CC-Tree.
The build time in-
creases quite drastically as a result of the data set size. This version is
thus not suitable for big data sets.
The time it takes to query the data structure is shown in figure 8.2. Here it can be
seen constraining queries improves the speed dramatically. The worst measured run
time for the normal queries are ≈12 seconds for a thousand queries with k = 100
(≈83 queries pr. second). For the same amount of vectors the worst measured run
time is ≈2.2 seconds (≈450 queries pr. second). In general the constrained searches
seems to be between 4 to 5 times as fast as the normal searches, which is a rather
dramatic increase.
==PAGE:90==
8.2 Initial Results
79
Figure 8.2: Query time for the first version of the CC-Tree. On the left the normal
(unconstrained) search time is shown, whereas the constrained search
time is shown on the right. Note the different y-axis of the two plots.
Using a small subset of the data (Due to hardware constraints) a qualitative per-
formance test was also carried out.
The embeddings (Extracted with the model
explained in Chapter D), were inserted into the data structure after which it was
queried. One of the results can be seen in figure 8.3. Normal queries on these embed-
dings returns items from quite a lot of different categories. However, if constrained
on the category the quality of the result seems to improve quite a lot.
First of all, a lot more of the images from the same item (images with a green check
mark in the upper right corner) are present in the constrained search result. Further-
more, all the images added in the constrained search would not have been present in
the first 200 images had normal nearest neighbor search been used (which can bee
seen from last the number beneath each image). These initial positive results moti-
vated the further development of the data structure. It seemed the approach could
be generally useful if an efficient implementation was developed.
==PAGE:91==
8.3 Final Results
80
Figure 8.3: A visualization of the qualitative difference between the search results
using normal KNN search and CKNN search. The left most image is
the query image, the upper most row is the top results of the normal
search. If the category is correct in the normal search the category name
is written in green. The lower most row is the results of the constrained
search. In both rows a green check mark is added if the result is an
image of the same item.
8.3
Final Results
To improve the efficiency of the data structure most of the code was rewritten. This
was done to fix a lot of my initial misunderstandings regarding C++, as well as making
the code more maintainable and generic. To improve efficiency I introduced multi-
threading combined with mutex locks to avoid data corruption, race conditions and
dead locks. The rest of the implementation details can be found in Appendix F.
In order to ensure the validity of the test results, all plots shown in this section are
the average of 10 runs. If not otherwise specified they have been calculated using
random Gaussian vectors assigned to categories in a uniform manner.
One of the main problems with the Cover Tree Algorithm is its build time. Com-
pared to linear search where new data can be inserted in constant time, adding new
elements to the Cover Tree requires a traversal of a big chunk of the tree which gets
more and more expensive as the tree gets bigger. In the first implementation, it took
up to two minutes to add 10.000 random vectors to an empty tree, and multiple hours
to add 100.000. In Figure 8.4 the build time of the final implementation can be seen.
These two plots are the average of 10 tree constructions with 0, 10 and 100 categories
resulting in 30 tree constructions for each dimensionality.
In the latest version 10.000 random vectors can be added to an empty tree in a range
==PAGE:92==
8.3 Final Results
81
between a tenth of a second to 20 seconds depending on the dimensionality of the
data. With 100.000 random vectors this increases to a range of 5 seconds a minute
to 40 minutes. This is quite a big difference, yet it seems to mostly be caused by the
locks used to ensure proper behaviour in the multithreaded system. As the dimen-
sionality increases, there seems to be more “collisions” where multiple threads try to
access the same node of the tree at the same time. Since this is not allowed, they
have to wait on each other, which means the performance is sub-optimal.
Interestingly a dimensionality of 256 seems to be the worst trade off for this imple-
mentation. The build time for vectors of 256 dimensions is consistently higher than
that of 512 which is quite odd. From inspection of the CPU usage while the tree is
getting constructed, it seems 256 dimensions for some reason causes more “collisions”
which means more time is spent on waiting.
Looking at the error bars it seems the build time does not vary to any great extend.
This important since these are the averages of CC-Trees with 0, 10 and 100 categories.
If maintaining the index was costly, the build time would thus vary significantly more
than what it does now. Instead it seems the “thread collisions” are the main cause
for the variability shown here. This is backed up by manual inspection of the CPU
usage during the tests.
These random vectors show more or less the worst case performance of the algorithm,
since such a data set will have the largest expansion constant. The CC-Tree can be
fully constructed in just 16.5 seconds averaged over 10 runs, when using the embed-
dings from the ShopStyle test data consisting of 376.387 embeddings with on more
than 7 kinds of meta data pr. data point. This also indicates maintaining the index
is not expensive in practice as hypothesized.
==PAGE:93==
8.3 Final Results
82
Figure 8.4: A bar plot of the build time depending on the size of the data set as
well as its dimensionality. On the left side the build time for a data set
of 10.000 random Gaussian vectors is shown, while the right side is for
a data set of 100.000 random vectors.
Figure 8.5 shows the amount of KNN/CKKN queries a constructed tree can handle
per second. As the data set grows, the search time increases dramatically (The y-axis
have different scales). In each of the two plots three groups are shown with 0, 10, and
100 categories. All queries in the group with 0 categories are normal KNN queries,
whereas the rest is CKKN queries.
With 10.000 vectors the latest implementation can handle between 890 and 3100
normal KNN queries per second almost an order of magnitude more than the single
threaded version. If instead the tree consists of 100.000 vectors, this drops drastically
to between 39 to 144 queries pr second. It can furthermore be seen that almost no
variability is present for any dimensionality in regards to normal KNN searches.
Although the normal KNN search time might not seem astonishing, the performance
is increased significantly when CKNN search is used. With the vectors divided be-
tween 10 uniform categories the implementation can top ≈5.600 queries pr second,
if instead 100 uniform categories are present it can top ≈17.800 queries per second.
Once again the speed falls drastically when the data set increases to 100.000 vectors.
However, with 100 uniform categories the data structure can in many cases handle
an order of magnitude more queries per second than normal KNN.
==PAGE:94==
8.3 Final Results
83
Figure 8.5: A bar plot of the constrained nearest neighbor search time depending
on the size of the data set, the dimensionality of the data as well as
the amount of categories. The vectors are all randomly drawn from a
Gaussian Distribution and assigned a random category uniformly. Each
search is constrained on the assigned category. The search time is cal-
culated based on 10.000 searches with k = 100.
Figure 8.6 shows how the implementation handles actual data using the test set of
the ShopStyle data. With all the embeddings inserted, each embedding was used as
query vector in a random order. Three kinds of queries were tested: a normal nearest
neighbors search, a search constrained on category and a search constrained on brand.
This was done 10 times, thus totalling 3.763.870 · 3 = 11.291.610 queries. With this
data amount the implementation can only handle 195 KNN queries pr. second. How-
ever, if constrained on category the search time becomes more than 4 times as fast
while a brand constraint improves the search speed by a factor of 9.
It is worth noting the query time on the CKKN searches using a brand constraint
varies a lot more. This is because the amount of images associated with a brand
varies to a great extend. Some brands such as Nike has a great amount of images,
while others have much less. This means the Nike searches does not prune the tree
as much as other smaller brands and thus take longer time.
==PAGE:95==
8.3 Final Results
84
Figure 8.6: The search time for the test subset of the ShopStyle data set. This
subset consists of 376.387 embeddings of 64 dimensions. After insertion
the data set has been shuffled after which all embeddings have been
used to query the data structure with k = 100 in order to provide
an accurate assessment of the search time. The solid lines shows the
measured search time, while the dotted line represent the calculated
mean.
Including the meta data index thus does not seem to affect the build time of the
algorithm, and using it significantly speeds up the query time. However, it is still not
known how the constraints affect the quality of the search result.
In Figure 8.7 the precision improvements from using constraints in the query can be
seen. In the top left plot the item precision at k is shown. It indicates whether or
not an image from the same item is included in the search result. It is easy to see the
item precision improves dramatically when the search is constrained on the category.
It is almost a 20 percent point improvement from normal KNN search of all values of k.
In the top right plot the category precision at k can be seen. Here it is obvious the
CKKN search would have 100% precision at every value of k. Yet since the model is
already quite good at returning at least one image from the same class, this is not as
big an improvement as in the other measures.
In the bottom most plot showing the category percentage, it is again quite obvious the
percentage of correct categories will be 100% at all positions since only the right class
==PAGE:96==
8.3 Final Results
85
can be returned given the constraint. It clearly shows how much the model would
need to improve in order to provide as good results without constraints. Despite the
tremendous advances in the general capability of deep models, such improvements
are not likely to occur in the near future.
Figure 8.7: Two plots showcasing the difference in precision for constrained search
versus normal nearest neighbors search. The left most plot shows Item
at k precision, which is 1 if there is an image of the same item in the
result and 0 otherwise. The right most plot shows class precision at k,
which is the precision at every position. In both plots the queries are
constrained on Category.
Figures 8.8, 8.9 & 8.10 show various query images and the results from normal KNN
and CKNN searches. Each figure contains two query images on the left, and the
result of both a KNN and CKNN search on the right. Beneath each image is the
category, distance, brand and color written (Note the color categories are not very
precise). Beneath the results of the CKNN search either a number or a dash is writ-
ten as well. If a number is present, it indicates the position of the image in the first
100 neighbors of the normal KNN search for the given query. Otherwise a dash in-
dicates the image not being among the 100 nearest neighbors in a normal KNN search.
In Figure 8.8 the queries are constrained by category. In both queries it is obvious the
color has influenced the embeddings. In the first query the results contain pink nu-
ances, however 7 different categories are returned in the first 10 results for the normal
KNN and only two of the images are from the query item. When constraining on the
==PAGE:97==
8.3 Final Results
86
category, only the right category is returned, and 5 images belong to query item. On
top of this it can be seen the 7 images from the same category are not present in the
first 100 results of the normal KNN search. In the second query, the first image with
the same category would appear as the 22nd neighbor, and the rest of the results would
not have been present among the first hundred results of a normal search. In both
cases constraining on the category thus drastically improves the quality of the results.
Figure 8.8: The two left most images are the query images, the upper rows are the
normal nearest neighbor search results and the lower rows are the search
results with a Category constraint.
Figure 8.9 shows two examples with brand constraints. Here it can be seen there
are still more images of the same category present than with a normal KNN search
despite the queries being constrained by brand and not category. On top of this, the
quality of the results also seems to improve quite a bit. For example the amount
of same-gender results are quite a lot higher in both cases. Constraining on brand
should also reduce the variability of the prices of the results, since most brands tend
to have a pricing strategy targeting a specific customer demographic. With the inclu-
sion of an index capable of handling continuous values, this price variability could be
==PAGE:98==
8.3 Final Results
87
reduced even further, since the prices could then be constrained by a given range.
Figure 8.9: The two left most images are the query images, the upper rows are the
normal nearest neighbor search results and the lower rows are the search
results with a Brand constraint.
Finally Figure 8.10 shows queries constrained by both category and brand. In my
data set each brand typically have quite few items for any category. This means the
result in many cases will just be images of the same item. However, in these two
examples there seem to be two items from these two brands in the given category.
This figure thus shows how specific the query can be, when including constraints on
more than one type of meta data.
==PAGE:99==
8.3 Final Results
88
Figure 8.10: The two left most images are the query images, the upper rows are
the normal nearest neighbor search results and the lower rows are the
search results with both a Category and a Brand constraint.
The current implementation of the CC-Tree thus promises great build time in the
order of seconds for data sets of less than 400.000 embeddings.
Maintaining an
index does not seem to have any negative effects on the performance, while allowing
for much faster queries. Furthermore, the constraints make the search much more
targeted improving the quality as a result. Constrained Nearest Neighbors Search
thus show great promise and could potentially benefit many domains besides fashion
search. All of this will be discussed further in the following chapter.
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 9
Future work
This chapter will briefly go through what could be done to improve the current
implementation of both the deep model and the data structure. Furthermore, ideas
to which domains could benefit from the concept of Constrained Nearest Neighbor
Search will be discussed.
9.1
Improving the model
A lot could be done to improve the current model due to its simplicity. If I had had
more time, I would firstly pursue training the model with NCA loss [26] instead of
triplet loss [25]. However, the model itself could also be made more complex. Some
researchers suggest using multiple scales of the input image in order to capture both
the intricate details and the high-level appearance of the image [71, 72]. Since this is
a rather simple addition to the model architecture it would also be worth investigating.
Another approach could be to include some sort of attention mechanism to allow the
model to focus on the most relevant part of the image. One such approach could be
the Region Proposal Network suggested Gordo et al. which also seems to be used in
the Pinterest’s search pipeline [42, 73]. Alternatively one could try and include the
Spatial Transformer Network developed by Jaderberg and Deepmind [74]. However,
based on experience such a transformer network might be difficult to get to work well
in practice on this data set.
To truly get great results one would probably need an object detection paradigm,
since each image contains so many objects. To get to this stage, the data sets would
need to be further annotated to some extend. It would be interesting to see what
kind of performance could be achieved with a small annotated subset and a semi-
supervised object detection model. The similarity training/search should then be on
the object-regions instead of the image as a whole like Pinterest is doing.
9.2
Improving the data structure
There are also many ways to improve the current implementation of the CC-Tree.
First of all, there might still be possible ways to optimize the code due to my lack of
==PAGE:101==
9.3 Perspective
90
expertise in C++. More importantly though is to build in an API in order to integrate
the CC-Tree with other software. Personally I would have liked to wrap it in a web
server to allow HTTP communication, yet did not have enough time.
It would also improve the system a great amount, if it was coupled with an index ca-
pable of handling continuous values. This could for example be implemented through
a B-Tree [75]. Another improvement would be to make the data structure disc based,
or at least capable of being persisted to disc. As it is now, the data structure has to
be build in memory every time it should be run, which is far from optimal.
Using a run time analyzer from the open source analysis tool called valgrind I found
that around 50% of the time was spent on distance calculations (Figure F.2). Since
these calculations are handled by Eigen, this cannot really be improved upon. This
means the program cannot be expected to achieve more than twice its current speed,
unless approximate searches are used instead. The possibility of approximate searches
was one of the reasons I chose the Cover Tree, yet I did not get around to implement it.
It would be interesting see how big the speed gains would be if approximate searches
was used instead.
There are also a lot of other tree based nearest neighbor algorithms most of which
should be possible to constrain in almost the same manner as I have constrained the
Cover Tree. Since each of these have their own advantages it might be worth the effort
to create constrained versions of these as well. However, Constrained Nearest Neigh-
bor Search should thus not just be seen as simple modifications of existing algorithms.
It is my firm belief, it is worth designing new algorithms specifically tailored to this
problem, due to the many domains which could benefit from constrained search.
9.3
Perspective
This thesis have focused solely on product search, yet the concept of Constrained
Nearest Neighbors Search have far bigger reach than this narrow domain. If Deep
Learning to any extend live up to the current expectations, deep models will be
trained to categorize information in as good as all domains. As a byproduct, this will
result in useful vector embeddings, making nearest neighbor algorithms more impor-
tant than ever before. As this thesis have shown, there are practically no downsides
to include constraints in these algorithms. Instead, the constraints help overcome the
models flaws and thus compliment the Deep Learning approach greatly.
One domain which could truly benefit from CKNN is public security. Many countries
are currently experimenting with facial recognition in the many security cameras in
their major cities. As an example, being able to locate a possible terrorist quickly is
deemed of high importance. With CKKN such searches could naturally be filtered by
time and location greatly reducing the amount of images to look through. Another
==PAGE:102==
9.3 Perspective
91
example would be searches for specific cars fleeing a crime scene, which could benefit
in the same manner.
Another domain could be content recommendations. Research have already shown
embeddings of users and content are a great tool for generating recommendations.
However, these recommendations are typically very general. With CKNN users would
get better options to state what they specifically are looking for at a given moment.
With movie content as an example the recommendations could be constrained by any
combination genre, actors, age, budget etc. improving the query speed and result
quality in the process.
Finally a lot of research has gone into generating embeddings for sentences, para-
graphs and whole documents. Search in these document embeddings could benefit
greatly from constraints on words the documents should contain. Just as relevant
meta data like the author, publisher etc.
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
Deep Learning continues to progress at an incredible pace, problems which before
seemed out of reach are suddenly solvable. Using a collection of relatively simple
concepts, these deep models can learn to approximate extremely complex functions.
In the process they convert these mostly raw inputs into vectors which embed descrip-
tive information about the inputs. These embeddings can in turn be used to search
the input data since the distance in vector space approximate the distance of the
original input space. This is already used to a great extend in two major companies
Pinterest and Ebay.
In this thesis I have showed decent embeddings can be created with relatively simple
models. However, the data quality are of big importance for the end performance,
and even with great performing models, catastrophic errors can still occur.
Current algorithms cannot include other information than the embeddings. This lim-
its which domains deep embeddings can be used in, and how specific the user can
query the system. To improve on this I have introduced the concept of Constrained
Nearest Neighbor Search. An approach differing from normal nearest neighbor search
by allowing search constraints on meta data associated with each embedding. In the
current implementation only discrete meta data can be used, however, this can easily
be extended to other types of data.
To prove the algorithms’ value I have implemented an efficient multithreaded sys-
tem in C++ and tested it on both random data as well as fashion image embeddings.
Through these tests I have proved the system lives up to most companies’ speed
requirements. Furthermore, I have shown these constraints not only improves the
quality of the result but decreases the query time significantly compared to the orig-
inal algorithm.
I am thus of the firm belief constrained nearest neighbors as a concept could be of
great value in many domains. Furthermore, it seems to be a great companion to
Deep Learning models in the attempts to provide alternative search interfaces such
as image search.
==PAGE:104==
APPENDIX A
Deep Learning
A.1
Non-linearities
The Feed Forward layers are simply doing a linear transformation of the input. If
nothing else was done, no matter how many layers we added to the network it would
not be able to do anything but a linear transformation. To get around this, the out-
put of each layer is sent through a simple non-linear function before being passed to
the next layer. The output of this non-linear layer is called the activation of the layer.
Initially the Sigmoid function and TanH function were used as the non-linearity in
the networks (Red and Blue line in the left image of Figure A.1). However, after
further analysis they were deemed unfit for the task, due the function space of their
derivative. In the rightmost image in Figure A.1 the derivative of these two functions
can be seen. Notice their derivatives are positive just around value 0 on the x-axis,
but quickly approaches zero in both the positive and negative x-values. Since the
gradient is used to alter the weights of the network this means that for a very large
share of the possible values, the weights would not be updated in any meaningful way.
Today most networks are thus using the Relu function (Purple line in Figure A.1).
This is a very simple function which is linear in all positive values and 0 otherwise.
Still, this function is far from perfect since it might leave some units of the network
unused (known as the dead neuron problem) [76]. Newer functions have thus been
suggested [77, 78], yet Relu is still the activation function of choice in most cases.
==PAGE:105==
A.2 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
94
Figure A.1: The leftmost plot shows the three most common non-linearities: Sig-
moid, TanH and Relu.
The rightmost plot shows the derivative of
these.
A.2
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
Although Feed Forward Neural Networks can has the ability to proximate all possible
functions. Making such an approximation tend to require a huge amount of parame-
ters, and the result tend to not generalize as well. This is because slight alterations to
the input can completely change the output of the function. An obvious such example
are images. If a black and white image is given to a FFN every weight in the first
layer will be attached to a single pixel. This means that if every pixel of an image is
moved one to the right, then input will be completely different to the FFN, despite
such a change being unnoticeable to a human. This problem can be overcome given
enough parameters and training data. However, smarter solutions exists to handle
such data.
One of such solutions is Convolutional Neural Networks (CCN) [79]. Instead of hav-
ing a single weight for every feature, in CNNs a fixed number of weights are applied
to all features which reduces the amount of parameters greatly. These fixed number
of weights can be taught to act as filters which enhance important parts of the input
while diminishing the rest. Although the equations for applying the convolutions to
the input is a bit more complicated than those for the FFNs, the intuition is rather
simple. In Figure A.2 an input example is given alongside a kernel example. The
name “kernel” and “filter” are used intermittently throughout the literature for a
==PAGE:106==
A.2 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
95
group of learned weights, with kernel being the most formally correct.
In the right side of Figure A.2 the kernel is being applied to the input with a stride
of 1. This means the kernel is first placed in the upper right corner. It is then moved
one column to the right until it reaches the end. From here it moves all the way back
to the left size, and one row down. This continues until it has been applied to the
entire input. At every ”step” the dot product between the kernel and the current
location of the input is being calculated in order to provide a single value (Bottom-
Left). Just like with FFNs a single bias is attached to every kernel, this bias is added
to the result of the dot product. As can be seen in the bottom right of the figure, the
resulting matrix after a convolution is quite a lot smaller than the input. Sometimes
this is wanted, otherwise the input is padded evenly with zeros until the result is of
the wanted size.
==PAGE:107==
A.2 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
96
Figure A.2: An example of a convolution of a kernel over an input with a stride of
1. In the top-left corner the input and kernel is shown. To the right
of these is a visualization of how the kernel is moved across the input.
Below is the equations needed to calculate the result as well as the
resulting matrix.
Convolution layers are almost always followed by pooling (Figure A.3). In its essence
pooling is a single function applied to non-overlapping regions/pools of the input. The
most commonly used pooling function is the max of the pool. Here, the maximum
element is simply returned in each pool. Other types could be the mean, min etc. The
reason “Max Pooling” is used more commonly than the rest of the possible functions
is it has some subtle consequences. All types of pooling reduces the dimensionality
of the input to a great extend. Max Pooling however, does not only reduce the di-
mension as a result of the pooling. Since the max-function only returns the biggest
value in the pool affects the following layers. This helps the network specialize each
kernel, furthermore it makes the network location invariant. As can be seen in the
right most part of Figure A.3, even if it is the corner of the input which is the most
activated (with higher activation shown as a darker value), after a couple of layers
of pooling, this corner will dominate the result. When a network have learned to
==PAGE:108==
A.2 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
97
recognize a given object, the location of this object will thus not matter much.
Figure A.3: An example of pooling. In the top is the input, both with and without
the coloured pooling areas. Beneath are the equations for max and
mean pooling as well as the resulting matrices. In the right most part
of the image the resulting location invariance of a network with pooling
is shown. Darker values indicate a higher activation.
A lot of research have gone into figuring out what CNNs actually learn.
This is
difficult since each convolution layer tend to include multiple kernels in order to
highlight different aspects of the input. When each layer highlights aspects of the
outputs of the previous layer, the dimensionality of feature maps as they are called,
become of rather high dimensionality. The most promising results so far come from
the work of Olah, Mordvintsev, and Schubert [80], some of which can be seen in
Figure A.4. The images in this figure should be inspected from left to right, with the
left images being the first layers in the network and the right being the last layers.
From these images it seems the first layers of the network learn to highlight various
edges and general textures. The middle most layers seemingly find general patterns
==PAGE:109==
A.3 Gradient Descent
98
in the image, and the last layers find much more abstract concepts such as eyes,
buildings or shorts.
Figure A.4: Some feature visualization examples extracted from GoogLeNet [10].
Source: Image from [80].
A.3
Gradient Descent
Since every layer of a neural network is a parametized function which given an input,
produces a an output. The neural network itself is nothing but a parametized func-
tion consisting of all its layers. Such a function can be guided through optimization
to output more appropriate values and to do so gradient descent is used. Gradient
descent is an iterative optimization algorithm for finding the minimum of a func-
tion. With gradient descent a local minimum of a function can be found, by taking
steps proportional to the negative of the gradient of the function at the current point.
Neural network needs to be converted into a simpler function in order to be opti-
mized by gradient descent. To do so, a cost function is used. In general terms, the
cost function is a function which takes the output of the neural network as well as
the target values and calculates the difference between the two. By minimizing this
difference, the network is said to learn. This distinction between the cost functions
and the neural network is important. Since it is actually the cost function which is
minimized, the choice of cost function has a big impact on the final parameter values
of the network.
Gradient descent utilizes the gradient of the function at any point is the direction of
the steepest ascent. This means the negative of the gradient must be the direction of
the steepest descent. Since the goal is to minimize the cost functions, following the
direction of the steepest descent at every step is quite a reasonable heuristic. How-
ever, it does not ensure the end result will be the global minimum of the function,
==PAGE:110==
A.3 Gradient Descent
99
in fact with complicated functions it is far more likely the result will simply be a
local minimum. Once a local minimum have been reached the negative gradient of
all surrounding points will point towards the center of this minimum after which the
algorithm tend to get stuck.
In Figure A.5 an example of gradient descent can be seen. Note the starting point
affect the outcome of the optimization process. This is also the case with the initial
values weights of a neural network. However, due to lack of better alternatives, ran-
dom values of these weights are typically chosen. This can have a big impact on the
end performance of the network [81], yet no better way have been found so far.
Figure A.5: An example of gradient descent on a function in three dimensions. Note
that the starting position can influence which local minimum the func-
tion ends up in.
Source: Vasilis Vryniotis.
Although looking at the negative gradient of a single point at a time might work, a
theoretically better approach would be to look at the mean negative gradient of all
the points and go in this direction. However, with the complexity of modern neural
nets, combined with the size of the data sets, this is almost never feasible. Instead,
a small subset of points is typically used, and the mean negative gradient is followed.
Since there is really no way of knowing which points to choose at a given time, These
points are chosen randomly at every step. Hence the name of the method: “Stochas-
tic Gradient Descent”.
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX B
Amazon Data Set
B.1
overview
The first data set I created consists of images extracted from Amazon’s websites tar-
geting USA and England (amazon.com & amazon.co.uk). To extract images from
these websites I build a small web crawler using the Scrapy web crawling framework.
Although it was not possible to only extract fashion related items, I was able to speed
up the process by giving higher priority to links found on fashion related pages, and
lower priority to everything else.
In total ≈8 million images was retrieved, ≈4 million of which were fashion related.
From every page the name, description, price etc. was also extracted in order to be
used as meta data. In total the data set consists of 1248 unique categories.
B.2
Preprocessing
With all images stored locally, I inspected the data set manually. Here I found a
great amount of garbage images such as sizing charts, images of packaging etc. (Fig-
ure B.1). Since there were almost one garbage image for each individual fashion item,
these had to be removed. However, with 4 million images this is not a trivial task.
I ended up finding 100 different garbage images manually. Since the garbage images
were so similar to each other. I used an iterative process of extracting similar garbage
images using simple finger printing techniques1 followed by manual inspection in or-
der to remove the false positives.
Using this approach I was able to generate a relatively clean data set with ≈28000
garbage images in a few hours. I then extracted the same amount of fashion items
(Figure B.2) by random sampling followed by a coarse removal using the same fin-
gerprinting technique as before. Finally both the garbage data set and the cleaned
fashion data set was used as training data for a deep learning model. I here fine tuned
the Inception-Resnet model [12] with cross entropy loss on a 2 dimensional output
(wanted/unwanted). With this approach, the model achieved 99.4 accuracy, which
1https://github.com/ascribe/image-match
==PAGE:112==
B.3 Problems
101
was far better than I had anticipated.
Figure B.1: 10 random images from the garbage category used for training my
garbage removal model.
Figure B.2: 10 random images from the non-garbage category used for training my
garbage removal model.
Finally I ran the whole data set through this fine tuned model, and deleted all the
images which it classified as unwanted which amounted to more than 270.000 deleted
images.
B.3
Problems
Although the data set was now much cleaner, there were still some problems. The
main problem was the shear amount of categories. With more than 1200 categories,
each category was extremely fine grained, much more so than would be necessary for
any practical fashion related application. These fine grained categories also caused
==PAGE:113==
B.3 Problems
102
another problem. Amazon have over time become a market place, rather than a web
shop. This means fashion sellers from all over the world have started uploading their
items to Amazon. After thorough manual inspection it was obvious these sellers could
not discern between these fine grained categories either. This meant there was an
great amount of mislabelled images in each category.
Instead of spending a lot of time trying to merge the right categories, to make the
data set more usable for my task, I ended up creating another data set to work with.
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX C
Preliminary models
All models trained and fine tuned in this thesis have been implemented with the
Deep Learning framework Tensorflow [82]. This choice was made because I already
had quite a lot of experience with this framework, and because it integrates with
TensorBoard, which makes it easy to visualize performance and progress while
training the model. All models have furthermore been trained on my custom built
computer with specs detailed in Table C.1.
Table C.1: The hardware specs of the computer used to train the models.
Hardware
Type
CPU
Intel® Core™i7-6700K CPU @ 4.00GHz × 8
GPU
GeForce GTX 1070 8GB
RAM
64GB 3200MHz
Hard disc
500GB SSD & 2TB HDD
Operating System
Ubuntu 16.04 LTS
C.1
Inception performance
The first model I fine tuned was the Inception-Resnet Model [12] originally trained
on ImageNet. The model was fine tuned on the Amazon data set (Chapter B) with-
out altering the architecture in any way. This was mostly an experiment to see how
well it performed out of the box. I started out trying naively to fine-tune the whole
network. This was a very slow process, and after 24 hours / 2 epochs it had still just
an accuracy of 1.4%.
Since this approach seemed not to take me anywhere, I choose to freeze a big part
of the network and only train the last layers. I made a series of short experiments
each approximately 4 8 hours to figure out the amount of layers which should be
frozen. Interestingly the network performed the worst if I froze all the layers beside
the two last. After 6 hours the network still had only
1% accuracy. With three
layers unfrozen the performance would increase to 10% in the same amount of time.
The best performance came when I unfroze everything from the last inception-block
==PAGE:115==
C.1 Inception performance
104
to the final layer. Here I approached 20% in 8 hours, so I stuck with this configuration.
To benchmark the Inception-ResNet model it was run on the Amazon data for three
epochs with the hyper parameters shown in Table C.2. The result of this run can be
seen in Figure C.1. It was able achieve a classification accuracy of ≈40%, which is
decent considering it has to differentiate between more than 1200 categories. How-
ever, I was unsure I would be able to get it anywhere near a usable performance and
spent some time trying to find a way to reduce the category amount. Since this did
not seem feasible, I created the ShopStyle data set instead.
Table C.2: Hyper parameters for the first run on the Amazon Dataset.
Hyper parameter
Value
Batch Size
16
Learning Rate
Exponential Decay:
Initial Value = 2e-4
0.5 decay factor every 1.5 epoch
Number of epochs
3
Drop Out
Same as original network
Figure C.1: Two plots from TensorBoard displaying the training and validation
performance for the Inception-ResNet model on the Amazon data set.
The second to last layer of original inception network is 1536 dimensions, which is far
to large. I thus decided to insert a new layer between this layer and the final softmax
layer. However, this meant I needed to figure out which dimensionality this layer
should have. I had read the team at Google had had great results with a dimension-
ality of just 64. However, I was quite skeptical such a low dimensionality contained
enough information.
I thus decided to test three models with dimensionalities of
==PAGE:116==
C.2 VGG performance
105
64, 124, 256. These tests I made on the ShopStyle data set, using the same hyper
parameters as shown in Table C.2 and the results can be seen in Figure C.2.
Figure C.2: A plot showing the train and validation performance for three models
with 64, 128 & 256 dimensions in the second to last layer.
When looking at train accuracy and validation accuracy I realized they stayed prac-
tically identical for the entire training period.
I believed this had to be an er-
ror, and found out it was the way I was calculating the accuracy metric.
I used
https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/tf/contrib/metrics/accuracytf.metric.accuracy
which is a streaming metric. This is useful because one wants to see how the accuracy
changes, not the specific batch accuracy. However, I used the same variable for both
my validation and training accuracy in order to plot results in the same graph in
TensorBoard. Behind the scenes the results were thus mixed and made the metric
unreliable.
Despite of this I decided not to stop the experiment. I was mostly interested in the
relative performance with the various embedding sizes, which would be measurable de-
spite the flawed metric. This test suggested there was no practical difference between
a dimensionalty of 64 and 256 so I decided to use 64 dimensions as my embedding
size from then on.
C.2
VGG performance
Since the Inception-ResNet model seemed to only get ≈32% accuracy on the Shop-
Style data (although with a flawed metric measurements) and most of the research
papers I had found used VGG, I decided to use VGG as well. I found some weights for
the original VGG architecture trained on ImageNet, and used the same preprocessing
as I had done with the Inception model. However, the results were awful as can be
seen in Figure C.3. The accuracy was around 3 percent and the confusion matrices
showed it could not discern anything useful. I spent an embarrassingly long time
==PAGE:117==
C.2 VGG performance
106
figuring out what went wrong.
Figure C.3: The top image shows the validation accuracy for one of the first runs
with the VGG architecture. The second image shows the Confusion
Matrix for both the validation and train set.
It turned out I was normalizing the images two times, first by extracting the image
mean, and then by extracting the channel mean, which understandingly messed up
the data. With this small detail fixed, both the validation accuracy and the mean pr.
class accuracy increased to ≈52% (Figure C.4). The confusion matrices in Figure C.4
also show the model has been able to discern between the classes in a decent manner.
==PAGE:118==
C.2 VGG performance
107
Figure C.4: A figure containing several plots. On the top right two plots show the
training and validation accuracy of the model while, the top left shows
the mean pr. class accuracy, while the two plots on the bottom shows
the confusion matrices for the same model.
Although the model improved a lot, it still took a long time to train. I was wondering
if the hardware was utilized properly. So I created some software which queried stats
from the CPU and GPU along while training to show the stats in TensorBoard along
side the other information. An example of this can be seen in Figure C.5. Here all
the useful stats about the GPU can be seen. In the right most plot the utilization of
the GPU can be seen to be ≈90% on average, which means there was not anything
to do about the slow training.
==PAGE:119==
C.2 VGG performance
108
Figure C.5: Four plots showing the various stats of the GPU while training. From
the left, the first plot shows how much GPU memory is utilized, the
second how much power the GPU is consuming, the third plot show-
cases the temperature of the GPU while the last shows how much the
GPU is utilized.
==PAGE:120==
APPENDIX D
Final Model
From the preliminary work I concluded using the VGG model was a decent choice, and
stuck to this model for the rest of the project. I furthermore concluded an embedding
size of 64 dimensions seemed enough to capture a lot of the “content information” in
the images as stuck with this dimensionality as well.
D.1
Best Classifier
Having decided on the architecture and embedding size I spent a couple of weeks op-
timizing hyper parameters in order to see how much the performance could increase.
The final hyper parameters can be seen in Table D.1. Due to the long training time
I was not able to do many iterations in this optimization process.
Table D.1: Hyper parameters for the best performing classification model.
Hyper parameter
Value
Batch Size
24
Learning Rate
Exponential Decay:
Initial Value = 1e-3
0.5 decay factor every 2 epochs
Number of epochs
11
Drop Out
0,6
Trainable Layers
[”conv_5_4”, ”fc6”, ”fc7”, ”fc8”, ”embedding”, ”softmax”]
The results of the improved hyper parameters can be seen in Figure D.1 showing the
accuracy and mean per class accuracy (MPCA) on the train and validation data. Here
it is clear the model over fits quite a bit to the training data with ≈70% accuracy
and ≈60% MPCA both of which are approximately 10 percent points higher than
the validation accuracy and MPCA.
Since I was using the original weights of the VGG model, there was not much I could
change in order to overcome this over fitting. One thing I could probably do, was to
include some regularization of the final layers I was retraining. However, since classi-
fication accuracy was not the primary concern and I had a lot of other experiments
==PAGE:121==
D.1 Best Classifier
110
to run, I kept the model as it was and moved on.
Figure D.1: The accuracy of the final cross entropy model. On the right are the
results from the training data, while the results of the validation data
is shown on the right. In the top most row the accuracy is shown, while
the mean per class accuracy is shown below.
Since there was so many images with multiple clothing items in them, I found it
important to measure the top k accuracy as well. In Figure D.1 the top 5 accuracy
(the correct class being among the 5 top predictions) can be seen for both the training
and validation data. Here over fitting seems to be less an issue with both train and
validation accuracy being ≈90%.
==PAGE:122==
D.2 Center Loss
111
Figure D.2: The top-5 accuracy of the cross entropy model. On the left the top-5
accuracy on the training data is shown, while the top-5 accuracy of the
validation data is shown on the right.
D.2
Center Loss
In their paper from 2016 Wen et al. created a loss function which improved their
performance on face classification tasks [44]. The problem with face classification is
that there are typically orders of magnitude more categories than with more general
classification tasks such as ImageNet.
With so many categories they found cross
entropy to be inefficient, and tried to come up with another loss function to contribute
to the overall loss. The result was the Center Loss defined as:
Losscenter = 1
2
m
∑
i=1
∥xi −cyi∥2
2
with xi being an embedding of item i and cyi being a learned center for item i. If
used along side cross entropy for all categories it forces the model to embed the items
within a hypersphere with as small a radius as possible. This can be beneficial if the
categories resemble one another as much as faces do, since it reduces the chance of
overlapping categories.
I tried to use the center loss in various ways. At first I tried to see how it affected
the performance on the more generic categories I had in my data set. I thus inserted
a center for every category (167 in total) which only worsened the models’ perfor-
mance. I concluded this was due to the rather generic nature of each category, and
tried various ways of including these learned centers.
The final approach I ended up with, was inserting a center for each item in the data
set. The training data consists of more than 1.3 million images of ≈500.000 items.
While training I thus combined a cross entropy loss function for the 167 categories,
and the center loss for the ≈500.000 items combined into a single loss function called
==PAGE:123==
D.2 Center Loss
112
total loss. I gave the cross entropy loss twice as much importance by multiplying the
center loss with λ = 0.5.
The intuition for using the center function is depicted in Figure D.3. In the left most
image a yellow blob representing the decision boundary of class c encloses a set of
embeddings belonging to this class (Orange dots) a few of these embeddings belong
to item i (Green dots) of same category. However, although the embeddings are all
classified correctly, the four embeddings of i are scattered far from each other, which
is sub optimal given they all represent the same item. On the right most image in
the figure, a center for i (Black dot) have been inserted and the center loss is based
on how far each embedding of i is from this center. This forces the model to try and
find a single location to put all the embeddings from the same item.
Figure D.3: Two images showing the intution of the center loss. In the left most
image an example of the result of cross entropy loss is shown. Here all
the embeddings are classified correctly, yet associated embeddings are
scattered far from each other. On the right a center is inserted for each
item, and all associated embeddings are forced to be as close to this
center as possible..
Including the center loss this way seems to act like a regularizer making it much more
difficult to fit the model to the classification task. In Figure D.4 the three losses:
==PAGE:124==
D.2 Center Loss
113
center, cross entropy and total loss for the final model can be seen. This model used
the same hyper parameters as can be seen in Table D.1. Two things can be seen
from this figure. First of all it can be seen that the model is primarily optimizing the
cross entropy loss since the center loss is actually increasing throughout the training.
For the same reason it can be seen I might have stopped the training a bit too early.
If I had not stopped the training, the center loss might have started to decrease at
some point. However, due to time constraints, it was not possible to keep on training.
Figure D.4: Three plots showing the loss of the model. On the right the center loss
is shown, while the middle most plots shows the cross entropy loss and
the final plot shows the total loss as a weighted combination of the two.
In all plots the blue line is the validation loss, whereas the red line is
the training loss.
The accuracy of the model trained with center loss can be seen in Figure D.5. Here
it is obvious the accuracy on the training data gets impaired quite a lot by introduc-
ing the center loss. Both the normal accuracy and MPCA drops 5 percent points.
However, since the accuracy of the validation data more or less remains the same, it
seems to just remove the over fitting and not actually worsen the performance.
==PAGE:125==
D.2 Center Loss
114
Figure D.5: Four plots showing the accuracy of the model on the training data (left)
and the validation data (right). The top row shows the actual accuracy,
while the bottom row shows the mean per class accuracy.
On the other hand the center loss does actually seem to impair the model in regards
to top 5 accuracy which can be seen in Figure D.6. Where the model achieved almost
90% top 5 accuracy in both train and validation error before, it drops to 80% with
center loss.
==PAGE:126==
D.2 Center Loss
115
Figure D.6: Two plots of the top-5 accuracy for the center loss model. On the left
is the top-5 accuracy for the training data, while the top-5 accuracy
for the validation data is shown on the right.
I found this drop interesting and investigated it further. I was wondering what k
should be for the model would achieve 90% accuracy. Furthermore, I was wondering
how much it would help if the choices was “constrained” by the gender. Or in other
words if all the predictions from the wrong sex was removed before the top-k cate-
gories was calculated. I thus created the plot in Figure D.7. In this plot the blue
line is the top-k accuracy for the male categories with the female categories removed.
The red line the female categories with the male removed and the green line is the
overall top-k accuracy.
The plot shows knowing if the image is of a male category allows for much better top-
10 accuracy whereas knowing if the image is from a female category does not help
at all. This is probably because there are not just more female categories, the total
amount of images from the female categories is quite a lot bigger as well. This means
the model is most likely a biased towards predicting female categories, so removing
these from the result helps a lot.
It can also be seen that as k is increased, the added value decreases drastically. Go-
ing from top-1 to top-10 increased the total accuracy by more than 20 percent points.
While top-10 to top-20 only increases the accuracy with around 2.5 percent points.
==PAGE:127==
D.3 Triplet Loss
116
Figure D.7: A plot of the top-k accuracy for the center loss model. The green line
shows the actual top-k accuracy for all values up to N. The blue line
shows the top-k accuracy if the female categories are removed, while the
red line shows the top-k accuracy if the male categories are removed.
Since the validation accuracy seemed more or less the same with center loss and other
researchers had found it to improve their search results. I chose this model as the
foundation of the further work.
D.3
Triplet Loss
The final step in the training process was fine tuning the model specifically towards
search. As mentioned in Chapter 3 there are several loss functions which tries to do
just this. I initially tried to implement the NCA loss [26], yet had some problems with
implementing it in Tensorflow. Due to time constraints I moved on to triplet loss [25].
The main problem of triplet loss is figuring out which triplets to use. In the original
paper they solve this by having a very big batch size (≈5000) and then do some min-
ing within each batch to find the best embeddings to use as triplets for the loss. With
my hardware this was not possible unless I calculated the gradients asynchronously
which I deemed would be too slow and cumbersome. Instead I relied on heuristics to
find reasonably good triplets.
Wang et al. got the best results by having a lot of triplets with all three items being
from the same class (inner triplets), and only a small percentage (around 20%)
with two items from one class and the third from another (outer triplets) [71]. I
thus decided to follow the same approach. Since some images only had one image
associated with it, I divided the data set into two categories. All items which had
==PAGE:128==
D.3 Triplet Loss
117
more than one associated image was inserted in one category (multi set) and all the
items with only one associated image in the other (single set).
D.3.1
Inner Triplets
For the inner triplets I used the heuristic that two images from the same item
should resemble one another more than images from other items. For every triplet a
random item was thus picked from the multi set, and the anchor image and positive
image was chosen randomly from the images associated with this item. The challenge
was thus to find the best negative image to complete the triplet.
To find this negative image, I used three heuristics:
• Clothing with the same color are more similar
• Clothing from the same brand are more similar
• Clothing from the same price range are more similar
To find the negative image I took the intersection of all the images from the same cat-
egory and all images either from the color, brand or price range in a random manner:
same_category ∩{color ∥brand ∥price_range}. If the resulting intersection was a
zero set I would remove the constraint and try one of the others. Otherwise I would
continue to narrow down the set of images by taking the intersection of as many of
these three heuristics as possible in a random order. The negative image was then
chosen randomly from the set of images resulting from this process.
D.3.2
Outer Triplets
In order to generate the outer triplets, I would first choose a random anchor image
from the single set. I would then choose the positive image from the set of images
from the same category as the anchor narrowed down by the same three heuristics
mentioned above.
To find the negative image I used a heuristic about the category hierarchy. For exam-
ple womens-jeans and womens-slim-fit-jeans belongs to the same parent category
womens-pants. I thus assumed images from the same parent category (neighbors)
are more similar. The negative images were thus chosen from one of the neighboring
categories narrowed down by the three heuristics mentioned above.
This triplet generation process took quite a while. So I decided to generate 10 million
triplets in an offline manner, which would then be my data set for training the model.
==PAGE:129==
D.3 Triplet Loss
118
D.3.3
Final touches and results
The triplet loss tries to ensure the distance to the negative image is bigger than the
distance to the positive image plus some margin. However, this assumes the anchor,
positive and margin are all chosen in a well structured manner. Since I chose all the
triplets using broad heuristics there might be many cases where the positive image
would have been better of as the anchor. An example of such a case can be seen in
Figure D.8. This figure shows a case where the actual loss is less than if the anchor
and positive image had been switched.
To ensure this would not happen I thus used a slightly modified loss being:
tripletmax(a, p, n) = max(triplet(a, p, n), triplet(p, a, n))
It is difficult to say how much this modification helps, but it is cheap modification
and it cannot be worse than the original triplet loss.
Figure D.8: A visualization of an example where the switching the anchor and the
positive would make sense. The orange circle represents the anchor
embedding, the green circle the positive embedding while the blue rep-
resents the negative embedding. The orange lines shows the distances
from the anchor to the positive and the negative. While the green lines
shows the distances from the positive to the anchor and negative. The
black line is the margin which we would like to enforce. In the lower
parts of the image it can be seen that the margin added to the distance
from the anchor to the positive is shorter than the distance from the
anchor to the negative. This means the triplet loss would be 0. How-
ever, if the margin is added to the distance from the positive to the
anchor, it is quite a lot longer than the distance from the positive to
the negative. Thus the loss would be positive, and it would make sense
to switch the anchor with the positive.
Figure D.9 shows the resulting loss from the training session. Here the very noisy
nature of this loss function can be seen.
One of the reasons for this is that it is
==PAGE:130==
D.3 Triplet Loss
119
based using these rather simple heuristics. Interestingly it seems the distance from
the anchors to the positive images actually increase a bit. However, not as fast as
the distance to the negative images which is why the loss decreases.
With such a noisy loss it is difficult to say when the model converges.
However,
Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin spent 83 days on a cluster of computers to achieve
their results. It is thus fair to say the 6 days I spent on my hardware is probably not
enough. Due to time constraints I had to stop the training to free up the hardware
for other experiments. Yet, it would be interesting to see how much the results would
have improved had there been more time.
Figure D.9: Three plots related to the triplet loss. From the left the first plot shows
the distance from the anchor to the negative. The second shows the
distance from the anchor to the positive, while the third shows the
actual triplet loss.
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX E
Initial CC-Tree
Implementation
The first version of the Constrained Cover Tree was meant to be a simple test to see if
the idea of constrained nearest neighbor search made sense as a concept. Simultane-
ously it was supposed to be simple since it was the first program I had written in C++.
Despite my lack of experience with C++ I saw it as one of the only languages capable
of achieving the speed at which I was aiming for in this project. Even with the best
of algorithms, searching through hundreds of thousands of many dimensional vectors
requires at least tens of thousands distance comparisons. In a high level language like
Python this would take way to much time.
The Cover Tree has furthermore been criticized for taking to long to build. In the
results below it can be seen that this is a problem even with a fast low level language
like C++. I also considered writing the program in Java or Rust. Each of which have
garbage collection and is thus generally easier to work with. However, I have always
wanted to work with C++, and saw this as my best chance.
Having chosen a programming language I decided to divide the development process
into a few separate steps:
1. Create a normal Cover Tree Program which compiles
2. Alter the Cover Tree to handle a single discrete constraint
3. Build an index etc. to create complete program
4. Build performance tests to test the program properly
To create the Cover Tree I used a couple of open source projects found on Github
as reference implementations1. This allowed me to get much quicker off the ground
than if I had just attempted to create the program directly from the Cover Tree paper.
1https://github.com/DNCrane/Cover-Tree & https://github.com/manzilzaheer/CoverTree
==PAGE:132==
E Initial CC-Tree Implementation
121
With a compiling Cover Tree program, I wrote an extensive amount of unit tests
using Catch2 a popular C++ unit testing frame work. In an alternating process of
finding bugs, and writing new tests to fix them. The result is a set of tests which
provide a great amount of certainty the program is working as expected.
To keep it simple, I tried to use the standard library as much as possible. This meant
all vectors used in program are of the type std::vector<double>. This makes them
very convenient to work with, with the price of rather slow distance calculations.
The only external dependency used was Boost. However, this was mainly because I
wanted to learn how to include it in the program. Boost could thus easily be removed
as an dependency of the project.
From here I was ready for the second step of altering the Cover Tree into a simple
CC-Tree. To do so I created a Constraint class which could be given to the Cover
Tree when querying. At every step the constraint would then check whether the ID of
the current node was an allowed parent node or contained a point which was allowed
by the constraint.
After more unit tests, I moved on to create the rest of the program. The source of
this version can be found in my Github repository. This implementation has the
following lacks:
• It is single threaded
• It uses non optimized internal data structures
• It can only handle a single constraint in Integer format
• It cannot store meta data, only the vector itself
Results
The following results were from tests run on my laptop with the specs shown in
Table E.1. The qualitative test was run a small subset of the data with only 2000
images due to lack of disc space at the time.
Table E.1: Hardware of the computer running the tests.
Hardware
Value
Operating System
Mac OS Sierra
CPU cores
2 cores / 4 threads
Memory
8GB
Hard Disc
256GB SSD
External packages used
Boost
==PAGE:133==
E Initial CC-Tree Implementation
122
In Figure E.1 an example of a query can be seen. In the upper row the result of
normal nearest neighbor search is shown. The constrained nearest neighbors search
is shown in the same manner on the bottom row. These results suggested constraining
the results provided a real value in terms of improved search quality.
Figure E.1: A visualization of the search results given the query image on the left.
The top most row are the top 9 images given a normal nearest neighbor
search while the bottom row is the top 9 images when constraining on
the category.
Figure E.2 shows the time it takes to construct the a tree with 10.000 random vectors
of various dimensionality. Here it can be seen that this implementation is still quite
slow. It takes between 20 seconds and 2 minutes to insert 10.000 vectors. From other
tests I found it could take up to 3.5 hours to insert 100.000 vectors. So although it
was written in C++, the program was still too slow to work well in practice.
==PAGE:134==
E Initial CC-Tree Implementation
123
Figure E.2: A plot showing the build time of the CC-Tree. 10.000 vectors of various
dimensionality is inserted into the tree and every insertion is timed and
plotted.
This can also be seen in figure Figure E.3. Here two plots show the query time both
unconstrained and constrained as more and more vectors are inserted into the tree. In
the left most plot it can be seen that doing 1000 unconstrained queries on a tree with
10.000 vectors takes between 2 to 12 seconds which translates to 83 to 500 queries pr.
second.
In the plot on the right shows that if 10 categories of even size are present the data
structure can handle between 500 to 1000 constrained queries per second. If it on
the data set on the other hand consists of 100 categories the constrained query time
increases to 2.500 to 5.000 queries per second.
This performance is quite good. However, the search time increases dramatically as
the data set increases. This means the implementation can only efficiently handle
small data sets below hundred thousand elements. Since my goal was to handle at
least a few hundreds of elements, I decided to make the program more efficient.
==PAGE:135==
E Initial CC-Tree Implementation
124
Figure E.3: Two plots showing the search time of the CC-Tree. On the left the
unconstrained search time is shown, while the constrained search time
is shown on the right. Since the constrained search time is dependent
on the amount of categories both 10 and 100 categories are used.
==PAGE:136==
APPENDIX F
Final CC-Tree
Implementation
This chapter describes the thoughts that went into building the final version of the
CC-Tree. The final version of the program can be found in my Github repository.
Although the first version of the CC-Tree worked, it did not work as well as I was
aiming for, since it took to long time to construct the tree.
Data sets of just a
few hundreds of thousands items could not be queried efficiently. I thus decided to
improve the efficiency of the program and saw several ways to do so:
• Make the program multithreaded.
• Use more optimized internal data structures.
• Use the improved Cover Tree algorithm developed by Izbicki and Shelton [70].
F.1
Improved Cover Tree algorithm
Using the improved cover tree algorithm required me to rewrite a lot of the code base.
In the process I decided to restructure the code in order to make it more generalizable
and encapsulate responsibility. The code is thus very Object-Oriented for better or
worse. For example each vector is added inside an Item class, which then handles
measuring distances to other items. This choice was made because I originally wanted
to use multiple vectors (one for style and one for content) which would be a simple
change in one class instead of rewriting code in various places.
I also used various more “advanced” features of C++ such as iterator access in the
objects in order to make the code resemble the pseudo code algorithm as much as
possible.
==PAGE:137==
F.2 Multi threading
126
F.2
Multi threading
For most programming languages, making a single threaded program multi threaded
requires quite a lot of work, and C++ is no exception. Careful implementation of lock-
ing mechanisms is needed to avoid data corruption, race conditions and dead locks.
However, if locks are used and two threads attempt to access the same resource, one
of the threads will have to wait idle which can decrease performance significantly. For
this reason a lot of research have tried to create lock free data structures to increase
parallelism, with the lock free tree developed by Sewall et al. being one of them [83].
I looked into whether to attempt a lock free data structure, but quickly concluded
this would be to much work given the time I had available. I thus ended up including
a mutex lock in each node of the tree. A little research suggested shared_mutex
should be significantly faster than other mutex locks. However, this was not included
in C++11, so I switched to C++14 to get access to this API.
Including the mutex locks means only one thread can work on a given node in the
tree at any given point in time, while constructing the tree. This also means writing
to the data structure while it is being queried increases the query time. The query
thread will in this case often have to wait until a given writing thread is done with a
node.
To begin with I used a very naive approach in regards to the Index. I simply kept one
lock, and locked the whole index every time a tread was inserting or removing keys or
data. Since inserting the values into the index should be much faster than inserting
vectors into the tree, it was my assumption this would not affect the performance to
any notable degree. However, this implementation slowed down the performance of
the program to a halt since all threads was continuously waiting for the others.
To fix this, I ended up using a nested data structure with a unique mutex lock for
every meta key in the index. This way a thread only have to wait for another if they
are trying to insert data related to the same meta key.
F.3
Optimized data structures
The final improvement I made was faster internal data structures. The biggest of these
changes was a better data structure for handling the vectors called Eigen. Eigen is
an extremely fast linear algebra library used in many C++ projects here included the
CPU version of TensorFlow1.
1http://docs.chainer.org/en/stable/comparison.html
==PAGE:138==
F.4 Results
127
I further improved the way I handled constraint to use faster dictionaries for looking
up whether a node should be searched or not. The index was also altered to be able
to handle multiple discrete meta data values. This meant the query could now be
constrained by the intersection of multiple constraints such as category and brand.
F.4
Results
Since most of the results have been thoroughly analyzed in section 8.3, I will quickly
compare the my results to other open source nearest neighbors search libraries. Com-
paring such libraries is like comparing apples to oranges, which is why I have not
included such an analysis in the main part of the thesis.
In Figure F.1 the performance of the three most popular libraries are shown on a
data set with a size and shape resembling mine. These three libraries are all approxi-
mate approaches which give them much higher querying performance if the precision
is lowered. As they reach absolute precision their performance drops substantially,
with annoy performing worse than the brute force approach.
It should be noted I have no idea what kind of hardware these tests have been run on.
However, given they can achieve 100 queries per second, it is my assumption their
hard ware is better than mine. This means my unconstrained search performance
is most likely quite a bit worse than both faiss and nmslib. However, it is better
than annoy and when introducing the constraints such as brand, the performance
seemingly becomes on par with at least faiss. This quite good results as I see it.
==PAGE:139==
F.4 Results
128
Figure F.1: The performance of the three most popular approximate nearest neigh-
bor search libraries on a data set with 50-dimensional representation of
350.000 users from Last.fm.
Source: Ben Frederickson.
In order to see if there were some things I could do to improve the performance
further. I ran a run time analysis using a tool called valgrind. In the test I inserted
10.000 random vectors, and did 1000 searches. The result were a graph of how much
time was spent on each function in the program. This graph was much to big to be
included on paper, yet a screen shot is included in Figure F.2. From studying the
graph I could not find any obvious things to improve. However, it could be seen that
half of the run time was spent on calculating the distances between vectors. Since
the distances are already computed as closely to optimal as can be expected, and the
amount of distance calculations are determined by the Cover Tree algorithm a big
performance gain over the current implementation should not be hoped for.
==PAGE:140==
F.4 Results
129
Figure F.2: A snap shot of the run time analysis results outputted from valgrind.
Each box is a function in the code. The brighter the color the bigger
share this part of the code has of the entire run time of the program.
In each box the function name is written in the top, then comes a
percentage of big a run time share this box has followed by the share
actually spent inside the function body. The arrows between the boxes
shows which functions is called inside the function body. In the green
box in the lower left corner the share of the distance calculation can be
seen..
==PAGE:141==
Bibliography
[1]
Jillian D’Onfro. Google search engine facts. 2016. url: http://www.businessinsider.
com/google-search-engine-facts-2016-3 (visited on November 4, 2017).
[2]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “ImageNet Classi-
fication with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Advances In Neural
Information Processing Systems (2012), pages 1–9. issn: 10495258. doi: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.protcy.2014.09.007. arXiv: 1102.0183. url:
https://papers.nips.cc/paper/4824-imagenet-classification-with-
deep-convolutional-neural-networks.pdf.
[3]
O. Russakovsky et al. “ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge”.
In: ArXiv e-prints (September 2014). arXiv: 1409.0575 [cs.CV].
[4]
Warren S. McCulloch and Walter Pitts. “A logical calculus of the ideas im-
manent in nervous activity”. In: The Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 5.4
(1943), pages 115–133. issn: 00074985. doi: 10 . 1007 / BF02478259. arXiv:
arXiv : 1011 . 1669v3. url: https : / / pdfs . semanticscholar . org / 5272 /
8a99829792c3272043842455f3a110e841b1.pdf.
[5]
F Rosenblatt. “The perceptron: A probabilistic model for information storage
and organization in …”. In: Psychological Review 65.6 (1958), pages 386–408.
issn: 1939-1471(Electronic);0033-295X(Print). doi: 10.1037/h0042519. arXiv:
arXiv:1112.6209. url: http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/rev/65/6/386.
pdf%7B%5C%%7D5Cnpapers://c53d1644-cd41-40df-912d-ee195b4a4c2b/
Paper/p15420.
[6]
Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. “Multilayer feedfor-
ward networks are universal approximators”. In: Neural Networks 2.5 (1989),
pages 359–366. issn: 08936080. doi: 10.1016/0893-6080(89)90020-8. arXiv:
arXiv:1011.1669v3. url: https://ac.els-cdn.com/0893608089900208/1-
s2.0-0893608089900208-main.pdf?%7B%5C_%7Dtid=4a25c86a-e3e5-11e7-
88e3-00000aab0f02%7B%5C&%7Dacdnat=1513596139%7B%5C_%7D.
[7]
David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. “Neurocom-
puting: Foundations of Research”. In: edited by James A. Anderson and Edward
Rosenfeld. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1988. Chapter Learning Represen-
tations by Back-propagating Errors, pages 696–699. isbn: 0-262-01097-6. url:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=65669.104451.
==PAGE:142==
Bibliography
131
[8]
Steve LeVine. Artificial intelligence pioneer says we need to start over. 2017.
url: https://www.axios.com/ai- pioneer- advocates- starting- over-
2485537027.html (visited on December 20, 2017).
[9]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very Deep Convolutional Networks
for Large-Scale Image Recognition”. In: (2014). issn: 09505849. doi: 10.1016/
j.infsof.2008.09.005. arXiv: 1409.1556. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1409.1556.
[10]
Christian Szegedy et al. “Going deeper with convolutions”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition 07-12-June-2015 (2015), pages 1–9. issn: 10636919. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.
2015.7298594. eprint: 1409.4842. url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1409.4842.
pdf.
[11]
Christian Szegedy et al. “Rethinking the Inception Architecture for Computer
Vision”. In: (2015). issn: 08866236. doi: 10 . 1109 / CVPR . 2016 . 308. arXiv:
1512.00567. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.00567.
[12]
Christian Szegedy et al. “Inception-v4, Inception-ResNet and the Impact of
Residual Connections on Learning”. In: (2016). issn: 01678655. doi: 10.1016/
j.patrec.2014.01.008. arXiv: 1602.07261. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1602.07261.
[13]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: CoRR
abs/1512.03385 (2015). arXiv: 1512.03385. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1512.03385.
[14]
H. Li et al. “Visualizing the Loss Landscape of Neural Nets”. In: ArXiv e-prints
(December 2017). arXiv: 1712.09913 [cs.LG].
[15]
Jason Yosinski et al. “How transferable are features in deep neural networks?”
In: (2014). issn: 10495258. arXiv: 1411.1792. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1411.1792.
[16]
Hanjiang Lai et al. “Simultaneous feature learning and hash coding with deep
neural networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 07-12-June (2015), pages 3270–3278.
issn: 10636919. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298947. arXiv: 1504.03410. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.03410v1.
[17]
Himalaya Jain et al. “SUBIC: A supervised, structured binary code for image
search”. In: (2017). arXiv: 1708.02932. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1708.
02932.
[18]
Dan Wang et al. “Supervised Deep Hashing for Hierarchical Labeled Data”. In:
(2017). arXiv: 1704.02088. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.02088.
[19]
Deng Cai, Xiuye Gu, and Chaoqi Wang. “A Revisit on Deep Hashings for Large-
scale Content Based Image Retrieval”. In: (2017). arXiv: 1711.06016. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.06016.
==PAGE:143==
Bibliography
132
[20]
Haomiao Liu et al. “Deep Supervised Hashing for Fast Image Retrieval”. In:
2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
(2016), pages 2064–2072. issn: 10636919. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.227. url:
http://www.cv-foundation.org/openaccess/content%7B%5C_%7Dcvpr%7B%
5C_%7D2016/papers/Liu%7B%5C_%7DDeep%7B%5C_%7DSupervised%7B%5C_
%7DHashing%7B%5C_%7DCVPR%7B%5C_%7D2016%7B%5C_%7Dpaper.pdf.
[21]
Han Zhu et al. “Deep Hashing Network for Efficient Similarity Retrieval ∗”. In:
Proceedings of the 30th Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2016) 1
(2016), pages 2415–2421.
[22]
Kevin Lin et al. “Deep Learning of Binary Hash Codes for Fast Image Re-
trieval”. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops (2015), pages 27–35. issn: 9781467367592. url: https://github.
com/kevinlin311tw/caffe-cvprw15.
[23]
S Chopra, R Hadsell, and LeCun Y. “Learning a similiarty metric discrimina-
tively, with application to face verification”. In: Proceedings of IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2005), pages 349–356. issn:
10636919. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2005.202. url: http://yann.lecun.com/
exdb/publis/pdf/chopra-05.pdf.
[24]
J. Bromley et al. “Signature verification using a “Siamese” time delay neural
network”. In: International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelli-
gence 7.04 (1993), pages 669–688. issn: 0218-0014. doi: 10.1142/S0218001493000339.
url: http://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/S0218001493000339.
[25]
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. “FaceNet: A unified
embedding for face recognition and clustering”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 07-
12-June-2015 (2015), pages 815–823. issn: 10636919. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.
7298682. arXiv: 1503.03832. url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1503.03832.pdf.
[26]
Yair Movshovitz-Attias et al. “No Fuss Distance Metric Learning using Proxies”.
In: (2017). issn: 15208532. doi: 10.1109/ICPR.2006.140. arXiv: 1703.07464.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.07464.
[27]
Jacob Goldberger et al. “Neighbourhood Components Analysis”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (2004), pages 513–520. issn: 10495258.
doi: 10.1.1.108.7841. eprint: arXiv:1307.5748v1. url: http://www.cs.
toronto.edu/%7B~%7Dfritz/absps/nca.pdf%20http://eprints.pascal-
network.org/archive/00001570/.
[28]
Oren Rippel et al. “Metric Learning with Adaptive Density Discrimination”. In:
(2015). arXiv: 1511.05939. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05939.
[29]
Hyun Oh Song et al. “Deep Metric Learning via Lifted Structured Feature
Embedding”. In: CVPR (2016), page 11. issn: 10636919. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.
2016.434. arXiv: 1511.0645. url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1511.06452.
pdf%20http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.0645.
==PAGE:144==
Bibliography
133
[30]
Qiang Chen et al. “Deep domain adaptation for describing people based on fine-
grained clothing attributes”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 07-12-June-2015 (2015),
pages 5315–5324. issn: 10636919. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7299169. arXiv:
arXiv:1311.2524. url: http://www.cv- foundation.org/openaccess/
content%7B%5C_%7Dcvpr%7B%5C_%7D2015/papers/Chen%7B%5C_%7DDeep%7B%
5C_%7DDomain%7B%5C_%7DAdaptation%7B%5C_%7D2015%7B%5C_%7DCVPR%7B%
5C_%7Dpaper.pdf.
[31]
Kevin Lin et al. “Rapid Clothing Retrieval via Deep Learning of Binary Codes
and Hierarchical Search”. In: Proceedings of the 5th ACM on International
Conference on Multimedia Retrieval - ICMR ’15 (2015), pages 499–502. doi:
10.1145/2671188.2749318. url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=
2671188.2749318.
[32]
Junshi Huang et al. “Cross-domain image retrieval with a dual attribute-aware
ranking network”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision 2015 International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV
2015 (2015), pages 1062–1070. issn: 15505499. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2015.127.
arXiv: 1505.07922. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.07922.
[33]
M. Hadi Kiapour et al. “Where to buy it: Matching street clothing photos in on-
line shops”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision. Volume 2015 International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2015.
2015, pages 3343–3351. isbn: 9781467383912. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2015.382.
arXiv: 1507.05348.
[34]
Taewan Kim et al. “Visual Fashion-Product Search at SK Planet”. In: (2016),
pages 1–13. arXiv: 1609.07859. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.07859.
[35]
Kota Yamaguchi et al. “Retrieving similar styles to parse clothing”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 37.5 (2015), pages 1028–
1040. issn: 01628828. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2014.2353624. url: http://www.
tamaraberg.com/papers/paperdoll.pdf.
[36]
Wei Yang, Ping Luo, and Liang Lin. “Clothing co-parsing by joint image segmen-
tation and labeling”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2013 (2014), pages 3182–3189.
issn: 10636919. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2014.407. arXiv: 1502.00739.
[37]
Xintong Han et al. “Learning Fashion Compatibility with Bidirectional LSTMs”.
In: arXiv 1 (2017). doi: 10.1145/3123266.3123394. arXiv: 1707.05691. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.05691%7B%5C%%7D0Ahttp://dx.doi.org/10.
1145/3123266.3123394.
[38]
Andreas Veit et al. “Learning visual clothing style with heterogeneous dyadic
co-occurrences”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Vision 2015 International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2015
(2015), pages 4642–4650. issn: 15505499. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2015.527. arXiv:
1509.07473. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.07473.
==PAGE:145==
Bibliography
134
[39]
Ziad Al-Halah, Rainer Stiefelhagen, and Kristen Grauman. “Fashion Forward:
Forecasting Visual Style in Fashion”. In: (2017). doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.50.
arXiv: 1705.06394. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.06394.
[40]
Alex Krizhevsky and Ge Hinton. “Using Very Deep Autoencoders for Content-
Based Image Retrieval”. In: Proceedings of the European Symposium on Artificial
Neural Networks (ESANN) April (2011), pages 1–7.
[41]
Zhaoqiang Xia et al. “Unsupervised Deep Hashing for Large-scale Visual Search”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.00206 (2016). arXiv: 1602.00206. url: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1602.00206%20https://arxiv.org/pdf/1602.00206.pdf.
[42]
A. Zhai et al. “Visual Discovery at Pinterest”. In: ArXiv e-prints (February
2017). arXiv: 1702.04680 [cs.CV].
[43]
Fan Yang et al. “Visual Search at eBay”. In: (2017). doi: 10.1145/3097983.
3098162. arXiv: 1706.03154. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03154%7B%
5C%%7D0Ahttp://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3097983.3098162.
[44]
Yandong Wen et al. “A discriminative feature learning approach for deep face
recognition”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lec-
ture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics). Vol-
ume 9911 LNCS. 2016, pages 499–515. isbn: 9783319464770. doi: 10.1007/978-
3- 319- 46478- 7_31. arXiv: 1311.2901. url: http://ydwen.github.io/
papers/WenECCV16.pdf.
[45]
T. M. Cover and P. E. Hart. “Nearest Neighbor Pattern Classification”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory 13.1 (1967), pages 21–27. issn: 15579654.
doi: 10.1109/TIT.1967.1053964. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=1053964.
[46]
Alina Beygelzimer, Sham Kakade, and John Langford. “Cover trees for near-
est neighbor”. In: Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine
learning - ICML ’06 (2006), pages 97–104. issn: 9781595936493. doi: 10.1145/
1143844.1143857. url: http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=
1143844.1143857.
[47]
Jon Louis Bentley. “Multidimensional binary search trees used for associative
searching”. In: Communications of the ACM 18.9 (1975), pages 509–517. issn:
00010782. doi: 10.1145/361002.361007. url: http://delivery.acm.org/
10.1145/370000/361007/p509-bentley.pdf?ip=130.226.230.208%7B%
5C & %7Did = 361007 % 7B % 5C & %7Dacc = ACTIVE % 20SERVICE % 7B % 5C & %7Dkey =
36332CD97FA87885.8602A718F36E53E1.4D4702B0C3E38B35.4D4702B0C3E38B35%
7B%5C&%7DCFID=825974021%7B%5C&%7DCFTOKEN=32546161%7B%5C&%7D%7B%
5C_%7D%7B%5C_%7Dacm%7B%5C_%7D%7B%5C_%7D=1512642689%7B%5C_%7D%
20http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=361002.361007.
[48]
“Bkd-Tree: A Dynamic Scalable kd-Tree”. In: 2003, pages 46–65. isbn: 3-540-
40535-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-45072-6_4. url: http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/978-3-540-45072-6%7B%5C_%7D4.
==PAGE:146==
Bibliography
135
[49]
“New Algorithms for Efficient High-Dimensional Nonparametric Classification”.
In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 7 (2006), pages 1135–1158. issn:
1533-7928. url: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/%7B~%7Dagray/clsfnn.pdf.
[50]
Sunil Arya et al. “An optimal algorithm for approximate nearest neighbor
searching fixed dimensions”. In: Journal of the ACM 45.6 (1998), pages 891–923.
issn: 00045411. doi: 10.1145/293347.293348. url: http://www.cse.ust.hk/
faculty/arya/pub/JACM.pdf%20http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?
doid=293347.293348.
[51]
Marius Muja and David G. Lowe. “Fast matching of binary features”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2012 9th Conference on Computer and Robot Vision, CRV 2012
(2012), pages 404–410. doi: 10.1109/CRV.2012.60. url: http://www.cs.ubc.
ca/%7B~%7Dlowe/papers/12mujaCRV.pdf.
[52]
Antonin Guttman. “R-trees”. In: Proceedings of the 1984 ACM SIGMOD in-
ternational conference on Management of data - SIGMOD ’84. 1984, page 47.
isbn: 0897911288. doi: 10.1145/602259.602266. arXiv: ISBN0-89791-128-8.
url: https://klevas.mif.vu.lt/%7B~%7Dalgis/DSA/guttman.pdf%20http:
//portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=602259.602266.
[53]
Leonid Boytsov and Bilegsaikhan Naidan. “Engineering Efficient and Effective
Non-metric Space Library”. In: Similarity Search and Applications - 6th Inter-
national Conference, SISAP 2013, A Coruña, Spain, October 2-4, 2013, Pro-
ceedings. 2013, pages 280–293. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-41062-8_28. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41062-8_28.
[54]
Marius Muja and David G. Lowe. “Fast Approximate Nearest Neighbors with
Automatic Algorithm Configuration”. In: International Conference on Com-
puter Vision Theory and Application VISSAPP’09). INSTICC Press, 2009,
pages 331–340.
[55]
Hakan Ferhatosmanoglu et al. “Constrained nearest neighbor queries”. In: Ad-
vances in Spatial and Temporal Databases (2001), pages 257–276.
[56]
Mohamad Dolatshah, Ali Hadian, and Behrouz Minaei-Bidgoli. “Ball*-tree: Ef-
ficient spatial indexing for constrained nearest-neighbor search in metric spaces”.
In: (). url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1511.00628.pdf.
[57]
Jerome H. Freidman, Jon Louis Bentley, and Raphael Ari Finkel. “An Algo-
rithm for Finding Best Matches in Logarithmic Expected Time”. In: ACM Trans-
actions on Mathematical Software 3.3 (1977), pages 209–226. issn: 00983500.
doi: 10 . 1145 / 355744 . 355745. url: http : / / inspirehep . net / record /
108619/files/slac-pub-1549.pdf%20http://portal.acm.org/citation.
cfm?doid=355744.355745.
[58]
Kevin Beyer et al. “When Is “Nearest Neighbor” Meaningful?” In: Database
Theory—ICDT’99 (1999), pages 217–235. issn: 3540654526. doi: 10.1007/3-
540-49257-7_15. arXiv: 9780201398298. url: http://link.springer.com/
10.1007/3-540-49257-7%7B%5C_%7D15.
==PAGE:147==
Bibliography
136
[59]
H. Flashka. “Some geometry in high-dimensional spaces”. In: Lecture Notes
(2010), pages 1–45.
[60]
Y. Jing et al. “Visual Search at Pinterest”. In: ArXiv e-prints (May 2015). arXiv:
1505.07647 [cs.CV].
[61]
Matthew Lynley. Pinterest raises $150M at a $12.3B valuation as it makes a
full press into visual search. 2017. url: https://techcrunch.com/2017/06/
06/pinterest- raises-150m- at-a-12-3b-valuation- as-it- makes-a-
full-press-into-visual-search/ (visited on December 6, 2017).
[62]
Pulkit Agrawal, Ross Girshick, and Jitendra Malik. “Analyzing the performance
of multilayer neural networks for object recognition”. In: Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 8695 LNCS.PART 7 (2014), pages 329–344.
issn: 16113349. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-10584-0_22. arXiv: 1407.1610.
url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1407.1610.pdf.
[63]
W. Liu et al. “SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector”. In: ArXiv e-prints (De-
cember 2015). arXiv: 1512.02325 [cs.CV].
[64]
Jerome H Friedman. “A GRADIENT BOOSTING MACHINE”. In: The Annals
of Statistics 29.5 (2001), pages 1189–1232. url: https://projecteuclid.org/
download/pdf%7B%5C_%7D1/euclid.aos/1013203451.
[65]
Moses Charikar et al. “Image Similarity Search with Compact Data Structures”.
In: System (2007), pages 208–217. doi: 10.1145/1031171.1031213. url: http:
//www.cs.princeton.edu/cass/papers/LCL04.pdf.
[66]
Hervé Jégou, Matthijs Douze, and Cordelia Schmid. “Product quantization for
nearest neighbor search”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-
chine Intelligence 33.1 (2011), pages 117–128. issn: 01628828. doi: 10.1109/
TPAMI.2010.57. arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3. url: https://hal.inria.fr/
inria- 00514462v1%20http://eprints.pascal- network.org/archive/
00008315/.
[67]
M. Douze, H. Jégou, and F. Perronnin. “Polysemous codes”. In: ArXiv e-prints
(September 2016). arXiv: 1609.01882 [cs.CV].
[68]
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. “Billion-scale similarity search
with GPUs”. In: (2017). arXiv: 1702.08734. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1702.08734.
[69]
David R. Karger et al. “Finding nearest neighbors in growth-restricted metrics”.
In: Proceedings of the thiry-fourth annual ACM symposium on Theory of comput-
ing - STOC ’02 (2002), page 741. issn: 07349025. doi: 10.1145/509907.510013.
url: http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=509907.510013.
[70]
Mike Izbicki and Christian R Shelton. “Faster Cover Trees”. In: Proceedings
of the Thirty-Second International Conference on Machine Learning 37 (2015).
url: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/izbicki15.pdf.
==PAGE:148==
Bibliography
137
[71]
J. Wang et al. “Learning Fine-grained Image Similarity with Deep Ranking”.
In: ArXiv e-prints (April 2014). arXiv: 1404.4661 [cs.CV].
[72]
Srikar Appalaraju and Vineet Chaoji. “Image similarity using Deep CNN and
Curriculum Learning”. In: (2017), pages 1–9. arXiv: 1709.08761. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1709.08761.
[73]
Albert Gordo et al. “Deep image retrieval: Learning global representations for
image search”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lec-
ture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics). Vol-
ume 9910 LNCS. 2016, pages 241–257. isbn: 9783319464657. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-319-46466-4_15. arXiv: 1604.01325. url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1604.
01325.pdf.
[74]
Max Jaderberg and Google Deepmind. “Spatial Transformer Networks”. In:
arXiv (2015), pages 1–14. issn: 1087-0156. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3343. arXiv:
arXiv:1506.02025v1. url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1506.02025.pdf.
[75]
Douglas Comer. “Ubiquitous B-Tree”. In: ACM Computing Surveys 11.2 (1979),
pages 121–137. issn: 03600300. doi: 10.1145/356770.356776. url: http:
//portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=356770.356776.
[76]
L. Trottier, P. Giguère, and B. Chaib-draa. “Parametric Exponential Linear
Unit for Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: ArXiv e-prints (May 2016).
arXiv: 1605.09332 [cs.LG].
[77]
D.-A. Clevert, T. Unterthiner, and S. Hochreiter. “Fast and Accurate Deep
Network Learning by Exponential Linear Units (ELUs)”. In: ArXiv e-prints
(November 2015). arXiv: 1511.07289 [cs.LG].
[78]
G. Klambauer et al. “Self-Normalizing Neural Networks”. In: ArXiv e-prints
(June 2017). arXiv: 1706.02515 [cs.LG].
[79]
Yann LeCun et al. “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition”.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (1998), pages 2278–2323. issn: 00189219. doi:
10.1109/5.726791. arXiv: 1102.0183.
[80]
Chris Olah, Alexander Mordvintsev, and Ludwig Schubert. “Feature Visual-
ization”. In: Distill (2017). https://distill.pub/2017/feature-visualization. doi:
10.23915/distill.00007.
[81]
Ilya Sutskever et al. “On the importance of initialization and momentum in deep
learning”. In: ICASSP, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing - Proceedings 2010 (2013), pages 8609–8613. issn: 15206149.
doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2013.6639346. arXiv: arXiv:1301.3605v3. url: http:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v28/sutskever13.pdf.
[82]
M. Abadi et al. “TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous
Distributed Systems”. In: ArXiv e-prints (March 2016). arXiv: 1603 . 04467
[cs.DC].
==PAGE:149==
Bibliography
138
[83]
Jason Sewall et al. “PALM: Parallel Architecture-Friendly Latch-Free Modifica-
tions to B+ Trees on Many-Core Processors”. In: Vldb 4.11 (2011), pages 795–
806. issn: 21508097. url: http://vldb.org/pvldb/vol4/p795-sewall.pdf.
==PAGE:150==
