==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
A data-driven framework for demand
flexibility detection and evaluation
Pierre Winkler
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3800
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Deployment of the smart meters in EU catalysed the research in non-intrusive
load monitoring (NILM); which estimates the individual appliance’s power draw
from the aggregated electrical consumption measurement of a household.
From
a distribution system operator standpoint, it provides cost-effective monitoring of
households appliances and gives an insight of their consumption pattern.
The vast
majority of the state-of-the-art approaches for NILM requires a training phase on the
appliances models and have difficulties to be generalised.
This study presents a novel and innovative approach for NILM based on two
complementary techniques; sparse decomposition and community detection. The former
uses translation-invariant boxcar dictionary of atoms that each model the events of an
appliance. The latter is an adaptation of the techniques for disaggregation work and
finds the co-occurrence network from the established graph; each community output
represents an appliance.
The algorithm is train-less and suitable for large-scale implementation with a
focus on disaggregating the commonly found large appliances in households.
The
low-sampling-rate monitoring requires the tuning of a single parameter. The evaluation
is performed on real active power consumption data with a 1-minute resolution. We
demonstrate efficient disaggregation capabilities on large appliances for a complex signal.
Index Terms – demand-side management, energy disaggregation, sparse signal
processing, community detection, non-intrusive load monitoring.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master
of Science in Sustainable Energy. The thesis was carried completed in a time period from
September 2017 to March 2018. The thesis was set to be 35 credits for the authors. The
main supervisor is Pierre Pinson (DTU Elekto). The co-supervisor is Guillaume Le Ray
(DTU Elektro).
Kongens Lyngby, March 15, 2018
Pierre Winkler
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
A warm thanks to my supervisor Pierre Pinson and co-supervisor Guillaume Le Ray.
A warm thanks to my mother, sister and grandmother for the daily support.
A warm thanks to Thibaut Richert for the daily support, the free coffee card and the
exquisite cookies.
==PAGE:8==
vi
Acknowledgements
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Acronym
CNN
convolutional neural network
DNN
deep neural network
DSO
distribution system operator
HMM
hidden Markov model
MP
matching pursuit
NILM
non-intrusive load monitoring
NMF
non-negative matrix factorisation
OMP
orthogonal matching pursuit
RLE
run-length encoding
RNN
recurrent neural network
Graph theory
∆Q
gain in modularity
A
adjacency matrix
C
set of communities in the network
E
set of edges
G(V, E)
graph associated with its nodes and edges
Q
modularity function
V
set of nodes
wu,v
weight on the connection e(u, v)
Mixture model
K
number of components
==PAGE:10==
viii
Acknowledgements
p(x | y)
conditional probability
p(x)
probability to observe x
Signal processing
α
coefficient
†
Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse
∅
empty set
Λ
sparse support vector of the coefficients α
0
vector of all 0
x
aggregated power consumption
Φ
dictionary
supp(·)
designate the support vector
N
set of appliances
R
residuals
S
sparsity
T
set of time
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Nomenclature
ix
Contents
ix
List of Figures
xi
List of Tables
xiii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Stack of NILM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Contribution and method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
State-of-the-art NILM
5
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
NILM algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Method
13
3.1
Sparse decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Bridging toward community detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Community detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Data description
37
4.1
Synthetic residential load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
EnergyLab Nordhavn dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Electrical energy disaggregation
47
5.1
Experimental protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Experiment on synthetic dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5.3
Experiment on a NILM dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Conclusion and perspectives
59
6.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
Bibliography
63
EnergyLab Nordhavn dataset
69
Residual analysis for the sparse recovery
71
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
2.1
Pattern of different load type [14] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1
Finding the best sparse approximation of the signal from a large collection
of boxcar elements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Three
atoms
ϕ
stored
in
the
dictionary,
i.e.
three
distinct
translation-invariant boxcar functions.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Matrix Φ for T = 5. The solid dots (•) indicate a nonzero value and the
empty dots (◦) indicate zero values. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Input and output of our sparse decomposition algorithm. (Top) Aggregated
signal x. (Middle) Set of strongest atoms ΦΛ. (Bottom) Recovered signal
resulting from the aggregation of the strongest atoms. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Sparse representation completed the OMP algorithm with different stopping
criterion on the error tolerance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.6
L2-norm of the error as function of the log(iteration). Circled numbers refers
to a specific analysis on the OMP algorithm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.7
Overlapped subset of noised atoms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.8
A multivariate Gaussian mixture model with two features. The scatter shows
the class labels and the side plot the corresponding joint probability.
. . . .
27
3.9
Zoom on the section Figure 3.8.
In green the density function and the
individual kernels with the colour assigned to a cluster. . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.10 Distinctive waveform for different clothes washing programs. . . . . . . . . .
29
3.11 Simple undirected weighted graph with the corresponding symmetric
weighted adjacency matrix.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.12 Optimisation and aggregation steps from the Louvain method until final
clusters are achieved [46].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.13 Establishing the l1-distance from a single atom to the neighbour’s atom,
i.e.
creating the connection with a weighted edge from one node to the
neighbour’s node. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1
General schematic of a Markov Chain model with two states, on and off. . .
38
4.2
24-hour of synthetic generated load. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5
Representation of the data joining problem. Every arrow is representing a
signal, of the mixture or appliances. The intersection window is the location
that provides satisfactory combination to join individual signal.
. . . . . . .
44
4.6
Histograms of power consumption for appliances submeter and rooms submeter. 44
4.7
24-hour recording with the corresponding sources of the mixture.
. . . . . .
45
==PAGE:14==
xii
List of Figures
5.1
Aggregated synthetic load over 24-hour.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Distribution of the labels, one bin represent one label group. . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
(Left) Weighted adjacency matrix with the entire set of atoms versus (Right)
the same set with the 10% recall. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Co-occurrence network on the synthetic dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.6
(Top) Ground truth, (Bottom) Predicted.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.7
Aggregated AMPd load. (Left) Scalled for large appliances.
(Right) Scalled for less energy intensive appliances. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.8
Co-occurrence network on the AMPd dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.10 Disaggregation output for the AMPd dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
1
Residual analysis for a stopping criteria at ||ε||2 ≤0.2. Tolerance used for
this project. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
2
Residual analysis for a stopping criteria close to white noise. Tolerance set
aside in this project. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
==PAGE:15==
List of Tables
3.14 Exemplification of the given weights for Figure 3.13.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Comparison of households energy data sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Results from the NILM toolkit statistical and diagnostic function. The three
numbers are respectively the minimum, median and maximum.
. . . . . . .
42
5.5
Algorithm performance with random walk noise of different levels added to
the output.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.9
Algorithm performance on the denoised AMPd dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:16==
xiv
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Context
Greenhouse-gas reduction to tackle climate change is the cornerstone for limiting
global warming.
In December 2015, 195 signatories adopted by consensus the Paris
agreement [1]. It aims to limit the global warming to 2oC by 2100, with respect to
the pre-industrial levels.
All the parties (174 in January 2018), hold responsibility
to mitigate global warming. The novelty offered by the agreement pursues to reboot
climate policy, giving flexibility to the countries own commitment. The malleable nature
of the Paris agreement hitherto led to strong political ambition but few actions [2].
Parties must revamp the pledging system and catalyse closer cooperation. Indeed, no
indicators anchor the pledges in reality and terminate velleity over tangible results. More
collaboration on two problems among advanced industrial countries might get the Paris
agreement back on track, namely reducing the cost of renewables and developing efficient
energy technologies.
Notwithstanding the continuous bolster for renewable energy integration, demand
reduction is a cost-effective solution to curb CO2 emissions.
Both are required to
mitigate climate change. Introducing new energy generation is generally expensive and
politically tense, while, demand reduction is less expensive and politically favourable.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) maintains its propositions in their 2017 Market
report [3], and adjudicates on energy efficiency programs enabled by connected smart
meter in households.
Predictions announce 830 millions worldwide cloud-connected
meters to be installed by the end of 2020 [4]. These smart meters are fundamental
components in intelligent networks [5].
An EU directive requires the smart meters
deployment according to a predefined schedule:
“Member States are required to ensure the implementation of smart metering
systems […]”
- EU Commission Recommendation [6].
Smart meters collect aggregated measurements of energy consumption at the
household level.
The sizeable deployment programs for smart meters triggered
the rebirth of non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM) applications.
The superposed
consumption of the home appliances motivates the need for disaggregation work.
Non-intrusive load disaggregation strives to decompose the total energy consumption
in a set of individual appliance consumption pattern [7]. Indeed, the aggregated signal
is complex to study, and retrieving the individual sources is challenging. The diverse
NILM applications created a ripple effect leading to the plethora of research.
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Stack of NILM
NILM has a bright future in the energy field allowing a better insight on households
consumption. However, it has a broader societal impact than just the energy efficiency
purpose. The following part, walks the reader through NILM applications in the energy
field.
Breakdown the customer consumption. Energy disaggregation helps customers to
get more insight into their day-to-day energy use.
It gives valuable information
on the large loads (e.g.
heating and cooling consumption) as well as on smaller
individual appliances and electronics. Valuable analytics at the appliance-level, issued
from the decomposed aggregated energy consumption, could help extend the primary
meter-reading function of the smart meter.
The latter could enable sending direct
feedback with the breakdown consumption to the end-user. Moreover, load monitoring
protagonists need to tackle customer’s acceptance. Plans to raise public awareness about
the objectives of consumption analysis are necessary. It is elementary to be credible
toward the householders before targetting the accuracy in the disaggregation work.
Dynamic pricing.
Data management and analytics for smart meters offer many
opportunities for utilities.
Utilities are currently deploying smart meters mainly to
improve their meter-to-cash process [8]. Meter data management strategies also can
help utilities reducing customer service costs (labour work for manually reading the
meters). It also enables advanced tariff schemes that need to be transparent and capable
of reflecting the anticipated households consumption. Dynamic pricing might reflect the
network constraint to the benefit of both utilities and consumers [9].
Utility interest in flexibility. The increasing congestion occurrence in the distribution
grids motivates the need for flexible ressources and new operational strategies.
Distribution system operator’s (DSO) interest has risen towards the use of novel methods,
techniques and resources to counteract this issue and demand-side management is one
of them. Indeed, it is hitherto considered as an unexploited resource. In contrast with
flexibility to encounter network congestion, selling own customer flexibility is in today’s
electricity market not financially profitable [10].
1.3
Research questions
Throughout this thesis, a DSO stanpoint is taken where information on households
connected to the distribution grid is limited.
Consumption patterns are changing
with the electrification of the transport (i.e.
electric vehicles) and heating sectors.
Hence, identification of large and flexible appliances can serve DSOs to avoid network
congestions and add value on the householders appliances if they become flexible.
−What are the available techniques to extract the individual load consumption
profiles from aggregated power measurements?
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Contribution and method
3
−Under which constraints the existing NILM methods perform and are they
conceivable for large-scale implementation?
−What
prerequisites
define
a
NILM
dataset
as
satisfactory
for
energy
disaggregation?
−What does a low sampling (1-minute resolution) involve for disaggregation work?
−Is the accuracy level acceptable to detect large and flexible appliances?
−Will it be possible to determine the power draw and frequency from these
appliances?
1.4
Contribution and method
The recent drift in research toward unsupervised methods for NILM does not give access
to prior knowledge in the individual power consumption or the number of appliances
in the households. Smart meters provide active power measurements only. Working
with reactive power or voltage measurements data requires specific hardware and is not
within the scope of this project. Moreover, the data collected for this project have a low
resolution (i.e. a 1-minute). In chapter 2, we explore the state-of-the-art unsupervised
methods suitable for low sampling rate. Techniques that drag interest are scrutinised,
and their applications for real-world implementation discussed. It gives the opportunity
to perceive the challenges in the field.
In chapter 3, we propose an application-centric approach on a low-sampling rate
and robust-to-noise with a focus on its capacity for large-scale deployment.
Our
method operates in two phases with an intermediary stage. Section 3.1 describes the
event detection capabilities of the algorithm achieved via orthogonal matching pursuit
algorithm which leverages on the work of Arberet et al.
[11].
The process aims
at approximating a signal using box-shaped elements.
Appliances do not draw tidy
and exhibit spikes at the start. Variations in the power create internal states in the
steady-states. On account of the relatively low-sample rate of the input data fades some
of the appliances features, i.e. transient signatures are not available here to identify
specific appliances. The interest is in large appliances such as washing machines, dryers
or dishwashers which are multi-state appliances with a non-deterministic transition
between states. These operational modes create a portfolio of signatures for the same
appliance. Hence, the elements output from the sparse approximation exposes intimate
relationship over the signal.
In section 3.2, we aim at explaining how to uncover a
recurrence in the element necessary for the community detection algorithm presented in
section 3.3. We believe that the atoms selected from the orthogonal matching pursuit
are not pure but distorted by noise. We interpret the intermediary phase as a bridge
toward community detection algorithm.
In chapter 4, we expose the model to generate synthetic load for disaggregation.
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
Moreover, real measurements from EnergyLab Nordhavn1 project are considered. The
electrical measurements are compared to the existing NILM dataset via diagnostic and
statistical tools [12].
The set of functions used to pre-process the data and reach a
1-minute time resolution is disclosed. Finally, we discuss the suitability of EnergyLab
Nordhavn dataset for NILM purposes.
In chapter 5, the NILM algorithm is conducted on a real and synthetic dataset. The
synthetic dataset is entirely controllable and ensures to demonstrate and interpret the
disaggregation performance on different noise levels as well as the necessary handling
for so-called cyclic appliances. The real dataset aims to represent power measurement
in a more realistic frame with a dataset composed of measurements from rooms, cyclic
and large appliances. We disclose the performance at disaggregating single-state and
multi-state appliances. In chapter 6, we conclude on the project achievements and open
up on perspectives.
1http://www.energylabnordhavn.dk/
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
State-of-the-art NILM
The literature review treats the state-of-art algorithms for energy disaggregation. First,
we give the reader the necessary background and elicit the essential components for
NILM comprehension. Second, we exhibit the unsupervised NILM algorithms for the
low-sampling rate.
We will cover the limitation aspects regarding the data input,
computational efficiency and disaggregation performance. The research conducted on
hidden Markov model, deep learning, load classification and blind source separation is
here presented. This part does not aim to be an extensive review. Ultimately, the review
is deliberately restricted to a low-sampling rate framework.It is unlikely, for large-scale
NILM implementation, to work on a high-sampling rate for an apparent reason of
computationally and storage costs. This constraint involves that methods relying on
transient appliances signatures (very short-term fluctuation in power or current) as
feature selection will not be exposed here. Moreover, a vast majority of today’s, and
in the foreseeable future, smart-meters measure active power only. Therefore, NILM
algorithms relying on reactive power, current, voltage waveform or taking advantage of
the multi-phase signal, are here brushed aside. The chapter ends with a discussion of
the techniques presented, with the issues it aims to tackle in the future.
2.1
Background
Let us first briefly clarify the meaning of Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring. On the one
hand, load monitoring is the study of electricity consumption over time. Devices such as
smart meters retrieve the consumption as a single point of measurement. On the other
hand, non-intrusive, opposed to intrusive, measures individual appliances or group of
appliances [13]. As a rule, in a non-intrusive environment, unique equipment is placed
on the electrical switchboard. The individual appliances signature (i.e. consumption
of each device) is superposed. This superposition leads to the need for disaggregation
work, invoking the separation techniques. Indeed, the mixture (i.e. aggregated signal)
is a complex signal to study and to retrieve their respective sources is challenging.
Individual electrical appliances exhibit a unique pattern, termed load or appliance
signature. The appliances features (e.g. type, power consumption pattern) enable the
use of disaggregation methods to discern and recognise specific appliances from the
mixture. In that context, smart meters are already a limitation. The sampling rate
from these meters determine the extractable informations.
A fine-grained resolution
opens the possibility to more information, but the relevance remains questionable for
real-world problems. Conceptually, appliances are categorised into three types. This
==PAGE:22==
6
2 State-of-the-art NILM
Time
Power
Type-I: Single-State
Type-III:
Continuously Varying
Type-II:
Multi-State
Figure 2.1: Pattern of different load type [14]
classification relies upon operational states of the appliances and not absolute power
consumption, Figure 2.1 illustrates the three types. These types are often referred to in
the literature to explain thresholds for certain disaggregation algorithm with as,
1. Type-I appliances have only two states of operation: on and off;
2. Type-II appliances have a finite number of operating states. Such category gather
washing machines, dish washers, stoves etc. together;
3. Type-III
appliances
have
a
continuously
variable
operation,
they
remain
challenging for disaggregation algorithm.
NILM literature exposes two level of data complexity. In [15], Makonin et al. asks
for a clear statement on whether the dataset is noised or denoised. A noised dataset is
the total power consumption measured in the household. However, tracing back all the
submetered appliances consumption might not correspond to the total power, leaving
an untraceable energy residual. A denoised dataset corresponds to the summation of
all available submeters. Hence the unmetered load is the discrepancy (e.g. a laptop
temporarily charging on a wall socket). It is needless to say that denoised datasets are
not entirely representative of the real-world challenges. Most of NILM publication work
on denoised datasets.
Every second year a new NILM algorithm review is available [14, 16, 17], with the
presentation of new methods, but hidden Markov models (HMM) and neural networks
(NN) represent the vast majority of the approaches in the literature. Two branches
of algorithms are considered in the literature regarding NILM, namely supervised
NILM and unsupervised NILM. Supervised infer the composition of an aggregated
signal using the individual household appliances as the training set.
This approach
involves submeters at the household, which is costly and time-consuming. Therefore,
recent research leans toward unsupervised NILM. These terms slightly contravene the
upfront interpretation and should be viewed cautiously. These unsupervised systems
can be classified into three groups [18]. The first group uses unlabelled training sets
==PAGE:23==
2.2 NILM algorithms
7
of a household to build the appliance’s model or populate the appliance’s database,
e.g. HMM. It further indicates the sensibility of a method to changes. The second
group requires labelled data from “known” household to learn the appliance’s model
which are then used for disaggregation on an “unseen” household, e.g.
NN. Lastly,
the disaggregation takes place without training phase. Indeed, no prior knowledge or
measurement of the submeters is needed. Notice, that our presented method presented
is categorised in this last group.
2.2
NILM algorithms
2.2.1
Hidden Markov model
HMMs are the successful paradigm in the NILM field, owing presumably to the ease to
catch the underlying intuition. Indeed, HMMs are a natural representation of electric
appliances.
It describes the appliances states (Type-I and II) with Markov chains.
Therefore, it is a purely generative approach to disaggregation where simultaneous
appliances modelling occurs.
Therefore, HMM works with a learning and inferring
phases. The former estimates the transition and emission matrix with the initial state
probabilities from unlabelled training data. These model parameters are learned and
require the submetered data as prior knowledge. The latter, the individual appliances
states are reckoned from the observed aggregated signal. HMM is also referred as load
classification algorithm [16] due to the inferring aspects and proceeds with a sliding
window to detect the events.
The list below discloses HMM extensions enumerated
chronologically:
• Factorial Hidden Markov Chain (FHMM) [19] is an extension of HMM using
multiple Markov chains. FHMM refers to HMM with distributed states as the
features of the distributed state factorise the aggregated state representation. In
this case, each Markov chain represents an individual appliance.
• Conditional Factorial Hidden Markov Model [20] includes additional features such
as the correlation between the appliances, time of the day and other exogenous
parameters. Factorial hidden semi-Markov chain grows the idea and incorporates
different gamma distribution to reveal the state occupancy duration of the
appliances.
• Additive Factorial Hidden Markov Chain (AFHMM) [21] is another extension the
HMMs. It is a major step forward in the field of disaggregation with HMM. First,
the learning phase is said unsupervised. The system learns from the aggregated
signal by extracting individual clean cycle of one appliance in the aggregated signal.
Second, they use a robust mixture component for the inferring phase. It allows
to handle the unmodelled observations giving a computationally efficient process
and free the system from local optima;
• Differential Factorial Hidden Markov Chain (DFHMM) gives as output the
differential signal.
==PAGE:24==
8
2 State-of-the-art NILM
Even though the scientific field is very active on HMMs, it has substantial limits.
On the one hand, the supervised learning approach leads to the satisfactory result but
lacks generalisation. Indeed, creating a dictionary of Markov chain for generalisation
purpose is prompt to computational intensive work and local optima. On the other
hand, unsupervised learning phase requires suitable dataset to extract appliances signal
[21]. AFHMM can cope with multi-state appliances but under the condition of short
cycle duration and denoised signal. The performance with HMMs reduces rapidly with
increasing noise level. Similarly to noise, a large number of appliances will degrade the
algorithm performance. With signature-based approaches, once an error in the on-off
paring occurs, the error is propagated at least on another on-off paring. Thus it imposes
substantial restrictions on the complexity. Moreover, the original approach is based on
first-order Markov model and inherently do not encode duration of the states.
2.2.2
Deep learning
Different deep learning architectures are employed for energy disaggregation purposes,
through Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), Convolutional Neural Network (CNN),
autoencoder and combination of this Neural Network (NN) with HMMs.
Most of
the work in the literature uses high-frequency samples to determine the additive
subcomponent of a signal [22]. Kelly et al. achieve the first publication using NN for
energy disaggregation on low-rate measurements [23]. It put in perspective three deep
NN architectures, all trained on UK-DALE dataset. It performs better that HMMs
on average and “generalises” well over different UK-DALE houses.
In the wake of
the sequence-to-sequence model for disaggregation introduced Kelly et al., Zhang et al.
implement a sequence-to-point model where the input is a window of the mixture, and
the output is a point of single appliance [24]. Sequence-to-point learning outperforms
previous NN approach using the same low-rate real-world sample.
Most of the DNN techniques remains accurate and performs well on a specific dataset.
The inherent issues with deep learning models are the massive need for data to move
the model toward generalisation which remains questionable. Extracting the “footprint”
of the individual appliances signal over multiple households requires large dataset to
train neurals. Labelled data representing the large panels of householders is missing
and will probably never exist. However, a vast amount of unlabeled data are available.
Further work suggests that the neural are pre-trained in an unsupervised manner on
unlabelled data to identify the useful features. Afterwards, training on labelled data
allows fine-tuning.
The alternative proposed by Huss [25] works on a hybrid model for load
disaggregation. CNN extracts the features correlated with the appliances states and
injects as observations in a hidden semi Markov model of the appliances. The transitional
feature is added to the HMM. This hybrid model is trained and evaluated on 1Hz
dataset (i.e. high-resolution) data. Combination of a CNN and HMM enhance load
disaggregation evaluation in contract with simple CNN models.
Indeed, both have
==PAGE:25==
2.2 NILM algorithms
9
a specific benefit on denoised and noised NILM. Inherently, each network operates
independently in neural NILM leading to a discrepancy between the sum of the individual
output and the aggregated signal. In contrast, HMM sums to the aggregated signal,
and the residual is null (or close). In a noised NILM case, NN NILM process good
solution and learning capabilities in the presence of noise but HMMs tend to fail. The
hybrid model is shown to perform considerably better than a CNN alone, and it further
demonstrated a significant increase in performance compared to HMM alone. Hybrid
model focus on outperforming with more accuracy the existing NN and HMM techniques.
However, does accuracy trumps the ease of deployment of a technique?
2.2.3
Load classification
Load classification results by first detecting signatures emphasised by the activation of
appliances, and secondly classified by inference via a appliances model [16]. HMMs are
part of the load classification method, but since they represent a significant volume of
the published research for NILM, they are in separated sections.
Energy disaggregation research started in the 1980s with George Hart with this
approach. He is considered as the father of NILM algorithm his first published work on
disaggregation in 1984 from the MIT EnergyLab [7]. He laid the foundation in the NILM
community using the steady-states signature, as real power and reactive power, to track
the on-off operation of the appliances. Analysing the step changes in active and reactive
power succeed to differentiate Type-I and some Type-II appliances. Performance on
such algorithm is mitigated. The recent approach in [26], proposed load classification
for NILM based on the Voltage-Current trajectories of appliances. It abstracted the
similarity from mapped values and aimed to extract the graphical signatures.
Such
disaggregation approach performs well. However, it aspires to be abandoned since actual
smart meters only collects the real power.
State-of-the-art features extraction using only active power measurements, and
derived attributes, is presented in [27]. The technique relied on subtractive clustering and
transformed active power transitions as features. The recognition method is achieved
with a maximum likelihood classifier. A 1Hz sampling rate (relatively high-sampling
rate) experimental data from REDD dataset is selected and propose an unsupervised
subtractive clustering performing better than the k-mean approach.
This method
is however limited to Type-I appliances.
It recognises the feature with the power
change and time duration.
The limitations of such algorithm are similar to Hart’s
approach. Indeed, appliances with similar power draw are not correctly distinguished,
and multi-state appliance (Type-II) are not processed. Even if these approaches require
low parameter tuning and are little sensitive to noise, it involves a dictionary from the
prior collection of the state appliances, i.e. set of prior values inferring the individual
appliances. Appliances feature with exclusively active power measurements encounter
difficulties and is limited to specific type of appliances. The unsupervised application
would require an extensive dictionary beforehand.
==PAGE:26==
10
2 State-of-the-art NILM
Energy disaggregation is conducted graph signal processing (GSP) represent a
dataset using a set of nodes and weights. GSP belongs to the load classification approach.
In [28], the weights reflect the similarity or the correlation between the nodes and build
a low-complexity classifier. In the first instance, it does not requires event detection to
detect appliance changing states. In the continuity, a blind method is proposed [18],
with similar performance. This proposed GSP approach requires the manual labelling
of the appliances. The classification is achieved via regularisation graphs.
2.2.4
Blind source separation
In [16], Bonfigli et al. categorises one of the unsupervised algorithms as blind source
separation.
Blind refers to the unsupervised process.
Formerly, such techniques
find application in computer vision, audio signal processing or even noise reduction.
Single-channel source separation problem occurs when sources emit signals, and a single
sensor records the mix.
Non-negative matrix factorisation is one of the well-known
method [29]. The single-channel as the aggregated electrical load can also enjoy from
source separation approach.
This problem is inherently under-determined, and its
solution relies on making appropriate assumptions concerning the sources. Utter blind
source separation is indeed possible, and there is always prior information as the natural
characteristic of the signal enables to distinguish the sources.
In [11],
Arberet et al.
adapt sparse approximation techniques for energy
disaggregation purpose. The model populates the signal with boxcar function aiming
to catch the natural behaviour of the load. The sparse approximation is achieved via
greedy algorithm, i.e. matching pursuit. The appliances labelling takes advantage of the
three available phases of the load and accomplish with a decision tree. Such algorithm
gives the possibility to work on the load event decomposed as boxcar.
2.3
Discussion
The anterior NILM algorithms presentation draws meaningful conclusions.
Two
fundamental limitations can be retained, namely the data input and the provisional
application to real-world NILM. While using open and perfectly suitable NILM dataset
helps for comparison across methods, there might be a discrepancy with the real-life
householder’s data.
The study mainly uses denoised data from cautiously selected
sources.
Also, techniques that request a training phase leaves the generalisation of
the method disputable.
Only drafts of hypothetical validation support the generic
solutions. Moreover, too often the effort focuses on optimising existing methods where
disaggregation performance is the objective function. The specific end-application is
often omitted.
Globally, two techniques drag the attention in NILM field, i.e.
HMM and NN.
These two techniques are inherently tricky to generalise which is a central limit for the
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Discussion
11
real-world application. Over the years, the continuous upgrades of HMM and NN, going
along with a gain in performance, made it difficult to replace with a more suitable and
innovative technique, i.e. application-centric techniques. Most of the approach disclose
similar performance because authors select the right set of appliances to constitute their
denoised mixture. Performance alone is not the sole measure of the success of a method
but relies partly on the underlying intuition. However, NN differs from the HMM. NN
is merely a force machine working and performing great in plenty of fields. Nowadays
computing power and available data open the possibility to take advantage of such
technique including the energy disaggregation field. HMM success relies probably on
its ease to understand the underlying concepts, namely its natural representation of the
load with Markov chains. The next method of load disaggregation will probably have a
bit of both, or at least a right new intuition.
Our approach deviates from the unsupervised techniques requiring training on either
labelled and unlabelled data to perform disaggregation, i.e.
HMM and NN. Our
methods fall into two categories of algorithms, namely blind source separation for the
first phase and appliances feature extraction. It decomposes the signal into a set of
the event (event-based approach) to form patterns of signatures with clustering on
the co-occurrence.
Using in the first instance matching pursuit algorithm, we take
the advantages of such techniques known for denoising capabilities. The clustering is
achieved via community detection providing co-occurrence networks. The incontestable
benefit of these unsupervised techniques is the training-less approach. We can already
foresee that generic method is a readily achievable goal.
==PAGE:28==
12
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Method
The energy disaggregation problem can be formulated as a given mixture signal
x = {x1, x2, . . . , xT} with T the number of sample available. The aggregated power
consumption is the contribution of N appliances with the power draw y(i)(t) for appliance
i ∈{1, 2, . . . , N}. At any point in time t we have,
x(t) =
N
∑
i=1
y(i)(t) + σ(t),
(3.1)
where σ(t) representing the appliances contributing to the power draw but not accounted
in the model. The neglected appliances are either too small to enable the detection or
be deliberately set aside for lack of interest. Like for other NILM algorithms, we first
process the event detection and secondly the learning and inferring part. Respectively,
section 3.1 decomposes the signal, and section 3.3 builds the co-occurrence network with
the signal elements. Section 3.2 act as a bridge between the techniques.
3.1
Sparse decomposition
In this section, we present a widely used technique in signal processing called sparse
approximation.
The underlying motivation for using sparse decomposition is the
will to have an elementary signal representation, i.e.
a simpler and decomposed
representation of our electrical load. It is probably worth to have a reminder on the
terminology of decomposition and disaggregation. Here, signal decomposition refers to
the linear combination of elements to retrieve an approximation of the original signal.
Disaggregation refers to finding the individual sources, which once aggregated result to
the original signal. This section focus on the decomposition part of the electrical load.
Sparse representation and overcomplete dictionaries are one of the successful
paradigms in signal processing. Sparse representation implies that the signal represents
a smaller number of dictionary elements. The idea is to create an extensive dictionary
of patterns and introduce sparsity to keep only the fitting elements, i.e. the strongest
elements. A dictionary is a large collection of elements termed atom. The physical
interpretation of the signal is shaping the atom.
It aims to find the best sparse
approximation of the signal with the set of elements.
These elements can either be
waveforms or translation-invariant functions in our case. A proper dictionary is essential
for success. Therefore dictionary learning algorithm seeks for the best representation
==PAGE:30==
14
3 Method
under sparsity constraints [30, 31]. Figure 3.1 illustrates how a dictionary can fulfil the
sparse approximation of a signal.
Dictionary
Power
Time
Signal
{
}
…
Figure 3.1: Finding the best sparse approximation of the signal from a large collection
of boxcar elements.
3.1.1
Tractability and complexity
Sparse decomposition applying direct sparse approximation with a dictionary Φ =
{φk}K
k=1 containing the K atoms and activated by the set of coefficients α = {αk}K
k=1
aiming to minimise the error in the approximation can be defined as followed,
x −
K
∑
k=1
αkφk

2
.
(3.2)
This problem is combinatorial nature since it requires to combine all the possible sets
of atoms to result in the optimal sparse representation of a signal. Such combinatorial
optimisation which belongs to NP-hard problem [32]. A direct sparse approximation is
an intractable problem and cannot be solved by a polynomial-time algorithm where the
lower bound is exponential. An alternative approach is ineluctable. An approximated
solution of the original problem can be obtained with tractable algorithms. Matching
pursuit (MP) are greedy types of algorithms allowing to solve such problem that is
computationally tractable and solvable in polynomial time.
3.1.2
Sparse decomposition model
The sparsity hypothesis is a central assumption for sparse decomposition model. We
concede our signal admits a sparse approximation over a dictionary Φ. The dictionary
is said to be overcomplete meaning that it contains a much larger collection of atoms
than number of sample of the signal. This type of dictionary allows to be more flexible
and have a richer data representations.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Sparse decomposition
15
Let x = (x1, . . . , xT)⊤denotes the aggregated load signal, where T is the number of
samples. Our approach relies on the decomposition of the mixture signal x in a collection
of K atoms {φk}K
k=1 such that,
x(t) =
K
∑
k=1
αkφk(t),
(3.3)
where φk ∈R1×T is an atom belonging to the dictionary Φ ∈RT×K. The dictionary
is a large collection of unit norm vectors ∥φk∥2=1, k = 1, . . . , K with K ≫T. Indeed,
the dictionary acquires its meaning since it covers the entire time length with set of
alternative atom shapes. The coefficients α ∈R1×K activate the atoms in the dictionary.
The matrix form of Equation 3.3 is given as,


x1
...
xT

=


α1
...
αK


⊤


φ1,1
φ2,1
· · ·
φK,1
φ1,2
...
...
...
φ1,T
φK,T

.
(3.4)
Once we admit a sparse approximation over the dictionary Φ for our signal x, we have
x ≈αΦ. This implies that the vast majority of the coefficient α = (α1, . . . , αK) are
equal to zero with only a few nonzero entries measured by their ℓ0-norm. The sparsity
S is reflected through ∥α∥0
1 ≤S. The coefficient vector α is said to be S-sparse. The
so-called sparse support vector Λ refers to all the nonzero entries in α and is given as,
Λ = supp(α) = {k : αk ̸= 0}K
k=1 ,
(3.5)
where Λ is a set that restricts matrix Φ to a sub-matrix ΦΛ . Again, the sparsity is
convoyed with |Λ| ≤S.
To counteract this complexity, greedy algorithms are employed. Perhaps one of the
best known, MP allows to locally find optimal solution at each stage to be close enough
to a global optimal solution.
3.1.3
Let’s be greedy
Greedy methods are based on a divide-and-conquer principle. The MP is a step wise
forward algorithm. It select an atom in the dictionary according to the atom contribution
in the sparse signal recovery.
the correlation evaluate the contribution of this atom
and the residuals can be updated.
The widely used MP algorithm are intrinsically
sequential [33]. Among the popular extension of MP algorithm, orthogonal matching
pursuit (OMP) differs by updating all the activated coefficients at every iteration by
computing the orthogonal projection of the set of selected atoms. It gives the opportunity
to correct an atom or to push it to zero and discard it. Such an extension gives better
result but requires more computational effort due to the extra step.
1∥·∥0 is a common abuse of language to designed the ℓ0 ”norm”, which is not a norm in any sense.
==PAGE:32==
16
3 Method
OMP algorithm is a recursive process computing the new approximated signal bxj at
each j iteration given the updated residual Rj = x −bxj. The next atom φj+1
max in the
dictionary Φ is selected for which the magnitude of the inner product Rjφ⊤
k is the largest
on a ℓ2-norm. In other terms, the next atom φ⊤
k maximises the p-correlation with the
residuals Rj such as,
kj+1
max := arg max
k
Rjφ⊤
k

2 ∀k /∈Λj.
(3.6)
For each iteration, a single element is added to the signal recovery bxj updating the
sparse support vector supp(αj) = Λj. It therefore extend Λj by one element such as,
Λj+1 = Λj ∪kj
max,
(3.7)
where kj
max is the selected atoms at j that maximise the p-correlation (i.e. p-value) with
the residual Rj. The coefficients cj are computed in the least square sense such as,
αj := arg min
α
∥x −αΛjΦΛj∥2 = Φ†
Λjx,
(3.8)
where Φ† is the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse of ΦΛj.
Updating the whole set of
active coefficients is a particularity of OMP algorithm compare to MP. It is also the
most computationally heavy step.
After j iteration and updating Λj the signal is
approximated such as,
x ≈ΦΛjΦ†
Λjx.
(3.9)
The last iteration result to the sparse support vector ΛJ = {kj}
J
j=1 restricting the
dictionary ΦJ
Λ given our sparse approximated signal x ≈αΛJΦΛJ.
A condensed version of the OMP in four recursive steps:
• Initialisation: R0 = x, α0 = 0, Λ0 = ∅,
• For j = 1 with recursively j = j + 1 until the stopping criteria is met at J,
1 kj+1
max := arg max
k
Rjφ⊤
k

2
∀k /∈Λj
2 Λj+1 = Λj ∪kj+1
max
3 αj := arg min
c
x −αΛjΦΛj

2 = Φ†
Λjx
4 Rj = x −αjΦΛj
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Sparse decomposition
17
3.1.3.1
Design of the translation-invariant boxcar dictionary
Dictionaries are designed to result in the best sparse representation of a signal.
Therefore, the set of functions generating the dictionary is pre-specified from the physical
interpretation of the input signal. These elements can correspond to different linear
transformation (i.e. scales, translations, frequencies or rotations) or train a dictionary
from a signal. To better fit the model, selection of a predefined set of linear transforms
is computed through training signals. Under strict sparsity constraints, the algorithm
seeks for the best representation of the signal. The atoms generated from various aims
to result in the best sparse approximation.
Given a set of training signals, we seek
the dictionary that leads to the best representation for each member in this set, under
strict sparsity constraints. Algorithm for designing overcomplete dictionaries for a sparse
representation exist [30, 34, 35]. The dictionary is often said to be overcomplete meaning
that the set of basis vector (atoms) is much larger than the dimension of the input
(T ≪K).
We
assume
that
some
bases
elements
compose
the
signal
defined
as
translation-invariant boxcar functions, as on Figure 3.2.
In computer vision and
convolutional neural network the term “invariance” means that you can recognise an
object as an object even when its appearance varies in the same ways and “translation”
express the collection of sample moved in the same direction and the same amount.
“Boxcar” originated from the geometrical shape of the atom. In our work, we follow the
dictionary design from Arberet et al. [11]. It clearly aims to approximate Type-I and
Type-II appliances signal (as a remainder cf. Figure 2.1). Each atom is generated such
as,
φl,w =
1
√w Πl−w/2,l+w/2 (t) ,
(3.10)
where l is the boxcar translation and w the width. The boxcar function is made of two
Heaviside function as,
Πa,b (t) = H(t −a) −H(t −b),
(3.11)
where the H (·) is a Heaviside step function with Πa,b (t) equal to 1 if a ≤t ≤b, otherwise
0. It needs to be emphasised that the birth of our atom occur here. The boxcars or
atoms are generated and stored in the dictionary. Figure 3.3 illustrate the dictionary
matrix for a short time sample with a binary representation. Remember that only the
K strongest atoms are relevant for our signal.
==PAGE:34==
18
3 Method
Figure
3.2:
Three
atoms
ϕ
stored
in
the
dictionary,
i.e.
three
distinct
translation-invariant boxcar functions.
Figure 3.3: Matrix Φ for T = 5. The solid dots (•) indicate a nonzero value and the
empty dots (◦) indicate zero values.
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Sparse decomposition
19
0
200
400
600
800
0
2000
4000
6000
Clothes washer
Clothes dryer
Living room
0
200
400
600
800
0
2000
4000
6000
Power [W]
Strongest atoms
0
200
400
600
800
Time [min]
0
2000
4000
6000
Recovered signal
Figure 3.4: Input and output of our sparse decomposition algorithm. (Top) Aggregated
signal x. (Middle) Set of strongest atoms ΦΛ. (Bottom) Recovered signal resulting from
the aggregation of the strongest atoms.
3.1.4
Electrical load decomposition
3.1.4.1
OMP output analysis
We expose the OMP output on a 14-hour electrical measurement.
It consist of an
denoised dataset with outlets measurements from the clothes washer, clothes dryer and
living room. The following part is meant to be a simple but representative example of the
power of OMP algorithms in comparison to the traditional method, namely event-based
and states-based approach.
The three subplots Figure 3.4 illustrate the input and output of the OMP on an
electrical load. The load here are superposed, and the clothes washer and dryer operate
at the same time. Even though the clothes dryer occult partially the clothes washer,
the atoms output decompose the aggregated signal in two boxcars respectively. The
==PAGE:36==
20
3 Method
recovered signal reflects two benefits using a sparse approximation. First, the aggregation
of the strong atoms result in a denoised observed mixture. Secondly, the output gives a
simplified representation of the observed mixture not to complexify the later processes.
Indeed, the internal states fluctuation are faded out. There is here a clear advantage
compared to traditional event detection approaches since simultaneous appliances do
not occult the individual appliances signature.
3.1.4.2
Stopping Criteria
In general, stopping rules in iterative procedures are key elements. OMP algorithms
are iterative greedy algorithm reducing the error between the aggregated K strongest
atoms and the measured signal at each step. Stopping criteria must be specific to an
application. Indeed, an application on noise reduction signal of an audio signal or a
sparse representation of electrical load ensues different algorithm stops. We explore the
possibility of stopping our algorithm.
A limit of the number of iteration can be set. However, it does not ensure the recovery
of the signal, neither the effective sparse signal: by over-fitting the signal and fitting the
noise or by under-fitting with a lousy recovery. Inherently, the recursive process should
stop when the sparsity order is reached, but the number of elements to reconstitute a
sparse signal relies on the expected features of the channel and is unavailable information
in real life problems. Therefore, iteration or sparsity thresholds does not guarantee a
high-quality recovery by stopping the algorithm too early or too late stage. Figure 3.5
exemplify under- and over-fitting, on sub-figure 1 and sub-figure 4 respectively.
The noise structure of the signal is shaping the stopping rules. A noiseless signal
recovery would require the OMP algorithm to stop when εj = 0. Have as stopping
threshold E[ε2] = σ2 seems a reasonable assumption, since the noise is an additional
distortion to the channel [36]. It is important to mention that we assume a Gaussian
noise case for our stopping rules. Additional noise on the signal is considered to be εj =
N(0, σ2). A meaningful approach would be to stop the greedy process before fitting the
noise. This is done when applied to denoising signal (e.g. audio, image). The threshold
for this type of approach would be to stop the algorithm when it reaches the power of the
noise in the channel, i.e. E [ε2] = σ2. In most cases, there is a drop in the error in function
of the number of iteration, creating a bent. It would be therefore more interesting to
study the variation of the residual through the iterations j. Figure 3.5 sub-plot
3
suggest the OMP output with a stopping criterion on residuals distributed as Gaussian
noise and do not correspond to the bend in the curve. An explicit visual residual analysis
is revealed in the appendix Figure 2. A normally distributed noise is complicated to
achieve since the algorithm always tries to minimise the error conducting to a rather
t-distributed residual with a tight variance. Nevertheless, stopping the algorithm on
such threshold leads to over-fitting with an excess of smaller and insignificant atoms.
Moreover, we would like to keep our stopping criteria application-centric.
In
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Sparse decomposition
21
0
200
400
600
800
Time [min]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Power [W]
∥ε∥2 ≤0.5
S =7
1
0
200
400
600
800
Time [min]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Power [W]
∥ε∥2 ≤0.2
S =13
2
0
200
400
600
800
Time [min]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Power [W]
∥ε∥2 ≤0.0182
S =163
3
0
200
400
600
800
Time [min]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Power [W]
∥ε∥2 ≤0.001
S =597
4
Figure 3.5: Sparse representation completed the OMP algorithm with different stopping
criterion on the error tolerance.
==PAGE:38==
22
3 Method
101
102
103
104
log(iteration)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
∥ε∥2
1
2
3
4
Figure 3.6: L2-norm of the error as function of the log(iteration). Circled numbers refers
to a specific analysis on the OMP algorithm.
section 2.1, we illustrate an accepted classification of appliances in three subgroup.
However, it remains an approximation and the real-world electrical load is a less
disciplined process. On a 1-minute resolution, Type-I appliance is inclusive of inner state
leading to spikes or drops. The same applies for Type-III appliance on the multi-states.
The second reason is that in our configuration we pass information (atoms, clusters,
connections) therefore introducing a bias that continuous through the whole process.
We need a stopping criteria beyond the noise threshold. Our approach neither fall in
stopping criteria build on sparsity, neither on residuals as noise. The stopping criteria is
finally determined heuristically on a l2-norm error tolerance. The l2-norm error satisfy
specific properties of scalability, allowing the feed with various sample length in the OMP
algorithm. The tolerance stopping criteria is set at 0.2 and disclose a meaningful sparse
representation for our application, see Figure 3.4 sub-plot 3 as well as Figure 3.6 for the
error as function of the iteration. An explicit visual residual analysis is revealed in the
appendix Figure 1. Large set of atoms is not wished but rather the most representative.
It is always the balance between finding the good fit or parsimony. The reason for a
parsimonious recovery also relies on the later step of the process. More atoms mean
more information to pass in the following step and complexify the whole. Once the core
of the OMP and the stopping rules is implemented, the algorithm is fully data-driven.
3.1.4.3
Practicalities for algorithm implementation
There is a necessity to sequence dataset we path through the OMP algorithm due to
memory limits from the dictionary. Figure 3.3 illustrate the possible combinations for a
signal of length T = 5. The dictionary matrix is generated using Numpy module from
python and the array’s items are encoded in 64-bit base-2 format (i.e. float64 in Numpy
python). An array of 1000 floats occupies 0.08192 MB. Generating a dictionary using
our boxcar function method for 1000 timestamps leads to a 1000-by-201000 matrix. By
quick calculation, this occupies 1.6GB memory size with an quadratic growth toward
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Sparse decomposition
23
more timestamp. We encountering a O (n2) space complexity. This limitation results
in the following necessity of sequencing the dataset and gather smaller arrays before
running our OMP algorithm.
To avoid time and space complexity the time series requires being sequenced in
chunks of a 1000 timestamps or below.
In order not to break essential appliances
signature the load is cut at the minima. Once this set of sequenced data is obtained
and normalised, we run it through the OMP algorithm with the shrunk dictionary
according to the time series dimension. This step allows us to reduce the complexity
with acceptable bias introduced due to breaks in the signal. Moreover, we deliberately
ignore small boxcar with power consumption below 100 W to avoid posterior intricacy.
==PAGE:40==
24
3 Method
3.2
Bridging toward community detection
As disclosed in section 3.1, the approximated signal is represented by a set of strong
atoms deployed over time. Even if similarly shaped atoms appear recurrently over time,
they suffer from uniqueness due to the intrinsic OMP mechanism, cf.
Equation 3.8.
There is an ineluctable need to elevates our approach and enable finding the intimate
relation of the set of atoms. To analysis, the recurrence of the atoms over time and make
a joint estimation by finding the co-occurrence, we first need to denoise the atoms. This
phase is achieved via probabilistic clustering, i.e. Gaussian mixture models. Figure 3.7
illustrates a subset of noised strong atoms leading to slight variation in power magnitude
and operation time. We would, therefore, vanish this alteration that we conceive as noise.
This enables analysis via community detection algorithm.
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Relative operation time [min]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Power [W]
εP
εl
Figure 3.7: Overlapped subset of noised atoms.
3.2.1
Mathematical background
3.2.1.1
Alternative clustering algorithms
Atom denoising can be obtained with alternative clustering method, as long as it remains
a “light” clustering aiming to denoise and not group the sample. On the one hand, the
best-known k-means algorithm is parametrised with the number of clusters, i.e. the
hypothetic number of centroid representing the entire dataset.
On the other hand,
agglomerative hierarchical clustering builds the clusters incrementally to a dendrogram.
The algorithm starts with one cluster for each data point and ends with all the data
points in the same cluster. The intermediary steps move from a high to a low number
of clusters by merging two clusters by similarity measures. For this methods, no cluster
number is required but to retrieve the number of the cluster a maximum distance needs
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Bridging toward community detection
25
to be set.
K-means and hierarchical clustering are non-probabilistic techniques and
compute a hard assignment for each data point to a cluster which might lead to poor
grouping.
Gaussian mixture model (GMM) computes the probability of a data point before
assigning to a cluster. The cluster can be of any shape, namely due to the integration of
the variance (or covariance) in the minimising function. It allows catching anisotropically
distributed blobs as well as blobs with unequal variance. The k-means clustering method,
it finds k to minimise (x−µk)2 by only calculating the Euclidean distance, in other words,
it uses the distance-to-cluster-centre to assign an observation to a cluster. GMM find
the k to minimise the (x−µk)2/σ2. In a certain way k-means works with distance, GMM
with the weighted distance [37, 38].
3.2.1.2
The model
Back to basics. The one-dimensional, or univariate, Gaussian distribution N (x|µ, σ)
given as a probability density function such as,
N
(
x|µ, σ2)
=
1
(2πσ2)1/2 exp
{
−(x −µ)2
2σ2
}
,
(3.12)
where µ is the mean and σ2 the variance of the normal distribution. In a multivariate
case D ≥1, Gaussian distribution variance σ2 becomes a covariance matrix Σ specifying
the rotation and the relative elongation of the Gaussian on a 2-D plane such as,
Σ = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(xi −µ)(xi −µ)⊤,
(3.13)
The D-dimensional vector x in the multivariate case takes form as,
N(x|µ, Σ) =
1
(2π)D/2
1
|Σ|1/2 exp
{
−1
2 (x −µ)⊤Σ−1 (x −µ)
}
.
(3.14)
where µ ∈R1×D is the mean vector and Σ ∈RD×D is the covariance matrix.
|Σ|
represent the determinant of the matrix Σ.
Describing a large dataset with a single multivariate normal distribution suffer form
significant limitation. Indeed, using a linear combination of several Gaussian function
enables to catch the local structures over the global one.
GMM is a probabilistic
model representing a set of subpopulation normally distributed. A GMM is a set of
K superposed components such as,
p(x) =
K
∑
k=1
ϕk N(x|µk, Σk) ∀k : ϕk ≥0,
(3.15)
==PAGE:42==
26
3 Method
where kth components has a mean of µk and a covariance matrix of Σk.
This is
called a mixture of component with each component a Gaussian distribution with their
own attributes. The total probability density function sums to 1 with p(x) ≥0 and
N(x|µk, Σk) ≥0. It implies that the mixture coefficients ϕk must satisfy,
K
∑
k=1
ϕk = 1 and 0 ≤ϕk ≤1.
(3.16)
In short, GMM is governed by mixing components ϕk that weights the multivariate
Gaussian distribution N(x|µk, Σk) with their respective means µk and covariance matrix
Σk. Therefore, we need to retrieve an estimation of the parameters θ = {ϕ, µ, Σ} so
the GMM fit the best the data. One way to estimate this parameters is to use the
maximum likelihood. However, such approach is complex since it entails the summation
of the K components in the logarithm function. Alternative heuristic approach exist
for statistical inferences. One of them is the famous expectation-maximisation (EM)
algorithm approach that estimate the parameters θ∗. This algorithm iterates around
two steps, the expectation phase and the maximisation phase. The former estimates
the hidden variable given the input data and the current values of the parameters. The
latter maximise the joint distribution of the input data and the hidden variable.
3.2.2
Denoising the atoms
This part aims to exemplify the atom denoising process for strongest atoms on a 100
day real load. As described in section 3.1, the strong atoms have generated width w
and a magnitude given by the coefficient α, cf. Equation 3.8. The width refers to the
operational time and the magnitude represent the power. Therefore, each dataset points
are represented by a vector x = (power, operation time) which satisfies the multivariate
case. The two features can be drawn on a 2-D plane with each axis representing one
feature, see Figure 3.8.
One of the redundant question raising in unsupervised learning and more specifically
in GMM is the number of components. Indeed, the number of components is not known
a priori. The number of subpopulation can be either guessed or estimated via statistical
tools such as Akaike information criterion (AIC) or Bayesian information criterion (BIC).
Model under-fitting and over-fitting are adjusted with this analytic tools.
This two
information criterion measure the fit with a penalty term for the number of components.
When used for forward or backward model selection, the AIC penalises the number of
parameters in the model to a lesser extent than BIC. Consequently, more parameters
will define the model. We need to find the model that minimise this adjusted measure
of fit.
We need to keep in mind that GMM is utilised for atom denoising purpose,
not for clustering. Therefore common used analytic tools such as AIC, BIC or even
corrected AIC (AICc) are not suitable for our application since it always leads to fewer
components than we require. Establishing a rule of thumb is complicated, primarily
because the variable is too numerous: the length of the time series, the guessed number
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Bridging toward community detection
27
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Operation Time
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Power
0.000
0.002
0.004
Joint probability
0.0
0.2
0.4
Joint probability
Figure 3.8: A multivariate Gaussian mixture model with two features. The scatter shows
the class labels and the side plot the corresponding joint probability.
of appliances and type of appliances. Indeed the number of components is determined
backwards from the output of the community detection algorithm and will be discussed
in latter sections. Briefly, the quality of the community detected is significantly impacted
by the number of component K at this stage. This backward and forward fine-tuning is
the cost of having unsupervised learning method.
Figure 3.8 illustrate our anisotropic sample entailed by the discrete operational time.
The relatively high number of components coupled with the discrete operation time will
tend to “cluster” power deviation. This support our preference for a mixture model
instead of a k-mean clustering. Indeed, it assumes spherical clustering and would not
have caught the elongated shaped. On the side of the plot the joint probability function
for power and operational time point out the dense area. It can be approximated as
==PAGE:44==
28
3 Method
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Power [W]
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
Joint probability function
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
Individual normal kernel probability function
Figure 3.9: Zoom on the section Figure 3.8.
In green the density function and the
individual kernels with the colour assigned to a cluster.
an L-shape with dense atom representation for power below 1000 W for all operation
time and for operation time below 10 minutes for all power.
Figure 3.9 is not a
one-dimensional GMM, merely a cut in the two-dimensional GMM and projected on
the power. It aims to illustrate on a reduce sequence the underlying motivation for such
probabilistic approach. Moreover, we can see that each clump in the densities forms a
class label of denoised atoms. The ticks at the bottom represent a data point. All the
individual normal probability function will produce a k component in the model.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Community detection
29
3.3
Community detection
In the anterior section 3.1, we reconstruct a sparse signal from the householder’s load
with a set of strong atoms.
We assume that an atom is inherent to an appliance.
However, these atoms suffer from uniqueness caused by superposed noise thereby making
impossible an analysis on the recurrence. As explained in the latter section 3.2, we
“denoise” the elements using probabilistic mixture model creating a recurrence and
triggering network co-occurrence. Studying the relationship with other atoms over time
is achieved via community detection. This algorithm reveals atoms linked to other atoms
creating a so-called molecule. Ultimately, the molecules represent appliances.
In one of the reference paper from Arberet et al. [11], the authors proceed to joint
estimations of atoms to the molecule via supervised classification. The join atoms also
called molecule, represent the set of signal type inherent to an appliance. This method
requires prior knowledge of the householder’s set of appliances. Moreover, to keep a
consistency with the field, the vocabulary from graph theory is kept. Therefore, an
atom is now a node, a molecule becomes a community and the time dimensionality
vanishes leaving room for connections in between atoms. One of the challenges we try to
tackle is to disaggregate the multi-state (Type-II) appliances having a non-deterministic
change in states, see Figure 3.10. We hope to join the denoised atoms using community
detection and retrieve the appliances.
Figure 3.10: Distinctive waveform for different clothes washing programs.
==PAGE:46==
30
3 Method
3.3.1
Complex network
3.3.1.1
Graph theory framework
In the recent years, there has been a great resurgence of interest in graph clustering, more
commonly referred as community detection. The graph partitioning problem consists in
identifying a subset of interacting agents such that the inhibition of those interactions
will adequately partition the graph in a set of smaller disconnected components while
ensuring constraints like minimising the number of removed interactions. In other words,
in graph clustering problem, a cluster corresponds to a set of nodes with more links inside
the set than to the rest of the graph.
A graph G(V, E) is a mathematical representation of a pairwise relation between
individual agents n ∈R.
These interactions are expressed with a set of nodes (or
vertices) V = 1, . . . , n and a set of edges (or links) E = {e (u, v) : u, v ∈V }. A pair
e(u, v) is part of E if there is a connection between the agents u and v. In this project,
we only consider undirected edges which are graphs where all the edges are bidirectional,
meaning that each pair (u, v) ∈E result to e(u, v) = e(v, u). It often called network
graphs, wherein a friendship network the relation is admitted to be reciprocal. In our
study, the edges are also weighted such as for all u, v ∈V the edges e(u, v) ∈E are
weighted by wu,v .The assigned weights allow us to represent costs, capacity or distance.
Moreover, the adjacency matrix represents graphs unequivocally and allows to analyse
graphs using matrix theory and linear algebra. Adjacency matrix can represent graphs
A ∈{wu,v}n×n such as,
A (u, v) =
{wu,v
if
e(u, v) ∈E
0
otherwise.
We also do not consider negative links in the graphs, i.e. A(u, v) ≥0 ∀u, v ∈V .
The above definition depicts the adjacency matrix for weighted graphs. Each weight
wu,v is associated to the edge u, v. Since we are working on an undirected graph for
this project, the adjacency matrix is symmetric A = AT. Directed graphs are otherwise
nonsymmetric matrices. Figure 3.11 illustrates an undirected weighted graph with the
correspond adjacency matrix. To sum it up, our graph is undirected, i.e. reciprocal edge
for a pair of nodes, with a non-negative weight assigned to the edge.
3.3.1.2
Community detection and quality function
The community detection problem necessitates partitioning a network into a community
of densely connected nodes, with only sparse connection with the nodes belonging to
different communities [39]. In [40], Reichardt et al. started with the general ansatz that
community detection problems could be inspired from statistical mechanics and create a
parallel with energy partition. This analogy alleviates the whole concept of partitioning
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Community detection
31
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1.6
1.9
1.3
1.4
1.4
0.8
1
0.6
A =


0
1.6
0
0
0
0.6
0
...
0
1.3
0
0
0
1.9
0
0
0
0
1.4
...
0
0.8
0
1
· · ·
0
0
0
...
0
1.4
· · ·
· · ·
0


Figure 3.11:
Simple undirected weighted graph with the corresponding symmetric
weighted adjacency matrix.
and applies to weighted and directed network alike. The core of the community detection
process relies on quality functions, i.e.
objective function, and it is inherent to the
perception of the community architecture. The quality measure captures the notion of
community structure as groups of nodes with better internal connections than external.
Process for community detection coexist, either by removing the inter-community
connection using random walk mechanism [41, 42] or by optimisation [43], i.e. minimising
or maximising problems. The exact formulation of the optimisation problem is known
to be an intractable problem, more precisely it falls in NP-complete problems. Once
more, the algorithm employs heuristic or similar approximation approach that aims to
optimise a community quality function.
A weighted graph G = (V, E) has a weight wu,v with u, v ∈V and e(u, v) ∈E.
The objective is to obtain partitions represented as sets of disjoint and none overlapping
communities C such as,
∪ci = V,
∀ci ∈C,
(3.17)
ci ∩cj = ∅,
∀ci, cj ∈C.
(3.18)
In the literature, a renowned measure is the single-criterion scores called modularity of
the partition. Modularity introduced by Newman et al. [44] developed before Reichardt
et al. [40] but there formalism helps on the global interpretation within this general
framework. It rapidly became one of the most popular quality function. Modularity can
be defined as “the measure of modularity is built upon the idea that random graphs are
not expected to present inherent community structure; thus, comparing the observed
density of a subgraph with the expected density of the same subgraph in the case where
edges are placed randomly leads to a method for identifying clusters. Random graphs
are used to assess the community detection algorithms.” [45]. Modularity, as mentioned
above, is a quality function specific to our study. In [46, 47], further criterion with
different approaches are exposed to evaluate the community.
==PAGE:48==
32
3 Method
This measure of partition quality is computed with modularity. High modularity
in a network is defined as a high density of connections between the nodes in the same
community, sparse or less dense connections between the nodes of the communities. Two
elements enter in the modularity calculation, namely the internal edge of the weights in
the community and the weights of the incident edges toward a community. Modularity
is defined as,
Q =
1
2m
∑
c∈C
[
Σc
in −Σc
tot
4m2
]
,
(3.19)
where Q is a scalar between -1 and 1, and Σc
in is the sum of the weights from all the
internal edges of community c given as,
Σc
in =
∑
wu,v,
∀u, v ∈C,
(3.20)
and Σc
tot the sum of the weights from the edges incident to any vertex in community c
such as,
Σc
tot =
∑
wu,v,
∀u ∈C
or
v ∈C
and
e(u, v) ∈E.
(3.21)
Notice that the elements composing modularity function are normalised by m and result
from the summed edges weight across the network such as,
m =
∑
wu,v,
∀e(u, v) ∈E.
(3.22)
The modularity,
or quality function of the communities,
is a NP-complete
optimisation problem.
Therefore,
there is a heuristic approach to modularity
optimisation.
Louvain method relies upon a heuristic for maximising the quality
function.
3.3.1.3
Louvain method
After introducing the concept of modularity as a quality criterion for the community
detection, Newman projected the optimisation on a greedy algorithm [48].
The
agglomerative hierarchical clustering inspires his approach.
Similarly, the algorithm
starts with all nodes as a community and recursively join two communities in one to
improve the quality function. The process ends when a single community joins all the
nodes and can, therefore, be represented as a dendrogram. A cut through it define the
partition and the linked quality measure.
The heuristic Louvain method optimise locally the modularity on all nodes, then
each small communities is grouped into one node and this step-by-step is recursively
repeated, calculating the gain in modularity such as,
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Community detection
33
∆Qu→c =
[∑c
in +wu→c
2m
−
(∑c
tot +w(u)
2m
)2]
−
[∑c
in
2m −
(∑c
tot
2m
)2
−
(w(u)
2m
)2]
,
(3.23)
where, w(u) is the sum of the weights of the edges incident to the vertex u. Σc
in and Σc
tot
are defined as in Equation 3.20 and Equation 3.21 respectively. wu→c is defined as the
sum of the weights of the edges from the vertex u to vertices in community c such as,
wu→c =
∑
v∈c
wu,v.
(3.24)
The gain in modularity moved around an isolated node u and assigned it to a new
community c. This process is recursive and greedy aiming to maximise the gain ∆Qu→c.
Figure 3.12 illustrate the steps of the Louvain method.
There is this first phase of
optimisation and secondly a phase of aggregation steps. The Louvain algorithm stops
when the communities are stable, i.e. when the threshold on the gain of modularity is
met. Here is a brief description of the two recursive phases:
1
In the optimisation phase, we consider each node u and each neighbour v. We
compute the possible gain ∆Qu→c′ moving u to the neighbours community c′
v. The
node u is then assigned to the community ˆc that maximise the gain ∆Q. The search
stops when no nodes moves to a new community. Once the optimisation process
converged, the updated community information set and modularity is computed.
2
In the aggregation phase, the algorithm build the new graph with the new
set of vertices V ′ composing the communities C′. The edges weights are simply
given by the sum of the vertices given by the latest communities.
This Louvain method has proved that this algorithm ensures a good reconstitution of
the communities. The time complexity of performing computation is expected to be fair,
i.e. O(n log n). Notice that the correction level through the nodes affects the problem
hardness. The resolution limit seems to be circumvented thanks to the multi-level of the
algorithm. Louvain method has lower computational cost and is highly parallelisable
[49].
The reliability of modularity optimisation is questionable. In [50], the author’s main
conclusion regards the issue with the quality function that tends to work well when the
partition as the same number of nodes. So-called resolution limit implies that modularity
might miss substantial graph substructures. They recommended that quality function
should utilise for comparison of equal size partitions with an equivalent number of nodes.
==PAGE:50==
34
3 Method
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
81120101318
146
214
91619
571215
317
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
81120101318
146
214
91619
571215
317
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
81120101318
146
214
91619
571215
317
C1
C3
C4
C2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Optimization
Optimization
Final clustering
Aggregation
Aggregation
Figure 3.12: Optimisation and aggregation steps from the Louvain method until final
clusters are achieved [46].
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Community detection
35
3.3.2
Community as an individual appliance
Unlike social network where it can be straightforward to draw the graph, our application
requires handling before processing to the community detection algorithm. We expressed
already our motivation to find the co-occurrence network from the labelled atoms. Notice
that this method is deterministic. This part aims to reveal how the graph is built from
the set of atoms. Results from the community detection are disclosed in the following
part.
Figure 3.13 exemplify the creation of the link between the atoms. The atom labelled
11 get the weighted connection from the l1-distance, corresponding here to time, to the
other atoms. All the atoms are then permuted to gather the whole set of connection.
The l1-distance is measured from a centre to another.
To keep a sparse adjacency
matrix, we discard what we consider as weak links, i.e.
atom separated by more
than 3 hours. We could see this as a bubble around the atom limiting long-distance
connections. The remaining strong links are normalised to the maximum distance. This
is also a workaround to emphasise the link between the atoms. The reason for limiting
connections is twofold: first we believe that atoms over 3 hours do not have any relation,
second, we need to limit the connection in between the atoms and keep a sparse adjacency
matrix. These two requirements are a matter of the well functioning of the community
detection algorithm.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Power [W]
8 1
9
11
6
13
w11,6
Figure 3.13: Establishing the l1-distance from a single atom to the neighbour’s atom, i.e.
creating the connection with a weighted edge from one node to the neighbour’s node.
Table 3.14: Exemplification of the given weights for Figure 3.13.
u
11
11
11
11
11
11
. . .
v
8
1
9
12
6
13
. . .
w(u, v)
0.596
0.629
0.84
0.775
0.325
0.604
. . .
==PAGE:52==
36
3 Method
Aforementioned backward or forward fine-tuning (section 3.2) on the number of
components K occurs when the community detection output is not satisfying. Indeed, a
too large number of component lack the creation of recurrence over the dataset can lead
in extreme cases to a single community. As explained, this occurs when the algorithm
encounters null models (random graph). Indeed, null model is a benchmark for graph
theory since the result through community detection algorithm on the random graph
should be zero or one. The same append when the number of components is too scarce,
namely when denoising becomes clustering. There is, therefore, a golden mean to obtain.
If correctly set it can lead to the correct number of appliances. Moreover, stopping
criteria for the Louvain algorithm corresponds the gain in modularity. For this work, it
is untouched, i.e. when the condition ∆Q ≤0.001 is fulfilled, the algorithm stops.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4
Data description
In this chapter, we present the datasets used for this thesis, namely synthetic and
real.
The synthetic data (section 4.1) are fully controllable and adjustable given a
significant benefit to the quality and the flexible complexity of the signal. The real
dataset (section 4.2) is collected from the EnergyLab Nordhavn project. This dataset will
be subjected to diagnostics and statistics to compare to other household energy dataset
available for NILM. We will also discuss the approach to clean the data, i.e. dealing with
different sample rates for different submeters, handling erroneous or incomplete data.
4.1
Synthetic residential load
Load shaping of residential end-users by process of synthesis is a complex task. Indeed,
household energy usage is intimately linked to lifestyle factors that are extremely
subjective and not easily defined with any degree of precision [51].
The purpose of
this work is not to catch the complexity of this psychological behaviour but to build a
reasonably realistic model with a controllable level of complexity. The primary reason for
modelling the electricity consumption is to avoid the strain of playing with real-life data
from the beginning. The model is meant to be simple. It allows us to generate realistic
residential loads by aggregating meaningful appliances in a household.
The unique
purpose of this work is to generate a signal with a perfect insight of the source. Moreover,
being able to complexify a signal gradually is a substantial advantage when testing the
performance of our algorithms.
There are numerous algorithms in the literature by
which the input data are synthetic [21, 11, 27].
Two approaches subsist for modelling residential electricity consumption:
the
top-down and the bottom-up approach [52]. On the one hand, the top-down approaches
are driven by macroscopic data. The input is in this method very general as the Gross
Domestic Product (GPD) or the appliances saturation rates. On the other hand, the
bottom-down models rely on microscopic data and employ statistical energy usage data
or time use data to construct load profile [53]. The bottom-up time series approach
is a logical choice for the assessment of demand flexibility, where information on the
appliances level needs to be known. It is adequate to control, shift, add and aggregate
the synthetic appliances.
It is based on random processes generation of the electric
power demand including Monte Carlo extraction and Markov chains. Describing human
behaviour with Markov chains is proved to be accurate [54]. This will allow us to generate
a various set of loads demand for our later purpose of decomposition. The model needs
to take into account the presence at home of the householders and the proclivity for the
==PAGE:54==
38
4 Data description
ON
OFF
PON→OF F
POF F →ON
PON→ON
POF F →OF F
The schematic of a generic Markov chain model is
given with probabilities P of changing from one
state to the other m = 2. At each time instance
depending on the current state and the associated
probabilities the model switches to another state
or remains in the current state.
Figure 4.1: General schematic of a Markov Chain model with two states, on and off.
usage of individual appliances. [52]. Our approach is therefore decomposed in occupancy
and appliances modelling.
4.1.1
Occupancy modelling
The proposed modelling approach generates household occupancy.
Notice that the
occupancy is a substantial factor for energy consumption [55]. Large appliances require
a human presence to start a dishwasher, or the occupancy directly disrupts the steady
cycles of a heat pump, e.g. human disrupting the thermal steadiness of an enclosed
space by opening a window. The end-goal is to model appliances taking account of
the occupancy. The focus is on single-state and multi-states appliances. Therefore, the
model should deal with transition in discrete space. Markov chain conceptualises well
and is appropriate for such model. Possible extension among synthesising occupancy
could be first to differentiate work days and weekdays.
4.1.2
Appliance modelling
To create the residential load, we stack N Markov Model with m states. Single states
appliances, e.g. fridges or heat pump, can be simplified with m = 2, see Figure 4.1.
Multi-states appliances can be modelled with m > 2, as washing machines or dishwasher.
Transient-state appliances (Type-III) are here neglected since most of this appliances are
difficult to model and do not contribute significantly to the total energy consumption
of a household. All the observations follow a first-order1 discrete-time Markov chain
and are independent.
A transition matrix unequivocally represents a Markov chain.
The transition probabilities are extracted applying a naive analysis using the one-step
transition [56] from real consumption data available (e.g. EcoGrid EU).
The proposed modelling approach for the appliances is divided into categories.
Consumer appliances can be categorised based on their operational states. In our model,
we included the two states of operation (on and off) and the multi-state appliances.
We distinguish two types of appliances: those inferring with occupancy entirely or
partially [51]. On the one hand, heat-pump has repetitive cycling when the house is
1Markov chain implies the memoryless property of the stochastic processes.
It is possible to
counteract this inherent Markov property and extend the stochastic simulation of the electric load;
a high-order Markov chain allows giving inertia to every time the appliances switch on and off.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 EnergyLab Nordhavn dataset
39
00:00
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Time [hour]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Power [W]
Vampire load
Fridge
Heat Pump
Washing Machine
Figure 4.2: 24-hour of synthetic generated load.
in steady-state, i.e. thermal losses are steady. Otherwise, the cycling of the heat pump
follows a stochastic process, since it is considered that occupancy disrupts the steady
thermal state. On the other hand, dependent appliances are turned on only when the
occupancy in there. In this model, we selected three appliances with significant energy
consumption and therefore potential use for flexibility. These electronic devices have
a distinct signature in terms of operational time but a fixed magnitude. Two of them
are Type-I appliances (i.e. heat-pump and fridge), and one is a Type-II appliance (i.e.
washing machine). Figure 4.2 shows the output of our synthetic load model. Notice that
we added a vampire load and random walk on top of the signal.
4.2
EnergyLab Nordhavn dataset
EnergyLab Nordhavn is a large-scale integrated research and demonstration project
located in Copenhagen, Denmark. The sector is a living laboratory for future smart
technologies, innovative business models and new operational solutions on all at every
level - component, building, grid infrastructure and system level. The general objectives
are to transform the energy system to efficiently integrate a significant share of renewable
energy, provide a basis for the design of future energy infrastructure in sustainable
developments, and contribute to Copenhagen’s goal of becoming the first carbon-neutral
capital by 2025 [57]. One of the focus of the project is to study the consumer behaviours
and their contribution to the flexible energy system.
This study is conducted on Frihavns Tårnet apartments and comprises a 12-story
residential building whose construction was completed in 2016. The data acquisition only
concerns three floors for a total of 7 apartments. All the housing units are equipped
==PAGE:56==
40
4 Data description
with a broad panel of smart metering, sensors and devices with controllable capabilities.
Our interest in this project concerns the electricity consumption: available data are by
room, by sockets or overall consumption. The dataset is peculiar to the area and not
representative of the large panel of Danish homes. Large appliances are featured with
smart start technologies, meaning that by default the start of the washing machine can
be delayed up to 2 hours. We can already foresee a difficulty to contextualise appliances.
Indeed, starting the appliance is not anymore an occupant act, but a decision made
upon the electricity price dynamicity or network congestion. It is of equal importance to
warn that successful flexibility schemes reckon on customer behaviours: age, education,
incomes, understandings of smart technologies and motivation are among the essential
elements. We have just presented the intrinsic limits of the data due to the aim of
EnergyLab Nordhavn project, i.e. a laboratory for flexibility leading to a conspicuous
change in energy consumption. It is also noteworthy that these apartments are new and
contains the newest type of appliances (dishwasher with the built-in smart start). Other
boundaries rely on the restraint sample of the population studied, leading to a poorly
diversified data.
4.2.1
NILM data sets
The growing interest in energy disaggregation drawn data sets release, like REDD [58],
AMPds [59], iAWE [60] and UK-DALE [61]. The previously cited data sets all contain
the aggregated power and the submetered power data.
This part aims to include
the EnergyLab Nordhavn has one of the references for energy disaggregation.
The
comparison with the already existing dataset made on the quantity of available data, the
quality of the measurements and the complexity of this dataset. This comparison criteria
are from NILM toolkit [12] which tries to compare all the available datasets. Indeed,
the same criteria did on the open source project for NILM toolkit, enabling comparison
of energy disaggregation algorithms reproducible.
Table 4.3 includes the EnergyLab
Nordhavn in the already existent households energy datasets. The measurements are
all over the year 2017, with approximately a year of measurements. In theory, seven
apartments are available, not all are usable. The two last columns depict the frequency
of the available data. Frequency over the individual or grouped appliances (e.g. rooms)
are suitable for energy disaggregation, with a slightly lower frequency than the same
data sets. However, the overall consumption frequency is mostly lower than the rest
of the dataset.
For our purpose of energy disaggregation, we secede the aggregate
sample and instead aggregate the available appliances sample. Indeed, we need to build
comprehensive feedback on the rightness of our disaggregation algorithm. Regarding the
frequency of the appliances sample, the resolution is suitable to practise downsampling
(i.e. decimation in signal processing field). The data will be downsampled to a 1-minute
resolution.
The appliances considered as large are submetered individually, i.e washing machine,
dryer, dishwasher and oven with the cooking plates.
All the latter have their own
==PAGE:57==
4.2 EnergyLab Nordhavn dataset
41
Table 4.3: Comparison of households energy data sets
Data set
Institution
Location
Duration
per house
Number
of houses /
apartments
Appliance
sample
frequency
Aggregate
sample
frequency
REDD (2011)
MIT
MA, USA
3-19 days
6
3 sec
1 sec & 15 kHz
Smart * (2012)
UMass
MA, USA
3 months
3
1 sec
1 sec
AMPds (2013)
Simon Fraser U.
BC, Canada
1 year
1
1 min
1 min
iAWE (2013)
IIT Delhi
Delhi, India
73 days
1
1 or 6 sec
1 sec
UK-DALE (2014)
Imperial College
London, UK
17 months
4
6 sec
1-6 sec & 16 kHz
EnergyLab (2017)
DTU
Copenhagen, DK
10 months
7
5 sec*
15 sec **
80-150 sec
* refers to the individual appliance.
** refers to the group of appliances.
signal available. The rest of the measurement are grouped by rooms, i.e., living room,
bathroom, bedroom, depot and kitchen.
It is unknown what contains the group of
appliance.
We can only have some assumptions, e.g.
living room group contains a
TV and a Hi-Fi sound system. The submeter setup of EnergyLab Nordhavn dataset is
similar to the Almanac of Minutely Power dataset (AMPds) with individual submeter
for large appliances and single submeter for rooms.
The complexity of a dataset is directly linked to the number of appliances aggregated
in the signal.
In [12], disaggregation algorithm across the datasets has a correlated
computational complexity to the number of appliances. However, this is not entirely fair.
It would mean to put all appliances on an equal footing as the cyclic appliances (Type-I)
easier to disaggregate due to its redundancy and the appliances with continuously
varying power draw (Type-III).
4.2.2
Data set diagnostics and statistics
Before applying the set of diagnostic and statistic functions, we preselected the
data.
In this first selection, we explored the dataset visually and aimed to discard
the damaged part of the dataset.
In fact, the first months of measurements are
unusable. This phase comprises the testing phase of smart devices and led to corrupted
measurement. Similarly, some of the apartments are set aside due to wrong system
setup leading to incoherence in the measurements, e.g. submeters measurement greater
than over-consumption. Out of the expected 12 months over seven apartments, setting
aside the lousy collection of measurements lead to 4 months over two apartments.
Concretely, diagnostic functions evaluate the wireless issues with the sensors or data
retrieval problems leading to sample drop. These tools allow us to assess the quality of
the data and later on focus our effort data correction procedure.
The three diagnostics utilised are the detection of gaps, the dropout rate and the
up-time. First, the detected gaps locate the so-called “gap” in a sensor channel is defined
==PAGE:58==
42
4 Data description
Table 4.4: Results from the NILM toolkit statistical and diagnostic function. The three
numbers are respectively the minimum, median and maximum.
Data set
Number of
appliances
Percentage energy
submetered
Dropout rate
ignoring gaps (%)
Mains up-time
(days)
Percentage
up-time
REDD
9, 16, 23
58, 71, 89
0, 10, 16
4, 18, 19
8, 40, 79
Smart *
25
86
0
88
96
AMPds
20
97
0
364
100
iAWE
10
48
8
47
93
UK-DALE
4, 12, 53
19, 48, 82
0, 7, 22
36, 102, 470
73, 84, 100
EnergyLab
10
71, 89, 91
48
0.2, 0.3, 9.5
-
by the time elapsed between two measurements is greater than a specified threshold.
These “gaps” occurs while faulty sensor operation. Depending on the “gap” size the
data is either sequenced or interpolated. Then, the dropout rate calculates the total
number of samples divided by the expected number of samples constitute the dropout
rate.
Additionally, the dropout rate is calculated ignoring the large gaps and only
calculated on the contiguous sequences. Finally, the up-time is the total time recorded
without interruption is the up-time. It is unequivocally the last timestamp minus the
first timestamp.
Table 4.4 exposes the results of the diagnostic functions.
The percentage of
submetered energy indicate an excellent coverage in comparison to other NILM dataset.
However, the EnergyLab Nordhavn disclose poor results for the dropout rate and mains
up-time with barely a day of continuous data on average. In comparison our dataset is
clearly a “lower quality” in compare to the existing disaggregation datasets. However,
for our method it is not required to have continuous measurements since the time
dimensionality is set aside for the last phase. However, we require having proper events
to generate our connections.
4.2.3
Data set preprocessing
Despite that fact that the dataset is dramatically shrunk EnergyLab Nordhavn is
hitherto adequate for our NILM purpose from a sample frequency persepective. This
quality issues entail a succession of data manipulation. Notice that some large appliances
connection is in more than one phase. We, therefore, merged this phases to obtain the
equivalent of the measurement output of a single phase. Appliances with predominant
missing main data are filtered out. Consistent set of time series is composed of consistent
appliance time series. In this part, we present preprocessing practices for mitigating
common data challenges.
Preprocessing tools and storage.
All the preprocessing is achieved with the
pandas library written for Python programming language. Data retrieval and storage
is done using HDF5 file format. It gives easy and rapid access to the hierarchically
organised data.
Tree structure is exposed in the Listing 1 and code for moving
==PAGE:59==
4.2 EnergyLab Nordhavn dataset
43
the raw data to HDF5 format is available on the project’s GitHub 2 by invitation.
IEEE floating-point specification recommends a sentinel approach for indicating missing
values with NaN in the array.
We rather moved toward the masking approach, by
transformation the original array and giving easy access to the storage to retrieve the
orignal datset.
Slicing. The first milestone regards slicing the subsets. Our interest is to preferably
obtain qualitative sequences with full events or succession of events instead of having a
long series, which would be more convenient for load forecasting for example. Therefore,
we handle “gaps” (missing data) in the first instance by slicing and keeping consistent
sequence (separation of the dataset into two entities). One sequence should be at least 5
consecutive hours. Gaps larger than 5 minutes initialise a new sequence, and we discard
sequences below the 200 minutes. This early data selection is made in the knowledge
of the desired data for the project.
Indeed, the quality of a sequence surpasses the
contiguity of the sequence. For our later study, the matter of quality events is our Grail.
We sliced the data to reach an acceptable quality of acquisition to downsample and
interpolate the sequences subsequently.
Downsampling and interpolation. The interpolation requirement is achieved
under the condition of no more significant gap than 5 minutes. We are working on
minutes dataset and interpolation on more substantial than 5 minutes introduce too large
biases. 5-minute tolerance for interpolation is determined to form the trade-off having
not too many sequences. The dataset highly varied in terms of frequency of samples. A
large part is downsampling (decreasing the frequency), and the rest is up-sampling. In
the case of downsampling, the summary statistic to calculate the new aggregated values is
done by summing. In the case of upsampling, we evaluated through cross-validation the
best type of interpolation that introduced the smaller biases in the dataset. Intuitively,
since we are handling the power of a substantial amount of Type-I appliance (on and
off states only) forward filling might lead to the best interpolation path. Regarding the
interpolation method, a couple of interpolation types are tried, e.g. forward filling, linear
interpolation, b-spline of order 2 and 3. The selection among the methods is achieved by
synthesising missing values in a “clean” dataset sequence. Cross-validation is utilised to
assess which method generalise and creates the lower biases in the dataset. We evaluate
the error of the dataset by computing the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE). It assesses
that the simple filling creates lower biases. The data are interpolated over small periods
of missing-data with forward-filling.
Filtering out implausible measurement.
Filtering out implausible data is
essential to avoid supplementary biases in the measurements. Targeting this implausible
sequences imply substantial deviation from the submeter and the total energy measured.
An exploration of the data through visualisation and plotting can reveal corrupted
measurements. A typical example of erroneous data acquisition is when an appliance
show unruly peaks.
For example, a single pulse measured for the washing machine
2https://github.com/piewin/nilmMT.git
==PAGE:60==
44
4 Data description
{
...
Mixture
Appliance1
Appliance2
Appliance3
ApplianceN
Intersection window
Figure 4.5: Representation of the data joining problem. Every arrow is representing
a signal, of the mixture or appliances. The intersection window is the location that
provides satisfactory combination to join individual signal.
0
1000
2000
Frequency
Dryer
0
1000
2000
Washing Machine
100
200
Room Group
0
1000
2000
Living Room Group
Active Power [W]
Figure 4.6:
Histograms of power consumption for appliances submeter and rooms
submeter.
is very unlikely. The revelation of measurement failure may be achieved through the
run-length encoding (RLE). Using RLE to detect and correct implausible data rely on the
assumption that appliances, as the washing machine, work by cycle or programs. RLE
output allows establishing a rule-based system where single values become implausible
and are corrected, zero or standby mode values. This method remains case-by-case basis
and is done here only for the large flexible appliances.
This whole preprocessing entails that the submetered signals coincide only very little
in time to each other, cf. Figure 4.5 for a graphical representation of the problem. Plainly
there is a trade-off having more appliances or more extended datasets. In the aftermath,
we try to optimise the number of appliances without penalising too much the dataset
length. This penalisation is represented by introducing a degradation factor. Indeed, if
joining a dataset degrade excessively the dataset, we drop the signal. We first sort by
subset appliances by length and join the subset to each other. If the joined dataset is
==PAGE:61==
4.2 EnergyLab Nordhavn dataset
45
00:00
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Time [hour]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Power [W]
Bathroom
Depot
Dryer
Kitchen Group
Living Room Group
Room Group
Washing Machine
Figure 4.7: 24-hour recording with the corresponding sources of the mixture.
degraded by more than 60% by joining the subset, the subset is discarded. From this
short data study, two large appliances are raised as insufficient for the project, namely the
dishwasher and the oven cooking plate. Figure 4.6 provides an overview of the power
distribution of some submeters. Finally, the pre-processing leads to a very curtailed
number of events. Sequence as in Figure 4.7 are unfortunately too scarce. An alternative
would have been to reconstruct the signal by taking pieces of submeter measurement and
reconstruct ourselves the event. However, this is questionable operation since we might
insert excessive recurrence of the signal. The metering issues have already motivated
research. Indeed in [62], NMF algorithms are used to recover nonnegative time series
from temporal aggregates. This algorithm would allow having a comprehensive recovered
dataset. The biases of such techniques are still questionable. To prove the versatility of
such technique, NMF is also used for single-channel source separation in a multitude of
applications in signal processing [29] and notably in energy disaggregation.
4.2.4
Suitability for NILM
Despite the advantage that benefits the EnergyLab Nordhavn dataset, its integration
to the NILM dataset is jeopardised. Let us start with the pros, namely the submetered
percentage relatively high, i.e. over 80%. It gives a satisfactory insight into the entire
load. Moreover, the submeter setup contains the appliances we are interested studying,
namely these large and possibly flexible appliances. The cons are mainly related to the
limited number of events.
First due to the reduced collected data over the month
and apartment that enables pre-processing work.
Secondly, as previously reported,
the intersection windows has to comprise the mixture and the individual sources to
enable feedback on our disaggregation work.
Moreover, an interesting signal such
==PAGE:62==
46
4 Data description
as energy-intensive kitchen appliances or the dishwasher are too corrupted and thus
discarded.
The typical limitation of our technique, as for NN and HMM, relies on the lack of
events to trigger the disaggregation work. Indeed, for our approach sufficient number of
events will give the compulsory recurrence of atoms. For NN and HMM, both require
to train the neurons or to populate the appliance’s model. The limited dataset might
jeopardise the performance. Moreover, the method such as conditional factorial HMM
is set aside. Indeed, the smart start of the appliances fade away the contextualisation
capabilities.
Satisfactory quality and events of a dataset for disaggregation work
is therefore primordial.
Moreover, the collected measurements belong to identical
apartments with approximately the same appliances.
The building is new and not
representative of the Danish homes, therefore, testing the potential for generalisation on
EnergyLab Nordhavn is questionable.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5
Electrical energy
disaggregation
5.1
Experimental protocol
5.1.1
Appliance labelling
The appliance labelling process tags with learned appliance’s names the signatures. This
process is supervised and requires a dictionary but aims for generalisation. In [63], the
list of residential appliances comes from the largest Asian and Pacific area retailers.
These lists are meant to be generic and applicable to multiple households. Residential
appliances mainly differ from the business or industrial appliances due to the variety
and the influence of householders on the randomness of the operations.
The labelling used in this work is based on greedy search. The room loads such
as bedrooms or living room are classified as “unassigned”. The reason is twofold: on
the one hand, it is difficult to determine the specific room to which belong the room
signature. Even with the contextualisation of the signature, distinguishing them remains
a difficult task. The waveform output from the community detection algorithm is feed
in the machinery to maximise similarity with the true individual signal. The community
detection often leads to more cluster than the real number of sources. An appliance
signature must be seen as a set of signatures.
Therefore, two communities can be
appended to the same appliance signal by aggregation. The similarity measure used is
the estimation accuracy. The greedy process recursively adds one community to a label
until all the communities are run through [22]. This greedy search is computationally
costly and supposes the availability of the individual sources. This inconvenient can be
relieved with classification via a decision tree.
5.1.2
Performance evaluation criteria
The spontaneous approach to evaluate the disaggregation performance of a method is
essential to measure the gap between the reconstructed signal by1:T and the observed
signal y1:T, where T is the time duration of the samples.
Our OMP algorithm
would reconstruct the whole signal if no stopping criteria were set.
As a result,
performance evaluation such as root-mean-square error (RMSE), mean average error
(MAE) or disaggregation percentage (D) give no valuable indication on goodness of the
disaggregation power of our process. Moreover, appliances performance to each other
==PAGE:64==
48
5 Electrical energy disaggregation
it difficult to compare with the RMSE score as it is not normalised. Therefore, such
performance criteria are worthless for our method.
In load classification models (HMM and extensions) the typical classification metrics
are obtained from binary metrics building the confusion matrix. In our case, due to the
signal approximation, such method is not adapted and adopted. In [58], Kolter et al.
introduced to NILM the estimation accuracy. There is also a general tendency in the
literature to use such evaluation criteria in unsupervised NILM [18, 27]. It is defined as,
Est. Acc. = 1 −
∑T
t=1
∑N
i=1
ˆy(i)
t
−y(i)
t

2 · ∑T
t=1
∑N
i=1 y(i)
t
,
(5.1)
where, t time index and i the appliance index over N appliances.
The estimation
accuracy for individual appliances can be obtained by eliminating the summation over
N such as,
Est. Acc.(i) = 1 −
∑T
t=1
ˆy(i)
t
−y(i)
t

2 · ∑T
t=1 y(i)
t
.
(5.2)
5.2
Experiment on synthetic dataset
5.2.1
Setup for energy disaggregation
The first energy disaggregation work relies on a synthetic dataset. The reason is twofold:
exemplify the algorithm robustness to noise and the required handling when cyclic
appliances are considered, i.e. heat pump and fridge. The synthetic model generates
load with cyclic appliances, clothes washer and base components with a different level of
random walk noise. Figure 5.1 shows a 24-hour sequence of load data. Notice that the
appliances signature varies in function of the occupancy state and is exposed in details
section 4.1.
The base component is build upon a random variable X added to the aggregated
signal such as X ∼N(µ, σ2). It aims to synthetise additional small appliances with
controllable magnitudes. The default settings are µ = 70[W] and σ = 10[W]. Moreover,
this allows testing the robustness of the method to synthetic noise. We generate 100
days resulting in 100 washing machine events with a many clothes washer program.
Inherently, cyclic appliance generates plenty of events in a day.
The OMP error tolerance remain untouched, i.e.
∥ε∥2 ≤0.2, in comparison to
section 3.1. Sparse approximation algorithm aims, inter alia, to denoise the signal. The
100 days generated load correspond to S =5465 boxcars for the full time series, i.e. ≈
55 elements for 1440 sample measurements per day.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Experiment on synthetic dataset
49
00:00
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Time [hour]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Power [W]
Clothes washer
Fridge
Heat pump
Base component
Figure 5.1: Aggregated synthetic load over 24-hour.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Label
0
100
200
300
Frequency
Recall
Stay
Figure 5.2: Distribution of the labels, one bin represent one label group.
As exposed previously, the community detection suffers when nodes are heavily
connected neighbour nodes, triggered here by the cyclic appliances.
After the atom
denoising process via the mixture model, some label group numerous elements in
comparison to the rest of the label. This is often the case with cyclic appliances. Since
this recurrence disrupts our community detection algorithm it is a good omen to recall
some of the atoms, see Figure 5.2 where 10% or 10 class labels are recalled. Figure 5.3
indicates the pair of nodes connected before and after recalling part of the class label
with excessive elements. The result leads to a sparser matrix.
The number of components for the GMM is K = 100. This is relatively low for atoms
denoising purpose and is achieved with the backward and forward tuning. Such values
are understandable when we know that the synthetic model generates highly redundant
signal from the cyclic appliances. The limit for creating a connection between two nodes
in the network is 3 hours. The sparsity S and the number of components K for the
==PAGE:66==
50
5 Electrical energy disaggregation
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 5.3: (Left) Weighted adjacency matrix with the entire set of atoms versus (Right)
the same set with the 10% recall.
mixture model remains the same over the different noise levels.
If we increase the number of components, some cluster will have a too small number
of elements to create a recurrence of atoms. Same if the number K is decreasing, the
elements contained in some cluster will be unbalanced compared to another cluster.
Moreover, reducing the number of appliances might lead to losing the first purpose
namely denoising and moved to clustering.
Figure 5.4 illustrates the community network with 7 communities. The label on the
network does not exist at the step of the community detection; it is just here to help
the interpretation of the community.
The edges do not include the weights but are
simply represented as an undirected and unweighted link. The number of community
rarely matches the true number of appliances. Therefore, each of this cluster represents
a type of signature of an appliance. The final result, namely the disaggregated signal
for each appliance is given by the greedy method. In [11], Arberet et al. describe the
union of atoms, through joint estimations, like a molecule. The visual analogy with the
community is relevant.
5.2.2
Result and performance
The disaggregation work ends when each molecule is transferred back to its time
dimensionality and the greedy search labels the signatures. Table 5.5 demonstrate that
the model is a little affected by noise since the OMP algorithm approximates the events
with boxcar functions and results in a denoised recovery. The score is fairly steady over
the different noise level, without a significant drop in estimation accuracy. The algorithm
performs better with a standard deviation of σ = 30[W] than with σ = 10[W]. This is the
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Experiment on synthetic dataset
51
clothes washer #1
fridge #1
heat pump #1
fridge #2
clothes washer #2
fridge #3
clothes washer #3
Figure 5.4: Co-occurrence network on the synthetic dataset.
perverse effect of the noise. Indeed, the approximation over the cyclic appliances with
the boxcars result to a more heterogeneous set of atoms. Therefore, the atom denoising
leads to group label more evenly distributed, see Figure 5.2, helping the community
detection algorithm. However, we can notice a slight degradation of the score with σ =
50[W].
Figure 5.6 pictures the disaggregated load through the algorithm without the base
component removed for readability. Visually, the disaggregation performs well. One
of the main issues is that the node attached to the true washing machine are gathered
together. Indeed, through the events, these nodes are too often nearby and results as
the same appliance. Regarding the estimation accuracy, we can safely say that they
were detected and soundly disaggregated.
5.2.3
Intermediary conclusion
First of all, we demonstrated the robustness to noise of our method. This feature is a
significant advantage knowing that the noise issue is a common challenge in the NILM
field. OMP algorithm serves the denoising purpose entirely. The success of the signal
denoising is based on the set stopping rule, knowing that we are not interested in small
appliances. This characteristic allows to neglect the smaller appliances and preserve the
following steps to a certain extent.
==PAGE:68==
52
5 Electrical energy disaggregation
Table 5.5: Algorithm performance with random walk noise of different levels added to
the output.
Std. dev. of random walk noise
Appliances
Estimation accuracy
Overall
σ = 10 [W]
Fridge
0.593
0.956
Heat pump
0.751
Washing machine
0.776
σ = 30 [W]
Fridge
0.597
0.931
Heat pump
0.681
Washing machine
0.727
σ = 50 [W]
Fridge
0.607
0.923
Heat pump
0.646
Washing machine
0.676
00:00
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Time [hour]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Power [W]
Clothes washer
Fridge
Heat pump
00:00
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
00:00
Time [hour]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Power [W]
Clothes washer
Fridge
Heat pump
Figure 5.6: (Top) Ground truth, (Bottom) Predicted.
Secondly, cyclic appliances weaken the performance of the community detection by
having largely unbalanced edges per nodes. Regarding adjacency matrix, it is overfull
to allow convergence of the algorithm. This is an inherent drawback of such algorithm.
The large unbalance in the connection requires to alleviate the matrix and obtain a
sparser matrix. For this reason, we recall the most numerous cluster of denoised atoms
to distribute the inputs more evenly and improve the performance of the community
detection algorithm.
Notice also that recalling more cluster of denoised atoms and
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Experiment on a NILM dataset
53
pass it to the labelling process leads to better performance. Nevertheless, we want to
follow the parsimony principle and not get biased by the certain prior knowledge of
the synthetic dataset. To do so, we show that the extraction of 10% only can achieve
proper results. Moreover, it seems that the synthetic data is easy to disaggregate but the
substantial redundancy in the atoms shape run the algorithm into difficulties. Therefore
it is necessary to dissociate the waveform coming from the cyclic appliances.
Alternative approach exists and could achieve a better overall result. One of those
is the Predominant Local Pulse [64] which primarily used in music to extract beats and
tempo. The advantage is that it catches the quasi-periodic pulse and can presumably
enhance our algorithm.
5.3
Experiment on a NILM dataset
5.3.1
Setup for energy disaggregation
21:00
23:00
01:00
03:00
05:00
Time [hour]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Power [W]
Clothes dryer
Clothes washer
Dishwasher
Kitchen wall oven
Bedroom
Master bedroom
Dining room
Fridge
03:00
05:00
07:00
09:00
11:00
Time [hour]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Power [W]
Figure 5.7: Aggregated AMPd load. (Left) Scalled for large appliances.
(Right) Scalled for less energy intensive appliances.
The second experiment tries our disaggregation algorithm on a NILM dataset, namely
the Almanac of minutely power dataset (AMPd) [59]. This dataset is also very similar
to EnergyLab Nordhavn dataset from a submeter setup standpoint. No transformation
is required, the dataset is already on a 1-minute resolution. The dataset is denoised
(section 2.1). The noised dataset is extremely complicated namely due to the aggregation
of numerous appliances and rooms, including a rental suite, of the house. It is constituted
of three type of load: the large appliances (i.e. clothes washer, clothes dryer, dishwasher
==PAGE:70==
54
5 Electrical energy disaggregation
and oven-cooking plate), the cyclic appliance (i.e. fridge) and power draw from the
rooms (e.g. bedroom, master bedroom and dining room). Again, we are not interested
in the electrical consumption of the rooms; it just adds complexity to the disaggregation
process. Therefore, such loads do not appear in the result and remain unassigned. Large
and possibly flexible appliances are our centre of interest.
The OMP error tolerance remain untouched, i.e. ∥ε∥2 ≤0.2 and atoms below 100
[W] are discarded. The 90 days from January 1st 2013 to March 31st 2013 correspond to
S = 4341 boxcars for the full time series, i.e. ≈48 elements per day. We have K = 250
components for the GMM. Since we have a cyclic appliance and the presence of label
with significantly more elements we recall the top-5 GMM labels output. The limit for
creating a connection between two nodes in the network is 3 hours.
dishwasher #1
dishwasher #2
clothes dryer #1
clothes dryer #2
kitchen wall
oven #1
clothes dryer #3
clothes washer #4
Figure 5.8: Co-occurrence network on the AMPd dataset.
5.3.2
Result and performance
The community algorithm converges to 7 communities, see Figure 5.8. The room loads
are neglected in the visualisation. The first fact that arises in Table 5.9 is the failure
to detect the clothes washer. The too close signatures between the clothes washer and
the dishwasher caused this failure. The degree of dissimilarity is not enough, and it
leads to two signatures composed of the same atoms. A possibility would be to increase
the number of component K at the expense of losing the recurrence and not catching
the co-occurrence. The restricted number of events for these appliances is part of this
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Experiment on a NILM dataset
55
confusion. The clothes washer deteriorates the result for the dishwasher. Moreover, it
can be said that the rest of the appliances are detected and to reasonably disaggregated
from the overall consumption. Such performance let determine the frequency of use of
the multi-state appliances, namely the clothes dryer and the kitchen wall oven.
Table 5.9: Algorithm performance on the denoised AMPd dataset.
Appliances
Estimation accuracy
Clothes dryer
0.810
Clothes washer
Failure
Dishwasher
0.103
Kitchen wall oven
0.669
Fridge
0.664
Overall
0.914
5.3.3
Intermediary conclusion
The proposed setup with the AMPd aspires to represent the complexity of a mixture
from a small apartment. As exposed, we need to alleviate the adjacency matrix to ensure
a correct assignment of nodes to the communities. We recall the numerous class label
that belongs to cyclic appliances. The community detection input, allows the algorithm
converge to a competent representation of the co-occurrence network.
As soon as the community detection fails to cluster a certain type of waveform
in a separate community, then the error is propagated.
The greedy search setup
diminishes the performance of the undiscovered appliance and appliance retrieving the
set of waveforms.
The discrepancy in events across the large appliances might also
partially affect the recognition performance. Indeed, if one large appliance appears on a
daily basis and another only few times a month, the capabilities to extract such nodes
in a single community is compromised.
In this project, we focus the disaggregation work on energy-intensive appliances
commonly found in households such as clothes washers and dryers, dishwashers, kitchen
appliances, heat pumps or fridges. This experiment is only to exemplify the possibility
of the algorithm. Further detection and disaggregation work can be implemented for
other scenarios. Appliances in the same power range can be disaggregated. However,
we believe that small appliances with a poor recurrence are difficult to retrieve with our
algorithm.
An unsupervised method often requires fine-tuning of parameters across the processes.
Our application-centric model gets out of the traditional tools to find correctness.
However, the anchored tolerance parameter of the OMP allows to only fine-tune the
number of components for the GMM. As shown in the two experiments, the set value
for K depends on the signal input and a right balance need to be found from the
==PAGE:72==
56
5 Electrical energy disaggregation
community detection output. The train-less feature of our model opens to the possibility
of generalisation of the algorithm for a large scale implementation.
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Experiment on a NILM dataset
57
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time [minute]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Power [W]
Clothes dryer
Ground truth
Predicted
21000
21200
21400
21600
21800
22000
Time [minute]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Power [W]
Clothes washer
Ground truth
Predicted
0
100
200
300
400
500
Time [minute]
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Power [W]
Dishwasher
Ground truth
Predicted
0
20000
40000
60000
Time [minute]
0
2000
4000
6000
Power [W]
Kitchen wall oven
Ground truth
Predicted
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Time [minute]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
Power [W]
Fridge
Ground truth
Predicted
Figure 5.10: Disaggregation output for the AMPd dataset.
==PAGE:74==
58
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and perspectives
6.1
Conclusion
Political incentives at the EU level to support the deployment of smart meters,
together with the DSO’s interest, in getting better insight into the households
electrical consumption motivates novel NILM research.
Real-world constraints for
the disaggregation work bring to the need for unsupervised techniques mainly for
implementation on large-scale. Additional technical constraints from the smart meters
give only access to power measurements at a low sampling rate. The extensive literature
review discusses the existing unsupervised methods for NILM. The popular hidden
Markov model and neural network exhibit, among others, a sensibility to noise and
a learning phase. Moreover, the compliance of both methods to a generalisation for a
large-scale implementation disputable. Other approaches often lose intuition mainly due
to too heterogeneous phases in the disaggregation process. In this study, the proposed
approach fits the real-world constraints for load disaggregation and is implemented for
a 1-minute resolution. The overall process is train-less and application-centric. The
method keeps a clear vision of the operations, with two main phases and an intermediate
stage.
It is based on two complementary techniques, namely sparse decomposition
and community detection algorithm.
The intermediate stage employs probabilistic
clustering.
The greedy orthogonal matching pursuit algorithm is employed to decompose the
signal.
The outcomes of the study exemplify a superior capacity, in comparison
to traditional approaches,
to grasp the occulted signature when dealing with
superposed signals. Also, the empirically determined stopping criteria that aim to be
application-centric is based on an error tolerance. We dismantle the stopping rules on
a normally distributed noise that does not fit the application. The stopping condition
that is set results to the strongest atoms, which once aggregated give a denoised and
sparse representation of the observed signal.
The intrinsic orthogonal matching pursuit mechanism drives the need to denoise
atoms. This may be conceptualised as noise that distorts the atom. Gaussian mixture
model discards the noise from the atoms. Consequently, we adapt the primary use of
this probabilistic clustering to serve the denoising purpose. It has been proven that this
step creates a recurrence of labelled atoms and allows to find the intimate relationship
between them.
The number of components is discussed for the mixture model and
need to be determined with a backwards-forwards parameter tuning. It substantially
==PAGE:76==
60
6 Conclusion and perspectives
impacts the quality of the community detection output. Visual indicators, such as the
distribution of class labels or the sparsity of the adjacency matrix, helps to define the
number of components optimally.
The application of the community detection turns away from the primary use,
i.e. community in social networks analytic. Obtaining the co-occurrence network for
our problem requires creating the connection between the atoms beforehand.
These
connections are given by the distance from a labelled atom to its neighbours.
This
process takes the absolute time dimensionality out.
The conducted experiments on either synthetic or real datasets revealed the
tendency of cyclic appliances to weaken the performance of the community detection
algorithm, namely caused by an access to connections across the graph.
In the
presence of cyclic appliances, we necessitate alleviating the adjacency matrix by recalling
the numerous class labels degrading the algorithm output.
Multi-state appliances
with non-deterministic transitions are detected and disaggregated correctly.
The
disaggregation is sufficient to determine the frequency of use of the large appliances.
However, the full disaggregation process fails when the appliances signatures are too
similar. Moreover, the algorithm proved robustness with respect to different noise levels.
More generally, the full method requires undertaking the problem in a parsimonious
fashion. The degree of sparsity achieved from the orthogonal matching pursuit impacts
the community detection. Therefore, we deliberately ignore the smaller appliances and
aim to retrieve a simplified recovery of the signal. The empirically determined stopping
criterion for the sparse decomposition and the backwards-forwards parameter tuning for
the number of components are the cost of unsupervised methods. The project picture
the disaggregation work with large appliances as designated. A broader set of appliances
can be detected as far as they have a certain recurrence over time and a power draw in
the same range as the appliances studied in the project.
6.2
Further work
Perspective 1: semi-supervised appliances labelling. In this project, the tagging
process is achieved via a greedy search. It is not a realistic implementation for large-scale
disaggregation. Indeed, it requires the individual appliance sources to tag the signatures.
Decision tree classifier is an alternative way to label the signatures. Ideally, unmixing
mechanism classifies the signatures in large appliances, cyclic and unassigned for the
power draw we are not interested in. The so-called question at each node of the tree
relies on the signatures perceptions such as the operation time, the power draw and the
energy consumed during one cycle. The challenge is to find the suitable questions that
reduce and to quantify the uncertainty at a single node, respectively the information gain
and the Gini impurity. The tree is built recursively on each node. In [18], a proposed
web-based interface labels the signature which could be declined as a decision tree where
the last decision gives a multi-choices with an attached probability. It leaves a set of
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Further work
61
possible outcomes when signatures are too similar. We could also enlarge the detection
panel of appliances or installed devices such as electric vehicles, batteries, photovoltaics.
Perspective 2: alternative to community detection. Thinking about alternatives
enhance our algorithm is always welcome. Therefore, instead of seeing the relationship
between atoms as connections in a network,
it could be seen as dimensions.
T-distribution stochastic neighbour embedding (t-SNE) aims at discovering the hidden
relationship using a dimensionality reduction approach.
The field of dimensional
reduction finds the non-linear and non-local relationships in the data or featured space.
The t-distribution prevents the last cluster from being too compact, in comparison to a
Gaussian distribution. It is a matter of finding the low intrinsic dimensionality hidden
in the data. The t-SNE process works on a 1D cluster with attraction and repelling of
nodes at each iteration. We expect this method to counteract the relatively equal size
of the modules since it preserves the local and the global structure of the sample. The
implementation such as word2vec [65] makes us believe that the high dimensionality
(highly connected) can be handled without the need to alleviate the adjacency matrix.
Additional perspectives.
The desire to reduce the computational cost and to
enable real-time disaggregation goes with an online implementation of the algorithms.
It processes the data input serially and avoids running the entire dataset.
Sparse
decomposition is accessible and reliable for parallelisation in case of the electrical load.
Online and distributed Gaussian mixture model exists and leads to a substantial gain
in time with a correct accuracy. Similarly, community detection algorithm existing in a
dynamic version with a possible evaluation of the drift, birth and death of communities
over time.
Distribution system operator’s aims to gain information on their consumers. Among
DSOs, the collected data vary in resolution. The slight adaption on the stopping rules
for the sparse approximation with a change in resolution. We foresee that the feasible
range would be in between 5 seconds to 15 minutes resolution with only an adaption on
the sparse approximation algorithm. There is an interest in testing and adapting the
full algorithm on this different resolutions to establish the limit. A too coarse resolution
might fade out relevant information, and the portfolio of identifiable appliances might
diminish.
If the resolution allows it, analysis on the drift of consumption (summer,
winter, over the years) used to determine the frequency of use.
==PAGE:78==
62
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
UNFCCC. “Paris Agreement”. In: Conf. Parties its twenty-first Sess. December
(2015), page 32. issn: 1098-6596. doi: FCCC/CP/2015/L.9/Rev.1. arXiv: arXiv:
1011.1669v3. url: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2015/cop21/eng/
l09r01.pdf.
[2]
David G. Victor et al. “Prove Paris was more than paper promises”. In: Nature
548.7665 (2017), pages 25–27. issn: 14764687. doi: 10.1038/548025a.
[3]
International Energy Agency. “Energy Efficiency 2017”. In: (2017). issn: 19326203.
doi: 10.1787/9789264284234- en. url: http://www.oecd- ilibrary.org/
energy/energy-efficiency-2017%7B%5C_%7D9789264284234-en.
[4]
Telefónica. “The Smart Meter Revolution. Towards a smarter future”. In: (2014),
page 11.
[5]
Qie Sun et al. “A Comprehensive Review of Smart Energy Meters in Intelligent
Energy Networks”. In: IEEE Internet Things J. PP.99 (2015), pages 1–1. issn:
2327-4662. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2015.2512325. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=7365417.
[6]
European Commission. “Commission Recommendation of 10 October 2014 on the
Data Protection Impact Assessment Template for Smart Grid and Smart Metering
Systems (2014/724/EU)”. In: November 2010 (2014), pages 63–68.
[7]
George W. Hart. “Nonintrusive Appliance Load Monitoring”. In: Proc. IEEE 80.12
(1992), pages 1870–1891. issn: 15582256. doi: 10.1109/5.192069.
[8]
Oracle (Oracle). “Meter-to-Cash Optimization for Smarter Utilities”. In: (2012).
[9]
European Commission. “Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament
and of the Council on the internal market for electricity”. In: 0379.2016 (2016),
page 90. url: http://eur- lex.europa.eu/resource.html?uri=cellar:
9b9d9035-fa9e-11e6-8a35-01aa75ed71a1.0012.02/DOC%7B%5C_%7D1%7B%5C&
%7Dformat=PDF.
[10]
Niamh Oconnell et al. “Benefits and challenges of electrical demand response: A
critical review”. In: Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 39 (2014), pages 686–699. issn:
13640321. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2014.07.098.
[11]
Simon Arberet and Andreas Hutter. “Non-intrusive load curve disaggregation
using sparse decomposition with a translation-invariant boxcar dictionary”. In:
IEEE PES Innov. Smart Grid Technol. Conf. Eur. Volume 2015-Janua. January.
2015. isbn: 9781479977208. doi: 10.1109/ISGTEurope.2014.7028915.
==PAGE:80==
64
Bibliography
[12]
Nipun Batra et al. “NILMTK: An Open Source Toolkit for Non-intrusive Load
Monitoring”. In: (2014). doi: 10.1145/2602044.2602051. arXiv: 1404.3878.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.3878%7B%5C%%7D0Ahttp://dx.doi.org/10.
1145/2602044.2602051.
[13]
Antonio Ridi, Christophe Gisler, and Jean Hennebert. “A survey on intrusive
load monitoring for appliance recognition”. In: Proc. - Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit.
(2014), pages 3702–3707. issn: 10514651. doi: 10.1109/ICPR.2014.636.
[14]
Ahmed
Zoha
et
al.
“Non-intrusive
Load
Monitoring
approaches
for
disaggregated energy sensing: A survey”. In: Sensors
(Switzerland) 12.12
(2012), pages 16838–16866. issn: 14248220. doi: 10.3390/s121216838. arXiv:
1404.3878.
[15]
Stephen Makonin and Fred Popowich. “Nonintrusive load monitoring (NILM)
performance evaluation: A unified approach for accuracy reporting”. In: Energy
Effic. 8.4 (2015), pages 809–814. issn: 15706478. doi: 10.1007/s12053- 014-
9306-2.
[16]
Roberto Bonfigli et al. “Unsupervised algorithms for non-intrusive load monitoring:
An up-to-date overview”. In: 2015 IEEE 15th Int. Conf. Environ. Electr. Eng.
EEEIC 2015 - Conf. Proc. 2015, pages 1175–1180. isbn: 9781479979936. doi:
10.1109/EEEIC.2015.7165334.
[17]
Anthony Faustine et al. “A Survey on Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring Methodies
and Techniques for Energy Disaggregation Problem”. In: March (2017). arXiv:
1703.00785. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.00785.
[18]
Bochao Zhao, Lina Stankovic, and Vladimir Stankovic. “On a Training-Less
Solution for Non-Intrusive Appliance Load Monitoring Using Graph Signal
Processing”. In: IEEE Access 4 (2016), pages 1784–1799. issn: 21693536. doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2557460.
[19]
Z Ghahramani and Mi Jordan. “Factorial hidden Markov models”. In: Mach. Learn.
273 (1997), pages 245–273. issn: 0885-6125. doi: 10.1023/A:1007425814087. url:
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/A:1007425814087.
[20]
H. Kim et al. “Proceedings of the 2013 SIAM International Conference on Data
Mining”. In: Proc. SIAM Conf. Data Min. (2013), pages 747–758. doi: 10.1137/
1.9781611972832. arXiv: 1110.4925. url: http://epubs.siam.org/doi/book/
10.1137/1.9781611972832.
[21]
Zico Kolter, Tommi Jaakkola, and J Z Kolter. “Approximate Inference in Additive
Factorial HMMs with Application to Energy Disaggregation”. In: Proc. Int. Conf.
Artif. Intell. Stat. XX (2012), pages 1472–1482. issn: 15337928. url: http://
people.csail.mit.edu/kolter/lib/exe/fetch.php?media=pubs:kolter-
aistats12.pdf.
[22]
Henning Lange and Mario Bergés. “The Neural Energy Decoder: Energy
Disaggregation by Combining Binary Subcomponents”. In: NILM2016 3rd Int.
Work. Non-Intrusive Load Monit. (2016), pages 1–5. url: nilmworkshop.org.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
65
[23]
Jack Kelly and William Knottenbelt. “Neural NILM”. In: Proc. 2nd ACM Int. Conf.
Embed. Syst. Energy-Efficient Built Environ. - BuildSys ’15 (2015), pages 55–64.
doi: 10.1145/2821650.2821672. arXiv: arXiv:1507.06594v3. url: http://dl.
acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2821650.2821672.
[24]
Chaoyun Zhang et al. “Sequence-to-point learning with neural networks for
nonintrusive load monitoring”. In: (2016). arXiv: 1612 . 09106. url: http : / /
arxiv.org/abs/1612.09106.
[25]
Anders Huss. “Hybrid Model Approach to Appliance Load Disaggregation
EXPRESSIVE APPLIANCE MODELLING BY Hybrid Model Approach to
Appliance Load Disaggregation”. In: (2015).
[26]
Liang Du et al. “Electric load classification by binary voltage-current trajectory
mapping”. In: IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 7.1 (2016), pages 358–365. issn: 19493053.
doi: 10.1109/TSG.2015.2442225.
[27]
Nilson Henao et al. “Approach in Nonintrusive Type i Load Monitoring Using
Subtractive Clustering”. In: IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 8.2 (2017), pages 812–821.
issn: 19493053. doi: 10.1109/TSG.2015.2462719.
[28]
Vladimir Stankovic, Jing Liao, and Lina Stankovic. “A graph-based signal
processing approach for low-rate energy disaggregation”. In: IEEE SSCI 2014 -
2014 IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput. Intell. - CIES 2014 2014 IEEE Symp. Comput.
Intell. Eng. Solut. Proc. (2015), pages 81–87. doi: 10.1109/CIES.2014.7011835.
[29]
Mikkel N Schmidt. “Single-channel source separation using non-negative matrix
factorization”. In: (2008).
[30]
Michal Aharon, Michael Elad, and Alfred Bruckstein. “K-SVD: An algorithm for
designing overcomplete dictionaries for sparse representation”. In: IEEE Trans.
Signal Process. 54.11 (2006), pages 4311–4322. issn: 1053587X. doi: 10.1109/
TSP.2006.881199. arXiv: 59749104367.
[31]
Mohammad Emadi et al. “A New Performance Guarantee for Orthogonal Matching
Pursuit Using Mutual Coherence”. In: 5 (2016), pages 1–6. issn: 0278-081X. doi:
10.1007/s00034-017-0602-x. arXiv: 1608.00381. url: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1608.00381.
[32]
Laurent Daudet. “Audio sparse decompositions in parallel Let the greed be shared
!” In: (), pages 1–7.
[33]
Stéphane Mallat and Zhifeng Zhang. “Matching Pursuit With Time-Frequency
Dictionaries”. In: IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 41.12 (1993), pages 3397–3415. issn:
1053587X. doi: 10.1109/78.258082.
[34]
Laura Rebollo-Neira and Zhiqiang Xu. “Sparse signal representation by adaptive
non-uniform B-spline dictionaries on a compact interval”. In: Signal Processing 90.7
(2010), pages 2308–2313. issn: 01651684. doi: 10.1016/j.sigpro.2010.02.004.
arXiv: 0908.0691. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sigpro.2010.02.004.
==PAGE:82==
66
Bibliography
[35]
Jin Xu, Haibo He, and Hong Man. “Active Dictionary Learning in Sparse
Representation Based Classification”. In: 1 (2014), pages 1–7. arXiv: 1409.5763.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.5763.
[36]
D.J. Tanenbaum, A.S. & Wetherall. Computer Networks. Volume 522. 2015,
pages 851–884. isbn: 978-3-319-19418-9. doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 319- 19419- 6.
url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-19419-6.
[37]
Christopher M.Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. 2006.
[38]
Trevor
Hastie,
Robert
Tibshirani,
and
Jerome
Friedman.
The
Elements
of Statistical Learning. 2009, +0, 525258258525252787787474*/==741æø’ m,
.mnbvcx12Âš. isbn: 978-0-387-84857-0. doi: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 0 - 387 - 84858 - 7.
arXiv: 1010.3003. url: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%
7B%5C%%7D2F978-0-387-84858-7.pdf%7B%5C%%7D0Ahttp://link.springer.
com/10.1007/978-0-387-84858-7.
[39]
Vincent D. Blondel et al. “Fast unfolding of communities in large networks”. In:
(2008). issn: 1742-5468. doi: 10.1088/1742- 5468/2008/10/P10008. arXiv:
0803.0476. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/0803.0476%7B%5C%%7D0Ahttp:
//dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/P10008.
[40]
Jörg Reichardt and Stefan Bornholdt. “Statistical mechanics of community
detection”. In: Phys. Rev. E - Stat. Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 74.1 (2006),
pages 1–14. issn: 15393755. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.74.016110. arXiv: 0603718
[cond-mat].
[41]
Zhana Kuncheva and Giovanni Montana. “Community detection in multiplex
networks using locally adaptive random walks”. In: (2015). arXiv: 1507.01890.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1507.01890.
[42]
Pascal Pons and Matthieu Latapy. “Computing communities in large networks
using random walks”. In: Comput. Inf. Sci. 10 (2005), pages 284–293. doi: 10.
1007/11569596_31. arXiv: 0512106 [physics]. url: http://www.springerlink.
com/index/p312811313637372.pdf.
[43]
M. E. J. Newman. “Modularity and community structure in networks”. In: Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 103.23 (2006), pages 8577–8582. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.0601602103. arXiv: 0602124 [physics]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
physics / 0602124 % 7B % 5C % %7D0Ahttp : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas .
0601602103.
[44]
M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan. “Finding and evaluating community structure
in networks”. In: (2003), pages 1–15. issn: 1539-3755, 1550-2376. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevE.69.026113. arXiv: 0308217 [cond-mat]. url: http://arxiv.org/
abs/cond-mat/0308217%7B%5C%%7D0Ahttp://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.
69.026113.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
67
[45]
Fragkiskos D. Malliaros and Michalis Vazirgiannis. “Clustering and Community
Detection in Directed Networks: A Survey”. In: (2013), pages 1–86. issn: 03701573.
doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2013.08.002. arXiv: 1308.0971. url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1308.0971%7B%5C%%7D0Ahttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.
2013.08.002.
[46]
Arnaud Browet. “Algorithms for community and role detection in networks”. In:
PhD Thesis (2014).
[47]
Santo Fortunato. “Community detection in graphs”. In: Phys. Rep. 486.3-5 (2010),
pages 75–174. issn: 03701573. doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2009.11.002. arXiv:
0906.0612.
[48]
M. E J Newman. “Fast algorithm for detecting community structure in networks”.
In: Phys. Rev. E - Stat. Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 69.6 2 (2004), pages 1–5.
issn: 15393755. doi: 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 69 . 066133. arXiv: 0309508v1
[arXiv:cond-mat]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/cond- mat/0309508%7B%
5C%%7D0Ahttp://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.69.066133.
[49]
Xinyu Que et al. “Scalable Community Detection with the Louvain Algorithm”. In:
Proc. - 2015 IEEE 29th Int. Parallel Distrib. Process. Symp. IPDPS 2015 (2015),
pages 28–37. issn: 1530-2075. doi: 10.1109/IPDPS.2015.59.
[50]
Santo Fortunato and Marc Barthelemy. “Resolution limit in community detection”.
In: Pnas 104.1 (2006), pages 36–41. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10 . 1073 / pnas .
0605965104. arXiv: 0607100 [physics]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/
0607100%7B%5C%%7D0Ahttp://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0605965104.
[51]
A. Capasso et al. “Bottom-up approach to residential load modeling”. In: IEEE
Trans. Power Syst. 9.2 (1994), pages 957–964. issn: 08858950. doi: 10.1109/59.
317650.
[52]
A. Grandjean, J. Adnot, and G. Binet. “A review and an analysis of the
residential electric load curve models”. In: Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 16.9 (2012),
pages 6539–6565. issn: 13640321. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2012.08.013. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2012.08.013.
[53]
M. Nijhuis, M. Gibescu, and J. F.G. Cobben. “Bottom-up Markov Chain Monte
Carlo approach for scenario based residential load modelling with publicly available
data”. In: Energy Build. 112 (2016), pages 121–129. issn: 03787788. doi: 10.1016/
j.enbuild.2015.12.004. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.
12.004.
[54]
a Pentland and A Liu. “Modeling and prediction of human behavior.” In:
Neural Comput. 11.1 (1999), pages 229–42. issn: 0899-7667. doi: 10 . 1162 /
089976699300016890. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9950731.
[55]
S. Firth et al. “Identifying trends in the use of domestic appliances from
household electricity consumption measurements”. In: Energy Build. 40.5 (2008),
pages 926–936. issn: 03787788. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2007.07.005.
==PAGE:84==
68
Bibliography
[56]
Hung Wen Yeh et al. “Estimating transition probabilities for ignorable intermittent
missing data in a discrete-time markov chain”. In: Commun. Stat. Simul. Comput.
39.2 (2010), pages 433–448. issn: 03610918. doi: 10.1080/03610910903480800.
[57]
The City of Copenhagen. “CPH 2025 Climate Plan”. In: (2012), page 64.
[58]
J Zico Kolter and Matthew J Johnson. “REDD : A Public Data Set for Energy
Disaggregation Research”. In: SustKDD Work. xxxxx.1 (2011), pages 1–6. issn:
9781450308403. url: http : / / users . cis . fiu . edu / %7B~ % 7Dlzhen001 /
activities/KDD2011Program/workshops/WKS10/doc/SustKDD3.pdf.
[59]
Stephen Makonin et al. “AMPds: A public dataset for load disaggregation and
eco-feedback research”. In: 2013 IEEE Electr. Power Energy Conf. EPEC 2013
Section III (2013). doi: 10.1109/EPEC.2013.6802949.
[60]
Nipun. Batra et al. “It’s Different: Insights into home energy consumption in
India”. In: Proc. 5th ACM Work. Embed. Syst. Energy-Efficient Build. August
(2013), pages 1–8. doi: 10 . 1145 / 2528282 . 2528293. url: https : / / dl .
dropboxusercontent.com/u/75845627/buildsys%7B%5C_%7Dpaper.pdf.
[61]
Jack Kelly and William Knottenbelt. “Neural NILM”. In: Proc. 2nd ACM Int. Conf.
Embed. Syst. Energy-Efficient Built Environ. - BuildSys ’15 (2015), pages 55–64.
doi: 10.1145/2821650.2821672. arXiv: arXiv:1507.06594v3. url: http://dl.
acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2821650.2821672.
[62]
Jiali Mei et al. “Recovering Multiple Nonnegative Time Series From a Few
Temporal Aggregates”. In: 1 (2016), pages 1–9. arXiv: 1610.01492. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1610.01492.
[63]
Zhenyu Wang and Guilin Zheng. “Residential appliances identification and
monitoring by a nonintrusive method”. In: IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 3.1 (2012),
pages 80–92. issn: 19493053. doi: 10.1109/TSG.2011.2163950.
[64]
Peter Grosche. “Extracting Predominant Local Pulse Information From Music
Recordings”. In: 19.6 (2011), pages 1688–1701.
[65]
Hendrik Heuer. “Text comparison using word vector representations and
dimensionality reduction”. In: Euroscipy (2016), pages 13–16. arXiv: 1607.00534.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1607.00534.
==PAGE:85==
EnergyLab Nordhavn
dataset
1 HDF5 "energylab_nordhavn.h5" {
2 FILE_CONTENTS {
3 group
/
4 group
/building1
5 group
/building1/apart1
6 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17
7 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec
8 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower
9 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower/BathroomGroup_PhaseB
10 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower/Depot_PhaseC
11 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower/Dishwasher_PhaseC
12 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower/Dryer_PhaseA
13 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower/KitchenGroup_PhaseA
14 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower/LivingRoomGroup_PhaseC
15 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower/OvenCookingPlate_PhaseA
16 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower/OvenCookingPlate_PhaseB
17 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower/OvenCookingPlate_PhaseC
18 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower/RoomGroup_PhaseB
19 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower/Switchboard_PhaseA
20 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/ActivePower/WashingMachine_PhaseB
21 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/MeteringCurrent
22 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/spec/MeteringCurrent/Cooker_PhaseB
23 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/tot
24 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/tot/ActiveEnergy
25 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/tot/ActiveEnergy/ActiveEnergy
26 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/tot/ActivePower
27 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/tot/ActivePower/ActivPowerL1
28 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/tot/ActivePower/ActivPowerL2
29 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/tot/ActivePower/ActivPowerL3
30 group
/building1/apart1/Apr17/tot/ActivePower/ActivePowerTotal
31
}
32 }
Listing 1: .h5 file group structure of EnergyLab Nordhavn dataset for 1 month and 1
apartment
==PAGE:86==
70
==PAGE:87==
Residual analysis for the
sparse recovery
0
200
400
600
800
−0.1
0.1
0.3
Residuals for the normalised signal
Index
Residual
0
50
100
150
−0.2
0.4
0.8
Lag
ACF
Autocorrelation function
0
50
100
150
0.0
0.4
Lag
Partial ACF
Partial autocorrelation function
Distribution
residual
Density
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
5
15
GGG
G
GG
G G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
GGG
G
GG
G
G
GGG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G GGG
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GGG
GG
G G
G
GG
G
G
G GG GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G GGG
GG
G
GG
G
G G
G
G G
GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G
G G
GG
G
G
GGGGG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G GG
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G G
G G
G
G
G
G
GG G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GGG
GG
G
G
GG
GGGGG
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
GG
GG
GGG
G
G G
G
G
GGG
G
G G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG G
G G
G G
GG G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GGGG
GG G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGGGG
GGG
G
GG G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G G
G
GG
G
GG
GGG G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G G
G
G G
G GG
G G
G
G
GG
GGG
G
G
G
G GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G GG
G
G
G
G G
G
G
GG
G
G G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG G
G G
G
G
G
G GG
GGG
GGG
GGGG
G G
G
G G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG G
G G
G G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
GG
G
G G
G
GG
G
G
GG
GGG
G GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
−0.1
0.1
0.3
Normal Q−Q Plot
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
0
50
100
150
0.0
0.4
0.8
p−values for Ljung−Box statistic
Lag
p−value
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.0
0.4
0.8
frequency
Cumulative periodogram
Figure 1: Residual analysis for a stopping criteria at ||ε||2 ≤0.2. Tolerance used for this
project.
==PAGE:88==
72
Residual analysis for the sparse recovery
0
200
400
600
800
−0.06
0.00
Residuals for the normalised signal
Index
Residual
0
50
100
150
0.0
0.4
0.8
Lag
ACF
Autocorrelation function
0
50
100
150
−0.10
0.00
0.10
Lag
Partial ACF
Partial autocorrelation function
Distribution
residual
Density
−0.06
−0.04
−0.02
0.00
0.02
0
40
80
G GG
G
G G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G GG
G
G G
G
G
GG
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
GGG
GG
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G GG
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
GG G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
G
GG
G GG
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G G
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G G
GG
G
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
−0.06
0.00
Normal Q−Q Plot
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
GG
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
0
50
100
150
0.0
0.4
0.8
p−values for Ljung−Box statistic
Lag
p−value
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.0
0.4
0.8
frequency
Cumulative periodogram
Figure 2: Residual analysis for a stopping criteria close to white noise. Tolerance set
aside in this project.
==PAGE:89==
==PAGE:90==
