==PAGE:1==
Master’s thesis
Technical University of Denmark
March 2018
Behavioral and
electrophysiological markers of
hearing status in relation to
recreational noise exposure
Bertrand SMITS
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Title
Behavioral and electrophysiological markers of hearing status in relation
to recreational noise exposure.
Author
Bertrand Smits (student ID: s155559)
Comment
This report submitted March 15th, 2018 was part of the requirements
to achieve the Master of Science in Engineering Acoustics at the Technical
University of Denmark. It represented 35 ECTS points and it concluded a
7.5-month project. Within this period, a 1.5-month extension was granted
by DTU’s Board of Exemption for personal reasons.
Supervisors
Ass. Prof. SEBASTIEN SANTURETTE
PhD student PERNILLE HOLTEGAARD
Centre for Applied Hearing Research
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Ass. Prof. CHEOL-HO JEONG
Acoustic Technology
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This study was designed to investigate the correlation on humans between
recreational noise exposure from concerts and some markers of hearing sta-
tus in relation to the condition of noise-induced neural degeneration. The
markers of hearing status involved otoscopy, tympanometry, ABR wave I
(Clicks and 4 kHz tone burst at levels up to 100 dB nHL), AFC-audiometry
(warble tone) and speech-in-noise assessment (DANTALE I material). Noise
measurements were carried out during concerts using a dosimeter.
Two non-randomized groups of normal-hearing listeners took part in
the study, one of 8 participants (4M, 4F) who attended the concerts (the
exposed-group) and one of 7 participants (4M, 3F) who were asked to avoid
any exposure to intense sounds (the non-exposed group) for a month. All
participants went through three sessions: one before the concert, one within
24 hours post-concert (or within one week after the ﬁrst session for the non-
exposed group) and the last one, four weeks post-exposure.
Our data revealed that the levels of exposure were high enough to be con-
sidered dangerous for the hearing system if presented more than 15 minutes
daily. A small threshold shift was induced within 15 hours post-exposure
at frequencies above 4 kHz. It remained 4 weeks post-exposure on the left
ear but not on the right ear. However, there was no signiﬁcant effect of the
noise exposure from concerts on the level growth of ABR wave I for any of
the stimulus and we did not ﬁnd any relationship between noise exposure
and a change in the performance of speech-in-noise.
Overall, based on this study, we could not conclude that exposure to
noise from a live-performance for two hours caused permanent neural dam-
ages.
Keywords:
Noise-induced hearing loss, synaptopathy, neural de-
generation,
recreational
noise,
ABR,
audiometry,
speech-in-noise,
pretest-posttest designs, non-equivalent groups design.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgement
I am deeply grateful to my supervisors Cheol-Ho Jeong, S´ebastien San-
turette and Pernille Holtegaard whose help, stimulating suggestions and
encouragements helped me in all the time of research for and writing of this
thesis. An extra thank you to Pernille for taking the time during her PhD to
carry out the few measurements I was not able to perform.
I would like to give my special thank you to Anders Mortensen, Head
of Production at the venue Vega for being so open about this study since
the beginning, for allowing participants to carry a dosimeter during the
concerts and for kindly offering free concert tickets. Without this offer, I
would probably not have been able to gather so many participants in such
short period of time. This is highly appreciated.
Furthermore, a thank you to the board of Exemptions at DTU for grant-
ing me an extra 1.5-month and to my supervisors for supporting my deci-
sion to extend the period.
I owe my gratitude to my good friend R´emi Decorsi`ere for spending time
reviewing my thesis.
The last months have been very challenging with the birth of my twins.
I would not have managed it without the help of my lovely wife Anne who
took more than her share of work at home to let me focus on my thesis.
Finally, this project would not exist without the participants who agreed
to spend up to 15 hours of their time, sometimes very late, sometimes
during their holidays, for the sake of science: Jonathan Haslund Gjerrild,
Sophie Emilie Smietana, Marco Brander, Louise Bondesen Rasmussen, Ce-
cilia Randbaek Pedersen Tanya Pheiffer Sunding, Simon Sørensen, Pernille
Ohms, Jens Østergaard, Jonas Fribo Frandsen, Camilla Chorkendorff, Jessica
Juntermanns, Amalie Pernille Rasmussen, Nikolaj Ib Klausen.
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
4
2.1
Theoretical framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Neuroanatomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Hearing status assessment tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
Environmental acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.4
Design of experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Methods
22
3.1
Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Noise exposure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6
Non-equivalent group analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Results
32
4.1
Noise exposure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
AFC-audiometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Speech-in-noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Auditory brainstem response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Discussion
49
6
Conclusion
54
A Recruitment message
60
I
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Contents
B
Noise questionnaire
61
C Noise results
65
D AFC results
68
D.1 Tables of descriptive statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
D.2 Individual data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
D.3 Inferential statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
E
SPIN results
73
E.1
Tables of descriptive statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
F
ABR results
75
F.1
Tables of descriptive statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
F.2
Inferential statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
F.3
Noise overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
II
==PAGE:11==
List of abbreviations
ABR Auditory brainstem response
AFC Alternative forced choice
AN Auditory nerve
ANCOVA Analysis of covariance
ANOVA Analysis of variance
BM Basilar membrane
CAP Compound action potential
DPOAE Distorsion product otoacoustic emissions
DS Discrimination score
E. Exposed group
GLM General linear model
HINT Hearing in noise test
IHC Inner hair cells
IRU Interacoustics
KKS King-Kopetsky syndrom
LG Level growth
NEGD Non-equivalent group design
NEQ Noise-exposure questionnaire
NIHL Noise-induced hearing loss
NIND Noise-induced neural degeneration
non-E. non-exposed group
OHC Outer hair cells
III
==PAGE:12==
Contents
Contents
SGC Spiral ganglion cell
SNR Speech-to-noise ratio
SPIN Speech-in-noise
SPL Sound pressure level
SRTN Speech recognition threshold in noise
SRT Speech recognition threshold
TM Tympanic membrane
TTS Temporary threshold shift
WI Wave I
WV Wave V
IV
==PAGE:13==
Chapter
1
Introduction
Prolonged exposure to intense sounds can lead to damages of the outer hair
cells (OHC), a critical part of the hearing system (Plack, 2014): this is often
referred to as noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL). For decades, hearing sci-
entists have focused more on the understanding of causes and consequences
of the permanent NIHL as compared to the temporary NIHL. The perma-
nent NIHL can easily be measured with the audiometry because permanent
damages of the outer hair cells (OHC) lead to a permanent elevation of
the hearing thresholds. This is not the case for the temporary NIHL. Un-
til very recently and the contribution of Kujawa and Liberman (2009), the
wide consensus was that the effects of temporary hearing loss were only
momentary in the sense that the temporary threshold shift (TTS), that is
a decrease of the sensitivity to quiet sounds, recovered after some days or
weeks post-exposure following an exponential time course (Clark, 1991). It
is very recently that the scientists have started to link the temporary NIHL
with a condition that has been reported since the ﬁfties: i.e., a degradation
of speech performance in background noise observed on people presenting
clinically normal hearing thresholds. For the last three decades, such condi-
tion got the names of Obscure Auditory Dysfunction (OAD), King-Kopetzky
syndrome (KKS) and Hidden Hearing Loss (HHL) (as cited in (Plack, Barker,
& Prendergast, 2014)). In this thesis, a term coined by Pernille Holtegaard
(Holtegaard & Østergaard, 2015) is preferred: Noise-Induced Neural De-
generation (NIND). It intends to relate both the causality (noise) and the
consequence (neural degeneration). Indeed, recent investigations in mice
(Kujawa & Liberman, 2009) and guinea pigs (Furman, Kujawa, & Liberman,
2013; Lin, Furman, Kujawa, & Liberman, 2011) have revealed that perma-
nent anatomical damages could be induced by medium-to-intense noise ex-
posure despite the fact that the OHC remained undamaged. These lesions
were seen at a higher stage in the auditory pathway, namely between the
inner hair cells (IHC) and the auditory nerve (AN) ﬁbres. The Kujawa and
1
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Liberman (2009) study was a breakthrough in that ﬁeld; they discovered —
using advanced techniques such as ABR, DPOAE and confocal imaging—
that mice exposed to a 100 dB SPL high-frequency noise for 2 hours devel-
oped synaptic lesions responsible for a permanent loss and damage of the
spiral ganglion cells (SGC), the cell bodies of the cochlear afferent neurons
(Kujawa & Liberman, 2009), hence the term NIND. Nowadays, a decade af-
ter this study, direct evidence for a noise-induced neuropathy in humans
is still challenging to obtain (Plack et al., 2014) because it is not ethical to
intentionally present patients with such high levels for so long time. In-
stead, many studies did investigate speciﬁc cohort of people with history
of acoustic over-exposure, but results were not as signiﬁcant as expected
(Grinn, Wiseman, Baker, & Le Prell, 2017; G. Stamper & Johnson, 2015).
Pernille Holtegaard, a PhD student in the CAHR department at DTU, is cur-
rently working on the subject of NIND. She has already investigated some
of the proposed markers of this conditions: speech recognition threshold in
noise (SRTN), and ABR. Using a group of music-exposed persons aged from
18 to 32 years old and a control group, she found evidence of a decrease of
amplitude of wave I (in the left-ear only) on the noise-exposed individu-
als. Following these observations, she suggested that noise exposure might
have an impact on the supra-threshold processing in humans (Holtegaard &
Østergaard, 2015). This Master’s thesis is in line with Holtegaard’s project;
it aims at investigating the impact of noise-exposure on human listeners in
relation to the NIND. While reviewing the literature, it became clear that
it could be exciting to repeat some of the measurements performed by Ku-
jawa and Liberman (2009) on humans. It would then be necessary to expose
human listeners to very intense noise and this is obviously not ethically cor-
rect. Thinking further, millions of people are actually exposed to dangerous
levels every day: teachers, nursery staff, nightclub workers are few exam-
ples. Based on this observation, we tried to ﬁnd a group of people that
could voluntarily and already be exposed to intense noise when attending
some kinds of event. At ﬁrst, we thought about ﬂight attendants but our
ﬁnal choice went to people who could attend live-music performances. In
a university, we are surrounded by young adults going to concerts and we
thought that a group of students who be more convenient than a group of
ﬂight attendants. Thus, this study proposes to investigate the effect of high-
level noise exposure during concerts on some of the proposed markers of
2
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1. Introduction
the NIND: ABR wave I, speech-in-noise tests and temporary threshold shift
(TTS). More speciﬁcally, this thesis aims at answering the following research
questions:
• Can attendance to a two-hour concert lead to a TTS?
• Are the level growths of wave I in human listeners reduced after the
exposure to intense noise from a two-hour concert?
• Is it possible to measure an impact of noise exposure on participants
four weeks post-exposure?
There are at least two good reasons to carry out such a study.
First, it
could potentially give relevant evidence for noise-induced neuropathy in
humans as observed in Kujawa and Liberman (2009). We expect to observe
a reduction of the level growth of the amplitudes og ABR wave I after
exposure to concert noise. Second, if a long-term reduction of ABR wave
I is associated to poorer speech-in-noise performances, this could indicate
that proper hearing protection must be worn during concerts. For exanple,
concert noise is a hot topic in France where a new law was released in
August 2017 about that matter.
It aims at reducing the maximum limit
of the equivalent sound level measured over 15 minutes from 115 dBA to
102 dBA (Carpentier, 2017)). In a bigger perspective, the NIND must be
fully understood in humans to be able to release proper noise guidelines
and develop appropriate treatments or provide clinical tools to characterize
the early signs of hearing impairment.
CHAPTER 1 (Introduction) introduces the motivations for that study
and deﬁne some terms used throughout this thesis. CHAPTER 2 (Back-
ground) is written with a twofold purpose: ﬁrst, it introduces the theory
needed to understand the thesis, and second, it presents the literature that
helps understanding the current research within the ﬁeld of NIND. The
theory section will focus on the area between IHC and cochlear nucleus, as
well as on basics of noise measurement and statistical design. CHAPTER
3 (Methods) describes the instrumentation and procedures involved in the
data collection.
CHAPTERS 4 and 5 (Results and Discussion) intend to
offer a detailed description and interpretation of the data gathered. Finally,
a conclusion is drawn based on the ﬁndings revealed by this work.
3
==PAGE:16==
Chapter
2
Background
The context of this study is introduced by summarising the relevant
knowledge gathered in various articles of reference concerning the NIND.
Hair cells, auditory nerves, auditory brainstem response, spiral ganglion,
transduction and audiometry are recurrent concepts in the papers and are
thereby deﬁned prior the literature review. In addition, the tools used in
this study to assess the hearing ability of the participants are described.
Because the study also involves measurements of noise exposure, this
chapter focuses on some basic knowledge of noise measurements. Finally,
we motivate the choice of a non-equivalent group analysis (part of a
quasi-experimental design) and the reliability-adjusted ANCOVA as a
statistical tool.
2.1
Theoretical framework
2.1.1
Neuroanatomy
The reader must be aware that basic knowledge of hearing science is re-
quired. Anatomy and functions of the outer ear, middle ear, the cochlear
and part of the organ of Corti are not reviewed in this section. Instead, the
focus is directed towards the IHC/OHC functions, the mechanism of trans-
duction and the type I afferent spiral ganglion ﬁbres which are the auditory
nerve ﬁbres believed to be crucial in the mechanism of NIND.
Anatomy and function of the IHC and OHC
Four rows of hair cells (one
of IHC, three of OHC) are running parallel to the length of the cochlea
from base to apex (Figure 2.1).
There is an estimated 2800 to 4400 IHC
and 11200 to 16000 OHC in humans (Webster, Popper, & Fay, 1992). OHC
and IHC have different functions and their pattern of innervation with the
brainstem are also fundamentally different.
The OHC exhibit a motility
4
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
Figure 2.1: Cross section of the cochlea showing the organ of Corti, the OHC/IHC
and the cochlear nerves. The zone of focus of this study is emphasized with the red
box. Adapted from Yost (2007).
property (Yost, 2007), a fast adaptive response in which they use speciﬁc
motor proteins (prestin (Pickles, 2012)) to expand and contract their size in
response to an acoustic stimulus. This movement is crucial for low level
of sounds because it causes an increase of response of the basilar mem-
brane (BM) which consequently acts as an active ampliﬁer at low levels in
the cochlea. This leads to a non-linear compression of the BM which al-
lows enhancement of the frequency selectivity and a larger dynamic range
of hearing (Plack, 2014). Whereas the OHC are not involved in the transmis-
sion of information as per se (Plack, 2014), it is the case of the IHC which
are responsible for converting the BM’s vibration into electrical activity. This
mechanism —called transduction—is described below. Regarding the inner-
vation, IHC are mostly linked to the afferent (ascending to the brainstem)
system whereas OHC are related to both the afferent and efferent (descend-
ing from the brainstem) systems (Webster et al., 1992). At the apical ends of
both types of hair cells are rooted varied-length protuberances that form tiny
volumes external to the cell: the stereocilia. They must be robust enough to
cope with an incessant bending but they can break if pushed too far (Pickles,
2012). That could explain why they are ordered in a shallow V formation
along the BM. Also, the rigidity of the stereocilia comes from the fact that
they are ﬁrmly connected to each other by horizontal side links. These links
force the stereocilia of the same rows to move all together when pushed.
Other links called tip-links exist. They are localized on top of the stereocilia
and their function are detailed right below.
5
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
Neural and synaptic mechanisms
The transduction efﬁciently translates
the biomechanical vibrations from the cochlear into neural information at
the level of IHC (Plack, 2014). For this reason, the IHC are considered the
natural biological transducers (Yost, 2007). The OHC transmit the vibrations
from the BM to the tectorial membrane. This membrane moves in a shear-
ing movement which leads to a deﬂection of the stereocilia placed on top
of the IHC and touching the tectorial membrane. Then the ﬁne tip-links
act as macromolecular trapdoors. They pull the hair cells open and a ﬂow
of positively charged potassium ions (K+) contained in the endolymph (the
ﬂuid found in the scala media) are discharged throughout channels into the
cells. This mechanism occurs because a difference of potentials is created by
the positive endocochlear potential and the negative intracellular potential.
Hence, the cation inﬂux generates a phenomenon called depolarization and
Ca2+ inﬂux is triggered through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. The Ca2+ in-
ﬂux causes a process in the IHC that entails the ribbons (Plack, 2014; Webster
et al., 1992).
Figure 2.2: a — Picture of a synaptic ribbon formed by the presynaptic IHC and
the postsynaptic SGN. b — Schematic of an IHC which connects to several AN
through the synapses. c — Schematic of the IHC ribbon synapse. From (Moser &
Starr, 2016)
6
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
Synaptic ribbons (Figure 2.2) are attached to the membrane of the IHC by
means of large proteins and are responsible for this modulation; they are
the ones interacting with dozens of vesicles attached to the membrane when
the depolarization phase takes place. Electrical potentials are therefore pro-
duced by the IHC which turns into the liberation of chemical transmitters
at the vesicles stage responsible for a potential running along the neural ﬁ-
bres. Such a process is said to be adaptive because the levels of potential
are related to the deﬂection of the stereocilia, which in turns is linked to the
intensity of the sound stimulus. With such a system the hair cells continu-
ously release the neurotransmitters needed for the creation of potentials and
the response varies depending on the stimulus intensity (Pickles, 2012).
Figure 2.3: Diagram of innervation showing the hair cells, Type I and Type II neu-
rons. Type I connect with the inner hair cells, have bipolar and myelinated (en-
velops of Myelin surround the axon of the cells to electrically insulate it) cell bodies
in the spiral ganglion. Type II cells connect with the OHC, are monopolar and not
myelinated. Regarding innervation, type I connects the nearest IHC, whereas type
II travels further basalwards before connecting to the OHC. From (Webster et al.,
1992)
Auditory nerves and innervation
After the transduction, the auditory
nerve (AN) that is connected through synapses at the basal ends of the hair
7
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
cells on one side and to the cochlear nucleus on the other side, transports
the audio information to the brainstem. Within this auditory nerve, one
ﬁnds primary neurons whose cell bodies reside in the spiral ganglion: the
spiral ganglion neurons (SGN). Two types of SGN (I and II) are allocated
to the afferent and efferent systems. Approximately 30000 cell bodies can
be found in the spiral ganglion of a human, and 90 to 95% of the SGN are
connected to the IHC (Webster et al., 1992). Each IHC is associated with
approximately 20 afferent ﬁbres whereas only 6 ﬁbres innervate one OHC
(Figure 2.3). The discharge rate and the discharge threshold are two im-
portant parameters characterizing a ﬁbre.
All ﬁbres exhibit spontaneous
activity, i.e. they discharge spontaneously in absence of any sound stimu-
lus. But the ﬁbres deviate (Figure 2.4) in the ﬁring rate (that is the number
of spikes per second): one ﬁnds ﬁbres with lower threshold and high spon-
taneous (HS) ﬁring rate and with high threshold and low spontaneous (LS)
rate. The HR ﬁbres are more sensitive and start to be active for low levels
of sound while the low SR ﬁbres are active for mid-to-high levels of sounds.
For very high sound levels, both the SR and HR ﬁbres are active and all ﬁres
at a maximum ﬁring rate of about 200 spikes per second (Plack, 2014).
To summarize, the movement of the IHC triggers the transduction which
creates the electrical signals sent to the brain throughout the auditory nerve
bundle which contains primary neurons called SGN. Damaged IHC, ab-
normal mechanism of transduction or loss of the SGN would prevent the
acoustic information to travel to the brain and hence, induce a hearing loss.
2.1.2
Hearing status assessment tools
The well-known audiological techniques of audiometry, speech-recognition
threshold (SRT), discrimination scores (DS), tympanometry and reﬂex mea-
surements are often the primary tests performed in hearing studies to ensure
that the participants present normal hearing abilities or to evaluate the level
of impairment. Other audiologic tests such as ABR can be applied to detect
lesions at the auditory nerve and brainstem stages.
Audiometry and middle ear measurements
The technique of audiometry
is often the primary and fastest clinical tool to bring to light a potential
hearing loss. The audiogram is the graphical results associated to this tech-
8
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
Figure 2.4: Firing rate as a function of the sound levels for the two types of ﬁbers:
the high-spontaneous rate and the low-spontaneous rate ﬁbers. From (Plack, 2014)
nique. It shows the auditory thresholds at different frequencies (usually
from 0.125 kHz to 8 kHz), i.e., the levels of the quietest sounds that can be
detected by a person, compared to normal hearing. Therefore, the levels are
not plotted as dB SPL. Instead it is the deviation to the zero line correspond-
ing to the average threshold for young normal-hearing persons i.e., dB HL
that appears on the audiogram. The range to which a person is considered
to have a clinical normal audiogram is large, up to 10 dB to 20 dB above the
zero line (Plack, 2014). An hearing loss will be accompanied with an ele-
vated hearing threshold above 20 dB. The shape of the audiogram can help
detecting the type of hearing loss. For example, hearing impairment that can
occur after long term exposure to intense noise or short exposure to a blast
often show an elevated threshold shift in the frequency range 3 kHz to 6 kHz
with some recovery at the highest frequencies (McBride & Williams, 2001).
Furthermore, sometimes in research, it makes sense to perform higher res-
olution audiometry. This is done using the audioscan technique. As such,
the technique is similar to the audiometry, the difference lies in the num-
ber of frequencies to cover (for instance 64 frequencies per octave (Zhao &
Stephens, 2007)). Such a technique is not really used in the clinics because
it takes too long to carry out the measurement.
Speech recognition threshold and discrimination score
Speech recogni-
tion threshold and discrimination score are two techniques of the speech
audiometry family. Both SRT and DS help to determine the degree and type
9
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
of hearing loss and give information on the word recognition abilities of a
listener in quiet conditions. They are performed on both ears separately.
The SRT is deﬁned as the lowest level at which the subject can recognize
the speech signal 50% of the time and the DS measures the speech intel-
ligibility (SI) at a supra-threshold level. Both tests use the Danish speech
material DANTALE I; SRT uses a sequences of three digits whereas DS uses
a sequence of one-syllabus common Danish words (nouns, verbs and adjec-
tives) (Holtegaard, 2015).
Tympanometry
Tympanometry is used to detect any kind of middle ear
pathologies. It uses a probe with three holes (one speaker, one microphone
and a hole to change the pressure) inserted in the ear (Figure 2.5). A 226 Hz
tone (LF) is emitted through the speaker. The microphone measures the
amount of sound that is bounced back from the TM as the pressure varies.
A 226 Hz tone is preferred because at low frequency, the middle ear is a stiff-
ness dominated system. It means that the sound will not go through if the
TM is stiff. When both sides have equal pressure the TM is the most com-
pliant because that is the state where most sound goes through. When the
pressure is lowered or increased, the TM become less compliant (Venema,
2012).
Figure 2.5: For the tympanometry, a probe with three tiny holes is inserted in the
ear canal. This probe measures how the admittance while the pressure in the ear
canal changes. From (Venema, 2012)
Reﬂex measurement
An acoustic reﬂex is the unconscious contraction (on
both sides) of the stapedius muscles in response to high-level sounds (Plack,
10
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
2014). Abnormal reﬂexes can show potential conductive, cochlear and neu-
ral disorders (Plack, 2014) but the technique cannot be used to diagnose sites
of damages. Four conﬁgurations of reﬂexes are interesting (Emanuel, 2009):
• the right ipsi/contra-lateral pathways (plain/dashed red in Figure 2.6)
• the left ipsi/contra-lateral pathways (plain/dashed blue in Figure 2.6)
When a loud sound enters the ear, it travels to the brainstem passing through
the outer, middle and inner ear, following the VIII nerve. It then reaches
the cochlear nucleus and progresses further to both right and left superior
olivary complexes. One part of the signal goes back to the ipsilateral middle
ear and one part of the signal travels to the contralateral middel ear through
the facial nerves. It results in a contraction of both stapedius muscles to
pulling-out the ossicles.
Hence a change of the stiffness which in turns
imply a decrease in middle ear compliance which is measured with the
tympanometer (Venema, 2012).
Figure 2.6: A very simpliﬁed model of the acoustic reﬂex pathway representing
the middle ear (ME), the inner ear (IE), the vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII), the
cochlear nucleus (CN), the superior olivary complex (SOC), and the facial nerves
(VII). Adapted from (Emanuel, 2009).
ABR
ABR is another powerful clinical tool used nowadays to screen new-
borns for potential hearing loss. It is also frequently used in hearing re-
search as it offers many advantages over the audiometric evaluation. ABRs
are an electro-physiological measurements based on auditory evoked po-
tentials —small electrical potentials created in response to a stimulus—, and
11
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
Figure 2.7: Zones of generation of the waves I to V in the auditory system. From
(Hall, 2015). However one should notice that it is not so simple as Hall (2015) cited:
”Multiple anatomic sites may contribute to a single ABR wave and, conversely, a
single anatomic site may generate multiple ABR waves.”
therefore reﬂect the synchronous ﬁring activity of auditory neurons at dif-
ferent stages along the auditory pathway (Hall, 2015). ABR plots are thereby
showing voltages measured as a function of latencies by means of four elec-
trodes placed on the scalp of a patient (the method is presented in more
details in Section 4.4). The voltages do not typically exceed 0.5 µV (Hall,
2015)). Different types of sound stimuli can be used as mean of excitation:
clicks, tone burst, chirps. ABR occurs almost always within the ﬁrst 5 ms
after an acoustic stimulus is presented and results is typically a waveform
(Figure 2.8) with succession of peaks and troughs. The peaks –referred to
as waves– are often of most interest even though the troughs can also be
related to a speciﬁc anatomical region (Hall, 2015). Among the ﬁve majors
waves that are detected by the technique (Figure 2.7), the important wave for
this thesis is wave I. ABR Wave I appears normally 1.5 ms after the stimulus
12
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
(click at 85 dB nHL). It’s anatomic origin is clearly deﬁned and is associated
to neuronal afferent activity at the level of the eighth nerve ﬁbres and more
precisely at the stage where they leave the cochlea and enter the internal
auditory canal (Hall, 2015). For the sake of this study it is crucial to keep
in mind that many parameters must be taken into account when analysing
ABR: patient age, gender, body temperature, and of course hearing loss can
potentially affect the results of latencies and amplitudes of an ABR reading.
Figure 2.8: Example of an ABR waveform showing the peaks (waves I to V) and
troughs as a function of the latency. The ﬁve waves occur within 6 ms. Adapted
from (Hall, 2015).
2.1.3
Environmental acoustics
The equivalent sound pressure and peak level are basics of environmental
acoustics. Associated with a weighting ﬁlter, they give the LAeq and LCpeak,
two metrics used widely when dealing with noise measurements.
Equivalent sound pressure level
Leq is the equivalent sound pressure level
deﬁned (Jacobsen, Poulsen, Rindel, Gade, & Ohlrich, 2011) as:
Leq = 10 log

1
t2 −t1
Zt2
t1
p2(t)dt

/p2
ref

(2.1)
13
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
where t1 and t2 are two instant of time, p is the time-varying sound pressure
and pref is the reference pressure such that pref = 20 µPa. It is well adapted
for measuring the ﬂuctuating noise of live-music performances. Dosimeters
typically use values of integration time of 1 minute. If the noise occurs over
many 1-minute values (for example two hours), then the equivalent sound
pressure level can be calculated by adding the mean square values such that:
Leq,T = 10 log
 X
i
ti
T 100.1Li
!
(2.2)
Furthermore when loud impulse sounds are present in an occupational
noise measurement, it can be interesting to also measure the peak level de-
ﬁned as:
Lpeak = 20 log
ppeak
pref

(2.3)
where ppeak is the maximum value reached by the sound pressure (not to be
confused with the maximum sound level measured over a period of time).
Weighting ﬁlters
Results of environmental noise measurements are often
given in weighted sound pressure levels. The (A,B,C,D) weightings reﬂect
the relative loudness of a sound perceived by the ear and the A-weighting
more speciﬁcally corresponds approximately to the inverse of the 40 phons
(deﬁned as a level of 40 dB at 1 kHz) equal-loudness-contour. The shape of
the A-weighting curve is frequency-dependent and emphasizes (or assign
less weight to) the frequency area between 1 kHz to 5 kHz, i.e. the region of
the greatest acuity (Kinsler, Frey, Coppens, & Sanders, 2000). LAeq is widely
used in regards to trafﬁc, industrial and occupational noise measurements
because it is considered easy to relate to compared to other noise rating
procedures (Kinsler et al., 2000). The C-weighting (which mirror to the 90-
phon equal loudness level contour) is nearly ﬂat up to 2 kHz before it starts
to roll-off. LCpeak is often used when dealing with infra-sounds and for
occupational noise measurements where loud sounds are present.
Noise-induced hearing loss
Noise-induced hearing loss can occur after
short exposure to very intense sounds (like jet engine, explosion) or long
and repeated exposure to medium-intensity sounds (like machinery or mu-
sic). Although the former occurs in a more sudden manner and leads to a
14
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
Figure 2.9: Frequency weighting curves widely used in environmental acoustics.
From (Jacobsen et al., 2011)
more dramatic and irreversible hearing loss, the latter is the most insidious
hearing loss as it can develop without being aware of it, and it takes time
before the ﬁrst signs of hearing loss appear. Results of studies on industrial
workers have established that signs of hearing impairments (measured as
threshold shifts at 3 kHz to 6 kHz and 2 kHz) start to show-up if a worker
is exposed to sounds of 90 dBA for 8 hours everyday, 5 days a week, during
10 years (Kinsler et al., 2000). Such studies on the effect of noise on people,
pushed national and worldwide organisations to release daily criteria for
occupational noise exposure (Table 2.1). The same recommendations can be
done for non-occupational noise (Table 2.2).
Duration per day
8h
4h
2h
1h
30min
15min
2min
1min
NIOSH (1998)
85
88
91
94
97
100
109
112
OSHA (2009)
90
95
100
105
110
115
115
115
WHO (1995)
85
88
91
94
97
100
109
112
Table 2.1: Guidelines for daily noise exposure according to the National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health (of Health & Services, 1998), the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA, 2009), and the World Health Organiza-
tion (D. Johnson et al., 1995)
.
15
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
Limiting Daily
Exposure Time
<2min
<4min
<8min
15min
1h
2h
8h
A-weighted
Sound Level
Slow Response
dBA
115
110
105
100
90
85
75
Table 2.2: Recommended daily exposure times for non-occupational noise. From
(Kinsler et al., 2000).
2.1.4
Design of experiments
In the section below we describe the motivations behind the choice of a
pretest-posttest design with two non-randomized groups. It is all a matter
of controlling threats to internal and external validities, so these two terms
are explained before-hand.
Internal and external validities
The internal validity is the extent to which
the results of an experiment correspond accurately to the reality of the spe-
ciﬁc study. In other terms, it can be seen as the degree of reliability of the
analysis as such. External validity considers the study in a broader per-
spective and questions whether the results can be generalised across pop-
ulations, settings, treatment variables and measurement instruments. Fur-
thermore, the threats to internal validity are history, maturation, pre-test
effects, tools, regression towards the mean, selection of participants, mortal-
ity, the interaction of confounding factors. The threats to external validity
comprise interaction effects of selection biases and treatment, a reactive in-
teraction effect of pretesting, a reactive impact of experimental procedures,
multiple-treatment interference (Dimitrov & Rumrill Jr, 2003).
Choice of the design
When it comes to investigating the effect of an in-
tervention on one or multiple groups of people, at least four designs of the
pretest-posttest family can be considered. Differences between the designs
lie in the degree of threat to external and internal validities (Dimitrov &
Rumrill Jr, 2003):
• One-group pretest-posttest design: measurements are performed on
one single group before and after an intervention.
• Randomized control-group pretest-posttest design: two groups are
used. The postest measurements are performed on only one group.
16
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Theoretical framework
• Non-randomized control group pretest-posttest design: similar to the
previous design but the roups are selected non-randomly.
• Randomized Solomon four-group design: four groups are involved,
two control groups and two experimental groups. Measurements after
the intervention are performed for all groups but only two groups are
used for pretest measurements.
It is tempting to choose the one-group pretest-posttest design as it only
requires one study group and therefore potentially less participants. Un-
fortunately, this design is the weakest of all four designs as there is no
external validity and very limited internal validity (Axelrod & Hayward,
2006; Moorehead, 2006). The four-group Salomon-design should be the one
to go for in theory. It offers the best control in terms of external and in-
ternal validity but it requires four groups of people. In the context of a
master’s thesis, it is absolutely not conceivable. The two-group designs are
left. Whereas in theory, it is always better in terms of control (for effects of
history, maturation and pre-testing (Moorehead, 2006)) to select randomized
groups, it is not doable due to practical reasons; we will take the participants
that kindly accept to take part in the study. Therefore, the non-randomized
control-group pretest-posttest design (also called the nonequivalent-groups
desing NEGD) is chosen in this thesis. As described in (Axelrod & Hay-
ward, 2006) and (Trochim, Donnelly, & Arora, 2016), such a design, with
the use of the control group, accounts for threats to internal validity (such
as temporal trends, regression to the mean and learning curve) and threats
to external validity (as it often provides more providers and settings, facil-
itate recruitment of large population). The main disadvantage is related to
the possible bias created by non-randomization at selection: the outcome
of the experiments can be strongly inﬂuenced by the difference between the
groups at start. However, with a good control of the two groups and an extra
post-intervention measurement performed sufﬁciently long time after the
intervention, it is a fairly reliable and robust design (Axelrod & Hayward,
2006). Attention should be put, however, on the choice of the two groups
and the analysis tools. The inclusion/exclusion criteria should be identical
for both groups, stringent enough to control for potential confounders and
broad enough to ensure a right amount of participants. Their choice will be
based on the factors that affect the different measurements performed in this
study. For example, it is well known that ABR measurements are affected
17
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Background
2.2. Literature review
by gender, age and body temperature (Hall, 2015); criteria will be selected
keeping these factors into mind. Whereas it is difﬁcult to control the body
temperature, it is easier to select the same amount of males/females with
fairly the same age in average in the two groups.
2.2
Literature review
While looking at the literature, it appeared clear to the author that two
periods could divide the chronology of research on NIND: the pre and post-
Kujawa. This section discussed these two periods, the outcomes of Kujawa
and Liberman (2009) and the evidence of NIND in humans.
Early signs of auditory deﬁcits despite normal audiometric assessment
The ﬁrst papers on the ”so-called” obscure auditory dysfunction in humans
can be found in the ﬁfties (Plack et al., 2014). Many audiologists and oto-
laryngologists reported cases of patients presenting clinically normal au-
diograms but complaining systematically about poor hearing performances
in presence of background noise (especially in the discrimination of speech
in noise). In the early nineties, the hearing scientists started to focus on
this type of dysfunction, after they observed a connection with psycholog-
ical disorders: depression, anxiety and loneliness (King & Stephens, 1992;
Sauders & Haggard, 1989). Causes of this condition could not be explained
at that period because the measurement techniques were less mature than
nowadays (Zhao & Stephens, 1999). By using the term ”obscure”, the re-
searchers wanted to avoid referring to any speciﬁc causes, although some of
them presumed that such a condition —later renamed as King-Kopetzky
syndrome (KKS)— could be provoked by multi-factorial factors such as
non-organic hearing loss, psychological conditions or poor linguistic abil-
ity (Sauders & Haggard, 1989). Others assumed that damages could take
place in the medial olivocochlear efferent system (MOCS) based on the re-
sults of DPOAE measurements using contralateral acoustical stimuli (Zhao
& Stephens, 2007). The MOCS has been known for long time to play an
important role in the detection of signals in noisy environments.
Furthermore, when it comes to interpreting the results of a clinical audio-
gram, Plack et al. (2014) stressed two important facts. First, a good sensitiv-
ity threshold measured with clinical audiometry doesn’t necessarily means
18
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2. Background
2.2. Literature review
lack of hair cells damages.
The technique is maybe simply not adapted
for detection of the damages.
Zhao and Stephens (1999) introduced the
use of audioscan—a very high-resolution audiometry that allows improved
accuracy and sensitivity—to show that people with KKS could actually
present slight notched-increases of the threshold in the low-frequency re-
gion (0.5 kHz to 3 kHz). Zhao and Stephens (2009) also revealed differences
in DPOAE between patients with KKS and their control group, indicating
slight minor cochlear damages. Second, it is crucial to select subjects with
matched-audiograms to avoid confounding effects due to differences in the
OHC. It was shown by Sauders and Haggard (1989) that, although OAD
patients had normal audiograms (within arbitrary limits), their thresholds
were measured slightly higher at all frequencies compared to the control
group and signiﬁcantly higher at frequencies of 250 Hz and 3000 Hz. The
fact that the lowest threshold limit is chosen arbitrarily and that there is
quite a large dynamic range, could potentially place some patients with
slight OHC damages in the category of clinically normal-hearing patients.
Proposed mechanism of NIND
The breakthrough study came out quite
recently, in 2009.
Kujawa and Liberman (2009) exposed some mice to a
one-octave band (8 kHz to 16 kHz) calibrated noise at a level of 100 dBSPL
for only 2 h. This sound level was moderate enough not to provoke a loss
of the OHC —which could have lead to a permanent hearing loss—, but
high enough to provoke a temporary shift of the hearing threshold. They
discovered that the noise had induced permanent and rapid damage to the
cochlear nerve terminals which could not be detected with the simple audio-
gram technique. Threshold sensitivity had fully recovered after two weeks
and had remained stable 8 to 16 weeks later. In addition, DPOAE threshold
also recovered indicating no loss of OHC. The rapid and long term dam-
ages to the synaptic connections could however be detected with ABR and
CAP. Indeed, 8 weeks after the exposure, ABR wave I (WI) appeared to be
decreased at higher frequencies and medium/high sound levels compared
to pre-exposure. This could potentially indicate loss of neurons in the spiral
ganglion area since wave I is closely related to the response of the neurons
in the mentioned region.
This condition was then conﬁrmed by the use
of confocal imaging, an optical imaging technique that allows high optical
resolution and contrast. This technique allowed the count of spiral gan-
19
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Background
2.2. Literature review
glion cells as well as synaptic ribbons —a good metric for analysing the
IHC afferent innervation. Five regions along the basilar membrane were
investigated and it appeared that IHC were not affected, and that at all
post-exposure times, ribbons were consistently reduced, the reduction be-
ing greater at higher frequencies (32 kHz) where the largest effect was also
seen in the ABR WI. Up to two years post-exposure, the SGC were also dra-
matically reduced. Furthermore the loss of SGC was less rapid than the loss
of terminals. This loss of SGC could, however not only be related to age-
ing as the reduction was more dramatic for the noise-exposed mice than for
the not-exposed mice. An explanation for the condition of NIND was then
proposed by Kujawa and Liberman (2009): the mechanism of transduction
seemed to function properly at low levels but not at medium to high levels.
At high frequencies, neurons became rapidly inactive due to the loss of post-
and pre-synaptic elements of the IHC. The more the loss of ribbons the less
the neural response amplitude. The damages appeared to affect the low-
spontaneous rate ﬁbres used for the coding of high intensity sounds and
not the high-spontaneous rate ﬁbres (Furman et al., 2013); this was lately
conﬁrmed in a study on guinea pigs (Lin et al., 2011).
Evidence of HHL in humans
G. Stamper and Johnson (2015) released the
results of a study in line with Kujawa and Liberman (2009) but with focus
on humans: they investigated the correlation between noise-exposure with
electro-physiological measures such as ABR and DPOAEs. Noise exposure
was not measured directly but assessed on thirty clinically-normal-hearing
people using the noise-exposure questionnaire (NEQ) developed by Niet-
zel (as cited in G. Stamper and Johnson (2015)). ABR wave I was statisti-
cally correlated to the results of the NEQ, in contrary to DPOAE. At levels
above 70 dB SPL —so at supra-threshold— a higher history of noise expo-
sure systematically led to a decrease of the amplitude of ABR wave I. ABR
wave V was also investigated and no trend could be seen in the data. After
analysing their data again, they found out that the effect were limited to
women (G. C. Stamper & Johnson, 2015). Two interesting papers published
in 2017, did not ﬁnd any evidence of risk of synaptopathy due to high-level
noise exposure. First, Grinn et al. (2017) have investigated the effect of recre-
ational noise exposure (concerts, dance events, live music) on some known
markers of NIND (DPOAE, pure-tone audiometry, words-in-noise and elec-
20
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 2. Background
2.2. Literature review
trocochleography) using 32 participants and a design very similar to the one
we chose in this study: a 3 pretest-posttest design. Their data did not reveal
any relationship between post-year exposure and NIND and between noise
exposure and change of threshold, DPOAE amplitude or AP amplitude.
However they found out that the high dose of noise-exposure from concerts
and bars led to a decrease of speech-in-noise performance the day after the
events. Second Prendergast et al. (2017) used a large cohort of 126 partici-
pants with wide range of lifetime noise exposures but clinically normal au-
diometric thresholds up to 8 kHz. Based on ABRs and Frequency-following
responses (FFRs) their data didn’t reveal any relation between noise expo-
sure and the amplitude of the ABR WI amplitude or ABR wave V latencies
or between the noise-exposure and FFR signal-to-noise ratios.
Summary of the literature review
• Exposure to high levels of noise can result in a TTS, which in turns can
cause a permanent loss of synapses and a degeneration of the type I
afferent SGN ﬁbers. Hence the term NIND.
• Low spontaneous high-threshold neurons responsible for coding high-
intensity levels are affected. So NIND affect supra-threshold levels and
this would explain why people who supposedly present a NIND show
clinically normal audiograms.
• People with NIND show poor performance with speech-in-noise
(SPIN) tasks.
Such tests can be used to assess the impact of noise
exposure on the auditory system. We hypothesize that synaptopathy
injury causes SPIN performance to degrade.
• The assumed markers of the NIND are the TTS measured with the
audiometry, poor performances of SPIN and a reduced ABR WI at
medium-to-high levels.
• Evidence in humans are not obvious. This gives good motivations to
performing the current study.
• Recruitment of patients must be done with care: with matched audio-
gram if possible, without tinnitus, and age should be within 18 to 35
years. The number of women and men should be similar.
21
==PAGE:34==
Chapter
3
Methods
Keeping in mind the knowledge gathered in the literature review, ex-
periments have been performed in order to investigate the effect of
noise exposure from concerts on supposed markers of the NIND (ABR,
AFC-audiometry and SPIN). Each aspect of the process is presented: the
recruitment, the instrumentation used for collecting the data, the general
quasi-experimental procedure and the statistical process used for the
analysis of data.
3.1
Subjects
A total of 15 participants took part in the experiment. They were found
using DTU’s Forum feature at https://cn.inside.dtu.dk and the website
www.forsoegsperson.dk. The criteria for participation are shown in the re-
cruitment message posted on both websites in October 2017 (Figure A.1).
Each test listener was placed in one of two groups: 8 participants in the
concert group (exposed) and 7 in the control group (non-exposed). The two
groups were not randomised as it was up to the participants to decide their
group. For the exposed group, the ages varied from 24 to 32 years old (with
mean 25.1 years old overall, F:24.8 yrs, M:25.5 yrs), and the group was bal-
anced regarding gender. Note that the experimenter was part of that group.
The non-exposed group contained four females and three males with ages
ranging from 19 to 27 years old (with mean 23.4 years old overall, F:23.8 yrs,
M:23 yrs). All 15 persons were asked to attend the three sessions (pretest,
posttest1 and posttest2). Two test listeners of the non-exposed group did
not attend posttest2; one participant in the exposed group did not follow
any of the SPIN tests. There were 16 drop-outs overall and all participants
who remained showed normal hearing abilities (threshold 25 dB nHL across
all frequencies, SRT below 0 dB). A thirty-minute information meeting was
held before the pretest at the end of which consent was obtained.
Fur-
22
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.2. Procedure
thermore, the study was approved by the Science-Ethics Committee for the
Capital Region of Denmark (reference H-16036391). Beforehand, all partic-
ipants were instructed about the sessions throughout an email sent at least
two days before the experiment. All participants received compensation for
the study.
3.2
Procedure
Figure 3.1:
This quasi-experimental study is deﬁned by two non-randomised
groups and three sessions designated as pretest (session pre-concert), posttest1 (ﬁrst
session after the concert) and posttest2 (second session post-concert). The measures
performed during the sessions are shown between the brackets.
An overview of the procedure is shown in Figure 3.1.
Both groups un-
derwent the same experiments.
To start with, each participant of both
groups went through a screening session to select normal hearing listeners.
23
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.3. Screening
Then AFC audiometry and ABR measures were performed at each session
whereas SPIN was only performed during pretest and posttest2. It was de-
cided to cut-out the SPIN test from posttest1 because we believed that any
potential changes in the SPIN performance score after the concert would
have been related to the expected TTS. The pretest took 5.5 h in average and
was performed within one week before the concert, posttest1 around 4.5 h
and took place within 15 h after the concert and posttest2 around 5 h and
was done approximately 4 weeks after the concert. In total the participants
were tested from 14 h to 17 h. During the screening session, all participants
were asked to ﬁll out the Noise-Exposure-Questionnaire described in Sec-
tion 3.5 and were instructed to use the dosimeter for at least 2 h during the
concert for the exposed group and two hours the evening before posttest2
for the non-exposed group. Further details about the methods and equip-
ment used for the screening step, the ABR, AFC-audiometry and SPIN tests
are described in the following.
3.3
Screening
Otoscopy
To investigate the ear canal and the tympanic membrane state,
we performed an otoscopy at the beginning of each session. We focused
on the amount of ear wax in the ear canal as well as the shape of the tym-
panic membrane. In case of to much earwax, participants were sent to an
ENT doctor to have their ears cleaned before performing any listening test.
Standard safety requirements were followed by the experimenter during the
tests. A Video Otoscopy with Micro Digital CDD Camera from INTERA-
COUSTICS (IRU) was used together with the VIOT module provided in the
IRU’s software NOAH 4.
Tympanometry
Right after the otoscopy, the participants went through the
technique of tympanometry using an Audiometer AT235H from IRU cou-
pled to a headphone TDH-39P and an impedance probe. We tested tympa-
nometry and the ipsilateral and contralateral reﬂexes while the subject was
instructed not to move and not to swallow during the four measurements
(2 for each ear). The focus was put on the values of the compliance of the
eardrum and the volume of the ear canal as well as the reﬂexes. We checked
the reﬂexes for the following frequencies [Hz]: 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000,
24
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.3. Screening
Measures
Lower limit
Upper limit
Ear volume/Static admittance [millimhos]
0.37
F:1.9/M:2.2
Compliance [mL]
0.2
2.0
Middle ear pressure [daPa]
-100
100
Table 3.1: Limits of normality for the tympanometry. We refered to these limits to
ensure that all participants had normal tympanogram. Adapted from (Holtegaard,
2015).
Wide Band and at the levels [dB SPL] 75, 80, 85, 90. This measurement pre-
sented some challenges: the values didn’t seem to be reliable from a test
to another. For that reason, we made sure that the measured values were
within the limits stipulated in Table 3.1 but we didn’t focus further on the
absolute values.
Audiogram
A clinical air conduction audiogram was obtained for both
ears during the ﬁrst session only to ensure that all participants had thresh-
old below 20 dB HL. The full two-channel clinical audiometer AC40 unit
from IRU was used to estimate the auditory thresholds of each subject. It
was combined with insert earphones ER-3A from ETYMOTIC RESEARCH.
Seated in a sound booth isolated from external noise, the participant was
instructed to press a response button each time he/she could hear a tone.
The subject’s thresholds were tested in each ear, one at a time, starting with
the right ear. Frequencies of [kHz] 0.25, 0.5,1,2,3,4,6,8 (with re-test at 1 kHz)
were covered. Outside the booth the task of the experimenter was to de-
crease the level by 10 dB for each good answer and by increasing by 5 dB for
each wrong answer. The starting level was 30 dB HL and the hearing thresh-
old level was determined as the lowest level to which the listener responded
correctly three times (or 75%).
SRT and DS
Right after the audiometry, SRT and DS measures were per-
formed at pretest and posttest2 (last session) using the clinical audiometer
AC40 combined with the insert earphones ER-3A. For determining the SRT,
the listeners were instructed to repeat a sequence of three digits. Outside the
booth, the experimenter followed a 5-up 10-down technique similar to the
audiometry. That is the level was decreased by 10 dB for a correct answer
(determined as two numbers repeated correctly) and increased by 5 dB for
a wrong answer. Thus to establish the SRT, at least three correct responses,
25
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.4. Measures
on ascending runs, had to be obtained at the same level. As for the DS,
the listener was asked to repeat a sequence of words presented at 40 dB in
presence of noise in the contra ear set to 30 dB SPL. Meanwhile, the exper-
imenter was counting the percentage of correct answers. The levels were
such that it was not a completely quiet test situation but it was easy enough
to discriminate the words in the noise. Using noise in the non-test ear was
to ensure that the test ear only was responding to the supra-threshold stim-
ulus. For both ears, a score of at least 90% for the DS and below 0 dB HL
were required to continue with the study.
3.4
Measures
Speech-in-noise
Speech-in-noise tests were performed for each subject
only during pretest and posttest2, in the same booth as the one used for
the clinical audiometry and right after the measures of SRT and DS. The
participants had to repeat a list of mono-syllabic words per signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) condition. Three SNR conditions were tested for each ear: 10
dB SNR, 5 dB SNR and 0 dB SNR. For each condition the level of the speech
was set to 70 dB SPL and the level of the noise was changed. The six lists
were taken from the Danish speech material DANTALE I and reused for
the same condition for both sessions. This was done to ensure a reliable
comparison based on the exact same material. The experimenter task was
to assess the participant’s performance by determining the percentage of
correct answers.
AFC-audiometry
For the AFC-audiometry technique, the participants
were seated comfortably in a chair placed in a booth isolated from ex-
ternal noise.
The AFC-audiometry is a MATLAB-based script based on
an 3-Alternative-Forced-Choice paradigm (hence AFC) known from the
psychoacoustic research theory. A calibration has been performed at the
beginning of the measurement campaign and checks of the measurement
chain were performed prior almost each AFC test (when possible) using a
calibrated Class 1 Sound Level Meter Nor131 from NORSONIC associated
with a coupler GRAS 43AB Artiﬁcial Ear to make sure that the output
level were as expected (the booth was used by many students). The setup
for this experiment is described in Table 3.2. A frequency-modulated tone
26
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.4. Measures
Stimulus type
Frequencies [kHz]
Intervals
Warble
0.5,1,2,3,4,6,8
3
Rule
Starting value
Starting step size
1up-2down
40 dB SPL
8 dB SPL
Minimum step size
Number of reversals
Number of repetitions
2
4
2
Table 3.2: Parameters used in the AFC-framework in MATLAB for the audiometry
experiment.
(warble tone) was used for two reasons: ﬁrst, it is believed to help reducing
the effects of standing waves in the ear canal at high frequencies and
second, using a slightly broader frequency area (as compared to pure tones)
prevents the risks of falling in a narrow notch in the frequency spectrum
with poorer/better sensitivity and therefore prevents the risks of measuring
threshold sensitivities that do reﬂect the reality. The results from the AFC
framework that is two datasets of threshold values (because repeated twice)
per ear were averaged in MATLAB.
ABR
Measurements of ABR were performed with the ECLIPSE hardware
from INTERACOUSTICS combined with the software OTOACCESS. Pre-
vious to each test, the experimenter prepared the patient and instructed
him/her with the technique: it was made clear that the patient should be
relaxed or sleeping during the measurements while laying on a bed placed
in a sound/noise-proof booth. No phone was allowed in the cabin. The skin
was scrubbed with an abrasive gel to allow a proper low skin impedance
recommended by IRU to be below 3 kΩand balanced in values (“Addi-
tional Information Eclipse”, 2015). Four electrodes were used: one on each
mastoid, one on the high forehead (vertex) and one between the eyebrows
(ground) at some distance to the vertex electrode (Figure 3.2). The experi-
menter started the measurement when he/she was sure–looking at the EEG
window in OtoAccess– that the patient was relaxed. Three pre-made pro-
tocols had been previously programmed for the study and the parameters
are displayed in Table 3.3. Tone burst was set to 4 kHz to target the 3 kHz to
6 kHz characteristic frequency region which is usually associated with noise
damage in humans. The clicks stimuli were chosen because all regions of
the cochlea are activated with the click (Hall, 2015).
Techniques assisted the experimenter in adequately peaking the waves (con-
27
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.4. Measures
Name
TB 4kHz
ABR click level-growth
Stimulus type
Tone burst
Clicks
Stimulus per second
11.1
11.1
Polarity
Alternate
Alternate
Frequency [kHz]
4
-
Burst window
Blackman
-
Levels [dB nHL]
100/95/90/85
95/90/85/75/65/60/55
Stop criteria
4000 stimuli or residual noise < 30 nV
4000 stimuli or residual noise < 30 nV
Response conﬁdence
Detect = 99% (Fmp=3.1)
Detect = 99% (Fmp=3.1)
Transducer
ER2
ER3
Table 3.3: Parameters used with the Eclipse system for the ABR experiments. Two
stimuli were considered, the 4 kHz tone burst and the clicks. ER2 were used for
4kHz tone burst and and ER3 earphones were used for the clicks. The ER2 were
calibrated in units dB peSPL. In such units, the levels for 4 kHz tone burst corre-
spond respectively to 92, 97, 102, 107 dB peSPL, whereas it corresponds to 70, 75,
80, 90, 100, 105, 115 dB peSPL for the clicks.
tra wave and rarefaction with condensation data) and assessing the quality
of the measurements (the Fmp and the residual noise). Some sessions ap-
peared to be very noisy, and it would have taken too long time to have the
noise reduced down to 30 nV. Very measurements present residual noise up
to 100 nV. Most of them show noise below 40 nV which is considered low
enough (see the overview in Figure F.1 in Appendix F). Note that two types
of earphones were utilised: ER-2 Tubephone Insert Earphones from Etymo-
tyc Research for the tone burst and 3A E-A-Rtone Gold for the clicks. The
reasons was that the ER3 response is not ﬂat at high frequencies as opposite
to the ER2. Finally. the experimenter always made sure to place the small
pre-amp unit of the earphones as far as possible from the two ears.
Figure 3.2: Placement of the electrodes for the ABR tests: one on each mastoid, one
at the vertex and the ground connection placed on the low forehead. Based on the
document (“Additional Information Eclipse”, 2015).
28
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.5. Noise exposure
3.5
Noise exposure
Noise exposure questionnaire
T. Johnson, Cooper, Stamper, and Chertoff
(2017) have developed a tool to estimate the annual noise exposure based on
a 10-minute questionnaire. Following the work from (Neitzel, Seixas, Gold-
man, & Daniell, 2004), the questionnaire comprises 17 questions divided into
three parts: 1)-basic demographic information, 2)-six questions to detect the
participants with high-risk of noise exposure, and 3)-eleven questions re-
lated to participation to loud activities. Questions are built to give answers
on the frequency of participation (choices are daily, weekly,monthly, every
few months, never) and the duration (choices are 8 hours or more, 4 to 8
hours, 1 to 4 hours, and less than an 1 hr)(See Appendix B). The calculation
of the annual noise exposure (LA,eq8760) based on the results of the noise-
exposure questionnaire is fully described in (T. Johnson et al., 2017). For
each speciﬁc episodic, noisy activity corresponding to the result of one of
the 17 questions, the yearly time-exposure (CEF) is calculated as the product
of the frequency with the duration. The occasional daily exposures for a
year is then computed using the equation:
DOE = CEF
T
× 100
where
T = 8760
2
L−79
3
(3.1)
L correspond to an average level of the episodic activity. The same equation
is applied to the routine, non-noisy activity but with CRF deﬁned as:
CRF = 8760 annual hours −CEF
(3.2)
The past-year noise exposure is then the sum of the doses of all the episodic,
noisy activities and the dose for the routine, non-noisy activity:
LAeq8760h =

10 × log10
P DOE + DDE
100

+ 79
(3.3)
Notice that impulse-noise exposures are not included in the present calcula-
tion. Based on the recommendation from the NIOSH, T. Johnson et al. (2017)
calculated an annual equivalent exposure limit of 78.6 dBA (LAeq8760h) and
considered individuals with LA,eq8760 above 79 dBA to be at highest risk for
developing NIHL.
29
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.6. Non-equivalent group analysis
Noise exposure measurement
To assess the acoustic-exposure at the con-
certs, we used a personal sound dosimeter of type Casella dBadge CEL-35X
mounted on the shoulders of the participants using the CEL-6352 Crocodile
Clip Kit. Three dosimeters were used for the study and each of them have
been calibrated at the beginning and at mid-term of the study using the
CEL-120 Acoustic Calibrator delivering 94 dB SPL at 1 kHz and complying
with the requirements of IEC 60942:2003 and ANSI S1.40:2006 (which guar-
anty accurate calibration over a wide range of temperature, humidity and
pressure conditions Casella). After the measurement, Leq and LCpeak were
retrieved at the ofﬁce using Casella Insight software. The participants in the
exposed group were asked to carry the dosimeter on their shoulder from
when they entered the concert hall to when they left and to pay attention
not to be standing behind a tall person (to avoid acoustic shadows at the
microphone position). All participants were offered a set of ear plugs EAR
Soft Neon providing 36 dB SNR (Figure C.1 in Appendix C) and were asked
to use them if they found it necessary. Note also that Vega allowed the
participants to wear the dosimeter during the concert. The participants in
the non-exposed group used the dosimeter for minimum 1.5 h the evening
before the second session (posttest1).
3.6
Non-equivalent group analysis
Different types of analysis can be applied to the chosen design and the
choice is not trivial as there is no consensus on what method is the best
to apply (Fancher, 2013): analysis of the change score (the difference be-
tween the posttest data and the pretest data) or analysis of posttest scores
with control of pretest differences are the most used ones.
Whereas the
ﬁrst method involves ANOVA, the second method uses ANCOVA with the
pretest as the covariate and the posttest as the response. Both methods tackle
the same questions though (Fancher, 2013): ANOVA tests the overall effect
of the treatment at posttest and ANCOVA tests the effect of a treatment for
a speciﬁed score at pretest. We decided to go for the latter method in this
study because it takes into account the fact that the non-randomization of
the groups introduce uncontrolled variation in the experiment. The general
30
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.6. Non-equivalent group analysis
ANCOVA model for the NEGD is as follows (Trochim et al., 2016):
yi = β0 + β1xadj + β2zi + ei
(3.4)
where yi is the posttest outcome for the ith unit, β0, β1 and β2 are the
coefﬁcients of the intercept, pretest and mean difference for treatment re-
spectively; zi is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 to indicate that a
subject belongs to the exposed group and 0 to indicate that the subject be-
longs to the non-exposed group. Finally xadj is the adjusted pretest score for
each person and can be calculated using the test-retest reliability estimate
calculated using the pretest and posttest data of the non-exposed group.
xadj = ¯x + r(x −¯x)
(3.5)
where ¯x is the group mean, x is the original pretest value and r is the reli-
abitlity calculated as:
r =
cov(X1, X2)
std(X1)std(X2)
(3.6)
where X1 and X2 are the pretest and posttest scores for the non-exposed
group.
With the ANCOVA we can use the t-test to deduce whether the mean of two
groups are signiﬁcantly different from each other. In our model, we look at
the t-test value and the associated p-value to assess whether the estimate of
the concert’s effect is statistically signiﬁcant. The null hypothesis is that the
estimate is equal to zero (not signiﬁcant) and the alternate hypothesis is that
the coefﬁcient is different from zero. In addition to the t-test, we also use
the F-statistic which provides a test on the signiﬁcance of the entire model
considered. All statistical analysis are conducted using MATLAB.
31
==PAGE:44==
Chapter
4
Results
For the ABR, AFC-audiometry, SPIN and noise exposure, descriptive statis-
tics are presented ﬁrst to give the reader an overview of the central tendency
and dispersion of the datasets. Then a comparison on the possible outcomes
between the groups is done for each session and for both ears. Finally, the
test-retest reliability ANCOVA method tests whether the concerts have a
signiﬁcant effect on the measured outcomes.
4.1
Noise exposure
The statistical summary for the noise measurements is presented in Table
4.1. Three main noise measures are shown: LAeq8760 is based on the noise
questionnaire (see Section 3.5) and is the estimated noise exposure for the
past year (see Table C.2 in Appendix C for the details of calculation). LAeq
and LCpeak (see Table C.1 in Appendix C for more details) relate to the
noise exposure measured using a dosimeter during the concerts for the
exposed group (for a time-average of exposure of 02h38min) and during
at least 1.5 h (for a time-average of exposure of 02h03min) at home for the
non-exposed group.
Notice that for two subjects in the exposed group,
the levels are calculated based on the data measured by the venue itself
and not using the dosimeter (Vega uses a monitoring system called 10EaZy
to insure compliance with the law (10EaZy, 2018). A comparison between
the data measured with the dosimeter and Vega´s system was done for
one participant (see Figure C.2 in Appendix C). Considering the distance
difference between Vega’s measurement microphone placed in the back of
the room (17 m away from the stage in Store Vega) and the dosimeter (place
on the participant’s shoulder who was standing at 2/3 of the room), there
was 1.3 dBA difference between the two measures.
This was considered
acceptable enough and therefore it was decided to use Vega’s system as a
backup in case some participants would not manage to use the dosimeter.
32
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4. Results
4.1. Noise exposure
Exposed
(N=8)
Non
Exposed
(N=7)
Mean
Median
Std
Min
Max
Mean
Median
Std
Min
Max
LAeq8760[dBA re. 20 µP]
70,8
71,0
3,1
67,0
76,0
69,6
70,0
1,5
67,0
72
LAeq [dBA re. 20 µP]
97,1
101,6
13,5
64,2
105,3
64,5
62,1
6,5
56,5
73,0
LCpeak [dBC re. 20 µP]
128,0
131,6
12,7
97,6
136,7
120,7
119,1
10,7
112,8
143,5
Table 4.1: Table of descriptive statistics for the noise measurements: past-year noise
exposure (LAeq8760) and the noise levels measured during the concerts (LAeq and
LCpeak) are shown for both groups.
The averaged LAeq is 32.6 dBA higher for the exposed group (97.1 dBA) than
for the non-exposed group (64.5 dBA) (Figure 4.1). The minimum level for
the exposed group is 64.2 dBA because one participant (#6) used ear plugs
during the concert: the exposure level was measured at 100.2 dBA and
36 dBA were subtracted to account for the attenuation provided by the ear
plugs (Figure C.1 in Appendix C). Note that the correction was based on the
assumption that the ear plugs were perfectly inserted and wore at all time.
Due to this correction, the exposed group’s noise distribution is slightly
more skewed than the non-exposed group (the difference between mean and
median is slightly higher for the exposed group than for the non-exposed
group). For the same group, the maximum LAeq measured is 105.3 dBA.
Regarding the non-exposed group, the levels range from 57 dBA to 73 dBA.
There is a fairly large range of levels (16.5 dBA between min and max) con-
sidering that the people from the non-exposed group were asked to remain
quiet at home. Looking at the standard deviation, there is more disper-
sion for the exposed group (13.5 dBA) than the other group (6.5 dBA) and
this is again due to the correction. It is reduced to 2.8 dBA when removing
participant #6 from the analysis.
Regarding the LCpeak levels, they give an idea of how high the impulse
sounds were during the measurements, there is only 8 dBC difference be-
tween the means of the two groups , but the highest mean is observed for
the exposed group. Surprisingly, the highest LCpeak level was actually mea-
sured for one participant in the non-exposed group and the lowest LCpeak
level was measured for one participant in the exposed group.
As for the past-year noise exposure calculated based on the answers to the
33
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. Results
4.2. AFC-audiometry
questionnaire, the two groups seem fairly equal at ﬁrst sight: there is only
1.2 dBA difference between the means (70.8 dBA for the exposed group vs
69.6 dBA for the non-exposed group). The ranges of the data are also fairly
similar (9 dBA for the exposed group vs 5 dBA for the non-exposed group)
compared to the means. The dispersion of the data is slightly larger for
the exposed group, even though the standard deviations for both groups
are very small compared to the means. From Table C.2, one can see that
for most of the participants, large doses of noise come from listening to
music with headset and speakers and events. Note also that two of them (#3
and #10) were exposed to ﬁrearms within the past year. This observation is
however not included in the calculation.
Inferential statistics
Inferences about the difference in means between
the groups for each three measures were performed using a paired
two-tailed t-test at the 5% signiﬁcance level (with assumed unequal vari-
ances).
That is because a calculation showed that the variances of the
samples were unequal. Note that participant #6 was disregarded for this
analysis because he was the only one wearing the ear plugs.
The null
hypothesis was that the two data samples (corresponding respectively to
the exposed and non-exposed groups) for each three conﬁgurations were
from populations with equal means.
The results showed that the null
hypothesis were rejected for the LAeq (t-value=14.26,p-value<0.001) and
LCpeak (t-value=2.7015,p-value=0.0296) datasets but not for the LAeq8760
(t-value=0.8222,p-value=0.4338) dataset.
This means that the two groups
are signiﬁcantly different in regards to LAeq and LCpeak but not in regards
to LAeq8760.
4.2
AFC-audiometry
The results of the AFC-audiometry measures are reviewed in this section.
First, the results across all frequencies from 500 Hz to 8000 Hz are consid-
ered, then focus is put on two bins calculated as the arithmetic average of
the audiometric thresholds measured from 0.5 kHz to 3 kHz and from 4 kHz
to 8 kHz. The data for participant #6 are withdrawn from the analysis be-
cause he was the only one wearing ear plugs and that the data gathered at
the posttest2 session are missing for participants #14 and #15.
34
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4. Results
4.2. AFC-audiometry
Raw data from 500 Hz to 8000 Hz
The descriptive statistics showing the
central tendency and the dispersion of each group based on the entire AFC-
audiometry dataset at all measured frequencies are shown in Tables D.1
(Pretest), D.2 (Posttest1) and D.3 (Posttest2) in Appendix D. From these ta-
bles, it can be seen that the higher the frequency, the higher the averaged
hearing thresholds for both ears, groups and all three sessions. The averaged
thresholds are calculated above 20 dB SPL above 6 kHz. One participant in
the exposed group reached a maximum threshold of 38.75 dB SPL during
the posttest1 session and the minimum thresholds are found at low fre-
quencies (as low as 3.5 dB SPL). The maximum standard deviation is 10 dB
SPL which could be considered large compared to the means. The medians
are very similar to the means overall: the data are fairly well distributed
around the means.
LE.-Lnon-E. [dB]
0.5 kHz
1 kHz
2 kHz
3 kHz
4 kHz
6 kHz
8 kHz
Pretest
-2/0.6
1.7/-0.8
-0.6/-0.5
-1.1/1.8
1.1/0.6
0.8/-0.3
-0.5/1.2
Table 4.2: The difference at pretest between the averaged threshold levels of each
group considering each frequency and both ears (Left/Right). The negative values
mean that the averaged thresholds for the non-exposed group are larger than for
the exposed group.
Table 4.2 summarizes the differences of threshold levels between the groups
at pretest and for each frequency. Across all frequencies the mean differ-
ence is around −0.1 dB for the left ear (with a maximum of 2 dB) and 0.6 dB
SPL for the right ear (maximum of 1.7 dB). This seems small. Inferences
about the difference in means between the groups for each frequency were
performed using a paired two-tailed t-test at the 5% signiﬁcance level. For
all frequencies, the test failed to reject the null hypothesis that the means
of the groups were equal (Table 4.3). This means that the two groups are
statistically not different at pretest in regards to the hearing threshold.
From Figure 4.1, we observe that there is a general positive difference be-
tween pretest and posttest1 and pretest and posttest2 above 4 kHz for the
exposed group. Above 4 kHz the averaged increase between pretest and
posttest1 is about 1.2 dB for the left ear and 1.3 dB for the right ear (Table
D.4), and between pretest and posttest2 it is about 2.9 dB for the left ear and
0.3 dB for the right ear (Table Table D.5). As for the non-exposed group, we
35
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4. Results
4.2. AFC-audiometry
0.5 kHz
1 kHz
2 kHz
3 kHz
4 kHz
6 kHz
8 kHz
LEFT
t-test
-0.53
0.76
-0.33
-0.54
0.45
0.26
-0.13
p-value
0.61
0.46
0.75
0.60
0.66
0.80
0.90
RIGHT
t-test
0.34
-0.37
-0.22
0.89
0.20
-0.11
0.31
p-value
0.74
0.72
0.83
0.39
0.84
0.91
0.76
Table 4.3: Table of inferences about the difference in means between the groups
for each frequency. A paired two-tailed t-test at the 5% signiﬁcance level (testing
the null hypothesis that the population means were equal) was chosen because we
were not conﬁdence, considering the data, to hypothesize a direction of change. The
p-value is always greater than 0.05 meaning that there is no signiﬁcant difference
between the groups at pretest.
see a decrease of hearing thresholds between pretest and the two following
sessions: the decrease is larger between pretest and posttest1 than between
pretest and posttest2. The mean curves for the non-exposed group are ex-
pected to lie around zero because the hearing thresholds are not expected to
change for this group between the sessions. This is not the case when con-
sidering all participants. If we eliminate participant #10, however, the mean
curves for the non-exposed group comes closer to the zero line up to 6 kHz
for three conﬁgurations out of four. Indeed, participant #10 exhibits large
delta between the sessions because the pretest has been measured fairly
high (Figure D.1). The fact that the curves for posttest1 and posttest2 are
very similar could mean that the pretest data are incorrect. However, we
better keep the data as we are not sure whether this outlier is due to real
physical difference or to measurement error. As for the difference between
pretest and posttest2, we observe a difference of thresholds between the ex-
posed and non-exposed groups for both ears if we consider all participants.
This changes slightly if we disregard participant #10.
Bining the threshold values into two bands
Based on the above obser-
vations, the data are divided into two frequency bins. Comparing the bins
(Figure 4.2), it is immediately apparent that the differences between groups
are larger (and above 1 dB SPL for three cases out of four) for the bin 4 kHz
to 8 kHz than for the bin 0.5 kHz to 3 kHz. For the low-frequency bin, the
thresholds difference from pretest to posttest1 are close to zero. From pretest
to posttest2 there are more discrepancies between the groups. The behaviour
of the right ear between pretest and posttest2 agree with Figure 4.1. Up to
36
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4. Results
4.2. AFC-audiometry
-5
0
5
LPosttest1-LPretest [dB SPL]
Left ear
2000
4000
6000
8000
Frequency [Hz]
-5
0
5
LPosttest2-LPretest [dB SPL]
Exposed
Non-exposed
Non-exposed w/o #10
-5
0
5
Right ear
2000
4000
6000
8000
Frequency [Hz]
-5
0
5
Figure 4.1: The difference for the exposed (green) and non-exposed (purple) groups
between the averaged threshold levels of posttest1 and pretest (top panel) and be-
tween the averaged threshold levels of posttest2 and pretest (bottom panel). Each
frequency and both ears (Left/Right) are considered. The negative values mean
that the threshold levels measured at pretest are larger than the ones measured
at posttest1. For the exposed group, only the threshold levels measured for the
participants #9 to #13 are utilized because #14 to #15 did not attend the posttest2
session. The average for the non-exposed group calculated without the data from
participant #10 is also shown.
3 kHz, the non-exposed group exhibits larger threshold delta and at high fre-
quencies the non-exposed group exhibits, in average, lower threshold deltas
than the exposed group.
Finally, Figure 4.3 displays the threshold levels measured during the three
sessions from 4 kHz to 8 kHz for all participants (top plots) and the average
of the threshold levels for each group (bottom plots). Looking at the indi-
vidual data, one participant from the exposed group (#8) seem to have high
hearing thresholds at high frequencies. Furthermore, for both left and right
ears, the thresholds tend to increase at posttest1 or remain constant for most
participants in the exposed group and the threshold levels seem to decrease
37
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4. Results
4.2. AFC-audiometry
-2
-1
0
1
2
LPosttest1-LPretest [dB SPL]
Left ear
0.5kHz-3kHz
4kHz-8kHz
-2
-1
0
1
2
LPosttest2-LPretest [dB SPL]
Exposed
Non-exposed
-2
-1
0
1
2
Right ear
0.5kHz-3kHz
4kHz-8kHz
-2
-1
0
1
2
Figure 4.2: Difference of the mean threshold levels between posttest1 and pretest
(two top plots) and between posttest2 and pretest (two bottom plots) for the con-
trol group (green) and the non-exposed group (purple) and both ears (L/R). Two
frequency bins are considered.
for the participants of the non-exposed. This is also what we observe for
the averages. At pretest, the groups seem similar for both ears as we saw
previously. Then, we observe a threshold shift in the positive direction at
posttest1 which continues slightly at posttest2 for the exposed group, left
ear. It does decrease to baseline for the right ear. As for the exposed group,
we observe the opposite; the averaged thresholds decrease at posttest1 com-
pared to pretest and increase again at posttest2 to recover to a level similar
as pretest. Both ears are consistent. Withdrawing the mentioned outlier in
the averages for the exposed group slightly changes the absolute values but
not the shape of the curves i.e the change rate of the levels between the ses-
sions for both ears. The level of changes from the sessions do not exceed a
38
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4. Results
4.2. AFC-audiometry
10
15
20
25
30
35
Threshold [dB SPL]
Left ear
10
15
20
25
30
35
Right ear
Pretest
Posttest1
Posttest2
10
15
20
25
30
35
Threshold [dB SPL]
Exposed
Non-exposed
Exposed w/o #8 and #2
Pretest
Posttest1
Posttest2
10
15
20
25
30
35
Figure 4.3: Hearing thresholds for each participant (top panel) of the groups and
averaged across the groups (bottom panel; exposed: green, non-exposed: purple).
Each session are shown as well as the data for both ears. Only the bin 4 kHz to
8 kHz is considered. In the top plot, the individual data are also plottes together
with the error bars.
few decibels.
Inferential statistics
The data in the bin 4 kHz to 8 kHz were analysed
with the reliability-corrected ANCOVA model as described in Section 3.6.
In order to deal with the bias of the treatment effect estimates brought by
the non-randomization of the groups at pretest, a ”reliability” correction
was used to adjust all pretests for measurement error. The reliability coef-
ﬁcients were calculated using Equations 3.6 and the data measured for the
non-exposed group and the adjustments were done for each person using
Equation 3.5. The results are presented in Table 4.4. Thus, it was found
that the concerts were responsible for an increase of hearing thresholds of
approximately 3 dB at posstest1 and posstest2 for the left ear. The increase
was relatively similar for the right ear at posttest1 but was greatly smaller
39
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4. Results
4.3. Speech-in-noise
r
Adj. R2
Estimate
CI
t-test
p-val
F-stat
p-val
Pretest vs Posttest1 LEFT
0.79
0.89
2.9
[1.37 4.43]
4.17
0.0015
53
2.25e-6
Pretest vs Posttest2 LEFT
0.62
0.79
3.15
[0.73 5.57]
2.95
0.016
22.1
0.0003
Pretest vs Posttest1 RIGHT
0.50
0.80
2.86
[0.02 5.70]
2.22
0.049
26.6
6.12e-05
Pretest vs Posttest2 RIGHT
0.80
0.80
0.79
[-1.82 3.41]
0.69
0.51
23.3
0.0003
Table 4.4: Table of inferential statistics performed on the AFC-audiometry dataset
considering the bin 4 kHz to 8 kHz and the two posttest sessions. For each model, it
shows the test-retest reliability coefﬁcient, the adjusted R-squared, the coefﬁcient of
the concert´s effect with the conﬁdence interval. t-test relates (with the p-value) to
the signiﬁcance of the concert effect coefﬁcient and F-stat relates (with the p-value)
to the signiﬁcance of the entire linear model.
at posttest2. For the three signiﬁcant models mentioned, normal and resid-
ual plots are displayed (see Figures D.2, D.3 and D.4) in order to check
for the model assumption (linearity, normality). The data are symmetrically
distributed around a diagonal line i.e the error distribution is approximately
normal, the residuals seem relatively structureless and the points are equally
distributed around the x-axis so there is no evidence to counter the fact that
there is a concert effect on the hearing threshold. Finally, the same analysis
was performed without the data from participant #8, (see Table D.6). The
concert effect was estimated larger for the left ear and non-signiﬁcant for
the right ear at posttest2.
4.3
Speech-in-noise
The descriptive statistics for the SPIN data retrieved at 3 levels of SNR
(10/5/0 dB) are shown in Tables E.1 and E.2 in Appendix E. The data for
participant #6, #14 and #15 are withdrawn from the analysis. #14 and #15
did not attend the posttest2 session. Data are missing for participant #1
(both sessions), #2 (0 dB SNR for pretest, left ear) and #11 (0 dB SNR for
posttest2).
LE.-Lnon-E. [dB]
Left/Right
10 dB SNR
1/-9
5 dB SNR
7/-1
0 dB SNR
13/-9
Table 4.5: Mean difference of the percentage of correct answers at pretest between
the exposed group (E.) and the non-exposed group (non-E.) for three levels of SNR.
A negative value means that the non-exposed group performed in average better
than the exposed group.
40
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4. Results
4.3. Speech-in-noise
60
70
80
90
100
Left ear
Exposed
Non exposed
60
70
80
90
100
Right ear
40
50
60
70
80
Score [% correct]
40
50
60
70
80
Pretest
Posttest2
20
30
40
50
60
70
Pretest
Posttest2
20
30
40
50
60
70
10dB SNR
5dB SNR
0dB SNR
Figure 4.4: Percentage of correct answers (score) at pretest and posttest2 for the
three levels of SNR and both ears. The individual data are displayed in grey and
the error bars are also represented. Because many data points are disregarded in
this analysis due to incomplete datasets, all averages are based on either four or
ﬁve data points.
41
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4. Results
4.3. Speech-in-noise
Table 4.5 shows the difference of percentage of correct answers at pretest
between the two groups. We observe that the difference of means is positive
for the left ear and negative for the right ear. We used lists of 25 words, so
the difference we observe are of maximum 3 words (one word per 4%). For
the left ear the difference decreases with SNR.
Figure 4.4 shows the change of the percentage of correct answers between
pretest and posttest2 for the three levels of SNR considered in this study.
First, the lower the SNR the poorer the scores for both groups and sessions.
At 10 dB SNR, the averaged scores considering both sessions and ears are
above 70%; at 5 dB SNR, they range from 56.5% to 65% score, and at 0 dB
SNR, the averages levels are below 53%. Second, for the exposed group, the
scores get better or constant from pretest to posttest2 for 5 conﬁgurations out
of 6. It is only at 0 dB SNR that the percentage of correct answers are reduced
at posttest2. The decrease is about 5% which, again, correspond to one word
(on a list of 25). The biggest increase of score is seen at 10 dB SNR with
nearly 13% difference. Otherwise the scores don’t vary much from a session
to another for the exposed group. For the non-exposed group, we see the
same decrease of score at 0 dB SNR as for the exposed group. Overall, we
see the same trends as for the exposed group for the left ear and opposite
trend for the right ear. Third, the dispersion of the data, represented by the
error bars, seems large compared to the mean for all conﬁgurations which
tend to indicate that the uncertainty on the data is large.
Inferential statistics
The SPIN data at the three levels of SNR were anal-
ysed with the reliability-corrected ANCOVA model as described in Section
3.6. The reliability was calculated using Equations 3.6 and the adjustments
were done based on Equation 3.5. The results for the three levels of SNR
are displayed in Table 4.6. The r values correspond to the reliability correc-
tion applied to the pretest scores for both groups an calculated using the
data of the non-exposed group. The lowest reliability coefﬁcient (meaning
that there is high measurement error) is found at 0 dB SNR. It seems that
the higher the SNR, the lower the correlation coefﬁcient. Also, interestingly
we see the highest adjusted R2 for the 0 dB SNR. At 0 and 5 dB SNR, the
adjusted R2 are si low that we can consider the linearity assumption to be
violated. Also it can be seen by checking at the p-value for the t-tests that
the concerts never have a signiﬁcant impact on the posttest2 data. The infer-
42
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4. Results
4.4. Auditory brainstem response
r
Adj. R2
Estimate
CI
t-test
p-val
F-stat
p-val
0 dB SNR LEFT
0.87
0.595
0.78
[-19.32 20.89 ]
0.10
0.924
6.15
0.05
5 dB SNR LEFT
0.70
0.062
-2.23
[-26.07 21.61]
-0.22
0.831
1.30
0.33
10 dB SNR LEFT
0.70
0.195
4.38
[-5.37 14.13]
1.06
0.323
2.09
0.19
0 dB SNR RIGHT
0.96
0.496
-5.93
[-23.69 11.82]
-0.82
0.445
4.93
0.05
5 dB SNR RIGHT
0.84
0.115
6.36
[-5.85 18.56]
1.23
0.258
1.58
0.27
10 dB SNR RIGHT
0.55
-0.135
2.3
[-13.41 18.10]
0.35
0.740
0.47
0.65
Table 4.6: Table of inferential statistics performed on the SPIN dataset considering
all three levels of SNR and the only one posttest session. For each model, it shows
the test-retest reliability coefﬁcient, the ajusted R-squared, the coefﬁcient of the
concert´s effect with the conﬁdence interval. t-test relates (with the p-value) to the
signiﬁcance of the concert effect coefﬁcient and F-stat relates (with the p-value) to
the signiﬁcance of the entire linear model.
ential statistics corroborate the impression that there is no clear trend in the
SPIN datasets.
4.4
Auditory brainstem response
The results for the ABR measures are reviewed in this section. The table of
descriptive statistics for the entire dataset is placed in Appendix F. The data
for participant #6 are withdrawn from the analysis and data are missing for
participants #14 (posttest2), #15 (all sessions). The exposed group contained
3 males and 4 females whereas it was balanced for the non-exposed group.
Focusing on the amplitudes of WI
Figure 4.5 shows the amplitude of WI
as a function of the stimulus levels for each group and session. We observe
that the higher the levels of the stimuli, the larger the amplitudes of WI. The
increase for the 4 kHz tone burst seems to be quasi-linear across the levels.
As for the clicks, the increase is linear up to 75 dB nHL for the non-exposed
group and up to 85 dB nHL for the exposed group.
Above these limits,
the levels increase in a more shallow way for the exposed group. For both
groups and both ears, we see a clear decrease of the amplitudes from 85 dB
nHL and up. Looking at the difference between the groups at pretest, for the
4 kHz tone burst, the amplitudes of the wave at pretest are measured larger
(as for the other sessions though) for the non-exposed group than for the
exposed group and there are larger differences for the right ear than for the
left ear). For the clicks, the groups seem fairly equal at pretest up to 75 dB
nHL for both ears, but then the exposed group exhibits larger amplitudes at
85 dB nHL and 90 dB nHL- especially for the left ear. Finally, it is interesting
43
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4. Results
4.4. Auditory brainstem response
85
90
95
100
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Amplitude [7V]
Left ear
85
90
95
100
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Right ear
pretest
posttest1
posttest2
65
70
75
80
85
90
Stimulus level [nHL]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Amplitude [7V]
65
70
75
80
85
90
Stimulus level [nHL]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Exposed
Non-exposed
TB 4kHz WI
Clicks WI
Figure 4.5: Amplitude of WI as a function of the stimulus levels for the 4 kHz tone
burst (top plots) and the clicks (bottom plots) at pretest, posttest1 and posttest2.
Data are shown for the exposed group (green color), for the non-exposed group
(purple color) and both ears (L/R).
to notice that for the exposed group, left ear, considering the clicks, there is
a larger decrease of amplitude of the wave between 85 dB to 90 dB nHL at
posttest1 than at pretest. It slightly increases at posttest2. For the right ear,
the amplitude increases greatly from 85 dB nHL to 90 dB nHL at pretest, but
it slightly reduces at posttest1 and it gets ﬂat at posttest2.
Figure 4.6 represents the pretest-posttest changes of the level growth of WI
calculated considering the two highest levels presented for each stimulus.
Such levels are chosen because that is where we expect to observe the biggest
concerts’ effect. For three of four conﬁgurations (4 kHz tone burst left and
right, Clicks right), there is a clear decrease of the level growth from pretest
to posttest1 and an increase from posttest1 to posttest2. The biggest decrease
44
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4. Results
4.4. Auditory brainstem response
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Level growth WI [7 V]
Left ear
Exposed
NonExposed
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Right ear
Pretest
Posttest1
Posttest2
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Level growth WI [7 V]
Pretest
Posttest1
Posttest2
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
TB 4kHz 95->100
Clicks, 85->90
Figure 4.6: The change of level growth of WI calculated at the difference between
the amplitudes at 100 dB nHL and 95 dB nHL for the 4 kHz tone burst (top plots)
and at 90 dB nHL and 85 dB nHL for the clicks (bottom plots). The results are
shown for both ears (L/R). The error bars are shown together with individual data
in grey.
are seen for the right ear. For two of these conﬁgurations (Tone burst right,
clicks right) the level growth increase from pretest to posttest1 and decrease
from posttest1 to posttest2. For the left ear, there seems to be no signiﬁcant
difference between the groups for the 4 kHz tone burst and the clicks. The
decrease of amplitudes after the concert, for the exposed group is obviously
interesting because it is expected but the concert effect could be masked by
some threat to internal validity, i.e. by some factors not related to the study.
Focusing on the slopes of wave I
Figure 4.7 shows the slopes of the curves
that ﬁts the quasi-linear curves ”amplitudes vs level” of WI for both stimuli.
It is interesting to perform such analysis because Table 4.7 conﬁrms that the
45
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 4. Results
4.4. Auditory brainstem response
E.
non-E.
Pretest
Posttest1
Posttest2
Pretest
Posttest1
Posttest2
TB4kHz
R-squared
0.94/0.88
0.89/0.9
0.91/0.95
0.93/0.84
0.93/0.89
0.89/0.77
Clicks
R-squared
0.87/0.88
0.88/0.77
0.87/0.92
0.82/0.76
0.84/0.84
0.82/0.81
Table 4.7: R-squared showing how well the regression line ﬁt the data points.
curve are almost linear. The difference with the level growth is that the slope
uses the information from all levels, even the smallest ones. Comparing
with Figure 4.6, there seems to be difference only for the click stimulus, left
ear. The level growth decreases, whereas the slope increases from pretest
to posttest1. Otherwise there is no big differences beside the fact that the
groups at pretest seem more similar considering the slope.
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Slope WI
Left ear
Exposed
NonExposed
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Right ear
Pretest
Posttest1
Posttest2
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Slope WI
Pretest
Posttest1
Posttest2
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
TB 4kHz 95->100
Clicks, 85->90
Figure 4.7: The change of slopes for the 4 kHz tone burst (top plots) and for the
clicks (bottom plots). The results are shown for both ears (L/R). The error bars are
shown together with individual data in grey.
46
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4. Results
4.4. Auditory brainstem response
Inferential statistics
First inferences about the difference in means at
pretest between the groups for each measures of amplitudes were per-
formed using a paired two-tailed t-test (with assumed unequal variances)
in MATLAB. The null hypothesis was that the two groups were equal. The
results (Table 4.9) show that the null hypothesis could not be rejected at the
5% signiﬁcance level for any levels. This means that there were no evidence
that the groups were not equal at pretest for any of the considered levels.
TB 4kHz
100
95
90
85
t-test
-1.14/-0.42
-0.89/-2.24
-1.79/-2.16
-1.13/-1
p-value
0.3/0.68
0.4/0.05
0.12/0.06
0.29/0.34
Clicks
90
85
75
65
t-test
0.86/-0.43
0.58/-0.8
0.33/-0.43
-0.28/-0.8
p-value
0.75/0.68
0.78/0.45
0.75/0.68
0.78/0.45
Table 4.8: Table of inferential statistics on the difference at pretest for the 4 kHz
tone burst and the clicks. The results are shown for both ears (L/R).
Furthermore, the ABR dataset was analysed with the reliability-corrected
ANCOVA model as described in Section 3.6. The reliability was calculated
using Equations 3.6 and the adjustments were done based on Equation 3.5.
The results for the different combinations involving pretest and posttest1
are displayed in Table F.3. The reliability coefﬁcient ranged from 0.06 to 0.9
meaning that the measurement error varied a lot between the different com-
binations tested. Secondly, most of the adjusted R-squared are very small
and therefore a linear regression analysis might not be suitable for most
data. Looking at the p-value for the estimate of the concert effect, only one
model (Table 4.9) has a p-value below 0.05 and therefore can be considered
signiﬁcant: the level growth from 65 dB nHL to 90 dB nHL for the clicks
left ear. For this combination, the normality assumption is tested and the
results are seen in Figure4.8.
The residuals seem to be equally distributed
r
Adj. Rˆ2
Estimate
CI low
CI up
t-test
p-val
F-stat
p-val
Clicks WI 65->90
0,04
0,376
-1,794
-3,489
-0,099
-2,359
0,04
4,614
0,038
Table 4.9: Relevant part of Table F.1 showing the results of the reliability-adjusted
ANCOVA for the only signiﬁcant model.
47
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 4. Results
4.4. Auditory brainstem response
0.2
0.25
Adjusted pretest
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Posttest
Exposed
Non exposed
-0.1
0
0.1
Residuals
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.25
0.50
0.75
0.90
0.95
0.98
Probability
0
0.5
Fitted values
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Standardized residuals
Figure 4.8: Residual and normality analysis.
around the x-axis. Looking at the estimate, which represent the mean dif-
ference between the two groups, the estimate for the ﬁrst mentioned model
doesn’t seem to give meaning: it is calculated to be -1.8, but it is impossible
that there is a difference of 1.8 µV between the level growth of the groups.
Looking carefully into the data, the signiﬁcance of that model comes from
the fact that pretest values are adjusted to the mean of each group because
a large correction is applied to the pretest data due to a large measurement
error between pretest and posttest1. It is not believed that this model is a
real model because there is too much noise in the measurement of the non-
exposed group. The results for the different combinations involving pretest
and posttest2 are displayed in Table F.4. None of the models from the above
were signiﬁcant.
48
==PAGE:61==
Chapter
5
Discussion
There was a signiﬁcant difference between the groups in regards to noise
exposure
All participants in the exposed group were exposed to noise lev-
els above 98 dBA for more than 2 hours, with peak levels above 125 dBC.
Such levels of recreational noise are considered dangerous when the time
of exposure exceed 15 minutes per day (Kinsler et al., 2000). Few partici-
pants reported feelings of reduced hearing sensitivity and phantom sounds
within two hours post-concert, but none reported such feelings the morn-
ing after the concert. The levels and times of exposure were similar to the
ones used by Kujawa and Liberman (2009) on mice. They used an acous-
tic overexposure stimulus of an octave band of noise (8 kHz to 16 kHz) at
100 dB SPL, for 2 h. In average, more than 34 dB difference was measured
between the groups. Moreover, the relatively low levels measured for the
non-exposed group shows that the participants from this group did try to
avoid exposing themselves to intense noise. However, we found surpris-
ing that the highest levels of impulse sounds were actually measured for
one participant in the non-exposed group. This did not seem to impact the
results though but the levels were not analysed further as it was enough
for this study to conﬁrm that the groups were different in terms of noise-
exposure. The data gathered throughout the noise questionnaire showed no
signiﬁcant difference of past-year noise exposure between the groups, but
revealed that two of the participants had been exposed to high-risk noise
levels from ﬁrearms over the past-year. Such observation was not taken into
account as it is not part of the calculation of the LAeq8760. The equivalence
in terms of past-year exposure is positive for the study because it removes
a confounding effect. Indeed, previous studies (Holtegaard & Østergaard,
2015; G. Stamper & Johnson, 2015) have shown that being exposed to noise
on a long run can sensibly affect some of the markers of NIND such as the
SPIN test and the ABR amplitudes. Despite the fact that the participants
in the non-exposed group were explicitly asked not to expose themselves
49
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 5. Discussion
to intense sounds during the month of the study, three of them did not
fully respect that condition. One participant did play acoustic guitar in a
church some days before the second session, one visited a nightclub during
1.5 hours two weekends before the last session and one took a plane twice
within the month of the experiment. Our time being limited to select more
participants, it was decided to keep them in the groups. It shows, however,
how challenging it is to ensure that the study conditions are respected when
the study lasts a month. This parameter must be controlled better in further
studies. This is not easy since we are all at one point or another in our daily
lives exposed to intense noise sources.
Evidence that the noise from concert increases the hearing thresholds to
a small extent.
The AFC-audiometry data revealed that the noise from the
concerts was responsible for an increase of thresholds of up to 3 dB within 15
hours after the concert at frequencies from 4 kHz to 8 kHz. There was no re-
covery four weeks after the exposure for the left ear and greater recovery for
the right ear. We performed the same analysis withdrawing an outlier from
the exposed-group and this conﬁrmed that the concerts affected the hear-
ing thresholds of the left ear up to posttest2, and the right ear at posttest1
only. These differences are small and in agreement with Grinn et al. (2017)
who found an averaged TTS of about 3 dBA at 4 kHz and 8 kHz on people
exposed to comparable levels. TTS is known to retrieve in an exponential
manner (Clark, 1991) within some hours post-exposure and this could ex-
plain why we observed only a maximum 3 dB threshold shift: the measures
were not carried out before 9 hours post-exposure for practical reasons. An
other explanation could be that the AFC-audiometry was performed few
minutes after the SPIN test where the participant was exposed to broad-
band noise at 70 dB SPL for an extensive amount of time. If a TTS would be
induced by such noise, then it would possibly mask the TTS induced by the
concert. Furthermore, a reduction of thresholds was observed at high fre-
quencies from pretest to posttest1 and from pretest to posttest2 for the non-
exposed group. It was not anticipated as we would have expected to see the
difference of hearing thresholds of the control group between the sessions
to be close to zero in the absence of noise exposure. Withdrawing a partici-
pant from the analysis did actually bring the curves from the non-exposed
group close to the zero line and increased the concert effect. Even though
50
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5. Discussion
we attempted to take the measurement errors into account in the analysis
using the reliability-corrected ANCOVA, we could not go around measure-
ment errors due to the lack of participants and the individual variability of
the hearing thresholds. As a consequence, the levels of TTS estimated by
the data probably does not totally reﬂect the reality. The conﬁdence inter-
vals for the coefﬁcients were also large which conﬁrm that the sample size
was too small. Such levels of TTS could, however, be too small to induce a
synaptopathy in humans. As exposed in (Grinn et al., 2017), there was no
sign of synaptopathy damages in rodents after 20 dB to 30 dB TTS; only TTS
levels from 40 dB to 50 dB TTS were associated with a NIND.
No evidence that SPIN performances were decreased after noise expo-
sure
As for the speech-in-noise tests, we failed in revealing any signiﬁ-
cant impact of the concerts on the speech-in-noise performance four weeks
post-exposure.
The results are surprising knowing that the people with
assumed NIND have reported poor performance understanding speech in
background noise but agree with Grinn et al. (2017) who found ”no sta-
tistically signiﬁcant relationship between WIN (word-in-noise) score shifts
and noise exposure at 1-week post-noise on the overall test”. This lack of
evidence could be related to the technical limitations and the way it was
measured. Performing the same test within two time intervals can bring the
risk of training effects. We don’t believe that the participants could have
remembered the words and numbers (8 lists of 25 different words) from a
session to another even though the words were elementary. It is a fact, how-
ever, that the participants were more familiar with the technique at posttest2
and this could have inﬂuenced the results.
No signiﬁcant decrease of the level growth of WI after exposure to noise.
Regarding the ABR measures, we investigated the level growth of WI, that
is the change of amplitudes between a certain level and the maximum pre-
sentation levels for each stimulus (100 dB nHL for the 4 kHz tone burst and
90 dB nHL for the clicks). We also investigated the changes of slopes based
on the assumption (which we veriﬁed) that there was a linear relationship
between the stimulus levels and the amplitude of the wave. This analysis
was performed to account for the amplitudes measured at the small levels.
Our data revealed that there was only a signiﬁcant impact of the concert
51
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 5. Discussion
noise when considering the level growth of the clicks calculated from 65 dB
nHL to 90 dB nHL of ABR WI measured on the left ear. However, the es-
timate of the effect’s coefﬁcient did not make sense because of the large
correction applied to the pretest data. It is very surprising to observe such
lack of evidence as we would have expected a decrease of the level growth at
higher levels. Looking at the mean curves, we found, considering the click
stimulus and the exposed group, that there was a larger decrease of the level
growth calculated from 85 dB to 90 dB nHL at posttest1 than pretest for both
ears. This is in agreement with the hypothesis that the NIND is associated
with a decrease of the level growth at higher levels but the statistical test
failed to ﬁnd this difference signiﬁcant because of a large measurement er-
ror. It is well established that age, gender and body temperature can affect
the results of an ABR; the groups used for the analysis of the ABR were,
unfortunately, not balanced as there was one female more in the exposed-
group. This could have affected the results. Furthermore, even though the
levels and times of exposure are similar to what the mice were exposed to in
Kujawa and Liberman (2009), these levels were most likely not high enough
and the time of exposure not long enough to cause an extensive synap-
topathy on humans. The human hearing system is probably more resilient
than animals meaning that either higher noise levels or long time exposure
should be applied for inducing synaptopathy.
The limitations of the study
The non-randomization of the two groups
associated to the few amount of participants is a drawback. Going for a
non-randomized design, it was clear from the beginning that the groups
should be as balanced as possible to avoid confounding effects and as large
as possible (our plan was to recruit at least 10 listeners in each group). We
also found critical to form two balanced group in terms of at least age and
gender. Unfortunately, we did not manage to recruit enough persons to
fulﬁl these requirements as we had 8 participants in the exposed group
(balanced) and 7 participants in the non-exposed group (4 females). For
some measures, we even used less participants because of missing data.
Also, we decided to completely disregard the data from one participant
because he was the only one to wear ear plugs during the concert.
We
could have accounted for the overall attenuation provided by the ear plugs
and put him in the non-exposed group but we decided not to, because we
52
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5. Discussion
were unsure that he had used the ear plugs properly. The positive point,
however, is that we found no evidence that the groups were not equal at
baseline in terms of past-year noise exposure, hearing threshold levels and
ABR amplitudes of WI for the clicks and the 4 kHz tone burst but it was
not the case for the SPIN scores. There were some differences between the
groups but also a large dispersion and hence the lack of signiﬁcance.
A pretest-posttest design was convenient, but we found that the measure-
ment errors introduced between the sessions could give some issues. They
seemed to be large in some conﬁgurations considering the large variation
of outcomes for the non-exposed group. Efforts were done to take into the
measurement errors by adjusting the pretest data with the test-retest reliabil-
ity coefﬁcient. But we found some limitations in using this technique when
the measurement error was so large that the reliability was calculated very
close to zero. The consequences were that the data were modiﬁed greatly
and the estimate of the effect didn’t have physical meaning. Measurement
errors are difﬁcult to control when the measures are performed on humans
within weeks from each other. For example, all participants agreed to avoid
exposing themselves to intense noise within the month of the experiment.
Some did not follow the demand and this could have clearly biased the data.
Further perspective
The lack of effect to the exposure to one single concert
is obviously a good news for those attending live-music performances once
in a while. But it does not necessary mean that it is safe to be exposed to
concert noise in a long run. It should not be neglected that the auditory sys-
tem is somehow being affected by exposure to recreational noise since some
people have reported feeling of TTS within two hours after the concert or
short-term tinnitus. But in which extent? The neural impact of the noise-
exposure could be too small to be detected by the techniques we used or
the statistical design. Therefore, there is need for longer term investigations.
For instance, it could relevant to perform additional posttest measures be-
tween concerts to investigate possible changes over a longer period. Also
we believe that it would be relevant to test the participants right after the
concert in order to correlate a probable larger TTS with changes of ABR WI
amplitude at higher levels. It could also be interesting to look at the ratio of
WI and WV done in some studies.
53
==PAGE:66==
Chapter
6
Conclusion
To investigate the effect of concert noise on people’s auditory system, we
designed a pretest-posttest study involving two non-randomized groups: an
exposed group of young adults voluntarily exposed to concerts noise, and a
control group. After we ensured that all participants were normal hearing
listeners, a battery of audiological tests were performed at each sessions:
ABR WI, AFC-audiometry and speech-in-noise tests. We found that:
• The levels and time of exposure to concerts were similar to the ones
used in the reference study of Kujawa and Liberman (2009).
Such
levels should not be recommended for more than 15 minutes daily
above which hearing loss can potentially be induced.
• The noise exposure induced a small threshold shift at frequencies
above 4 kHz which remained 4 weeks later on the left ear but not
the right ear. These levels are not expected to intense enough to cause
a synaptopathy.
• There was apparent signiﬁcant impact of the noise exposure to con-
certs on the level growth of ABR WI considering the clicks stimu-
lus from 65 to 90 dB nHL. But the estimate of the effect coefﬁcient
didn’t seem to give any physical meaning. However, looking closely at
the data, it seemed that for the clicks, there was a more shallow level
growth at posttest1 than posttest2, which was in agreement with the
hypothesis. However, the statistical test failed to ﬁnd this difference
signiﬁcant.
• Finally there were no trend in the SPIN dataset and no relationship
were found between the noise exposure and a decrease of the SPIN
performance.
Overall, based on the results of this study, we cannot conclude that exposure
to a two-hour concert can cause permanent neural damages.
54
==PAGE:67==
References
10eazy. (2018). Retrieved from https://www.10eazy.com/ (Accessed: 16-02-
2018)
3M. (2018). Hearing protection [Datasheet]. http://multimedia.3m.com/mws/
media/711107O/3m-hearing-protection-brochure.pdf.
Additional information eclipse [Computer software manual]. (2015).
Axelrod, D., & Hayward, R. (2006). Nonrandomized interventional study
designs (quasi-experimental designs). In H. Press (Ed.), Clinical research
methods for surgeons (p. 63-76).
Bonate, P. (2000). Analysis of pretest-posttest designs. Chapman & Hall /Crc.
Carpentier, L. (2017, sep). Doucement les infrabasses! Le Monde Week-end,
14-15.
Casella. (n.d.). Casella cel120 acoustic calibrator datasheet [Computer soft-
ware manual].
Clark, W.
(1991).
Recent studies of temporary threshold shift (tts) and
permanent threshold shift (pts) in animals.
Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 90(1), 155-163.
Dimitrov, D., & Rumrill Jr, P. (2003). Pretest-posttest designs and measure-
ment of change. Speaking of research, 20, 159-165.
Emanuel, D.
(2009).
Acoustic reﬂex threshold (art) patterns: An interpreta-
tion guide for students and supervisors. https://www.audiologyonline
.com/articles/acoustic-reflex-threshold-art-patterns-875. (Ac-
cessed: 21-09-2017)
Fancher, E. (2013). Comparison of methods of analysis for pretest and posttest data
[Msc Thesis].
Furman, A. C., Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2013). Noise-induced
cochlear neuropathy is selective for ﬁbers with low spontaneous rates.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 110(3), 577-586.
Grinn, S. K., Wiseman, K. B., Baker, J. A., & Le Prell, C. G. (2017). Hid-
55
==PAGE:68==
References
References
den hearing loss? no effect of common recreational noise exposure
on cochlear nerve response amplitude in humans. Frontiers in Neuro-
science, 11, 465.
Hall, J. (2015). ehandbook of auditory evoked responses. Missy Hall.
Holtegaard, P. (2015). Screening procedure of auditory functions [Computer
software manual].
Holtegaard, P., & Østergaard, S. (2015). Signs of noise-induced neural de-
generation in humans. In Proceedings of isaar 2015.
Jacobsen, F., Poulsen, T., Rindel, J., Gade, A., & Ohlrich, M. (2011). Funda-
mental of acoustics and noise control. (Note no 31200)
Johnson, D., Papadopoulos, P., Watfa, N., & Takala, J.
(1995).
Exposure
criteria, occupational exposure levels.
Johnson, T., Cooper, S., Stamper, G., & Chertoff, M. (2017). Noise expo-
sure questionnaire (neq): A tool for quantifying annual noise exposure.
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 14-35.
King, K., & Stephens, D.
(1992).
Auditory and psychological factors in
auditory disability with normal hearing. Scandinavian Audiology, 21,
109-114.
Kinsler, L., Frey, A., Coppens, A., & Sanders, J.
(2000).
Fundamentals of
acoustics (4th ed.).
Kujawa, S., & Liberman, M. (2009). Adding insult to injury: Cochlear nerve
degeneration after ’temporary’ noise-induced hearing loss. The Journal
of Neuroscience, 14077-14085.
Lin, H. W., Furman, A. C., Kujawa, S. G., & Liberman, M. C. (2011). Primary
neural degeneration in the guinea pig cochlea after reversible noise-
induced threshold shift.
Jaro-journal of the Association for Research in
Otolaryngology, 12(5), 605-616.
McBride, D. I., & Williams, S. (2001). Audiometric notch as a sign of noise
induced hearing loss. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 58(1),
46-51.
Moorehead,
C.
(2006).
Experimental
designs.
Retrieved
02-09-
2017,
from
www.dartmouth.edu/~oir/docs/Types of Experimental
Designs Handout.doc
Moser, T., & Starr, A. (2016). Auditory neuropathy - neural and synaptic
mechanisms. Nature reviews neurology, 12, 135-149.
Neitzel, R., Seixas, N., Goldman, B., & Daniell, W. (2004). Contributions
56
==PAGE:69==
References
References
of non-occupational activities to total noise exposure of construction
workers. Annals of Occupational Hygiene, 48(5), 463-473.
of Health, U. D., & Services, H. (1998). Occupational noise exposure-revised
criteria.
OSHA. (2009). Appendices.
Pickles, J. (2012). An introduction to the physiology of hearing. Emerald.
Plack, C. (2014). The sense of hearing. Psychology Press.
Plack, C., Barker, D., & Prendergast, G. (2014). Perceptual consequences of
’hidden’ hearing loss. Trends in Hearing, 18, 1-11.
Prendergast, G., Guest, H., Munro, K. J., Kluk, K., Leger, A., Hall, D. A.,
. . . Plack, C. J. (2017). Effects of noise exposure on young adults with
normal audiograms i: Electrophysiology. Hearing Research, 344, 68-81.
Sample size for before-after study (paired t-test)?
(n.d.). http://www.sample-
size.net/sample-size-study-paired-t-test/. (Accessed: 02-03-2018)
Sauders, G., & Haggard, M. (1989). The clinical assessment of obscure audi-
tory dysfunction-1. auditory and psychological factors. Ear & Hearing,
10(3), 200-208.
Stamper, G., & Johnson, T. (2015). Auditory function in normal-hearing,
noise-exposed human ears. Ear hear, 172-184.
Stamper, G. C., & Johnson, T. A. (2015). Letter to the editor: Examination of
potential sex inﬂuences in stamper and johnson. auditory function in
normal hearing. Ear and Hearing, 36(6), 738-740.
Trochim, W., Donnelly, J., & Arora, K. (2016). Research methods knowledge
base. Cengage Learning. (www.socialresearchmethods.net/kb/)
Venema, T.
(2012).
Continuing education:
tympanometry [White pa-
per].
https://ihsinfo.org/IhsV2/CEUs/pdf/jun2012/CE%20Article
Tympanometry.pdf.
Webster, D., Popper, A., & Fay, R. (1992). The mammalian auditory pathway:
Neuroanatomy. Springer-Verlag.
Yost, W. (2007). Fundamentals of hearing - an introduction. Elsevier.
Zhao, F., & Stephens, D. (1999). Audioscan testing in patients with king-
kopetzky syndrome. Acta Oto-laryngologica, 119(3), 306-310.
Zhao, F., & Stephens, D. (2007). A critical review of king-kopetzky syn-
drome: Hearing difﬁculties, but normal hearing? Audiological Medicine,
5, 119-124.
Zhao, F., & Stephens, D. (2009). Distortion product otoacoustics emissions
57
==PAGE:70==
References
References
in patients with king-kopetzky syndrome. International Journal of Audi-
ology, 45, 34-39.
58
==PAGE:71==
Appendices
59
==PAGE:72==
Appendix
A Recruitment message
Figure A.1: First message posted on DTU forum to recruit participants. The mes-
sage used for Forsøgsperson.dk was the same. Note that another round of recruit-
ment was done to recruit male participants only.
60
==PAGE:73==
Appendix
B Noise questionnaire
61
==PAGE:74==
Appendix C: Final Noise Exposure Questionnaire 
  
Noise Exposure Questionnaire/University of Kansas Medical Center/Hearing & Speech Department/© 2016 
Page 1 of 3 
Noise Exposure Questionnaire 
 
Name: ________________________________   Date: _____________________ 
INSTRUCTIONS: 
Please answer the following questions about yourself, your hearing, and any noise you may 
have been around during the past year. Write an answer in the blank [______] or check [ ] 
the best answer to each question.  
Please answer these questions about any loud sounds. 
DURING THE PAST YEAR (12 months): 
1. 
Outside of a paid job, how often did you use power tools, chainsaws, or other shop tools?  
 Never      Every few months      Monthly      Weekly      Daily 
If you used power tools, on average, how many hours did each time/session last?  
 8 hours or more    4 hours up to 8 hours     1 hour up to 4 hours    Less than 1 hour  
If you used power tools, how often did you wear earplugs or earmuffs during this activity? 
 Never      Sometimes      Always    
2. 
Outside of a paid job, how often did you drive heavy equipment or use loud machinery (such as 
tractors, trucks, or farming or lawn equipment like mowers/leaf blowers)?  
 Never      Every few months      Monthly      Weekly      Daily 
If you drove/used loud machinery, on average, how many hours did each time/session last? 
 8 hours or more    4 hours up to 8 hours     1 hour up to 4 hours    Less than 1 hour 
If you drove/used machinery, how often did you wear earplugs or earmuffs during this activity? 
 Never      Sometimes      Always      
3. 
How often did you attend car/truck races, commercial/high school sporting events, music 
concerts/dances or any other events with amplified public announcement (PA)/music systems? 
 Never      Every few months      Monthly      Weekly      Daily 
If you attended these events, on average, how many hours did each time/session last?  
 8 hours or more    4 hours up to 8 hours     1 hour up to 4 hours    Less than 1 hour 
If you attended these events, how often did you wear earplugs or earmuffs during this activity? 
 Never      Sometimes      Always      
4. 
How often did you ride/operate motorized vehicles such as motorcycles, jet skis, speed boats, 
snowmobiles, or four-wheelers?   
 Never      Every few months      Monthly      Weekly      Daily 
If you rode motorized vehicles, on average, how many hours did each time/session last?  
 8 hours or more    4 hours up to 8 hours     1 hour up to 4 hours    Less than 1 hour 
If you rode motorized vehicles, how often did you wear earplugs or earmuffs during this activity? 
 Never      Sometimes      Always   
==PAGE:75==
Appendix C: Final Noise Exposure Questionnaire 
  
Noise Exposure Questionnaire/University of Kansas Medical Center/Hearing & Speech Department/© 2016 
Page 2 of 3 
Please continue answering these questions about any loud sounds. 
DURING THE PAST YEAR (12 months): 
5. 
How often did you ride in or pilot small aircraft/private airplanes?        
 Never      Every few months      Monthly      Weekly      Daily 
If you flew airplanes, on average, how many hours did each time/session last?  
 8 hours or more    4 hours up to 8 hours     1 hour up to 4 hours    Less than 1 hour 
If you flew airplanes, how often did you wear earplugs or earmuffs during this activity? 
 Never      Sometimes      Always   
6. 
How often were you around or did you shoot firearms such as rifles, pistols, shotguns, etc.?  
 Never      Every few months      Monthly      Weekly      Daily 
If you were around/shot firearms, on average, how many shots did you fire each time/session?  
_________ shotgun/rifle shots per session          _________ pistol shots per session 
If you were around/shot firearms, how often did you wear earplugs or earmuffs while shooting? 
 Never      Sometimes      Always      
7. 
How often did you play a musical instrument?  
 Never      Every few months      Monthly      Weekly      Daily 
If you played, please tell us what musical instrument: __________________________________ 
If you played a musical instrument, on average, how many hours did each time/session last?  
 8 hours or more    4 hours up to 8 hours     1 hour up to 4 hours    Less than 1 hour  
If you played a musical instrument, how often did you wear earplugs or earmuffs while playing? 
 Never      Sometimes      Always   
8. 
How often did you listen to music, radio programs, etc. using personal headsets or earphones?   
 Never      Every few months      Monthly      Weekly      Daily 
If you listened through earphones, on average, how many hours did each time/session last?  
 8 hours or more    4 hours up to 8 hours     1 hour up to 4 hours    Less than 1 hour   
9. 
Other than music concerts and headset use (already covered in questions 3 and 8), how often did 
you listen to music, radio programs, etc. from audio speakers in a car or at home?   
 Never      Every few months      Monthly      Weekly      Daily 
If you listened via speakers, on average, how many hours did each time/session last?  
 8 hours or more    4 hours up to 8 hours     1 hour up to 4 hours    Less than 1 hour 
 
 
 
Please Continue to Next Page 
 
==PAGE:76==
Appendix C: Final Noise Exposure Questionnaire 
  
Noise Exposure Questionnaire/University of Kansas Medical Center/Hearing & Speech Department/© 2016 
Page 3 of 3 
Please continue answering these questions. 
NOTE DIFFERENT TIME-FRAMES: 
10. 
Now think back to this past summer. Over the summer months, did you work a noisy paid 
job, such as in construction, farming, a factory, lawn service, carwash, or other indoor or outdoor 
job working around loud equipment or machinery? By noisy job, we mean sounds so loud that 
you had to shout or speak in a raised voice to be heard at arm’s length. 
 Yes      No (if no, skip to # 11) 
If yes, please describe this noisy job: _______________________________________________ 
If you worked a noisy job, please estimate the number of hours you worked in a typical week:  
________ hours worked per typical week this summer 
If you worked a noisy job this summer, did your employer give you earplugs or earmuffs to wear 
at work?    Yes          No 
How often did you wear earplugs or earmuffs when around loud noise at this summer job?    
 Never      Sometimes      Always      
11. 
Other than during the summer, over the past year, did you work one or more noisy paid jobs, 
such as in construction, farming, a factory, lawn service, carwash, or other indoor or outdoor job 
working around loud equipment or machinery?  By noisy job, we mean sounds so loud that you 
had to shout or speak in a raised voice to be heard at arm’s length.    
 Yes      No (if no, you’re done with the survey) 
If yes, please describe the noisy job(s): ______________________________________________ 
If you worked a noisy job, please estimate the number of hours you worked in a typical week:  
________ average hours worked per typical week during the school year 
If you worked a noisy job during the school year, did your employer give you earplugs or earmuffs 
to wear at work?    Yes          No 
How often did you wear earplugs or earmuffs when around loud noise at this noisy job?    
 Never      Sometimes      Always    
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
Appendix
C Noise results
Gender
Group
From concert to
posttest1 [hours]
From posttest1 to
posttest2 [days]
Age
LAeq
dBA re. 20µP
LCpeak
dBC re. 20µP
Duration
Ear plugs
Mesure
Music’s style
Participant #1
M
Exposed
9
32
32
103,9
136,1
02h03
N
D
Hip-hop
Participant #2
M
Exposed
9
35
25
97,8
132,9
02h32
N
D
Pop/Rnb
Participant #3
F
Exposed
14
26
23
103,6
129,1
02h00
N
V
Folk
Participant #4
M
Exposed
8,5
24
20
102,2
136,7
02h18
N
D
Pop/Rnb
Participant #5
F
Exposed
9
31
24
101,0
133,6
03h46
N
D
Punk rock
Participant #6
M
Exposed
15,5
31
25
100,2
133,9
03h46
Y
D
Punk rock
Participant #7
F
Exposed
9,5
27
31
105,3
127,6
02h00
N
V
Post-punk/Rock
Participant #8
F
Exposed
8,5
27
21
98,4
130,3
02h23
N
D
Indie-rock
Participant #9
F
Non-exposed
17
29
24
62,1
113,5
02h00
N
D
-
Participant #10
M
Non-exposed
17
36
23
56,5
112,8
01h57
N
D
-
Participant #11
M
Non-exposed
10,5
29
19
68,4
143,5
01h35
N
D
-
Participant #12
F
Non-exposed
10,5
32
25
73,0
122,3
02h12
N
D
-
Participant #13
F
Non-exposed
10
33
21
71,4
120,2
01h58
N
D
-
Participant #14
F
Non-exposed
10,5
-
25
58,1
119,1
02h36
N
D
-
Participant #15
M
Non-exposed
17
-
27
62,0
113,5
02h03
N
D
-
Table C.1: Information about the participants and the noise levels they were ex-
posed to during the concerts for the exposed group and at home for the non-
exposed group. Note that one participant (#6) wore ear plugs during the concert
and that for two participants (#3 and #7) noise exposure assessment was performed
using Vega’s measurement system (V) instead of the dosimeter (D).
Figure C.1: Noise attenuation given by the ear plugs used in this study. Source: 3M
(2018).
65
==PAGE:78==
Appendix C. Noise results
Levels with ear plugs [dB]
60
Levels [dB]
94
97
94
98
91
n/a
87
76
78
90
90
EF
RE
Power
tools
Heavy
equipment
Events
Motorized
vehicles
Pilot
aircraft
Shoot
ﬁrearms
Play
music
instrument
Listening to music
with headset
Listening to music
with speakers
Noisy holidays
paid job
Noisy paid
job
LAeq
Participant 1
0,0
0
1,1
0
0
0
0
0,9
10,9
0,0
0
1353
2,6
71
Participant 2
1,1
0
18,3
11,0
0
0
10,9
1,1
1,4
0,0
0
565
2,9
76
Participant 3
1,1
0,7
0,4
0
0,5
x
0
3,4
5,4
0,0
0
1208
2,7
71
Participant 4
0
0
1,1
0
0
0
2,6
1,1
0,5
0,0
0
289
3,0
68
Participant 5
0
0
2,2
0
0
0
0
3,4
0,1
0,0
0
618
2,9
68
Participant 6
1,1
2,2
2,2
0
0,0
0
0
3,4
5,4
0,0
0
1208
2,7
71
Participant 7
0,4
0
13,2
0
0
0
0
6,8
5,4
0,0
0
1837
2,5
74
Participant 8
0,0
0
1,1
0
0
0
0
1,1
0,5
0,0
0
253
3,0
67
Participant 9
0
0
1,1
0
0
0
0
3,4
5,4
0,0
0
1203
2,7
70
Participant 10
0,0
0
1,1
2,8
0
x
0
3,4
1,4
0,0
0
772
2,8
70
Participant 11
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6,8
1,4
0,0
0
1350
2,6
69
Participant 12
0,0
0
2,2
0
0
0
0,1
1,7
14,5
0,0
0
1907
2,4
72
Participant 13
0
0
1,1
0
0
0
0
1,1
1,8
0,0
0
403
3,0
67
Participant 14
0
0
1,1
0
0
0
0
0,3
5,4
0,0
0
653
2,9
69
Participant 15
0,0
0
0,0
0,0
0
0
0,0
3,4
5,4
0,0
0
1200
2,7
70
Test
1,1
0,0
54,8
5,5
0,0
x
87,0
3,4
5,4
14,5
0
1359
2,6
81
Table C.2: Details of the calculation of the past-year noise exposure based on (T. Johnson et al., 2017). A 30 dB attenuation rate is applied
when participant (it happened for one participant) answered that they were always using ear plugs while exposed to the sound. No
attenuation was applied when they answered that they ”sometimes” used ear plugs.
66
==PAGE:79==
Appendix C. Noise results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Relative time
60
70
80
90
100
110
LAeq [dB re.20 7Pa]
10EaZy - distance to stage = 17m
dosimeter - distance to stage = 11m
10Eazy corrected for the distance
Figure C.2: Comparison between the measurement performed with Vega’s system 10EaZy and the measurement performed with the
dosimeter during one concert. The dosimeter was placed at approximately 2/3 of the room. 10EaZy was placed 17m away from the stage.
A correction is applied to the measurement with 10Eazy to account for the distance difference.
67
==PAGE:80==
Appendix
D AFC Results
D.1
Tables of descriptive statistics
Pretest
Mean
Std dev
Median
Min
Max
0.5 kHz E
12.21/13.54
7.15/3.42
10.5/12.75
3.5/9.5
25.25/20
1 kHz E.
10.86/10.21
3.62/3.71
10/9.25
7.5/5.5
18.5/16.25
2 kHz E.
14.32/14.25
2.19/5.26
14/13.5
11.75/5.25
17.25/23
3 kHz E.
12.82/13.96
3.42/3.98
12.25/13.25
8.75/10
17.5/21.75
4 kHz E.
15/15.18
5.28/6.38
15.25/14
7.75/10
23.25/28.75
6 kHz E.
20.43/21.25
6.23/6.79
20.5/19.5
9.25/11
30.75/30.75
8 kHz E.
20/23.82
9.94/8.19
19/23.25
7.75/15.75
37.75/38.75
0.5 kHz non-E.
14.21/12.96
6.99/2.79
12.25/11.5
8.25/10.5
29.25/18
1 kHz non-E.
9.14/11.04
4.74/4.53
8.25/10.75
3.75/4.75
18/19
2 kHz non-E.
14.96/14.79
4.75/3.74
13.75/14.75
9.75/10.75
21.5/21
3 kHz non-E.
13.96/12.21
4.48/3.34
15.5/11.75
8.75/7.5
20.5/18.5
4 kHz non-E.
13.89/14.57
3.82/4.59
13.25/13
9.25/10.25
21.5/23
6 kHz non-E.
19.68/21.57
4.23/2.89
19/21.25
14.25/18
25.75/25.5
8 kHz non-E.
20.5/22.64
3.16/5.55
20/22.75
15.25/14.25
25/30.75
Table D.1:
Table of descriptive statistics for the AFC-audiometry measures at
pretest for both ears (L/R) and for the exposed group (E.) and non-exposed group
(non-E.). The values are in dB SPL.
68
==PAGE:81==
Appendix D. AFC results
D.1. Tables of descriptive statistics
Posttest1
Mean
Std Dev
Median
Min
Max
0.5 kHz E
12.14/13.04
4.47/2.82
10.75/13.5
6.75/9.5
20.75/17
1 kHz E.
10.93/9.18
3.34/3.61
9/7.75
8.25/5.75
16/16.75
2 kHz E.
13.36/15.25
1.87/6.9
14.25/15
11/6
15.75/26.75
3 kHz E.
13.04/13.86
2.82/3.37
14.25/13.5
8.5/9.5
15.75/19.25
4 kHz E.
15.71/16.54
4.09/7.07
16.25/13.75
9.25/9.75
21.75/29
6 kHz E.
22.43/22.54
5.55/6.71
22.25/22
12/14.75
29.75/32.75
8 kHz E.
21.04/24.96
7.55/7.75
21.5/24
11/14
34.75/38.75
0.5 kHz non-E.
12.57/13.82
4.98/4.58
11.75/13.25
6.5/8.5
19.25/20
1 kHz non-E.
9.96/10.54
4.94/3.36
8.25/10.5
5.25/5.75
20/15.25
2 kHz non-E.
14.04/14.43
2.67/2.59
12.75/15
11.5/10.5
18.75/18.25
3 kHz non-E.
13.43/11.11
3.13/3.2
15/11.25
9.25/5.75
16.75/15.75
4 kHz non-E.
12.75/12.89
2.14/2.45
13.5/13.75
8.75/8.75
14.75/15.5
6 kHz non-E.
18.36/20
3.85/3.75
18.25/19.25
15/16.75
26.25/27.75
8 kHz non-E.
18.11/19.93
4.81/5
17.75/19.5
9.5/14.5
24/28.5
Table D.2:
Table of descriptive statistics for the AFC-audiometry measures at
posttest1 for both ears (L/R) and for the exposed group (E.) and non-exposed group
(non-E.). The values are in dB SPL.
Posttest2
Mean
Std Dev
Median
Min
Max
0.5 kHz E
11.39/13
5.51/3.7
11.25/14.5
5.5/6.5
22.25/16.25
1 kHz E.
10.71/10.39
4.74/3.45
9.25/10.75
5.75/6.25
20.75/15.5
2 kHz E.
14.46/13.89
2.37/4.82
14/13.5
10.75/7.5
18.5/20.75
3 kHz E.
13/13.96
2.7/4.9
11.75/12.5
10/9.75
17/24.25
4 kHz E.
17.25/15.93
5.86/7.46
18/14.25
9.75/6
24.5/28.75
6 kHz E.
21.86/21.39
5.36/5.27
22.5/19.75
12/14.25
29/28.75
8 kHz E.
21.86/23.89
8.03/7.56
20.75/21.5
13.25/14.5
37.25/38.25
0.5 kHz non-E.
13.6/12.85
4.53/3.98
14.25/11
7.25/9.25
18/18.5
1 kHz non-E.
9.25/13.65
3.33/4.88
9/14.5
6.25/6.75
14.75/19
2 kHz non-E.
14.5/14.7
2.89/3.12
14.5/13.25
11.25/11.75
17.5/19.75
3 kHz non-E.
14.45/13.35
3.46/5.21
15/15.5
8.5/6.25
17/17.75
4 kHz non-E.
13.7/14.15
1.9/2.93
13.5/15.75
11.75/9.5
16.5/16.5
6 kHz non-E.
19.25/19.75
2.34/2.98
18.25/19
17.25/16.75
22.75/23.25
8 kHz non-E.
21.3/23.7
2.12/4
20.5/23.75
18.75/19
24.25/28.25
Table D.3:
Table of descriptive statistics for the AFC-audiometry measures at
posttest2 for both ears (data separated by /) and for the exposed group (E.) and
non-exposed group (non-E.). The values are in dB SPL.
69
==PAGE:82==
Appendix D. AFC results
D.2. Individual data
Lposttest1-Lpretest [dB SPL]
0.5 kHz
1 kHz
2 kHz
3 kHz
4 kHz
6 kHz
8 kHz
exposed
-0.1/-0.5
0.1/-1.0
-1.0/1.0
0.2/-0.1
0.7/1.4
2.0/1.3
1.0/1.1
non-exposed
-1.6/0.9
0.8/-0.5
-0.9/-0.4
-0.5/-1.1
-1.1/-1.7
-1.3/-1.6
-2.4/-2.7
Table D.4: The difference for each group between the averaged threshold levels of
posttest1 and pretest considering each frequency and both ears (Left/Right). The
negative values mean that the threshold levels measured at pretest are larger than
the ones measured at posttest1.
Data for all participants are considered in the
calculation.
Lposttest2-Lpretest [dB SPL]
0.5 kHz
1 kHz
2 kHz
3 kHz
4 kHz
6 kHz
8 kHz
exposed
-0.8/-0.5
-0.2/0.2
0.1/-0.4
0.2/0.0
2.3/0.8
1.4/0.1
1.9/0.1
non-exposed
-2.0/-1.0
-0.2/2.2
-1.5/0.4
-1.3/0.8
-1.5/-1.1
-2.0/-1.1
-0.1/0.9
Table D.5: The difference for each group between the averaged threshold levels of
posttest2 and pretest considering each frequency and both ears (Left/Right). The
negative values mean that the threshold levels measured at pretest are larger than
the ones measured at posttest1. For the exposed group, only the threshold levels
measured for the participants #9 to #13 are utilized because #14 to #15 did not
attend the posttest2 session.
D.2
Individual data
2000
4000
6000
8000
0
10
20
30
40
Threshold [dB SPL]
Left ear
Pretest
Posttest1
Posttest2
2000
4000
6000
8000
Frequency [Hz]
-10
-5
0
5
10
Normalized threshold [dB SPL]
2000
4000
6000
8000
0
10
20
30
40
Right ear
2000
4000
6000
8000
Frequency [Hz]
-10
-5
0
5
10
Participant #10
Figure D.1: Threshold levels and normalized threshold levels for participant #10.
Data are shown for each frequency and for both ears (L/R).
70
==PAGE:83==
Appendix D. AFC results
D.3. Inferential statistics
D.3
Inferential statistics
-4
-2
0
2
Residuals
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.25
0.50
0.75
0.90
0.95
0.98
Probability
10
20
30
40
Fitted values
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
Standardized residuals
Figure D.2: Residual analysis for the model Pretest vs Posttest1, Left ear.
-2
0
2
Residuals
0.05
0.10
0.25
0.50
0.75
0.90
0.95
Probability
10
15
20
25
30
Fitted values
-4
-2
0
2
4
Standardized residuals
Figure D.3: Residual analysis for the model Pretest vs Posttest1, Right ear.
-2
0
2
Residuals
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.25
0.50
0.75
0.90
0.95
0.98
Probability
10
15
20
25
30
Fitted values
-4
-2
0
2
4
Standardized residuals
Figure D.4: Residual analysis for the model Pretest vs Posttest2, Left ear.
71
==PAGE:84==
Appendix D. AFC results
D.3. Inferential statistics
r
Adj. R2
Estimate
CI
t-test
p-val
F-stat
p-val
Pretest vs Posttest1 LEFT
0.79
0.70
3.2
[1.40 4.98]
3.97
0.0026
15.3
0.0009
Pretest vs Posttest2 LEFT
0.62
0.40
3.65
[0.11 7.19]
2.38
0.045
4.40
0.05
Pretest vs Posttest1 RIGHT
0.50
0.53
4.36
[0.90 7.82]
2.80
0.019
7.81
0.0091
Pretest vs Posttest2 RIGHT
0.80
0.50
0.37
[-2.12 2.87]
0.35
0.739
6.10
0.0246
Table D.6: Table summarizing the inferential analysis performed on the AFC-
audiometry dataset. Participant #8 is withdrawn from the analysis.
72
==PAGE:85==
Appendix
E
SPIN Results
E.1
Tables of descriptive statistics
Pretest
Mean
Std dev
Median
Min
Max
10 dB SNR E.
81/71
14/9
80/72
60/56
96/80
5 dB SNR E.
64/63
13/11
60/64
48/48
84/80
0 dB SNR E.
53/40
14/11
56/44
36/28
64/52
10 dB SNR non-E.
80/80
5/12
80/76
72/68
84/100
5 dB SNR non-E.
57/64
13/9
52/68
44/52
76/72
0 dB SNR non-E.
40/49
13/16
34/47
32/32
60/70
Table E.1: Table of descriptive statistics for the SPIN data retrieved at pretest. Data
for the exposed (E.) and non-exposed group (non-E.) groups are displayed for both
ears(L/R). The values are in %.
Posttest2
Mean
Std dev
Median
Min
Max
10 dB SNR E.
94/75
6/7
92/72
88/68
100/84
5 dB SNR E.
65/65
20/8
64/62
44/60
92/80
0 dB SNR E.
48/40
11/6
52/40
32/32
56/48
10 dB SNR non-E.
89/77
8/9
92/76
80/68
96/88
5 dB SNR non-E.
61/59
10/9
64/60
44/48
72/72
0 dB SNR non-E.
35/53
16/19
34/54
16/28
56/75
Table E.2: Table of descriptive statistics for the SPIN data retrieved at posttest2.
Data for the exposed (E.) and non-exposed group (non-E.) groups are displayed for
both ears(L/R).The values are in %.
73
==PAGE:86==
Appendix E. SPIN results
E.1. Tables of descriptive statistics
Lposttest2-Lpretest [dB]
Mean (L/R)
10 dB SNR E.
13/4
5 dB SNR E.
1/2
0 dB SNR E.
-5/0
10 dB SNR non-E.
9/-3
5 dB SNR non-E.
4/-5
0 dB SNR non-E.
-5/4
Table E.3: Difference between posttest2 and pretest for the exposed (E.) and non-
exposed (non-E.) group.
The negative values mean that the score is measured
higher at pretest compared to posttest2.The values are in %.
74
==PAGE:87==
Appendix
F
ABR Results
F.1
Tables of descriptive statistics
75
==PAGE:88==
Appendix F. ABR results
F.1. Tables of descriptive statistics
E. mean
E. median
E. Std Dev
E. min
E. max
non-E. mean
non-E. median
non-E. std dev
non-E. min
non-E. max
Pretest WI TB 4kHz 100
0.3200
0.3100
0.0400
0.2900
0.3700
0.3800
0.3300
0.1100
0.2800
0.5400
Pretest WI TB 4kHz 95
0.2700
0.2600
0.0600
0.2200
0.4000
0.3200
0.3100
0.1000
0.2100
0.4400
Pretest WI TB 4kHz 90
0.1800
0.1800
0.0300
0.1300
0.2100
0.2400
0.2100
0.0800
0.1700
0.3600
Pretest WI TB 4kHz 85
0.1100
0.1300
0.0600
0.0300
0.1900
0.1500
0.1600
0.0700
0.0500
0.2400
Pretest WI Clicks 90
0.4000
0.4100
0.1000
0.2800
0.5200
0.3400
0.3600
0.1400
0.1500
0.4600
Pretest WI Clicks 85
0.4100
0.4000
0.0800
0.3100
0.5400
0.3700
0.3600
0.1500
0.2100
0.5700
Pretest WI Clicks 75
0.3000
0.2900
0.0700
0.1900
0.3900
0.2800
0.2600
0.1000
0.1700
0.4300
Pretest WI Clicks 65
0.1400
0.1100
0.0700
0.0700
0.2800
0.1500
0.1400
0.1100
0.0300
0.2800
Posttest1 WI TB 4kHz 100
0.3300
0.3400
0.0600
0.2400
0.4000
0.3500
0.3400
0.1100
0.2500
0.5000
Posttest1 WI TB 4kHz 95
0.2500
0.2500
0.0400
0.2100
0.3000
0.2800
0.2900
0.0900
0.1800
0.3800
Posttest1 WI TB 4kHz 90
0.1600
0.1600
0.0300
0.1200
0.2000
0.2100
0.1900
0.0600
0.1600
0.3000
Posttest1 WI TB 4kHz 85
0.1100
0.1200
0.0600
0.0300
0.2100
0.1400
0.1300
0.0700
0.0400
0.2500
Posttest1 WI Clicks 90
0.3900
0.3800
0.1200
0.2200
0.5700
0.3300
0.3300
0.1500
0.1600
0.4900
Posttest1 WI Clicks 85
0.4300
0.4300
0.1100
0.2800
0.5900
0.3600
0.3500
0.1400
0.2300
0.5200
Posttest1 WI Clicks 75
0.3100
0.3200
0.0500
0.2200
0.3800
0.2800
0.2900
0.1100
0.1200
0.4100
Posttest1 WI Clicks 65
0.1300
0.1600
0.0600
0.0200
0.2000
0.1800
0.1800
0.1100
0.0400
0.3200
Posttest2 WI TB 4kHz 100
0.3300
0.3500
0.0500
0.2700
0.4000
0.3700
0.3200
0.1400
0.2200
0.5900
Posttest2 WI TB 4kHz 95
0.2600
0.2600
0.0500
0.1900
0.3500
0.3200
0.2800
0.1200
0.2000
0.5000
Posttest2 WI TB 4kHz 90
0.1700
0.1700
0.0700
0.0500
0.2500
0.2300
0.2100
0.0700
0.1600
0.3300
Posttest2 WI TB 4kHz 85
0.1300
0.1400
0.0500
0.0500
0.2000
0.1600
0.1500
0.0900
0.0700
0.2800
Posttest2 WI Clicks 90
0.3700
0.3700
0.0900
0.2400
0.5000
0.3500
0.2700
0.1400
0.2300
0.5400
Posttest2 WI Clicks 85
0.3600
0.3500
0.0600
0.2800
0.4500
0.3500
0.3000
0.1500
0.1900
0.5200
Posttest2 WI Clicks 75
0.2900
0.2900
0.0400
0.2400
0.3500
0.3200
0.2300
0.1800
0.1800
0.6400
Posttest2 WI Clicks 65
0.1700
0.1600
0.0500
0.1000
0.2600
0.1600
0.1400
0.1300
0.0400
0.3400
Pretest WI TB 4kHz 100
0.3400
0.3300
0.0900
0.2400
0.5000
0.3700
0.3300
0.1400
0.2100
0.5400
Pretest WI TB 4kHz 95
0.2200
0.2000
0.0600
0.1700
0.3100
0.3100
0.3100
0.0800
0.2200
0.4300
Pretest WI TB 4kHz 90
0.1400
0.0900
0.0700
0.0700
0.2500
0.2400
0.2600
0.0900
0.0700
0.3300
Pretest WI TB 4kHz 85
0.1100
0.1000
0.0400
0.0700
0.1800
0.1400
0.1300
0.0600
0.0700
0.2100
Pretest WI Clicks 90
0.4300
0.4000
0.1400
0.3100
0.7100
0.3300
0.2600
0.2100
0.0400
0.5900
Pretest WI Clicks 85
0.3700
0.3300
0.0900
0.3100
0.5000
0.3800
0.3300
0.1300
0.2200
0.5500
Pretest WI Clicks 75
0.2700
0.2800
0.0600
0.1700
0.3400
0.2900
0.2700
0.1400
0.1400
0.4700
Pretest WI Clicks 65
0.1200
0.1100
0.0500
0.0700
0.1900
0.1500
0.1700
0.0700
0.0500
0.2300
Posttest1 WI TB 4kHz 100
0.3200
0.3200
0.0900
0.1800
0.4300
0.4000
0.3400
0.1700
0.2000
0.6200
Posttest1 WI TB 4kHz 95
0.2600
0.2300
0.0700
0.1900
0.3700
0.3100
0.2800
0.0900
0.2000
0.4500
Posttest1 WI TB 4kHz 90
0.1700
0.1500
0.0500
0.1200
0.2800
0.2600
0.2500
0.1000
0.1200
0.3900
Posttest1 WI TB 4kHz 85
0.1100
0.1200
0.0500
0.0400
0.1700
0.1600
0.1700
0.0800
0.0400
0.2800
Posttest1 WI Clicks 90
0.3800
0.3600
0.1300
0.2600
0.5500
0.3600
0.2800
0.1700
0.2300
0.6400
Posttest1 WI Clicks 85
0.4000
0.4600
0.1200
0.2300
0.5400
0.3700
0.3100
0.1700
0.2100
0.6500
Posttest1 WI Clicks 75
0.2900
0.2900
0.0500
0.2200
0.3800
0.3200
0.2900
0.1200
0.1800
0.4700
Posttest1 WI Clicks 65
0.1400
0.1500
0.0700
0.0600
0.2300
0.1500
0.1500
0.0600
0.0900
0.2500
Posttest2 WI TB 4kHz 100
0.3300
0.3200
0.0800
0.2200
0.4500
0.3500
0.3500
0.1600
0.1800
0.6100
Posttest2 WI TB 4kHz 95
0.2500
0.2500
0.0600
0.1900
0.3600
0.3100
0.2800
0.1200
0.2000
0.5100
Posttest2 WI TB 4kHz 90
0.1700
0.1700
0.0500
0.1100
0.2400
0.2400
0.2300
0.0900
0.1300
0.3800
Posttest2 WI TB 4kHz 85
0.1200
0.1100
0.0400
0.0700
0.2000
0.1400
0.1600
0.0800
0.0200
0.2400
Posttest2 WI Clicks 90
0.3900
0.3800
0.1100
0.2500
0.5400
0.3400
0.3100
0.0700
0.2800
0.4500
Posttest2 WI Clicks 85
0.3800
0.3500
0.1000
0.2500
0.5200
0.3500
0.3300
0.1300
0.2400
0.5500
Posttest2 WI Clicks 75
0.2800
0.2700
0.0600
0.2200
0.3700
0.3300
0.3000
0.1800
0.1800
0.6300
Posttest2 WI Clicks 65
0.1400
0.1300
0.0500
0.0800
0.2200
0.1700
0.1600
0.0400
0.1300
0.2300
Table F.1: Table of descriptive statistics for the ABR data retrieved at pretest,
posttest1 and posttest2. Data for the exposed (E.) and non-exposed group (non-
E.) groups are displayed for the left ear (ﬁrst part of the table) and the right ear
(second part). The values are in µV.
76
==PAGE:89==
Appendix F. ABR results
F.2. Inferential statistics
WI
WI
WI
WI
100 [dB nHL]
95 [dB nHL]
90 [dB nHL]
85 [dB nHL]
TB 4kHz
-0.06/-0.03
-0.05/-0.09
-0.06/-0.1
-0.04/-0.03
90 [dB nHL]
85 [dB nHL]
75 [dB nHL]
65 [dB nHL]
Clicks
0.06/0.1
0.04/-0.01
0.02/-0.02
-0.01/-0.03
Table F.2: Mean difference of amplitudes between the groups at pretest for each
presentation level and for WI. The results are shown for both ears (data separated
by /). Negative values mean that the amplitude for the exposed group is greater
than for the non-exposed group. The values are in 40 nV
F.2
Inferential statistics
r
Adj. Rˆ2
Estimate
CI low
CI up
t-test
p-val
F-stat
p-val
LEFT
TB WI 95->100
-0,11
-0,159
0,001
-0,097
0,099
0,023
0,982
0,176
0,841
TB WI 90->100
0,97
0,196
0,021
-0,056
0,098
0,613
0,554
2,467
0,135
TB WI 85->100
0,67
0,09
0,023
-0,072
0,118
0,534
0,605
1,592
0,251
Clicks WI 85->90
-0,39
0,097
-0,021
-0,047
0,005
-1,78
0,105
1,646
0,241
Clicks WI 75->90
0,36
0,272
-0,041
-0,158
0,076
-0,78
0,453
3,238
0,082
Clicks WI 65->90
0,04
0,376
-1,794
-3,489
-0,099
-2,359
0,04
4,614
0,038
TB WI slope
0,82
0,203
0,002
-0,004
0,008
0,714
0,491
2,524
0,13
Clicks WI slope
0,81
0,736
0,001
-0,001
0,004
1,133
0,283
17,726
0,001
RIGHT
TB WI 95->100
0,76
-0,051
-0,059
-0,176
0,057
-1,134
0,283
0,71
0,515
TB WI 90->100
0,42
-0,16
-0,029
-0,192
0,134
-0,399
0,699
0,17
0,846
TB WI 85->100
0,91
0,199
-0,035
-0,147
0,076
-0,706
0,496
2,491
0,133
Clicks WI 85->90
0,25
-0,169
-0,024
-0,136
0,087
-0,489
0,636
0,134
0,876
Clicks WI 75->90
0,24
0,063
-0,175
-0,556
0,206
-1,024
0,33
1,404
0,29
Clicks WI 65->90
0,77
0,467
-0,072
-0,21
0,066
-1,165
0,271
6,253
0,017
TB WI slope
0,82
0,138
-0,001
-0,008
0,006
-0,458
0,656
1,959
0,192
Clicks WI slope
0,87
0,408
0
-0,006
0,005
-0,083
0,935
5,142
0,029
Table F.3: Table of inferential statistics for the ABR dataset considering the pretest
and posttest1 sessions
77
==PAGE:90==
Appendix F. ABR results
F.3. Noise overview
r
Adj. Rˆ2
Estimate
CI low
CI up
t-test
p-val
F-stat
p-val
LEFT
TB WI 95->100
0,5
-0,12
0,0353
-0,0507
0,1213
0,9275
0,3779
0,4319
0,6621
TB WI 90->100
0,73
0,36
-0,008
-0,1014
0,0853
-0,1944
0,8502
4,1375
0,0532
TB WI 85->100
0,72
0,13
0,0101
-0,0651
0,0853
0,3029
0,7689
1,8159
0,2175
Clicks WI 85->90
0,47
-0,13
0,0103
-0,0637
0,0843
0,3143
0,7605
0,3883
0,689
Clicks WI 75->90
0,61
-0,01
0,0009
-0,1455
0,1472
0,0138
0,9893
0,9453
0,424
Clicks WI 65->90
-0,23
0,18
0,2217
-0,0297
0,4731
1,9951
0,0772
2,2151
0,1651
TB WI slope
0,74
0,22
0,0001
-0,005
0,0051
0,026
0,9798
2,5765
0,1304
Clicks WI slope
0,81
0,74
0,0014
-0,0013
0,004
1,1334
0,2835
17,7264
0,0005
RIGHT
TB WI 95->100
0,18
0,06
-0,0685
-0,3046
0,1676
-0,6563
0,528
1,3539
0,3062
TB WI 90->100
0,4
0,73
-0,0914
-0,1999
0,0172
-1,9037
0,0894
15,6646
0,0012
TB WI 85->100
0,65
0,46
-0,0322
-0,131
0,0667
-0,7366
0,4801
5,658
0,0256
Clicks WI 85->90
-0,13
-0,08
-0,0332
-0,3609
0,2946
-0,229
0,824
0,5978
0,5705
Clicks WI 75->90
-0,03
0,04
1,9747
-1,9346
5,8841
1,1427
0,2826
1,2498
0,3319
Clicks WI 65->90
0,64
0,5
-0,0529
-0,1914
0,0856
-0,8644
0,4098
6,432
0,0184
TB WI slope
0,74
0,22
0,0001
-0,005
0,0051
0,026
0,9798
2,5765
0,1304
Clicks WI slope
0,81
0,74
0,0014
-0,0013
0,004
1,1334
0,2835
17,7264
0,0005
Table F.4: Table of inferential statistics for the ABR dataset considering the pretest
and posttest2 sessions
F.3
Noise overview
20
40
60
80
100
Residual noise
0
50
100
150
200
Frequency
Left ear
20
40
60
80
100
Residual noise
0
50
100
150
200
Right ear
Figure F.1: The residual noise is used in the ABR technique to assess the quality
of a measurement. A good measurement requires a residual noise to be around 30
nV but the noise is reasonably low up to 40 nV “Additional Information Eclipse”
(2015). Above these noise levels the measurements are less reliable especially at low
levels of stimulus where the amplitude is small compared to the noise. These plots
show a frequency distribution of the noise residuals considering all ABR measured
to give an overview of the overall quality.
78
