==PAGE:1==
Cross-Platform Mobile App
Development: A Systematic
Evaluation of Cross-platform
Languages and IDEs.
Master thesis 2017
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
March, 16 2017
s113415 - Patrick Schøller Larsen
Supervisor:
Ekkart Kindler
==PAGE:2==
Abstract (English)
In this thesis the focus is on cross-platform mobile app development tools. The goal is to
ﬁnd out, what is needed to know both about the app that is being developed and the
developer before choosing the development tool. For this we research which
cross-platform development tool is the most popular and three tools are chosen to be
tested by making simple app examples.
The thesis also describe what is learned about the tools when developing the app
examples and what criteria and guidelines is needed to choose the best possible tool both
what is needed to know about the app but also about the developers proﬁle.
Lastly, the thesis explains the results and recommendations on which of the tested tools
will be best suited for diﬀerent apps and developers.
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (Danish)
Fokus i denne afhandling er cross-platform mobil app udbiklings værktøjer. M˚alet er at
ﬁnde ud af, hvad det der brug for at vide b˚ade omkring den app der bliver udviklet men
ogs˚a omkring udvikleren før udviklings værktøjet bliver valgt. Til det m˚al unsersøger we
hvilke cross-platfrom udviklings værktøjer er de mest populære og tre værktøjer bliver
udvalgt til at blive testet ved udvikling af simple app eksempler.
Afhandlingen beskriver ogs˚a hvad der er lært omkring værktøjerne og hvilke kriterier og
retningslinjer der er nødvendigt at vide for at vælge det bedst mulige udviklings værktøj
b˚ade hvad der skal vides om app der skal udvikles men ogs˚a omkring udviklerens proﬁl.
Til sidst forklare afhandlingen de resultater og anbefalinger omkring hvilke værktøjer der
er det bedste valg for forskellige apps og udviklere.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract (English)
i
Abstract (Dansih)
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
App examples/criteria
5
2.1
Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Development life cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Cost Development/Maintaining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Value
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
App examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Cross-platform development tools
10
3.1
Popular today . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Technology experiments
17
5
App categories
20
5.1
Types of apps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
How to
26
6.1
Xamarin How to
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
PhoneGap How to
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3
Appcelerator Titanium How to . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7
Development of examples
56
7.1
PhoneGap Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.1.1
PhoneGap ﬁrst app
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.1.2
Learned PhoneGap ﬁrst app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.1.3
PhoneGap second app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.1.4
Learned PhoneGap second app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.2
Appcelerator Titanium examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.2.1
Appcelerator Titanium ﬁrst example app
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.2.2
Learned Appcelerator Titanium ﬁrst app
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.2.3
Appcelerator Titanium second example app . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7.2.4
Learned Appcelerator Titanium second app . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7.3
Xamarin examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.3.1
Xamarin ﬁrst example app
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.3.2
Learned Xamarin ﬁrst app
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
7.3.3
Xamarin second example app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
iii
==PAGE:5==
7.3.4
Learned Xamarin second app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
8
Comparison
100
8.1
PhoneGap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
8.2
Xamarin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
8.3
Appcelerator Titanium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
9
Discussion of results
108
9.1
Third app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
10 Guidelines for selection
110
10.1 PhoneGap developer proﬁle example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
10.2 Xamarin developer proﬁle example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
10.3 Appcelerator Titanium developer proﬁle example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
11 Conclusion
113
11.1 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
References
115
A Appendix A
118
B Appendix B
123
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
The result of this master thesis is guidelines that helps in selecting the cross-platform
IDEs for mobile app development and help developers determine the best possible cross-
platform app development tool for a speciﬁc purpose. This is done by systematic analysis
and evaluation of realistic app examples for the diﬀerent tools and comparing the results.
The comparison will focus on how much code can be reused, which programming language
the IDEs support and how easy it is to install and use the tools.
This is important because it will help developers determine which tool will be best suited
for developing the mobile app that they are making or help them ﬁgure out what decisions
about the app that are needed before choosing. Diﬀerences such as: does the app need
native user-interface for each platform or is it a simple one page application.
1.1
Motivation
Developing mobile apps for multiple platforms would for most cases mean that the app
would have to be programmed from scratch for each platform that it would be made for.
This means that it could be considered multiple projects that are closely related, but
where each project would have slightly diﬀerent designs mostly for the user interface and
diﬀerent approaches for the implementation.
This is due to the fact that for example Android apps would be implemented using the
oﬃcial IDE for Android, Android Studio and written in the programming language Java.
Where iPhone apps would be developed on a Mac computer and would be implemented
using the integrated development environment for macOS, Xcode and written in the pro-
gramming language Swift.
This means that not only will it be necessary to make two diﬀerent user interfaces to make
the app look like either an iPhone app or Android app because diﬀerent platforms have
diﬀerent rules and expectations on the design of the user-interface, but it also means that
the code for the functionality will have to be written multiple times, in diﬀerent program-
ming languages which is platform speciﬁc. This will result in the development of the apps
taking more time and might give more problems, because the two programming languages
can have some diﬀerences that could make the same functionality harder to implement.
The best thing when developing apps for multiple platforms would be to use the same
programming language for all the programming and that way be able to use one code
base for multiple platforms. This would mean that it would be possible to make apps for
multiple platforms where the only diﬀerence would be in the design of the user-interface to
make it follow the guide lines of the diﬀerent platforms. To be able to use the same code
for both apps, it would be necessary to have a compiler that would be able to compile the
same code into two apps. This is called cross-platform app development.
There exists a lot of diﬀerent tools, that claim to be great tools for cross-platform app
development, such as Xamarin, PhoneGap, Appcelerator Titanium and NativeScript. The
problem is that it can be diﬃcult to ﬁgure out, which tools works as intended and which
tools would be best suited for the type of app the developer wants to develop.
1
==PAGE:7==
1.2
Problem Deﬁnition
The problem deﬁnition was determined by focusing on cross-platform app development
and what was needed to develop an app that could work on multiple platforms.
The problem is to deﬁne criteria and guidelines for choosing the right cross-platform mo-
bile app IDE depending on the characteristics of the app and the developer’s proﬁle.
The characteristics that are important when trying to determined which IDE is the best
suited to develop the app, is characteristics like these:
• Should the app be able to work oﬄine or should it only work as long as there is an
internet connection?
• What is the functionality of the app?
• Does the app do all the work on the phone or does it use web services to do all the
work?
This thesis will focus on the development tools that focus on developing apps that aren’t
games and where writing code is necessary to get a functioning app in instead of tools
that either focus on game development or focus on app development without coding.
1.3
Method
The method that has been used in this thesis was as the ﬁrst step to focus was on re-
searching other projects about cross-platform development tools to determined what had
been done before and what could be done as further work.
The next step was ﬁnding the most used and popular development tools and ﬁnding all
the necessary information on the tools.
These information was composed into tables to make it more comparable and to make
sure that the important information was available for each of the tools.
The tools where then compared by focusing on what could be learned about the tools by
the available information before the tools where tested and three tools where chosen as
the once to test further.
The criteria that was used to evaluate the tools was determined by determining what is
important both when developing an app and when the app is deployed.
The three tools where then installed and a simple todolist app was developed to make
sure that it was possible to go from scratch to a working app. The next step was to make
two simple apps for each of the three development tools while focusing on the criteria that
was chosen earlier. This was done to test the tools and determine their strengths and
weaknesses.
The results where then compared and discussed and then the conclusion was made on
which tool was recommended in diﬀerent situations.
2
==PAGE:8==
1.4
Related work
This section is about some related work and what can be used from the earlier work.
In March 2011 there was a research done at Cambridge by Gustavo Hartmann, GeoﬀStead
and Asi DeGani [1]. The study attempts to look at the state of existing frameworks that
facilitate and enable cross-platform mobile app development. The research focuses mainly
on open source frameworks although some commercial tools are also listed for complete-
ness.
The research focused on that M-learning or mobile learning providers want apps to deliver
consistent user experience and behave similarly across diﬀerent devices and platforms. The
focus is to make sure that this can be achieved in a cost eﬃcient manner which minimizes
the need for content adaptation and also in a way that supports the evolution of mobile
technology.
The research gave a list of the most popular cross-platform development tools from 2010
and for every development tool the research focus on evaluating the tools on their strengths,
weaknesses, supported platforms and what access there is to diﬀerent device capabilities.
What is interesting is to look at what was popular in 2010 and then understand the rea-
sons and the capabilities of every tool. That will give a good basis to understand the
development of those tools that are still popular today and a possibility to compare to the
newest tools.
In March 2016 there was a thesis done at Technical University of Denmark Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science by Piotr Milczarek [2].
The goal of the project was to propose a comprehensive solution for creation of data-
collection apps by investigation of the most popular platforms.
The thesis focuses on investigating the groups interested in data collection and their pri-
orities and what the existing technologies actually allows to implement.
The thesis gives some examples on general purpose cross-platform frameworks categorized
on a high level according to the level of integration into the hosting system and the level
of control the developer has over it.
The thesis chooses Xamarin as the one oﬀering the most complete approach to code shar-
ing strategies for cross-platform mobile app development.
The thesis found 10 cross-platform development tools and described that the top three
tools account for 70 percent of primary use. Top three tools are PhoneGap, Xamarin and
Unity.
The result of the thesis was proving, that abstracting a signiﬁcant amount of function-
ality for the data-collection apps is possible. The sample app was implemented with no
platform-speciﬁc code at all.
The chosen cross-platform environment, Xamarin was proven to be able of utilizing the full
3
==PAGE:9==
spectrum of capabilities of iOS and Android. However, the diﬀerences between platforms
were found to be very broad in the crucial areas. But at the time of the thesis this was
one of the focus points on further development of Xamarin.
1.5
Overview
This report will start by giving an idea about which criteria that are the focus of the
thesis and what apps that will be made to test the tools. This is done in Chapter 2 App
examples/criteria.
Then Chapter 3 will give an overview of the diﬀerent tools that have been picked and it
will give a short description of the tools.
Chapter 4 is about ﬁnding the three tools to be tested. This is done by looking at the
diﬀerent tools and using some criteria to narrow it down to three tools.
Chapter 5 is about what diﬀerent kinds of categories apps can be divided into and what
the criteria is for a app to ﬁt into one of those. It will also give examples on what types
of apps there is in the categories.
Chapter 6 gives a guide on how to make the ﬁrst basic cross-platform app for each of the
three tools that have been chosen.
Chapter 7 is about the programming of the apps for each of the three tools and about how
the tools live up to the criteria that was mentioned in Chapter 2. This is done to show
how it was done and what was learned while implementing the apps.
Chapter 8 is a comparison of the diﬀerent tools that was tested and about what was
learned by programming the apps mentioned in Chapter 7.
Chapter 9 will discuss and evaluate the result of the thesis and what could have been done
diﬀerently.
Chapter 10 describe diﬀerent guidelines that can be used to determine which tool ﬁt the
developers proﬁle and the type of app they are about to develop. The chapter will also
give examples on what kind of proﬁles that ﬁts the three diﬀerent tools.
The last part which is chapter 11 in the report will focus on comparing the results and
the discussion and evaluate the results and what could be done as future work. The last
part will be a conclusion on the project.
4
==PAGE:10==
2
App examples/criteria
This chapter is be about which criteria that are be used to ﬁgure out which tools would
be the best choice for diﬀerent development scenarios depending on the developer and the
type of app. The Chapter will also look at the types of apps that will be used to test the
diﬀerent criteria.
2.1
Criteria
The diﬀerent criteria that are mentioned in this chapter are all under the top-level criteria
development process beneﬁts. The focus is to ﬁgure out what will make the development
process as easy as possible, both for the development but also for the maintenance of the
app.
2.1.1
Development life cycle
Hardware/sensor accessibility
How hard is it to access the diﬀerent phones hardware/sensors, get the information from
them and use in the apps? Is it only the most used sensors such as GPS that is easy to
use or is it every sensor.
• Which sensors can be accessed, and which is the most important?
• How many steps is necessary to access the sensors?
• Can the data be access directly or is it platform dependent?
• Give a character from 1-10
Deployment
How easy is it to deploy the apps that is developed and how much control do the developer
have in the process of deploying. Will the tool or the company behind the tool do anything
that is needed or do the user have all the control of deploying the apps.
• How much control do the user have of the deployment?
• How easy is it to deploy?
• Do the tool provide everything that is needed to deploy the app?
• Is the deployment process depending on organization or can it be deployed through
the tool?
• Give a character from 1-10
Add new pages/fragments
Is it possible to add multiple pages/views or fragments for the apps and how is it done?
Is it diﬃcult to navigate between the pages or do the tools oﬀer a simple way to do it?
5
==PAGE:11==
• Is it possible to add extra pages?
• Is it simple to implement the new pages?
• Does the tool help in any way?
• How is the pages connected?
• Give a character from 1-10
Simulation test/ development support
How does the emulators and the debugging work and is everything that is needed to run
a emulator given through the tool or do the user need to download additional software
or speciﬁc things to get it to work. Does the tool oﬀer multiple emulators so that it is
possible to see how the apps look on diﬀerent platform or a speciﬁc phone.
• Does the tool provide everything that is needed?
• How does the debugging work and is it working both on physical devices and the
emulators?
• Does the tool give the opportunity to run the app on emulators for speciﬁc phones?
• Does the emulators take long time to start when testing the app?
• How is the feedback on error messages?
• Give a character from 1-10
2.1.2
Cost Development/Maintaining
Reusable code
One of the biggest ways to save money and development time both on developing but also
on maintaining the code for apps, is to be able to use as much as the same code for all
platforms as possible.
This will save time when developing the apps, but it will also save time when ﬁxing bugs
or adding extra features to the apps, because it will just be one time that the bug has to
be ﬁxed or one time that the new code has to be written.
• How much code can be reused?
• Does the reusable code make it easier to add or change functions?
• Give a character from 1-10
Learning curve
How easy is it to get started using the tool? Is it easy to understand how it works and to
make the ﬁrst simple app. Is it easy to understand the structure of the tool?
These criteria will be considered but it won’t give a character for the tool but will be
considered when discussing what tool to choose.
6
==PAGE:12==
• How steep is the learning curve when the programming language isn’t known?
• How steep is the learning curve when the programming language is known?
• How ﬂexible is the tool both how fast can the user learn to use the tool but also how
much can be done with the tool?
• How hard is it to make a simple app?
Documentation and support
How easy is it to ﬁnd help or information on the programming in the tool or how to
do anything using the tool? How possible is it to get help if there is a problem or ﬁnd
information on a solution for the problem?
• How well documented and helpful are the tools own documentation and support?
• Is it easy to ﬁnd solutions using Google or external help?
• How is the help on coding problems?
• Check be searching on the same problem for each tool?
• Give a character from 1-10
Legacy
Is it possible to import existing projects for example other web applications and then turn
them into apps using the tool?
• Is it possible to import existing projects with the same programming language?
• Is it possible to import existing projects with another programming language?
• What must be changed to import projects?
• Give a character from 1-10
Diﬀerent programming language possibilities
How many diﬀerent coding languages can the tool support? This aﬀects how easy it is to
begin programming the apps.
If the tool has many diﬀerent languages it supports, then there is a larger chance that is
supports one that the programmer knows or that is easy to learn. It will also be better
if the programming language that is supported, is a well-known or popular programming
language both for the easy start but also because it will be well documented how to solve
problems.
• How many programming languages does the tool support?
• How well documented is the languages?
• Are the programming languages easy to learn or very special?
7
==PAGE:13==
• Are the languages well documented?
• Is there a lot of extra functionality or changes?
• Give a character from 1-10
2.1.3
Value
This section is about criteria that adds value to the ﬁnal app. This means something
that makes the app more appealing for the users. This could for example be a good user
interface.
Native design
An impotent part of making a good app for multiple platforms, is to be able to make the
user interface as perfect for each type of phone as possible. This means that the user in-
terface must be diﬀerent for each platform to make sure it follows native design guidelines.
Native design means that the user interface follows the devices culture and guidelines on
the design of the app. This means that e.g the toolbar is placed in a speciﬁc part of the
view and that buttons for iPhone have a rounded edge.
• Is it possible to make native user-interface?
• Does the tool only support one user-interface for the app?
• Can it be native design for multiple apps?
• Is it hard to make diﬀerent designs for multiple platforms?
• Give a character from 1-10
2.2
App examples
This section is about the diﬀerent app examples that will be made to test the three tools.
This means that every app will be made three times. The apps will be made with the
above criteria in mind.
The ﬁrst app example is a simple app using two diﬀerent sensors, the geolocation and
the accelerometer. It uses the geolocation to get the current location and calculate the
distance traveled from one location to the second location.
The accelerometer will be used to show the acceleration and let the user see the data as
the accelerometer measures it.
The second app example is a simple app that will connect to webservices to receive data
from a running indoor golf tournament.
The data that will be received will be shown on two diﬀerent views.
The ﬁrst view will show three leaderboards.
The ﬁrst leaderboard is placement leaderboard that shows the total points given from each
tournament and the average.
The second leaderboard will show the netto leaderboard which shows the total scores when
8
==PAGE:14==
the golf handicap has been subtracked from the brutto score.
The third leaderboard will show the total brutto score which is the number of strokes used
and the average brutto score from the attended tournaments.
The second view will show 5 diﬀerent leaderboards.
The ﬁve leaderboards will be the same way as the ﬁrst view with a total amount and an
average but these leaderboards will focus on the best 5 rounds and will be for the netto
score, brutto score, fairway hits, green in regulations(GIR) and number of putts.
9
==PAGE:15==
3
Cross-platform development tools
As mentioned in the introduction there was a related research [1] done in 2011 which
gave a list of the most popular development tools for cross-platform development in 2010.
These tools can be seen in table 1.
Tool
Still exist
Rhodes
yes
PhoneGap
yes
FeedHenry
yes but it is not a tool anymore
Appceleretor
yes
Grapple
no
MotherApp
no
Corona
yes
MoSync
yes
Resco
no
CouchOne
no
MobileIron
no
WidgetPad
yes
AML
no
QT
yes
QuickConnectFamily
yes
BedRock
no
Table 1: Tools 2011
Some of these development tools do not exist anymore, but the ones that still exists are
described below.
MotherApp and MobileIron has been made into companies that focus on delivering soft-
ware solution for mobile platforms.
The following sections will describe what these tools are and what is mentioned as the
important parts of the tool, both from the tools own websites and what is described about
the tools from users.
The focus will be on when the tools was ﬁrst made available, which programming lan-
guages the tools support, what kind of app it supports (native, hybrid or web), what is
described as the tools strengths and what is described as important information when
learning about the tool.
The tools with descriptions that doesn’t ﬁt the above, is because of the information avail-
able about the tool. This means that for some of the tools it is not possible to get as much
information about what the tool oﬀers or what the strenghts are.
Rhodes
Rhodes (called RhoMobile now) has been around since 2008 and provides a platform to
support the creation of cross-platform mobile apps.
Rhodes uses Ruby (an open source programming language) for building the business logic
for the mobile app following a best practice Model-View-Controller development pattern.
The User interface is constructed using HTML, JavaScript and CSS. The framework pro-
vides a templating language similar to Ruby on Rails views, which makes it quick and
10
==PAGE:16==
easy to develop portable user interfaces without compromising quality.
RhoMobile is the mobile application container that runs as a true native application but
allows you to easily write cross platform code by using common web skills.
Rhodes is an API library set that is accessible to all RhoMobile applications. It provides
access via both JavaScript and Ruby interfaces and allows developers to access device level
capabilities like Camera or geolocation. Rhodes is free to use, open-source and developers
can contribute to the project.
Supported by a thriving, open source community and built around modern coding lan-
guages like JavaScript, HTML5 and CSS3, RhoMobile Suite leverages existing web devel-
opment skills to build feature-rich, native enterprise applications.
Rhodes is part of a wider suite of tools for mobile development which include RhoSync for
synchronization and back-end integration, RhoHub for app development and deployment
and RhoGallery for hosted cloud management.
PhoneGap
The Phonegap open source framework from Nitobi created in early 2008 provides a tool-
box for building native mobile applications using only HTML, JavaScript and CSS. It’s
quite popular among users mainly because of its ﬂexibility, straightforward architecture
and ease of use.
It follows the hybrid web model by providing a set of native app wrappers for all major
mobile platforms with an embedded browser (also known as WebView) which renders the
User interface and supports the interaction between the web app and the device.
The core part of PhoneGap is its device-independent JavaScript API that provides func-
tionality like storage, geo-location, sensor interactivity and much more without coupling
the code to the speciﬁcs of the underlying platform.
PhoneGap is probably best when you have an existing web application you want to con-
vert/port to a mobile environment. Since most code would already be in a web format
anyway, the task of converting web to mobile web in most cases shouldn’t be too labor
intensive (depending on how the web app was built and its nature).
Although the API provides a useful and feature-rich set of capabilities it falls short when
it comes to UI and making your app look and feel like a native application. The creators
focused more on the features (and making them consistently available across platforms)
and left the users with the task of styling the markup to mimic a native app.
Fortunately there are loads of open source libraries specialized in exactly this. Therefore,
it’s not unusual to see Phonegap being used in conjunction with other libraries like XUI
and Sencha Touch.
FeedHenry
FeedHenry is a cloud-based mobile application platform that enables users to design (which
can also be done oﬄine), develop, deploy and manage applications for mobile devices.
The platform specializes in extending enterprise systems to mobile devices, and provides
mobile-speciﬁc services for security, notiﬁcations and data synchronization. Developers
can easily build back-end logic that supports their mobile applications—all in a secure
and scalable manner.
FeedHenry includes Native and hybrid software development kits (SDK) for client app
development on iOS, Android, Windows, Xamarin, Cordova, and in web apps.
The core components that make up FeedHenry, including drag and drop forms builder,
11
==PAGE:17==
application life cycle management, reporting, analytics, user management, and more.
FeedHenry includes a build farm which automates the app build process, maintains a
history of previous builds and provides the ability to create builds for platforms without
requiring the associated infrastructure and tools (e.g. building iOS binaries from a Linux
OS).
FeedHenry has changed to something called Red Hat that isn’t a development tool but
more a community that is used.
Developers choose their own tools and can work either locally in their own environment
or from the hosted platform with full access to all features. Support is provided for na-
tive SDKs as well as leading toolkits, frameworks, and languages. The Cloud Build Farm
service supports builds for native and hybrid applications for iOS, Android, and Windows
Phone.
Appcelerator Titanium
Appcelerator Titanium is an open extensible development tool for creating native apps
for multiple mobile devices including iOS, Android and Blackberry, as well as hybrid and
HTML5. It includes an open source SDK supporting many diﬀerent devices and mobile
operating system APIs, Studio, which is An Eclipse-based integrated development envi-
ronment (IDE), that simpliﬁes the development process, a powerful Eclipse-based IDE,
Alloy, which is an MVC (model-view-controller) and Cloud Services for a ready-to-use
mobile back-end.
Appcelerator Titanium’s approach to cross-platform is based on the cross-compilation
technique, which is a platform independent JavaScript API that is compiled to the dif-
ferent target platforms as required.
This compilation process happens in three steps:
pre-compilation, front-end compilation and platform and package compilation.
Although Appcelerator Titanium uses JavaScript as the main language for development,
it doesn’t use a browser engine to render the user interface on the mobile phone device
(although it does for desktop apps).
Its API provides abstractions to most User interface elements that are converted to true
native UI elements when deployed to the phone. This reveals a much more ﬂuid and richer
user experience than the browser-based techniques.
Corona
Corona is a free cross-platform framework for rapidly creating apps and games for mobile
devices and desktop systems. This means that it is possible to create projects once and
publish it to multiple types of devices, including Apple iPhone and iPad, Android phones
and tablets, Amazon Fire, Mac Desktop, Windows Desktop, and even connected TVs such
as Apple TV, Fire TV, and Android TV.
Using Lua scripting language, over 1000 built-in APIs, a vast selection of plugins, and
Corona Native extensions (C/C++/Obj-C/Java), it is possible to use Corona to develop
apps. It is even possible to monitor projects instantly on multiple devices using Live Builds.
Mosync
MoSync is a free and open-source SDK for mobile applications.
It is integrated with
the Eclipse development environment. MoSync produces native mobile applications for
multiple platforms using C, C++, Java, JavaScript, C#. From this code base, MoSync
12
==PAGE:18==
can build application packages for hundreds of diﬀerent mobile devices on a wide range
of mobile operating systems. MoSync currently supports versions of Android, iOS, Win-
dows Mobile Classic, Windows Phone, Symbian S60, Java Mobile and the Moblin platform.
Mosync is discontinued because the company behind went bankrupt. It is still available
but there is no further development on the tool.
WidgetPad
WidgetPad is a free, collaborative, web-based, open-source mobile development environ-
ment where developers can easily create smartphone applications using standard web
technologies (such as HTML 5, CSS and Javascript) and distribute them as stand-alone
applications to app stores.
WidgetPad aims to alleviate the complexity of creating native applications and eliminate
the need to learn platform-speciﬁc API-sets and tools. The current set of tools for iPhone
developers allows them to create fully interactive mobile apps that take advantage of the
iPhones and Androids advanced hardware capabilities (GPS, accelerometer, compass, etc.)
QT
QT is a cross-platform application framework that is used for developing application soft-
ware that can be run on various software and hardware platforms with little or no change
in the underlying codebase, while still being a native application with native capabilities
and speed.
QT uses standard C++ with extensions including signals and slots that simplify handling
of events, and this helps in development of both GUI and server applications which re-
ceive their own set of event information and should process them accordingly. Qt supports
many compilers, including the GCC C++ compiler and the Visual Studio suite. Qt also
provides Qt Quick, that includes a declarative scripting language called QML that allows
using JavaScript to provide the logic.
QuickConnectFamily
QuickConnectFamily is designed to dramatically reduce the development time of applica-
tion’s in a cross platform world. QuickConnectFamily uses HTML and CSS to create the
user interface and then implement the application logic in JavaScript.
The JavaScript framework is identical on all the supported application platforms.
QuickConnectFamily is open source and free to use.
3.1
Popular today
After looking at the most popular tools of 2011 it is interesting to see what is popular
today and if there is any of the tools that is still used.
This was done by looking at more recent works such as the thesis [2] and researching which
tool was mentioned the most and what was commented about the tools.
The most popular development tools as of this moment can be seen in table 2.
13
==PAGE:19==
Tool
Xamarin
PhoneGap
Appceleretor Titanium
QT
NativeScript
Alpha Anywhere
DropSource
MobileRoadie
Ionic
Coco2d
Unity 3D
Corona
5app
Microsoft PowerApps
Adobe Air
Table 2: Tools 2017
Xamarin
Xamarin is a cross-platform development tool with a C# shared codebase, developers can
use Xamarin tools to write native Android, iOS, and Windows apps with native user in-
terfaces and share code across multiple platforms, including Windows and macOS.
Native User interface, native API access, and native performance.
Anything you can do in Objective-C, Swift, or Java you can do in C# with Xamarin.
Xamarin apps have access to the full spectrum of functionality exposed by the underlying
platform and device, including platform-speciﬁc capabilities like iBeacons and Android
Fragments.
NativeScript
NativeScript is an open source framework for building native mobile apps with Angular,
TypeScript or JavaScript for Android or iPhone.
NativeScript oﬀers easy accessible platform-native user interface - no webviews. Deﬁne
once and let NativeScript adapt to run everywhere, or tailor the User interface to speciﬁc
devices and screens.
Alpha anywhere
Alpha Software’s Alpha Anywhere platform is a complete business application develop-
ment and deployment environment that enables users to become proﬁcient in creating
mobile business forms and applications that run across all devices.
Alpha Software oﬀers the Alpha Anywhere platform with a wizard-driven development
environment for building HTML5 and hybrid mobile apps, including connectors for com-
mon back-end systems and SQL databases.
DropSource
Dropsource is the next level no-code mobile app development platform for visually build-
ing powerful, data-driven and native iOS and Android apps.
Easily and quickly design and style the app’s user interface with Dropsource’s intuitive,
browser-based, visual drag-and-drop experience, including a broad range of powerful na-
14
==PAGE:20==
tive iOS and Android components.
Build apps for the iPhone and for Android, and let Dropsource automatically generate the
Swift 4 and Java source code. All apps will display on any iPhone or Android phone and
will work with varying screen sizes with Dropsources system of constraints.
MobileRoadie
MobileRoadie is a self-service mobile app platform to create, customize and manage mo-
bile apps.
MobileRoadie oﬀers mobile platforms for iOS and Android. They are created and man-
aged through Mobile Roadie’s Content Management System, which features a Dashboard
to view app analytics and activity.
The reason that the section about MobileRoadie is diﬀerent is that there is less informa-
tion avaiable about the tools strenghts and focus.
Ionic
Ionic is a complete open-source SDK for hybrid mobile app development.
Ionic provides tools and services for developing hybrid mobile apps using Web technologies
like CSS, HTML5, and Sass. Apps can be built with these Web technologies and then
distributed through native app stores to be installed on devices by leveraging Cordova.
Ionic Creator is a drag-and-drop interface building tool.
Ionic provides all the functionality which can be found in native mobile development SDKs.
Coco2d
Cocos2d is primarily used in two-dimensional game development. It gives developers the
option of ﬁve diﬀerent forks or platforms to develop on, based on their preferred program-
ming language:
Cocos2d-x uses C++
Cocos2d-JS uses JavaScript
Cocos2dXNA uses C#
Cocos2d-Swift uses Xcode and Objective-C
Cocos2d(Python) uses Python
The reason that the section about Cocos2d is diﬀerent is that there is less information
available about the tools strengths and focus. What was available was what diﬀerent tools
supports which programming languages.
Unity 3D
Unity 3D is a game engine that can be used if you want to take care of your graphics.
This cross platform mobile development tool goes beyond simple translation. After de-
veloping your code in UnityScript, C# or Boo, it is possible to export the games to 17
diﬀerent platforms, including iOS, Android, Windows, Web, Playstation, Xbox, Wii and
Linux.
Once the game is on all the chosen platforms, Unity will even help distribute it to the
appropriate stores, get social shares and track user analytics.
5app
Designed primarily for companies developing apps for their employees to use (or for the
people those companies hire to make those apps). 5App focuses on data security while
using HTML5 and JavaScript coding to export apps to Android and iOS.
The only downside is they require you to get in touch with them before you get started
15
==PAGE:21==
using their platform, but they promise productivity and ease of use once you do.
Microsoft PowerApps
The objective of PowerApps is to enable business users to build new capabilities via apps,
without requiring that they have coding experience.
PowerApps have connections to various Microsoft-based and third-party applications, in-
cluding Microsoft SQL Server, SharePoint and OneDrive in the Oﬃce 365 productivity
suite, as well as Dropbox, Google Docs, SAP, Oracle and Dynamics CRM.
Users can create, manage and share business apps on iOS, Android and Windows devices.
Adobe Air
Adobe Air is a cross-platform runtime system developed by Adobe Systems for building
desktop applications and mobile applications.
Adobe AIR allows Adobe Flash content and ActionScript 3.0 coders to construct applica-
tions and video games that run outside a web browser and behave as a native application
on iOS and Android.
Adobe provides for AIR HTML5 and JavaScript development with Adobe Dreamweaver
CS5, although any other HTML editor or text editor can be used.
3.2
Summary
This chapter shows that there exist a lot of diﬀerent cross-platform development tools and
that many of the tools talks about the same strengths and supports a variation of the
same programming languages.
The chapter gives the available and important information of the diﬀerent tools and gives
and overview of when they where developed and what reasons there is to choose those tools.
The information given in this chapter leads to the next chapter 8 where the information
from this chapter will be used to compare the tools and determine which three tools should
be tested further.
16
==PAGE:22==
4
Technology experiments
This Chapter will be about comparing all the tools that have been written about in the
previous chapter and choosing the 3 tools that will be tested by making some simple apps
to test the tool and see how they work with the criteria in mind. This is done because the
only way to really get to know the tools is not by reading about what they can do but by
testing the tools and their limitations.
This Thesis is focusing on the development tools that focuses on programming apps that
aren’t games and tools where writing code is needed.
This means that some of the tools can be taken out of consideration because they focus
on game development or focus on making apps without having to code ( which in most
cases means that the users have less customization options than if they are programming
it from scratch).
The tools that will be compared is written below in ﬁgure 1.
Figure 1: Table for tool comparison
The next step is to compare ﬁgure 1 with the ﬁgure 2, which shows the most used tools
and which tools is most used as the primary development tool.
This gives the tools:
• PhoneGap
• Xamarin
• Qt
• Adobe Air
• Appcelerator Titanium
17
==PAGE:23==
From this overview it can be seen that PhoneGap and Xamarin is the two most used
development tools and that Qt Adobe Air and Appcelerator Titanium is less used but still
popular tools.
Figure 2: Most used Cross-platform development tools1
The next step is to consider the diﬀerent development tools supported platforms. All of
the tools supports app development for iOS and Android but only PhoneGap, Xamarin
and Appcelerator Titanium supports development for other platforms.
Next step is to compare what programming languages the diﬀerent tools support.
PhoneGap supports HTML, CSS and JavaScript which are basic web programming lan-
guages which is easy to learn and well documented.
Xamarin supports C# which is a harder language to learn but which is well known and
well documented and Ruby which is also a well documented and easy to learn program-
ming language.
Qt support C++ which is a harder programming language to learn and master. It is
well documented and oﬀers the developer a lot of options but it is a complex language.
1Source:
https://www.developereconomics.com/reports/cross-platform-tools-2015/,(CC) BY-NC-ND
4.0
18
==PAGE:24==
There are things like memory handling that is important to know when using C++ to not
overwrite any data on the computer because it is using manual deallocation.
Adobe Air supports HTML, CSS and JavaScript which is basic web programming lan-
guages which is easy to learn, use and well documented.
Appcelerator Titanium supports JavaScript and XML for the user-interface which is easy
to learn, use and well documented.
Then there is the consideration of diﬀerent focus of the tools.
Where PhoneGap and
Adobe Air focuses on Web Development to create apps, Xamarin and Qt are more fo-
cused on native app development and Appcelerator Titanium is focused on native and
hybrid programming with a combination of web and native.
When looking at the above comparisons then two of the three tools that will be tested is
PhoneGap and Xamarin because they are the most used and popular tools and they sup-
port some easy to learn and well documented programming languages and they support
app development for multiple platforms.
The last tool was chosen between Adobe Air and Appcelerator Titanium and looking at
the comparisons then they both support easy to learn and well documented programming
languages.
The two biggest diﬀerences are that Appcelerator Titanium supports app development for
Windows Phone and Universal Windows besides the most important platforms which is
iOS and Android.
Whereas Adobe Air only supports iOS and Andorid. Futhermore Adobe Air is focused on
much the same development as PhoneGap, whereas Appcelerator Titanium uses a diﬀer-
ent approch then the tools already chosen.
This means that the last tool chosen to be tested is Appcelerator Titanium.
19
==PAGE:25==
5
App categories
This Chapter is about the diﬀerent categories that apps can be described by.
When
developing apps it is important to know which categories your app ﬁts into.
This is
because that each category gives diﬀerent focus points or parts of the app that is more
important than others. Some categories might be more focused on functionality then the
design of the apps and others might focus mostly on a beautiful user interface.
This chapter will talk about the diﬀerent categories and give examples of apps that ﬁts into
the diﬀerent categories and talk about if it is possible to ﬁnd apps that ﬁts into multiple
categories.
The diﬀerent app categories are:
• Lifestyle apps
• Social media apps
• Utility apps
• Games
• Productivity apps
• News/information apps
• Entertainment apps
• Private/company apps
Lifestyle apps
A lifestyle app is one that supports the individual facets, that deﬁne your lifestyle.
The advantage of these apps is that once they’re a part of a user’s lifestyle repertoire,
they’re likely there for good. These are the apps that people turn to on a daily basis to
help them ﬁnd the next new song, restaurant or destination. They’re the apps that help
them ﬁnd themselves, what they like and dislike, and where they’re heading next.
Lifestyle apps tend to complement other products and services very well. For this reason
sponsored advertising partnerships are successful in lifestyle apps.
For example, RunKeeper oﬀers its users exclusive deals on Nike products.
Lifestyle apps cover apps that helps in Fitness, Dating, Food, Music and Travel and does
anything from help the user plan an itinerary to help keep statistics on their training or
meeting new potential dating partners.
Lifestyle app could be apps like:
• Tinder, which is a dating app
• MyFitnessPal, which is a diet and nutrition tracking service to help the user stay
(or get) in shape.
• Ebay, which lets users track their bids and keep a constant eye on the items they
are selling.
• Mint, which helps users keep track of their personal ﬁnances.
20
==PAGE:26==
• MobilePay, which helps users transfer money to each other or pay in some stores
with out having to use cash.
Social media apps
A social media app is one that helps the user be in contact with their social life or follow
what their friends are doing.
Social media apps are apps that most of the users check in with every day to either share
information with their friends or family, or to see what is happening to the people they
know.
Social media apps make it easy for their users to share something they feel passionate
about without having to leave the app.
Social media apps are anything from posting anonymous jokes or other things the user is
passionately about, to apps that lets you communicate with your friends or apps that lets
the user search jobs through their network.
Social media app could be apps like:
• Facebook messenger, which is a place where Facebook friends can write to each
other, keep long conversations going, send money, make video and phone calls over
the internet and send stickers and animated GIFs with ease.
• Twitter, which is a free micro blogging app that allows registered members to broad-
cast short posts called tweets. Or follow celebrities to hear what they have to say.
• LinkedIn, which is a social networking app designed speciﬁcally for the business
community. The goal of the site is to allow registered members to establish and
document networks of people they know and trust professionally.
• Snapchat, which is an app where users can snap a picture and send it to their friends
and it will only be saved until it is viewed.
• Jodel, which is an app where users can post things anonymously and read every post
which is sorted by the time it is posted.
Utility apps
Utilities are the types of mobile apps that we may use most often without thinking about
them as apps. Many of them come pre-installed on your device and serve a single function.
These are the types of mobile apps that we tend to use more often, but for shorter periods
of time.
Utility apps cover many diﬀerent kinds of apps. Anything from ﬁnding the nearest gas
station to analyzing the wiﬁsignals near the user or things like managing passwords or
securing who have access to speciﬁc apps.
Utility app could be apps like:
• WiFi analyzer, which helps analyze your WiFi signal as well as other signals around
you.
• Solid Explorer, which supports the basics like archiving and un-archiving ﬁles, check-
ing your storage folders, moving ﬁles around, and more.
• Lastpass Password Manager, which saves passwords of the users accounts, and also
generates new passwords for the user.
21
==PAGE:27==
• ColorNote, which is a really simple app for making notes. The user can save notes,
memos, e-mails, messages and to-do lists.
• Dark sky, which uses the phone’s GPS to pinpoint the users exact location and tell
you if it’ll rain or snow in the next hour.
Games
The gaming and entertainment category are huge, and as such, very competitive.
Games are one of the more obvious mobile app categories and need little explanation.
These types of apps are popular among developers because they bring users back multiple
times each week, sometimes multiple times per day.
Game app could be apps like:
• Angry birds, which is a game where the player shoots birds at castles with pigs in
them an try to knock them down.
• Candy crush, which is a game where players have to match colored candies in groups
of three or more to get points.
• Medals of war, which is a game where the player sends units against an opponent to
destroy their headquarter.
• Idle Heroes, which is a game where players collect heroes and collect gold and other
items to make the heroes as strong as possible.
• Hustle castle, which is a game where players have a castle where they build diﬀerent
rooms and train guards and defend the castle against other players.
Productivity apps
Productivity apps are developed to help us be more productive.
Productivity apps are often described as tools and covers anything that can help make
the user more productive, anything from a simple calculator to an automation app that
can make the users daily life a whole lot easier.
These types of apps are indispensable when they’re done right.
That means helping
your user accomplish a task more easily, quickly and eﬃciently than your competitors.
Convenient features that allow them to get from point A to point done are what set this
type of mobile apps apart.
Productivity app could be apps like:
• Any.do, which keeps the users schedule on track with to-do list, reminders, notes
and the ability to share lists with and assign tasks to others.
• Google Keep, which lets the users create post it notes to quickly right down thoughts
that they want to remember.
• Slack, which takes conventional instant messaging a step further to make a more
useful group messaging and coordination tool. It also supports ﬁle sharing, direct
and group messaging tools.
• Trello, which aims to help users get things done and stay organized. The app lets
users create boards for all the projects they are working on.
22
==PAGE:28==
• Skype, which is a videoconferencing tool and available on both Android and IOS
tablets. The app is completely free and provides you with message, voice and video
call capabilities.
News/information apps
News and information apps supply their users with the news and information they’re
looking for in an easy to understand layout that eﬃciently navigates them to the things
they care most about.
News and information apps are pretty straightforward.
The most important feature of a news app are the sharing functions.
These apps spread through providing fresh, relevant content to a mass audience.
News/information app could be apps like:
• Appy Geek, which collects news from over 1,000 news sources around the world. You
can just choose from various topics like the internet, Apple, smartphone, cars, and
you can also pick speciﬁc sources like Digital Trends.
• SmartNews, which brings users trending stories and categorizes them based on the
subject.
It’s clutter-free, easy to browse through, and good at digging up fresh
content.
• Pocket, which lets users store news for later reading, and oﬀers a simple user interface
that lets users ﬁnd the articles they saved, bookmark them, and archive other articles
they want to come back to.
• News360, which lets users search for their favorite topics, or speciﬁc news sites, and
make a list.
• theScore, which is an app that specializes in sport news and real time scores.
Entertainment apps
Entertainment apps could be arranged together with game apps because the two categories
are similar in a lot of ways. But entertainment apps can be distinguished from games apps
because they often have quite diﬀerent goals, even though both of them seek to entertain
the user.
Entertainment apps are often educational and seek to ‘gamify’ an already existing process
or activity.
Entertainment apps also include apps that let the users watch TV, read books or listen to
music.
Entertainments app could be apps like:
• Netﬂix, which is an app that lets users watch movies or series on their phone or
using a chrome-cast, so users can watch it on their television.
• Spotify, which is a app that lets users listen to all the music they want and like.
• Math Motion: Cupcake!, which is an app that lets users practice their addition or
multiplication skills while feeling like they are playing a game.
• EbookDroid, which is an app that lets users read books or other ﬁle types directly
on their phone.
23
==PAGE:29==
• Math Ninja, which lets users train their math skills while still being entertained by
playing a game.
Private/company apps
Private/company apps are the category of apps that is not released for everybody. These
apps can either be apps that is developed for private use for a developer and the ones that
get the app from the developer or a app that is only used by the employees in a company.
These apps can be an app that would likely ﬁt into one of these categories, but which one
is only known by the developer and the ones that has permission to use it.
Private/company app could be apps like:
• Inventory app, which could be use by a company to keep stock of what they have in
the warehouse.
• Security app, which could be used by a company to control all the security in the
building by using some tablets.
• Developer app, which could be anything that the developer needs just for himself
could be some kind of statistics or list of things he needs.
5.1
Types of apps
There are three types of apps that can be choosen between when developing apps.
The ﬁrst type is a Native app. Native apps are developed speciﬁcally for one platform,
and can take full advantage of all the device features. They can use the camera, the GPS,
the compass, the list of contacts, and so on. They can also use the device’s notiﬁcation
system and work oﬄine.
The second type is a Mobile web app. Web apps are not real applications, they are basi-
cally websites that look and feel like native applications, but they are not implemented as
native applications. They are run by a browser and typically written in HTML5. Users
ﬁrst access them as they would access any web page: they navigate to a special URL and
then have the option of “installing” them on their home screen by creating a bookmark
to that page.
The third type is a hybrid app. Hybrid apps are part native apps, part web apps. Like
native apps, they live in an app store and can take advantage of many of the device fea-
tures available. Like web apps, they rely on HTML being rendered in a browser, with the
caveat that the browser is embedded within the app. Hybrid apps are popular because
they allow cross-platform development and thus signiﬁcantly reduce development costs:
that is, the same HTML code components can be reused on diﬀerent mobile operating
systems.
5.2
summary
The chapter give a overview on the diﬀerent kinds of app categories. These categories
are important to know when developing an app to know what category the app being
24
==PAGE:30==
developed is in and what is important for the end users in that category.
Apps often ﬁts into multiple categories but when that happens it is important to choose
what category the app should ﬁt into to know what the end users wants instead of trying
to target end users that wants diﬀerent apps.
This is important for my evaluation because the tools that helps focus on the important
parts of the apps in each category is better suited for developers that wants an app in a
speciﬁc category.
When knowing what category the app is targeting then the developer knows what is
important and what is the focus of the app. This makes it easier to choose the right
cross-platform development tool both when knowing the category but also when knowing
the type of app that is wanted.
25
==PAGE:31==
6
How to
The next step after the three tools was chosen in the last chapter was to test the tools
with a simple app to make sure that it is possible to make apps using the tools.
This chapter is about the ﬁrst simple app that is used to test the three development tools
and gives a how to for each tool on implementing the app. This is done to make sure that
it is possible to create a functioning app with each of the tools.
The chapter gives a conceptual description which gives an overview of the how to and a
technical description which is only needed to read if the reader wants to know exactly how
it was done or wants to create the apps themselves.
To make sure that it is possible to create apps for both iPhone and Android using Xamarin,
PhoneGap and Appcelerator you will need the following things:
• A Mac computer running Mac OS X Yosemite(10.10) or greater.
• An Apple developer license
The ﬁrst thing you must do, is to use the Apple developer license to get the tool Xcode.
Xcode is Apple’s development tool and it is needed to develop apps for iPhone.
When downloading Xcode you get all the necessary SDKs and tools needed to deploy
iPhone apps. This is done by going to https://developer.apple.com/ choosing account
and then enter your credentials to log in.
When you are logged in, there is the possibility to press ”Download Tools” which takes
you to a site where you can choose which version of Xcode you want. It is recommended
to always download the latest version which might be the only version working with the
diﬀerent IDEs you choose.
Xcode can only be downloaded by having an apple developer license and it can only run
on a Mac computer.
The app that is developed using the tools is a simple TO-DO List with the possibility to
add and remove items from the list. This is just to make sure that it is possible to go from
making the project to deploying the app.
The app is a simple app where it is possible to have a list of things you have to do, this list
can be updated by adding a new task or deleting one of the existing tasks. An example of
the ﬁnal app can be seen in ﬁgure 3. The design for each of the tools might be diﬀerent
depending on what the tools oﬀers.
26
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3: TO-DO list app
6.1
Xamarin How to
This section is about the how to develop a simple app using Xamarin on a Mac. The
section will have a conceptual approach and a more technical approach.
When Creating apps using Xamarin on a Mac machine, it is only possible to create apps
for Android and Apple phones and tablet, but when developing on a windows then it is
only possible to create apps for Windows and Android phones and tablets.
Conceptual approach
The ﬁrst step is to download and install the tool.
When this is done the next step is to create a new project. This is done by making a new
solution and choosing a multiplatform project and then an app. When app is chosen there
is two possibilities. The ﬁrst is to chosoe the form pages project which is a cross-platform
project with shared design. The design will still use the native design for buttons and
toolbar etc. but the design will be deﬁned once.
The second possibility is to choose the native apps which in most cases is the same as the
Xamarian forms but the key diﬀerence is that it takes one user interface for the iOS app
and another for the Android app, so it is much better if you need to be able to tailor the
design for each platform.
In this case the forms apps were chosen.
When the project is made Xamarin generates three folders. one for shared code, one for
the iOS speciﬁc code and one for the Android speciﬁc code. This is shown in ﬁgure 4
27
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4: Xamarin forms project structure
The next step is to make the user interface for both apps. To start with the interface for
the iPhone was made and this was done in the iOS folder of the project and it looks like in
ﬁgure 5. The application uses iOS-standard user interface design, such as the ‘add’ button
being positioned in the navigation bar and using the built-in plus (+) icon. It also uses
the default UINavigationController ‘back’ button behavior and supports ‘swipe-to-delete’
in the table.
28
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5: Xamarin forms project structure iOS folder
After the user interface of the iPhone app was made the next step was to make the user
interface of the Android app. This was done in the Android folder and it looks like the
ﬁgure 6. The application uses iOS-standard user interface design, such as the ‘add’ button
being positioned in the navigation bar and using the built-in plus (+) icon. It also uses
the default UINavigationController ‘back’ button behavior and supports ‘swipe-to-delete’
in the table.
29
==PAGE:35==
Figure 6: Xamarin forms project structure Android folder
The next step was to make the buttons work so it is possible to add new tasks and make it
possible to delete tasks. This was done in the Android folder for the Andorid app and in
the iOS folder for the iPhone app by making a call when the button is clicked. The next
step was to make the functionality of the button and this was done in the shared folder
where a method was created that added a task to the list and functions was created to
make it possible to delete tasks.
The shared code is where everything is bound together and the app.cs ﬁle is called from
both the iOS appdelegate and the Android main. The ﬁles in the shared code is anything
that doesn’t need to be handle speciﬁcally by either devices and the structure is shown in
ﬁgure 7.
Figure 7: Xamarin forms project structure Shared folder
The ﬁnal step was to test the app using the emulators or using a physical iPhone or An-
droid by deploying the apps.
30
==PAGE:36==
Technical approach
This section is the technical how to of the TO-DO list app for Xamarin and will go into
detail on how the app was developed and the code that was used.
The ﬁrst thing you must do is download the latest version of Xamarian.Mac and Xamarian
studio which can be found on https://www.xamarin.com/download
This will give you the installation ﬁle VisualStudioInstaller.dmg. Once it is downloaded
click the ﬁle to mount the installer and then run it by double-clicking the logo. The installer
inspects your system to choose which components need to be installed or updated.
The installer presents a list of required components that are missing and that needs to be
downloaded and installed as shown in ﬁgure 8.
Figure 8: Installation screen- Choosing what you need
When everything you need is selected, press the Install and Update button to start the
installation process.
When the installation is complete then its ready for you to begin developing apps.
If you haven’t installed Xcode before installing the software on a Mac it will ask you to
install Xcode which is needed to get the libraries that are needed to make native iPhone
apps. This could also be done by coding the app on Windows and having a Mac computer
accessible on the network, for remote compilation and debugging. But to narrow the work,
it was decided to focus on developing the app on a Mac computer for iPhone and Android.
When Xamarian studio has been installed you can make a quick example by clicking on ﬁle
> New solution link in the upper left-hand corner of the screen to open the New Project
dialog box. Next step is to Select Multiplatform then App. After choosing App there is
three possibilities as shown in ﬁgure 9.
The ﬁrst is to choose the form pages project and the second is to chose the native apps.
31
==PAGE:37==
The third is a game app.
Figure 9: Xamarin choose project type
When the project is created, the default project Xamarin creates is a simple TO-DO-List
app which can run for both the Android and the iPhone simulators.
Inside the project there is 3 folders with the names:
• yourprojectname
• yourprojectname.Droid
• yourprojectname.IOS
Shared code The ﬁrst folder is where all the shared code is written and the two other
folders have a reference to that folder. The code in that folder is anything that doesn’t
directly do anything for the design of the user interface. This means that in this example
the code deﬁnes the item object and the get and set methods for the object. The structure
for the example that was made is shown in ﬁgure 7
iOS part
The iOS folder uses only a handful of classes required to implement the iOS application
using the shared code to store and retrieve data.
The iOS app references the platform-speciﬁc SDK libraries as shown in ﬁgure 5. The
reference is iOS.Xamarin and is given by Xamarin when the project is created. It needs
to have a reference to the shared code to make sure it can access the shared code.
The iOS-speciﬁc application has two classes to help displaying tasks:
32
==PAGE:38==
• EditingSource – This class is used to bind lists of tasks to the user interface. Because
we’re using MonoTouch.Dialog for the Task list, we need to implement this helper to
enable swipe-to-delete functionality in the UITableView. Swipe-to-delete is common
on iOS, but not Android or Windows Phone, so the iOS speciﬁc project is the only
one that implements it.
• TaskDialog – This class is used to bind a single task to the UI. It uses the Mono-
Touch.Dialog Reﬂection API to ‘wrap’ the TaskItem object with a class that contains
the correct attributes to allow the input screen to be correctly formatted.
The User Interface Layer consists of the following classes:
• AppDelegate – Contains calls to the Appearance API to style the fonts and col-
ors used in the application.
Tasky is a simple application so there are no other
initialization tasks running in FinishedLaunching.
• Screens – subclasses of UIViewController that deﬁne each screen and its behavior.
Screens tie together the UI with Application Layer classes and the common API
(TaskItemManager). In this example the screens are created in code, but they could
have been designed using Xcode’s Interface Builder or the storyboard designer.
• Images – Visual elements are an important part of every application. Tasky has
splash screen and icon images, which for iOS must be supplied in regular and Retina
resolution.
The main Screen is a MonoTouch.Dialog screen that displays a list of tasks from the
SQLite database. It inherits from DialogViewController and implements code to set the
Root to contain a collection of TaskItem objects for display.
The two main methods related to displaying and interacting with the task list are:
• PopulateTable – Uses the Business Layer’s TaskManager.GetTasks method to re-
trieve a collection of TaskItem objects to display.
• Selected – When a row is touched, displays the task in a new screen.
Task Details is an input screen that allows tasks to be edited or deleted.
Tasky uses MonoTouch.Dialog’s Reﬂection API to display the screen, so there is no UIV-
iewController implementation. Instead, the HomeScreen class instantiates and displays a
DialogViewController using the TaskDialog class from the Application Layer.
The functionality of the Task Details screen (such as saving or deleting a task) must be im-
plemented in the HomeScreen class, because this is where the MonoTouch.Dialog.BindingContext
is created. The following HomeScreen methods support the Task Details screen:
• ShowTaskDetails – Creates a MonoTouch.Dialog.BindingContext to render a screen.
It creates the input screen using reﬂection to retrieve property names and types from
the TaskDialog class. Additional information, such as the watermark text for the
input boxes, is implemented with attributes on the properties.
• SaveTask – This method is referenced in the TaskDialog class via an OnTap attribute.
It is called when Save is pressed, and uses a MonoTouch.Dialog.BindingContext to
retrieve the user-entered data before saving the changes using TaskItemManager.
33
==PAGE:39==
• DeleteTask – This method is referenced in the TaskDialog class via an OnTap at-
tribute.
It uses TaskItemManager to delete the data using the primary key (ID
property).
The ﬁnal app for iOS looks like ﬁgure 10.
Figure 10: iPhone ToDo-list design
Android part
The Android app project must contain a reference to the platform-speciﬁc Xamarin.Android
assembly to access classes from the Android SDK as shown in ﬁgure6. The reference is
Mono.Android and is given by Xamarin when the project is created. It also needs a ref-
erence to the shared code so that it can use the shared methods.
Like the iOS version we looked at before, the Application Layer in the Android version con-
tains platform-speciﬁc classes required to ‘bind’ the objects exposed by the Core to the UI.
TaskListAdapter – to display a List of objects we need to implement an adapter to display
custom objects in a ListView. The adapter controls which layout is used for each item in
the list
The Android app’s User Interface Layer is a combination of code and XML markup.
• Resources/Layout – screen layouts and the row cell design implemented as AXML
ﬁles. The AXML can be written by hand or laid-out visually using the Xamarin UI
Designer for Android.
• Resources/Drawable – images (icons) and custom button.
• Screens – Activity subclasses that deﬁne each screen and its behavior. Ties together
the UI with Application Layer classes and the common API.
The main Screen consists of an Activity subclass HomeScreen and the HomeScreen.axml
ﬁle which deﬁnes the layout (position of the button and task list).
34
==PAGE:40==
The main Screen code deﬁnes the handlers for clicking the button and clicking items in
the list, as well as populating the list in the OnResume method (so that it reﬂects changes
made in the Task Details Screen). Data is loaded using the Business Layer’s TaskItem-
Manager and the TaskListAdapter from the Application Layer.
The Task Details Screen also consists of an Activity subclass and an AXML layout ﬁle.
The layout determines the location of the input controls and the C# class deﬁnes the
behavior to load and save TaskItem objects.
The ﬁnal app for Android looks like ﬁgure 11.
Figure 11: Android ToDo-list design
Deploying the app - Xamarin
When the developer wants to deploy the app for iPhone they have to have a paying de-
veloper account at Apple the same as when they want to debug on a physical iPhone device.
When the developer wants to deploy the app for Android they have to go through speciﬁc
steps. Xamarin oﬀers a simple guide for deploying the app for android and it is found
at the link https://developer.xamarin.com/guides/android/deployment,_testing,
_and_metrics/publishing_an_application/ which will guide the developer though all
the necessary and optional steps for deploying the app.
The steps that have to be done is :
• prepare the application for release
• Sign the Android Application Package.
Preparing the application for release is done by multiple steps. The ﬁrst step is to right
click on the android folder of the project and choose options and then choose Android
Application. This will open up the view shown in ﬁgure 12.
35
==PAGE:41==
Figure 12: Xamarin Android options
In Android Application it is important to choose an icon as the apps icon and to set the
version number and name.
When this is done the next step is to conﬁgure the linker which tells the tool which as-
semblies it needs to link. This is done under the Android Build as shown in ﬁgure 13
Figure 13: Xamarin Android Builder
The options for the linker is:
• Don’t link – This turns oﬀthe linker; no linking will be performed.
36
==PAGE:42==
• Link SDK assemblies only – This will only link the assemblies that are required by
Xamarin.Android. Other assemblies will not be linked.
• Link all assemblies – This will link all assemblies that are required by the application,
and not just the ones required by Xamarin.Android.
A last necessary part in the Android Builder is to go to the general tab and make sure
”Use Shared Mono Runtime” is unchecked.
When this is done the most necessary steps is completed and the next step is to select
Build> Build all to verify that it builds successfully in release mode. This means that the
build has to be set to release mode instead of debug mode
The next step is to begin the publishing process by right clicking on the Android folder
and selecting archive for publishing. Archive for Publishing builds the project and bundles
it into an archive ﬁle.
When the project is archived the next step is to choose sign and Distribute in the bottom
right corner as shown in ﬁgure 14
Figure 14: Xamarin Android sign and Distribute
When choosing sign and distribute there is to choices for distribution by Google play or
ad-hoc as shown in ﬁgure 15
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure 15: Xamarin Distribute choices
The Google play choice is for distributing through google play and the ad-hoc is to get
the apk ﬁle and distribute the ﬁle your self.
After clicking Ad-Hoc, Visual Studio for Mac opens the Android Signing Identity dialog.
To publish the .APK, it must ﬁrst be signed it with a signing key (also referred to as
a certiﬁcate). If a certiﬁcate already exists, click the Import an Existing Key button to
import it and then proceed Otherwise, click the Create a New Key button to create a new
certiﬁcate.
The Create New Certiﬁcate dialog is used to create a new signing certiﬁcate that can be
used for signing Android applications as shown in the ﬁgure 16. Click OK after entering
in the necessary information.
Figure 16: Xamarin new Android certiﬁcate
When the certiﬁcate is created a new certiﬁcate was added to the key store. Click Next
38
==PAGE:44==
to publish the app ad-hoc (for independent distribution) and then the only step that is
left is to choose where the apk ﬁle has to be saved and enter the chosen password.
When it is saved it is possible to send it directly to the users that should have the app or
let people download it through a website.
6.2
PhoneGap How to
This section is about the how to develop a simple app using PhoneGap. The section will
have a conceptual approach and a more technical approach.
For the PhoneGap it isn’t necessary to use a Mac computer to create apps because Phone-
Gap will do all the work of converting the app to both an Android app and an iPhone app.
Conceptual approach
The ﬁrst step is to download and install the tool.
When this is done the next step is to create a new project. This is done by making a
new project by pressing ﬁle > create new project and then choose the template you want.
When the project is created the next step is to open the index.html which is the main ﬁle
and where all the code for this app will be done. It can be found in the www folder at the
location of the project as shown in ﬁgure 17.
Figure 17: PhoneGap project location
The structure of the project is seen in the www folder as shown in ﬁgure 18
39
==PAGE:45==
Figure 18: PhoneGap project structure
The next step was then to make the user-interface for the app. To start with the interface
for the app was made by just adding two buttons, a title and adding a table. This looks
like ﬁgure 19.
Figure 19: PhoneGap buttons
The next step was to make the functionality for the app both for the buttons and then to
make it possible to add tasks to the table. This was done by using javascript to make the
functions that is needed and using HTML and CSS to make it look right.
The ﬁnal step was to make sure that the project is running. This is done by pressing the
arrow in the top right corner of the project as shown in the ﬁgure 20.
40
==PAGE:46==
Figure 20: Installation screen- Choosing what you need
When the project is running it will look like the ﬁgure 21 and it will give an ip-address,
which can be used to test the project. This is done by downloading the PhoneGap De-
veloper app on the phone and use the ip-address. This will only work if the computer
running the project and the phone are on the same network.
Figure 21: Run screen- running
Technical approach
The ﬁrst thing to do is go to https://PhoneGap.com/ and choose Download PhoneGap
from the home page.
Then click the blue download button on the next page to begin the download.
When it is downloaded just run the installation ﬁle and it is installed.
The next step is to create a new project by pressing ﬁle > create new project and then
choose the template you want.
41
==PAGE:47==
When the project is created you can follow the local path to ﬁnd the ﬁles on the computer
as shown in the ﬁgure 22.
Figure 22: Run screen - Local path
There are three key ﬁles and folders which are:
• index.html, which is where you’ll be writing the app’s code.
• index.css, found in the css folder, which is used to design the look and feel of the
app.
• The img folder, which is where all the images for the app will be stored.
Next step is to code the app. The ﬁrst thing is to open the index.html ﬁle in your favorite
html editor or nodepad++. When it is open replace all the existing code with the follow-
ing :
1 <!DOCTYPE html>
2 <html>
3
<head>
4
<t i t l e>To−Do List</ t i t l e>
5
<l i n k
r e l=” s t y l e s h e e t ” type=” text / css ”
href=” css / index . css ”/>
6
<s c r i p t
type=” text / j a v a s c r i p t ” language=” JavaScript ”>
7
8
</ s c r i p t>
9
</head>
10
<body>
11
12
</body>
13 </html>
This is the main structure of the standard web page and to add the two buttons on the
top we add the following code between the body tags:
1 <input
type=”button” value=”Add To−Do”/>
2 <input
type=”button” value=”Remove Completed Tasks”/>
42
==PAGE:48==
3 <br/><br/>
4 <table
id=”dataTable” width=”100%” border=”1”>
5
6 </ table>
The app will need to have some JavaScript functions implemented. The functions that
will be needed are:
• createNewToDo() - Prompts the user to enter a new to-do item.
Once the user
presses the OK button on the resulting dialog, a new row is added to the table.
• addTableRow(todoDictionary, aooIsLoading) - Adds a row to the to-do list table. It
accepts several arguments: a dictionary containing both the text of the to-do along
with the checkbox state and a boolean value, which indicates if the app is loading
or not. This will be explained a little later.
• checkBoxClicked() - Called whenever the state of a checkbox is changed. It loops
through all checkboxes and either applies or removes a strike-through style to the
text of the corresponding to-do.
• viewSelectedRow(todoTextField) - Displays the value of the passed-in text ﬁeld in
a popup dialog.
• deleteSelectedRow(deletButton) - Deletes the row that corresponds to the row of the
button that was passed into the function.
• removeCompletedTasks() - Loops through all the table rows and removes the rows
where the to-do item is marked as complete.
• saveToDoList() - Saves the to-do list using the Local Storage API.
• loadToDoList() - Loads the to-do list when the app is ﬁrst launched using the Local
Storage API.
• deleteAllRows() - Removes all rows from the table.
All of the above functions have to be created between the scripts tags in the index.html and
can be seen in appendix 1 an example of the createNewToDo() function can be seen below.
1
<s c r i p t
type="text/javascript" language="JavaScript">
2
// create a new to-do
3
function createNewToDo ()
4
{
5
var todoDictionary = {};
6
7
// prompt the user to enter to-do
8
var todo = prompt ( "To-Do" , "" ) ;
9
i f
( todo != null )
10
{
11
i f
( todo == "" )
12
{
13
a l e r t ( "To-Do can’t be empty!" ) ;
14
}
15
else
16
{
17
// append the new to-do with the table
43
==PAGE:49==
18
todoDictionary = { check
:
0
,
text
:
todo };
19
addTableRow ( todoDictionary ,
false ) ;
20
}
21
}
22
23
}
24
</script >
When the functions are created all you have to do is bring it all together. This is done by
adding the relevant function call to the onClick property of the UI controls by adding the
following code between the body tags in index.html :
1 <body onload=”loadToDoList () ”>
2
<input
type=”button” value=”Add To−Do”
o n c l i c k=”createNewToDo () ”/>
3
<input
type=”button” value=”Remove Completed Tasks () ”
o n c l i c k=”
removeCompletedTasks () ”/>
4
<br/><br/>
5
<table
id=”dataTable” width=”100%” border=”1”>
6
7
</ table>
8 </body>
the ﬁnal app looks like ﬁgure 23.
Figure 23: PhoneGap ToDo-list design
Deploying the app - PhoneGap
When the developer wants to deploy the app they have to create an adobe account at
https://build.phonegap.com/apps this is PhoneGap Build which is the cloud based
solution that uses the code and makes the apps.
It is possible to get a free account where it is possible to have on app running.
44
==PAGE:50==
When deploying the app on PhoneGap build all it needs is the ﬁles conﬁg.xml and in-
dex.html. The best way to do this is take the two ﬁles and make a zip ﬁle containing
them.
When this is done the ﬁle must be uploaded and then you get the option to build the app
to Android, iOS and Windows Phones as shown in the ﬁgure 24
Figure 24: PhoneGap Build page
The reason that it has error in the iOS build is that the developer account isn’t enough to
deploy the app. To get the app deployed for iOS the developer’s Apple account need what
is called provisional proﬁles which is only possible with access to deploying in app store.
The way to get access to deploying in app store is by upgrading the developer proﬁle and
the cheapest upgrade where the access is granted cost 100 USD per year.
To deploy for Android there is a couple of steps that needs to be taken to sign the appli-
cation.
The ﬁrst step is to download the executable called keystore which comes with every
JDK(Java Development Kit) and the open up the terminal and write keytool -genkey
-v -keystore yourappname.keystore -alias appnamealias -keyalg RSA -keysize
2048 -validity 10000 changing yourappname and appnamealias to your own information.
You will be asked for a password; don’t use anything you will forget and if you really need
to, write it down. If you lose the password you won’t be able to update your application
in the future.
You’ll be asked for your ﬁrst and last names, key those in, hit enter again.
You’ll be asked for the name of your “organizational unit” – For this app DTU was used
45
==PAGE:51==
– you would likely use your studio name or, if you don’t have any alternatives, your own
full name.
You’re asked for the name your organization. Then your “city of locality”, and your “state
or province”.
More location questions, you will need to key in the two-letter code for your country.
Finally, you will be asked to conﬁrm all is correct and then enter your password once more,
which will be the same as the one you entered and reentered earlier.
The .keystore ﬁle has been created! You can ﬁnd it by clicking on the magnifying glass in
the top right and doing a quick search for .keystore.
Then you go to edit account in PhoneGap Build and chose signing keys as shown in picture
25
Figure 25: PhoneGap Build signing keys
Click ’add a key’ as shown i ﬁgure 26, ensuring you use the same alias used when you
generated your key.
Figure 26: PhoneGap Build add keys
Go to the proﬁle again and into signing keys and chose unlock key as shown in ﬁgure 27
and the supply the certiﬁcate password which was the second password entered and the
46
==PAGE:52==
keystore password which was the ﬁrst password entered.
Figure 27: PhoneGap Build unlock keys
Then the last part is to go to the app page and choose rebuild or build and the press the
apk button as shown in ﬁgure 24 to download the ﬁle and choose it what way you want
it distributed it can be send by emailed and installed when opening the email or send
through Google play store or by a website.
When having the correct data, it is a simple way to deploy the app for diﬀerent platforms
and an easy way to change the code the only thing needed is the passwords for the signing
and then rebuild. But it removes the control of the building phase because everything is
done by PhoneGap build.
6.3
Appcelerator Titanium How to
This section is about the how to develop a simple app using Appcelerator Titanium on
mac. The section will have a conceptual approach and a more technical approach.
Conceptual approach
The ﬁrst step is to download and install the tool.
When that is done the next step is to create a new project. This is done by making a new
project and choosing Mobile App project and selecting default alloy project. When the
project is created the next step is to deﬁne the data model. This is done on the top-level
project folder and creating a new alloy model.
The next step is to create a single task and save it. This is done in the index.js ﬁle.
Then the next part is to make the functionality of the add button so that each time we
call the add() method on the myTasks collection the view is synchronized with the new
data.
The next step is to make the add task button.
47
==PAGE:53==
In the Project Explorer, right-click on the project folder and select New > Alloy Controller
and then the next part is to create the functionality of the button so that there is a text
ﬁeld where the task name can be written.
The ﬁnal step is to test the app which is done by making the app run, this is done by
using the emulators or by deploying the app so it can be tested on a physical phone.
Technical approach
When using Appcelerator Titanium it is important to have jdk (Java Development Kit)
installed because it is an Eclipse based program but even more important is that you don’t
use jdk 9 because Appcelerator studio doesn’t support this. Appcelerator Titanium only
support jdk 8 or earlier versions at the time of this thesis.
To start with you must go to https://platform.appcelerator.com/ and create and account
which is used both when getting information and help on their web page but also for
logging on the product and managing your apps.
When the account is created and you are logged in, press the logo in the top left corner
and choose Titanium SDK. This takes you to a page where you can choose between using
Axway Appcelerator Studio or the Axway Appcelerator CLI (command-line interface).
Choose the IDE which is the larger download and that is the studio version.
When the download is complete follow the installation steps. When ﬁnished start Appcel-
erator Studio and use your credentials to connect to your account.
Then it is time to create a new project. This is done by selecting File > New > Mobile
App Project.
Then select the Default Alloy Project type as shown in ﬁgure 28 and click next.
48
==PAGE:54==
Figure 28: Appcelerator Titanium new project
The structure of the project is shown in ﬁgure 29.
49
==PAGE:55==
Figure 29: Appcelerator Titanium project structure
On the Project Location screen, enter TODOList for the Project name and com.your- do-
main.todolist. Replace your-domain with your personal or organization’s domain. Leave
the other ﬁelds at their default values. Then click OK.
The heart of the TODOList app is the data containing the user’s tasks, so we’ll start by
deﬁning our data model. Alloy uses Backbone to provide its data modeling and collection
features.
Right-click or Control-click on the top-level project folder and select New > Alloy Model
or press Cmd+Shift+M (on a Mac).
In the New Model dialog enter tasks for the Model name. Select sql from the Adapter
menu and in the Schema table add two ﬁelds named name and description and set their
types to text and click OK.
This creates a new ﬁle in the app/models directory called tasks.js. This ﬁle describes the
data model you just created. The conﬁg section deﬁnes the data columns, adapter type,
and collection name.
1 exports . d e f i n i t i o n = {
2
co nfig :
{
3
columns :
{
4
”name” :
” text ” ,
5
” d e s c r i p t i o n ” :
” text ”
6
} ,
7
adapter :
{
50
==PAGE:56==
8
type :
” s q l ” ,
9
collection name :
” tasks ”
10
}
11
. . .
12 }
Next step is to write code that creates a task Collection from the model deﬁnition. This
means that we create a single task and save it to device storage.
Open controllers/index.js and delete the doClick() function deﬁnition added by the project
wizard. Then make a reference to our collection:
1 var mytasks = Alloy . C o l l e c t i o n s . tasks ;
Create a new model object (task) and assign it a name and description:
1 var
task = Alloy . createModel ( ’ tasks ’ ,
{
2
name :
’ trash ’ ,
3
d e s c r i p t i o n :
’ take
the
trash
out ’
4 }) ;
Then add the task to the collection and to the database.
1 myTasks . add ( task ) ;
2 task . save () ;
Then save the changes to index.js
In Alloy (which is a “component-oriented” application framework that enforces separation
of concerns with a Model/View/Controller architecture.), collection data can be synchro-
nized to a view object, or a single model can be bound to a view component. At runtime,
Alloy monitors your application’s collections for changes and updates any synchronized
view objects with the new data. Speciﬁcally, the Backbone add, change, destroy, fetch,
remove, and reset events are monitored for changes. In this case, each time we call the
add() method on the myTasks collection the view is synchronized with the new data.
Open views/index.xml.
Delete the <Label> element that was generated by the project wizard and add a <TableView>
element in its place.
Insert a <TableViewRow> element inside the <TableView> element, as shown below:
1 <Alloy>
2
<Window c l a s s=” container ”>
3
<!−−Add TableView and
TableViewRow −−>
4
<TableView>
5
<TableViewRow></TableViewRow>
6
</TableView>
7
</Window>
8 </Alloy>
The <TableViewRow> element will be repeated for each element in our data set.
Add a <Collection> element to the top-level <Alloy> element and set its src property to
”tasks”. This corresponds to the name of the collection we created before.
1 <Alloy>
2
<Co ll ec ti on
src=” tasks ”/>
3
<Window c l a s s=” container ”>
4
. . .
51
==PAGE:57==
5
</Window>
6 </Alloy>
To synchronize the collection with the view, assign tasks to the TableView element’s dat-
aCollection attribute.
1 <Alloy>
2
<C o ll ec ti on
src=” tasks ”/>
3
<Window c l a s s=” container ”>
4
<!−−Asssign
the
c o l l e c t i o n
to
the TableView −−>
5
<TableView
dataCollection=” tasks ”>
6
<TableViewRow></TableViewRow>
7
</TableView>
8
</Window>
9 </Alloy>
Using curly-bracket syntax, assign the name from each task (that is, each model in the
collection) to the name attribute of the <TableViewRow>. The ﬁnal contents of index.xml
should look like the following:
1 <Alloy>
2
<C o ll ec ti on
src=” tasks ”/>
3
<Window c l a s s=” container ”>
4
<TableView
dataCollection=” tasks ”>
5
<TableViewRow name=”{name}”
d e s c r i p t i o n=”{ d e s c r i p t i o n }”></
TableViewRow>
6
</TableView>
7
</Window>
8 </Alloy
By default, Android applications built with Appcelerator Titanium use the AppCompat
theme, which uses a dark background with light text, while iOS defaults to black text and
a black background. In order to see text, change the background to white for iOS only by
adding the platform attribute to the container rule.
Open styles/index.tss and add the platform attribute to the container like this:
1 ” . container [ platform=i o s ] ” :
{
2
backgroundColor :
’ white ’
3 }
The next step is to make the add task button.
In the Project Explorer, right-click on the project folder and select New > Alloy Con-
troller.
In the New Controller dialog, give the controller the name addtask.
Click OK. Open
views/addtask.xml and add the following markup:
1 Alloy>
2
<Window c l a s s=” container ”>
3
<View layout=” v e r t i c a l ”>
4
<TextField
id=”nameInput” hintText=”Name . . . ”></TextField>
5
<TextField
id=” descriptionInput ” hintText=” Description . . . ”></
TextField>
6
<Button
id=” insertBookButton ” onClick=”addTask”>Add</Button>
7
</View>
52
==PAGE:58==
8
</Window>
9 </Alloy>
This creates input text ﬁelds where the user will enter the task name and description, and
a button to add the new task to the collection. The button’s onClick handler will call the
insertTask() function, which will be created next.
Open styles/addtask.tss and add the following styling:
1 ” . container [ platform=i o s ] ”
:
{
2
backgroundColor :
’ white ’
3 }
4 ” TextField ”
:
{
5
borderStyle :
Ti . UI .INPUT BORDERSTYLE ROUNDED,
6
top :
10 ,
7
l e f t :
20 ,
8
r i g h t :
20 ,
9
height :
40
10 }
Open controllers/addtask.js, remove the existing code in that ﬁle and add the following:
1 var myTasks = Alloy . C o l l e c t i o n s . tasks ;
Deﬁne a new function named addTask() with the following code:
1 function
addTask ()
{
2
var
task = Alloy . createModel ( ’ tasks ’ ,
{
3
name :
$ . nameInput . value ,
4
author
:
$ . descriptionInput . value
5
}) ;
6
myTasks . add ( task ) ;
7
task . save () ;
8
// Close
the window .
9
$ . addtask . c l o s e () ;
10 }
For iOS, open views/ios/index.xml and insert a Toolbar element inside the Window ele-
ment below the TableView element:
1 <Toolbar bottom=”0”>
2
<Items>
3
<Button
id=”add”
t i t l e=”Add task ” onClick=”addTask”/>
4
</Items>
5 </Toolbar>
For Android, open views/index.xml and add the following Menu and MenuItem elements
below the TableView element:
1 <Menu id=”menu” platform=” android ”>
2
<!−−Cannot
s p e c i f y
node
text .
Use
a t t r i b u t e s
only . −−>
3
<MenuItem id=”addTask”
4
t i t l e=”Add task ”
5
onClick=”addTask”
6
showAsAction=”Ti . Android .SHOW AS ACTION IF ROOM” />
7 </Menu>
Open controllers/index.js and add the following code to open the addtask controller when
the appropriate native control is used. For Android, depending on the device, the Add
button can either be accessed from the Action Bar at the top of the display or by using
the Menu button. For iOS, use the toolbar at the bottom of the screen.
53
==PAGE:59==
1 function
addTask () {
2
var myAddTask = Alloy . c r e a t e C o n t r o l l e r ( ” addtask ” ,{}) . getView () ;
3
i f
(OS IOS) {
4
$ . index . openWindow(myAddTask) ;
5
}
6
i f
(OS ANDROID) {
7
myAddTask . open () ;
8
}
9 }
Save the changes and then you should now be able to click ’Add’ and add new tasks to
the collection which persist between sessions.
Figure 30: Appcelerator Titanium iOS
The ﬁnal app will look like ﬁgure 30 on an iPhone and like ﬁgure 31 on an Android phone.
Figure 31: Appcelerator Titanium Android
Deploying the app - Appcelerator Titanium
54
==PAGE:60==
Appcelerator only supports distributing the app through app store for iOS where the de-
veloper needs a paying Apple developer account as mentioned earlier.
For distributing for Android the developer has to go through the same steps as for Phone-
gap to get the keytool and making a certiﬁcate and a password. When the certiﬁcate is
made the developer can right click on the solution in Appcelerator Titanium and choose
Publish Android play store and then the developer is asked for the certiﬁcate and the alias
and the passwords as shown in ﬁgure 32.
Figure 32: Appcelerator Titanium Publish on Android
When the credentials and certiﬁcate is entered and accepted the developer gets the apk
ﬁle out and can either distribute it by email or web or through Google play.
55
==PAGE:61==
7
Development of examples
This chapter is were the apps that where chosen as the example apps are discussed and
the chapter will be about how they are implemented and what was leaned while devel-
oping the apps. This is done to learn more about the tools and test their strengths and
weaknesses to better understand what type of apps they are suited to develop and what
developer proﬁles the tools ﬁts.
The most important parts of this chapter are what is learned when implementing the apps
for each of the tools, this is written after the implementation of each of the apps. This
means that readers who wants to know how to implement the apps can read everything
in the chapter and those that are only interested in what was learned, can read the last
part for each of the apps.
7.1
PhoneGap Examples
This section is about the two app examples and how they were developed in PhoneGap
and what was learned while developing the apps.
7.1.1
PhoneGap ﬁrst app
This section describes the development of the ﬁrst of the two apps that is made with
PhoneGap and how it is done and what is learned from making the app with focus on the
criteria described earlier.
The ﬁrst app is the geolocation and accelerometer app.
The app will be a one page application which contains ﬁve text ﬁelds and ﬁve buttons.
The two ﬁrst buttons are used to get data from the sensors and calculate the distance
between the two latest locations.
The third button gets current data from the accelerometer and the fourth and ﬁfth button
are used to start and stop the watching of the accelerometer to get the data as soon as it
changes. The ﬁve text ﬁelds are used to show the sensor data.
All the code for this app is written in the ﬁle index.html.
The ﬁrst step was to make the view which was done with the code shown in code listing
1.
1 <!DOCTYPE html>
2 <html>
3
<head>
4
<t i t l e>Geolocation Example</ t i t l e>
5
</head>
6
<body onload=”onLoad () ”>
7
<p id=” geolocation ”>Finding
geolocation . . .</p>
8
<p id=” geolocationold ”>Finding
geolocation . . .</p>
9
<p id=” content ”> show
distance</p>
10
<p id=” dst ”> show
distance</p>
11
<p>
12
<button
on cl i ck=” getcurrentLocation () ”>Get
geolocation</button>
13
</p>
14
<p>
15
<button
on cl i ck=” calculateDistance () ”>Calculate
distance</button>
56
==PAGE:62==
16
<p>
17
<button
on cl i ck=” getAcceleration () ”>Get
Acceleration</button>
18
</p>
19
<p>
20
<button
on cl i ck=”startWatch () ”>Watch Acceleration</button>
21
</p>
22
<p>
23
<button
on cl i ck=”stopWatch () ”>Stop Watching
Acceleration</button>
24
</p>
25
<div
id=” accelerometer ”>Waiting
f o r
accelerometer . . .</ div>
26
</body>
27 </html>
Code Snippet 1: PhoneGap ﬁrst app view
The code for the view deﬁnes ﬁve buttons by using simple HTML code and some describing
text which is shown in the ﬁgure 33
Figure 33: Basic view accelerometer/geolocation app iPhone
The next step was to make the functionality using the geolocation and calculating the
distance. This is done by using java script which is under the title tag but still inside the
head tag as shown in code listing 2.
1
2
<s c r i p t
type="text/javascript"
charset="utf -8"
src="cordova.js"></script
>
3
<s c r i p t
type="text/javascript"
charset="utf -8">
4
5
var
c u r r e n t p o s i t i o n ;
6
var currentpositionLa ;
7
var currentpositionLo ;
8
var
o l d p o s i t i o n ;
57
==PAGE:63==
9
var
o l d l l a ;
10
var
o l d l l o ;
11
var watchID = null ;
12
13
function
getcurrentLocation ()
14
{
15
var options = { enableHighAccuracy :
true };
16
c u r r e n t p o s i t i o n = navigator . geolocation . getCurrentPosition ( onSuccess
,
onError , options ) ;
17
o l d p o s i t i o n=c u r r e n t p o s i t i o n ;
18
}
19
function
calculateDistance ()
20
{
21
var options = { enableHighAccuracy :
true };
22
o l d l l a = l o c a l S t o r a g e . getItem ( "OldLat" ) ;
23
o l d l l o = l o c a l S t o r a g e . getItem ( "OldLng" ) ;
24
document . getElementById ( "content" ) . innerHTML = ’Success , attempting
calculation ...’ ;
25
c u r r e n t p o s i t i o n = navigator . geolocation . getCurrentPosition (
onSuccess2 ,
onError , options ) ;
26
var
l l a = l o c a l S t o r a g e . getItem ( "CurrentLat" ) ;
27
var
l l o = l o c a l S t o r a g e . getItem ( "CurrentLng" ) ;
28
var dst = ’Distance: ’ + calcTheDistance ( l l a ,
l l o , o l d l l a , o l d l l o ) + ’
Metres’ ;
29
document . getElementById ( "dst" ) . innerHTML = dst ;
30
}
31
32
function toRadians (num)
33
{
34
return num ∗(Math . PI / 180) ;
35
};
36
37
function
calcTheDistance ( l a t i 1 ,
long1 , l a t i l o l d , l o n g l o l d )
38
{
39
var r = 6371000; //Meters
40
var la1 = l a t i 1 ;
41
var la2 = l a t i l o l d ;
42
var
l a t1 = toRadians ( l a t i 1 ) ;
43
var
l a t2 = toRadians ( l a t i l o l d ) ;
44
var lo1 = long1 ;
45
var lo2 = l o n g l o l d ;
46
var la2minla1 = toRadians ( la2−la1 ) ;
47
var lo2minlo1 = toRadians ( lo2−lo1 ) ;
48
49
var
cal = Math . sin ( la2minla1 / 2) ∗Math . sin ( la2minla1 / 2) +
50
Math . cos ( l at 1 ) ∗Math . cos ( l a t 2 ) ∗
51
Math . sin ( lo2minlo1 /2) ∗Math . sin ( lo2minlo1 /2) ;
52
var c = 2∗Math . atan2 (Math . sqrt ( cal ) , Math . sqrt (1−cal ) ) ;
53
54
var d = r ∗c ;
55
return Math . round (d) ;
56
}
57
58
// onSuccess Geolocation
59
//
60
function
onSuccess ( p o s i t i o n ) {
61
var
l a t = p o s i t i o n . coords . l a t i t u d e ;
62
var lng = p o s i t i o n . coords . longitude ;
63
l o c a l S t o r a g e . setItem ( "OldLat" , l a t ) ;
64
l o c a l S t o r a g e . setItem ( "OldLng" , lng ) ;
65
var element = document . getElementById ( ’geolocationold’) ;
58
==PAGE:64==
66
element . innerHTML = ’Latitude: ’
+ p o s i t i o n . coords .
l a t i t u d e
+ ’<br />’ +
67
’Longitude: ’
+ p o s i t i o n . coords .
longitude
+ ’<br />’ +
68
’Altitude: ’
+ p o s i t i o n . coords .
a l t i t u d e
+ ’<br />’ +
69
’Accuracy: ’
+ p o s i t i o n . coords .
accuracy
+ ’<br />’ +
70
’Altitude Accuracy: ’
+ p o s i t i o n . coords .
altitudeAccuracy
+ ’<br />’ +
71
’Heading: ’
+ p o s i t i o n . coords . heading
+ ’<br />’ +
72
’Speed: ’
+ p o s i t i o n . coords . speed
+ ’<br />’ +
73
’Timestamp: ’
+
p o s i t i o n . timestamp
+ ’<br />’ ;
74
75
}
76
77
// onError Callback receives a PositionError object
78
//
79
function onError ( e r r o r ) {
80
a l e r t ( ’code: ’
+ e r r o r . code
+ ’\n’ +
81
’message: ’ + e r r o r . message + ’\n’) ;
82
}
Code Snippet 2: PhoneGap ﬁrst app functionality geolocation
This JavaScript code is used to create the functions getcurrentLocation(), CalculateDis-
tance(), toRadians(num), calcTheDistance(lati1,long1,latilold,longold), onSucces2(position),
onSucces1(position) and onError(error).
The function getCurrentLocation() is called by one of the buttons and uses the onSuc-
cess(position) function which gets the current position and posts the information to the
paragraph element named ”geolocationold” and stores the positions in local storage.
The function CalculateDistance() is called by the next button and ﬁrst uses the onSuc-
cess2(position) function to get the new position and posts it to the paragraph element
named ”geolocation”. The onSucces2(position) function is not shown but is the same as
onSuccess(position)
The CalculateDistance() sends the old longitude and latitude and the new longitude and
latitude to the function calcTheDistance(lati1,long1,latilold, longold) which uses those in-
formation and the function toRadians(num) to calculate the traveled distance.
shown in ﬁgure 34
59
==PAGE:65==
Figure 34: PhoneGap geolocation app iPhone
1
function
getAcceleration () {
2
navigator . accelerometer . getCurrentAcceleration ( onAccelSuccess ,
onError ) ;
3
}
4
5
function
onAccelSuccess ( a c c e l e r a t i o n ) {
6
var element = document . getElementById ( ’accelerometer’) ;
7
element . innerHTML = ’Acceleration X: ’ + a c c e l e r a t i o n . x
+ ’<
br />’ +
8
’Acceleration Y: ’ + a c c e l e r a t i o n . y
+ ’<
br />’ +
9
’Acceleration Z: ’ + a c c e l e r a t i o n . z
+ ’<
br />’ +
10
’Timestamp: ’
+ a c c e l e r a t i o n . timestamp + ’<
br />’ ;
11
}
12
13
function onAccError ()
{
14
a l e r t ( ’onError!’) ;
15
}
16
17
function startWatch ()
{
18
// Update acceleration every 1 seconds
19
var options = { frequency :
1000
};
20
21
watchID = navigator . accelerometer . watchAcceleration ( onAccelSuccess ,
onAccError ,
options ) ;
22
}
23
24
function stopWatch ()
{
25
i f
( watchID ) {
60
==PAGE:66==
26
navigator . accelerometer . clearWatch ( watchID ) ;
27
watchID = null ;
28
}
29
}
Code Snippet 3: PhoneGap ﬁrst app accelerometer functionality
This JavaScript code from code listing 3 was used to create the functions getAccelera-
tion(), onAccelSuccess(acceleration), onAccError(), startWatch(), stopWatch().
The function getAcceleration() is called by one of the buttons and uses the onAccelSuc-
cess() function which gets the current acceleration and posts the information to the content
division element named ”accelerometer”.
The functions startWatch() and stopWatch() is called by the last two buttons, the ﬁrst
start the watching of the acceleration and updates the content division element named
accelerometer with the updated data every second and the stopWatch() function is used
to stop the app watching the sensor.
as shown in ﬁgure 35 for iPhone
Figure 35: PhoneGap accelerometer app iPhone
7.1.2
Learned PhoneGap ﬁrst app
What was learned from this is that PhoneGap makes it easy to get the data from sensors
the only thing that is needed is to call navigator and what sensor is needed at least for
the most comment sensors for example a call to get the current acceleration is naviga-
tor.accelerometer.getCurrentAcceleration(onAccelSuccess, onError) and then deﬁne what
61
==PAGE:67==
should happen on success an on error. It was a bit harder to ﬁgure out how to get the
data stored so it could be used for calculations later, but it turned out that PhoneGap
has a simple function for using local storage on the device.
For this example, it was possible to reuse 100 percent of the code but this also meant that
not only was the functionality the same but the user interface was the same as well. This
meant it was not possible to make one app with a user interface that was native for both
Android and iPhone.
PhoneGap doesn’t provide the opportunity to debug the code by itself, but it doesn’t
provide an editor either. This means that in order to write the code the user must use
some editor where it is possible to write HTML/JavaScript code. A simple example of
this would be notepad++ or Netbeans. To debug the code the user has to ﬁnd an editor
that allows this. The only other way is by opening the project in a browser and check for
errors. The PhoneGap developer app only lets the programmer see the result but it won’t
return error msg or give any kind of feedback that can be used.
7.1.3
PhoneGap second app
This section describes the second of the two apps that is made with PhoneGap and how it is
done and what is learned from making the apps with focus on the criteria described earlier.
The second app is the IndoorGolfStatistics.
This app contains two views. The ﬁrst view contains four buttons. The ﬁrst button is
used to change between the two views. The three other buttons are used to connect to a
webservice each which gets data from a database and then the data is shown in tables.
The second view is much the same as the ﬁrst execpt that it have 5 buttons conneced to
webservices which shows the statistics from the best rounds.
All the code for this app is written in the ﬁle index.html.
The ﬁrst step was to setup the HTML document with everything that was needed. This
was done in the head tag as shown in code listing 4 in line 3-7 which contains the infor-
mation that the app should scale with the device screen size and that the user should be
able to zoom in the app.
The next step was to make the view for the all-time statistics which was done with the
code shown in code listing 4.
1 <!DOCTYPE html>
2 <html>
3
<head>
4
<meta
charset=” utf −8”>
5
<meta name=” viewport ” content=” i n i t i a l −s c a l e =1, maximum−s c a l e =2,
user−s c a l a b l e=yes ,
width=device−width”>
6
<t i t l e>Blank App</ t i t l e>
7
</head>
8
<body onload=”changeView () ”>
9
10 <div
data−r o l e=”page” id=” Alltime ”>
11
<div
data−r o l e=” header ”>
12
<h1>Welcome To the
a l l
time
S t a t i s t i c k
f o r
Indoor
g o l f</h1>
13
</ div>
62
==PAGE:68==
14
15
<div
data−r o l e=”main”
c l a s s=”ui−content ”>
16
<p>Welcome !
I f
you
c l i c k
on the
button below ,
i t
w i l l
take you to
the
page with
leaderbord
of
the
best 5 rounds .</p>
17
</ div>
18
<div
data−r o l e=” f o o t e r ”>
19
<button
type=”button”
o n c l i c k=”changeView () ”>Go to
s t a t i s t i c
page
f o r
the 5 best
rounds</button>
20
</ div>
21
22
<div
data−r o l e=” f o o t e r ”>
23
<h1>Placement
leaderbord</h1>
24
<button
type=”button”
o nc l ic k=” g e t S t i l l i n g () ”>Get PlacementGns</button>
25
<table
id=” S t i l l i n g l e a d e r b o r d ” border=”1”>
26
<caption></ caption>
27
<thead>
28
</thead>
29
<tbody></tbody>
30
</ table>
31
</ div>
32
33
<div
data−r o l e=” f o o t e r ”>
34
<h1>Netto
leaderbord</h1>
35
<button
type=”button”
o nc l ic k=” getNetto () ”>Get NettoGns</button>
36
<table
id=” Netto leaderbord ” border=”1”>
37
<caption></ caption>
38
<thead>
39
</thead>
40
<tbody></tbody>
41
</ table>
42
<div></ div>
43
</ div>
44
45
<div
data−r o l e=” f o o t e r ”>
46
<h1>Brutto
leaderbord</h1>
47
<button
type=”button”
o nc l ic k=” getBrutto () ”>Get BruttoGns</button>
48
<table
id=” Brutto leaderbord ” border=”1”>
49
<caption></ caption>
50
<thead>
51
</thead>
52
<tbody></tbody>
53
</ table>
54
</ div>
55 </ div>
Code Snippet 4: PhoneGap second app view
The ﬁrst view contains a division which contains a header and a description text and three
buttons connected to tables which gets the data by webservices that receives data from a
database.
The code below which have a header and a description text. It also contains three buttons
shown in code listing 4 in lines 24,35 and 47 that is connected to tables that is made to
contain the data from the web-server.
Each of these tables is placed in a division or section of their own within the overall
division.
the next step was to determine which libraries that should be used which was done with
the code shown in code listing 5.
63
==PAGE:69==
1 <s c r i p t
src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery -1.8.0.min.js"></script >
2
<s c r i p t
type="text/javascript"
charset="utf -8"
src="cordova.js"></script >
3
<s c r i p t
type="text/javascript"
charset="utf -8">
Code Snippet 5: PhoneGap second app scripts used
The ﬁrst script makes sure that it is possible to use JSON calls which makes it simpler to
work with the data received from the web-services which returns JSON objects.
The two other scripts are used to make sure that we use PhoneGaps library cordova.
The next step was to create the functionality of the buttons and an example of the code
for the buttons is shown in code listing 6.
1 function
getBrutto () {
2
$ . ajax ({
3
type :
"POST" ,
4
url :
"http://" + "mobil.xn--schller -golf -xjb.dk" + "/WebServices
/IndoorServices.asmx/IndoorBruttoGns" ,
5
data : JSON. s t r i n g i f y ({
6
}) ,
7
contentType :
"application/json; charset=utf -8" ,
8
dataType :
"json" ,
9
success :
function
( response ) {
10
i f
( response . d . length > 0) {
11
a l e r t ( response . d) ;
12
var data = JSON. parse ( response . d) ;
13
jsonToHtmlTable ( data ,
’#Brutto_leaderbord’ , "Brutto leaderbord"
) ;
14
} else {
15
// vis fejlmeddelelse
16
a l e r t ( ’Reading of statistic failed’ ,
response . d .
ErrorCode ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
17
}
18
19
} ,
Code Snippet 6: PhoneGap second app functionality
This was done by making a function for each button containing the above code just with
diﬀerent web-service calls this means a diﬀerent host and only the last part of the host
was diﬀerent the text IndoorBruttoGns is the part that deﬁnes which web-service is called.
When the connection is made to the web-service the data is send to functions that will
process the data and get it into the right table this is shown in code listing 6 line 13.
These functions is made with the code shown in code listing 7.
1
//implementation
2
function jsonToHtmlTable ( jsonObj ,
s e l e c t o r ,
caption ) {
3
$ ( s e l e c t o r + ’ caption’) . html ( caption ) ;
4
addColumns ( jsonObj ,
s e l e c t o r ) ;
5
addRows( jsonObj ,
s e l e c t o r ) ;
6
}
7
8
function addColumns ( jsonObj ,
s e l e c t o r ) {
9
i f
( ! $ . isArray ( jsonObj )
| |
jsonObj . length < 1)
10
return ;
11
var object = jsonObj [ 0 ] ;
12
var theadHtml = "" ;
13
f o r
(var property
in
object ) {
14
i f
( object . hasOwnProperty ( property ) )
15
theadHtml += "<th>" + property + "</th>" ;
64
==PAGE:70==
16
}
17
$ ( s e l e c t o r + ’ thead ’) . html ( theadHtml ) ;
18
}
19
20
function addRows( jsonObj ,
s e l e c t o r ) {
21
var tbody = $ ( s e l e c t o r + ’ tbody’) ;
22
$ ( tbody ) . empty () ;
// refreshes the table and makes it ready for new
data
23
$ . each ( jsonObj ,
function
( i ,
d) {
24
var row = ’<tr>’ ;
25
$ . each (d ,
function
( j ,
e ) {
26
row += ’<td>’ + e + ’</td>’ ;
27
}) ;
28
row += ’</tr>’ ;
29
tbody . append ( row ) ;
30
}) ;
31
}
Code Snippet 7: PhoneGap second app data handling
The rest of the functions for the buttons can be found in appendix.
The next step was to create the view for the statistics for the 5 best rounds.
This was done by the code shown in code listing 8.
1
2 <div
data−r o l e=”page” id=” best5 ”
s t y l e . display == ”none”>
3
<div
data−r o l e=” header ”>
4
<h1>S t a t i s t i c
f o r
indoor
g o l f
5 best
rounds</h1>
5
</ div>
6
7
<div
data−r o l e=”main”
c l a s s=”ui−content ”>
8
<p>This
i s
the
leaderbords
f o r
the 5 best
rounds .
I f
you
c l i c k
on the
button below ,
i t
w i l l
take you to
All
time
s t a t i s t i c s
page .</p>
9
<button
type=”button”
o nc l ic k=”changeView () ”>Go to
All
time
s t a t i s t i c
page</button>
10
</ div>
11
12
<div
data−r o l e=” f o o t e r ”>
13
<h1>Netto 5 best
average
leaderbord</h1>
14
<button
type=”button”
o nc l ic k=”getBestNettoGns () ”>Get NettoGns 5 best</
button>
15
<table
id=” Netto5best leaderbord ” border=”1”>
16
<caption></ caption>
17
<thead>
18
</thead>
19
<tbody></tbody>
20
</ table>
21
<div></ div>
22
</ div>
23
24
<div
data−r o l e=” f o o t e r ”>
25
<h1>Fairway
h i t s
5 best
average
leaderbord</h1>
26
<button
type=”button”
o nc l ic k=”getBestFhGns () ”>Get FhGns 5 best</button>
27
<table
id=” Fh5best leaderbord ” border=”1”>
28
<caption></ caption>
29
<thead>
30
</thead>
31
<tbody></tbody>
32
</ table>
33
</ div>
65
==PAGE:71==
34
35
<div
data−r o l e=” f o o t e r ”>
36
<h1>Green
in
re gula tion
5 best
average
leaderbord</h1>
37
<button
type=”button”
o nc l ic k=” getBestGirGns () ”>Get GirGns 5 best</button>
38
<table
id=” Gir5best leaderbord ” border=”1”>
39
<caption></ caption>
40
<thead>
41
</thead>
42
<tbody></tbody>
43
</ table>
44
</ div>
45
46
<div
data−r o l e=” f o o t e r ”>
47
<h1>Putts 5 best
average
leaderbord</h1>
48
<button
type=”button”
o nc l ic k=” getBestPuttsGns () ”>Get PuttsGns 5 best</
button>
49
<table
id=” Putts5best leaderbord ” border=”1”>
50
<caption></ caption>
51
<thead>
52
</thead>
53
<tbody></tbody>
54
</ table>
55
</ div>
56
57
<div
data−r o l e=” f o o t e r ”>
58
<h1>Brutto 5 best
average
leaderbord</h1>
59
<button
type=”button”
o nc l ic k=” getBestBruttoGns () ”>Get BruttoGns 5 best</
button>
60
<table
id=” Brutto5best leaderbord ” border=”1”>
61
<caption></ caption>
62
<thead>
63
</thead>
64
<tbody></tbody>
65
</ table>
66
</ div>
67 </ div>
68
</ div>
69
</body>
70 </html>
Code Snippet 8: PhoneGap second app second view
The second view was done in much the same way as the ﬁrst view. By making a division
which contains a header and a description text and 5 buttons connected to tables. Then
the functionality of the buttons was made the same way as the buttons on the ﬁrst view.
The last step that was needed was to deﬁne which view that is shown when this was done
by the code shown in code listing 9.
1
function changeView () {
2
3
// window.location = "best5.html"
4
var x = document . getElementById ( "best5" ) ;
5
var y = document . getElementById ( "Alltime" ) ;
6
i f
(x . s t y l e . display === "none" ) {
7
x . s t y l e . display = "block" ;
8
y . s t y l e . display = "none" ;
9
} else {
10
x . s t y l e . display = "none" ;
11
y . s t y l e . display = "block" ;
12
}
66
==PAGE:72==
13
14
}
Code Snippet 9: PhoneGap second app change between views
This function is created to change which division is hidden and which is shown.
7.1.4
Learned PhoneGap second app
What was learned from this is that PhoneGap makes it easy to get the data from web-
services both SOAP and RESTFUL webservices the only thing that is needed is to use an
ajax call and deﬁne what the host is and what kind of data is received or should be sent.
PhoneGap makes it easy to use other libraries that normal web development uses and when
imported they are used basically the same way as normal HTML/JavaScript programming.
PhoneGap focus on one page applications this means that while it is possible to create
multiple pages it is better to show and hide diﬀerent views. If it is chosen to make multiple
pages then the connection between the views works like the views are two diﬀerent web
pages. this means that if the developer wants the feel of a app that contains everything
then the best way is to show and hide the diﬀerent parts.
67
==PAGE:73==
7.2
Appcelerator Titanium examples
This section is about the implementation of the two apps on Appcelerator Titanium and
what was leaned while developing the apps and deploying the Indoor golf app.
7.2.1
Appcelerator Titanium ﬁrst example app
This section describes the ﬁrst of the two apps that is made with Appcelerator Titanium
and how it is done and what is learned from making the apps with focus on the criteria
described earlier.
The ﬁrst app is the geolocation and accelerometer app.
The app contains three buttons that get data from the sensors which is then displayed as
a pop up that lets the user see the data from the sensor or the distanced traveled.
All the code for this app is written in the app folder of the project.
The ﬁrst step was to make the view which was done with the code shown in code listing
10 in the index.xml ﬁle under the views folder inside the app folder.
1 <Alloy>
2
<Window c l a s s=” container ”>
3
<Label
id=” l a b e l ” onClick=” getLocation ”>Hello ,
World</ Label>
4
<Button
id=”button” onClick=” getLocation ”
t i t l e=”Get
F i r s t
Location ” top
=”10” width =”500” height=”50”/>
5
<Button
id=” distance ” onClick=” getDistance ”
t i t l e=”Get Distance ” top=”60
” width =”500” height=”50”/>
6
<Button
id=” accelerometer ” onClick=”getAcc”
t i t l e=” get
a c c e l e r a t i o n ” top
=”110” width=”500” height=”50”/>
7
<Label
id=”labelTimestamp” top=”160”>timestamp</ Label>
8
<Label
id=” labelx ” top=”180”>x</ Label>
9
<Label
id=” labely ” top=”200”>y</ Label>
10
<Label
id=” l a b e l z ” top=”220”>z</ Label>
11
</Window>
12 </ Alloy>
Code Snippet 10: Appcelerator Titanium ﬁrst app view
The code for the view made four buttons by simple xml code and some describing text
which is shown in the picture 36 for iPhones and ﬁgure 37 for Andorid.
68
==PAGE:74==
Figure 36: Appcelerator Titanium basic view accelerometer/geolocation app iPhone
Figure 37: Appcelerator Titanium basic view accelerometer/geolocation app Android
The next step was to make the permissions ﬁle to make sure that the user have the options
to give the app permission to use the sensors.
This is done by making a library folder under the app folder and making a new JavaScript
ﬁle called permissions which is ﬁlled with the code shown in code listing 11.
1 /**
2
* Hepers for run -time permissions.
3
*/
69
==PAGE:75==
4
5 // DEPENDENCIES
6 var
d i a l o g s = require ( ’alloy/dialogs’) ;
7
8 // PUBLIC INTERFACE
9
10 exports . requestLocationPermissions = requestLocationPermissions ;
11
12 // PRIVATE FUNCTIONS
13
14 function
requestLocationPermissions ( authorizationType ,
callback ) {
15
16
// FIXME: Always returns false on Android 6
17
// https://jira.appcelerator.org/browse/TIMOB -23135
18
i f
(OS IOS && ! Ti . Geolocation . locationServicesEnabled ) {
19
return
callback ({
20
success :
false ,
21
e r r o r :
’Location Services Disabled’
22
}) ;
23
}
24
25
// Permissions already granted
26
i f
( Ti . Geolocation . hasLocationPermissions ( authorizationType ) ) {
27
return
callback ({
28
success :
true
29
}) ;
30
}
31
32
// On iOS we can determine why we do not have permission
33
i f
(OS IOS) {
34
35
i f
( Ti . Geolocation . l oca tio nS e r v i c e s A u t h o r i z a t i o n === Ti . Geolocation .
AUTHORIZATION RESTRICTED) {
36
return
callback ({
37
success :
false ,
38
e r r o r :
’Your device policy does not allow Geolocation’
39
}) ;
40
41
} else
i f
( Ti . Geolocation . l o c a t i o n S e r v i c e s A u t h o r i z a t i o n === Ti .
Geolocation .AUTHORIZATION DENIED) {
42
43
d i a l o g s . confirm ({
44
t i t l e :
’You denied permission before’ ,
45
message :
’Tap Yes to open the Settings app to restore permissions ,
then try again.’ ,
46
callback :
function ()
{
47
Ti . Platform . openURL( Ti . App . iOS . applicationOpenSettingsURL ) ;
48
}
49
}) ;
50
51
// return success:false without an error since we’ve informed the user
already
52
return
callback ({
53
success :
false
54
}) ;
55
}
56
}
57
58
// Request permission
59
Ti . Geolocation . requestLocationPermissions ( Ti . Geolocation .
AUTHORIZATION ALWAYS,
function ( e ) {
70
==PAGE:76==
60
61
i f
( ! e . success ) {
62
return
callback ({
63
success :
false ,
64
e r r o r :
e . e r r o r
| |
’Failed to request Location Permissions’
65
}) ;
66
}
67
68
callback ({
69
success :
true
70
}) ;
71
}) ;
72 }
Code Snippet 11: Appcelerator Titanium ﬁrst app permissions
This code makes sure that the users will be asked for permission for the app to use the
sensors no matter what Android or iOS device the app is running on.
The next step was to create the functionality using the geolocation, calculating the dis-
tance and getting the data from the accelerometer. All the functionality is made in the
index.js ﬁle.
The ﬁrst step was to deﬁne the permissions and make sure that the permission is called
when the app tries to get the location the ﬁrst time and then get the location and set the
coordinates as the old coordinates to be used to calculate the distance later. This was
done with the code shown in code listing 12.
1 var permissions = require ( ’permissions’) ;
2 var old ;
3
4 $ . index . open () ;
5 function
getLocation ()
{
6
’use strict’ ;
7
8
// Use library to handle run -time permissions
9
permissions . requestLocationPermissions ( Ti . Geolocation .
AUTHORIZATION WHEN IN USE,
function ( e ) {
10
i f
( ! e . success ) {
11
12
// In some cases the library will already have displayed a dialog , in
other cases we receive a message to alert
13
i f
( e . e r r o r ) {
14
a l e r t ( e . e r r o r ) ;
15
}
16
17
return ;
18
}
19
20
// Get our current position
21
Ti . Geolocation . getCurrentPosition ( function ( e ) {
22
23
// FIXME: https://jira.appcelerator.org/browse/TIMOB -19071
24
i f
( ! e . success
| |
e . e r r o r ) {
25
return
a l e r t ( e . e r r o r
| |
’Could not find your position.’) ;
26
}
27
var
l a t i t u d e = e . coords . l a t i t u d e ;
28
var
longtitude = e . coords . longitude ;
29
old = e . coords ;
71
==PAGE:77==
30
a l e r t ( "latitude: " + l a t i t u d e + " longtitude: " + longtitude ) ;
31
}) ;
32
33
}) ;
34 }
Code Snippet 12: Appcelerator Titanium ﬁrst app geolocation functionality
The way that the geolocation was called is by using Appcelerators own method for geolo-
cation and then the data is shown by an alert box as shown in the ﬁgure 38
Figure 38: Appcelerator Titanium geolocation app
The next step was to create the function that gets the current location and calculate the
distance from the old location to the current location. This was done with the code shown
in code listing 13.
1 function
getDistance ( e ) {
2 ’use strict’ ;
3
4
// Use library to handle run -time permissions
5
permissions . requestLocationPermissions ( Ti . Geolocation .
AUTHORIZATION WHEN IN USE,
function ( e ) {
6
7
i f
( ! e . success ) {
8
9
// In some cases the library will already have displayed a dialog , in
other cases we receive a message to alert
10
i f
( e . e r r o r ) {
11
a l e r t ( e . e r r o r ) ;
12
}
13
14
return ;
15
}
16
17 // Get our current position
18
Ti . Geolocation . getCurrentPosition ( function ( e ) {
19
20
// FIXME: https://jira.appcelerator.org/browse/TIMOB -19071
21
i f
( ! e . success
| |
e . e r r o r ) {
72
==PAGE:78==
22
return
a l e r t ( e . e r r o r
| |
’Could not find your position.’) ;
23
}
24
var
l a t i t u d e = e . coords . l a t i t u d e ;
25
var
longtitude = e . coords . longitude ;
26
var current = e . coords ;
27
calculateDistance ( old , current ) ;
28
}) ;
29
30
}) ;
31 }
32 function
calculateDistance ( old , current ) {
33
var
l a t = current . l a t i t u d e ;
34
var lng = current . longitude ;
35
var
l a t o l d = old . l a t i t u d e ;
36
var lngold = old . longitude ;
37
var r = 6371000;
38
var la2minla1 = ToRadians ( latold −l a t ) ;
39
var lo2minlo1 = ToRadians ( lngold−lng ) ;
40
var
cal = Math . sin ( la2minla1 /2) ∗Math . sin ( la2minla1 /2)
+ Math . cos ( l a t ) ∗Math . cos ( l a t o l d ) ∗Math . sin ( lo2minlo1 /2) ∗Math . sin (
lo2minlo1 /2) ;
41
var c = 2∗Math . atan2 (( Math . sqrt ( cal ) ) ,Math . sqrt (1−cal ) )
;
42
var distance2 = Math . round ( r ∗c ) ;
43
44
a l e r t ( "distance: " + distance2 ) ;
45
46 }
47
48 function ToRadians (v) {
49
var num = v ;
50
return num ∗(Math . PI /180) ;
51 }
Code Snippet 13: Appcelerator Titanium ﬁrst app current location functionality
The code above gets the current location and calls the function calculateDistance with the
current location and the old location to calculate the distance between the two locations.
The next step was to make the functions that gets the acceleration and making and func-
tions that check for changes on the acceleration and calls the function when it is updating.
This is done with the code shown in code listing 14.
1 var acceleromterCallback = function ( e ) {
2
var timestamp = e . timestap ;
3
var x = e . x ;
4
var y = e . y ;
5
var z= e . z ;
6
a l e r t ( "timestamp: " + timestamp + " x: " + x + " y: " + y + " z: " + z ) ;
7 };
8 function getAcc ( e ) {
9
Ti . Accelerometer . addEventListener ( ’update’ ,
acceleromterCallback ) ;
10 };
Code Snippet 14: Appcelerator Titanium ﬁrst app accelerometer functionality
The code in code listing 14 makes the device access the accelerometer and get the data
that will then be displayed in an alert box and change when the acceleration changes as
show in the ﬁgure 39 and 40.
73
==PAGE:79==
Figure 39: Appcelerator Titanium acceleration on Android device
Figure 40: Appcelerator Titanium acceleration changed on Android device
7.2.2
Learned Appcelerator Titanium ﬁrst app
What was learned from this is that Appcelerator Titanium makes it easy to get the data
from sensors. The only thing that is needed is to get permission if using the locations and to
call Appcelerator Titaniums own library with the cal Ti.Geolocation.getCurrentPossition
for the location and Ti.Accelerometer.addEventListener to get the acceleration every time
it changes. It was easy to use the date without having to save or change the date it was
change to a format that is universal and therefor ready for use on all devices.
It is possible to test geolocation on the emulators because it gets the location through the
internet connection on the computer, but sensors like the accelerometer does not provide
any data which makes sense when it needs movement to determine the acceleration but
74
==PAGE:80==
this means that to test this a physical device is needed and only android is possible to test
directly on the device unless the developer has one of the Apple developer accounts that
gives access to provisional proﬁles which is only the paying accounts which as mentioned
earlier is 100 dollars per year for the cheapest account.
For this example, it was possible to reuse 100 percent of the code but in the permission
ﬁle a check was needed to determine which platform the app is running on to know which
call for permission that is needed.
Even though the user-interface is only written once Appcelerator Titanium makes diﬀer-
ence on the user-interfaces to make sure that the look and feel of the app is more native.
This means that buttons look diﬀerent on the diﬀerent platforms and that things like the
toolbar is placed in diﬀerent places.
Appcelerator Titanium is not the best at giving error messages that point to a speciﬁc
point in the code. Some errors it can pinpoint but some of the errors is shown as being
on a line of code that doesn’t exist. This means that it can be hard to pinpoint exactly
where the error is, especially if the error is in the XML ﬁles which is where the tool has
most problems in pinpointing the error.
7.2.3
Appcelerator Titanium second example app
This section describes the second of the two apps that is made with Appcellerator Tita-
nium and how it is done and what is learned from making the apps with focus on the
criteria described earlier.
The second app is the IndoorGolfStatistics.
The app have two views the ﬁrst have four buttons where the ﬁrst three buttons is used
to connect to a web-server to get data that is then shown to the user. the fourth buttons
is used to show the second view which contains 5 buttons to get data from the data base.
All the code for this app is written in the ﬁle index.js and index.xml for the ﬁrst view and
Best5.js and Best5.xml for the second view. The two XML ﬁles is under the view folder
of the project and the two JavaScript ﬁles is under the controllers folder.
The ﬁrst step was to make the ﬁrst view which was done with the code shown in code
listing 15 and was written in the index.xml ﬁle.
1 <Alloy>
2
<Window c l a s s=” container ”>
3
<Button
id=”Placement” onClick=” getPlacement ”
t i t l e=”Get
a l l
time
placement” top=”10” width =”500” height=”50”/>
4
<Button
id=”Netto” onClick=” getNetto ”
t i t l e=”Get
a l l
time
netto
avarage ”
top=”60” width =”500” height=”50”/>
5
<Button
id=”Brutto” onClick=” getBrutto ”
t i t l e=”Get
a l l
time
brutto
avarage ” top=”110” width =”500” height=”50”/>
6
<Button
id=”Best5” onClick=”FiveBestView”
t i t l e=”Go to
s t a t i s t i k s
f o r
best 5 rounds” top=”160” width=”500” height=”50”/>
7
</Window>
8 </ Alloy>
Code Snippet 15: Appcelerator Titanium second app view
The code for the view creates a view with four buttons by simple XML code and some
75
==PAGE:81==
describing text. The view as it looks on the devices in shown in ﬁgure 41 for iOS and 42
for Android.
Figure 41: Appcelerator Titanium basic view indoor app iPhone
Figure 42: Appcelerator Titanium basic view Indoor app Android
The next step was to make the functionality of the buttons and make sure that each but-
ton calls a diﬀerent web-service and display the data received. An example of the code
used for the three ﬁrst buttons is shown in the code listing 16.
1 function
getBrutto ()
{
76
==PAGE:82==
2 var
url = "http://mobile.xn--schller -golf -xjb.dk/WebServices/IndoorServices.
asmx" ;
3 var xhr = Ti . Network . createHTTPClient ({
4
onload :
function ( e ) {
5
// this function is called when data is returned from the server and
available for use
6
// this.responseText holds the raw text return of the message (used
for text/JSON)
7
// this.responseXML holds any returned XML (including SOAP)
8
// this.responseData holds any returned binary data
9
Ti . API . debug ( this . responseText ) ;
10
a l e r t ( ’success’) ;
11
a l e r t ( this . responseText ) ;
12
makeTableView ( "Brutto Leaderboard" ) ;
13
var tasks = json . parse ( this . responseText ) , /* parse the json string
*/
14
rowsForTableView = [ ] ;
/* put the rows in here */
15
16
/* create the rows */
17
f o r
( i
in
tasks ) {
18
var
row = makeTableView ( tasks [ i ] ) ;
19
rowsForTableView . push ( row ) ;
20
};
21
22
myTableView . setData ( rowsForTableView ) ;
23
24
} ,
25
onerror :
function ( e ) {
26
// this function is called when an error occurs , including a timeout
27
Ti . API . debug ( e . e r r o r ) ;
28
a l e r t ( e ) ;
29
a l e r t ( ’error’) ;
30
} ,
31
timeout :5000
/* in milliseconds */
32 }) ;
33 var soapRequest = "<?xml version =\"1.0\" encoding =\"utf -8\"?>\n" +
34 "<soap:Envelope xmlns:xsi=\"http://www.w3.org/2001/ XMLSchema -instance \"\n" +
35 "xmlns:xsd=\"http://www.w3.org/2001/ XMLSchema \"\n" +
36 "xmlns:soap=\"http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/soap/envelope/\">\n"+
37 "<soap:Body >\n"+
38 "<IndoorBruttoGns xmlns=\"http:// localhost :30641/ WebServices\" />\n"+
39 "</soap:Body >\n" ;
40 "</soap:Envelope >" ;
41 xhr . open ( "POST" ,
url ) ;
42 xhr . setRequestHeader ( ’Content -Type’ , ’text/xml; charset=utf -8’) ;
43 xhr . send ({xml :
soapRequest }) ;
// request is actually sent with this
statement
44 };
Code Snippet 16: Appcelerator Titanium second app functionality
This code creates a connection with the web-service and deﬁne the SOAP messaged that
should be received from the web-service.
The code then has an onload function that
handles the data received if the connection is a success and an on error to give an error
messaged if the connections fails. This code was done for three buttons in this view and
ﬁve buttons in the second view
The next step was to create a function for making the tables this was done with the code
shown in code listing 17.
77
==PAGE:83==
1 makeTableViewRow = function ( o b j e c t ) {
2
3
var row = Ti . UI . createTableViewRow ({
4
}) ;
5
6
var
t i t l e = Ti . UI . createLabel ({
7
text :
object ,
8
}) ;
9
row . add ( t i t l e ) ;
10
11
return row ;
12 };
Code Snippet 17: Appcelerator Titanium second app tables
This code creates the tables and sets the title to the input.
The next step was to create a function for changing the views. This was done with the
code shown in code listing 18
1 function FiveBestView ()
{
2
var Best5 = Alloy . c r e a t e C o n t r o l l e r ( ’Best5’) . getView () ;
3
// // For Alloy projects , you can pass context
4
// // to the controller in the Alloy.createController method.
5
// // var win2 = Alloy.createController(’win2’, {foobar: 42}).getView();
6
// win2.open();
7
$ . Best5 . open () ;
8 };
9 $ . index . open () ;
Code Snippet 18: Appcelerator Titanium second app changing views
This code gets the view from the Alloy framework and then tells the app to open the view.
Then the second view was created in the same way as the ﬁrst with the code shown in
code listing 19.
1 <Alloy>
2
<Window c l a s s=” container ”>
3
<Button
id=” Netto5best ” onClick=” get5BestNetto ”
t i t l e=”Get 5 best
netto
avarage ” top=”10” width =”500” height=”50”/>
4
<Button
id=” Brutto5best ” onClick=” get5bestBrutto ”
t i t l e=”Get 5 best
brutto
avarage ” top=”60” width =”500” height=”50”/>
5
<Button
id=”FH5best” onClick=”get5BestFH”
t i t l e=”Get 5 best FH avarage ”
top=”110” width =”500” height=”50”/>
6
<Button
id=” Gir5best ” onClick=” get5BestGir ”
t i t l e=”Get 5 best
Gir
avarage ” top=”160” width =”500” height=”50”/>
7
<Button
id=” Putts5best ” onClick=” get5bestPutts ”
t i t l e=”Get 5 best
Putts
avarage ” top=”210” width =”500” height=”50”/>
8
<Button
id=” Alltime ” onClick=”AllTimeView”
t i t l e=”Go to
s t a t i s t i k s
f o r
a l l
time” top=”260” width=”500” height=”50”/>
9
</Window>
10 </ Alloy>
Code Snippet 19: Appcelerator Titanium second app second view
This view creates six buttons where the ﬁrst 5 is to get diﬀerent results from the webser-
vice and the last is to go back to the ﬁrst view.
78
==PAGE:84==
7.2.4
Learned Appcelerator Titanium second app
What was learned from developing this example is that Appcellerator Titanium is not
good at connecting to SOAP web-services most of the example found in their own docu-
mentation and other places is not working anymore. This means that it took a long time
to ﬁgure out what functionality was outdated and what still worked.
When the functionality that was working was determined there was the problem of having
to send a SOAP envelop as a request messaged even to a web-service that takes no input.
This mean that it was not possible to get anything other than an internal 500 service
error because the request was changed by Appcelerator Titanium and without access to
the error log of the serve it is not possible to get and error messaged that can be used to
ﬁgure out what the change is.
Appcelerator Titanium oﬀers a lot of ways to connect to a REST web-service but they
are removing most of the ways to connect to SOAP. This is because SOAP web-services is
being used less and less but they are still used and a lot of existing web-services use SOAP
this means that it can be hard for developers to get the information they need form the
web-services when using Appcelerator Titanium.
It was also hard to get the error message or information of the response from the server
even when debugging. The best way ended up getting the function to create an alert
messaged which return the return data and made it into text so it was possible to see that
it was an internal server error. One of the things that made it hard was that when the
function connects to the web-service then it goes into success even when getting an error
messaged back.
Appcelerator Titanium oﬀers a simple way to make new view ﬁles and connect them with
simple calls this means that is easy to keep the code from each page separate and this lets
the developer keep and better structure and makes it easier to ﬁnd and change the code
that is needed or add code to a speciﬁc page.
79
==PAGE:85==
7.3
Xamarin examples
This section is about the implementation of the two apps in Xamarin and what was learned
while developing the apps and deploying the Indoor golf app.
7.3.1
Xamarin ﬁrst example app
This section describes the ﬁrst of the two apps that are made with Appcelerator Titaniu-
mand how it is done and what is learned from making the apps with focus on the criteria
described earlier.
The ﬁrst app is the geolocation and accelerometer app.
The app contains buttons to get data from the sensors and to calculate the distance be-
tween two locations and ﬁelds to show the data to the user.
The ﬁrst step was to make the view which consist of buttons and labels to show in data
from the sensors.
The view was made in the App.xaml.cs ﬁle which is the main ﬁle in the shared code and
this was done with the code shown in code listing 20.
1 using
System ;
2 using Xamarin . Forms ;
3 using
s t a t i c
System . Math ;
4
5 namespace DistanceAcc
6 {
7
public
p a r t i a l
c l a s s App :
Application
8
{
9
Label
lblLat ,
lblLng ,
lblLat2 ,
lblLng2 , distance1
;
10
double
latold ,
lngold ;
11
IMyLocation
loc ;
12
13
public App()
14
{
15
lblLat = new Label ()
16
{
17
HorizontalTextAlignment = TextAlignment . Center ,
18
Text = ”Lat”
19
};
20
lblLng = new Label ()
21
{
22
HorizontalTextAlignment=TextAlignment . Center , Text = ”Lng”
23
24
};
25
26
lblLat2 = new Label ()
27
{
28
HorizontalTextAlignment = TextAlignment . Center ,
29
Text = ”Lat Second”
30
};
31
lblLng2 = new Label ()
32
{
33
HorizontalTextAlignment = TextAlignment . Center ,
34
Text = ”Lng Second”
35
};
36
distance1 = new Label ()
37
{
38
HorizontalTextAlignment = TextAlignment . Center ,
39
Text = ” Distance ”
80
==PAGE:86==
40
};
41
42
var
a c c e l e r a t i o n = new Button
43
{
44
Text = ”Get Location ” ,
45
VerticalOptions = LayoutOptions . CenterAndExpand ,
46
HorizontalOptions = LayoutOptions . CenterAndExpand ,
47
BorderColor = Color . Black ,
48
BorderWidth = 2 ,
49
50
};
51
52
var
Distance = new Button
53
{
54
Text = ”Get
distance ” ,
55
VerticalOptions = LayoutOptions . CenterAndExpand ,
56
HorizontalOptions = LayoutOptions . CenterAndExpand ,
57
BorderColor = Color . Black ,
58
BorderWidth = 2 ,
59
60
};
61
62
// The root
page
of
your
a p p l i c a t i o n
63
MainPage = new ContentPage
64
{
65
Content = new StackLayout
66
{
67
VerticalOptions = LayoutOptions . Center ,
68
Children = {
69
70
new Label {
71
HorizontalTextAlignment = TextAlignment . Center ,
Text = ”Current
Location ”
72
} ,
73
lblLat
,
lblLng , lblLat2 ,
lblLng2 ,
acceleration ,
Distance ,
distance1
74
}
75
}
76
};
77
78
79
}
80
81
protected
override
void
OnStart ()
82
{
83
// Handle when your app
s t a r t s
84
loc = DependencyService . Get<IMyLocation >() ;
85
loc . locationObtained += ( object
sender ,
ILocationEventArgs
e ) =>
86
{
87
var
l a t = e . l a t ;
88
var
lng = e . lng ;
89
lblLat . Text = l a t . ToString () ;
90
lblLng . Text = lng . ToString () ;
91
};
92
loc . ObtainMyLocation () ;
93
}
94
}
95 }
Code Snippet 20: Xamarin ﬁrst app view
The view shown in code listing 20 contains labels that are used to show the data to the
81
==PAGE:87==
user and buttons that are used to get the data from the sensors.
The code for the view start by getting the location on start and writing it on the ﬁrst two
labels and made two buttons by simple C# code and some labels for the rest of the data
which is shown in the ﬁgure 43 for iPhones and ﬁgure 44 for Android
Figure 43: Xamarin basic view geolocation app iPhone
82
==PAGE:88==
Figure 44: Xamarin basic view geolocation app Android
The next step was to make the OnCLick functions for the buttons an example of the code
can be seen in the code listing 21.
1
a c c e l e r a t i o n . Clicked += ( sender ,
e ) =>
2
{
3
// Handle when your app
s t a r t s
4
loc = DependencyService . Get<IMyLocation >() ;
5
loc . locationObtained += ( object
sender1 ,
ILocationEventArgs
e1 ) =>
6
{
7
var
l a t = e1 . l a t ;
8
var
lng = e1 . lng ;
9
l a t o l d = l a t ;
10
lngold = lng ;
11
lblLat . Text = l a t . ToString () ;
12
lblLng . Text = lng . ToString () ;
13
};
14
loc . ObtainMyLocation () ;
15
};
Code Snippet 21: Xamarin ﬁrst app on button click
Xamarin uses DependencyServices to make it possible to call the functions in the plat-
forms speciﬁc folders. To make this work an interface must be implemented in the shared
code folder which is done with the code in code listing 22.
1 using
System ;
2 namespace DistanceAcc
3 {
4
public
i n t e r f a c e
IMyLocation
5
{
6
void
ObtainMyLocation () ;
7
event
EventHandler<ILocationEventArgs> locationObtained ;
8
}
9
public
i n t e r f a c e
ILocationEventArgs {
83
==PAGE:89==
10
double
l a t
{ get ;
set ;
}
11
double
lng { get ;
set ;
}
12
}
13 }
Code Snippet 22: Xamarin ﬁrst app interface
This interface is the used to make the class for each platform reference it.
The next step is then to make the functionality of the platform speciﬁc classes which for
Android was done by making a new class and writing the code shown in code listing 23.
1 using
System ;
2 using
Android . Content ;
3 using
DistanceAcc . Droid ;
4 using Xamarin . Forms ;
5 using
Android . Locations ;
6 [ assembly :
Xamarin . Forms . Dependency ( typeof ( GetMyLocation ) ) ]
7 namespace DistanceAcc . Droid
8 {
9
//−−−event
arguments
containing
l a t
and lng −−−
10
public
c l a s s
LocationEventArgs :
EventArgs ,
ILocationEventArgs {
11
public
double
l a t
{ get ;
set ;
}
12
public
double
lng { get ;
set ;
}
13
}
14
15
public
c l a s s
GetMyLocation :
Java . Lang . Object , IMyLocation ,
ILocationListener {
16
LocationManager lm ;
17
public
void
OnProviderDisabled
( s t r i n g
provider ) { }
18
public
void
OnProviderEnabled
( s t r i n g
provider ) { }
19
public
void OnStatusChanged ( s t r i n g
provider ,
A v a i l a b i l i t y
status ,
Android .OS. Bundle
extras ) { }
20
//−−f i r e d
whenever
there
i s
a change
in
location −−−
21
public
void OnLocationChanged ( Location
l o c a t i o n ) {
22
i f
( l o c a t i o n != nu l l ) {
23
LocationEventArgs
args = new LocationEventArgs () ;
24
args . l a t = l o c a t i o n . Latitude ;
25
args . lng = l o c a t i o n . Longitude ;
26
locationObtained ( this ,
args ) ;
27
};
28
}
29
//−−−an EventHandler
delegate
that
i s
c a l l e d
when a
l o c a t i o n
i s
obtained−−−
30
public
event
EventHandler<ILocationEventArgs>
31
locationObtained ;
32
//−−−custom event
accessor
that
i s
invoked when
c l i e n t
subscribes
to
the
event−−−
33
event
EventHandler<ILocationEventArgs>
34
IMyLocation . locationObtained {
35
add {
36
locationObtained += value ;
37
}
38
remove {
39
locationObtained −= value ;
40
}
41
}
42
//−−−method to
c a l l
to
s t a r t
getting
l o c a t i o n −−−
43
public
void
ObtainMyLocation
()
44
{
84
==PAGE:90==
45
lm = ( LocationManager )
46
Android .App. Application . Context . GetSystemService ( Context .
LocationService ) ;
47
lm . RequestLocationUpdates ( LocationManager . NetworkProvider ,
48
0 , //−−time
in ms−−
49
0 , //−−distance
in
metres−−
50
t h i s ) ;
51
}
52
//−−−stop
the
l o c a t i o n
update when the
object
i s
set
to
null −−−
53
˜GetMyLocation ()
{
54
lm . RemoveUpdates ( t h i s ) ;
55
}
56
}
57 }
Code Snippet 23: Xamarin ﬁrst app Android functionality
This code makes it possible for the app to get the location and lets the functions from the
buttons call get my location by using dependencyservices.
The next step was to make the same functionality for the iOS part of the app and this
was done by making a new class and write the code shown in code listing 24.
1 using
System ;
2
3 using
CoreLocation ;
4 using
DistanceAcc . iOS ;
5 [ assembly :
Xamarin . Forms . Dependency ( typeof ( GetMyLocation ) ) ]
6 namespace DistanceAcc . iOS
7 {
8
//−−event
arguments
containing
l a t
and lng−−−
9
public
c l a s s
LocationEventArgs :
EventArgs ,
ILocationEventArgs {
10
public
double
l a t
{ get ;
set ;
}
11
public
double
lng { get ;
set ;
}
12
}
13
public
c l a s s
GetMyLocation
:
IMyLocation
14
{
15
CLLocationManager lm ;
16
//−−−an EventHandler
delegate
that
i s
c a l l e d
when a
l o c a t i o n
i s
obtained−−
17
public
event
EventHandler<ILocationEventArgs>
18
locationObtained ;
19
//−−custom event
accessor when
c l i e n t
subscribes
to
the
event−−−
20
event
EventHandler<ILocationEventArgs>
21
IMyLocation . locationObtained {
22
add{
23
locationObtained += value ;
24
}
25
remove{
26
locationObtained −= value ;
27
}
28
}
29
//−−method to
c a l l
to
s t a r t
getting
location −−−
30
public
void
ObtainMyLocation ()
31
{
32
lm = new CLLocationManager
33
{
34
DesiredAccuracy = CLLocation . AccuracyBest ,
35
D is ta nc eF il t er = CLLocationDistance . FilterNone
36
};
85
==PAGE:91==
37
//−−−f i r e d
whenever
there
i s
a change
in
location −−−
38
lm . LocationsUpdated += ( object
sender ,
CLLocationsUpdatedEventArgs e ) =>
39
{
40
var
l o c a t i o n s = e . Locations ;
41
var
strLocation = l o c a t i o n s [ l o c a t i o n s . Length −1 ] . Coordinate
. Latitude . ToString () ;
42
strLocation = strLocation + ” , ” + l o c a t i o n s [ l o c a t i o n s . Length
−1 ] . Coordinate . Longitude . ToString () ;
43
LocationEventArgs
args = new LocationEventArgs
44
{
45
l a t = l o c a t i o n s [ l o c a t i o n s . Length −1 ] . Coordinate .
Latitude ,
46
lng = l o c a t i o n s [ l o c a t i o n s . Length −1 ] . Coordinate .
Longitude
47
};
48
locationObtained ( this ,
args ) ;
49
};
50
lm . AuthorizationChanged += ( object
sender ,
CLAuthorizationChangedEventArgs e ) =>
51
{
52
i f
( e . Status == CLAuthorizationStatus . AuthorizedWhenInUse )
53
{
54
lm . StartUpdatingLocation () ;
55
}
56
};
57
lm . RequestWhenInUseAuthorization () ;
58
}
59
//−−−stop
the
l o c a t i o n
update when the
object
i s
set
to
n u l l −−−
60
˜GetMyLocation ()
{
61
lm . StopUpdatingLocation () ;
62
}
63
64
}
65 }
Code Snippet 24: Xamarin ﬁrst app IOS functionality
This code makes it possible for the app to get the location and lets the functions from the
buttons call get my location by using dependencyservices.
Dependency services is necessary to be able to communicate between the platform speciﬁc
classes and the shared code. This means that in order to use the data gathered by the
platform speciﬁc functions the dependency services are needed to send the data to the
shared code which then alters the user-interface.
The functionality result of pressing the buttons can be seen in ﬁgure 45 for iPhone and
ﬁgure 46 for Android.
86
==PAGE:92==
Figure 45: Xamarin buttons pressed geolocation app iPhone
Figure 46: Xamarin buttons pressed geolocation app Android
87
==PAGE:93==
7.3.2
Learned Xamarin ﬁrst app
What was learned from this is that Xamarin uses diﬀerent ways to get sensor data depend-
ing on which platform the app is running on. The structure of Xamarin makes dependency
services very important when platform speciﬁc functionality is needed to make sure that
the user-interface doesn’t have to be made independently.
It is possible to test the use of geolocation on the iPhone simulators, but not on the An-
droid simulators. It is simple to connect an Android device and test it on the physical
device. It is not possible to debug on a physical iPhone device unless the developer has a
paying Apple development account because the same information that is needed to deploy
the app is needed to test on the physical device.
Xamarin makes it easy to get Native user-interface without having to code two diﬀerent
interfaces. What Xamarin does is that when the app is running the design of buttons
and anything else in the user-interface gets a speciﬁc look depending on the platform and
device the app is running on. This means that e.g. a toolbar would be placed at the top
of the user-interface and look one way on Android and be placed at the bottom of the
page with another look for the iPhone.
For this example, it was only possible to reuse the code for the user-interface and the
interface that was used for dependency services, but Xamarin oﬀers a simple way to make
the platform speciﬁc code and keep it separated without having to make diﬀerent project
because it will only be the iPhones that uses the code from the iPhone part of the project
and Android devices that access the Android part of the project.
Xamarin oﬀers speciﬁc error messages when something goes wrong and most of the time
the tool will stop the running app and show where the error is or where the app failed.
This helps developers in ﬁnding the error and helps to ﬁgure out what went wrong or at
the very least gives the point that must be debugged to ﬁgure out what the error is.
7.3.3
Xamarin second example app
This section describes the second of the two apps that are made with Xamarin and how it is
done and what is learned from making the apps with focus on the criteria described earlier.
The second app is the IndoorGolfStatistics.
The app is a multiple page app which on the ﬁrst page contains three tabs with diﬀerent
leaderboards and a toolbar with a icon that when pressed changes the page to the second
page. The second page contains ﬁve tabs with diﬀerent leaderboards for the ﬁve best
rounds.
All the code for this apps user interface is written in the shared folder and the connection
with the webservice is written in each of the platform speciﬁc folders.
The ﬁrst step was to make the view which was done with the code shown in code listing
25 and was written in a new ﬁle in the shared folder called TabPages.cs. This ﬁle uses the
page type TabbedPage which is one of the type of pages that Xamarin oﬀers.
88
==PAGE:94==
1 using
System ;
2 using
System . C o l l e c t i o n s . Generic ;
3 using
System . Linq ;
4 using
System . Text ;
5 using
System . Threading . Tasks ;
6
7 using Xamarin . Forms ;
8
9 namespace xamFormPCL
10 {
11
public
c l a s s
TotalResults
:
TabbedPage
12
{
13
public
TotalResults ()
14
{
15
T i t l e = ” Total
r e s u l t a t e r ” ;
16
var
S t i l l i n g = new Resultater () ;
17
S t i l l i n g . ReadWebserviceAndFillTable<S t i l l i n g >(” S t i l l i n g e n ” , ”
I n d o o r S t i l l i n g ” ) ;
18
S t i l l i n g . T i t l e = ” S t i l l i n g e n ” ;
19
Children .Add( S t i l l i n g ) ;
20
var
Brutto = new Resultater () ;
21
Brutto . ReadWebserviceAndFillTable<S t i l l i n g >(”Brutto” , ”
IndoorBruttoGns” ) ;
22
Brutto . T i t l e = ”Brutto ” ;
23
Children .Add( Brutto ) ;
24
var
Netto = new Resultater () ;
25
Netto . ReadWebserviceAndFillTable<S t i l l i n g >(”Brutto” , ”
IndoorBruttoGns” ) ;
26
Netto . T i t l e = ”Netto” ;
27
Children .Add( Netto ) ;
28
29
ToolbarItem
tbi = new ToolbarItem () ;
30
tbi . Text = ”Bedste 5” ;
31
tbi . Icon = ” leaderboard . png” ;
32
tbi . Clicked += t b i C l i c k e d ;
33
t h i s . ToolbarItems .Add( tbi ) ;
34
}
35
void
t b i C l i c k e d ( object
sender ,
EventArgs e )
36
{
37
t h i s . Navigation . PushAsync (new Best5Results () ) ;
38
}
39
}
40
// public
c l a s s
Best5NavPage
:
NavigationPage
41
//{
42
//
public
Best5NavPage ()
43
//
{
44
45
//
}
46
//}
47
public
c l a s s
Best5Results
:
TabbedPage
48
{
49
public
Best5Results ()
50
{
51
T i t l e = ”Bedste 5
r e s u l t a t e r ” ;
52
var
Best5 = new Resultater () ;
53
Best5 . ReadWebserviceAndFillTable<Best5Gns>(”Brutto” , ”
IndoorBestNettoGns” ) ;
54
Best5 . T i t l e = ”Netto” ;
55
Children .Add( Best5 ) ;
56
Best5 = new Resultater () ;
57
Best5 . ReadWebserviceAndFillTable<Best5Gns>(”Brutto” , ”
89
==PAGE:95==
IndoorBestFhGns” ) ;
58
Best5 . T i t l e = ”FH” ;
59
Children .Add( Best5 ) ;
60
Best5 = new Resultater () ;
61
Best5 . ReadWebserviceAndFillTable<Best5Gns>(”Brutto” , ”
IndoorBestGirGns” ) ;
62
Best5 . T i t l e = ”GIR” ;
63
Children .Add( Best5 ) ;
64
Best5 = new Resultater () ;
65
Best5 . ReadWebserviceAndFillTable<Best5Gns>(”Brutto” , ”
IndoorBestPuttsGns ” ) ;
66
Best5 . T i t l e = ” Putts ” ;
67
Children .Add( Best5 ) ;
68
Best5 = new Resultater () ;
69
Best5 . ReadWebserviceAndFillTable<Best5Gns>(”Brutto” , ”
IndoorBestBruttoGns ” ) ;
70
Best5 . T i t l e = ”Brutto ” ;
71
Children .Add( Best5 ) ;
72
73
ToolbarItem
tbi = new ToolbarItem () ;
74
tbi . Text = ” Total
r e s u l t a t e r ” ;
75
tbi . Icon = ” l e a d e r b o a r d b a l l . png” ;
76
tbi . Clicked += t b i C l i c k e d ;
77
t h i s . ToolbarItems .Add( tbi ) ;
78
}
79
void
t b i C l i c k e d ( object
sender ,
EventArgs e )
80
{
81
t h i s . Navigation . PopAsync () ;
82
}
83
}
84
}
Code Snippet 25: Xamarin second app ﬁrst view
The code for the view creates the classes for the two pages and for each children on the
page there is a list that gets data from a dependency service which is then displayed. The
ﬁrst page of the view as it looks on the devices in shown in ﬁgure 47 for iOS and 48 for
Android.
Each Tabbed page gets a toolbar implemented which have a title and an icon. The icon
has an onClick function that leads to the other page.
At the button of the page on iPhone and just under the toolbar on the Android is shown
the page children which is each of the subpages.
90
==PAGE:96==
Figure 47: Xamarin ﬁrst page indoor app iPhone
Figure 48: Xamarin ﬁrst page indoor app Android
The next step was to make the functionality of the Dependency services and make sure
that each Dependency service calls a diﬀerent web-service and display the data received.
This was ﬁrst done by making an interface which was done with the code shown in code
listing 26.
1 using
System ;
91
==PAGE:97==
2 using
System . C o l l e c t i o n s . Generic ;
3 using
System . Linq ;
4 using
System . Text ;
5 using
System . Threading . Tasks ;
6
7 namespace xamFormPCL
8 {
9
public
i n t e r f a c e
IWebServiceCall
10
{
11
s t r i n g
InvokeService ( s t r i n g
webServiceOperation ) ;
12
}
13 }
Code Snippet 26: Xamarin second app dependency services
This code makes sure that it is possible to call the dependency service and make sure that
the class in each platform folder is the same type.
The next step was to create the class for connecting the web-service and receive an JSON
object. To work with JSON object a NuGet package was needed to be downloaded through
the tool and it had to be done for each of the three folders. The way to do this is by right
clicking on the folder and choose add and add NuGet Packages as shown in the ﬁgure 49
and the choose the package Newtonsoft.Json as shown in ﬁgure 50 and press add package.
Figure 49: Xamarin add NuGet packages
92
==PAGE:98==
Figure 50: Xamarin add JSON packages
When the packages was installed the class was created and the class was the same for both
iOS and Android the only diﬀerence was the namespace and it was with the code shown
in code listing 27
1
2 using
System ;
3 using
System . C o l l e c t i o n s . Generic ;
4 using
System . IO ;
5 using
System . Linq ;
6 using
System . Net ;
7 using
System . Text ;
8 using
System . Threading . Tasks ;
9 using
System .Xml;
10 using
System .Xml. Linq ;
11 using
UIKit ;
12 using xamFormPCL. iOS ;
13
14 [ assembly :
Xamarin . Forms . Dependency ( typeof ( WebserviceCall ) ) ]
15 namespace xamFormPCL. iOS
16 {
17
c l a s s
WebserviceCall
:
IWebServiceCall
18
{
19
private
HttpWebRequest CreateSOAPWebRequest( s t r i n g
webServiceOperation )
20
{
21
//Making Web Request
22
HttpWebRequest Req = ( HttpWebRequest ) WebRequest . Create (@” http ://
mobil . xn−−s c h l l e r −golf −xjb . dk/WebServices/ IndoorServices . asmx” ) ;
23
//SOAPAction
93
==PAGE:99==
24
Req . Host = ”mobil . xn−−s c h l l e r −golf −xjb . dk” ;
25
Req . Headers .Add( ”SOAPAction :
\” http :// l o c a l h o s t :30641/
WebServices/” + webServiceOperation + ”\”” ) ;
26
// Content type
27
Req . ContentType = ” text /xml ; charset=\”utf −8\”” ;
28
Req . Accept = ” text /xml” ;
29
//HTTP method
30
Req . Method = ”POST” ;
31
// return HttpWebRequest
32
return Req ;
33
}
34
public
s t r i n g
InvokeService ( s t r i n g
webServiceOperation )
35
{
36
// Calling CreateSOAPWebRequest method
37
HttpWebRequest
request = CreateSOAPWebRequest(
webServiceOperation ) ;
38
39
//XDocument SOAPReqBody = new XDocument () ;
40
//SOAP Body Request
41
//SOAPReqBody . LoadXml(”<?xml
version =\”1.0\”
encoding=\”utf
−8\”?>\r \n<soap : Envelope xmlns : x s i =\”http ://www. w3 . org /2001/XMLSchema−
instance \” xmlns : xsd=\”http ://www. w3 . org /2001/XMLSchema\” xmlns : soap=\”
http :// schemas . xmlsoap . org /soap/ envelope /\”>\r \n
<soap : Body>\r \n
<
Helloworld + ” xmlns=\”http :// l o c a l h o s t :30641/ WebServices \” />\r \n
</
soap : Body>\r \n</soap : Envelope >”) ;
42
var SOAPReqBody = XDocument . Parse ( ”<?xml
version =\”1.0\”
encoding=\”utf −8\”?>\r \n<soap : Envelope xmlns : x s i =\”http ://www. w3 . org
/2001/XMLSchema−instance \” xmlns : xsd=\”http ://www. w3 . org /2001/XMLSchema\”
xmlns : soap=\”http :// schemas . xmlsoap . org /soap/ envelope /\”>\r \n
<soap :
Body>\r \n
<” + webServiceOperation + ” xmlns=\”http :// l o c a l h o s t :30641/
WebServices \” />\r \n
</soap : Body>\r \n</soap : Envelope>” ) ;
43
44
using
( Stream stream = request . GetRequestStream () )
45
{
46
SOAPReqBody . Save ( stream ) ;
47
}
48
49
var
ServiceResult = ”” ;
50
// Geting
response
from
request
51
using
( WebResponse
S e r v i c e r e s = request . GetResponse () )
52
{
53
using
( StreamReader rd = new StreamReader ( S e r v i c e r e s .
GetResponseStream () ) )
54
{
55
// reading
stream
56
ServiceResult = rd . ReadToEnd () ;
57
ServiceResult = ServiceResult . Substring ( ServiceResult .
IndexOf ( ”<” + webServiceOperation + ” Result>” ,
StringComparison .
CurrentCulture ) + 8 + webServiceOperation . Length ) ;
58
ServiceResult = ServiceResult . Substring (0 ,
ServiceResult
. IndexOf ( ”</” + webServiceOperation + ” Result>” ,
StringComparison .
CurrentCulture ) ) ;
59
}
60
}
61
62
return
ServiceResult ;
63
}
64
}
65 }
Code Snippet 27: Xamarin second app webservice call
94
==PAGE:100==
The code gets a string as an input which is used to determine which webservice is called
by using the SOAP response in the same way as was discussed in Appcelerator Titanium.
Then it makes a connection to the webservice and receives a JSON object as a response
which is then parsed to make sure that it is possible to use the information received.
The information is then returned to the TabbedPage where it was called and then it is
shown.
The last step is to make the app.cs ﬁle make the main page and to create the class struc-
ture of the response that is received to make sure that it response is in the format that
we want to show. This is done with the code shown in code listing 28.
1 using
System ;
2 using
System . C o l l e c t i o n s . Generic ;
3 using
System . Linq ;
4 using
System . Text ;
5 using
Newtonsoft . Json ;
6 using Xamarin . Forms ;
7
8 namespace xamFormPCL
9 {
10
public
c l a s s App :
Application
11
{
12
public App()
// s t r i n g
Result
13
{
14
MainPage = new NavigationPage (new TotalResults () ) ;
15
}
16
17
protected
override
void
OnStart ()
18
{
19
// Handle when your app
s t a r t s
20
}
21
22
protected
override
void
OnSleep ()
23
{
24
// Handle when your app
s l e e p s
25
}
26
27
protected
override
void OnResume ()
28
{
29
// Handle when your app resumes
30
}
31
}
32
public
c l a s s
S t i l l i n g
33
{
34
public
s t r i n g Nr { get ;
set ;
}
35
public
s t r i n g Name { get ;
set ;
}
36
public
s t r i n g
I a l t
{ get ;
set ;
}
37
public
s t r i n g
Antal { get ;
set ;
}
38
public
s t r i n g Gns { get ;
set ;
}
39
}
40
public
c l a s s
Best5Gns
41
{
42
public
s t r i n g Nr { get ;
set ;
}
43
public
s t r i n g Name { get ;
set ;
}
44
public
s t r i n g
I a l t
{ get ;
set ;
}
45
public
s t r i n g
Antal { get ;
set ;
}
46
public
s t r i n g Gns { get ;
set ;
}
95
==PAGE:101==
47
}
48
49 }
Code Snippet 28: Xamarin second app create main page
The class Stilling is used for all the responses for the ﬁrst page and the class Best5GNS
is used for the response for the second page. The second page looks like the ﬁgure 51 for
iPhone and 52 for Android.
Figure 51: Xamarin second page Indoor app iPhone
96
==PAGE:102==
Figure 52: Xamarin second page Indoor app Android
7.3.4
Learned Xamarin second app
What was learned from this is that Xamarin oﬀers an easy way to get the data from a
web-services both SOAP and RESTFULL web-services. For this example the connection
to the web-service had to be platform speciﬁc but because it was the same code used there
wasn’t any additional time used to write the code the class just had to be copied into the
other folder and have the namespace changed to ﬁt the new location.
The only thing that was needed to make the SOAP call was to know how the response
look like and make an SOAP request that matches the response. Other than that all that
is needed is an NuGet Package to handle the JSON response and convert the response
into a readable format.
For this example, it was possible to reuse close to 100 percent of the code. The only thing
was that the webservice call had to be made twice. This also means that not only was the
functionality the same but the user interface was the same as well, but Xamarin changes
the user-interface to look more native depending on the device the app is running on. This
means that a tabbed page has the items at the top for Android and at the bottom for the
iPhone. It also meant that the icons had to be stored in a special way for Android they
had to be made as AndroidResource and to make sure that there was a icon no matter
what Android device they had to be made in diﬀerent sizes and under speciﬁc folder under
the resources folder as shown in ﬁgure 53
97
==PAGE:103==
Figure 53: Xamarin images under resource folder
For iPhone the picture had to be put under the resource folder and made as a BundleRe-
source to start with there was a lot of diﬀerent names the pictures had to have to make
it suitable for every device but a new update made it possible just to write -iphone in
the name of the picture used for iPhone, and -ipad for pictures for iPad and if nothing is
written in the name then it uses the same picture. The Resource folder with the image
ﬁles is shown in ﬁgure 54.
98
==PAGE:104==
Figure 54: Xamarin images under resource folder
Xamarin oﬀers a lot of diﬀerent standard pages such as navigation page, tabbed page and
carousel page. These pages make it easier for the developer to get exactly the layout that
they want without having to create a new page from scratch. This helps the user make a
design that will also be ﬁtted to look native for each device without specifying the view
for each platform. Xamarin also oﬀers an easy way to open a new page in the stack and
to pop the pages that have to be closed when it is needed.
99
==PAGE:105==
8
Comparison
Criteria
PhoneGap
Xamarin
Apccelerator
Ti-
tanium
Hardware/sensor
accessibility
8
6
8
Deployment
8
9
8
Add
new
page/view
5
8
7
Simulation/
Development
support
3
7
7
Reusable code
10
8
9
Learning curve
Documentation
and support
8
8
5
Legacy
8
5
8
Diﬀerent
pro-
gramming
lan-
guages
8
8
6
Native design
4
8
7
Total
62
67
65
Average
6,88
7,44
7,22
Table 3: Tools Comparison
8.1
PhoneGap
Hardware/sensor accessibility
- All sensors
- Easy accessibility
- Direct access not hardware dependent
- Can use local storage to store data
- Many diﬀerent ways to watch or get sensor data
It is possible to access all the sensors on the phones. The sensors are easy to access and
the data can be used directly in the app. The data is not hardware dependent this means
that for the app it doesn’t matter which platform it is running on because the data it
receives from the sensors are the same.
While using Phonegap it is possible to save the data on the phone for later use which
makes it easy to save and use data later without having to send it to a database or other
storage which needs an internet connection.
PhoneGap oﬀers ways to not only get the data which is current from the sensors but also
use functionality to watch how the data changes by watching the data.
Deployment
-Developers chooses the code that should be build.
100
==PAGE:106==
-Uploads chosen code to external build.
-Easy to deploy to the supported platforms.
To deploy using PhoneGap the developer has to zip the code ﬁles and upload them to
PhoneGap Build which then makes it possible to deploy the app to iPhone, Android and
Windows Phone.
It is an easy way to deploy the app and there is a lot of documentation to show what is
needed to deploy the app.
Add fragments/new Pages
- it is possible to make extra views
- Make a new HTML ﬁle and connect it but functions as to diﬀerent web pages
- Possible to hide and show diﬀerent parts
- The tools oﬀer no help
It is possible to make extra views but it will functions a lot like making multiple web
pages. A better way to make more views is by changing between what is shown in the
view and what is hidden.
The tools doesn’t oﬀer any help to create new views, so the developer has to know how to
do it themselves.
Simulation/development support
- The tool doesn’t provide any emulators
- debugging works by opening the app as a web page and inspecting the page or using
PhoneGap developer app to see how the app works on the device but only possible on
same Wi-Fi as the computer that has the code.
- It works fast when connecting
- Only feedback on errors when inspecting the web page and the feedback is not very
accurate or help full
PhoneGap doesn’t oﬀer any help in debugging the code. The best way to debug is to
either just test the app on the phone by using PhonGap developer app or by opining the
app in a browser on the computer and the inspect the page this gives a idea on what is
wrong.
Reusable code
- 100 percent reusable code
- makes it fast and easy to develop new functions or change existing code.
Phonegap reuses all the code there is nothing that have to be written twice unless the
developer wants two diﬀerent user-interfaces.
Learning curve
- It is easy to learn all that is needed is to learn the programming language and JavaScript
and a few extra functionality.
- If the programming language is know then there is only a few extra functions that is
needed to learn.
- Much like normal web-programming.
101
==PAGE:107==
Documentation and support
- PhoneGaps own documentation is only about getting to know the tool but not about
coding
- Searching on Google gives a lot of help both because HTML/JavaScript is well doc-
umented and used problems but PhoneGap speciﬁc problems is also answered a lot on
stackowerﬂow and other sites like it.
- A lot of help on coding problems.
Legacy
-It is possible to take existing web projects and get Phonegap build to deploy it.
- It is only possible with web projects with HTML and JavaScript
- Nothing needs to be changed if the project is a HTML project but it is possible to use
extra features.
Diﬀerent programming languages
-It supports HTML/JavaScript
- very well know programming language
- easy to learn
- Well documented.
- Some added features but they aren’t necessary to use.
Native design
- It is possible to make native design by using PhoneGap framework and focusing on the
design of everything on the user interface.
-There is only one design but some parts can be speciﬁed on which device such as toolbar.
- It is not possible to make multiple user interface for the same app.
It is possible to make native design but because it is only possible to make one user-
interface then it is only possible to make it native for one platform unless the app is
created multiple times.
PhoneGap doesn’t help to create native views so everything needs to be made by the
developer.
PhoneGap results
PhoneGap is an easy to learn tool that focus on making simple one page applications. It
is easy to learn and html and javascript is a well documented programming languages and
there exist a lot of examples on how to implement the code and how to get sensor data.
It is possible to import existing html projects and make them into apps using PhoneGap
Build.
The tool is easy to use but is not suited to make complex apps but for single page appli-
cations it is well suited.
When the focus in not on making native design then PhoneGap is a tool that is good
for cross-platform app development because it reuses all the code and the data received
from sensors is not platform speciﬁc and therefor there is nothing that should be diﬀerent
between platforms.
102
==PAGE:108==
8.2
Xamarin
Hardware/sensor accessibility
- Every sensor even the once only a few phones have such as proximity sensor
- It must be done for each platform and it takes multiple steps to get the date and make
it usable
- Its platform dependent data so it has to be changed before being used or shown
It is possible to access all the sensors on the phones. The sensors are easy to access but
the code has to be done for each platform and then send to the shared code by dependency
services.
Deployment
-Developers build the app through the tool.
-The tool gives everything that is needed to deploy
-Easy to deploy to the supported platforms.
To deploy using Xamarin the developer has go through some steps to chose what version
and to create the needed information but Xamarin oﬀers a lot of documentation and shows
step by step how to deploy the app.
Everything that is needed to deploy the app is given by the tool except the developer
proﬁle from Apple.
Add fragments/new Pages
- it is possible to make extra views/activities
- It is possible to create extra views and simple enough to connect them but when using
native designs then it has to be done for each platform
- It is simple calls that connect new views and activities
- Oﬀers diﬀerent kind of pages.
It is possible to make extra views and it is made easy by Xamarin. Xamarin oﬀers some
pre made pages which makes it easy for the developer to get a native design by using pages
that ﬁts their functionality and pages that is already programmed to be native.
Simulation/development support
- The tool provides the emulators and everything that is needed.
- Debugging works by running the app in debug mode either on a real device that is con-
nected to the computer or using the emulators
- Yes, simulation is possible on many speciﬁc phones which means that it is possible to
test on exactly the device that the app is targeting.
-It takes some time to start the emulators but when they are running then the app opens
fast.
- The feedback on errors is helpful and most of the time it gives the line and place of the
error in the code.
Reusable code
- back-end code can be reused but not for getting data from sensors and there are some
things that the shared code doesn’t support.
- Most functionality is easy to add or change and most of the code that have to be made
103
==PAGE:109==
in the platform speciﬁc folders can written once and then copied into each folder.
Xamarin oﬀers the possibility to create apps that reuses all the code but for a lot of
functionality it is better to make the code platform speciﬁc and then only make the
user-interface as shared code. This will make a native design and make sure that the
functionality ﬁts the platforms and make it as optimal as possible.
Learning curve
-If the user doesn’t know C# then it can be hard to learn how to make some of the more
complex functionality while getting to know how the projects are structured and how it
works. But when they have learned how it works then it i possible to make all the func-
tionality they want.
- If the programming language is known then the user still needs to learn how the tool is
structured and all the extra functionality and some changes on existing functionality in
C#.
- The tool gives an option on creating a simple example app as a start to make it easier
to get started and oﬀers some guides to help new users.
Documentation and support
- Xamarin oﬀers a lot of documentation but most is divided between the diﬀerent plat-
forms with help on how to use the functionality but it lacks more information in the
cross-platform section.
- There is a lot of help to get on Google and sites like stackowerﬂow both on coding prob-
lems or anything else that is needed.
Legacy
-It is possible to import existing C# and ruby projects but to make sure that it will be
usable as apps a lot of code will have to be rewritten. It should be possible to use the link
scan.xamarin.com to check how much of the existing code that has to be changed.
Diﬀerent programming languages
-It supports C# and Ruby
- C# is a very well know programming language
- Ruby is mostly known for web-development using Rail but not much else but it is well
documented.
- C# is not the easiest programming language to learn but it is well documented and there
exist a lot of help.
- Ruby is an easy to learn programming language but it not as well suited to make complex
functionality as C#
- There is a lot of extra functionality in Xamarin or changed that needs to be learned.
Native design
- It is possible to make native design and use the platform speciﬁc libraries .
-It can be made for multiple platforms in the same project.
- It takes some extra work because each user-interface have to be made for each of the
platforms.
Xamarin results
Xamarin is an tool focused on native apps. The tool has a structure that supports complex
104
==PAGE:110==
apps and makes it easy to make platform speciﬃc code. The tool helps make the user-
interface look native. The programming languages the tools support is well documented
and when using c# then it is possible to create the apps that is needed even when the
app is complex.
It also makes it the user-interface look native without having to code the user-interface
multiple times.
8.3
Appcelerator Titanium
Hardware/sensor accessibility
- All sensors
- Easy accessibility
- Direct access not hardware dependent
- Can use the data directly
It is possible to access all the sensors on the phones. The sensors are easy to access and
the data can be used directly in the app. The data is not hardware dependent this means
that for the app it doesn’t matter which platform it is running on because the data it
receives from the sensors are the same.
Appcelerator Titanium oﬀers ways to not only get the data which is current from the
sensors but also use functionality to watch how the data changes by watching the data.
Deployment
-Developers build the app through the tool.
-Need to use keytool from JDK
-Easy to deploy to the supported platforms.
To deploy using Appcelerator the developer has to go through some steps to get the keys
that is needed but it is a simple way to deploy the app and there is a lot of documentation
that shows how to deploy the app.
Add fragments/new Pages
- it is possible to make extra views
- It is simple to make a new view and connect it.
- The tool helps to make it simpler to create and connect new views
- Connected by simple calls
It is possible to make extra views and it is easy to connect the views. The developer has to
make the new view from scratch but when the view is made then Appcelerator Titanium
makes it look native when running on a phone.
Simulation/development support
- The tool provides the emulators and everything that is needed.
- Debugging works by running the app in debug mode either on a real device that is con-
nected to the computer or using the emulators
- Yes, simulation is possible on many speciﬁc phones and iPad/tablets which means that
it is possible to test on exactly the device that the app is targeting.
-It takes some time to start the emulators but when they are running then the app opens
105
==PAGE:111==
fast.
- The feedback on errors is helpful and but the line that it gives for error ﬁnding doesn’t
always match the place of the error.
Reusable code
- It is close to 100 percent reusable code. There are a few calls such as some sensor calls
that is diﬀerent depending on the device but this can be done with a simple check on
which device it is.
- makes it fast and easy to develop new functions or change existing code.
It is possible to reuse almost all of the code but some functionality has to be platform
speciﬁc but Appcelerator Titanium solves this by making it possible to make a if statement
that respond to which platform the app is running on.
Learning curve
- Appcelerator Titanium is a simple tool to learn and the language is well known and
documented it is only needed to learn the language and a few extra functions because the
structure of the tool is simple.
- If the programming language is known then the user only needs to learn some tool spe-
ciﬁc functionality.
- The tool gives an option on creating a simple example hello world app as an start to
make it easier to get started and oﬀers some guides to help new users.
Documentation and support
- Appcelerator has a lot of documentation on their diﬀerent tools and on speciﬁc func-
tions but only focus on what is needed to make the functions work but lacks some bigger
examples to show how it works.
- Stackowerﬂow has some help but not much and most of the help found on Google is from
the tools own documentation..
Legacy
-It is possible to take existing projects created in eclipse or Appcelerator Titanium.
-Every project in JavaScript should be possible to import and the tool will try to add the
ﬁles that is needed.
- it is possible to import directories and get them promoted as projects.
Diﬀerent programming languages
- It supports JavaScript
- very well know programming language
- easy to learn
- Well documented.
- Some added features but they aren’t necessary to use.
Native design
- It is possible to make native design by focusing on the design of everything on the user
interface.
- There is only one design but it is possible to check which device the app is running on
and that means that it is possible to have some small diﬀerences in the UI depending on
the platform.
106
==PAGE:112==
- It is not possible to make multiple user interface for the same app.
Appcelerator Titanium results
Appcelerator is an tool focused on hybrid apps. The tool is easy to learn and JavaScript
is a well documented programming languages and there exist a lot of examples on how to
implement the code and how to get sensor data.
The tool reuses almost all of the code and therefore makes it easy to make new function-
ality or to change existing data. It also makes it the user-interface look native without
having to code the user-interface multiple times.
107
==PAGE:113==
9
Discussion of results
This chapter is about the result found throughout this thesis and discus what a third app
could have tested and what future work would consist of.
There exist a lot of diﬀerent cross-platform mobile app development tools.
These de-
velopment tools range from simple web development made into apps like PhoneGap to
development tools focusing on native app development like Xamarin.
Each tool uses their own approach and diﬀer on which programming language it supports
and the structure of the tool. This means that every tool has diﬀerent strengths.
PhoneGap is an easy to lean and use tool which focuses on one page application so its
strength is that it is an easy tool to learn and to create simple apps, but it won’t be as
useful when trying to create multi-page apps with a complex functionality.
Xamarin is focused on native cross-platform app development and uses a more complex
programming language and a structure that supports both cross-platform functionality
but also platform speciﬁc functionality. The structure of Xamarin makes the tool suitable
for more comprehensive apps with complex functionality and supporting multiple views.
Appcelerator Titanium focus on hybrid apps with a focus on making the user-interface
native looking but still make the functionality more like web applications. One of the
strengths is that it uses a simple and easy to learn programming languages but with help
from the tool to make the user-interface suit the platform that the app is running on
without the developer having to write additional code.
One of the things that have been made obvious in this thesis is that some app development
tools is better than others but every tool has its own strengths and weaknesses this means
that for some developers and some type of apps a speciﬁc tool might ﬁt better while for
another developer making the same app or a diﬀerent app another tool would be better
suited.
This means that to really make an eﬃcient guide for selecting the right development tool
then as many development tools as possible has to be tested as thoroughly as possible to
know all the possibilities the tools oﬀers.
Optimally it should be tested both with developers that know the programming languages
and only have to get to know the tool and developers that doesn’t know the programming
language to test how easy it is for new developers to get to know the tool and if it is better
to learn a new language to use a new tool or use the known programming languages to
develop the app that is wanted.
As mentioned earlier in this thesis, the app examples used in this thesis, gave some insight
into how the tools works and what they oﬀer. This gives a good basis for determined what
is needed to know about the developer them self and about the app that is being develop
to make the best possible choice of development tool.
The guidelines for selection is discussed in the chapter Guidelines for selection where what
is important to know before choosing is declared and examples of diﬀerent developer pro-
108
==PAGE:114==
ﬁles is given an shown what developer proﬁles would be recommended to use each of the
three tools.
9.1
Third app
This section is about what a third app example could be used to check about the diﬀerent
development tool and is used to show that even though the app example that was made
gave a good understanding of the tools and what they can do that more app examples
can still be used to get a better understanding on what the tool support or doesn’t support.
There is three parts that could be good to test about the tools to make the choice of
development tool easier.
One of the three points a third app could test is to test what is possible to make with the
user interface and how much does the tool support native design in a simple to use way.
It has been tested very lightly in the second app example but not much this means that
if the developer wants to create a user-interface that is user friendly, eﬃcient and looks
very good then what does the tool do to help the user.
The second point is to test what can be accessed on the phone does the tool help develop-
ers get access to sending an SMS or access the contacts in the phone. Does the tool allow
the developer to check the phones internet connection to see if it is oﬄine or online and
so on.
This means that the app could test what functionality is available from the devices and
not just if it is possible to get data from the hardware.
The third point could be a part of the ﬁrst point because it would be to focus on how it is
to get data from the user-interface and use it in the app. Does the tool provide with easy
accessibility to the data that the user can enter into the app, and do it support for local
storage in the app or on the phone or does it need for the data to be send by web-services
to a database to be stored in a good and safe way.
109
==PAGE:115==
10
Guidelines for selection
This chapter is about what is learned from this thesis about what is necessary to know
before choosing the cross-platform development tool. This section will give examples of
proﬁles and apps that would be recommended for each of the three tools that where tested
in this thesis.
What was learned by researching the diﬀerent types of apps was that the end user for
each of the categories focus on diﬀerent things. Some categories focus on a beautiful user-
interface where other focus on eﬃcient functionality as mentioned in section 5.
This means that in order to develop an app that ﬁts the end user, the developers need to
know what category their app ﬁts into or what category is the focus if it ﬁts into multiple
categories.
The category tells a lot about what some of the focus areas are when developing the app,
should the developers give more focus to making a native design or should they make sure
that the functionality is as optimal as possible even if that means the user-interface won’t
be native.
Another important part to know is about the functionality of the app. What is the most
important feature of the app. What is important to know about the important function-
ality of the app is if it is input from the user or is it connecting to a database to receive
and send data or is it platform speciﬁc functionality or connecting to the senors on the
phone. This is important, to understand which tool ﬁts best, some tools are better than
others at connecting to the sensors or to handle complex functionality.
The last part that helps when choosing the development tool is the developers proﬁle.
Which programming languages does the developer know and how well does he know the
programming language.
The reasons that this is important to know is to be able to choose a development tool
that supports a language that the developer already knows. This will give the developer
less to learn before being able to develop the app.
The more there is known about the criteria and functionality of the app and the develop-
ers proﬁle, the better a decision on development tool can be made. This is because the
more tools that are tested the more is it possible that some tools have a lot of the same
strengths and weaknesses but there will also be some diﬀerences. This means that to be
able to recommend as few tools as possible, as much as possible is needed to be known
about the app and the developer.
The proﬁles below is chosen after what was learned from testing the tools as written in
section 7 and knowing what programming languages the tools support and the structure
the tools uses when developing cross-platform apps.
10.1
PhoneGap developer proﬁle example
Developer
- New Programmer
- Web Developer
- HTML/JavaScript experience
110
==PAGE:116==
- Likes to use CSS for the design
The developer could either be a new programmer or a web developer that usually pro-
grams using HTML and JavaScript and uses CSS for the user-interface. The developer
could both be a windows user or a mac user without needing to learn to use the other
operation system.
App
- Native Design/user-interface doesn’t matter
- Simple app
- Eﬃcient one page application
- Web like app
For example a news/information app where the user-interface doesn’t need to be native
as long as the app has a user-interface where the user can get the news and information
they are looking for in an easy and logic way.
10.2
Xamarin developer proﬁle example
Developer
- C# Programmer
- Experienced with Visual Studio
The developer could be a C# programmer that usually uses visual studio as the develop-
ment tool. The developer could either be a windows user or a mac user without needing
to learn to use the other operating system.
App
- Native design
- Native App
- Complex functionality
- Multiple pages app
For example a Lifestyle app with focus on giving the users an app with a native design
which ﬁts a complex app with a lot of diﬀerent functionality and a lot of diﬀerent pages.
The app could be a app helping with training and keeping statistics while giving the pos-
sibility of sharing with friends or making challenges and compare results and statistics.
10.3
Appcelerator Titanium developer proﬁle example
Developer
- JavaScript programmer
- Mac user
111
==PAGE:117==
The developer could be a JavaScript programmer that usually programs on a mac com-
puter.
The developer could be a programmer that is only used to programming in
JavaScript and using XML to design the user-interface.
App
- Native design
- Simple app
- Hybrid/native app
For example a simple Utility app with focus on a native design an simple functionality
with the focus on giving the user a native looking user-interface with simple functionality
that helps the users save their passwords to make it easier to remember them.
112
==PAGE:118==
11
Conclusion
The goal for this thesis was to determine what was necessary to know before choosing the
cross-platform mobile app development tool.
In order to do this, the criteria was determined in section 2 and it was decided what apps
should be developed to test the diﬀerent development tools.
In order to be able to test the development tools the popular development tools was re-
searched, which was done in section 3 and the tools where then compared in section 4
where three tools where chosen for further testing to ﬁgure out their strengths and weak-
nesses.
The diﬀerent type of app categories was researched in section 5 to better understand what
types of apps can be made and what is important for the end user depending on the type
of app. This was done in order to better understand how the strengths and weaknesses of
the development tools can be used to choose the right tool when understanding exactly
what kind of app is being developed.
To make sure that the tools, that was chosen, worked, a simple app was made and section
6 give both a conceptual overview of how to create a simple app and a more technical how
to create the apps.
The two app examples decided in section 2 was developed for the three development tools
and what was learned for each app and for each tool was written in section 7.
The result was then compared in section 8 and characters from 1-10 where given for each
of the criteria mentioned in section 2.
The most important part of the thesis is section 10 which is about what is needed to
know about the app and the developers proﬁle before choosing the development tool. The
section gives examples of apps and proﬁles that would be recommended for each of the
tested tools and gives guidelines for choosing the right tool.
The Guidelines can be used to ﬁgure out which tool is best suited for diﬀerent kind of
apps and for diﬀerent developers and the more the tools are tested the easier it is to know
the strengths and weaknesses of the tools and what kind of apps and developer proﬁles
that ﬁts the diﬀerent tools.
As the main priority of the project was to create guidelines for selecting the right cross-
platform development tool and to understand what is necessary to know about the app
and the developers own proﬁle before choosing.
This was done for the tools that was selected and there exist a lot of diﬀerent tool with
diﬀerent strengths and weaknesses. This means that in order to get the best possible
match of development tool, every tool should be tested in the same way and with as many
examples as possible. This should be done in a way so everything learned about the tools
is collected in the same place.
In this thesis the guidelines for selection was made and gives a recommendation and ex-
amples on which proﬁles and apps ﬁts the diﬀerent tools.
113
==PAGE:119==
11.1
Future work
Future work would consist on setting up an open community where developers can share
information and experience on diﬀerent mobile app development tools which can then be
used to make a more complete guide on which development tool to choose for diﬀerent
developer proﬁles and depending on the app the developer wants to develop.
One important part of this work would be to set up some criteria for what kind of informa-
tion is accepted to make sure that the guide is not based on the wrong type of information
and that it will give users the best match of development tool. This means that it would
need to have some type of control on what data is accepted and what needs to be discarded
and the best way to do this is to have a group of people determined what can be used.
Future work could even be to create a tool where developer inputs information about the
app they are developing, their own experiences and which programming languages that
they know and then the tool should be able to give one or two development tools that will
be the best ﬁt for creating that app and for that developer.
The tool should be made to give the developers an easy to use tool which helps developers
know what should be decided about the app before choosing the development tool and an
easy way to know when it makes more sense to use a new development tool instead of just
always using the ones they know.
114
==PAGE:120==
References
[1] Asi
DeGani
Gustavo
Hartmann,
Geoﬀ
Stead.
Cross-platform
mo-
bile development .
https://wss.apan.org/jko/mole/Shared%20Documents/
Cross-Platform%20Mobile%20Development.pdf, March 2011.
[accessed 02-10-
2017].
[2] Piotr Milczarek. Cross-platform development of data collection apps: a study
of capabilities of diﬀerent mobile platforms . Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, 2016. [accessed 07-10-
2017].
[3] Xamarin. https://www.xamarin.com/. [accessed 05-01-2018].
[4] PhoneGap. https://phonegap.com/. [accessed 05-01-2018].
[5] Android. https://developer.android.com. [accessed 05-12-2017].
[6] Microsoft Powerapps.
https://powerapps.microsoft.com/da-dk/.
[accessed
05-01-2018].
[7] PhoneGap Docs. http://docs.phonegap.com/. [accessed 05-01-2018].
[8] Xamarin
Mac.
https://developer.xamarin.com/guides/mac/getting_
started/hello,_mac/#Requirements. [accessed 12-11-2017].
[9] Xamarin
Requirements.
https://developer.xamarin.com/guides/
cross-platform/getting_started/requirements/. [accessed 13-11-2017].
[10] Chelsea Baldwin. Cross platform mobile development tools: Ending the ios vs. an-
droid debate. buildblog by thinkapps, January 21 2017. [accessed 09-11-2017].
[11] Sebastian Hanschke Henning Heitk¨otter and Tim A. Majchrzak. Evaluating Cross-
Platform Development Approaches for Mobile Applications . Department
of Information Systems, University of M¨unster, M¨unster, Germany Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg, 2013. [accessed 03-10-2017].
[12] Suyesh Amatya and Arianit Kurti. Cross-Platform Mobile Development: Chal-
lenges and Opportunities . Faculty of Technology, Linnaeus University, V¨axj¨o,
Sweden SSpringer International Publishing Switzerland, 2014. Part of the Advances
in Intelligent Systems and Computing book series (AISC, volume 231) [accessed 09-
10-2017].
[13] RALUCA BUDIU. Mobile: Native apps, web apps, and hybrid apps. https: // www.
nngroup. com/ articles/ mobile-native-apps/ , September 14 2013. [accessed 11-
11-2017].
[14] Ritesh Patil. Pros and cons of cross-platform mobile app development. https: //
www. infoq. com/ articles/ mobile-cross-platform-app-development , Septem-
ber 13 2016. [accessed 12-11-2017].
[15] Tarun Agarwal. “i want to fail on both ios and android”. buildblog by thinkapps,
January 10 2017. [accessed 14-11-2017].
115
==PAGE:121==
[16] Matteo / Mobile App Development.
What are the diﬀerent types of mobile
apps?
breaking down industries and functionalities.
https: // duckma. com/
mobile-app-categories/ , January 10 2017. [accessed 15-11-2017].
[17] ThinkMobiles.
What are the popular types and categories of apps.
https: //
thinkmobiles. com/ blog/ popular-types-of-apps/ , 2017. [accessed 16-11-2017].
[18] Diﬀerence
between
Xamarin.Forms
and
Native
apps
in
’MobleApps’
tab.
https://forums.xamarin.com/discussion/53829/
difference-between-xamarin-forms-and-native-apps-in-mobleapps-tab.
[accessed 12-12-2017].
[19] Logan Merrick. What are the popular types and categories of apps. buzinga http: //
www. buzinga. com. au/ buzz/ how-many-app-types-are-there/ , March 21 2016.
[accessed 18-11-2017].
[20] Android Sensor overview.
https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/
sensors/sensors_overview.html. [accessed 05-12-2017].
[21] Rama
Krishna
Raju.
how
many
diﬀerent
sensors
are
available
inside
a
smartphone?
https://www.quora.com/
how-many-different-sensors-are-available-inside-a-smartphone, November
23 2015. [accessed 05-12-2017].
[22] David
Nield.
All
the
Sensors
in
Your
Smartphone,
and
How
They
Work.
https://fieldguide.gizmodo.com/
all-the-sensors-in-your-smartphone-and-how-they-work-1797121002,
July
23 2017. [accessed 05-12-2017].
[23] Nick
T.
Did
you
know
how
many
diﬀerent
kinds
of
sensors
go
inside
a
smartphone?
https://www.phonearena.com/news/
Did-you-know-how-many-different-kinds-of-sensors-go-inside-a-smartphone_
id57885, July 06 2014. [accessed 05-12-2017].
[24] Bintu Harwani. PhoneGap Build: Developing Cross Platform Mobile Ap-
plications in the Cloud. https://books.google.dk/books?id=wUrBAQAAQBAJ&
pg=PA187&lpg=PA187&dq=phonegap+cross+platform+accelerometer+distance&
source=bl&ots=11dftdNNRN&sig=NfZSCyI0GGbfqeE-I6v61ZwF9FM&hl=da&sa=X&
ved=0ahUKEwjl3MDD76nYAhWIJlAKHUqFDRsQ6AEIJzAA#v=onepage&q=phonegap%
20cross%20platform%20accelerometer%20distance&f=false, November 21 2013.
CRC Press [accessed 08-12-2017].
[25] Rik Ravado. 10 Free Accelerometer Apps for iPhone and iPod Touch. https:
//turbofuture.com/cell-phones/10-Best-Accelerometer-Apps, April 29 2016.
[accessed 10-11-2017].
[26] Titanium Appcelerator docs. http://docs.appcelerator.com. [accessed 15-12-
2017].
[27] PhoneGap Build. https://build.phonegap.com. [accessed 05-01-2018].
[28] Xamaring Forums. https://forums.xamarin.com. [accessed 08-01-2018].
[29] Xamaring Developer. https://developer.xamarin.com. [accessed 10-01-2018].
116
==PAGE:122==
[30] Top
7
:
Best
free
web
development
IDE
for
JavaScript,
HTML
and
CSS.
https://ourcodeworld.com/articles/read/200/
top-7-best-free-web-development-ide-for-javascript-html-and-css,
May
13 2017. [accessed 10-11-2017].
[31] Stackoverﬂow. https://stackoverflow.com. [accessed 15-01-2018].
[32] Bob
Crowley.
Using
HttpClient
as
it
was
intended
(be-
cause
you’re
not).
https://contrivedexample.com/2017/07/01/
using-httpclient-as-it-was-intended-because-youre-not/,
July
1
2017.
[accessed 18-12-2017].
[33] Apple Developer. https://developer.apple.com. [accessed 05-10-2017].
117
==PAGE:123==
A
Appendix A
This appendix shows the code for the script in the index.html in the to-do list for PhoneGap
1
<s c r i p t
type="text/javascript" language="JavaScript">
2
// create a new to-do
3
function createNewToDo ()
4
{
5
var todoDictionary = {};
6
7
// prompt the user to enter to-do
8
var todo = prompt ( "To-Do" , "" ) ;
9
i f
( todo != null )
10
{
11
i f
( todo == "" )
12
{
13
a l e r t ( "To-Do can’t be empty!" ) ;
14
}
15
else
16
{
17
// append the new to-do with the table
18
todoDictionary = { check
:
0
,
text
:
todo };
19
addTableRow ( todoDictionary ,
false ) ;
20
}
21
}
22
23
}
24
25
// add a row to the table
26
var rowID = 0;
27
function addTableRow ( todoDictionary ,
appIsLoading )
28
{
29
rowID +=1;
30
var table = document . getElementById ( "dataTable" ) ;
31
var rowCount = table . rows . length ;
32
var row = table . insertRow ( rowCount ) ;
33
34
// create the checkbox
35
var
c e l l 1 = row . i n s e r t C e l l (0) ;
36
var element1 = document . createElement ( "input" ) ;
37
element1 . type = "checkbox" ;
38
element1 . name = "chkbox[]" ;
39
element1 . checked = todoDictionary [ "check" ] ;
40
element1 . setAttribute ( "onclick" , "checkboxClicked()" ) ;
41
c e l l 1 . appendChild ( element1 ) ;
42
43
// create the textbox
44
var
c e l l 2 = row . i n s e r t C e l l (1) ;
45
var element2 = document . createElement ( "input" ) ;
46
element2 . type = "text" ;
47
element2 . name = "txtbox[]" ;
48
element2 . s i z e = 16;
49
element2 . id = "text" + rowID ;
50
element2 . value = todoDictionary [ "text" ] ;
51
element2 . setAttribute ( "onchange" , "saveToDoList()" ) ;
52
c e l l 2 . appendChild ( element2 ) ;
53
54
// create the view button
55
var
c e l l 3 = row . i n s e r t C e l l (2) ;
56
var element3 = document . createElement ( "input" ) ;
57
element3 . type = "button" ;
118
==PAGE:124==
58
element3 . id = rowID ;
59
element3 . value = "View" ;
60
element3 . setAttribute ( "onclick" , "viewSelectedRow(document.
getElementById(’text’ + this.id))" ) ;
61
c e l l 3 . appendChild ( element3 ) ;
62
63
// create the delete button
64
var
c e l l 4 = row . i n s e r t C e l l (3) ;
65
var element4 = document . createElement ( "input" ) ;
66
element4 . type = "button" ;
67
element4 . value = "Delete" ;
68
element4 . setAttribute ( "onclick" , "deleteSelectedRow(this)" ) ;
69
c e l l 4 . appendChild ( element4 ) ;
70
71
// update the UI and save the to-do list
72
checkboxClicked () ;
73
saveToDoList () ;
74
75
i f
( ! appIsLoading )
a l e r t ( "Task Added Successfully." ) ;
76
}
77
78
// add the strike -through styling to completed tasks
79
function
checkboxClicked ()
80
{
81
var table = document . getElementById ( "dataTable" ) ;
82
var rowCount = table . rows . length ;
83
84
// loop through all rows of the table
85
f o r (var
i = 0;
i < rowCount ;
i++)
86
{
87
var row = table . rows [ i ] ;
88
var chkbox = row . c e l l s [ 0 ] . childNodes [ 0 ] ;
89
var textbox = row . c e l l s [ 1 ] . childNodes [ 0 ] ;
90
91
// if the checkbox is checked , add the strike -through styling
92
i f ( null != chkbox && true == chkbox . checked )
93
{
94
i f ( null != textbox )
95
{
96
textbox . s t y l e . setProperty ( "text -decoration" , "line -through" ) ;
97
}
98
}
99
100
// if the checkbox isn’t checked , remove the strike -through
styling
101
else
102
{
103
textbox . s t y l e . setProperty ( "text -decoration" , "none" ) ;
104
}
105
106
}
107
108
// save the to-do list
109
saveToDoList () ;
110
}
111
// view the content of the selected row
112
function viewSelectedRow ( todoTextField )
113
{
114
a l e r t ( todoTextField . value ) ;
115
}
116
119
==PAGE:125==
117
// delete the selected row
118
function
deleteSelectedRow ( deleteButton )
119
{
120
var p = deleteButton . parentNode . parentNode ;
121
p . parentNode . removeChild (p) ;
122
saveToDoList () ;
123
}
124
125
// remove completed tasks
126
function removeCompletedTasks ()
127
{
128
var table = document . getElementById ( "dataTable" ) ;
129
var rowCount = table . rows . length ;
130
131
// loop through all rows of the table
132
f o r (var
i = 0;
i < rowCount ;
i++)
133
{
134
// if the checkbox is checked , delete the row
135
var row = table . rows [ i ] ;
136
var chkbox = row . c e l l s [ 0 ] . childNodes [ 0 ] ;
137
i f ( null != chkbox && true == chkbox . checked )
138
{
139
table . deleteRow ( i ) ;
140
rowCount−−;
141
i −−;
142
}
143
}
144
145
// save the to-do list
146
saveToDoList () ;
147
148
a l e r t ( "Completed Tasks Were Removed Successfully." ) ;
149
}
150
151
152
// save the to-do list
153
function saveToDoList ()
154
{
155
var todoArray = {};
156
var checkBoxState = 0;
157
var textValue = "" ;
158
159
var table = document . getElementById ( "dataTable" ) ;
160
var rowCount = table . rows . length ;
161
162
i f
( rowCount != 0)
163
{
164
// loop through all rows of the table
165
f o r (var
i =0; i<rowCount ;
i++)
166
{
167
var row = table . rows [ i ] ;
168
169
// determine the state of the checkbox
170
var chkbox = row . c e l l s [ 0 ] . childNodes [ 0 ] ;
171
i f ( null != chkbox && true == chkbox . checked )
172
{
173
checkBoxState = 1;
174
}
175
else
176
{
177
checkBoxState= 0;
120
==PAGE:126==
178
}
179
180
// retrieve the content of the to-do
181
var textbox = row . c e l l s [ 1 ] . childNodes [ 0 ] ;
182
textValue = textbox . value ;
183
184
// populate the array
185
todoArray [ "row" + i ] =
186
{
187
check
:
checkBoxState ,
188
text
:
textValue
189
};
190
}
191
}
192
else
193
{
194
todoArray = null ;
195
}
196
197
// use the local storage API to persist the data as JSON
198
window . l o c a l S t o r a g e . setItem ( "todoList" , JSON. s t r i n g i f y ( todoArray ) ) ;
199
}
200
201
// load the to-do list
202
function loadToDoList ()
203
{
204
// use the local storage API load the JSON formatted to-do list , and
decode it
205
var
theList = JSON. parse (window . l o c a l S t o r a g e . getItem ( "todoList" ) ) ;
206
207
i f
( null == theList
| |
theList == "null" )
208
{
209
deleteAllRows () ;
210
}
211
else
212
{
213
var count = 0;
214
f o r
(var obj
in
theList )
215
{
216
count++;
217
}
218
219
// remove any existing rows from the table
220
deleteAllRows () ;
221
222
// loop through the to-dos
223
f o r (var
i = 0;
i < count ;
i++)
224
{
225
// adding a row to the table for each one
226
addTableRow ( theList [ "row" + i ] ,
true ) ;
227
}
228
}
229
}
230
231
// delete all the rows
232
function
deleteAllRows ()
233
{
234
var table = document . getElementById ( "dataTable" ) ;
235
var rowCount = table . rows . length ;
236
237
// loop through all rows of the table
121
==PAGE:127==
238
f o r (var
i = 0;
i < rowCount ;
i++)
239
{
240
// delete the row
241
table . deleteRow ( i ) ;
242
rowCount−−;
243
i −−;
244
}
245
246
// save the to-do list
247
saveToDoList () ;
248
}
249
250
251
252
253
</script >
122
==PAGE:128==
B
Appendix B
This appendix shows the code for the buttons in the index.html in the Indoor Golf app
for PhoneGap
1
<s c r i p t
src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery -1.8.0.min.js"></script >
2
<s c r i p t
type="text/javascript"
charset="utf -8"
src="cordova.js"></script >
3
<s c r i p t
type="text/javascript"
charset="utf -8">
4
5
function changeView () {
6
7
// window.location = "best5.html"
8
var x = document . getElementById ( "best5" ) ;
9
var y = document . getElementById ( "Alltime" ) ;
10
i f
(x . s t y l e . display === "none" ) {
11
x . s t y l e . display = "block" ;
12
y . s t y l e . display = "none" ;
13
} else {
14
x . s t y l e . display = "none" ;
15
y . s t y l e . display = "block" ;
16
}
17
18
}
19
20
function
getBrutto () {
21
$ . ajax ({
22
type :
"POST" ,
23
url :
"http://" + "mobil.xn--schller -golf -xjb.dk" + "/WebServices
/IndoorServices.asmx/IndoorBruttoGns" ,
24
data : JSON. s t r i n g i f y ({
25
}) ,
26
contentType :
"application/json; charset=utf -8" ,
27
dataType :
"json" ,
28
success :
function
( response ) {
29
i f
( response . d . length > 0) {
30
a l e r t ( response . d) ;
31
var data = JSON. parse ( response . d) ;
32
jsonToHtmlTable ( data ,
’#Brutto_leaderbord’ , "Brutto leaderbord"
) ;
33
} else {
34
// vis fejlmeddelelse
35
a l e r t ( ’Reading of statistic failed’ ,
response . d .
ErrorCode ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
36
}
37
38
} ,
39
40
e r r o r :
function
()
{
41
// ingen forbindelse , vis meddelelse og lad bruger selv
beslutte om han vil vente eller noget andet!
42
a l e r t ( ’No Connection’ , ’Not possible to read statistics
right now , check connection and try again.’ ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
43
}
44
45
}) ;
46
};
47
48
function
getNetto () {
49
$ . ajax ({
50
type :
"POST" ,
123
==PAGE:129==
51
url :
"http://" + "mobil.xn--schller -golf -xjb.dk" + "/WebServices
/IndoorServices.asmx/IndoorNettoGns" ,
52
data : JSON. s t r i n g i f y ({
53
}) ,
54
contentType :
"application/json; charset=utf -8" ,
55
dataType :
"json" ,
56
success :
function
( response ) {
57
i f
( response . d . length > 0) {
58
//
alert(response.d);
59
var data = JSON. parse ( response . d) ;
60
jsonToHtmlTable ( data ,
’#Netto_leaderbord’ , "Netto leaderbord" )
;
61
} else {
62
// vis fejlmeddelelse
63
a l e r t ( ’Reading of statistic failed’ ,
response . d .
ErrorCode ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
64
}
65
66
} ,
67
68
e r r o r :
function
()
{
69
// ingen forbindelse , vis meddelelse og lad bruger selv
beslutte om han vil vente eller noget andet!
70
a l e r t ( ’No Connection’ , ’Not possible to read statistics
right now , check connection and try again.’ ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
71
}
72
73
}) ;
74
};
75
76
function
g e t S t i l l i n g () {
77
$ . ajax ({
78
type :
"POST" ,
79
url :
"http://" + "mobil.xn--schller -golf -xjb.dk" + "/WebServices
/IndoorServices.asmx/IndoorStilling" ,
80
data : JSON. s t r i n g i f y ({
81
}) ,
82
contentType :
"application/json; charset=utf -8" ,
83
dataType :
"json" ,
84
success :
function
( response ) {
85
i f
( response . d . length > 0) {
86
//
alert(response.d);
87
var data = JSON. parse ( response . d) ;
88
jsonToHtmlTable ( data ,
’#Stilling_leaderbord’ , "Placement
leaderbord" ) ;
89
} else {
90
// vis fejlmeddelelse
91
a l e r t ( ’Reading of statistic failed’ ,
response . d . ErrorCode
,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
92
}
93
94
} ,
95
96
e r r o r :
function
()
{
97
// ingen forbindelse , vis meddelelse og lad bruger selv
beslutte om han vil vente eller noget andet!
98
a l e r t ( ’No Connection’ , ’Not possible to read statistics
right now , check connection and try again.’ ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
99
}
100
101
}) ;
124
==PAGE:130==
102
};
103
104
function getBestBruttoGns () {
105
$ . ajax ({
106
type :
"POST" ,
107
url :
"http://" + "mobil.xn--schller -golf -xjb.dk" + "/WebServices
/IndoorServices.asmx/IndoorBestBruttoGns" ,
108
data : JSON. s t r i n g i f y ({
109
}) ,
110
contentType :
"application/json; charset=utf -8" ,
111
dataType :
"json" ,
112
success :
function
( response ) {
113
i f
( response . d . length > 0) {
114
//
alert(response.d);
115
var data = JSON. parse ( response . d) ;
116
jsonToHtmlTable ( data ,
’#Brutto5best_leaderbord’ , "Brutto 5 best
average leaderbord" ) ;
117
} else {
118
// vis fejlmeddelelse
119
a l e r t ( ’Reading of statistic failed’ ,
response . d .
ErrorCode ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
120
}
121
122
} ,
123
124
e r r o r :
function
()
{
125
// ingen forbindelse , vis meddelelse og lad bruger selv
beslutte om han vil vente eller noget andet!
126
a l e r t ( ’No Connection’ , ’Not possible to read statistics
right now , check connection and try again.’ ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
127
}
128
129
}) ;
130
};
131
132
function getBestNettoGns () {
133
$ . ajax ({
134
type :
"POST" ,
135
url :
"http://" + "mobil.xn--schller -golf -xjb.dk" + "/WebServices
/IndoorServices.asmx/IndoorBestNettoGns" ,
136
data : JSON. s t r i n g i f y ({
137
}) ,
138
contentType :
"application/json; charset=utf -8" ,
139
dataType :
"json" ,
140
success :
function
( response ) {
141
i f
( response . d . length > 0) {
142
//
alert(response.d);
143
var data = JSON. parse ( response . d) ;
144
jsonToHtmlTable ( data ,
’#Netto5best_leaderbord’ , "Netto 5 best
average leaderbord" ) ;
145
} else {
146
// vis fejlmeddelelse
147
a l e r t ( ’Reading of statistic failed’ ,
response . d .
ErrorCode ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
148
}
149
150
} ,
151
152
e r r o r :
function
()
{
153
// ingen forbindelse , vis meddelelse og lad bruger selv
beslutte om han vil vente eller noget andet!
125
==PAGE:131==
154
a l e r t ( ’No Connection’ , ’Not possible to read statistics
right now , check connection and try again.’ ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
155
}
156
157
}) ;
158
};
159
160
161
162
function getBestFhGns () {
163
$ . ajax ({
164
type :
"POST" ,
165
url :
"http://" + "mobil.xn--schller -golf -xjb.dk" + "/WebServices
/IndoorServices.asmx/IndoorBestFhGns" ,
166
data : JSON. s t r i n g i f y ({
167
}) ,
168
contentType :
"application/json; charset=utf -8" ,
169
dataType :
"json" ,
170
success :
function
( response ) {
171
i f
( response . d . length > 0) {
172
//
alert(response.d);
173
var data = JSON. parse ( response . d) ;
174
jsonToHtmlTable ( data ,
’#Fh5best_leaderbord’ , "Fairway hits 5
best average leaderbord" ) ;
175
} else {
176
// vis fejlmeddelelse
177
a l e r t ( ’Reading of statistic failed’ ,
response . d .
ErrorCode ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
178
}
179
180
} ,
181
182
e r r o r :
function
()
{
183
// ingen forbindelse , vis meddelelse og lad bruger selv
beslutte om han vil vente eller noget andet!
184
a l e r t ( ’No Connection’ , ’Not possible to read statistics
right now , check connection and try again.’ ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
185
}
186
187
}) ;
188
};
189
190
191
192
function getBestGirGns () {
193
$ . ajax ({
194
type :
"POST" ,
195
url :
"http://" + "mobil.xn--schller -golf -xjb.dk" + "/WebServices
/IndoorServices.asmx/IndoorBestGirGns" ,
196
data : JSON. s t r i n g i f y ({
197
}) ,
198
contentType :
"application/json; charset=utf -8" ,
199
dataType :
"json" ,
200
success :
function
( response ) {
201
i f
( response . d . length > 0) {
202
//
alert(response.d);
203
var data = JSON. parse ( response . d) ;
204
jsonToHtmlTable ( data ,
’#Gir5best_leaderbord’ , "Green in
regulation 5 best average leaderbord" ) ;
205
} else {
206
// vis fejlmeddelelse
126
==PAGE:132==
207
a l e r t ( ’Reading of statistic failed’ ,
response . d .
ErrorCode ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
208
}
209
210
} ,
211
212
e r r o r :
function
()
{
213
// ingen forbindelse , vis meddelelse og lad bruger selv
beslutte om han vil vente eller noget andet!
214
a l e r t ( ’No Connection’ , ’Not possible to read statistics
right now , check connection and try again.’ ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
215
}
216
217
}) ;
218
};
219
220
221
222
function getBestPuttsGns () {
223
$ . ajax ({
224
type :
"POST" ,
225
url :
"http://" + "mobil.xn--schller -golf -xjb.dk" + "/WebServices
/IndoorServices.asmx/IndoorBestPuttsGns" ,
226
data : JSON. s t r i n g i f y ({
227
}) ,
228
contentType :
"application/json; charset=utf -8" ,
229
dataType :
"json" ,
230
success :
function
( response ) {
231
i f
( response . d . length > 0) {
232
//
alert(response.d);
233
var data = JSON. parse ( response . d) ;
234
jsonToHtmlTable ( data ,
’#Putts5best_leaderbord’ , "Putts 5 best
average leaderbord" ) ;
235
} else {
236
// vis fejlmeddelelse
237
a l e r t ( ’Reading of statistic failed’ ,
response . d . ErrorCode
,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
238
}
239
240
} ,
241
242
e r r o r :
function
()
{
243
// ingen forbindelse , vis meddelelse og lad bruger selv
beslutte om han vil vente eller noget andet!
244
a l e r t ( ’No Connection’ , ’Not possible to read statistics
right now , check connection and try again.’ ,
null ,
300 ,
800) ;
245
}
246
247
}) ;
248
};
249
250
251
252
253
254
//implementation
255
function jsonToHtmlTable ( jsonObj ,
s e l e c t o r ,
caption ) {
256
$ ( s e l e c t o r + ’ caption’) . html ( caption ) ;
257
addColumns ( jsonObj ,
s e l e c t o r ) ;
258
addRows( jsonObj ,
s e l e c t o r ) ;
259
}
127
==PAGE:133==
260
261
function addColumns ( jsonObj ,
s e l e c t o r ) {
262
i f
( ! $ . isArray ( jsonObj )
| |
jsonObj . length < 1)
263
return ;
264
var object = jsonObj [ 0 ] ;
265
var theadHtml = "" ;
266
f o r
(var property
in
object ) {
267
i f
( object . hasOwnProperty ( property ) )
268
theadHtml += "<th>" + property + "</th>" ;
269
}
270
$ ( s e l e c t o r + ’ thead ’) . html ( theadHtml ) ;
271
}
272
273
function addRows( jsonObj ,
s e l e c t o r ) {
274
var tbody = $ ( s e l e c t o r + ’ tbody’) ;
275
$ ( tbody ) . empty () ;
// refreshes the table and makes it ready for new
data
276
$ . each ( jsonObj ,
function
( i ,
d) {
277
var row = ’<tr>’ ;
278
$ . each (d ,
function
( j ,
e ) {
279
row += ’<td>’ + e + ’</td>’ ;
280
}) ;
281
row += ’</tr>’ ;
282
tbody . append ( row ) ;
283
}) ;
284
}
285
286
287
288
</script >
128
