==PAGE:1==
EXPERIENCES OF PATIENTS 
WITH CANCER DURING 
HOSPITALISATION
Master’s Thesis Report, 18th of March 2018
Technical University of Denmark
Design & Innovation
Frederikke Fruelund  
s123661
Synne S. Skjørten   
s123450
Supervisors:
Anja Maier, Jaap Daalhuizen
==PAGE:2==
Produktionstorvet 
Building 424
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Centrifugevej 
Building 372
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Experiences of patients with cancer during hospitalisation
Creation of an intervention tool to improve patient experience
Master thesis report
Submitted: 	
	
	
18.03.2018
Date of examination: 	 	
27.03.2018
ECTS Points: 	 	
	
30 points
University:	
	
	
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Supervisors: 	 	
	
Anja Maier, DTU Management Engineering 
	
	
	
	
Jaap Daalhuizen, DTU Management Engineering
Frederikke Fruelund
s123661
Synne Sorteberg Skjørten
s123450
==PAGE:4==
IV
==PAGE:5==
V
Abstract
In Denmark there are 41 000 new cases of cancer every year. That is 114 new 
people with a cancer diagnosis every day, or one person every 15 minutes. 
Therefore, cancer is something that many will have to deal with at some point in 
their life. Cancer treatment courses are complex and requires a lot of time spent 
admitted to the hospital. Being hospitalised can be a stressful experience in an 
already challenging time. It requires entering an unfamiliar environment and 
putting oneself in a vulnerable position. For most, it is therefore a major loss of 
control to be hospitalised. By involving patients in their course of treatment, it is 
possible to give back some of this control and thereby improve their quality of life 
while hospitalised. 
The aim of this Master’s Thesis was to explore how it is possible to improve 
the experience of hospitalisation for cancer patients. It was found that patients 
do not feel that they receive sufficient information regarding their illness 
during their course of hospitalisation. This leads to many concerns, which can 
make their hospitalisation experience unpleasant. Consequently there is a need 
for transparency of health information related to the hospitalisation course. 
However, patients lack the energy for acquiring this information, and the health 
personnel lack the time to inform the patients. 
The project started with a structured literature review of how to achieve a good 
experience through patient involvement. Furthermore, literature regarding 
Design for Emotion theory was investigated in order to understand the 
experiences of the patients and how these can be affected. Lastly, the surrounding 
care system and the current technologies within healthcare innovation were 
investigated. This knowledge was used as a base for the project. 
Through fieldwork at the Department of Hematology at Rigshospitalet, the daily 
activities were identified. Furthermore nine key concerns for patients regarding 
hospitalisation were identified. They revolved around three main areas. One of 
these areas was chosen as focus for the improvement and the underlying problem 
was defined. The literature and insights from the fieldwork were then used to 
create concepts to solve the identified problem. One concept was refined through 
feedback from experts. 
The project resulted in an intervention tool that supports hospitalised cancer 
patients in the process of preparing for the doctor consultations. Through use 
of this tool, patients can reflect on their emotional state. Furthermore, they 
can get inspiration of what can be essential to discuss with the doctor, without 
using too many mental resources. By being well prepared for the doctor 
consultation, patients will get a feeling of being actively involved in their course 
of hospitalisation. Supporting patients through this process enables them to gain 
back control over their hospitalisation course. The tool will thereby allow for a 
better quality of life and provide a better experience of the hospitalisation course.
==PAGE:6==
VI
Preface 
The following learning objectives has been created for the purpose: 
1.	
Apply design engineering competencies to ideate, conceptualize and 
develop a better experience for patients hospitalised with cancer
2.	
Perform a structured literature review, by critically identifying, assessing 
and applying the research to frame and guide the project.
3.	
Gain expertise within the field of Design for Emotion, and use relevant 
methods from this field to improve the current patient hospital experience.
4.	
Involve relevant stakeholders throughout the design process, to ensure a 
solution that creates value in the hospital context.
5.	
Critically assess the knowledge gathered throughout the project to 
maintain an unbiased viewpoint.
6.	
Evaluate and validate the outcome based on potential and realisability
7.	
Communicate and report the project in a suitable and understandable 
manner, using proper documentation and references.
8.	
Stage the project based on an estimation of the scope, complexity and 
desired result of the task with the use of milestones. 
9.	
Dynamically adjust the staging of the project in accordance to unforeseen 
events, project complexity and obtained results 
10.	
Form and manage sustainable and dynamic partnerships with 
Rigshospitalet and involved stakeholders.
==PAGE:7==
VII
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the many people who has contributed to the project 
and the creation of this master thesis.
First of all we would like to thank our supervisors Professor and Head of 
Department Anja Maier and Assistant Professor Jaap Daalhuizen from DTU 
Management Engineering. They have supported us throughout the project 
and given us academic feedback as well as valuable supervision. 
Furthermore we are grateful to Head of Department Nurse Rikke Skjøde Baes 
and her interest in this project. She has provided us with time and valuable 
insights into the hospital context. Furthermore she has given us access 
to interviewing patients and the health personnel within Team 1 at the 
Department of Hematology at Rigshospitalet. Without this point of access we 
would not have succeeded with this project. Furthermore we would like to 
thank all the patients and the cheerful health personnel within Team 1 for their 
time and feedback. 
A special thanks goes to Fie Juhl Vojdemann, previous doctor at the Department 
of Hematology, Rigshospitalet and now MD in speciality training at Bispebjerg 
Hospital. She has supported us throughout the project with continuous 
feedback, time and interest in the thesis. 
Last, but not least, we would like to thank all the former patients who have 
participated in our feedback sessions. Without their willingness to participate, 
the intervention tool would not have been successfully developed. 
==PAGE:8==
VIII
  
Nomenclature 
Design team: The two students that have conducted this project.
Empirical study: Study of a context, based on sensory experiences and observations. Also 
known as fieldwork study.
End concept: The end result of this project. It is a proposed solution to the intervention tool 
(however  still on a conceptual basis).
Health Information: Information regarding a patient’s health. Includes information of: the 
disease, complications, care history, treatment options and outcomes, daily plan during 
hospitalisation and the whole hospitalisation course.
Hospital staff: All stakeholders working for the hospital, including laboratory technicians 
and cleaning personnel.
Healthcare Personnel: Used as a common term for both doctors and nurses. If insights are 
only based on one of the stakeholder groups, they have been represented by profession 
(respectively doctors/clinicians and nurses). 
Hospitalisation course: A patient’s stay in the hospital from point of entry to discharge.
Intervention Tool: A tool with the aim of helping patients with a challenge in a given 
context.
Patient involvement: For this project is is defined as: “Patients should be involved in sharing 
information, feelings and accepting doctors’ and nurses’ instructions” (Vahdat 2014). 
Quality of care: Is for this project not only defined as the clinical quality but also the 
perceived.  As an example: the perceived quality of care would be decreased if the patients 
were not involved in their treatment.
Quality of life: The general well-being of a person, both in relation to physical and 
psychological aspects. In this project the main focus has been on the psychological quality 
of life. 
Treatment course: A treatment course, where a regime from the doctor is followed by a 
patient. A treatment course can involve hospitalisations but also involve ambulatory visits 
to the doctor. The length of a cancer treatment course varies depending on the disease and 
the treatment given. 
==PAGE:9==
IX
  
==PAGE:10==
X
  
Contents
Abstract	
V
Acknowledgements	
VII
Nomenclature 	
VIII
Introduction
I	
Thesis background and motivation 	
2
II	
Overall aim, research questions and assumptions	
3
III	
Scope of thesis	
4
IV	
Setting the scene	
5
V	
General approach and the theoretical motivation	
7
Chapter 1.	
Literature background 	
1.1	
Healthcare Innovation 	
12
1.2	
Experiences in a hospital - for patients	
14
1.3	
Experiences in a hospital - for health personnel 	
18
1.4	
Design for emotion - creating a good user experience 	
20
1.5	
Conclusion	
23
Chapter 2.	 Discover	
2.1	
Introduction to context and case	
26
2.2	
Empirical study - Conducting fieldwork	
26
2.3	
Results of the emperical study	
28
2.4	
Verifying insights	
39
2.5	
Conclusion 	
39
Chapter 3.	 Define 	
3.1	
Organisation and categorisation of insights	
42
3.2	
The core concerns within hospitalisation	
43
3.3	
Choice of focus areas	
47
3.4	
Problem definition 	
48
3.5	
Conclusion 	
49
Chapter 4.	 Requirements for success	
4.1	
Existing solutions	
52
4.2	
List of requirements	
53
4.3	
Conclusion 	
54
==PAGE:11==
XI
  
Chapter 5.	  Idea generation & testing	
5.1	
Explorative idea generation	
58
5.2	
Concept creation and low-tech prototyping 	
59
5.3	
Expert workshops	
62
5.4	
Evaluation of concepts 	
63
5.5	
Conclusion	
65
Chapter 6.	 Concept detailing 	
6.1	
Further insights into the doctor consultation 	
68
6.2	
Detailing the concept	
70
6.3	
Validation of concept and potential	
75
6.4	
Conclusion	
76
Chapter 7.	 Presentation of end concept	
7.1	
What value does Aceso provide?	
84
7.2	
How does Aceso work?	
85
7.3	
Potential impact	
85
7.4	
Potential for future versions  	
86
Chapter 8.	 Discussion and further work	
8.1	
Contribution to literature 	
90
8.2	
Reflection on the process 	
90
8.3	
Limitations of process 	
91
8.4	
Reflections on the end concept 	
92
8.5	
Limitations of end concept 	
93
8.6	
Further work 	
94
Chapter 9.	 Conclusion	
97
Bibliography	
98
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Introduction
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction 
I	
Thesis background and motivation 
Cancer is a disease that can turn one’s life upside down. In Denmark there are 41 000 new cases of 
cancer every year. That is 114 new people with a cancer diagnosis every day, or one person every 15 
minutes (Sundhedsdatastyrelsen 2016). Cancer is therefore something that most people will have to 
deal with at some point during their life. When diagnosed with cancer one enters a treatment course, 
where a regime from the doctor is followed. Cancer treatment courses are complex and require a lot 
of time spent admitted to the hospital which may reduce the quality of life. For some, the hospital 
becomes their second home. Becoming hospitalised can be a stressful experience and a radical change 
in life as it requires entering an unfamiliar environment and putting oneself in a vulnerable position. 
It may lead to many concerns for the patients. One common concern comes from the major loss of 
control that cancer patients experience when hospitalised with cancer. This loss of control can be 
perceived; such as losing the feeling of overview, or more direct; such as not having a say in decision 
making regarding ones health. Suddenly, one is not in charge of own existence but rather a patient 
dependent upon the administration of others. As a result, patients seek to regain control over their 
course of treatment. They want to be actively involved. Another concern may derive from the hospital 
personnel’s main focus on treatments and results. This can leave the patients with a feeling of being 
reduced to the status of a diagnosis instead of a whole human being. They fear that their individual 
needs might be forgotten or overseen (S. Almerud et al, 2007). These concerns, together with many 
other concerns related to hospitalisation, are the reasons why patients seek to be more involved in their 
course of treatment. Patient involvement can be achieved through enhanced communication between 
the patient and health personnel. Additionally, by creating transparency of health information related 
to the patient’s hospitalisation course. These factors give the patients a chance to participate actively 
in their hospitalisation course. In other words, involving the patients can relieve them from some of 
their concerns and unpleasant emotions they go through. Thereby their quality of life will be improved 
(Vahdat et al. 2014).
Making sure that patients are involved in their course of treatment can be challenging. The healthcare 
personnel’s work procedures are being streamlined, affecting how much time they can put aside for 
individual patients. It is a result of a healthcare industry that is becoming more geared to optimize 
productivity over catering to individual patient needs. Expenditure on medicine, a population that lives 
longer with more diseases, as well as more expensive treatments are challenges that increasingly require 
constant development and rethinking of the healthcare system. The challenge is therefore to create 
time and space for innovation in the healthcare industry (Winther et al. 2015). 
Along with becoming more efficient, the healthcare sector is also becoming more digital. There is 
currently a large focus on digitalisation and the possibilities of new technology in the healthcare 
industry (Omachonu & Einspruch 2010). There is a general belief among healthcare professionals 
and politicians, that the current healthcare challenges can be solved with implementation of new 
technologies (Winther et al. 2015). As a result, digital solutions are increasingly introduced in all 
aspects of healthcare. However, a consequence to this focus is that the new solutions draw the 
healthcare personnel’s attention away from the patients and over to technology. When designing 
new digital solutions in healthcare it is therefore important to look at how a solution might directly 
or indirectly affect the patients and their experiences (We are couch 2018). As a large part of an 
experience is emotions, understanding these emotions and how to affect them is important (Desmet & 
Schifferstein 2012). For this the Design for Emotion theory can be used. 
==PAGE:15==
3
Introduction 
II	
Overall aim, research questions and assumptions
The overall aim of this thesis was the following:
The aim of this Master’s Thesis was to improve the quality of life for patients hospitalised 
with cancer. 

The aim was accomplished by creating an innovative intervention tool that allows patients to 
be more involved and participate actively in their course of treatment during hospitalisation. 
Thereby the patients will be relieved from some of the unpleasant experiences and emotions 
which are related to their hospitalisation.
Based on this aim, two main research questions with additional sub questions have been created in 
order to guide the research of the thesis.  
The first research question guides the research of studying the existing situation: 
1.	 What are the experiences of being hospitalised for cancer patients?
•	 What activities and events do the patients go through on a daily basis?
•	 What emotions and concerns do the patients experience?
•	 What does a cancer treatment course entail?
•	 How do the health personnel and patients communicate information related to patients’ course of 
treatment?
•	 What is the future of the healthcare industry in relation to upcoming technological trends?
The second research question guides the development of an intervention:
2.	 How can we develop an intervention tool that allows patients to actively participate in their course 
of hospitalisation and thereby improve their experience?
•	 How can we reduce the concerns that patients experience during hospitalisation?
•	 How can we make the patients feel more involved in their course of hospitalisation?
These research questions are based on the following assumptions, where some were created at the start 
and some were created during the literature study:
•	 Hospitalisation is a stressful experiences for cancer patients that implicate concerns and 
unpleasant emotions1
•	 Patients will be relieved from the unpleasant emotions and concerns by getting a feeling of being 
involved in their course of treatment. This will improve their hospitalisation experience2  
•	 A better hospitalisation experience will improve the quality of life for cancer patients3 
•	 The patients feeling of involvement can be improved by4:
◦◦Enhanced communication between the patients and the health personnel.
◦◦Creating transparency of health information related to patients hospitalisation course
1   Verified in: Chapter 2 and Chapter 3
2, 3, 4   Verified in: Section 1.2
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction 
III	
Scope of thesis
The following target group have been of relevance for this thesis: 
•	 Males and females between the ages of 20-80 years
•	 Patients hospitalised due to treatment or side effects in relation to cancer
The project has focused on the daily life of hospitalisation. This means that the experience 
of the enrolment and the discharge from the hospital have been omitted from the scope, as 
they are short events compared with the daily routines at the hospital.  
The entire journey of a cancer patient, from symptom onset to recovery or end of life care, 
has briefly been touched upon in this thesis. Gaining insights into the context and the 
challenges that cancer patients deal with have made it possible to emphasize with them and 
understand their situation. The illustration below visualise the entire journey of cancer 
treatment and the scope of this Master’s Thesis (Figure 1).
From the illustration it is seen, that this Master’s Thesis revolves around planned 
hospitalisations due to treatments at the hospital and acute hospitalisations due to side 
effects of the treatments.
Figure 1.  The entire course of treatment for patients dealing with cancer visualised via a patient journey. The blue 
box indicates the scope of this Master’s Thesis:  Planned and acute hospitalizations for cancer patients
==PAGE:17==
5
Introduction 
IV	
Setting the scene
The thesis has been conducted in collaboration with Rigshospitalet, which is the largest 
hospital in Denmark  (Rigshospitalet 2018a). More specifically the ward section3 in Team 
1, at the Department of Hematology. Team 1 is one of three sections at the Department of 
Hematology (Figure 2), and deals mostly with patients who have bone marrow cancer 
(multiple myeloma), lymphoma and CLL (Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia). The 
Department of Hematology have in total 42 beds available for patients with diseases within 
their area of specialisation. (Rigshospitalet 2018c). All beds are commonly occupied on a 
daily basis. As patients are hospitalized due to various reasons, the length of hospitalisation 
differs, typically within the range of two days to three weeks. An average number of 
patients hospitalised within a year is around 2000 patients in the entire Department of 
Hematology.4
The Department of Hematology is a part of a centre in Rigshospitalet called Finsencentret. 
The other departments that make up Fincenscentret are the Departments of Oncology 
and Infectious Diseases (Rigshospitalet 2018b). As many patients within this centre deal 
with serious diseases much effort has been put into making the patients feel well received. 
Therefore, Finsencentret have strategically been working on different initiatives and 
projects concerning patient involvement since 2013 (Reiermann 2017). Some of these 
initiatives focus on changing the workflow for the healthcare personnel while other focus 
on giving the patients a more active role in their course of treatment. There have for 
example been a focus on improving the ward rounds where different coaching strategies 
for the healthcare personnel have been considered. Furthermore a patient book has 
been introduced.This was book that was handed out to patients when a new course of 
hospitalisation begun. In the book patients could note down important appointments, 
questions and events (Troest, Inge 2018). Implementation of the book was however not 
successful. Therefore it has been withdrawn (Appx. 1, 2) 
3   Ward section: only deals with treatments that requires hospitalization.
4   The average stay and number of patient has been provided to the design team by the nurses and 
Department Doctor  in the Department of Hematology, Rigshospitalet
Figure 2.  Rigshospitalet organizational chart
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction 
Common for all these initiatives are that they focus on what is of value for the patients.
Furthermore each initiatives should contribute to (Winther 2017): 
•	 Standardization/dissemination of the good solutions
•	 Individualization of benefits to match the individual patient and his / her relatives
•	 Innovation that should benefit both patient, staff, quality and economics
For this project, these guidelines have been taken into consideration (Chapter 4). 
Even though the departments have used the last years to systematically involve patients in 
their course of treatments, an evaluation conducted in 2016 revealed that the objective was 
not fully accomplished. Six areas of improvement were established (Figure 3) and the 
results showed that patient satisfaction was only improved within one of the areas.
One of the reasons for this is because the health personnel experience that they do not 
have the required time to involve the patients (Reiermann 2017). Many of the initiatives 
tried out have laden them with extra, more time consuming responsibilities. Thereby, 
some of the health personnel viewed the initiatives as obstacles in their work efficiency. 
Consequently, some of the initiatives were not fully adopted5. There is a challenge in 
improving patient involvement without taking extra time from the health personnel. This 
challenge creates room for improvement which is seen as an opportunity for this project..
5   This knowledge was gained through an interview with a project manager working on patient 
involvement in Finsencenteret
Figure 3.  Six areas of improvement in Fincencenteret
==PAGE:19==
7
Introduction 
V	
General approach and the theoretical motivation
This project adopts the design thinking as the overall methodology. It is a methodology 
that provides a systematic and solution-based approach to solving problems (Interaction 
Design Foundation 2018). The approach is illustrated by the Double Diamond illustration 
(Figure 4). The process has consisted of diverging and converging project phases in order 
to expand and narrow down the challenge and solution space. The timeline of the project 
can be seen in Appendix 3.
The general approach within each phase will now briefly be described:
Discover
Initially a structured literature review was conducted in order to establish a solid 
theoretical foundation for the thesis. It revolved around three main areas (Figure 5) and 
gave the following insights:
•	 The hospital experience - Experiences within hospitalisation and the concept of 
patient involvement was investigated to 
gain contextual background knowledge. The 
insights clarified the needs and mind-sets of 
the patients and the health personnel and 
verified some of the initial assumptions for 
the project (Introduction II)
•	 Healthcare Innovation - The concept of 
healthcare innovation and the challenges 
that exists were investigated in order to 
understand the future of the healthcare 
industry and the technologies it entails. 
The insights created a foundation of 
the development of a new concept, as 
introduction of new concept should fit into 
the context of the healthcare industry.
•	 Design for Emotion - Finally, gaining an 
understanding of Design for Emotion Theory 
was used to create a good user experience. As 
a big part of an experience is emotions, it provided a framework for the thesis. 
Figure 4.  The design phases
Figure 5.  The three areas of the literature 
review
==PAGE:20==
8
Introduction 
Afterwards, an empirical study was conducted with starting point in a ward section. A 
great focus was put on this phase in order to gain a thorough understanding of the hospital 
context. A qualitative approach was selected and therefore the focus was on interviewing 
and observing few stakeholders in depth. To back up the insights, baseline data was used 
to inform the project, which verified that the insights found through fieldwork were also 
relevant on a larger scale.
Define 
Based on the insights, nine concerns that patients experience in relation to their 
hospitalisation were identified. They revolved around three main areas. One area 
Compromising quality of care was selected for further work. A problem statement 
related to the concern was created. It concerns patients need for transparency into health 
information. Patients however lack the energy for acquiring this information, and the 
health personnel lack the time to inform the patients. 
Develop
Based on the problem statement and requirements, the solution space was explored by 
generating ideas. The ideas were transformed into five concepts. Rapid prototypes were 
created. Each concept was then evaluated and validated through feedback sessions with 
experts and via an evaluation method. The process of developing prototypes was iterative 
where modifications were made according to feedback from the stakeholders. 
Deliver
The result of the thesis was insights into what concerns cancer patients have in relation to 
their hospitalisation. In addition, an end concept that allows patients to participate actively 
in their courses of treatment during hospitalisation was created. More specifically, a tool 
for guiding the patients through their doctor consultations. The end concept is not fully 
developed, but the core features of it are thoroughly considered.
==PAGE:21==
9
Introduction 
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
APPROACH
•	 A structured literature review
GOAL
The goal was to gain an understanding of:
•	 Healthcare innovation and why it is important
•	 The trends for the future within healthcare innovation
•	 The experiences of being at the hospital 
•	 Patient involvement and the current challenges
•	 Design for Emotions Theory and how can it be applied in this 
project
1  Literature Background
==PAGE:24==
12
Literature background 
Chapter 1.	 Literature background 
This chapter aims to gain an understanding of how academic literature deals with some of 
the different topics related to the thesis. This is both to serve as a theoretical foundation 
for the thesis and to serve as background knowledge about the hospital context. The 
litterature study was conducted in a structured manner (Appx. 4, 5) 
This chapter takes a look into the following three areas:
•	 Healthcare innovation and the trends in technology
•	 Experiences in the hospital for the patients and the healthcare personnel
•	 Insights into Design for Emotion Theory and how it can be applied 
1.1	
Healthcare Innovation 
Innovation is essential to meet the challenges that the society of the 21st century face in 
terms of technological advances, economic sustainability and social change (Cropley & 
Cropley 2012). New technologies are developed at an increased rate and the healthcare 
sector is becoming more complex (Parker 2006). It is an area in constant change due to the 
development of new treatment methods and with complex challenges like the increasing 
demands and needs from patients, and decreasing resources available to fund healthcare 
(Ingerslev 2015). Most of the population will interact with the healthcare system though 
their lives and thus it affects the lives of many people. Innovation within the healthcare 
sector is therefore crucial, and making sure to solve these challenges without decreasing 
the quality of treatment or increasing the cost for society is important. 
 Healthcare innovation can be defined as: 
“The introduction of a new concept, idea, service, process, or product aimed at improving 
treatment, diagnosis, education, outreach, prevention and research, and with the long 
term goals of improving quality, safety, outcomes, efficiency and costs.” (Omachonu & 
Einspruch 2010)
To get an understanding of why it is important to introduce new concepts to improve 
various aspects within healthcare, it is necessary to get an overview of the socio-economic 
development common in most developed countries.
 
Why is healthcare innovation important? Looking at our society a big part of the population 
is aging. Additionally people live longer and get more chronic diseases (Haughom 
2017a). Due to the growing demand, there will be a universal shortage of doctors and 
nurses, which will put the healthcare sector under a severe pressure in the coming years 
(Omachonu & Einspruch 2010). This social development threatens the economic future 
globally since fewer citizens will be of working age and more will be elderly. Thus there 
will be fewer taxpayers to pay for healthcare. Looking at Denmark, there will over the 
next 10 years be more than 200.000 citizens above 64 years old. The number of 80 year 
olds and above will double over the next 30 years (Bom 2012). Consequently healthcare 
relies on the expanding technological developments and on the sustaining progress within 
medical science to improve the value of healthcare delivery. These are key elements when 
==PAGE:25==
13
Literature background 
determining the ability to prevent, diagnose, treat and manage medical conditions with 
increasing safety and efficacy. 
 The healthcare systems are however also affected by the financial burden of constantly 
adopting innovative solutions (Patou & Maier 2017). The demand for more healthcare 
is increasing faster than the economy. As an example, in the United States the amount 
spent on healthcare today represents about one-sixth of the gross domestic product. This 
economic development threatens governments, businesses and the citizens (Herzlinger 
2006).
As a result, globally there are many reasons for innovation in the healthcare sector and 
some consider it as the “magic bullet” to meet the future challenges (Ingerslev 2015). These 
challenges require an ability to innovate and a willingness to cooperate in developing 
better solutions for treating the individual patient. As well as changing the way in which 
managements, professions, municipalities and regions organize and assign tasks (Bom 
2012). By implementing innovative solutions in the healthcare sector the hope is to create 
more effective and convenient treatments that are less costly for the society.(Omachonu & 
Einspruch 2010) The need for innovation within healthcare, is seen as fundamental part of 
the motivation for this project.
1.1.1.	
Technology trends in the healthcare setting
Technology remains a key driver of innovation in healthcare and it will be no different 
in the future (Haughom 2017a).  Some argue that the next revolution is upon us, where 
the healthcare industry has now entered the digital age (Haughom 2017b).  Especially 
communication and information technologies offer new opportunities for innovating 
in the healthcare sector. Furthermore they can potentially have a large impact on public 
health. The opportunity to revolutionize the healthcare sector has therefore never been 
greater (Omachonu & Einspruch 2010).  
There are many different trends for the future of health innovation. Two of the most 
relevant for this project will now be described.
Technology as fundamental infrastructure. Due to the huge improvements in network 
security and the ability to transmit data globally (Omachonu & Einspruch 2010) it is now 
possible to use technology as a part of the infrastructure for healthcare delivery. This 
allows for detailed data capture which can be shared among stakeholders at different 
levels, which can facilitate quality examinations of the patients (Marsch & Gustafson 
2013). An attempt for using digital systems as the main infrastructure, may been seen 
by Sundhedsplatformen used in Region Hovedstaden and Region Sjælland in Denmark. 
Sundhedsplatformen breaks with the former silo-structure of healthcare data. It is 
now possible to share health records electronically among stakeholders across different 
levels. The aim is to create coherency in the course of treatment for the patient (Region 
Hovedstaden 2018). Sundhedsplatformen is therefore an example of how technology 
allows for integrated care across different organizations and stakeholders.
==PAGE:26==
14
Literature background 
Technology to understand the individual patient. Another trend that healthcare innovation 
is revolving around is using technology to enable patients to play a central role in their 
own course of treatment (Marsch & Gustafson 2013). By monitoring and capturing 
real-time data about individuals it is possible to give a more personalized care, tailored 
to the individual patients and their needs (Haughom 2017a). The data can for example 
be captured by users’ input into mobile applications, wearable sensors and smartphone 
sensors. Furthermore decision support tools are being developed to enhance patient 
centred care. The tools will help individuals understand, access and make choices about 
their course of treatment (Marsch & Gustafson 2013).
Considerations when implementing new technologies. Before implementing new technologies 
into the healthcare sector, it is important to consider the societal challenges described 
earlier. As the healthcare personnel are increasingly becoming overburdened, 
implementing new technologies might laden them with extra responsibilities. This can 
be major obstacle in their work efficiency. When designing healthcare technology-based 
solutions it is therefore important that the health personnel experience the solutions as 
assisting tools that promote their workflow. Otherwise they may not adopt the solutions 
in the long term (Christodoulakis et al. 2017). 
Additionally it is important to keep in mind that introducing new technological solutions 
in the hospital sector should not shift the healthcare personnel’s focus from the patients 
and over to the technology. Thereby too much attention should not be needed in order to 
understand how the technology works (Paasch 2014).
1.2	 Experiences in a hospital - for patients
This section will give contextual knowledge about the experiences within hospitalisation. 
The experiences will be presented from the patient’s point of view, as it will help clarify 
their needs and mind-sets. Furthermore this section will investigate the concept of patient 
involvement, as it for this project is believed to be an approach to improve the patient 
experience. 
Being hospitalised can be a radical change for many. One goes from being in charge of own 
existence to becoming a patient dependent upon the administration of others. S. Almerud 
et al (2007) states that “the forced dependency is total” where the “patienthood exposes our 
inherent human weakness” (Almerud et al. 2007).  
During hospitalisation, patients go through a lot of potentially unpleasant experiences and 
emotions. They may be anxious, stressed out, unsure and confused about the situation, 
which can be strengthened by the uncertainty about the length of hospitalisation. The 
waiting times for being examined by a doctor or nurse may be long and difficult to 
predict. This is because care is prioritized based on the severity of patients’ conditions 
(Kim et al. 2017). As hospitals often are stressful environments with many activities and 
patients to look out for, the individual patient may feel forgotten or overseen due to lack 
of information and involvement. Furthermore patients and their families may be required 
==PAGE:27==
15
Literature background 
to make major decisions regarding care and treatment which can affect the patient’s life 
forever (Anne Johnson, Bev Gaughwin 2005). 
Another unpleasant element for patients is the uncertainty about the disease. Suddenly the 
patients may experience modifications to the body with difficulties performing personal 
care and have reduced mobility. Consequently patients may doubt themselves and their 
abilities. Questions like: ‘Can I manage on my own?’ and ‘Will I be able to go back to work 
somehow?’  may form in their minds (Almerud et al. 2007). 
Due to the intense situation that patients are in, it is important that they are seen as whole 
human beings, and not as objects to be treated (Almerud et al. 2007).
1.2.1.	 Better experience through patient involvement 
For most patients it is a major loss of control to be hospitalised with a serious illness 
(Winther et al. 2015) as patients mental resources may be limited. Thereby the do not 
have much energy to relate to their illness. Additionally the control of the patients 
might be taken away unintentionally by the healthcare personnel (Kjærside et al. 2014). 
Consequently many patients look out for more control. One way of giving back control 
is by letting them participate actively in their course of hospitalisation. In other words, 
involving the patients can relieve the patients from some of the unpleasant experiences 
and emotions they go through (Winther et al. 2015).  
Patient involvement is in Denmark as well as internationally considered as essential factors 
in the attempts to improve the quality of the treatments in the healthcare system (Jacobsen 
et al. 2008). 
Research has shown the benefits of patient involvement are many: 
•	 Patients will be more satisfied with the treatment experience (Heerdegen et al. 2017)
•	 It has a positive, lasting effect on the health of the patients (Jacobsen et al. 2008)
(Postprint et al. 2009)
•	 It heightens the patients’ quality of life (Norouzinia et al. 2015)
•	 It can reduce anxiety and pain (Vahdat et al. 2014)
•	 It can reduce treatment time by improving the cooperation with the health 
personnel (Vahdat et al. 2014)
As seen, involving patients and providing them with appropriate information gives 
valuable outcomes and increases the patient experience of being hospitalised (Vahdat et al. 
2014). 
==PAGE:28==
16
Literature background 
1.2.2.	 Current challenges with patient involvement 
The following will create an overview of the current challenges that exists within patient 
involvement. 
Different definitions of patient involvement. Despite the clear consensus about the importance 
of patient involvement among many stakeholders, there are various perceptions of 
what it means to involve patients (VIBIS 2013). This is also supported by the different 
terminologies used to describe patient involvement: collaboration, partnerships of 
patients, patient participation etc. (Sahlsten et al. 2008)(Vahdat et al. 2014). Two common 
views that defines what it means to involve patients are the following:
•	 “Patients should be involved in the decision-making about the treatment” (Kjærside et al. 
2014)
•	 “Patients should be involved in sharing information, feelings and accepting doctors’ and 
nurses’ instructions” (Vahdat et al. 2014)
The first definition states that decisions regarding the patient’s treatment should not be 
taken solely by the healthcare personnel. The patient should also take part of the decision. 
The second definition states that health information regarding the patient should be 
shared with the patient. Furthermore the patient should be able to share feelings with the 
healthcare personnel. It is also stated that the patient should accept the instructions from 
the health personnel. Thereby the patient will necessarily not be a part of the decision 
making. For this project the second definition of patient involvement is selected as it is 
believed that creating a feeling of being involved in ones course of treatment is enough for 
improving the patient’s experience. 
Lack of a systematic and evidence based approach. There are numerous and diverse 
interventions that focus on increasing patient involvement. Patient involving 
interventions generally aim at improving, one or more of the following areas (Coulter & 
Ellins 2006, Figure 6):
Within each area, only few of the strategies are however evaluated and evidence based 
(Kjærside et al. 2014), as there are methodological difficulties involved in assessing patient-
focused interventions. Furthermore many interventions are tailored to individual needs 
and circumstances, making it hard to measure the effect of them (Coulter & Ellins 2006). 
It is therefore necessary to have a far more systematic approach when creating patient 
involving interventions (VIBIS 2013).  
Figure 6.  Areas  for improving patient involvements
==PAGE:29==
17
Literature background 
Patients have different needs. One of the reasons why it might be challenging to give an exact 
definition of patient involvement is the patient’s needs. Patients are not the same and 
have different wishes to involvement and may experience involvement differently. Some 
patients do not even want to get involved in their treatment course (Kjærside et al. 2014).
1.2.3.	 Patient involvement through communication and information
The following elements has found to be essential, when involving patients in their course 
of hospitalisation:
•	 Clear communication between patients and health personnel
•	 Clear insights into health information related to the patient’s hospitalisation course
This is because that decisions regarding the patient’s health are best taken, when the 
patient and the healthcare personnel have overlapping knowledge (Jacobsen et al. 2008).
Within the domain of overlapping 
knowledge, a shared understanding of 
the patient’s condition and potential 
complications can be achieved (Figure 7). 
Additionally a shared knowledge regarding 
the patient’s treatment options and 
outcomes can be created. Thereby patients 
can better make decisions about their 
treatment (Coulter & Ellins 2006).
Additionally it is within this domain that the healthcare personnel can become familiar 
with the patients’ needs (Norouzinia et al. 2015). It has been found that patients who have 
doctors who listens to their worries are more satisfied with their treatment experience 
(Heerdegen et al. 2017). However in a study conducted in 2014, by The Danish society 
for patient safety and Trygfonden, it was found that a fourth of all Danish patients have 
questions or concerns about their disease, which they do not talk with the healthcare 
personnel about (Kjærside et al. 2014). One reason for this can be that patients find it 
difficult to open up to strangers and utter their basic fears and concerns. In addition they 
experience that the healthcare personnel prefer to talk about everyday things, but shy away 
from conversations regarding deep fears and innermost thoughts (Almerud et al. 2007). 
Consequently a greater focus is needed on patient-centered communication, as it can open 
up for conversations on what is important in life for the patients (Epstein & Street 2007). 
An important source for assessing whether the practice is on the premises of the patient, 
is therefore to investigate whether information is shared between patients and health 
personnel (Kjærside et al. 2014). 
Figure 7.  Overlapping knowledge domains
==PAGE:30==
18
Literature background 
1.2.4.	 Patient involvement in the future
Patient involvement in the healthcare system is not a new area. It has become a political 
necessity in many countries due to the socio economic development (Section 1.1) which 
can challenge the quality of care (Vahdat et al. 2014). Patient involvement is thought to 
promote the quality and experience of care in a socially sustainable manner (Sygeplejersken 
2015).  In the last years, it has been a national priority by the Danish government to 
increase patient involvement. In the period 2014-2017, the government allocated 20 
million DKK to strengthen the involvement of patients in the healthcare sector (VIBIS 
2013). Furthermore the Danish government launched various initiatives in 2016 to 
improve the patient experience of cancer care (Regeringen 2016). 
It can be argued that this increased focus on patient involvement by the government 
provides a great opportunity for hospitals to focus on creating better patient experiences in 
the future. 
1.3	
Experiences in a hospital - for health personnel 
Understanding the experiences of the healthcare personnel is essential, as they are the 
caregivers of the patients and thereby have a large influence on the patients’ experiences. 
Therefore the following section will briefly give an overview of the work environment of 
the healthcare personnel at a hospital. 
The job of clinicians and nurses is mainly to treat and care for patients while keeping 
them and their next of kin informed about their illness. It is a field where knowledge 
within science and instrumental skills are necessary. It is however also a field where 
communication skills and the ability to show compassion is essential in order to 
understand the patients and their situation (Tørring 2007). Finding a balance between 
medical knowledge and demonstrating compassion is therefore important. If the 
healthcare personnel only base their perception on documented data and laboratory 
results, the patients may feel reduced to the status of organs or a diagnose. They should 
therefore pay attention to patients’ stories and experiences (Almerud et al. 2007).
Hearing the patients’ stories and experiences can be intense, as it requires ongoing levels 
of personal and emotional contact with patients (Walsh 2013). Some experience it as 
wearisome and exhausting to be involved in the patients emotional distress (Saha et al. 
2011). Furthermore the healthcare personnel have to deal with ethical dilemmas and make 
tough decisions while cooperating with their colleagues. This can be complicated where 
troublesome situations occurs (Walsh 2013).
Considering the healthcare personnel’s working hours, they may be experienced as long, 
demanding, intense and unsociable. Additionally, they experience non-uniform work 
patterns that are unpredictable. Consequently there has been a widespread concern about 
healthcare personnels’ well-being and the levels of stress that they experience (Walsh 
2013).
==PAGE:31==
19
Literature background 
External factors also influence the healthcare personnel’s work environment. As 
mentioned (Section 1.1), a gap between the tasks needed to be accomplished and the 
resources available grows annually if no radical actions takes place, due to the socio 
economic development. To overcome the problems, the Danish government have since 
2002 demanded an annual 2% increase in productivity in the Danish hospitals. As a 
consequence the productivity should annually be increased without the usage of more 
resources (Sygeplejersken 2017). This affects the health care personnel by changing their 
work procedures and cutting down the amount of staff on watch (Sørensen 2016). 
Furthermore the productivity requirement affects how much time the healthcare 
personnel can put aside for the individual patient. In a widespread survey conducted by the 
Danish association Yngre Læger (Young Clinicians) in 2014 it was found that 90% of all 
the members who had answered the survey thought that, too much focus on the 
productivity in the healthcare sector, affects the contact with the patients. Furthermore the 
survey highlights that the clinicians would like to involve and spend more time with their 
patients  (Figure 8) (Yngre Læger 2014).
Several other studies also enhance the importance of patient involvement. It has been 
found that clinicians are more satisfied with their job and less disposed to burnouts when 
communicating empathically with the patiente (Shanafelt & Michael Krasner 2009). It has 
also been found that an enhanced empathic care to patients is highly correlated to the well-
being of the clinicians (Shanafelt et al. 2005). 
Consequently it is emphasized that patient involvement is not only sought to be important 
for patients, but also for the clinicians. Moreover an enhanced experience for both the 
clinicians and the patients can be achieved by communicating empathically. 
Figure 8.  Survey thatshows clinicians’ interest in involing patients more
==PAGE:32==
20
Literature background 
1.4	 Design for emotion - creating a good user 
experience 
This project seeks to develop an intervention tool. As mentioned in section 1.1.1, 
introduction of new technological solutions in the hospital sector can result in a shift 
of the healthcare personnel’s focus from the patients and over to the technology. This 
shift can have a negative effect on the patient’s experience of the hospitalisation. User 
Experience Design is a design approach to ensure a good user experience when developing 
new products.  There are many opinions of what a user experience encompasses 
(Hassenzahl & Tractinsky 2006a), however for this project, the following definition will be 
used: 
“User Experience encompasses all aspects of the end-user’s interaction with the company, 
its services, and its products.”  (Norman & Nielsen 2018)
This definition states that in order to create a good user experience, one has to look at not 
only features of the product, but also all direct and indirect interactions with the product, 
its context and related stakeholders. 
This project will therefore use a User Experience Design approach in order to ensure that 
the developed intervention tool takes the patient’s needs of a good experience into account. 
Furthermore that the solution does not result in a shift of focus away from the patients.
Why Design for emotion? A pivotal part of a user experience is emotions. Any product 
will elicit emotions from the user, whether or not the designer intends or is aware of 
it (Desmet & Schifferstein 2012). In addition to affecting the overall user experience, 
emotions can also affect how the user relates to the product. “A product that evokes anger will 
be pushed aside, one that evokes fascination will be explored, and one that evokes boredom will be 
ignored.” (Desmet & Hekkert 2007).  
	
	
	
	
For this project emotions are therefore seen as important, as they will affect both the 
overall user experience and directly how the users might react to a product. In order to 
ensure an understanding of patient’s emotions in the hospitalisation context, the thinking 
behind Design for Emotion Theory will be used. Emotional Design may be defined as: 
“Emotional design strives to create products that elicit appropriate emotions, in order to 
create a positive experience for the user” (Interaction Design Foundation 2018b)
Via Emotional Design, positive experiences can therefore be created for the users during 
their interaction with a product. 
How can we understand emotions? When talking about emotions it can be easy to think 
in one dimension, as good or bad. This, however gives limited insight as emotions are 
complex and have more dimensions. Understanding these dimensions is important before 
designing for them. Classifying emotions can be a challenge in itself, as there is no formal 
criteria for what an emotion is (Russell 2003) Robert Plutchik is known for identifying 8 
base emotions (Plutchik 2001), Paul Ekman proposes 6 primary emotion (Ekman 1992) 
and Desmet (Pieter M. A. Desmet 2012) proposes 25 positive emotions for use in product 
design.		
 	
 	
 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
==PAGE:33==
21
Literature background 
One recognised way of understanding emotions is via the concept of Core Affect, 
introduced by James Russel (Russell 2003). Affect is a generic term that covers a broad 
range of feelings that people experience. It’s an umbrella concept that encompasses both 
emotions and moods (Barrett & Bliss-Moreau 2009). Core affect theory states that as long 
as we are conscious, we are experiencing some sort of core affect, dependent on a wide 
array of internal and external sources.
  “Core affect is that neurophysiological state consciously accessible as the simplest raw 
(non-reflective) feelings evident in moods and emotions. “ (Russell 2003)
The circumplex model of affect explains 
the concept (Figure 9). The horizontal 
axis represents valence (that ranges from 
unpleasant to pleasant), and the vertical 
axis represents arousal (that ranges from 
calm to excitement). The describing terms 
in the figure represent emotions. Core 
affect can be neutral (the central point), 
moderate, or extreme (the periphery). 
It can be experienced in relation to a 
particular stimulus, as emotion. Or it 
can be experienced without a relation 
to a particular stimulus, as moods. As 
core affect is something we are always 
experiencing, our current state can always 
be plotted on the circumplex model. “Core 
affect theory therefore offers a simple, yet 
powerful way to organize product experience, 
because all possible experiences involved in the user-product interaction can be described in terms of 
core affect” (Desmet 2008).
Core affect and the circumplex model is relevant for this project as it can help understand 
the nuances of emotion and how emotions contrast with each other. Our belief is 
however, that while the circumplex model provides terminology to describe the most 
extreme emotions and moods (the words around the periphery) it does not offer terms to 
describe the less intense emotions and moods. As core affect can be anywhere from neutral 
to extreme, finding a way to describe the less extreme states is needed. 
  
Creating emotional experiences. When creating emotional experiences it is necessary to gain 
a deeper understanding of the processes behind. “Emotions are elusive in the sense that they are 
subjective: different people will experience different emotions towards the same product” (Desmet 
& Schifferstein 2012). However, emotions are also systematic. Even though they may differ 
from person to person, the underlying process that elicits them is organised and universal 
(Ellsworth & Scherer 2001). When creating emotional experiences, understanding the 
underlying process can help to predict the emotional outcome of a situation  (Ellsworth & 
Scherer 2001). 
Figure 9.  The Circumplex model of core affect
==PAGE:34==
22
Literature background 
In cognitive theory, it is argued that emotions always involves an assessment of appraisal. 
Appraisal is an automatic evaluation of whether something (the stimulus) is beneficial or 
harmful to one’s personal well-being. The result can be beneficial, harmful or not relevant, 
leading to pleasant, unpleasant or lack of emotion (Ellsworth & Scherer 2001). In practice 
this means that if one has insight into how a person will appraise a stimuli, it is possible to 
predict the emotional outcome. This is illustrated in the following figure (Figure 10).
In order to understand a person’s appraisal of a situation related to a product Desmet & 
Hekkert, 2007 introduces a new element to the model, namely concerns. There are three 
different kinds of concerns; goals, standards and attitudes.  A concern is a more or less 
stable preference for certain states of the world. For example how we believe, we and 
others should behave. Concerns can therefore be a point of reference to understanding 
appraisal to a stimuli (Nico 1986, Figure 11). 
“We are only emotional about things that support or threaten our concerns. Therefore design for 
emotion is design for concerns.” (Desmet 2008). If something is seen as beneficial to our 
concerns, it will result in positive emotions, and if it is seen as threatening it will result in 
negative emotions.
As emotions are the output of the combination of different factors (concerns, stimuli and 
appraisal) designers may not have the ability to exert the amount of control needed to 
create a particular emotion (Hassenzahl & Tractinsky 2006b). For the project, this means 
that the focus will be on the patients concerns as a key to understanding their appraisal of a 
situation is their emotional response. 
Figure 10.  The prosess of emotions
Figure 11.  The process of product emotion
==PAGE:35==
23
Literature background 
1.5	
Conclusion
Insights into the healthcare sector and the socio-economic development was gained, in 
order to understand context of the project. It was found that the healthcare industry is 
currently facing serious challenges due to the demographic development. Therefore there 
is a growing demand for healthcare, which puts the healthcare industry under a severe 
pressure. The development was found to have the following consequences:
•	 A great focus is put on productivity. The healthcare personnel’s work procedures 
are being streamlined and standardized and the amount of staff on watch is reduced. 
Implementation of new technology should therefore not be an obstacle in their work 
procedures. 
•	 Little time is set aside for the individual patient. Many patients voice that they feel 
forgotten or overseen due to the lack involvement in their course of treatment. This 
was found to create a bad experience. 
For this project, patient involvement is defined as:  “Patients should be involved in sharing 
information, feelings and accepting doctors’ and nurses’ instructions” as it is believed that creating 
a feeling of being involved in ones course of hospitalisation, is enough for improving the 
patient’s experience. When creating a feeling of being involved, the following elements has 
found to be essential:
•	 Clear communication between patients and health personnel
•	 Clear insights into health information related to the patient’s hospitalisation course
These elements are therefore important to have in mind for the rest of the project.  
In order to understand the current experiences of the patients and how these can be 
effected, Design for Emotions Theory has been investigated, as big part of experiences are 
emotions. It was found that: 
•	 Emotions are complex and have more than one dimensions. Understanding these 
dimensions is important before designing for emotions.
•	 The concerns that patients bring into a meeting with a product affects their 
emotions related to the product. Understanding the patients concerns is therefore 
important.
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
APPROACH
•	 Follow the actor /nurse (x2)
•	 Interview with:
•	
Former patient at Dep. of Oncology  (x1)
•	
Patients at Dep. Hematology (x5)
•	
Head department nurse at Dep. Hematology (x1)
•	
Nurse at Dep. Hematology (x1)
•	
Previous doctor at Dep. Hematology (x1)
•	 Verifying insights with baseline data
GOAL
The goal was to gain an understanding of:
•	 What the cancer patient experience is like and their pain 
points
•	 The current workflow and activities around patients at the 
department
•	 The communication and information flows
Investigation of current practice
2 Discover
==PAGE:38==
26
Discover 
Chapter 2.	Discover
2.1	 Introduction to context and case
The empirical study takes its starting point in a ward section1, more specifically Team 1 
at the Department of Hematology at Rigshospitalet (Figure 12). Team 1 is one of three 
sections at the Department of Hematology, and deals mostly with patients who have bone 
marrow cancer (multiple myeloma)2, lymphoma3 and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia 
(CLL)4. The team has 21 beds available for patients with diseases within their area of 
specialisation. All beds are commonly occupied on a daily basis.  
The target group for the empirical study was:  
•	 Males and females in the ages 20-80 years old
•	 Hospitalised due to treatment or side effects in relation to cancer
•	 Have more than 2 days of experience with hospitalisation
2.2	 Empirical study - Conducting fieldwork
The empirical study has been qualitative and case-based. Interactions can be hard to 
quantify, and therefore a qualitative approach was thought to fit the aim for the phase. By 
selecting a qualitative approach for collecting empirical data, the focus was on exploring 
and interpreting a smaller group of respondent’s experiences and concerns within 
hospitalisation in depth. It has been beneficial since it helped understand the feelings, 
values, and perceptions that underlie and effect the behaviour of the patients and the 
health personnel. Especially in the challenges that can occur in the interaction between 
patients and the health personnel. 
1  Ward section: only deals with trteatments that requires hospitalisation. 
2  Multiple myeloma: a cancer of the plasma cells in the bone marrow.
3  Lymphoma: a group of blood cancers that develop from lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell.
4  Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia: a type of blood cancer that starts in the bone marrow.
Figure 12.  Filedwork at Team 1
==PAGE:39==
27
Discover 
2.2.1.	 Observing current practice 
In the previous chapter it was found that patient involvement is enhanced by effective 
communication and information (Section 1.2.3). An approach to investigate how the 
current information and communication flow between the health personnel and patients 
was taking place, the method follow the actor (Latour 2005) was used. Consequently 
nurses were followed around during their work, which gave deeper insights into the 
health personnel’s workflow around the patients. 
2.2.2.	 Expert interviews - Hearing the patient’s story
An approach for getting closer to the patients was to let them tell their stories about their 
journeys with cancer. More specifically understand the patients’ sequences of care events 
and the related experiences. For this semi-structured interviews (Jamshed 2014) were 
conducted with patients. The interviews focused on letting the patients describe their daily 
journeys at the hospital and furthermore their entire journeys with cancer from symptom 
onset. Lastly the interviews focused on hearing whether the current initiatives for patient 
involvement had an effect on the patients (Appx. 1, 6). Some of the questions formulated 
to reveal their experienced journeys and degree of involvement were:
•	 What activities takes place during your day?
•	 Do you feel your individual needs are met?
•	 Do you feel that you are listened to?
•	 How have your entire course of treatment been?
During the interviews the patients were then asked to describe activities and care in a 
chronological order, which was written on a timeline to create a journey. The approach 
created interactive sessions where the timeline worked as a boundary object. Afterwards 
the patients were asked to comment on the concerns and the emotions they experienced 
during the activities. Since it might be hard for people to recall what have happened in 
the past, the intention with making the patients comment on how they felt during the 
activities, was for them to recall pain points (negative emotions) and delights (positive 
emotions). The interviews were therefore used as invitations for patients to describe their 
experiences, provide constructive criticism and reflect on positive aspects.
When performing fieldwork at a hospital one has to show consideration and 
be aware of the context. Ethics are of high importance. As it explained in 
the literature study (Section 1.2), patients are in a vulnerable situation when 
hospitalised. Respecting the patients’ is therefore essential. It was important to 
structure the interviews around questions that did not let the patients feel like 
Figure 13.  Team 1, Department of Hematology
==PAGE:40==
28
Discover 
their diagnosis but instead the persons behind the disease. This was for example 
done by asking patients into their hobbies and private life. In addition the 
patient’s level of energy was taken into account. Some interviews where shorter 
than others, planned after how well the patients felt on the given day.
2.2.3.	 Expert interviews - Hospital personnel 
The health personnel was interviewed regarding the daily hospitalisation journey of 
patients, in order to verify the activities. These interviews also helped gain deeper insights 
into the workflow around patients and the related concerns, enhanced our understanding 
of the context and problems (Figure 14). 
2.3	 Results of the emperical study
The insights collected via the empirical study were organised and analysed. The result will 
now be presented.
2.3.1.	 Characteristics of the patients 
The patients that were interviewed during the empirical study can be seen on the next 
page (Figure 15). These patients have provided insights into how it is to be admitted to the 
Department of Hematology. Contextual knowledge regarding their cause of stay will now 
be presented to highlight the patients’ situation and needs. 
Hospitalisation reason and length: Patients are hospitalised for two main reasons: due to acute 
sickness or due to a planned stay at the hospital. Acute hospitalisation is typically caused 
by infections, side effects of their treatments or due to the progression of the disease itself. 
Planned hospitalisation takes places when the patients receives treatments that require 
observation or assistance from the healthcare personnel. The length of hospitalisation 
differs, typically within the range of two days to three weeks.
Figure 14.  Nurse and mapping the daily journey
==PAGE:41==
29
Discover 
Figure 15.  These are the interviewed patients who have mainly contributed 
to the insights of the empirical study    
Meet the patients
Patient 1 
Male,  65 years, 
Malignt melanom
Patient 2 
Female, 80 years, 
Myelomatose
Patient 3 
Female,  70 years, 
Myelomatose
Patient 4 
Male,  66 years, 
CLL
Patient 5 
Female,  50 years, 
Unknown
Patient 6 
Female,  60 years, 
Malignt lymfom
==PAGE:42==
30
Discover 
Types of treatments: As mentioned patients within this department mainly deals with bone 
marrow cancer, lymphoma or CLL. Treatments to the diseases are given individually to fit 
to each patient depending on their needs and how widespread the cancer is. 
Typical treatments are howeverchemotherapy5,  radiation therapy6, immunotherapy7 and, 
or a bone marrow transplantation. In the case of infections, the patients often receive 
antibiotics (Rigshospitalet 2018c).
How the treatments affects the patients: Treatments can 
be tough on body and mind. The most common side 
effects include: fatigue, vomiting, feeling nauseous, 
loss of appetite, taste changes, diarrhea, constipation 
and loss of hair (Figure 16). Many treatments 
involves breaking down the immune system which 
makes patients extremely vulnerable to otherwise 
common illnesses and infections. A common cold 
can have severe consequences and a high fever is 
reason enough for acute hospitalisation and careful 
observation (Rigshospitalet 2018c).  Assistance as 
well as the watchful eye of a nurse is often needed. 
The side effects may disappear after end of treatment, however it is not always the case. 
Side effects from cancer treatment can therefore have an additional negative impact on 
one’s quality of life (Kræftens Bekæmpelse 2016).
Depending on the progress of the disease and the effect of the treatment, some cancer 
types can be cured. For some finding a cure is not possible. In this instance the focus will 
be on keeping the disease at bay and provide the best possible quality of life for the patient 
(Kræftens Bekæmpelse 2016).  
As a conclusion, being hospitalised with cancer puts patients in a vulnerable position. 
Many environmental, precautionary measures are taken to make sure that the health of 
the patients will not worsen due to the hospitalisation itself. Patients are for example not 
allowed to drink tap water, as it can contain bacteria that can affect their health negatively. 
Solutions created for this context should therefore not to compromise the health of the 
patients.
Classifying patients. The above mentioned characteristics of cancer patients highlights that 
the individual patients’ mental and physical well-being, differ while hospitalised. Thus it 
was observed that the health personnel have different approaches to the treatment and 
care of the patients. Meals are for instance served in bed for some patients, whereas other 
patients collect the food themselves.
5  Chemotherapy covers a wide range of treatments, from tablet treatment to toxin into the veins
6  Radiation therapy is a local treatment where radiation is given to the disease area without treating other 
parts of the body.
7  Immunotherapy is treatment with antibodies administered into the blood, which then binds to the cancer 
cells and destroys them.
Figure 16.  Side effects
==PAGE:43==
31
Discover 
For this project it was therefore decided to classify patients into three main groups:
Group 1 - Patient with surplus of mental and physical resources: 
•	 Can take care of themselves - regular mobility 
•	 Excess of resources to communicate with others 
Group 2 - Patient with surplus of mental resources but not physical:
•	 Their disease hinders their mobility - they cannot get out of bed 
•	 Excess of resources to communicate with others 
Group 3 - Patient with no surplus of mental or physical resources
•	 Cannot take care of themselves 
•	 In too much pain and excess of resources to communicate
As a conclusion, introducing solutions to patients with little surplus of mental and physical 
resources (group 3) might be challenging. Patients within this group might not take 
pleasure in making more decisions about their health. 
2.3.2.	 Characteristics of the hospital environment 
This section gives insights into the environment that the patients’ are hospitalised in, the 
stakeholders involved in the patients hospitalisation course and how they communicate. 
Three main stakeholders are related to the care of patients: nurses, doctors and next of kin. 
Their intention in relation care of patients have been mapped out (Figure 17). 
Nurse: The primary role of nurses are daily care of patients and coordination of activities. 
They are considered as the direct care providers of the patients. Accordingly they play an 
important role in establishing effective communication with the patients (Norouzinia et 
al. 2015). As mentioned in the literature background (Section 1.3), the work environment 
of the nurses can however be very stressful and intense, which affects how much time they 
can put aside for the individual patient.  
Figure 17.  Stakeholders in the hospital
==PAGE:44==
32
Discover 
Doctors: The primary role of the doctors is to diagnose and treat patients. They focus on the 
overall treatment and related decisions, leaving the daily patient care up to the nurses. As 
they are responsible for main decisions in regards to treatment, they have a lot of influence 
on the patients’ health. However they spend little time with the patients compared to 
the nurses and have to rely on the nurses for insight into the patients’ experiences and 
concerns.
Next of kin: They play an important role in the patients’ course of treatments. They provide 
the patients with support in a challenging time. Often they also help patients navigate in 
their course of treatment. However, not all patients have next of kin available to help. In 
addition next of kin may not have mental or physical resources to provide patients with 
the support they need. 
To conclude it was discovered that patients interact with many different stakeholders 
during their hospitalisation course. Nurses, doctors and next of kin are stakeholders 
influencing patients the most. All want to help the patients, however their resources 
(energy and time) may be limited. 
Communication. As mentioned, patients mainly communicate with nurses when having 
concerns regarding their stay. Communication takes place via different channels where the 
following were found to be the most commonly used: 
•	 Orally, in relation to care: Nurses mainly communicate orally with patients when they 
enter their rooms in relation to care.
•	 Information board: A whiteboard 
is placed beside each patient bed, 
with the intention to note down 
information in relation to the patient’s 
stay such as caregiving nurses and 
doctors as well as upcoming activities 
(Figure 18). The whiteboards were 
implemented as an initiative for 
bettering the patient involvement. It 
was found that patients have different 
needs for private life and sharing of 
personal health data on the board. 
Some patients does for example not 
want the nurses to write down the 
daily activities on the board as other 
people entering the room can see the 
information. 
 
Figure 18.  An information board
==PAGE:45==
33
Discover 
Figure 19.  An information board
•	 Nurse pull-string: In each ward room, a red string hangs 
down from the wall within reach of the patients beds 
(Figure 19). When pulled, the purpose is to signalize 
that the patients’ needs help from the healthcare 
personnel. Even though patients are encouraged to 
pull it, every time they have a concern or a request, it 
was found that patients rarely use it. They associate it 
with something to be used, only in acute situations. It 
was found that most patients would rather wait for the 
health personnel to show up in their room, in relation 
to care. Consequently the patients can wait for the 
healthcare personnel for many hours before getting 
their questions or concerns answered. 
To conclude it was seen that communication mainly takes place between the patients and 
the nurses. If patients want to discuss their health with a doctor for example, they have 
to ask the nurses. In addition, the communication is on the premise of the healthcare 
personnel as the patients are afraid of contacting the nurses by the pull-string.
2.3.3.	 A typical day as a patient 
This section will investigate a typical day as a cancer patient in the Department of 
Hematology. In order to understand what experiences patients have during their 
hospitalisation, the daily patient journey was mapped out. 
The journey was based on the activities that takes place daily. The focus was on identifying 
the main recurring activities that happen daily, rather that mapping out every possible 
activity.  Furthermore, in order to show an extra dimension of the experience, some pain 
points for patients and hospital staff regarding these activities were mapped. The empirical 
insights showed that different patients had very similar journeys. It was therefore decided 
to make one colligated journey, instead of using personas to map out several very similar 
journeys. This was done in order to keep a broader perspective. By doing so the goal was 
that future conclusions based on the journey map would be relevant for as many patients 
as possible. 
 
The journey shows (Figure 20) that the activities that takes place throughout a day of 
hospitalisation vary. There are differences in routines and culture across the departments 
and patients have different diagnoses and needs. However there is also a general rhythm to 
daily life, with some main activities that repeat every day. The following are some of the 
main events with selected pain points. The pain points are described as they are a source of 
unpleasant emotions. 
==PAGE:46==
34
Discover 
Figure 20.  A day in the hospital
==PAGE:47==
35
Discover 
Early start - The day in the hospital has an early start, normally patients get woken up at 
06.00 o’clock to be ready for the first medicine and check-ups of the day.  
Pain point: With a lot of pain, a foreign environment and new people, patient often 
have trouble sleeping through the night. Getting woken up early is therefore not always 
appreciated and leaves no surplus of energy for the rest of the day. 
Medicine & blood tests - Patients receive medicine up to 6 times a day, depending on their 
situation. It is the nurses who distribute the medicine, either in pill form or intravenously. 
Blood tests generally happen once a day and are either performed by the nurses or the 
hospital laboratory technicians. 
Pain point: There are often a lot of different medicines. Patients experience that there is a 
need for them to keep a track of what they get themselves, in order to prevent errors.
Updating the information board - The nurses generally update the information board after 
they come on shift. 
Pain point: The use of the information board vary depending on the nurse and their 
perceived importance of it. With a lot of information and different people to keep a track 
of, the patients are very dependent of the board being updated. Therefore the patients do 
not always feel that the information board actually improves their involvement.
Visit from doctor - The doctors do ward rounds accompanied by a nurse for the purpose of 
making decisions concerning patient care. At this event the patient is present. 
Pain point: The doctors do not talk to every patient every day, but rather according to 
if there is new information to be discussed. In addition, the ward rounds takes place 
between 10.00-16.00 o’clock, but there are no appointment times for each patient. Firstly, 
this results in the patients’ uncertainty about if the doctor is stopping by at all that day. 
Secondly the patient does not know what time during the day the doctor might come by. 
This can be problematic, as many patients voice that the doctor consultation is the most 
important event during the day. At this event, life essential information regarding progress 
of disease etc. is presented. The uncertainty about when it will take place, can therefore 
lead to many concerns for the patients. 
“The most important event that takes place during a day is the doctor consultation” - 
Patient 1
Meals - Meals are served three times a day and there is a trolley with coffee and cakes that 
comes by in the afternoon. 
Personal care - The nurses bring clean clothes and towels to the patients and assists with 
personal care as needed. 
Visit from next of kin - Next of kin can come by whenever they wish. 
Pain point: Most patients really appreciate visits from next of kin. However, it can be tough 
to plan the visits with all the uncertainty around when other activities happen.
==PAGE:48==
36
Discover 
In addition to the activities above, the patients can experience many other activities during 
their stay. These activities include: Exercise and physiotherapy, regular cleaning and 
appointments for tests at other departments, just to name a few.
Conclusions from the journey: When one thinks of being hospitalised, it is easy to believe 
that the patients mainly only lay in bed waiting to get better. However, as seen from the 
user journey, being a patient at the Department of Hematology is a busy experience. Care 
takes place from 06.00-22.00 o’clock and most events cannot be controlled by the patients 
themselves. They have to be available and ready for when a nurse or doctor comes by and 
tells them that something is going to happen. Consequently it may be difficult to plan visits 
from next of kin, etc.
It can also be seen that there are many stakeholders across care of the patients. Every 
patient has up to two responsible nurses at a time and there are three shifts of nurses every 
day, (day-, afternoon- and night shift). This means that one patient has to interact with 
five nurses per 24 hours. In addition there are doctors, laboratory technicians, a cleaning 
lady and a physiotherapist, just to name a few. It can be tiring to interact with many 
different stakeholders throughout a day. 
Some activities like meals have a more or less fixed time, but most activities depend on 
when the nurses can come by and how busy they are. This means that there is a chance 
that activities might collide. It requires coordination from the hospital staff and can be a 
concern for the patient when it comes to planning their own activities such as personal 
care or visits from next of kin.
It can be seen that patients have to relate to many stakeholders, events and 
information every day. Much information can get lost or misinterpreted. 
Consequently the patients may at times feel lack of transparency into health 
information and information regarding their stay. This leads to patients that 
feel less involved in their course of treatment than what they want.
2.3.4.	  From cancer diagnosis to treatment  
Through interviews it was found that hospitalisation is not the first step of a cancer 
journey for many. It was therefore important to gain a deeper understanding of the 
context and the challenges a cancer patient have already dealt with before entering a 
hospitalisation course. In order to do this, the entire journey for patients with cancer was 
mapped.
Patients’ journeys throughout the entire course of treatment can be complex and last for 
many years. Patients receive different treatments, have different preferences etc. and 
therefore each journey of a patient differs. However, it was found that the major stages 
in the entire course of treatment are characterized the same way. The illustrated journey 
(Figure 21) therefore reflects the major stages that all cancer patients typically goes 
through. In addition the interviewed patients’ emotions within each step have been added. 
==PAGE:49==
37
Discover 
 
The journey will now be presented step by step.
Symptom onset: The first step in a journey is usually the symptom onset where the 
patient is not feeling well or can feel a change in the body. 
Appointment at GP: As a consequence one will go to the general practitioner (GP) 
to get a checkup. If the GP discovers signs of abnormality that could be a sign of 
cancer, the GP makes a referral to the hospital.     
Screening and biopsy at hospital: At the hospital the patient will be screened and 
tested e.g. via a biopsy. The hospital will then send the tests to analysis.
Diagnosis at hospital: The patient will after some time return to the hospital where 
the diagnosis will be given by a doctor. This can be a devastating experience. 
Treatment decisions at hospital: Either the same day or later, the patient will meet 
up with a doctor where decisions will be made about the treatment possibilities 
and how to proceed with a treatment plan. If a treatment after some time shows 
not to have any effect, the patient will consult doctors again were new plans will 
be made. In this step the patient may meet many different doctors depending on 
which departments and hospitals the treatments are available. 
Planned hospitalisation for treatment and acute hospitalisation: The patient will get 
different treatments at the hospital. Depending on the type the patient is either 
hospitalised or sent home the same day. At some point almost every patient 
experiences side effects of the treatments. Some of the side effects may be so 
serious so the patient have to be hospitalised acutely e.g. with an infection or 
irregular heartbeats.
Figure 21.  The overall cancer patient journey
==PAGE:50==
38
Discover 
Monitoring the disease:  During the course of treatment the patient will be 
monitored in order to have the development of the disease under control. This 
can e.g. include x-rays, scans and blood work. 
Recovery or end of life care: If the treatments work effectively some patients will 
recover and survive. Other patients may however unfortunately experience that 
none of the available treatments work. At this point the patient will have to 
prepare for death. It is this step of the journey that all patients’ fears will become 
reality.  
Understanding the complexity: The red numbers next to each stage of the journey are based 
in the experience of one of the interviewed patients. They show how many times each 
stage was repeated. When adding up the numbers, the patient had 113 meetings with 
the hospital. The journey from the initial diagnosis to the end of the treatment process 
has lasted for more than 5 years. During this process the patient has visited 14 different 
departments across 5 hospitals. To give an overview: the patient has visited various 
hospitals around every 16th day for the last 5 years.  
As a conclusion, the journey of cancer patients may be very complex and long. Especially 
the following challenges were voiced by the patients; 
•	 Various stakeholders to deal with: The patients have to deal with a lot of stakeholders 
that are involved in their courses of treatment such as different doctors and nurses 
specialising in various diseases and body parts. 
•	 Various locations to deal with: The treatments can occur at different hospitals and 
departments which the patients have to respond to.
•	 A lot of information to relate to: Within each meeting the patients will receive 
complex information about their disease which may be difficult to understand due 
to the medical terms used. Furthermore the patients have to manage the practical 
information given about when the treatments takes place, where they take place etc. 
As a result of these factors, some patients experience the journey of handling their disease 
is like a full time job that it is tough to manage. Consequently, many quit their real jobs. 
Their lives typically only revolve around cancer, which can be an emotionally exhausting 
situation. 
From the investigation of the entire course of treatment it can be seen that 
cancer patients are in a complex situation that brings many challenges. Patients 
have often gone through a long emotional journey before they are hospitalised 
and due to the various information, locations and stakeholders to deal with the 
patients often feel like thrown around with little involvement in their course of 
treatment. This leads to little surplus of mental resources. 
==PAGE:51==
39
Discover 
2.4	 Verifying insights
As a qualitative approach was selected for this project, the focus has been on interviewing 
and observing few stakeholders in depth. To back up these insights baseline data has been 
used to inform the discover phase. The information has consisted of internal data and 
empirical studies from the Department of Hematology, Oncology and Infectious Diseases 
(Troest 2016)(Is it a Bird 2016). Furthermore a Danish, nationwide investigation of patient 
experiences has been used (LUP 2016). All data have been used with focus on hospitalised 
patients and patient involvement. It has verified that the insights found through the 
empirical study were also relevant on a larger scale
2.5	 Conclusion 
In this chapter an empathic understanding of cancer patients’ experiences within 
hospitalisation was gained. It was found that:
•	 Treatments can be tough on body and mind
•	 Patients may experience reduced mobility and changes to the body due to treatments
•	 Patients have a low immune system and are extremely exposed to otherwise 
common illnesses and infections 
Being hospitalised with cancer therefore puts patients in a vulnerable position. Many 
environmental, precautionary measures are taken to make sure that patients will not get 
sicker due to the hospitalisation. Solutions created for this context should therefore not to 
compromise the health of the patients.
To understand the communication and information flows, the daily activities taking place 
around patients were investigated. It was found that:
•	 Patients go through many activities during the day while hospitalised, which they 
cannot control themselves. The event that many patients finds most important, 
according to their well-being, is the doctor consultation. 
•	 Patients voice that they do not have sufficient insights into their illness and course of 
stay. They lack transparency into health information.
These experiences may make the patients feel like they are not actively involved in their 
course of treatment. 
The entire journey for patients with cancer was mapped - from symptom onset to end 
of life or recovery. It was found that patients have often gone through a long emotional 
journey before they are hospitalised. This affects the patient’s excess of mental resources 
during the hospitalisation. 
==PAGE:52==
==PAGE:53==
APPROACH
•	 Organise collected insights 
•	 Categorise insights into areas and concerns 
•	 Select concerns as focus for the project
•	 Make problem definition and problem statement based on 
selected concerns
GOAL
The goal was to gain an understanding of:
•	 Identify patients main concerns
•	 Understand the underlying problem related to the concerns
•	 Identify which concerns have potential for further work
ANALYSIS OF CURRENT PRACTICE
3 Define
==PAGE:54==
42
Define 
Chapter 3.	Define 
This chapter will combine the information which has been created and gathered during 
the previous phases Literature Background and Discover. The gathered insights were 
analysed and synthesised in order to define and interpret the identified core concerns and 
problems that cancer patients experience during hospitalisation. One concern was chosen 
as a focus area and the underlying problem was defined in a problem definition. 
3.1	
Organisation and categorisation of insights
In the literature background it was found that (Desmet & Hekkert, 2007)talks about how 
the concerns one brings into a meeting with a product affects the emotional response to 
the experience. In order to design a solution that produces a certain emotion, it is therefore 
important to know the concerns of the user. As concerns can be highly personal, it is 
not feasible to map out each and every concern a person might have. However, based on 
the fieldwork, it was clear that cancer patients often share many of their main concerns 
when it comes to hospitalisation. In order to sort through all the information and insights 
gathered from the discover phase and identify the key universal concerns, an affinity 
diagram was used. 
Affinity diagram (Beyer & Holtzblatt K 1998) is a method that helps organise and connect 
large amounts of data by sorting them into groups based on their natural relationships. 
Insights related to the patient experience of hospitalisation were collected and each insight 
was assigned a post-it and hung on a wall (Figure 22). The insights where then moved 
around and grouped based on similarities. Care was taken to note the source of the insight 
on each post-it, so that it would be possible to verify each group from more than one 
source8. Afterwards the insights were evaluated with focus on identifying core concerns 
that the patients experience. The evaluation lead to the creation of new groups and 
reorganisation of others. This process was iterative and the groups were reorganised until 
the insights fit into one overlying main concern for each group. Care was taken to 
formulate each concern as a statement from the patients’ point of view. Each concern is 
something the patients might experience during hospitalization.
By using this method of synthesising the raw data into main concerns, the goal was to gain 
deeper insights into what it is like being a hospitalised cancer patient. As these concerns 
are likely to affect how the patients behave, gaining a good understanding of them was 
essential to the further work of creating a good solution. By identifying what problem 
leads to these concerns and trying to solve it, the hope was that the final solution would 
also remove or lessen the concern.
8    Sources for the insights were: Literature Background, Field work, Internal data and empirical 
studies from the Department of Hematology, Oncology and Infectious Diseases, The Danish nationwide 
investigation of patient experiences 2016 report
==PAGE:55==
43
Define 
Figure 22.  The procees of the affinity diagram
3.2	 The core concerns within hospitalisation
The organisation of insights resulted in nine core concerns that fall under three different 
areas, that will be described in the following section (Figure 23).  
Figure 23.  The nine concerns
==PAGE:56==
44
Define 
3.2.1.	 Compromising on quality of care
There is a controversy within the healthcare sector when it comes to the demand for 
efficiency and the quality of care. The pressure of always having to cut back on costs 
affects the healthcare personnel and their daily workflow and leads to a need for making 
compromises between efficiency and the quality of care given to patients. One of the areas 
that suffer as a result of these compromises is patient involvement, as the patients lack 
transparency into their health information.
This problem affects the patient experience and leads to the following concerns:
Concern 1 - There is a need for someone to have an overview of my treatment course, 
but I fear that I don’t have the energy
As mentioned earlier, the health personnel are generally quite busy and have to juggle 
between different tasks. In addition the patients meet different healthcare personnel and 
there is a lack of continuity of caregivers that the patients interact with in the hospital. 
There is a lot of information to navigate, coordinate and remember and there is a need for 
someone to keep an overview over all the information related to the patient’s case. As a 
cancer patient, especially when you are hospitalised, your energy is often quite low and it 
can therefore be challenging to manage this task yourself. An area that can be challenging 
to manage is to keep a track of your medicine. There is a system for managing it for the 
health personnel, but patients experience that the health personnel do not always have an 
overview. Additionally, messages can get lost when the health personnel change shifts or 
simply forgotten. 
“As a patient you need to have an overview yourself” - Patient9
It was found that the next of kin plays an active role for many patients during their 
hospitalisation. Many patients have a desire of the next of kin being present during the 
ward rounds as they can help the patients navigate in the information given by the doctors. 
However, not all patients have next of kin, and regardless, important information can be 
given when the next of kin are not present at the hospital.  Hence, the situation is a source 
of great concern for many patients.
Concern 2 - I feel that I don’t always have the time to give the patients the quality of 
care I would want
This concern is formulated as voiced by the health personnel. A concern regarding the 
patient experience from the health personnel’s point of view is their lack of time and the 
consequences it has for the patients. The increasing number of patients as well as the 
continued demand for more efficiency at the hospitals leads to more tasks, but less time 
for the health personnel. The result is that the most crucial, lifesaving tasks get priority 
and less critical things like patient involvement gets down prioritised. Not having time to 
give the patients the care they would like to give is a concern voiced by several staff. This 
concern was also found in the literature background (Figure 8).  
As a consequence it has been found that the patients experience that the health personnel 
focus more on treating the patient’s disease rather than seeing the patients as whole human 
beings. 
9   Quotations from patients interviewed during fieldwork
==PAGE:57==
45
Define 
Concern 3- I worry that I am not seen as a whole human being with individual needs, 
but only as my disease
Another important matter for the patients has been found to be how they are viewed by 
the healthcare personnel. Most of them say that they would like the healthcare personnel 
to base their advice according each patient’s individual situation along with how they are 
doing. Not two patients are exactly the same, and they have different need and wished 
concerning their care and treatment. In the nationwide study it has also been found that 
almost 1/5 of all planned hospitalized patients do not experience that the health personnel 
ask them about their own experiences regarding their disease (LUP 2016). A concern 
is that individual factors, such as medical history or personal values, are not taken into 
consideration when deciding the treatment. 
	 “ You need to adapt the system to the patient and not the patient to the system” - Nurse10
Concern 4 - It is frustrating not to have sufficient information about my treatment 
and care
Many patients voice that they would like to be better informed and updated about their 
treatment and what activities happen when and why. This is both so it is possible to plan 
around the activities, but also so they can be a part on the decision making when it comes 
to their courses of treatment and health. This dependence can lead to a sense of unbalance. 
It was found that being on the same information level can help the patient feel respected 
and give a sense of equality on decisions regarding one’s health. 
“The doctors are not decision makers when it comes to a patient’s health and treatment, 
but rather advisers.”   - Doctor 11
The dependence of not being able to access information yourself and the uncertainty of 
not having information has been found to be an important concern for the patients.
3.2.2.	 Seriously ill
There are many concerns that are connected to being seriously ill. Having cancer is 
challenging, both due to the pain that comes with the disease and treatment, but as 
mentioned in Section 2.3.1, also because it puts one in a vulnerable position and can affect 
the relationships with other people. It also touches upon some of the most basic human 
needs of survival and safety which in itself can be a lot to handle.
Concern 5 - Dealing with cancer is overwhelming for me
It has been found that hospitalisation can be emotionally tolling as it is an environment 
with other people in a similar situation. Therefore the patient do not only have to deal 
with their own disease, but also the situation of the other patients. In addition, getting 
cancer can have an impact on relationships with next of kin, who might not know how to 
deal with the situation themselves. Having for example to deal with important decisions on 
different treatment options in the middle of coming to terms with a diagnosis and being 
sick, makes for an extremely overwhelming situation which is the source of  concerns for 
many patients.
“The hospital is an unavoidable evil”  - Patient  9
10	
Quotation from nurse interviewed during fieldwork
11	
Quotation from doctor interviewed during fieldwork
==PAGE:58==
46
Define 
Concern 6 - I fear being a burden to others
It can be concluded that patients experience that they are very dependent on others when 
they are seriously ill. Most patients are used to managing things on their own and the 
result of suddenly becoming dependent is often that they feel like an inconvenience and a 
burden. Being hospitalised for example, requires that the next of kin come to you.  
“ I’m worried about my husband who has drive here every day”   - Patient 9
The result of patients feeling like a burden is that they often end up giving less priority to 
their own needs. A common opinion among the patients has found to be that they do not 
call for the nurses (using the alarm system next to the bed) unless it is absolutely critical, as 
they don’t want inconvenience the nurses in any way. 
Concern 7: My illness makes me vulnerable and that is uncomfortable 
One of the most basic human needs is a having sense of security, and the vulnerability 
that comes with being sick can be uncomfortable for many. Being seriously ill means that 
you are often physically and mentally drained, which leaves you vulnerable and in need of 
additional human care. The care provided by the health personnel can therefore have an 
extra importance for how well a patient deals with the experience of being hospitalised. 
Patients voice that they are uncomfortable with being vulnerable
3.2.3.	 Uncertainty about the future
Getting seriously ill, involves not being able to handle the disease yourself. This means 
that you need help from professionals and have to put your trust in the healthcare system. 
It also means on some level to let go of the control of the future and leave the decision 
making up to others. The uncertainty about the future regarding one’s health can be the 
source of concerns for many. 
Concern 8 - I think it is scary not having any control of what the future will bring. 
No-one knows what the future will bring, which can be an unsettling thought for anyone, 
however even more so if you are seriously ill. Getting diagnosed with cancer forces one 
to face death, and to think about when it occur. That experience in itself is scary, but also 
forces you to think through a lot of uncomfortable thoughts, for example worrying about 
not seeing one’s children grow up. 
“I just want to grow old and see my children get married” - Patient 9
Cancer is a challenging disease that is not well understood. There are many individual 
factors involved, but there is no answer to what treatment will work for what person, or 
how long it is going to take (Kræftens Bekæmpelse 2018). The uncertainty of not knowing 
the future and that not even the health personnel have the definite answer, has found to be 
a great concern for many patients  Due to this, patients also express that the experience of 
hospitalisation is greatly affected by the updates on the treatment progress from the doctor 
during ward rounds.
==PAGE:59==
47
Define 
Concern 9: It is unsettling that I have to be so dependent on others 
In addition to the concern of being a burden to others, patients also express that being 
dependant on other people in itself is unsettling. When you are hospitalised, a lot of 
decisions regarding your health are left up to others and the healthcare personnel are 
also humans who can make mistakes. Letting others in control of your health therefore 
requires trust in them, in the healthcare system itself and that eventual errors will be 
detected.  Additionally the health personnel may have divergent mind-sets on how to 
proceed with the patient’s disease and the course of treatment. Most patients do not 
have the expertise like the medical personnel (another knowledge domain), and differing 
opinions or experiencing errors, can lead to concerns regarding having to put so much 
trust in the health personnel and the healthcare system. 
3.3	 Choice of focus areas
The nine concerns together creates a picture of what it is like to be a cancer patient. After 
identifying the key concerns it was clear that the scope of solving all nine concerns was 
too large for the time frame of the project. It was therefore decided to choose one area for 
further work. The choice of a area for further focus was based on the following factors:
Future of healthcare:  The healthcare system is becoming more geared to optimize 
productivity over catering to individual patient needs (Section 1.1). Some of the concerns 
are results of challenges related to this new focus. This focus is not likely to go away 
anytime soon, but rather increase. Therefore, choosing an area that deals with these 
challenges was important.
Patient involvement: As described in the literature background (Section 1.2.1), patient 
involvement has a large potential for bettering the patient’s experience of hospitalisation. 
The project has focused on identifying the degree of patient involvement at the 
Department of Hematology and choosing an area with a potential for improving the 
patient involvement was therefore important.
Changeability: Some of the concerns stem from problems that are harder to solve than 
others. The fact that the future and cancer is hard to predict (Concern 8) and a sickness 
that makes one vulnerable (Concern 7) are for example not so easy to change.
The chosen area: Based on the three mentioned factors, the area Compromising 
quality of care was selected. First of all the concerns within this area all deal with 
the challenges related to the future of healthcare. The healthcare personnel 
are becoming overloaded with work and the patient’s individual needs are 
overseen. Secondly, it was believed that the concerns within this area could be 
removed, by increasing patient involvement. Finally, the concerns stem from 
challenges with the healthcare system and not directly from having cancer. 
They are therefore believed to be possible to remove. In addition the solution 
should not worsen the other non-selected areas Seriously ill and Uncertainty 
about the future as they all have a great impact of the patient experience. 
==PAGE:60==
48
Define 
3.4	 Problem definition 
This section will approach how the core problem that causes the concerns is identified.
According to the logic behind a problem tree it is crucial to understand the difference 
between symptoms and the underlying problem, as it is not possible to solve the problem 
by treating the symptoms only (Vesely 2008). In this case the identified concerns are the 
symptoms of underlying problem. Consequently, in order to resolve the selected concerns, 
it was necessary to understand and identify the underlying problem. It was therefore 
important to have a good definition of the problem itself as well as the related context, in 
order to make sure the project was going the right direction. 
The problem definition to sum up the underlying problem was the following:
Problem definition

What is the problem and who has the problem: 
Cancer patients seek transparency into health information related to the 
hospitalization course. However, patients lack the energy for acquiring this 
information and the healthcare personnel lack the time to communicate it. This 
leads to great concern for the patients and a lower quality of care (for definition 
see nomenclature).

Relevant context factors:
 The health personnel have to deal with the controversy between the 
continuous demand for more efficiency and increased quality of care. As a result 
they are overloaded with work and the most crucial, lifesaving task have to be 
prioritized.

What are the goals for the future:
To improve the hospitalisation experience for cancer patients by providing 
access to health information, create mental comfort and relieve patients of 
concerns.

What are the side effect to be avoided: 
That the solution has a negative effect the patient’s health or on the health 
personnel’s workflow in regards to time and task handling. That the solution 
leads to additional concerns for the patients.
==PAGE:61==
49
Define 
The problem definition gives a base for what the problem is, namely the paradox between 
the energy level of the patients and the lack of time of the health personnel. This paradox 
and the underlying insights are visualized in the illustration (Figure 24).
3.5	 Conclusion 
This chapter has described the analysis of the current practice. It was found that cancer 
patients have many concerns in regards to hospitalisation, however they generally fall 
under the following three areas:
•	 Compromising on quality of care: An area of core concerns for both patients and 
healthcare personnel revolves around the lack of time for patient involvement in 
regards to informing the patients on their treatment and care, and the resulting 
lower quality of care. 
•	 Lack of control: Patients have several concerns regarding lack of control, both in 
regards to not being able to control the future and leaving the control of their health 
up to others.
•	 Serious illness:  Cancer is a serious illness that touches upon the basic human need for 
survival and safety. Patients have concerns related to becoming a burden to others 
and being in a vulnerable situation.
An area that calls for improvement is Compromising on quality with the lack of patient 
involvement during hospitalisation. Therefore this area was selected. 
Figure 24.  Problem definition paradox
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
APPROACH
•	 Map out existing solutions
•	 Interview with project manager from Finsencentret 
regarding patient involvement initiatives 
•	 Online search
•	 Create a list of requirements for a future intervention tool
GOAL
The goal was to gain an understanding of:
•	 Learn from existing solutions regarding transparency of health 
information for patients 
•	 Use gained knowledge from previous phases to set 
requirements for a solution and frame the phase Develop
Requirements for success
4  Requirements
==PAGE:64==
52
Requirements 
Chapter 4.	Requirements for success
In this chapter existing solutions that provide transparency of health information for 
patients will be presented. Furthermore, requirements for developing a solution will be 
established.
4.1	 Existing solutions
This section will investigate existing solutions that provide transparency of health 
information for patients. By investigating existing solutions, the goal was to learn from 
them, what worked and what did not, and be sure to use this knowledge when setting up 
requirements for developing a solution. Guidelines for the investigation were created. 
They may be found in Appendix 2, together with an overview of the existing solutions. 
Some of the existing solutions were identified and discussed with a project manager that 
deals with patient involvement in the Department of Hematology at Finsencentret. Other 
solutions were identified via an online search. 
The following solutions were found: 
•	 A book that helps patients note down important appointments, questions and events 
•	 A whiteboard in the patient’s ward with relevant information about their course of 
treatment.
•	 An initiative focusing on one doctor being responsible for one patient’s entire course 
of treatment
•	 Three apps that helps patients manage their course of treatment
The learnings from the existing solutions were the following:
•	 Solutions that require too many resources from the hospital will rarely be used as 
intended and some will not be implemented. The resources are related to:
◦◦How much time the healthcare personnel can set aside
◦◦How many healthcare professionals can be involved in the patients course of 
treatment
◦◦How much money can be set aside for new solutions
•	 If the solutions are too complex to navigate, the patients will not use energy on 
learning how to use them
 
As a conclusion, creating a solution that requires too many resources from the hospital 
should be avoided in this project in order to become effective and successful. From the 
patients perspective the solution should not be too complex as it will overwhelm them. 
==PAGE:65==
53
Requirements 
4.2	 List of requirements
In the following section the requirements for the later concept development are presented. 
The requirements were iterated throughout the project and in the end formalized to 
a final version, with the purpose of making up a framework for the solution space. 
The requirements derive from the challenges and insights identified in the literature 
background, the empirical study, analysis and the existing solutions. Furthermore, they 
derive from the principles established by the Department of Hematology for increasing 
patient centred care (Section IV). The main requirements will now be presented. Note that 
more requirements were established. The extensive list may be found in Appendix 7.
==PAGE:66==
54
Requirements 
4.3	 Conclusion 
Existing solutions that provide transparency of health information have been investigated. 
It was found that solutions that require too many resources from the hospital will rarely be 
used as intended and some will not be implemented. Furthermore it was found that if the 
solutions are too complex to navigate in, the patients will not use energy on learning how 
to use them. 
After the investigation of the existing solutions, requirements for developing a solution 
was established. The requirements derived from the challenges and insights identified in 
the previous chapters. They mainly revolved around patient involvement, physical and 
mental challenges with cancer and the hospital environment. The requirements helped 
making the solution space more concrete and tangible. Thereby they created a foundation 
for the concept development phase. 
Figure 25.  List of requirements
==PAGE:67==
55
Requirements 
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
APPROACH
•	 Explorative idea generation
•	 Concept creation 
•	 Low-tech prototyping  
•	 Expert workshops
•	
Previous doctor at Dep. Hematology (x1)
•	
Previous hospitalised patients (x4)
•	 Evaluation of concepts by Weighted Object Method
GOAL
The goal was to gain an understanding of:
•	 Explore the solution space for ideas on how to solve the 
identified problem
•	 Create viable concepts 
•	 Choose one concept for further detailing
Idea generation & testing
5 Develop
==PAGE:70==
58
Develop 
Chapter 5.	 Idea generation & testing
The following chapter describes the exploration of the solution space for ideas, followed by 
development of five concepts. Finally the selection of one concept based on feedback from 
experts and an evaluation. 
5.1	
Explorative idea generation
Initially in this phase the solution space related to the problem statement was explored 
and expanded. The first step was to ‘think outside the box’ and start to look at alternative 
ways for viewing the identified problem. Different brainstorming techniques such as 
5-minute brainstorms, brain-writing and finding inspiration from other contexts (Osborn 
1957)(IDEO 2018) were used in order to stimulate free thinking.  The starting point 
for the brainstorming was the goal related to the problem statement (Section 3.5). The 
solution space for this goal was however very broad and needed to be guided, in order to 
brainstorm more specifically on essential aspects. Therefore a main question and related 
sub-areas lead the brainstorming. The sub-areas were based on what health information 
patients would like insights into. Furthermore a focus was put on how the health 
information could be communicated. The main question and the related sub-topics that 
led the idea generation were the following: 
How do we provide transparency for patients into their health information and thereby 
relieve them from concerns and create mental comfort? 
•	 Care history overview
•	 Overview of treatment outcomes 
•	 Daily plan overview
•	 Overview of whole hospitalisation course
•	 Communication of health information 
This resulted in 82 ideas that potentially could solve the problem statement. (Figure 26)
Figure 26.  Brainstorming
==PAGE:71==
59
Develop 
5.2	 Concept creation and low-tech prototyping 
The next step after generating ideas was to identify ideas with potential in order to create 
concepts. The ideas were first hung up to get an overview. They were then discussed and 
based on pros, cons and potential the ideas, which best satisfied the List of requirements 
(Section 4.2) were selected for further concept detailing. For each of the concepts, low-
tech prototypes1 were created on paper in order to get further details about the functions 
and a common understanding of how they worked. 
The result was five detailed concepts that focused on solving different aspects of the 
patients’ lack of transparency of their health information:
•	 2 concepts focused on giving patients easier access to their personal medical 
information
•	 1 concept focused on providing patients with access to general health information in 
relation to their disease
•	 1 concept focused on coaching patients during communication with the healthcare 
personnel 
The five concepts will now be presented briefly. For further details about the features of 
the concepts and their pros and cons, see appendix 8.  
Concept  1 - My Past Care Results (app)
Challenge: Patients cannot remember what care-related activities have taken place in the 
past during their hospitalisation. Not knowing this can lead to a feeling of lack of control. 
Solution: Give patients an overview by making it possible to see previous tests results, 
medicine and appointments in a user friendly manner in their bed during hospitalisation. 
(Figure 27)
How: App on phone or tablet 
1   Characterised by a quick and easy translation of high-level design concepts into tangible and testable 
artefacts (Telono 2018)
Figure 27.  Concept 1
==PAGE:72==
60
Develop 
Concept 2 - Prepare for doctor consultation (app)
Challenge: Patients cannot remember the questions they would like to ask the doctor about 
during the doctor consultation and some do not know what to ask about. Additionally, the 
busy environment of the hospital and the focus of efficiency makes it hard for patients to 
open up and talk about deeper concerns.  (Section 1.2.3)
Solution: Help patients to prepare for the doctor consultation by guiding them through 
some easy to fill out steps that allows them to reflect on what should be talked about 
during the consultation with the doctor. The preparation will make it easier talk about 
deeper concerns. (Figure 29)
How: A template is filled out before the doctor consultations by the patients. Three 
features: mood evaluation, example topics and note down questions.
Concept 3 - My Future Care Activities (digital information board)
Challenge: Patients would like an overview of future care related activities, but the 
healthcare personnel is too busy informing and updating the patients.
Solution:  Give patients an overview of their future hospitalisation activities by displaying 
relevant information on a screen inside the patient’s room.  (Figure 30)
How:  Replace the existing whiteboard with a screen and develop a program for it.
Figure 28.  Concept 2
Figure 29.  Concept 3
==PAGE:73==
61
Develop 
Concept 4 - My Simulated Hospitalisation stay (app)
Challenge: Patients would like an overview of their hospitalisation progress. It is not 
obvious for patients where in the process they are and what needs to happen before 
discharge. 
Solution:   Create an overview by displaying a timeline with previous and future tests 
results, medicine and appointments. Furthermore display what is required before 
discharge is possible. (Figure 31)
How: A system will use algorithms based on a typical stay with the same conditions to 
try to simulate the future activities and the expected discharge date. This is visible for the 
patients via a tablet that is handed out by the healthcare personnel.
Concept 5 - Treatment course examples (booklet)
Challenge: Same as concept 4 (lack of insight into treatment course and progress)
Solution:  Inform patients about all the typical reasons for hospitalisation in a department 
and give a point of reference for the patients.
How: Booklet informing patients about what activities, test, etc. typically takes place for 
patients hospitalised under the same conditions as them.
Figure 30.  Concept 4
Figure 31.  Concept 5
==PAGE:74==
62
Develop 
5.3	 Expert workshops
Workshops with expert users (four 
former patients and a doctor) were 
conducted in order to get valuable 
feedback on the developed concepts. 
As most hospitalised cancer patients 
have little surplus of mental resources 
it was thought not to be ethical to 
use their energy and time on longer 
workshops. Involving former patients 
were therefore thought to be more 
appropriate, meaning that contact to 
some needed to be established. Contact 
to Copenhagen Centre for Cancer and 
Health was established. (Appendix 11) 
However no patient contacts were 
established. Therefore another channel was selected for reaching out to former patients. 
Through social media four former patients who had experiences within hospitalisation 
were found. Individual workshops were held with each expert. 
The goal for these workshops was to gain insights on the following three questions for 
each of the five concepts. 
•	 What is working in this concept?
•	 What is not working or could be potential negative side effects of this concept?
•	 What other ideas does this concept give?
Low-tech prototypes were selected as tools to reflect the five concepts. They 
were used as boundary objects between the expert users and the design team. 
When presenting users to prototypes that are roughly sketched, it is easier for 
them to give honest feedback and focus on the high-level value propositions of 
the concept.  If the concepts on the other hand look “too done” the focus will 
often be on smaller details such as fonts, colours, etc (Telono 2018).    
The feedback from the workshops were generally positive. Many important insights were 
collected. The tendency was that the experts liked the concepts concerning the preparation 
for the doctor consultation (concept 2) and the digital information board (concept 3) the 
most. The overall output of the workshops were the following: 
•	 A concept that is has a specific and easy to understand will be better received by the 
healthcare personnel
•	 Not all patients benefit from having information about their hospitalisation 
available, before they have talked to the healthcare personnel, as the information can 
be misunderstood. This can potentially lead to more concerns. 
•	 The information presented to the patients regarding their stay should be easily 
understood and should not contain too many medical terms.
Figure 32.  Expert workshop
==PAGE:75==
63
Develop 
The feedback was used as inputs to the evaluation of the concepts. 
Accurate and unbiased feedback is essential if it should be used for evaluating 
the core value of the concepts. Giving unbiased feedback is however impossible 
for users to give, as they will always judge the concepts based on their own 
experiences. It can be difficult for users to say which concept in general creates 
the most value (De Young 1991). Consequently selection of a concept should 
not solely be based on feedback from the experts, but also be based on the list of 
requirements and insights gathered throughout the project. 
 
5.4	 Evaluation of concepts 
The concepts were evaluated in order to select one for further development. The choice 
should reflect the List of requirements (Appx. 7). Therefore the method Weighted 
Objectives Method (WOM),(Cross 2008) was selected. The full WOM table may be seen 
in appendix 9. In a WOM objectives are set up to evaluate the concepts. Each objective is 
given a weight depending on how important it is seen to be, for the entire evaluation of 
the concept.  The objectives for evaluation where the following. Note: the full names of the 
objectives are in the full WOM table.
The concept selected for further development, which also got the highest score was
Concept 2 - Prepare for doctor consultation. This concept was selected for multiple reasons:
Firstly; all of the concepts align with the problem definition (Section 3.4), by focusing on 
improving the transparency of health information for patients in a way that does not take 
additional time from the healthcare personnel:
•	 In relation to creating transparency, concept 1,3,4 and 5 provides this by giving 
the patients more insight into their health information by digital tools. Therefore 
they do not focus on oral communication with the healthcare personnel. Concept 
2 provides transparency by making it easier to receive health information directly 
from the healthcare personnel by talking to them. 
•	 In relation to not taking additional time from the healthcare personnel, concept 2 
solves this by making it possible to utilize the time already reserved to talk with the 
healthcare personnel more efficiently. The other concepts solves this challenge by 
informing the patients without involving the healthcare personnel (by using digital 
tools instead).
•	 Cater to different needs
•	 Transparency 
•	 Enhanced communication
•	 Feeling of control
•	 Simple to use
•	 Relieve of concerns
•	 Cheap to implement
•	 Time from healthcare personnel
==PAGE:76==
64
Develop 
It was concluded that the differences between concept 2 and the concept 1,3,4 and 5 is that 
concept 2 focuses on enhancing direct communication. Thereby, individual patient needs 
can be satisfied and potential mistakes leading to additional concerns can be avoided. In 
addition to fulfilling the problem definition, concept 2 also satisfies the goal for the future 
and avoids the potential side effects.2
Secondly; Concept 2 got the highest score in the WOM, which indicates that it satisfies the 
list of requirements to the highest grade. Therefore it will take contextual factors regarding 
the hospitalisation into account and fit into the hospital environment.  
Thirdly; Patients voice that the doctor consultation is an important even of their 
hospitalisation experience (Section 2.3.3) therefore improving this event, can make a big 
change for the patients.
What about the energy level of the patients? 
By creating greater transparency of health information, patients will be relieved 
of concerns. Thereby, patients will be relieved from the racing thoughts, which 
can be a consequence of dealing with unanswered questions regarding their 
health information. The patients will therefore spend less energy on concerns 
and the concept will provide a better mental comfort.
2   Goals for the future: To improve the hospitalisation experience for cancer patients by providing access to 
health information, create mental comfort and relieve patients of concerns.
Side effect to be avoided: That the solution has an negative effect the patient’s health or on the healthcare 
personnel’s workflow in regards to time and task handling. That the solution leads to additional concerns for 
the patients.
==PAGE:77==
65
Develop 
5.5	 Conclusion
In this chapter the solution space for ideas was explored, followed by the development of 
five concepts. Afterwards low-tech prototypes were created in order to gain a common 
understanding of the concepts. Furthermore the prototypes worked as boundary objects 
between the design team and the experts who were invited in for giving feedback on the 
concepts. The feedback was used as input to the evaluation of the concepts. The concepts 
were evaluated via a WOM. On basis of this, Concept 2 - preparing for the doctor 
consultation, was selected for further work. The concept should work as a tool that helps 
patients to prepare for the doctor consultation by guiding them through some easy to fill 
out steps about what should be discussed during the consultation. This should be done by 
the following features: mood evaluation, example topics and note down questions.
The concept was selected based on the following benefits:
•	 It allows patients to a large extent to participate actively in their course of treatments 
via direct communication with the healthcare personnel 
•	 It accommodates for individual patient needs 
•	 It utilizes time that the healthcare personnel already has reserved for talking to the 
patient 
•	 It meets the requirement from the WOM and therefore takes contextual factors into 
account
Consequently, concept 2 gives the patients transparency of their health information, 
relieving them of concerns, while not disturbing the workflow of the healthcare personnel.
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
APPROACH
•	 Map out the process of the doctor consultation
•	 Specify additional contextual requirements
•	 Specify the concept’s core functions
•	 Verify the concept via expert workshops 
•	
Previous doctor at Dep. Hematology (x1)
•	
Nurse at, Dep. Hematology (x1)
GOAL
•	 Gain further insights into the process of doctor consultations 
•	 Specify concept in regards to contextual requirements, scope 
and features
•	 Understand how the concept works in a hospital situation
Preparing for the doctor consultation
6 Concept detailing
==PAGE:80==
68
Concept Detailing 
Chapter 6.	Concept detailing 
The aim of this phase was to work further on detailing the selected concept. The process 
in relation to the doctor consultation was therefore investigated where related needs 
and challenges were identified. An area of focus in relation to the process of the doctor 
consultation was selected. Furthermore, the features of the concept were evaluated and 
detailed. In the end the concept was validated with expert users.
6.1	 Further insights into the doctor consultation 
Through the literature review (Chapter 1) and fieldwork (Chapter 2), the design team got 
the impression that better preparation for the patients before could help solve many of the 
challenges with this event. The concept was created on this assumption. In order to verify 
this assumption and the scope of the concept, the whole process of the event was mapped 
out. 
The illustration below is a storyboard that presents the processes around the doctor 
consultations (Figure 33) 
The experience around the existing process of the doctor consultation can be a cause 
of concern for patients. The main challenges and needs for the process of the doctor 
consultation, can be seen in Figure 34.
Figure 33.  The process of the doctor consultation
Patients prepares for 
doctor’s consultation. 
If patients have any 
questions to bring into 
doctor’s consultation 
they typically try 
remember them or note 
them down. 
Doctor and nurse 
prepare for consultation. 
They talk about what 
plans are for patient and 
the treatment and what 
should be said in the 
consultation
During the doctor’s 
consultation, the doctor 
and nurse presents 
the patient’s health 
status and talks about 
future treatment plans. 
Afterwards they ask the 
patients if they has any 
questions.
After the consultation, 
the patient reflects upon 
what has been said. 
Furthermore the doctor 
and nurse wrap up the 
consultation and note 
down the conclusions in 
their internal systems.
==PAGE:81==
69
Concept Detailing 
As seen in the illustration there are challenges and needs for both the patients and the health­
care personnel. For the patients, the consultation is an opportunity to get more transparency of 
health information regarding their disease and treatment at the hospital. It is also an opportunity 
to talk about how they feel about their situation and what concerns they might have. However, 
this opportunity is not used to the full extent today. The patients express that it can be hard to 
know what to ask about and that it is easy to forget questions for the consultations. Furthermore, 
during the consultation itself, the doctors tend to steer the conversation around treatment and 
diagnosis. The patients express that it can be hard to keep up with the information given by the 
consultation while remembering their own questions. In addition, the main focus on treatment 
and diagnosis can lead to other facets of the patient’s experience, such as concerns and emotional 
state, being overlooked. Discussing these topics and making sure that all questions are answered 
are important in order to create transparency of health information, and thereby relieve the 
patients of concerns.
The challenges for the healthcare personnel mainly revolves around that it can be hard to 
know what needs different patients have for the consultation. As a doctor or nurse it is not 
always easy to know if the patients have gotten all questions answered. It can also be hard 
to remember to tell patients about relevant offers from the hospital, for example that it is 
possible to talk to a psychologist, if they do not know that the patients are feeling down. 
Most of the challenges can be solved by better preparation for the consultation. Only the 
patients know what is most important for them and by being better prepared they can take 
a more active role. However, it can be challenging to prepare on a low energy level. It was 
therefore decided that helping patients prepare was the focus with the biggest potential. 
Consequently keep the same scope. 
Figure 34.  Challenges and needs of the doctor consultation
==PAGE:82==
70
Concept Detailing 
6.2	 Detailing the concept
The initial detailing of the concept looked at its form. Even though the initial concept 
(Section 5.2) was a digital solution, an analogue paper version of the concept could provide 
much of the same value for the patient. Time was therefore spent making sure that a 
digital solution would be the best decision for the context. An internal evaluation of an 
analogue vs. a digital solution was made based of the list of requirements as well as insights 
about the hospital context. It became clear that going with a digital solution had the 
following advantages:
•	 Time from healthcare personnel (Appx. 7): An analogue version would require the 
healthcare personnel to print out papers for the patients, while a digital version 
could run independently. 
•	 The requirement for a clean and hygienic hospital requirement (Appx. 7): A paper solution 
could mean a lot of papers lying around the ward, while a digital solution could be 
kept to one device.
•	 The future hospital: The hospital personnel have mentioned that an idea for the future 
would be to give every patient their own tablet. From the literature study (Section 
1.1.1) it was seen that the hospital is becoming more digital. A digital solution would 
therefore fit the future hospital context. 
The result of this evaluation was to go with a digital solution. The features will now be 
presented. The flow of the interface can be seen in Appendix 10.
6.2.1.	 Core features - Mood
The first core feature of the concept was “Mood”. It was based on the following challenge 
from Figure 34: 
•	 “Sometimes, my emotions overshadow everything and I cannot think clearly and 
don’t know what to ask the doctor about”.  
From the challenge it can be seen that the patient’s mood can impact how well they can 
prepare for the doctor consultation. The mood feature should therefore help the patients 
reflect on their own mood and the reason behind it. This will help them think more 
clearly. 
The thoughts behind the detailing of the mood feature were the following: In order 
to make sure that the Mood feature would prompt reflection from the patients, it was 
decided to focus on more than one dimension of emotion. This would allow for deeper 
reflection from the patients. It was decided to use Design for Emotion and the Circumplex 
model of core affect (Figure 35) as the theoretical base. However, the Circumplex model 
in its original form is quite complex. It it not optimal for direct practical use as can be 
challenging to know exactly where on the two axis one is. Existing solutions for simpler 
mapping of emotions were researched (Desmet 2013)(Delft Institute of Positive Design 
2012). However, these solutions were found to be too complex for the energy level of 
the patients, or too shallow, not allowing for enough reflection. Instead, a new way of 
translating the model into practical use was developed.
==PAGE:83==
71
Concept Detailing 
Figure 35.  Circumplex model of core affect
The framework consists of three steps: 
Step 1 & 2
The challenge with this feature was to make it easy to fill out, while at the same time 
promote reflection. Instead of presenting the user with all options at once, the framework 
helps the user to place themselves on the two axis by presenting one axis at a time. 
Presenting a user with too many options can however also make it hard for them to choose 
an option. An axis has an unlimited number of options, and to place something on an axis 
therefore requires a lot of evaluation from a user. Therefore, each axis is divided into the 
following options:
•	 For the valence dimension the three options are: Pleasant, neutral and unpleasant. 
•	 For the arousal dimension the three options are: calm, neutral and active. 
Choosing between one of the three options for the two dimensions will place the user on 
the wheel in the Circumplex model. The logic is explained in the following in Figure 36
Step 1
==PAGE:84==
72
Concept Detailing 
After choosing one option in each of these two steps, the user has placed themselves on the 
wheel. (Figure 37)
Step 3
In order to promote deeper reflection from the user and include moods and emotions of 
different intensity, the last step is:
•	 Present user with some additional detail terms. 
As the original circumplex model does not offer any terms that describe different 
intensities of emotions or very neutral emotions, these have been added. The following 
examples explain the logic behind the terms presented (Figure 38, 39):
Figure 36.  Step one and two
Figure 37.  The mapping of  emotions based on step 1 & 2
Step 2
Step 1 & Step 2
==PAGE:85==
73
Concept Detailing 
The user chooses: 	
      +
The user is presented with words that relate to:
•	 Calm
•	 Pleasant
•	 Calm-Pleasant
Topic words: 
•	 Calm
•	 Relaxed
•	 Satisfied
•	 Content
•	 Safe
•	 Awaiting
The user chooses: 	
      +
The user is presented with words that relate to:
•	 Calm
•	 Neutral
•	 Calm-Neutral
Topic words:
•	 Calm
•	 Awaiting
•	 Deferen
•	 Neutral
•	 Even
•	 Indifferent
By going through these three steps to identify current mood and emotions, the users gets 
a chance to reflect on their feelings and possible causes for these feelings. The described 
framework is believed to have a low complexity level for the user.
Figure 38.  Area of topic words for example 1
Figure 39.  Area of topic words for example 2
 Step 3 - Example 1
 Step 3 - Example 2
==PAGE:86==
74
Concept Detailing 
6.2.2.	 Core features - Suggestions for discussion
Another core feature of the concept was “suggestions for discussion”.  It was based on the 
following challenges, from Figure 34: 
•	 “I need to understand what the doctor can help me with” 
•	 “ I don’t know what to ask about “
From the challenges it can be seen that patients find it difficult to translate anxiety, 
concerns and hopes into concrete questions. There was therefore a need for a feature that 
helps the patients with asking questions and provides information about offers from the 
hospital. 1
It was decided that the concept needed to provide the patients with: example topics, 
questions and concerns all for discussion with the doctor. Furthermore patients should be 
able to see the most frequently selected questions, concerns and topics from other patients. 
(A suggestion that came from the feedback session with patients (Section 5.3).  A mind 
map was created in order to get an overview of the possibilities that could be included 
(Figure 40).
 
Via the example questions, topics and concerns the following should be enhanced:
•	 Give patients inspiration of what to ask about 
•	 Give patients insights into their possibilities in relation to available offers for cancer 
patients, such as the possibility to get an appointment with a physiotherapist if ones 
mobility is becoming reduced. 
•	 Help patients talk about more taboo breaking subjects that may be uncomfortable to 
talk about. For example questions related to how cancer affects one’s sexual life. 
•	 Lower barriers for bringing up topics that can be difficult to talk about. E.g. death.  
1	
Such as talking to a psychologist or a priest
Figure 40.  Mind map
==PAGE:87==
75
Concept Detailing 
6.2.3.	 Core features - Note down questions
The third core feature of the concept was “Note down questions”. It was based on the 
following challenge from Figure 34: 
•	 I need help noting down my questions, otherwise I forget them” 
 It was therefore decided that the concept should provide patients with a place to save their 
questions for use during the consultation. It was therefore important that it was quick to 
use whenever the question arose.
6.3	 Validation of concept and potential
In order to validate the concept, 
feedback sessions were conducted 
with the healthcare personnel. The 
focus was on understanding how an 
implementation of the concept would 
affect the healthcare personnel and 
their work procedures. This was 
seen as important as one of the main 
requirements for a new solution to 
be adopted, was that the solution 
would not impact the healthcare 
personnel’s workflow negatively.  A 
doctor who had previously worked 
at the Department of Hematology 
and a nurse from the department 
were invited in for feedback sessions. (Figure 41).The feedback from the experts was 
overall very positive, and gave an impression that the concept would fit the context of the 
hospital. In addition, the sessions provided some further insights that led to the following 
alterations and refinements:
Included in the concept:
•	 During preparation, patients should be able to prioritise their questions. The 
consultations may be short and the doctors may not have time to answer all the 
questions at a meeting. 
•	 The screens that the patient’s interact with should be kept simple and should easily 
communicate the meaning of a function. Icons are good for this.
Potential for future versions:
•	 During preparation, patients could be able to request an appointment with a doctor
•	 If the questions asked by the patients are logged, the board of directors at the 
department could use the data to understand areas of improvement. If a question is 
asked several times by a patient it might indicate an area that could be improved.
The feedback provided did therefore not change the overall concept, but provided input to 
some additional features that could be added.  
Figure 41.  Final feedback session
==PAGE:88==
76
Concept Detailing 
6.4	 Conclusion
In this chapter the scope of the selected concept was revisited. It was chosen to maintain 
the focus on patients’ preparation for the doctor consultation. This was chosen as it was 
believed to be the focus that would provide the most value for the patients and healthcare 
personnel. Furthermore, the decision of a digital concept was evaluated and the concept 
features detailed. During detailing the following was decided: 
•	 Mood: The theory behind the Circumplex model of core affect should be used for 
patients to express their emotional state. However, it was decided that the model was 
too complex for patients to fill out. It was therefore decided to split up the emotional 
evaluation in two steps after the two axis.
•	 Suggestions for discussion: The patients should get inspiration of what to ask about 
during the consultation via suggestions of topics, concerns and questions. To find 
out what the topics, concerns and questions could be included, a mind map was 
created. 
•	 Notetaking: It was decided that the concept should provide patients with a place to 
save their questions for use during the consultation
After detailing of the concept, expert users were invited to give feedback on it. The 
feedback was overall very positive, but resulted in some alterations of the concept. 
==PAGE:89==
77
Concept Detailing 
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
Presentation of end cpncept
7  Aceso
==PAGE:92==
80
Presentation of end concept 
Chapter 7.	Presentation of end concept
Aceso
A digital tool that makes it easy for hospitalised cancer patients to prepare for their doctor 
consultations
The app ensures that patients are involved in the conversation, that their needs are 
seen and lets the patients become more informed on their situation and course of 
hospitalisation. This is done by the following features: 
Let patients reflect on their current mood
Whatever emotional state patients are in, it is important that they reflect upon it and 
what the cause of it could be. By reflecting, the patients can develop a deeper level of 
understanding of themselves and how they feel in certain situations. Consequently it will 
be easier for patients to express their needs towards the healthcare personnel. It is possible 
for patients to reflect on their mood via the feature My Mood (Figure 42). The feature allow 
patients to explore their mood in depth by three easy to fill out steps:
•	 Express mood by selecting between three options ranging from unpleasant to 
pleasant
•	 Detail arousal level by selecting between three options ranging from calm to active
•	 Further detail mood by selecting relevant detail terms such as “Satisfied” and 
“Awaiting”
Figure 42.  Mood feature
==PAGE:93==
81
Presentation of end concept 
Make sure that patients do not forget their questions
Whenever a question relevant for the doctor consultation come to mind, it is essential that 
patients have a place to note them down. Otherwise they may forget them. It can however 
be troublesome for them to do now, as they do not have anywhere to write them down. 
Facilitating an easy way of noting down questions is therefore important.  
The feature Add custom question (Figure 43) allows patients to easily note down their 
questions while they are still fresh in mind. The feature is available for patients on most 
screens in the app. First of all on the home screen, which provides access all the possible 
features of the app. 
Figure 43.  Home screen
==PAGE:94==
82
Presentation of end concept 
Find inspiration of what to discuss with the doctor
Patients do not always have a surplus of mental energy to figure out what information is 
important to procure. Questions can be easy to forget, some topics be uncomfortable to 
bring up and the patient might simply not know what to ask about.  It can for example be 
hard to request an appointment with a psychologist, if it is not clear that it is something 
the hospital offers. 
Making sure that the patients discuss what is important for them can be done via the 
feature Suggestions for discussion (Figure 44). The feature allow patients for the discovery of 
possible topics, questions and concerns that might be relevant for the doctor consultation. 
When a relevant question or concern has been found, the patient can save it. The 
questions are mainly based on what other patients frequently asks about. This might lower 
the barrier for the patients to bring up topics they are unsure about. In some of the 
questions and concerns, information about possible services and offers are integrated.  
Figure 44.  My preperation - Suggestions for discussion 
==PAGE:95==
83
Presentation of end concept 
Keep the consultation on track
During the consultation patients experience that the doctor steers the conversation. 
Consequently it can be easy for the patients to forget their own agendas. As consultations 
are limited on time, it is important that they are kept on track, so the patients get answers 
to the questions that are important for them. Making sure that the consultations are kept 
on track is possible when the patients are well prepared, and have their questions and 
concerns with them during the consultation.
The feature My questions & topics  (Figure 45) allow patients to see their saved questions 
and topics during the doctor consultation. Furthermore, it is possible for the patients to 
see which questions are the most important for them to ask about. 
Figure 45.  My questions & topics
==PAGE:96==
84
Presentation of end concept 
7.1	
What value does Aceso provide?
Aceso provides therapeutic value to the patients, as it allow patients to 
discuss deep fears and innermost thoughts in relation to their disease. 
Additionally it enables patients to open up and discuss embarrassing or 
taboo-breaking topics with the doctor. 
During the consultation, Aceso facilitates access to the healthcare 
personnel’s knowledge and insights. This enables patients to take better 
decisions regarding their health. 
After using Aceso, patients will worry less and feel more 
secure. Giving words to difficult topics will reduce the 
concerns of the patients and thereby improve their mental 
well-being. 
Aceso provide the patients with information about the offers that are 
available for the patients, such as talking to a psychiatrist or priest.   
Aceso will make it easier for patients to put words to their concerns and 
needs. Thereby the effort of gaining this knowledge will be reduced for the 
healthcare
 personnel. This will make it easier for the healthcare personnel to consider 
the needs of the individual patient.
==PAGE:97==
85
Presentation of end concept 
7.2	 How does Aceso work?
As seen Aceso should be used by patient on a tablet (Figure 46). This requires the 
department to have tablets with the app installed, available for patients to borrow during 
their stay. The tablets will be handed out when the patients get admitted, available for the 
patients to use 24/7. The tablets should be handed in when the patients are discharged. 
7.3	 Potential impact
Aceso should be available for each hospitalised patient at the department of Hematology 
and Oncology at Rigshospitalet as these are the departments that mainly deal with cancer 
treatments. Based on that, the solution is estimated to have an effect on 4000 patients 
yearly.1 Thereby Aceso can improve the lives of many cancer patients. 
1   Calculation: The average of patients hospitalised in the Department of Hematology, Rigshospitalet is 
yearly 2000. It is assumed that the Department of Oncology accommodate around the same amount of 
patients. Further insights are however needed in order to give an exact number.
Figure 46.  Storyboard of use
==PAGE:98==
86
Presentation of end concept 
7.4	 Potential for future versions  
Aceso has potential to facilitate the whole process of the doctor consultation, from start to 
end. Extending the use scenario requires adding more features. It is suggested to be done in 
two steps as illustrated in the figure below (Figure 47)
7.4.1.	 Version 2 - Including the healthcare personnel  
The step forward from the first iteration of the app is to extend the use to the healthcare 
personnel and their preparation for the consultation. This can be done by letting the 
doctor and nurse responsible for consultation see what questions and concerns that the 
patient has prepared. The app would be used in the preparation before each consultation 
and help set the agenda for the meeting where the patient’s wishes were already taken 
into consideration. Knowing what the patient want to talk about before the meeting, 
could help them be better prepared to meet the patients and would make it easier for the 
healthcare personnel to involve the patient. Additionally allowing the healthcare personnel 
to know the mood of the patients before consultations could help them be better prepared 
to meet the patients and ensure their needs are met. 
 
7.4.2.	 Version 3 - From preparation tool to facilitation tool
The earlier versions only focus on the preparation before the doctor consultation and not 
the consultation itself or the events that happen after. There is however a potential to 
extend the solution to cover the whole doctor consultation thereby all three phases: before, 
during and after the consultation. The app would then go from being more of a note 
taking and reflection tool, to an interactive facilitation tool. 
Extending Aceso to the entire process of the doctor consultation requires that the 
following features would be added: 
For the patients: 
Noting the answers to the questions:   Making it possible for patients or next of kin to note 
down the answers to the patients’ questions during the consultation or after. 
Figure 47.  Potential for future versions
==PAGE:99==
87
Presentation of end concept 
History:  It would be possible for patients to see own questions and answers from earlier 
consultations. The data would be stored in the hospital’s information system, for example 
Sundhedsplatformen, so that the patients could access the data after their discharge. 
Request a consultation: Making it possible for patients to indicate that they want a 
consultation the following day. This would also relieve the nurses of coming by every day 
to ask the patient.
For the department leaders:
Statistics over time:  Adding the feature to see what questions, concerns and topics are most 
commonly discussed over a period of time. This would highlight areas of improvement 
for the experience of hospitalisation. Using the data from the app could help identify for 
example what information the patients are not getting and thereby help the department 
improve. This task would fall on the department leaders as the nurses and doctors are 
more focused on the daily care.
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
8 Discussion
==PAGE:102==
90
Discussion 
Chapter 8.	Discussion and further work
The following chapter will present some key reflections on the process and final results of 
the project as well as relevant limitations. Furthermore, it will take a look into the future 
work for getting towards an implemented solution.
8.1	 Contribution to literature 
Identification of 9 key concerns
This project has had a practical approach with the aim of developing an intervention tool. 
The main contributions to theory therefore comes from the analysis phase of the project. 
As the scope for the literature background and empirical study was quite broad, the 
findings from the analysis are relevant for anyone that wishes to understand the hospital 
context and the experiences for cancer patients. The identified 9 key concerns provide 
valuable insight into the minds of patients hospitalised with cancer. As these concerns will 
influence how the patients react to different situations, they should be kept in mind when 
developing any new solution in the same context. 
Mood Framework
Another contribution to literature is the new framework developed for patients to reflect 
on their mood. It required finding a way to simplify the Circumplex model of core affect 
for practical use, while still retaining the baseline idea behind the original framework. 
Finding a balance between simplicity and complexity in relation to expressing ones mood, 
has therefore been crucial. If the framework was too simple, the mood of the patients 
would only be reflected in one dimension of emotions (e.g. good or bad). This may not 
allow patients for enough reflection of their emotional state. If the framework on the other 
hand was too complex, the required level of energy to fulfil the task might be too high for 
the patients. Therefore much effort was put into finding a balance. More work is needed 
to verify the details of the new framework, but it is our belief that the new framework 
contributes with a practical way of measuring emotions in several dimensions for use in 
physical solutions. In addition, the new framework introduces terms to describe more 
neutral emotions, which we believe is not common for existing practical use tools (Desmet 
2013)(Delft Institute of Positive Design 2012). 
8.2	 Reflection on the process 
Scoping the project
For this project it was decided that gaining a deep understanding of the context and 
stakeholders as well as identifying their needs and concerns was important. A lot of time 
was therefore spent on gaining this understanding. We believe that spending time on 
the context and analysis resulted in an end concept that tackles a real need. Furthermore, 
making sure that the end concept would fit into the hospital context increased its potential 
of making a difference. For the project however, this meant that there was less time to 
work on finishing the detailing and testing of the final solution.
==PAGE:103==
91
Discussion 
Another cause of a shorter detailing and testing phase was the initial problem scope of 
the project. The project initially took a starting point in a much more concrete problem 
statement given to the design team by a contact at the hospital. However, after the initial 
fieldwork it became clear that the proposed problem did not exist in the same scale 
as initially assumed. As a big part of the motivation for the project was the potential 
of making a real difference for patients, working based on a real need was seen as 
fundamental. Therefore it was decided to proceed with a wide scope that focused on the 
whole hospitalisation experience, which later could be narrowed down after identification 
of a real problem. Changing the scope late in the process, however resulted in being able to 
spend less time on the finalizing the end concept.
Collaboration with hospital stakeholders 
One factor that has affected the project in a significant way was the collaboration with 
different stakeholders, mainly Rigshospitalet. In order to gain insights based in real life, 
access to the hospital environment, patients and healthcare personnel has been crucial. It 
allowed the design team to go back and verify assumptions, and get feedback throughout 
the course of the project. However, the hospital is a busy environment where the main 
objective is treating patients. Therefore we were taken by surprise with respect to the 
timeframe given to us by the hospital. We had to adjust to the timeframe of the empirical 
study, set by the hospital partner. It is hard to see how this could have been avoided, 
however it is something that we would keep in mind for future projects that require 
interactions with a hospital.
8.3	 Limitations of process 
Basing empirical study on insights from one department  
Fieldwork at the hospital has mainly been performed in Team 1, at the Department of 
Hematology. We only have limited insights into other teams and departments and the 
possible differences that would affect the solution. Even though we largely believe that 
there are not any significant differences, it is worth to keep in mind, that it is something 
to be investigated. An effort was made to get in touch with some of the other teams and 
departments that deal with cancer, however it was only possible to a certain extent within 
the time frame of the project. 
Choice of stakeholders 
As the doctor consultation became the focus for the end concept, it would have been 
ideal to involve more than one doctor in the project. This would have allowed for various 
viewpoints on the doctors experiences in relation to the doctor consultation. However, the 
main focus of the overall project has been on improving the experience for the patients, 
and therefore the focus was on interviewing patients and nurses (who are close to the 
patients (Section 2.3.2). Due to the timeframe of the project it was decided not to spend 
time on establishing new contacts to doctors near the end of the project, however it is a 
limitation to be aware of.   
==PAGE:104==
92
Discussion 
Another stakeholder group which could have been more involved in the project, was the 
next of kin. It was clear from the empirical study that next of kin play an important role for 
many patients. However, it was also clear that not every patient has next of kin and if even 
if they do, the next of kin are not always present in the hospital. As a result of this insight, 
it became a focus not develop concepts dependent on next of kin. Therefore next of kin 
was not directly interviewed. By making this choice, we might however have missed out 
on some good insights from the stakeholder group. It was as a trade-off between time and 
importance for the project, but is another limitation of the project.
8.4	 Reflections on the end concept 
Completion of aim 
There are many areas of the hospitalisation experience for patients that could be improved. 
We chose to focus on the preparation for the doctor consultation, which could be 
argued to be quite a narrow focus. However, the empirical study showed that the doctor 
consultation is one of the main events that affect the patient’s experience of hospitalisation 
the most (Section 2.3.3). Therefore, we believe that our end concept has big potential to 
improve the hospitalisation experience for patients overall. 
Being more prepared does not necessarily equal that the patients are more involved 
in their course of treatment. However, better preparation for the doctor consultation 
will create a better basis for making decisions, and give the patients a feeling of being 
more involved. Furthermore, establishing an effective dialogue addressing the patients’ 
questions, will give patients access to the healthcare personnel’s knowledge. Therefore 
it is believed that the end concept will create more transparency of health information. 
The value added is believed to be that patients will worry less which will reduce their 
concerns and improve their mental well-being. Thereby it is believed that the goal created 
in relation to the problem statement has been fulfilled: Improve the hospitalisation 
experience for cancer patients by providing access to health information, create mental 
comfort and relieve patients of concerns.
Potential and reliability of the end concept
We believe that focusing on a single event during hospitalisation has resulted in a feasible 
end concept. It is flexible in that it only deals with one part of one event and should not 
affect other events in the hospital in a negative way. This also makes it easy to implement, 
as it does not require restructuring of the current activity flow. It is possible to test if the 
solution gives the desired results before scaling up and adding more features in future 
versions (Section 7.4). In addition, the end concept has potential for expanding to other 
users and locations, such as other types of patients or parts of the hospital. We therefore 
believe that scoping the project down to this level was a success. 
==PAGE:105==
93
Discussion 
Potentially unwanted effects
Ideally, Aceso will only have a positive impact on the hospital context and its stakeholders. 
However, introducing new technology can affect the situations and events in ways that are 
hard to predict during the design process (Paasch 2014). The following are some potential 
unwanted effects that is important to keep an eye out for: 
•	 Affecting the healthcare personnel’s workflow in a negative way. This includes 
taking up time or mental resources.
•	 Creating expectations of patients are required to use the solution. The use 
is voluntary and choosing to not use the solution, should not have negative 
consequences for the patients.
•	 Sharing of private patient data without the patient’s consent.
•	 The technology should not take the healthcare personnel’s focus away from 
the patients. It is important to verify that the solution creates more room for 
compassion, and not draw focus over to the technology.
8.5	 Limitations of end concept 
Even though we believe that the end concept takes many different factors of the context 
and users into account, it does have some limitations. Firstly, it is an app for personal use 
which requires a tablet. In order to get the solution out to as many patients as possible, 
it requires the hospital to invest in tablets that the patients can borrow. Although this is 
something Team 1 have been thinking about as a possibility for the future, it still requires 
an investment from the hospital.  
The second limitation is that using the solution requires some familiarity with using 
digital interfaces such as a tablet.  Many of the patients in Team 1 are elderly, and even 
though digital solutions are becoming the new norm and focus has been put on making the 
interface easy to use, it is worth to note there will be some patients that cannot use the app. 
Lastly, there is a limitation related to the information that is displayed in the app. The 
suggestions for topics, questions and concerns to discuss are meant to help the patients 
reflect but will also most likely point the reflection in a direction. Care should be taken 
into making sure that the right topics are chosen in order to create most value for the 
patients.
==PAGE:106==
94
Discussion 
8.6	 Further work 
This section will outline key steps to continue the development of the end concept into an 
implemented solution. Furthermore, a roadmap for getting to future versions of the app is 
proposed. 
Involving additional stakeholders
In order not to miss out on valuable insights and potential, as well as ensuring a successful 
implementation, the following stakeholders should be involved in the future work on the 
project.
•	 Doctors: As mentioned in the discussion a step for the future work is involving more 
doctors. 
•	 Next of kin: Next of kin can play an important role for patients (Section 2.3.2), and 
could therefore also be involved in the future work. 
•	 Hospital management:  The hospital management dictate the prioritisation of time 
and resources in the hospital. Therefore, having the management on board is key 
to a successful implementation and adoption of a viable solution. They should be 
involved after finalising the solution.
Test within the following aspects: 
In order to verify the outcome of the solution, further testing of the end concept is needed. 
There are mainly two areas that should be in focus:
Verifying the content of suggested topics, questions and concerns with patients 
Verifying the usability and output of the mood feature with patients
Detailing
Further detailing is needed on different aspects of the app. The feedback from stakeholders 
and tests should be used to finish designing the details of the layout, interface and 
programming of the app.
The following implementation plan is an example of how to structure the future work 
allowing for the implementation of version 1 as well as future versions.
==PAGE:107==
95
Discussion 
Figure 48.  Implementation plan
==PAGE:108==
9 Conclusion
==PAGE:109==
97
Conclusion
The overall aim of this thesis was to improve the quality of life for patients 
hospitalised with cancer by improving their hospital experience.  A cancer 
treatment course is complex and requires a lot of time spent admitted at the 
hospital. During hospitalisation patients goes through a lot of potentially 
unpleasant experiences and emotions which can reduce the quality of life. 
It was found that one way of improving patients experiences, was through 
patient involvement. The solution to improving the experience was therefore 
to create an innovative intervention tool that allow patients to be more 
involved and participate actively in their course of hospitalisation. This 
was done through a three-staged thesis, consisting of a Literature Review, 
Investigation and analysis of current practice and Intervention tool development.  The 
Literature Review and Investigation and analysis of current practice resulted 
in identification of 9 key concerns, common for hospitalised cancer patient. 
The concerns fall under three different areas, where one was selected as a base 
for the intervention tool development. The area revolved around the patients’ 
lack of transparency of health information and the controversy between their 
limited energy and the healthcare personnel’s lack of time. 
The result of the thesis is insights into what concerns cancer patients have 
in relation to their hospitalisation. In addition, a concept helping patients 
to participate actively in their course of hospitalisation, without using too 
many mental resources. More specifically Aceso, an app that makes it easy for 
hospitalised cancer patients to prepare for their doctor consultations. It serves 
as a tool for noting down questions and provides examples of topics, concerns 
and questions for discussion with the doctor. The app ensures that patients 
are involved in the conversation, that their needs are seen. Furthermore 
it lets patients become more informed on their situation and course of 
hospitalisation. Aceso can provide great emotional value for the patients 
by reducing anxiety and creating a better foundation for making decisions 
regarding health. 
All in all, Aceso contributes to more patient involvement by solving 
the challenges related to the doctor consultation. Some steps remain on 
developing the end concept before implementation. Further testing is needed 
in order for Aceso to become a validated intervention tool. Future versions of 
Aceso can also be developed to include the healthcare personnel and thereby 
facilitate the whole process of the doctor consultation. Lastly this thesis opens 
up for further improvement of patient involvement, by tackling more of 
the identified concerns. Thereby this thesis contributes to the overall aim of 
providing a better hospitalisation experience for cancer patients.  
==PAGE:110==
98
Bibliography 
Bibliography
Almerud, S. et al., 2007. Of vigilance and invisibility: Being a patient in technologically intense 
environments. Nursing In Critical Care, 12(3), pp.151–158.
Anne Johnson, Bev Gaughwin, N.M. and R.C., 2005. Long-stay views from the hospital bed: patient 
perspectives of organisation of care and impact of hospitalisation. Available at: http://www.publish.csiro.
au.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/ah/pdf/AH050235.
Barrett, L.F. & Bliss-Moreau, E., 2009. Affect as a Psychological Primitive. Advances in experimental social 
psychology, 41, pp.167–218. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20552040 [Accessed 
March 16, 2018].
Beyer, H. & Holtzblatt K, 1998. The Affinity Diagram. In Contextual Design . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers 
Inc., pp. 154–163. Available at: http://pages.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/~saul/wiki/uploads/CPSC681/beyer_holtzblatt.
pdf [Accessed March 16, 2018].
Bom, M., 2012. Gode idéer skal sætte produktiviteten i vejret. Sygeplejersken. Available at: https://bibliotek.
kk.dk/ting/object/infomedia/35169059 [Accessed December 5, 2017].
Christodoulakis, C., Asgarian, A. & Easterbrook, S., 2017. Barriers to Adoption of Information Technology 
in Healthcare. Available at: http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~christina/documents/ACM_CASCON2017.pdf 
[Accessed March 7, 2018].
Coulter, A. & Ellins, J., 2006. Patient-focused interventions A review of the evidence. Available at: http://
www.health.org.uk/sites/health/files/PatientFocusedInterventions_ReviewOfTheEvidence.pdf [Accessed 
December 13, 2017].
Cropley, D. & Cropley, A., 2012. A Psychological Taxonomy of Organizational Innovation: Resolving the 
Paradoxes. Creativity Research Journal. Available at: http://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/doi/
pdf/10.1080/10400419.2012.649234?needAccess=true [Accessed December 27, 2017].
Cross, N., 2008. Engineering design methods : strategies for product design, J. Wiley.
Delft Institute of Positive Design, 2012. Pick-A-Mood pictorial tool for mood measurement. Available at: 
http://studiolab.ide.tudelft.nl/diopd/library/tools/pick-a-mood/ [Accessed March 18, 2018].
Desmet, P., 2013. Premo. Available at: http://studiolab.ide.tudelft.nl/studiolab/desmet/premo/ [Accessed 
March 18, 2018].
Desmet, P. & Hekkert, P., 2007. Framework of Product Experience Human-Product Interaction. 58 
International Journal of Design, 1(1). Available at: www.ijdesign.org.
Desmet, P. & Schifferstein, H., 2012. Emotion Research as Input for Product Design. In Product 
Innovation Toolbox. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 149–175. Available at: http://doi.wiley.
com/10.1002/9781118229248.ch6e [Accessed March 10, 2018].
Desmet, P.M.A., 2008. Product Emotion. In Product Experience. Delft: Elsevier, pp. 379–397. Available at: 
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780080450896500186 [Accessed March 16, 2018].
Ekman, P., 1992. An Argument for basic emotion. Cognition and Emotion. Available at: https://www.
==PAGE:111==
99
Bibliography 
paulekman.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/An-Argument-For-Basic-Emotions.pdf [Accessed March 14, 
2018].
Ellsworth, P.C. & Scherer, K.R., 2001. Apprasial processes in emotion. In Apprasial processes in emotion. 
New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 572–595.
Epstein, R.M. & Street, R.L., 2007. Patient-Centered Communication in Cancer Care: Promoting Healing 
&amp; Reducing Suffering. Available at: https://healthcaredelivery.cancer.gov/pcc/pcc_monograph.
pdf?file=/pcc/communication/pcc_monograph.pdf [Accessed December 4, 2017].
Hassenzahl, M. & Tractinsky, N., 2006a. User experience - a research agenda. Behaviour & 
Information Technology, 25(2), pp.91–97. Available at: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/
abs/10.1080/01449290500330331 [Accessed September 28, 2017].
Hassenzahl, M. & Tractinsky, N., 2006b. User experience - a research agenda. Behaviour & 
Information Technology, 25(2), pp.91–97. Available at: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/
abs/10.1080/01449290500330331 [Accessed November 21, 2017].
Haughom, D.J., 2017a. Innovation in Healthcare: Why It’s Needed and Where It’s Going. HealthCatalyst. 
Available at: https://www.healthcatalyst.com/innovation-in-healthcare-why-needed-where-going [Accessed 
December 5, 2017].
Haughom, D.J., 2017b. The Rising Healthcare Revolution: The Future Is Already Here. HealthCatalyst. 
Available at: https://www.healthcatalyst.com/innovation-in-healthcare-why-needed-where-going [Accessed 
December 5, 2017].
Heerdegen, A.C.S., Petersen, G.S. & Jervelund, S.S., 2017. Determinants of patient satisfaction with cancer 
care delivered by the Danish healthcare system. Cancer, 123(15), pp.2918–2926.
Herzlinger, R.E., 2006. Why Innovation in Health Care Is So Hard. Harvard Business Review. Available at: 
https://hbr.org/2006/05/why-innovation-in-health-care-is-so-hard [Accessed December 4, 2017].
IDEO, 2018. Effective Brainstorming Techniques. Available at: https://www.ideou.com/pages/
brainstorming [Accessed March 17, 2018].
Ingerslev, K., 2015. Crossing and creating boundaries in healthcare innovation. Journal of Health 
Organization and Management, 30(2), pp.541–557. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1108/JHOM-07-2015-
0107 [Accessed December 6, 2017].
Interaction Design Foundation, 2018a. 5 Stages in the Design Thinking Process. Available at: https://www.
interaction-design.org/literature/article/5-stages-in-the-design-thinking-process [Accessed January 29, 
2018].
Interaction Design Foundation, 2018b. What is Emotional Design? Available at: https://www.interaction-
design.org/literature/topics/emotional-design [Accessed March 16, 2018].
Is it a Bird, 2016. Ventet og velkommen. Available at: https://www.hvidovrehospital.dk/om-hospitalet/
visioner-og-maal/Documents/strategi_ventet-og-velkommen.pdf.
Jacobsen, C. et al., 2008. Patientinddragelse mellem ideal og virkelighed –, Available at: https://www.sst.
dk/~/media/AFCF19A968C445238B19027CB3E2CAE4.ashx.
Jamshed, S., 2014. Qualitative research method-interviewing and observation. Journal of basic and clinical 
==PAGE:112==
100
Bibliography 
pharmacy, 5(4), pp.87–8. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25316987 [Accessed March 
16, 2018].
Kim, S.H., Myers, C.G. & Allen, L., 2017. Health Care Providers Can Use Design Thinking to Improve 
Patient Experiences. Harvard Business Review, p.
Kjærside, B. et al., 2014. Indikatormål for “patientinddragelse” - teoretiske og metodiske overvejelser. Igarss 
2014, 2(1), pp.1–5.
Kræftens Bekæmpelse, 2016. Mulige bivirkninger ved kemoterapi. Available at: https://www.cancer.dk/
hjaelp-viden/kraeftbehandling/behandlingsformer/kemoterapi/bivirkninger-kemoterapi/ [Accessed January 
29, 2018].
Kræftens Bekæmpelse, 2018. Statistik – antal der lever med kræft. Available at: https://www.cancer.dk/
hjaelp-viden/fakta-om-kraeft/kraeft-i-tal/nogletal/antal-der-lever-med-kraeft/ [Accessed February 27, 
2018].
Latour, B., 2005. Reassembling the Social An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. Available at: https://
dss-edit.com/plu/Latour_Reassembling.pdf [Accessed March 16, 2018].
LUP, 2016. Den Landsdækkende Undersøgelse af Patientoplevelser 2016. Available at: https://
patientoplevelser.dk/files/dokumenter/filer/LUP/LUP2016/lup_2016_rapport.pdf [Accessed January 11, 
2018].
Marsch, L.A. & Gustafson, D.H., 2013. The Role of Technology in Health Care Innovation: A Commentary. 
Journal of dual diagnosis, 9(1), pp.101–103. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23599690 
[Accessed December 27, 2017].
Nico, H.F., 1986. The Emotions, Cambridge Univ. Press.
Norman, D. & Nielsen, J., 2018. The Definition of User Experience (UX). Available at: https://www.
nngroup.com/articles/definition-user-experience/ [Accessed March 16, 2018].
Norouzinia, R. et al., 2015. Communication Barriers Perceived by Nurses and Patients. Global Journal of 
Health Science, 8(6), p.65. Available at: http://www.ccsenet.org/journal/index.php/gjhs/article/view/52028.
Omachonu, V.K. & Einspruch, N.G., 2010. Innovation in Healthcare Delivery Systems: A Conceptual 
Framework. , 15(151). Available at: https://www.innovation.cc/scholarly-style/omachonu_
healthcare_3innovate2.pdf [Accessed December 4, 2017].
Osborn, A., 1957. Applied imagination : principles and procedures of creative thinking, Available at: https://
trove.nla.gov.au/work/11608745?q&versionId=13647029 [Accessed March 17, 2018].
Parker, R.M., 2006. What an Informed Patient Means for the Future of Healthcare. 
Pharmacoeconomics, 24(2), pp.29–33. Available at: http://production.datastore.cvt.dk/
filestore?oid=5481256a0b2ed09c1532563d&targetid=5481256a0b2ed09c1532563f [Accessed March 14, 
2018].
Patou, F. & Maier, A.M., 2017. Engineering Value-Effective Healthcare Solutions : A Systems Design 
Perspective. International Conference on Engineering Design (ICED17), 3(August), pp.31–40.
Pieter M. A. Desmet, 2012. Faces of Product Pleasure: 25 Positive Emotions in Human-Product Interactions. 
International Journal of Design, 6(2). Available at: www.ijdesign.org [Accessed November 22, 2017].
==PAGE:113==
101
Bibliography 
Plutchik, R., 2001. The Nature of Emotions Human emotions have deep evolutionary roots, a fact that may 
explain their complexity and provide tools for clinical practice. Available at: http://www.jstor.org.proxy.
findit.dtu.dk/stable/pdf/27857503.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3A444cf3ee07e12543b30a4c09a7f0dce7 [Accessed 
March 14, 2018].
Postprint, P. et al., 2009. Nurse-patient interaction and communication : a systematic literature review. , 
17(5), pp.339–353.
Paasch, B.S., 2014. Trådløse telefoners betydning for sygeplejepraksis. Klinisk Sygepleje, (1), pp.23–34.
Regeringen, 2016. Patienternes Kræftplan IV, Available at: https://www.sum.dk/Temaer/~/media/Filer - 
Publikationer_i_pdf/2016/Kraeftplan-IV-aug-2016/Kraeftplan-IV-Patienternes-aug-2016.ashx [Accessed 
March 15, 2018].
Region Hovedstaden, 2018. Sundhedsplatformen - én samlet patientjournal. Available at: https://www.
regionh.dk/sundhedsplatform/om-sundhedsplatformen/Sider/en_samlet_patientjournal.aspx [Accessed 
January 2, 2018].
Reiermann, J., 2017. inddragelse af patienter udfordrer lægers faglighed.pdf.
Rigshospitalet, 2018a. Et højt specialiseret hospital. Available at: https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/ [Accessed 
March 15, 2018].
Rigshospitalet, 2018b. Finsencentret. Available at: https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/afdelinger-og-klinikker/
finsen/Sider/default.aspx [Accessed March 15, 2018].
Rigshospitalet, 2018c. Team 1: Lymfekræft, myelomatose og lymfatisk leukæmi. Available at: https://www.
rigshospitalet.dk/afdelinger-og-klinikker/finsen/haematologisk-klinik/ambulatorier-og-sengeafsnit/Sider/
team-1-lymfekraeft-mylomatose-lymfatisk-leukaemi.aspx [Accessed January 29, 2018].
Russell, J.A., 2003. Core Affect and the Psychological Construction of Emotion. American Psychological 
Association. Available at: http://ivizlab.sfu.ca/arya/Papers/Others/Emotions/Core_Affect.pdf [Accessed 
March 10, 2018].
Saha, D., Sinha, R.K. & Bhavsar, K., 2011. Understanding job stress among healthcare staff. Online Journal of 
Health and Allied Sciences, 10(1), pp.1–4.
Sahlsten, M.J.M. et al., 2008. An Analysis of the Concept of Patient Participation. Nursing Forum, 43(1), 
pp.2–11. Available at: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1744-6198.2008.00090.x [Accessed November 28, 
2017].
Shanafelt, T.D. et al., 2005. Relationship between increased personal well-being and enhanced empathy 
among internal medicine residents. Journal of general internal medicine, 20(7), pp.559–64. Available at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16050855 [Accessed December 29, 2017].
Shanafelt, T.D. & Michael Krasner, J.S., 2009. Enhancing Meaning in Work A Prescription for Preventing 
Physician Burnout and Promoting Patient-Centered Care. JAMA, 302302(9). Available at: http://jama.ama-
assn.org/cgi/content/full/302/12/1338 [Accessed December 29, 2017].
Sundhedsdatastyrelsen, 2016. Cancerregisteret - Tal og analyse, Available at: https://sundhedsdatastyrelsen.
dk/da/tal-og-analyser/analyser-og-rapporter/sygdomme/cancerregisteret [Accessed March 15, 2018].
Sygeplejersken, 2017. Opgøret med de 2%. Available at: https://dsr.dk/sygeplejersken/arkiv/sy-nr-2017-1/
==PAGE:114==
102
Bibliography 
opgoeret-med-de-2 [Accessed November 30, 2017].
Sygeplejersken, 2015. patientinvolvering et begreb med praktisk potentiale.
Sørensen, E.E., 2016. Sådan rammer besparelser hospitalerne. TV2 Lorry. Available at: https://www.
tv2lorry.dk/artikel/oversigt-saadan-rammer-besparelser-hospitalerne [Accessed November 30, 2017].
Telono, 2018. Lo-Fi vs. Hi-Fi Prototyping: how real does the real thing have to be? Available at: https://
www.telono.com/en/articles/lo-fi-vs-hi-fi-prototyping-how-real-does-the-real-thing-have-to-be/ 
[Accessed March 17, 2018].
Troest, Inge, R., 2018. Patientinddragelse i Finsencentret. Available at: https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/
afdelinger-og-klinikker/finsen/patienter-og-paaroerende/Sider/patientinddragelse.aspx [Accessed January 
28, 2018].
Troest, I., 2016. Patientinddragelsesdag - materialer. In Righospitalet. Available at: https://www.
rigshospitalet.dk/afdelinger-og-klinikker/finsen/patienter-og-paaroerende/Sider/patientinddragelsesdag-
materialer.aspx [Accessed March 16, 2018].
Tørring, B., 2007. Kommunikation mellem sundhedsprofessionelle og patienter indlagt i intensiv afdeling – 
et praksisudviklingsprojekt.
Vahdat, S. et al., 2014. Patient Involvement in Health Care Decision Making: A Review. Iranian Red 
Crescent Medical Journal, 16(1), pp.1–7. Available at: http://www.ircmj.com/?page=article&article_
id=12454.
Vesely, A., 2008. Problem Tree: A Problem Structuring Heuristic. Central European Journal of Public Policy, 
2(2), pp.68–80. Available at: http://www.cejpp.eu/index.php/ojs/article/view/24/20 [Accessed March 16, 
2018].
VIBIS, 2013. Sundhedsprofessionelles forståelser af patientinddragelse - en kvalitati undersøgelse. 
VIDENSCENTER FOR BRUGERINDDRAGELSE i sundhedsvaesenet. Available at: https://www.
danskepatienter.dk/files/media/Publikationer - Egne/B_ViBIS/A_Rapporter og undersøgelser/
sundhedsproffesionelles_forstaaelse_kvalitativ.pdf [Accessed November 28, 2017].
Walsh, J., 2013. Gender, the work-life interface and wellbeing: A study of hospital doctors. Gender, Work 
and Organization, 20(4), pp.439–453.
We are couch, 2018. Why UX needs a place at the healthcare table. Available at: http://www.wearecouch.
com/blog/user-experience-in-healthcare [Accessed March 15, 2018].
Winther, K.P. et al., 2015. Inddragelse af patienter betaler sig. Jyllandsposten.
Winther, K.P., 2017. Systematisk patientinddragelse i Finsencentret 2017 - 2018,
Yngre Læger, 2014. Undersøgelse omkring patientkontakt. Available at: http://patientforløb.dk/sites/
default/files/Undersøgelsen.pdf [Accessed January 2, 2018].
De Young, L., 1991. Interacting with users in the design process. In COMPCON Spring ’91 Digest of Papers. 
IEEE Comput. Soc. Press, p. 500. Available at: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/128857/ [Accessed 
March 17, 2018].
