==PAGE:1==
Vision Training using Eye
Tracking
Alin-Marius Cruceat
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The goal of the thesis is to ﬁnd if there is any way of using eye tracking devices
which can help chidlren with cerebral palsy deal with their vision problem and
improve their condition.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The aim of this thesis is by using eye tracking devices to see if there is any
way to help children with cerebral palsy deal with their vision problems and
hopefully improve their concentration capability.
The thesis consists of an application developed in Unity and a set of data analisys
coresponding to the result of children interacting with this software by using a
eye tracking device
Lyngby, 15-May-2018
Alin-Marius Cruceat
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisers Mikkel Damgaard Olsen and Per Bækgaard
for all of their support and great council during this project. The oportunity that
I was given was indeed a great step into learning to work with new technologies
and implementing something that is both attractive and useful.
Last but not least I would like to thank the Elsass Institute for the oportunity
to work side by side with them and for their interess into helping children with
cerebral palsy. Interacting with these children in order to ﬁnd a way to help
them was a great honor for me and a experience which had great impact upon
myself and my wish to help make the World a better place, in the limits that I
have.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Cerebral Palsy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3.1
Eye Can Learn[5] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3.2
Ultimeyes[8] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
The application
5
2.1
Exercise 1: Fixation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Exercise 2: Saccades . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Exercise 3: Pursuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Eye Tracking - Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
Eye Eye Tribe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Calibration
15
3.1
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
The data collection process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Using the calibration from a person to another
. . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.2
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.3
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.4
Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3.4
Using a 2 step calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4.2
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4.3
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.4
Aﬃne Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.5
Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.6
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Discussion and Conclusion
35
4.1
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Feedback
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Impediments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Next step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Statistics show that at least 42% children having cerebral palsy have vision
problems, 58% have diﬃculty with communication and 23%-56% have learning
disabilities. Predominantly people with CP have abnormal muscle tone, leading
to issues in reﬂexes, motor development and coordination.
Because of these
vision problems, these children most likely will struggle with essential tasks like
reading, becoming very easily frustrated and distracted.
The problem we are seeking to solve is not the lack of vision, but rather the
lack of the capacity to focus on the important targets. This is the reason why
the requirement is developing an attractive virtual environment in which the
children are asked to ﬁnd diverse objects or complete certain tasks which will
help them to sharpen their visual skills and improve their attention on the
elements that matter.
1.1
Project plan
The project I have decided to develop is a training application for children with
CP (cerebral palsy). For developing I will use Unity as a programming platform
and as a technology I will use TheEyeTribe. An advantage of using eye-gaze
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
access systems is that it allows exploration without the need of calibration.
Despite this advantage, the accuracy of the collected data will not be achieved
without an accurate calibration, reason why I expect to have my main challenge
on this part.
The target users would be children of age between 4 and 8 years old. I have de-
cided to work with children around this age because calibrating the eye-tracking
device can be very hard for anyone having problems with focusing on the cali-
bration points, but if we consider that we can use the ability to communicate
with them, calibrating the device can be possible.
Since CP is caused by a
brain-disorder, it is important to start the intervention as early as possible, in
order to help to establish the missing connections and in order to get better
motor control as well as improving cognitive learning.
In order to see if such a solution is really worth trying for working with children
with disabilities, my ﬁrst approach with this system is to test it on healthy
people and by achieving a result I would know that is the conﬁrmation that the
experiment can go further with children as participants.
1.2
Cerebral Palsy
According to Cerebral Palsy Alliance [2] the term of "cerebral palsy" (or short
CP) refers to a group of disorders aﬀecting a person’s ability to move. The cause
of the disorder is the damage to the developing brain either during pregnancy
or shortly after birth.
From physical point of view symptoms of CP can be recognised as disturbances
in body movement, muscle control, muscle coordination, muscle tone, reﬂex,
posture and balance. People who have CP may also have visual, learning, hear-
ing, speech, epilepsy and intellectual impairments. Although cerebral palsy is a
permanent life-long condition, some of these signs of cerebral palsy can improve
or worsen over time.
There is a classiﬁcation of the types of CP [3] even though it is not made on
a speciﬁc set of criteria. This information provides just little information, but
it is used, even by doctors because it oﬀers a simple method to comunicate the
scope of the impairment.
• Mild Cerebral Palsy - a child can move without assistance; his / her daily
activities are not limited.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Related works
3
• Moderate Cerebral Palsy - a child will need braces, medications, and adap-
tive technology to accomplish daily activities.
• Severe Cerebral Palsy - a child will require a wheelchair and will have
signiﬁcant challenges in accomplishing daily activities.
• No CP - the child has Cerebral Palsy signs, but the impairment was
acquired after completion of brain development and is therefore classiﬁed
under the incident that caused the Cerebral Palsy, such as traumatic brain
injury or encephalopathy.
1.3
Related works
1.3.1
Eye Can Learn[5]
One of my main inspiration sources is represented by this website, designed in
order to provide exercises for children in order to improve and sharpen their
visual skills. The website oﬀers a visual training tool, but not a treatment that
should be provided by professional institutes. The aim of these exercises is to
improve the attention of children for better school performances and improved
attention.
As they state, the exercises are aiming to improve 3 types of eye movement:
• Fixations: ability to hold eyes steady without moving oﬀtarget
• Saccades: the ability of our eyes to make accurate jumps as we change
targets
• Pursuits: the ability of our eyes to follow a moving target
1.3.2
Ultimeyes[8]
Another great source of inspiration for me was Ultimeyes, a program designed to
challenge vision and track progress and performance. Based on the mechanics of
the vision system Ultimeyes delivers a unique experience tailored and optimized
to each individual using a proprietary adaptive algorithm. There are many fac-
tors that determine performance in Ultimeyes including reaction time, contrast
level and accuracy. [8]
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.1: The “targets” and “distractors” in the Ultimeyes application [6]
In ﬁgure 3.14 we can see the main 2 elements of this application, the targets and
the distractors. The aim of this game is to click on the targets to earn points
while clicking on the distractors will lose points. This game is intended to excite
the cells in the visual cortex so that the eyesight will eventually become better.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
The application
Based on the ability to aim our eyes EyesCanLearn[1] refered to 3 basic types
of eye movements:
• Fixation – the child is asked to ﬁxate on a target and maintain focus
• Saccades – the child is asked to look at objects on a screen which relocate
upon interaction
• Pursuing – the child is asked to follow a target moving
For each of these types, a game level will be implemented aimed to help the
participant improve the speciﬁc eye movement.
The requirement of this application was, ﬁrst of all, to be interesting for the
children so that they would be interested into interacting with it. Furthermore,
it was needed for they not to be distracted by other elements.
Because of
this, the application’s interface was decided to be a black screen, with only one
element on it. The element is represented by a animation which starts to play
only upon gazing on it.
The pictures from ﬁgure 2.1 were the main actors from the application of which
most children were excited about them. The feedback I received was both good
==PAGE:16==
6
The application
Figure 2.1: Interactable objects in the application
and useful and it was used from a data collecting session to another in order to
improve the user experience.
As you can see in ﬁgure 2.2, the whole application consists of a blank screen
with only one element on it, the interactable object which will be randomly
chosen from one of the images from ﬁgure 2.1. When the user gazes upon the
object and the eye tracker detects this the object will start animating, giving
feedback to the user that he/she has done the right thing. If the gaze on the
objects stops it, the object will stop from animating.
2.1
Exercise 1: Fixation
The ﬁxation exercise is represented by the quest of gazing on the object for a
consistent period (5-10 seconds). The aim of the exercise is to monitorize the
capacity of keeping the attention on a singular object. The object will relocate
once or twice upon completing correctly the task in limited time, in order to
verify that the user is actually looking at the object and not staring empty on
the screen. The exercise is estimated to end within 20 seconds.
2.2
Exercise 2: Saccades
For the saccades exercise the user’s gaze will cause the object to relocate to an-
other random position on the screen upon the ﬁrst ﬁxation on it. The relocation
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Exercise 3: Pursuit
7
Figure 2.2: Application screen
of the object will also change the object itself, so that the user might not lose in-
terest of just watching the same cartoon character all over again. The elements
that are important here to be tracked are the speed the reaction, reason why at
the end of the exercise the more objects the user has managed to ﬁxate on the
better it is. The whole routine of this exercise is required to be completed in
maximum one minute. The objects will relocate until they will reach a certain
set number of relocations (49 was used, so that they will be a total on 50 objects
to be interacted with within a minute)
2.3
Exercise 3: Pursuit
Finally the pursuit exercises requires a continuous tracking of the object as it
will move in a random direction upon interacting with it. Upon reaching the
end of the random trajectory the object will change with another and it will
start moving towards a diﬀerent direction. The pursuit exercise will also run in
time of a minute or until the user manages to change the moving direction 10
times.
==PAGE:18==
8
The application
Figure 2.3: Example of Electro-OculoGraphy [2]
2.4
Eye Tracking - Theory
Eye tracking is a procedure of measuring the eye movement, commonly done by
a eye tracker. There are two types of eve movement monitoring techniques as
they are described in the book of Andrew Duchovski.[2]
• Techniques that measure the position of the eye relative to the head
• Point of regard (POR) - techniques that measure the orientation of the
eye in space
Duchovski describes four broad categories of eye movement measurement method-
ologies:
• Electro-OculoGraphy - records the electric potential diﬀerences of the skin
surrounding the ocular cavity (see ﬁgure 2.3)
• Scleral contact lens/search coil - very precise, but intrusive method that
involves attaching a mechanical or optical reference object mounted on a
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Eye Tracking - Theory
9
Figure 2.4: Example of search coin embedded in contact lens and electromag-
netic ﬁeld frames for search coil eye movement measure.[2]
contact lens worn on the eye by the user. The principle implies employing
a wire coil, which is measured moving through an electromagnetic ﬁeld
(see ﬁgure 2.4)
• Photo-OculoGraphy (POG) or Video-OculoGraphy(VOG) - category of
techniques that do not often provide point of regard measurements. The
measurements speciﬁc to this category are measurements of distinguish-
able features of the eye under rotation or translation, e.g., the apparent
shape of the pupil, the position of the limbus and corneal reﬂections of a
closely situated directed light source (see ﬁgure 2.5)
• Video-Based Combined Pupil/Corneal Reﬂection - technique that uses in-
expensive cameras and image processing hardware in order to compute
the point of regard in real time. The apparatus can be mounted on table
(see ﬁgure 2.6) or worn on the head (see ﬁgure 2.7)
2.4.1
Eye Eye Tribe
The Eye Tribe was a Danish startup company that produced eye tracking tech-
nology and was selling it to software developers for them to incorporate the eye
tracking device into their applications and programs. The Eye Tribe’s software
allowed a user to direct a smart phone, tablet, or computer with just the look
of an eye. The company focused on a sleek appearance and a portable struc-
ture. They decide to go on a diﬀerent direction and stopped producing their
technology on December 2016. [10]
The device they developed is a is a table-mounted video-based eye tracker device.
that basically contains infra-red light emitter(s) and camera(s) (see ﬁgure 2.8).
==PAGE:20==
10
The application
Figure 2.5: Example of search coin embedded in contact lens and electromag-
netic ﬁeld frames for search coil eye movement measure.[2]
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Eye Tracking - Theory
11
Figure 2.6: Example of an old table-mounted video-based eye tracker.[2]
Figure 2.7: Example of head mounted video-based eye tracker.[2]
==PAGE:22==
12
The application
Figure 2.8: How The Eye Tribe eye tracker works [1]
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Eye Tracking - Theory
13
The device emits a pattern of infrared light with the purpose of receiving re-
ﬂections of it in our eyes. The camera built in takes periodic pictures of the
illuminated area and by using image processing algorithms it determines the
eyes position and the gaze point.
For the implementation of this project’s software The Eye Tribe device was
used.
==PAGE:24==
14
The application
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Calibration
Trying to perform the calibration can many times be diﬃcult, even for healthy
adults. During the process itself the more movement the user makes the worse is
the result of the calibration process. Even if the algorithm is taking in consider
the distance between the user and the device at every single frame, since the
result of the calculus of the distance to the user is approximate, by having this
distance variant in time the result of our calibration can only be poor.
Even if we assume that by communicating with the children, that we can collab-
orate with them to stay still for around 30 seconds, this still does not conﬁrm
us that in this period they are looking at a speciﬁc point on the screen, or even
that they would not get bored by staring at some images and from one moment
on they would just stare away. For this reason we need to ﬁnd a way in which
we would know, within a known error, the position on screen where our user is
gazing, even when they are unable to make a calibration.
3.1
Theory
The calibration of modern eye trackers procedure had been improved consider-
ably. Modern eye trackers like Tobii have lately developed features that allow
==PAGE:26==
16
Calibration
Figure 3.1: Eye tracker calibration [4]
constrained head movement. This feature helped improve the process of cali-
bration, even though the old problems of this technology remain (interference
from eyelashes, certain spectacle rims, etc.). Because of this problems the best
solution for a perfect calibration procedure even for high-end technologies like
Tobii, requires a limited movement posture of the user.
In order to calibrate theEyeTribe device a set of rules have been established (as
suggested in the TheEyeTribe starting guide [3]):
• The Monitor used - must be of maximum 24". The eye tracker needs to
be set near the monitor otherwise the tracking will not function optimally
• User positioning - the user should position himself centered in front of the
monitor at a distance of of 45 - 75 cm.
• Head movement - the calibration procedure requires no head movements
==PAGE:27==
3.2 The data collection process
17
The calibration protocol maps the eye positions to speciﬁc coordinates on the
screen. By having the gaze points deﬁned, any other position on the screen can
that the user is looking at can be determined. For TheEyeTribe speciﬁc, the
calibration routine requires focusing on 9, 12 or 16 calibration points, setup that
can be done by the user. The default option is 9 points.
3.2
The data collection process
The application was designed so that the data collected would ﬁll a text docu-
ment as seen in ﬁgure 3.2, having in each line a frame containing in this order:
the x and y coordinates of the transformed gaze using the recalibration transfor-
mation function (more details in section 3.4), the original user x and y user gaze
coordinates, the hard recalibration position x and y coordinates (translation
user to force a gaze ﬁxation so that the routine of the application will continue
in case of the tracker not being able to register a ﬁxation), the original x and y
coordinates of the object from the screen and ﬁnally the time of the frame from
the end of the recalibration (more details in section 3.4).
3.3
Using the calibration from a person to an-
other
3.3.1
Hypothesis
The question that came into my mind when discovering that not everyone can
perform a calibration was if there is any chance to see any similarities between
calibrations that would allow us to use the calibration of a person able to do it
on someone who cannot.
The approach we are interested to take here is the following: Can we conﬁgure
the eye tracker on a person and use his conﬁguration on the use of other people?
By having as data the original data coordinates as the eye tracker sees them,
we are interested to see how one person’s control on the system changes when
he uses another calibration than his own. We expect this facility to be available
for us on a certain manner, but the question is: Is this reuse of calibration from
another person accurate enough so that we might use it as a general solution
==PAGE:28==
18
Calibration
Figure 3.2: Format of the data collection ﬁle
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Using the calibration from a person to another
19
Figure 3.3: Experiment 1 setup
whenever the eye tracker cannot be calibrated on someone? If not what are the
general conditions in which this criteria is to be taken into consideration..
3.3.2
Method
In order to make this experiment I have gathered a group of students, asking
them to look at an image on the screen and if the image does not move at all
when focused on it to press a button on the keyboard. The eye tracker was
set in front of an 23 inch monitor and 60 cm away from the user as shown in
ﬁgure 3.3. In most of the situations if the eye tracker did not register an hit
point on the object, the users were pressing the trigger the at 2-3 seconds after
making eye contact with the object.
The participants were asked to set their head on a support in order to stay still,
only moving their eyes for the experiment. The experiment itself represented
the Saccades exercise (look in chapter 2.2) where the user was asked to look for
the object on the screen after a small ﬁxation on the object the object relocates
to another position on the screen.
==PAGE:30==
20
Calibration
3.3.3
Participants
The group that made the experiment was formed by 4 students of age range
19-22, 3 male and 1 female. One of the students was wearing glasses having
myopia. Upon making the experiment I was asked if he should keep the glasses
or take them oﬀ, reason why I asked him to participate to the experiment as 2
persons, with and without the glasses.
3.3.4
Result
At the end of the data collection from a group of 4 students I received 5 sets of
data (the student with myopia having 2 sets), each set containing the use of the
student on the calibrations of every other student plus his. This means a total
of 25 data ﬁles.
In order to make a useful data analysis, ﬁrst of all the data needs to be processed.
This processing is actually a clustering, splitting the data into clusters having
in common the position of the object. By this processing we can actually see
what was the user looking at regarding the object’s position.
Before jumping into the data analysis, lets take a look at the metrics used here:
• Average Reacting Time(ART) - calculated as being the time from the time
of spawning the object until the user focusing it. The lower this time is
the better is the reaction time of the user or the better the calibration is.
• Scattering LevelSL - Showing how much the gaze points are varying upon
ﬁxating on a object. This distance is basically the average distance be-
tween each pixel and the center position of the cluster (in pixels).
• Number of objects interacted withObjNr - The number of objects the user
managed to interact with within the recording time (30 seconds) - maxi-
mum 49
Now that we have everything set up, lets take a look at the results of our
experiments. In ﬁgures 3.5 - 3.9 we have some tables with the results per user,
each of the columns representing the name of the participant which made the
calibration for the certain results. For an easier analysis the column regarding
user’s results upon using his own calibration is highlighted.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Using the calibration from a person to another
21
Figure 3.4: Participants setup in the data collection
Figure 3.5: Experiment 1 results for participant 1 as user for each calibration
==PAGE:32==
22
Calibration
Figure 3.6: Experiment 1 results for participant 2 as user for each calibration
Figure 3.7: Experiment 1 results for participant 3 as user for each calibration
Figure 3.8: Experiment 1 results for participant 4 (with glasses) as user for
each calibration
Figure 3.9: Experiment 1 results for participant 4 (without glasses) as user for
each calibration
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Using the calibration from a person to another
23
Figure 3.10: Sample of the collected data on user participant 4 with glasses
interacting on calibration made without glasses
3.3.5
Discussion
A big conclusion that we can take from start by confronting the results are that
people who have sight problems will have diﬃculties in most of the cases when
using other people’s calibration, no matter if they use or not their glasses. If
there is no solution but to use another person’s calibration it is high indicated
to interact with the eye tracker without glasses, because as we see, participant 4
had some very poor results when he was wearing glasses on all the calibrations
except his (see ﬁgure 3.8), compared to the other situation when he was wearing
them(see ﬁgure 3.9).
We can say based on our results that each user had his best results when using
his own calibration, fact which was expected. We can easily observe that in
==PAGE:34==
24
Calibration
Figure 3.11: Histogram with the distance between the object and every gaze
point for user participant 4 with glasses, calibrator participant 4
without glasses
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Using the calibration from a person to another
25
Figure 3.12: Sample of the collected data on user participant 4 without glasses
interacting on calibration made without glasses
most of the situations all the other participants had diﬃculties collaborating
with participant 4 (by using his calibration or by sharing him their calibration).
Not only that, but participant 4 himself had diﬃculties in completing the ex-
ercises with his glasses when using a calibration he has made without them(see
ﬁgure 3.10). Participant 4 struggled in most of his cases when he was wearing
his glasses, to prove to the system that he was ﬁxated on the object, but the eye
tracker was detecting something else. The other plot is one example of most of
the other scenarios when everything went according to plan, the eye tracker saw
the position of the gaze (maybe not perfect, but precise enough) and recognized
a ﬁxation, so the routine moved on quickly.
In the ﬁgures 3.10 and 3.12 you can clearly see why the issue was that big. The
plots above represent all the gaze points that the user had when the object was
positioned on the location marked with a green circle. By making a histogram of
==PAGE:36==
26
Calibration
Figure 3.13: Histogram with the distance between the object and every gaze
point for user and calibrator participant 4 without glasses
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Using a 2 step calibration
27
both data sets in order to compare the distances between the object and every
gaze point, we can spot the great diﬀerence between them.
The histograms
in ﬁgures 3.11 and 3.13 display the scattering level of every single collected
point in the data sets.
The ﬁrst big change that we see between these two
histograms is represented by the number of points, participant 4 having less
data points collected when he was wearing the glasses on both collection and
usage, meaning that he was more precise with the tracking. We can also pot
that in this case the scattering level does not get over 2000
We can say that this experiment showed us that using the calibration form a
person to another is not a bad move, but because of the diﬀerences between
people’s eyes it is very situationally indicated.
3.4
Using a 2 step calibration
As we discussed before, having a person make the calibration when he is required
to use the application is not highly indicated always, because of the length of
the procedure. I attempted in the experiment before to see if by chance the
calibration of another person can be used in order to have the system set for
the use of another person, which as a result we didn’t get much of a success.
The big issue with experiment 1 can be seen in ﬁgure 3.14. The ﬁrst screen
is the view of the calibrator, and even more it contains the actual screen co-
ordinates of the current calibration. In many cases the second screen might
look exaggerated, but mainly that is the view of another person’s gaze locations
used on a calibration that is not his. The big issue is when the user looks on a
certain point on the screen. He might be gazing on an object, but when it gets
interpreted by the current calibration it is observed that the interpreted gaze
location and the actual gaze location are not the same in many of the cases.
What we need here is a way to make the calibration or a part of it on the actual
user of the system. We might ask ourselves: "But what if the procedure was
shorter? Is there a possibility to have a good calibration using fewer steps?" The
next approach you will see is an attempt of simplifying everything assuming that
we can estimate the diﬀerence between two calibrations with a linear function.
==PAGE:38==
28
Calibration
Figure 3.14: View of the screen from calibrator’s and user’s point of view
estimated by the tracker in experiment 1
3.4.1
Hypothesis
The idea behind this second experiment was that by having a initial calibration
made so that some of the parameters to be set up (an approximation of the gaze
location on the screen and the distance between user and the tracker) we can
make a point pattern matching is we have 3 points so that we can scale, translate
and rotate up the calibrator’s calibration so that it ﬁts the gazing locations of
the user. The amount of calibration points requested was selected based on the
number of points required to deﬁne a plane.
3.4.2
Method
Here I have decided to establish the 3 calibration points as being the 2 top
the corners of the screen and the center of the bottom part of the screen (see
ﬁgure 3.15).
At the beginning of this experiment the participants would be
asked to look at the 3 points of the screen and when they are gazing on the
object to press a key on the keyboard to register the coordinates that should
map on the initial calibration’s locations. After registering these 3 coordinates
the exercise automatically begins as it should.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Using a 2 step calibration
29
Figure 3.15: Recalibration positions for experiment 2
Figure 3.16: Experiment 2 results for participant 1 as user for each calibration
By having these 3 coordinates and their correspondent featuring the correct
gaze positions of the user on the calibrator’s calibration, after determining the
parameters (translation, rotation scale and shearing) the rest of the correspon-
dents of each of the coordinates registered by the eye tracker will be calculated
using the aﬃne transformation.
3.4.3
Participants
The participants were the same 4 people as they were in the previous experiment,
having the exact same setup of the system.
==PAGE:40==
30
Calibration
Figure 3.17: Experiment 2 results for participant 2 as user for each calibration
Figure 3.18: Experiment 2 results for participant 3 as user for each calibration
Figure 3.19: Experiment 2 results for participant 4 (with glasses) as user for
each calibration
Figure 3.20: Experiment 2 results for participant 4 (without glasses) as user
for each calibration
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Using a 2 step calibration
31
Figure 3.21: The aﬃne transformation [7]
Figure 3.22: The transformation functions
3.4.4
Aﬃne Transformation
The aﬃne transformation is a function between aﬃne spaces which preserves
points, straight lines and planes[9]. This function is used combines linear trans-
formation and translations in order to estimate coordinates from a plane having
the corresponding coordinate from another plane. In this experiment it will be
deﬁned as in ﬁgure 3.21.
Because what we have are the points, we will need to estimate the function that
maps these coordinates. When applying the function we will have something
like in ﬁgure 3.22 where (x’, y’) is the user gaze point transformed into a corre-
sponding point into the calibrated screen. Basically by having the 3 calibration
points we obtain 6 equations with 6 unknowns (a,b,c,d,e and f), from which we
can easily ﬁnd our function.
3.4.5
Result
When making the experiment the ﬁrst impression that I had when I have seen
the running of it was that something was wrongly calculated in the aﬃne trans-
formation. The major disappointment that I had was when I have seen that
all the participants were having a worse experience with the ﬁrst experiment,
followed by approving results as you can see in ﬁgures 3.16 - 3.20. I have decided
myself to plot the original gaze points and the recalibrated gaze points to see
what I have done wrong and I did so as you can see in ﬁgure 3.23. After seeing
that most of the points have a tendency to be recalibrated the upper part of the
==PAGE:42==
32
Calibration
Figure 3.23: Sample of the collected data on user and calibrator participant
2 as user for each calibration
screen and after checking the algorithm for possible errors I ﬁgured out that a
reason why this is happening is because of the selected recalibration positions.
Having two of the on the upper extreme y value of the axis and only one on the
lower extreme part my transformation should drag all my transformation points
towards the dominant direction of the recalibrated points.
3.4.6
Discussion
This shrinking on the y axis was something that was general on all the recali-
brations, but what triggered me to see beyond this unfortunate event were the
results for the recalibration of participant 4 when he was wearing glasses. I have
observed that in all of the cases participants that were using the calibration of
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Using a 2 step calibration
33
Figure 3.24: Sample of the collected data on calibrator participant 4 (with
glasses) and participant 1 as user
participant 4 were not having so many diﬃculties as before.
My main observation from ﬁgures 3.16 - 3.20 from experiment 1 was that the
scattering level of participant 4 (with glasses) tends to be smaller when using
another person’s calibration, observation strengthened when I have seen par-
ticipant 4 calibrating the tracker after another person had it calibrated before.
I have seen that the screen of participant 4 was much larger that the one of
other participants, fact supported by a much smaller scattering level on using
other calibrations than his own. Looking on the data I have seen that one of
the biggest diﬀerences that I can analyze further was the usage of participant
1 on the calibration of participant 4. As you can observe in ﬁgure 3.24 the
data was shrank not only on the y axis because of the issue, but also on the
x axis, allowing the user’s gaze points to have more hits than in the previous
experiment.
==PAGE:44==
34
Calibration
This observation and analysis, even though it was made on a experiment having
an unfortunate issue, proved that a linear transformation has potential of align-
ing a calibration for the user of another person. The only barrier here would be
ﬁnding the perfect way of making this estimation by using as few recalibration
points as possible.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Discussion and Conclusion
4.1
Data analysis
If we are to plot the results into confusion matrices we would have something
like what you see in ﬁgures 4.1 and 4.2, where on the columns are the calibrators
and on the rows we have the users. The darker color implies a shorter average
reaction time, meaning a smoother interaction with the calibration. What I have
tried to achieve here was a recalibration which would eventually bring another
person’s calibration to a more reliable level for any other user, matter that in a
small level I am happy that I achieved.
4.2
Feedback
During the experiment session I have asked all the participants about their
experience and in which of the cases they felt like they can rely more on someone
else calibrating the tracker. For my surprising all the participants said that
despite their problems with each others calibration and even with their own,
they really appreciated the approached direction that was taken and the result
they have seen when using the calibration of the participant with the glasses.
==PAGE:46==
36
Discussion and Conclusion
Figure 4.1: Average Reaction Times - Experiment 1
Figure 4.2: Average Reaction Times - Experiment 2
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Conclusion
37
Participant 4 was the most excited about the approach and he oﬀered himself
available for any other future improvements on this approach, him really believ-
ing in the idea ofone day ﬁnding a great solution for helping people with vision
problems, using the help of of other people.
Another session of feedback that I have had was regarding the objects used in
the application as shown in ﬁgure 2.1. Talking with 10 girls and 7 boys of age
between 4 and 7 years old I was happy to hear all the ﬁgures were to their likes,
of course, with 5 of the boys preferring the football lizard and Spiderman over
the pretty ponies. The boys also requested more super heroes to be added into
the collection whereas 2 girls asked for princesses and fairies.
4.3
Conclusion
It is important to evidentiate that despite the terrible aﬃne transformation
function estimating impediment I have achieved a better calibration for people
which rely on their glasses for their daily correct eye sight requirement. Even
though at ﬁrst we observed that relying on the calibration of people which are
wearing glasses is not a good choice, we have seen that by having a good recali-
bration we can get over this impediment and proceed furtherin the direction of
making the world a better place.
4.4
Impediments
Most of the impediments were in implementation and most probably also in
brainstorming and ﬁnding with the help of other researchers a way to to ap-
proach this matter. I must admit that I started this matter by aiming high on
learning algorithms without trying to see if I can ﬁnd another solution which
can be easier and faster. On the implementation part most of the problems
I had were on approaching to implement in code my mathematical formulas,
many times because of the lack of library support on solving geometric formu-
las by using vectors and matrices. There were multiple libraries which I could
have paid in order to do my work, but my ﬁnal stand was by calculating on pa-
per everything, verifying myself with experiments and asking for feedback from
another friend.
==PAGE:48==
38
Discussion and Conclusion
4.5
Next step
I believe that my next step here would be estimating te linear function correctly
and by testing it to hopefully achieve the results I expect. Another approach I
would go for would be estimating a nonlinear function because of an occurrence
that I have seen in many interactions with the eye tracking, which would be
the asymmetry of the eyes. Myself have a diﬀerence between my eyes, like my
mother also, causing me to see further with an eye than with the other one. I
expect this matter is not unique reason why the next approach should take it
in consider as well.
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
Tobii AB. How do Tobii Eye Trackers work? url: https://www.tobiipro.
com/learn-and-support/learn/eye-tracking-essentials/how-do-
tobii-eye-trackers-work/.
[2]
Andrew T. Duchovski. Ete tracking Methodology, Theory and Practice,
Third Eddition. Three volumes. Springer, 2017.
[3]
The EyeTribe. Getting Started | theeyetribe-docs. url: http://theeyetribe.
com/dev.theeyetribe.com/dev.theeyetribe.com/start/index.html.
[4]
Lisa Herrod. Do You See What I See? EyeTracking the User Experience.
url: https://www.slideshare.net/LisaHerrod/we05-eye-tracking-
the-user-experience.
[5]
Eye Can Learn. Eye Can Learn | Eye Exercises for Visual Health and
School Success. url: http://eyecanlearn.com/.
[6]
lrg5172. There’s an App for That. url: http://sites.psu.edu/gadilamedicalinnovation
2014/11/05/35/.
[7]
Udacity. Aﬃne Transformation. url: https : / / www . youtube . com /
watch?v=il6Z5LCykZk.
[8]
Ultimeyes. ULTIMEYES. url: http://ultimeyesvision.com/.
[9]
Wikipedia. Aﬃne Transformation. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Affine_transformation.
[10]
Wikipedia. The Eye Tribe. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_
Eye_Tribe.
