==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Oral Delivery of Prodrugs 
Loaded into Microcontainers 
Álvaro Romero Chica 
S161078 
Master thesis 
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
Oral Delivery of Prodrugs Loaded into Microcontainers 
 
 
Author: 
Álvaro Romero Chica 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Anja Boisen, DTU Nanotech 
Line Hagner Nielsen, DTU Nanotech 
Chiara Mazzoni, DTU Nanotech 
Cecilie Maria Madsen, Lundbeck Pharma S/A 
 
DTU Nanotech 
Department of Micro- and Nanotechnology  
Technical University of Denmark 
Ørsted Plads 
Bygning 345 C 
DK-280 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
 
Submission date: 2nd June 2018 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
 
Preface 
This thesis is the last step to achieve a Master´s degree in pharmaceutical design and 
engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The thesis was carried out from January 
2018 to June 2018 with 30 ECTS points at the Technical University of Denmark and in 
Lundbeck Pharma A/S. 
The thesis was performed in the Nanoprobes research group in the Center of Intelligent Drug 
Delivery and Sensing Using Microcontainers and Nanomechanics (IDUN), Department of 
Micro and Nanotechnology, Technical University of Denmark (DTU Nanotech) and in 
collaboration with the Analytical Development in Pharmaceutical R&D department at 
Lundbeck Pharma A/S. 
  
At DTU Nanotech, the development of loading methods for the microcontainers, the loading of 
microcontainers, spray coating of the drug loaded microcontainers and µDiss release studies 
were performed from January to end of May. From March to May the storage and enzymatic 
studies were accomplished at Lundbeck Pharma A/S.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
 
Acknowledgement 
Let me express my gratitude to those who contributed in this project in order to achieve the best 
outcome. First I thanks to my supervisors at DTU Nanotech, Professor Anja Boisen, researcher 
Line Hagner Nielsen and PhD student Chiara Mazzoni. I will further like to thank my supervisor 
at Lundbeck Pharma Cecilie Maria Madsen. Without your help and time, this project would not 
be done. Especially to Line and Chiara who spent uncountable hours helping me in the 
laboratory and in the office when it was necessary and brought me back on track to continue 
with this project when it was needed. 
Second, I would like to express my gratitude to all the technicians at Lundbeck that helped with 
the HPLC equipment. Søren thank you for fixing this equipment every time it failed. As well I 
would like to thank to Christoffer Gerner for the tips that helped to deal with the optimization 
of the experiments carried out at Lundbeck Pharma. 
Thanks to research assistant Jorge Sevilla and the whole Nanoprobes group for the tips and help 
with loading the SU-8 microcontainers and the trainings with equipment in the IDUN 
laboratory. 
Last, but not least, I would like to thanks to all my friends who dropped my body at home when 
it was necessary and those who were on my side all the time.  
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
 
Abstract 
Prodrugs are compounds designed to enhance properties of the parent drug to increase the 
bioavailability. It is beneficial if drugs can be administered by the oral route, however, prodrugs 
are not very stable when taken orally. This is due to the chemical bonds in the prodrug are often 
unstable, thus they can be cleaved by enzymatic activity or by the low gastric pH. 
This project studied the protective effect of SU-8 microcontainers for oral administration of 
prodrugs. Valaciclovir and simvastatin were loaded and confined in microcontainers and 
exposed to different storages conditions. Meanwhile, VAL, which is enzymatic degraded in the 
gastrointestinal tract was used as model for studying the protective effect of the use of 
microcontainers to the harsh environment of the gastrointestinal tract. 
 Moreover, the protection of the use of SU-8 microcontainers from two different storage 
conditions was studied in two prodrugs, simvastatin and valaciclovir. The presence of unstable 
bonds in this type of drugs can end in a lower shelf life. Therefore, the use of SU-8 
microcontainers as an alternative formulation could insulate these prodrugs from the 
environment increasing their stability over time. 
Different methods were investigated to load the SU-8 microcontainers with the prodrugs of 
study, valaciclovir and simvastatin. From these methods the spatula + brush loading method 
showed the best performance. 
µDiss release studies were performed to characterise the release of valaciclovir and simvastatin 
from the SU8-microcontainers with lids of various thicknesses. These release studies were 
performed in PBS media that simulated the gastric pH for 1 h and the intestinal pH for 3 to 
12hs. The pH sensitive lids were applied by spray coating onto the cavity of prodrug-loaded 
SU-8 microcontainers with the polymer either Eudragit S-100 or Eudragit L-100-55. The 
outcome of these studies was the selection of a 19.3 ± 2. 6 µm thick lid of Eudragit S-100 as 
this provided a sustained release in the intestinal pH and protected most of the drug from early 
release in the gastric pH. Furthermore, in vitro enzymatic studies were performed to compare 
the degradation of valaciclovir when it was loaded in the SU-8 microcontainers with the 
degradation of bulk powder of valaciclovir. These experiments consisted of two stages to 
recreate the transit through the gastrointestinal tract, this was recreated by a gastric stage for 1 
h with FaSSGF medium pH 1.6, and with an intestinal stage for 3-3.5 h with FaSSIF medium 
where pancreatin was added to mimic the enzymatic activity. The results of this experiments 
confirmed the degradation of the valaciclovir in its acyclovir after the intestinal stage, and the 
sustained release from the microcontainers. 
The storage protection of the prodrugs using SU-8 microcontainers was studied with the two 
prodrugs. SU-8 microcontainers were filled with the prodrugs, spray coated with a Eudragit S-
100 lid and stored for 1 month in a soft storage conditions of 30 ± 5°C and 65 ± 5% RH or in a 
more stressed storage conditions of 60 ± 5°C and 80 ± 5% RH. The results showed that both 
drugs were stable in both condition without difference between the powder control samples and 
the Su8-microcontainers samples. 
The conclusion of this project showed the potential of the use of SU-8 microcontainers to 
protect valaciclovir from the enzymatic degradation and the stability of each prodrug in the 
storage conditions studied. 
 
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
 
Contents 
Preface 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I 
Acknowledgement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II 
Abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II 
Abbreviations 
1. Introduction  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
1.1. The gastrointestinal tract and its challenges for oral drug delivery 
 
 
 
1 
1.1.1. Mouth and esophagus   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
1.1.2. Stomach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
1.1.3. Small intestine  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
1.1.4. Colon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
1.2. In vitro gastric and intestinal media and pancreatin 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
1.3. Physicochemical properties of drugs and drug absorption 
 
 
 
 
6 
1.4. Prodrugs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
1.4.1.  Classical classification  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
1.4.1.1. Carried linked prodrugs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
1.4.1.2. Bioprecursor prodrugs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
1.4.2. Prodrug design approaches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
1.4.2.1. Classical approach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
1.4.2.2. Novel approaches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
1.4.2.2.1. Targeting transporters 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
1.4.2.2.2. Targeting enzymes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
1.4.3. Valaciclovir 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
1.4.3.1. Physicochemical properties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
1.4.3.2. Mechanism of action  
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
1.4.3.3. Valaciclovir metabolism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
1.4.4. Simvastatin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
1.4.4.1. Physicochemical properties  
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
1.4.4.2. Mechanism of action  
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
1.4.4.3. Metabolism  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
1.5. Storage and stability studies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
1.6. SU-8 Microcontainers for oral delivery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
1.7. HPLC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
1.7.1. Reversed-phase HPLC  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
1.7.2. Development of a RP-HPLC method 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
1.8. Spray coating 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
1.9. pH sensitive polymers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
2. Hypothesis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
3. Purpose 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
4. Materials and Methods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
4.1. Materials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
4.2. Sample preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
4.2.1. Loading of SU-8 microcontainers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
4.2.1.1. Manual loading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
4.2.1.2. Powder embossing loading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
4.2.1.3. Spatula + brush loading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
4.2.2. Spray coating of the microcontainers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
4.3. Measurement of the thickness of the lids 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
4.4. Scanning electron microscope 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
4.5. SU-8 microcontainers production  
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
4.6. µDiss release studies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
4.6.1. Common method 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
 
4.6.2. Eudragit S-100 UV spectrum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
4.6.3. µDiss release study I: Aciclovir 20 loops vs 30 loops Eudragit S-100 lid 
 
 
29 
4.6.4. µDiss release study II: Valaciclovir 25 loops vs 30 loops Eudragit S-100 lid  
 
29 
4.6.5. µDiss release study III: Valaciclovir 30 loops Eudragit S-100 lid 
 
 
 
30 
4.6.6. µDiss release study IV: Valaciclovir 30 loops Eudragit L-100 lid 
 
 
 
30 
4.6.7. µDiss release study V: Simvastatin 25 loops Eudragit S-100 lid 
 
 
 
30 
4.7. RP-HPLC methods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
4.7.1. RP-HPLC method for simvastatin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
4.7.2. RP-HPLC method for valaciclovir 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
4.8. Valaciclovir Enzymatic studies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
4.8.1. Common methodology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
4.8.2. First valaciclovir enzymatic study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
4.8.3. Second valaciclovir enzymatic study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
4.8.4. Third valaciclovir enzymatic study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
4.8.5. Fourth Valaciclovir enzymatic study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
4.9. Storage studies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
4.9.1. Common method 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
4.9.2. Valaciclovir storage study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
4.9.2.1. Non-stored samples analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
4.9.2.2. Stored samples analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
4.9.3. Simvastatin storage study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
4.9.3.1. Stored and non-stored samples simvastatin analysis 
 
 
 
40 
4.10. Statistics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
5. Results and Discussion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
5.1. Loading of SU-8 microcontainers  
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
5.1.1. Manual loading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
5.1.2. Powder embossing loading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 
5.1.3. Spatula + Brush 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
5.2. Characterisation of lids by µDiss release studies 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
5.2.1. Eudragit S-100 UV spectrum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
5.2.2. µDiss release study I: Aciclovir 20 loops vs 30 loops Eudragit S-100 lid 
 
 
45 
5.2.3. µDiss release study II: Valaciclovir 25 loops vs 30 loops Eudragit S-100 lid  
 
46 
5.2.4. µDiss release study III: Valaciclovir 30 loops Eudragit S-100 lid 
 
 
 
48 
5.2.5. µDiss release study IV: Valaciclovir 30 loops Eudragit L-100-55 lid  
 
 
49 
5.2.6. µDiss release study V: Simvastatin 25 loops Eudragit S-100 lid 
 
 
 
50 
5.3. Thickness of the lids 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
5.4. Valaciclovir enzymatic studies  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
5.4.1. First valaciclovir enzymatic study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
5.4.2. Second valaciclovir enzymatic study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
5.4.3. Third valaciclovir enzymatic study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 
5.4.4. Fourth valaciclovir enzymatic study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
5.5. Storage studies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
5.5.1. Valaciclovir storage study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
5.5.1.1. Non-stored samples analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
5.5.1.2. Stored samples analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
5.5.2. Simvastatin storage study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
6. Conclusion  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 
7. Future perspectives 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 
References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
 
Abbreviations 
ACN: Acetonitrile 
ACV: Acyclovir 
API: Active pharmaceutical ingredient 
AUC: Area under the curve 
CaCl: Calcium chloride 
BCS: Biopharmaceutical classification system 
DNA: Deoxyribonucleic acid  
DSB: Dibutylsebacate  
EL-100-55: Eudragit L-100-55 
ES-100: Eudragit S-100 
EtOH: Ethanol 
FaSSIF: Fasted state simulated intestinal fluid 
FaSSGF Fasted state simulated gastric fluid 
GIT: Gastrointestinal tract 
HPLC: High performance liquid chromatography 
HAPT-1: High-affinity pentamidine transporter 1 
HSV 1/2: Herpes simplex virus 1/2  
HMG-CoA: Hydroxy-methylglutaryl coenzyme A 
IPA: 2-Isopropanolol. 
LDL: Low density lipoprotein 
MeOH: Methanol 
PEPT1: Peptide transporter 1 
PBS: Phosphate buffer saline 
RH: Relative humidity 
RP- HPLC: Reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography 
RT: Retention time 
SEM: Scanning electron microscope 
SVA: Simvastatin acid/ tenivastatin 
SV: Simvastatin 
VACVase: Valacyclovirase 
VAL: Valaciclovir 
VZV: Varicella zoster virus  
µContainers: SU-8 microcontainers 
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
1 
 
1. Introduction 
Among all the possible routes of administration of a drug, the oral route is the preferred as it 
has benefits compared to other routes. Some of the main advantages are high patient compliance 
due to ease of administration and a lower cost of the production compared to other routes (i.e. 
parenteral [1]. These advantages makes oral delivery interesting for the pharmaceutical industry 
and the market and example is the fact that 54 of the top 100 sales drug in the US Market in 
2013 are administered orally [2].  
Nevertheless, oral administration is not ideal for all available drugs, or those on their way to 
the market. In these cases, it might be necessary to use less patient-friendly routes of 
administration like the parenteral [1]. The reasons to discard the oral route are related to the 
gastrointestinal tract (GIT) and with the physicochemical properties of the drug. The challenges 
that can be found in the GIT are the pH changes, the enzymatic degradation, the intestinal 
metabolism and the intestinal barrier function. Meanwhile, the physicochemical properties of 
the drug can affect its solubility and intestinal permeability. All these weaknesses can cause a 
low absorption and bioavailability of orally administered drugs [1,3]. 
The development of new drug delivery systems for oral administration (i.e. nanoparticles, 
liposomes and microcontainers) will hopefully allow to overcome those challenges [4,5]. The 
use of these delivery systems will hopefully make it possible to administer drugs via the oral 
route which is not possible today. Drugs that can take advantage of these technologies are, for 
example, peptides, vaccines and prodrugs [6,7]. 
1.1. The gastrointestinal tract and its challenges for oral 
drug delivery 
The main purpose of the GIT is to break down the food and harvest the energy from it to be 
used in the body. A secondary function is to work as a barrier from the external environment to 
protect the body. This means that any orally administered drug must go through the GIT. The 
GIT consists of the mouth, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine (Figure 1 A) [8]. 
Each of these parts participate in the main functions of the GIT, digestion, absorption of 
nutrients, excretion and barrier/protective [9]. Some of the challenges present the GIT to a drug 
are the wide pH changes (Figure 1 B), luminal and microbiota enzymatic activity and the barrier 
function of the GIT [10]. 
The lumen is the first line of defence. Bacteria and pathogens face the swap of pH along the 
GIT, the secretion of pancreatic and biliary juices. The next line of defence is the microclimate 
(unstirred water layer, mucus and glycocalyx) and the last is the epithelium [11]. 
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
2 
 
 
Figure 1 A) Schematic representation of the gastrointestinal tract. B) pH changes along the 
GIT. The lowest pH is found in the stomach, while the most of the intestinal pH is in a range of 
5-7, being close to 8 in the distal small intestine and in some parts of the colon. Image from 
[12]. 
1.1.1. 
Mouth and esophagus  
Most of the orally administered drugs are formulated in pills or capsules to be just swallowed 
and their time of transit through the mouth and oesophagus is short, not having impact in the 
drug absorption. For some others drugs this route is an alternative to avoid the first pass 
metabolism in the liver [13]. In the mouth these drugs face the enzymatic activity and pH of the 
saliva and cross the buccal mucosa. The enzymatic activity in the saliva is due to the presence 
of alpha amylase, lysozyme and others enzymes from the buccal epithelial cells (oxidases, 
esterases and reductases) [13,14]. The pH of the saliva is close to 7 and the thickness of the 
mucosa is 500 µm [14].  
1.1.2. 
Stomach  
The stomach is the first real barrier to overcome. The transit time through the stomach varies 
from 7 to 202 min, due to the presence of food and interindividual differences [13,15]. The drug 
is exposed to a wide range of pH as it can be between pH 1-3 in a fasted state stomach and up 
to pH 6 in a fed state stomach, this values varies [16]. This wide range of pH can affect the drug 
pharmacokinetics and cause an early degradation of the acid labile compounds such as 
prodrugs(Figure 1B) [13,15,17]. Besides the pH, peptidases, amylases, nucleases and other 
enzymes are secreted to digest the food and they can cause degradation of sensible orally 
administered drugs [10]. 
Some drugs as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are well adsorbed in the stomach [14]. 
They have the next challenge of the GIT, the mucus. The mucus works as a mechanical and 
physical barrier. It is a hydrogel composed by 95% water and the remaining 5 % is a mixture 
of proteins 2-3% (mucins are the main proteins), salts, carbohydrates, antibodies, bacteria and 
cellular debris [18]. The function of the mucus is to protect the epithelium from corrosive 
elements in the GIT lumen and from erosion from the passage of food [19]. The thickness of 
the mucus varies along the GIT as seen in Figure 2, being between 189 - 274 µm in the stomach 
[18]. These drugs must cross this barrier by diffusion to reach the epithelium where they are 
absorbed. This absorption of them can be slowed down due to the thickness, the constant 
renewal of the mucus layer and the binding to the mucosal proteins. These proteins gives a 
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
3 
 
negative charge to the mucus (electrostatic interactions) and can cause H-bonds and 
hydrophobic interactions with the crossing drugs [19,20]. 
 
Figure 2 Thickness of the GIT mucus from the stomach (Corpus and antrum), small intestine 
(Duodenum, jejunum and ileum) and Colon [18]. 
1.1.3. 
Small intestine 
Those drugs that managed to survive the harsh gastric environment pass to the duodenum. The 
duodenum is the first and shortest part of the small intestine (0.20-0.30 m). Here the low gastric 
pH is raised to pH values between 5.7-6.8. The short transit time of approximately 40 min in 
the duodenum gives less relevance to the duodenum for drug absorption compare to the next 
intestinal sections [21]. 
Next to the duodenum is the jejunum followed by the ileum, the main sites of absorption for 
most of the orally administered drugs [18]. This is due to their longer transit times (2-3 h ileum 
and 3-4 h), the extension of the surface 300-400 m2 and the lower mucosal thickness. This 
extension is due to the presence of villi and crypts gives a rugose surface to the intestinal 
epithelium as seen in the Figure 3 A. The pH values of these sections are more stable and closer 
to the physiological pH, being in a range of 6.6-7 for ileum and 7.0 to 7.3 for the jejunum [15].  
The main hazard for some drugs is the high enzymatic activity in the lumen [10]. The secretion 
of pancreatic enzymes (lipase, amylase, trypsin and chymotrypsin) creates a high enzymatic 
activity in the intestinal lumen [17,22]. This enzymatic activity is increased by the presence of 
brush-border membrane peptidases on the epithelium and by the microbiota [23,24]. 
 
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
4 
 
 
 
Figure 3 A) Schematic representation of the intestinal barrier and cell organization of the 
epithelium. B) mechanism of absorption and metabolism of the drugs in the enterocyte [21,25]. 
Same as in the stomach, there is a mucus layer that protects the epithelium from the harsh 
environment and bacteria. It is thinner (123 µm jejunum and 480µm ileum, Figure 2) compared 
to the stomach mucus, but still a mechanical barrier to overcome with the same difficulties [18]. 
Thus, different strategies have been developed in combination of new drug delivery systems to 
overcome the intestinal mucus. As an example is the attachment of enzymes, such as papain, 
on the surface of nanoparticles [26]. Increasing mucoadhesion is another strategy that increases 
the time of transit of the drug allowing more time for dissolution and absorption [27]. 
Those drugs that evade the luminal enzymatic degradation must cross a thinner mucus layer to 
reach the intestinal epithelium to be absorbed. The epithelium consists in a single cell layer 
composed by different types of cells with different functions as seen in the Figure 3A. Different 
types of cells are found, differentiating two main populations, enterocytes (absorptive cells) and 
secretory cells (goblet, enteroendocrine and Paneth cells). Besides this two main populations 
there are others types of cells (microfold, tuft and cup cells) [25].  
This layer is the main responsible of the absorption of the drugs by different mechanisms, 
passive diffusion, active transport (facilitated diffusion), endocytosis and paracellular transport. 
Small amphipathic molecules can cross the epithelium through passive diffusion, meanwhile 
hydrophilic molecules can cross the epithelium through the paracellular transport or by uptake 
of fluids (Figure 3 B) [28–30]. 
The active transport of drugs occurs against gradient and requires energy. Some drugs, like 
prodrugs, take advantage of membrane transporters, such as peptide transporter 1 (PEPT1) that 
their main function is the uptake of nutrients to be absorbed [21].  
In the case of paracellular permeability, small polar drugs can cross the epithelium through 
pores or channels that allow molecules up to 15 Å [21]. This path is used by less of the 5% of 
drug compounds [31]. It is considered as a route of limited capacity as the pores represents just 
a 0.3% of the GIT surface. All these mechanisms are responsible of the cross of the drug from 
the GIT lumen to the enterocyte or directly to the circulation. However, some drugs suffer the 
efflux from the enterocyte back to the lumen by the presence of transmembrane protein as P. 
glycoprotein (Figure 3 B) [21,31].  
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
5 
 
Those drugs that are absorbed through the epithelium can suffer an early metabolism by 
enzymes of phase I (CYP4503A) and phase II metabolism (Glucuronosyl transferase, N-Acetyl 
transferase, glutathione s-transferase), they are responsible of oxidation and conjugation 
reactions respectively [10]. Moreover, in the intestinal epithelium there are intestinal 
carboxylesterases responsible of the early metabolism of some ester prodrugs in the intestine 
[32].  
1.1.4. 
Colon 
The colon is the last section of the GIT and the one with longer transit time up to 19 h. In the 
colon the pH range is between 5.7 to 6.6 and the mucosa is up to 830µm thick [21]. 
As last section of the GIT, it has a lower impact for most of the drugs as they have been already 
absorbed in the small intestine. Nevertheless, some drugs target this section of the intestine to 
for local treatment of diseases such as Chron´s disease. Thus, drug delivery systems have been 
developed to cross the GIT without releasing the loaded drugs until they reach the Colon [33, 
34]. 
1.2. In vitro gastric and intestinal media and pancreatin  
The development of biorelevant media for the study of the solubility of new drugs has taken a 
special importance in the pharmaceutical development since late 90’s. The aim of developing 
these media is to recreate the closest environments in vitro of the in vivo environments. The pH 
and osmolarity are tuned to be the closest to the human GIT fluids [35]. Fasted state simulated 
gastric fluid (FaSSGF) has been developed to recreate the gastric medium, the pH is lowered 
to 1.6 with HCl, the formation of micelles is due to sodium lauryl sulphate and osmolarity is 
tuned with sodium chloride. In the case of the fasted state simulated intestinal fluid (FaSSIF) 
the pH is 6.5, it has a buffer capacity and the composition of phospholipids, bile salts and other 
components varies between the different approaches [35,36]. 
Recreating the composition of the media of the GIT might not be enough for those studies that 
aim study the stability of the developing drug [23]. Thus the use of pancreatin has been accepted 
by the scientific community and the pharmacopeia as an alternative to the use of human or 
animal GIT fluids [23]. Pancreatin is a biotechnological product containing a mixture of 
enzymes from the porcine pancreas, some of the characterised enzymes are amylase, lipase, 
carboxyl esterases and proteases. It has been employed to study the enzymatic degradation of 
drugs and prodrugs [37–39] Besides its use in the laboratory, it has been employed to treat 
pancreatic exocrine insufficiency [40]. 
 
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
6 
 
1.3. Physicochemical properties of drugs and drug 
absorption 
Solubility in the GIT fluids and the intestinal permeability are considered the main limiting 
factors for drug absorption [41]. Thus, they are used to classify drugs in the biopharmaceutical 
classification system (BCS) in four main classes as seen in Table 1 [42].  
The BCS is a useful tool to translate the in vitro dissolution to in vivo bioavailability [43]. This 
classification has been welcomed from agencies and industry. It is estimated a 100 $ millions 
savings for the industry thanks to the use of the BCS [43]. 
The solubility for this classification is calculated with in vitro studies by dissolving the drug in 
an aqueous solution with a pH in a range from 1.6 to 6.8. in case of an ionisable compound this 
dissolution test must be done at pH = pKa, pH = pKa + 1, pH= - 1 and pH= 6.8 at 37°C. To 
consider a compound as highly soluble its highest strength dissolves in 250 ml in a pH range 
1.6-6.8 [41]. 
The permeability can be calculated via human pharmacokinetic studies, or through in vivo 
intestinal perfusion in human subjects. However, other methods not involving humans can be 
used, in vivo animals studies can be used, as in vitro permeability studies in intestinal tissues, 
or monolayers of suitable epithelial cell [41]. Some cells lines from intestine as Caco-2 can be 
used to simulate in vitro the permeability [44]. 
The absorption of drugs of the class II and IV is limited by the dissolution rate/solubility as 
seen in Table 1. Solid drugs have to dissolve in the GIT fluids to reach the barrier where is 
going to be absorbed (epithelium in the GIT) [45].  
Table 1 BCS according to solubility and permeability of the drug in development. 
Class 
Solubility 
Permeability 
Rate limiting step 
I 
High 
High 
Dissolution/gastric emptying 
II 
Low 
High 
Dissolution/solubility 
III 
High 
Low 
Permeability 
IV 
Low 
Low 
Dissolution/solubility and 
permeability 
 
Solubility can be defined as “the maximum amount of a substance that will dissolve in a given 
amount of solvent at a specified temperature” [45]. It has a major impact in the dissolution of 
drugs and limits the absorption. It is affected by the crystalline polymorph or solvate of the 
drug, the pH of the medium and pKa of the drug, the lipophilicity of the drug and the ability of 
the drug to be solubilized in the GIT fluids [46]. 
A drug can present different crystallized forms, each of them with different physicochemical 
properties and one of them is solubility. Thus, the dissolution rate can be enhanced using the 
right polymorph. Nevertheless, in some cases the increased solubility does not translate in a 
higher absorption or bioavailability (Higher hydrolysis or instability) [46]. 
The GIT fluid pH influences the solubility and as consequence in the dissolution rate of the 
drug. Most of the drugs are either weak acids or bases that can be ionized by the change of pH 
in the medium. Weak acids and bases are in an equilibrium between ionised or unionised, which 
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
7 
 
is determined by their acidic dissociation constant (Ka, can be expressed in the logarithmic 
form pKa) and the medium pH. As the pH changes this moves toward the ionised form or to 
the unionised, being the first one more soluble [45].  
The lipophilicity character of a compound is determined by the water/octanol partition 
coefficient log P. This is inherent to the drug structure by the presence of polar groups (-OH, -
NH2) hydrogen bonds van Der Waals forces and other structure interactions [46]. According to 
Lipinski´s rule of 5, a log P of 5 is acceptable for an adequate permeability. This rule also 
considers that the presence of more of 5 H-bonds donors, more of 10 H-Bonds acceptors and 
molecular weights above 500 will cause a poor permeability and absorption [44]. 
The absorption of a drug in the GIT depends heavily on its permeability and is the limiting step 
for drugs of Class III and IV as seen in Table 1. Those compounds with low permeability will 
suffer low bioavailability. Intestinal permeability can be defined as the velocity of drug passage 
through the intestinal barrier. As seen in 1.1.3. before a drug can cross the intestinal epithelium 
through four main mechanism, passive diffusion, active transport, endocytosis and 
transcellularly. These mechanism plus the mechanism of efflux define the permeability of the 
intestinal barrier. 
Passive diffusion is the main mechanism as it is estimated that 95% of the drugs are absorbed 
by this mechanism. Two basic characteristics define the permeability of a drug: 
• Neutral compounds are more permeable than ionized compounds. 
• Lipophilic compounds are more permeable than polar compounds.  
The main reason is that drugs must cross through the highly nonpolar lipid bilayer of the cell 
membrane. Here the pH of the GIT pH plays an important role, it affects permeability of weak 
acid and basic compounds. If a compound is completely ionized its permeability will be lower 
than the needed for its absorption [31].  
 
1.4. Prodrugs 
Developing a prodrug is an useful strategy to improve solubility and permeability and issues 
related with the GIT [47–49]. The concept of prodrugs refers to those drugs which require a 
chemical/enzymatic transformation to release a pharmacologically active drug. This kind of 
drugs represents the 10% of the drugs approved worldwide. They are designed to solve an issue 
that discards the use of the parent drug. This issues are present in Table 2 with examples of 
prodrugs that had overcome them [50,51]. 
The first compound that can be considered as a prodrug was introduced in 1867 by Cahn and 
Hepp. It was the antipyretic agent acetanilide, known as Antifebrin®, which active metabolite 
is the well-known paracetamol [52]. Another early prodrug is the popular Aspirin® 
(acetylsalicylic acid). It was introduced in the market by Felix Hoffman in 1897, this compound 
was developed to reduce the toxicity of the parent drug, but further study about its mechanism 
of action showed this hidden aspect [53].  
 
 
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
8 
 
Table 2 Main issues that can be overcome by using a prodrug strategy and examples of 
prodrugs [54]. 
Issues 
Example 
Bioavailability, poor aqueous solubility 
Prednisolone phosphate 
Bioavailability, poor absorption / permeability 
Enalapril 
High first pass extraction 
Bambuterol 
Poor site specificity 
Anticancer agents 
Incomplete absorption 
Valaciclovir 
Unfavourable organoleptic 
Chloramphenicol 
palmitate 
Pharmaceutical formulation difficulties 
Chloramphenicol 
succinate 
Adverse effects / toxicity 
Acetylsalicylic acid 
 
Until the middle of the 20th century, the term prodrug was not used. It was introduced by Adrien 
Albert during the development of chloramphenicol derivates to improve the water solubility 
and its bitter flavour, the derived prodrugs were chloramphenicol sodium succinate (improved 
water solubility) and chloramphenicol palmitate(formulated as suspension) [51]. 
Although their design is to solve these issues, in some cases they are still affected by the 
challenges previously reported. They can suffer undesired pH and enzymatic degradation in the 
GIT [55,56]. Or their permeability or solubility are low [49,57]. 
1.4.1. 
Classical classification 
A classification of prodrugs differentiates them in two main groups: carrier linked prodrug and 
bioprecursor prodrug [58].  
1.4.1.1. 
Carrier linked prodrugs  
The first groups, carrier linked prodrug relays on the loss of a carrier from the active compound 
(Figure4), this carrier is bound by a covalent linkage that is cleaved. In principle the prodrug is 
less active than the parent drug due to this modification. Examples of this group can be 
enalapril, oseltamivir and valaciclovir [51].  
 
Figure 4 Concept of carrier-prodrug, the drug is bound to a carrier/promoiety allowing to 
cross barriers (any limitation of the parent drug) and reach the desired target after an 
enzymatic or chemical transformation that cleaves the covalent bond releasing the parent drug 
and the carrier. Adapted from [50]. 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
9 
 
A well designed carrier linked prodrugs has to satisfy the next criteria [59]: 
• The linkage drug promoiety must be covalent. 
• The prodrug is inactive or less active than the parent drug. 
• The linkage must be cleaved in vivo. 
• The bioconversion must take place rapidly to minimize prodrug metabolism and ensure 
effective drug levels in the site of action. 
The carrier-linked the parent drug suffer a notable modification in their structure with the 
addition of a carrier (Figure 5). Some of the main bonds used are listed here [50]: 
Alkyl esters as prodrugs: the formation of an ester bond is one of the most popular trends in 
prodrug design, as it increases the lipophilicity of the parent drug by reducing charged groups 
of the parent drug (as carboxylic acids and phosphates). As consequence, the absorption 
increases due to an increase in the permeability. This covalent bond is cleaved by esterases 
found in blood, intestine, liver and other tissues. 
Phosphate esters as prodrugs: The addition of a phosphate group to a hydroxyl or amine groups 
increase the solubility of the parent drug. This allow its use by parenteral or oral administration. 
They are rapidly bioconversed into the parent drug by alkaline phosphatases present 
ubiquitously in the body. 
Carbonates and carbamates as prodrugs: It is a similar approach as the formation of alkyl 
esters, but having a higher enzymatic stability. They are bioconversed by esterases. 
Amides as prodrugs: this kind of bond has a higher stability making it less popular than esters. 
They are designed to take advantage of intestinal transporters such as PEPT1. Their 
bioconversion is done by carboxylesterases, peptidases and proteases. 
Oximes as prodrugs: the formation of an oxime from a ketone, amidine and guanidines 
improves the membrane permeability and the adsorption of the parent drug. They hydrolysed 
by cytochrome P450. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
, 
 
 
 
 Figure 5: Main functional groups used for the prodrug design, adapted from [50]. 
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
10 
 
1.4.1.2. 
Bioprecursor prodrugs  
The second group, bioprecursor prodrugs, does not relays in a carrier, they require their 
activation by the cleavage or modification of their structure. Most of the examples of this kind 
of prodrugs release a phase I metabolism product as active drug.  
The main Phase I reaction are [58]: 
• Oxidative reaction: oxidation of alcohol, acid functions and hydroxylation of aliphatic 
carbon atoms are examples of this type of reactions. 
• Reductive reactions: Reduction of carbonyl groups, reduction of alcoholic groups and 
carbon-carbon double bonds, among other reactions. 
• Reaction without change in their state of oxidation: Hydrolysis of esters and ethers, 
hydrolytic cleavage of C—N single bonds 
Some examples of this group are acyclovir, omeprazole and simvastatin [58]. 
1.4.2. 
Prodrug design approaches 
1.4.2.1. 
Classical approach 
The classical prodrug approach for oral administration consisted in the addition of functional 
highly hydrophilic groups such as phosphates and sulphates to increase the solubility of the 
parent drug or lipophilic groups to increase the permeability. The aim of this modification is to 
modify the pharmacokinetics, increase bioavailability, reduce side effects, extend activity by 
the modification of the physicochemical properties of the parent drug [60]. 
1.4.2.2. 
Novel approaches 
Novel approaches have emerged thanks to the understanding and the discover of transporters 
and enzymes that can be targeted to improve the effectiveness of the prodrug and its active 
form. 
1.4.2.2.1. Targeting transporters 
It is one strategy to consider when designing a new prodrug. These transporters are responsible 
of the uptake of nutrient by the enterocytes in the intestine [30]. 
Among these transporters, PEPT1 is present through all small intestine. It has a high capacity 
and low affinity character. It can transport dipeptides, tripeptides and peptidomimetics drugs 
such as β-lactam antibiotics. Thus, PEPT1 has become an interesting target in the development 
of prodrugs, some of prodrugs that use PEPT1 as transporter are valaciclovir, valganciclovir, 
captopril and enalapril [61,62]. 
Targeting transporters has been used as well as a strategy to improve the distribution of a 
prodrug. An example is levodopa, a prodrug of the neurotransmisor dopamine. Due to the high 
hydrophilicity of dopamine, it cannot cross the blood brain barrier for the treatment of the 
Parkinson´s disease. This barrier can be crossed by levodopa thanks to the presence of the 
neutral amino acid heterodimeric transporter LAT1-4F2hc [62]. 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
11 
 
1.4.2.2.2. Targeting enzymes 
The other strategy of the novel approach is targeting enzymes of interest for the bioconversion 
of the prodrug into the active drug. This strategy has been studied for the use of prodrugs in the 
treatment of cancer. The overexpression of exogenous prodrug-activating enzymes in the 
tumour by different strategies can release the active drug only where is desired [39]. In addition, 
some tumours present an aberrant overexpression of enzymes, like Matrix-metalloproteinases, 
that can be targeted for the activation of prodrugs [60,63]. 
1.4.3. 
Valaciclovir 
 
One of those prodrugs is valaciclovir (VAL). It is an interesting concept of carrier linked 
prodrug of the parent drug Acyclovir (ACV), which is another bio precursor prodrug. VAL is 
the L-valyl ester of ACV as seen in the Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6 Structure of VAL where valine is bound by an ester bond to Acyclovir. 
ACV is effective in the treatment of herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2 (HSV-1 and HSV-2) and 
varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infections, but its low oral bioavailability (10-20 %) demands 
multiple daily doses [64]. Thus, there was a need of improving this aspect to reduce the 
posology of ACV. The development of prodrugs or modifications of ACV structure brought 
different candidates, among them VAL showed an ACV absolute bioavailability of 54 % [65]. 
The increase of the oral bioavailability of ACV was the result of the attachment of L-valine 
amino acid that allows the use of the transporters PEPT1 and HPT-1 for its absorption in the 
small intestine [66,67]. 
1.4.3.1. 
Physicochemical properties  
VAL is a hydrophilic compound with a log P of -0.3. The hydrochloride salt of VAL has a 
water solubility of 174 mg/ml, but VAL has a low permeability, making it a BCS class III drug 
as seen in the section 1.3 [68]. Its solubility and permeability can be affected by the GIT tract 
as it can be ionised, having two pKas 4.06 and 6.32 due to the amine groups. In addition, VAL 
absorbs light and has a maximal absorbance at 254 nm [69].  
 
 
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
12 
 
1.4.3.2. 
Mechanism of action  
The released ACV form VAL is the responsible of the mechanism of action. ACV is 
intracellularly activated by the viral thymidine kinase of HSV-1, HSV-2 and VZV. After 
activation to ACV monophosphate, is converted into the diphosphate and triphosphate by 
cellular kinases. The triphosphate form is able to block viral DNA replication by competitive 
inhibition of the viral DNA polymerase (Figure 7) [64]. 
 
Figure 7 A) Bioconversion of VAL into ACV and B) the further activation of ACV and its 
mechanism of action. Adapted from [70]. 
1.4.3.3. 
Valaciclovir metabolism: 
The metabolism of VAL is complex and involves different enzymes (Figure 8). Before 
absorption, VAL is partially transform in the gut lumen to ACV, the rest of VAL are uptake by 
enterocytes through PEPT1 and high-affinity pentamidine transporter 1 (HAPT-1). In the 
enterocytes, VAL is partially bioconversed into ACV by the human Valacyclovirase 
(VACVase). The remaining VAL reaches the portal circulation heading to the liver, where it 
will face again in the hepatocytes to VACVase. This tortuous pathway causes a low half-life of 
VAL being undetectable after 3 h of oral administration [71]. 
After being bioconversed into ACV it follows two routes of elimination, it can be metabolized 
into 
9-(carboxy-methoxymethyl)guanine 
and 
8-hydroxy-9-[(2-hydrox-
yethoxy)methyl]guanine or go through renal excretion without being transformed, being this 
last one the main elimination route [65,72]. 
 
Figure 8 Valaciclovir pathway and metabolism after oral administration, adapted from [73]. 
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
13 
 
VAL suffers an undesirable hydrolysis in the gut lumen releasing the poorly absorbable ACV 
before absorption, in vitro studies with dog and human gastric and intestinal fluids confirmed 
the degradation of VAL in the intestinal the degradation, loss of the valine carrier, cause the 
loss of the improvements of the prodrug. [74]. 
In this thesis the abbreviation VAL will be used in the methods and results to refer to 
Valaciclovir hydrochloride, which was the salt of valaciclovir used. 
1.4.4. 
Simvastatin 
Simvastatin (SV) is one of the eldest hydroxy-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) 
reductase inhibitor, along with lovastatin. Moreover, SV is a modification of lovastatin. It was 
introduced in the Swedish market in 1988 and later to the rest of the global pharmaceutical 
market. It is a bioprecursor drug as it lacks pharmacological activity and requires the 
bioconversion to its active form, known as simvastatin acid (SVA) or tenivastatin, to have a 
pharmacological effect(Figure 9) [75]. 
 
Figure 9 Opening of the lactone acid of simvastatin. Simvastatin acid is the active metabolite. 
1.4.4.1. 
Physicochemical properties  
Simvastatin is a hydrophobic compound with low water solubility (30µg/ml) [76], but 
acceptable permeability, therefore is considered a Class II type drug in the biopharmaceutical 
classification system [68]. Its log P is 4.68 which explains its low solubility and high 
permeability. The lack of ionisable groups give it a predicted pKa value of 14.91, so GIT pH 
will have little effect in its solubility [44]. It absorbs light and its maximum absorption is at 
231, 238 and 247nm [69]. 
 
1.4.4.2. 
Mechanism of action 
SVA inhibits HMG-CoA causing the reduction of the levels of mevalonate and the regulatory 
sterol pool as consequence (Figure10). The physiological response is an upregulation of HMG-
CoA, other enzymes involved in the endogenous cholesterol production and the LDL receptor. 
The upregulation of this last receptor is responsible of the reduction of the cholesterol by the 
uptake of low density lipoproteins (LDL) in the bloodstream, therefore the inhibition of HMG-
CoA has two effects, reduction of endogenous cholesterol and upregulation of LDL uptake [75]. 
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
14 
 
 
Figure 10 Mechanism of action of Statins. the inhibition of HMG CoA reduces the production 
of cholesterol. This causes the overexpression or LDL-receptors reducing LDL proteins from 
the systemic circulation and the blood cholesterol levels [77]. 
1.4.4.3. 
Metabolism  
SV suffers a high first pass metabolism in the liver after absorption and only 5% of SV reaches 
the systemic circulation. In the liver, SV suffers multiple modifications in different metabolism 
routes. In those routes the lactone ring is open activating SV to SVA by esterases and 
paraoxonases, but SVA can be reconverted into SV via the acyl glucuronide intermediate and 
via the CoASH-dependent pathway(Figure 11) [75]. 
SV and SVA goes through a oxidative metabolism by Cytochrome P450, being CYP3A4/5 the 
main responsible >80 % and CYP2C8 responsible of the 20% of the rest of the SVA metabolism 
according to in vitro studies [78]. The main route of elimination of the resulting metabolites is 
by biliary secretion [79]. 
 
Figure 11 Simvastatin metabolism. SV is transformed to SVA (Simvastatin Hydroxyacid) or 
oxidized by phase I metabolism enzymes. SVA can be either oxidized or conjugated by Phase I 
and II metabolism enzymes. At the same time SVA can be turned back into SV by a CoASH 
dependent pathway. adapted from [79]. 
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
15 
 
The hydrolysis of the lactone ring not only happens in the liver, it has been studied in vitro the 
influence of gastric and intestinal fluids. SV suffer a higher hydrolysis in the gastric medium 
than in the intestinal [79]. 
1.5. Storage and stability studies 
In the development of a new drug or formulation there is a set of studies proposed by the world 
health organisation and international conference of harmonisation study the stability of the 
active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) and formulations. These studies aim to study how the 
quality of the API or the new formulation varies ought to the environmental conditions 
(Temperature, humidity and light). These studies are long term studies (>6 months), which are 
adapted to the type of product of study (requires refrigerated storage or not) [80]. 
To study how the temperature and humidity affect the API of formulation in those that do not 
require refrigeration 3 scenarios are present as seen in Table 3. 
Table 3: Storage condition for not refrigerated products 
Study 
Storage condition 
Minimum time period 
Long-term 
25±2°C /60±5% RH or 
30±2°C /65±5% RH or 
30±2°C /75±5% RH 
12 months or 6 months 
Intermediate 
30±2°C /65±5% RH 
6 months 
Accelerated 
40±2°C /75±5% RH 
6 months 
 
The decision of different conditions and length for the long-term depends on knowledge about 
the stability of the drug. Those drugs known as stable will be stored under for shorter period. 
In case that occurs within the first 6 months of the long-term studies, an intermediate study 
should be carried out [80]. In the case of formulation these conditions can be applied for study 
the stability. In addition further studies should be done to adjust the product to the climate of 
the market that will be used [77]. 
 
1.6. SU-8 Microcontainers for oral delivery  
As seen before, the development of new oral delivery system will open the door to the oral 
administration of drugs which currently are not suitable. One of these systems are 
microcontainers. There are different concepts of microcontainers under development using 
different materials, in this project SU-8 µContainer (µContainers) were the choice [81]. 
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
16 
 
 
Figure 12 µContainers SEM image and concept of loaded and coated µContainer [5]. 
As seen in Figure 12, a µContainers consist in a hollow cylindric structure open only from one 
side. The dimensions of the cavity of the µContainers are 220 µm and 270 µm of diameter and 
height respectively its external diameter is approximately 300 µm [5,82]. The design allows the 
unidirectional release. This characteristic is not achieved by other nano/microcarriers such as 
microparticles, nanoparticles or liposomes that release their load from multiple angles [83–85]. 
Unidirectional release can increase the bioavailability of compounds with low permeability and 
low solubility [5,81]. 
The fabrication of the µContainers (Figure 13) uses the negative photoresist SU-8. It is 
composed by a monomer containing 8 epoxy moieties [86]. It has the property of crosslink 
within itself under UV exposition creating a solid material. The mechanical, thermal and 
chemical stability after the process make SU-8 an interesting material for creation of three-
dimensional structures such as micro gears and micro cantilever [87]. Unfortunately, SU-8 
suffers the downside of not been a FDA approved material, even though its biocompatibility 
has been studied, not showing in vitro cytotoxicity and equivalent haemolytic activity as others 
FDA approved polymers [86]. 
 
Figure 13 µContainers fabrication by two step photolithographic process. In the first step a 
mask covers the SU-8 solution preventing total crosslinking of SU-8 and leaving a crosslinked 
base on which the walls of the µContainers will be formed with UV light and a second mask 
with a different design [88]. 
Some of the advantages of using these µContainers are the beforecited unidirectional release, 
their mucoadhesion and the fact that they can be closed with a pH sensitive lid. These aspects 
make them interesting for the delivery of drugs that can be affected by the exposition to the 
lumen enzymes or low pH, or have low solubility [5]. 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
17 
 
1.7. HPLC 
High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is an analytical technique that allow us to separate, 
identify and quantify different analytes from each other’s from a liquid sample thanks to their 
physicochemical properties. This chromatographic technique was introduced in the period between 1959 
- 1964. It sped up the chromatography analysis thanks to the increase of the pressure and reduction of 
the particle size in the columns [89]. 
There are different types of HPCL according to the mobile phase and the stationary phase 
employed [90]:  
• Normal phase: The stationary phase/column is composed by a polar material, usually 
silica that retains the polar analytes from the organic mobile phase. 
• Reversed-phase: in this case the stationary phase is hydrophobic and retains those 
analytes by their hydrophobicity from the polar mobile phase. 
• Ion exchange: The stationary has an ionically charge surface that retains those analytes 
of opposite charge the charge of the stationary phase. It can be tuned with the used 
mobile phase pH and ionic strength. 
• Size exclusion: In this type the separation of analytes is due to their molecular size. 
This technique is versatile and can be employed in different areas [90]: 
• Environmental application. 
• Forensic application. 
• Food industry. 
• Clinical application. 
• Pharmaceutical application. 
 
1.7.1. 
Reversed-phase HPLC  
It is defined by the IUPAC as “An elution procedure used in liquid chromatography in which 
the mobile phase is significantly more polar then the stationary phase, e.g. a microporous 
silica-based material with chemically bonded alkyl chains. The term 'reverse phase' is an 
incorrect expression to be avoided.” [91]. 
It is estimated to be used over 65 % (even up to 90%) of all HPLC separations are RP-HPLC 
thanks to the versatility, simplicity and scope of the reversed phase methods [92]. The use of 
this technique has been useful for the determination, separation and identification of metabolites 
and degradation products of small molecules and it is one of the application in the 
pharmaceutical industry. Some examples can be the determination of degradation products of 
drugs like Flupritine [93] and Cilostazol [94]. Prodrugs and their degradation 
products/metabolites, are not an exception of small compounds that can be determined by this 
technique, in the literature multiple examples can be found [94].  
The separation mechanism behind the RP-HPLC is based on the hydrophobic binding between 
the analyte and the stationary phase. The distribution of the analyte between the mobile phase 
and the stationary phase depends on the binding properties of the stationary phase, the 
hydrophobicity of the analyte and the composition of the mobile phase. Therefore, the 
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
18 
 
mechanism can be seen as a adsorption desorption process between the analyte to the stationary 
phase that is in equilibrium with the mobile phase [95]. 
 
Depending on the composition of the mobile phase during the analysis there are two running 
modes: 
• Isocratic: when the mobile phase keeps constant during the whole analysis,  
• Gradient: when the ratio of the organic solvent and aqueous solvent of the mobile phase 
swift during the analysis.  
The use of isocratic or gradient mode depends on the complexity of the sample and in the 
properties of the analyte of interest. The gradient mode is useful for complex samples of 
unknown composition, as the modification of the mobile phase during the analysis allows the 
complete desorption of highly hydrophobic compound from the stationary phase [96–98]. 
The main components of a HPCL-system is seen in Figure 14. 
 
Figure 14 : Scheme of a HPLC equipment with the main components. 
1.7.2. 
Development of a RP-HPLC method  
While developing a RP-HPLC method some aspects must be considered: 
First, it is important to do a literature review to find before used methods for similar samples. 
Next, it should be considered the equipment that fits better to our analysis, which is the best 
mobile phase, best column and best detector among other parameters. Some of the main 
parameters to consider during the development of a RP-HPLC method are here presented [99]: 
• Column: It can be considered the main concern for a stable and reproducible analysis 
multiple factors must be consider for achieving the desired efficiency such as the particle 
size, column diameter or length of the column [99].  
• Mobile phase: it is responsible of the separation of the analyte from the sample, along 
with the composition of the stationary phase of the column. Here different ratios of 
organic solvent: aqueous solvent can be tuned for getting a better separation of analyte. 
The selection of the organic solvent must consider its wavelength cut-off as it can 
interfere in the detection of the analyte. Methanol (MeOH) and Acetonitrile (ACN) are 
commonly used due to their low wavelengths cut off. Another aspect that can be attended 
is the pH o the mobile phase in the case of our analyte has different pKas. It can be 
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
19 
 
ionizable as its polarity will vary with different pH values affecting the retention time. 
Thus, the choice of the right pH is crucial and it is no desirable a swift of this value 
during the analysis, to prevent this the mobile phase should have a buffer capacity usually 
with a buffer between 10-50mM [100]. 
• Viscosity: A high viscosity can reduce the interaction between the analyte and stationary 
phase and cause an undesirable increase of the pressure at low flow rates, the ideal value 
for this parameter is 0,5 centipoise [92]. 
• Temperature: Related with the last point, an increase of temperature will cause a 
reduction of viscosity and therefore an increase of the interaction between the analyte 
and the stationary phase. High temperatures can be useful for increasing the resolution 
of the method [95]. 
• Flow rate: Increasing the flow rate is a tentative solution for speed up the analysis, as it 
can reduce the retention time of the compounds but can affect highly in the separation of 
peaks and in the width of them [99,100]. 
1.8. Spray coating 
The µContainers need a pH sensitive lid to confine and protect the load form the gastric fluids 
as seen in Figure 12. This lid is created thanks to the use of the spray coating technique, more 
accurately ultrasonic spray coating. This technique allows the coating of three-dimensional 
objects such as cantilevers and µContainers [103–105].  
Spray coating is based in the formation of small droplets thanks to the atomization of a liquid 
with the flow of a gas (usually nitrogen) through a small orifice. In addition to the flow of a gas 
the addition of a step of ultrasonication (ultrasonic spray coating) can be added, where the 
droplet is formed by high frequency waves. The principle behind ultrasonication is the 
conversion of a high frequency electrical signal into a mechanical expansion and contraction 
(vibration) of two piezoelectric transducers between the electrodes. This vibration is sent to the 
titanium tip of the nozzle. The liquid traveling through the nozzle until the vibrating tip reaches 
a critical wave amplitude breaking into a spray of small droplet [106]. Those drops reach an 
impact surface were the solvent evaporates leaving layer of the dissolved polymer (Figure 15) 
[77]. This last approach has some advantages over just spray coating such as simplicity, good 
transfer, efficiency, economical, precise conformal coating on non-planar surfaces, formation 
of droplet in the micrometres range and good reproducibility [107]. 
 
Figure 15 Schematic representation of the ultrasonic atomization equipment, adapted from 
[103] 
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
20 
 
It is a versatile technique that relays in multiple parameters to create an uniform coating, the 
main parameters to consider are :[94,103,108,109]: 
• Solution: Concentration of the polymer, solvent used and flow rate. 
• Surface of impact 
• Number of spray passes (loops)  
• Speed of the nozzle 
• Height of the nozzle from the surface 
• Pressure of the gas  
• Power of the ultrasonic generator  
This last approach, ultrasonic spray coating was used in the project, therefore for easiness to 
the reader the term spray coating used in this project will refer to ultrasonic spray coating. 
1.9. pH sensitive polymers  
As seen in the previous section, the use of µContainers need the closing of them with a pH 
sensitive lid that allows to go through the gastric fluids without releasing their load. 
A polymer can be considered as a pH sensitive when its solubility or conformation in aqueous 
solution is reversible or irreversible changeable by the environmental pH. Generally this 
property is defined by the characteristic structure of the ionizable group and by several 
structural an environmental (hydrophobicity/ hydrophilicity of the backbone polymer, ionic 
strength and polymer composition) [110].  
Currently there is a wide repertoire of pH sensitive polymer available on the market, one of the 
most used is Eudragit (Figure16). Eudragit is the brand name for a group of cationic copolymers 
based on polymethacrylates. It has been employed as pH sensitive coating since 1953, when 
they were introduced in the market by the company Roöhn & Hass in Germany. Different 
modification has been carried out to tune the copolymer to dissolve in different pH values as 
seen in Figure 16 [111]. 
 
Figure 16 Backbone structure of Eudragit and its different types or grades according to radical 
substitution. Adapted from [111]. 
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
21 
 
Previous works with µContainers used Eudragit L-100 as coating material thanks stand pH 
values lower than 6 without dissolving [5]. This pH sensitive polymer has been used for other 
formulations such as pH sensitive nanoparticles microcapsules [112,113]. 
In this project two similar polymers were used, Eudragit S-100 (ES-100) and L100-55(EL-100-
55), these polymers dissolves at pH 7.5 and 5.5 respectively being able to go through the gastric 
medium without releasing their loads as well [111]. 
ES-100 usually is employed in pH triggered release in the colon. As example is the formulation 
for the local release of mesalazine only in the colon. In this project ES-100 has been employed 
because thanks to the work within the Nanoprobes group it is known that the rat intestinal fluid 
pH is close to 7.5 [33,111]. Besides its pH triggered release, ES-100 has been employed to 
achieve sustained release from tablets depending on the thickness of the ES-100 coating [114]. 
Sustained release is an useful strategy to increase the absorption and bioavailability of those 
drugs with poor solubility and / or poor permeability [115]. Sustained release from the pH 
sensitive lid in combination with the mucoadhesion of the µContainers. Mucoadhesion might 
enhance the absorption of drugs as VAL and SV, as the combination of these two aspects has 
been employed to increase the absorption of itraconazole (Class II drug) [115]. 
EL-100-55 is used as enteric coating and for gastric resistant nanoparticles. An example is the 
formulation of gastric resistant nanoparticles carrying the prodrug omeprazole. This polymer is 
employed to target the human small intestine preventing the release of drug in the gastric pH 
[116]. 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
22 
 
2. Hypothesis 
The use of SU-8 microcontainers can protect valaciclovir from pH dependent and enzymatic 
degradation in the gastrointestinal tract due to a pH sensitive lid. 
Simvastatin and valaciclovir can be protected at storage conditions with the use of SU-8 
microcontainer closed with a pH sensitive lid. 
. 
3. Purpose 
In this project the prodrugs were loaded into SU-8 microcontainers and protected with a pH 
sensitive coating. The purpose of this thesis was to evaluate the benefit of the use of SU-8 
microcontainers for the protection of these prodrugs compared to the use of bulk powders. Thus, 
the enzymatic and pH degradation in the gastrointestinal tract were studied in vitro, along with 
the degradation at storage conditions. 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
23 
 
 
4. Materials and Methods: 
4.1. Materials 
Acyclovir (purity > 98%) and simvastatin (purity >97%) were acquired from Tokyo chemical 
industries (Tokyo, Japan). Valaciclovir hydrochloride (VAL) and simvastatin acid ammonium 
salt (SVA) (>97.5% purity), porcine pancreatic extract (pancreatin), dibutylsebacate (DSB) 
(>97% purity), ethanol 96%(EtOH), 2-propanol (IPA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. 
Louise, USA). Methanol (MeOH) (for HPLC >99.9% purity) and acetonitrile (ACN) (for HPLC 
>99.95% purity) was acquired from VWR BDH chemicals (Fontenay-sous-Bois, France). 
Sodium hydroxide pellets (NaOH), sodium dihydrogen phosphate monohydrate was acquired 
from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Sodium chloride (NaCl) (99.95% purity) was acquired 
from Fisher Scientific (Leicestershire, UK). FaSSIF/FeSSIF/FaSSGF powder was purchased 
from Biorelevant (London, UK). Eudragit S-100 and L-100-55 were purchased from Evonik 
(Darmstadt, Germany). Deionised water was obtained from a Purelab ultra system (ELGA lab 
water, UK).  
µContainers were provided by the Associate Professor Stephan Sylvest Keller (IDUN research 
center, DTU Nanotech, Lyngby, Denmark). that the µContainers are on a Silicon surface of 
12.8 x 12.8mm square chip that contains 625 µContainers in total (Figure17). 
 
Figure 17 Scheme of a Silicon chip containing 625 µContainers 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
24 
 
4.2. Sample preparation 
4.2.1. 
Loading of SU-8 microcontainers  
The loading of the µContainers was done using three different methods as described in this 
section.  
4.2.1.1. 
Manual loading 
This method consisted in a three-step process (Figure 18). The first step involved in pouring 
the drug powder on the chip covering the surface and pressing it into the µContainers with the 
tip of the fingers (Figure 18 A). The pressing continued until no more powder remained on the 
surface (Figure 18 B). In the last step (Figure 18 C). The chip was hold between two metal 
plates to avoid emptying the µContainers and an air gas was used to remove the powder between 
the µContainers. 
The loading of the µContainers was checked with a TM3030 Plus Scanning electron microscope 
(Hitachi, Japan) and by contrast of the weight before and after the loading. This check was done 
in all the methods. 
 
Figure 18 Scheme of the manual loading method: A) the powder is poured on the surface of the 
chip and pressed into the µContainers with the tip of the finger. B) Pressing continues until no 
more powder is on the surface. C) The chip is kept between two metal plates and cleaned with 
an air gun. 
4.2.1.2. 
Powder embossing loading  
This method consists in multiple steps and has been reported in the literature as a loading 
method with high efficiency, homogenous loading and reproducibility [117]. (Figure 19). First, 
a shadow mask was placed to fill the gaps between µContainers (Figure 19 A). The next step 
was pouring the drug powder covering the whole surface (Figure 19 B), followed by 
compression at 0.15 Tons with a pressure adjustable electric crimper MSK 160E (MTI 
corporation) for 5 s (Figure 19 C). The lasts steps were the removal of the shadow mask and 
the cleaning of the remaining powder between the µContainers with an air gun (Figure 19 D). 
This second method was employed to load the µContainers with AC, VAL and SV.  
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
25 
 
 
 
Figure 19 Scheme of the powder embossing method, A) placing the shadow mask on the chip, 
B) covering the surface with the drug powder, C) compression of the powder and loading of the 
µContainers and D) removal of the shadow mask and cleaning with air pressure. 
4.2.1.3. 
Spatula + brush loading: 
This method contains multiple step that combine steps some of them from previous methods. 
First, as before the shadow mask was aligned between the µContainers (Figure 20 A). Second, 
a layer of drug powder was poured covering the whole surface. Thereafter, the powder was 
compressed with the tip of a laboratory spatula until no powder remained on the surface (Figure 
20 B). Third, the drug powder was poured covering the whole surface a second time and it was 
forced into the µContainers by repeated pressing with a brush (Figure 20 C). As in the previous, 
method a final cleaning step was carried out after removal of the shadow mask (Figure 20 D). 
 
Figure 20 Scheme of the spatula + brush loading method. A) The shadow mask is placed to fill 
the gaps between the µContainers, B) a first layer of drug powder is loaded into the 
µContainers by pressing with the tip of a spatula, C) a second layer of drug powder is loaded 
into the µContainers by repeated pressing with a brush and D) after removal of the shadow 
mask the chip is cleaned with air pressure.  
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
26 
 
4.2.2. 
Spray coating of the microcontainers. 
All the loaded µContainers in this project were coated with the same program. The only changes 
were the number of loops (passes of the nozzle over the chip) and the polymer solutions. The 
spray coating of all µContainers was done with an ExactaCoat spray coating system (Sono-Tek, 
New York, USA) and a accumist nozzle. 
Two 1% w/v ES-100 in (IPA) with 5% v/w DSB/ES100 and 2% v/v deionised water/IPA 
solutions were prepared for this project and stored at room temperature. 2 g ES-100 were 
dissolve in 150 ml of IPA with the addition of 107 µl of DSB. The solution was kept under 
stirring for 30 min, then enough IPA was added to reach 200 ml, followed by the addition of 4 
ml of deionised water. The solutions were left overnight under stirring. 
The EL-100-55 solution was prepared and gently provided by the PhD student and supervisor 
Chiara Mazzoni. Prior spray coating 20 ml of IPA were flushed through the system and 10 ml 
of each solutions were used to fill up the system. The settings of the program were the described 
in Table 4: 
Table 4 Parameter and values of the setting of the program for spray coating. * Loops: each 
loop consists in two passages of the nozzle over the chip, therefore a 20 loops lid is a 40 layers 
lid. To simplify, in this thesis the term loop will be employed. 
 
 
Parameter 
Value 
Infusion rate (ml/min) 
0.1 
Heat plate temperature (°C) 
40 
Generator power (W) 
2.2 
Nitrogen pressure (kPa) 
0.020 
Z-Value/ nozzle height (mm) 
50 
Loops* 
20-25-30 
Path speed(mm/s) 
10 
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
27 
 
4.3. Measurement of the thickness of the lids  
The thickness of the lid was measured by spray coating half of a flat silicon chip coated with 
SU-8. The thickness was only measured in those spray batches coated to form a 30-loops lid 
with the same parameters as in section 4.2.2. The thickness was measured with a KLA-Tencor 
Alpha-Step IQ stylus profilometer (California, USA) The data processing was done with the 
Alpha-step IQ Software. (California, USA). The main parameters of the method employed are 
presented in Table 5. 
Table 5: Parameters for the measurement of thickness of the lids 
Parameter 
Values 
Scan length (µm) 
500 
Scan speed (µm/s) 
50 
Sampling rate (Hz) 
50 
Sensor range(µm/pm) 
550/32.8 
Adjustment 
Center bias 
Scan time (s) 
100 
Resolution (µm) 
1 
Required stylus force (mg) 
15.3 
Contact speed 
3 
Required radius (µm) 
5.0 
 
4.4. Scanning electron microscope 
TM3030 Plus Scanning electron microscope (Hitachi, Japan) was used to examine the state of 
the pH sensitive lid in the µDiss release and enzymatic studies and the loading of the 
µContainers with ACV, VAL and SV. The chips were attached with double-sided tape to a 30° 
angle holder for better imaging. 
4.5. SU-8 microcontainers production 
The fabrication process of the SU-8 was done by the group of Associate Professor Stephan 
Sylvest Keller. It consisted in the next steps (Figure 13) [52,118,119]:  
The process consists in multiple steps: 
The first step is the preparation of the silicon wafer, where the µContainers are going to be 
produce on. By spin coating SU-8 is spread on the surface of the wafer. In case of need for dry 
removal of the µContainers, a Teflon layer can be placed between the silicon wafer and the SU-
8 solution before spin coating.  
The second step is the photolithographic process. This process is subdivided in two steps to 
achieve the desired design. First a shadow mask covers the surface, exposing to the UV light 
only those areas that will be the base of the µContainers. After the exposition of UV light and 
the crosslinking of the SU-8 creating the base, a second mask covers the surface exposing the 
areas of the walls to the UV light. 
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
28 
 
4.6. µDiss release studies 
4.6.1. 
Common method 
All the µDiss release studies were done with the µDiss profiler (Pion inc, USA). The data were 
analysed with Au Pro software v.5.5.2.3974 (Pion inc, USA). 
The common procedure was the simulation of a gastric stage with 10 ml of 20 mM phosphate 
buffer saline (PBS) pH 4 (for chips coated with ES-100) or pH 1.6 (for chips coated EL-100-
55) for 1 h. The chips were attached to round stirring magnets and submerged in the medium. 
The tip of the probe was submerged in the medium and the bubbles were removed before 
acquiring data. Afterwards, the chips were taken out and dried at 37°C in an oven. Next, for the 
simulation of the intestinal stage, they were reattached to the magnets and submerged in 10 ml 
of 20 mM PBS pH 7.5 (for chips coated with ES-100) or pH 6.5 (for chips coated EL-100-55) 
for more than 3 h under stirring. To avoid loss of medium by evaporation, the vials were sealed 
with parafilm. The main common parameters are in Table 6. The main differences between the 
µDiss release studies are in Table 7. The use of pH 4 the gastric stage and pH 7.5 for the 
intestinal stage was based on data non- published from the Nanoprobes group. These pH values 
were considered as the pH values in the rat stomach and intestine. The use of pH values 1.6 and 
6.5 was to simulate the pH values of the enzymatic study for the chips with EL-100-55 lid. 
Table 6: Common parameters in all µDiss release studies. 
Parameter 
values 
Stirring (rpm) 
100 
Temperature (°C) 
37 
PBS 20 mM pH 
(gastric/intestinal) 
1.6–4/ 6.5-7.5 
Volume (ml) 
10 
Gastric time/Intestinal time(h) 
1/3-16 
λ(nm) 
238 (simvastatin)/ 254 (Acyclovir/Valaciclovir) 
Probe tip (mm) 
1 
 
 
Figure 21: Scheme of the µDiss release studies common method parameters.  
 
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
29 
 
Table 7: overview of the µDiss release studies. 
µDiss 
release study Loaded drug 
Coating (loops) 
Number 
samples 
λ(nm) 
pH 
I 
ACV 
ES 100(20-30) 
2-2 
254 
4-7.5 
II 
VAL 
ES-100(25-30) 
2-1 
254 
4-7.5 
III 
VAL 
ES100(30) 
2 
254 
4-7.5 
IV 
VAL 
EL-100-55(30) 
3 
254 
1.6-6.5 
V 
SV 
ES100(25) 
3 
238 
4-7.5 
 
4.6.2. 
Eudragit S-100 UV spectrum  
A simple experiment was done to check the UV spectrum of ES-100 to know if there is an 
overlap with the UV spectrum of VAL and SV. This experiment was done by the dilution of a 
range aliquots (100 µl - 400 µl) of the 1% w/v ES-100/IPA coating solution in 10 ml of 20 mM 
PBS pH 7.5 to create a standard curve. It was done in triplicate. 
4.6.3. 
µDiss release study I: Aciclovir 20 loops vs 30 loops Eudragit 
S-100 lid  
This experiment was carried out to study the of two different ES-100 lids on the release of a 
hydrophilic drug as ACV. The selection of ACV was because it has a high solubility (2.5 mg/ml 
at 37°C) and absorbs light at the wavelength 254 nm, as its prodrug [121]. In this experiment a 
total of four chips were loaded by the embossing method and spray coated. Two with a 20 loops 
ES-100 lid and the other two with a 30 Loops lid. This experiment was done following the 
common method. The chips remained 1 h in the gastric stage and 3.8 hrs in the intestinal stage. 
The aspect of the lid was checked by SEM image after the spray coating process. 
A standard curve was done for each channel with a range of 20 - 330 µg/ml with R² values 
between 0.989 - 0.999. The 1.233 mg/ml ACV stock solution employed was prepared in 
deionised water. 
4.6.4. 
µDiss release study II: Valaciclovir 25 vs 30 Loops Eudragit 
S-100 lid  
This release study was done to compare the release of VAL from the µContainers with two 
different thickness lids, 25 and 30 loops. 
Three chips were loaded by embossing method with VAL and spray coated with ES-100. Two 
of them were spray coated to form a lid with 25 loops and the other with 30 loops. The method 
employed was the same as the common method using a pH 4 and pH 7.5 for the gastric and 
intestinal stage. The chips remained 1 h in the gastric stage and 12 hrs in the intestinal stage. 
A standard curve was done for each channel with a range of 12 – 316 µg/ml with R² values 
between 0.990 – 0.999. The VAL stock solution was prepared in deionised water. 
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
30 
 
4.6.5. 
µDiss release study III: Valaciclovir 30 loops Eudragit S-100 
lid  
This release study was done to confirm the previous experience with the same lid of 30 loops. 
The same setup as 4.4.5 was used with three chips loaded by embossing method and coated 
with 30 loops ES-100. The chips remained 1 h in the gastric stage. Unfortunately, the third chip 
broke after being separated from the magnet after the gastric stage. Thus, only two chips where 
used in the intestinal stage that lasted 12 hrs stage. The pH of the gastric stage was 4 and 7.5 
for the intestinal stage.  
A 2.003 mg/ml VAL in deionised water stock solution was used for the standard curves. They 
done for each channel with a range of 19.98 - 181.81 µg/ml with R² values between 0.990 – 
0999.  
The state of the lid was checked by SEM image after the coating, after the gastric stage and 
after the intestinal stage.  
4.6.6. µDiss release study IV: Valaciclovir 30 loops Eudragit L-
100-55 lid  
The experiment was carried out following the common method with adaptations to replicate the 
conditions of the enzymatic study carried out with chips with a EL-100-55 lid. Three chips were 
loaded with VAL by the spatula + brush method and spray coated with EL-100-55 solution to 
create a 30 loops lid. 
They were 1 h in the gastric stage (pH 1.6) and 13 hrs in the intestinal stage (pH 6.5). A 2.00 
mg/ml VAL in deionised water stock solution was used for the standard curves with a range of 
21.84 - 418.47 µg/ml and R² values of 0.999 for all the channels. 
4.6.7. 
µDiss release study V: Simvastatin 25 loops Eudragit S-100 
lid  
This experiment was carried out following the common method. Three chips were loaded with 
SV with the embossing method and spray-coated with a 25 loops ES-100 lid. The samples 
remained 1 h in the gastric stage pH 4 and 11 hrs in the intestinal stage pH 7.5. 
A standard curve was done with a 3.956 mg/ml stock solution of simvastatin in ethanol. The 
range was 0.199 - 96.320 µg/ml with R² values of 0.990 for two of the channels and 0.293 for 
the third one. 
The state of the lid was checked at the end of the intestinal stage by SEM image. 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
31 
 
4.7. RP-HPLC methods 
4.7.1. 
RP-HPLC method for simvastatin 
A RP-HPLC method was developed to detected, identify and quantify SV and SVA. The RP-
HPLC method was based on the work of G. Carlucci et al. with some modifications [122]. The 
main parameters of the RP-HPLC method are in Table 8. 
Table 8 Main parameters of RP-HPLC method for simvastatin. 
Parameter 
Value 
Flow rate (ml/min) 
2 
Column temperature (°C) 
40 
Detection wavelength (nm) 
238 
Sample volume (µl) 
10 
Running mode 
isocratic 
 
The equipment used was a L7000 (Merck-Hitachi. Tokyo, Japan) composed by: pump unit L-
7100, autosampler L-7200, UV detector L7400 and column oven L300. A Xbridge™ C18 
column with a particle size of 3.5µm and dimensions 4.6 x 150 mm was used (Waters. Dublin, 
Ireland). The mobile phase employed (35: 65 25mM PBS: Acetonitrile pH 4.5) was prepared 
daily and ultrasonicated for 10 min. The pH was checked with a pH meter Meter lab PHM 220 
(Radiometer analytical. Loveland, Colorado) before analysis. The system control and data 
acquisition was done with the software Merck-Hitachi chromatography data station software v 
4.1. Retention time (RT) for SVA 2.4 min, 3.8 min for SV. 
4.7.2. 
RP-HPLC method for valaciclovir  
A RP-HPLC method was developed to detect, identify and quantify VAL and ACV. The HPLC 
method used was developed based on the work of G.E. Carnero et al. [74]. The main parameters 
are presented in Table 9. 
Table 9 Main parameters RP-HPLC method for VAL. 
 
The equipment used was a L7000 HPLC system (Merck-Hitachi. Tokyo, Japan) composed by: 
pump unit L-7100, autosampler unit L-7200, UV detector unit L7400 and column oven L300. 
A Xbridge™ C18 column with a particle size of 3.5µm and dimensions 4.6 x 150 mm was used 
(Waters. Dublin, Ireland). The mobile phase (25: 75 MeOH: 25mM PBS pH 6) was prepare 
daily and ultrasonicated for 10 min. The pH was checked with a pH meter Meter lab PHM 220 
(Radiometer analytical. Loveland, Colorado) before analysis. The system control and data 
Parameter 
value 
Flow rate (ml/min) 
1.4 
Column temperature (°C) 
40 
Detection wavelength (nm) 
254 
Sample volume (µl) 
10 
Running mode 
isocratic 
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
32 
 
acquisition was done with the software Merck-Hitachi chromatography data station software 
v4.1. RT for ACV 1.2 min and 1.5 min for VAL. 
4.8. Valaciclovir Enzymatic studies 
4.8.1. 
Common methodology 
This set of experiment shared a common scheme as all of them tried to simulate an enzymatic 
digestion in the GIT. In all of them three chips (VAL µContainers) were loaded with VAL by 
the spatula + brush method and spray coated to form a 30 loops lid (ES-100 or L-100-55). They 
were compared with three samples of VAL powder (Bulk VAL) as controls. The media 
employed were FaSSGF for the gastric stage and FaSSIF for the intestinal stage. Both were 
prepared according to the protocol from the Biorelevant website the day before the experiment. 
The pH was measured with a pH meter Meter lab PHM 220 (Radiometer analytical. Loveland, 
Colorado) during and after preparation.  
FaSSGF: 1 litre was prepared as it is the minimum recommended by Biorelevant. 1.999g of 
NaCl was dissolved in 900 ml deionised water and the pH adjusted to 1.6 with HCl 0.5 M and 
made up to 1000 ml. 60 mg of FaSSIF/FeSSIF/FaSSGF powder were dissolved in 500 ml of 
the previous solution. It was kept under stirring until complete dissolution and made up to 1000 
ml. 
FaSSIF: 250 ml were prepared for each experiment. The buffer solution was prepared 
dissolving 105 mg of NaOH pellets, 989 mg of sodium dihydrogen phosphate monohydrate and 
1.547 mg of NaCl in 225 ml of deionised water. The pH was adjusted to 6.5 or 7.5 (the company 
ensured the stability with these pH values) with NaOH 1M or HCl 0.5 M. The volume was 
made up to 250ml. 560mg of FaSSIF/FeSSIF/FaSSGF powder were dissolved in 125 ml of the 
buffer solution and stirred until complete solution. The volume was made up to 250 ml and it 
was stored overnight. 
The enzymatic study consisted in two stages, a gastric stage to recreate the low gastric pH and 
an intestinal stage to recreate the intestinal enzymatic activity (Figure22). In the gastric stage 
three chips and three powder samples were kept in FaSSGF pH 1.6 for 1 h. Afterwards, the 
chips were transferred to new vials for to the intestinal stage. In the intestinal stages the chips 
and new powder samples were kept in as solution containing 9 ml of FaSSIF, 1 ml CaCl 160 
mM and pancreatin to recreate the enzymatic activity. In some studies, an extra vial extra vial 
containing only FaSSIF with CaCl and pancreatin was used as a blank. The samples from the 
gastric stage did not suffered any further handle after their collection for their HPLC analysis. 
In contrast, the samples and blank from the intestinal stage were precipitated with different 
methods and centrifuged with a Labofuge 400 centrifuge (Heraeus instruments, Hanau, 
Germany) the supernatant was then analysed. The main parameters and the differences between 
each experiment are presented in Table 10. 
 
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
33 
 
Figure 22 Scheme of the common method for the enzymatic studies. A) the first gastric stage was 1 h long 
for all experiments and three powder samples were dissolve in parallel with three chips in FaSSGF. B) in
the intestinal stage the chips used in A) were submerged in FaSSIF solution with CaCl and pancreatin.
New powder samples were added and one extra vial was used as blank. 
Table 10 Main parameters for each of the enzymatic studies. 
 
 
 
Study 
Parameter 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
30 loops lid 
ES-100 
ES-100 
ES-100 
EL-100-55 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Gastric stage 
Medium 
Duration (h) 
pH 
total Volume (ml) 
Sample (ml) 
Refill with new 
media 
 
 
FaSSGF 
1 
1.6 
10 
1 
Yes 
 
FaSSGF 
1 
1.6 
10 
1 
Yes 
 
FaSSGF 
1 
1.6 
10 
0.3 
No 
 
FaSSGF 
1 
1.6 
10 
0.3 
No 
• 
Intestinal 
stage 
Medium 
Duration (h) 
pH 
total Volume (ml) 
Sample (ml) 
Precipitation 
method 
Centrifugation 
(min/rpm) 
Refill with new 
media 
Addition of 
pancreatin: 
Pancreatin activity 
(USP unit/ml) 
Blank 
 
 
FaSSIF 
3h 
7.5 
10 
1 
+0.1 ml HCl 
0.5M 
8/11500 
Yes 
Vial 
238 
 
No 
 
FaSSIF 
3h 
7.5 
10 
0.3 
+0.3ml MeOH 
5/11500 
Yes 
Vial 
565 
 
Yes 
 
FaSSIF 
4.5h 
7.5 
10 
0.3 
+0.03ml HCl 0.5 M 
5/11500 
No 
Vial 
569 
 
Yes 
 
FaSSIF 
3h 
6.5 
10 
0.3 
+0.03ml HCl 0.5 M 
5/11500 
No 
Stock solution 
569 
 
Yes 
Stirring/ Shaking 
(rpm) 
Shaking 
100 
Shaking 
100 
Stirring 
100 
Stirring 
100 
Medium standard 
curve 
Deionised water 
FaSSGF/FaSSIF:MeOH 
FaSSGF/FaSSIF+ 
CaCl+pancreatin 
FaSSGF/FaSSIF+ 
CaCl+pancreatin 
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
34 
 
4.8.2. 
First valaciclovir enzymatic study 
This experiment was carried out as first attempt of enzymatic digestion with porcine pancreatic 
extract (pancreatin) with lipase activity of 11.92 USP unit/mg. 
In the gastric stage, 2.498 ± 0.20 mg (n=3) of VAL were used as control (Bulk VAL), the chips 
used were loaded with 3.558 ± 0.244 mg (n=3) of VAL. In the intestinal stage 2.708 ± 0.032 
mg (n=3) of VAL were used as control (Bulk VAL). 
The gastric stage followed the common method of the section 4.8.1. The samples were kept in 
15 ml plastic vials sealed with parafilm in a water bath (Julabo GmbH. Seelbach, Germany) at 
37°C and with continuous shaking at 100 rpm. 1 ml samples were taken at 0, 15, 30, 60 min 
and a same volume of FaSSGF was added. The samples were kept in HPLC closed vials until 
analysis at room temperature. 
After the gastric stage the chips were transferred to clean dry 15 ml plastic vials. 9 ml of FaSSIF 
were added with 1 ml 160 mM CaCl in deionised water (final concentration 16mM). in parallel 
three new VAL powder samples were dissolved in the same volumes of FaSSIF and CaCl. The 
first sample was taken prior addition of pancreatin, next 200.28±5.95 mg pancreatin (mean 
±SD, n = 6) were added to each vial and carefully shaken until complete suspension of the 
pancreatin. Next samples were taken at 30-60-120-180 min. An equal volume of FaSSIF was 
added to keep the volume constant. The pH was checked at the start of the experiment and at 
the end with pH strips Neutralit® pH 5-10 (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The samples taken 
were transferred from the vial to 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes. Then 100 µl of HCL 0.5 M were 
added and vortexed to precipitate the proteins in solution and stop further enzymatic activity. 
The samples were centrifuged for 8 min at 11500 rpm. The supernatants were filtered through 
a 0.22µm hydrophobic cellulose mixed ester syringe filter and transferred to HPLC vials. 
The HPLC method used was the one described in 4.7.2. The concentrations were calculated 
from the area under the curve (AUC) against the standard curve and all dilutions (addition of 
new FaSSGF or FaSSIF and addition of HCL0.5M) of the samples were considered in the data 
analysis. The stock solutions were prepared in deionised water. The standard curves for ACV 
and VAL were done before the gastric stage once. The main parameters of these standard curves 
are in Table 11. 
VAL was expressed as percentage of the initial amount of VAL. Thus, from the AUC the 
concentration was calculated. From this concentration the amount of VAL was calculated with 
the volume present in the vials and considering the dilutions from the precipitation step and the 
addition of new media to the vials. The amount of VAL was divided by the initial amount of 
each sample and multiplied by 100. In the case of the chips the percentage released in the gastric 
stage was added to all the measurements plus the percentage withdrawn in the previous sample. 
Table 11 Standard curves of the first enzymatic study 
Standard curve 
Range (µg/ml) 
R² 
Stock solution 
(µg/ml) 
ACV 
5.08 - 81.30 
0.999 
101.25 
VAL 
12.98 - 519.08 
0.994 
1297.70 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
35 
 
4.8.3. 
Second valaciclovir enzymatic study 
To improve some aspects of the previous experiment (4.8.2) some modifications were 
introduced in this experiment (Table 10). The experiment followed the common method. The 
first modification was the volume of the samples. In both stages 0.3 ml were taken instead of 1 
ml. A new precipitation method was employed by dilution of the intestinal stage samples with 
0.3 ml MeOH instead of using HCL 0.5 M. In addition, the samples were centrifuged for 5 min 
instead of 8 min. Another modification was the increase of the concentration of pancreatin to 
474.40 ± 2.02 mg (mean ± SD, n = 7), to achieve a closer enzymatic activity to the used in the 
literature [38]. The last modification was the addition of an extra vial. It was prepared as blank 
containing the FaSSIF with CaCl2 and pancreatin solution as the samples.  
Samples were taken at 0, 15, 30, 60 min in the FaSSGF stage and at 0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180 
min in the intestinal stage. The first sample was taken after the addition of pancreatin. The 
HPLC method used was the same as in the section 4.7.2. 
The AUC was used to calculate the concentration against the standard curve. The blank was 
subtracted to the samples, but due to poor integration by the software the AUC used was from 
the raw data without blank subtraction. All dilutions steps were considered in the data analysis 
as in 4.8.2.. 
The Bulk VAL samples were 3.346 ± 0.15 mg of VAL (n=3), 3.906 ± 0.32 mg of VAL (n=3) 
were loaded in the chips of the µContainers samples and 3.192 ± 0.178 mg of VAL (n =3) were 
used as Bulk VAL samples in the intestinal stage. 
The stock solutions were prepared in FaSSGF and in FaSSIF: MeOH (1:1) for gastric and 
intestinal stages respectively. The standard curve for the gastric stage were done before this 
stage once and the standard curves for the intestinal stage were done between the gastric and 
intestinal stages once. The main parameters of the standards curves are shown in Table 12. 
Table 12 Standards curves of the second enzymatic study 
Standard curve 
Range (µg/ml) 
R² 
Stock solution 
(µg/ml) 
ACV gastric 
5.18 - 155.37 
0.998 
517.9 
ACV intestinal 
2.11 - 211.40 
0.999 
211.4 
VAL gastric 
25.64 - 512.7 
0.997 
512.7 
VAL intestinal 
5.41 - 270.43 
0.999 
540.85 
 
4.8.4. 
Third valaciclovir enzymatic study 
This experiment was carried out following the common method with some modifications. One 
of the main differences was the use of the µDiss stirring system and water bath instead of 
shaking the vials. The powder samples were stirred using a cross magnet and the chips were 
attached to a round stirring magnet. The vials used were closed with parafilm as in the previous 
studies. The volume sample was 0.3 ml, but there was no further media addition to avoid 
dilution of the enzymes and minimize the variation between samples during the experiment. 
477.32 ± 0.30mg (mean ± SD n=7) pancreatin were added to each of the vials. A step backwards 
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
36 
 
was done with the precipitation method used. 0.03 ml HCl 0.5 M were used again instead of 
MeOH.  
The Bulk VAL samples used in the gastric stage weighted 3.456 ± 0.168 mg of VAL, the 
µContainers VAL samples were loaded with 3.461 ± 0.33 mg of VAL (n=3). The pancreatin 
added to each vial was 477.32 ± 0.3 mg per vial (n=7). it was kept the same or at least close to 
the used in 4.8.2 to reduce another factor that had impact on the results. 
Samples of the gastric stage were taken at 0, 15, 30, 60 min, no new FaSSGF was added. 
Samples of the intestinal stage were taken at 0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 210. 
The HPLC method used was the same as in the section 4.7. 2.. The AUC was employed for the 
calculation of VAL concentrations. The height was used for the calculation of ACV. The blank 
was subtracted to the standard curves and the samples in the intestinal stage. The integration of 
the ACV and VAL peaks was done manually. ACV is expressed as percentage of the theoretic 
amount of ACV released from VAL. This was done considering that 1 mol of VAL release 1 
mol of ACV. The concentration of ACV was calculated from the height of the sample peak 
against the standard curve. The amount of ACV was calculated considering the real volume in 
the vial at each sample plus the ACV withdrawn in the previous sample. Afterwards this value 
was divided by the ACV molecular weight 225.21g/mol. Next this value was divided by the 
number of mols VAL (µg weighted VAL / 360.799 g/mol) and multiplied by 100. 360.799 
g/mol is the molecular weight of VAL hydrochloride. All dilutions steps were considered as in 
the data analysis as in 4.8.3. 
The stock solutions of the standard curves were prepared with FaSSGF for gastric stage. The 
stock solution of the standard curves was prepared with a solution that received the same 
treatment as the samples. For ACV and VAL stock solution 1193.470 mg were dissolved in 
22.5 ml FaSSIF and 2.5 ml of CaCl2 160 mM were added. After stirring 10 min, 2.5 ml of HCl 
0.5 M were added to precipitate the proteins in solution. The 25 ml were split in Eppendorf 
tubes and centrifuged for 5 min at 11500 rpm. All the supernatants were collected in a 50 ml 
falcon tube. The standard curves of each stage were measured three times before their stage. 
The main paratmeter of the standard curves are presented in Table 13. 
The pH at the end of the experiment was measured with the pH strips. In addition, the medium 
from one vial was measured with a pH meter Meter lab PHM 220 (Radiometer analytical. 
Loveland, Colorado). 
Table 13 Standard curves of the third enzymatic study. 
Standard curve 
Range (µg/ml) 
R² 
Stock solution 
(µg/ml) 
ACV gastric 
10.47 - 209.36 
0.999 
209.36 
ACV intestinal 
12.29 - 245.85 
0.993 
245.85 
VAL gastric 
24.40 - 488.08 
0.999 
488.08 
VAL intestinal 
25.26 - 505.20 
0.999 
505.20 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
37 
 
4.8.5. 
Fourth valaciclovir enzymatic study 
The main difference with the previous enzymatic studies was the use of 30 loops EL-100-55 
coating instead of ES-100. The method was the same of the common method with adaptations 
for the new coating. The gastric stage was carried out as 4.8.5 without modifications. The 
intestinal stage suffered most of the modifications as seen in Table 10. The initial pH was 
lowered to 6.5.  
Instead of adding pancreatin to each vial at the start of the intestinal stage, a common stock 
solution FaSSIF+CaCl2+Pancreatin was prepared and used for the samples and for the standard 
curves to reduce the variation between the samples and the standard curve and have the same 
matrix. This common stock solution was prepared with 117 ml of FaSSIF medium and 13 ml 
160 mM CaCl2 solution and 6207 mg were added. 
90ml of the common stock solution were kept for the experiment. 10 ml of the common stock 
solution were added to each sample´s vials and to the extra vial used as Blank. 
40 ml of the common stock solution were used for the standard curves. This fraction was 
precipitated with 4 ml HCl 0.5 M, vortexed, split in 40 Eppendorf tubes, centrifuged 5min at 
11500rpm and the supernatants were collected in a 50 ml falcon tube. 
The gastric stage samples were taken at 0, 15, 30, 45, 60 min. There was no addition of new 
FaSSGF solution. In the intestinal stage samples were taken at 0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180 min 
without addition of new FaSSGF / FaSSIF. The pH values of all vials were measured with a pH 
meter Meter lab PHM 220 (Radiometer analytical. Loveland, Colorado).  
During the analysis of the 90 min samples the autosampler crashed and stopped working. Thus, 
the vials of the samples and the standard curves were frozen at -21°C and reanalysed next day 
after thawing in a water bath at 37°C for 20 min and stay at room temperature for 30 min. 
The data was treated as in 4.8.4. The standard curves were done three times for the gastric stage 
before within and after the sample analysis. The standard curves for the intestinal stage were 
done only before and while the sample analysis as the system failed. Next day they were 
repeated with the same vials (after thawing) before and after the analysis of all the samples. 
They were repeated to minimize the variation between the samples and the previous standard 
curves caused by the freezing. The main aspects of the standard curves are shown in table14. 
Table 14 Standard curves of the fourth enzymatic study 
Standard curve 
Range (µg/ml) 
R² 
Stock solution 
(µg/ml) 
ACV gastric 
12.124 - 242.48 
0.999 
242.48 
ACV intestinal 
12.63 - 252.50 
0.979 
245.85 
VAL gastric 
25.34 - 506.88 
0.999 
506.88 
VAL intestinal 
24.34 - 486.80 
0.999 
486.80 
ACV intestinal after 
thawing 
12.63 - 252.50 
0.994 
245.85 
VAL intestinal after 
thawing 
24.34 - 486.80 
0.999 
486.80 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
38 
 
4.9. Storage studies 
4.9.1. 
Common method 
Two storage condition were employed to study the protection of SV and VAL by the 
µContainers from the storage conditions. As seen in the section 1.5 these storage studies should 
be carried for at least 6 months, because of the length of this thesis this period was shortened to 
1 month. As time was a limiting factor, two storage condition were chosen 30 ± 5°C and 65 ± 
5% RH equivalent to the intermediate storage conditions and 60 ± 5°C and 80 ± 5% RH. The 
first condition was considered as soft condition and the second was used as a stress condition. 
Six chips of VAL (µContainers) and six of SV (µContainers SV) were loaded into µContainers 
with the embossing method and spray coated with ES-100 to form a 30 loops lid. In both cases 
the six chips were split in two groups, three chips were stored in the soft condition and the other 
three in stress condition. In parallel as control three powder samples of VAL (Bulk VAL) and 
SV (Bulk SV) were kept in each condition (Table 15). 
To recreate the soft condition a climate chamber was used and set to the desired temperature 
and relative humidity(RH). For the stress conditions, samples were kept in a desiccator that 
recreated the desired humidity at 60 °C and the desiccator was kept in an oven set at 60°C. 
Table 15 Conditions and samples of VAL and SV for storage study. 
 
 
 
Prodrug 
Soft condition 
30 ± 5°C and 65 ± 5% RH 
Stress condition 
60 ± 5°C and 80 ± 5% RH 
Valaciclovir 
3 chips (µContainers) 
3 powder (Bulk VAL) 
3 chips (µContainers) 
3 powder (Bulk VAL) 
Simvastatin 
3 chips (µContainers SV) 
3 powder (Bulk SV) 
3 chips (µContainers SV) 
3 powder (Bulk SV) 
==PAGE:47==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
39 
 
4.9.2. 
Valaciclovir storage study 
4.9.2.1. 
Non-stored samples analysis 
A set of three chips were loaded with 3.335±0.089 mg with the embossing method (mean ± SD, 
n=3) and spray coated with a 30 loops ES-100 lid. (t0 µContainers). 
They were used to study how the loading method and coating affected VAL and to develop the 
sample handle method. 
• First, 10 ml of MeOH were added to the samples with a magnet in a 50 ml glass. The 
glasses were close with parafilm and kept under stirring for 10 min to ensure the 
dissolution of the lid.  
• Second, 10 ml of mobile phase (25:75 MeOH: 25mM PBS pH 6) were added. Same as 
before, the glasses were closed with parafilm and kept under stirring for 20 min to ensure 
complete dilution of VAL 
Once dissolved, 1ml of the solution was transferred in a HPLC vial and analysed with the 
method 4.7.2. 
Two standard curves were prepared in 1:1 v/v MeOH: Mobile phase covering a range of 
1.650 - 65 µg/ml for ACV (R²=0.9935) and 60.57 - 605.65 µg/ml (R²=0.99874) for VAL. 
They were repeated before, during and after the sample analysis. 
4.9.2.2. 
Stored samples valaciclovir analysis 
Six chips were loaded with VAL and closed with a 30 loops S-100 lid. They were split in two 
groups. A set of three chips (µContainers VAL) were kept in individual 20ml glasses and 3 
samples of VAL powder (Bulk VAL) were stored in the soft storage condition. The other set of 
three chips were kept in individual 20 ml glasses, in parallel other three samples of VAL powder 
were stored in same stress conditions. 
Table 16 Samples of the VAL storage study. 
 
After one month under those condition the samples were prepared for analysis. The handling 
method of the samples was the same as the employed in 4.9.2.1, with an extra step, the samples 
in 20 ml glasses were transferred after the addition of MeOH to a 50 ml glass. The day of the 
analysis three more samples of VAL powder (to Bulk VAL), 2.813±0.143 mg (mean ± SD, n=3) 
were prepared with the same handling method. 1 ml of the sample solution were transferred to 
an HPLC vial and analysed with the same method as seen in the t0 µContainers samples. The 
standard curves prepared covered the range of 44.560 - 222.800 µg/ml (R² = 0.9999) for VAL 
and 2.308 - 57.690 µg/ml (R² = 0.9913) for ACV. They were measured three times. Before, 
within and after the sample analysis.  
Storage condition 
Mean weight 
(mg) 
SD 
 
Type sample (n) 
30±5°C and 65±5% RH 
2.333 
0.547 
µContainers (3) 
2.693 
0.547 
Bulk VAL (3) 
60±5°C and 80±5% RH 
3.273 
0.380 
µContainer (3) 
3.567 
0.350 
Bulk VAL (3) 
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
40 
 
4.9.3. 
Simvastatin storage study 
4.9.3.1. 
Stored and non-stored samples simvastatin analysis. 
A total of six chips were loaded with embossing method with SV and closed with a 30 loops 
ES-100 lid. They were split in two groups for each condition. 
A set of three chips were kept in individual 20 ml glasses in soft condition, in parallel other 
three samples of SV powder were stored in same condition. The set of three chips (µContainers 
SV) were kept in individual 20 ml glasses in stress condition, in parallel 3 samples of SV 
powder (Bulk SV) were stored in same conditions (Table 17). 
The day prior HPLC analysis, 4 more chips (t0 µContainers) were loaded by the spatula + brush 
method and coated with ES-100.  
Table 17 Samples and storage conditions of the simvastatin storage study 
Storage condition 
Mean weight 
(mg) 
SD 
Sample (n) 
30±5°C and 65±5% RH 
1.683 
0.372 
µContainers SV (3) 
2.107 
0.061 
Bulk SV (3) 
60±5°C and 80±5% RH 
2.338 
0.181 
µContainer SV (3) 
2.530 
0.126 
Bulk SV (3) 
None 
2.210 
0.238 
t0µContainers (4) 
 
The preparation of the samples was carried out after 1 month of storage by addition of 10 ml of 
ethanol to the 20 ml glasses and pipetting several times to guarantee complete dilution of the 
Bulk powder samples. Afterwards, all the samples were transferred to a 15-ml falcon tube and 
kept overnight to ensure complete release of SV from the µContainers samples. The use of 
ethanol as solvent is due to its capacity to dissolve ES-100 [123] and SV [57]. 
Next day the HPLC analysis was carried out, with the simvastatin HPLC method. A Standard 
curve of the (AUC) was prepared for SV and SVA in ethanol. It was measured before, within 
and after the analysis of the samples each. The range covered for SV was 15.965 – 3.193 µg/ml 
(R²=0.9998) and the range covered for SVA was 15.915 - 318.300 µg/ml (R²=0.9994).  
 
 
==PAGE:49==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
41 
 
 
4.10. 
Statistics 
The software employed for the data analysis and graphic representation of the data was Origin 
Pro 2018 (Originlab corporation software, North Hampton, USA). The data are showed as mean 
± standard deviation (SD).  
In the µDiss release studies and storage studies the data are expressed in percentage of the 
loaded amount. In the enzymatic studies VAL is expressed in percentage of the loaded drug in 
the µContainers (µContainers VAL) or in the powder samples (Bulk VAL). ACV is expressed 
as percentage of the total moles of VAL in each of the samples. 
In the µDiss release studies and in the enzymatic studies, the final VAL % released in the gastric 
stage was added to all the measurements of the intestinal stage. 
Unpaired t-test was used as statistical analysis using GraphPad software Quick calcs where it 
was considered necessary. It was considered that p-value below 0.05 (5%) were statistically 
significant. 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
42 
 
5. Results and discussion 
5.1. Loading of SU-8 microcontainers 
In this thesis different loading methods were tested and used to load the µContainers with VAL, 
SV and ACV. As the project advanced, the loading methodology evolved to solve drawbacks 
and get a higher loading and a reduce waste of µContainers and drugs. A brief overview of the 
different loading methods has been given in Table 18. 
Table 18 Comparison of the three loading methods with their pros and cons 
Method 
Loading 
 (mean ± SD mg, n) 
Pros 
Cons 
Manual loading 
ACV 
1.855±0.389, 5 
• 
Ease of use 
• 
No breaking of 
chips 
• 
Loss of drug 
powder 
• 
Not complete 
loading 
• 
Powder between 
µContainers 
Embossing loading 
ACV 
VAL 
SV 
 
2.078±0.817, 6 
2.844 ± 0.724, 32 
1.927±0.429, 12 
• 
Complete loading 
• 
Less powder 
between 
µContainers 
• 
Less waste of 
drug powder 
 
• 
Breaking of chips 
when compressing 
• 
Loss of 
µContainers 
Spatula + brush 
loading 
VAL 
SV 
 
 
3.389 ± 0.336, 23 
2.891 ± 0.479, 10 
• 
Complete loading 
• 
Less powder 
between 
µContainers 
• 
Less waste of 
drug powder. 
• 
No breaking of 
chips 
• 
Loss of 
µContainers  
• 
Time consuming 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1.1. 
Manual loading  
A set of five chips were loaded manually with ACV. They were weighted before and after the 
loading to know the loaded amount of ACV by this method. 1.855±0.389 mg (mean ± SD, n=5) 
were loaded into the µContainers. SEM image was utilised to check the loading of the chips as 
seen in the Figure 24.  
==PAGE:51==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
43 
 
 
Figure 24: µContainers loaded with the manual method. They were not completely loaded and 
there was considerable amount of ACV outside the µContainers. The bar scale equals 300 µm. 
From SEM image, the loading was considered as low, as it was appreciated that most of the 
µContainers were not completely loaded (Figure 24). In addition, the observed amount of 
powder outside the µContainers was higher than expected and the amount of drug powder used 
was high. The presence of drug between µContainers would influence in the release profile 
performed in the µDiss and enzymatic studies. In addition, a poor filing of µContainers causes 
a defective lid formation on the µContainers, this would cause the same effect as not having a 
lid. The lack of lid or a defective lid could cause an unwanted early drug release [124]. These 
reasons were enough to use the next method. 
5.1.2. 
Powder embossing loading 
After discarding the manual loading, the powder embossing method was employed to load the 
µContainers with ACV, VAL and SV. The loading of ACV was 2.078±0.817 mg (mean ± SD, 
n= 6), VAL 2.844 ± 0.724 mg (n= 32) and SV 1.927±0.429 (n=12). The loading with VAL and 
SV was checked by SEM image (Figure 25). 
 
Figure 25: µContainers loaded with SV and VAL by embossing method. The arrow points the 
gap left by the loss of µContainers after removing the shadow mask. The scale bar equals 300 
µm. 
The amount of loaded drug was higher by powder embossing compared with the m values of 
ACV with the manual method. The SEM images confirmed a complete loading (Figure 25). 
Moreover, the use of the shadow mask reduced the amount of powder used, as it was not wasted 
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
44 
 
in loading the gaps between the µContainers. These aspects made embossing method more 
efficient compared to the manual, but there were two aspects to consider. First, there was loss 
of µContainers in all the chips with the shadow mask, (Figure 25, arrow). Second, Chips usually 
break with this process in the compression.  
The loss of microcontainers causes affects to the calculated loading of drug because as the 
weight of the lost µContainers cannot be considered. The loss of chips caused a the repetition 
of the loading of multiple chips and was time / resource consuming. These downsides were 
enough to develop a new loading method. 
5.1.3. 
Spatula + Brush loading 
This method was developed to overcome the drawbacks of the embossing method by the 
removal of the compression step. The loading of the µContainers was higher compared with 
the previous methods, for VAL was 3.389 ± 0.336 mg (mean ± SD, n= 23) and for SV was 
2.891 ± 0.479 mg (mean ± SD, n= 10). The filling was checked by SEM image (Figure 26). 
This method kept the advantages of the embossing method and solves the loss of chips. 
Nevertheless, it presented some inconveniences as it was more time consuming and there was 
a loss of µContainers due to the removal of the shadow mask.  
 As the loading obtained was the highest of all the methods (Table 18) and the waste of materials 
was reduced, it was considered as a suitable method for the loading µContainers for the scale 
of loaded µContainers necessary for this project.  
 
Figure 26: Loading of µContainers with SV and VAL by the spatula + brush method. Scale bar 
equals 300 µm. 
5.2. Characterisation of lids by µDiss release studies 
A set of experiments were done to determinate the number of loops required to make suitable 
pH sensitive lids. The aim was to achieve a lid that stands the gastric pH and, at the same time, 
provide a sustained release of the loaded prodrugs in the intestinal pH with ES-100. With EL-
100-55 the aim was to characterise the release of VAL in the same pHs as in the enzymatic 
studies.  
5.2.1. 
Eudragit S-100 UV spectrum 
The UV spectrum of ES-100 was measured and characterized as explained in 4.6.2. It was done 
to understand if the results obtained in further experiment were biased or not by the presence 
==PAGE:53==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
45 
 
of the soluble polymer. It was done in triplicate in case of failure of any of the channels. The 
UV spectral data showed that ES-100 absorbs a 238 and 254 nm. The use of different aliquots 
showed linearity between the concentration of ES-100 and the absorption spectrum, confirming 
the observed absorbance was by the presence of ES-100. The absorption of ES-100 at those 
wavelengths must be considered to interpret the results, as there will be an overestimation due 
to the dissolution of ES-100. This interference could be reduced by applying the Zero-intercept 
model analysis of the software. This analysis solves the overlap UV absorption of two 
compound by applying the second derivative spectroscopy [124], but due to complexity and 
limited time, this could not be done. 
5.2.2. 
µDiss release study I: Aciclovir 20 loops vs 30 loops Eudragit 
S-100 lid  
As described in the method 4.6.3 two chips were loaded with 2.149 ± 0.838 mg (mean ± SD) 
of ACV and spray coated with ES-100 to close the µContainers with a 20 loops lid. Another 
two chips were loaded with 1.654 ± 0.289 mg of ACV and closed with a 30 loops ES-100 lid. 
The aim was to compare the release of ACV with these two lids. 
 
Figure 27 Release profile of ACV from the µcontainers closed with a 20 Loops (grey square, 
n=2) or 30 loops (red dots, n=2) ES-100 lid. 
Two different release profiles were observed for each lid (Figure 27). First, in the gastric stage 
two different release profiles were observed. 21.10 ± 5.51 % of the ACV was released from the 
µContainers with a 20 loops lid at the end of this stage. In contrast, only 3.28 ± 2.42 % was 
released from the µContainers with a 30 loops lid in the same stage. This difference could be 
explained by the thickness of the lid and the porosity seen in Figure 28.  
 In the intestinal stage the differences between lids continued. The 20 loops lid showed a fast 
release reaching a plateau within the first 60 min of the stage (120 min total time) indicating 
full release. In contrast, the 30 loops lid showed a sustained release during the intestinal stage 
and did not reach the plateau at the end of the experiment, indicating that not all ACV had been 
released from the µContainers.  
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
46 
 
 
Figure 28 SEM image of µContainers after coating with ES-100. A) µContainers closed with a 
20 loops lid. B) µContainers closed with a 30 loops lid. There is a visible difference in the 
porosity and thickness of the lid between A and B. Scale bar equals 300 µm. 
It is noteworthy that the maximum release from the µContainers closed with a 20 loops lid was 
65.14 ± 6.78 % of the loaded drug. This reduction of the release could be explained by loss of 
ACV in the handling of the loaded µContainers before the spray coating process and a 
difference between the weighted amount and the actual loaded amount. In addition, as seen in 
5.2.1. ES-100 absorbs at 254 nm as well being a source of error. 
These results showed the capacity of the 30 loops ES-100 lids to prevent the release of most of 
the ACV in the gastric pH. The rest of ACV was released in the intestinal pH, with different 
rates for each lid. The 20 loops lid showed a fast release while the 30 loops thick lid showed a 
sustained drug release. Sustained release has been useful to increase the bioavailability of 
poorly absorbed drugs [124]. This property bind to the mucoadhesion and unidirectional release 
of the µContainers [5], could be enough to improve the bioavailability of the loaded drugs. 
5.2.3. 
µDiss release study II: Valaciclovir 25 loops vs 30 Loops 
Eudragit S-100 lid 
This experiment was designed based on the results from 5.3.2.. The aim was to determinate 
how the thickness of the lid will affect the release of VAL. Two thickness were chosen: 25 
loops lids to reduce the fast release observed in the previous experiment and 30 loops lids which 
provided a sustained release in the first study 5.2.2. Two chips were loaded with 2.94 ± 0.524 
mg and were spray coated to form 25 loops lids, the other chip was loaded with 3.052 mg and 
spray coated to form a 30 loops lids. The lids were checked by SEM (Figure 30) and showed 
differences between each other. The 25 loops lids (Figure 30 A) were thicker compare to the 
20 loop lids (Figure 28 A), but some areas showed high porosity of the lid as the area shown 
(Figure 30 A). In contrast the 30 loops lid (Figure 30 B) showed less of those areas and a thicker 
lid than the 25 loops lid (Figure 30 B)  
Two different profiles were observed between the two lids as expected from the results of 5.3.2. 
In both cases the release in the gastric stage was low, 3.57 ± 0.73 % of VAL was released from 
the µContainers with a 25 loops lid and 0.03 % from the with a 30 loops lids. This release from 
the set of 25 loops lids could be attributed to those areas with high porosity.  
In the intestinal stage the release profile showed differences between each lid. The µContainers 
with 25 loops lid showed a faster release than those with a 30 loops lid. The plateau was reached 
after 170 min approximately in the intestinal stage (230 min total time) for the µContainers with 
==PAGE:55==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
47 
 
a 25 loops lid. The µContainer with a 30 loops lid showed a sustained release and reached the 
plateau after 600 min (660 min total time). The maximum release from the set of 25 loops lids 
was 107.64 ± 2.0 % and 104,09 % for the 30 loops lids at the end of the experiments. These 
values over 100 % could be explained by the presence of ES-100 in solution, which absorbs at 
the measurement wavelength 254 nm as was checked in 5.2.1. 
Both coating proved to be able to overcome the gastric pH preventing early release of most of 
the drug in the gastric pH. In addition, the use of 25 loops lid was discarded as it did not provide 
the sustained release observed in 5.2.1 in the intestinal pH. On the other hand, the release profile 
with the 30 loops lid showed similar sustained release as in 5.2.1. which would help the 
absorption of VAL [124] and protect it from the luminal enzymatic activity [125,126]. 
 
 
Figure 29 : Release profile of VAL from µContainers with 25 loops (black square=2) or 30 
loops (red dots, n=1) lids. 
 
Figure 30 SEM image of µContainers coated with ES-100. A) µContainers closed with a 25 
loops lid, B) µContainers closed with a 30 loops lid. Scale bar equals 300µm. 
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
540
600
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Valaciclovir (%)
Time (min)
 25 Loops
 30 Loops
Gastric
Stage
Intestinal stage
==PAGE:56==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
48 
 
5.2.4. 
µDiss release study III: Valaciclovir 30 loops Eudragit S-100 
lid  
This study tried to confirm the sustained release profile of the 30 loops lid observed in 5.3.3 
and 5.3.2. Thus, a set of three chips were loaded, spray coated and started the experiment. 
Unfortunately, the third chip broke when it was separated from the round stirring magnet for 
SEM image of the coating after the gastric stage, and there were therefore only duplicate 
measurements for the intestinal stage. The data showed in Figure 31 are from the two chips that 
remained. 
The loading of these two chips was 2.980 ± 0.024 mg. The release profile (Figure 31) showed 
release in the gastric stage of 14.21 ± 5.78 % of VAL. This could be explained by a poor loading 
and coating of the µContainers on the border of the chips (Figure 32 A). In the intestinal stage, 
the sustained release is observed as in the first study. A plateau is reached after approximatively 
at 370 min of the intestinal stage (430 total time). As seen in the previous study, the released 
VAL was above 100%, with a release of 120.68 ± 2.29 %. This could be explained by the 
presence of ES-100. 
These results confirmed that a 30 loops lid allowed a sustained release of VAL from the 
µContainers, and protection of most of the load from early release in the gastric pH. As discuss 
in 5.2.2 and 5.2.3 this characteristic made this thickness acceptable for protecting VAL from 
the harsh gastrointestinal environment. Therefore, this lid was chosen as the suitable for the rest 
of the project. 
 
Figure 31 Release profile of VAL from the µContainers with a 30 loops ES-100 lid. (n=2). 
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Valaciclovir (%)
Time (min)
Gastric 
stage
Intestinal stage
==PAGE:57==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
49 
 
 
Figure 32 SEM images of µContainers coated with a 30 loops lid. A) General view of the spray 
coated chips, the chips on the border showed a poor coating on the border of the chip (arrows). 
B) Image of the 30 loops lid on µContainers before the gastric stage. C) Image of the unaffected 
coating after gastric stage. D) Image after the intestinal stage where no coating is observed on 
the surface. Scale bars equals 300 µm. 
 
5.2.5. 
µDiss release study IV: Valaciclovir 30 loops Eudragit L-
100-55 lid  
The use of EL-100-55 was due to the results observed in 5.3.3. this polymer dissolves at a lower 
pH than ES-100 that ensured the complete release in these experiments  
To study the release of VAL with this new coating three chips were loaded with 3.152 ± 0.29 
mg of VAL and spray coated to form a 30 loops EL-100-55 lid. The aim of this release study 
was to characterise the release of VAL from the µContainers with a 30 loops lid of EL-100-55.  
Three µContainers were loaded with 3.152 ± 0.29 mg of VAL and spray coated to form the lid. 
The gastric stage pH was lowered to 1.6 as it was the pH used in the enzymatic digestion that 
would take place after the characterisation (Enzymatic study 5.4.4). The pH of the intestinal 
stage was as well lowered to 6.5 due to the same reason as before. The aim of these pH changes 
was to create the closest scenario possible to the one that would be used in the enzymatic 
digestion. 
The release profile (Figure 33) showed that after the gastric stage 30.68 ± 9.60 % of VAL was 
released and in the intestinal digestion the release suffered a fast release as the one seen in 
5.3.2.. 100.23 ± 15.07 % of VAL was released at 48 min of the intestinal stage (108 min total 
time) and 103.31 ± 15.84 % at 145 min of the intestinal stage (205 min total time). This lid 
allowed the protection of approximately % of the loaded VAL from the gastric media. Once 
more time the percentage above 100 % could be explained by the presence of EL-100-55 in 
==PAGE:58==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
50 
 
solution. Although the UV spectrum of this polymer was not studied, its structure is similar as 
ES-100 (Figure16). 
These results showed that EL-100-55 could release most of VAL in the intestinal stage, instead 
of in the gastric. However, the desired sustained release was not achieved with this coating. To 
achieve sustained release, it would be necessary a similar characterisation as done with ES-100, 
but due to lack of time it could not be done. 
 
Figure 33: VAL release profile from the µContainers with a 30 loops EL-100-55 lid. (n=3) 
5.2.6. 
µDiss release study V: Simvastatin 25 loops Eudragit S-100 
lid  
The aim of this study was to study the release of SV in the gastric and the intestinal pH. SV is 
a bioprecursor prodrug that is affected by the low gastric pH as seen in 4.4.3.3. 
From the µDiss release studies of VAL, it was obvious that a coating of 25 loops could form a 
lid that protected the loaded from the gastric pH as seen in 5.3.3. Thus, an experiment was 
carried out to characterize the release of SV from µContainers with a 25 loops lid in a gastric 
and intestinal environment. Three chips were loaded with 1.022 ± 0.188 mg of simvastatin and 
spray coated to form a 25 loops lid.  
The release profile (Figure 34) showed that 4.02 ± 0.94 % Simvastatin was released in the 
gastric stage leaving the rest of the SV protected from the gastric pH. In the intestinal stage up 
to 12.85 ± 5.90 % was released, reaching the plateau after approximately 140 min of the 
intestinal stage (200 min total time). This low total release could be affected by the dissolution 
of the ES-100, causing interference in the UV absorption measurements, making it difficult to 
quantify SV in this kind of experiments. SEM images confirmed (Figure 35) that the release of 
SV was not complete as SV remained in the µContainers after the intestinal stage.  
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Valaciclovir (%)
Time (min)
Gastric 
Stage
Intestinal stage
==PAGE:59==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
51 
 
These results showed that the release limiting factor was the low solubility of SV in the medium 
[127] and not the thickness of the lid. The same lid showed higher release of VAL in 5.2.3. 
where a solubility was not a limiting factor. Due to the limit of time of this project, no more 
µDiss studies were done with SV, in different biorelevant media where simvastatin has a higher 
solubility [79]. 
 
Figure 34: Release profile of simvastatin from µContainers with a 25 loops ES-100 lid. (n=3). 
 
 
Figure 35: SEM image of the SV loaded µContainers after the intestinal stage. SV powder could 
be found inside the µContainers. Scale bar equals 300 µm. 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
52 
 
5.3. Thickness of the lids 
The samples were prepared for the measurement of the thickness in each of the batches of chips 
prepared for the enzymatic studies. These chips had a lid of 30 loops of ES-100 o EL-100-55. 
The decision of using this thickness was done by the results obtained from the µDiss release 
studies. 
The samples spray coated with 30 loops of ES-100 had a thickness was 19.3 ± 2. 6 µm (n = 8). 
The samples spray coated with 30 loops of EL-100-55 had a thickness of 28.7 ± 5.6 µm (n= 3). 
5.4. Valaciclovir enzymatic studies 
A set of experiments were done to study the degradation of VAL in a simulated digestion with 
a gastric stage and an intestinal stage and the protection from that degradation using the 
µContainers and a sustained release. 
5.4.1. 
First valaciclovir enzymatic study 
This experiment was carried out to recreate the GIT transit of VAL as a powder (referred to as 
Bulk VAL) or loaded in µContainers (referred to as µContainers VAL) and closed with the 30 
loops ES-100 pH sensitive lids. It would provide a sustained release on the intestinal 
environment as observed in the µDiss release study 5.2.4. Some major changes were done for 
this experiment compared to the µDiss release studies. First, the media used were FaSSGF and 
FaSSIF, these media are more complex than PBS as they contain phospholipids and bile salts. 
Secondly, the pH used in the gastric stage was 1.6 instead of 4 as used in the µDiss release 
studies. This change of pH was done because it was the recommended pH for the preparation 
of FaSSGF solution by the manufacturer. The last modification compared to the µDiss release 
studies was the addition of pancreatin and CaCl in the intestinal stage. The use of pancreatin 
aimed to mimic the luminal enzymatic activity in the intestine. In this first experiment 200.28 
± 5.96 mg (n=6) of pancreatin were added to each of the vials of the intestinal stage. The reason 
to use this concentration was due to be a concentration (20 mg/ml) in the midpoint of the 
concentration range used in similar experiments found in the literature where a range of 10 – 
40 mg/ml were used to study the impact of pancreatin in different prodrugs [128]. This 
concentration corresponds to a lipase activity of 238 USP units /ml. 16 mM CaCl was added, 
as this concentration has been employed in similar experiments and it is known that CaCl 
increase the enzymatic activity of pancreatin [38][129].  
The results obtained from this experiment are represented in Figure 36 as percentage of the total 
VAL. The first sample of the intestinal stage was taken prior addition of pancreatin based on 
the methodology used by N. Borkar et al [38]  
Overall, there is no degradation of VAL in the gastric stage in any group of samples, but 
degradation was observed in the intestinal stage. From the µContainers, there was a release in 
the gastric stage and a continuous release was seen in the intestinal stage until the end of the 
experiment. 
A decrease of the Bulk VAL was found in the gastric stage, but a big variation was seen between 
the triplicates, and the change in concentration was not considered significant (p-value = 
0.0607). At the same time, the AUC of ACV peak did not increase as it should have, if VAL 
had been degraded into ACV. Thus, it was not believed that VAL is being degraded into ACV. 
==PAGE:61==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
53 
 
The variation could be explained by errors in the refill of the vials with the new FaSSGF caused 
by the micropipette employed during the sampling of this stage. It is noteworthy that there was 
detected a small peak with the same retention time as ACV in the 0 min samples of Bulk VAL, 
the presence of ACV could be attributed to the purity of VAL as the same peaks were observed 
in the different concentrations of the VAL standard curve. The certificate of purity provided by 
the company confirmed the presence of ACV and other impurities in the batch of VAL used, 
and a VAL purity of 90%.  
In the case of the µContainers VAL, 42.29 ± 12.88 %VAL of the loaded VAL was released at 
the end of the gastric stage. This release could be explained by the presence of poor closure of 
some µContainers (Figure 38 A). These values were affected as the Bulk VAL values because 
the same micropipette was used. Same as with the Bulk VAL samples, a ACV peak was 
detected but could not be quantified. It is remarkable that the standard curve for this experiment 
were prepared in deionised water instead of FaSSGF, nevertheless the baseline and the retention 
times were not affected, there was a small peak observed before the peaks of ACV and VAL 
that could be attributed to the components of the FaSSGF solution.  
In the intestinal stage a different micropipette was used to reduce the error observed in the 
gastric stage. The Bulk VAL samples at 0 min showed a 112.30 ± 1.16 % of VAL, this could 
be explained by the difference of the media used between the sample (FaSSIF) and the standard 
curve (Deionised water) and by the variation overtime as all the standard curves were measured 
before the gastric stage. Due to this overestimation all the initial sample of the intestinal stage 
was corrected to 100%: 
The bulk VAL samples suffered a decrease during this stage and at the same time an increase 
of the peak ACV was observed (Figure 37 B and 37 C), but the concentration of ACV was not 
possible to quantify as there was an overlap with the peaks from the complex medium (Figure 
37 B) and not blank subtraction was possible due to the lack of a control vial with the same 
medium. The peak of VAL was slightly overlapped by the medium peaks (Figure 37 B). 
However, the VAL peak is almost separated from the medium peaks, but it could cause VAL 
measurement s to be slightly overestimated. This could explain why the actual measurement of 
the 0 min intestinal sample (60 min) was found to be slightly higher than expected (112.30 ± 
1.16 % of VAL). At the endpoint of the intestinal stage Bulk VAL was reduced to 37.17 ± 0.38 
%. 
No correction was done at min 0 (60min) to the µContainers VAL samples. The release of the 
remaining VAL from the µContainers occurred during the intestinal stage. The maximum 
release 94.4 ± 2.21 % VAL was reached at the end of the experiment. This value counts the 
VAL released in the gastric stage. 
The ACV peak was to a high degree overlapped by the medium peaks, but from the 
chromatograms, and increase in ACV signal was observed during the experiment, meaning that 
part of the released VAL from the µContainers was degraded into ACV during the intestinal 
stage. The chips were stored for later SEM analysis, which confirmed the complete dissolution 
of the pH sensitive lid and release of drug (Figure 38 B). 
The pH values in the intestinal stage were checked after the addition of pancreatin and at the 
end of the experiment. They were measured from the vial of the first µContainer VAL sample 
with the pH strips. In both measurements the indicated pH was within the range 7-8. 
==PAGE:62==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
54 
 
These results confirm the degradation of VAL of Bulk VAL samples by the presence of 
pancreatin in the medium. Before these set of experiments the stability of VAL was studied in 
PBS and FaSSGF pH 1.6 and PBS and FaSSIF pH 7.5 (data not shown). These studies were 
done by the risk of alkaline degradation of VAL in the intestinal stage [74]. The results of these 
experiments showed that the degradation of VAL in the time frame of the enzymatic studies 
was not significant in none of the media. In addition, these results confirm the release profile 
of VAL observed in the µDiss release studies 5.2.3 and 5.2.4, where most of the loaded VAL 
was sustained released in the intestinal stage. Although the degradation of the VAL released in 
the gastric stage could not be studied with this method, most of released VAL in the intestinal 
stage. The increase of VAL showed that the release of VAL overcame its enzymatic 
degradation. Therefore, the total enzymatic degradation of the loaded VAL should be lower 
than the suffered in the Bulk VAL samples. 
 Besides the enzymatic degradation of VAL, it was obvious that the complex medium of the 
intestinal stage affects the quantification of ACV and VAL due to peak overlap. These peaks 
from the medium could be explained by the presence of lipids peptides and other components 
that absorb at 254 nm from the pancreatin [130]. To overcome this aspects different flow rates 
( 1.2 ml/min and 1 ml/ml ) were studied, but there was no separation of the peaks (Data not 
shown), other approach considered but not attempted was the increase the aqueous fraction of 
the mobile phase. Most of the elements from pancreatin eluted earlier than ACV and VAL, 
therefore they were more hydrophilic. An increase of the polarity of the mobile phase would 
retard the release of ACV and VAL from the rest of the components of the medium.  
 
Figure 36 Release profile of VAL from the µContainers (µContainer VAL, red dot, n=3) vs VAL 
in powder (Bulk VAL, grey square, n=3).  
0
60
120
180
240
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Valaciclovir (%)
Time (min)
 Bulk VAL
 µContainers VAL
Gastric 
stage
Intestinal stage
==PAGE:63==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
55 
 
 
Figure 37: HPLC profiles of the first Bulk VAL sample, A) It is the sample taken at 0 min before 
the addition of VAL, a small peak was detected in the front corresponding to the FaSSIF 
solution components, a second peak at 1.2 min appears that corresponds to ACV and impurities 
from the VAL, its AUC was below the range of the standard curve for ACV and it was not 
measured. B) It is the sample take at 30 min of the intestinal stage after addition of pancreatin. 
C)It is the same sample at the end of the experiment (the scales are reduced in the Y axe). 
 
 
Figure 38: SEM image of the µContainer VAL sample 2. A)Aafter spray coating, the red arrows 
point to µContainers with defective lid. B) After the intestinal stage no remaining of the lids 
were found confirming the total release of VAL. Scale bar equals 300 µm. 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
56 
 
5.4.2. 
Second valaciclovir enzymatic study 
This experiment confirmed again the degradation of VAL during the intestinal stage. The 
release profile of VAL from the µContainers differed highly from 5.4.1 indicating uncomplete 
release, which was confirmed by SEM imaging. 
This experiment was carried out to solve some of the issues observed in the previous 
experiment. The amount of pancreatin was increased up to 474.40 ± 2.02 mg (lipase activity 
565.50 ± 2.41 USP unit/ml, n=7) to be closer to the one used by N. Borkar et al [38]. An extra 
vial was used as Blank which received the same treatment as the samples.  
As showed in Figure 39, in the gastric stage the decrease of VAL in the Bulk VAL samples 
observed in the 5.4.1 was not observed, confirming that the variation seen in the previous study 
was due to the used micropipette. 99.67 ± 1.47 % of Bulk VAL was quantified at 0 min of the 
gastric stage. At the end of this stage 96.55 ± 1.53 % of the Bulk VAL remained. This decrease 
cannot be considered as significant (p-value = 0.0635).  
In the case of the µContainers VAL samples 20.17 ± 7.75% VAL was released at the end of the 
stage. This release was in the range observed in µDiss release study 5.3.4. and in enzymatic 
study 5.4.2. This release could be explained by the presence of a µContainers with a defective 
lid. 
In the intestinal stage a new method of precipitation was used, instead of using HCl, methanol 
was used in a ration 1:1 with the sample. Visual inspection of the samples after addition of 
methanol confirmed that there was no protein precipitation, thus the enzymatic activity cannot 
be considered as stopped after sampling.  
The use of a Blank to subtract the peaks and noise from the medium did not solve this 
interference as the subtraction caused a high disruption of the data and a poor integration by the 
software (Figure 40). Thus, the data analysis was done without the blank substation, as in 5.4.1. 
despite the overestimation and incapacity of measuring the ACV peak. This should be 
considered to understand the data here showed. Some possible factors contributed to the failure 
of the blank subtraction and the integration. First there was small differences in the amount of 
pancreatin added to each of the vials. Second, the refill of the vials with new FaSSIF was an 
extra source of error due to small difference between each addition. And last, the shaking of the 
vials showed to be inefficient to maintain the samples homogenously mixed. Part of the 
pancreatin remained on the bottom of the flask.  
 At the end of this experiment 26.22 ± 0. 86 % VAL in the Bulk Val samples remained. This 
lower value compared to the results from 5.4.1 could be explained by the increased amount of 
pancreatin and its enzymatic activity and by the fact that the enzymatic activity would not be 
stopped by the precipitation method. 
Regarding the µContainers VAL samples, an increase of VAL was observed, but at a different 
trend than what was observed in 5.4.1. and at the end of the experiment a total 53.07 ± 8.62 
%VAL was released (including the release from the gastric stage). This final percentage 
differed from the result of 5.4.1. showing that there was not complete release. In these data 
there were no subtraction at any point to correct effect of the medium on the chromatogram. 
This lower release could be explained by the failure of the dissolution of the lid as an initial 
visual check showed that most of the µContainers were still closed with a lid after the 
==PAGE:65==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
57 
 
experiment. Thus, the chips were kept for further SEM imaging, which confirmed this fact. 
(Figure 40).  
ACV was not quantified in the samples due to peak overlap, but an increase of its peak was 
observed in all samples as in 5.4.1. As in 5.4.1 the pH was measured with the pH strips. the pH 
observed was between 7-8. 
These results showed once more time the degradation of VAL in the intestinal stage was related 
with the presence of pancreatin. The increase of pancreatin could be the major responsible of 
the reduction in the Bulk VAL samples at the end of the intestinal stage compared to the results 
from 5.4.1. However, it could be affected by the failure of the precipitation step. As well, the 
increase of pancreatin had an effect in the release of VAL from the microcontainers. The release 
in the gastric stage was similar as the previously seen, but in the intestinal stage the release 
profile observed in 5.4.1 was not reproduced. This was explained by the failure of the 
dissolution of the lids. 
 
Figure 39 Profile release of VAL from the µContainers (µContainers VAL, red dots, n=3) in 
the gastric and intestinal stages shows an incomplete release of VAL, the powder samples of 
VAL (Bulk VAL, black squares, n=3) shows a low decrease in the gastric stage and a marked 
decrease in the intestinal stage. 
 
0
60
120
180
240
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Valaciclovir (%)
Time (min)
 Bulk VAL
 µContainers VAL
Gastric
stage
Intestinal stage
==PAGE:66==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
58 
 
 
Figure 40: Example of the effect of the subtraction of the blank on the 0-min sample of the Bulk 
VAL sample 1 and the poor integration of the software. 
 
Figure 41 SEM image of the µContainers VAL sample 3. A) After spray coating with the 30 
loops ES-100 lid. B) After the intestinal stage, some µContainers lost their lid or were opened 
(red arrows) but most of them remained with their lids. Scale bar equals 300 µm. 
5.4.3. 
Third valaciclovir enzymatic study 
This experiment showed the degradation of VAL as in the previous, but it was possible to 
quantify ACV in the intestinal stage confirming the degradation of VAL into ACV. The release 
profile of VAL from the µContainers showed similar as in 5.4.3, and SEM imaging confirmed 
the presence of unopened µContainers.  
The aim of this experiment was to repeat the experiment 5.4.2 which presented some failures 
in the methodology that needed to be improved. All the modifications were done to improve 
==PAGE:67==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
59 
 
the issues observed in the intestinal stage in the previous attempts. One of the main changes 
was the use of HCl 0.5 M in the same ratio as in 5.4.1 which had proven to induce sufficient 
precipitation, the other major change was the preparation of the standard curves with a stock 
solution that contained the same proportion of pancreatin as the samples to reduce the 
differences between the samples and the standard curves, in addition the height of the ACV 
peak was used instead of the AUC to calculate its concentration. The subtraction of the blank 
was used, though the addition of pancreatin was done one by one. The integration of the peaks 
was done manually, as the integration done by the software (Figure 40) was highly affected in 
the 5.4.2.. Although this approach was not the ideal, it improved the data analysis (Figure 43). 
In addition, to reduce the variability between samples and the standard curve, the dilution of 
the sample was omitted as it would dilute the enzyme in the sample and it was a possible source 
of error.  
The use of the µDiss stirring unit in this equipment was another modification of the previous 
experiment to reduce the difference between samples. The constant stirring on the bottom of 
the vials kept the content on the vial in movement avoiding the precipitation on the bottom of 
part of the pancreatin as observed in 5.4.2.. 
The release profile seen in Figure 42 showed that in the gastric stage the Bulk VAL samples 
presented at 0min a value or 109 ± 2.48 % VAL. At the end of the stage dropped to 105.10 ± 
1.67 % VAL this difference was not considered statically significant (p-value =0.0867). 
Regarding the µContainers VAL samples a similar release was observed in this stage as in 5.4.2 
reaching to a total release of 26.55 ± 7.85 % at the end of the gastric stage. This result was 
consistent with the results observed in the µDiss release study 5.3.4 and in 5.4.2.. As seen in 
the previous experiment a small peak corresponding to ACV was observed in all the samples, 
but could not be quantified. 
In the intestinal stage, similar trends where observed as in the previous experiments. The initial 
value for the Bulk Val samples were 95.32 ± 3.02 % VAL, this value confirms that the presence 
of the complex medium caused an overestimation of the measurements, as in the previous cases 
the standard curve used were done without pancreatin. In contrast, the standard curves prepared 
for this experiment were done in a solution that suffered the same treatment as the samples as 
described in 4.8.4.. At the end of the experiment 26.29 ± 1.02% VAL remained in the Bulk 
VAL samples, this difference was considered as significant (p-value < 0.0001). It must be 
considered that the end of this experiment was half an hour later than the previous experiments. 
Thanks to a better subtraction of the blank and integration of the peaks, it was possible to 
quantify ACV. ACV from the Bulk VAL samples (Bulk ACV) showed an increase in parallel 
to the decrease of VAL in these samples. The first point it was measured was at 30 min of the 
intestinal stage being 21.17 ± 0.32 % of the theoretic ACV that could be released from VAL. 
At the end this value increased up to 49.86 ± 1.96 % (p-value < 0.0001). This confirms the 
observations done in 5.4.1. of the degradation of VAL into ACV by the presence of pancreatin. 
In the case of the µContainers VAL samples, a similar release profile was observed as in 5.4.2. 
with a final release of 52.32 ± 8.39 % VAL. In parallel to the increase of VAL in these samples, 
5.30 ± 1.03 %ACV (µContainers ACV) was quantified from the 90 min of the intestinal stage 
( 150 min total time ) until the end of the experiment. At the end of the experiment 15.59 ± 4.7 
% of ACV was quantified, this increase was considered significant (p-value= 0.0209) 
==PAGE:68==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
60 
 
At the end of the experiment the pH values observed were between the range 7-8. However, the 
pH of the medium of the vial of the µContainers VAL sample was 6.83. This extra measurement 
was done because the chips of the µContainers samples showed the same aspect as in 5.4.2. and 
some areas of the µContainers looked coated after the study. The samples were kept for further 
SEM analysis. The SEM analysis confirmed the incomplete dissolution (Figure 44 B) of the 
lids. 
These results are in accordance with the obtained in 5.4.2. as the decrease of VAL in the Bulk 
VAL samples followed similar trend as seen before. The fact of having similar VAL % in the 
Bulk VAL samples in a later end point than in 5.4.2. proved that the use of methanol did not 
inactivated the enzymes, and that this problem was solved with the use of HCl as precipitating 
agent. The changes in the data treatment allowed quantifying ACV in this experiment which 
showed the parallel increase of ACV with all the samples. This increase confirms that VAL 
was degraded in its metabolite ACV. ACV has a poorer permeability than VAL, therefore the 
loss of VAL by the intestinal enzymatic activity could be the reason why not all VAL is absorb 
in the in the intestine [73,74,131].  
The release of VAL in the gastric stage was similar to the seen in the previous studies, and most 
of the loaded VAL avoided its early release in this stage. In addition, the same release profile 
as in 5.4.2. was seen in the intestinal stage. Thanks to the measurement of the pH, it was possible 
to spot the reason behind this effect. ES-100 dissolves in pHs above 7.5 [33], the measured pH 
6.83 proved that the dissolution of the lids would not happen. A possible explanation of the 
drop of the pH could be the presence of phospholipases in pancreatin [132] this enzyme could 
hydrolyse the phospholipids present in the FaSSIF medium releasing free fatty acids to the 
medium reducing the pH [133]. 
Coming back to the release of VAL in the intestinal stage, there was a release although the pH 
dropped, which could be contradictory, but the pH would drop during the experiment and not 
immediately allowing some degradation of the lids and the release of part of the loaded VAL 
at the beginning of the experiment, but the release seems to continue despite the pH change. 
This slow rate release at pHs below 7.5 has been before seen in drug delivery systems that use 
ES-100, more over with this systems there was release of their load in gastric pH, which could 
explain the release observed in the gastric stage in the previous experiments [134].  
==PAGE:69==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
61 
 
 
Figure 42 Profile release of VAL from the µContainers (µContainers VAL, red dots, n=3), the 
powder samples of VAL (Bulk VAL, black squares, n=3). In the intestinal stage,ACV was 
measured from the µContainer VAL samples there (µContainers ACV, n=3) and from the VAL 
of the Bulk VAL samples (Bulk ACV, n=3).  
 
 
Figure 43 Example of the effect of the subtraction of the blank and the integration done 
manually. A) Raw data from a Bulk VAL sample and B) same sample after the subtraction of 
the blank. 
0
60
120
180
240
300
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Valaciclovir / Aciclovir %
Time (min)
 Bulk VAL
 Bulk ACV
 µContainers ACV
 µContainers VAL
Gastric
stage
Intestinal stage
==PAGE:70==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
62 
 
 
Figure 44 SEM image of the µContainers VAL sample 3. A) After spray coating with the 30 
loops ES-100 lid. B) After the intestinal stage, some µContainers lost their lid or were opened. 
Scale bar equals 300 µm. 
5.4.4. 
Fourth valaciclovir enzymatic study 
In this experiment EL-100-55 was used to solve the incomplete release of 5.5.3. Similar 
degradation of VAL in the Bulk VAL samples was observed, and A new release profile was 
spotted with this new coating. A high proportion of VAL was released in the gastric stage, while 
in the intestinal stage the release was fast and the percentage of VAL remained constant during 
this stage. In parallel ACV increase in all the samples in the intestinal stage. 
The aim of this experiment was to evaluate the release of VAL from the µContainers with a lid 
of EL-100-55. The selection of this new coating material was done due to an incomplete release 
in the previous experiments, that could be attributed to the drop of pH during the intestinal stage 
observed and explained in 5.4.3. EL-100-55 is soluble in pHs above 5.5, so in case of drop of 
the pH it will dissolve. Some adjustments were done for this experiment, as explained in 4.8.5. 
The aim of preparing a single stock solution was to reduce the difference between the samples 
and the standard curves. 
There was no difference in the gastric stage for the Bulk VAL samples (p-value= 0.0917) and 
no ACV was quantified in these samples as in the previous experimental setups. In the case of 
the µContainers VAL samples, there was a release of VAL up to 52.33 ± 9.51 % VAL at the 
end of the gastric stage. This release corresponded with the results observed in the µDiss release 
studies 3.3.6. where there was release in the gastric stage of approximately of 30 %. Same as 
with the Bulk VAL samples, the peak of ACV was detected but could not be quantified. 
The data acquired from the intestinal stage were marked by the failure of the autosampler at 90 
min of this stage (150 min). The samples were handle as described in 4.8.5. after the breakdown. 
Looking at the data in Figure 45, in the first 90 min of the intestinal stage, there was a decrease 
of Bulk VAL from 108.36 ± 5.59 %VAL at 0 min to 78.09 ± 4.06 % VAL (p-value =0.0016). 
Due to the failure of the equipment the samples at 90 min were reanalysed next day as starting 
point and it was observed and increase up to 90.11 ± 5.47 %VAL. The standard curve used for 
the analysis of these samples were done the same day with the vials used for the initial. This 
was done to have the same treatment of the samples and the standard curve concentrations. The 
==PAGE:71==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
63 
 
data obtained from min 90 to end of the intestinal stage showed a decrease of VAL in the Bulk 
VAL samples to 75.39 ± 0.79 % VAL (p-value= 0.0099). as seen in Figure 45. 
In parallel to the decrease of VAL in the bulk VAL samples, ACV increased during the 
experiment being firstly quantified at 30 min of the intestinal stage 14.95 ± 1.2 % ACV and 
increased up to 27.46 ± 2.9 % ACV (p-value=0.0023) at 90 min of the intestinal stage prior 
equipment failure. The min 90 samples were remeasured next day after the handling showed a 
27.39 ±2.94 % ACV. From min 90 ACV increased up to 43.33 ±2.94 % ACV (p-value =0.0027) 
at the end of the intestinal stage. 
Regarding the µContainers VAL samples, the maximum percentage of VAL was reached at 30 
min of the intestinal stage 97.091 ± 9.51 % VAL. From this point it remained constant until 
min 90 where 93.40 ± 9.51 % VAL (p-value = 0.6591). The min 90 samples after the analysis 
next day showed an increase to 104.55±9.51 % VAL. It could be considered that it remained 
constant during this period as at the end of the experiment 104.73 ± 6.43 % VAL was measured 
and there was no statistically significant difference (p-value =0.9762).  
In the µ Containers VAL samples, an increase of ACV was observed 30 min in the intestinal 
stage and raised from 8.1 ± 2.0 to 12.12 ± 3.29 % ACV within the first 90 min of the intestinal 
stage, however this difference was not considered as statistically significant (p- value= 0.1448). 
Same as the rest of samples, 90 min samples were measured next day with an 8.96 ± 2.15 % 
ACV. This value raised up to 16.54 ± 2.67 % ACV at the end of the experiment (p- value = 
0.0186). 
The chips after the intestinal stage did not showed remains of the coating by visual inspection. 
To ensure complete release of VAL, the samples were kept for SEM Analysis, but it could not 
be carried out by failure of the equipment.  
The pH values were measured at the end of the experiment in all the vials with a pH meter 
Meter lab PHM 220 (Radiometer analytical. Loveland, Colorado). The values observed were 
6.31 ± 0.01 for the blank and The Bulk VAL samples and 6.08 ± 0.03 for the microcontainers 
samples. The difference of the pHs between the Bulk VAL samples and the µContainers 
samples (p-value = 0.0002) could be attributed to the presence of Eudragit as it was the only 
difference between the samples. The drop of pH from the initial 6.5 of the media was in 
accordance with the observations in 5.4.3. Thus, the presence of pancreatin causes a drop of the 
pH and it could be explained by the release of free fatty acids and a low buffer capacity of the 
medium in the intestinal stage. 
The results from this experiment corresponded with the previous experiments regarding the 
effect of pancreatin on VAL. It was degraded in ACV during the intestinal stage. Due to the 
failure of the equipment the obtained result at the end of the experiment are more difficult to 
correlate with the previously seen, however there is a similar trend in the decrease of VAL as 
the one observed before and in the increase of ACV in the Bulk VAL samples. In the gastric 
stage there was a higher release of VAL from the µContainers than the observed in the µDiss, 
this difference could be attributed to the difference of media employed as it has been similar 
differences between the release in PBS and in FaSSGF with this polymer [130]. The differences 
between the degradation of VAL in the Bulk VAL samples and in the µContainers confirms 
that the use of µContainers protects VAL from the enzymatic degradation, as VAL in the Bulk 
samples are decreasing constantly while it remains constant in the µContainers samples. 
==PAGE:72==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
64 
 
 
Figure 45 Release profile of VAL from the µContainers (µContainers VAL, red dot, n=3) vs 
VAL in powder (Bulk VAL, black squares, n=3). In the intestinal stage ACV from the BUL 
samples (Bulk ACV, black triangle, n=3) increases along this stage, same as with the ACV from 
the µContainers samples (µContainers ACV, red triangle, n=3) 
With all the results from the µDiss release and enzymatic studies it could be concluded that the 
use of µContainers with a 30 loops ES-100 lid could reduce the enzymatic degradation of VAL. 
A 30 loops thick lid of ES-100 showed the ability of protect most of the VAL loaded in the 
µContainers from an early release in the gastric pH, as consequence less VAL would face the 
enzymatic activity of the medium from the starting point. In addition, the release of the 
remaining VAL is in done in the intestinal stage in a sustained release fashion. This release 
profile was observed in all the µDiss release and in the first enzymatic study. This release profile 
had improved the bioavailability of poor permeable drugs as VAL, in addition this release 
profile reduced the enzymatic degradation in others drug delivery systems with the same release 
profile. The VAL degradation of the Bulk VAL samples, confirmed that releasing all the loaded 
VAL at the start point leads to a high loss of it in the intestinal stage while the release from the 
microcontainers achieved a lower loss. These results only studied the protective effect from the 
release profile, however the mucoadhesion and unidirectional release of the µContainers are 
two characteristics that would add an extra increment in the bioavailability and enzymatic 
protection. 
Besides, this work stablished the base for further work. An enzymatic study model using 
pancreatin and two stages was used and improved during this thesis. This model was not found 
for the study of VAL and it can be used for further experiments that will use this drug delivery 
system or others that take advantage of pH sensitive polymers. Problems were observed and 
identified. Different solutions were applied to overcome these difficulties that could not be 
forecasted without this project. Thus, this project leaves a clearer path for further research. 
 
 
0
60
120
180
240
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Valaciclovir / Acyclovir(%)
Time (min)
 Bulk VAL
 Bulk ACV
 µContainers VAL
 µContainers ACV
Gastric 
stage
Intestinal stage
==PAGE:73==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
65 
 
5.5. Storage studies 
All drug that reaches the market must study its storage stability in its different formulations. 
The loading of prodrugs into µContainers can be considered a different type of formulation 
from the current ones. The prodrugs used in this project have sensible bonds that are designed 
to be cleaved and being instable by themselves. Therefore, the use of µContainers could insulate 
the loaded prodrugs from the external environments as a capsule does, increasing the lifespan 
of the prodrugs. 
5.5.1. 
Valaciclovir Storage study 
5.5.1.1. 
Non-stored samples analysis  
The aims of this experiment were to develop a method to release VAL from the µContainers 
with the less handling possible and the maximum recovery of VAL. The samples were handled 
as described in 4.9.2.1. 
The analysis of the samples showed a recovery of 102.11±4.11 % VAL (mean ± SD, n =3) of 
these samples (Table 19). In addition, a small peak at RT 1.2 min was observed as in the 
enzymatic studies corresponding a ACV. However, as discuss then it could be attributed to the 
purity of VAL, and not to a degradation during the filling or spray coating process. 
5.5.1.2. 
Stored samples analysis 
The aims of this experiment were to study the degradation of VAL under different storage 
conditions and to know if VAL was protected when it was loaded in µContainers from those 
condition. The two chosen storage conditions aimed to recreate an extreme environment of 
stress degradation (60±5 °C and 80±5% RH) and other with softer conditions (30±5 °C and 
65±5% RH) like the intermediate conditions for stability testing of active pharmaceutical 
ingredients and finished product according to the guidelines of the world health organization. 
These guidelines suggest that these studies should be carried out at least 6 months, but due to 
the length of this project the running time was shortened to 1 month [135].  
Same as with the t0 µContainers samples, two peaks were detected at 1.2 min and at 1.5 min, 
corresponding to ACV and VAL respectively. 
In case of degradation, the expectation was a reduction of the peak at 1.5 min with or without 
an increase of the peak at 1.2 min. In case of increasing this last peak, it could be deduced that 
VAL was degraded into ACV by hydrolysis of the ester bond. In contrast, if this peak did not 
increase it could be considered the possibility that VAL degrades in unknown degradation 
products.  
Same as with the t0 µContainers samples, the peak at 1.2 min was under the range of the ACV 
standard curve in all the samples. Therefore, VAL is not degraded into AC.  
To ensure that VAL was not degraded by the storage conditions the recovery was calculated as 
with t0 µContainers (Table 19, Figure 46). 
==PAGE:74==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
66 
 
Table 19 Recovery percentage of the samples of the VAL storage study 
Storage 
conditions 
Sample 
Recovery (mean ± SD, %) 
p=value (vs. t0 
µContainers) 
30±5°C - 65±5% 
RH 
Bulk VAL 
108.62 ± 1.88 
0.0671 
µContainers 
VAL 
122.64 ±12.3 
0.0544 
60±5°C - 80±5% 
RH 
Bulk VAL 
107.79 ±5.09 
0.2071 
µContainers 
101.45 ± 20.56 
0.9591 
None (t0) 
t0 Bulk VAL 
98.87 ± 3.09 
0.3364 
t0 µContainers 
102.11±4.11 
 
 
None of the recoveries was below 100 % and above 100 % apart from to Bulk VAL. This could 
be explained by the evaporation of methanol during in the handling of the samples. In Figure 
46 it is plotted the recovery of all the samples plus the t0 µContainers. Comparing the samples 
to the t0 µContainers samples there was no difference statistically significant. 
These results proved that VAL was a stable compound in the storage conditions and in the time 
frame of the experiment. Thus, it could not be concluded that the use of µContainers would 
give an extra protection, however this was a first step and this experiment should be carried out 
in a longer period as the recommended. 
 
Figure 46: Recovery of VAL from all the samples used in the VAL storage study(n=3). 
5.5.2. 
Simvastatin storage study 
The aim of this experiment was to compare the degradation of simvastatin under two different 
storage conditions as described in the methodology. The results from the analysis are found in 
Table 19. The recovery was low in the case of the µContainers stored at 60±5°C -80 ±5% RH 
and statistically significant compared to the t0 µContainers. In these samples drops of water 
were found on the surface of the chips and the coating presented a yellow colour not seen in the 
==PAGE:75==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
67 
 
samples stored in soft conditions. The presence of water on the surface might cause damage in 
the lids of the µContainers and the loss of part of their content during the samples were handle, 
there was no statistically differences between the rest of the samples compared to t0µContainers. 
As seen in 5.5.1, the recovery percentage was above 100 % (Table 20, Figure47) except in the 
stress conditions, this could be explained by the evaporation of ethanol during the time between 
the preparation of the sample and the analysis. No peak for SVA was detected in any of the 
samples, meaning that SV was not degraded to its metabolite under these storage conditions or 
by the loading and spray coating process.  
These results show that there was no degradation of SV due to the storage conditions, as the 
Bulk SV samples did not suffer any detectable degradation, as their recovery was close to 100% 
and no SVA was found. The µContainers samples were affected by the handling, but as in the 
Bulk SVA samples no SVA was detected.  
Table 20 Recovery of SV from the samples of the simvastatin storage study. 
 
Figure 47: Recovery percentage of SV from each of the samples of the storage study (n=3, 
t0µContainers n=4). 
 
to µContainers
30 °C-65 %RHµ Containers SV 
30 °C-65 %RH Bulk SV  
60°C-80% RH µContainers SV 
60°C-80% RH Bulk SV 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Simvastatin (%)
Storage 
conditions 
 
Sample 
Recovery (mean ± 
SD, %, n)) 
p-value (against 
t0 µContainers) 
30±5°C-65±5% 
RH 
 
Bulk SV 
104.96 ± 4.18, 3 
0.2411 
 
µContainers SV 
125.00 ±20.06,3 
0.6731 
60±5°C-80±5% 
RH 
 
Bulk SV 
103.79 ± 4.52, 3 
0.2072 
 
µContainers SV 
61.45 ± 7.31, 3 
0.0051 
None (t0) 
 
t0 µContainers 
SV 
118.26 ± 16.05, 4 
 
==PAGE:76==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
68 
 
6. Conclusion 
In this thesis the loading methods of drugs into µContainers was investigated, the 
characterisation of different lids was performed to reach the lid with the desired release profile. 
The effect of the enzymatic activity on VAL was studied and the improvement of the stability 
of VAL and SV in different storage conditions was studied with the use of µContainers. 
From the results of the different loading methods, the spatula + brush method showed to be the 
one with the highest yield for loading and it was found that 3.34 ± 0.33mg of VAL and 2.89 ± 
0.48 mg of SV could be loaded in a chip of 625 µContainers. This method proved to be useful 
for the preparation of samples for the demands of this project. 
Furthermore, it was found out that a lid of ES-100 on the cavity of the microcontainers with a 
thickness of 19.3 ± 2.6 µm impeded the releases of most of the loaded drugs in gastric pH and 
provided sustained release ACV and VAL in intestinal pH. This was observed in the µDiss 
release and enzymatic studies. However, the release of SV showed that the release of poorly 
soluble drugs was limited by the solubility instead of by the behaviour of the lid.  
An experimental set up was designed and improved for the study of the release from 
µContainers and enzymatic degradation of prodrugs. This experimental model suffered the 
influence of pancreatin making necessary the application of changes to overcome those 
complications. This experimental set up would be useful for further works in the same field and 
the as the decrease of pH and overlap of peaks in the pancreatin related with the complex 
medium have been marked. 
The enzymatic degradation studies showed the degradation VAL into ACV by pancreatin 
leading. The defence between the bulk powder samples and the µContainers samples proves 
that a complete initial release of the VAL in presence of pancreatin will cause a dramatic 
degradation of it, as seen with the bulk VAL samples. In contrast the presence of the lid avoids 
this initial release protecting the loaded VAL from part of this degradation. Thus, the 
employment of µContainers with the developed lid for delivering VAL could protect it from 
the enzymatic degradation in the small intestine. 
The storage studies showed that VAL and SV are stable and do not degrade into their active 
metabolites under the conditions and time period of the experiments. Therefore, no advantage 
was found between the use of µContainers or not for the protection of VAL and SV. 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
69 
 
7. Future perspectives: 
The characterisation of the drug release in the µDiss studies with a 30 loops ES-100 lid can 
be a starting point for further projects. For a better characterisation, this can be done with 
the use of the ZIM analysis by the software. This analysis will solve the absorption overlap 
at the same wavelength between the ES-100 and the drugs, reducing the error by the presence 
of ES-100. In addition, employing bigger size of samples and biorelevant media instead of 
PBS would provide a solid base for further experiments. 
The use of ES-100 as coating material did not fit with the enzymatic experiments due to the 
drop of pH by the presence of pancreatin. However the selection of this polymer was done 
to be more suitable for its study in rat as animal model. In case of further work with this 
material, the enzymatic study could be adapted for this conditions with the increase of the 
buffer capacity of the intestinal medium.  
A better characterisation of the EL-100-55 lid is necessary to achieve a sustained release and 
reduce the release in the gastric stage. The development of similar work with this polymer 
as in this project can be a future line of work. This polymer dissolves in human intestinal 
pH, so it would allow studying the release of drugs in experiments that approaches more to 
the human physiology.  
The loss of VAL in the gastric stage prevented the study pancreatin degradation on all the 
loaded drug. This limitation could be overcome with the use of one single medium that can 
be tuned from gastric condition to intestinal conditions. This medium is under development 
in the Nanoprobes group. 
The in vitro enzymatic study cannot the effect of the mucoadhesion and unidirectional 
release of the microcontainers combined with the enzymatic activity. Therefore, in vivo 
studies with rats or other animal models can provide a better image of the real protective 
effect of the µContainers for prodrugs and its impact in the bioavailability of them. 
The limitation of time did not allow to study SV further than the storage studies. To 
overcome the solubility issue in PBS, the µDiss release studies with SV should be carried 
out with simulated gastric and intestinal media, as they can increase the solubility of SV. 
Once solved this experimental issue, it should be carried out similar experiments as the 
performed with VAL. 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
70 
 
References  
[1] 
A.C. Anselmo, S. Mitragotri, An overview of clinical and commercial impact of drug delivery 
systems., J. Control. Release. 190 (2014) 15–28. doi:10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.03.053. 
[2] 
Top 
100 
Drugs 
for 
2013 
by 
Sales 
- 
U.S. 
Pharmaceutical 
Statistics, 
(n.d.). 
https://www.drugs.com/stats/top100/2013/sales (accessed May 10, 2018). 
[3] 
A.M. Wagner, M.P. Gran, N.A. Peppas, Designing the new generation of intelligent 
biocompatible carriers for protein and peptide delivery, Acta Pharm. Sin. B. 8 (2018) 147–164. 
doi:10.1016/j.apsb.2018.01.013. 
[4] 
L. Zhang, S. Wang, M. Zhang, J. Sun, Nanocarriers for oral drug delivery, J. Drug Target. 21 
(2013) 515–527. doi:10.3109/1061186X.2013.789033. 
[5] 
L.H. Nielsen, A. Melero, S.S. Keller, J. Jacobsen, T. Garrigues, T. Rades, A. Müllertz, A. Boisen, 
Polymeric microcontainers improve oral bioavailability of furosemide, Int. J. Pharm. 504 (2016) 
98–109. doi:10.1016/j.ijpharm.2016.03.050. 
[6] 
Z. Niu, I. Conejos-Sánchez, B.T. Griffin, C.M. O ’driscoll, M.J. Alonso, Lipid-based 
nanocarriers for oral peptide delivery ☆, (2016). doi:10.1016/j.addr.2016.04.001. 
[7] 
A.K. Jain, S. Jain, Advances in oral delivery of anti-cancer prodrugs, Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 
13 (2016) 1759–1775. doi:10.1080/17425247.2016.1200554. 
[8] 
G. Mazza, L. Olivetti, Gastrointestinal Tract, in: Atlas Imaging Anat., Springer International 
Publishing, Cham, 2015: pp. 137–161. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-10750-9_8. 
[9] 
L.K. Cheng, G. O ’grady, P. Du, J.U. Egbuji, J.A. Windsor, A.J. Pullan, Gastrointestinal system, 
(n.d.). doi:10.1002/wsbm.19. 
[10] 
Y.N. Gavhane, A.V. Yadav, Loss of orally administered drugs in GI tract., Saudi Pharm. J.  SPJ  
Off. Publ. Saudi Pharm. Soc. 20 (2012) 331–44. doi:10.1016/j.jsps.2012.03.005. 
[11] 
?? V. Keita, J.D. S??derholm, The intestinal barrier and its regulation by neuroimmune factors, 
Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 22 (2010) 718–733. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2982.2010.01498.x. 
[12] 
V. V. Khutoryanskiy, Longer and safer gastric residence, Nat. Mater. 14 (2015) 963–964. 
doi:10.1038/nmat4432. 
[13] 
S.S. Davis, J.G. Hardy, J.W. Fara, Transit of pharmaceutical dosage forms through the small 
intestine., Gut. 27 (1986) 886–92. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3732895 (accessed 
May 22, 2018). 
[14] 
I.F. 
Uchegbu, 
Fundamentals 
of 
pharmaceutical 
nanoscience, 
n.d. 
https://books.google.dk/books?id=geu3BAAAQBAJ&pg=PA310&lpg=PA310&dq=saliva+dru
g+degradation&source=bl&ots=QCw6X6wwb0&sig=Y346a3lZOCxsd995C2CG1f7-
Ve4&hl=es&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjp6_SdspnbAhVCM5oKHeXIAwYQ6AEIUzAG#v=onepa
ge&q=saliva drug degradation&f=false (accessed May 22, 2018). 
[15] 
M. Koziolek, M. Grimm, D. Becker, V. Iordanov, H. Zou, J. Shimizu, C. Wanke, G. Garbacz, 
W. Weitschies, Investigation of pH and Temperature Profiles in the GI Tract of Fasted Human 
Subjects Using the Intellicap® System, J. Pharm. Sci. 104 (2015) 2855–2863. 
doi:10.1002/JPS.24274. 
[16] 
L. Kalantzi, K. Goumas, V. Kalioras, B. Abrahamsson, J.B. Dressman, C. Reppas, 
Characterization of the Human Upper Gastrointestinal Contents Under Conditions Simulating 
Bioavailability/Bioequivalence Studies, Pharm. Res. 23 (2006) 165–176. doi:10.1007/s11095-
005-8476-1. 
[17] 
A.Y. Abuhelwa, D.B. Williams, R.N. Upton, D.J.R. Foster, Food, gastrointestinal pH, and 
models of oral drug absorption, (2017). doi:10.1016/j.ejpb.2016.11.034. 
[18] 
L.M. Ensign, R. Cone, J. Hanes, Oral drug delivery with polymeric nanoparticles: The 
gastrointestinal mucus barriers ☆, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 64 (2012) 557–570. 
doi:10.1016/j.addr.2011.12.009. 
[19] 
A. MacAdam, The effect of gastro-intestinal mucus on drug absorption, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 
11 (1993) 201–220. doi:10.1016/0169-409X(93)90010-2. 
[20] 
R.A. Cone, Barrier properties of mucus ☆, (2008). doi:10.1016/j.addr.2008.09.008. 
[21] 
P.-A. Billat, E. Roger, S. Faure, F. Lagarce, Models for drug absorption from the small intestine: 
where are we and where are we going?, Drug Discov. Today. 22 (2017) 761–775. 
==PAGE:79==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
71 
 
doi:10.1016/j.drudis.2017.01.007. 
[22] 
J. Keller, P. Layer, Human pancreatic exocrine response to nutrients in health and disease, Gut. 
54 (2005). doi:10.1136/gul.2005.065946. 
[23] 
F. Sarti, J. Barthelmes, J. Iqbal, F. Hintzen, A. Bernkop-Schnürch, Intestinal enzymatic 
metabolism of drugs, J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 63 (2011) 392–399. doi:10.1111/j.2042-
7158.2010.01224.x. 
[24] 
C.D. Klaassen, J.Y. Cui, Special Section on Drug Metabolism in the Microbiome—Minireview 
Review: Mechanisms of How the Intestinal Microbiota Alters the Effects of Drugs and Bile 
Acids, 
DRUG 
Metab. 
Dispos. 
Drug 
Metab 
Dispos. 
43 
(2015) 
1505–1521. 
doi:10.1124/dmd.115.065698. 
[25] 
C. Pereira, J. Costa, B. Sarmento, F. Araújo, Cell-based in vitro models for intestinal 
permeability studies, in: Concepts Model. Drug Permeability Stud., Elsevier, 2016: pp. 57–81. 
doi:10.1016/B978-0-08-100094-6.00005-5. 
[26] 
S. Dünnhaupt, O. Kammona, C. Waldner, C. Kiparissides, A. Bernkop-Schnürch, Nano-carrier 
systems: Strategies to overcome the mucus gel barrier, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 96 (2015) 447–
453. doi:10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.01.022. 
[27] 
M.E. V Johansson, G.C. Hansson, Immunological aspects of intestinal mucus and mucins, Nat. 
Publ. Gr. 16 (2016). doi:10.1038/nri.2016.88. 
[28] 
L. Barthe, J. Woodley, G. Houin, Gastrointestinal absorption of drugs: methods and studies, 
Fundam. Clin. Pharmacol. 13 (1999) 154–168. doi:10.1111/j.1472-8206.1999.tb00334.x. 
[29] 
L.S. Schanker, MECHANISMS OF DRUG ABSORPTION AND DISTRIBUTION1,2, (n.d.). 
https://www-annualreviews-
org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/doi/pdf/10.1146/annurev.pa.01.040161.000333 
(accessed 
May 
14, 
2018). 
[30] 
C. Pereira, J. Costa, B. Sarmento, F. Ara Ujo, 3.3 - Cell-based in vitro models for intestinal 
permeability 
studies, 
Concepts 
Model. 
Drug 
Permeability 
Stud. 
(2016) 
57–81. 
doi:10.1016/B978-0-08-100094-6.00005-5. 
[31] 
T. Endocytosis, E. Paracellular, 8.1 Permeability Fundamentals, Synthesis (Stuttg). (n.d.) 86–99. 
doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-369520-8.50009-7. 
[32] 
Y. Yang, H. Aloysius, D. Inoyama, Y. Chen, L. Hu, Enzyme-mediated hydrolytic activation of 
prodrugs, Acta Pharm. Sin. B. 1 (2011) 143–159. doi:10.1016/j.apsb.2011.08.001. 
[33] 
M.Z.I. Khan, H.P. Štedul, N. Kurjaković, A pH-Dependent Colon-Targeted Oral Drug Delivery 
System Using Methacrylic Acid Copolymers. II. Manipulation of Drug Release Using Eudragit® 
L100 and Eudragit S100 Combinations, Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 26 (2000) 549–554. 
doi:10.1081/DDC-100101266. 
[34] 
S. Amidon, J.E. Brown, V.S. Dave, Colon-targeted oral drug delivery systems: design trends and 
approaches., AAPS PharmSciTech. 16 (2015) 731–41. doi:10.1208/s12249-015-0350-9. 
[35] 
A. Fuchs, M. Leigh, B. Kloefer, J.B. Dressman, Advances in the design of fasted state simulating 
intestinal 
fluids: 
FaSSIF-V3, 
Eur. 
J. 
Pharm. 
Biopharm. 
94 
(2015) 
229–240. 
doi:10.1016/J.EJPB.2015.05.015. 
[36] 
A. Aburub, D.S. Risley, D. Mishra, A critical evaluation of fasted state simulating gastric fluid 
(FaSSGF) that contains sodium lauryl sulfate and proposal of a modified recipe, Int. J. Pharm. 
347 (2008) 16–22. doi:10.1016/J.IJPHARM.2007.06.018. 
[37] 
A.S. Borde, E.M. Karlsson, K. Andersson, K. Björhall, H. Lennernäs, B. Abrahamsson, 
Assessment of enzymatic prodrug stability in human, dog and simulated intestinal fluids, Eur. J. 
Pharm. Biopharm. 80 (2012) 630–637. doi:10.1016/J.EJPB.2011.11.011. 
[38] 
N. Borkar, B. Li, R. Holm, A.E. Håkansson, A. Müllertz, M. Yang, H. Mu, Lipophilic prodrugs 
of apomorphine I: Preparation, characterisation, and in vitro enzymatic hydrolysis in biorelevant 
media, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 89 (2015) 216–223. doi:10.1016/J.EJPB.2014.12.014. 
[39] 
H.K. Han, G.L. Amidon, Targeted prodrug design to optimize drug delivery., AAPS PharmSci. 
2 (2000) E6. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11741222 (accessed May 12, 2018). 
[40] 
C.M. Seiler, J. Izbicki, L. Varga-Szabó, L. Czakó, J. Fiók, C. Sperti, M.M. Lerch, R. Pezzilli, G. 
Vasileva, Á. Pap, M. Varga, H. Friess, Randomised clinical trial: a 1-week, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study of pancreatin 25 000 Ph. Eur. minimicrospheres (Creon 25000 MMS) 
for pancreatic exocrine insufficiency after pancreatic surgery, with a 1-year open-label extension, 
Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 37 (2013) 691–702. doi:10.1111/apt.12236. 
==PAGE:80==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
72 
 
[41] 
Fda, Cder, Purdie, Florine P, Waiver of In Vivo Bioavailability and Bioequivalence Studies for 
Immediate-Release Solid Oral Dosage Forms Based on a Biopharmaceutics Classification 
System 
Guidance 
for 
Industry, 
(2017). 
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm 
(accessed May 19, 2018). 
[42] 
G.L. Amidon, H. Lennernäs, V.P. Shah, J.R. Crison, A theoretical basis for a biopharmaceutic 
drug classification: the correlation of in vitro drug product dissolution and in vivo 
bioavailability., Pharm. Res. 12 (1995) 413–20. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7617530 
(accessed May 14, 2018). 
[43] 
H. Yuasa, Drug Absorption from the Colon In Situ BT  - Drug Absorption Studies: In Situ, In 
Vitro and In Silico Models, in: C. Ehrhardt, K.-J. Kim (Eds.), Springer US, Boston, MA, 2008: 
pp. 77–88. doi:10.1007/978-0-387-74901-3_3. 
[44] 
Showing 
Compound 
Simvastatin 
(FDB023580) 
- 
FooDB, 
(n.d.). 
http://foodb.ca/compounds/FDB023580 (accessed May 23, 2018). 
[45] 
B. Mittal, B. Mittal, Pharmacokinetics and Preformulation, in: How to Dev. Robust Solid Oral 
Dos. Forms from Concept. to Post-Approval, Elsevier, 2017: pp. 17–37. doi:10.1016/B978-0-
12-804731-6.00002-9. 
[46] 
D. Hörter, J.B. Dressman, Influence of physicochemical properties on dissolution of drugs in the 
gastrointestinal tract, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 25 (1997) 3–14. doi:10.1016/S0169-
409X(96)00487-5. 
[47] 
H. Maag, Overcoming poor permeability â€“ the role of prodrugs for oral drug delivery, Drug 
Discov. Today Technol. 9 (2012) e121–e130. doi:10.1016/j.ddtec.2012.04.002. 
[48] 
E.H. Kerns, L. Di, E.H. Kerns, L. Di, Chapter 7 – Solubility, in: Drug-like Prop. Concepts, Struct. 
Des. Methods, 2008: pp. 56–85. doi:10.1016/B978-012369520-8.50008-5. 
[49] 
V.J. Stella, K.W. Nti-Addae, Prodrug strategies to overcome poor water solubility, Adv. Drug 
Deliv. Rev. 59 (2007) 677–694. doi:10.1016/J.ADDR.2007.05.013. 
[50] 
J. Rautio, H. Kumpulainen, T. Heimbach, R. Oliyai, D. Oh, T. Järvinen, J. Savolainen, Prodrugs: 
design 
and 
clinical 
applications, 
Nat. 
Rev. 
Drug 
Discov. 
7 
(2008) 
255–270. 
doi:10.1038/nrd2468. 
[51] 
J. 
Zawilska, 
Jakubbwojcieszak, 
A. 
Olejniczak, 
Prodrugs::A 
challengeeforrtheedruggdevelopment, (n.d.). http://www.if-pan.krakow.pl/pjp/pdf/2013/1_1.pdf 
(accessed May 11, 2018). 
[52] 
P. Marizza, S. Keller, A. Müllertz, A. Boisen, Polymer-filled microcontainers for oral delivery 
loaded using supercritical impregnation, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.09.022. 
[53] 
A. Bertolini, A. Ferrari, A. Ottani, S. Guerzoni, R. Tacchi, S. Leone, Paracetamol: New vistas of 
an old drug, CNS Drug Rev. 12 (2006) 250–275. doi:10.1111/j.1527-3458.2006.00250.x. 
[54] 
K.M. Wu, A new classification of prodrugs: Regulatory perspectives, Pharmaceuticals. 2 (2009) 
77–81. doi:10.3390/ph2030077. 
[55] 
F. Cao, J.-X. Guo, Q.-N. Ping, Z.-G. Liao, Prodrugs of scutellarin: Ethyl, benzyl and N,N-
diethylglycolamide ester synthesis, physicochemical properties, intestinal metabolism and oral 
bioavailability 
in 
the 
rats, 
Eur. 
J. 
Pharm. 
Sci. 
29 
(2006) 
385–393. 
doi:10.1016/j.ejps.2006.07.007. 
[56] 
S. Geboers, S. Haenen, R. Mols, J. Brouwers, J. Tack, P. Annaert, P. Augustijns, Intestinal 
behavior 
of 
the 
ester 
prodrug 
tenofovir 
DF 
in 
humans, 
(n.d.). 
https://lirias.kuleuven.be/bitstream/123456789/489191/2/Ester+prodrug+tenofovir+-+IJP+-
+Lirias.pdf (accessed May 20, 2018). 
[57] 
J.M. Aceves-Hernández, J. Hinojosa-Torres, I. Nicolás-Vázquez, R.M. Ruvalcaba, R. María, L. 
García, Solubility of simvastatin: A theoretical and experimental study, J. Mol. Struct. 995 
(2011) 41–50. doi:10.1016/j.molstruc.2011.03.048. 
[58] 
Y.M. Choi-Sledeski, C.G. Wermuth, Chapter 28. Designing Prodrugs and Bioprecursors, Pract. 
Med. Chem. (2015) 655–694. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-417205-0.00028-6. 
[59] 
V. Abet, F. Filace, J. Recio, J. Alvarez-Builla, C. Burgos, Prodrug approach: An overview of 
recent cases, Eur. J. Med. Chem. 127 (2017) 810–827. doi:10.1016/J.EJMECH.2016.10.061. 
[60] 
A. Dahan, E.M. Zimmermann, S. Ben-Shabat, Modern prodrug design for targeted oral drug 
delivery, Molecules. 19 (2014) 16489–16505. doi:10.3390/molecules191016489. 
[61] 
Y. Zhang, J. Sun, Y. Sun, Y. Wang, Z. He, Prodrug Design Targeting Intestinal PepT1 for 
==PAGE:81==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
73 
 
Improved Oral Absorption: Design and Performance, Curr. Drug Metab. 14 (2013) 675–687. 
doi:10.2174/1389200211314060004. 
[62] 
X. Han, J. Sun, Y. Wang, Z. He, PepT1, ASBT-Linked Prodrug Strategy to Improve Oral 
Bioavailability and Tissue Targeting Distribution, Curr. Drug Metab. 16 (2015) 71–83. 
doi:10.2174/1389200216666150401110754. 
[63] 
I. Giang, E.L. Boland, G.M.K. Poon, Prodrug applications for targeted cancer therapy., AAPS J. 
16 (2014) 899–913. doi:10.1208/s12248-014-9638-z. 
[64] 
R. Patel, Valaciclovir:development, clinical utility and potential, Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs. 
6 (1997) 173–189. doi:10.1517/13543784.6.2.173. 
[65] 
C. MacDougall, B.J. Guglielmo, Pharmacokinetics of valaciclovir, J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 
53 (2004) 899–901. doi:10.1093/jac/dkh244. 
[66] 
D.D. Phan, P. Chin-Hong, E.T. Lin, P. Anderle, W. Sadee, B.J. Guglielmo, Intra- and 
interindividual variabilities of valacyclovir oral bioavailability and effect of coadministration of 
an 
hPEPT1 
inhibitor., 
Antimicrob. 
Agents 
Chemother. 
47 
(2003) 
2351–3. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12821497 (accessed May 13, 2018). 
[67] 
C.P. Landowski, D. Sun, D.R. Foster, S.S. Menon, J.L. Barnett, L.S. Welage, C. Ramachandran, 
G.L. Amidon, Gene expression in the human intestine and correlation with oral valacyclovir 
pharmacokinetic 
parameters., 
J. 
Pharmacol. 
Exp. 
Ther. 
306 
(2003) 
778–86. 
doi:10.1124/jpet.103.051011. 
[68] 
S.K. 
Lu, 
OFFICE 
OF 
CLINICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY 
REVIEW, 
(2007). 
https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/DevelopmentResources/
ucm072850.pdf (accessed May 14, 2018). 
[69] 
N.C. 
for 
B.I.P.C. 
Database, 
Simvastatin 
CID=54454, 
(n.d.). 
https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/54454 (accessed May 21, 2018). 
[70] 
Antiviral Agents and Treatment of HIV Infection | Basicmedical Key, (n.d.). 
https://basicmedicalkey.com/antiviral-agents-and-treatment-of-hiv-infection/ (accessed May 16, 
2018). 
[71] 
K.R. Beutner, Valacyclovir: a review of its antiviral activity, pharmacokinetic properties, and 
clinical 
efficacy., 
Antiviral 
Res. 
28 
(1995) 
281–90. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8669888 (accessed May 16, 2018). 
[72] 
J. Soul-Lawton, E. Seaber, N. On, R. Wootton, P. Rolan, J. Posner, Absolute bioavailability and 
metabolic disposition of valaciclovir, the L-valyl ester of acyclovir, following oral administration 
to 
humans., 
Antimicrob. 
Agents 
Chemother. 
39 
(1995) 
2759–64. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8593015 (accessed May 13, 2018). 
[73] 
C. Macdougall, B.J. Guglielmo, Pharmacokinetics of valaciclovir, J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 
5353 (2004) 899–901. doi:10.1093/jac/dkh244. 
[74] 
G.E. Granero, G.L. Amidon, Stability of valacyclovir: Implications for its oral bioavailability, 
Int. J. Pharm. 317 (2006) 14–18. doi:10.1016/J.IJPHARM.2006.01.050. 
[75] 
T.R. Pedersen, J.A. Tobert, Simvastatin: a review, Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 5 (2004) 2583–
2596. doi:10.1517/14656566.5.12.2583. 
[76] 
G. Murtaza, Solubility enhancement of simvastatin: a review., Acta Pol. Pharm. 69 (n.d.) 581–
90. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22876598 (accessed May 16, 2018). 
[77] 
WHO Expert Committee on Specifications for Pharmaceutical Preparations - WHO Technical 
Report Series, No. 863 - Thirty-fourth Report: Annex 5 - Guidelines for stability testing of 
pharmaceutical products containing well established drug substances in conventional dosage 
forms: General, (n.d.). http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/es/d/Js5516e/15.html (accessed May 
23, 2018). 
[78] 
T. Prueksaritanont, B. Ma, N. Yu, The human hepatic metabolism of simvastatin hydroxy acid 
is mediated primarily by CYP3A, and not CYP2D6, Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 56 (2003) 120–124. 
doi:10.1046/j.1365-2125.2003.01833.x. 
[79] 
S. Geboers, J. Stappaerts, J. Tack, P. Annaert, P. Augustijns, In vitro and in vivo investigation 
of the gastrointestinal behavior of simvastatin, Int. J. Pharm. 510 (2016) 296–303. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijpharm.2016.06.048. 
[80] 
I. Harmonised, T. Guideline, INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON HARMONISATION OF 
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR REGISTRATION OF PHARMACEUTICALS FOR 
HUMAN USE STABILITY TESTING OF NEW DRUG SUBSTANCES AND PRODUCTS 
==PAGE:82==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
74 
 
Q1A(R2), 
(2003). 
http://www.ich.org/fileadmin/Public_Web_Site/ICH_Products/Guidelines/Quality/Q1A_R2/St
ep4/Q1A_R2__Guideline.pdf (accessed May 18, 2018). 
[81] 
H.D. Chirra, L. Shao, N. Ciaccio, C.B. Fox, J.M. Wade, A. Ma, T.A. Desai, Planar Microdevices 
for Enhanced In Vivo Retention and Oral Bioavailability of Poorly Permeable Drugs, Adv. 
Healthc. Mater. 3 (2014) 1648–1654. doi:10.1002/adhm.201300676. 
[82] 
Z. Abid, C. Gundlach, O. Durucan, C. von Halling Laier, L.H. Nielsen, A. Boisen, S.S. Keller, 
Powder embossing method for selective loading of polymeric microcontainers with drug 
formulation, Microelectron. Eng. 171 (2017) 20–24. doi:10.1016/J.MEE.2017.01.018. 
[83] 
S. Eaimtrakarn, Y. Itoh, J. Kishimoto, Y. Yoshikawa, N. Shibata, K. Takada, Retention and 
transit of intestinal mucoadhesive films in rat small intestine, Int. J. Pharm. 224 (2001) 61–67. 
doi:10.1016/S0378-5173(01)00738-4. 
[84] 
P. van Hoogevest, X. Liu, A. Fahr, Drug delivery strategies for poorly water-soluble drugs: the 
industrial 
perspective, 
Expert 
Opin. 
Drug 
Deliv. 
8 
(2011) 
1481–1500. 
doi:10.1517/17425247.2011.614228. 
[85] 
W. Gao, J.M. Chan, O.C. Farokhzad, pH-Responsive Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery, (n.d.). 
doi:10.1021/mp100253e. 
[86] 
K. V Nemani, K.L. Moodie, J.B. Brennick, A. Su, B. Gimi, In vitro and in vivo evaluation of 
SU-8 biocompatibility., Mater. Sci. Eng. C. Mater. Biol. Appl. 33 (2013) 4453–9. 
doi:10.1016/j.msec.2013.07.001. 
[87] 
J.B. Lee, K.H. Choi, K. Yoo, Innovative SU-8 lithography techniques and their applications, 
Micromachines. 6 (2015) 1–18. doi:10.3390/mi6010001. 
[88] 
SU8containers_process.jpg 
(JPEG 
Image, 
700 × 232 
pixels), 
(n.d.). 
http://www.nanotech.dtu.dk/-/media/Institutter/Nanotech/Research/Research-
groups/Biomaterial-microsystems/SU8containers_process.ashx?h=232&w=700&la=da 
(accessed May 12, 2018). 
[89] 
L.R. Snyder, Peer Reviewed: HPLC: Past and Present., Anal. Chem. 72 (2000) 412 A-420 A. 
doi:10.1021/ac002846r. 
[90] 
M. Thammana, A Review on High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC), Res. Rev. J. 
Pharm. 
Anal. 
RRJPA. 
5 
(n.d.). 
http://www.rroij.com/open-access/a-review-on-high-
performance-liquid-chromatography-hplc-.pdf (accessed May 13, 2018). 
[91] 
reversed-phase chromatography, in: IUPAC Compend. Chem. Terminol., IUPAC, Research 
Triagle Park, NC, n.d. doi:10.1351/goldbook.R05376. 
[92] 
B. Prathap, A. Dey, G.H. Srinivasa Rao, P. Johnson, & P. Arthanariswaran, A Review -
Importance 
of 
RP-HPLC 
in 
Analytical 
Method 
Development, 
3 
(2013). 
http://www.ijntps.org/File_Folder/0037.pdf (accessed May 13, 2018). 
[93] 
R. Peraman, K. V Lalitha, N.M. Raja, H.B. Routhu, Identification of Degradation Products and 
a Stability-Indicating RP-HPLC Method for the Determination of Flupirtine Maleate in 
Pharmaceutical Dosage Forms., Sci. Pharm. 82 (2014) 281–93. doi:10.3797/scipharm.1310-01. 
[94] 
M.G. McGrath, A. Vrdoljak, C. O’Mahony, J.C. Oliveira, A.C. Moore, A.M. Crean, 
Determination of parameters for successful spray coating of silicon microneedle arrays, Int. J. 
Pharm. 415 (2011) 140–149. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2011.05.064. 
[95] 
A.P.B. (Firm), Reversed Phase Chromatography: Principles and Methods, Amersham Pharmacia 
Biotech, 1999. https://books.google.dk/books?id=4Q3eQgAACAAJ. 
[96] 
S. Lakshmi, A Review on Chromatography with High Performance Liquid Chromatography 
(HPLC) and its Functions, RRJPA. 4 (2015). http://www.rroij.com/open-access/a-review-on-
chromatography-with-high-performance-liquid-chromatography-hplc-and-its-functions.pdf 
(accessed May 14, 2018). 
[97] 
A. Alcázar, J.M. Jurado, A.G. González, Gradient Scouting in Reversed-Phase HPLC Revisited, 
J. Chem. Educ. 88 (2011) 74–76. doi:10.1021/ed100506c. 
[98] 
M. Swartz, HPLC DETECTORS: A BRIEF REVIEW, J. Liq. Chromatogr. Relat. Technol. 33 
(2010) 1130–1150. doi:10.1080/10826076.2010.484356. 
[99] 
K.D. Sanjay, H.D.. Kumar, Importance of RP-HPLC in analytical method development: A 
review, Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Res. 3 (2012) 4626–4633. 
[100] S. Sood, R. Bala, Method development and validation using HPLC technique – a review, J. Drug 
Discov. 
Ther. 
2 
(2014) 
23–29. 
==PAGE:83==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
75 
 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download;jsessionid=029C378A01C5DDAF3D3B99927C
2C4743?doi=10.1.1.867.1469&rep=rep1&type=pdf (accessed May 14, 2018). 
[101] H.J. Issaq, S.D. Fox, M. Mahadevan, T.P. Conrads, T.D. Veenstra, Effect of Experimental 
Parameters on the HPLC Separation of Peptides and Proteins, J. Liq. Chromatogr. Relat. 
Technol. 
2614 
(2003) 
2255–2283. 
doi:10.1081/JLC-120023246doi.org/10.1081/JLC-
120023246. 
[102] D. V. McCalley, Effect of temperature and flow-rate on analysis of basic compounds in high-
performance liquid chromatography using a reversed-phase column, J. Chromatogr. A. 902 
(2000) 311–321. doi:10.1016/S0021-9673(00)00924-9. 
[103] S.S. Keller, L. Gammelgaard, M.P. Jensen, S. Schmid, Z.J. Davis, A. Boisen, Deposition of 
biopolymer films on micromechanical sensors, Microelectron. Eng. 88 (2011) 2297–2299. 
doi:10.1016/J.MEE.2011.02.093. 
[104] L. Hagner, Microcontainers as an oral delivery system for spray dried cubosomes containing 
ovalbumin, (n.d.). doi:10.1016/j.ejpb.2016.12.008. 
[105] L.H. Nielsen, J. Nagstrup, S. Gordon, S.S. Keller, J. ??stergaard, T. Rades, A. M??llertz, A. 
Boisen, pH-triggered drug release from biodegradable microwells for oral drug delivery, 
Biomed. Microdevices. 17 (2015). doi:10.1007/s10544-015-9958-5. 
[106] PhD 
Joseph 
1riemer, 
Ultrasonic 
spray 
coating 
of 
nanoparticles, 
(2011). 
www.globalsolartechnology.com (accessed May 20, 2018). 
[107] S. Bose, S.S. Keller, T.S. Alstrøm, A. Boisen, K. Almdal, Process Optimization of Ultrasonic 
Spray Coating of Polymer Films, Langmuir. 29 (2013) 6911–6919. doi:10.1021/la4010246. 
[108] Determination of parameters for successful spray coating of silicon microneedle arrays, Int. J. 
Pharm. 415 (2011) 140–149. doi:10.1016/J.IJPHARM.2011.05.064. 
[109] G. Perfetti, T. Alphazan, P. van Hee, W. J Wildeboer, G. Meesters, Relation between surface 
roughness 
of 
free 
films 
and 
process 
parameters 
in 
spray 
coating, 
2011. 
doi:10.1016/j.ejps.2010.12.001. 
[110] K.M. Huh, H.C. Kang, Y.J. Lee, Y.H. Bae, pH-Sensitive Polymers for Drug Delivery, 
Macromol. Res. 20 (2012) 224–233. doi:10.1007/s13233-012-0059-5. 
[111] S. Thakral, N.K. Thakral, D.K. Majumdar, Expert Opinion on Drug Delivery Eudragit®: a 
technology evaluation : a technology evaluation, Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. Expert Opin. Drug 
Deliv. 10 (2013). doi:10.1517/17425247.2013.736962. 
[112] M. Cetin, A. Atila, Y. Kadioglu, Formulation and In vitro Characterization of Eudragit® L100 
and Eudragit® L100-PLGA Nanoparticles Containing Diclofenac Sodium, AAPS 
PharmSciTech. 11 (2010) 1250–1256. doi:10.1208/s12249-010-9489-6. 
[113] M.A. Dea-Ayuela, S. Rama-Iñiguez, S. Torrado-Santiago, F. Bolas-Fernandez, Microcapsules 
formulated in the enteric coating copolymer Eudragit L100 as delivery systems for oral 
vaccination against infections by gastrointestinal nematode parasites, J. Drug Target. 14 (2006) 
567–575. doi:10.1080/10611860600849464. 
[114] R. Mehta, A. Chawla, P. Sharma, P. Pawar, Formulation and in vitro evaluation of Eudragit S-
100 coated naproxen matrix tablets for colon-targeted drug delivery system., J. Adv. Pharm. 
Technol. Res. 4 (2013) 31–41. doi:10.4103/2231-4040.107498. 
[115] S. Kalepu, V. Nekkanti, Insoluble drug delivery strategies: review of recent advances and 
business prospects, Acta Pharm. Sin. B. 5 (2015) 442–453. doi:10.1016/J.APSB.2015.07.003. 
[116] S. Hao, B. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Zhu, B. Wang, T. Guo, Preparation of Eudragit L 100-55 enteric 
nanoparticles by a novel emulsion diffusion method, Colloids Surfaces B Biointerfaces. 108 
(2013) 127–133. doi:10.1016/j.colsurfb.2013.02.036. 
[117] Z. Abid, C. Gundlach, O. Durucan, C. von Halling Laier, L.H. Nielsen, A. Boisen, S.S. Keller, 
Powder embossing method for selective loading of polymeric microcontainers with drug 
formulation, Microelectron. Eng. 171 (2017) 20–24. doi:10.1016/J.MEE.2017.01.018. 
[118] V. Kumar, N.N. Sharma, Synthesis of hydrophilic to superhydrophobic SU8 surfaces, J. Appl. 
Polym. Sci. 132 (2015) n/a-n/a. doi:10.1002/app.41934. 
[119] J. Kwon, K. Trivedi, N. V Krishnamurthy, W. Hu, J.-B. Lee, B. Gimi, SU-8-based 
immunoisolative microcontainer with nanoslots defined by nanoimprint lithography., J. Vac. Sci. 
Technol. B. Microelectron. Nanometer Struct. Process. Meas. Phenom. 27 (2009) 2795–2800. 
doi:10.1116/1.3258146. 
[120] L.H. Nielsen, S.S. Keller, K.C. Gordon, A. Boisen, T. Rades, A. Müllertz, Spatial confinement 
==PAGE:84==
Master Thesis 
 
June 2018 
76 
 
can lead to increased stability of amorphous indomethacin, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 81 (2012) 
418–425. doi:10.1016/j.ejpb.2012.03.017. 
[121] N.C. 
for 
B.I.P.C. 
Database, 
Acyclovir 
CID=2022, 
(n.d.). 
https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/acyclovir#section=Top (accessed May 25, 2018). 
[122] G. Carlucci, P. Mazzeo, L. Biordi, M. Bologna, Simultaneous determination of simvastatin and 
its hydroxy acid form in human plasma by high-performance liquid chromatography with UV 
detection, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 10 (1992) 693–697. doi:10.1016/0731-7085(92)80098-8. 
[123] E. Industries, Specification and test methods of EUDRAGIT L 100 and EUDRAGIT S 100, 1 
(n.d.). https://www.pharosproject.net/uploads/files/cml/1389279051.pdf (accessed May 18, 
2018). 
[124] C. Mazzoni, F. Tentor, S.A. Strindberg, L.H. Nielsen, S.S. Keller, T.S. Alstrøm, C. Gundlach, 
A. Müllertz, P. Marizza, A. Boisen, From concept to in vivo testing: Microcontainers for oral 
drug delivery, J. Control. Release. 268 (2017) 343–351. doi:10.1016/J.JCONREL.2017.10.013. 
[125] R. Shaikh, T.R. Raj Singh, M.J. Garland,  a D. Woolfson, R.F. Donnelly, Mucoadhesive drug 
delivery systems., J. Pharm. Bioallied Sci. 3 (2011) 89–100. doi:10.4103/0975-7406.76478. 
[126] S. VINOGRADOV, A. ZEMAN, E. BATRAKOVA, A. KABANOV, Polyplex Nanogel 
formulations for drug delivery of cytotoxic nucleoside analogs, J. Control. Release. 107 (2005) 
143–157. doi:10.1016/j.jconrel.2005.06.002. 
[127] G. Murtaza, Solubility enhancement of simvastatin: A review, Acta Pol. Pharm. - Drug Res. 
(2012). 
[128] A.S. Borde, E.M. Karlsson, K. Andersson, K. Björhall, H. Lennernäs, B. Abrahamsson, 
Assessment of enzymatic prodrug stability in human, dog and simulated intestinal fluids, Eur. J. 
Pharm. Biopharm. 80 (2012) 630–637. doi:10.1016/j.ejpb.2011.11.011. 
[129] F.J. Alvarez, V.J. Stella, The role of calcium ions and bile salts on the pancreatic lipase-catalyzed 
hydrolysis of triglyceride emulsions stabilized with lecithin., Pharm. Res. 6 (1989) 449–57. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2762220 (accessed May 28, 2018). 
[130] M.R. Liyanage, K. Bakshi, D.B. Volkin, C.R. Middaugh, Ultraviolet Absorption Spectroscopy 
of Peptides, in: Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, 2014: pp. 225–236. doi:10.1007/978-1-62703-673-
3_15. 
[131] J. Soul-Lawton, E. Seaber, N. On, R. Wootton, P. Rolan, J. Posner, Absolute Bioavailability and 
Metabolic Disposition of Valaciclovir, the L-Valyl Ester of Acyclovir, following Oral 
Administration to Humans, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 39 (1995) 2759–2764. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC163025/pdf/392759.pdf (accessed May 13, 
2018). 
[132] F.H.C. Tsao, H. Cohen, W.R. Snyder, F.J. Kézdy, J.H. Law, Multiple forms of porcine pancreatic 
phospholipase A2: Isolation and specificity, J. Supramol. Struct. 1 (1973) 490–497. 
doi:10.1002/jss.400010605. 
[133] A. Mustranta, P. Forssell, K. Poutanen, Comparison of lipases and phospholipases in the 
hydrolysis of phospholipids, Process Biochem. 30 (1995) 393–401. doi:10.1016/0032-
9592(94)00030-1. 
[134] W. M. Obeidat, J.C. Price, Preparation and evaluation of Eudragit S 100 microspheres as pH-
sensitive release preparations for piroxicam and theophylline using the emulsion-solvent 
evaporation method, J. Microencapsul. 23 (2006) 195–202. doi:10.1080/02652040500435337. 
[135] Annex 2 Stability testing of active pharmaceutical ingredients and fi nished pharmaceutical 
products, 
World 
Heal. 
Organ. 
WHO 
Tech. 
Rep. 
Ser. 
(2009). 
http://www.ich.org/fileadmin/Public_Web_Site/ICH_Products/Guidelines/Quality/Q1F/Stabilit
y_Guideline_WHO.pdf (accessed May 18, 2018). 
 
