==PAGE:1==
Active Self-Tracking and Data
Visualization of Time Series on
Wearables
Andrei Corneliu Suciu
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The motivation for this project is the need for an active self-tracking instrumen-
tation system that allows its users to make observations on subjective phenom-
ena, which currently cannot be registered using the existing passive tracking
techniques. This type of observations is relevant for self-reﬂecting and discov-
ering various spatiotemporal connections between the causes and the eﬀects of
events at a glance.
The proposed personal informatics system makes use of
a smartwatch as a base-platform and includes a Visual Analogue Scale as a
data collection component and an interactive spiral visualization component for
instant self-reﬂection.
The proof-of-concept prototype implementation was evaluated from both a qual-
itative and quantitative point of view. A higher compliance rate has been reg-
istered when using the smartwatch approach compared to the smartphone one,
due to the watch’s accessibility. The conducted experiments proved that the
watch allows momentary self-registration three times faster than the phone,
with an average time of 7.1 seconds per registration. The spiral visualization
was perceived as intuitive by 76% of the test subjects when interacting with it
for the ﬁrst time. Additionally, the spiral structure facilitates the identiﬁcation
of recurring patters in the data, fact represented by the 87% of the participants
who correctly identiﬁed certain patters during the tests. Finally, the long term
back pain tracking experiment proved how the instrumentation system can be
used in order to detect correlations between the spatiotemporal metadata and
the symptom severity.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis project was written at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of the
requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Digital Media Engineering.
This thesis presents the design and implementation of the ActiveSF smartwatch
personal informatics system for tracking subjective phenomena and visualizing
the registered data on a spiral shaped timeline.
Lyngby, 02-June-2018
Andrei Corneliu Suciu
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank Jakob Eg Larsen, who was my thesis project
supervisor, for his constant guidance throughout the whole development process.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Jakob for his help on preparing for the ACM
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Montŕeal 2018.
Secondly, I would like to thank Daria Styczyńska for proofreading this thesis
several times.
I would also like to thank my family and close friends for the continuous support
and understanding they have shown during the ﬁve months this project was
pursued.
Finally, I would like to thank all the people who voluntary agreed to take part
in the experiments.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Analysis
5
2.1
Motivation and Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Base-platform Prerequisites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Related Work
9
3.1
Personal Informatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Case study: Simpliﬁed Wearable Usage in Self-tracking
.
10
3.2
Ecological Momentary Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Spiral Shaped Timeline Visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Design
13
4.1
Requirements Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.1
Human-Computer Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.2
Personal Informatics Stage-Based Model . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Visual Analogue Scale Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.1
Available Scale Designs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.2
Customized VAS Input
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.3
VAS Input Iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Spiral Data Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.1
The Spiral Concept
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.2
Spiral Visualization Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.3.3
Spiral Visualization Iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Setup Screen Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Watch Face Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Implementation
33
5.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.1
VAS Input
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1.2
Temporal Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.3
Location Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Data Visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.1
Spiral Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.2
Watch Face . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2.3
Permissions and Data Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Experiments
43
6.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Experiment 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2.2
Apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2.3
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Experiment 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.3.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3.2
Apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3.3
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7
Results and Discussions
49
7.1
Experiment 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2
Experiment 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.2.1
Intuitiveness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.2.2
Usability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.2.3
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2.4
Perception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7.3.1
Detailed Feedback Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
8
Future Work and Conclusion
63
8.1
Data Synchronization with Smartphone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.2
Cloud Integration and Connection with Passive Data . . . . . . .
64
8.3
Further Enhancements of the Spiral Visualization . . . . . . . . .
64
8.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A Experiment 2 - Online Survey Results
67
B Active Self-tracking Using a Smartwatch and Spiral Time Vi-
sualization of the Past Recorded Events
85
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
C Active Self-Tracking and Visualization of Subjective Experience
using VAS and Time Spirals on a Smartwatch
91
Bibliography
99
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The past decade has led to the development of high computational and low-cost
wearable devices such as smartphones, smartwatches and various other types of
wrist attached gadgets [GVA01]. Multiple aspects of our lives nowadays rely
on the use of this type of devices, especially for fulﬁlling common tasks such
as taking pictures or using a navigation system on a smartphone. The obvious
question which arises is what other relevant use cases can be beneﬁcial for our
lives by using this type of smart devices.
A well-known scenario is using this type of smart devices as personal informat-
ics systems for passively self-tracking events that happen regularly during a day
[RRMC14]. The reduced sizes and the accurate input sensors which are incor-
porated in the devices (e.g. accelerometer, gyroscope, barometer) [MBdRL15]
allow automatic tracking of events such as the number of steps, blood pres-
sure or sleep [LP13]. Meanwhile, Quantiﬁed Self movement was started as a
collective knowledge community from individuals sharing insights and engag-
ing in debates about self-tracking techniques. In the technical retail space, the
trend has also been towards passive self-tracking devices. On automatic passive
tracking, the phenomena can be automatically tracked due to their common
characteristics and correlation to physical actions (e.g. accelerometer for steps
counting[BOWE94]). There are still plenty of phenomena for which there is
currently no instrumentation system capable of automatic passive tracking. Ex-
amples of such subjective experiences can be mood tracking, anger episodes,
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
or pain assertion.
Generally, we can relate to this type of subjective expe-
riences as being evaluated only by accessing the users’ self-consciousness and
by actively quantifying the information speciﬁc to the experience. Therefore,
the self-consciousness becomes part of the tracking instrumentation system, be-
cause there is no standard way of quantifying abstract experiences such as pain
or mood. These are all user-speciﬁc characteristics, and the users have to access
their cognitive system in order to quantify such experiences.
Formally, we can deﬁne the concept of self-tracking (life-logging, personal analyt-
ics or informatics) as the people’s free-will of monitoring and recording speciﬁc
aspects of their lives, using both conventional (e.g. journals) or digital tech-
niques (e.g. smartphones) [Lup14]. The concept of self-reﬂection is closely
related to self-tracking, either the passive or active form. Self-reﬂection rep-
resents the people’s ability to introspect on the data in order to get insights
about the causes that generated the data and therefore to take informed actions
based on the introspection. Conventionally, in the digital world, self-reﬂection
is done via interactive visualizations under diﬀerent forms (e.g. graphs, plots,
animations, pain text, maps, tables, charts)[WGK10].
This document presents a personal informatics solution for active self-
tracking and spiral timeline data visualization using a smartwatch as
base-platform.
The instrumentation system makes use of a Visual Analogue
Scale for asserting a value to a subjective experience [MF93]. As for the data
visualization component, a spiral shaped timeline is used for displaying and nav-
igating through the history of recorded experiences. Overall, the users have an
instant in-situ visualization tool where the matter of making an observation is
reduced to a few seconds. Compared to using a smartphone as a base-platform
for active self-tracking system, smartwatches showed better results at accessi-
bility. Making an observation with a phone implies a series of actions such as
pulling the phone out of the pocket, unlocking it, ﬁnding the app and making an
observation. Such a series of events takes on average 68.9% more time compared
to recording an observation on smartwatch according to the experiments (Sec-
tion 6). For phenomena requiring highly frequent observations, smartphones
might be not appropriate and considered too time-consuming. This was one
of the fundamental reasons for using a smartwatch as the underlying tracking
platform. Of course, the small display size represented a challenge when build-
ing up the spiral visualization, but its accessibility is deﬁnitely the smartwatch’s
best asset. The problem of making an observation is consequently reduced to
an average time of 7.1 seconds (Section 7.2.3) as shown in the experiments.
This thesis project has been developed on the top of two scientiﬁc research
projects, which also correspond to the two core functionalities of the prototype:
a spiral visualization for self-reﬂection [LCJ13] and an active self-tracking mod-
ule using a wearable device [LEC17a]. It has been shown at the CHI Personal
==PAGE:15==
3
Informatics workshop in 2013 that the QS Spiral visualization can be appro-
priate for self-reﬂection on periodic quantiﬁed self data. The identiﬁcation of
recurring patterns is easier on spiral plots, compared to other conventional plots
(e.g. time axis plot) due to the recurrent alignment property of a spiral. A
major asset is the glanceability of the interface, shown also by the conducted
experiments, where 83% of the users spent on average fewer than 10 seconds for
correctly identifying several patterns on the spiral.
In order to validate this project, a series of experiments was considered, mostly
for testing the visualization and the accessibility of using this data collection
and reﬂection system. For testing the visualization, an experiment has been
conducted in order to assert whether or not the spiral time visualization and the
gesture interactions are intuitive for the users. The test subjects were asked to
recognize certain patterns on the spiral and to interact with it through gestures
such as scrolling and swiping. In order to test the accessibility, the test users
were asked to record diﬀerent observation using a smartphone and a smartwatch
in order to determine which platform is the most accessible one. Lastly, a long-
term experiment has evaluated the whole functionality of the system. One test
subject tracked back pain symptoms for a month using the proposed active self-
tracking system. Based on the collected data, the test subject was asked to use
the spiral visualization for self-reﬂection and to identify certain patterns in the
data.
The outcome of the project, combined with the ﬁndings from other related
studies, especially within healthcare [Swa09], might bring valuable input for
improving personal active self-tracking and data visualization applications on
small wearable devices.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Analysis
2.1
Motivation and Goal
People are provided nowadays with diverse oﬀ-the-shelf wearable devices capable
of monitoring various phenomena of interest. The motivation for choosing to
develop an active self-tracking application on a wrist attached device such as
a smartwatch consists of the good price, processing power, and accessibility.
Furthermore, the motivation lies in the need for an accessible instrumentation
system for data collection and immediate visualization. A system like this may
come as an extension to the traditional healthcare for instance, where patients
have an in-situ tracking system for registering patient-driven healthcare data
about symptoms and receive personalized medicine [Wie12]. On the other hand,
the system may be also used as a tool for getting more insights into the factors
which trigger some personal phenomena and produce self-awareness to people
[HS07]. On either of the usage scenarios, using a digital solution rather than the
traditional paper-based journals proved to be easier to adopt for people, due to
its compliance-enhancing features [SSS+03].
The goal of this project is to create an active self-tracking data acquisition
application for self-registration of subjectively perceived phenomena using a
smartwatch as the base-platform.
Additionally, the aim is to annotate each
observation data point with relevant metadata information (e.g.
timestamp,
==PAGE:18==
6
Analysis
location, speed) [SL18]. Therefore, the application facilitates analysis of the
observed phenomena in connection to this external metadata, which can be
passively registered.
Contextual data is strongly related to the causes which trigger an active obser-
vation from the user. As a result, collecting such data alongside with active ob-
servations provides more accurate self-reﬂection results, especially for sensitive
phenomena. For instance, to get an understanding about the spatiotemporal
patterns of an experience such as allergic reaction, the user needs to know if the
time and location contributed as a factor to it, and then based on its severity
assertion, he or she is able to understand why those spatiotemporal factors are
mapped to the assigned severity. Additionally, the application fulﬁlls the goal
of instantly presenting the means for exploring the collected data directly on
the smartwatch clock face, through the spiral visualization integration.
Even though not implemented in the current state of the application, data syn-
chronization with smartphones or cloud systems has been analyzed. This pos-
sible option is discussed in Chapter 8. The events recorded by the smartwatch
may be transferred to the smartphone or to a cloud service via WiFi, where
enhanced pattern detection might be applied using machine learning or AI.
Several other analyses have been considered for this project, and are explained
in the Design Chapter (4). Primarily, it has been considered:
• how can the instrumentation system be designed for "all" [RMJ14];
• how can the visualization ﬁt the needs of a diverse end-user audience which
has diﬀerent social backgrounds and capabilities of interaction;
• what is the minimum set of metadata to be collected so that it ﬁts the
demand of the majority of users;
• to what degree the limited size of the watch is a pre-mortem for the project,
or even the Android Wear OS and its capacity of rendering complex visu-
alizations;
• how can the Visual Analog Scale input be as intuitive as possible and also
deliver accurate results on a small display with the radius of two regular
ﬁngertips width;
• how people tend to assert subjective phenomena and how do they relate
to color codes that are as universal as possible.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Base-platform Prerequisites
7
2.2
Base-platform Prerequisites
Probably the most important aspect of the described self-tracking solution is
represented by the platform: both from a hardware and software point of view.
It is estimated for the end of year 2018 that the smartwatches market will reach
141 millions of units sold, with an increase of 47% compared to 2017 [Sta18].
These statistics reveal that the demand for such devices is high and there is a
possible increasing audience looking for active self-tracking solutions.
Secondly, software-wise, the solution is implemented on an Android Wear OS
powered watch, which supports pairing with phones running Android 4.4+ and
iOS 9.3+. Even though the smartwatch is powered by Android, it can still in-
tegrate with iOS smartphones, which makes the possible user segment broader.
But most importantly, the tracking system can function as a standalone applica-
tion on the smartwatch. For an enhanced experience and considering future de-
velopments, it is recommended to have it paired with a smartphone. According
to the platform distributions in May 2018, there are about 94% of the Android
powered phones accessible for this application integration [Dev18]. As for the
iOS distribution, more than 95% of the smartphones are accessible [ios18].
==PAGE:20==
8
Analysis
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Related Work
As mentioned in the introduction section, this project has started as a contin-
uation of two existing researches and aimed to result in an active self-tracking
application capable of providing both accessible inputs and data visualization.
Even though the ActiveSF application prototype is not described as a whole in
the two underlying studies, it relies on the proof-of-concept from those two case
studies: the appropriate usage of wearables in self-tracking and the periodic
property of the spiral shaped timeline when visualizing data.
3.1
Personal Informatics
In the past decades, experience sampling method and ecological momentary
assessment (EMA) have been the methods used for self-tracking general phe-
nomena [SS94]. The implementation of these methods considered both written
or oral assessments, as well as digital solutions for collecting information about
events.
Especially with the latest trends in digital media, smartphones and
smartwatches have been used for this type of digital ecological momentary as-
sessment [HAH16] [ESKB16]. These techniques have gained a lot of popularity
due to their convenience and ease to use. Compared to paper or oral assess-
ments, the digitalized solutions allow a simpliﬁed data acquisition procedure,
==PAGE:22==
10
Related Work
which takes advantage of both active and passive data collection for more de-
tailed reports.
In May 2018, over 505 types of self-tracking devices were available world-wide
for the public, according to the Quantiﬁed Self guideline to self-tracking tools
[qua18]. The personal informatics tools appear to have a trend towards multi-
sensor platforms, which incorporate various tracking elements such as:
ac-
celerometer, GSR sensor, temperature or heart rate sensors [Swa12]. In other
words, the trend has been towards universal tracking devices equipped with the
most common sensors, in order to track as many phenomena of interest as pos-
sible. Examples of widely-used self-tracking wearables are: Fitbit, Zeo Personal
Sleep Coach, LG Urbane Watch or Apple Watch. It becomes obvious also that
the trend about the physical appearance of these devices is to be made lighter
and more accessible than before. The next Subsection (3.1.1) exempliﬁes the
usage of light and accessible tools for self-tracking high frequency events.
3.1.1
Case study: Simpliﬁed Wearable Usage in Self-tracking
It was discussed in the Personal Informatics Section that wearable devices are
very appropriate for self-tracking.
This can be extended to the use of non-
conventional digital devices such as phones and watches. A simpliﬁed track-
ing system has been introduced by the following case study which served as a
starting point in the development of the current self-tracking system. A smart-
button[sma18] has been proven to be accurate enough for collecting quantiﬁed
self-data with a very high frequency. The case study presents this simpliﬁed
one-button instrumentation system used by a Danish veteran suﬀering from
PTSD [LEC17b]. The study has proven how useful an accessible self-tracking
mechanism is within the healthcare ﬁeld. By registering a high amount of ob-
servations about the symptoms of hyperarousal in between the therapeutical
sessions, the doctor was able to add an extra layer of details in the recovery
process, otherwise not accessible by conventional assessment.
This study showed promising results in ﬁnding a new self-tracking technique
that will bring two major advantages for the users:
• An accessible and more advanced data input method. The one-button
device proved to be accessible and appropriate for a high amount of obser-
vations, but it was limited due to the input possibilities, which consisted
of only one button press. The current solution explores the use of a diﬀer-
ent input method on the smartwatch, with a Visual Analogue Scale which
provides the possibility for more advanced inputs.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Ecological Momentary Assessment
11
• An in-situ and in-momento visualization for self-reﬂection. This combines
the input functionality with the visualization one, in order to provide an
immediate report on the data, on the same device. This enhances the
accessibility too, and the users do not have to register observations on
the watch and then wait for the integration with the phone or a desktop
computer to be done. Furthermore, this can be extended to integrations
with other systems like a PC or a Cloud service which can manipulate
the data, but in the meantime the users are provided with this instant
self-reﬂection tool directly on their small, wrist-attached device.
3.2
Ecological Momentary Assessment
Various ecological momentary assessment techniques have been evaluated for
this project, and therefore signiﬁcant time has been put into researching related
tools which accomplish the assessment of subjective phenomena. Three solutions
have been consulted in order to understand how they solve the EMA problem.
The ﬁrst one, even though is not a completely digital solution, was very much
worth investigating, due to its target users and the way it combines traditional
paper journals with a digitalized button similar to the Danish war veteran suﬀer-
ing from PTSD case. The research has been presented at ACM CHI Conference
on Human Factors 2018, and it presents tracking Parkinson’s disease symptoms
ﬁrstly using multiple Bluetooth or NFC buttons and secondly using only paper
based diaries. This study suggests that Parkinson patients are more inclined
to using paper based solutions rather than digital ones, because of the ease of
modifying past recording. In the same time, this related work shows that the
ActiveSF app on a smartwatch might not be suitable for this type of disease.
Even though the app allows for modiﬁcation of only newly added entries, the
smartwatch might be diﬃcult to handle by these patients due to the disease
characteristic and the reduced size of the watch interface.
Another related solution, which will be often mentioned throughout this paper,
is the Manage My Pain smartphone app [man18].
Essentially, it solves the
same issue as ActiveSF, only on a diﬀerent platform, the smartphone. The app
consists of the main screen where the user can use a numerical input scale,
colored with a green, yellow and red gradient, only allowing discrete values as
input. The app takes advantage of the large display size of a phone and allows
for multiple annotations around the registered observation.
Users may add
annotations such as the body part where the pain is felt, medication, mood or
side notes. This has the potential of creating more accurate input than simply
using a Visual Analogue Scale. On the other hand, the data visualization is not
==PAGE:24==
12
Related Work
as appropriate as the spiral, because of the use of linear or pie charts, which do
not emphasize on the serial and periodical attributes of the observations.
Finally, the closest related work to the solution proposed in this thesis is repre-
sented by a Microinteraction-based ecological momentary assessment prototype
running on a smartwatch [IHM+16]. The participants in the study showed a
higher compliance rate when using a smartwatch, compared to using a smart-
phone, which strengthens the decision of using a watch. Moreover, people did
not perceive the smartwatch as burdensome, even though there were about eight
times more interactions for making an observation in case of the phone. This is
mainly due to the watch’s accessibility, a fact which is proven also in this thesis.
3.3
Spiral Shaped Timeline Visualization
The recursive property of a spiral is well known and various other projects meant
to take advantage of its intuitive temporal representation. A good example is
SpiraClock, which is a spiral visualization technique that aims to present near
future events [DH02].
Moreover, it aims to be a bridge between the static
representation of calendars and classic desktop or phone notiﬁcations.
Even
though the SpiraClock displays events in the future (e.g. bus schedules), the
visualizing principle applies also to the proposed ActiveSF’s spiral which shows
past events. The solution concluded as being eﬃcient in providing a continuous
outlook to the users, without notiﬁcation interruptions.
John V. Carlis and Joseph A. Konstan propose a spiral visualization very similar
to the one discussed in this thesis, where the emphasis on the data is put on both
its serial and periodic property [CK98]. Besides proving how eﬃcient the spiral
mechanism is for discovering the temporal patterns, they show how multiple
data sets can be simultaneously represented on the same spiral in order to ﬁnd
the correlation between the sets. This might be applied in a further release of
the ActiveSF app, where active observations can be displayed next to passively
collected data on the same spiral. Finally, this research shows the potential of
the spiral visualization for self-reﬂection, one of the key factors of this thesis.
Concretely, the study concludes with the fact that the test subjects reacted to
the spiral concept by telling stories to each other in order to determine the cause
of some periodic patterns, which is exactly how the reﬂection process should be.
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4
Design
Designing visualizations for small display devices has never been a trivial task.
The limited amount of space is usually problematic, and a good balance has
to be found in order to create meaningful and intuitive visualizations. In this
chapter, the entire iterative process of designing the visualization is presented.
4.1
Requirements Analysis
First of all, the whole design process was pursued in iterative stages, complying
with the agile software development methodology [HD09]. It has been chosen
due to its ﬂexible characteristic, which allows for rapid changes of partial solu-
tions during the testing and feedback sessions (both with peers in class or with
the thesis supervisor). The design and the implementation of the application
were carried out in sprints of two to three weeks, followed by feedback, testing,
and ﬁxes. At the beginning of each new sprint, the feedback and the test results
were analyzed, resulting in new designs and therefore new execution plans for
the rest of the sprint. In the following Sections, a timeline explaining how the
visualization’s design evolved during each sprint will be shown. In addition, it
will be explained in a more detailed level, what were the factors which triggered
the changes in the visualization, and how various trade-oﬀs had to made in order
==PAGE:26==
14
Design
Figure 4.1: Overview of the Agile Software Development Process [agi18].
to cope with the limited amount of screen space, human-computer interactions
principles or Android limitations.
4.1.1
Human-Computer Interaction
Human-computer interaction principles were constantly considered during the
design phase. According to Scott I. MacKenzie, the human-computer interaction
happens at the interface layer [Mac12], which is represented by the dashed line in
Fig. 4.2a. A great emphasis has been put on the sensors and responders layer
and this is especially because of the reduced size of the interface. The input
interface was designed with respect to the visual and tactile sensors, but also
to overcome problems like wide ﬁngertips. Regarding the spiral visualization,
the color codes and gestures interactions were chosen so that the users ﬁnd the
displayed information intuitive and are able to self-reﬂect on the data somewhere
in between the cognitive band and the rational band (Fig. 4.2b).
(a) Human-computer factors simpliﬁed di-
agram.
(b) Newell’s time scale of human cognitive
processes.
Figure 4.2: Human Factor in HCI [Mac12], pages 29-30.
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Requirements Analysis
15
4.1.2
Personal Informatics Stage-Based Model
The personal informatics system is designed around the idea of a ﬁve-stage model
proposed at CHI 2010 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
[LDF10]. The model serves as a high level design of the application, where the
goal is of course to facilitate self-reﬂection and informed decision making. The
model consists of the following 5 stages, which incorporate both the human and
the computer factor (Fig. 4.3):
1. Preparation: consists of the user’s process of preparing for active self-
tracking. He or she has to decide on the phenomena to be tracked, on
a schedule (if it makes sense in the context of the phenomena) when the
observations should be made and what instrumentation system is the most
appropriate to use (e.g. a smartwatch, a wearable button, a journal).
2. Collection: the process of actively introducing data into the system by
interacting with the self-tracking tool when the observed phenomena oc-
cur.
3. Integration: the set of necessary transformations or connections that
have to be done between the data and the graphical user interface.
4. Reﬂection: the process of inspecting the visualization and analyzing it
in order to identify patterns in the data or to discover the causes which
triggered certain recordings.
5. Action: the set of actions that the user takes based on an informed
decision resulted from the introspection on the data from the reﬂection
step.
Figure 4.3: The Stage-Based Model of Personal Informatics Systems [LDF10].
==PAGE:28==
16
Design
4.2
Visual Analogue Scale Input
4.2.1
Available Scale Designs
The collection (Fig. 4.3) stage deﬁnes the necessary mechanics which facil-
itate the input component for data. Therefore, multiple input methods have
been considered in the initial design and planning phase of the project. The
criteria for choosing a subjective experience measurement were how appropriate
the measurement technique is to the world-wide public (From "Some" to "All"
[RMJ14]), how accurate the input method is in connection to gender, age or
cause of the symptom [Kel98] and ﬁnally, how can it ﬁt on the small size display
of a smartwatch (average size is approximately 1.28 inches or 3.25 cm - Fig. 4.4)
[siz17].
Figure 4.4: Display size of the most popular smartwatches in May 2017 [siz17].
The following 2 measurement techniques have been considered in the planning
phase of the project when the phenomenon of interest was pain tracking [MF93]:
• Visual Analog Scale for Pain (VAS Pain): a unidimensional mea-
sure of the intensity of pain, which can be extended to quantify the inten-
sity of other subjective phenomena. The standard VAS length is 10 cm
[MPJB86], and it is delimited by its left and right boundaries which repre-
sent the symptom extreme (e.g. for the pain case: no pain on the left and
worst possible pain on the right of the scale) [SH76]. There are multiple
implementations of Visual Analogue Scales, using color gradients, shades
of grey or even ﬁgures describing the intensity of the recorded phenomena
(Fig. 4.5). Disregard of the implementation, the Visual Analogue Scale
has the property of being a continuous scale, which allows real numbers as
valid assessments. This gives an inﬁnity of possibilities for asserting the
severity of an event, therefore being ﬂexible to each individual cognitive
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Visual Analogue Scale Input
17
process and subjective perception.
(a) VAS with gradient color and ﬁgures in-
dications.
(b) VAS with no markers or ﬁgures indica-
tions.
Figure 4.5: Two commonly used types of VAS designs.
• Numeric Rating Scale for Pain (NRS Pain): a unidimensional mea-
sure of the pain intensity which can be extended to quantify the intensity
of other subjective phenomena. Usually, it is used in the 11-items NRS
form [FYJL+01] (Fig. 4.6), and it allows only for discrete values when
asserting the severity of an event. The scale contains 11 values equally
distributed (0 representing no pain to 10 representing the most severe
pain), where all the integer numbers can be chosen as a reference value
for quantiﬁcation. The main property of the scale is that it allows only
the selection of integer values, represented by the 11 markers on the scale
[Joh05].
Figure 4.6: Numeric Pain Rating Scale [phy18].
==PAGE:30==
18
Design
4.2.2
Customized VAS Input
It was proven that a Visual Analogue Scale is very reliable and accurate
for assessing subjective phenomena, such as pain or mood [PEBP01]. There-
fore, since the beginning of the project, the design choice was made to use a
Visual Analogue Scale for the data collection phase. Compared to a Numeric
Rating Scale, it proved to be more ﬂexible, accurate, and more likely to map
to the diverse subjective perception of individuals, because of the possibility of
choosing analogue/continuous values. In other words, continuous values were
preferred over the discrete ones because they provide more accurate and diverse
inputs. For instance, making an observation of value 7.5 on the Numerical Pain
Scale have to be rounded down to 7 or up to 8, therefore bias is introduced in
the measurement process. The proposed input visualization for this project is
presented in Fig. 4.7.
Figure 4.7: The mapping of a real 10 cm VAS for pain to the watch face with
a display radius of 1.65 cm (LG Urbane).
Two important design decisions led to the actual form of the scale: applying a
color code gradient and no discrete helping markers along the scale as in the
Numeric Pain Rating version. The reason for the color gradient lays in the habit
of people’s cognitive process to usually map "no pain" to color green and "severe
pain" to the color red. More precisely, in the conducted experiment, 91.3% of the
participants found the color association intuitive or very intuitive. Additionally,
the color code helps the user understand approximately what analogue value is
represented on the scale because there is no discrete marker.
The decision of not having discrete markers on the scale (between 0 and 10)
is backed up by this study [JMF16] which analyzes the performance of the
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Visual Analogue Scale Input
19
Visual Analogue Scale. The explanation can be found again by analyzing the
cognitive process of humans when making an assertion. People are tempted to
associate the values to integer markers on a scale in general, creating an uneven
distribution of the bins around the markers. As a result, in order to reduce the
bias of the observations and get the real analogue values from the users, the
design decision has been made not to add support markers on the scale.
Designs of Visual Analogue Scales have been done on smartwatches before
[Kam16], but the size of the VAS is less than 3 cm on the watch face. The
solution for getting almost a 1 to 1 ratio with the real physical 10 cm VAS ruler
was to bend the scale alongside the edge of the screen. This design choice led to
a VAS length of 9.8 cm, on the LG Watch Urbane with a 1.3 inch round display
size. Of course, depending on the size of the screen, the length of the scale may
vary, but nevertheless, it is still close to a 1:1 ratio with the real VAS rulers.
The mapping is done as in Fig. 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Real 10 cm VAS mapped to the display of an LG Urbane watch
resulting in a 9.8 cm scale length.
Regarding the width of the scale, it is about 10mm or the equivalent of 48 CSS
pixels, which is the average ﬁngertip size according to the Android developers
portal [Too15]. On the gradient colored scale, the user has the possibility to slide
the black marker alongside, in order to position it on the color corresponding to
the severity of the tracked symptom. Regarding the wide ﬁngertip problem, the
design and programming logic of sliding the marker allows for an extra 10mm
space for moving the ﬁnger next to the scale. This way users with wide ﬁngertips
can tap outside the space which delimits the scale and still move the marker, as
long as they do not touch the Ok or Cancel buttons.
After positioning the marker on the correct location on the scale, the users have
the possibility of saving the observation by pressing the Ok button, represented
by the green check mark (the left button in Fig. 4.8). Visual and haptic feedback
will be provided to the user in order to conﬁrm the successful operation. On
the contrary, in case the user decides that he or she does not want to make an
==PAGE:32==
20
Design
observation anymore, he or she has the possibility of returning to the previous
screen by pressing the Cancel button (the red "X" button on the right in Fig.
4.8), or to swipe right as usual on Android Wear [exi18]. When pressing the
conﬁrmation button, the analog value will be saved, as well as the timestamp
and the location of the user. In case of multiple observations within the same
hour, the values will be aggregated and their average displayed. The watch will
keep track of the number of observations within an hour and save the counter
in a diﬀerent storage location.
4.2.3
VAS Input Iterations
Figure 4.9: The four iterations which resulted in the ﬁnal prototype version
of the VAS input.
Figure 4.9 exempliﬁes on a chronological timeline how the interface evolved after
each iteration process. A cheap and fast version of a low ﬁdelity prototype was
constructed on paper, considering the exact measures of the watch. This proved
as an eﬀective way of designing the interface, which led to iteration 2 where
the actual interface was built using Android Studio. It contained the bent scale
alongside the screen edge, the marker and the basic functionality of adding
a reference and its timestamp. Later on, after iteration 3, the gradient was
extended with the yellow color in between green and red and the background
color was changed to a dark shade of grey. The intermediate yellow color was
added as a response to the feedback sessions, where users wanted a smoother
crossing between "no pain" and "severe pain" colors. Additionally, the dark
grey background was added in order to comply with the Android wear standard,
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Spiral Data Visualization
21
which advises the interfaces’ background colors to be as dark as possible in order
to save battery (bright pixels drain the battery faster). Finally, the two buttons
were added and concluded the ﬁnal version of the input interface. The cancel
button was added in order to facilitate a smoother interaction for the users
when navigating between activities. This also improved the intuitiveness of the
interface according to the feedback received from the test users.
4.3
Spiral Data Visualization
4.3.1
The Spiral Concept
The concept is based on the Archimedean spiral, which is described in polar
coordinates as the position of a point, gradually translated away from the center
of the spiral with a constant angular velocity [Kno78]. This property oﬀers the
exact solution for self-reﬂection, because the spiral displays the location of the
translated data points (observations) over time, emphasizing on the temporal
characteristic of the data. The spiral is exempliﬁed in Fig. 4.10a with respect
(a) Spiral visualization on the watch face.
(b) Spiral visualization zoom in.
Figure 4.10: The spiral concept is actually the continuous horizontal linear
time axis representation, bent so that the moment t0 becomes
the center of the spiral and as the spiral advances, the moment
tnow is on the outermost ring.
to a conventional representation of a linear timeline. The straight time axis
is bent multiple times so that the moment t0 becomes the center of the spiral
and the moment "now", tnow, is the outermost ring of the spiral. This is also
what creates the past time eﬀect in the proposed spiral visualization. The user
relates to the most present observations oftener than the past ones, therefore
the access to these present observation is easier due to the location of these
observations on the outermost ring of the spiral. As the spiral progresses in the
past, the user sees the old records perfectly aligned with the recent ones, in the
same location in the spiral, but on more inner rings. This alignment property
==PAGE:34==
22
Design
is actually what makes the spiral suitable for temporal patterns detection. As
presented in Fig. 4.10b, the raw representation of the spiral interface positions
the events (the colored portions) chronologically on the bent axis so that the
events are all aligned with respect to the time they occurred. The time scale
used for drawing the spiral is 24 hours, which oﬀers a direct mapping of one
spiral ring to one complete 24 hours day.
Fig. 4.10b presents the spiral visualization in its raw form on the watch. Various
elements have been added to the spiral in order to make it more intuitive and
meaningful for the users. Supporting lines, information about the current hour,
the mapping between the days and each ring of the spiral and several other
features have been included in the visualization (Subsection 4.3.2). Ultimately,
all these additions are meant to enhance the raw spiral visualization and make
the interface more suitable for self-reﬂection at a glance.
4.3.2
Spiral Visualization Design
Figure 4.11: Spiral components identiﬁed on the visualization.
The Spiral Data visualization corresponds to the reﬂection step from the ﬁve-
stage personal informatics model.
Furthermore, it is the result of the inte-
gration phase which manipulates the data resulted from the collection stage
in order to provide the users with a meaningful visualization for self-reﬂection.
The eﬃciency of the spiral in showing periodical patterns is presented in Figure
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Spiral Data Visualization
23
4.12. The visualization aggregates the data based on the timestamp when data
was registered and displays it in the same area of the spiral, using the alignment
property.
Figure 4.12: The eﬃciency of showing the periodical data on the spiral com-
pared to a bar plot. Due to the spiral alignment property, it is
easier to see that the majority of red-orange, severe observations
occur in the evening. On the contrary, the bar plot does not make
it easier to observe the periodical characteristic of the data.
The particularity of this instrumentation system is that it allows accessibility
and instant data visualization directly on the smartwatch display. The spiral
data visualization is a continuous time series meant to comply with the round
watch face form factor. Not only the round factor is extremely appropriate for
a circular visualization such as a spiral, but it also allows many data points
to be displayed on a small screen (usually around 318 ppi [siz17]). One of the
conducted experiments allowed displaying 504 data points with 73% of the test
subjects being able to read them. Lastly, the spiral shaped timeline has proven
to be very eﬃcient in extracting the temporal patterns of the data compared to
conventional plot types (e.g. line plots or bar plots) [WAM01]. An example of
the proposed spiral visualization displaying 7 days can be observed in Fig. 4.13.
The collected observations are stored chronologically and fetched from the de-
vice’s internal storage when the visualization is loaded. The spiral is read start-
ing from the center of the screen and continuing clockwise. The spiral is set to
arrange the observations on a 24 hours scale for a complete overview of an entire
day. An observation is represented by an arc positioned between two adjacent
hours (Fig. 4.13). As a result of the conducted tests, the default number of
observations which should be displayed in order to keep the interface glanceable
and intuitive is seven. However, experiments have shown that displaying up to
21 days is a valid option for the users, and there are trackable phenomena where
==PAGE:36==
24
Design
(a) Spiral visualization on the 1.3 inch
screen of a LG Urbane smartwatch.
(b) Spiral visualization zoom in.
Figure 4.13: Spiral visualization example on the watch and focus on the visu-
alization.
a monthly overview is probably more appropriate.
The color of an arc represents the quantiﬁcation of a subjective observation.
Speciﬁcally, colors such as strong green represent not severe or low observations,
while orange and red represents intermediate to severely rated observations (Fig.
4.13b). White colors should be considered as blank or non-existing observations.
The meaning of them is that within the respective hour slot no event has been
registered. As a result, the space is used for displaying the ﬁrst letter of the
day that the blank recording corresponds to. This proved as an eﬀective way
of enhancing the details of the visualization and helping the users understand
faster which day of the week they are looking at.
Additionally, multiple other supporting lines and markers are added in order
to enhance the intuitiveness of the spiral. Hour markers positioned every three
hours at the edge of the screen help the users to easily keep track of the time
when the experience occurred. Moreover, for keeping track of the days, at the
positions of 0, 6, 12 and 18 on a classic clock, the name of the day and its date
are shown. As the spiral advances and displays events further in the past, the
text size is scaled with a factor of 90%, in order to give the impression of past
events. In the center of the visualization, the month, date, day and hour when
the ﬁrst record is displayed are shown (Fig. 4.11). Following the spiral clockwise
from the center, the outermost ring of it is considered to be the closest day to
the present moment. Finally, a blue marker on the outermost ring indicates to
the user what the current time is.
In order to provide an easier visualization for self-reﬂection, two more design
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Spiral Data Visualization
25
choices have been made. First, the weekend days are colored with a light reddish
color. As a result of the experiments in between sprints, users have requested
that they would like to have a better overview on the whole week, with a separa-
tion between weekdays and weekends. This is mainly because the self-reﬂection
process depends on the users’ behavior during these days, which for the majority
of people is diﬀerent (e.g. hours spent in the oﬃce at work compared to relax-
ing or active weekends). Secondly, thin supporting lines under each observation
were drawn for facilitating an easier understanding of the transition between
days.
The challenge of mapping a large number of data points to the spiral was not
trivial. For longer usages, the users may collect thousands of recordings [num16],
which are impossible to be displayed simultaneously on the spiral. Therefore,
the design choice was to make the visualization fully interactive. By default,
the ﬁrst seven days starting from the present moment and advancing to the past
are displayed on the spiral. Through touch-based gestures, the user is able to
fetch and navigate over the observations directly on the smartwatch:
• swipe up for fetching observations from the past;
• swipe down for navigating through events until the current time;
• swipe left to open a new Visual Analogue Scale input and add a new
observation.
The gestures have been established based on an evaluation session with test
users, using the "thinking aloud" method [Lar17]. Users reported that fetching
observations from the past should be mapped to the swipe up gesture because
it feels more natural in concordance to other visualizations on mobile devices
where the scrolling is done through swiping up. Concretely, they reported that
swiping up on the phone when using Facebook or LinkedIn, they navigate to
posts in the past. On the other hand, the opposite gesture, swiping up, will
eventually bring the user to the beginning of the news feed on the previously
mentioned socialization platforms (which corresponds to the most recent post
or to the moment "now").
After getting a full understanding of the visualization, the user is able to explore
and identify patterns (e.g. time intervals with low/high severity) in order to
take informed actions. For instance, a person suﬀering from a chronic disease
(lasting for 3 months or more [chr16]) can use the spiral visualization to ﬁnd the
correlation between the time and the perceived pain after taking medication.
==PAGE:38==
26
Design
4.3.3
Spiral Visualization Iterations
Each iteration has marked the visualization with more enhancements and visual
elements added, mainly after feedback sessions with test users. The visualization
went through nine iterations which can be seen on a timeline in Fig. 4.14.
Figure 4.14: The nine iterations which resulted in the ﬁnal prototype of the
Spiral Visualization.
The ﬁrst iteration produced a low-ﬁdelity prototype on paper, as in the VAS
visualization case. The main design at this stage was to display an observation
on a 12 hours scale, common for analogue watches. An observation was delimited
by an arc between two adjacent hours and its height (or thickness) represented
the quantiﬁcation of that observation.
For the most severe records, the arc
corresponding to the time of the record was touching the next ring of the spiral.
No color codes were applied, only the observations belonging to the same day
(two complete spiral rings) were colored diﬀerently.
The second and third iterations are actual Android Wear applications on the
smartwatch. Visualization (2) is an exact representation of the low-ﬁdelity pro-
totype.
Details about the way it is represented programmatically using the
Android APIs can be consulted in Section 5.2.1. The visualization is not very
complex, with the current time shown in the center of the spiral, and only
three days displayed (24hours × 3days = 72 data points). The ﬁrst limitation
emerged and led to iteration (3). Users reported after testing, that the height
of the arc mapped to an observation is too diﬃcult to be perceived in rapport
to the Visual Analogue Scale which uses color codes. As a result, iteration (3)
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Spiral Data Visualization
27
means to represent the severity of an observation as the height of the arc plus
the corresponding color code from the VAS input.
Iterations (4) and (5) are the result of further user testing. Precisely, the users
argued that it is diﬃcult to follow one ring of the spiral which represents a day.
Moreover, they noticed that the idea of representing the severity of an event as
the height of the arc does not bring value to the visualization due to its reduced
size. Consequently, the severity was represented only through the color code. By
default, blank observations were colored in strong green. Iteration (4) presents
each adjacent day of the week in a darker shade of grey in order to comply
with the test feedback. Indeed, this new aspect made it easier to distinguish
between the days of the week, but it decreased the pattern recognition because
of the reduced size of the rings of the spiral. Furtherly, iteration (5) tried to
overcome this issue by drawing thin arcs under each observation and coloring
them with the same color for observations belonging to the same day. The width
of the spiral rings was increased and the alternating days underline arc made it
possible to observe which ring belongs to which day.
Iteration (6) added more components on the spiral visualization. Firstly, the
design of having blank observations marked as strong green proved to be mis-
leading. The shades of green for no observation tended to be misinterpreted
as low-severity observations during the post-iteration tests. Three important
elements were added in the visualization: the blank observations, the support
lines at the positions of 12, 3, 6, 9 on the watch and ﬁnally the initial letter of
the name of the day of the week at random positions on the arcs. Thus, the test
users reported that it was easier to follow the exact day an observation belongs
to, and to distinguish between no observations and low-severity ones.
Iteration (7) represented a turning point in the development of the spiral. Again,
after more testing, the users mentioned that the 12 hours scale is hard to follow
and to present the temporal characteristics of the patterns in an intuitive way.
Concretely, for discovering patterns occurring at certain moments of the day
(e.g. morning), the users had to be careful to skip every second ring of the
spiral (e.g. evening) because of the overlapping of the hours (e.g. 11:00 AM
and PM). The result was a 24 hours scale which kept all the characteristics of
the 12 hours one, except the hour markers and the reduced size of the arcs.
Nevertheless, this measure proved to facilitate the identiﬁcation of patterns and
two times more data points were added.
Iteration (8) utilized the space much more eﬃciently than visualization (7). First
of all, the spiral rings are wider because the spiral is drawn up to the edge of the
display, compared to the previous iteration where around 20% of the space was
occupied by the hourly markers. Also, the space in the center of the spiral was
reduced, meaning that the stroke width of the spiral was increased by almost
==PAGE:40==
28
Design
40%. The position of hour 0 (midnight) was moved on the bottom part of the
screen because the tests shown that it brings more intuitiveness and also users
tend to notice the upper part of the screen ﬁrst, where the observations during
the day are positioned (and the lack of observations during the night represented
by white arcs at the bottom). The name of the days was consequently moved at
the bottom of the screen corresponding to hour zero. The 24 hour markers were
erased and instead only the markers corresponding to every three hours in a day
were shown surrounded by a grey semicircle (74% of the test subject suggested
this). The initial letter from the name of a day was displayed only on white
observations and in the center of the spiral the month, day and hour when the
most inner ring starts displaying observations replaces old current time from
iteration (7).
Finally, the last iteration (9), presents the information in the center in a more
intuitive way, with the name of the month, date, day and time explicitly stated,
rather than the previous abbreviations. For helping the users to keep track of
the day and date, the spiral presents at positions 0 and 12 the name of the day
as a three letters abbreviation (e.g. Mon, Tue) and at the positions 6 and 18,
the date. The supporting text simulates the time ﬂowing towards the past by
decreasing its size by a factor of 90% as looking to the inner spiral rings. The
days of the weekend are specially colored with a light red in case no observation
is done at a particular time during the weekend. In this case, the event color
representation has the priority to be shown.
4.4
Setup Screen Design
Primarily as a result of the feedback session with the users, a new feature has
been added to the system: a setup screen, where the users have the possibility
to select the desired number of days to be displayed in the spiral. The testers
argued that this brings more value to the users from two points of view. Firstly,
there is the ﬂexibility which allows the end user to set up a visualization which
ﬁts him or her the best, in terms of the number of shown days displaying ob-
servations. Secondly, it improves the self-reﬂection process because there are
certain phenomena that people can reﬂect on having a broader context (e.g.
events that tend to happen several times a month). On the other hand, phe-
nomena such as allergic reactions might be considered more appropriate to be
visualized on a weekly basis.
Based on the tests, the setup screen provides the option of choosing the desired
number of days bounded between the default value 7 and the maximum one,
21.
The maximum value was established after the usability tests, described
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Setup Screen Design
29
in Session 7.2.2.
The setup screen is loaded by using a long press gesture
anywhere on the spiral visualization screen.
The users can edit the number
of days by pressing the blue arrows that surround the numerical value. The
left-oriented arrow decreases the number, which is lower bounded by 7. The
right-oriented arrow increases the numerical value and it is upper bounded by
21. The timeline in Fig. 4.15 shows how the corresponding spiral visualization
looks like for the selected number of days. The timeline advances as the increase
button is pressed so that the number of days displayed in the spiral rises from
7 to 21.
Figure 4.15: Timeline showing the corresponding spiral visualization with in-
creasing the number of days shown in the spiral.
Finally, the user has to use the conﬁrmation or cancellation buttons, in the
same manner as they are used on the VAS input screen. The green button will
save the number of the days set by the user, and reload the spiral visualization
screen. Every time the spiral visualization is loaded, the setup is retrieved from
the persistence unit and the spiral is constructed using that parameter. The
red cancel button will simply reload the spiral visualization screen, with no
modiﬁcations to the size of the spiral.
==PAGE:42==
30
Design
4.5
Watch Face Design
The watch face was designed primarily for accessibility reasons. As proven in
the experiments, adding a custom interactive watch face [cus18] with a shortcut
to the app has the potential to lower the time for making an observation by
24%. Hence the importance of a watch face service running permanently on
the watch. It does not aﬀect the user experience, as the users are still able to
customize it in terms of the background image or the format of time shown on
the watch face: digital or analog. The design of the watch face is minimalistic
for the scope of this project. Again, the purpose was to prove its advantage
in making fast observations. Nevertheless, the design was inspired from two
projects: one is the Google Fit project and the other one is from a Master’s
thesis research done by Tomasz Rafal Kaminski at the Technical University of
Denmark.
(a) Google Fit watch face design [goo18a].
It is an analog watch face with tick-
ing second hand, which displays on the
right side, information about the time
spent doing physical exercises.
(b) Tomasz’s watch face design [Kam16].
It is an analog watch face on which the
users can position up to four buttons
and tack multiple phenomena by sim-
ply pressing on the corresponding but-
ton.
Figure 4.16: Analog watch face designs considered for the ActiveSF watch
face layout.
The main idea from the two considered examples shown in Fig. 4.16 is to add
a small button on the watch face which will open the application, in this case,
the spiral visualization. The button is shown only in the interactive mode of
the watch face in order to avoid the confusion that the button is clickable from
the ambient mode [amb18]. As a result, the shortcut was added on the face
with the ActiveSF icon 4.17. Haptic feedback is delivered to the user to signal
the loading of the ActiveSF app and its main visualization, the spiral timeline.
The watch will vibrate for 200 ms and a short Toast message will be displayed
with the text "Spiral visualization loading". The interaction ﬂow with all the
gestures required to navigate through the applications screens is presented in
Fig. 4.17. A simple tap gesture on the ActiveSF app icon from the watch face
in the interactive mode will open the spiral visualization. From this point, the
==PAGE:43==
4.5 Watch Face Design
31
user can choose between making a new observation by swiping left and opening
the VAS input screen, or to long press anywhere on the spiral and open the
setup screen.
Figure 4.17: The available gestures interactions for navigating between the
app’s screens. A single tap gesture on the application’s shortcut
opens the main screen, the spiral visualization. Swipe left on the
spiral screen loads the VAS input screen. Long press gesture on
the spiral opens the setup activity.
==PAGE:44==
32
Design
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Implementation
The following chapter aims to discuss and motivate the implementation of all
the design choices presented in the previous chapter. During the implementa-
tion, important decisions have been made in connection with the Android API,
especially when drawing the spiral. It also presents how the Android Platform
allowed the collection of spatiotemporal data and how the smartwatch app is
used when the device is paired with a smartphone.
5.1
Data Collection
Generally, the data collection phase is identiﬁed in this solution context with the
VAS Input activity. Three core requirements were considered at the beginning
of the implementation:
1. The active self-tracking application should function without connection to
the Internet. Even though most of the smartwatches today are equipped
by default with a WiFi relay or even GSM connection (50% of the most
popular smartwatches in May 2017 [siz17]), the application should function
as a standalone one. Situations when there is no WiFi connection available
should not inﬂuence the process of self-tracking.
==PAGE:46==
34
Implementation
2. The application should work with either no GPS embedded sensor or no
GPS signal available.
3. The application should work with no paired device nearby. In case the
paired smartphone or tablet (handheld device) is not near the smartwatch
or no Bluetooth connection is available, the app should be able to still
record observations and safely store them on the local disk.
5.1.1
VAS Input
The VAS Input activity consists of the 9.8 cm long arc which simulates the
real 10 cm Visual Analogue Scale. The VAS is actually an arc drawn to ﬁt
inside the circular edge of the display using the native drawArc method of the
Android Canvas. It has a sweep angle of 338 degrees, which corresponds to 9.8
cm out of the 10.4 cm circumference of the watch screen. The VAS bent scale
is then colored with a gradient from green to yellow to red which is rotated by
90 degrees clockwise, so that the start of it corresponds to the position 6 o’clock
on a regular watch.
The thin marker used for selecting the appropriate quantiﬁcation level on the
scale is also an arc with a sweep angle of only 4 degrees.
By default, it is
drawn on the middle-top part of the screen, corresponding to the yellow color
in the gradient, or to the 12 o’clock position on a regular watch. A Swipe Touch
Listener [ont18] is attached to the VAS View and is responsible for handling
every touch interaction with the View object. Therefore, after the touch gesture
which moved the marker ends, the marker’s ﬁnal position is computed as the
angle between the center of the screen and the location of the arc using the
arctan2 function from the Math class. The angle is afterward converted to a real
analogue value from 0 to 10 and stored as a ﬁeld variable of the VasInputView
class.
The VasInput activity contains two other Views, the Ok and Cancel buttons.
The cancel button simply exits the activity by calling the ﬁnish() method which
will load the previous activity, the Spiral View. The observation is made when
the Ok button is pressed. A listener attached to the button will handle the
logic of storing the observation’s value, the timestamp and the location. Finally,
visual and haptic feedback is presented to the user in order to emphasize the
successful operation. A Toast message will pop-up and display the conﬁrmation
while the watch will vibrate once for 500 ms.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Data Collection
35
5.1.2
Temporal Data
The temporal data is the most important element to be registered due to the
spiral visualization which is dependent on the timestamps of the observations.
Pressing the Ok button triggers the handler which manages the creation and
parsing of the timestamp.
The current time is determined by calling the java.util.Date constructor, which
returns the current time in milliseconds. The next step is to format the data
using an international standard, ISO 8601 in UTC format [iso02]. Because the
level of granularity for this application is one hour, the minutes and seconds are
removed from the date string, which has the ﬁnal format:
yyyy-MM-dd’T’HH
The timestamp is unique, therefore it can be used as the key used for mapping
the VAS input and the location. When new inputs are registered within the
same hour, the values mapped to that hourly timestamp are overwritten. The
current storage option is to store the observation using the SharedPreferences
API. Currently, SharedPreferences is a good method of storing the information,
because the number of observations is not extremely high. During the four weeks
experiment, the collected data aggregated 220 data points, having a size of only
7.7 KB. Additionally, it has been measured that the average time of fetching
the objects from the XML ﬁles using the eﬃcient SharedPreferences API is less
than 100 ms.
For the scope of this thesis project, the storage capabilities of SharedPreferences
are enough. For a further release though, migration to using a proper database
as SQLite3 for Android is encouraged only in terms of maintainability of the
app. The overhead of using shared preferences is reduced due to the eﬃcient
way in which the data is organized.
Basically, the data is fetched from the
XML ﬁles only when needed. The app uses a buﬀer of one-month equivalent
data points (774) when loading the spiral. If the user decides to navigate more
than one month in the past, new data is fetched and the process continues like
this. At any point in memory, not more than 774 observations will be loaded,
which is not a big load on the wearable’s CPU. As a matter of fact, the logic of
fetching observations and drawing the visualization can be done on the main UI
thread (although not recommended), because of the reduced overhead induced
by SharedPreferences.
==PAGE:48==
36
Implementation
5.1.3
Location Data
Detecting the location on a wearable powered by Android is straightforward
using the Google Play Services Location APIs [goo18b].
Location awareness
allows wearables to retrieve the geolocation of the device, as well as data about
the instant speed, the location provider, and the accuracy conﬁdence. There
are two diﬀerent approaches when dealing with location services on wearables:
whether or not the device is equipped with a GPS sensor. The location retrieval
on this app handles both cases.
A function invocation to the Package Manager on Android, returns true or
false on whether or not the hardware includes a GPS sensor. The application
can handle both the case with existing or not existing GPS sensor.
Google
Play Services automatically chooses if the location should be retrieved using the
internal GPS sensor or the handheld’s sensor by computing a cost function over
the power consumption. Nevertheless, in case of the paired device not being
nearby and no GPS sensor embedded, the wearable has to handle the logic by
itself. In this application, the implementation choice has been that if neither
the handheld nor GPS module is available, the saved location should be the last
known cached location from Google Play Service. The users are being informed
instantly when such a situation occurs so that they can turn on the Bluetooth
connection with the paired device, or turn on the GPS service on the wearable
if it comes with such an option.
Figure 5.1: LocationListener callbacks methods invoked during the VAS ac-
tivity’s lifecycle.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Data Visualization
37
The location is obtained by implementing the LocationListener interface from
the Google Play Services package. Speciﬁc method callbacks have to be invoked
on concrete stages of the activity lifecycle in order to make sure that the location
listener is attached and detached at the proper time. LocationListener and in
general location fetching is an expensive operation with a direct eﬀect on the
battery life and the workload of the system.
The used callbacks and their
invocation can be seen in Fig. 5.1 in connection with Android’s native activity
lifecycle management methods. Finally, the location is saved as a latitude and
longitude tuple, mapped to the timestamp and saved in the location storage
XML ﬁle using the same SharedPreferences API.
5.2
Data Visualization
5.2.1
Spiral Implementation
The spiral visualization is the result of the data integration phase. It is entirely
constructed using Canvas class’ native methods of drawing arcs, lines, and other
geometrical shapes, as well as printing arrays of characters on the screen. The
entire spiral is built by drawing small arcs which have the property that each
drawn arc is a few pixels closer to the center of the screen, in order to create
the spiral eﬀect. An arc represents an observation in between two adjacent
hours, and has an angle of 360/24 = 15 degrees (360 degrees of the round
watch display divided by 24 hours in a day). The drawing process of an arc is
explained in Fig. 5.2. The diagram shows how a single arc, the small yellow one
at the bottom of the round factor of the watch, is built. From a mathematical
point of view, the arc is deﬁned by four parameters:
• A square (the blue one in Fig. 5.2), which by its dimension deﬁnes an
inner circle which intersects the square on all its four edges.
• The circle which is deﬁned by the square mentioned above (the yellow one
in Fig. 5.2). The circle deﬁnes the trajectory of the arc. The arc can be
placed at any position on the edge of the circle, and a 360 degrees arc is
actually the full circle.
• The starting angle, measured from the position 3 o’clock on a regular
watch, is the position on the trajectory circle, where the arc starts. It is
measured clock-wise, in degrees. starting from 3 o’clock. For instance, in
Fig. 5.2, the yellow arc’s starting angle is exactly 90 degrees because the
angle between the position 3 o’clock and 6 o’clock on a watch is always 90
degrees.
==PAGE:50==
38
Implementation
Figure 5.2: How an arc (yellow observation) is drawn on the watch face.
• The sweep angle, which can be assimilated to the length of the arc. The
arc is drawn clockwise, from the start angle plus the sweep angle which
in this case in 15 degrees, and will always be 15 degrees for the 24 hours
scale of the spiral.
The drawArc Android invocations that draw the arc on the canvas are done
inside a loop. As mentioned, each arc corresponds to an hour, therefore repre-
senting the default seven days actually means drawing 7days×24hours, respec-
tively 168 arcs. Each of these arcs is constructed in the same manner as in Fig.
5.2, the only addition being that at every iteration of the loop, the dimensions
and coordinates of the deﬁning square (and implicitly the trajectory circle) are
updated. Basically, as the spiral advances towards the center of the screen, the
support squares are actually getting smaller and smaller, which also results in
smaller arcs in term of the size in pixels (but the same sweep angle of 15 de-
grees). Fig. 5.3 shows a detailed representation of how the ﬁrst ﬁve arcs which
form the visualization of 7 days are drawn.
In Fig. 5.3a, the yellow arc is constructed in the ﬁrst iteration of the loop. The
second arc is drawn by scaling down the support square, which inﬂuences also
the trajectory circle, making the arc a few pixels closer to the center of the grey
canvas. In Fig. 5.3b, the same iterative process takes place, with the scaling
down of the support squares and the arcs being drawn on the trajectory circle
starting on the start angle and adding the sweep angle which deﬁnes the length
of the arc (15 degrees). The spiral is drawn counter-clockwise (note the order
and the direction of the drawing). Just for a better overview, Fig. 5.4 show all
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Data Visualization
39
(a) How the ﬁrst 2 arcs (yellow and orange
observation) are drawn on the watch
face.
(b) How the ﬁrst 5 arcs (observations) are
drawn on the watch face.
Figure 5.3: How the spiral is drawn starting from the ﬁrst arc, with informa-
tion about the support squares and circles which deﬁne the arc.
the support squares which deﬁne all the arcs in a default 7 days visualization.
Figure 5.4: All the squares determining all the arcs in the visualization.
The same spiral conﬁguration is exempliﬁed in Fig. 5.5. Each step represents
diﬀerent iterations in the drawing loop. One arc is drawn on every iteration
(there are 168 iterations for the resulting visualization), but for exempliﬁcation
and conciseness, only certain moments are shown on the timeline.
The color of the arc is determined by its corresponding color in the VAS input
gradient. A Paint object is used for coloring the speciﬁc arc corresponding to
an observation. At every iteration of the drawing loop, a function computes
the exact RGB colors from the VAS input where the marker was positioned and
applies that RGB color to the arc using the Paint object. The same Paint object
is used to manipulate the appearance of the supporting text (i.e. the date and
the name of the day), as well as the information in the center of the spiral.
==PAGE:52==
40
Implementation
Figure 5.5: How a spiral visualization of 7 days is drawn starting with arc 1
until the 7 × 24 one. Every new arc marking an observation is
shifted a few pixels towards the center of the screen, in order to
create the spiral eﬀect.
Before explaining the implementation logic of the gesture interactions, it has
to be understood how the time is kept when drawing the spiral. Also, it was
mentioned before that the spiral is drawn counter-clockwise, and this is because
the drawing point (arc) is the current time, and then all the past events (arcs)
are displayed. This is the reason why the spiral can not advance more than
the current time, and if a user tries to scroll more than the current time it will
shrink and redraw until the current hour (the default mode). The time is always
relative to the moment "now". When the spiral is constructed in the onDraw()
function, a Date object is instantiated with the current time. Then, a ﬁeld of the
Spiral Class keeps track of the number of milliseconds that corresponds to the
swiped distance on the screen. A function is responsible for computing the ratio
between the swiped pixels and the time units, and this value is modiﬁed at every
gesture interaction with the screen of the watch. Finally, in the loop drawing
the arcs, every iteration subtracts one hour from the date object. This is how
it is known at any time in the loop what hour and date are represented. When
the loop exits, the date object will contain the information which is displayed
in the center of the spiral.
The gesture interactions are handled by a touch listener attached to the Spiral
View. This function listens for swipe events but also computes how many pixels
represent the diﬀerence between the start and the end positions of the swipe
gesture (when the ﬁngertip is on and oﬀthe watch’s screen) on the vertical axis.
By default, the whole vertical axis having 320 pixels corresponds to navigating
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Data Visualization
41
7 days on the spiral. In other words, the ratio is 320/7=46 pixels for navigating
one day in the spiral. Every time the touch listener’s method is invoked by
the Android OS, the spiral view is invalidated and redrawn. This operation
is extremely fast so that the users cannot observe the redrawing of the spiral.
Just as an order of magnitude compared to the average perception time for
noticing the app response, the spiral is redrawn on average in 50 milliseconds,
compared to the 200 ms threshold when an experienced user perceives that the
visualization changes.
Fig. 5.6 illustrates how swipe up gesture works. Swipe up is the equivalent of
fetching observations from the past (or navigating towards past observations),
while swipe down corresponds to navigating towards the current time.
The
Figure shows the initial state of the spiral on the left, then its state after swiping
up 5 mm (or 46 pixels) on the screen, and ﬁnally in the right image how the
spiral looks like after swiping 10 mm (or 92 pixels) from its initial state (swiping
10 mm from the bottom of the screen upwards). It can be observed how 5 mm
swapped on the screen correspond to shifting the spiral one day into the past.
The three red observations exemplify how they move towards the outer part of
the spiral as the navigation continues towards the past (can be assimilated to
the center of the spiral). Finally, the highlighted observations are positioned on
the outermost ring of the spiral (ring 1) and another 5 mm swapped upwards
will actually push them outside the visible area of the spiral.
Figure 5.6: How the swipe up gesture interaction inﬂuence the visualization
and allows navigation within the spiral. The exact reverse behav-
ior happens when the gesture is swipe down.
5.2.2
Watch Face
The watch face is implemented by extending the CanvasWatchFaceService ab-
stract class which was included in API level 21. As explained in the design
==PAGE:54==
42
Implementation
phase, an analog watch face with a ticking second hand was preferred. In the
ambient mode, the ticking hand is not drawn and only the hour markers are
shown in black and white shades. The watch face is registered in the Android
manifest ﬁle as a service and its update cycle is every second in the interactive
mode, due to the ticking hand.
The application icon is added as an image over the background picture, on the
right side of the watch face, having a dimension of 100 × 100 pixels. A Touch-
Listener is attached to the View object, and by overriding the onTapCommand
method inherited from the parent service class, the logic of starting an intent is
handled. The intent object is used to start the main activity of the application,
which is the spiral visualization screen. A Toast informs the user that the tap
gesture on the button was successful and the spiral is loading. Additionally, the
Vibrator service is invoked so that the watch vibrates for 200 ms.
5.2.3
Permissions and Data Privacy
The application uses a few features which require special permissions from the
user, but also from the Android OS. The data storage and data privacy is also
a very important topic that was analyzed, especially since the European new
data regulations which took eﬀect from the 25th of May 2018 [gdp16].
Because the application uses a custom deﬁned watch face which facilitates
faster access to the spiral visualization, the watch face has to run as a stan-
dalone service which requires Android OS permission in order to be displayed
and auto-updated every second.
This permission is acquired by adding the
WAKE_LOCK permission in the Android Manifest ﬁle. Other service speciﬁc
privileges are the vibrate component of the watch, used for haptic feedback,
but also the ﬁne location access. The last one, the location approval has to
be explicitly provided by the user, through a special permission request dialog
window [dia18].
Regarding the new European Data Protection Regulation, the self-tracking app
stores all the data on the local disk of the wearable device.
As long as the
observations represent personal related data, they have to be fully protected
and not accessible to anyone except the user. The owner of the device has,
therefore, the possibility of keeping the data on the device or to export it to
other platforms or cloud storage solutions.
Nevertheless, the out-of-the-box
solution does not share any of the sensitive personal data with any systems.
Extensions can be added in the future, such as the integration with a high
computational cloud service capable of pattern recognition, but this will have
to be done only over secure protocols and data encryption on the cloud side.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 6
Experiments
Five series of diﬀerent analysis, divided into two experiments, have been con-
ducted in order to validate the active self-tracking prototype. They primarily
relate to the intuitiveness of the spiral visualization, pattern recognition, acces-
sibility or perception tests.
6.1
Method
The method of evaluating the proposed active self-tracking solution consists
of two ample experiments. Both of them aim to test the pattern recognition
facility of the spiral visualization and the intuitiveness of the application in
general. Moreover, these tests investigate the accessibility of the smartwatch
as the hardware support platform, the glanceability of the spiral timeline and
ﬁnally the perceptual inﬂuences from external factors on the visualization. The
fundamental diﬀerence between the experiments is the number of participants
involved and the duration of the experiments. While for the long-term exper-
iment, the evaluation meant to be more qualitative, guided by the Nielsen’s
usability heuristics [Nie95], the method for experiment 2 was more quantitative,
aiming for gathering more feedback from the users on various tests.
==PAGE:56==
44
Experiments
6.2
Experiment 1
The ﬁrst experiment was carried out by two active testers, who used the smart-
watch active self-tracking solution for a duration of four weeks respectively two
weeks. This test plans to check the performance of the app after intensive usage,
the accessibility and the ease of interacting with the visualization. Ultimately,
it should answer the questions of how glanceable can the interface be when
consulted by an experienced user for the self-knowledge gaining process.
6.2.1
Participants
For this long-term experiment, a total of N=2 subjects have been involved, and
this is mainly due to the limited amount of watches available during the testing
phase, but also because it was hard to ﬁnd volunteers in possession of an Android
powered watch, willing to take part in a multiple weeks experiment like this.
The ﬁrst test subject is a 24 years old male with a computer science engineering
degree, called ACS. He is considered to be an experienced user with knowledge
about wearables or developing applications for this category of devices. The
second one is this thesis supervisor, related to as JEL in the results section.
6.2.2
Apparatus
The ActiveSF application was installed on an LG Urbane smartwatch using An-
droid Studio. Several upgrades were done to the application’s interface during
the four weeks testing period, but none of them being major enough to inﬂuence
the result or the storage mechanism of the data. The smartwatch was perma-
nently used in connection with a paired Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge smartphone,
using either Bluetooth or local WiFi network, for test subject ACS.
6.2.3
Procedure
The test subjects were wearing the smartwatch attached to their wrist for the
two and four weeks period, except for the nights during sleep. At the end of a
day, test user ACS was asked to use the spiral visualization in order to look for
eventual patterns and to note down if some inaccurate data might be there (e.g.
entries at wrong hours or unexpected severity levels). Lastly, he was asked to
note down in a form of a scale from one to ten, how he perceived the display of
==PAGE:57==
6.3 Experiment 2
45
the watch under various lighting conditions, or by sitting down or up or walking.
At the end of the experiment, the user has completed an online survey with his
feedback on the application. The survey can be found in Appendix A.
Moreover, the test subject ASC was asked to duplicate the observation also on
his mobile phone, using the Manage My Pain Lite [man18] application. It tries
to solve exactly the same problem as the proposed smartwatch solution, but
on a diﬀerent platform: the smartphone. The target of this experiment is to
conclude whether or not the smartwatch solution is appropriate for long-term
usage as a valid self-tracking platform in comparison to the phone. Lastly, the
user was asked to express his subjective opinion on which visualization oﬀers
better self-reﬂection on data: the spiral timeline or the classic bar/pie charts
that Manage My Pain Lite app provides.
6.3
Experiment 2
The second large scale experiment followed a diﬀerent approached than the ﬁrst
one. It had more of a quantitative purpose, where the aim was to get as many
persons as possible to quickly test the solution from diﬀerent points of view.
The aspects being tested have been the following:
1. Intuitiveness: how much time does it take for users interacting with the
application for the ﬁrst time to interpret the visualization’s components.
Additionally, the intuitiveness is measured by computing the success rate
of the pattern recognition tasks and through an subjective grade received
by each survey participant regarding both the spiral and the VAS input.
2. Usability tests: how fast (glanceable) and handy it is for the users to
recognize easy patterns when seeing the interface at a glance. This analysis
also presents some A/B testing results carried out for choosing how various
elements on the visualization should look like. At this point, users were
asked to measure the usability and the eﬃciency of the graphical user
interface, as quantiﬁed general scores and detailed comments.
3. Accessibility test: how accessible the smartwatch and the solution de-
sign is compared to the time it takes to solve the same problem on a
smartphone, registering observations via a VAS input.
4. Perceptual tests: how diﬀerent factors such as lighting conditions, wrist
position or the users’ body posture inﬂuences the perception on the visu-
alization.
==PAGE:58==
46
Experiments
6.3.1
Participants
A total number of N=30 participants took part in this set of tests. The vast
majority of the population are students, 86.7% of them having a technical back-
ground. Regarding the age, 80% of the test subjects are between 22 and 28
years old. Even though the volunteers who took part in these tests do not form
a broad segment of the real society due to the lack of people outside the age
interval (22 - 28), the evaluation gave an accurate enough understanding about
how real users perceive the application. The usability and the interface of the
tracking solution have been inﬂuenced by the results of this series of tests, but
they also provided general ideas on how real users would interpret the spiral vi-
sualization or the VAS input under diﬀerent use cases. The age and educational
background distribution are presented in Fig. 6.1.
(a) Age distribution of the participants. (b) Educational background of the partic-
ipants.
Figure 6.1: Age and background distribution of the 30 participants in Exper-
iment 2.
Close to three-quarters of the participants (73.3%) declared that they have used
conventional passive self-tracking apps, while 33.3% of those reported the us-
age of any kind of active self-tracking methods (pain journals, allergy tracking,
mood, various other symptoms).
As expected, the population using passive
self-tracking is higher, because of the convenience. People tend to adopt active
personal informatics solutions usually when it is required (e.g. a chronic dis-
ease). Nevertheless, the majority of the participants can be considered advanced
wearable users, with previous experience in using a quantiﬁed self app, accessing
it almost daily (45%) or for sure several times per month (40%).
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Experiment 2
47
6.3.2
Apparatus
The experiment was conducted in form of an online survey.
As mentioned
before, due to the lack of smartwatches, the whole testing procedure was divided
into two parts, the second one aiming to gather as much feedback as possible
from the users, regarding the features and intuitiveness of the interface. For
the accessibility test and perceptual test, there have been 10 participants
involved, who actually interacted with the watch.
6.3.3
Procedure
The online survey was organized into three sections, which can be entirely con-
sulted in Appendix A.
1. Information collection about the participants: age, education, passive and
active self-tracking experience, the frequency of usage.
2. Application design: how intuitive does the VAS input appear, how ap-
propriate does the smartwatch solution seem for rapid observations, how
intuitive is the information in the center of the spiral, how glanceable
should a solution like this be or how the time markers are displayed.
3. Pattern recognition and time estimates: the participants were asked to
identify certain patterns on concrete visualizations and to provide a rough
estimate of the time it took to answer the question. This test showed
promising results on how people perceive the spiral visualization at a
glance and how handy and eﬀective pattern recognition is.
==PAGE:60==
48
Experiments
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 7
Results and Discussions
In this chapter, a detailed explanation of the results of the tests is presented.
Both Experiment 1 and 2 are discussed in this chapter and how their results
inﬂuenced the development of the application and led to its ﬁnal version.
7.1
Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was designed to test the application under prolonged usage, for a
period of 4 weeks by test subject one, called ACS and for 2 weeks by test subject
number two, named JEL. A total of 220 observations have been collected by
ACS during the period between 1st of May and 25th of May 2018. The tracked
phenomena for user ACS was back pain.
Every time a back pain symptom
occurred, the user was making an observation on the watch, by opening the
application from the watch face. The objective of the test was to see whether
or not there is a correlation between the back pain occurring at certain hours
and other external factors such as location, weather or intense physical activity.
Two screenshots with the spiral visualization containing real collected dataset
are presented in Fig. 7.1a and 7.1b. The spiral conﬁguration from the left side
emphasizes on the observations which occurred during the weekdays, while the
one on the right highlights the observations registered over the weekend.
==PAGE:62==
50
Results and Discussions
(a) Observations during the week days.
(b) Observations during the weekend.
Figure 7.1: Seven days displayed on the spiral with real observations about
back pain.
During this experiment, ASC used in parallel the Manage My Pain Lite app on
the phone, for registering the same observations as on the watch. This approach
gave a broad understanding of how these two platforms solve the same problem.
First of all, considering the time spent for making the observations and the
average time for registration on both platforms (7.1 seconds for the watch vs
22.6 seconds on the phone), it took in total 26 minutes for registering all 220
records on the watch. On the other hand, it required 83 minutes to register
all the observations on the phone. It is obvious that on a long-term usage and
a high frequency of observations, the watch is more than three times faster
than the phone with respect to the time needed for registering an event.
The long-term battery usage and storage consumption were also analyzed after
the four weeks experiment for ACS. At this point, smartwatches are still limited
when it comes to battery capacity or disk size. Nevertheless, during the four
weeks, the battery consumption was less than 1% of all the processes running on
the operating system according to the Android Wear OS companion application.
The storage is also not a problem, and it was considered since the design phase
of the app so that it can function as a standalone one. During the four weeks,
the total memory needed to store the 220 observations was 7.7 KB, while the
APK ﬁle is less than 17 MB.
Regarding pattern recognition, for ACS’s case, it was quite obvious that the
back pain is sometimes present in low amounts in the morning and rarely in the
afternoon, based on the green and yellow observations in this parts of the day
(Fig. 7.1a). The number of severe observations is always located in the evening
part of the spiral (21:00 - 00:00), meaning that the pain has its peak at that
time. On the other hand, the pattern changes during the weekend 7.1b. First
of all, the frequency of observations is lower, and the number of severe ones
is almost not existent. Judging by ACS’s lifestyle, who is a software engineer
working 8 hours per day on his personal projects or some days at his job, the
==PAGE:63==
7.1 Experiment 1
51
backbone is exposed to long hours of continuous pressure while sitting on the
chair. By computing the average pain level during the day, the data shows that
by the time the day advances, the pain becomes more present, having the peak
value between 21:00 and 00:00. The average pain level in the morning is 1.34, in
the afternoon it is 1.50, while in the evening the average reaches 4.43 units on
the scale. In contrast, the test subject is very active during the weekends, going
to swimming or running. These activities relax the muscles of the backbone,
and less of a pressure is put on the vertebrae, resulting in the low observations
in the weekends.
One other interesting pattern aroused when the location history was consulted,
this time on a desktop system. The data have been downloaded from the watch
and integrated with Google Maps API for computing a clustered map of loca-
tions. The clustering algorithm aggregated 41 location data points after the
duplicates were removed from the collection. The map is presented in Fig. 7.2
and contains two clusters with the most popular locations for ACS. On average,
the pain level registered at the oﬃce where the test subject works two days
per week has a level of 1.51. On the other hand, the average pain level for the
observations made at home reaches 3.74 out of the maximum allowed value on
the scale (10). Of course, one of the explanations could be that the pain has its
peak at the evening when the test subject is always home and as a result, the
average is higher for the events registered at this location. One further reason
is that ACS bikes 30 minutes to the train station and walks for another 20 on
the streets of Copenhagen until reaching the oﬃce, meaning that the backbone
is less prone to pain due to the physical activity. While working a full day at
home, the test subject is usually very static resulting in a higher amount of pain.
Test subject JEL presented his feedback on the application through the "think-
ing aloud" method. He tested the gestures interactions with the visualization
and suggested that the swipe left gesture, which opens the VAS input, might
be interpreted by the app as either a short scrolling up or down gesture. If
the movement of the ﬁngertip is not completely horizontal on the screen and
advances up or down the screen with a few pixels while doing the swipe left
gesture, those pixels will be perceived as scroll up or down until the complete
swipe gesture ends. One solution for decreasing the impact of this is to reduce
the swipe threshold by 30 – 40%, down to 60 – 70 pixels. Also, the swipe veloc-
ity can be reduced, which will make the recognition of a swipe gesture possible
even when the speed of the ﬁngertip is lower.
Furthermore, JEL reported that when registering an observation in the VAS
input screen, pressing the Ok button should close the activity and reload the
spiral visualization automatically after the observation is stored. This will elim-
inate the unnecessary extra gesture from the user in order to dismiss the VAS
input and reload the spiral screen. For consistency reasons, the same behavior
==PAGE:64==
52
Results and Discussions
Figure 7.2: Location pattern and pain average level from the observations col-
lected by ACS.
should be implemented for the Cancel button, with the only exception that no
observation is stored after the button is pressed. Additionally, the test subject
suggested that the gap between the green and the red extremes of the VAS
should be emphasized and redrawn with a diﬀerent color than the background
one. This will help users diﬀerentiate when the marker is positioned at the very
beginning or end of the scale, corresponding to zero severity and highest severity
possible.
Finally, the test subject suggested that the accessibility could be even more
increased if the spiral visualization would be displayed directly on the watch
face. The spiral should have two modes on the watch face, similar to the way
it works at the moment with the shortcut button. In the ambient mode, the
spiral should be drawn in toned colors, with a grey shade, to indicate that the
spiral is not available for interactive gestures. Nevertheless, the users can use
it to self-reﬂect at a glance, without having to even make a single tap gesture.
The opposite mode, the interactive one, should have the same behavior as in
the current version of the prototype. Gestures interaction will allow the user
to navigate through the spiral, the only diﬀerence being that the interaction is
done at the level of the watch face, and the tap gesture of loading the spiral is
removed.
==PAGE:65==
7.2 Experiment 2
53
7.2
Experiment 2
7.2.1
Intuitiveness
Measuring the intuitiveness of an interface is deﬁnitely not an easy task. Because
the ActiveSF app runs on a small display device, there is not much space for
displaying tutorials or support text to guide the users when using the interface.
The intuitiveness was a key performance indicator since the start of the project.
Based on the results regarding the Visual Analogue Scale design, 93.3% of the
test subjects declared that they ﬁnd the green and red gradient association
with pain severity very intuitive. This gave promising results that the color
coded scale approach is a valid one. Moreover, 96.7% reported that quantifying
subjective events such as pain or anger is very intuitive and easier to relate to
in connection to a color (Fig. 7.3a). On the ﬁrst interaction with the interface,
and having a minimal context knowledge about what the scale represents, the
average score that the VAS input GUI received was 8.2 (Fig. 7.3b). In other
words, judging that a score of seven-plus means good intuitiveness results, 76.6
% of the population responded that the VAS interface is intuitive. What is
promising is that the rest of 23.3 % rated the scale between 4 and 6, but no
entries lower than 4 were registered, meaning that nobody considered the VAS
completely unusable and unintuitive at a ﬁrst glance.
(a) Intuitiveness score for the color code
correlation.
(b) General score for the intuitiveness of
the VAS input.
Figure 7.3: Intuitiveness of the design of the VAS input technique. The scores
are individual subjective grades.
Regarding the spiral visualization, 60% of the population graded the spiral with
4 or 5 (on a scale from 1 to 5) when it comes to how appropriate it is for
discovering temporal patterns.
Including the 26.7% who rated it as decent,
it is very promising that 86.7% tend to say it is suitable for self-reﬂection.
With reference to the information presented in the center, 73.4% found it self-
explanatory enough. All the aggregated grades can be seen on the distribution
==PAGE:66==
54
Results and Discussions
plots in Appendix A.
On the intuitiveness scale, from 1 to 10, the average score was 6.26 (Fig. 7.4a),
considering that at the time the responses were collected the spiral visualization
was not ﬁnished (see Fig. 7.4b). The ﬁnal version was rated on an average of
7.75, which shows an improvement of 24%. Even though fewer people evaluated
the ﬁnal version, the 24% growth shows that the newly added features of the
spiral lead to better results regarding the intuitiveness. Additionally, considering
the correct responses for the ﬁve pattern recognition tasks, on average 83.22%
chose the correct patterns. This result, combined to the 7.75 out of 10 score
for the spiral intuitiveness conclude that the spiral timeline is appropriate for
self-reﬂection and intuitive enough so that at least 80% of the new users will
have a decent to smooth experience at their ﬁrst interaction with the interface.
(a) How intuitive the test participants per-
ceived the spiral visualization.
(b) The visualization at the moment the
survey was made.
Figure 7.4: The grades registered for the intuitiveness of the spiral visualiza-
tion.
7.2.2
Usability
The primary goal of this test category was to measure the glanceability and
eﬃciency of the spiral visualization in the context of real pattern recognition
scenarios. The time and success rate were the main key performance indicators
for these matters.
Firstly, the users were asked what exactly glanceable means to them. They were
requested to provide a value in seconds that they consider to be the threshold
between a glanceable and a non-glanceable interface. The average answer was
8.23 seconds, with the majority of answers being between 5 and 10 seconds.
Therefore, a benchmark was deﬁned throughout the project, that the time of a
glanceable self-reﬂection process should be less than 10 seconds.
==PAGE:67==
7.2 Experiment 2
55
Three tasks were designed for pattern recognition and glanceability, using the
spiral visualization from iteration 8, as in Fig. 7.4b. The tasks can be consulted
in the survey results, in Appendix A. The ﬁrst test, an easy self-reﬂection one,
where the users had to ﬁnd the most severe observation in the visualization
(Experiment 1 in the survey, Appendix A), 83.3% of the people answered cor-
rectly and 60% of them were also able to answer in less than 10 seconds. The
second task, a medium diﬃculty one, asked the participants to name the period
of the day with the most severe average of observations (Experiment 2 in the
survey). A huge proportion of 96.7% answered correctly and 63.3% of the peo-
ple were able to provide an answer within the 10 seconds threshold. The last
task (Experiment 3 in the survey), a diﬃcult pattern on a real set of collected
observations on back pain was provided. The testers were asked to select the
best hour interval for having intense physical activities so that the back pain
will be the lowest. 88.8% of the people selected the correct answer based on the
pattern, with an average time of 12.6 seconds. For a ﬁrst time seen pattern, the
average self-reﬂection time of 12.6 seconds is still close enough to the deﬁned
threshold.
This proves that people actually understand the concept of the spiral and are
able to deliver a correct result from self-reﬂection. It is expected though, that
as the users learn how to interpret the spiral and reﬂect on data about a phe-
nomenon of their own interest and not the back pain provided one, the time
should drop under the 10 seconds threshold, even for not obvious patterns. As
a conclusion on these tests, they conﬁrm that the application is in between
the margin of the cognitive and rational bands from Newell’s classiﬁcation and
people were able to recognize diﬀerent temporal patterns on the spiral.
A very interesting discovery aroused from task 3, regarding the way cognitive
process functions for individuals. Figure 7.5a is the spiral conﬁguration used for
the experiment, while the results are presented in Fig 7.5b. Both options, 09:00
- 11:00 PM and 18:00 - 20:00, are considered to be correct, the only diﬀerence
is how people interpret them, which is strictly a matter of subjectivity. The
yellow option, 9:00 - 11:00 PM, preferred by almost 41%, is the interval with no
observations, with the highest number of blank arcs on the visualization. People
who chose this option argued that the reason why there are blank observations is
that there was no pain felt and therefore no need for an observation. As a result,
following the logic that no observation means no pain, they chose this option for
intense physical activities. On the other hand, a slightly bigger percent, 48%,
chose the read option, the interval between 18:00 and 20:00 PM. They have
motivated their choice as follows: "You cannot relate to the lack of observations
to draw a conclusion". Therefore, they chose the interval with many light green
observations, that means the least pain.
Both cognitive interpretations are valid and would not introduce any bias in
==PAGE:68==
56
Results and Discussions
(a) Spiral conﬁguration for the back pain
task.
(b) Users’ responses for Task 3.
Figure 7.5: Task 3 spiral conﬁguration and the participants responses for this
task.
the self-reﬂection process. Every user has the freedom to assert an event or to
self-reﬂect as they consider better and more logical. The half choosing to take
into account blank observations will act in concordance to it, as the other half
will make sure to mark observations explicitly and reﬂect only by taking those
into consideration.
The last task of the study was to determine the maximum number of days that
should be represented in the spiral. After experimenting with diﬀerent conﬁg-
urations, the conclusion was that displaying 21 days was the maximum value
which made sense for the self-reﬂection process and the glanceability threshold.
73.7% of the participants responded correctly within an average time of 11 sec-
onds at the experiment. Increasing the number of days will lead to a decrease
in the accuracy of self-reﬂection due to the condensed information on a tiny
display.
Finally, several A/B tests have been pursued in order to determine what is the
best approach for certain features of the visualization such as: the time markers,
the information in the center of the visualization, the diﬀerentiation between
weekdays and weekend or whether or not the spiral should have a settings panel
for choosing the desired number of days to be displayed. The results can all
be observed in detail in Appendix A. The direct impact on the visualization
was that the hourly time markers were replaced with 3-hourly markers, the
information in the center of the spiral was replaced with the actual name of the
month and expanded time format. Finally, the settings screen was added and
started using the long press gesture on the spiral, which allows the user to pick
an integer value between 7 and 21 which represent the number of days displayed
in the spiral.
==PAGE:69==
7.2 Experiment 2
57
7.2.3
Accessibility
The accessibility test’s goal is to establish whether or not the smartwatch plat-
form is more appropriate than a smartphone for data collection. The test re-
sulted in the conclusion that the watch is three times more accessible than
the phone, with respect to the time used for registering an observation. An
average time of 22.6 seconds was registered for making an observation on the
phone, using the Manage My Pain Lite application. The series of actions such
as pulling the phone out of the pocket, unlocking it, navigating to the app and
opening it plus making the observation proved to be too time-consuming on
average. On the other hand, it took only 7.1 seconds on average to register
an event using the VAS input screen. The performance was improved from 9.4
seconds after the watch face service with the shortcut for the app was added.
The interaction is now reduced to 2 tap gestures and a swipe action for adding a
new entry, therefore the good average time of 7.1 seconds. As a more solid point,
47% of the survey takers agreed that the smartwatch solution might be more
accessible, while the same percentage, 47% were convinced that it is handier
(only 6% preferred the phone).
7.2.4
Perception
The test subjects for this matter interacted with the smartwatch directly, by
having it attached to their wrist. Based on this paper presented at ACM CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 2018 [TB18], the percep-
tual tests used this average parameters which are stated in the paper: a pitch
angle of 50 degrees, head to watch distance of 28 cm, and height from ﬂoor of
100 cm while sitting and 142 cm while standing. They were asked to perform a
series of 4 experiments of recognizing an easy pattern while:
1. Standing up: the participants had to name the date of the weekend days,
which according to the spiral conﬁguration in Fig. 7.6a are 19 and 20.
2. Sitting down on a chair: for this task, the participants were asked to
count the rings of the spiral, with the correct answer being 9.
3. Walking on a regular peace: the test subjects had to name the 3 hours
interval with the highest average of severe observations.
The expected
answer was 21:00 - 00:00 PM.
4. With a source of intense light from a lamp or sun, perpendicular to the
watch’s screen (Fig. 7.6b): this task expected the participants to count
the green observations between 6:00 and 12:00, the valid answer being 2.
==PAGE:70==
58
Results and Discussions
(a) The spiral conﬁguration used for the
perceptual tests.
(b) The watch face under bright perpen-
dicular light from a lamp.
Figure 7.6: Perception tests interface conﬁguration.
The results of the perceptual tests were very similar for the sitting and standing
situations.
80% of the people responded correctly to the standing up task,
while 90% answered correctly during the sitting down task. The 10% diﬀerence
is primarily due to the reduced number of test subjects (10 people), so it is
expected that on a larger tested population the values should be less than 10%
diﬀerent. Regarding the ﬁrst two perceptual tests, the result is obvious that
the body position of the user is not a factor of inﬂuence over the way he or she
perceives the visualization.
Not any considerable inﬂuence was discovered either at the perceptual test when
the user was walking. The response rate was 100% correct, everybody selecting
the interval 21:00 - 00:00 as the ﬁnal answer. The test aimed to be very easy,
and that is because the scenario when a user consults the watch while walking
is for very accessible tasks. It is very unlikely that a user will self-reﬂect on the
exact day or look for a particular value on the spiral while walking. This type
of task requires more cognitive power and focus and therefore people tend to
stand still while performing those intense cognitive actions.
Finally, the lighting conditions test lead to very interesting results. It might
be very common that the user would use the spiral visualization outside in
the sun or inside with plenty of artiﬁcial light. Only 50 % of the participants
answered correctly, after taking a long time (more than 20 seconds on average)
looking at the visualization. The rest of 50% answered either 1 or 3, which
was incorrect, but their perception of the colors was aﬀected by the light. The
explanation is that the shades of green and yellow under bright light tend to
be very similar, as you can see in the sample image from the test case (Fig.
7.6b). Due to the intense light, the colors are very diﬃcult to be distinguished
and an ample proportion of the test subjects were confused by this. The direct
result was to apply a decreasing saturation ﬁlter function on the colors of the
observations, so that the shades green and yellow, or orange and red will be
easily distinguishable under bright light conditions.
==PAGE:71==
7.3 Discussion
59
7.3
Discussion
Experiment 1 proves how using the ActiveSF application for a prolonged time
allows users to collect impressive amounts of data at a pace that was not pos-
sible using a smartphone. Furthermore, with an integration API that will be
presented at Section 8, the users will be able to manipulate the ﬂow of data from
the smartwatch to a web service as the clustering one used for computing the
map just by using a few tap interactions. This could enhance the self-reﬂection
process and allow users to discover patterns that would otherwise be almost
impossible to ﬁnd, such as the correlation between the location and the pain
felt.
In the back pain experiment, the data has the potential of providing doctors
or chiropractors with the exact time and location of the symptoms. They can
consequently determine the core cause of the back pain and recommend a per-
sonalized recovery treatment. The premises are good that this accurate and
often collected data can serve as a basic point of starting a diagnosis process
between a doctor and a patient.
Experiment 1 also provided a good comparison of using the current active self-
tracking solution on the smartwatch and a similar app on the phone.
Even
though the smartphone allows the addition of more details and annotations
around a single observation (associated symptoms, environment, characteristics,
notes) 7.7a, it comes with two downsides compared to the ActiveSF app: the
VAS scale is a discrete numerical one with ten possible entries and the data
visualization on a linear timeline is not as appropriate as the spiral.
Finally, the second experiment and all its subcategories proved to be a very
eﬃcient way of overcoming the lack of physical smartwatches for long-term usage
which the test subjects could have used. Therefore, Experiment 2 gathered a
good amount of data about various usability matters of the visualization. This
gave a very good feedback on the work at that point, and more importantly,
it helped to improve the spiral visualization to a 7.75 average score on the
intuitiveness. On the other hand, the whole instrumentation system has been
tested by fewer people compared to the survey participants. Exactly, there has
been ten users who have fully interacted with the application, and who evaluated
the system mainly through the "thinking aloud" method.
This implies that the gestures interactions have not been tested so thoroughly as
the spiral and VAS input visualizations, from the number of participants point
of view. They have been presented the smartwatch and the app so that they
are able to give feedback on this matter, which was really useful for mapping
the scrolling direction for navigating through the spiral. Nevertheless, the low
==PAGE:72==
60
Results and Discussions
(a) VAS input and list of annotations for
Manage My Pain app.
(b) Linear data visualization for Manage
My Pain app.
Figure 7.7: Manage My Pain app input and data visualization components.
number of test subject implies that the results of the gesture interactions tests
cannot be considered entirely reliable. They oﬀered an important starting point
and a good overview of how people would prefer to interact with a dynamic
interface on a smartwatch, but there is still room for research on this topic.
Additionally, even though the accessibility test had also a reduced number of
participants, it was very concludent on this aspect, by ﬁnding the 300% increase
in time for making an observation on the phone.
7.3.1
Detailed Feedback Review
This Subsection aims to present the most common information extracted from
the detailed text feedback given by the survey takers.
The feedback can be
organized into four categories based on the similarity between the comments:
1. The information in the center: "I don’t ﬁnd intuitive the info in the
center because if there is an "M" next to a "D" and a "H", users tend to
think it’s minutes instead of months. I think instead I would try to ﬁt in
something like: 5 Apr, 8am or 5 Apr, 8:00."
People argued that at the time the survey was active, the information in
the center of the spiral was not intuitive enough, because of the one letter
abbreviations used for representing the month, date and hour when the
==PAGE:73==
7.3 Discussion
61
spiral starts (moment t0 in Fig. 4.10a). The result of this aggregated feed-
back has been discussed, in the results Section of the second experiment
and the abbreviations have been replaced with the complete names of the
month and day.
2. The spiral complexity is too high: "Consider reducing the complexity
to either show less info or create summaries."
Some of the participants mentioned that the spiral is too complex for av-
erage users, which decreases the intuitiveness. They added that they ﬁnd
the smartwatch solution very accessible and appropriate for collecting in-
put, but the visualization is maybe too condensed for such a small display.
For the same reason, they argued that the details are hard to catch.
3. Good overview over the observations: "Regarding the ability to rep-
resent abstract observations, I think it’s awesome and really fast.
The
power to see that information at a glance fulﬁlls very well the need of peo-
ple that doesn’t want to spend that much time using technology, but still
wants its beneﬁts."
On the other hand, most of the users noticed that even though the spiral
does now allow for details, it is very easy to observe at a glance how the
patterns look like. They mentioned that if they are not looking for gran-
ular events (i.e. the hour when a particular event happened), but simply
look for larger patterns such as periods of the day, the visualization is very
pleasant to use of self-reﬂection and getting the big picture from the data.
4. Good intuitiveness: "I think that the spiral visualization has great po-
tential for displaying events in a intuitive manner."
Some of the participants appreciated the intuitiveness of the spiral and
they argued that it is very appropriate for drawing conclusions at a glance.
Additionally, they mention that the user has to be committed to registering
symptoms every time they occur, otherwise the probability of identifying
a pattern signiﬁcantly decrease.
==PAGE:74==
62
Results and Discussions
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 8
Future Work and
Conclusion
The following chapter presents the conclusions of the project and talks about
the limitations and future enhancements for the prototype.
8.1
Data Synchronization with Smartphone
Data synchronization with the handheld should be developed more, in order to
facilitate not only location sharing but also sending data from the watch to the
phone. The solution has been designed to be a standalone app on the watch,
but these devices are still limited in terms of storage capabilities, so transferring
the observations to the phone and using it as a permanent storage is deﬁnitely a
good enhancement. Moreover, this possibility allows the actively collected data
from the watch to be linked to other external data sources from the internet
in order to analyze other connections between the triggers of some symptoms.
For instance, if a user measures the itching of eczema on the skin, the data
can be sent to the phone which would download the history of UV indices as
a variable in the detection process and maybe establish whether or not there
is a connection with the tracked phenomena and the solar radiation intensity.
This use case and some other similar ones imply that a paired application will
==PAGE:76==
64
Future Work and Conclusion
be developed on the phone as well.
8.2
Cloud Integration and Connection with Pas-
sive Data
Based on the data synchronization with the handheld device, the concept of
synchronization can be extended so that the data is furtherly sent to a special
cloud service. This service would be able to use its computational power to
apply diﬀerent detection and pattern recognition algorithms in order to detect
patterns that otherwise would be impossible for a human to identify. One other
possible use case for this future feature could be sending the data directly to a
doctor’s registry. Once arrived there, the data can be manipulated so that it
gives the doctor a better overview of how the chronic disease symptoms evolve
over time [WVKG+18]. Generally, within the healthcare sector, it was proven
at the CHI Conference 2018, that data collected and meaningfully visualized
can be an important enhancement for the treatment process [HLOW18].
8.3
Further Enhancements of the Spiral Visual-
ization
The spiral visualization is deﬁnitely a new approach for visualizing data on a
smartwatch. This prototype managed to achieve very good results on the data
visualization side, but there is clearly room for more enhancements. One impor-
tant improvement would be to facilitate the interaction even more and provide
the user with a mechanism of checking out more details on the spiral. One way
would be to implement an approach for viewing large layouts on small screens
[SSTR93], which provides the technique of both adding a consistent amount of
data and creating the zoom in eﬀect for visualizing details on particular data.
This is similar to the magnifying glass eﬀect applied only on certain areas of the
canvas (1.5 or 2 centimeters radius semi-circle on the right side of the ﬁngertip),
leaving the rest of the spiral visualization not scaled. By this interaction, the
zoom can be applied on clusters of arcs from the spiral and the user can better
read the information on those arcs.
The magnifying glass eﬀect, or ﬁsh eye eﬀect, works as shown in Figure 8.1.
The concept has been considered as a future enhancement of the prototype as
a result of the direct feedback from the test users. Concretely, some of them
==PAGE:77==
8.4 Conclusion
65
raised the point that the information in the spiral may be too condensed and it
is diﬃcult to catch details. Such an interaction still oﬀers the same good self-
reﬂection mechanism but has also the potential of organizing the information in
a way which allows the users to catch more details from the spiral because of
the zoom eﬀect. Of course, implementing such a behavior implies reconsidering
the approach for navigating through the spiral using the vertical scrolling inter-
action. Solutions such as using the Digital Crown [app18] concept introduced
by Apple or a rotating bezel such as the one on Samsung Gear Sport [sam18]
smartwatch are both interaction techniques worth researching.
Figure 8.1: The canvas which has the initial state in the left image is
"stretched" so that at any point in time, one square is fully mag-
niﬁed, while the surrounding squares are gradually scaled down
[SSTR93].
The squares used for describing the concept can be
mapped to an arc of the spiral. The Fish Eye Eﬀect has been
applied to the spiral visualization in order to simulate this type of
behavior.
8.4
Conclusion
This thesis presented the design, implementation and testing phases of Ac-
tiveSF, a personal informatics application prototype. The architecture and de-
sign choices for building this prototype have been described in this thesis. The
Visual Analogue Scale proved to be an accurate mechanism for Ecological Mo-
mentary Assessment, while the decision of applying a color code scheme on the
scale reduced the bias and was perceived as intuitive by the vast majority of the
testers. Finally, the spiral visualization was identiﬁed as a good self-reﬂection
tool which gives an intuitive overview of the recorded data.
The most important limitation of this platform is the reduced size of the screen.
Some test users of the quantitative experiments argued that the display size is
==PAGE:78==
66
Future Work and Conclusion
too small in order to present a detailed visualization. On one hand, it is true
that the screen does not allow a detailed data visualization, but on the other
hand, it was not the main purpose of the spiral visualization. Primarily, it aimed
to present an overview of the data and not details for deep self-reﬂection.
The most important value that this solution brings to the users is that it comes as
a complete active self-tracking instrumentation system, delivered directly on the
smartwatch as a standalone application. The accessibility and high compliance
rate of the smartwatch platform are also key assets of the application prototype.
Considering that both the quantitative and qualitative experiments showed pos-
itive results, the prototype can be recognized as a valid personal informatics so-
lution. Furthermore, acknowledging the signiﬁcant inﬂuence that such a system
can have in healthcare, it can be concluded that the ActiveSF instrumenta-
tion system has great potential for helping users self-reﬂect and understand the
causes of various chronic diseases.
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A
Experiment 2 - Online
Survey Results
==PAGE:80==
Active self-tracking
30 responses
How old are you?
30 responses
What is your education background?
30 responses
22
23
24
25
26
28
40
50
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
2 (6.7%)
2 (6.7%)
2 (6.7%)
2 (6.7%)
10 (33.3%)
10 (33.3%)
5 (16.7%)
5 (16.7%)
4 (13.3%)
4 (13.3%)
5 (16.7%)
5 (16.7%)
1 (3.3%)
1 (3.3%)
1 (3.3%)
1 (3.3%)
Technical
Other
13.3%
86.7%
==PAGE:81==
Have you ever used passive self-tracking apps? (steps tracking, sleep,
pulse measuring etc.)
30 responses
Have you ever used active self-tracking apps (pain journals, allergy tracker,
mood tracker etc.)? Active self-tracking means that the tracking is done
actively by the user and not automatically by the app.
30 responses
If yes on at least one of the 2 questions above, how often do you use
them?
20 responses
Yes
No
26.7%
73.3%
Yes
No
66.7%
33.3%
==PAGE:82==
Do you regularly wear a smartwatch or wearable devices (e.g. Apple
watch, Android powered smartwatches, Fitbit)?
30 responses
Do you consider that using a smartwatch for tracking an event is more
accessible than doing the same operation on a smartphone?
30 responses
Daily
Several times a week
Once a week
Several times a month
40%
15%
45%
Yes
No
16.7%
83.3%
==PAGE:83==
Active self-tracking application design
How intuitive do you ¡nd to associate "no pain" to Green color and "the
most severe pain" to intense Red?
30 responses
How intuitive do you ¡nd to quantify abstract observations (pain, anger,
allergic reactions, mood) using a color code scale? (see Fig. 1)
30 responses
Yes
No
Maybe
46.7%
1
2
3
4
5
0
10
20
30
1 (3.3%)
1 (3.3%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
1 (3.3%)
1 (3.3%)
4 (13.3%)
24 (80%)
==PAGE:84==
How intuitive do you ¡nd the visual analogue colored scale of the
application for making an observation (Fig. 2), in respect to the scale
above (Fig. 1)?
30 responses
Please select the hourly interval when the most severe observation
occurred, according to the visualization above (Fig. 3).
30 responses
5
10
15
20
12 (40%)
17 (56.7%)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
5
10
15
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
2 (6.7%)
2 (6.7%)
3 (10%)
3 (10%)
2 (6.7%)
2 (6.7%)
1 (3.3%)
1 (3.3%)
6 (20%)
6 (20%)
4 (13.3%)
4 (13.3%)
12 (40%)
12 (40%)
==PAGE:85==
Please provide a rough estimate of how much time did it take to ¡nd the
answer for the question above.
30 responses
Please select the period of the day where the average of observations is
the most severe.
30 responses
3 - 4
18 - 19
8 - 9
21 - 22
16.7%
Less than 10 seconds
Between 10 and 20 seconds
Between 30 and 60 seconds
More than 60 seconds
10%
10%
20%
60%
3 - 6 AM (night)
6 - 9 PM (morning)
12 - 15 PM (noon)
18 - 21 (evening)
96.7%
==PAGE:86==
Please provide a rough estimate of how much time did it take to ¡nd the
answer for the question above.
30 responses
How intuitive do you ¡nd the spiral visualization (Fig. 3) for displaying
observations?
30 responses
How appropriate do you think a spiral timeline visualization is for
Less than 10 seconds
Between 10 and 20 seconds
Between 30 and 60 seconds
More than 60 seconds
10%
26.7%
63.3%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
2
4
6
8
2 (6.7%)
2 (6.7%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
3 (10%)
3 (10%) 3 (10%)
3 (10%)
1 (3.3%)
1 (3.3%)
3 (10%)
3 (10%)
7 (23.3%)
7 (23.3%)7 (23.3%)
7 (23.3%)
3 (10%)
3 (10%)
1 (3.3%)
1 (3.3%)
==PAGE:87==
discovering recurring patterns of the observations (e.g. the period of the
day, or hours interval)?
30 responses
How intuitive do you ¡nd the information in the center of the spiral?
(Month, Day, Hour)
30 responses
In your opinion, what is the minimum number of seconds an user should
look at a visualization in order to understand a pattern. How many
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
10
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
4 (13.3%)
8 (26.7%)
9 (30%)
9 (30%)
1
2
3
4
5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
4 (13.3%)
4 (13.3%)
11 (36.7%)
8 (26.7%)
3 (10%)
==PAGE:88==
seconds exactly mean "glanceable" to you?
26 responses
Would you consider using such a smartwatch solution for actively tracking
various phenomena and self-re¢ect on the tracked data?
18 responses
Please provide some detailed comments about the active self-tracking
application and its visualization here. Thank you!
12 responses
1
3
4
5
7
8
10
15
20
30
69
0
2
4
6
8
1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)
4 (15.4%)
4 (15.4%)
1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)
7 (26.9%)
7 (26.9%)
1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)
6 (23.1%)
6 (23.1%)
2 (7.7%)
2 (7.7%)
1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)1 (3.8%)
1 (3.8%)
Yes
No
Maybe
22.2%
61.1%
16.7%
==PAGE:89==
The information in the center of the spiral is not intuitive if you see it for the ¡rst time. 
It is hard to follow the day of the spiral when you display more days. In Fig.4 there are 6 days displayed and it
is easier to follow compared to Fig. 3 
I ¡nd the visualization intuitive enough for getting the big picture of the observations, but details are hard to
catch
I gave a 7 regarding the intuitiveness of the spiral vis. due to the fact that is di£cult to realise which day is it.  
However, I ¡nd it very useful, clear and easy for seeing patterns in the 4 parts of the day (morning, midday,
evening and night). 
I don't ¡nd intuitive the info in the center because if there is an "M" next to a "D" and a "H", users tend to think
it's minutes instead of months. I think instead I would try to ¡t in something like: 5 Apr, 8am or 5 Apr, 8:00. 
Regarding the ability to represent abstract observations, I think it's awesome and really fast. The power to see
that information at a glance ful¡lls very well the need of people that doesn't want to spend that much time
using technology, but still wants its bene¡ts.
I ¡nd it easy to draw conclusions and to have a summary/overview based on the spiral visualisation. Although
I can imagine that with more data points, this task may become a bit more di£cult. All in all, it is an innovative
way to display this kind of data!
I think that the spiral visualization has great potential for displaying events in a intuitive manner.
Too much information on area such as a smart watch
interesting concept, you may want to consider being able to tab for different views, consider reducing the
complexity to either show less info or create summaries. Overall the complexity of the spiral is quite high for
the average user
The visualization is not really intuitive. It is just to cluttered. Just extract the information out of that and show
me what I want to see (your questions). If I want to see the details I am not going to check my smartwatch, I
probably have my smartphone with me. The smartwatch should just be used for the logging and quick
interactions, not stuff that will take me a minute to ¡gure out what am I looking at. Kisses.
The spiral visualisation can be useful in order to make an approximation on the time of the day when certain
activities took place (in this case, the scaling of the observations). In most cases, this approach ful¡lls it's
purpose and if the measurements are constant, then a pattern may emerge and can be easily identi¡ed as a
cluster. However, in the event of random measured observations spread throughout the day, the time it takes
to correctly asses the measurement increases and in some cases, there cannot be a precise opinion at a ¡rst
glance.
Overall the application seems nice and even though the spiral visualization looks complex, it's really easy to
interpret. However I'm still unsure what exactly we are measuring
Interesting way to have this kind of visualisation
The spiral was not that intuitive. It took a long time to ¡nd out when the exact day started etc. It would be too
much to look at for me and I would not use it. I like the watch design, but make it more simple.
The green - red scale works ¡ne but the Visualization period is too extensive. It could maybe be limited to only
showing the last month so it becomes more simple. The Grey and black text and edges should be adjusted so
it gets a better visual appearance.
==PAGE:90==
Extra questions for more details about the spiral visualization (not
mandatory to answer but very much appreciated).
Do you ¡nd it better to have the hour markers distributed as in Figure 5
(3:00 AM, 6:00 AM, 9:00 AM, 12:00 PM etc) or displayed for every hour
(1AM, 2AM, 3AM ... 12PM, 13PM etc.) as in Figure 6.
27 responses
Please provide a short answer to motivate your choice.
18 responses
It's better to keep the UI clean, it makes it easier in my opinion to draw conclusions.
less clustered
Maybe a two-hour notation would be better
I would also only make the lines bigger so i don’t even have to see the numbers. It’s a waste of space to have
all the numbers
overall its easier to look at
Looks nicer
The overall view is less “crowded” by the numbers
Figure 2 seems less cluttered
The ¡rst approach is better since it contains less information and can be processed faster.
Figure 1 (every 3 hours
marker)
Figure 2 (every hour marker)
22.2%
77.8%
==PAGE:91==
I chose "every 3 hour" maker because if you show every hour, the visualization becomes much harder to read
More intuitive and friendly
The less numbers, the more comprehensive. Simplicity should always be prioritized when it comes to
useroriented design.
¡gure 5 is more simple and faster understandable
In ¡gure 6 I felt I got much more detail and information from the visualization in a shorter amount of time
I can better read ¡gure 6
Less crowded
The app contains a lot of information already so even more text will increase its complexity.
It's more manageable to look at. Too much is happening in Fig. 6 where every hour is displayed.
Lets assume the tracked phenomena is back pain. Based on the
visualization bellow, Fig. 7, when would you decide to do any sort of
intense physical activity (running, gym etc.) so that the pain is the
minimum during the activity.
27 responses
Please provide a rough estimate of the time it took you to answer the
question (in seconds).
Between 12:00 and 14:00 PM
Between 18:00 and 20:00 PM
Between 9:00 and 11:00 AM
Between 15:00 and 17:00 PM
7.4%
40.7%
48.1%
==PAGE:92==
24 responses
If you want, you can explain and motivate your choice for the experiment
above.
9 responses
If I do exercise during that time frame where I experience the most pain, possibly this might help to combat
against it
Now that I have looked an analysed how the visualization works from previous question it got easier to answer
the question above
seems like its the time of day with less pain, although from personal experience running can be extremely hard
on your back
I have made a rough approximation on the section in which the light green colour is more predominant while
not taking into account the white ones since they mainly represent a period of inactivity.
This is the ¡rst question in this survey which I'm not sure I answered correctly :D Mainly because of the
shades of green. I didn't remember which one had the 'highest' value, but then I assumed it's bright green.
Another reason why I chose my answer is because between 18-20 most of the time slots are ¡lled in with
green (unlike the other options)
It actually shows 20-23. So it took time because that was not an option.
I really had to read the question and look at the spiral several times before understanding
Unsure, if titles that is not colored expressed a period of the least pain.
Chose the period with no observations.
2
5
7
12
20
30
68
Les…
0
2
4
6
2 (8.3%)
2 (8.3%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
5 (20.8%)
5 (20.8%)
2 (8.3%)
2 (8.3%)
4 (16.7%)
4 (16.7%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%)
1 (4.2%
1 (4.2%
==PAGE:93==
Please count how many observations have been recorded between 0 and
6:00 AM, on the visualization bellow (Fig. 8).
20 responses
Please provide a rough estimate of the time it took you to ful¡ll the task
(in seconds).
22 responses
4
8
9
10
12
0
5
10
15
20
1 (5%)
1 (5%)
1 (5%)
1 (5%)
16 (80%)
1 (5%)
1 (5%)
1 (5%)
1 (5%)
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
15
20
180
0
2
4
6
2 (9.1%)
2 (9.1%)
6 (27.3%)
6 (27.3%)
1 (4.5%)
1 (4.5%)
2 (9.1%)
2 (9.1%) 2 (9.1%)
2 (9.1%)
1 (4.5%)
1 (4.5%)
3 (13.6%)
3 (13.6%)3 (13.6%)
3 (13.6%)
1 (4.5%)
1 (4.5%) 1 (4.5%)
1 (4.5%)
==PAGE:94==
Please count how many observations have been recorded between 0 and
6:00AM (Fig. 9).
22 responses
Please provide a rough estimate of the time it took you to ful¡ll the task
(in seconds).
23 responses
Would you consider useful to have an application settings panel for
choosing the desired number of days to be displayed in the spiral?
4
6
9
10
11
0
5
10
15
20
2 (9.1%)
1 (4.5%)
1 (4.5%)
1 (4.5%)
1 (4.5%)
1 (4.5%)
1 (4.5%)
17 (77.3%)
2
3
5
6
7
10
12
13
15
20
200
0
1
2
3
4
5
1 (4.3%)
1 (4.3%)1 (4.3%)
1 (4.3%)
4 (17.4%)
4 (17.4%)
2 (8.7%)
2 (8.7%)2 (8.7%)
2 (8.7%)2 (8.7%)
2 (8.7%)2 (8.7%)
2 (8.7%)
1 (4.3%)
1 (4.3%)
4 (17.4%)
4 (17.4%)
3 (13%)
3 (13%)
1 (4.3%)
1 (4.3%)
==PAGE:95==
3 responses
Do you think it is useful to have the weekend days colored with a light red
shade, in order to differentiate between the working days and weekend
(Fig. 10)?
3 responses
How intuitive do you ¡nd the ¡nal version of the spiral visualization (Fig.
10) for displaying observations and identifying recurrsive patterns?
3 responses
Yes
No
Maybe
100%
Yes
No
Maybe
100%
==PAGE:96==
This content is neither created nor endorsed by Google. Report Abuse - Terms of Service - Additional Terms
1.0
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
1 (33.3%)
1 (33.3%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
1 (33.3%)
1 (33.3%)1 (33.3%)
1 (33.3%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
 Forms
==PAGE:97==
Appendix B
Active Self-tracking Using a
Smartwatch and Spiral
Time Visualization of the
Past Recorded Events
The scientiﬁc article written as the ﬁnal hand-in document for the 02830 Ad-
vanced Project in Digital Media Engineering course at DTU. This thesis project
is a continuation of the 02830 Advanced Project in Digital Media Engineering
course.
==PAGE:98==
Active self-tracking using a smart watch and spiral time
visualization of the past recorded events
Andrei Corneliu Suciu
Technical University of
Denmark
s161453@student.dtu.dk
ABSTRACT
The concept being addressed in this paper consists of pro-
viding users with the right means for self-tracking subjective
experiences using a smart watch, as well as allowing data vi-
sualization of the records within a spiral shaped timeline. Con-
cretely, a data acquisition smart watch application has been
implemented in order to allow the users to actively self-track
symptoms occurrences and to identify certain patterns using
the spiral visualization. As target users, the research started
from a case study of patients suffering from post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), but it might be extended to patients
suffering from various diverse health disorders. The results of
this research have proven that the patients may beneﬁt from
this application as they are able to self-reﬂect on the causes of
their symptoms, but also collect valuable input for the doctors
and the recovery process.
Author Keywords
Active self-tracking, data collection, self-reﬂection, smart
watch, spiral visualization, patient doctor interaction, Visual
Analogue Scale.
INTRODUCTION
Collecting and showing accurate data to doctors helping pa-
tients have proven to have major improvements over the recov-
ery process of the patients, especially to shorten the recovery
time. Based on the case study of a Danish veteran suffering
from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) [3] using a Blue-
tooth wristband button for tracking symptoms, the research
might be extended to developing a more generic active self-
tracking tool using a smart watch and a smart phone. This
paper will speciﬁcally start presenting the motivation and goal
of the research, followed by exploring the different stages of
data collection and user self-reﬂection by analysis, then deﬁne
how these stages were implemented as a smart watch proto-
type. Finally, it will review and discuss the results of the tests
and conclude upon these.
Motivation and goal
The motivation of this project is to provide people following a
therapeutical process with the means to self-track data about
symptoms occurrences as well as providing data visualization.
Additionally, the motivation for choosing a smart watch as a
recording device is that it is an easy to carry wearable, with
a good amount of computational power which comes with
an affordable price. The goal of the research is to create a
self-tracking data acquisition smart watch app for recording
data such as: time, pain level, vitals, location. This data may
be subject to two different kind of prelucration/integration:
• Spiral time visualization on the smart watch (ﬁg. 2). This
type of visualization has been chosen because it allows the
user to easily observe certain patters about the occurrence
of the symptoms that would be hardly distinguished on
conventional plots (e.g. line plots, bars plots).
• Data synchronization with a smart phone. This possible
option is brieﬂy considered on this paper, the main focus
being on the ﬁrst type of integration. The events recorded
by the smart watch user may be furthermore transferred to
the phone, where they may be sent directly to the doctor’s
database, or to a cloud server, where highly-computational
pattern detection might be applied using machine learning
or AI.
SOLUTION ANALYSIS
Self-tracking and the interaction with the system might be
seen as an iterative process, shaped as a pipeline consisting of
5 stages [6]. The goal of this interaction is to provide both the
patients and the doctors with accurate collected data and then
based on the reﬂection stage to take informed actions (ﬁg. 1).
It is also very important to mention that active self-tracking
(opposite to the passive one) implies the user to use his/her self-
consciousness when making an observation in the collection
phase. Therefore, the reﬂection stage is based on subjective
recordings and the patients have the most meaningful data to
reﬂect upon. Passive self-tracking can be further implemented
as part of this solution, in order to collect more essential data,
such as location or vitals.
Figure 1. The Stage-Based Model of Personal Informatics Systems
==PAGE:99==
The preparation[6] stage consists of the patient wearing a
smart watch frequently. By pressing a small button on the
watch face [2], the patient has the possibility of recording the
occurrence of a symptom, and also subjectively rate the pain
level that he or she is feeling.
The collection[6] stage requires the system to deﬁne the nec-
essary mechanics in order to facilitate the collection of data.
Moreover, this should facilitate a smooth human-computer
interaction based on the simpliﬁed cognitive human factors:
sensors, responders, and brain [7] (Appendix C ﬁg. 6). Specif-
ically, user-driven collection of subjective experience is done
through a Visual Analogue Scale [8]. The Visual Analogue
Scale is loaded within an Android Wear Activity (ﬁg. 2 left-
side), and the pain level scale is mapped to color codes: strong
green represents non-existing pain, while strong red is mapped
to severe pain. The gradient represents all the intermediate
values between non-existing pain and severe suffering. The
reason for choosing this representation instead of a quantiﬁed
scale with values between 0 and 10 is that people’s cognitive
process is more likely to associate the pain level to the integer
values/markers on the scale. According to this research about
the performance of Visual Analogue Scale [4], the bins tend
to have an uneven distribution around the markers because
people can relate easily to the markers, instead of the interme-
diate (real analogue values) on the scale (Appendix ﬁg. A).
Therefore, decorations/markers along the slider considerably
bias the distribution of recorded data and as a result the color
scheme has been applied.
It is also important to mention that the length of the VAS
is 9.8 centimeters, and the round design alongside the edge of
the screen has been chosen in order to maximize the length
of the scale and allowing users to more accurately input data
(the ﬁngertip of a person is usually 10mm wide or 48 CSS
pixels [9]). Finally, the patient may use his/her ﬁnger to swipe
on the VAS for choosing the pain value and then press OK
in order to save the event. The timestamp and the pain value
will be automatically saved for the user and the activity will
be destroyed.
Figure 2. Visual Analogue Scale Input and Spiral Visualization of Data
The integration[6] stage gathers the saved events and create
the spiral visualization that will be displayed in the reﬂection
phase. The recorded observations are stored chronologically
and drawn on the spiral starting from the center of the screen
and continuing clock-wise. The spiral is set to display the
events on an analog scale (12 hours) for the past seven days,
and an event is represented between two adjacent hours on the
watch. The color of the arc represents the pain level recorded
at a speciﬁc point in time. Speciﬁcally, colors such as green
represents low pain values, while orange and red represents
intermediate to high values of pain. The reﬂection and action
stages are correlated. The patient is able to interact with the
spiral visualization by using gestures:
• scroll up for fetching observations from the past;
• scroll down for navigating through events until the current
time;
• swipe left for opening a new Visual Analogue Scale input
activity and add a new observation.
During this stage, the user is able to analyze and identify cer-
tain patterns (e.g. which are the time intervals with low/high
pain levels) and then take informed actions based on the re-
ﬂection. A common example in this case would be the when
is the patient recommended to drive or to have any kind of
physical activities.
TESTS AND VALIDATION
Visual Analogue Scale UI Design
The development phase of the self-tracking application started
with a testing and validation phase, where various experiments
were conducted in order to validate the hypothesis. Users were
examined ﬁrstly, in order to test if two proposed designs are
considered feasible input methods, as well as the accuracy
of two Visual Analogue Scale designs (ﬁg. 5). The ﬁrst one
consisted of an approximately 30mm wide scale, where the
user was able to swipe its ﬁnger and register a value. The
second design is the one presented in the solution section (ﬁg.
2, the left side picture). The test aimed to specify which one
of these two input methods is the more accurate one. Ten
people have been asked to use the sliding marker on the scale
to register the following values: 0, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 9 and 10
(or the appropriate color for design 2) with an accepted error
threshold of 0.5. The results of the test showed that the long
VAS input scale (98mm) using colors is approximately 36%
more accurate than the smaller non-colored one. A low ﬁdelity
prototype has been built before conducting this experiment
(Appendix B 5). The designs for the Visual Analogue Scales
was drawn on paper, with respect to the actual size of the
LG Watch Urbane which has been used for testing. The low
ﬁdelity prototype proved to be a cheap and effective solution
for validating the VAS design.
Spiral Time Visualization Design
The development of the spiral time visualization is based on a
ﬁrst low ﬁdelity prototype, whose sketch can be found in (Ap-
pendix B). At the initial testing phase, the spiral visualization
was developed to display the pain level as the height of the
arc between the two adjacent hours when the observation had
been made (Appendix B). The experiments and test conducted
with users showed promising results at that phase, but during
the iteration 1 phase, some drawbacks (presented in section
Iteration 1) had been discovered and the visualization had been
redesigned (see Iteration 2).
==PAGE:100==
The UI interaction represents the key aspect of this appli-
cation because it allows the user to easily interact with the
relevant data and reﬂect about it. As a result, for a high-ﬁdelity
prototype, the users’ needs and values have been identiﬁed
(maximum latency, the size of the buttons and graphs, intuitive-
ness)[5] and based on an active user-testing implementation
process, three visualizations designs have been created (ﬁg.
3):
• Figure (a) represents the pain level as the height of the arc
between the two hours when the event have been recorded.
• Figure (b) represents the pain levels as arcs of the same
height in adjacent order, which compose the spiral. The
level of pain is shown through the color code.
• Figure (c) combines the two approaches above and repre-
sents the pain levels as arcs of the different heights and
colors.
Figure 3. Designs considered for the Spiral Visualization in the testing
phase.
Further tests have been conducted, with users being the main
test subjects. Mostly through A/B testing and direct feedback
form the user, the test had tried to establish which is the most
meaningful representation in terms of scale, time period to be
displayed, zoom interaction and colors. It was also a good
evaluation of the Android API and LG Watch Urban hard-
ware capabilities, as the hardware and API limitations were
considered project pre-mortems.
ITERATIONS
During the entire development of the project throughout 13
weeks, there have been three iterations regarding the spiral
visualization (ﬁg. 4).
Figure 4. Iterations during the development process.
Iteration 1
Iteration (ﬁg. 4(a)) started from the initial idea that the pain
level should be represented as the height of the arc between
two hours. After testing the visualization with subject users,
details such as hour markers, the days of the week and different
colors for the days have been added. The spiral visualization
have been proven to be invalid for satisfying the users needs
and the project goal because according to the feedback, the
height of the arc between two hours is too difﬁcult to be read
and understood (the maximum height of an arc corresponding
to a pain level observation of value 10 (red) was 20 pixels).
Iteration 2
Iteration (ﬁg. 4(b)) has proven to be the most efﬁcient one
regarding the received feedback from the subjects. Firstly, it
allowed more days to be represented on the spiral, considering
the resolution of the testing device (320x320). In the image
presenting iteration (b) (ﬁg. 4) there are 7 days displayed.
Secondly, this visualization has determined to be adequate
for observing repetitive patterns (e.g. time interval from 2
to 7 compared to the interval 8-10), consistent with the VAS
input and therefore easier to read the pain levels because of
the colors correlation.
Iteration 3
Iteration (ﬁg. 4(c)) has been carried out to overcome one prob-
lem of the previous one: it was hard to distinguish between the
days of the week displayed on the spiral. As a result, every two
consecutive days are represented as a grey and white colors
alternating sequence, making it easier for the user to differ-
entiate between the days. On the other hand, the efﬁciency
of patterns recognition has dropped, because of the reduced
width of the spiral.
METHOD
Alongside with speciﬁc testing and validation during the ini-
tial low-ﬁdelity prototype phase and the three development
iterations, an experiment was intended to be run in order to
determine the impact of the self-tracking instrumentation sys-
tem applied on a medical case. Due to the limited amount of
time and resources, the experiment has been carried out for
a week and had only one subject actively tracking back pain.
The test subject was able to record a few observations over a
week and reﬂect that the back pain was the most severe during
evenings, especially after workout sessions. The Danish study
case though [3] has proven to have positive results with a 35-
years-old male combat veteran suffering from PTSD [1]. As
mentioned before, this particular project documented in this
paper started as an extension to this Danish veteran case, and
its main goal was not to test whether or not active self-tracking
is appropriate for medical usage (already proven in the PTSD
veteran case study), but to create an intuitive, robust and less
error-proned system for tracking symptoms and visualizing
data on the smart watch.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The back pain experiment shown great premises regarding
self-reﬂection and spiral visualization. The subject mentioned
==PAGE:101==
that it was considerably easier to follow repetitive patterns
and distinguish them on the spiral plot, compared to a time
line. Also through self-reﬂection, the subject got the idea to
try adding one more gap day between workout sessions in
order to lower the back pain. Even though the experiment
cannot be validated due to the limited amount of time and test
subjects, it served its main goal of providing the user with the
right means for tracking symptoms and then take informed
actions based on the data (e.g. the gap day between workouts).
Furthermore, the data can be presented to a doctor who might
recommend personalized exercise sessions to be carried out
by the patient suffering from back pain. The data has potential
of showing to the doctors what is the main cause of the back
pain and the doctor can personalize one of the 4 mostly used
stabilization techniques such as trunk balance, stabilization,
segmental stabilization, and motor control [10].
Regarding the results from the testing and validation phases,
which have been brieﬂy presented in the validation and itera-
tions sections, the tests concluded that the spiral visualization
from iteration (ﬁg. 4 (a)) is invalid. The test subjects were
unable to easily distinguish patterns on the spiral plot, as well
as reading the pain level represented as the height of the arc be-
tween tow hours. As a result this visualization was discarded.
Iteration (b) and (c) (ﬁg. 4) presented good results on the tests.
The users were able to distinguish repetitive patters and to
read the pain level through the color code. Via A/B testing on
16 subjects, spiral visualization (b) has been voted as the most
complete and intuitive one, with 63%.
Finally, throughout the experiment upon the Visual Analogue
Scale, it has been proven that a VAS with a length of 98mm
with no intermediate numerical markers mapping the pain level
on a gradient colour code from green to red is approximately
36% more accurate than the previous 30mm horizontal one
(ﬁg. 5).
CONCLUSION
Active self-tracking has been proven to be a valuable approach
in collecting relevant data that might be used for both patients
and doctors during a therapeutical process. Considering the ini-
tial PTSD case study, this self-tracking instrumentation comes
as a extension which provides the patients with the opportunity
to both register more accurate data via a professional tool as a
smart watch and to self-reﬂect on the the data using the spiral
visualization. The new Visual Analogue Scale on the smart
watch allows more accurate inputs from the patients compared
to the one wristband button presented in the Danish veteran
case study. Finally, the spiral time visualization conﬁrmed
to be appropriate to the self-reﬂection phase and feasible for
making informed decisions through patterns recognition.
REFERENCES
1. Bertelsen M Madsen T Andersen SB, Karstoft KI. 2014.
Latent trajectories of trauma symptoms and resilience:
the 3-year longitudinal prospective USPER study of
Danish veterans deployed in Afghanistan. The Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry 75, 9 (2014), 1001–1008. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.4088/JCP.13m08914
2. Android Developers. 2017. Creating Watch Faces.
Android Developer documentation. (2017).
https://developer.android.com/training/wearables/
watch-faces/index.html.
3. Thomas Blomseth Christiansen Jakob Eg Larsen,
Kasper Eskelund. 2017. Active Self-Tracking of
Subjective Experience with a One-Button Wearable: A
Case Study in Military PTSD. arXiv:1703.03437. (2017).
https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.03437v1.
4. Tovi Grossman Justin Matejka, Michael Glueck and
George Fitzmaurice. 2016. The Effect of Visual
Appearance on the Performance of Continuous Sliders
and Visual Analogue Scales. CHI 2016, San Jose, CA,
USA. (2016).
5. JAKOB EG LARSEN. 2017. PERSONAL DATA
INTERACTION FOR MOBILE AND WEARABLES.
Slides. (2017). INTERACTION ELEMENTS
https://cn.inside.dtu.dk/cnnet/filesharing/download/
db92f5f5-9bb5-42d7-8fc2-628b90e54e47.
6. Anind; Forlizzi Jodi Li, Ian; Dey. 2010. A Stage-Based
Model of Personal Informatics Systems. Article
(Conference paper). (2010). Pages 557-566
http://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/36798313.
7. I. Scott MacKenzie. 2013. Chapter 2 - The Human Factor.
In Human-Computer Interaction. Elsevier Inc., 28–29.
http://www.sciencedirect.com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/
science/article/pii/B9780124058651000029
8. E. John Gallagher MD Polly E. Bijur PhD, Wendy
Silver MA. 2001. Reliability of the Visual Analog Scale
for Measurement of Acute Pain. Academic Emergency
Medicine 8, 12 (2001). DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/089443939201000402
9. Google Developers PageSpeed Tools. 2015. Size Tap
Targets Appropriately. Android Developer documentation.
(2015).
10. PhD Ping-Tung Lai Wen-Dien Chang, PhD Hung-Yu Lin.
2015. Core strength training for patients with chronic low
back pain. Journal of Physical Therapy Science 27, 3
(2015), 619–622. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1589/jpts.27.619
==PAGE:102==
90
Active Self-tracking Using a Smartwatch and Spiral Time Visualization of
the Past Recorded Events
==PAGE:103==
Appendix C
Active Self-Tracking and
Visualization of Subjective
Experience using VAS and
Time Spirals on a
Smartwatch
Authors:
Andrei Corneliu Suciu
Technical University of Denmark
Jakob Eg Larsen
Associate Professor at the Technical University of Denmark - DTU Compute
The scientiﬁc paper "Active Self-Tracking and Visualization of Subjective Ex-
perience using VAS and Time Spirals on a Smartwatch" was written by Andrei
Corneliu Suciu and Jakob Eg Larsen as part of the MobileVis Workshop at ACM
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, April 21, 2018, Mon-
treal, QC, Canada.
https://mobilevis.github.io/
==PAGE:104==
Active Self-Tracking and Visualization
of Subjective Experience using VAS
and Time Spirals on a Smartwatch
Andrei Corneliu Suciu
Technical University of Denmark
Cognitive Systems Section
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
andreicorneliu.suciu@gmail.com
Jakob Eg Larsen
Technical University of Denmark
Cognitive Systems Section
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
jaeg@dtu.dk
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author(s).
MobileVis ’18 Workshop at CHI 2018, April 21, 2018, Montreal, QC, Canada.
https://mobilevis.github.io/
© 2018 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s).
Abstract
In this paper, we describe a smartwatch-based system that
enables self-tracking and registration of subjective expe-
rience (such as pain) using a VAS-like scale, as well as
allowing the acquired data to be visualized directly on the
smartwatch. The data visualization is tailor-made for the
round smartwatch form factor using an interactive time spi-
ral. Our proof-of-concept prototype implementation is de-
scribed along with a case study where the application has
been used to self-track back pain as the phenomenon of
interest. It is found that the smartwatch allows momentary
self-registration when the phenomenon occurs and that the
spiral structure of the data visualization facilitate identifying
recurring patterns in the data.
Author Keywords
Active self-tracking; Self-reporting, Self-reﬂection; Smart-
watch; Time spiral; Visual Analogue Scale.
ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.m [Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI)]:
Miscellaneous
Introduction
Self-tracking has received a lot of attention the past decade
in part due to the technological developments of low-cost
computing and sensing devices, including activity track-
==PAGE:105==
ers, step counters, heart rate and sleep monitoring devices.
Meanwhile, the Quantiﬁed Self-community has provided
a forum for people engaging in the self-tracking and self-
experimentation culture to share experiences and knowl-
edge. In the commercial space, the main focus has been on
passive sensing of mainly physical activity, heart rate and
sleep monitoring leaving less attention to active tracking of
subjectively experienced phenomena. In the Quantiﬁed Self
community many experiments and self-tracking projects
have involved tracking of subjective phenomena including
mood, pain, symptoms and other subjectively experienced
phenomena. However, off-the-shelf tools supporting track-
ing of subjective experience has not been readily available.
We note that there are certain phenomena that cannot be
passively measured, such as, pain, mood, anger or even
basic events such as sneezes or allergy symptoms. Hav-
ing easy to use data acquisition instruments for active self-
tracking allow quantiﬁcation of such phenomena.
Figure 1: A Visual Analogue Scale
(VAS) mapped onto the edge of an
analogue clock face. This way the
scale has a length of 9.8cm close
to the standard 10cm VAS
Figure 2: Data visualization using
a time spiral on a 12 hour analogue
clock face. Each hour is
color-coded green-red to indicate
number of data points or severity of
the observations (e.g. of a
symptom)
In this paper we explore smartwatches as a platform for
active self-tracking, data acquisition and data visualiza-
tion. Our goal is to create a self-tracking data acquisition
smartwatch app for self-registration of observations of sub-
jectively perceived phenomena. Furthermore, the aim is to
annotate each observation data point with relevant meta-
data including time, location, and physical activity sensing
data in order to allow analysis of the observed phenom-
ena in relation to those contextual data. For instance to
understand the spatio-temporal patterns of the phenomena,
e.g. if a symptom occurs at certain hours of the day, days
of the week, or at certain locations. To illustrate the system
we describe a case where it has been used to self-register
occurrences of back pain. Through registration of the per-
ceived level of pain using the VAS and exploration of the
collected data directly on the smartwatch clock face.
A Smartwatch Personal Informatics System
Our proposed smartwatch-based personal informatics sys-
tem [12] includes an input component for data collection
and a data visualization component for reﬂection.
First, for input, the approach adapts the Visual Analogue
Scale (VAS) to a smartwatch clock face. By bending the
scale and positioning it at the edge of the smartwatch dis-
play we obtain a length very close to the standard 10cm
VAS [15] [13], see Fig. 1. By sliding the ﬁnger at the edge
of the touch display an indicator (the black marker) can be
positioned on the scale. When the user has positioned the
marker the observation is conﬁrmed by pressing a button in
the center of the display. The smartwatch provides visual as
well as haptic feedback to indicate to the user that the data
has been registered.
Second, the system allows direct visualization of the col-
lected data on the smartwatch clock face. Again, we aim to
utilize the round analogue watch form factor and therefore
choose to show the continuous time series in a time spiral.
This allows us to utilize the round property of the display by
mapping a relatively large amount of data onto a relatively
small space, see Fig. 2. Touch-based gestures allow the
user to navigate the visualization. An advantage of this type
of visualization is that it allows the user to easily observe
recurring temporal patterns, which might be harder to distin-
guish in conventional plots (e.g. line plots or bars plots).
Related Work
In the last decades, experience sampling (ESM) and eco-
logical momentary assessment (EMA) [16, 1] have been
supported with different types of computer-based solu-
tions. Studies have shown higher compliance rate and bet-
ter quality data using electronic self-registration solutions
compared to paper-based diaries [7].
==PAGE:106==
Most recently smartwatches have been introduced as a
platform for ESM and EMA solutions [4, 5]. Recent stud-
ies have shown promising results of using smartwatches
for ecological momentary assessment [8]. In part due to
the convenience of the devices being easily accessible and
that the registrations can be done with very brief interac-
tions. Further simpliﬁcation of the data acquisition step us-
ing smartbuttons have demonstrated the ability to collect
self-reported data (symptoms) at a high frequency that is
unthinkable using traditional methods [11].
Figure 3: Visualization 1a – Pain
level represented as a combination
of the color code (red, orange,
green) and the height of the arc
mapped to an observation in
granularity of hours
Figure 4: Visualization 1b –
Separates the different days using
different colors. Thereby making it
easier for the user to see which
day the hour slots belong to. Pain
level by hour is indicated by the
height of the arc
Using time spirals to visualize time series is a known ap-
proach applied to different data types [18, 6]. A time spiral
visualization related to a clock face was explored in Spir-
aClock [3], which provides a calendar directly on an ana-
logue clock face. However, that was explored as an early
web-based approach. In earlier work we have also explored
the concept of using time spirals for visualizing personal
data, which have the inherent properties of recurrent pat-
terns [10]. At that point, the approach was deployed as a
visualization method for smartphones, as opposed to the
smartwatch deployment described in this paper. Unlike pre-
vious solutions, a smartwatch facilitates direct availability
of the collected personal data, similar to the activity visual-
ization complication found on the watch face on the Apple
Watch.
VAS Input on a Smartwatch
A user-driven personal informatics system requires atten-
tion to the interface for data collection [12]. In the following,
we assume that the system is used for pain assessment
and the VAS is used for registering the subjectively expe-
rienced pain level [14]. The Visual Analogue Scale is pre-
sented on the smartwatch watch face as shown in Fig. 1,
and the pain level scale is mapped to color codes: strong
green represents no pain, while strong red is mapped to
the strongest pain. The gradient represents all the interme-
diate values between no pain and severe pain. This way
we deploy an analogue scale that avoids the potential bias
discrete indications would introduce [9].
Unlike previous VAS implementations on smartwatches, we
have chosen a design where the length of the VAS is 9.8
centimeters. That is the measurement in our present pro-
totype implementation, which is using an Android-based [2]
LG Watch Urbane with a 1.3 inch round display correspond-
ing to a circumference of 10.4 centimeters. Deploying our
prototype on smartwatches with different display sizes
would obviously lead to different measures. The round de-
sign alongside the edge of the screen has been chosen
in order to maximize the length of the scale and allowing
users to more accurately input data (the ﬁngertip of a per-
son is usually about 10mm wide or 48 CSS pixels [17]). The
user may use his/her ﬁnger to swipe on the VAS for choos-
ing the pain value and then press an OK button in the cen-
ter of the display in order to conﬁrm the observation. The
timestamp and the pain assessment value will automati-
cally be saved for the user. A swipe right gesture enables
the user to cancel the VAS input without making an obser-
vation. Two or more consecutive observations within one
minute will be discarded and only the last one kept. This
allows the user to correct if the conﬁrm OK button in the
center of the display was pressed by mistake while adjust-
ing the marker on the scale.
Time Spiral Visualization on a Smartwatch
The collected observations are stored chronologically and
drawn on the spiral starting from the center of the screen
and continuing clock-wise. The spiral is set to display the
events on an analog scale using 12 hours similar to a stan-
dard clock face. By default, the past three days are shown.
Events are represented between two adjacent hours on
==PAGE:107==
the watch. The color of the arc represents the pain level
recorded at a speciﬁc point in time. Speciﬁcally, colors such
as green represent low or non existing pain values, while
orange and red represents intermediate to high values of
pain, see Fig. 3 as an example. The user is able to inter-
act with the spiral visualization using touch-based gestures,
which include:
• swipe up for fetching observations from the past;
• swipe down for navigating through events until the
current time;
• swipe left to open a new Visual Analogue Scale input
to add a new observation.
At this stage, the user is able to explore and identify pat-
terns (e.g. time intervals with low/high pain levels) and then
take informed actions based on the reﬂection. An exam-
ple could be a person suffering from a chronic disease who
wants to explore the temporal relation between subjectively
perceived pain and time (hour of the day) taking medica-
tion.
Figure 5: Visualization 1c – Is a
simple variant where only one color
is used. The pain level is mapped
to the height of the arc
corresponding to the time of the
observation by hour
Figure 6: Visualization 2 – The
color code of the observation is
displayed in the spiral timeline with
no emphasize on the adjacent days
of the week
Prototyping Visualization Conﬁgurations
Due to the relatively small display on a smartwatch (in our
case 1.3 inches) providing a readable visualization on the
limited display area is not trivial. At present we have ex-
plored different visual conﬁgurations of the data visualiza-
tion. In the following, we describe our designs and experi-
ences.
Spiral Visualization 1
The ﬁrst visualization conﬁguration aims to display the pain
level as the height of the arc between two adjacent hours,
when an observation was made during the particular hour.
The maximum height of an arc is 20 pixels, corresponding
to the most severe pain level. In the center of the visualiza-
tion, the current time is displayed, and following the spiral
towards the outer rings, every two adjacent rings compose
a day (2 × 12 hours). The alternating days are marked
with the corresponding names at the time they begin. The
visualization is shown in three different variants: The ﬁrst
(Fig. 3) also use color gradients to indicate the severity of
the pain in different hour slots. The second variant (Fig. 4)
separates the different days with different colors. Since one
day consists of two rings the colors emphasize which day
the rings and different hour slots belong to and makes it
easier to distinguish the end and the start of the following
day. The third variant (Fig. 5) uses just one color and the
pain level is indicated by the height of the arc.
Spiral Visualization 2
The visualization shown in Fig. 6 allow more days to be rep-
resented on the time spiral, considering the display resolu-
tion of the LG Watch Urbane used for prototyping (320×320
pixels, 1:1 ratio, ~245 PPI density). In the example in Fig. 6
ﬁve days are displayed, which provide more available infor-
mation to the user than the three days used in the previous
ﬁgures. This visualization has been found to be more ad-
equate for observing repetitive patterns, simply because
of the increased quantity of represented data and the col-
ored arcs mapped to the events (e.g. the time interval from
02:00–07:00 compared to the interval 08:00–10:00). An ad-
vantage of this conﬁguration is the consistency having the
VAS input pain level colors correlate to the colors shown in
the time spiral visualization. Underneath the arc represent-
ing an observation, there is a thin arc with a speciﬁc color
for the day of the week. The starting of a new day on the
spiral is marked with a three-letter abbreviation (e.g. Mon,
Tue, etc.), and the next 24 arcs representing a day have the
thin arc/line underneath using the same color. The color of
this underline alternates every 24 arcs, assisting the user to
==PAGE:108==
distinguish days in the time spiral.
Spiral Visualization 3
The visualization shown in Fig. 7 uses a different approach
to assist the user in differentiating between days. Every two
consecutive days are represented with a grey and white
background colors alternating. In this conﬁguration color
gradients are used to show the registered pain level. How-
ever, in our experience, this conﬁguration is less efﬁcient in
terms of recognizing patterns because of the reduced width
of the spiral, compared to Spiral Visualization 2.
Figure 7: Visualization 3 -
Emphasize the different days of the
week by alternating the
background colors of the spiral
using different gray scale for
adjacent days
Case: Self-Tracking Back Pain
As a proof-of-concept, an N=1 self-tracking experiment was
set up using the smartwatch based personal informatics
system. The phenomenon of interest was back pain as
experienced throughout the day and the purpose was to
see if relations to other phenomena could be observed.
The self-tracking experiment was carried out for a duration
of four weeks and had only one subject actively tracking
back pain. The subject was able to use the smartwatch
VAS input in order to actively collect data points mapped
to the pain severity of the backbone (i.e. green color code
for low or non-existing pain and red for a high pain level).
Depending on the subjective assertion of pain present at
any time of the day, 54 observations were made during
the four weeks experiment. The interactive time spiral vi-
sualization 2 (Fig. 6) was used to reﬂect and visualize the
collected data. Through self-reﬂection, the test subject
noticed by interacting with the spiral visualization, that the
back pain was most severe during evenings (high density of
red/severe observations within the 7:00 - 10:00 PM interval,
compared to the reduced observations number between
12:00 - 7:00 PM). Moreover, it was found that back pain was
experienced especially after days with workout sessions.
Again, through self-reﬂection, the test subject was aware of
his workout programme and using the spiral visualization
was able to identify a higher number of severe observations
in the days with the workout session compared to the days
with no physical activity. Additionally, the self-tracking data
suggested that weather might be an inﬂuencing factor as
well. That is, the colder and windier it was during a day, the
more severe back pain was found in the data. The test user
browsed through the weather reports history during the ex-
periment period and by gesture interactions with the spiral
visualization was able to fetch data from the beginning of
the experiment. A possible correlation was observed, as
a slightly higher number of red/painful observations were
made during cold and windy days. However, due to the
short time span it was unclear if the relations found were
coincidental.
Discussion and Conclusion
The back pain case has illustrated the use of the VAS for
data collection and the time spiral data visualization to sup-
port self-reﬂection. The subject found it easy to observe
the repetitive patterns and distinguish them on the time
spiral visualization. Through self-reﬂection based on the
collected data, the subject obtained new ideas for self-
experimentation projects that would involve adding one
more gap day between workout sessions in order to see if
that would lower the back pain. Another self-experiment in-
volved not to bike during windy cold evenings. Even though
the experiment cannot be considered conclusive due to the
limited duration, it serves to illustrate the point of having a
simple personal informatics system at hand, that allows the
user to collect data on subjective experiences and reﬂect on
the data. It serves to illustrate the main goal of providing the
user with means for tracking symptoms and use that to take
informed actions based on data (e.g. the gap day between
workouts in the case).
==PAGE:109==
We have demonstrated a smartwatch-based personal infor-
matics system that allows both the collection of subjective
experience assessed on a VAS and a visualization of the
collected data using time spirals. Different conﬁgurations
of the data visualization have been discussed. As a proof-
of-concept case, the smartwatch system was applied in a
four week self-tracking experiment where the participant
collected data with self-assessed back pain. Exploration
of the collected data on the smartwatch led to a couple of
new insights and provided ground for further self-tracking
experiments.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded in part by TrygFonden.
REFERENCES
1. Tamlin S Conner and Lisa Feldman Barrett. 2012.
Trends in ambulatory self-report: the role of momentary
experience in psychosomatic medicine. Psychosomatic
medicine 74, 4 (2012), 327.
2. Android Developers. 2017. Creating Watch Faces.
Android Developer documentation. (2017).
https://developer.android.com/training/
wearables/watch-faces/index.html.
3. Pierre Dragicevic and Stéphane Huot. 2002.
SpiraClock: a continuous and non-intrusive display for
upcoming events. In CHI’02 extended abstracts on
Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 604–605.
4. Anja Exler, Andrea Schankin, Christoph Klebsattel, and
Michael Beigl. 2016. A wearable system for mood
assessment considering smartphone features and data
from mobile ECGs. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct. ACM, 1153–1161.
5. Katrin Hänsel, Akram Alomainy, and Hamed Haddadi.
2016. Large scale mood and stress self-assessments
on a smartwatch. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct. ACM, 1180–1184.
6. K Priyantha Hewagamage, Masahito Hirakawa, and
Tadao Ichikawa. 1999. Interactive visualization of
spatiotemporal patterns using spirals on a geographical
map. In Visual languages, 1999. Proceedings. 1999
IEEE symposium on. IEEE, 296–303.
7. Michael R Hufford, Arthur A Stone, Saul Shiffman,
Joseph E Schwartz, and Joan E Broderick. 2002.
Paper vs. electronic diaries. Applied Clinical Trials 11, 8
(2002), 38–43.
8. Stephen Intille, Caitlin Haynes, Dharam Maniar, Aditya
Ponnada, and Justin Manjourides. 2016. µEMA:
Microinteraction-based ecological momentary
assessment (EMA) using a smartwatch. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing.
ACM, 1124–1128.
9. Tovi Grossman Justin Matejka, Michael Glueck and
George Fitzmaurice. 2016. The Effect of Visual
Appearance on the Performance of Continuous Sliders
and Visual Analogue Scales. CHI 2016, San Jose, CA,
USA. (2016).
10. Jakob Eg Larsen, Andrea Cuttone, and Sune Lehmann
Jørgensen. 2013. QS Spiral: Visualizing periodic
quantiﬁed self data. In CHI 2013 Workshop on
Personal Informatics in the Wild: Hacking Habits for
Health & Happiness.
==PAGE:110==
11. Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and
Thomas Blomseth Christiansen. 2017. Active
Self-Tracking of Subjective Experience with a
One-Button Wearable: A Case Study in Military PTSD.
In In Proceedings of workshop in Computational Mental
Health at CHI 2017.
12. Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A
stage-based model of personal informatics systems. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 557–566.
13. Paul Karoly Mark P. Jensen and Sanford Braver. 1986.
The Measurement of Clinical Pain Intensity: a
Comparison of Six Methods. Pain 27, 10 (1986),
117–126.
14. E. John Gallagher MD Polly E. Bijur PhD, Wendy
Silver MA. 2001. Reliability of the Visual Analog Scale
for Measurement of Acute Pain. Academic Emergency
Medicine 8, 12 (2001). DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/089443939201000402
15. Jane Scott and E.C. Huskinsson. June 1976. Graphic
Representation of Pain. Pain 2, 2 (June 1976),
175–184.
16. Arthur A Stone and Saul Shiffman. 1994. Ecological
momentary assessment (EMA) in behavorial medicine.
Annals of Behavioral Medicine (1994).
17. Google Developers PageSpeed Tools. 2015. Size Tap
Targets Appropriately. Android Developer
documentation. (2015).
18. Marc Weber, Marc Alexa, and Wolfgang Müller. 2001.
Visualizing time-series on spirals.. In Infovis, Vol. 1.
7–14.
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[agi18]
What
is
Agile
Software
Development?
https://www.
visual-paradigm.com/guide/agile-software-development/
what-is-agile-software-development/, May 2018.
[Online;
accessed 16-May-2018].
[amb18]
Keep your app visible on wear. https://developer.android.
com/training/wearables/apps/always-on, April 2018. [Online;
accessed 18-May-2018].
[app18]
Learn how to use the digital crown, side button, and gestures.
https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT205552, 2018.
[Online;
accessed 29May-2018].
[BOWE94]
Phillip D Baker, Joseph A Orr, Dwayne R Westenskow, and Tim-
othy P Egbert. Method for determining blood pressure utilizing
a neural network, August 23 1994. US Patent 5,339,818.
[chr16]
Medical
deﬁnition
of
chronic
disease.
https://www.
medicinenet.com/script/main/art.asp?articlekey=33490,
May 2016. [Online; accessed 18-May-2018].
[CK98]
John V Carlis and Joseph A Konstan. Interactive visualization
of serial periodic data. In Proceedings of the 11th annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology, pages 29–
38. ACM, 1998.
[cus18]
Draw watch faces. https://developer.android.com/training/
wearables/watch-faces/drawing, April 2018. [Online; accessed
18-May-2018].
==PAGE:112==
100
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Dev18]
Google Developers. Android Distribution dashboard. https://
developer.android.com/about/dashboards/, May 2018. [On-
line; accessed 12-May-2018].
[DH02]
Pierre Dragicevic and Stéphane Huot. Spiraclock: a continuous
and non-intrusive display for upcoming events. In CHI’02 extended
abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, pages 604–605.
ACM, 2002.
[dia18]
Dialoginterface. https://developer.android.com/reference/
android/content/DialogInterface, April 2018.
[Online; ac-
cessed 21-May-2018].
[ESKB16]
Anja Exler, Andrea Schankin, Christoph Klebsattel, and Michael
Beigl. A wearable system for mood assessment considering smart-
phone features and data from mobile ecgs. In Proceedings of the
2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiq-
uitous Computing: Adjunct, pages 1153–1161. ACM, 2016.
[exi18]
Exit full-screen activities on wear. https://developer.android.
com/training/wearables/ui/exit, Aprilie 2018.
[Online; ac-
cessed 17-May-2018].
[FYJL+01]
John T Farrar, James P Young Jr, Linda LaMoreaux, John L
Werth, and R Michael Poole. Clinical importance of changes in
chronic pain intensity measured on an 11-point numerical pain
rating scale. Pain, 94(2):149–158, 2001.
[gdp16]
General data protection regulation.
http://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679,
April 2016. [Online; accessed 21-May-2018].
[goo18a]
Google ﬁt. https://www.google.com/fit/, April 2018. [Online;
accessed 18-May-2018].
[goo18b]
Location and context overview. https://developer.android.
com/guide/topics/location/, April 2018. [Online; accessed 19-
May-2018].
[GVA01]
Julian W Gardner, Vijay K Varadan, and Osama O Awadelkarim.
Microsensors, MEMS, and smart devices, volume 1. Wiley Online
Library, 2001.
[HAH16]
Katrin Hänsel, Akram Alomainy, and Hamed Haddadi.
Large
scale mood and stress self-assessments on a smartwatch. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Per-
vasive and Ubiquitous Computing:
Adjunct, pages 1180–1184.
ACM, 2016.
==PAGE:113==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
101
[HD09]
Orit Hazzan and Yael Dubinsky.
Agile software engineering.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2009.
[HLOW18]
Matthew K Hong, Udaya Lakshmi, Thomas A Olson, and Lauren
Wilcox. Visual odls: Co-designing patient-generated observations
of daily living to support data-driven conversations in pediatric
care. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems, page 476. ACM, 2018.
[HS07]
Lynda R Hutchinson and Nicholas F Skinner. Self-awareness and
cognitive style: Relationships among adaption-innovation, self-
monitoring, and self-consciousness. Social Behavior and Person-
ality: an international journal, 35(4):551–560, 2007.
[IHM+16]
Stephen Intille, Caitlin Haynes, Dharam Maniar, Aditya Ponnada,
and Justin Manjourides. µema: Microinteraction-based ecological
momentary assessment (ema) using a smartwatch. In Proceedings
of the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing, pages 1124–1128. ACM, 2016.
[ios18]
Distribution dashboard iOS.
https://developer.apple.com/
support/app-store/, May 2018. [Online; accessed 12-May-2018].
[iso02]
Date and time on the internet: Timestamps. https://www.ietf.
org/rfc/rfc3339.txt, July 2002.
[Online; accessed 19-May-
2018].
[JMF16]
Tovi Grossman Justin Matejka, Michael Glueck and George Fitz-
maurice. The eﬀect of visual appearance on the performance of
continuous sliders and visual analogue scales. CHI 2016, San Jose,
CA, USA, 2016.
[Joh05]
Claire Johnson. Measuring pain. visual analog scale versus nu-
meric pain scale: what is the diﬀerence? Journal of chiropractic
medicine, 4(1):43–44, 2005.
[Kam16]
Tomasz Rafal Kaminski. A Wearable System for Acquiring Data
on Subjective Experiences. Master’s thesis, Technical University
of Denmark, Richard Petersens Plads, building 324, 2800 Kongens
Lyngby, Denmark, 2016.
[Kel98]
Anne-Maree Kelly.
Does the clinically signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
visual analog scale pain scores vary with gender, age, or cause of
pain? Academic Emergency Medicine, 5(11):1086–1090, 1998.
[Kno78]
Wilbur R Knorr. Archimedes and the spirals: the heuristic back-
ground. Historia mathematica, 5(1):43–75, 1978.
==PAGE:114==
102
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Lar17]
Jakob Eg Larsen.
Technical university of denmark - personal
data interaction for mobile and wearables lecture:
Usability
evaluations. https://cn.inside.dtu.dk/cnnet/filesharing/
download/4948a5e8-520e-40e9-b407-3e3e92b9b1ab,
2017.
[Online; accessed 21-May-2018].
[LCJ13]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Andrea Cuttone, and Sune Lehmann Jørgensen.
Qs spiral: Visualizing periodic quantiﬁed self data. In CHI 2013
Workshop on Personal Informatics in the Wild: Hacking Habits
for Health & Happiness, 2013.
[LDF10]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi.
A stage-based model of
personal informatics systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 557–566.
ACM, 2010.
[LEC17a]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Chris-
tiansen. Active self-tracking of subjective experience with a one-
button wearable: A case study in military ptsd. In In Proceedings
of workshop in Computational Mental Health at CHI 2017, 2017.
[LEC17b]
Jakob Eg Larsen, Kasper Eskelund, and Thomas Blomseth Chris-
tiansen. Active self-tracking of subjective experience with a one-
button wearable: A case study in military ptsd. In In Proceedings
of workshop in Computational Mental Health at CHI 2017, 2017.
[LP13]
Ruizhi Chen Jingbin Liu Heidi Kuusniemi Yuwei Chen Liang Chen
Jyrki Kaistinen Ling Pei, Robert Guinness. Human behavior cog-
nition using smartphone sensors. Sensors, 13(2):1402–1424, 2013.
[Lup14]
Deborah Lupton. Self-tracking modes: Reﬂexive self-monitoring
and data practices. 2014.
[Mac12]
I Scott MacKenzie. Human-computer interaction: An empirical
research perspective. Newnes, 2012.
[man18]
Manage my pain. https://www.managinglife.com/, May 2018.
[Online; accessed 17-May-2018].
[MBdRL15]
Stephen J. Redmond Michael B. del Rosario and Nigel H. Lovell.
Tracking the evolution of smartphone sensing for monitoring hu-
man movement. Sensors, 15(8), 2015.
[MF93]
Max D Miller and Daron G Ferris. Measurement of subjective
phenomena in primary care research: the visual analogue scale.
Family Practice Research Journal, 1993.
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
103
[MPJB86]
Paul Karoly Mark P. Jensen and Sanford Braver. The measure-
ment of clinical pain intensity: a comparison of six methods. Pain,
27(10):117–126, 1986.
[Nie95]
Jakob Nielsen. 10 usability heuristics for user interface design.
Nielsen Norman Group, 1(1), 1995.
[num16]
Let’s make active self-tracking much easier with a one touch de-
vice, June 2016.
[ont18]
Detect common gestures.
https://developer.android.com/
training/gestures/detector, May 2018. [Online; accessed 21-
May-2018].
[PEBP01]
E. John Gallagher MD Polly E. Bijur PhD, Wendy Silver MA.
Reliability of the Visual Analog Scale for Measurement of Acute
Pain. Academic Emergency Medicine, 8(12), 2001.
[phy18]
Numeric pain rating scale.
https://www.physio-pedia.com/
Numeric_Pain_Rating_Scale, May 2018. [Online; accessed 17-
May-2018].
[qua18]
Quantiﬁed
Self-
Guide
to
Self-Tracking
Tools.
http://
quantifiedself.com/guide/, May 2018. [Online; accessed 14-
May-2018].
[RMJ14]
Simon Robinson, Gary Marsden, and Matt Jones.
There’s not
an app for that: mobile user experience design for life. Morgan
Kaufmann, 2014.
[RRMC14]
John
Rooksby,
Mattias
Rost,
Alistair
Morrison,
and
Matthew
Chalmers
Chalmers.
Personal
tracking
as
lived
informatics. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference
on Human factors in computing systems, pages 1163–1172. ACM,
2014.
[sam18]
Samsung gear sport. http://www.samsung.com/global/galaxy/
gear-sport/, 2018. [Online; accessed 29May-2018].
[SH76]
Jane Scott and E.C. Huskinsson. Graphic representation of pain.
Pain, 2(2):175–184, June 1976.
[siz17]
2017 smartwatch comparison guide.
https://newatlas.com/
smartwatch-comparison-2017-specs/49553/, May 2017. [On-
line; accessed 17-May-2018].
==PAGE:116==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[SL18]
Andrei Corneliu Suciu and Jakob Eg Larsen. Active self-tracking
and visualization of subjective experience using vas and time spi-
rals on a smartwatch. In CHI 2018 Workshop on Data Visualiza-
tion on Mobile Devices, 2018.
[sma18]
Flic Bluetooth smartbutton. https://flic.io/, May 2018. [On-
line; accessed 12-May-2018].
[SS94]
Arthur A Stone and Saul Shiﬀman.
Ecological momentary as-
sessment (ema) in behavorial medicine.
Annals of Behavioral
Medicine, 1994.
[SSS+03]
Arthur A Stone, Saul Shiﬀman, Joseph E Schwartz, Joan E Brod-
erick, and Michael R Huﬀord. Patient compliance with paper and
electronic diaries. Controlled clinical trials, 24(2):182–199, 2003.
[SSTR93]
Manojit Sarkar, Scott S Snibbe, Oren J Tversky, and Steven P
Reiss. Stretching the rubber sheet: a metaphor for viewing large
layouts on small screens. In Proceedings of the 6th annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology, pages 81–
91. ACM, 1993.
[Sta18]
Statista.
Smartwatch unit sales worldwide from 2014 to 2018
(in millions). https://www.statista.com/statistics/538237/
global-smartwatch-unit-sales/, May 2018. [Online; accessed
12-May-2018].
[Swa09]
Melanie Swan. Emerging patient-driven health care models: an
examination of health social networks, consumer personalized
medicine and quantiﬁed self-tracking. International journal of en-
vironmental research and public health, 6(2):492–525, 2009.
[Swa12]
Melanie Swan. Sensor mania!
the internet of things, wearable
computing, objective metrics, and the quantiﬁed self 2.0. Journal
of Sensor and Actuator Networks, 1(3):217–253, 2012.
[TB18]
Anastasia
Bezerianos
Petra
Isenberg
Lonni
Besançon
Tanja Blascheck,
Bongshin Lee.
Preparing for perceptual
studies: Position and orientation of wrist-worn smartwatches for
reading tasks. 2018.
[Too15]
Google Developers PageSpeed Tools. Size tap targets appropri-
ately. Android Developer documentation, 2015.
[WAM01]
Marc Weber, Marc Alexa, and Wolfgang Müller. Visualizing time-
series on spirals. In Infovis, volume 1, pages 7–14, 2001.
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
105
[WGK10]
Matthew O Ward, Georges Grinstein, and Daniel Keim. Interac-
tive data visualization: foundations, techniques, and applications.
CRC Press, 2010.
[Wie12]
Brenda K Wiederhold.
Self-tracking: better medicine through
pattern recognition, 2012.
[WVKG+18] Peter West, Max Van Kleek, Richard Giordano, Mark J Weal,
and Nigel Shadbolt.
Common barriers to the use of patient-
generated data across clinical settings. In Proceedings of the 2018
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, page
484. ACM, 2018.
