==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Automated Behavior Tracking
An easy-to-deploy and fully automatic sensor setup
system for tracking daily activity in the home.
Mette Gere
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The thesis investigates the design of a sensor-based and automatic solution for track-
ing home-based daily activities.
It does so with pre-made sensors that can track motion, temperature, humidity, and
button press.
The temperature, humidity, and motion data prove most accurate in term of specific
activity tracking.
The thesis also assess deployment of the sensor solution. This relates to the possibility
of deploying the solution to users who will be able to successfully set up the solution
in their own homes.
This is possible with a very simplified setup and pre-customed sensors.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
Kongens Lyngby, June 2, 2018
Mette Gere
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
The aurthor wishes to thank Jakob E. Bardram and Per Bækgaard for supervision
and guidance, as well as fellow master thesis students for repeated knowledge sharing
and advice, and lastly, all study participants who opened their homes and daily lives
in the name of science.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Motivation
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Goals & Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Related Work
5
2.1
A Cognitive Perspective on Behavior Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Behavior Tracking Methods & Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Automatic Behavior Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Types of Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Daily Activities & Mental Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Methodology
21
3.1
Desk Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
User Story Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Screenless Wireframes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Design
25
4.1
Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
User Story Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.4
Screenless Wireframes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Iteration #1
33
5.1
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Iteration #2
67
6.1
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.2
Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7
Discussion
77
7.1
Manual Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7.2
Accuracy of Sensors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.3
Future Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
8
Conclusion
79
A Appendix
81
A.1 Iteration #1 - User Manual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A.2 Iteration #2 - User Manual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Motivation
Mental illness is becoming the fourth most common reason for ill-health and disabil-
ity worldwide. The World Health Organization (WHO) estamistates that 450 million
people are diagnosed with a mental disorder today and that the number will increase.
[1]
The WHO recommends countries to focus on healthcare provided in the communities
instead of mental institutions. It is possible to treat some mental illnesses in the com-
munities, and a person suffering from mental illness can live a worthy and productive
life at home if given the right treatment. This approach will make treatment more
accessible and affordable for the greater majority. [1]
The treatment of mental illness is also in focus because mentally ill people risk an
excess mortality of 15 - 20 years. The excess mortality derives from physical diseases
that go undertreated and underdiagnosed. [2]
Multiple initiatives have tried to addressed the problem. From all-round competence
teams to care models with assigned care managers have been assigned individually
to patients. These methods are comprehensive and unfortunately they have shown
little effect and cannot justify the expenses. [3]
Different approaches have shown more promising results. It has a positive effect on
the treatment if the patient gets empowered through illness insight and behavior un-
derstanding. [4]
Illness insight and behavior understanding can be obtained with self-tracking and
self-monitoring of daily activities.
Daily activities such as sleep, dietary, physical
activity, social interaction, and personal hygiene which all are correlated with mental
illness. [7]
Self-tracking and self-monitoring span from use of daily diaries, wearables, smart-
phone applications and build-in smartphone sensors, e.g. GPS or accelerometer. The
latter example let the patient write or manually type records of daily activities. [8][5]
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Motivation
1.1
Background
The currently used methods in self-tracking and self-monitoring are smartphones,
wearables and sometimes paper-based schemes, e.g. diaries. [6][5]
Wearables and build-in smartphone sensors are sometimes used to either automat-
ically track activities or support manual inputs. This can be heart rate, location,
accelerometer or similar. [8]
There is a huge number of smartphone apps for self-tracking and self-monitoring re-
lated to mental health.1,2,3 They differ in focus of illnesses and goals, and some apps
aim to generate awareness, be informative, encourage to behavior change or a mixture
of these.
Amongst these apps can be mentioned Daylio [2.2.2], eMoods [2.7], Up! [2.2.2], and
Moodcast [2.11]. They track working hours, sleep, and mood etc. based on multiple
methods of data collection. It can be manual inputs of activity or mood from the
user, or geographical location of the user’s smartphone.
The project called MONARCA developed a persuasive personal monitoring system
for bipolar disorder patients. The system enables a user to update personal data and
the system tracks the user’s behavior with build-in smartphone sensors. The project
proved very beneficial although it did not generate significant behavior change. [5]
All the current methods rely primarily on manual user inputs. This demands the user
to have a smartphone and consistently use it to make reportings.
Manual reportings are burdensome, often incomplete, and sometimes registered in
retrospective. All this can generate bias from subjectiveness of questions (e.g. mood
evaluations) and inaccurate recalling of information from the user’s memory. [9]
Recent studies have explored automatic tracking to address the issues with man-
ual tracking. Automatic tracking using wearables, build-in smartphone and wireless
sensors. These studies have proven interesting results, yet the studies have been ex-
plorative and not fully applied nor adapted in any human behavior related field. [10]
This thesis will examine automatic behavior tracking related to mental health specif-
ically.
1 PsyberGuide: Apps for mood-tracking: an expert reviews the products,
https://psyberguide.org/expertreview/apps −for −bi −polar −disorder −expert −review/
2PsyCom: Top 25 Best Mental Health Apps: An Effective Alternative for When You Can’t
Afford Therapy? https://www.psycom.net/25-best-mental-health-apps
3Healthline:
The Best Bipolar Apps of 2018, https://www.healthline.com/health/bipolar-
disorder/top-iphone-android-apps
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Problem Statement
3
1.2
Problem Statement
The focus of the thesis is automatic behavior tracking using only sensors. The scope
is limited to home-based daily activities related to mental health for one single person.
The problem statement is as follows:
What is the design of an easy-to-deploy and fully automatic sensor setup
system for tracking daily activities in the home with a special focus on
mental health?
The research question identifies this thesis as a user-centered design project.
1.3
Goals & Methods
The end goal is a fully automatic sensor kit that can be deployed to users. The users
must be able to successfully install all sensors in their own home using provided in-
structions
The user must also be able to sufficiently use a manual tracking system for a tempo-
rary period of time. The manual tracking is used to evaluate accuracy of the sensors
(ground truth).
The design of the system will be developed using recognised design methodology.
Firstly, a desk research to gain insight of previous work and sensors technology. Sec-
ondly, a survey will be used to gain knowledge from users and their daily behavior.
Thirdly, a user story map will be created to sketch the entire solution and identify
the minimum viable product. Fourthly, development of scenarios to identify optimal
user and environmental triggers for sensor tracking. Fifthly, development of screen-
less wireframes to identify touch points between the user and the system, and sixthly,
observations to evaluate the user’s ability to install the solution in their home.
1.4
Results
The solution shows potential for accurately tracking home-based daily activities using
sensors. The sensor data proves accurate when compared to a fictional scenario that
describes basic daily behavior.
The sensors are most accurate for tracking showering and sleep patterns. They are
slightly less accurate for tracking door events and even less accurate for eating habits.
It is possible to design an easy-to-deploy solution that users are able to independently
setup in their own home only using provided instructions.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Motivation
The solution holds great potential for future advanced data analysis and combinations
of sensor data connected to the same activity to improve accuracy of activity tracking.
The solution emphasise the importance for valid a method of a parallel tracking
method for validation of the sensors. This has not yet been solved.
1.5
Thesis Outline
A thorough review of related work will be provided. The section describes tracking of
behavior from a cognitive perspective, a selection of available tools, studies of auto-
matic behavior tracking, and sensor technology. The methodology chapter describes
recognised design methods that will be applied in the design chapter. These include
a desk research, a survey, scenarios, a user story map, screenless wireframes, and
observations.
The solution design is tested in two iterations. The second iteration is modified based
on results from the first iteration.
The thesis finalises with a combined discussion of the two iterations and a conclusion
that answers the problem statement.
The discussion chapter brings forward reflections upon the design and the following
study. The conclusion answers the problem statement and finalises the thesis.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
This section has four parts. The first part describes what it means to track behavior
and what makes it difficult. The second part examines methods and existing tools
for behavior tracking. The third part investigates research in automatic behavior
tracking using sensors, and the last part explains which activities that are relevant
to track and why.
The first three parts are related to creating a design of an easy-to-deploy and fully
automatic sensor setup system for tracking daily activities. The last part is related to
the special focus on mental health. Both parts are stated in the problem statement.
2.1
A Cognitive Perspective on Behavior Tracking
The first section investigates state of the art in behavior tracking and presents cur-
rently used self-reporting methods.
The article “Cognitive Psychology and Self-Reports: Models and Methods” [9] de-
scribes behavior and tracking of behavior, and it highlights three essential aspects:
1. the separation between behavior (a specific activity) and tracking of the behav-
ior (the self-reporting afterwards)
2. how the user is asked or prompt to provide information
3. the retention interval (the time the user had to hold onto to the information in
memory)
The separation between behavior and tracking of the behavior means that the report-
ing happens in retrospective (after the event has occurred). This demands the user to
recall feelings (e.g. mood) or specific actions (e.g. going to bed). The recalling can be
of huge cognitive demand of the user and the user’s autobiographical memory. Once
asked, or prompt to report, the autobiographical memory retains the information by
activating certain brain cells. This activation is affected by the given instructions,
and therefore, the instructions can be influential. [9]
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Related Work
In other words, the formulation of the question highly affects the given replies, and
this makes retrieving of information subjective both ways. Correspondingly, it mat-
ters how the user understands and interprets the question because it can differ from
the conductor’s interpretation. In some cases, the user has to formulate a respondent
answer which also can differ in understanding and interpretation compared to the
conductor.
The article presents two models, the Flexible Processing Model and the Four-Stage
Model, that describe the steps of information retrieval in memory. Both models vi-
sualise how fragile information retrieval from memory can be due to the many steps
where the information retrieval rely on subjectivity. [9]
Figure 2.1: 1. Flexible Processing Model [9], 2. Four-Stage Model [12].
It also matters whether the user is familiar with the questions prior to the event. The
formulation of questions can draw attention to certain details, and the extra attention
affects the user’s memory. Therefore, it matters whether the user is familiar with the
questions or not because the accuracy of recalling the information depends on what
the user has paid attention to. [11]
The replies can also be affected by retention interval, meaning the time the user had
to hold on to the information in memory. If the user is separated from the activity
being referred to for a longer period of time, it can generate biased answers. As time
goes by, the user’s memory and accuracy of recalling will decline. [11]
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Behavior Tracking Methods & Tools
7
Lastly, the reference period, meaning the period of time which the question refers to,
and the order of the questions can affect the responses. The answers will be more
accurate if the reference period is short, e.g. one day compared to three days.
A prior question can activate certain brain cells, and thereby, affect (with stimuli)
nearby connected brain cells, which then, already being stimulated, will fire more
easily, and trigger a certain response of the user. [11]
Conclusively, the article highlights how these methods, relying on reportings in retro-
spective, only can be explanatory, and not predictive. [9]
2.2
Behavior Tracking Methods & Tools
The second section investigates methods and existing tools for behavior tracking.
The article “Mobile Technology for Mental Health Assessment” describes Ecological
Momentary Assessment (EMA) which are daily diaries, signal-dependent and event-
dependent reportings. [13]
Daily diaries are reportings of events and moods at the end of the day.
Signal-
dependent reportings are reportings performed at random intervals during the day in
response to an alarm, and event-dependent reportings are performed after predeter-
mined interpersonal or challenging events during the day.
The event-dependent reportings prove to be most accurate.
The method reduces
the bias and inaccuracy of retrospective collected data. However, the method faces
challenges as they are perceived and experienced to be burdensome and demanding
a high level of engagement and motivation from the user.
Conclusively, the article states that tracking must be instant and in the user’s typical
milieu, yet not burdensome but instead easy and quick. Thereto, the design of the
system must accommodate a lower level of engagement and motivation from the user.
2.2.1
The MONARCA Project
The MONARCA project developed a digital smartphone-based tool for Bipolar Dis-
order patients to do self-reportings. This was done as an alternative to previously
used paper-based reporting schemes, and one of the main focus was the ease of use
of the system.
The user input had to be as simple and short as possible. The reportings should
be kept at a bare minimum but in order to collect valuable data, some parameters
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Related Work
had to be mandatory (sleep, mood, subjective activity, and medicine) whereto other
parameters could be optional (universal warning signs, early warning signs, alcohol,
stress, and notes). See the figure 2.2. [5]
Figure 2.2: The MONARCA project - User Interface.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Behavior Tracking Methods & Tools
9
Reportings could be registered any time a day and as many times as the user wished
to. A build-in alarm system would help the user to remember to do the reportings,
and it could be customised by the user himself. The alarm system had three interac-
tions; OK, Snooze, and Dismiss, and showed as a pop-up notification on the user’s
smartphone (see figure 2.3).
Figure 2.3: The MONARCA project - Alarm Notification.
The MONARCA project found that the system had a positive effect on disease man-
agement and awareness, although it did not have an effect on lifestyle change. [5]
There is an increasing number of systems similar to the MONARCA project.1,2,3 A
selective handful of these will be assessed in the next section.
2.2.2
Smartphone Applications
The selective handful of smartphone apps are Daylio [2.2.2], eMoods [2.7], Up! [2.2.2],
and Moodcast [2.11]. Each of these smartphone apps are used for self-monitoring.
The apps’ interfaces are presented below which show how the user do inputs/report-
ings, customisation, and data visualisation over time.
The interfaces are characterised by color schemes, icon usage, free text, pop-up noti-
fications, and one click inputs.
1 PsyberGuide: Apps for mood-tracking: an expert reviews the products,
https://psyberguide.org/expertreview/apps −for −bi −polar −disorder −expert −review/
2PsyCom: Top 25 Best Mental Health Apps: An Effective Alternative for When You Can’t
Afford Therapy? https://www.psycom.net/25-best-mental-health-apps
3Healthline:
The Best Bipolar Apps of 2018, https://www.healthline.com/health/bipolar-
disorder/top-iphone-android-apps
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Related Work
Daylio, figure 2.4, figure 2.5 and figure 2.6.
The interfaces are clean and simple, and helps the user to get started with reportings
with pre-defined mood and activity tracking. The user can easily change the moods
and activity as he wishes. See figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Daylio - Interface - Mood & Activity Tracking.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Behavior Tracking Methods & Tools
11
The input visualisation follows a classic calendar view and it sums up the number of
individual reportings the user has registered. See figure 2.2.2.
Figure 2.5: Daylio - Interface - Visualisation of user inputs..
The application will occasionally promp the user with home screen notifcations. The
notifications allow for direct user inpus from the user, and it can be mood tracking
(one click) or by asking a question (free text input). See the example in figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Daylio - Interface - Home screen Notification.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Related Work
eMoods, figure 2.7
eMoods is less clean in its’ interface and more text-based. It also enables the user to
manually track his sleep and intake of medication.
Figure 2.7: eMoods - Interface - User Inputs.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Behavior Tracking Methods & Tools
13
Up!, figure 2.8 and 2.9
The Up! interface has seven predefined moods and three belonging parameters: anx-
iety, energy level, and self-confidence that the user can evaluate on a scale from -2 to
+2.
Figure 2.8: Up! - Interface - Mood Tracking.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Related Work
The user can also register and customise inputs of early warning signs4 and see the
inputs over time. See figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: Up! - Interface - Early Warning Signs and Calendar view..
The Up! app occasionally prompt the user with home screen notifications to do mood
trackings. The interaction is an easy one-click action. See figure 2.2.2.
Figure 2.10: Up! - Interface - Home screen notifications..
4Characteristic changes of behavior that can indicate a forthcoming manic or depressive period
related to the bipolar disorder
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Automatic Behavior Tracking
15
Moodcast, figure 2.11
The Moodcast interface is straightforward and simple. It lets the user track either
predefined or customised moods and activities. See figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11: Moodcast - Inteface - Mood & Activity Tracking.
The presented examples all rely on manual user inputs. The next section examines
automatic and semi-automatic tracking of behavior to accommodate for the manual
tracking.
2.3
Automatic Behavior Tracking
The project “Semi-Automated Tracking: A Balanced Approach for Self-Monitoring
Applications” [8] combined manual and automated data collection for self-monitoring
and was oriented around three parameters; data capture feasibility, purpose of self-
monitoring, and motivation level.
The motivation for the project derived from findings of self-monitoring having a pos-
itive effect on treatment and behavior change.
The article highlights how completely automated tracking can have the exact oppo-
site effect as fully automation of data collection can significantly reduce awareness,
accountability, and involvement from the user because he is not actively involved.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Related Work
The article describes manual input as ground truth. This means securing validity of
data and ensuring that the automatic captured data actually describe reality and
identifies the right activity the user is doing. The automated tracking could also be
used as activity suggestions and then corrected manually for precision afterwards.
The article enhances the importance of data accuracy when it is used for self-monitoring
and afterwards assessment and treatment. This promotes reactive effects related to
therapeutic outcomes. Reactive effects are described as follows: “Known as reactive
effects (or reactivity), self-monitoring often results in a change in frequency of the
target behavior, typically in a desired, positive direction, which therefore provides ben-
efits towards behavior change”. [8] Essentially, this means that because of the effect
self-monitoring can have, also comes a high demand of accuracy of the system.
Another interesting aspect presented in the article, is the importance of the user’s
motivation. According to the level of motivation, ideally, the level of automation
should be adjusted accordingly. [8]
The next section examines how automatic behavior actually can be done. The section
does so by assessing studies of automatic behavior tracking and sensors used for the
purpose.
2.3.1
Use of Sensors for Automatic Behavior Tracking
The article “The Elderly’s Independent Living in Smart Homes: A Characterization
of Activities and Sensing Infrastructure Survey to Facilitate Services Development”
[10] is an example of use of sensors for tracking behavior. It explains how to activities
can be identified digitally and what qualifies as an activity.
It is the combination of sensors that is the key element in sufficient activity tracking.
It is the use of multiple sensors and their combined output that can generate high
accuracy in identifying the right activity and at the right time.
The article describes the connection between activity tracking and the quality of the
activity which can differ significantly, e.g. sleep and the quality of sleep. Sleep is
body- and mind-dependent variables and without these variables, it is not possible
to fully and precisely track actual sleep by only using automatic sensing.
The system must rely upon human behavior triggers and detect when the user is
getting ready to go to bed, lying in his bed and getting up again. The beforehand
triggers can be brushing teeth, changing cloth, going to the bathroom, turning of the
lights etc. All indicators that, once combined, are indicating the user is going to bed.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Automatic Behavior Tracking
17
The study divides activities into four categories: composite activities, sequential ac-
tivities, concurrent activities, and interleaved activities which makes activity tracking
easier to work with. See figure 2.12. [10]
Figure 2.12: The Relationship Between Activities, a) Composite Activities b) Se-
quential Activities c) Concurrent Activities d) interleaved Activities.
On this note, the time of day can also be a trigger that helps to identify an activity.
Some daily activities are likely to happen within a certain time frame, e.g. breakfast
in the morning or showering in the evening/morning.
The key is to understand the complexity of daily activities and break them down
into smaller pieces, as so, these pieces identify potential passive sensing triggers (also
referred to as contextual information). These tracking triggers are necessary for the
validity and accuracy of daily activity tracking.
Once everything is connected and brought together, it forms the basis for effective
activity tracking, represented in figure 2.13. [10]
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Related Work
Figure 2.13: Characterization of an Activity.
2.4
Types of Sensors
This section presents different types of sensors and their potential use. The presenta-
tion is focused at human behavior tracking sensors and it is not a complete overview
for this reason.
A sensor has an input (a physical quantity) and an output (a signal). The input is
received by a processor or a microcontroller which converts an energy signal into an
electrical signal.5
Sensors can be classified into active and passive sensors. Active sensors require an ex-
ternal excitation signal or a power signal. Passive sensors generate output responses
directly and do not require external power signals.5
Relevant sensors in this context are temperature, proximity, accelerometer, infrared
sensor, pressure, motion, ultrasonic, light, touch, humidity, and tilt sensors. A few
examples can be seen in figure 2.14.5
The following section covers which exact activities that are relevant to track and why
related to the special focus on mental health that is stated in the problem statement
(see section 1.2).
5Electronic Hub: Different Types of Sensors, https://www.electronicshub.org/different-types-
sensors/
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Daily Activities & Mental Health
19
Figure 2.14: Sensor examples: Temperature, Accelerometer, Motion, and Humidity.
2.5
Daily Activities & Mental Health
The reason for tracking specific daily activities derives from correlations between these
activities and mental health.
One of the most important activities is sleep.
The article “The Role of Sleep in
Bipolar Disorder” [14] describes how it is traceable in a patient’s mood and behavior
when he has consistent sleep habits (bedtime and wake up time) and consistent sleep
patterns (sleep phases and interval) compared to non-consistent habits and irregular
patterns. Non-consistent sleep can be caused by poor eating habits.
Poor eating habits can affect mental health directly in cognitive functioning (e.g.
maintaining of brain structure and function of neurons and brain centres), or indi-
rectly by weakening the quality of other activities such as sleep or physical activity.[15]
The article “The Relationship Between Physical Activity and Mental Health: A Sum-
mary of Evidence and Policy” [16] states how physical activity can reduce risk of
depression, dementia and Alzheimer’s. Physical activity enhances psychological well-
being, improved self-perception and self-esteem, mood and sleep quality, and lastly,
reduced levels of anxiety and fatigue.
The correlation between quality of social relationships and mental health is also sig-
nificant. The study “Social Relationships and Depression: Ten-Year Follow-Up from
a Nationally Representative Study” [17] focuses on clinical depression and social rela-
tionships’ effect on patients’ condition. The article describes how low quality of social
relationships prove to be a major risk factor of severe depression.
Lastly, a person’s level of personal hygiene and self-neglect can significantly decrease
correspondingly to mental health. The article “Importance of Personal Hygiene” [18]
clarifies how personal hygiene makes a person feel good about himself, and the as-
sumption is that if you look good, you will feel good. On this note, personal hygiene
also helps to avoid infections and disease spreading.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Related Work
Conclusively, this means there is an entire ecosystem of daily activities that affect
mental health.
2.6
Summary
The state of the art makes it clear that data input must be as objective as possible,
quick and easy, either automatic or with limited user involvement. The data input
must be instant, directly related to an event and ideally happening in the user’s own
milieu.
The designer must be aware of the relationship between the level of automation and
user’s involvement, if fully automated, there is a of risk losing illness insight and
behavior understanding.
The combination of sensors can increase accuracy of activity identification and track-
ing. The sensors can be triggered by different human behavior and actions. Despite
a combination of sensors, the presented method is limited in tracking the quality of
an activity, e.g. sleep, actually eating and quality of commodities.
There are five main activities that are relevant to track because of their effect on men-
tal health. These are sleep, physical activity, social interaction, dietary, and personal
hygiene.
The next section describes the methodology that will be used to design the solution.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
This chapter describes a selection of design methods. The methods will be used to
design the solution and they include a desk research, a survey, a user story map,
scenarios, screenless wireframes, and observations.
3.1
Desk Research
A desk research is a standard method for data collection using existing resources that
are available from a desk, e.g. by using a PC. The method is efficient, effective, and
low-cost which makes it very used in all phases of a research, although mostly in the
beginning.
A desk research requires a certain critical sense regarding source validity. This refers
to publications’ origins, number of citations, and recognised institutions etc.
The desk research was primarily used for the related work chapter. The research
examined existing sources of behavior tracking, current solutions and tools, mental
illness, and sensor technology. The knowledge will be used to know how to design an
easy-to-deploy and fully automatic sensor setup that can track daily activities with
a special focus on mental health (Problem Statement, 1.2).1
3.2
Survey
Surveys are an easy, low-cost and fast way to gather quantitative data. The quanti-
tative data can reveal tendencies, opinions or general behavior.
In this context, the survey was used to collect basic and general knowledge of home
behavior, routines, and habits. [19]
1Design Research Techniques: Secondary Research,
http://designresearchtechniques.com/casestudies/secondary-research/
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Methodology
3.3
Scenarios
Scenarios describe a flow of events, actions or activities in a chronological manner
and as the user would perform them. It tells a story by breaking the event or activity
into small bits.
The scenario visualises and concretise a situation and the corresponding environment
in which the user will use the solution. By breaking down an activity into small pieces,
the activity transforms from being abstract into being concrete and manageable.[19]
The scenario method will be to identify triggers (user actions) that can be tracked
digitally by sensors.
3.4
User Story Map
The User Story Map is used to plot an entire solution. The map defines high-level
user goals, activities and tasks. [20]
The map also declares the Minimum Viable Product (MVP). This is the main func-
tionality of the solution. The MVP is the feature that serves the most critical user
goal as fast as possible and with as little effort as possible.
Once the MVP is declared, it helps the creators to work on the most important and
prioritised tasks. It ensures that the product can go live as fast as possible with its’
core feature that holds the highest value to the user.
3.5
Screenless Wireframes
Screenless wireframes are used to describe user interactions that do not have a tra-
ditional graphical interface (GUI). Instead, the screenless wireframes can describe
TUI (Touch User Interface), VUI (Voice User Interface), CUI (Conversational User
Interface) or any other user interaction with the system.
These interactions work in the same manner as a GUI, and the wireframes are used
to describe the interactions. The wireframes include microinteractions; user actions,
(invisible) triggers, rules, and feedback. [21]
The rules describe what happens once a trigger has been activated, e.g.
enabled
features or provided feedback. Feedback helps the user to understand the rules of
the system. The feedback can be visual (animations, messages etc.), audio (speech,
earcons - a short, distinct sound meant to convey information, e.g. “your earphones
are connected to your phone via bluetooth” or similar), or haptic (vibrations, tactile
==PAGE:33==
3.6 Observations
23
etc.) [??]microinteractions]
The screenless wireframes are used in this context to determine what happens when
the user interacts with the system.2
3.6
Observations
Observations can be rich on data and usually takes place in the research setting. The
research setting is where the solution/product is intended to be used. The observa-
tions can provide an understanding of why things happen as they do once the user
connects with the solution/product in the intended environment.
The method enables a holistic understanding of the use of the solution/product and
an in-depth understanding of why it is working or not. In the latter case it is often
an external factor that hasn’t been considered in the design phase as these factors
were not present.
In other words, a product/solution is rarely independent and context-free, and once
brought from the development environment into the research environment, these de-
pendencies will stand out.
A limitation in the observation method is the presence of the observer. This can
affect the user’s behavior and generate biased results. It is especially the case if the
observer is also the designer of the solution/product being tested.
Another limitation is subjectivity and what the observer pays attention to.
This
means that observations always will contain a level of subjectivity. Again, this be-
comes more biased if the observer is also the designer of the solution/product. The
observer/designer will perceive the situation differently because of his stakeholder
position related to the solution/product, e.g. wishing it to be a success.
The observation method will be used in the study of thesis to see whether the solution
is actually easy to deploy and possible for the user to set up without any help. The
observations are directly related to the measurement of an easy-to-deploy solution
declared in the problem statement. [19]
The next section applies the described methodology.
2Inside Intercom: Google’s Golden Krishna on designing screenless experiences,
https://blog.intercom.com/google-golden-krishna-screenless-experiences/
==PAGE:34==
24
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Design
The design chapter present the solution after having applied the design methodology.
The design section covers the conducted survey, the scenarios, an assessment of sensor
suitability for each of the activities that will be tracked, and lastly the screenless
wireframes and the user story map.
4.1
Survey
The survey was kept very structured (closed-end questions), simple, short, and shal-
low. This was done to gather as many responses as possible (15 in total), ensure
reliable data and to assure participants of their anonymity. This survey design elimi-
nates potentially bias of participants interpreting the questions too differently, feeling
bored or tired, or feeling intimidated.
The survey was done to see which exact activities were performed, at what time, and
in which order.
The outcome of the survey shows that daily morning routines generally include: snooz-
ing, brushing teeth, eating breakfast, doing make-up and hair, checking social media
or TV, helping kids, cuddling with partner, preparing and drinking coffee, walking
the dog, turning off alarm, getting clothed, ventilating bedroom, siding bed, in the
bathroom, and everything before leaving the home for work or school.
Daily evening routines generally include brushing teeth, removing make-up and con-
tact lenses, changing cloth, laying in bed and watching TV (sometimes timed to turn
off after 30 minutes), cleaning, in the bathroom, ventilating bedroom, listening to an
audiobook before falling asleep.
The results of the survey was used to design two generic scenarios. One for a morning
routine and one for an evening routine.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Design
4.2
Scenarios
The scenarios can identify specific human behavior/events that can be used as triggers
for the sensors. They also visualise potential objects and environment (rooms in the
home) that effectively can be included in the assessment of sensor suitability (section
4.2.1). See the two scenarios below, figure 4.1 and 4.2.
Figure 4.1: A generic morning routine.
Figure 4.2: A generic evening routine.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Scenarios
27
4.2.1
Sensor Suitability
Ten sensors have been included in an assessment of suitability for tracking identified
activities and desired measurements. The identified activities derive from the two
scenarios (see section ??).
The assessment is plotted in the figure below, 4.3. The red color indicates no match,
the yellow color indicates a possibility e.g. by including objects, and the green color
indicates a match between the sensor and the event.
The table gives an overview of what is possible to track for each specific activity and
which sensors to use.
Figure 4.3: Assessment overview of sensor suitability for inidividual activity track-
ing.
The table also makes it possible to prioritise activities according to importance. Im-
portance is based on events that have the strongest link to activities that correlate
with mental health (see section 2.5). This will be sleep, eating, showering and brush-
ing teeth (‘Physical Activity’ and ‘Social Interaction’ have been added subsequently).
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Design
4.2.1.1
Sleep
Five parameters are considered possible in a sensor related context for tracking sleep;
temperature, accelerometer, pressure, motion, and light.
• When a person is lying in his bed, the temperature will increase.
• When a person gets into his bed or opens the bedroom door, there will be
movement (x-, y-, z-values).
• When a person is lying in his bed, the pressure on the mattress will increase.
• When a person enters his bedroom, there will be motion detected.
• When a person goes to sleep, the light will be turned off.
4.2.1.2
Bath
Three parameters are considered possible in a sensor related context for tracking a
bath; humidity, accelerometer, and motion.
• When a person takes a shower in the bathroom, the humidity will increase to a
detectable level.
• When a person opens the bathroom door, there will be movement (x-, y-, z-
values).
• When a person enters the bathroom, there will be motion detection.
4.2.1.3
Eating
Four parameters are considered possible in a sensor related context for tracking eating;
temperature, proximity, accelerometer, and motion.
• When a person opens and closes the fridge, the temperature will increase for a
short period of time.
• When a person is cooking, the person will approach the kitchen tables or stove
for a certain period of time.
• When a person is using a kitchen, the person will open and close kitchen cup-
boards and/or the fridge.
• When a person enters the kitchen, there will be motion detection.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 User Story Map
29
4.2.1.4
Social Interaction
Two parameters are considered possible in a sensor related context for tracking social
interaction; accelerometer and motion. If someone enters the home, there will be
movement (x-, y-, z-values), and there will be motion detection.
These two parameters are not directly connected to social interaction, however, by
using an accelerometer, it is possible to track whether a person leaves his home or
if someone enters. It is also possible to track for how long the person is gone or
for how long the visitor is staying. Along with time of day, this makes it possible
to generate hypothetical rules based on assumptions of social interactions, e.g.
a
hypothesis that the person is together with friends if the person is gone for five hours
on a Friday evening. This will be the absolut ground basis for tracking indications of
social interaction in this thesis context.
4.2.1.5
Physical Activity
Two parameters are considered possible in a sensor related context for tracking phys-
ical activity; temperature and accelerometer. When a person exercises, his tempera-
ture will increase, and when a person leaves his home to exercise, there will be door
movement (x-, y-, z-values).
4.3
User Story Map
The user story map identifies the MVP. The MVP is a design that first and foremost
can collect and store data. This means that the first activity (yellow squares, figure
4.4) and corresponding tasks (white squares, figure 4.4) is to set up the system. The
second activity is manual tracking, and thirdly, the user performing daily activities,
in other words, the actual data collection.
The sensors and automatic tracking are the two known elements of the solution, but
in order to be able to validate the solution, manual tracking (ground truth) must be
added to the design.
To do this, the user will use a supplied smartphone app for a certain amount of time
to do the manual inputs. Once the sensor data is validated, the sensor solution runs
by itself.
See the user story map below 4.4.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Design
Figure 4.4: ...[reference].
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Screenless Wireframes
31
4.4
Screenless Wireframes
The screenless wireframes define the user actions, triggers, rules, and feedback. It
declares the specific user actions that activate the triggers. The triggers will activate
the sensors to track the specific activities. See the wireframes below, figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Screenless Wireframes of the Solution Design.
The wireframes visualise the selected sensors which will be explained in section 5.1.1.
4.5
Summary
A conducted survey has given insights of morning and evening routines. The routines
have been used to create generic scenarios.
Potential triggers have been identified using the scenarios, and based on that an as-
sessment of sensor suitability have been made.
A user story map has been created to identify the minimum viable product which is
data collection and storage. This is both manual (temporary) and automatic in order
to be able to evaluate accuracy of the sensors.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Design
The choice of sensors have been affected by their ability to meet this requirement
as well as the assessment of their suitability for capturing human triggers and track
desired values.
The next section describes the final design and the technical implementation.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Iteration #1
The design has two iterations. This section describes the setup, the implementation,
and the following study and results of the first iteration.
The first iteration is followed by the second iteration which is based on experiences
from the first iteration.
5.1
Implementation
The implementation describes how to build and set up the sensor kit. The setup con-
tains six sensors, one manager (a hub for uploading data), and five service accounts.
The illustrations below provide an overview of the solution: the setup and the func-
tioning system.
A detailed explanation follows of each service, sensor, and component of the system.
See figure 5.1 and 5.2.
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Iteration #1
Figure 5.1: Iteration #1 - How to set up the system.
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Implementation
35
The illustration below visualises the functioning system.
Figure 5.2: Iteration #1 - An overview of the functioning system.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Iteration #1
5.1.1
Sensors
Sleep
This section presents the selected sensors and how they work together with the smarth-
pone app that will be used for the manual inputs.
A pre-made accelerometer sensor specially designed for sleep tracking will be used in
the solution. The sensor is called SleepPeanut and it tracks:
• Bedtime
• Wake up time
• Sleep time
• Sleep performance and efficiency
• Time to fall asleep
Bath
A pre-made humidity sensor will be used as the bath sensor. It is called a Wireless
Sensor Tag. The sensor comes with a Wireless Tag Manager which must be con-
nected to a router. The Wireless Sensor Tag can be customised for tracking multiple
parameters, but in this context it will be used to track:
• Humidity
• Temperature
• Date
• Time
Eating
It is not possible to track eating directly. Therefore, tracking of eating will be done
using three Flic buttons that the user must press correspondingly to having breakfast,
lunch, or dinner. Each button will be name tagged and they each track:
• Button name
• Pressed
• Date
• Time
Door Events
A pre-made angle based motion/door open-close sensor will be used for tracking front
door events. It is the same sensor as used for bath tracking (Wireless Sensor Tag),
and it uses the same Wireless Tag Manager. The difference between the two sensors
is the customisation of the sensor. The front door sensor will track:
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Implementation
37
• Opening events
• Closing events
• Date
• Time
Physical Activity
Tracking of physical activity will be the same sensor as the social interaction.
Manual Tracking
An app called aTimeLogger will be used for the data validation. The app must be
customised to have seven entry points; sleep, bath, door enter, door exit, breakfast,
lunch, and dinner.
The user presses the icon corresponding to the activity the user is doing, and then
the activity, along with date and time, will be stored locally . The stored data can be
exported once the manual tracking period is over. The exported data has the same
format as the sensor data and can be used for input comparison and sensor data
validation.
5.1.2
Service Accounts
There is one account for each sensor service, one account for the integration service,
and lastly, one account for the data storage.
The sensors, the services, and their accounts are listed below:
• Sleep
◦Sensor: SleepPeanut
◦Account: Sense Peanut
• Eat
◦Sensor: Flic buttons
◦Account: Flic account
• Bath
◦Sensor: Wireless Sensor Tag
◦Hub: Tag Manager
◦Account: Wireless Tag account
• Door
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Iteration #1
◦Sensor: Wireless Sensor Tag
◦Hub: Tag Manager (same as for ‘Bath’)
◦Account: Wireless Tag account (same as for ‘Bath’)
• Service integration
◦IFTTT
• Data Storage
◦Google
5.1.3
Service Customisation and Integration
This section explains how the multiple services are technically connected and how
they integrate with each other.
The section starts with the IFTTT service as this service is the main link between
the others.
5.1.3.1
Data Collection & Storage
The service IFTTT makes it possible to collect all data in one place despite of the
fact that the sensors were selected from three different suppliers. The IFTTT does
this by connecting the structure behind each sensor with a data storage service, in
this case, Google Sheets.
The IFTTT stands for If This Then That. This means that if one thing happens in
one of the two services (on the sensor side) then something else happens in the other
service (Google Sheets). See the figure below, 5.3.
Figure 5.3: A visualisation of the IFTTT terminology.
In this context, if a sensor is triggered, the captured data should be stored in a Google
sheet.
The action between the two services is customised in the IFTTT environment and
referred to as “Applets”. All Applets follow the IFTTT methodology, and the first
thing is to select the two service that the IFTTT must be the link between.
The sensor kit solution consists of seven Applets in total, see figure 5.4.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Implementation
39
Figure 5.4: The Applets of the solution in the IFTTT environment.
The first time each Applet runs, the corresponding sheet can be seen in Google Sheets,
see figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: The data storage files in Google Sheet.
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Iteration #1
The IFTTT and Google Sheets each demand an account. In the latter case, it is a
regular Google account. The IFTTT asks for permission to access the other account
when creating a new Applet. The link between the two services is established when
the access is granted.
5.1.3.2
SleepPeanut
The SleepPeanut is a pre-made sleep sensor of 25x45x 5 mm and 7.5 grams (see figure
5.6. It can measure bedtime, wake up time, sleep time, sleep cycles, sleep performance
and sleep efficiency. It does so by using a build-in accelerometer.
Figure 5.6: The SleepPeanut sensor.
The SleepPeanut get activated by pulling out an attached strip. The SleepPeanut
must be connected to a SensePeanut account that gets created once downloading the
app “SensePeanut” from either Google Play or App Store. The app and the Sleep-
peanut connect via Bluetooth.
The app instructs the user in how to place the SleepPeanut under the bed sheet and
just below the pillow, and to declare an estimation of bedtime and wake up time
during the week and during the weekend.
Once in place, a new Applet can be created along with the connection to Google
Sheets (see figure 5.7).
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Implementation
41
Figure 5.7: Choosing the two services to connect in the IFTTT environment, 1.
SleepPeanut and 2. Google Sheet.
The connection between two services starts with choosing a predefined trigger. The
predefined triggers are mostly guidelines, and they can be customised after selecting
it. See figure 5.8)
Figure 5.8: The pre-defined triggers between the two selected services (SleepPeanut
and Google Sheets).
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Iteration #1
In this case the most suitable Applet is the “Night analysis is ready”-trigger (see
the figure 5.9). It is described as follows: “The trigger fires every time SleepPeanut
detects a wake up. This trigger offers various information about your night such as
its duration, its score and the time you spent in each sleep phase category. This might
happen multiple times during the night.” This means that when the Sleeppeanut de-
tects a wake up, the Applet will be triggered.
Figure 5.9: The chosen trigger for the SleepPeanut.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Implementation
43
The next step is to choose the second service to integrate with. There are two possible
triggers when integrating with Google Sheets.
In this case the chosen action is “Add row to Sheets” which is described as: “This
action will add a single row to the bottom of the first worksheet of spreadsheet you
specify. Note: a new spreadsheet is created after 2000 rows.” See figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: The chosen action for Google Sheets.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Iteration #1
The Applet can be customised after choosing an action. The name of the spreadsheet,
the format, and optionally the drive folder path can be selected in the customisation
of the applet (see figure 5.11.
Figure 5.11: Configuration of the SleepPeanut trigger.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Implementation
45
The format for the SleepPeanut is declared as follows:
Bed Date: {{BedDate}} ||| Fell Asleep At: {{FellAsleepAt}} ||| Sleep
Score: {{Score}} ||| Created At: {{CreatedAt}} ||| Wake Date: {{Wake-
Date}}
The customisation defines which data that will be withdrawn from the SleepPeanut
and added into the Google Sheet. As can be seen below (figure 5.12), the connected
Google Sheet saves the data in the declared format.
Figure 5.12: Data from the SleepPeanut saved in a Google Sheet.
5.1.3.3
Flic
A Flic button is a wireless button of 27x27x8 mm and 6.5 grams (see figure 5.13).
The buttons come in five colors (turkis, yellow, green, black and white) and have a
sticky back side so they can be attached to any desired surface.
Figure 5.13: Flic Buttons.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Iteration #1
The Flic buttons work together with the Flic smartphone app (iOS or Android) via
Bluethooth.
Each button can be given a specific name and customised according to different types
of click: “Click”, “Double Click”, and “Hold”. Each press can be assigned an action
(e.g. ‘Start playing music”) and in this context the action is to connect with IFTTT.
In the IFTTT environment, a new Applet is created similar to the SleepPeanut Ap-
plet. The desired trigger in this case is “Flic is clicked”, see figure 5.14
Figure 5.14: The Flic trigger chosen in the IFTTT environment.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Implementation
47
It is possible to select a specific Flic because of the connection between the two ac-
counts. In the example, the Flic button named “Black | Dinner” is chosen (figure 5.15)
In the IFTTT environment, it is possible to choose a desired click type. In this case,
the click type is irrelevant and therefore “Any” is chosen.
Figure 5.15: The chosen click type - ”Any”.
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Iteration #1
The “Formatted row” is set to “ClickedAt” and the “Drive folder path” is set to “app-
s/flic” (figure 5.16.
Figure 5.16: Configuration of the Flic Applet.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Implementation
49
The outcome format consists of a date and time stample in a Google sheet (figure
5.17).
Figure 5.17: Storage of Flic button data in Google Sheet.
5.1.3.4
Wireless Sensor Tag & Ethernet Tag Manager
The Wireless Sensor Tags are the sensors themselves, referred to as tags, and the
Ethernet Tag Manager is like a hub or gateway used by the tags to upload data in
the cloud.1 See figure 5.18.
Figure 5.18: The Tag Manager and a Wireless Sensor Tag.
The manager has a power plugin and gets connected directly to a router. The man-
ager can be activated using a browser or an app (Wireless Tag) available for Android
1The user’s smartphone works as the hub/gateway for uploading data for the Sleepeanut and
the Flic buttons
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Iteration #1
and iOS.
When activating the manager, an account will be created using email and password.
When setting up this account, it is important to customise the manager to allow usage
for multiple accounts. This will make the manager accessible to multiple users.
Once the manager is set up, the tags can be associated. The system searches for
unassociated tags, and once found, they can be associated to the manager. The tag
itself must not be too close to the manager otherwise the association will not be es-
tablished. This means that the tag must be physically moved away from the manager.
Four tags are associated to the same manager in the example below (figure 5.19).
Each tag is given a name corresponding to what they are tracking (in the example:
door, shower, bed, and fridge).
Figure 5.19: Four associated tags in the wireless sensor environment.
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Implementation
51
Each tag can be customised to track specific values which can be temperature, hu-
midity, motion detection or door opening and corresponding sensitivity. In “Settings”
the link to IFTTT can be customised.
The desired settings were found after a small trial-and-error testing of each tag:
• Door
◦Armed
– Sensitivity: 100 %
– Mode: Door Monitoring Mode
– Threshold Angle: 3 degrees
• Shower
◦Armed (optional)
A new Applet is created in the IFTTT environment. The trigger for the shower tag
is “Temperature & Humidity”, and the trigger for the door tag is “Door Opening/-
Closing”.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Iteration #1
The name of the spreadsheet and the row format are declared in the Applet configu-
ration (figure 5.20).
Figure 5.20: Configuration of the wireless sensor tag in the IFTTT environment.
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Implementation
53
The format for the bath tag is declared as follows:
Tag Name: {{TagName}} ||| Occurred At: {{Occurred At}} ||| Tempera-
ture C {{TemperatureCelcius}} ||| Humidity Percentage: {{HumidityPe-
rcentage}}
The format shows in the Google Sheet, see the figure below (5.21).
Figure 5.21: The bath tag data stored in Google Sheets.
The format for the door tag is: “TagName ||| OccurredAt” and the format in Google
Sheet is as follows (figure 5.22):
Figure 5.22: The door tag data stored in Google Sheets.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Iteration #1
5.1.4
Data Validation
The app aTimeLogger enables customisation of declared inputs which in this case is
sleep, bath, door enter, door exit, breakfast, lunch, and dinner.
The first app image (figure 5.23) shows the declared input points with names, icons,
and colors. The app image shows a typical day of tracking and all the manual inputs.
The third app image shows all app options and the “Report” option which will be
used to extract the data after the study period.
Figure 5.23: aTimeLogger - Interfaces: 1. Inputs, 2. Manual Inputs, 3. Settings .
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Implementation
55
The app is available for Android and iOS, and Android allows for inputs directly from
the home screen which makes it fast and easy (see figure 5.24).
Figure 5.24: aTimeLogger - Inputs directly assessible from the home screen.
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Iteration #1
5.1.5
Conclusion
The ‘Implementation’ chapter has described how the sensor kit works and how it is
set up.
The sensor kit uses pre-made sensors; one sensor specifically designed for sleep track-
ing (SleepPeanut), three wireless buttons (Flic), and two wireless tags that track
motion, humidity, and temperature.
All sensors have applied services behind their build-in technology (smartphone apps
or website) which require creation of accounts. An account for the service IFTTT
and Google must also be created.
The integration between the services can be established using Applets in the IFTTT
environment. When the integration is configured, the automated tracking is in place
and can be followed in real-time in the Google Sheet.
The user must use a customised smartphone app (aTimeLogger) for manual tracking.
The app will be used for manual tracking for a temporary period of time to ensure
validity of the sensor data. Once the manual tracking period is over, the data must
be manually extracted from the app.
5.2
Study
The study section describes two user tests and one feasibility test of the system. The
test runs for 22 days.
5.2.1
Method
The study uses statistics and observations to evaluate the results. The statistical
calculations use a fictional scenario. The scenario is an assumption (a reference or
”guideline”) of home behavior and will be further explained below.
[5.2.1.1] The
scenario means that the study operates with three truths: the sensor inputs, the
manual inputs, and the scenario.
5.2.1.1
Scenario
The scenario is an assumption of basic home behavior. The assumption is that each
activity will occur at least once a day (wake up, bedtime, bath, breakfast, lunch,
dinner, door enter, and door exit).
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Study
57
The scenario will be used to calculate a corresponding percentage for each of the
activities per participant. The calculated percentage can be relatively small but also
exceed 100 % because the scenario is very basic.
5.2.1.2
Statistics
The data proves suitable for a standard test-t (a symmetrical distribution). The t-
test will be used to calculate p-values for detecting any statistical significant difference
(when p < 0.05) between the manual inputs and the sensor data.
5.2.1.3
Observations
Each participant is given setup instructions together with the sensor kit. After the
participant is given the instructions, the conductor observes the setup execution and
documents successful/unsuccessful predefined tasks. The predefined tasks are:
• Download of apps
• Creating accounts
• Correct placement of sensors
• Setup time
Besides the tasks, the conductor is obliged to register any relevant notes, e.g. related
to the home environment.
5.2.2
Results
All results from iteration #1 are presented in the table below. [5.1] The three truths
of the study are listed, as well as input differences and time differences (minutes),
calculated p-values, and observation results. The results will be discussed in the foll-
wing section 5.2.3
A explanation of initials is provided below second table. [5.3]
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Iteration #1
Table 5.1: Iteration #1 - Results.
Scenario
FT
FT - %
P1
P1 - %
P2
P2 - %
Bath
22
18
81.82
3
13.64
9
40.91
Wake up
22
22
100.00
5
22.73
9
40.91
Bedtime
22
22
100.00
3
13.64
8
36.36
Breakfast
22
19
86.36
1
4.55
22
100.00
Lunch
22
5
22.73
1
4.55
10
45.45
Dinner
22
8
36.36
5
22.73
12
54.55
Enter/Exit
44
61
138.64
0
0.00
0
0.00
Manual
Total
176
155
88.07
18
10.23
70
39.77
Bath
22
19
86.36
28
127.27
10
45.45
Wake up
22
22
100.00
15
68.18
15
68.18
Bedtime
22
22
100.00
21
95.45
15
68.18
Breakfast
22
16
72.73
3
13.64
22
100.00
Lunch
22
5
22.73
1
4.55
10
45.45
Dinner
22
6
27.27
7
31.82
12
54.55
Enter/Exit
44
58
131.82
0
0.00
109
247.73
Sensor
Total
176
148
84.09
75
42.61
193
109.66
Bath
-1
-25
-1
Wake up
0
-10
-6
Bedtime
0
-18
-7
Breakfast
3
-2
0
Lunch
0
0
0
Dinner
2
-2
0
Enter/Exit
3
0
-109
Manual
/
Sensor
Diff.
Total
7
-57
-123
Bath
00:11
00:26
00:18
Wake up
00:31
00:17
03:36
Bedtime
00:11
03:59
04:23
Breakfast
00:02
00:01
00:02
Lunch
00:20
00:02
00:04
Dinner
00:17
00:05
00:15
Time
Diff.
(hh:ss)
Enter/Exit
00:10
-
-
Bath
0.3275
0.0417
5.5790
Wake up
0.1697
0.3530
0.0501
Bedtime
0.0253
-
0.5751
Breakfast
0.1381
-
0.9978
Lunch
0.1869
-
0.4996
Dinner
0.2199
0.7920
0.8102
P
values
Enter/Exit
0.2276
-
-
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Study
59
Table 5.2: Iteration #1 - Observations.
Scenario FT FT - % P1
P1 - % P2
P2 - %
Setup h/m
02:20
02:50
Chrono.
Random
Apps
Accounts
Activation
Observs.
Placement
Table 5.3: Initial Explanations of Study Results Table [5.1].
Table Initials
Explanation
Scenario
The assumption of basic home behavior.
FT
Feasibility Study
FT - %
Feasiblity Study Percentage of the Scenario
P1
Partcipant #1
P1 - %
Participant #1 Percentage of the Scenario
P2
Partcipant #2
P2 - %
Participant #2 Percentage of the Scenario
Manual/Sensor
Diff.
The input difference between a registered bath
(manually and automatically). [Manual] - [Sensor]
Time Diff. (hh:ss) The average time difference between the manual and automatic
input in hours and minutes.
Observ.
Observation
Setup h/m
The observed time it tool the participant to setup of the
sensor kit in hours and minutes.
Chrono.
This refers to the way the participant set up the sensor kit.
If it is checked off, the participant chronologically followed
the given instructions.
Random
This refers to the way the participant set up the sensor kit.
If it is checked off, the participant randomly set up the sensor
in non-chronologically manner according to the given instructions.
Apps
This is checked off if the participant successfully managed to
download all necessary apps without interference from the
conductor.
Accounts
This is checked off if the participant successfully managed to
create all necessary apps without interference from the conductor.
Activation
This is checked of if the participant successfully managed to
activate all sensors without interference from the conductor.
Placement
This is checked of if the participant successfully managed to
place all sensors correctly without interference from the conductor.
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Iteration #1
5.2.3
Discussion
The discussion considers the amount of sensor and manual data that has been col-
lected. It evaluates the differences between the automatic and manual inputs and
discusses specific examples of interest. It evaluates results from the observations, and
lastly, it considers the design of the overall solution.
5.2.3.1
Data Collection
The amount of collected data is neither a success nor a failure.
The feasibility test has high scores for both manual and sensor tracking, participant
#1 has fairly low scores, especially for manual tracking, and participant #2 has in-
termediate scores.
It is important to emphasize that the percentages derive from an estimate and can
be a distortion of the real picture.
Participant #1 has a 1 to 22 ratio in ”Breakfast” and ”Lunch”, and a 5 to 22 ratio for
”Dinner” (manual inputs) and slightly higher scores for the automatic tracking. It
could be that the participant rarely eats breakfast, and that he does not eat in a lot,
e.g. eating lunch at work. Correspondingly, ”Lunch” and ”Dinner” are the lowest
scores in the feasibility study which supports this assumption.
Participant #2 is fairly consistent in his manual tracking of breakfast, and slightly
less lunch and dinner. An observation that can explain this consistency could be the
participant’s usage of a tablet instead of a smartphone. The tablet seems placed on
a regular basis on the couch table next to the three Flic buttons, and the couch table
seems as the primary place for the participant to eat.
The fairly static placement of the buttons and the tablet seem to consistently sustain
the Bluetooth connection between the two devices. This is likely to ensure the auto-
matic data tracking and the sustained manual inputs which has a score of 100 %.
5.2.3.2
Data Accuracy
The assessment of data accuracy will be based on the differences between the manual
inputs and the sensor inputs, the calculated time differences and p-values.
The time differences are primarily kept fairly small and almost all of the differences
are below or close to 30 minutes. The automatic trackings of eating are especially
low and also accurate in terms of manual/sensor inputs.
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Study
61
Oppositely, there is reason to believe that the SleepPeanut is not accurate based on
the calculated p-values. Two out of three calculated p-values show a statistically sig-
nificant difference between the sensor data and the manual inputs.
The data from the feasibility test visualise this inaccuracy very well, see Figure [5.25].
Figure 5.25: Iteration #1 - Feasibility Test - Sleep.
Bath
The p-values for bath tracking also differ a lot. However, when plotting the humidity
from the bathroom, the data clearly show indications of isolated events of increased
humidity in two cases (the feasibility test and participant #2). See Figure 5.26 and
5.28.
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Iteration #1
Figure 5.26: Iteration #1 - Feasibility Test - Bath.
Figure 5.27: Iteration #1 - Participant #2 - Bath.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Study
63
Incidents of increased humidity is not as clear for participant #1 (see Figure 5.28),
and with only three manual inputs, it is difficult to determine whether the participant
has taking a bath or not (note the y-axis starts at humidity = 30).
Figure 5.28: Iteration #1 - Particpant #1 - Bath.
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Iteration #1
However, when plotting the spike, a small pattern is revealed (see Figure 5.29.
Figure 5.29: Iteration #1 - Participant #1 - Bath - Humidity Spikes.
As can be seen in the figure [5.29], all humidity spikes happen between 06:56 and
10:10 in the morning or 18:28 and 23:50 in the evening except for four incidents.
This means that even though participant #1 had a low manual tracking score and the
humidity data does not clearly show isolated increased humidity events (compared
to the feasibility test and participant #1), there is still reason to believe that bath
activity happened on a regular basis. The main reasons are the time of day and the
date. The time of day almost stays the same and the date almost shifts on a daily
basis.
5.2.4
Observations
Both participants were able to download the needed apps, create the accounts, acti-
vate all sensors, and place them correctly.
Nonetheless, the setup is too comprehensive. The amount of apps, accounts, and espe-
cially setup time contradict the goal of an easy-to-deploy solution [Problem Statement,
Section 1.2].
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Study
65
Furthermore, the number of steps increase the risks of mistakes and the entire process
is likely to annoy the user.
The solution also requires that the conductor is on site to finalise the setup with
configuration of Applets and to establish the integration between the services. On
this note, the conductor must for a short time have access to the user’s device. These
two aspects are problematic.
5.2.5
Summary
The problem statement states an easy-to-deploy and fully automatic sensor setup
system for tracking daily activity, and the end goal states a sensor kit that easily can
be deployed to users. [Section 1.2 and 1.3]
With this in mind, the current solution has four main shortcomings:
1. Inaccuracy of the sleep sensor
• The time differences are high, sometimes several hours
• The data shows a statistical significant difference in two cases, p = 0.0253
(Participant #2) and p = 0.0501, see section 5.1
2. Only semi-automatic tracking of eating activities
• The Flic buttons require a user action directly and do not qualify as auto-
matic tracking.
3. A comprehensive setup
• The number of apps, accounts, services, and integrations make the solution
difficult to deploy.
4. Inconsistent manual tracking
• The manual tracking is not adequate and inconsistent.
This makes it
difficult to assess the sensor data validity which is essential to the solution.
A revisit to the sensor suitability assessment (Section 4.3) was made to explore other
tracking possibilities.
The assessment visualises temperature, accelerometer, pressure, motion, and light as
potential triggers for sleep tracking.
==PAGE:76==
66
5 Iteration #1
An assessment for tracking eating was temperature, accelerometer, and motion, al-
though these triggers were only evaluated to be ”yellow” meaning tracking in combi-
nation with an object.
After the assessment two main changes were made to the original design.
The new design exploits the positive results from the first iteration and aims to im-
prove the listed shortcomings.
The next section explains the new design, the study of the design, and the results.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 6
Iteration #2
The new design explores the possibility of using the temperature and accelerometer
in the wireless sensor tags.
The SleepPeanut will be replaced by a wireless sensor which will be attached with
double-sided tape directly onto the duvet’s underside. See figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: A wireless sensor tag with double-sided tape.
The sensor tag will be customised to track motion and temperature. The hypothesis is
that once the user is going to sleep, he will move the duvet and create trackable move-
ments, and that the temperature will increase once the participant is lying in the bed.
The three Flic buttons will also be replaced by a wireless sensor tag. The Flic buttons
showed potential in terms of accuracy, nonetheless they are exchanged for four main
reasons:
• The buttons are not automatic
==PAGE:78==
68
6 Iteration #2
• They require a separate account
• They require activation on location
• They are smartphone dependent (their reference point moves around and po-
tentially creates an unstable connection)
The tag will be placed on the inside of the fridge door as close to the outer edge as
possible and be customised to track motion.
The hypothesis is that when the user eats either breakfast, lunch, or dinner, he will
open/close the fridge and indicate the activity of having a meal. The specific meal
can be identified using time of day or over time detecting a repeated pattern of eating
in general.
6.1
Implementation
The new sensor setup design is more simple and contain less steps compared to the
first design.
This change meets the third identified shortcoming of the original design, see section
5.2.5.
The hypothesis is that the simpler design will make the solution easy to deploy (Prob-
lem Statement [1.2]).
The most important aspect is that the conductor can customise all the sensors before
deploying them to the user (see section 5.1.3.4). It only requires one account and it
is only the conductor who needs to have access.
The infrastructure behind the wireless sensor tags also provides data storage, visuali-
sation, an api, and data exports. Effectively, this means that also Google Sheets can
be excluded from the solution.
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Study
69
The new sensor setup is visualised in figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Iteration #2 - Interaction Diagram.
6.2
Study
The study is similar to iteration #1 and will also use a fictional scenario, statistics,
and observations. [Section 5.2.1] Only the time period and manual tracking are mod-
==PAGE:80==
70
6 Iteration #2
ified.
The manual tracking will be divided into minor parts separated by activity (four in
total).
Each activity will be individually tracked and for a shorter period of time. This means
that showering will be manually tracked for the first two days of the test period, sleep
will be tracked for the after-coming two days (day 3 and 4), meals will be tracked for
the following two days (day 5 and 6), and door events will be tracked on the following
two days (day 7 and 8) and the entire study runs for 14 days. See the manual tracking
schedule below. [6.3]
Figure 6.3: Iteration #2 - Manual Tracking Schedule.
6.2.1
Results
All results from iteration #2 are presented in the table below. [6.1] The three truths
of the study are listed as well as input differences and time differences (minutes),
calculated p-values, and observation results. The results will be discussed in the fol-
lowing section.
A explanation of initials is provided below second table. [5.3]
==PAGE:81==
6.2 Study
71
Table 6.1: Iteration #2 - Results.
Scenario FT
FT - % P1
P1 - % P2
P2 - %
Bath
2
11
550
0
0
4
200
Wake up
2
13
650
5
250
2
100
Bedtime
2
13
650
5
250
2
100
Breakfast
2
10
500
4
200
2
100
Lunch
2
12
600
1
50
0
0
Dinner
2
9
450.
4
200
1
50
Enter/Exit
4
22
550
0
0.00
0
0
Manual
Total
16
90
563
19
119
11
69
Bath
13
11
84.62
0
0.00
18
138.46
Wake up
13
13
100.00
11
84.62
13
100.00
Bedtime
13
13
100.00
11
84.62
13
100.00
Breakfast
13
10
76.92
2
15.38
1
7.69
Lunch
13
12
92.31
1
7.69
0
0.00
Dinner
13
9
69.23
3
23.08
1
7.69
Enter/Exit
26
22
84.62
0
0.00
0
0.00
Sensor
Total
104
90
86.54
28
26.92
46
44.23
Bath
0
0
-14
Wake up
0
-6
-11
Bedtime
0
-6
-11
Breakfast
0
2
1
Lunch
0
0
0
Dinner
0
1
0
Enter/Exit
0
0
0
Manual
/
Sensor
Diff.
Total
0
-9
-35
Bath
00:16
-
00:10
Wake up
00:21
01:05
00:07
Bedtime
00:03
00:12
00:08
Breakfast
00:06
00:00
00:05
Lunch
00:06
00:00
-
Dinner
00:40
00:01
00:08
Time
Diff.
(hh:ss)
Enter/Exit
00:05
-
-
Bath
0.0122
-
0.1019
Wake up
0.6229
0.8237
0.8045
Bedtime
0.1966
0.8084
0.8450
Breakfast
0.8825
0.0911
-
Lunch
0.9986
-
-
Dinner
0.7148
0.5406
-
P-values
Enter/Exit
0.9894
-
-
==PAGE:82==
72
6 Iteration #2
Table 6.2: My caption.
Scenario FT FT - %
P1
P1 - %
P2
P2 - %
Setup h/m
00:11
00:14
Chrono.
Random
Placement
Observ.
Apps
6.2.2
Discussion
The discussion considers the amount of sensor and manual data that has been col-
lected. It evaluates the differences between the automatic and manual inputs and
discusses specific examples of interest. It evaluates results from the observations and
compare with the results from first iteration. [5.2.4]
6.2.2.1
Data Collection
The calculated scores for the data collection were increased compared to the first it-
eration. This was an expected result because the manual tracking had been reduced.
[Manual Tracking Scheme, 6.3]
The scores prove to be almost fully applied. Participant #1 has an average of 119 %
and participant #2 has an average of 69 %. When looking closer at the individual
scores, participant #1 only has one score below 100 % (lunch) and four scores above
200 %. This means that the participant made manual trackings beyond the required
amount.
Participant #2 also only has one score below 100 % (dinner) and four scores above.
This means that the amount of collected data was very good and above the expected.
6.2.2.2
Data Accuracy
The data accuracy will be assessed on calculated time difference and p-values.
It is not relevant to include differences in the amount of inputs because the manual
tracking by default will be lower compared to the sensors. Nonetheless, a complete
manual tracking has been done in the feasibility test and it shows that there is no
difference between the sensors and the manual tracking.
The calculated time difference are mostly lower in the second iteration. There are
two exceptions with one time difference of one hour and five minutes and another
time difference of 40 minutes. The first one is wake up time (participant #1) and the
==PAGE:83==
6.2 Study
73
second one is dinner (feasibility test).
Eating
The accuracy for eating appears fairly good. The time differences are low and the
p-values are all above 0.05.
However, when the data is plotted a problem occurs. The accuracy for eating is high
because the inputs can be matched with a corresponding sensor input, but beside the
matched inputs there is a high number of unmatched sensor inputs. It is only because
of the manual inputs it is possible to say something about the accuracy and only for
those points. See figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Iteration #2 - Feasibility Test - Eating.
Sleep
The accuracy for sleep tracking in iteration #2 is slightly better compared to iteration
#1 in terms of amount of inputs and time differences except for one outlier with a
time difference of one hour and five minutes (Participant #2 - Wake up time).
Nonetheless, when plotting the data (temperature and motion) from the wireless sen-
sor tag, a clear pattern is revealed. See figure 6.5 and 6.6 below.
==PAGE:84==
74
6 Iteration #2
Figure 6.5: Iteration #2 - Feasibility Test - Sleep.
Figure 6.6: Iteration #2 - Participant #1 - Sleep.
The figures each have one abnormality; figure 6.5 at about two thirds on the temper-
==PAGE:85==
6.2 Study
75
ature curve and figure 6.6 in the very end of the temperature curve.1
The results from the observation are able to explain these abnormalities. The partic-
ipant from the feasibility test was ill on the specific day and therefore lying in bed
more than usual, and participant #1 was a away for the weekend in the very end of
the study.
Bath
The data from the bathroom shows clear spikes of increased humidity events which
also were seen in iteration #1. [Section 5.2.3.2]
Nonetheless, there is still a notable time difference and even a statistical significant
difference both in iteration #1 (Participant #1) [6.1] and in iteration #2 (Feasibility
Test). [6.1]
It is possible to make an assumption of what is causing this scenario when plotting
the manual inputs together with the sensor inputs that have a humidity value above
∼60. See figure 6.7.
Figure 6.7: Iteration #2 - Feasibility Test - Bath.
1Technical issues caused the missing index values on the x-axis.
==PAGE:86==
76
6 Iteration #2
The manual input sometimes occurs before the participant takes the bath and some-
times the manual input occurs after the participant has taking a bath.
Furthermore, the increased humidity will have a delay compared to the actual activity.
6.2.2.3
Observations
The participants follow the instructions chronologically unlike the participants from
the first iteration. However, all participants are successful in the pre-defined tasks
included in the observations.
The key take-away from the observations is the setup time. The setup time differs
with up to two hours and 36 minutes in favor of the second iteration. See the table
6.3.
Table 6.3: Iteration #1 and #2 - Observations - Setup Time Comparison.
Time Difference (hh:mm) in setup time.
Comparison of Iteration #1 and #2
Iteration #1
Participant #1
Iteration #1
Participant #2
Iteration #2
Participant #1
02:20 - 00:11 = 02:09 02:50 - 00:11 = 02:39
Iteration #2
Participant #2
02:20 - 00:14 = 02:06 02:50 - 00:14 = 02:36
6.2.3
Summary
The second iteration is considered an improvement of the first iteration.
Tracking of breakfast, lunch, and dinner, is not significantly improved but the data
shows that it is possible to track fridge events. These events do repeatedly occur in
connection with the participant having a meal. The problem occurs because fridge
events also happens without any connection to having a meal.
This means that
tracking fridge events qualifies a an element for tracking eating habits but not solely.
Instead it needs a combination of other tracking data related to eating habits.
The exchange of the sleep sensor from SleepPeanut to a wireless sensor tag is a clear
improvement. First of all, the wireless sensor tag collects far more data compared to
the SleepPeanut, and movement detection (of the duvet) together with the tempera-
ture prove to be valid parameters for tracking sleep activity.
The exchange of the two sensors to simplify the setup was also a clear improvement,
and the solution is considered easy to deploy for this reason.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
This section discusses the study on a general level and what the two iterations can
say about automatic and deploy-able sensor kits for home-based activity tracking.
7.1
Manual Tracking
It is unavoidable that the sensor kit comes with some degree of manual tracking oth-
erwise it is not possible to validate the data coming from the sensors.
In this study, a smartphone app was used for manual inputs. It is not the best solu-
tion, and as expected, the manual inputs proved inconsistent.
It is necessary to consider alternatives that can collect a second truth for validation
of the sensors. Together with the sensor kit, this must also be very user-friendly and
easily deployed. The second truth is the other dependent half of the overall solution,
and it is a combination of the two separate solutions.
This means that the design of an easy-to-deploy and fully automatic sensor setup sys-
tem for tracking daily activities in the home (problem statement), also is the design
of a parallel, consistent and reliable second source of data collection. This aspect
made the study problematic, and the solution was to use a scenario. [Section 5.2.1.1]
However, the scenario is not fully applicable which means the data might not show
the right picture.
The Flic buttons used in the first iteration showed potential of effective parallel data
collection. They were discarded in the second iteration amongst other because of the
demand of a separate account, on location activation, and their smartphone depen-
dency.
Nonetheless, if the buttons could be customised similarly to the customisation of the
wireless sensor tags, it could be an alternative to manual tracking. The buttons can
be attached to any surface or object (e.g. next to the door, bed, fridge or shower), and
the company behind the buttons has recently shipped a hub similar to the ethernet
tag manager. This could mean that the buttons would be independent of on location
customisation and another account but still have high accuracy because of the stable
==PAGE:88==
78
7 Discussion
data hub. Other alternative could be wearables.
7.2
Accuracy of Sensors
The two iterations show that sensor-based activity tracking can be accurate, espe-
cially sleep and bath activities.
Sensor-based tracking of physical activity and social interaction related to entrances
and exits of homes must be combined with other data. From the collected data, time
of day seems as the best indicator which is easy accessible with the current setup.
7.3
Future Perspective
The wireless sensor tags support customised audio feedback which could be interest-
ing for future perspectives in terms of user feedback. Eventually the setup should
also support some sort of visual feedback.
The wireless sensor tags enable feedback of battery time. As wireless sensors eventu-
ally will run out of battery this aspect is important to consider for future development.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The problem statement states:
What is the design of an easy-to-deploy and fully automatic sensor setup
system for tracking daily activities in the home with a special focus on
mental health?
The design of an easy-to-deploy sensor solution is pre-customised sensors. The sen-
sors comes with instructions of how and where to place them in the home and with
double-sided tape on the backside.
The fully automatic sensor setup system for tracking daily activities in the home is:
• a motion sensor that tracks when someone enters or exits the home
• a humidity sensor that tracks when someone takes a bath
• a combined motion and temperature sensor that is attached to the duvet and
track sleep activity
It had not been possible to find a solution for sufficiently tracking eating activity
using sensors. Only a motion sensor that tracks fridge event can provide indications
of eating activity.
An alternative is buttons that the user presses manually corresponding to having
breakfast, lunch, or dinner.
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Iteration #1 - User Manual
• Download the app “Flic”.
• Using the Flic app, connect to your three Flic buttons one at a time. Name the
turkis button “Breakfast”, name the white button “Lunch” and name the black
button “Dinner”.
• Place the three buttons in your kitchen with a note saying “Breakfast”, “Lunch”
and “Dinner”.
• Download the app “SensePeanut” and create an account.
• Connect with your SleepPeanut.
• Place the Sleeppeanut on your bed, under the sheet and just below your pillow.
• Plug in you Tag Manager.
• Download the app “Wireless Tag” and create an account.
◦Connect with the first tag
◦“Associate”
◦Check of “I am associating a short range (1st generation) tag
◦Click “Search Unassociated Tag”
◦Wait for response
◦“Associate” (do not be too close to the Tag Manager)
◦Name the tag “Bath” and place it in your bathroom
• Connect with the second tag
• Name the tag “Door”
• Attach the tag to your primary entrance/exit door
• Download the app “aTimeLogger”
==PAGE:92==
82
A Appendix
A.2
Iteration #2 - User Manual
• Place the tag named ”Door” on the inside of your main door and as close to
the edge as possible
• Place the tag named ”Fridge” on the inside of your fridge and as close to the
edge as possible
• Place the tag named ”Bath” somewhere in your bathroom where the tag will
not get wet
• Attach the tag named ”Bed” on the primary underside of your duvet in the
center.
• Connect the ethernet tag manager to a power plugin and your router.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1] World Health Organization - The World Health Report 2001,
”Mental Health: New Understanding New Hope”, 2001
WHO Library, Geneva
[2] H. Speyer, H. C. B. Nørgaard, M. Birk, M. Karlsen, A. S. Jakobsen, K. Pedersen,
C. Hjorthøj, C. Pisinger, C. Gluud, O. Mors, J. Krogh, M. Nordentoft,
”The CHANGE trial: no superiority of lifestyle coaching plus care coordination
plus treatment as usual compared to treatment as usual alone in reducing risk of
cardiovascular disease in adults with schizophrenia spectrum disorders and abdom-
inal obesity.”, World Psychiatry. 2016 Jun;15(2):155-65
[3] S. Bengtsson, S. Ø. Gregersen, ”Integrerede indsatser for menensker med psykiske
lidelser”, SFI - Det Nationale Forskningscenter For Velfærd, København 2013
[4] P. J. Barr, I. Scholl, P. Bravo, M. J. Faber, G. Elwyn, M. McAllister,
”Assessment of Patient Empowerment - A Systematic Review of Measures”,
PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371 , May 13, 2015
[5] J. E. Bardram, M. Frost, K. Szántó, G. Marcu ”The MONARCA Self-Assessment
System - A Persuasive Personal Monitoring System for Bipolar Patients”,
International Health Informatics, Florida, USA, 2012
[6] D. Bakker, N. Kazantzis, N. Rickard ”Mental Health Smartphone Apps: Review
and Evidence-Based Recommendations for Future Developments”,
JMIR Mental Health, March 2016
[7] M. Matthews, S. Abdullah, G. Gay, T. Choudhury,
”Tracking Mental Well-Being: Balacing Rich Sensing and Patient Needs”,
IEEE Volume: 47, Issue: 4, Apr. 2014
[8] E. K. Choe, S. Abdullah, M. Rabbi, E. Thomaz, D. A. Epstein, Ma. Kay, F.
Cordeiro, G. D. Abowd, T. Choudhury, J. Fogarty, B. Lee, M. Matthews, J. A.
Kientz, ”Semi-Automated Tracking: A Balancing Approach for Self-Monitoring
Applications”, IEEE Pervasive Computing, Volume: 16, Issue: 1, Jan.-Mar. 2017
[9] J. B. Joe, ”Cognitive psychology and self-reports: Models and methods”
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Quality of Life Research 12: 219-227, Netherlands
2003
==PAGE:94==
84
Bibliography
[10] Q. Ni, A. B. G. Hernando, I. P. de la Cruz ”The Elderly’s Independent Living in
Smart Homes: A Characterization of Activities and Sensing Infrastructure Survey
to Facilitate Service Development”, Sensors, ISSN 1424-8220, May 2015
[11] D. Reisberg, ”Cognition - Exploring the science of the mind”, W. W. Norton &
Company, Inc, 2016
[12] R. Tourangeau, ”Cognitive sciences and survey methods”, Cognitive aspects of
survey methodology: Building a Bridge between Disciplines, pp. 73-100,
National Academy Press, 2013
[13] P. A. Areán, K. H- Ly, G. Andersson, ”Mobile Technology for Mental Health
Assessment”, AICH Servier Research Group, 2016
[14] A. K. Gold, L. G. Sylvia, ”The Role of Sleep in Bipolar Disorder”,
Nature and Science of Sleep 2016:8
[15] K. Davison, J. Caims, C. Seely, E. Ng, U. Chandrasekera, E. Sengmueller, M.
Jaques, J. Palmer, ”The Role of Nutrition Care for Mental Health Conditions”,
Dietitians of Canada, 2012
[16] Dr. D. Hull, ”The Relationship Between Physical Activity and Mentalh Health:
A Summary of Evidence and Policy”,Northern Ireland Asembly, Research and
Information Service, 2012
[17] A. R. Teo, H. Choi, M. Valenstein, ”Social Relationships and Depression: Ten-
Year Follow-Up from a Nationally Representative Study,
PLOS, Issue 4, Volume 8, April 2013
[18] B. A. R. Hassen, ”Importance of Personal Hygiene”, Pharmaceutica, Analytica
Acta, Issue 8, Volume 3, 2012
[19] Y. Rogers, H. Sharp, J. Preece, ”Interaction Design - beyond human-computer
interaction, Wiley, UK, 2011
[20] J. Patton, ”User Story Mapping”, O’Reilly Media, UK, 2014
[21] D. Saffer, ”Microinteractions”, O’Reilly Media, USA, 2013
