==PAGE:1==
Machine Learning based
Characterization of White Matter
Developmental Patterns in
Children and Adolescents
Amalie Soﬁe Ekstrand
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Over the last several decades, studies have investigated maturational changes in the
brain.
Throughout childhood and adolescence, maturational changes occur in the
white matter. Currently, the reported results are, to the author knowledge, only on a
group level, however the desire to move beyond remains.
The goal of this thesis is to identify individual maturational trajectories of white
matter. Tensor decomposition methods were applied to longitudinal acquired diﬀusion-
weighted magnetic resonance imaging data, which reﬂects the underlying white matter
microstructure. Eighty-three subjects with three to 11 assessments in the ages from
7.5 to 19 years were included creating a data set of 699 scans. To quantify the diﬀusion
for modeling measures of fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diﬀusion (MD) were
used.
Water diﬀusion data are inherently positive, and non-negativity constraint was applied
to the models to achieve part-based representations. In an attempt to make the models
more robust, a novel approach of interpolation of the latent variable was added to the
model. Despite a boost in the predictive performance, the predictive performance of
the decomposition model remained below that of simple processes as subject mean
and age-matched scans, underlining the substantial between-subject variance present
in the data.
The model outperformed static models but performed the best with
smoothing of the latent time variable through Gaussian interpolation, which points
towards subtle but signiﬁcant changes in water diﬀusion measures in the white matter
during childhood and adolescence.
Individual maturational trajectories were identiﬁed. Mainly, FA increases and MD
decreases were observed, verifying maturational trends reported in the literature. Fur-
thermore, regional diﬀerences were detected.
Gender was tried classiﬁed using the model-based subject scores as features. Both
logistic regression, nearest-neighbor and artiﬁcial neural networks were investigated.
The predictions were unreliable when using FA, but MD achieved an accuracy of 81%.
A more protracted MD decrease for male subjects fostered the sex diﬀerence.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Gennem de seneste årtier har mange studier undersøgt hjernens modning. Op gennem
barndommen og tidlig ungdom sker store modningsrelaterede ændringer i den hvide
substans. På nuværende tidspunkt er der, til forfatterens viden, kun opgivet resultater
på et gruppeniveau, men et stort ønske om at komme længere eksisterer.
Målet for denne afhandling er at identiﬁcere individuelle modningsforløb for hvid sub-
stans. Tensor dekompositions metoder blev anvendt på data fra longitudinelt diﬀusion-
vægtet magnetisk resonans billede data, der afspejler den underlæggende mikrostruk-
tur i den hvide substans. Data fra 83 subjekter i alderen 7.5 til 19 år med 3 til 11
skanninger blev brugt og i alt blev 699 skanninger inkluderet. For at kvantiﬁcere dif-
fusionen er parametrene fraktionel anisotropy(FA) og middel diﬀusion(MD) blevet
brugt.
Diﬀusion er i sin natur positiv, og ved at anvende ikke-negativitets begrænsning opnår
modellen en parts baseret repræsentation. I et forsøg på at gøre modellen mere ro-
bust tilføjeres interpolation af latente tidsvariable, en hidtil uprøvet metode. På trods
af forbedring i prædiktionsevne forbliver prædiktionsevnen af tensor dekompositions-
modellerne under simple metoder som subjekt gennemsnit og gennemsnit af alders
matchede skanninger, hvilket understrenger den store intersubjektive variabilitet, der
er tilstede i diﬀusionsdataet. Modellen opnår bedre resultater end en model uden dyna-
mik, dog er det modeller med gaussisk interpolation og dermed den mest udjævnende
interpolationsmetode, der opnår de bedste resultater, hvilket tyder på, at der er små
men signiﬁkante alders relaterede modningseﬀekter i diﬀusionsparametrene gennem
den sene barndom og ungdommen.
Individuelle modningsforløb blev identiﬁceret. Tendenser rapporteret i litteraturen
blev veriﬁceret, i det der hovedagligt observeres øgning af FA og fald i MD. Deru-
dover blev regionale forskelle bemærket.
Subjekters køn blev forsøgt klassiﬁceret på baggrund af de subjekt speciﬁkke score den
bedste model opnåede. Både logistisk regression, nærmest-naboer og neurale netværk
blev afprøvet. På baggrund af FA kunne køn ikke prædikteres pålideligt, men med brug
af MD udledte subjekt speciﬁkke score kunne køn prædikteres med en nøjagtighed på
81%. Denne kønsforskel synes at skyldes et mere langstrakt fald i MD for mænd.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute at the Technical University of Denmark
in collaboration with the Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR)
at Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre in fulﬁllment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Biomedical Engineering.
The thesis deals with the maturation of the typically developing brain during childhood
and adolescence and the modeling thereof.
The project was supervised by Morten Mørup, Associate Professor, Section for Cog-
nitive Systems, DTU Compute and Kathrine Skak Madsen and William Baaré, Senior
researchers at the DRCMR.
Lyngby, 02-June-2018
Amalie Soﬁe Ekstrand
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my supervisors, Kathrine Skak Madsen, William Baaré, and
Morten Mørup for making the project possible and for their guidance and feedback
these past ﬁve months. Especially, I would like to thank Morten Mørup for his enthu-
siastic nature, which provided much motivation throughout the preparation of given
thesis.
Thanks to the dynamic and friendly environment at the DRCMR for the countless
advise received over lunch. A special thanks should be awarded to the IT department
at the DRCMR for always being helpful and allowing my ruthless exploitation of the
DRCMR cluster during the past ﬁve months.
I would like to express my gratitude to the children and their parents for their per-
severance throughout the 11 assessment, and six years they have been a part of the
study. Acknowledgment should be given to Søren Føns Vind Nielsen as the ﬁrst part
of the modeling are based solely on his implementation of the non-negative Canonical
Polyadic model in MATLAB™.
Lastly, I would like to thank my friends and family for tolerating my obsessive behavior
these past ﬁve months and for their many eﬀorts to amend it with encouraging words.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
ALS
Alternating Least Squares
ANN
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
CNS
Central Nervous System
CP
Canonical Polyadic
DTI
Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging
DW
Diﬀusion Weighted
DWI
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging
FA
Fractional Anisotropy
HALS
Hierarchical Alternating Least Squares
KNN
k-Nearest Neighbor
MD
Mean Diﬀusion
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
NMF
Non-negative Matrix Factorization
PARAFAC
Parallel Factor Analysis
RMSE
Root Mean Squared Error
TBSS
Tract-based Spatial Statistics
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Tensor Nomenclature
To describe tensor decomposition eﬃciently important tensor nomenclature and oper-
ations used later are deﬁned:
Many deﬁnitions from matrix linear algebra can be generalized to tensors, however
often as straightforward for tensors.
• Tensor order: The order of a tensor is the number of dimensions, also known
as ways or modes. A one-dimensional tensor is a vector (index with a single
number), second-dimensional tensor a matrix(indexed by a pair of numbers) and
a third-dimensional tensor can be thought of as a collection of matrices(indexed
by three numbers) and so forth. [30]
– Tensors are given by boldface Euler scripted upper-case letters, e.g., A
– Matrices are given by boldface upper-case letters, e.g., A
– Vectors are given by boldface lower-case letters, e.g., a
– Scalars are given by lower-case letters, e.g., a
•
nth mode matricization(M(n)): Transforming a tensor into a matrix, also
known as unfolding. The conversion into a matrix is achieved by reordering the
tensor elements, and are done diﬀerently depending on the mode it matricied
on. The mode of the matricizing indicate which mode ﬁbers are used as columns
[30]. Example of mode-n matricizing of a N-order tensor (X): X I1×I2×···×IN
becomes X
In×I1·I2···In−1·In+1···IN
(n)
. [45]
• Outer product: The outer product of three vectors, a, b, and c are given by:
X = a ◦b ◦c
such that xi,j,k = aibjck. Thus all combinations of all elements are included into
the resulting tensor. Graphical representation is shown below:
Figure 1: Graphical representation of the outer product.
==PAGE:14==
xii
• Kronecker product: Given two matrices AI×J and BK×L the Kronecker
product is deﬁned as: [30]
AI×J ⊗BK×J =


a11B
a12B
. . .
a1jB
...
...
...
...
ai1B
ai2B
. . .
aijB


Resulting in a matrix of size (IK) × (JL)
• Khatri-Rao product: Khatri-Rao product, also known as the column-wise
Kronecker product, is given by:
AI×J ⊙BK×J = CIK×J
If column n of A is given by a1 then the Khatri-Rao product can be given by:
AI×J ⊙BK×J = [a1 ⊗b1 a2 ⊗b2 ... aj ⊗bj]
Hence the same number of column are required for the matrices, but the number
of rows can diﬀer.
==PAGE:15==
xiii
==PAGE:16==
xiv
Contents
==PAGE:17==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgments
vii
Tensor Nomenclature
xi
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Basics of Brain Maturation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Basic Neuroanatomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Typically developing brain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Sex eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Diﬀusion and Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
Diﬀusion in the Brain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.2
Diﬀusion Weighted MRI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.3
Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.4
Microstructure and Diﬀusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.5
Macroscopic or microscopic?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Data and Preprocessing
15
3.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Image Acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Image Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Tract-Based Spatial Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Raw data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Formation of data tensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:18==
xvi
CONTENTS
4
Methods
23
4.1
Tensor Decomposition Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Canonical Polyadic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.2
Model Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1.3
Non-negativity constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.4
Number of Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.5
Evaluation and validation of models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Interpolation in CP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.1
Types of interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3.1
Logistic regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3.2
k-Nearest Neighbor algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.3
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.4
Evaluation of Classiﬁers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Results
39
5.1
Optimization process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Baseline measures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Non-negative CP model without interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Non-negativity CP with interpolation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.5
Non-negative CP without dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.6
Final model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.6.1
FA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.6.2
MD
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.7
Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Discussion
53
6.1
The use of interpolation in the time mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.1.1
FA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.1.2
MD
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Model complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3
Further improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.4
Sex diﬀerences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Conclusion
59
8
Future work
61
A Derivation of updates for A and C
63
B Implementation of non-negative CP with interpolation in MATLAB 65
C Weight matrix function implemented in MATLAB
69
D Classiﬁcation in MATLAB
75
==PAGE:19==
CONTENTS
xvii
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:20==
xviii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Motivation
Late childhood and early adolescence are a period of signiﬁcant changes both cognitive,
social, emotional, and physical. However, the accompanying structural brain matura-
tion is remarkably subtle. Still, late childhood and early adolescence are believed to
be a key period for the rewiring of the brain, and to study it advanced neuroimaging
methods are used[35, 32, 20, 49].
Improving the understanding of the typically developing brain may aid in determining
how the diseased brain diverge. Adolescence is of particular interest as many psy-
chological and neuropsychiatric diseases surface during this period [49]. In the long
hall understanding how individual maturation diﬀers neuroanatomically coupled with
behavioral tests may oﬀer insight into why children and adolescents behave and tackle
tasks diﬀerently. Moving beyond the characterization of typical brain development,
the thesis sets out to determine individual diﬀerences in brain development.
Up until now most studies in the literature investigating brain maturation are based on
cross-sectional data or longitudinal data with only a few assessments for each subject.
However, the few longitudinal studies available show high within- and between-subject
variability, which stresses the need to elaborate the available data [32, 31]. The data
used in given thesis has unprecedented time resolution in that up to 11 assessments
per subject are available, acquired over a period of 6 years. The sizeable data allows
for more advanced and data-driven modeling, which will hopefully add insight about
the developing brain.
Aim
The overall research questions of the thesis:
==PAGE:22==
2
Introduction
• Identifying individual maturational trajectories of MRI diﬀusion measures using
tensor decomposition methods.
• Predicting external variables of the data based on individual proﬁ
les using supervised methods, e.g., predicting sex based on individual proﬁ
les.
An additional aim became to improve model stability using interpolation of the latent
time variable in the tensor decomposition model.
Outline
The thesis is outlined starting with a background chapter on brain anatomy and current
theories in brain maturation. A small section on how MRI is acquired and how the
water diﬀusion in the brain reﬂect the underlying microstructure follows, including
how changes in the microstructure are quantiﬁed in the water diﬀusion parameters
used.
In chapter three, the data set is considered; both the demographic information, pre-
processing steps and how the data is formatted to do modeling.
Hereafter follows an account of the modeling applied, both tensor decompositions for
the maturational trajectories of the diﬀusion parameters, the implemented interpola-
tion in the tensor decomposition for robustness in the model, and logistic regression,
k-nearest neighbor and artiﬁcial neural network for classiﬁcation of the external vari-
able.
The results are presented in chapter 5, discussed in chapter 6, and main conclusions
are summarized in chapter 7. The thesis ﬁnishes oﬀwith suggestions for further work.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter will give a brief account of how the brain matures and how diﬀusion-
weighted imaging is acquired. Furthermore, the diﬀusion parameters used later on
for modeling are deﬁned and related to the underlying anatomical architecture of the
brain.
2.1
Basics of Brain Maturation
2.1.1
Basic Neuroanatomy
On a cellular level, the human brain consists of neurons and glial cells, i.e., cells that
support the neurons. Neurons are the information processing cells of the brain and
form a network by connecting with other neurons. These networks are responsible for
all of our thoughts, sensations, feelings, and actions[61].
Most neurons consist of a cell body with one longer extension, being the axon and
several other smaller extensions, being the dendrites[55]. Glial cells account for about
90% of the total number of cells in the central nervous system(CNS). Glial cells pro-
vide support and protection for the neurons through four main tasks; holding the
neurons in place, supplying nutrients and oxygen, acting as an immune system, and
insulating one neuron from the other. For the present thesis, the essential glial cell is
the oligodendrocyte. Oligodendrocytes produce an insulating lipid-rich myelin sheath
and support axonal structure and integrity throughout by wrapping the fatty sheath
around the axon (see Figure 2.1).
The fatty myelin sheath makes the signal leap,
whereby the signal propagation is much more eﬃcient[55].
Macrostructurally, the nervous tissue is divided into white and grey matter. White
matter occupies almost half of the human brain (40%)[48].
White matter consists
of myelinated axons, whereby it appears white when inspected histologically. Axons
enable the electrochemical signal to travel over longer distances before connecting with
==PAGE:24==
4
Background
other neurons. When bundles of axons from neurons within the same region of the
brain connect to a group of neurons in another region, the axons form a ﬁber tract[61].
These ﬁber tracts determine the anatomical connectivity of the brain.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of a neuron
and the myelin sheath the
oligodendrocytes
wraps
around the axon.
The
white
and
grey
matter
part of the neuron are
distinguished.
Borrowed
from [13].
Fiber tracts form the information pro-
cessing networks of the brain, or more
plainly put; form information highways.
Within a ﬁber tract, the majority of
the axons are arranged in a parallel
fashion.
White matter ﬁbers bundles
are divided into three types: Projection
tracts, connecting the cortex with an-
other part of the brain and brain stem;
Association tracts, connecting areas in
the same hemisphere; and Commissural
tracts, which crosses the midline and
connects areas in diﬀerent hemispheres.
Although the ﬁber tract is a functionally
related bundle, they do not stand out as
a delineated bundle[55].
Grey matter constitutes the cell bodies
and dendrites and is located in the outer
layer of the brain called cortex as well
as in subcortical structures such as the
amygdala, hippocampus, thalamus, hy-
pothalamus, and basal ganglia. Grey matter process neurological signals and ensures
transmission via white matter to other parts of the brain[55].
2.1.2
Typically developing brain
Although the overall structure is in place at birth, signiﬁcant changes occur during
postnatal brain maturation. Before technological discoveries made it possible to inves-
tigate the human brain in vivo, the biological brain development was believed to be
completed around the age of six, the time the brain reaches close to adult volume[48].
However, postnatal brain development has proven to be remarkably protracted and
involves considerable changes in structures (both cortical and subcortical) and most no-
tably for this thesis, signiﬁcant architectural changes in white matter ﬁber tracts[12].
Only a few postmortem studies investigate brain maturation; therefore knowledge
about brain maturation is augmented through non-invasive tools and animal studies.
From animal studies, it has been shown that increased myelination, axonal coherence,
and synaptic pruning accompanies maturation[62].
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Basics of Brain Maturation
5
2.1.2.1
Structural imaging
Using structural MRI and tissue segmentation make it possible to investigate the
macrostructural distribution of white and grey matter. Generally, an increase in grey
matter volume during early childhood followed by regressive changes into adolescence
are reported. The decrease is proposed to be associated with synaptic pruning, i.e.,
keeping and reinforcing the synapses in use, while eliminating those that are not, ﬁne-
tuning the brain to its speciﬁc environment. An inverted U-shape thereby characterizes
grey matter volume over the ﬁrst couple of decades with deceleration in the third
decade of life [43].
Individual regions are reported to follow temporally distinct maturational trajectories;
lower-order sensorimotor regions mature before higher-order association regions in the
temporal and frontal lobes, which mature after areas they integrate have matured[43,
17, 32, 38, 33, 24, 20]. The order in which cortical thinning occurs parallel to the
timing of reaching regionally relevant cognitive and functional development milestones.
Regions associated with more basic functions mature early (e.g., motor and sensory
brain regions as well as primary visual cortex) and regions associated with executive
functions and attention matures later[20, 17, 33, 24]. Although the general pattern
is agreed upon, some inconsistencies in the reported maturational timing of speciﬁc
regions exist, and it has been suggested that the diﬀerence in achieved results may be
due to diﬀerent preprocessing approaches[67, 51].
Synaptic pruning is not believed to be the sole source of grey matter volume decline.
The decrease in grey matter is counteracted by an increase in white matter, indicating
myelination in the border area between white and grey matter. The conversion of grey
matter to white is consistent with the relatively stable overall brain volume over late
childhood and adolescence [20, 32, 34, 43].
2.1.2.2
Maturation investigated using Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging
The major white matter ﬁber tracts are present at birth. The myelination peaks in
the ﬁrst years after birth and continuous in a more subtle pace into adulthood [33].
In the postnatal brain growth spurt, the structural changes are visible on structural
scans [61, 24]. As the changes slow down, researchers may turn to diﬀusion-weighted
imaging(DWI) to investigate the changes. DWI is sensitive towards changes in the
white matter microstructure, as DWI exploits the eﬀect of the environment on the
water diﬀusion. By using DWI, changes into adulthood are demonstrated (DWI is
described in more detail later)[33].
All major white matter ﬁber tracts show signiﬁcant nonlinear age-related changes
in water diﬀusion parameters such as fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diﬀusion
(MD). FA expresses the directionality of the diﬀusion, whereas MD reﬂects the size
of the overall diﬀusion. Both measures are inﬂuenced by microstructural changes like
myelination and change in axon density (a detailed account follows later in Section
==PAGE:26==
6
Background
2.4.3.1)[32, 34, 23, 31]. Most published studies investigating white matter maturation
are cross-sectional, whereby it is often only reported whether a signiﬁcant age eﬀect is
present or not instead of an actual rate of change. Generally, FA increases and overall
diﬀusion decreases during childhood and adolescence[35, 52, 33, 43].
Echoing structural studies described above, Lebel et al. showed that the white mat-
ter ﬁber tracts mature in a distinct timely and regional order.
For white matter,
commissural and projection ﬁbers mature earliest, followed by association ﬁber. Fron-
totemporal connections are found to mature last mirroring the late maturation of
frontal and temporal cortices [32, 34]. The maturation of speciﬁc white matter regions
is even believed to continue into early adulthood.
In addition, a few studies have investigated gradients of change in FA, and patterns of
posterior-to-anterior and inferior-to-superior development are observed [31, 33]. White
matter volume increases during adolescence, but the changes in FA are demonstrated
to be volume independent [34].
Brown et al.
showed that by using multimodal acquired neuroimaging (structural
and DW images), it is possible to predict brain age with a mean prediction error of
around 1.03 years. The prediction is, however, better for younger individuals as the
measures used change more in younger subjects. The diﬀerence in neuroanatomical
age among individuals of the same age gradually increases from being under a year in
the preschool years to being around 1.42 years for young adults. The small diﬀerence
in neuroanatomical age points towards a tightly bound timing of maturation which is
inﬂuenced a lot by the chronological age although some measures vary widely[12].
Brain function is inherently linked with brain structure, so some variation is age-
dependent like maturation and deterioration; however, age-independent relationships
between ability and white matter are also concurrently occurring[25]. Examples are
multiple and include frontoparietal cortices linked to sustained attention performance[29],
left anterior part of the white matter cerebral linked to reading skills[26]. Generally, a
higher FA value and a lower MD value in white matter ﬁber tracts are associated with
higher connectivity and better performance. Electrical impulses have been shown to
promote myelination and therefore may inﬂuence changes in diﬀusion parameters[31].
Consequently, the changes in microstructure are likely not caused by pure maturation,
but also due to learning in the same period.
2.2
Sex eﬀects
Multiple DTI studies have reported sex diﬀerences in water diﬀusion parameters across
time during adolescence. Multiple studies show a higher FA in corticospinal tract and
frontal part of the brain for males and higher FA in the splenic part of corpus callosum
for girls[21, 38, 68, 51]. Broadly, boys are shown to have higher FA compared with
girls, and sex diﬀerences in MD show an opposite pattern with boys showing lower
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Machine Learning on Brain Maturation using Neuroimaging
7
MD than girls. However, most reported sex diﬀerences are inconsistent across samples
and brain regions. Furthermore, it is important to note that many studies did not ﬁnd
any signiﬁcant sex diﬀerences in the diﬀusion parameters during adolescence [35, 31].
Generally, the literature points toward small, but signiﬁcant diﬀerences between sexes,
with earlier development in females, and more a protracted time course in males [68,
34, 57].
2.3
Machine Learning on Brain Maturation using
Neuroimaging
Only a few examples of machine learning techniques applied to DTI are to the author’s
knowledge published. Using DWI data, Imperati et al. performed clustering of white
matter voxels based on age-related trajectories [23]. Results showed that subsections
of major white matter tracts mature diﬀerently, for example, the splenic part of the
corpus callosum (CC) is separated from the rest of CC already when few clusters
are used in the modeling indicating a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in maturational trajectory
within the same white matter ﬁber tract. At the same time, some tracts were clustered
together; part of superior longitudinal fasciculus and cingulum bundle maturated with
a similar rate.
Another study used resting functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging (fcMRI)
to make accurate predictions about individuals’ brain maturity across development
[16].
==PAGE:28==
8
Background
2.4
Diﬀusion and Imaging
All molecules, including water, move due to thermally driven movements (Brownian
motion). This random movement is diﬀusion. If no hindrances are present (e.g., in a
pure liquid), the diﬀusion occurs in all directions to the same extent, and the diﬀusion
is deﬁned as being isotropic. If ink is dropped into a pure liquid, its shape will enlarge
as time elapse although the center remains the same. Due to the equal probability
of motion in any arbitrary direction, the ink spreads out according to a Gaussian
distribution. Thus, the isoprobability surface of the diﬀusion in 3D can be described
as a sphere with a radius corresponding to the maximum possible diﬀusion distance.
Einstein described the displacement in 3D as r =
√
6Dt, where t is the diﬀusion time
and the coeﬃcient of proportionality, D, is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient[44].
Molecular
weight, viscosity, and temperature all inﬂuence the diﬀusion coeﬃcient[6].
On the other hand, when the diﬀusion has directionality, the probability surface for
diﬀusion resembles an ellipsoid. The probability surface is elongated with increasing
directionality, and the diﬀusion is dubbed anisotropic(not-isotropic). If the diﬀusion is
hindered randomly, the diﬀusion remains isotropic, whereas ordered hindrances result
in anisotropic diﬀusion (see Figure 2.2)[44].
2.4.1
Diﬀusion in the Brain
Figure 2.2: Water diﬀusion carries in-
formation about whether
the environment is ran-
dom, resulting in isotropic
diﬀusion, or ordered re-
sulting in anisotropic dif-
fusion.
Water diﬀusion in the brain tissue expe-
rience a multitude of barriers making the
diﬀusion complex.
Overall, grey mat-
ter is not ordered enough to exhibit a
high degree of anisotropy. In white mat-
ter, the axons are ordered in a parallel
fashion, and the diﬀusion along the axon
bundle is greater than across it making
the diﬀusion anisotropic. Therefore, dif-
fusion values are a good indicator of the
type of tissue. Still, if the allowed diﬀu-
sion time is short, the number of barriers
encountered is low, whereby the diﬀusion
resemble isotropic diﬀusion to a higher
degree. More barriers are encountered as
time elapses making the diﬀusion more
anisotropic[6].
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Diﬀusion and Imaging
9
2.4.2
Diﬀusion Weighted MRI
In normal MRI, the spatial distribution of hydrogen nuclei is exploited and turned into
images. However, the use of gradients and refocusing pulses makes it possible for MRI
to be sensitive to diﬀusion of hydrogen nuclei instead of quantity (see Figure 2.3 for
a quick account). Diﬀusion can be evaluated by measuring the attenuation of signal
intensity (I) as a function of the degree of diﬀusion weighting, given by the b value:
I = I0 exp(−bD).
I0 is the signal without diﬀusion weighting and D the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient in the direction of the diﬀusion weighting. The b value is a function of the
gyromagnetic ratio of the nucleus of interest(here hydrogen nucleus from the water
molecules, γ = 42.6 MHz
T
) as well as the gradient strength, gradient duration, and
timings of the diﬀusion weighting gradients.
Such techniques are called diﬀusion-
weighted imaging (DWI). The diﬀusion is measured along a predetermined direction,
which is the direction of the gradient. With anisotropic diﬀusion, the observed diﬀusion
depends on the direction investigated. Fortunately, diﬀusion weighting gradients can
be applied along any arbitrary direction.
The diﬀusion in white matter is anisotropic. Hence, more than one parameter is needed
to deﬁne the resulting ellipsoidal probability surface uniquely.
Six parameters are
required to characterize the diﬀusion, namely the length and direction of the shortest,
middle and longest axis perpendicular to each other (see Figure 2.4). Therefore, the
diﬀusion needs to be measured in at least six directions to describe the diﬀusion; this
is where diﬀusion tensor imaging(DTI) come into play.
2.4.3
Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging
DWI makes the images sensitive to diﬀusion, and diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) is
a way to model DWI and quantify the underlying diﬀusion. As the name suggests,
the diﬀusion data is set up in a tensor(a higher-order array).
The six parameters
needed to identify an ellipsoid uniquely are the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the
diﬀusion tensor (λ1, v1, λ2, v2, λ3 and v3, ordered after size, see Figure 2.4).
The
diﬀusion tensor is addressed for each voxel[5]. DWI measurements are noisy whereby
the diﬀusion is often determined using least squares methods and an over-determined
system (namely, more than six diﬀerent gradient directions are used) to avoid ﬁtting
measurement inaccuracies. Today often as many as 30 to 256 directions are used.
2.4.3.1
Diﬀusion related measures
Although many potential measures of water diﬀusion can be obtained from diﬀusion-
weighted data, the most commonly used measures to quantify the diﬀusion in DTI
are:
Fractional anisotropy (FA), which reﬂects the degree of directionality in the diﬀusion:
==PAGE:30==
10
Background
Figure 2.3: A schematic drawing of the basic idea behind diﬀusion-weighted
MRI. A gradient (i.e., a magnet with a spatial change in strength)
is applied, whereby the protons are dephased into a phase roll(low
signal amplitude).
The gradient is turned oﬀ, the protons dif-
fuse and the imposed phase roll is disrupted. After a period, a
rephasing gradient is applied to reverse the dephasing gradient.
However, between the time of applying the dephasing gradient
to applying the rephasing gradient, water molecules have moved,
and the rephasing is not perfect. Imperfect rephasing, result in
a smaller degree of alignment of the protons, which results in a
smaller MR signal amplitude[44]. Hence, with more diﬀusion the
MR signal amplitude decreases. Gradients are shown in the top
panel, the protons in the middle panel, where the arrow and color
indicate the phase, and the MRI signal illustrated in the bottom
panel. Borrowed from the book [44].
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Diﬀusion and Imaging
11
FA =
r
1
2
p
(λ1 −λ2)2 + (λ2 −λ3)2 + (λ3 −λ1)2
p
λ2
1 + λ2
2 + λ2
3
(2.1)
FA is a normalized measure of the variation of the eigenvalues going from zero to one
with increasing directionality.
Figure 2.4:
The six parameters needed
to
uniquely
characterize
the
ellipsoid
probability
surface
resulting
from
anisotropic
diﬀusion,
namely the three eigenval-
ues and the corresponding
eigenvectors.
Mean diﬀusion (MD), which quantify how quickly
water diﬀuses in any direction by simply taking
the mean of the diﬀusion in the three direction of
the three eigenvalues:
MD = λ1 + λ2 + λ3
3
(2.2)
Although FA and MD are widely used mea-
sures using the raw eigenvalues has been sug-
gested to better capture the subtle microstruc-
tural changes. Furthermore, changes in FA can
arise from a change in diﬀusion in any or all of
the directions, whereby it furthers the insight to
report the raw diﬀusion as well.
The local ﬁber orientation are assumed to be in
the direction of the major eigenvector, whereby the primary eigenvalue are often
termed parallel diﬀusion
λ∥= λ1
(2.3)
Hence, the perpendicular diﬀusion are given by a mean of the remaining eigenvalues:
λ⊥= λ2 + λ3
2
(2.4)
2.4.4
Microstructure and Diﬀusion
The directional dependence in water diﬀusion can provide quantitative measures of
white matter microstructural integrity. Structural components like the myelin sheath
around the axons, the axonal membrane, and the neuroﬁbril are all longitudinal ori-
entated, whereby it is natural to assume that these aids the directionality of the
diﬀusion[6].
Beaulieu and Allen investigated the eﬀect of myelin on diﬀusion, and
found that even without myelin the diﬀusion can be anisotropic in ordered axonal
systems[7]. Packing and arrangement of axons are enough to cause anisotropic dif-
fusion, whereby the membrane alone is enough to form a barrier for the diﬀusion.
However, in mice it has been shown that demyelination increases λ⊥while λ∥remains
unchanged, thereby decreasing the diﬀusion directionality [60, 59]. Myelination can
thus modulate the degree of anisotropy, and keeping all but the myelin constant, the
==PAGE:32==
12
Background
myelin is believed to increase the directionality of the diﬀusion although to an unknown
extent[6]. Furthermore, Schwartz et al. found no correlation between the thickness
of the myelin and diﬀusion; as long as the myelin sheath is intact the anisotropy is
inﬂicted[54].
Axonal spacing and extracellular water have shown to be positively correlated with
λ⊥, so as the axon density increases, the diﬀusion transverse the axon decrease [54].
In a study by Schwartz et al., it was found that λ∥increases with axon diameter, but
decreases with axon count. The increase in λ∥with axon diameter, they believed,
are to be attributed to an inverse relationship between axon caliber and cytoskeleton,
whereby the intracellular diﬀusion is less restricted [54]. The opposite conclusion was
reached by Song, as they found that an increase in cytoskeleton amount did not change
the diﬀusion[60]. Furthermore, the eﬀect of axonal transport is found negligible[7].
Discrepancies between studies underpins the complexity of the relationship between
diﬀusion and microstructure. Conclusions are often reached based on very controlled
environments, which is far from the human brain. Furthermore, the maturational mi-
crostructural changes are not independent, e.g., during myelination, the extracellular
space and thus extracellular water content are decreased, all believed to increase direc-
tionality [54]. So when reversed inﬂuenced are tried determined by diﬀusion measures
it is far from straightforward.
To conclude, there is no one-to-one relationship between changes in diﬀusion and
any particular anatomical feature. No exact mechanism has been identiﬁed, but it is
clear that anisotropy directly reﬂects the presence of longitudinal ordered structures
in white matter. Membrane density has been suggested to be a simpliﬁed estimator
of the degree of anisotropy of the diﬀusion independent of the membrane is an axonal
membrane or a myelin sheath[34].
2.4.5
Macroscopic or microscopic?
The time in which the diﬀusion can diﬀuse is approximately 10-100ms depending on
the sequence. As the typical diﬀusion coeﬃcient is in the order of 0.8 −0.9e−3mm2/s,
the size of the objects inﬂuencing the diﬀusion needs to on the scale 4 −15µm [44]. In
principle, the diﬀusion measures microscopic architecture, but as the spatial resolution
is 2-3mm in each voxel direction, the results are inevitably averaged over the volume,
whereby the measurement becomes macroscopic. If the microstructure within a voxel
is not somewhat homogeneous, the features are averaged out, and the voxel becomes
featureless.
Thus, the anisotropy measurement is doubled-layered; the microscopic
anatomy need to induce anisotropic diﬀusion, but as a second layer, the coherence of
microscopic anatomy within a voxel is also needed for the anisotropy to be observed
using DWI [44].
When ﬁber tracts cross or in the boundary between white matter and other CNS
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Diﬀusion and Imaging
13
tissue types, the microscopic anatomy is heterogeneous. Consequently, anisotropy in
the diﬀusion of the overall voxel might be lost. These problematic phenomena are
called crossing ﬁbers and partial volume eﬀects.
==PAGE:34==
14
Background
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Data and Preprocessing
Following is a small section concerning the data set; how the data were acquired and
how it was formatted in preparation for modeling.
3.1
Participants
Ninety-ﬁve typically developing children aged 7 to 13 years were recruited from three
schools in the Copenhagen area (ﬁrst to six graders). Before participating in the study,
all children gave consent to the procedures explained orally and in writing. The parents
or legal guardians gave consent in writing after oral and written explanation of the
study objective and study procedures. The study was executed in agreement with the
Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the local Danish Committee for Biomedical
Research Ethics (H-KF-01-131/03, H-3-2013-037).
The participants underwent diﬀusion-weighted MRI up to eleven times, the ﬁrst ten as-
sessment with six months interval and the eleventh assessment being a follow-up a year
later. There were no parent-reported neurological or psychiatric disorder or signiﬁcant
brain injury at the time of inclusion. See reference[66, 41] for further demographic
information on the data set.
All subjects’ images were screened for neurological anomalies by an experienced neu-
roradiologist.
The raw images from all subjects were visually checked to ascertain
the quality of the data.
From this inspection, one subject with incidental neuro-
logical ﬁndings and two subjects with neuropsychiatric disease (ADHD, Asperger’s
syndrome) were excluded. Furthermore, scans from an additional subject showing ab-
normal neuroanatomy were removed (8 scans). 253 scans were either not completed
or not acquired at all, 34 scans with signiﬁcantly reduced image quality due to move-
ment or susceptibility artifacts were excluded from further analysis, bringing the total
number of scans included to 717 and the number of subjects to 92.
Since the primary interest of the investigations of given thesis is the dynamic processes
==PAGE:36==
16
Data and Preprocessing
of maturation, all subjects with less than three scans were excluded. Based on this
criterion, nine subjects were excluded and 18 scans. The total number of included
scans were 699 in the age span from 7.5 to 19 years old, and the number of subjects
was 83 (mean ± SD: 12.4 ± 2.36, 50 girls, 33 boys). The ages at the acquisition of all
included scan are visualized in Figure 3.1.
3.2
Image Acquisition
8
10
12
14
16
18
Age
Subjects
female
male
Figure 3.1: Age at scan (solid dot)
for all included sub-
jects.
Females are
depicted in red and
males in blue.
All scans were acquired using the same
3T
Siemens
Magnetom
Trio
MR
scan-
ner(Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) with an
eight-channel head coil (Invivo,
Orlando,
FL). Diﬀusion-weighted (DW) scans of the
whole brain were acquired using a twice refo-
cused balanced spin echo sequence to min-
imize eddy current.
Ten non-DW images
were acquired (b = 0) and 61 DW images
encoded along independent collinear diﬀu-
sion gradient orientations with a b-value of
1200s/mm2. The technical details of the se-
quence was as follows; repetition time (TR)
= 8200ms, echo time(TE) = 100ms, ﬁeld-
of-view(FOV) = 220 × 220mm2, and images
matrix 96 × 96. GRAPPA (a method of par-
allel imaging) was employed with an accel-
eration factor of 2. Sixty-one slices were ac-
quired with no gap with a uniform voxel size
of 2.3 × 2.3 × 2.3mm3, bringing the total ac-
quisition time to 9.50 minutes.
3.3
Image Preprocessing
Images were preprocessed using a pipeline
implemented
using
the
MATLAB™based
software SPM8(Statistical Parametric Map-
ping). Steps included correcting for distor-
tions caused by B0 ﬁeld inhomogeneities and
imaging gradient nonlinearities [4].
The diﬀusion tensor was ﬁtted using a least-squares-ﬁt by nonlinear optimization em-
ploying a Levenburg-Marquardt algorithm and constrained to be positive [4]. Subse-
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Tract-Based Spatial Statistics
17
quently, FA and MD volumes were calculated and transferred to MNI1 space using
DTI-TK[71] . The FA volumes were further processed through Tract-Based Spatial
Statistics(TBSS) to obtain a skeleton of the common-to-the-data-set white matter
structures. A procedure described below, which resulted in a skeleton of 100524 voxels
with a FA value higher than the threshold value of 0.2.
Figure 3.2: Illustration of TBSS skeleton in a midsagittal, coronal, and axial
plane overlaid the mean FA brain.
3.4
Tract-Based Spatial Statistics
Diﬀusion comparisons across multiple subjects and time points necessitate comparable
anatomic topology, namely that it is in fact diﬀusion of the same structure that is
compared. However, anatomical diﬀerences, especially between developing brains are
inevitable.
The advanced methods used for aligning images nowadays warp these
anatomical diﬀerences. However, no perfect alignment method has been discovered.
Therefore methods that allow for voxelwise comparisons without perfect alignment
are used instead.
Tract-Based Spatial Statistics(TBSS) is such a tool proposed in
2006 as a fully automated whole-brain analysis technique[58].
To establish spatial
correspondence TBSS uses nonlinear registration and a skeleton projection of the FA
volumes.
Achieving spatial coherence using TBSS can be divided into three main
steps:
Alignment
First, all scans are nonlinearly registered to either a chosen volume, the most typ-
ical image (i.e., the image that causes the least overall warping of data during co-
registration) or a data set speciﬁc template, as is the case in given data. The scans are
further aﬃne transformed into MNI space (as it is only aﬃne transformation, it is not
a perfect MNI space). The registration needs to align the structures while still pre-
serving the image topology, as too much warping may cause diﬀerent tracts to merge
into one.
1The Montreal Neurological Institute deﬁned a standard brain by using a large series of
MRI scans on normal controls[14].
==PAGE:38==
18
Data and Preprocessing
Tract skeleton generation
When all of the scans are in MNI space, a mean FA brain of the data set is created.
The mean FA brain is used for the so-called tract skeleton generation. The skeleton
is a representation of the white matter ﬁber tracts common to all subjects given by
a line or a thin surface running down the center of the actual ﬁber tracts (see Figure
3.3). To generate the TBSS skeleton, the direction perpendicular to the tract surface
is estimated for the mean brain. The FA value falls gradually from the center of the
tracts. Hence, if the voxel under investigation is oﬀcenter, the FA value will be higher
on the side towards the tract center. This directionality is exploited using FA intensity
based center-of-gravity (done locally in a 3x3x3 voxel volume around the voxel under
investigation), as a vector going from the voxel center to the local center-of-gravity
will point towards the tract center perpendicular to the local tract structure.
By
performing non-maximum suppression in this direction, the center voxels are found
giving rise to the skeleton. In each voxel, the two closest neighbors on each side are
compared. Only if the voxel of interest has the highest intensity, is it deemed part of
the skeleton.
The skeleton created from the mean FA map is thresholded to exclude any voxels that
primarily consist of grey matter or cerebrospinal ﬂuid. Here a FA threshold of 0.2 is
employed. Thresholding simultaneously prevents the skeleton from spreading to the
edge of the cortex, which is where the alignment is least trustworthy.
Figure 3.3: A 3D rendering of the in-
tricate nature of the TBSS
skeleton.
The color en-
coding are based on FA
values, blue(oﬀset value of
0.2) and red(1).
Projection of diﬀusion values onto
the TBSS skeleton
Lastly, each of the aligned FA image (the
subject scans) are now projected onto
the mean FA skeleton.
The projection
step is done to account for any mis-
alignment between subjects. The high-
est intensity perpendicular to the skele-
ton voxel is projected onto the subject-
speciﬁc skeleton.
As the data is longi-
tudinal, the voxels to project onto the
skeleton is decided on a subject level in-
stead of scan level using an average sub-
ject scan.
The search is carried out in three dimen-
sions. Any systematic misalignment will
thus not bias the result, as one merely
compare the highest FA value of the tract
in the direction perpendicular to the tract, not parallel. The reason for focusing on
the perpendicular direction in the alignment process is that rapid changes in FA are
experienced perpendicular to the tract direction, making good alignment crucial. On
the other hand, along the tract direction, the FA value will only change slowly within
the tract making misalignment less signiﬁcant.
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Raw data
19
The search for the highest FA is restricted to values close to the skeleton. A distance
image is created with the distance to the nearest skeleton voxel given for each voxel.
By only letting the FA search continue as long as the distance index is increasing,
it is ensured that the value is matching that skeleton voxel and that the FA value
only is assigned the skeleton once (if no restriction the same value would be fed to all
skeleton voxels on a line). Furthermore, distance constraint is applied; the FA value
is deweighted the further away from the skeleton voxel it is. The deweighting are only
applied when deciding the voxel to project from, the FA value projected are the real
FA value for each scan. The resulting data is said to be 4D with the subject ID being
the fourth dimension.
3.5
Raw data
Generally, diﬀusion data is noise prone. Some of the raw water diﬀusion values are
plotted to elucidate the nature of the data. The temporal change for neighboring voxels
for two randomly chosen subjects is shown (see Figure 3.4), as well as the temporal
change for the same voxel for multiple randomly chosen subjects (see Figure 3.5).
Neighboring voxels may follow the same trend within the same subject with varying
oﬀsets(Figure 3.4), but another subject may exhibit another trend in the same area
(Figure 3.5). For corresponding illustrations of MD see Figures 3.6 and 3.7. The rigged
nature of the subject measurements illustrates the within-subject variance, whereas
little overlap between the time course of diﬀerent subjects illustrates the between-
subject variance. Substantial variance both within and between subjects exist in the
data. In general, a more apparent decrease is present in the raw MD data than an
increase in the raw FA values indicating more time dynamic in MD.
==PAGE:40==
20
Data and Preprocessing
Figure 3.4: Illustration of FA values of neighboring voxels from two randomly
chosen subject in two randomly chosen areas over time. The voxels
are placed in diﬀerent axial slices (middle and top), and the precise
location are shown in the bottom right insert in each plot.
8
10
12
14
16
18
Age
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
FA
8
10
12
14
16
18
Age
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
FA
8
10
12
14
16
18
Age
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
FA
Figure 3.5: Illustration of FA values over time of the same voxel for diﬀerent
randomly chosen subjects.
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Raw data
21
Figure 3.6: Illustration of MD values of neighboring voxels from two randomly
chosen subject in two randomly chosen areas over time. The vox-
els are placed in diﬀerent axial slices (middle and top), and the
precise location are shown in the bottom right insert in each plot.
Diﬀusivity values for MD is in 10−3 mm2
s
.
8
10
12
14
16
18
Age
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
MD
8
10
12
14
16
18
Age
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
MD
8
10
12
14
16
18
Age
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
MD
Figure 3.7: Illustration of MD values over time of the same voxel for diﬀer-
ent randomly chosen subjects.
Diﬀusivity values for MD is in
10−3 mm2
s
.
==PAGE:42==
22
Data and Preprocessing
TBSS skelton
Vectorized
Multiple subjects
Multiple timepoints
Figure 3.8: Flow chart providing a schematic overview of the step underwent
to achieve the data tensor. Starting with the TBSS skeleton in 3D,
which are vectorized. As there are multiple subjects it becomes a
matrix, and with multiple time points a tensor is obtained.
3.6
Formation of data tensor
All the volumes resulting from the TBSS pipeline were ﬂattened into a column vector.
As each subject was scanned multiple times, a matrix arises for each subject. Given
that the data set includes 83 subjects a three-way array emanates. See Figure 3.8 for a
schematic overview. The values of MD are given in 10−3 mm2
s
, hence a scaling factor
if 10−3 is taken out of the data.
Age is a continuous variable, but to format the tensor, the structure is changed into a
grid. The gridded structure is achieved by binning the data into six-month intervals.
Nineteen scans are acquired within the same age bin for the same subject that it is
overwritten.
Unfortunately, the resulting tensor is far from uniformly sampled with dropout, oﬀset
in starting age (see Figure 3.1), exclusion of scans due to poor image quality and
irregular measurement intervals between scans. When the data is formatted into a
tensor, the portion of missing values is just under 65%.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4
Methods
This chapter presents the methods within machine learning employed to generate
individual maturational trajectories as well as the methods applied to solve the problem
of classifying sex based on these model derived individual maturational trajectories.
4.1
Tensor Decomposition Methods
The diﬀusion data acquired of the maturing brain can be set up into a three-way ar-
ray (X Skeleton voxels×Time×Subject); one for FA and one for MD. The structure suggests
that using multi-way methods would be appropriate and provide better possibilities
for exploring the data. In given thesis methods of tensor decomposition are employed.
Decomposition is the act of separating into constituent parts, hence tensor decom-
position is the procedure of expressing a tensor using interactions between simpler
tensors. By applying tensor decomposition techniques, the natural structural basis of
the data is taken into account as none of the dimensions are collapsed. Many diﬀerent
types of decompositions have been proposed, but the two most prominent methods
of tensor decomposition are Tucker and Canonical Decomposition (CANDECOMP),
also known as Parallel Factor Analysis (PARAFAC) [45, 28].
CANDECOMP and
PARAFAC, collectively Canonical Polyadic(CP) model, is the model employed in this
thesis. In the following, only the decomposition of a third order tensor is considered,
but most equations can be generalized to higher order tensors, for the present thesis
it is however not necessary.
4.1.1
Canonical Polyadic model
CP can be considered a higher-order extension of matrix singular-value decomposition,
as a multi-way tensor is decomposed into a sum of rank-one tensors(i.e., vectors)
dubbed components (see Figure 4.1)[30]. A component can be regarded as a basis
element in each mode, i.e., for the three-way model in Figure 4.1 both a1, b1 and c1
==PAGE:44==
24
Methods
X(I x J x K ) 
≈
B(RxJ)
C(KxR)
A(IxR)
=
a1
c1
b1
+
a2
c2
b2
aR
cR
bR
+ ⋯+
…
Figure 4.1: CP decomposition of a three-way array into trilinear compo-
nents.
Note that an error term is not included, hence an
approximation.[30] The model has R components. a1 is a column
in A, a so-called factor. Inspired by [15] and [45].
make up component 1. The number of components is commonly chosen a lot smaller
than the number of data points. Accordingly, in tensor decomposition methods, a high
number of data points are approximated using only a few elements, which are summed
based on weights. The relative number of parameters to the number of data points
leads to a model that handles missing values well [64].
The Tucker model decomposes a tensor into a set of matrices and one small core tensor.
These matrices map the dimensions of the original tensor. CP is a constrained version
of the Tucker model in that, only interactions between the same indices columns are
allowed, transforming the core tensor into a diagonal tensor, i.e., gl,m,n ̸= 0 if and
only if l = m = n. Consequently, it is assumed that the relationship between the
modes is trilinear for a decomposition of a three-way array[18]. An I × J × K array
can be described by a point in an IJK-dimensional space. However, a D-component
CP intends to describe the array in a much smaller D(I + J + K)-subspace spanned
by the achieved loading components, illustrating the constrained nature of CP [10].
For the core to remain a diagonal tensor, the loading matrices can in practice only be
multiplied with invertible matrices causing scaling (the scaling coeﬃcients for the same
component sums to 1) or identical permutations(i.e., change the order of the factors,
as the components are given in an arbitrary order in the ﬁrst place, changing the order
has no eﬀect)[30, 45]. Consequently, the diagonal core leads to the uniqueness of the
CP representation, meaning only one combination of rank-one tensors will sum to the
decomposed tensor, X, and hence only one unique minimizer of the cost function exists
up to scale and permutation of the loading matrices. Uniqueness is a great part of the
appeal of CP, as no further constraints are necessary to identify the optimal model
[45, 30, 47]. The CP model for a third order tensor can be given by:
X I×J×K ≈DD×D×D ×1 AI×D ×2 BJ×D ×3 CK×D
Where D is a diagonal tensor and ×n is the n-mode product. D is the number of
component decided on prior to the decomposition, which are the same for all modes
in CP. That is, the size of each modality of the core array D are the same, and the
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Tensor Decomposition Methods
25
core tensor becomes a cubical tensor [30, 45]. A describes the systematic variation in
the ﬁrst mode of X, likewise for B and C that describe the systematic variation in the
second and third mode of X, respectively.
Often the diagonal of the core is ﬁxed to 1 embedding the scaling in the loading
matrices, and the trilinear CP model can be written using the outer product:[45]
X I×J×K ≈
D
X
r=1
ad ◦bd ◦cd,
(4.1)
where ad refers to the d’th column of the A and so forth.
Using matrix notation the CP model is given by:
X(1) = A(C ⊙B)⊤,
X(2) = B(C ⊙A)⊤,
X(3) = C(B ⊙A)⊤,
(4.2)
Where ⊤indicate the transpose operation. The modes are unfolded, so XI×JK
(1)
is the
tensor X matricized on the ﬁrst mode and ⊙is the Khatri-Rao product, equivalent
to the column-wise Kronecker product. A review of the mathematical operations can
be found at the beginning of the thesis. The problem is thereby reduced to standard
matrix factorization problems, which can be solved with least squares methods.
4.1.2
Model Estimation
Missing value makes the problem NP-hard[19, 18, 47]. Hence, a CP decomposition
model with missing values is not solved exactly. Instead, the parameters are estimated
using numerical least squares approaches. The model convergences to the local min-
imum, which may or may not be the global minimum. Due to non-convex nature of
the optimization landscape, there is no guarantee of identifying an optimal solution.
Initialization is of importance, whereby the algorithm is often run multiple times to
decrease chances of ﬁnding a local minima solution [45]. In given thesis, Hierarchical
Alternating Least Squares (HALS) is used.
4.1.2.1
Hierarchical Alternating Least Squares
Alternating least squares algorithms, the workhorse of decompositions, employes a
number of modes-stepped iterative optimization process, where all but one dimension
are kept constant.
Namely, B and C are kept ﬁxed while solving for A, reducing
the optimization to a linear least squares problem. Instead of one single optimization
==PAGE:46==
26
Methods
problem, the optimization is divided into three subproblems, which are solved itera-
tively until convergence is established. As the estimates are conditional least squares,
the ﬁt will improve (or stay the same) for each iteration step [19, 64].
In the present thesis, the loss function is the squared Frobenius norm, which is easily
implemented applying Khatri-Rao product and matricizing (see Equation 4.2). Further
alleviation is gained by premultiplying redundant calculations in the alternating steps,
resulting in a more computationally eﬃcient approach.
For estimating A the objective function is as follows:
minimize
A
∥X(1) −A(C ⊙B)⊤∥2
F
(4.3)
As the process is the same for optimizing the diﬀerent factor, the equations are rewrit-
ten using more generic terms; W is the mode that is optimized and H the mode that
are kept constant in the given part of the alternating process:
L = minimize
W
∥X −WH∥2
F = 1
2
X
i,j
 
xij −
X
d
widhdj
!2
(4.4)
Missing data are handled using marginalization, whereby an indicator variable(r) is
added to the cost function. In marginalization, the model is ﬁtted by optimizing the
loss function while only considering non-missing data, which is the preferred way of
handling missing data[9].
L = 1
2
X
i,j
rij
 
xij −
X
d
widhdj
!2
(4.5)
Taking the derivative with respect to the column element wil:
∂L
∂wil =
X
j
rijwilh2
lj +
X
j
rijhlj

X
d̸=l
widhdj −
X
j
rijxijhlj


(4.6)
Setting to zero and solving for wil yields the following update rule for the element wil:
wil =
P
j rijxijhij −P
d̸=l wid
P
j rijhljhdj
P
j rijh2
lj
(4.7)
HALS is observed to convergence faster and generates the best solution within a given
time span [18, 47]. Due to the high dimensionality of the problem methods like gradient
descent are seldom used.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Tensor Decomposition Methods
27
4.1.3
Non-negativity constraint
Although the optimal solution of the decomposition is unique, sometimes the compo-
nents reached are highly correlated, and each component explains minimal variance.
This is a called degenerate solution, where the optimized components are an arti-
fact and without physical meaning. Imposing constraints like non-negativity ensure
that degeneracy no longer can occur [45]. The non-negativity constraint is an active
constraint, and if applied the constraint are most often applied to all modes.
The non-negative constraint enforces a parts-based nature in CP modeling. By only
allowing positive weights, the representation is achieved through an additive combina-
tion of the learned components whereby sparse and meaningful features are extracted.
The components are more intuitive when enforcing non-negativity [18, 36]. In prac-
tice, the non-negativity is achieved by merely truncating all negative values to zero
during the optimization process. Constraints are added so that the obtained model
do not contradict a priori knowledge. Adding non-negativity to 4.7 brings about the
following rule for update:
wil = max
 
0,
P
j rijxijhij −P
d̸=l wid
P
j rijhljhdj
P
j rijh2
lj
!
(4.8)
Being a constraint, adding non-negativity makes the resulting model less ﬂexible, and
the ﬁt is therefore at best the same. However, applying a non-negative constraint to
the CP model ensures that the resulting model conforms to the prior knowledge about
the parameters[9]. For FA and MD adding non-negativity is sensible and may make
the model more interpretable and realistic making up for the possibility of a poorer
ﬁt.
4.1.4
Number of Components
When ﬁtting a CP model, only one hyperparameter is selected, namely the number of
components. In practice, deciding on the appropriate number of components can be
a challenging task with no clear answer guaranteed. Notably, the components are not
nested since the component order is arbitrary.
The rank of a tensor (rank(X)) is the smallest number of rank-one tensors, which
generate X as their sum. So the rank of the tensor is also the smallest number of
components needed in an exact CP decomposition. Unfortunately, there is no straight-
forward way of determining the rank of a tensor, and the rank, therefore, does not
work as an aid in determining the correct number of components. Instead, the rank
can be approximated by the number of components found to be most appropriate
[30]. It should be noted that rank and non-negative rank are not necessarily the same,
and a diﬀerent number of components may be appropriate depending on whether the
non-negativity constraint is included in the model or not.
==PAGE:48==
28
Methods
A model is appropriate when the components reﬂect component-wise trilinear variation
in data.
As long as the model is appropriate, the number of components can be
increased. The most reasonable model is the model with the most components still
being appropriate. The added component must explain some trilinear variation that
the fewer component model is missing [10].
One method of deciding the appropriate number of components is, therefore, to ﬁt
models with diﬀerent numbers of components. The one with the lowest generalization
error is then assumed to be the most appropriate model. The models are often ﬁtted
multiple times in an attempt to minimize the eﬀect of diﬀerent initialization. Searching
for the right number of components is hence a time-consuming task. Furthermore,
several CP models with diﬀerent numbers of components may be appropriate making
the decision process even more complex [10].
A wrong number of components is
indicated by diﬀerences in achieved components for diﬀerent initializations even when
the same ﬁt is reached, which points towards an unstable model [9].
4.1.5
Evaluation and validation of models
It is no great achievement to get a model to ﬁt the training data perfectly; it is a matter
using a model complex enough. The real challenge is to ﬁt a model that can learn
relationships that can generalize to unknown data. The tensor structure allows for
prediction of missing values. Hence, the generalization error can be estimated by taking
out a subset of the data while training. The model performance can then be evaluated
by comparing the estimated result to the real data called the generalization error.
A typical procedure of estimating the generalization error is k-fold cross-validation,
where the k indicates the number of non-overlapping subsets the data are split into.
Cross-validation is a hold-out method, where one of the k portions is retained from the
training set. The generalization error is estimated using the "unseen" retained test
data. The process is repeated, so every data point gets to be in a test set exactly once,
and gets to be in a training set k-1 times. The model is trained k-times, requiring
k times as many computations to estimate the performance. The results from each
fold are averaged into a single performance measure [53, 65]. In cross-validation, each
of the training set diﬀerentiates a bit, and the change in achieved ﬁt indicates the
variance of the estimator.
In the present thesis, the generalization error is estimated using 10-fold cross-validation;
the process is shown in Figure 4.2. Furthermore, the subsets are stratiﬁed according to
subjects. In the attempt to achieve independence between training and test set entire
samples (i.e., time points) of a subject are left out.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Interpolation in CP
29
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
…
…
…
…
…
Figure 4.2: Schematic overview of 10-fold cross validation. Each box repre-
sents a portion of the data set. The color indicates, whether it is
a part of the test or training set in the given model optimization
process. Blue: training data, turquoise: test data
4.2
Interpolation in CP
Dropout and diﬀerent ages at recruitment resulted in an imbalanced data set. The
data is particularly sparse at the extremes of the investigated age span, which provoke
the model to become unstable. It has been shown that a substantial amount of data
is needed when data is not missing at random[47]. A substantial portion of the tensor
structure was missing (around 65%). In an attempt to ameliorate the issue of missing
data, interpolation was applied.
Interpolation is the estimation of the value of an
unknown point based on a sequence of known values; hence a way to ﬁll gaps in
the data. Many diﬀerent interpolation techniques exist, the appropriateness of which
depends on the structure of the underlying data.
Instead of applying the interpolation to the raw data and estimate new scans for
subjects based on very few observations, the interpolation was done in the latent
space taking advantage of the full data set. As the uneven sampling is in the time
domain, interpolation is only warranted for the time mode. Interpolation in the latent
space was achieved by adding a weighting matrix to the model, modifying 4.3:
L = 1
2
X
s
∥X{s} −
X
d
adcsdbdW(s)∥2
F
(4.9)
Where X{s} is the subject-speciﬁc data matrix. The weighting matrix changes accord-
ing to the subject, W(s)(latent time resolution×number of scans). Not only does the weights
change, but the number of columns change as the number of acquired scans diﬀers
depending on the subject. The latent time resolution can be decided arbitrarily but
here decided to go from age 7.5 to 19 in steps of 6 months to mimic the actual age span
and time resolution of the scans. bdW(s) is in a way latent time variables tailored
to the speciﬁc scan times of the subject determined using interpolation between the
points of the latent variable. Implementing CP using a weighting matrix eliminates
the estimation of missing data, and should, therefore, in theory, make the optimization
process more eﬃcient.
Components are still estimated by HALS. Subsequently, the optimization is divided
==PAGE:50==
30
Methods
into subproblems consisting of standard matrix factorization problem. In the following,
the update is derived for B, which is the interpolated mode. The factors of a mode
do not interact; hence the optimization of each factor can be decoupled [18].
The
Frobenius norm can conveniently be rewritten as ∥A∥2
F = Tr(A⊺A) making it easier
to diﬀerentiate. Furthermore, in an attempt to make the following equation a bit more
palatable and compact Rl = (X(s) −P
d̸=l adcsdbdW(s)):
L = 1
2
X
s
Tr

(Rl −alcldblW(s))⊺(Rl −alcslblW(s))

= 1
2
X
s
Tr

R⊺
l Rl −R⊺
l cslalblW(s) −clsW(s)⊺b⊺
l a⊺
l Rl
+ cslW(s)⊺b⊺
l a⊺
l cslalblW(s)
(4.10)
For better overview each of the terms are diﬀerentiated separately (See [8] for rules of
arithmetic):
∂
∂bl Tr (R⊺
l Rl) = 0
(4.11)
∂
∂bl Tr

R⊺
l cslalblW(s)
= (R⊺
l cslal)⊺W(s)⊺
= a⊺
l cslRlW(s)⊺
(4.12)
∂
∂bl Tr

cslW(s)⊺b⊺
l alRl

= a⊺
l RlcslW(s)⊺
= a⊺
l cslRlW(s)⊺
(4.13)
Which is the same as in Equation 4.12.
∂
∂bl Tr

cslW(s)⊺b⊺
l a⊺
l cslalblW(s)
=
∂
∂bl Tr

b⊺
l blc2
sla⊺
l alW(s)W(s)⊺
= bl(c2
sla⊺
l alW(s)W(s)⊺)⊺+ blc2
sla⊺
l alW(s)W(s)⊺
= 2blc2
sla⊺
l alW(s)W(s)⊺
(4.14)
As a⊺
l al is a scalar, it can, like csl, be moved around. Reuniting the parts into a single
equation yields:
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Interpolation in CP
31
∂L
∂bl =
X
s
blc2
sla⊺
l alW(s)W(s)⊺−a⊺
l cslRlW(s)⊺
(4.15)
Setting it equal to zero and solving for bl yields the following update:
bl =
X
s
(W(s)⊺W(s))−1 a⊺
l cslRlW(s)⊺
a⊺
l alc2
sl
=
X
s
(W(s)⊺W(s))−1 a⊺
l csl(X(s) −P
d̸=l adcsdbdW(s))W(s)⊺
a⊺
l alc2
sl
(4.16)
The corresponding equations for the update for A and C are found in Appendix A
and the implementation in MATLAB™in Appendix B.
As validation, it was examined that the two implementations were identical when no
interpolation was applied. With a weight matrix corresponding to the binning of the
tensor, the two implementations of non-negative CP achieve the same update given
the same initialization. This correspondence was veriﬁed using both synthetic and the
real data, thereby also ensuring that the formatting was in accordance.
Figure 4.3: A schematic comparison of the interpolation process for nearest-
neighbor, linear and Gaussian interpolation, respectively.
The
black dots correspond to the point being interpolated, and the
yellow and green dots correspond to the neighboring samples. In-
spired by [37].
4.2.1
Types of interpolation
In the present thesis the following types of interpolation are tested for improving the
stability of the model (see Figure 4.3 for a schematic representation):
• Nearest-neighbor interpolation
A given unknown point is assigned the value of the nearest known point without
regarding the neighboring values, resulting in a piece-wise constant interpolation
[2].
==PAGE:52==
32
Methods
• Linear interpolation
A straight line is ﬁtted between the two known neighboring points(one on each
side of the unknown point). The slope is assumed to be the same between the
known neighbors and the unknown point. Thereby, yielding a piece-wise linear
interpolation. The unknown value is approximated using the horizontal distance
from the known points to the approximated point [1].
• Gaussian interpolation
Here the weights are determined using a Gaussian bell; hence data close to the
point of interpolation is assigned more weight and the weight are decreasing with
distance like a Gaussian bell. This interpolation approach allows for smoothing
of the data, given the inclusion of more scans for approximating a single time
point. As the data is bound to be noisy, it might be reasonable.
A Gaussian bell is given by: [69]
g(x) =
1
σ
√
2π
e
−1
2
 x −µ
σ
!2
(4.17)
Where σ determines the width of the Gaussian bell. With higher σ more scans
are included and giving more weight. With σ another hyperparameter is added
to the model.
Translating the age at scan time into a weight matrix depending on the chosen type
of interpolation was implemented as a function in MATLAB™(see Appendix C)
4.3
Classiﬁcation
Classiﬁcation is the process of delineating data into predeﬁned output classes based on
a set of features. The goal of classiﬁcation is to predict the class of each item in the data
accurately. For successful classiﬁcation, the right classiﬁer needs to be utilized. The
optimal classiﬁer depends on the available data and the structure thereof, e.g., size,
number of features, and number of classes. Classiﬁcation is best suited for predicting
either binomial or nominal output variables[63].
Classiﬁcation is supervised descriptive modeling, where a decision boundary is deter-
mined. A decision boundary is a line or surface that partitions the feature space into
class speciﬁc regions; for a two-class problem all items on one side of the decision
boundary will be assigned the same class, and on the other side all items are assigned
the other class. The line itself is where the model is ambiguous about the class assign-
ment. Diﬀerent classiﬁers use diﬀerent approaches for identifying the input-output
class relationships.
These relationships are summarized in a model, which can be
applied to a diﬀerent item in which the class assignments are unknown [27].
Here three diﬀerent classiﬁers are attempted for classiﬁcation of gender based on
subject-score derived from the best performing non-negative CP model:
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Classiﬁcation
33
• Logistic Regression
• k-nearest neighbor
• Artiﬁcal neural network
4.3.1
Logistic regression
One approach for segmenting the data into output classes is logistic regression, which
despite its contradicting name is a relatively simple and widely used classiﬁer. Logistic
regression builds on linear regression, however, in logistic regression, the linear regres-
sion hypothesis(x⊺w) is mapped through a link function that ensures that the output
is between 0 and 1. A logistic function(see Figure 4.4) are used as link function and
is given by:
f(t) =
1
1 + e−t
(4.18)
Logistic regression models the natural logarithm of the odds ratio as a linear combi-
nation of the independent variables. The odds ratio is given by
p
1 −p, where p is the
probability: [40]
ln
p(x)
1 −p(x) = w0 + x⊺w
transforming it back to probability:
p =
1
1 + e−(w0+x⊺w)
In the logistic regression the constant (w0) moves the logistic function horizontally and
the slope (w) deﬁnes the steepness of the logistic function (see Figure 4.18).
The output of the logistic regression can be regarded as a conditional probability of
belonging to a class (e.g., 1) given the input features(p(y = 1|x)). Hence, the output
is not nominal but continuous, and a threshold needs to be decided upon, often the
probability of 0.5 is used [40].
Although logistic regression builds on linear regression, the decision boundary can be
nonlinear. Using the right forms of data transformation, e.g., including higher order
terms in the hypothesis results in nonlinear decision boundary. The data set is used
to ﬁt the hypothesis(determine the parameters of w), but it is the hypothesis that
determines the decision boundary. The model is linear in the sense that it is given by
a regression vector times transformations of input features summed together [42].
As the model has a binary response, it is derived from the Bernoulli distribution,
whereby the negative logarithm of the Bernoulli distribution1 is used as cost func-
tion. A drawback is that no closed form solution exists and hence requires numerical
1A special type of the binomial distribution.
==PAGE:54==
34
Methods
(a) Linear decision boundary.
(b) Nonlinear decision boundary.
Figure 4.5: An example where a linear decision boundary is insuﬃent(a). Al-
lowing for a quadratic terms, the logistic regression model achieve
an appropriate nonlinear decision boundary and achieve good clas-
siﬁcation accuracy.
optimization. Luckily, even though the optimization is iterative, the cost function is
convex, which implies that only one minimum exists. So no matter where the opti-
mization is initialized, the optimal solution is reached [22].
Figure 4.4: Examples
of
lo-
gistic
functions.
A
higher
t
in
Equation
4.18
corresponds
to
a
steeper
sig-
moid
indicating
a very conﬁdent
classiﬁer.
Logistic regression parameters can be used to un-
derstand the relative predictive power of diﬀer-
ent variables, assuming that the variables have
already been normalized to have a mean of 0 and
variance of 1 [40].
4.3.2
k-Nearest Neighbor algo-
rithm
The intuition behind k-nearest neighbor (KNN)
classiﬁcation is straightforward; test examples
are classiﬁed based on the class of their near-
est neighbors. A nearest-neighbor classiﬁer rep-
resents each test example as a data point in a d-
dimensional space, where d is the number of fea-
tures included. Given a test example, its proxim-
ity to the training data is computed using a prox-
imity measure. The majority class of its nearest
neighbors determines the class. Hence two hyper-
parameter can be optimized:
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Classiﬁcation
35
• Number of neighbors (k)
• Distance measure (such as Euclidean or Man-
hattan distance)
If k is chosen too small, the classiﬁer may be susceptible to overﬁtting due to noise in
the training data. On the other hand, if k is too large, the nearest neighbor classiﬁer
may misclassify the test example because its nearest neighbors may no longer only
include data in the vicinity [63].
The decision boundary is very ﬂexible and can
be arbitrarily shaped. Since the decision boundary is based on the composition of
the training examples, high variability exists, but as k is increased the variability is
decreased. The classiﬁer is based on the local training data, and no model is generated.
Consequently, it is computationally expensive to ﬁt a test example, as the distances to
all training example need to be calculated every time. The classiﬁer can only be used
when the full training set is available. Another important consideration in nearest
neighbor classiﬁcation is scaling of features. Often features are standardized to ensure
that no single feature is dominating the classiﬁcation [63].
The number of neighbors included is decided using cross-validation, in the given clas-
siﬁcation problem 1 to 10 neighbors are investigated.
4.3.3
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
A more sophisticated classiﬁer attempted is artiﬁcial neural network(ANN). The in-
spiration for ANN is the human brain and its interconnected circuit of neurons. ANN
mimics the human brain in that it uses nodes that connect to each other like neurons.
In a feed-forward neural network, the diﬀerent features are fed to the model’s input
layer, where the number of input nodes equals the input size. All input nodes connect
to all the hidden nodes. At each node, both hidden and output, a weighted sum of
its inputs are sent through a (nonlinear) transfer function. At the output layer, the
transfer function turns the output into a class probability (see Figure 4.6)2. The ac-
tivation of a node can be expressed as a function of the activation of the node in the
previous layer (al−1
k
):
al
j = σ
 X
k
wl
jkal−1
k
+ bl
j
!
,
(4.19)
where k is the number of nodes in the previous layer and bl
j is the bias of the j’te node
in the l’te layer. The bias is a constant added just before the transfer function and
impacts the threshold of the activation[46].
The network learns the weights of the connections and biases, and unlike KNN an
actual relationship is tried identiﬁed. The set of weights are optimized using numer-
ical least-squares of the output that is propagated back through the layers, updating
2The input layer only sends the input through and is therefore not counted as a layer. As
more hidden layer are added, the network becomes deep[63].
==PAGE:56==
36
Methods
b2
b1
Input layer 
Hidden layer 
Output layer 
Figure 4.6: Example of a two-layered feed-forward neural network. The net-
work has three input nodes connected to a single hidden layer
with four hidden nodes. The output layer has two nodes. The
weight of the node are indicated by the width of the connecting
line. Futhermore, the biases are shown.
weights using gradient descent. Due to this back-propagation, the transfer function is
often a type of sigmoid function as they are diﬀerentiable. Training can be cumber-
some, but classifying test examples when a model is achieved is rapid. Little intuition
is gained from the achieved model, which why the model is often referred to as a black
box[63].
An advantage is that no transformation of the input features is needed, as, in a way,
new features are generated at the hidden layer, which hopefully enables better predic-
tion.
In given thesis an ANN from the ANN:DTU Toolbox is utilized, which is a two-
layered feed-forward ANN. The nonlinear activation function of the hidden units is the
hyperbolic tangent (output between -1 and 1), and for the output, the logistic sigmoid
function turns the weighted sum into probabilities of belonging to a class (output
between 0 and 1)[56]. For more information on the network and the measures taken to
make it resilient towards overﬁtting see http://cogsys.imm.dtu.dk/toolbox/ann/.
The number of hidden nodes is a hyperparameter, and here determined using cross-
validation, and from 1 to 10 hidden nodes were investigated.
4.3.4
Evaluation of Classiﬁers
To evaluate the performance of a classiﬁer a confusion matrix is often employed as
it proves a quick overview. Classiﬁcation metrics are calculated from true positives
(TPs), false positives (FPs), false negatives (FNs) and true negatives (TNs), all of
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Classiﬁcation
37
Predicted
positive
negative
Actual
positive
TP
FN
negative
FP
TN
Figure 4.7: Confusion matrix of a binary classiﬁcation problem.
which are tabulated into the confusion matrix(see Figure 4.7)[39].
Depending on the nature of the classiﬁcation problem some or all of the following
classiﬁcation metrics are calculated and found to be more informative than accuracy
alone: [39]
• Precision =
TP
TP + FP
• Speciﬁcity =
TN
TN + FP
• Sensitivity =
TP
TP + FN
These measures are especially useful in case of class imbalance, for example in case of a
rare disease simply predicting the negative diagnostic outcome will oﬀer high accuracy
but not a good classiﬁer.
==PAGE:58==
38
Methods
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Results
In the following chapter, the results of the ﬁtted tensor decomposition models are
presented. Test performance is reported as a function of the number of components and
type of interpolation. The procedure for estimating the model order is the estimation
of missing values in a cross-validation setup [45, 11], and root mean sqaured error
(RMSE) the measure of predictive performance.
The section is divided into baseline results and results for non-negative CP both with
and without the use of interpolation. The components of the ﬁnal models are visual-
ized. Lastly, the performance of the classiﬁcation is reported.
5.1
Optimization process
Throughout the optimization, the same stopping criteria were used:
• The change in cost function is less than 10e-06 times the cost function.
• A maximum 100 iterations.
Only ﬁrst order models terminated due to the convergence criteria. Even when in-
creasing the number of iterations, changes in the cost function were higher than the
convergence criteria, indicating that the convergence criteria were too strict for given
optimization. However, when inspecting the change in sum of squared error(SSE),
the relative change in the last iterations was insigniﬁcant.
Hence, the models are
considered converged.
The following steps were carried out in the search for the optimal model:
1. Tenfold cross-validation with ﬁve reruns of models with the diﬀerent hyperpa-
rameters(i.e., number of components and type of interpolation).
==PAGE:60==
40
Results
2. Selection of the optimal hyperparameter.
3. Run of the model with the selected hyperparameter using the full data set. The
model is restarted ﬁve times.
4. Selection of the model achieving the lowest error.
If the model were unstable with ﬁve components the exact number of components were
determined, otherwise steps of 5 components were employed. If time allowed it, a ﬁner
search for the optimal number of components would have been carried out. However,
the optimization process takes longer as more components are included in the model.
5.2
Baseline measures
As a basis for the comparison, a few baseline measures were computed. The baseline
measures employed are overall mean; using the mean value of a speciﬁc TBSS voxel
from all the scans included in the training set to predict the value of the same voxel
for the scans included in the test set. The second approach follows the same logic,
but instead of using all scans in the training set, only the subjects own training scans
were used as the predictor. Additionally, a baseline measurement using the mean of
scans acquired closest in age to the estimated scan as predictor were calculated. The
results for the baseline measures are shown in Table 5.1 for FA and Table 5.2 for MD.
The best performing baseline measure for FA is subject mean, whereas MD reached
the best predictive outcome using age-neighboring scans as the predictor.
Table 5.1: The baseline root mean square error (RMSE) for FA. The overall
mean and subject mean of the training set were used as predictors
in the ﬁrst two measures, respectively. The last baseline measure
uses values from scans closest in age for the scan predicted. Here
six neighboring scans were included in the prediction.
D
Training Error
Test Error
Overall mean
0.0564 ± 3.7e-05
0.0565 ± 2.7e-04
Subject mean
0.0249 ± 8.0e-05
0.0286 ± 7.3e-04
Age neighboring scans (k=6)
0.0439 ± 4.2e-03
5.3
Non-negative CP model without interpola-
tion
First, a non-negative CP model using an age-binned tensor structure and the update
rule from Equation 4.8 were ﬁtted. Implementation can be found at https://github.
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Non-negativity CP with interpolation
41
Table 5.2: The baseline RMSE for MD. The overall mean and subject mean of
the training set were used as predictors in the ﬁrst two measures,
respectively. The last baseline measure uses values from scans clos-
est in age for the scan predicted. Here six neighboring scans were
included in the prediction.
D
Training Error
Test Error
Overall mean
0.0521 ± 5.2e-04
0.0521 ± 1.2e-03
Subject mean
0.0503 ± 6.7e-04
0.0522 ± 5.5e-03
Age neighboring scans (k=6)
0.0360 ± 6.1e-03
com/DTUComputeCognitiveSystems/cpNonNeg. Half-yearly bins were employed, e.g.,
above 7.5 to 8 years, above 8 to 9, and so forth. Hence, scans acquired at age 12.51
and 12.99 belongs to the same age bin, whereas scans acquired at age 12.99 and 13.01
belongs to two diﬀerent age bins. The result for FA are shown in 5.3 and for MD in
5.4. It is evident that both the model for FA and MD becomes unstable with more
than three components.
5.4
Non-negativity CP with interpolation
In the following the results of the ﬁtted CP models with non-negativity constraints
and interpolation in the time mode are presented. In this search, a temporal resolution
of 6 months was decided upon for the latent factor as that is the resolution the actual
data acquisition. The age span of the latent time factor is decided to be from age 7.5
to age 19 years mimicking the age span of the actual data. When comparing the result,
it should be kept in mind that the data set used with interpolation is 19 scans bigger
as described earlier. The root mean square error achieved for the various interpolation
methods are presented in Table 5.3 and 5.4 for FA and MD, respectively.
Nearest-neighbor is the simplest form of interpolation applied, and is very close to the
binned approached presented above. The next type of interpolation tested is linear
interpolation.
The linear interpolation model for FA is stable with 10 component
and hence outperforms the model without interpolation.The MD CP model with non-
negativity constraint and linear interpolation are stable with 5 components.
The last type of interpolation employed is Gaussian interpolation. A grid search were
carried out to ﬁnd the optimal combination of σ and number of components.
The values investigated spans from σ = 0.25, giving rise to a narrow peak only includ-
ing a few time points from the latent variable, up to σ = 5 for which nearly all points
in the latent variables are included in the representation. The high σ closely resembles
a model with no change over time. The Gaussian bell for the used σ = 0.25, 1, 2, and 5
are shown in Figure 5.1. An even ﬁner grid of σ values was initially investigated, but
==PAGE:62==
42
Results
Table 5.3: The root mean squared error (RMSE) of the non-negative CP model
of FA as a function of the number of components.
Each model
was restarted ﬁve times for each component number and type of
interpolation, and a 10-fold cross-validation approach was employed
for assessing the generalization of the model.
D = 1
D = 2
D = 3
D = 4
D = 5
D = 10
D = 15
No interpolation
Train 0.0545 ± 1.7e-05
0.0537 ± 3.9e-05
0.0531 ± 1.8e-05
0.0524 ± 1.9e-05
0.0518 ± 3.1e-05
-
-
Test
0.0546 ± 1.5e-04
0.0539 ± 1.5e-04
0.0533 ± 1.5e-04
1.68e05 ± 1.2e06
4.59e11 ± 3.3e12
-
-
Nearest neighbor
Train 0.0548 ± 2.2e-05
0.0543 ± 7.3e-05
0.0538 ± 2.0e-04
0.0531 ± 1.4e-04
0.0525 ± 1.6e-04
-
-
Test
0.0549 ± 2.0e-04
0.0553 ± 3.8e-03
0.0543 ± 1.5e-03
0.0538 ± 1.1e-03
0.317 ± 1.85
-
-
Linear interpolation
Train 0.0548 ± 2.2e-05
-
-
-
0.0524 ± 6.1e-05
0.0499 ± 4.5e-05
0.0477 ± 5.0e-05
Test
0.0549 ± 2.0e-04
-
-
-
0.0528 ± 4.1e-04
0.0505 ± 2.0e-04
6.65 ± 46.7
Gaussian interpolation
σ = 0.25
Train 0.0548 ± 2.2e-05
-
-
-
0.0525 ± 2.0e-04
-
-
Test
0.0549 ± 2.0e-04
-
-
-
0.200 ± 0.986
-
-
σ = 1
Train 0.0548 ± 2.2e-05
-
-
-
0.0524 ± 7.3e-05
0.0499 ± 3.4e-05
0.0478 ± 5.8e-05
Test
0.0549 ± 2.0e-04
-
-
-
0.0527 ± 1.7e-04
0.0505 ± 1.8e-04
0.0485 ± 2.0e-04
σ = 2
Train 0.0548 ± 2.2e-05
-
-
-
0.0525 ± 8.7e-05
0.0499 ± 3.4e-05
0.0478 ± 4.7e-05
Test
0.0549 ± 2.0e-04
-
-
-
0.0527 ± 1.8e-04
0.0505 ± 1.8e-04
0.0484 ± 2.0e-04
σ = 5
Train 0.0548 ± 2.2e-05
-
-
-
0.0524 ± 5.4e-05
0.0499 ± 3.4e-05
0.0478 ± 4.8e-05
Test
0.0549 ± 2.0e-04
-
-
-
0.0527 ± 1.8e-04
0.0505 ± 1.8e-04
0.0485 ± 2.1e-04
No dynamics
Train 0.0550 ± 2.2e-05
-
-
-
0.0527 ± 5.7e-05
0.0503 ± 7.4e-05
0.0481 ± 3.5e-05
Test
0.0602 ± 0.0103
-
-
-
0.0530 ± 1.8e-04
0.0508 ± 1.9e-04
0.0488 ± 2.1e-04
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Non-negativity CP with interpolation
43
Table 5.4: The root mean squared error (RMSE) of the non-negative CP model
of MD as a function of the number of components. Each model
was restarted ﬁve times for each component number and type of
interpolation, and a 10-fold cross-validation approach was employed
for assessing the generalization of the model.
D = 1
D = 2
D = 3
D = 4
D = 5
D = 10
No interpolation
Train 0.0527 ± 9.4e-05
0.0503 ± 3.4e-04
0.0487 ± 5.9e-05
0.0478 ± 6.7e-05
0.0469 ± 8.2e-05
-
Test
0.0531 ± 8.4e-04
0.0513 ± 3.4e-03
0.0494 ± 5.5e-04
1.68e+61 ± 9.3e+61
3.91e+32 ± 7.5e+32
-
Nearest neighbor
Train 0.0527 ± 4.6e-05
-
-
-
0.0488 ± 3.7e-04
-
Test
0.0530 ± 4.4e-04
-
-
-
0.3280 ± 1.14
-
Linear interpolation
Train 0.0527 ± 4.7e-05
-
-
-
0.0481 ± 3.3e-04
0.0460 ± 2.6e-04
Test
0.0530 ± 4.3e-04
-
-
-
0.0497 ± 3.1e-03
0.4277 ± 1.634
Gaussian interpolation
σ = 0.25
Train 0.0527 ± 4.7e-05
-
-
-
0.0482 ± 7.0e-04
-
Test
0.0530 ± 4.3e-04
-
-
-
19.02 ± 127.86
-
σ = 1
Train 0.0527 ± 4.7e-05
-
-
-
0.0480 ± 3.0e-04
0.0449 ± 1.5e-04
Test
0.0530 ± 4.3e-04
-
-
-
0.0486 ± 4.4e-04
0.5286 ± 2.643
σ = 2
Train 0.0527 ± 4.7e-05
-
-
-
0.0481 ± 6.5e-04
-
Test
0.0530 ± 4.3e-04
-
-
-
0.0856 ± 0.238
-
No dynamics
Train 0.0532 ± 4.5e-05
-
-
-
0.0486 ± 2.6e-04
-
Test
0.0535 ± 4.2e-04
-
-
-
0.0492 ± 4.3e-04
-
==PAGE:64==
44
Results
was found unnecessary as no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the achieved ﬁt were observed.
The weights was normalized in order to sum to 1 to ensure that it corresponded to a
full scan.
Figure 5.1: Gaussian
bells
with the σ’s used
in
the
interpo-
lation
process.
The
curves
are
shown for a scan
in the middle of
the
investigated
time range.
For low values of σ the results resembles the result
obtained without interpolation. As σ exceed 0.25
the change in performance is limited for FA, and
the models remain stable without saturating even
at 15 component. A slightly better performance
are achieved with the use of σ = 2, and at 15
components it is the ﬁtted model that performs
the best.
For MD it is evident that non-negative CP with
Gaussian interpolation using σ = 1 perform the
best, as both higher and lower σ results in over-
ﬁtting even at 5 components.
5.5
Non-negative CP with-
out dynamics
To investigate whether the data has a signiﬁcant,
timely dynamic, an additional weighting matrix
of equal weights were implemented. By assigning
equal weight to all points of the latent variable
for each scan, the time-speciﬁc mode is essentially
removed (all scans are considered acquired at the
same time point). Results are also shown in Table
5.3 and 5.4 for FA and MD, respectively. For FA
a model without dynamic almost performs as well as the best one with dynamics, and
by far outperforms the non-negative CP model without interpolation. For MD model
without dynamic is outperformed by dynamic models. This is following the diﬀerence
in optimal baseline measure; for FA the leading measure is subject mean indicating a
moderate timely trend, whereas the leading measure for MD is age-matched neighbors
indicating a more distinct age eﬀect.
5.6
Final model
The components of the ﬁnal models are shown individually.
As the order of the
components is arbitrary, it was decided to order the components after intensity de-
termined using the Frobenius norm of the matrix resulting from the product of the
==PAGE:65==
5.6 Final model
45
time and spatial skeletal modes.
For the visualizations, both values of the spatial
skeletal mode and time mode have been scaled between 0 and 1. The subject scores
have been scaled accordingly, and due to the scaling ambiguity, it is of no conse-
quence.
Animations of the full TBSS skeleton components can be downloaded at
https://www.dropbox.com/s/281ybrseftyefze/animation.pdf?dl=0.
5.6.1
FA
The model found to be performing the best with FA was non-negative CP with Gaus-
sian interpolation σ = 2 and 15 components. The mode-speciﬁc loadings from the
best predicting models are shown in Figure 5.2. A few components show generalized
activation (e.g., component 1), other components reﬂect more localized activation(e.g.,
component 2 shows high values in the body of corpus callosum and corticospinal tract
among other regions), but the majority of the components show activation only in
small areas here and there.
Component 1 shows a constant time course indicating an oﬀset component. Since all
subjects activate component 1, although, to a varying degree, the notion is aﬃrmed.
All subjects use not all components, and several components are only mildly activated,
highlighting the part-based nature of the model. As expected an increasing trend is
observed in the majority of the latent time components for FA, and most seem to level
oﬀduring late adolescence. The high σ give rise to curved latent time trends, which
corresponds to the prevailing notion of non-linear age eﬀects in FA during childhood
and adolescence. Remember that the outer product achieves the maturational trend,
and no direct biological information should be taken directly from the unfeasible wavy
components.
The error of the ﬁve reruns are shown in Figure 5.3. It is evident that no matter
the initialization, the performance of the model decrease together and obtain almost
identical ﬁts.
5.6.2
MD
The model found to perform the best with MD was non-negative CP with Gaussian
interpolation with σ = 1 and ﬁve components. The mode-speciﬁc loadings from the
best predicting models are shown in Figure 5.4.
Once again, one component(i.e.,
component 1) shows general activation and steady time course acting as an oﬀset.
Component 2 also generally activated and show the expected subtle decrease that
decelerates over time. Component 3 show accelerated decrease towards the end of the
investigated time span and looking at the subject score component three seems to be
more important for boys than girls. Unexpectedly two components show an increasing
trend over time(i.e., component 4 and 5), but when inspecting the spatial extent, it is
limited to fornix and the cerebral peduncle, respectively.
==PAGE:66==
46
Results
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
==PAGE:67==
5.6 Final model
47
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
==PAGE:68==
48
Results
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
Figure 5.2:
Components from the best performing FA model.
For the spatial mode every ﬁfth log(x + 1)
-transformed and normalized (between 0 (blue) and 1 (yellow)) slice is plotted. The time mode
are shown for a ﬁctitious subject with all scans as line plots and normalized. The subject mode
are shown as bar plots, height indicating importance and color indicating sex (blue = boy(1),
red = girl(0)). The logistic regression parameter are given in the parenthesis.
==PAGE:69==
5.6 Final model
49
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Iterations
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
SSE
10 5
1
2
3
4
5
Rerun
Figure 5.3: The sum-of-squared error as a function of iteration shown for the
ﬁve reruns of the non-negative CP model with Gaussian interpo-
lation with σ = 2 for the full data set. All reruns are similar.
==PAGE:70==
50
Results
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Figure 5.4:
Components from the best performing MD model. For the spatial mode every ﬁfth log(x + 1)
-transformed and normalized (between 0 (white) and 1 (black)) slice is plotted. The time mode
are shown for a ﬁctitious subject with all scans as line plots and normalized. The subject mode
are shown as bar plots, height indicating importance and color indicating sex (blue = boy(1),
red = girl(0)). The logistic regression parameter are given in the parenthesis.
==PAGE:71==
5.7 Classiﬁcation
51
5.7
Classiﬁcation
The classiﬁcation was performed using the subject score resulting from the best per-
forming decomposition. Hence, a data set of 83 observation(the known gender) and
15 features for FA and 5 for MD (number of components). A slight class imbalance
exists in the data, 50 girls against 33 boys, and simply assigning all observation as
girls results in an accuracy of 50
83 = 0.60.
The result of the classiﬁcation using subject score form the best performing models on
FA and MD are presented in Tables 5.6 and 5.7, respectively.
Both logistic regression, KNN, and ANN were implemented. For KNN from 1 to 10
neighbors were investigated, and for ANN up to 10 hidden units were tried. Only a
few hidden units were needed.
For FA a slight improvement from the baseline was achieved, using logistic regression
or ANN achieved the best classiﬁcation accuracy (67%). Surprisingly, ANN needed
three hidden units to achieve this. For MD the mean test accuracy was 81%, hence
a clear improvement from chance although still not perfect. The optimal classiﬁer for
MD was achieved using logistic regression. The resulting confusion matrix are shown
in Table 5.5. The most typical fault is false girl assignment. As expected, logistic
regression and ANN with one hidden unit performed the same for MD.
The parameters achieved when training a logistic classiﬁer on the full data for FA
and MD, respectively, are stated by each component in Figure 5.2 and 5.4. ANN did
not outperform logistic regression; hence no need for advanced transformations of the
input features was demonstrated.
Table 5.5: Predictive performance of logistic regression applied to subject
score derived from non-negative CP model on MD data. Results
summed over the diﬀerent crossvalidation folds are shown.
Confusion matrix
Predicted
Boy
Girl
Actual
Boy
24
7
Girl
9
43
Accuracy: 0.81
==PAGE:72==
52
Results
Table 5.6: The classiﬁcation error of gender on FA
Logistic regression
Train
0.17 ± 0.03
Test
0.33 ± 0.14
KNN
Neighbors (k)
1
2
3
4
5
10
Test
0.46
0.36
0.41
0.46
0.45
0.39
ANN
Hidden units
1
2
3
4
5
10
Train
0.26 ± 0.12
0.18 ± 0.03
0.18 ± 0.03
0.18 ± 0.03
0.18 ± 0.03
0.18 ± 0.03
Test
0.39 ± 0.09
0.34 ± 0.14
0.33 ± 0.14
0.33 ± 0.13
0.33 ± 0.13
0.33 ± 0.13
Table 5.7: The classiﬁcation error of gender on MD
Logistic regression
Train
0.18 ± 0.01
Test
0.19 ± 0.06
KNN
Neighbors (k)
1
2
3
4
5
10
Test
0.37
0.35
0.30
0.28
0.27
0.23
ANN
Hidden units
1
2
3
4
5
10
Train
0.17 ± 0.01
0.17 ± 0.01
0.17 ± 0.01
0.17 ± 0.02
0.18 ± 0.02
0.17 ± 0.02
Test
0.19 ± 0.06
0.20 ± 0.09
0.20 ± 0.09
0.21 ± 0.09
0.19 ± 0.08
0.19 ± 0.09
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 6
Discussion
In the following chapter, some of the potentials and limitations of the methods applied
and results obtained are discussed.
Looking at the predictive performance achieved by the various ﬁtted models, it is
evident that better prediction can be achieved using more straightforward processes
than tensor decompositions.
Instead, a better insight into the nature of the data
is achieved through the use of decomposition methods.
The resulting component
conforms to various leading beliefs about white matter maturation. First and foremost,
increasing FA and decreasing MD are encountered. As expected, the change in FA
shows deceleration towards the end of the investigated age span.
The obtained results are in line with the prevailing notion that the maturation is subtle
during late childhood and adolescence. This, however, complicated the use of tensor
decomposition as the change in one mode is almost absent, in practice almost reducing
the number of modes to two.
Secondly, the non-negativity constraint helps bring forward a parts-based model, which
illustrate regional diﬀerences in the maturational trajectories. Each basis TBSS skele-
ton change according to the corresponding time factor. When the outer product of
skeleton basis, time trend and subject score for the components are summed, the dif-
ferent spatial values in the skeleton factor result in diﬀerent maturational trends for
diﬀerent regions in the same subject. As the subject scores varied, individual matura-
tional trajectories were identiﬁed.
Real data are often challenging, and the given data were no exception. DWI and hence
the derived DTI measurement are noise prone. A long line of preprocessing steps lay
before the modeling.
DTI studies often investigate averages over either regions-of-
interests(ROI) or tract-of-interest. Instead of voxel values, a mean of multiple voxels
is instead modeled, averaging some of the noise out.
Tracts-of-interest is easily achieved by applying an atlas onto the TBSS skeleton. Al-
though the obtained results may have been more readily understandable and easier to
contrasted to results in the literature, it would add the assumption of equal maturation
==PAGE:74==
54
Discussion
over the averaged region (i.e., the atlas-based tracts). Multiple studies have disputed
this assumption [31, 23]. From the results obtained when preserving the full TBSS
skeleton, it is observed that a tract region is often but not always activated simulta-
neously, e.g., the structure of forceps major is co-activated in some components while
only partly in others.
Instead of averaging over regions, other steps to augment the model and achieve a
better performance are taken:
6.1
The use of interpolation in the time mode
To the author’s knowledge, no examples of implementation of interpolation in the
latent space for non-negative CP exists in the literature. Examples of interpolation of
the raw data as noise elimination are reported as well as more advanced methods like
function factorization using warped Gaussian processes[3, 70, 50].
Allowing for the interpolation to play out in the latent variable enables the interpola-
tion to be based on the full data set. With the more advanced forms of interpolation,
the actual age at the acquisition of the scan is used. If instead interpolation were
applied to estimate missing scans, some scans would be estimated on a very narrow
selection of scans. It is, however, unknown whether estimating missing values would
give rise to a similar performance boost. As an added beneﬁt, the interpolation of the
latent variables acts as regularization, shown by the slightly higher training errors.
The implementation of interpolation improved the stability of the model tremendously.
Even simple interpolation methods as linear interpolation oﬀered an improvement.
Considerable improvements were experienced for FA with increasing complexity of
the interpolation method. Unsurprisingly, diﬀerent parameter seems to proﬁt from
diﬀerent interpolation methods:
6.1.1
FA
Gaussian interpolation oﬀered the most signiﬁcant improvement for FA. As expected,
when σ were overly small, the model resembled nearest-neighbor and was therefore
only stable with a few components. As σ increased so did the stability.
Going from linear interpolation to Gaussian interpolation with increasing σ seem to
add more of almost the same steady values into the estimation. Results indicate that
as long as σ is above a certain threshold, the speciﬁc value does not change the model
ﬁt signiﬁcantly or at all. Averaging over more time points improves the stability of
the ﬁt presumably because the model becomes more vigorous against noise and hence
outperforms linear interpolation.
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Model complexity
55
Linked with the well-performing subject mean, the obtained results point towards
a steady FA with limited timely dynamics in the investigated period. The notion is
reinforced by the good performance obtained using an averaging weights matrix, which
takes the time dynamic part out of the model. Still, dynamic models perform better,
leading to the belief of a subtle but signiﬁcant timely eﬀect in FA in the investigated
age span.
Although the performance of the CP model is improved using interpolation, subject-
mean accomplished a better performance. The between-subject variance may be to
blame. In conjunction with a higher error for prediction using nearest age-matched
scans for FA, it is indicated that general trends across subjects are limited.
The
non-negative CP model performs at its best at a comparable level as the nearest age
neighboring scans, but more consistently. Indicating that the patterns across subjects
are picked up by the model, but with the limited degrees of freedom utilized, the
CP model is unable to model subject speciﬁc oddities, and with high between-subject
variance the CP model is outperformed by subject mean predictions.
6.1.2
MD
MD proved to be more challenging to model. Model robustness improved by interpo-
lation, but not to the same extent as FA. Overall mean performs equally to subject
mean for MD indicating similar within-subject and between-subject variance. Neigh-
boring scans achieved the lowest prediction error indicating that a more pronounced
age eﬀect is present in MD than FA. A lower optimal σ value aﬃrmed this. When
inspecting the resulting components, the dynamic is surprisingly subtle although pri-
marily decreasing.
As both FA and MD perform better when smoothed, six months seem to be too short
a period to observe signiﬁcant maturational diﬀerences over.
6.2
Model complexity
The degrees of freedom utilized by the model estimators are D(I+J+K) parameters (D
is the number of components, I, J, and K the dimension of each mode(TBSS voxels,
time and subjects))[9].
The degrees of freedom utilized by the diﬀerent the diﬀerent baseline measures are I,
IK and IK for overall mean, subject mean, and nearest-age-neighbors, respectively.
The size of I by far exceed the size of the others dimensions. Hence, only overall mean
uses fewer degrees of freedom than the non-negative CP model, which is the baseline
measure the decomposition model reliably outperforms.
==PAGE:76==
56
Discussion
6.3
Further improvements
A few technical details could be changed and maybe allow for better ﬁts. Principally,
a ﬁner grid search should have been carried out in search for the optimal number
of components. More components may be ﬁtted if using a step size of 1 instead of
5.
However, as the number of components increases, so does the computing time.
The time constraint did not a allow for a ﬁner search and a search with more com-
ponents but note that the FA model did not saturate at 15 components. Although,
the improvement when adding more components slows down. A greater performance
boost going from 5 to 10 component model than from 10 to 15 component model was
achieved, although, still a signiﬁcant improvement. Furthermore, it may be beneﬁcial
to allow the models to run for longer. Even though the cost functions plateaued, the
10e −6 stopping are not enforced.
Perfect reconstruction is seldom wanted, as the model then also incorporate the un-
avoidable noise, which is undesirable. So test performance using cross-validation is
employed to identify the appropriate model instead. Although perfect ﬁts are undesir-
able, it should be kept in mind that the best performing model still has a quite high
error rate (0.0484 for FA and 0.0486 for MD). The error level is comparable with what
the expected change of the diﬀusion parameter throughout the investigated time span
[33, 31].
No preprocessing was attempted, and in general preprocessing of multidimensional
data is diﬃcult.
Centering removing constant terms in the data could have been
applied, but as the data is already ratio-scaled with a meaning full zero so not as such
needed[10]. Up until now, only the model has been modiﬁed to ﬁt the data, instead of
ﬁtting the data to the model. No form of normalization or cleaning are applied, but
it might be worth exploring for improved training.
6.4
Sex diﬀerences
The diﬀerence in subject score did not reﬂect great sex diﬀerence in FA no matter the
classiﬁer utilized. Although it may be discouraging that no such eﬀects were observed,
it is in agreement with multiple longitudinal studies in the literature, which also report
no signiﬁcant sex eﬀects.[31, 32]
On the other hand, the sex diﬀerences reported in the literature are often localized,
whereas the FA voxel factors achieved through non-negative CP show more general-
ized co-activation. Hence it is diﬃcult to observe subtle diﬀerences that may be sex
diﬀerences. Since the residuals are substantial, sex diﬀerences in FA cannot be wholly
ruled out. Combined with the fact that subject score from the MD model achieved
better-than-chance prediction of gender using both logistic regression, ANN, and KNN
with accuracies above 80%, more investigations of sex diﬀerences are warranted. There
==PAGE:77==
6.4 Sex diﬀerences
57
is little evidence in the literature pointing towards pronounced sex diﬀerences in MD
than FA.
When investigating the parameters achieved through logistic regression, it is observed
that high importance of component 3 makes it more likely that the subject is male.
The time mode of component 3 showcase a protracted decrease, which is in line with
results in other studies linking continued maturation and low MD levels with males
[21, 51, 57]. The results presented in this thesis suggests that boys and girls have
diﬀerent developmental trajectories at least for MD with girl reaching mature levels
earlier in white matter microstructure.
==PAGE:78==
58
Discussion
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
Individual maturational trajectories were identiﬁed, but the predicted performance
found to be inferior to diﬀerent simple procedures used as a baseline. Baseline mea-
sures revealed diﬀerences in the character of the raw FA and MD data. FA was best
predicted by subject mean, whereas age-neighboring scans better predicted MD. This
diﬀerence suggested that diﬀerent augmentation of the tensor decomposition method
would improve the performance of the two diﬀusion measures.
By the addition of
interpolation of the latent time variable, the models became more robust, and the pre-
dicted performance strengthened. Diﬀerent types of interpolation were implemented,
but interpolation methods allowing for more smoothing (i.e., Gaussian interpolation
with high σ) were found to improve the performance the most. The models saturate
as σ increases, and the model outperforms a model without dynamic. In agreement
with the simple baseline measures, FA allows for more smoothing with higher σ than
MD. Generally, the results point towards little but signiﬁcant time dynamic in the
data, especially in MD.
The optimal FA model was found to be 15 component CP model with non-negativity
constraint and Gaussian interpolation of the time mode with σ = 2. The optimal MD
model was found to be a ﬁve component CP model with non-negativity constraint
and Gaussian interpolation with σ = 1. When inspecting the resulting components,
the general tendency of increasing FA and decreasing MD found in the literature was
validated, observing both regional and individual diﬀerences.
Hence, the achieved
results point towards individual diﬀerences in maturational trajectories of the white
matter microstructure.
These diﬀerence did not reﬂect clear sex diﬀerence for FA. Contrary, gender was clas-
siﬁed using subject score achieved from MD with a test accuracy of 81% using logistic
regression. The component found to be most important for the classiﬁcation shows
protracted decreases in MD throughout the investigated age span, which is in agree-
ment with the leading conception of sex diﬀerences in MD during adolescence.
The method of interpolation demonstrates potential as more components could be
added to the model. However, evaluating the results, the high residuals need to be
taken into account. Although a perfect model is not wanted, some patterns cannot be
==PAGE:80==
60
Conclusion
accounted for, may it be noise or real maturational trends.
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 8
Future work
The method of interpolation of latent variables shows potential, but it needs to be
validated with synthetic data to ensure that the model is, in fact, able to catch the
underlying structure. Furthermore, the implementation should be made more generic,
and measures to make convergence more eﬃcient, like inner iteration, should be taken.
Additionally, it may make sense to look into the initialization procedure as the MD
estimators were aﬀected by the initialization.
With regards to the results and the maturational data, a natural extension would be to
look into other diﬀusion parameters, i.e., parallel and perpendicular diﬀusion. As the
cohort project HUBU collected diﬀerent behavioral tests, it would also be of interest
to investigate if any other relationships between the component and external variables
could be identiﬁed. Lastly, to get a better understanding of the co-activation of the
many skeletal voxels spatial clustering of the components of the TBSS skeleton mode
could be of potential interest.
==PAGE:82==
62
Future work
==PAGE:83==
Appendix A
Derivation of updates for A
and C
The derivation of updates for A and C when the CP model are implemented with
both interpolation and non-negativity constraint. Starting with the loss function:
L = 1
2
X
s
∥X{s} −
X
d
adcsdbdW(s)∥2
F
(A.1)
Where X{s} is the data matrix for a speciﬁc subject and the weighting matrix W(s)(latent time resolution×numb
The loss function element-wise is as follows:
L = 1
2
X
s,i,j
 
X{s}i,j −
X
d
aidcsdˆbdj
!2
= 1
2
X
s,i,j

X{s}i,j −(
X
d̸=l
aidcsdˆbdj) −ailcslˆblj


2
(A.2)
Which is then diﬀerentiated with regards to ail
∂L
∂aij =
X
s,j

X{s}ij −
X
d̸=l
aidcsdˆbdj −ailcslˆblj



−cslˆblj

=
X
s,j
ailc2
slˆb2
lj +

X
d̸=l
aidcsdˆbdj

cslˆblj −X{s}ijcslˆblj
(A.3)
==PAGE:84==
64
Derivation of updates for A and C
Setting equal to zero and solving for ail:
ail
X
s,j
c2
slˆb2
lj +
X
s,j

X
d̸=l
aidcsdˆbdj

cslˆblj −X{s}ijcslˆblj = 0
(A.4)
ail =
P
sj X{s}ijcslˆblj −P
s,j
P
d̸=l aidcsdˆbdj

cslˆblj
P
s,j c2
slˆb2
lj
(A.5)
For C the process yields the following update rule for the element csl
csl =
P
ij X{s}ijailˆblj −
P
d̸=l aidcsdˆbdj

ailˆblj
P
i,j a2
ilˆb2
lj
(A.6)
==PAGE:85==
Appendix B
Implementation of
non-negative CP with
interpolation in MATLAB
function [FACT , sSSE , CPU] = interpol_nnCP_opti (Finit ,
X,W, D,maxiter)
% The
function
fits
PARAFAC/CandeComp(CP) with non -
negativity
constraints
% with
interpolation in the second
mode to the data in
X and D components.
% The
subproblems
are solved by NMF with
Hierarchical
Alternating
Least
% Sqeares(HALS) update.
%
% Usage:
%
% Input:
% Finit
cell
array of initialization of the
components
% X
cell
array of data , a cell for each
subject
% W
cell
array of weighting
matrices , one for
each
subject
%
(determines
the time
resolution)
% D
integer
number of components
% maxiter
integer
maximal
number of iterations in the
optimization
% Output:
% FACT
cell
array of fitted
components , each cell
contain the factor
==PAGE:86==
66
Implementation of non-negative CP with interpolation in MATLAB
%
for a given
modality
% sSSE
vector The SSE over
iterations
% CPU
integer
The time of the
optimization
% Written by Amalie
Sofie
Ekstrand , as part of her
Master 's thesis , spring
2018
tic
N = [size(X{1}(: ,1) ,1) size(W{1} ,1) size(W,2)]; %[
voxels
timepoints
subjects]
FACT = Finit;
SSE = inf;
dSSE = inf;
iter = 1;
% Indexing
IND = repmat (1:D,D,1);
for i = 1:D
IND(i,i) = nan;
end
IND(find(isnan(IND)))=[];
IND = flip(reshape(IND ,D,D-1));
% Premultiplication
sW = cellfun (@times , W,W, 'Un', false); % Weights
squared
for s = 1:N(3)
WWT{s} = W{s}*W{s}';
end
% The actual
update
while
iter
<= maxiter && dSSE
>=1e-6* SSE
old_SSE = SSE;
% b_hat
updated
after B has been
updated
if iter == 1
for s = 1:N(3)
b_hat{s} = FACT {2}'*W{s};
end
else
end
==PAGE:87==
67
% A
for d = 1:D % columnwise
update
for s = 1:N(3)
% Sum of model
without l'te component
d_sum = bsxfun (@times ,FACT {1}(: , IND(d,:)),
FACT {3}(s,IND(d,:)))*b_hat{s}(IND(d,:)
,:);
% numerator
a_t(:,s) = (X{s}-d_sum)*( FACT {3}(s,d)*
b_hat{s}(d,:) '); %2. dimension: scans
% denomenator
a_n(:,s) = sum(FACT {3}(s,d)^2* b_hat{s}(d
,:) .^2 ,2);
end
FACT {1}(: ,d) = max(0,sum(a_t ,2)/sum(a_n)); %
subject sum
end
% B
F1_sq=sum(FACT {1}.^2);
for d = 1:D
b_t = zeros (1,size(W{s},1));
b_n = zeros(size(W{s},1) ,1);
for s = 1:N(3)
d_sum = bsxfun (@times ,FACT {1}(: , IND(d,:)),
FACT {3}(s,IND(d,:)))*b_hat{s}(IND(d,:)
,:);
b_t = b_t + (FACT {1}(: ,d) '*(X{s}-d_sum))*(
FACT {3}(s,d)*W{s}');
b_n = b_n + F1_sq(d)*FACT {3}(s,d)^2* WWT{s
};% sum over
scans (sW is already
squared W)
end
% update
continuously - with non -negativity
constraint
FACT {2}(: ,d) = fastnnls(b_n ,b_t ');
for s=1:N(3)
b_hat{s}(d,:)= FACT {2}(: ,d) '*W{s};
end
==PAGE:88==
68
Implementation of non-negative CP with interpolation in MATLAB
end
% C
for d = 1:D
for s = 1:N(3)
d_sum = bsxfun (@times ,FACT {1}(: , IND(d,:)),
FACT {3}(s,IND(d,:)))*b_hat{s}(IND(d,:)
,:);
% numerator
c_t = FACT {1}(: ,d) '*(X{s}-d_sum)*b_hat{s}(
d,:) ';
% denomenator
c_n = sum(FACT {1}(: ,d).^2)*sum(b_hat{s}(d
,:) .^2 ,2);
FACT {3}(s,d)= max(0,c_t/c_n);
end
end
% Calculate
SSE
SSE =0;
for s = 1:N(3)
se = (X{s} - FACT {1}.* FACT {3}(s,:)*FACT {2}'*W{
s}) .^2;
SSE = SSE + sum(se(:));
SSE + sum(se(:));
end
dSSE = old_SSE - SSE;
sSSE(iter) = SSE;
iter = iter + 1;
end
toc
CPU = toc;
end
==PAGE:89==
Appendix C
Weight matrix function
implemented in MATLAB
function W = weight_matrix(method , Age ,startage ,endage
,acc , sigma)
% The
function
determines a weighting
matrice
based on
the
decided
method
% of interpolation.
% An age range and
resolution is decided
upon for the
time
modality in the
% latent
variables.
% Usage:
% Input:
% method
1 - Age
bracket
(0.5 year
interval)
%
2 - Linear
%
3 - Nearest -neighbor
%
4 - Gaussian
%
5 - No dynamics , mean
coefficients
% Age
Cell
array of age for each scan for each
subject (Age{subject })
% startage
The
starting
age of the
decided
time
modality
% endage
The end age of the
decided
time
modality
% acc
The
resolution of the
decided
time
modality
% sigma
The sigma
value
used for
Gaussian
interpolation
time = startage:acc:endage;% The time
resolution
which
is decided
upon time = 8:0.5:18.5;
==PAGE:90==
70
Weight matrix function implemented in MATLAB
if method == 1 % Age
brackets
for sub = 1: length(Age)
w = zeros (23, length(Age{sub}));
for sc = 1: length(Age{sub})
if isnan(Age{sub}(sc)) == 1
elseif Age{sub}(sc) < 8
w(1, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 8 &&
Age{sub}(sc) <
8.5
w(2, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 8.5 &&
Age{sub}(sc)
< 9
w(3, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 9 &&
Age{sub}(sc) <
9.5
w(4, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 9.5 &&
Age{sub}(sc)
< 10
w(5, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 10 &&
Age{sub}(sc)
< 10.5
w(6, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 10.5 &&
Age{sub}(sc
) < 11
w(7, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 11 &&
Age{sub}(sc)
< 11.5
w(8, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 11.5 &&
Age{sub}(sc
) < 12
w(9, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 12 &&
Age{sub}(sc)
< 12.5
w(10, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 12.5 &&
Age{sub}(sc
) < 13
w(11, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 13 &&
Age{sub}(sc)
< 13.5
w(12, sc) =1;
==PAGE:91==
71
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 13.5 &&
Age{sub}(sc
) < 14
w(13, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 14 &&
Age{sub}(sc)
< 14.5
w(14, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 14.5 &&
Age{sub}(sc
) < 15
w(15, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 15 &&
Age{sub}(sc)
< 15.5
w(16, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 15.5 &&
Age{sub}(sc
) < 16
w(17, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 16 &&
Age{sub}(sc)
< 16.5
w(18, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 16.5 &&
Age{sub}(sc
) < 17
w(19, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 17 &&
Age{sub}(sc)
< 17.5
w(20, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 17.5 &&
Age{sub}(sc
) < 18
w(21, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 18 &&
Age{sub}(sc)
< 18.5
w(22, sc) =1;
elseif Age{sub}(sc) >= 18.5
w(23, sc) =1;
end
end
W{sub} = w;
end
elseif
method == 2 % Linear
interpolation
for sub = 1: size(Age ,2)
knn = knnsearch(time ',Age{sub});
w = zeros(length(time),length(Age{sub}));
dist = Age{sub}-time;
==PAGE:92==
72
Weight matrix function implemented in MATLAB
for int = 1: length(Age{sub})
xs = dist(int ,knn(int));
if xs <0
w1 = 1-abs(xs)/acc;
w2 = 1-abs(dist(int ,knn(int) -1))/acc;
w(knn(int),int) = w1;
w(knn(int) -1,int) = w2;
elseif xs == 0
w(knn(int),int) = 1;
else
w1 =1 - xs/acc;
w2 =1 - abs(dist(int ,knn(int)+1))/acc;
w(knn(int),int) = w1;
w(knn(int)+1,int) = w2;
end
end
W{sub} = w;
end
elseif
method == 3 % nearest
neighbor
for s = 1: size(Age ,2)
[~,ix] = min(abs(Age{s}-time) ');
W{s} = zeros(length(time),length(Age{s}));
for c = 1: length(Age{s})
W{s}(ix(c),c) = 1;
end
end
elseif
method == 4 % gaussian
for s = 1: size(Age ,2)
time_diff = abs(Age{s}-time);
W{s} = zeros(length(time),length(Age{s}));
for
tidspunkt = 1: length(Age{s})
f = 1/( sqrt (2*pi)*sigma)*exp(-time_diff(
tidspunkt ,:) .^2/(2* sigma ^2)) ';
W{s}(:, tidspunkt) = f/norm(f,1);
end
end
==PAGE:93==
73
elseif
method == 5 %without
time
progression (no
dynamic)
for sub = 1: size(Age ,2)
W{sub }(1: length(time) ,1: length(Age{sub})) = 1/
length(time);
end
else
disp('error - wrong
method ')
end
end
==PAGE:94==
74
Weight matrix function implemented in MATLAB
==PAGE:95==
Appendix D
Classiﬁcation in MATLAB
% Classification
% This
script is created by Amalie
Sofie
Ekstrand
for
her M.Sc. thesis
% in the spring of 2018.
Intended
for
training
and
testing of
% classification
using
logistic
regression , KNN and
ANN.
% X:
The predictors , here the
subject
scores
from
the
optimal
nnCP
% y:
The
observed
responses ,
%
Here a dummy
variable:
%
0: girl
%
1: boy
X = FACT {3}; % The subject
specific
scores
y = Gender; % the known
gender of the data
%% Logistic
regression
% First the
subjects
are
divided
into
train and test
set:
K = 10;
CVO = cvpartition(y,'KFold ',K); % stratified
according
to gender
%%
% Taking out the
training
part of the data and
running
logistic
regression
==PAGE:96==
76
Classiﬁcation in MATLAB
for k = 1:K
trIdx = CVO.training(k);
teIdx = CVO.test(k);
[b,dev ,stats] = glmfit(X(trIdx ,:), y(trIdx)', '
binomial ', 'link ', 'probit ');
allb{k}=b; alldev(k) = dev; allstats{k} = stats;
yfit{k} = glmval(allb{k}, X, 'probit ');
% determine
the
training
error
ytrain{k} = yfit{k}( trIdx);
ytrue_tr{k} = y(trIdx) ';
fit_tr{k} = ytrue_tr{k} == round(ytrain{k});
% accuracy
accuracy_train (k) = sum(fit_tr{k})/length(fit_tr{k
});
% determine
the test
error
ytest{k} = yfit{k}( teIdx);
ytrue{k} = y(teIdx) ';
fit{k} = ytrue{k} == round(ytest{k});
% accuracy
accuracy(k) = sum(fit{k})/length(fit{k});
%% Confussion
matrix
idx = (ytrue{k}==1);
p(k) = length(y(idx));
n(k) = length(y(~idx));
tp(k) = sum(ytrue{k}(idx)== round(ytest{k}(idx)));
tn(k) = sum(ytrue{k}(~ idx)== round(ytest{k}(~ idx))
);
fp(k) = n(k)-tn(k);
fn(k) = p(k)-tp(k);
accuracy(k) = (tp(k)+tn(k))/length(fit{k});
sensitivity(k) = tp(k)/p(k);
specificity(k) = tn(k)/n(k);
precision(k) = tp(k)/(tp(k)+fp(k));
==PAGE:97==
77
end
%% KNN
k =10;
% Fit the KKN
algorithm
Mdl = fitcknn(X,y,'NumNeighbors ',k,'Standardize ' ,1);
rng (1); % For
reproducibility
CVMdl = crossval(Mdl); % Cross
validation , default is
10-fold
classError = kfoldLoss(CVMdl) % Class
error
%% ANN
% From ANN:DTU Toolbox
% Set the number of hidden
units
Nh = 10;
for K = 1:10
trIdx = CVO.training(K);
teIdx = CVO.test(K);
X_train = X(trIdx ,:);
y_train = y(trIdx);
X_test = X(teIdx ,:);
y_test = y(teIdx);
% Train the
network
disp('Network
training , this will not take long ...
')
results = nc_main(X_train ,y_train ',X_test ,y_test ',
Nh);
allCtrain(K) = results.Ctrain(end); % train
classification
error
allCtest(K) = results.Ctest(end); % test
classification
error
results.t_est_test % the model
prediction of the
test
example
end
==PAGE:98==
78
Classiﬁcation in MATLAB
disp('train ')
mean(allCtrain)
std(allCtrain)
disp('test ')
mean(allCtest)
std(allCtest)
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[1] Linear interpolation.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interpolation.
Ac-
cessed: 06-05-2018.
[2] Nearest-neighbor
interpolation.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Nearest-neighbor_interpolation. Accessed: 06-05-2018.
[3] R. C. Allen and S. C. Rutan.
Investigation of interpolation techniques for
the reconstruction of the ﬁrst dimension of comprehensive two-dimensional liq-
uid chromatography-diode array detector data. Analytica Chimica Acta, 705(1-
2):253–260, 2011.
[4] S. Angstmann, K. S. Madsen, A. Skimminge, T. L. Jernigan, W. F. C. Baare,
and H. R. Siebner. Microstructural asymmetry of the corticospinal tracts predicts
right-left diﬀerences in circle drawing skill in right-handed adolescents.
Brain
Structure and Function, 221(9):4475–4489, 2016.
[5] P. J. Basser, J. Mattiello, and D. LeBihan. Mr diﬀusion tensor spectroscopy and
imaging. Biophysical Journal, 66(1):259–67, 259–267, 1994.
[6] C. Beaulieu. The basis of anisotropic water diﬀusion in the nervous system - a
technical review. NMR in Biomedicine, 15(7-8):435–455, 2002.
[7] C. Beaulieu and P. Allen. Determinants of anisotropic water diﬀusionin nerves.
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 31(4):394–400, 1994.
[8] K. Brandt Petersen and M. Syskind Pedersen. The matrix cookbook. 2013.
[9] R. Bro. Multi-way analysis in the food industry - models, algorithms, and appli-
cations. PhD thesis, Chemometrics Group, Food Technology Department of Dairy
and Food Science, Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University, 1998.
[10] R. Bro and H. Kiers.
A new eﬃcient method for determining the number of
components in parafac models. Journal of Chemometrics, 17(5):274–286, 2003.
[11] R. Bro, K. Kjeldahl, A. K. Smilde, and H. A. L. Kiers. Cross-validation of com-
ponent models: A critical look at current methods. Analytical and Bioanalytical
Chemistry, 390(5):1241–1251, 2008.
==PAGE:100==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[12] T. T. Brown, J. M. Kuperman, Y. Chung, M. Erhart, C. McCabe, D. J. Hagler,
V. K. Venkatraman, N. Akshoomoﬀ, D. G. Amaral, C. S. Bloss, B. J. Casey,
L. Chang, T. M. Ernst, J. A. Frazier, J. R. Gruen, W. E. Kaufmann, T. Kenet,
D. N. Kennedy, S. S. Murray, E. R. Sowell, T. L. Jernigan, and A. M. Dale.
Neuroanatomical assessment of biological maturity. Current Biology, 22(18):1693–
1698, 2012.
[13] T. Burrel.
Brain boosting:
It’s not just grey matter that matters.
http:
//bergleslab.com/documents/Brainboosting_NewScientist_Feb15.pdf.
Ac-
cessed: 02-05-2018.
[14] J. Carlin. The mni brain and the talairach atlas. http://imaging.mrc-cbu.cam.
ac.uk/imaging/MniTalairach. Accessed: 24-05-2018.
[15] P. Comon, X. Luciani, and A. L. F. De Almeida. Tensor decompositions, alter-
nating least squares and other tales. Journal of Chemometrics, 23(78):393–405,
2009.
[16] N. Dosenbach, B. Nardos, A. Cohen, D. Fair, J. Power, J. Church, S. Nelson,
G. Wig, A. Vogel, C. Lessov-Schlaggar, K. Barnes, J. Dubis, E. Feczko, R. Coal-
son, J. Pruett, D. Barch, S. Petersen, and B. Schlaggar. Prediction of individual
brain maturity using fmri. Science (Washington), 329(5997):1358–1361, Septem-
ber 2010.
[17] J. Giedd, J. Blumenthal, N. Jeﬀries, F. Castellanos, H. Liu, A. Zijdenbos, T. Paus,
A. Evans, and J. Rapoport. Brain development during childhood and adolescence:
a longitudinal mri study. Nature Neuroscience, 2(10):861–863, 1999.
[18] N. Gillis. The why and how of nonnegative matrix factorization. ArXiv eprints,
page 25, 2014.
[19] N. Gillis and F. Glineur. Low-rank matrix approximation with weights or missing
data is np-hard. Siam Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 32(4):1149–
1165, 2011.
[20] N. Gogtay, J. N. Giedd, L. Lusk, K. M. Hayashi, D. Greenstein, A. C. Vaituzis,
T. F. Nugent, D. H. Herman, L. S. Clasen, A. W. Toga, J. L. Rapoport, and P. M.
Thompson. Dynamic mapping of human cortical development during childhood
through early adulthood. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 101(21), May 2004.
[21] M. M. Herting, E. C. Maxwell, C. Irvine, and B. J. Nagel. The impact of sex,
puberty, and hormones on white matter microstructure in adolescents. Cerebral
Cortex, 22(9):1979–1992, 2012.
[22] J. M. Hilbe. Logistic regression. https://www.encyclopediaofmath.org/images/
6/69/Logistic_regression.pdf. Accessed: 26-04-2018.
[23] D. Imperati, S. Colcombe, C. Kelly, A. Di Martino, J. Zhou, F. Xavier Castellanos,
and M. P Milham. Diﬀerential development of human brain white matter tracts.
Plos One, 2017.
[24] T. Jernigan, W. Baare, J. Stiles, and K. Madsen. Postnatal brain development:
Structural imaging of dynamic neurodevelopmental processes. Progress in Brain
Research, 189:77–92, January 2011.
==PAGE:101==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[25] H. Johansen-Berg. Behavioural relevance of variation in white matter microstruc-
ture. Current Opinion in Neurology, 23(4):351–358, 2010.
[26] T. A. Keller and M. A. Just. Altering cortical connectivity: Remediation-induced
changes in the white matter of poor readers. Neuron, 64(5):624–631, 2009.
[27] G. Kesavaraj and S. Sukumaran. A study on classiﬁcation techniques in data
mining. 2013 4th International Conference on Computing, Communications and
Networking Technologies, Icccnt 2013, page 6726842, 2013.
[28] H. A. L. Kiers and I. V. Mechelen. Three-way component analysis: Principles
and illustrative application. Psychological Methods, 6(1):84–110, 2001.
[29] B. Klarborg, K. S. Madsen, M. Vestergaard, A. Skimminge, T. L. Jernigan, and
W. F. C. Baare. Sustained attention is associated with right superior longitudinal
fasciculus and superior parietal white matter microstructure in children. Human
Brain Mapping, 34(12):3216–3232, 2013.
[30] T. G. Kolda and B. W. Bader. Tensor decompositions and applications. Siam
Review, 51(3):455–500, 2009.
[31] S. K. Krogsrud, A. Fjell, C. K. Tamnes, H. Grydeland, L. Mork, P. Due-
Tonnessen, A. Bjornerud, C. Sampaio-Baptista, J. Andersson, H. Johansen-Berg,
and K. B. Walhovd. Changes in white matter microstructure in the developing
brain-a longitudinal diﬀusion tensor imaging study of children from 4 to 11 years
of age. Neuroimage, 124(Part A):473–486, 2016.
[32] C. Lebel and C. Beaulieu.
Longitudinal development of human brain wiring
continues from childhood into adulthood.
The Journal of neuroscience : the
oﬃcial journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 31(30), July 2011.
[33] C. Lebel and S. Deoni. The development of brain white matter microstructure.
Neuroimage, 2018.
[34] C. Lebel, S. Treit, and C. Beaulieu. A review of diﬀusion mri of typical white mat-
ter development from early childhood to young adulthood. NMR in Biomedicine,
page e3778, 2017.
[35] C. Lebel, L. Walker, A. Leemans, L. Phillips, and C. Beaulieu.
Microstruc-
tural maturation of the human brain from childhood to adulthood. Neuroimage,
40(3):1044–1055, 2008.
[36] D. Lee and H. Seung.
Learning the parts of objects by non-negative matrix
factorization. Nature, 401(6755):788–791, 1999.
[37] G.
Lee.
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/90/
Comparison_of_1D_and_2D_interpolation.svg/2000px-Comparison_of_1D_
and_2D_interpolation.svg.png. Accessed: 16-04-2018.
[38] R. K. Lenroot, N. Gogtay, D. K. Greenstein, E. M. Wells, G. L. Wallace, L. S.
Clasen, J. D. Blumenthal, J. Lerch, A. P. Zijdenbos, A. C. Evans, P. M. Thomp-
son, and J. N. Giedd.
Sexual dimorphism of brain developmental trajectories
during childhood and adolescence. NeuroImage, 36(4):1065 – 1073, 2007.
[39] J. Lever, M. Krzywinski, and N. Altman. Classiﬁcation evaluation. Nature Meth-
ods, 13(8):603–604, 2016.
==PAGE:102==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[40] J. Lever, M. Krzywinski, and N. Altman. Logistic regression. Nature Methods,
13(7):541–542, 2016.
[41] K. S. Madsen, T. L. Jernigan, M. Vestergaard, E. L. Mortensen, and W. F. Baare.
Neuroticism is linked to microstructural left-right asymmetry of fronto-limbic ﬁbre
tracts in adolescents with opposite eﬀects in boys and girls. Neuropsychologia,
114:1–10, 2018.
[42] S. W. Menard. Logistic regression, from introductory to advanced concepts and
applications. SAGE, Thousand Oaks, Calif. London, 2010.
[43] K. L. Mills, A.-L. Goddings, M. M. Herting, R. Meuwese, S.-J. Blakemore, E. A.
Crone, R. E. Dahl, B. Guroglu, A. Raznahan, E. R. Sowell, and C. K. Tamnes.
Structural brain development between childhood and adulthood: Convergence
across four longitudinal samples. Neuroimage, 141:273–281, 2016.
[44] S. Mori, S. Introduction to diﬀusion tensor imaging, and higher order models.
Elsevier Science, Burlington, 2. ed. edition, 2013.
[45] M. Mørup. Applications of tensor (multiway array) factorizations and decom-
positions in data mining.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, 1(1):24–40, 2011.
[46] M. Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination Press, 2015.
[47] S. F. V. Nielsen and M. Mørup. Non-negative tensor factorization with missing
data for the modeling of gene expressions in the human brain. Proceedings of the
Ieee International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing (mlsp
2014 ), page 6958919, 2014.
[48] T. Paus. Growth of white matter in the adolescent brain: Myelin or axon? Brain
and Cognition, 72(1):26–35, 2010.
[49] T. Paus, M. Keshavan, and J. N. Giedd. Why do many psychiatric disorders
emerge during adolescence? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9(12):947–957, 2008.
[50] M. N. Schmidt. Function factorization using warped gaussian processes. Pro-
ceedings of the 26th International Conference on Machine Learning, Icml 2009,
382:921–928, 2009.
[51] V. J. Schmithorst, S. K. Holland, and B. J. Dardzinski. Developmental diﬀerences
in white matter architecture between boys and girls.
Human Brain Mapping,
29(6):696–710, 2008.
[52] V. J. Schmithorst and W. Yuan. White matter development during adolescence
as shown by diﬀusion mri. Brain and Cognition, 72(1):16–25, 2010.
[53] J. Schneider.
Cross validation.
https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~schneide/tut5/
node42.html. Accessed: 01-05-2018.
[54] E. Schwartz, E. Cooper, Y. Fan, A. Jawad, C. Chin, J. Nissanov, and D. Hack-
ney. Mri diﬀusion coeﬃcients in spinal cord correlate with axon morphometry.
Neuroreport, 16(1):73–76, 2005.
[55] R. R. Seeley, C. VanPutte, J. Regan, and A. Russo.
Anatomy & physiology.
McGraw-Hill„ 2011.
[56] S. Sigurdsson. Ann:dtu toolbox. http://cogsys.imm.dtu.dk/toolbox/ann/. Ac-
cessed: 24-05-2018.
==PAGE:103==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[57] D. J. Simmonds, M. N. Hallquist, M. Asato, and B. Luna. Developmental stages
and sex diﬀerences of white matter and behavioral development through adoles-
cence: A longitudinal diﬀusion tensor imaging (dti) study. NeuroImage, 92:356 –
368, 2014.
[58] S. M. Smith, M. Jenkinson, H. Johansen-Berg, D. Rueckert, T. E. Nichols, C. E.
Mackay, K. E. Watkins, O. Ciccarelli, M. Z. Cader, P. M. Matthews, and T. E. J.
Behrens. Tract-based spatial statistics: Voxelwise analysis of multi-subject diﬀu-
sion data. Neuroimage, 31(4):1487–1505, 2006.
[59] S. Song, S. Sun, W. Ju, S. Lin, A. Cross, and A. Neufeld. Diﬀusion tensor imaging
detects and diﬀerentiates axon and myelin degeneration in mouse optic nerve after
retinal ischemia. Neuroimage, 20(3):1714–1722, 2003.
[60] S. Song, S. Sun, M. Ramsbottom, C. Chang, J. Russell, and A. Cross. Dysmyeli-
nation revealed through mri as increased radial (but unchanged axial) diﬀusion
of water. Neuroimage, 17(3):1429–1436, 2002.
[61] J. Stiles and T. L. Jernigan. The basics of brain development. Neuropsychology
Review, 20(4):327–348, 2010.
[62] M. Takahashi, J. Ono, K. Harada, M. Maeda, and D. B. Hackney. Diﬀusional
anisotropy in cranial nerves with maturation: Quantitative evaluation with diﬀu-
sion mr imaging in rats. Radiology, 216(3):881–885, 2000.
[63] P.-N. Tan, M. Steinbach, and V. Kumar. Introduction to data mining. Pearson
Education„ 2014.
[64] G. Tomasi and R. Bro. Parafac and missing values. Chemometrics and Intelligent
Laboratory Systems, 75(2):163–180, 2005.
[65] J. Vanschoren, J. N. van Rijn, B. Bischl, and L. Torgo.
Openml: Networked
science in machine learning. SIGKDD Explorations, 15(2):49–60, 2013.
[66] M. Vestergaaard, K. S. Madsen, W. F. C. Baaré, L. R. Ejersbo, C. Gerlach,
A. Skimminge, T. Z. Ramsøe, P. Åkeson, O. B. Paulson, and T. L. Jernigan. White
matter microstructure in superior longitudinal fasciculus assoiated with spatial
working memory performance in children.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
23(9):2135–2146, 2011.
[67] N. Vijayakumar, K. L. Mills, A. Alexander-Bloch, C. K. Tamnes, and S. Whittle.
Structural brain development: A review of methodological approaches and best
practices. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 2017.
[68] Y. Wang, C. Adamson, W. Yuan, M. Altaye, A. Rajagopal, A. W. Byars, and
S. K. Holland. Sex diﬀerences in white matter development during adolescence:
A dti study. Brain Research, 1478:1–15, 2012.
[69] E.
W.
Weisstein.
Gaussian
function.
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/
GaussianFunction.html. Accessed: 24-04-2018.
[70] J. Xu, X. Liu, and Y. Wang. A symmetrical subtraction combined with interpo-
lated values for eliminating scattering from ﬂuorescence eem data. Spectrochimica
Acta Part A-molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 165:1–14, 2016.
[71] G. Zhang. Dti-tk. http://dti-tk.sourceforge.net/pmwiki/pmwiki.php. Ac-
cessed: 24-05-2018.
