==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESIS
Developing Platform Technologies:
Managing the development of Blue light
LED for Health Care and Sports
Author:
Stefano Guzzetti
Supervisors:
Karen Murdock
Jes Broeng
A thesis submitted in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for the degree of Master of Science in Industrial Engineering and Management
in the
Department of Management Engineering
June 2, 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
iii
DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET
Abstract
Department of Management Engineering
Master of Science in Industrial Engineering and Management
Developing Platform Technologies: Managing the development of Blue light
LED for Health Care and Sports
by Stefano Guzzetti
Blue light LED is an innovative technology that is gaining traction due to re-
cent researches upon its effects on the human body. DTU’s Fotonik department is a
cutting-edge player when it comes to blue light LEDs. Multiple applications of the
technology have been created, making blue light a platform technology. By the use
of roadmapping and scenario planning, the development of such technology is an-
alyzed. In particular, the factors inﬂuencing the development trajectory have been
investigated. The research has been carried out by mean of a workshop. The tools
applied have been used to map how the technology is planned to be developed.
Then, the research questions have been addressed by ﬁnding out that
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
v
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Karen Murdock and Jes Broeng, for their
guidance, advice and constructive critiques throughout the entire duration of this
master project in the face of adversity.
Furthermore, I would like to thank my teammates Gustavo Feijóo Carrillo, Mar-
cus Schultz Carstensen, Nicolai Hagelund, Dan Dimitru and Mai Nguyen, for their
participation to the workshop, for the good work done and for the funny moments.
Finally I would like to express my gratitude to my parents and friends, who
supported me during these two years.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
vii
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement and Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Technology and Technology management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Technology management framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Technology Roadmapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Use and Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Scenario Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Framework of analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Research Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Case Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Data Collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
Workshop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.2
Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.3
Desk Research & Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Methodology of Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Case Presentation
23
4.1
Technology background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Health Care Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Sports Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Analysis
27
5.1
Technology-Application Trend Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.1
Technology Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.2
Technology Trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1.3
Competing Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.4
Complementary Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.5
Application Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Scenario Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.1
Trends & Drivers, Importance and Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.2
Scenario Axes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.3
Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2.4
Early Warning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Roadmapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3.1
Future Value Opportunity Scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3.2
Current State
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3.3
Path To Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:8==
viii
5.4
Action Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4.1
Short term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4.2
Medium term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4.3
Long term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Findings
47
6.1
Main Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Strategic Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Limitations & Conclusions
53
A Workshop Templates
57
B
Workshop: Template #1
61
C Workshop: Template #2
65
D Workshop: Template #3
69
E
Workshop: Template #4
75
==PAGE:9==
1
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
As far as business strategy is concerned, it is crucial for any ﬁrm to have a clear and
well deﬁned strategy and to be able to deploy it at any level within the company.
This enables an organization and all its components to move in the same direction
and aim at the same objectives. Thus, business strategy needs to be deployed into a
ﬁrm’s technology base and into how the technology base is managed and used for
fulﬁlling operational tasks and for processes. It is clear that a strategy for technology
is needed. Technology strategy deﬁnes how a ﬁrm approaches the development and
use of technology (Porter, 1985). It is even more relevant for high-tech companies,
given the more strategic role played by the technology base in such organizations.
In general, technology strategy and the overall competitive strategy are funda-
mentally connected. The former is a vital element constituting the latter. Indeed,
deploying technological resources in an effective way contributes in building a
competitive advantage that is sustainable over time.
Ultimately, the effective
deployment of the technology strategy enhances a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial performance
(Porter, 1985).
Furthermore, it is of primary importance that the business strategy is consistent
with the technology policy (i.e. technology strategy). Technology policy is deﬁned
by Adler (1989) as the set of choices ﬁrms make on the acquisition, development and
deployment of technology to aid the achievement of their business strategy goals.
Its consistency with business strategy ensures that an organization’s technological
resources and capabilities are deployed successfully to pursue the business strategy
goals (Zahra and Covin, 1993).
Technology policy certainly represents a viable mean to promote successful perfor-
mances in companies. Although the inﬂuence of technology policy on performances
is not always consistent, ﬁrms may still greatly beneﬁt coming from the develop-
ment and pursue of a well-deﬁned technology policy. Therefore, managers should
pay close attention to the design of the development and implementation processes
of the technology policy into the organization. This is needed to ensure ﬁt between
technological choices and business strategy (Zahra and Covin, 1993).
In addition, technology strategy is also related to innovation. Innovation represents
the way a company adapt to changes within the market, industry and technology.
Innovating is fundamental to be continuously competitive and to survive over time.
Technology strategy also embodies strategical decisions towards technological inno-
vation. Although, business success cannot be guaranteed by the only technological
==PAGE:10==
2
Chapter 1. Introduction
innovation (Teece, 2010).
Nevertheless, technological change has a fundamental
function in competition and forecasting the evolution path of a technology is of
extremely importance to ﬁrms, since it enables them to anticipate such change and
improve their position (Porter, 1985).
Concerning the relationship between technology and innovation, it is clear that,
especially nowadays, startup companies have a role in innovating. On the role of
entrepreneurship and innovation Veeraraghavan (2009) stated that they are “two
sides of a coin”. Technology innovation is often achieved by high-tech startups,
which have had disrupting effects in multiple industries in the last decades. In order
for this innovation to be successful, technology-driven entrepreneurs and startups
had to face the process of taking a technology application, develop it and bring it to
market, adopting a trajectory for technology development and its application, hence
a technology strategy. Given the extent a high-tech startup rely on technology and
given the risky nature of such ventures, managing technologies is therefore crucial
to such companies. It may be even more vital to them than it is to large ﬁrms, since
they don’t rely on a large technological portfolio.
Thus, it is clear how signiﬁcant and strategic technology can be for new ventures
and established ﬁrms. Thus, the need to manage technology in organizations is
strong. With this regards, it is necessary that executives know how to manage the
technological dimension properly. Indeed, management has to plan and manage
how relevant technologies can be identiﬁed and selected, with the objective of
acquiring technological capabilities and exploiting them and concurrently protect
them to obtain a competitive advantage from it.
With respect to this research, technology management concepts and tools will be
used to plan the development trajectory of a platform technology in two university-
based projects and future spin-outs.
It will be useful to understand how such
technology is managed through the two study cases. First of all, the concept of
platform technology is deﬁned as a technology or a group of technologies that can
be used as a base technology for multiple applications.
A simple example of a
platform technology can be taken from the automotive industry: different types or
motor vehicles are built on top of the same chassis. In this case, the chassis works
as a platform technology that enables different types of vehicle, the applications, to
be built. The applications will differ from each other since what is built on top the
platform varies for each application. It would be possible for example to use the
same chassis to build an economy car, a luxury car, a convertible and a mini van
under the same or different brand. So, applications of a platform technology can
vary in form and market.
It is interesting to research and understand how this kind of technologies are man-
aged, in terms of deciding what trajectory should be followed in the development of
the different applications of the same base technology. The problem questions and
the research questions are presented in the next sections. Then, a literature review
concerning the theoretical aspects of the technology management tools comprising
the framework of analysis are introduced. The research methodology is illustrated
in the third chapter, while the description of the case studies is done in the fourth
one. In the ﬁfth chapter the empirical data collected through the analysis will be
collected. The ﬁndings of the research are presented in the sixth chapter, with a rec-
ommendation of the strategy to be followed during the technology development.
==PAGE:11==
1.2. Problem Statement and Research Questions
3
Finally, limitations are addressed and conclusions are drawn.
1.2
Problem Statement and Research Questions
The case study took place at The Technical University of Denmark (DTU) at the
department, DTU Fotonik.
Blue light LED technology allowed the organization
to exploit the blue light LED technology for many novel applications. Although
LED technology itself does not represent an emerging technology, its applications
are innovative. The two study cases that will be used as empirical evidence for the
analysis concern the application of such technology in the health care sector and
in the sports sector. The cases will be further described in chapter 4. However, the
problem of handling platform technologies is not speciﬁc to the cases of analysis
and it lies in the way platforms are developed and applied to create new products or
services. Indeed, the trajectory a technology can follow throughout its development
can depend on many factors. A deeper understanding of the factors underneath the
technology development dynamics is needed. It is crucial to know which factors are
the most relevant when making strategic decisions about technology development.
In the case of platform technologies, multiple applications of the same technology
will have to go through different development path at some point in time. Hence,
the decision-making process lying behind the path of the technology development
course has a high importance, given the impact of technology on organizations such
as startups and on their competitive advantage. This decision-making process is
inﬂuenced by the people involved in the technology development. In particular,
people’s personal background in terms of work experience, events, interests and
education form the prior knowledge that inﬂuences the selection of the market, the
way it is served and the technology application (i.e. the solution) to solve customer
problems (Shane, 2000; Venkataraman, 1997). For these reasons, knowing the most
inﬂuencing factors determining the development path will help to handle them
and, when possible, control them for a successful outcome.
The research questions that this research aims to answer are the following:
• Does the technology features, in particular having multiple application possi-
bilities, determine development trajectory?
• What are the deciding factors that inﬂuence the outcome of technology devel-
opment?
• How can these factors be managed for successful outcome?
This research questions will be answered by applying tools and mechanisms of anal-
ysis such as trend analysis, scenario planning, technology roadmap and action plan-
ning. These mechanisms help deﬁning a path for the development of the different
applications of the platform technology. Their combination works as a funnel for the
design and development of an action plan. Through their use, the factor determining
the technological course and outcome will be identiﬁed and analyzed.
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
5
Chapter 2
Literature Review
This chapter will provide the theoretical basis to the research. Literature, previ-
ous application and related work have been read, analyzed and critically reviewed.
Then, the framework of analysis is presented.
2.1
Technology and Technology management
Phaal, Farrukh and Probert (2004) demonstrated that technology can be deﬁned as
a speciﬁc kind of knowledge, which has the peculiarity of being applied and being
focused on the know-how possessed by an organization. Even though technology
is a form of knowledge, it may be incorporated into physical artifacts. Although it is
also usually connected to engineering and science, another important piece of what
can be called technology lies in the processes that permit its application effectively.
These two different aspects of technology can be addressed distinctively as hard
technology and soft technology.
According to the deﬁnition of technology that
has been given, it can further be distinguished in explicit and tacit technological
knowledge. The explicit one has been expressed and communicated or embedded
in a product or physical artifact, while the tacit one is difﬁcult to express and convey
and it relies on practice and training.
According to the deﬁnition proposed by The European Institute of Technology and
Management (EITIM) and mentioned in Phaal, Farrukh and Probert (2004), “Tech-
nology management addresses the effective identiﬁcation, selection, acquisition,
development, exploitation and protection of technologies (product, process and
infrastructural) needed to achieve, maintain [and grow] a market position and busi-
ness performance in accordance with the company’s objectives”. This deﬁnitions
embodies the most relevant themes in technology management. Firstly, it links the
company’s resources with its goals. This link is of critical importance and it needs
to be established and maintained, which represent a constant challenge for many
organizations. This can be achieved through a set of tools and processes supporting
knowledge management. In this context, it is relevant to establish effective commu-
nication and understanding between the commercial and technological function in
a company. Secondly, the deﬁnition includes the ﬁve fundamental processes, which
are part of the technology management process framework illustrated in ﬁgure
2.1, which are: identiﬁcation, selection, acquisition, exploitation and protection of
technology.
Cetindamar, Phaal and Probert (2009) highlighted the dynamic nature of technology
management as a consequence of the the opportunities and challenges constantly
created by technological changes. For this reason, technology management is seen
==PAGE:14==
6
Chapter 2. Literature Review
FIGURE 2.1: The technology management process framework.
as the capability to exploit the use of technical knowledge to improve existing tech-
nologies, develop products and processes and to create new knowledge and skills in
response to the competitive business environment (Jin and von Zedtwitz, 2008).
2.1.1
Technology management framework
A more comprehensive framework for technology management elaborated by
Phaal, Farrukh and Probert (2004) is displayed in ﬁgure 2.2.
The presented
framework consists in a set of interrelated elements.
The ﬁrst element is the
technology base, which represents the knowledge, people and processes that allows
an organization to operate and provide products or services within an industry.
Another element is the circular process of technology management, previously
presented in ﬁgure 2.1. The technology management process is closely related to
the technology base and it is incorporated into strategy, innovation and operations,
which are part of the framework. These elements are the core business processes,
meaning that are the most crucial for a company to function and survive over
time. Indeed, technology management is important for carrying out other business
processes, such as innovation and new product development, strategic planning,
and operations management, since those basic activities are needed to sustain the
continuous ﬂow of products and services to the market (Phaal, Farrukh and Probert,
2004).
Furthermore, technology management activities might be carried out in any busi-
ness process or department at any level in the ﬁrm. These business processes are
sub-processes included within the macro-processes, namely operations, innovation
and strategy. The performing of technology management activities supports the
connection between the technological perspective and the commercial perspective,
which are part of the framework.
A further element of the framework is the
underlying context in which a ﬁrm operates, which is represented by the organi-
zation and the environment. Thus, technology management is affected by both the
internal and external context, in relation to the organization’s structure, culture and
infrastructure, and the organization’s business environment (Cetindamar, Phaal
and Probert, 2009).
==PAGE:15==
2.2. Technology Roadmapping
7
The ﬁnal element of the framework is the knowledge ﬂow that is established
between the ﬁrm’s commercial and technological perspectives (Phaal, Farrukh and
Probert, 2004). The right balance between market requirements (pull mechanisms)
and technology capabilities (push mechanisms) must be achieved and maintained
(Cetindamar, Phaal and Probert, 2009).
In addition, time is an essential dimension within the framework alongside all
the above-mentioned elements of the framework.
Indeed, elements such as the
environment and the organization are dynamic by nature, they evolve over time
and it is crucial to synchronize the technological capabilities with the business
requirements (Cetindamar, Phaal and Probert, 2009).
Eventually, it is also worth to mention that the technology management framework
is applicable to all ﬁrms regardless to their size (Cetindamar, Phaal and Probert,
2009). This feature makes it suitable to the study case analyzed in this research,
which has the perspective of a startup company.
FIGURE 2.2: The technology management framework (Phaal, Far-
rukh and Probert, 2004).
2.2
Technology Roadmapping
2.2.1
Background
Technology roadmapping (TRM), is deﬁned as a technique for supporting plan-
ning and technology management, which is particularly effective in linking the
organizational objective and vision, the technological resources and the external
dynamic environment (Phaal, Farrukh and Probert, 2004).
The TRM technique
and its approach towards technology management and innovation were originally
developed at Corning and Motorola on the turn of 1980s. After that, it has been used
increasingly by both other companies, such as Philips, SIA, Lucent Technologies,
and by other organizations, e.g. consortia and governmental organizations (Phaal,
Farrukh and Probert, 2004).
TRM has revealed to be successful in supporting
different organizational goals, such as strategy, innovation and policy development
and deployment (Phaal et al., 2011). Furthermore, the evolution and development
==PAGE:16==
8
Chapter 2. Literature Review
of complex systems ca be mapped thanks to the structured approach given by
the TRM techniques. For these reasons, TRM is broadly adopted at both ﬁrm and
sector levels (Phaal et al., 2011). Phaal and Muller (2009) stated that roadmap acts
as a strategic lens to look at a complex system, since its condensed visual layout,
which provides a single-page overview combining all key outlooks. This supports
the strategic dialogue, which is needed to identify risks and challenges and to
develop general agreement and actions alignment. The purpose of the roadmap
framework as a managerial tool is to support communication and understanding
by representing in a structured way all the several interrelated point of views on a
system’s evolution. With regards to technology management, its aim is also to line
up scientiﬁc works with sector trends (Phaal and Muller, 2009).
There is not a ﬁxed format or template for a roadmap, indeed it is a ﬂexible tool.
Roadmaps can vary depending on the user’s purpose and perspective, which can
be technology push, market pull or a balanced perspective between the two. The
different and speciﬁc types of purposes, formats and uses of the roadmap will be
discussed in the subsection 2.2.2. Generally, a roadmap is a time-based chart, con-
stituted by a multiplicity of layers, which commonly incorporate both technological
(technology push) and commercial (market pull) perspectives, as illustrated in ﬁgure
2.3 (Phaal, Farrukh and Probert, 2004). A roadmap consists of two key elements: the
information-based structure, describing the system’s key elements (i.e. the content),
and the graphical layer, obtain by choosing layout, style and colors to display the
roadmap and its content with the aim of communication (Phaal and Muller, 2009).
This framework exploits the time-based structure to represent and develop strategic
plans, and it is also a useful tool communicate those plans. In particular, it allows
organizations to pursue and achieve aims in terms of evolution and development of
markets, technology and products (Phaal, Farrukh and Probert, 2004).
FIGURE 2.3: The generic technology roadmap proposed by EIRMA
(Phaal, Farrukh and Probert, 2004).
2.2.2
Use and Application
As previously stated, roadmaps are not ﬁxed, but their content and representation
varies, depending on their format, use and purpose. In Phaal, Farrukh and Probert
(2004), the authors gathered and examined a set of roadmaps, looking at their struc-
ture and at their content. From this examination, they have classiﬁed the different
ﬁndings on the basis of the graphical format and the intended purpose, and further
==PAGE:17==
2.2. Technology Roadmapping
9
clustered them into 16 areas. The authors have identiﬁed eight different types of
roadmap, grouped in accordance to intended purposes, which are the following:
• Product planning
• Service/capability planning
• Strategic planning
• Long-range planning
• Knowledge asset planning
• Program planning
• Process planning
• Integration planning
The remaining eight are clustered on the basis of their graphical format:
• Multiple layers
• Bars
• Tables
• Graphs
• Pictorial representations
• Flow charts
• Single layer
• Text
As it can be seen, there is no accepted standards for elaborating a roadmap and the
approach needs to be adapted to ﬁt the situation (Phaal, Farrukh and Probert, 2004).
Moreover, in literature can be found many different uses of the technology
roadmapping tool approach. Phaal, Farrukh and Probert (2004) illustrates how “the
general principles of the approach have been used to develop multiorganization (or
collaborative) roadmaps”, through the application of the so called T-plan fast-start
approach. A standard approach has been developed, which speciﬁcally aims at
supporting product planning. This standard T-plan process is workshop-based and
it consists of four workshop, during which the different layers of the roadmap are
deﬁned and then combined on a time-based roadmap.
Furthermore, it is also displayed how this approach and application has to be
customized to ﬁt the users’ needs and to pursue all the different purposes listed
above. This customization is connected to the following elements of the roadmap-
ping approach: time dimension, that can be tailored in terms of time horizon, time
scale and time intervals; layers, which always address the know-why, know-what
and know-how, but can vary to suit a speciﬁc situation or goal; annotation with
additional information, e.g. linkages, graphic tools and supplementary information;
process, to be adapted to resources and goals of organizations. As a result of a this
==PAGE:18==
10
Chapter 2. Literature Review
ﬂexible approach, a generalized roadmap has been elaborated. To this respect, it
has been presented a generalized future-oriented roadmapping framework, shown
in ﬁgure 2.4 (Phaal et al., 2011). When customizing the roadmapping approach,
planning results to be crucial to achieve the purpose. Criticalities have been found
in setting boundaries to the process, in keeping it updated and in the roll-out
phase(Phaal, Farrukh and Probert, 2004).
FIGURE
2.4:
The
generalized
framework
for
future-oriented
roadmapping (Phaal et al., 2011).
Phaal, Farrukh and Probert (2004) also shows the application of the roadmapping
fast-start approach in a disruptive technology trend context on two cases, a single
ﬁrm and a group of companies. In the individual ﬁrm case, the standard T-plan
approach has been used for strategic planning since 1998 and lately to integrate
product and platform technologies. At the sector level, the application of fast start
TRM provided multiple stakeholders with framework and resource common to
everybody to reach a share and collective purpose, as the second case demonstrated.
A further development step of strategic roadmapping has been the elaboration
of another approach, called S-Plan. It is a stable process that has been designed
for the support of general strategic assessment and for the investigation of novel
strategic business opportunities. The S-Plan method is appropriate for the strategy
and innovation processes as an initial exploratory step, potentially followed by the
standard T-plan. Although identifying and exploring new business opportunities
is the primary goal, this method provides other beneﬁts, such as improvements
in communications, making with a higher degree of consensus, supporting the
development of strategy and innovation processes and team building. As well as
the T-Plan, the S-Plan is performed by the means of workshops. This roadmapping
process has been applied in more than 20 study cases in several sectors.
These
sectors were, among others, packaging, technical consulting and contract research,
telecommunications,
aerospace,
automotive, materials,
computational science
(Phaal, Farrukh and Probert, 2007).
Phaal et al. (2016) elaborated and illustrated a revised version of the strategic
roadmap template. After having implemented the multilayered roadmap shown in
ﬁgure 2.4 in multiple technology and innovation strategy workshop, the authors
focused on the mediating role of the roadmapping template during interactive
strategy workshops. The goal of the revised template is the support to strategic
==PAGE:19==
2.2. Technology Roadmapping
11
innovation through multidisciplinary workshops, which are one of the methods
through which empirical evidence have been generated and framed during the
research process (see chapter 3 for the methodology).The novel template (presented
in ﬁgure A.3) consists in the use of process guidance in place of a facilitator, with the
aim of providing a template suited for self-facilitation. This has been achieved by
adding two elements into the roadmap structure: the ﬁrst one is the process steps
to be followed while using the roadmapping tool and the template, which have
been made clearly explicit; the second one is non-prescriptive prompts about the
process and the content that serve as a guide and checklist for ﬁlling the roadmap
chart. Both this modiﬁcations are meant to replace the role the facilitator has in
guiding a team throughout a workshop. One of the reasons why this template has
been developed is that a roadmapping expert in needed as a lead facilitator in a
workshop.
This is usually a disadvantage for smaller companies, which cannot
access such expert facilitator and are discouraged from using the template.
By
elaborating a self-facilitating template, it is possible for any multidisciplinary team
to carry out a workshop and to use the template to elaborate the innovation and
technology strategy.
The TRM future-oriented approach to strategic planning not only has been applied
within the industry, but also in academic research. Zhang et al. (2016) used the
TRM approach as the ﬁnal output of the research method, blending “both historical
data-oriented analytic results and forecasting insights”, in order to map big data
research.
The roadmap has been elaborated with the help of domain experts
through interviews, workshops and seminars to achieve insights on technology
evolution. Moreover, it has been found that modeling through TRM helped gener-
ating competitive technical intelligence.
Haddad and Maldonado (2017) showed how the roadmapping approach has been
also used at the sector level to map the creation and development of a non-existing
automotive sector. The tool has been used slightly differently in this case, since it
has been combined with the ’functions approach’, meaning that the different layers
of the TRM represented the different system functions within the sector/industry.
However, the roadmap gave a visual representation of the sector’s evolution over
time, focusing in the generation and diffusion of technology.
Another application of the TRM at the sector level has been done by Phaal et al.
(2011), which used it as a framework to map industrial emergence. The roadmap-
ping has been adapted to illustrate and communicate the whole lifecycle of an
industry, with a focus on the graphical format of the roadmap, used for story-telling
purpose.
Similarly, TRM at the industry level has been used to support R&D programs, more
speciﬁcally as a planning process driven by market needs for having a portfolio
of technologies able to satisfy a set of market/product needs (Cho, Yoon and Kim,
2016).
Studies on the scenario-based roadmapping also underlined the fact that the
characteristics of the roadmap layers (market layer and technology/resources layer)
are different: market involves external scenarios, while technology involves internal
ones. This led to the conclusion that different planning perspectives are needed (Lee
==PAGE:20==
12
Chapter 2. Literature Review
and Geum, 2017).
Bildosola et al. (2017) used the TRM to depict emerging technologies, using it as a
tool for the integration of all the knowledge on technology evolution.
As it can be seen, the roadmapping tool and approach has been widely used at ﬁrm
and sector level, with application in different ﬁelds and different purposes conﬁrm-
ing its adaptability and scalability. Furthermore, roadmapping is frequently used in
multidisciplinary workshops aiming at setting a strategy for technology and innova-
tion in tech companies. Nevertheless, some elements in the roadmap are ﬁxed, such
as the time-based characteristic and the layers, connecting market and resources.
2.3
Scenario Planning
The scenario planning technique has been originally developed and used for
military planning throughout World War II. Later, it has been slowly adopted by
the companies and organizations.
RoyalDutch/Shell has been the ﬁrst to do so
in the 1970s, since scenario planning has been driven by the high uncertainty of
oil prices. Since its ﬁrst business application, scenario planning has been increas-
ingly used with several purposes: as an input to strategic planning, to improve
decision-making in investments, and to deal with competitive actions. Generally,
scenario planning has been pictured as a mean for rehearsing the future.
Its
process stimulates creative thinking to make predictions about the future so that
organizations are prepared to face the challenges connected to it.
Furthermore,
scenario planning enables the investigation of multiple uncertainties concurrently
and it is associated with objective analysis and subjective interpretation.
These
characteristics make scenario planning useful in circumstances where the level of
uncertainty and change is high (Garvin and Levesque, 2005).
With regards to the different scenario planning techniques, the approach pro-
posed by Garvin and Levesque (2005) is adopted, which is now illustrated. The
components constituting scenario planning are presented in ﬁgure 2.5.
Firstly,
key focal issues are addressed and deﬁned: focal issues are relevant forthcoming
decisions or strategic uncertainties, which have an high impact on the organization
(e.g. the evolution of technology). Secondly, driving forces are identiﬁed. This is
done by researching the main themes and trends deeply affecting and inﬂuencing
the focal issue. In most of the cases these driving forces can be grouped in this
categories: social dynamics, economics, politics and technology.
These can be
identiﬁed by using PESTLE analysis (Oliver and Parrett, 2017), which also adds
legal and environmental drivers, if relevant. Driving forces are then distinguished
between the predetermined ones, which are nearly inevitable and unlikely to
change, and the uncertain ones. Thirdly, the uncertain driving forces are ranked to
deﬁne their importance. The ranking takes into account the degree of uncertainty
and the relevance and impact on the focal issue, thus on the organization itself.
Then, a scenario framework is created, where the most critical uncertainties are
combined as the axis of a 2x2 matrix. Each axis (uncertainty) has polar cases at
the two extremes, to demonstrate clearly contrasting environments (Oliver and
Parrett, 2017). After the framework is set, each one of the four quadrants of the
matrix represents a different scenario, which is the result of the combination of
extreme outcomes connected to the uncertainties. The next step is to enrich the
==PAGE:21==
2.3. Scenario Planning
13
scenarios by describing them through coherent and consistent narratives. Then, the
implications of each future scenario related to the organization and to the focal issue
are identiﬁed. Strengths and vulnerabilities are highlighted and options to address
gaps are determined. Finally, early warning signals are elaborated, so that these can
indicate what scenario is most likely to emerge.
The components are all the steps to be made to effectively plan scenarios. Both
Garvin and Levesque (2005) and Oliver and Parrett (2017) showed how the scenario
planning components form a process that is able to generate distinct scenarios.
FIGURE 2.5: Overview of the scenario planning components (Garvin
and Levesque, 2005).
Moreover, Ringland and préfacier (1998) offered several examples and case studies
on the adoption of scenario planing by companies as a support tool for strategic
planning in contexts characterized by high uncertainty, be it technology-wise or
market-wise. Among others, it has been used to build scenarios concerning: the
effect of new and emerging technologies (e.g.
internet) on the market by Cable
& Wireless, a British telecommunication company; the future of the European
IT industry by ECRC, a former research center; technology adoption to support
product opportunities evaluation by Krone, a component manufacturer for the
telecommunication industry; corporate strategy development by Shell, an oil & gas
multinational company which, as stated above, was the ﬁrst one to use scenario
planning and has, since then, integrated it in its company’s processes.
Another example has been provided by Oliver and Parrett (2017), which illustrated
the scenario planning process by means of a case study: the scenario planning tool
has been applied by a leading UK media planning agency to create a long-term
corporate strategy in relation to YouTube, the media company. The media agency
perceived the high uncertainty level of the business environments due to its fast
changes. Within this context, the key issue which was considered to be of strategic
importance, related to YouTube’s role in the UK media industry in the next 10 years.
The scenario planning process was carried out through a workshop. Participants
to the workshop where chosen among seniors who were holding operational and
planning positions within the agency. They were belonging to different departments
and had signiﬁcant knowledge about the media industry in UK and about YouTube,
it operations and strategy.
==PAGE:22==
14
Chapter 2. Literature Review
It can be seen from the numerous examples and study cases that scenario planning
has been widely used by companies and organizations to delineate probable future
contexts with the aim of supporting decision making and strategy creation. It is often
carried out by means of a workshop conducted with the participation of a multidis-
ciplinary team, as shown in Oliver and Parrett (2017); Ringland and préfacier (1998).
2.4
Framework of analysis
The theoretical concepts and elements presented in the previous sections form the
analytical framework utilized for the analysis and investigation performed during
the research activity. These elements have been used in practice in the form of visual
tools during workshops as described in section 3.4. Through this process of data
generation and thanks to the implementation of the above-mentioned theoretical
concepts in the form of templates, relevant empirical evidence have been collected.
Indeed, as far as the research questions and the analysis are concerned, the frame-
work consisting in scenario planning, roadmapping and action planning, offered
the opportunity to understand what inﬂuences and determines the development of
a platform technology. Through these means it has been possible to elaborate a tech-
nology strategy, through the generation of a roadmap and an action plan, concerning
the development of such technology in accordance to the technology management
and innovation principles. The tools resulted in being very powerful and meaning-
ful when combined. Although technology intensive innovation is challenging due to
high uncertainty and complexity, “conceptual frameworks, tools and methods such
as roadmapping, portfolio matrices and scenario planning are used to support the
management of technology and innovation activities” (Phaal et al., 2016). Further-
more, the templates adopted acted as a funnel with the ultimate purpose of elaborat-
ing a path for technology’s management and development in the long term. It starts
by looking at technological trends and applications in the long term; then drawing
scenarios based on the most critical trends, so leaving out those having less impact;
one scenario is chosen and a roadmapping is then generated to set the technologi-
cal trajectory to be followed in relation to the chosen scenario; ﬁnally an action plan
summarizes the outcome produced with the previous tools into the list of activities
to be put in place to realize what planned. It can be seen how the process starts
from a high level trends and drivers analysis and it gets more and more focused,
reaching the deﬁnition of a roadmap to achieve a technological vision, thus acting
like a funnel. This process, the concepts behind it and their application to the study
case allow this research to underline what drives the development trajectory of this
platform technology.
==PAGE:23==
15
Chapter 3
Methodology
3.1
Research Strategy
The main research method chosen to investigate how platform technologies evolve
and develop is case study research. Case study research strategy has been chosen
since it was the most suitable, given the research circumstances. Case study research
is appropriate to the research questions, since the questions are explanatory. Fur-
thermore, the suitability of case study research also depends on the degree of control
over behavioural events from the investigator. In this situation, the investigator has
no control or inﬂuence over the events determining the evolving of the case and the
phenomenon studied. Another characteristic of this research that drove the choice
of a research strategy based on case study is the fact that it focuses on contempo-
rary events. Investigating platform technologies and understanding the phenomena
governing its development into a set of different commercial applications is an ac-
tivity that focuses almost uniquely on contemporary events. Indeed, case study has
been deﬁned as an empirical investigation of a contemporary phenomenon within
its real-life context, in particular when there are not clearly evident boundaries be-
tween the phenomenon and the context (Yin, 1994). For all these reasons, it is clear
that case study constitutes the most appropriate research strategy to be pursued.
3.2
Case Selection
The case selected for the research is a platform technology currently developed and
applied by DTU in various projects. The platform technology is the blue light tech-
nology enabled by the use of LEDs. Besides LEDs emitting blue light, the basic LED
technology already represents a platform technology. LEDs have been used in many
different application serving different markets. Some of these applications are, for
instance: headlamps and daytime running lamps in the automotive industry; grow
lights for growing plants when sunlight is missing; light bulbs for general lighting
purpose; digital displays for TV screens and computer monitors; and outdoor light-
ing. As long as blue light is concerned, blue LEDs are not a new technology, since
they have been ﬁrst developed some decades ago. Although, blue LEDs have mostly
been used in combination with a phosphor coating to obtain a white light source to
be used for general lighting. Only recently LEDs have been used for the emission
of blue light, since the effects of blue light on humans have been discovered. It has
been used in some commercial application, such as: Philips HUE, a lamp to improve
the mood and the natural sleeping pattern; and lighting devices for the treatment
of skin damages and seasonal affective disorder (SAD). Different blue light LEDs
applications are also being developed at DTU within the Fotonik department. For
==PAGE:24==
16
Chapter 3. Methodology
this reason, it is clear how blue light LEDs can be considered a platform technol-
ogy. The case of study for this research project is comprises two projects, involved
in the development of applications of such technology. One project is applying the
technology to the health care and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, while the other
one uses blue light for perfromance enhancement connected to sports and e-sports.
More on the projects will be discussed in chapter 4. These two projects are going
through a development phase with the purpose of making a viable product, getting
traction and spin out in order to bring technological innovation to the market. This
study case involves different stakeholders such as:
• Team leaders: Jes Broeng, serial high-tech entrepreneur having co-founded
ﬁve startups, photonics scientist, professor of innovation at DTU, mentor and
keynote speaker concerning entrepreneurship and university spin-outs; Paul
Michael Petersen, professor, research group leader at DTU Fotonik, diode
lasers and LED system expert; Ngoc Mai Nguyen, Microbiologist, PhD gradu-
ate and graduate student instructor at UC Berkeley.
• Team members: Nicolai Hagelund, master student in photonics engineering at
DTU; Marcus Schultz Carstensen, master student in physics and nanotechnol-
ogy at DTU; Gustavo Feijóo Carillo, master graduate in electrical engineering
at DTU; Dan Dimitru, master student in industrial engineering and manage-
ment at DTU; and Stefano Guzzetti, master student in industrial engineering
and management at DTU.
• The University of Copenhagen and Rigshopsitalet, as partners for testing and
medical validation. A collaboration has been established with the following
people: Gitte Moos Knudsen, a translational neurobiologist and clinical neu-
rologist, leader of the Neurobiology Research Unit (NRU) at Rigshospitalet, Di-
rector of the Center for Integrated Molecular Brain Imaging (Cimbi) and Cen-
ter for Experimental Medicine Neuropharmacology (NeuroPharm); Kamilla
Miskowiak, professor of cognitive neuropsychiatry and leader the Neurocog-
nition and Emotion in Affective Disorders (NEAD) Group based at the Psy-
chiatric Centre Copenhagen, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet;
Steen Gregers Hasselbalch, professor of cognitive neurology and dementia,
consultant neurologist, clinical professor and research director at the Danish
Dementia Research Center (DDRC).
• National Videnskabsetisk Komité, The National Committee on Health Re-
search Ethics in Denmark.
• Food and Drug Administration and European Union for conformity with Eu-
ropean and US laws.
• Alzheimerforeningen, the Danish Alzheimer’s association.
• Team Danmark, as partner for the sports application project.
Furthermore, the choice itself of this DTU based case study allows a smoother data
collection process, given the direct contact with stakeholders and participation in the
project.
==PAGE:25==
3.3. Data Collection
17
3.3
Data Collection
Case study research is a qualitative method and qualitative data have been gathered
during the research. The activity of gathering data has been done in various ways.
3.3.1
Workshop
Workshop has been the main data collection method. It has been held over two
sessions. During the workshop, relevant technology management tools have been
used and applied to the case. The tools consists of ﬁve different templates, which
are further illustrated in section 3.4. The templates have been ﬁlled collectively and
all the participants contributed to the content and data generated. As stated above,
the workshop activities have been split into two sessions held approximately three
weeks apart. The content and the participants of the workshop were as shown in
table below.
Session #1
Content: technology-application trend assessment and scenario
planning.
Participants: Jes Broeng, Nicolai Hagelund, Marcus Schultz
Carstensen, Gustavo Feijóo Carillo, Dan Dimitru and Stefano
Guzzetti.
Session #2
Content: roadmapping, and action planning.
Participants: Jes Broeng, Ngoc Mai Nguyen, Nicolai Hagelund,
Marcus Schultz Carstensen, Gustavo Feijóo Carillo, Dan Dim-
itru and Stefano Guzzetti.
TABLE 3.1: Contents and participants of the workshops.
The data generated during the workshop reﬂect the believing and vision of those
participating in it. Participants to a different degree possess relevant knowledge
about the case of study, given their activities in the projects and their background
and capabilities, spanning from neurobiology, business development, to technology
development, prototyping and entrepreneurship among others. Moreover, it needs
to be said that since my active participation as a researcher and team member, there
was nobody who assumed the role of a facilitator during the workshop.
3.3.2
Observations
Observations have been another method that has been used to prepare and execute
data collection.
In the ﬁrst place, observations have been carried out at DTU’s
Executive MBA (EMBA), Master in Management of Technology, over a two days
period.
The EMBA class is made of professionals with expertise from different
industries and ﬁelds with leading managerial positions and years of working
experience. The students have applied the same tools that have been used during
the workshop and they applied those tools on the same cases. The observations
have been particularly useful to understand how those tools have been applied.
However, the students were not familiar with the study cases and most of the
==PAGE:26==
18
Chapter 3. Methodology
data produced was not useful. Although, some data served as an input for further
elaboration during the workshop.
Furthermore, as a team member, the observations of the team in action while devel-
oping the technology were very useful for data collection and for the achievement of
an overview on the project and the technological aspects. Although, all the informa-
tion gathered through these observations ﬂowed into the workshop and have been
an input to stimulate the group discussion, hence generating valuable data.
3.3.3
Desk Research & Documents
Desk research has also been a mean for generating data by gathering information
and knowledge about technologies and trends.
Data has also been retrieved from documents, particularly with respect to knowl-
edge about the technology and its functioning. The different types of documents
that have been investigated are books, academic articles and master thesis. Docu-
ments have been particularly useful to get some technical knowledge. Although the
acquired knowledge on the technical matter was quite basic, it revealed to be useful
since enabled the investigator to have a more comprehensive approach to the case.
3.4
Methodology of Analysis
The analysis has been conducted through the use of four templates (i.e. tools) for
technology management. The templates are listed below in the same order they
have been used:
1. technology-application trend assessment,
2. scenario 2040,
3. roadmapping,
4. action planning.
The templates are demonstrated in the appendix A.
Technology-Application Trend Assessment
The ﬁrst template (see ﬁgure A.1) is comprised of six steps:
1. Technology trend: a short title is given to the main technology trend, that is the
brain-tech trend.
2. Technology description: the development up-to-date of the blue light LED
technology are described.
3. Technology trends: the evolution of the brain-tech trend is mapped over three
time horizons. The ﬁrst horizon is about sustaining trends, the second one
concerns disruptive technology trends and the third one transformative trends.
Identiﬁed trends goes from the closest ones, sustaining the current state-of-the-
art of the brain-tech trend, to the farthest ones, which transform it completely.
==PAGE:27==
3.4. Methodology of Analysis
19
4. Competing technologies: current and future technical solutions competing
with blue light.
5. Complementary technologies and assets: other related developments and
technologies that can be important for the success of blue light technology de-
velopment.
6. Application context: the applications enabled by the blue light technology and
by the evolution of brain-tech over the sustaining, disruptive and transforma-
tive horizons are deﬁned. Together with the applications, the market impacted
by those applications are also deﬁned.
Through this template, the technological environment surrounding the blue light
technology is mapped over the long term. Blue light is part of the brain-tech trend
that arose recently, which consists in technology applied to the brain thanks to ad-
vancements in neurobiology, such as brain-computer interface and deep brain stim-
ulation through neurostimulators like electrodes. The template allows to map the
evolution of such trend over the time and it gives a good overview of related tech-
nologies that could compete or complement blue light. Then, by matching the aris-
ing trends in brain-tech and the technology (both blue light and complementary
technologies), potential technological applications and markets are deﬁned. This
way, a big picture of the blue light technology, the whole brain-tech trend and future
potential applications has been achieved.
Scenario 2040
The planning of the transformative scenario is done by using the second template
(shown in ﬁgure A.2). Again, it is made of six steps:
1. Trends and drivers: those relevant to blue light and to the brain-tech trend are
brainstormed. Trends already identiﬁed from the last template are also taken
into consideration. However, trends and drivers of any kind are considered,
such as legal, economic, environmental, political, social and so forth.
2. Importance: the identiﬁed trends and drivers are ranked by importance on the
basis of the impact they will have on blue light application and brain technolo-
gies. The rank given can be high, medium or low.
3. Uncertainty: Again, trends are ranked by their uncertainty, receiving a score
that can be high, medium or low. Uncertainty in this case is intended as the
unpredictability of the occurrence of events related to such trends and drivers.
Even though the happening of an event in 2040 cannot be known, some will
nearly inevitably occur, while others are uncertain. As example, two drivers
related to this case are taken, which are 1) data security and 2) discoveries
of brain research. Even if it is not known what kind of data security policies
will be implemented in the future, the problem of data security will surely be
addressed and some policies will be implemented; hence, the uncertainty of
data security is ranked as low. On the other hand, despite brain research will
surely be carried out it is uncertain whether this will achieve groundbreaking
discoveries or not; therefore, the uncertainty discoveries of brain research is
ranked as high.
==PAGE:28==
20
Chapter 3. Methodology
4. Scenario axes: drivers and trends that resulted to be both important and un-
certain are selected in a meaningful way, so that they form the axes of a 2x2
scenario matrix. The extremes of each axis are chosen by deﬁning two polar
outcomes of the uncertain driver selected. For instance the two polar extremes
for the discoveries of brain research driver are 1) scientiﬁc breakthrough and
complete understanding of brain functioning and 2) no progress and no un-
derstanding of the brain.
5. Scenarios: by pairing each extreme outcome of the drivers, four scenarios are
developed and the implications on the technology and its applications are
highlighted.
6. Early warning: indicators providing early warnings of the development of one
of the deﬁned scenarios are identiﬁed.
This second template aims at looking at the long term and depicting future scenar-
ios based on the drivers that are more important for blue light and for the brain-tech
trend. This way, different transformative scenarios are generated so that the poten-
tial future technological context can be visualized. It is essential to innovate and
develop in the right direction by pursuing a vision of the future scenario. Indeed,
on the basis of the participants believing and vision, one of the future scenarios,
the one that is judged as the most likely to emerge, is selected to be used as future
technological context during the roadmapping.
Roadmapping
The thirds template, pictured in ﬁgure A.3, is composed of three main steps, exe-
cuted according to the following order:
1. The future state: after having chosen one of the scenarios from the template
#2, participants visualized the expected evolution of the environment about
blue light technology and brain technologies. Then, the future application of
the technology is determined, considering at the same time the future scenario,
which ﬁxes the technological context. This future state is the vision of the blue
light and brain technology applications that the workshop participant want to
obtain through the development.
2. Current state: once the target is set (i.e. the future state), the current situation
is described, so that a starting point is established.
3. Path to value: the path to achieve the vision of future technological applica-
tions is deﬁned. This is the actual technology roadmap, which describes the
path of blue light and brain technologies development, capabilities needed and
market opportunities.
The data and knowledge and data generated in the ﬁrst two templates merge into the
roadmapping, whose purpose is the elaboration of a development trajectory that is
coherent and synchronized with the expected technological context and trends con-
cerning brain technologies and blue light. Template #1 and template #2 forced the
participants to explicit their believing about future technologies, trends and drivers,
so that they can clearly be pictured as they shape the technological context of the
coming years. Indeed, it would be an error to plan the technological trajectory with-
out considering how related technologies will evolve in the future. This is also use-
ful to understand how the evolution of brain technologies and blue light impact the
development of the industry and markets connected to health care and well-being.
==PAGE:29==
3.4. Methodology of Analysis
21
Action Planning
The last template is a simple translation of the technology roadmap into an action
plan to be executed to achieve the future state. It takes into account key actions,
enablers, barriers and resources. The template used for the action planning is illus-
trated in ﬁgure A.4.
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
23
Chapter 4
Case Presentation
4.1
Technology background
As already anticipated in the ﬁrst chapter, the platform technology in these study
cases is represented by the blue light LED technology.
LED, which stands for
Light-Emitting Diode, is a semiconductor light source. The technology exploits an
electrical and optical phenomenon called electroluminescence. This phenomenon
consists in a solid-state material releasing energy in the form of photons (i.e.
light) in response to the passage of an electric current. The ﬁrst observations of
electroluminescence and the creation of the ﬁrst LED have been done in 1907 by H.J.
Round. In 1928, Lossev also observed and investigated the same phenomenon with
a metal semi-conductor. He investigated the physical nature of the luminescence
and he found that light-emission was not caused by incandescence. After a couple
of decades if incremental innovation in the LED ﬁeld, a new category of compound
semiconductors was introduced in the early 1950s.
These compounds resulted
to be optically very active, hence instrumental to LED technology.
After initial
advancements in the technology, the use of the new compound led to a major
breakthrough in 1966, given the high efﬁciency attained with such LEDs. In general,
1960s were years of technological progress for LEDs.
The emission of coherent
visible light from LEDs has been ﬁrstly reported in 1962, marking the beginning of
visible-spectrum LEDs. In the late 1960s, low efﬁciency blue light-emitting diodes
were fabricated. Concurrently, the ﬁrst commercial LED reached the market thank
to General Electric Corporation. However, The Monsanto Company has been the
ﬁrst to mass produce LEDs for commercial purpose. This led to the ﬁrst commercial
applications of the LED technology: in 1972, Hamilton watch company released
the ﬁrst wrist watch using an LED display; pocket calculators manufacturers
also started using LEDs for the numeric display.
The constant development of
LEDs brought to the production of high-efﬁciency blue LEDs in the 1990s. This
breakthrough allowed many other applications, for instance full color TV displays
by combining red, green and blue LEDs. High-efﬁciency blue LEDs are also used
to produce white light by applying a phosphor coating to the diode. One of the
applications of this technology is for example the LEDs light bulbs. Furthermore,
the continuously growing power capabilities of LEDs enabled the emergence of new
application areas, such as lighting for indoor and outdoor, lighting for indicators
and signs, automotive lighting for bicycle, motorcycles and cars and may more
(Schubert, 2006).
With respect to this research activity, the analysis will be focused on the technology
and application of blue light LEDs. Blue light is deﬁned by the wavelength, which is
between 450-495 nm. In addition, it is a portion of the high-energy light within the
visible spectrum (Kuse et al., 2014). This is illustrated by the picture 4.1.
==PAGE:32==
24
Chapter 4. Case Presentation
FIGURE 4.1: The entire electromagnetic spectrum and the visible light
spectrum, with high-energy light highlighted.
Although LEDs have been invented quite some time ago, as just described above, it
is only recently that blue light LED technology has emerged. Since the commercial-
ization of white light based on the blue phosphor-coated LED, it has been found out
that blue light has some effects on the human body. Indeed, blue light affects the
circadian rhythm (Cajochen et al., 2011; Tosini, Ferguson and Tsubota, 2016), it can
be harmful to the eyes at certain wavelength (Smick et al., 2013) and it also improves
emotional response in humans(Vandewalle et al., 2010). However, blue light has
never represented an issue, since the previously diffused light bulbs did not have
the blue component, as demonstrated by ﬁgure 4.2.
FIGURE 4.2: The emission spectrum of the sun and different kind of
light bulbs.
This is the reason why blue light technology is innovative despite exploiting a tech-
nology that has been ﬁrstly fabricated decades ago.
4.2
Health Care Case
As far as the study cases are concerned, the ﬁrst one of them consists in a university
project based at the department of photonics at DTU. The project was born in the
==PAGE:33==
4.3. Sports Case
25
summer 2017, from the collaboration between UC Berkeley and DTU. The ﬁndings
of latest research in the ﬁeld of cognitive neuroscience made at the Picower Institute
for Learning and Memory at MIT inspired the birth of such project. Indeed, (Iac-
carino et al., 2016) showed the effect of ﬂickering light on the brain activity in mice.
In particular, the study focused on mice affected by Alzheimer’s disease (AD). It has
been found that ﬂickering light can entrain brainwaves at the same frequency, which
ultimately leads to a decrease in amyloid beta plaques in the brain and to enhanced
immune system capabilities in the hippocampus region, which can have remark-
able implications on the way Alzheimer’s disease develops and on its ﬁght. These
groundbreaking ﬁndings have driven the collaboration between DTU and Berke-
ley with the ultimate goal of developing a device to ﬁght Alzheimer’s in humans
through brain stimulation. Blue ﬂickering light is used for this application, since it
is believed that the blue component is the one responsible for such effect on brain’s
activity. Throughout the year, different versions of prototypes have been built. The
prototypes are reliable, although only the proof of concept has been achieved. They
can be ranked as TRL 3, following the NASA/DOD technology readiness level (TRL)
scale. The prototype lamps were built using a set of 5 LEDs, an Arduino board, a
printed circuit board and some electronics components. Therefore, the technology
behind it does not represent a novelty. Although, the new aspect of the technology
resides in its application, which is light therapy for AD treatment (examples of the
prototypes are illustrated in ﬁgure 4.3). Alongside the product development activi-
ties, medical validations activities are carried out with the collaboration of Rigshos-
pitalet. Besides, the project is very open, in terms of contributions from external
organizations and collaborations with partners.
FIGURE 4.3: Two prototype produced: an old version on the left and
the newest one on the right.
4.3
Sports Case
With regards to the second case study, it concerns the use of blue light for perfor-
mance enhancement in professional athletes. This is also another university project
based at the photonics department at DTU. Indeed, the idea is to control the brain
activity through the use of blue light. Unlike the health care case, light stimulation is
provided by using a continuous blue light LED source. The idea is that the athletes
will be able to preform better after the light stimulation. The project idea exploits
==PAGE:34==
26
Chapter 4. Case Presentation
two different effects of blue light on human brain: the effect on the circadian rhythm
and the effect on the reaction time. The former is used to help athletes in synchroniz-
ing their circadian rhythm when they travel for competitions. The circadian rhythm
is indeed disrupted by the changing of time zones: this effect on one’s circadian
rhythm is commonly known as jet lag. The altered circadian rhythm affects athletes
performances, therefore blue light is used in speciﬁc time frames to avoid this alter-
ation. The latter effect, instead, is exploited to decrease the athletes’ reaction time
during competitions. They undergo light stimulation immediately before a race, as
shown in ﬁgure 4.4.
FIGURE 4.4: Swimmer Jeanette Ottesen from the Danish national
team in the during light stimulation.
In this case the effect on the brain has a short duration and it is not entrainable, dif-
ferently from what happens with the circadian rhythm. One of the main activities in
the projects consists in evidence-based validation. Rigshospitalet represents an es-
sential partner for testing and evidence generation purpose. Although, the product
has already been tested for many months with the collaboration of the swimming
and badminton national teams of Denmark. The prototype consists in an LED lamp
emitting blue light.
==PAGE:35==
27
Chapter 5
Analysis
5.1
Technology-Application Trend Assessment
This section corresponds to the analysis of data generated using the template #1 (see
appendix B).
Setting The Context
The study cases are both university-based projects, as already mentioned before.
The ultimate purpose is indeed to create a startup company for further developing
the platform technology into the different possible applications, to be able to bring
innovation from the university to the market and to consumers.
Therefore, the
startup company perspective is assumed.
Secondly, the technology trend under analysis is deﬁned as brain-tech. As already
anticipated in section 3.4, the brain-tech trend arose when neuroscience and neu-
rotechnology combined to enable technological applications addressing the brain
and the way it works. On top of this, it’s worth remembering that such trend it
does not only include technological and engineering aspects, but also medical ones.
Therefore, all those aspects need to be taken into account when assessing the brain-
tech trend and its evolution.
5.1.1
Technology Description
According to its form, the base technology is the blue LED light source. This tech-
nology have assumed the form of a therapy lamp, a device for ambient lighting
and a goggle. The form can vary depending on the applications that have been re-
cently commercialized, for example Samsung HUE light bulbs, Samsung Energy Up
therapy lamps and AYO glasses. With regards to the technology developed in the
case study, blue LEDs are used in two different ways, emitting ﬂickering and non-
ﬂickering blue light. Although the projects are based on the effect of blue light, LEDs
emitting other colors are also used in combination with the blue ones. In particular
for the health care application, which uses the ﬂickering blue light mode. This is
unpleasant to eyes and user unfriendly, so blue light is combined with other col-
ors. Indeed, the lamp exploits the mixing of different colors to make the light source
appear white, while having the same beneﬁts of blue light. The technology’s func-
tion consists in the visual stimulation of the hippocampus through the visual cortex.
This stimulation produces changes in the neural oscillations, i.e. brainwaves. Brain
stimulation can also be enhanced by the combination with stimulation through other
means, such as sound and vibration.
==PAGE:36==
28
Chapter 5. Analysis
5.1.2
Technology Trends
Three different time horizons have been chosen to classify the technology trends
identiﬁed. The time span corresponding to each horizon is not ﬁxed, but it varies
from technology to technology, since the innovation pace can be very different. Some
technologies and industries innovate very quickly, for instance the software indus-
try, and the time horizons should be adapted to the industry innovation’s pace. Re-
garding the case under analysis, according to the believing of the participants, it has
been determined that: the horizon for sustaining trends refers to those occurring in
the short term, namely in 2023, 5 years from now; the time reference for the disrup-
tive trends has been set at 2030; and ﬁnally, it is believed that it is necessary to wait
until 2040 to see transformative trends occur. Starting from the current state of art,
the technology trends identiﬁed along those time horizons are the following:
• Past technological development: A major background information concern-
ing LED technology has been provided in section 4.1. As far as blue light is
concerned, it is not a new technology since the production of high-efﬁciency
blue LEDs started in the 1990s. Nevertheless, they have mainly been used in
two major applications: 1) in combination with phosphor coating to obtain
white light; 2) in the RGB (red-green-blue) conﬁguration used for simple LED
displays, crystal LED and OLED screens. Even though blue LEDs are a rela-
tively old technology, only recently the effects of blue light on the human body
have been discovered. It has been found out that it can disrupt the circadian
rhythm, damage the eyes, affect the mood, boost alertness, treat acne and in-
duce brainwaves. Thanks to these ﬁndings, blue light technology entered the
brain-tech trend. Therefore, blue LEDs can be applied to address issues related
to the human brain and also exploit the latest technological developments, that
enabled LEDs to shrink their size considerably.
• Current state of art: As of today, the state of the art of the technology is the
existing light stimulation device built at DTU. The device for brain stimulation
has been evaluated using the technology readiness level scale originally devel-
oped at NASA. The technology has been evaluated as a TRL 3, meaning that
the technology is in the process of achieving an experimental proof of concept.
Furthermore, the current state of the art includes other technologies within the
brain-tech trend. These are brain computer interfaces (BCIs), which exploits
frequencies between 9 and 30 Hz, and brain entrainment technologies, which
exploit frequencies between 9 Hz up to more than 100 Hz. BCIs is a technology
based on purely electrical communication, while brain entrainment technolo-
gies have a multi-modal approach, using different means, such as light, sound
and vibration to stimulate the human brain through the senses.
• Sustaining horizon - 2023: Two major technology trends have been identiﬁed
in the short term. The ﬁrst one is connected to the latest research on the effect of
light on the human body and its optimal performance. There is indeed a major
concern on the correlation between light, health and lifestyle. The attention on
the topic is growing, as it can be seen from the development and commercial-
ization of solutions that address the issue of a proper lighting, such as Philips
HUEs and the ’night vision mode’ implemented in all recent electronic devices,
which ﬁlters blue light to avoid the disruption of the natural circadian rhythm.
The second trend relates to the application of personal trackers in health care.
Nowadays it is possible to keep trace of somebody’s behaviour by using sensor
==PAGE:37==
5.1. Technology-Application Trend Assessment
29
that are implemented in objects of everyday use, such as mobile phones and
wearables. This, thanks to the remarkable data-processing power, can be used
to monitor people incurring in a high health-related risk, to alert emergency
services and to predict diseases for preventive treatment. The latter is enabled
by the analysis of people’s behaviour, which can ultimately inﬂuence the risk
factor connected to the occurrence of certain diseases.
• Disruptive horizon - 2030: The big data trend is expected to enter and dis-
ruptively change the health care and medical sector, enabling a personalized
medicine by the means of machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI).
These two technologies are already used nowadays to diagnose diseases and
tech- companies have developed other solutions which are applied to the
health care sector, such as IBM’s Watson and Google’s DeepMind. The evo-
lution of such technologies will make possible to process and analyze data
about people’s physical and nutritional behaviour, which can be collected by
sensors and trackers. It will be feasible to recognize and predict the insurgence
of illnesses, meaning that preventive personal treatment can be achieved. An-
other technology that will play a big role in attaining a personalized health
care is genetics mapping and editing technologies. New technologies (e.g. ,
CRISPR-Cas9, name identifying a new genome editing approach based on a
DNA sequence called CRISPR) will enable the mapping and editing of peo-
ple’s genomes and consequently acting on the genetic-related health issues.
Closely linked to this personalized health care trend, there is also a person-
alization trend connected to sport’s training and to people’s lifestyle with the
purpose of obtaining optimal physical and mental conditions and enhanced
performances. The combination of the above-mentioned technologies will help
in understanding what is better for each individual, not only in terms of health
care, but also in terms of lifestyle and life quality. Furthermore, it is also be-
lieved that rates and prices for health insurances will drop in the future, due
to the possibility of disease prevention.
• Transformative horizon - 2040: One of the technological trends that is ex-
pected to transform the brain-tech area and the health care system is the in-
tegration of robotics and implants into the human body. Brain implants are
already being utilized and the focus on neurotechnologies has grown in the Sil-
icon Valley since the famous serial entrepreneur Elon Musk established Neu-
ralink, a venture for developing solutions based on neurotechnologies, which
also include brain implants. These are believed to become almost a widespread
good in 2040, almost a utility. Furthermore, another technological trend is be-
ing generated by the further development of the AI-based diagnosing trend
outlined within the disruptive horizon. Medical doctors are expected to be re-
placed by AI technology, which is going to be available to anybody at any point
in time and space, since it could be implemented in portable devices of every-
day use. An additional trend concerns the way patients are treated. Indeed,
there is the believe that the place of treatment will be move from hospitals to
homes. Home treatment and home care will be the normality.
5.1.3
Competing Technologies
Then, competing technologies have been deﬁned.
In general, any device that
can have an impact on brain activity and/or performances is to be considered
a competing technology. Within the landscape of competing technologies, some
==PAGE:38==
30
Chapter 5. Analysis
technologies are more established than others, in terms of the achievement of both
technological maturity and major market adoption during the last years or decades.
Technologies belonging to this category are drugs and chemicals.
These can be
found under various forms: pharmaceutical companies commercialize solutions for
psychiatric medications, for the cure of sleeping disorders, for improving focus and
so forth; others are goods such as caffeine and other stimulants for performance
enhancement, like Ritalin and Modaﬁnil.
Since blue light could be applied to
performance improvement by boosting alertness, enhancing cognition, improving
memory and regulating the natural sleep and wake cycles, the startup will compete
with companies offering those products.
A product based on blue light will be
perceived as more natural and less harmful to health than caffeine, stimulants and
drugs. People concerned with their well-being and adverse to drugs and chemicals
could represent a market for such application. On top of this, it is well known that
different nutritional and behavioural habits are affecting the way the human body
work. Diets and behaviours for the improvement of physical and mental condition
can be considered substitutes of a blue light application.
On the other hand, there are other competing technologies that are more innovative
and cutting-edge. Among these, there is transcranial magnetic stimulation, which
stimulates the brain on the basis of a changing magnetic ﬁeld. Another competing
technology is infrared light. Indeed, a Canadian based company called VieLight
already commercialized a product line for infrared transcranial and nasal photo-
biomodulation. This technology is also currently undergoing clinical trials. A fur-
ther way to stimulate the brain is via electrical signals. An example of this tech-
nology is PlatoScience, which is a company selling a solution for brain stimulation
through electrical pulses with the aim of improving working performances. Elec-
tronic brain implants are also a competing technology. Moreover, brain stimulation
is also pursued through sounds and vibrations. Acoustic and tactile stimuli rep-
resent a way to send a signal to the brain and it might induce brainwaves in the
same way light does. Depending on their effectiveness, these applications can im-
pact blue light and the startup since they can offer the same value to users, which is
brain stimulation. However, they might not have the same effect on the brain and
the combined effect of blue light can enhance the effectiveness.
5.1.4
Complementary Technologies
As far as complementary technologies are concerned, the most relevant are those
that can be used in combination with blue light technology to make it more mean-
ingful or to optimize its application. This is the case of smart devices and wearable
computers (e.g. smart watches), which could in the future allow the tracking and the
collection of data about the usage behaviour. Data will be a valuable asset to achieve
customization and to ﬁt the need of every single user. To this respect, technologies
to process and elaborate information will be key to deal with big data. Nanotech-
nologies are also to be considered as complementary, since biosensors might be a
way to collect data about how blue light technology and the way it is used affect the
user’s body. Diagnosing methods are another fundamental complementary asset,
especially in relation to the treatment of AD. Biomarkers and methods for the mea-
surement of amyloid beta plaques are surely an important complementary asset.
Along with these diagnosing methods, other emerging technologies are addressing
the problem of diagnostics through genome sequencing. Furthermore, in relation
==PAGE:39==
5.2. Scenario Planning
31
to big data, high-tech world class companies dealing with data collection and min-
ing, AI and machine learning are also considered as complementary assets in term
of strategical partnership. Such companies are, for example Google, Amazon and
Facebook, which are already looking at taking this technological approach into the
health care sector. All these technologies, positively impact the blue light technol-
ogy, by giving the opportunity to enrich the product with a customization, offering
a better customer experience and a diagnosing service.
5.1.5
Application Context
These technology applications reﬂect what the startup will be able to implement
into a solution over the time horizons by looking at the technology trends and the
complementary technologies.
• Current state of art: The current state of the art is the therapy lamp developed
within the study case. A number of those prototypes will be used for test-
ing purposes, although there is still no medical validation on this state-of-art
technology. So far, the lamp is a stand-alone device.
• Sustaining horizon - 2023: By the ﬁrst horizon, it is expected that the technol-
ogy will enable a stand-alone light device for brain stimulation, which could
also be multi-modal by combining it with sounds and vibrations and inte-
grated with light sensors and personal trackers for collecting data on the user
experience. The technological application would have an impact in the health
care market, in particular people with AD and with biomarkers of AD (e.g.
amyloid beta). The end-use locations would be nursing homes and hospitals.
Concerning only the performance enhancement, the market of professional
athletes and sports enthusiasts will be addressed.
• Disruptive horizon - 2030: A solution for light stimulation will, at this point,
beneﬁt from the combination of other technologies, such as pharmaceutical
products or other drug based solutions, to achieve a better enhancement of
brain performances. Along with this, the measurement and monitoring of
those performances will be integrated into the overall solution, through the
introduction of a mobile application. The products will then be applied into
the ambient lighting market and used by the general public at schools, hospi-
tals, ofﬁces, workspaces and homes.
• Transformative horizon - 2040: Technologies within the brain-tech area will
enable brain computer interfaces and brain implants. These technologies, to-
gether with the genome sequencing technologies, which are believed to be able
to achieve gene-therapy by mapping and modifying genes, will change and to
some extent revolution the health care system.
5.2
Scenario Planning
This section corresponds to the analysis of data generated using the template #2 (see
appendix C).
==PAGE:40==
32
Chapter 5. Analysis
5.2.1
Trends & Drivers, Importance and Uncertainty
Trends and drivers deﬁning the future scenarios have been addressed. Some were
the same technology trends identiﬁed by using the ﬁrst template (section 5.1.2). Oth-
ers have been determined by looking at general trends such as legal, economic, envi-
ronmental, political, social among others. All the trends and drivers that have been
pinpointed are listed in table 5.1 below, which also includes the assessment of the
importance and uncertainty of each trend.
Trend/Driver
Importance
Uncertainty
1) Health issues
Safety issues, especially towards
the drawbacks of blue light on
eyes’ safety.
It is known that
the
blue-violet
light
range
is
harmful to the retina at certain
wavelengths and this has been
in particular associated with the
aging-related macular degener-
ation (AMD). Although, it has
been found that the most haz-
ardous wavelengths are those be-
tween 415 nm to 455 nm (Smick
et al., 2013).
Medium
Low
2) Data trackers
Personalized data through per-
sonal trackers and wearable de-
vices (e.g.
Apple product such
as iPhone, Apple Watch and oth-
ers) and through the tracking of
people’s behaviour (e.g. data col-
lection and usage by companies
such as Facebook, Google and
Amazon).
High
Low
3) Aging population
People nowadays lives longer
due to better living conditions
and better health care, and better
living conditions for all are con-
stantly pursued.
High
Low
4) Education and learning
Focus on people’s education and
on making the learning process
more efﬁcient and effective.
Medium
Medium
==PAGE:41==
5.2. Scenario Planning
33
5) Security
Security, in terms of data man-
agement and protection against
piracy and improper use.
High
Low
6) Fight against AD
The focus towards AD is growing
since it has become of the biggest
burden for most governments in
developed countries and for soci-
ety in general. Governments and
international organizations such
as the European Union are gath-
ering forces and concentrating re-
sources towards the ﬁght of AD.
Medium
Low
7) Performance improvement
Commercialization of products
for physical and mental perfor-
mance improvement, for athletes,
sportspeople,
high-performing
professionals and students.
Medium
Low
8) Politics, morals and ethics
Given
the
nature
of
the
technology-application
area
(i.e.
braintech) and in the light
of
the
implications
that
new
technologies can have on hu-
mans, such as gene manipulation
and
brain
stimulation,
issues
concerning ethics, morality and
religious
matters
might
arise;
furthermore, these technologies
are endorsed and embraced by
innovators, which accounts for a
narrow portion of the entire mar-
ket, while the majority of it still
has to adopt it, meaning that this
sector might be object of politics
discussions and regulations.
Medium/high
High
==PAGE:42==
34
Chapter 5. Analysis
9) Personalized medicine and
genomics
The health care industry is being
inﬂuenced by technology trends.
To this respect, to major trends
have been highlighted:
ﬁrstly,
health care is going towards the
use of big data to achieve a per-
sonalized approach to medicine;
secondly, scientiﬁc and techno-
logical breakthrough in genomics
are enabling the possibility of di-
agnostics based on genome se-
quencing and treatments based
on genes manipulation.
High
High
10)
Breakthrough
in
neuro-
science and brain optimization
Researches in the ﬁeld of neuro-
biology open the gates to major
discoveries on the brain’s work-
ing mechanisms.
This scientiﬁc
progress has also contributed to
technologies for brain optimiza-
tion and stimulation.
High
High
TABLE 5.1: The identiﬁed trends and drivers together with the eval-
uation of their importance and uncertainty.
5.2.2
Scenario Axes
The deﬁnition of scenario axes started form the identiﬁcation of the most important
and uncertain trends. The ﬁrst driver that has been chosen as an axis for the sce-
nario matrix is the one named politics, morals and ethics, which have medium/high
importance and high uncertainty. The choice of the second axis was done slightly
differently: two drivers, namely Personalized medicine and genomics and Breakthrough
in neuroscience and brain optimization, has been merged together since their inter-
dipendence and complementarity. The new driver that constitutes the second axis
can be described as the technological and scientiﬁc advancements, in terms of the
understanding of the brain’s mechanisms and their optimization, the ability to use
big data within health care and the use of gene diagnosis and manipulation.
Hereafter, the two extremes of the axes have been created, which are illustrated be-
low.
==PAGE:43==
5.2. Scenario Planning
35
Extreme 1:
The mechanisms regulating the
way the brain works are com-
pletely
understood
thanks
to
the
research
in
neurobiology;
technology
developments
en-
abled the achievement of gene
sequencing and manipulation.
vs
Extreme 2:
The brain’s mechanisms are still
not
understood,
research
has
not achieved important break-
through and the way the brain
works is still mysterious; there
is no technology that enables the
manipulation of genes.
TABLE 5.2: Axis 1: extreme outcomes related to the technological and
scientiﬁc progress.
Extreme 3:
Practices enabled by new tech-
nologies, such as brain stimula-
tion and gene manipulation are
considered unethical; there are
particular concerns about their
misuse and about religious mat-
ters; furthermore, the society is
characterized by high social in-
equality.
vs
Extreme 4:
Society has embraced new tech-
nologies and their application,
and they are embedded into the
health care system.
TABLE 5.3: Axis 2: extreme outcomes related to politics, morals and
ethics.
5.2.3
Scenarios
The four possible future scenarios have been generated by coupling the axes ex-
tremes. The scenarios have been classiﬁed and described as follows:
==PAGE:44==
36
Chapter 5. Analysis
Scenario A, extreme 1 and extreme 3
The effect of the technology applica-
tions are understood, although there
are issues with politics, ethics and
morals that prevent those applica-
tions to be diffused and adopted by
the general public; however, enhance-
ment and care through the technology
applications can be achieved and they
are only available for individualized
use by the elite.
Scenario B, extreme 1 and extreme 4
The effect of brain technologies on hu-
mans is completely understood and it
their application has been embraced
by society and governments, which
embedded them into the health care
systems; enhancement and cure is
then available to the general public,
ideally to everybody; no major issues
arouse and regulators have been able
to leverage science and technology
in favour of society’s wellness. This
scenario has been labeled ’superhu-
mans’, since people can live longer,
better and brain and physical perfor-
mances are enhanced.
Scenario C, extreme 2 and extreme 3
Brain mechanisms are still not un-
derstood and, as a consequence, nei-
ther is the effect of technology appli-
cations on the brain; there are strong
issues with ethics and politics due
to the low understanding and possi-
ble misuse, which eventually led to
heavy regulations that block the such
application of technologies within so-
ciety.
Scenario D, extreme 2 and extreme 4
In spite of the incomplete under-
standing of the brain mechanisms and
how they are affected by technology
applications, society has embraced
the minor technological and scientiﬁc
advancements; incremental develop-
ment of the technology occurred and
it’s application is broadly diffused to-
gether with personal trackers.
TABLE 5.4: Future scenarios generated.
With respect to scenarios depicted, a consideration has been done by the partic-
ipants on the basis on their believing and future vision: the present situation is
very close to the scenario where brain mechanisms are not completely understood
and society embraces brain technologies and their application. Indeed, today few
things are know about the brain working mechanisms and many aspects are still a
mystery. Although, technology is not feared, contrarily it is applied to well being
and health care. Moreover, as explained in section 3.4, it is necessary to select one of
the scenarios, in order to set the future technological context during the roadmap-
ping. The scenario that the participants judged as the most likely to emerge, was
picked. So, taking into account the present situation, the scenario that has been
selected is Scenario B, namely that predicting a complete understanding of the brain
functioning and a society embracing technology development and embedding it
into the health care system. The reasons behind the choice are the following: ﬁrstly,
neurobiology it is a very active research ﬁeld which is already showing promising
progresses and investments on research projects are fostering scientiﬁc discoveries.
This is expected to continue. Secondly, technological and scientiﬁc breakthrough
==PAGE:45==
5.3. Roadmapping
37
will allow even more effective technological solutions addressing the well being of
people. Therefore, embracing technology will in the interest of people, governments
and regulatory bodies.
A scenario like the selected one would be ideal for blue light technology and
brain technologies in general, since their application into products and services will
beneﬁt from a total understanding of how the brain works by being more effective.
Furthermore, their application as a brain stimulator and performance enhancement
and the potential impact on the health care market could not be possible if techno-
logical discoveries are not socially accepted and embedded into the health care and
well being system. The startup will surely beneﬁt from the development of tech-
nologies and solutions in such a future technological context.
5.2.4
Early Warning
A couple of early warnings have been identiﬁed by the participants, so that it will
be possible to detect whether the actual scenario is moving towards the desired di-
rection or not. By looking at the Axis 1 (i.e. technological and scientiﬁc progress),
in particular at research in neuroscience and related scientiﬁc discoveries, it will be
clear in what scenarios are more likely to emerge. If progress in neuroscience will
continue successfully, than a future where brain working mechanisms are under-
stood is more likely. So, a ﬁrst warning is the quantity and quality of researches
and ﬁndings in neuroscience. Concerning the same axis, but focusing on genome
sequencing and manipulation, the same basic reasoning has been done. A warning
is represented by groundbreaking scientiﬁc progress from researches in the ﬁeld of
genes mapping and genes engineering. Such warning can also be integrated with
technological development and business applications on genome engineering: in
particular, a CRISPR approach needs to be closely observed, as it appears to be very
effective and promising. All these will provide an indication about which extreme is
the most likely to occur.
The second warning is related to the Axis 2 regarding politics, morals and ethics.
Signals of the evolution towards one or another extreme will be found by looking
at changes in laws and regulations in the med-tech sector. A further event that is
believed to serve as a warning has been identiﬁed in the investments made by coun-
tries driving the world’s economy, like China and the US. It is important to under-
stand what strategic investments are those countries making and towards which di-
rections are they pointing, especially in relation to health care and technology. Mon-
itoring these investment policies would give a signal of a wind of change, meaning
that it would be easier to predict future scenario and eventually react to the change.
5.3
Roadmapping
This section corresponds to the analysis of data generated using the template #3 (see
appendix D). The roadmapping template has been ﬁlled out following the steps as
illustrated in section 3.4 and shown in ﬁgure A.3.
In addition, a further clariﬁcation needs to be done, concerning the time frame
adopted in the roadmapping. The chosen time frame is indeed different from the
one adopted in the technology-application trend assessment (see section 5.1). The
==PAGE:46==
38
Chapter 5. Analysis
selection of the intervals has been discussed during the workshop and the ﬁnal time
frame chosen is:
• Short term: 2018-2021.
• Medium term: 2022-2026.
• Long term: 2027-2030.
The reason behind this decisions is that planning the development of a technol-
ogy until 2040 would have not been feasible, due to the many uncertainties related
to the distance in time. The period 2030-2040 corresponds to the period when trans-
forming trends will occur. So, the evolution of technology trends will be such that
the industry will be transformed, disabling the opportunity of concrete and prag-
matic planning. However, the difference in the time frames is not senseless, since
the 2040 scenario selected from the previous template serves as a guidance for tech-
nology development. It sets the future environment encompassing blue light and
brain technologies. For this reason, the long term interval is set until 2030, so that
meaningful and achievable development objectives can be deﬁned taking into con-
sideration the predicted scenario.
5.3.1
Future Value Opportunity Scenario
As the ﬁrst step of the technology roadmapping, the future state is deﬁned. The
future desired state of the technology and application is determined also according
to the future context, that helps in shaping a vision for technology development. It
is illustrated in the table below.
Future State
Technology applications:
Stand-alone lamp for the health care and products
for general lighting solutions that are personalized
and integrated with personal proﬁle.
Technology features:
Mobile application enabling:
1. personalized use;
2. tests of progresses through cognitive tests;
3. showing improvements to users;
4. track of behaviour and data collection on the
usage.
Market opportunities:
Market of general individual performance en-
hancement (for e.g. sports, work, study).
Personalized
health
care
market,
thanks
to
biomarkers and genomics, that is to say diagnos-
ing methods.
Capabilities needed:
Experts on brain performance enhancement (e.g.
neuroscientists, doctors, etc.).
Marketing and medical regulations specialists.
Coders and mobile app developers.
==PAGE:47==
5.3. Roadmapping
39
TABLE 5.5: Desired outcome of the technology development.
5.3.2
Current State
Before starting to elaborate the technology roadmap, the current technological and
commercial situation has been outlined, which is shown in table 5.6.
Current State
Technology application:
Stand-alone product at the prototype level, which
is manufactured by the team.
Strategic partners:
University of Copenhagen, UC Berkeley and Sinua
Partners, which is a consultancy company in the
health care and med-tech sector.
Dialog with other potential partners active into the
health care sector, such as Lundbeck.
Market regulations:
US health care market: FDA approval as a medical
device.
EU health care market: class IIb medical device
compliance.
Competitors:
The competitors are the following:
1. Pharmaceutical companies.
2. Vielight, a company commercializing solu-
tions for brain stimulation and brainwaves
entrainment using infrared photobiomodu-
lation.
3. Cognito therapeutics, MIT’s based company
that is using the same basic technology, ﬂick-
ering light, for the same purpose, which is
treating AD. They are not offering any prod-
uct or service, but they are performing clini-
cal trials.
4. Gamma Light Therapy, which is selling a kit
for brain stimulation through light.
How-
ever, the technology is slightly different from
the case study’s one, since blue light is not
being used.
5. AYO, portable glasses emitting blue light,
designed to improve sleeping patterns, jet-
lag and winter blues and winter depression.
6. PlatoScience, which sells a device for brain
stimulation and performance improvements
through electrical impulses.
==PAGE:48==
40
Chapter 5. Analysis
Capabilities possessed:
Blue light LED technology.
Unique solution: lamp with masked ﬂickering for
health care application.
TABLE 5.6: Current state of technological and commercial aspects.
5.3.3
Path To Value
Once having deﬁned the arrival and the stating point, the development trajectory
has been developed. During this step, some assumptions have also been made,
based on the group discussion during the workshop:
• According to the future scenario, technological breakthrough concerning brain
technologies and genome engineering will occur, that neurobiology studies
will lead to a deep understanding of brains mechanisms and that society will
embrace such changes and embed them into the health care system.
• Concerning an eventual intellectual property dispute between DTU/UC
Berkely and MIT, since a patent application has been submitted from both
sides, it is assumed that there will not be any major issue.
• It has been assumed that there will not be eye-related safety issues connected
to the use of the developed products. Dangerous wavelengths are known and
can be therefore avoided.
• It is assumed that the technology would have some effect on the brain and that
users will keep using the product in response to that effect.
Development Trajectory: Short Term
==PAGE:49==
5.3. Roadmapping
41
Market opportunities:
The following markets can be addressed:
1. Alzheimer’s patients and people showing
signs of early stage AD.
2. The market of holistic wellness. As a mat-
ter of fact, holistic wellbeing clinic have inte-
grated cognitive therapy and brain technolo-
gies, sleep therapy and genomics and pre-
ventive treatment into their offer.
3. Sleep market for the optimization of perfor-
mances.
4. Niche market of top performing corporate
people, who have a very busy schedule
that often includes travels around the world.
Sleeping pattern, mental alertness and pro-
ductivity are negatively affected by this.
5. Sports market for athletes, e-sports and
sports enthusiasts.
6. Scientiﬁc research market. Given the impli-
cations our technology can have in the neu-
robiology ﬁeld, it can be used to carry out
researches concerning topics in that ﬁeld.
Core-tech path:
Prototypes development: a process of incremental
innovation and improvement of the existing proto-
types with the purpose of going towards a ﬁnished
product that is suitable for mass production.
Pilot tests for both applications, to demonstrate
that the technology induces some effects on the
brain. Tests will be conducted to show the effect of
blue light on cognition and performances, so the
results will be useful for both cases.
Due to the necessity to prove medical claims, the
health care application needs to follow a long path
of testings and procedures.
The sports case, which only focuses on perfor-
mances’ improvement, will not need any other
tests to be commercialized. Therefore, the techno-
logical applications’ path will be split.
Technology subsystem:
Deﬁning the optimal LED subsystem for both ap-
plication (e.g. optimal components, optimal wave-
length).
Developing of a mobile application connected to
the device.
==PAGE:50==
42
Chapter 5. Analysis
Alternative-tech path:
Data collection about the usage and the adherence
to the treatment.
App-based cognitive tests to see progresses and
measure performances.
Development of cognitive tests for the users in col-
laboration with neuroscientists from the Univer-
sity of Copenhagen and Rigshospitalet.
Implementation of privacy and security for sensi-
tive data handling (e.g. HIPAA compliance in the
US).
Business model:
Value creation by improving of people’s brain and
performances, ultimately improving their quality
of life.
Product sales.
Valuable data collected from users (i.e. usage, ad-
herence, behaviour).
Outsourcing:
LED subsystem when optimized.
Eventually the development of the app for data
collection, in San Francisco.
TABLE 5.7: Development path in the short term.
During the workshop activity, a signiﬁcant consideration about the industry
of the future have been made. It is likely that its shape will evolve and will be
different from today’s. Technological trends and new players are going to inﬂuence
the change in the medium and short term.
Technology companies, especially
those dealing with big data such as Google, Facebook, Amazon and Apple are
expected to be shaping the future. Their extensive access to personal data will allow
them to know the behaviour of people. Moreover, one of the future commercial
drivers linked to both brain-tech and health care market is the focus on diagnostics
techniques, through for example DNA sequencing. Those companies are expected
to enter the market of DNA mapping to achieve preventive and personalized
medicine, given their access to valuable personal data on people’s behaviour. It
is believed that those companies will shape the future health care sector.
Some
initiatives have already been taken by those companies towards that directions. It is
public knowledge that Amazon is joining forces with Berkshire Hathaway and JP
Morgan with the aim of disruptively change the health care industry, by leveraging
technology and lowering costs and prices of medicine. It has also emerged during
the workshop that Apple is willing to map sleep patterns and track the level of
sugar in the blood through the Apple Watch. AI is also a powerful mean that might
have a role in changing the health care system, as it has been demonstrated by IBM’s
Watson. This belief on the market changes goes along with the future scenario and
it contributes in shaping it.
Development Trajectory: Medium Term
Market opportunities:
General use of the light solutions in schools,
workspaces, hospitals and nursing homes.
==PAGE:51==
5.3. Roadmapping
43
Core-tech path:
Start of extensive and long lasting clinical studies
with patients in Copenhagen and Berkeley.
Stepping stone: outcome of the clinical studies; it
will establish if the technology is effective on the
brain, how, to what extent and on whom.
Product development for both sports and health
care application.
Obtaining medical devices compliance from FDA
and EU.
Alternative-tech path:
Pursue better diagnosing techniques, in term of ac-
curacy, early detection and ease of the diagnosing
operations of Alzheimer’s disease.
Diagnosing and biomarkers are fundamental for
the monitoring and treatment of AD. Hence, diag-
nostics is embedded into the product portfolio to
enrich the offer with the diagnosing service.
Business model:
Business development for the med-tech applica-
tion in San Francisco, overlapping with FDA com-
pliance.
Retail sales. Manufacturing a distribution can be
achieved through licensing. Becoming a data com-
pany.
Partnerships:
Sinua Partners and Texas Medical Center for med-
ical device compliance.
The latter is one of the
biggest medical hubs and it can provide access to
hospitals, doctors and high proﬁle professionals
who are experienced with FDA regulations.
A solution for commercialization can be a partner-
ship with a big player such as Johnson & Johnson
to handle logistics and distribution. Partner of the
sort, which is specialized in commercializing med-
ical devices, pharmaceutical and consumer health
care products, has a worldwide-coverage distribu-
tion network that would guarantee easy access to
all markets.
TABLE 5.8: Development path in the medium term.
Development Trajectory: Long Term
Market opportunities:
Targeting broader population
Core-tech path:
Product/service for broader population integrated
with DNA sequencing and diagnostics.
==PAGE:52==
44
Chapter 5. Analysis
Alternative-tech path:
Development of DNA sequencing techniques for
diagnostics.
Personalized medicine will be achieved thank to
the big data approach to diagnostics.
Business model:
Apply big data analysis to the health care, catching
the personalized medicine trend.
Partnerships:
Sinua Partners and Texas Medical Center for med-
ical device compliance.
The latter is one of the
biggest medical hubs and it can provide access to
hospitals, doctors and high proﬁle professionals
who are experienced with FDA regulations.
A solution for commercialization can be a partner-
ship with a big player such as Johnson & Johnson
to handle logistics and distribution. Partner of the
sort, which is specialized in commercializing med-
ical devices, pharmaceutical and consumer health
care products, has a worldwide-coverage distribu-
tion network that would guarantee easy access to
all markets.
TABLE 5.9: Development path in the long term.
Current state
Future state
2018-2021
2021-2026
2027-2030
Prototyping
Pilot tests
Clinical studies
Product development 
sports
App development
Cognitive tests
Data collection & 
analysis
Split path
Diagnostics
Sleep, sports, 
performance
General use 
(schools, hospitals, nursing 
homes, workspaces)
Diagnostics through
DNA sequencing
Personalized 
medicine
Broader 
population
AD 
Patients
Market 
Technology
Product development 
health care
FIGURE 5.1: The roadmap elaborated during the workshop with the
most relevant technology development stages.
5.4
Action Planning
This section corresponds to the analysis of data generated using the template #4 (see
appendix E).
==PAGE:53==
5.4. Action Planning
45
5.4.1
Short term
Future state: The future state in the short term is to have a team working on each
application. For the Alzheimer’s application the core team will be in connection
with experts and key opinion leaders. In regard to the performance enhancement
application, a team will be working on the niche market, namely the market of
sportspeople and executive business professionals travelling around the world.
Key actions: The starting teams working on the projects will be established,
which might include proﬁling and recruiting employees if needed. Then, ﬁber-based
prototypes have to be built for pilot testing at Rigshospitalet with neuroscientist
Gitte Moos Knudsen from the University of Copenhagen. A prototype will also
be developed for the performance enhancement project, which will be a portable
device. In the meanwhile, the value propositions and business models for both
applications will be deﬁned. By starting entering the niche market of performance
enhancement, a distribution channel will be set up. Besides that, the building of
the mobile application will be started. This means coding and building algorithms
for new product features, and also to design the data collection through the app.
Throughout the whole period it will be vital to apply to soft funds and receive
funding.
Enablers: The ﬁrst enabler to accomplish the key actions and reach the desired
future state will be the establishment of a company. Then, money collected through
fund raising are a sine qua non for the technological development.
However,
partners are considered as important. Among them, the major ones are Berkeley,
DTU, KU, CITRIS, the Buck Institute, the Texas Medical Center and CACHET
(Copenhagen Center for Health Technology).
Furthermore, there are accelerator
programs, technology challenges and the startup network, which can also play a
main role in the development path.
Barriers: IP infringement would be a major barrier, in case it will occur. On top
of that, funding is a barrier, being fund raising a competitive and not easy task.
The access to doctors and patients, since caution and ethical concerns for clinical
trials, for which an ethical clearance is needed. Along with this, also regulations
concerning medical devices and medical use represent a barrier to the development.
Competition has also been identiﬁed as a barrier for development. Finally, there is
also the fact that no devices are currently ready for pilot testing and that the actual
prototypes are not user friendly.
Resources: Resources in the short term will be the company’s team, volunteers
working part-time on the projects and the partnerships and collaboration estab-
lished, with particular emphasis on DTU, DTU Skylab, KU and Rigshospitalet.
5.4.2
Medium term
Future state: Within the end of the medium term, the future state is expected to
account for the FDA approval for the medical device for light therapy and for a
complete and successful mobile application that is able to collect personal data.
Moreover, a product for performance enhancement will be further optimized and it
will be made suitable to personalization.
==PAGE:54==
46
Chapter 5. Analysis
Key actions: Clinical trials will be carried out to understand the degree of
effectiveness of the medical application and see if any side effect connected to its
use will arise. The products will then be designed for volume manufacturing and a
distribution channel will be set up for retail sales of the medical device/application.
In addition, the product will be designed in combination with diagnostics by
linking the hardware to the data collected. This will also be done in synergy with
DNA sequencing, which will also be linked to diagnostics. With respect to this,
partnership with companies performing DNA sequencing will be crucial. Moreover,
given the implications connected to the use of data, security actions have to be taken
in order to protect the data collected. Other key activities consists in: establishing
advisers for PR and marketing, networking and generating new IP(s).
Enablers: A positive outcome of the scientiﬁc research connected to the medical
trails, together with a positive result of the FDA application will be among the most
essential enablers. Then, the achievement of the outsourcing of production will also
play a big role. This is also valid for the company’s partners. With regards to the
ﬁnancing, a VC funding round will be pursued.
Barriers: Firstly, it will be time and energy consuming to ﬁnd the right people to
be attracted within the company. Secondly, the achievement of a VC ﬁnancing is a
barrier itself, given the difﬁculty in obtaining the deal and the lower control on the
company resulting form it. Thirdly, inconclusive results from the clinical trials will
be a major barrier. Finally, it is expected that, at this stage, there will be competition
from the pharmaceutical industry.
Resources: Key resources have been identiﬁed in relation to the clinical tests and
scientiﬁc studies to be carried out. These resources are the laboratories at Berkeley
university, in particular for research studies on mice. Then, pharmaceutical compa-
nies such as Lundbeck and Novo Nordisk might collaborate and supply resources
for studies and researches. Finally, hospitals and general practitioners will be key to
achieve clinical testings.
5.4.3
Long term
Future state: The future state in the long term provides for the co-development
of the LEDs to be used and the integration of the technology solutions into the
general lighting system. It is also expected that such technological application will
be controllable, maybe through automation tehcnologies.
Key actions: It will be key to work together with politics and policy makers to
shape the environment of brain technologies, personalized medicine and diagnos-
tics.
Enablers:
As well as the previous periods, ﬁnancing is a key enabler, in
particular a three digit funding. Furthermore, new IPs and patents, together with
partnership with big consumers companies such as Philips will be fundamental.
Barriers: The only barrier that has been identiﬁed is competition.
==PAGE:55==
47
Chapter 6
Findings
6.1
Main Findings
From the analysis it was possible to generate a number of inferences in relation
to the research questions and problem statement presented at the very beginning
in section 1.2.
These ﬁndings will be illustrated and connected to the research
questions with the purpose of answering those questions.
In order to present the results of the research, the ﬁrst research question has been
addressed, which is:
Does the technology features, in particular having multiple application possibilities,
determine development trajectory?
It has been found that there is a correlation between the ’platform feature’, which
implies multiple application possibilities, and the development trajectory of the
technology, as described in the next paragraph.
Based on the analysis, it can be deducted that the development path is dependant
on the activities, resources and capabilities required for developing the base tech-
nology, i.e. blue light LEDs and the features related to it. In particular, the degree
of overlap of those three components, determines the development trajectory. The
two technology applications share part of the technological path needed to turn
them into products.
So, activities, resources and capabilities are to some extent
overlapping. For instance, as it can be seen from the case study, the two applications
share the prototyping activities, such as looking for better design of the electronics
and new design for the light diffuser; and also share pilot tests activities, that require
the same resources, e.g. fMRI, EEG and MEG machinery, and the same medical
and scientiﬁc capabilities. Therefore, decisions concerning the trajectory are made
considering the signiﬁcance of this overlap between the two applications.
This
means that at some moment in time the development path of the two applications
become ’specialized’. Then the overlap decreases to the point that it is advantageous
to split the trajectory. Yet, until that point, the joint development induces a more
efﬁcient use of resources and capabilities. Referring to the study case, it can be
seen that development activities concerning the design and optimization of the
base technology are run jointly until the path of the two applications is split.
Operationally, this is translated into, for instance, ﬁnding the right technological
setup (i.e. optimal light’s wavelength), scouting for the optimal components (i.e.
electrical components, LEDs), coding the algorithm controlling the functioning of
the base technology (i.e. LED light source). Performing such activities separately
for the applications leads to inefﬁciency.
Although, the development trajectory
==PAGE:56==
48
Chapter 6. Findings
of a platform technology that only focuses on resource efﬁciency can have some
drawbacks. As it is pictured in ﬁgure 2.4, the development trajectory is not only
driven by push factors (e.g. capabilities and resources), but also by pull factors
(e.g. market needs and business strategy). Therefore, by adopting a push-driven
trajectory, market drivers are not considered, that could potentially lead to missed
market opportunity for the health care and sports application. The reason behind
this biased approach to the development trajectory might reside in the highly
technical background of the workshop participants.
Then, the ﬁndings related to the second research question are illustrated below illus-
trated below:
What are the deciding factors that inﬂuence the outcome of technology development?
The deciding factors that have been identiﬁed can be classiﬁed in two main areas to
which those factors belong, which are the following: the macro-environment and
the ecosystem, that is comprised of the internal ecosystem and the external ecosys-
tem.
Macro-environment
The macro-environment is intended as the set of large drivers and forces external to
the company. Macro environment can inﬂuence the company and the outcome of
technology development. Indeed, trends are macro-environmental factor that have
an impact on the development of a technology. They are, as emerged by the analy-
sis, one of the deciding factors of technology outcome. The study case demonstrated
how the identiﬁcation of technology trends during the technology-application trend
assessment (section 5.1) and social, political, legal and demographic trends during
the scenario planning (section 5.2) were decisive in establishing the technology tra-
jectory in the roadmapping process.
For instance, the identiﬁed trends towards
big data and personalized medicine and diagnostics drove the decision regarding
the adoption of new technological features and capabilities, thereby inﬂuencing the
technology development path and its outcome.
Ecosystem
As far as the ecosystem is concerned, it is intended as the economic and social
environment surrounding and constituting a company (a startup in the case of
analysis), forming a network of organizations and people. The ecosystem-related
factors have been divided into those coming from the internal ecosystem and those
coming from the external ecosystem.
The internal ecosystem, that is the one within the company’s boundaries, can inﬂu-
ence the outcome of technology development on the basis of the factors described
below.
The ﬁrst factor is the knowledge and capabilities possessed by the team members.
It is important to have a diverse team, in terms of competences. Whenever the
capabilities needed for the development of a technology are missing, the trajectory
and the outcome may be inﬂuenced by this. Acquiring new employees might not
be an option due to scarce resources. Then, in such situation, strategical decisions
about technology have to be taken, for example about in-house or outsourced
==PAGE:57==
6.1. Main Findings
49
development. By looking at the study case, the mobile application feature requires
new knowledge and capabilities concerning application’s programming and the
possibility of outsourcing the development is considered for the future.
The second factor of the internal ecosystem is the previous experience and back-
ground of the founding members, especially during the planning phase, when
generating the technology trajectory (i.e. a roadmap) and the action plan. Experi-
ence in the industry and with the technology is remarkably important. However,
the experience as an entrepreneur is as relevant, if not more.
The contribution
from experienced members is of great importance for the technology development
and its outcome, since it also affects the company’s network, which is part of the
external ecosystem, as explained later. With respect to the study case, the team is
very technology driven and science driven, since it is made of mostly engineers
(students, graduate and professors) and one PhD graduate in biology, Ngoc Mai
Nguyen. Technical skills involve areas such as electrical, photonics, nanotechnolo-
gies, physics and industrial engineering. The team also includes skills concerning
prototyping, programming and neurobiology. The team leader Jes Broeng is also an
experienced entrepreneur, with high-tech startups and 20-years working experience
approximately. On the contrary, all the other members are quite young and have
a 0-5 years working experience.
Besides, somebody having pure business skills
is missing, which could make the difference, especially for a startup wanting to
sell a B2C product. Business and marketing skills are even more valuable in such
case. By confronting this with the trajectory, somebody who is specialized in mobile
app coding and data protection.
Product development is also a central activity
of development for this technology. Somebody with relevant skills is needed at
the right point in time, so that it will be possible to push the technology to the
market. Nonetheless, skills and competencies alone cannot guarantee a successful
outcome. Indeed, managing people is crucial: as previously deﬁned in 2.1, effective
communication and understanding needs to be established to link people to the
startup strategic goals. Therefore, when aiming at a successful trajectory outcome,
these aspect cannot be ignored.
Thirdly, the vision of the team is also crucial. Having a clear vision of the technology
development plays an important role in establishing the development trajectory.
A vision encompassing the macro-environment trends, visualizing the form and
features of a future technology application and foresee the shape of the market
and the industry is a factor of success for the technology development process.
The entrepreneurial vision combines the deciding factors and acts upon them at
the same time, with the purpose of achieving a successful outcome. This has been
shown by the roadmapping process, where all the deciding factors (e.g. technology
trends, future industry players and scenario, capabilities) have been taken into
account to generate a roadmap to elaborate a development trajectory. Then, the
roadmap has been put into an action plan translating the entrepreneurial vision into
concrete activities to be carried out and underlining the enabling elements. In both
cases, the entrepreneurial vision possesses by the two most experienced participants
with regard to entrepreneurship (i.e. Ngoc Mai Nguyen and Jes Broeng) made the
difference in generating a meaningful content, above all on a scientiﬁc and technical
point of view.
Nevertheless, a development trajectory cannot be based only on
entrepreneurial vision. The technology management is also about company strategy
and the achievement of company objectives. Although, company objectives and a
company strategy have not been a factor determining the development trajectory in
==PAGE:58==
50
Chapter 6. Findings
the case study.
With regards to the external ecosystem, it is deﬁned as the network of organizations
and people residing outside a company’s boundaries, having a relationship with the
company and thereby shaping the environment where the company develops and
grows. Technology development is inﬂuenced by factors connected to the external
ecosystem.
Partnerships, collaborations and co-operations are a factor contributing to the
technology development and to its success. Indeed, it is clear from the analysis that
a fundamental factor for developing a technological application is having the right
partnerships and collaborations in place, particularly for a startup with very limited
resources and a focused know-how.
With respect to this, having an extensive
network proved to be a critical factor to reach collaborators and partners. Indeed,
this can be seen by the many collaborations and partnerships in place in the study
case. For instance, key activities will be performed thanks to partnership with the
University of Copenhagen; many partners are considered enablers for success, such
as the Texas Medical Center and Copenhagen Center for Health Technology among
others; and searching for partners is also considered a key action to be performed to
acquire the technological capabilities about the DNA sequencing technology. This
importance that is given to partnerships and collaboration is also due to the difﬁ-
culty for a startup company to engage big and established players. Networking can
therefore limit this barrier. It is relevant to say that not only big organizations but
also other startups can be the objective of collaboration agreements, especially when
cutting-edge technology are concerned. Even though they can be easier to reach,
being aware of their existence can be challenging, hence the signiﬁcance of networks.
The last factor, which is also strictly connected to the previous one, is having a
startup-friendly environment, meaning that an ecosystem favorable to startups
is in place. In particular, in relation to the study case, it has been found that a
friendly ecosystem is fundamental in facilitating and improving the technological
development. Indeed, many of the actions provided for the development of the
technology application are the result of actions taken by governments and private
or public organizations to foster innovation through entrepreneurship. Both the
project under analysis beneﬁted from this kind of environment. Concretely, support
has been received in many ways: through mentoring; through DTU skylab; through
DTU’s Proof of Concept fund; through funding from the Danish Foundation for
Entrepreneurship; and through the Open Entrepreneurship program, which creates
a network of universities, researchers, investors, companies and entrepreneurs.
These initiatives, together with european initiatives and innovation challenges,
enable technology development and inﬂuence its outcome.
Once the deciding factors have been identiﬁed and describes, the third research
question is addressed:
How can these factors be managed for successful outcome?
Aiming at increasing the probability of success, the factors described above can be
handled and control those factor determining the future outcome of the technology
development process.
==PAGE:59==
6.1. Main Findings
51
Looking at platform technologies development, it is crucial to look for and clearly
recognize the overlapping activities, capabilities and resources in the development
path of different applications from the earliest stages, to leverage from those
commonalities. Although, it is arguable that this could also distract from market
opportunities. It can result into a lost opportunity to develop a minimum viable
product and push it to the market, collecting revenues and receiving customer
feedback.
Such feedback may also turn out to be valuable for the health care
application, since the user experience is similar under certain aspects.
It might
be difﬁcult to receiving customer feedback from broad range of people due to
regulatory restriction.
Furthermore, this may also allow the possibility to focus
on an application that is easier and more feasible to develop, with the purpose of
reaching the market as quickly as possible. When developing platform technologies,
companies may discriminate according to the applications’ time-to-market and
plan technology development accordingly. This way, applications with a shorter
time-to-market can use this as a way to collect early revenues from an application of
the platform technology, while the other is still under development. Those revenues
can enable the ﬁnancing of other technological applications that need a longer
development.
As far as the macro-environment is concerned, the way it inﬂuences the develop-
ment of a technology can be handled by being aware of how it can change in the
future and leveraging the trends connected to the area (industry and/or market)
of interest to develop successful technology applications. It is also important how
the competitive environment will change and what players will shape the industry
of the future.
Although a company cannot control the macro-environment, the
awareness of such factors surely helps in managing and planning the technology
path for a better outcome. Indeed, by knowing the macro-environment and how
it will evolve in the future, it will be possible to steer the technology development
accordingly and since an early stage take actions such as setting targets for partner-
ships to be established and capabilities and resources to be acquired.
Concerning the company’s ecosystem, external factors resulted to be among the
most impacting on developing a technology application, in particular being in an
environment fostering innovation and entrepreneurship. It is in the interest of en-
trepreneurs to build their businesses within a habitat where entrepreneurship is sup-
ported by incubators, accelerators, universities, innovation hubs, mentoring pro-
grams and by a network of companies eager to collaborate for innovation. Both
established companies and startups beneﬁt from it. The former monitor the indus-
try and the competitive environment (i.e. part of the macro-environment), beneﬁt-
ing from the relationship with startups developing cutting-edge technologies. On
the other hand, entrepreneurs and startups take advantage of the support given by
those institutions and initiatives. Support is given in the form of: counseling from
experienced entrepreneurs and professionals, access to facilities for technology de-
velopment, and networking. This last element is fundamental for the establishment
of partnership and collaboration for technology development and commercializa-
tion, which have been considered another important factor to be handled to deter-
mine a successful outcome. Indeed, it is also possible to control, to some extent, the
competitive environment by collaborating with competitors for the development of
a technological application, or a subsystem of it, instead of purely compete with
each other. This may allow to share the burden of resources for the development,
==PAGE:60==
52
Chapter 6. Findings
increasing the likelihood of a positive outcome. Given the beneﬁcial results of part-
nerships for technology development, managers and entrepreneurs are encouraged
to perceive them. Although, establishing relationships with the right entities, in ac-
cordance to the development trajectory planned, is not an easy task, since the plan-
ning itself depends on the vision and foreseeing capacity of technology develop-
ment managers and entrepreneurs. This are based on people’s experience and this
can sometimes be missing. Nevertheless, the team diversity factor can play a role
in this, based on the fact that having a diverse team can determine a comprehen-
sive approach to technology development. Besides giving an advantage in terms of
available capabilities, team diversity can help building a team vision, whenever the
vision of a single entrepreneur is lacking.
6.2
Strategic Recommendation
After the application of the technology management tools during the analysis, a
development trajectory for the blue light LED technology has been elaborated.
However, the trajectory developed cannot be considered complete, given the
technical bias of those elaborating it. Indeed, the trajectory has been mostly affected
by the technical perspective and few market factors have been considered while
developing it. Although, the tools used proven to be valid and a further iteration
could improve the result, in light of the this thesis ﬁndings.
In particular, the
roadmapping tool offers the possibility to consider the market aspects and it might
be used differently in the next iteration. If applied correctly is could correct some
of the biases.
Furthermore, the participation of somebody with a business and
commercial background is suggested.
Adler (1989) deﬁnes technology policy as a set of choices ﬁrms make on acquisition,
development and deployment to achieve strategy goals.
It can be questioned,
whether there are clear enough roles and goals in order to do proper manage
technology.
It is stressed how important it is to manage the interdependence
between the business strategy and the technology policy.
Further it has been
highlighted by Zahra and Covin (1993), that it is up to managers to make sure
to design and implement processes of technology policy into the organization, to
ensure ﬁt between choices and business strategy.
It is clear that there has been spend a lot of time driving the technology policy in
these two case studies. But one divergence is clear, that there are no clear roles
deﬁned in the health care case, and there is mainly one person driving the sports
case.
==PAGE:61==
53
Chapter 7
Limitations & Conclusions
Limitations have been mainly identiﬁed in the process of data collection.
The
workshop has been the methodology chosen to collect data. First of all a limitation
consisted in the choice of the participants, since two perspective where missing:
1) a commercial perspective, since there were no participants with a business and
commercial education or experience. 2) The majority of participants had much more
information about the health care application, since they are part of the project team;
so, participants were biased by their knowledge on the case and by their interests.
Secondly, the performing of the workshop activities was not very structured. This is
due to the lack of a real facilitator, to the poor experience with such task and to the
low familiarity with the workshop templates.
To conclude, the analysis illustrated that technology management can be done
through the use of tools such as technology-application trend assessment, scenario
planning, roadmapping and action planning.
My ﬁndings showed that there is a correlation between the multiple application pos-
sibilities and the development trajectory of the blue light LED technology. Further-
more, the factors that inﬂuence the outcome of technology development are: the
macro-environment, the the knowledge and capabilities possessed by the team, the
previous experience and back-ground, the vision, partnerships, collaborations and
co-operations and a startup friendly environment. Finally, indications on how to
handle those factors have been provided.
Despite the tools and the ﬁndings the strategic recommendations showed some
shortcomings in the case study, conﬁrming that managing technology in an ever-
changing world is hard.
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
55
Bibliography
Adler, P.S. 1989. Technology Strategy: A Guide to the Literatures. In Research on Tech-
nological Innovation, Management and Policy, ed. R.S. Rosenbloom and R.A. Burgel-
man. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press pp. 25–151.
Bildosola,
I.,
R.M.
Rio-Belver,
G.
Garechana
and
E.
Cilleruelo.
2017.
“TeknoRoadmap, an approach for depicting emerging technologies.” Techno-
logical Forecasting & Social Change 117:25–37.
Cajochen, C., S. Frey, D. Anders, J. Späti, M. Bues, A. Pross, R. Mager, A. Wirz-Justice
and O. Stefani. 2011. “Evening exposure to a light-emitting diodes (LED)-backlit
computer screen affects circadian physiology and cognitive performance.” Journal
of Applied Physiology 110(5):1432–1438.
Cetindamar, D., R. Phaal and D. Probert. 2009. “Understanding technology manage-
ment as a dynamic capability: A framework for technology management activi-
ties.” Technovation 29:237–246.
Cho, Y., S.P. Yoon and K.S. Kim. 2016. “An industrial technology roadmap for sup-
porting public R&D planning.” Technological Forecasting & Social Change 107:1–12.
Garvin, D.A. and L. Levesque. 2005. “A note on scenario planning.” Harvard Busi-
ness School Background Note 306-003.
Haddad, C.R. and M.U. Maldonado. 2017. “A functions approach to improve sec-
toral technology roadmaps.” Technological Forecasting & Social Change 115:251–260.
Iaccarino, H.F., A.C. Singer, A.J. Martorell, A. Rudenko, F. Gao, T.Z. Gillingham,
H. Mathys, J. Seo, O. Kritskiy, F. Abdurrob, C. Adaikkan, R.G. Canter, R. Rueda,
E.N. Brown, E.S. Boyden and L.H. Tsai. 2016. “Gamma frequency entrainment
attenuates amyloid load and modiﬁes microglia.” Nature 540:230–235.
Jin, J. and M. von Zedtwitz. 2008. “Technological capability development in China’s
mobile phone industry.” Technovation 28:327–334.
Kuse, Y., K. Ogawa, K. Tsuruma, M. Shimazawa and H. Hara. 2014. “Damage of
photoreceptor-derived cells in culture induced by light emitting diode-derived
blue light.” Scientiﬁc Reports 4.
Lee, H. and Y. Geum. 2017.
“Development of the scenario-based technology
roadmap considering layer heterogeneity: An approach using CIA and AHP.”
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 117:12–24.
Oliver, J.J. and E. Parrett. 2017. “Managing future uncertainty: Reevaluating the role
of scenario planning.” Business Horizons . In press.
Phaal, R., C. Kerr, I. Ilevbare, C.J.P. Farrukh, M. Routley and N.Athanassopoulou.
2016. On ’self-facilitating’ templates for technology and innovation workshops.
Technical Report 8 Centre for Technology Management, University of Cambridge.
==PAGE:64==
56
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Phaal, R., C.J.P. Farrukh and D.R. Probert. 2004. “Technology roadmapping—A plan-
ning framework for evolution and revolution.” Technological Forecasting & Social
Change 71(1-2):5–26.
Phaal, R., C.J.P. Farrukh and D.R. Probert. 2007.
“Strategic Roadmapping:
A
Workshop-based Approach for Identifying and Exploring Strategic Issues and Op-
portunities.” Engineering Management Journal 19(1):3–12.
Phaal, R., E. O’Sullivan, M. Routley, S. Ford and D. Probert. 2011.
“A frame-
work for mapping industrial emergence.” Technological Forecasting & Social Change
78(2):217–230.
Phaal, R. and G. Muller. 2009. “An architectural framework for roadmapping: To-
wards visual strategy.” Technological Forecasting & Social Change 76(1):39–49.
Porter, M.E. 1985. The Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Perfor-
mance. NY: Free Press. Republished with a new introduction, 1998.
Ringland, G. and P. Schwartz préfacier. 1998.
Scenario planning: managing for the
future. John Wiley & Sons.
Schubert, E.F. 2006. Light Emitting Diodes. 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press.
Shane, S. 2000. “Prior Knowledge and the Discovery of Entrepreneurial Opportuni-
ties.” Organization Science 11(4):448–469.
Smick, K., T. Villette, M.E. Boulton, G.C. Brainard, W. Jones, P. Karpecki, R. Melton,
R. Thomas, D.H. Sliney and D.L. Shechtman. 2013.
Blue Light Hazard: New
Knowledge, New Approaches to Maintaining Ocular Health. Technical report Re-
port of a round table, sponsored by Essilor of America.
Teece, D.J. 2010. “Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation.” Long Range
Planning 43(2-3):172–194.
Tosini, G., I. Ferguson and K. Tsubota. 2016. “Effects of blue light on the circadian
system and eye physiology.” Molecular Vision 22:61–72.
Vandewalle, G., S. Schwartz, D. Grandjean, C. Wuillaume, E. Balteau, C. Deguel-
dre, M. Schabus, C. Phillips, A. Luxen, D.J. Dijk and P. Maquet. 2010. “Spectral
quality of light modulates emotional brain responses in humans.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 107(45):19549–19554.
Veeraraghavan, V. 2009. “Entrepreneurship and Innovation.” Asia-Paciﬁc Business
Review 5(1):14–20.
Venkataraman, S. 1997. The Distinctive Domain of Entrepreneurship Research. In
Advances in Entrepreneursp, Firm Emergence and Growtb, ed. J. Katz and R. Brock-
haus. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press pp. 119–138.
Yin, R.K. 1994. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 2nd ed. SAGE Publications.
Zahra, S.A. and J.G. Covin. 1993. “Business strategy, technology policy and ﬁrm
performance.” Strat. Mgmt. J. 14:451–478.
Zhang, Y., G. Zhang, H. Chen, A.L. Porter, D. Zhu and J. Lu. 2016. “Topic analy-
sis and forecasting for science, technology and innovation: Methodology with a
case study focusing on big data research.” Technological Forecasting & Social Change
105:179–191.
==PAGE:65==
57
Appendix A
Workshop Templates
Template #1: Technology-Application Trend Assessment
FIGURE A.1: Template #1: trends, drivers and application analysis.
==PAGE:66==
58
Appendix A. Workshop Templates
Template #2: Scenario 2040
FIGURE A.2: Template #2: scenario planning generation for transfor-
mative horizon.
==PAGE:67==
Appendix A. Workshop Templates
59
Template #3: Roadmapping
FIGURE A.3: Template #3: roadmap generation.
==PAGE:68==
60
Appendix A. Workshop Templates
Template #4: Action Planning
FIGURE A.4: Template #4: action plan generation.
==PAGE:69==
61
Appendix B
Workshop: Template #1
FIGURE B.1: Overview of the template #1 ﬁlled out during the work-
shop.
==PAGE:70==
62
Appendix B. Workshop: Template #1
FIGURE B.2: Template #1, detail #1
FIGURE B.3: Template #1, detail #2
==PAGE:71==
Appendix B. Workshop: Template #1
63
FIGURE B.4: Template #1, detail #3
FIGURE B.5: Template #1, detail #4
==PAGE:72==
64
Appendix B. Workshop: Template #1
FIGURE B.6: Template #1, detail #5
FIGURE B.7: Template #1, detail #6
==PAGE:73==
65
Appendix C
Workshop: Template #2
FIGURE C.1: Overview of the template #2 ﬁlled out during the work-
shop.
==PAGE:74==
66
Appendix C. Workshop: Template #2
FIGURE C.2: Template #2, detail #1
FIGURE C.3: Template #2, detail #2
==PAGE:75==
Appendix C. Workshop: Template #2
67
FIGURE C.4: Template #2, detail #3
FIGURE C.5: Template #2, detail #4
==PAGE:76==
68
Appendix C. Workshop: Template #2
FIGURE C.6: Template #2, detail #5
FIGURE C.7: Template #2, detail #6
==PAGE:77==
69
Appendix D
Workshop: Template #3
FIGURE D.1: Overview of the template #3 ﬁlled out during the work-
shop.
==PAGE:78==
70
Appendix D. Workshop: Template #3
FIGURE D.2: Template #3, detail #1
FIGURE D.3: Template #3, detail #2
==PAGE:79==
Appendix D. Workshop: Template #3
71
FIGURE D.4: Template #3, detail #3
FIGURE D.5: Template #3, detail #4
==PAGE:80==
72
Appendix D. Workshop: Template #3
FIGURE D.6: Template #3, detail #5
FIGURE D.7: Template #3, detail #6
==PAGE:81==
Appendix D. Workshop: Template #3
73
FIGURE D.8: Template #3, detail #7
FIGURE D.9: Template #3, detail #8
==PAGE:82==
74
Appendix D. Workshop: Template #3
FIGURE D.10: Template #3, detail #9
==PAGE:83==
75
Appendix E
Workshop: Template #4
FIGURE E.1: Overview of the template #4 ﬁlled out during the work-
shop.
==PAGE:84==
76
Appendix E. Workshop: Template #4
FIGURE E.2: Template #4, detail #1
FIGURE E.3: Template #4, detail #2
==PAGE:85==
Appendix E. Workshop: Template #4
77
FIGURE E.4: Template #4, detail #3
FIGURE E.5: Template #4, detail #4
==PAGE:86==
78
Appendix E. Workshop: Template #4
FIGURE E.6: Template #4, detail #5
FIGURE E.7: Template #4, detail #6
==PAGE:87==
Appendix E. Workshop: Template #4
79
FIGURE E.8: Template #4, detail #7
FIGURE E.9: Template #4, detail #8
