==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
The effect of copper on microbial
processes in drinking water rapid fil-
ters
Anne Holm Thomsen (s122965)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Environment
Department of Environmental Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet
Building 115
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1600
info@env.dtu.dk
www.env.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In recent years Danish water works have struggled to comply with guideline values on
ammonium concentration in drinking water. Research within the field of nitrification,
by which ammonium is converted, is rapidly developing and in demand. Identifying
the causes of insufficient nitrification in biological sand filters, can be a challenging task
for water works. Current knowledge suggests that copper can be of great importance
to the nitrification process by activating an essential enzyme to the bio-chemical oxida-
tion. However, literature is lacking on the required concentration of copper to stimulate
nitrification in these drinking water systems, including methods to evaluate this.
Therefore this project aims to contribute to the development of a bioassay determin-
ing the effect of copper dosing on nitrification, which could help resolve the issue on
insufficient ammonium removal in drinking water rapid sand filters.
Through fed-batch experiments a mixed nitrifying culture originating from a sand
filter was extracted and enriched to a suitable inoculum. This was applied in the design
of a bioassay adapted from the principles of De Vet et al. (2012). Nitrification rates
were estimated by analyzing the change in nitrogen compounds, when dosing different
concentrations of copper.
The rate of ammonium removal was found to increase linearly with the concentra-
tion of copper in the range between 0 and 1.0 µg Cu/L. Nitrification rates were found
limited at copper concentrations below 0.5 ng Cu/L, and results suggested that copper
is required at concentrations above 39 ng Cu/L to facilitate nitrification.
The bioassay was applied to inlet source water from two Danish water works. Dosing
copper at a concentration of 1.0 µg Cu/L increased nitrification rates up to 17-fold.
This effect of copper dosing was higher for the water works with insufficient nitrification,
compared to the water source from a well-functioning sand filter.
This project successfully developed a novel bioassay to determine the effect of copper
dosing on nitrification.
The project further demonstrated how this method can be
applied as a diagnostic tool at drinking water treatment facilities. Applying this tool
and identifying copper deficiency, can help water works resolve the excessive ammonium
and nitrite concentrations compromising the water quality.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Sammenfatning
Danske vandværker har i de seneste år haft vanskeligt ved at overholde drikkevandsbek-
endtgørelsens krav for ammoniumindholdet i drikkevand. Dette har øget interessen for
forskning indenfor nitrifikation i biologiske sandfiltre, som fjerner ammonium på danske
vandværker. Årsagerne til utilstrækkelig ammoniumfjernelse er mange og kan ofte være
svære at identificere. Undersøgelser har peget på, at kobber kan være afgørende for at
facilitere ammoniumfjernelse i sandfiltre, da kobberioner aktiverer enzymer, der kataly-
serer nitrifikationsprocessen. Der forelægger imidlertid kun begrænset evidens for, hvilke
koncentrationer af kobber, der stimulerer nitrifikation, og analysemetoderne til at påvise
en effekt af kobberdosering er ikke tilgængelige.
Dette projekt har derfor til formål at bidrage til udviklingen af en stadardmetode,
til evaluering af effekten af kobbertilsætning og derigennem at afhjælpe utilstrækkelig
ammoniumfjernelse i drikkevandsproduktion.
Gennem eksperimentelt arbejde blev en kultur af nitrifikationsbakterier ekstraheret
fra et sandfilter og dyrket til en standardiseret starterkultur, som blev anvendt i design af
et biologisk assay. Ved brug af simple kemiske analysemetoder blev omsætningsrater for
nitrifikationsprocessen estimeret under tilsætning af forskellige kobberkoncentrationer.
Resultaterne viser, at raten for omsætning af ammonium stiger lineært med en øget
koncentration af kobber mellem 0-1µg Cu/L. Nitrifikationsraterne blev generelt fundet
begrænset af kobberkoncentrationer under 0.5µg Cu/L, og resultaterne indikerer, at en
koncentration på minimum 39 ng Cu/L er nødvendig for at facilitere ammoniumom-
dannelse af bakterier i sandfiltre. Det biologiske assay blev anvendt i en undersøgelse
af vand fra to danske vandværker, hvor effekten af kobber blev vurderet ved dosering
af 1µg Cu/L. Konklusionen på analysen viser, at tilsætning af kobber kan mangedoble
omsætningsraten. Samtidig blev effekten af kobberdosering fundet markant større på et
vandværk, der kæmper med utilstrækkelig ammoniumfjernelse.
Det lykkedes således med dette projekt at påvise, at kobber kan have en positiv effekt
på ammoniumomsætningen i biologiske sandfiltre, gennem udvikling af et nyt biologisk
assay. Projektet viste yderligere, hvordan dette assay kan anvendes som et diagnostisk
værktøj til at afhjælpe problemer med ammoniumfjernelse, hvilket kan føre til en øget
vandkvalitet.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Environmental Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
master degree in environmental engineering. The thesis was written during the period
January 2nd to June 2nd, 2018. The project accounts for 30 ECTS credits.
Kongens Lyngby, June 2, 2018
Anne Holm Thomsen (s122965)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would first and foremost like to thank my supervisor professor Hans-Jørgen Albrecht-
sen for making this project possible, and for professional guidance throughout the five
months. I appreciate the weekly status meetings you managed to keep despite your busy
calendar. Thank you for the challenging opportunity to work on something that was so
uncertain and for having faith in my lab skills. A special thanks to my co-supervisor
postdoc Carson Odell Lee for navigation and motivation throughout the project. Thank
you for always having a spare minute to discuss the wonders of nitrification, and thank
you for sharing all your knowledge on both experimental matters, data treatment and
so many odd things in life. Thank you for always having an extra pair of gloves on you,
and for allowing me to use your wastewater-free lab equipment.
Thanks furthermore to my technical supervisor research engineer Mikael Emil Olsson
for supervision in the laboratories. I appreciate especially your lecture on IcP-MF and all
the effort you put into detecting copper at such low concentrations. Thanks to laboratory
trainee Isabella Bech Meklenborg Joensen for running hundreds of water samples through
the Skalar analyzer. Thanks to laboratory technicians Hector Hernan Caro Garcia, Lene
Kirstejn Jensen and Sinh Hy Nguyen for co-supervision in the laboratories. I would
moreover like to thank postdoc Jane Fowler and senior researcher Arnaud Dechesne for
advisory on the very slow growing microbes, and in the preparation of artificial growth
media. Thanks to Florian Wagner for leaving behind not only experience on the effects
of copper but also a trace metal stock solution. I would of course like to thank the
part-taking water works for having me come and sample at their locations; thanks to
Brøndbyvester water work for the filter material, and to Islevbro and Nærum water
works for letting me sample inlet water for investigation.
On a different but yet serious note I would like to thank all my co-MSc students
at DTU for good company in every lunch and coffee break. Being a student amongst
such great fellow students makes me almost want to do another thesis. Thanks to Sevil
Vafadar Afshar for her motivational talks in the laboratory, and for laughing at all my
bad jokes. Thanks to Anne Lørup Arildsen for encouraging hugs over very strong black
DTU coffee.
Finally I would like to thank my friends and family for kind support and love through
my education at DTU. Thanks to my granddad Bent for reminding me that tomorrow
has fresh opportunities and that smiling makes you feel a lot better.
Last but not least I would like to thank everyone at DTU Environment for being a
great institution of education and research, and for making me believe that we can make
the world a little more sustainable.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Sammenfatning
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
List of Abbreviations
xiii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Drinking water production in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Aeration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Filtration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Water quality and problems with ammonium removal . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Nitrification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Copper and nitrification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Bioavailability of copper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Methods to evaluate microbial available copper
. . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
Project motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Method
17
3.1
Stock solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Artificial growth medium for nitrifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Inoculum
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.1
Sampling strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2
Ammonium analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.3
DO and pH monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.4
IcP metal analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
3.4
Data treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Inoculum tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5.1
Inoculum test 1 - Making a nitrifying culture . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5.2
Inoculum test 2 - Using inoculum in batch experiments . . . . . .
23
3.5.3
Inoculum test 3 - Optimizing inoculum performance . . . . . . . .
24
3.6
Bioassay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6.1
Tested source water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6.2
Copper experiment 1 - Effect of copper dosing . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6.3
Copper experiment 2 - Experimental design and references batches
26
3.6.4
Copper experiment 3 - Formulation of a standard curve . . . . . .
27
3.6.5
Copper experiment 4 - Applying method to a different water source 28
4
Results and Discussion
29
4.1
Preparation of nitrifying cultures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Use and optimization of inoculum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Testing the effect of copper dosing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Evaluating inoculum performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.1
Trace copper concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.2
Effect of pH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5
Investigation of different inlet water sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.6
Dose-response curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Discussion
45
5.1
A diagnostic tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Comparing findings to other studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Assumptions of the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Standardized inoculum for bioassay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.5
Recommendations for further research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
52
Appendices
60
A Inoculum test - 1
61
B Inoculum test - 2
69
C Inoculum test - 3
73
D Copper test - 1
77
E Copper test - 2
81
F Copper test - 3
85
==PAGE:13==
Contents
xi
G Copper test - 4
89
H Nitrogen balance
91
I
IcP analysis
95
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
List of Abbreviations
AOB
Ammonia Oxidizing Bacteria
AOA
Ammonia Oxidizing Archaea
Comammox
COMplete AMMonia OXidizer
HB
Heterotrophic Bacteria
DO
Dissolved Oxygen
AMO
Ammonia Mono-Oxygenase
ARR
Ammonium Removal Rate
Skalar
Automated Wet Chemistry Analyzer
CFA
Continuous Flow Analyzer
IcP
Iductively-coupled Plasma - Mass spectrometry
==PAGE:16==
xiv
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Clean drinking water is vital for healthy and sustainable living. Fresh water resources
account for less than 3 % of the earth’s water reservoir, of which the majority is found in
ice and glaciers (WWAP, 2003). Groundwater is an important source for drinking water
production as it makes up about 30 % of the global fresh water resource. Moreover,
groundwater is a protected water body that generally requires less treatment than water
derived from surface water sources such as lakes and rivers (Appelo and Postma, 2004),
and the carbon footprint of drinking water produced from groundwater is comparably
lower than that made from saline sources (Godskesen et al., 2018).
In Denmark the production of drinking water relies solely on groundwater abstrac-
tion (Jørgensen and Stockmarr, 2009). The anoxic groundwater undergoes treatment
steps of aeration and filtration before it is lead to the distribution system. The quality of
the produced drinking water is subject to national and international regulation stating
the maximum concentration of chemical compounds, as well as microbial and aesthetic
criteria. The main focuses in treating groundwater for drinking water production in-
clude addition of oxygen and removal of reduced species such as manganese, iron and
ammonium.
Ammonium is a reduced compound found in varying concentrations in the anoxic
groundwater. It is important to lower the concentration of ammonium when producing
drinking water for several reasons. If ammonium is present in the distribution system
it can cause regrowth of microbes, and associated problems with water quality and
corrosive conditions (Van Der Kooij, 2000). The maximum allowed concentration of
ammonium in Danish drinking water is 0.05 mgNH4/L (Ministry of Environment and
Food of Denmark, 2017). In recent years Danish water works have struggled to effectively
lower the ammonium concentration in drinking water (Danish Environmental Agency,
2017). Approximately 6 % of Danish water works exceed the quality regulation with
regards to ammonium concentration, This has emphasized the need to further investigate
and improve the current treatment technique.
Ammonium is removed from the water by a biological process called nitrification, in
which it is oxidized to nitrite and subsequently to nitrate (Prosser, 1990). This process is
carried out by ammonium oxidizing bacteria (AOB) or archaea (AOA). The biochemical
reaction is catalyzed by the microbial enzyme Ammonia Mono-Oxygenase (AMO), and
the enzyme is known to be activated by free copper ions (Ensign et al., 1993; Hyman
and Arp, 1992). Studies have found that dosing copper could potentially improve the
nitrification process (Wagner et al., 2016).
However, copper is also known to have
inhibitory effects on the nitrifying organisms (Loveless and Painter, 1968; Amin et al.,
2013; Aslan and Sozudogru, 2017). The current state of knowledge suggests that copper
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
concentrations can be of great importance to the performance of the nitrification process.
Nevertheless, current research fails to identify the effect of copper in drinking water
production at low copper concentrations, and provides no method of how or when copper
dosing can stimulate the nitrification process at drinking water production facilities.
Developing a method to quantify the effect of copper on nitrification in rapid sand
filters would assist in identifying if the current treatment process is limited by the copper
concentration. In case of copper depletion, dosing the right concentration would effec-
tively improve the water treatment process and could ultimately lead to a more efficient
production of drinking water while complying with water quality standards.
1.1
Objectives
The main goal of this project is to contribute to the develop a bioassay to determine
the effect of copper on nitrification in drinking water rapid sand filters. By applying
this method to operating water works, the project seeks to design a diagnostic tool to
evaluate if copper concentrations are limiting nitrification. The objectives of this project
include:
• Investigating current literature on the effect of copper on nitrification
• Assessing how to make an inoculum of a natural mixed nitrifying bacteria culture
originating from a rapid sand filter at an operating water work
• Developing a biological assay to determine the effect of copper on nitrification in
drinking water production:
– Using rate expression of ammonium removal/nitrite formation
– Applying as a diagnostic tool at operating water works
• Quantifying the correlation between copper and rate of nitrification
– Evaluate the range of copper concentrations to stimulate nitrification in drink-
ing water production
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
Having access to clean and healthy drinking water has always been an existential part of
human life. Water sources are vital for supplying drinking water, not only for consump-
tion in households, but also for agriculture and industries. Groundwater is an important
source for drinking water production (WWAP, 2003). The groundwater quality depends
strongly on the geology of the aquifer, its geographical location and the intensity of ab-
straction. The groundwater reservoir is maintained through infiltration from rainfall and
surface water. When the water travels downwards through layers in the soil, the concen-
tration of oxygen decreases due to microbial activity and diffusion limitation (Davidson
and Wilson, 2011). The dominating minerals in groundwater originate from the sedi-
mentary rocks in the ground, that has dissolved into the water phase. Other compounds
are products of microbial activity or above earth pollution leaching into the water body.
The quality of the groundwater is characterized by reduced species of hydrogen sulfide,
methane, dissolved iron, manganese, and ammonium. The anaerobic conditions exclude
a number of pathogenic bacteria that can cause health issues to humans (Appelo and
Postma, 2004). The properties of groundwater make it a viable source of fresh water,
that requires less treatment before consumption, resulting in a more environmentally
sustainable method of drinking water production (Godskesen et al., 2018).
The quality of the groundwater defines the necessary level of treatment, as the treated
water is subject to international and state regulation. The World Health Organization
(WHO) states international drinking water guidelines, in which common water con-
stituents are listed with maximum recommended concentrations (WHO, 2004).
The
European Commission have formulated the Drinking Water Directive, the legislative
foundation for drinking water quality in Europe (EU Council Directive, 1998). The di-
rective contains microbiological, chemical and indicator parameters for which the water
must be tested regularly, and found below the regulated maximum concentrations.
2.1
Drinking water production in Denmark
Denmark has approximately 2,600 centralized water works and 50,000 decentralized wa-
ter works and private abstraction wells (Danish Nature Agency, 2014). Danish water
works are traditionally owned and managed by the consumers, but bigger utility compa-
nies have gradually taken over the majority of drinking water production. In Denmark
drinking water is made up solely from groundwater resources (Jørgensen and Stockmarr,
2009). The water quality of Danish groundwater is generally recorded to be high, as
==PAGE:20==
4
2 Theory
regulation also states standards for the groundwater to be abstracted (Ministry of Envi-
ronment and Food of Denmark, 2017). If it does not comply with the standards, the well
is forced to close down. The groundwater is generally treated by aeration and filtration
before distributed to consumers (Figure 2.1).
Figure 2.1: Conceptual drawing of water treatment in Denmark from Wagner (2017)
adapted from VandCenterSyd (2017).
Shallow aquifers are particularly vulnerable to contamination from sources such as
fertilizers, manure and pesticides from households and agriculture as well as waste water
from industries (Appelo and Postma, 2004). This has forced several water works to
close down or move their abstraction wells to different locations (Jørgensen and Stock-
marr, 2009). The groundwater quality has been a challenge especially in well populated
areas of Denmark, where the level of abstraction is high or in areas with high risk of
anthropogenic contamination.
2.1.1
Aeration
After extraction the first step in treating the raw groundwater is aeration. Groundwater
is often depleted in oxygen as it originates from an anoxic environment. A sufficient
amount of oxygen is needed for the removal and conversion of different compounds
present in the raw groundwater.
During the aeration process unwanted gasses such as methane (CH4) and hydrogen
sulfide (H2S) are stripped away along with other volatile compounds (e.g. PCE and
TCE). When the groundwater is being aerated, its high content of carbon dioxide (CO2)
reacts with the air, and is ultimately stripped from the water. This leads to an increase
in pH, as a result of the carbonate system shifting speciation towards carbonate (CO2−
3 ).
Stripping of nitrogen from the groundwater is negligible when pH is close to neutral.
This is due to the low fraction of ammonia present at these conditions. If however, the
pH increasingly approaches 9.25, stripping of ammonia is expected.
The aeration step is essential for oxygen consuming processes such as iron and man-
ganese oxidation and nitrification. The aeration process oxidizes soluble metal salts into
insoluble hydroxides, and enables a physical removal of these compounds, due to forma-
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Drinking water production in Denmark
5
tion of particles (Gray, 1994). For example, during aeration iron II (Fe+2) is oxidized
into iron III (Fe+3), which causes a precipitation of the iron from the water.
2.1.2
Filtration
Different filtration technologies such as rapid sand filters, slow sand filters and roughing
filters are used to treat drinking water. Contaminants in the water are removed based
on physical, chemical and biological mechanisms. At Danish water works, rapid sand
filtration is the most commonly implemented.
The unfiltered water enters from the
top of the sand filter and flows vertically down through all layers by gravitational force
(Figure 2.2). A rapid sand filter is defined as having a filtration velocity of 5-15 m/h
(Crittenden and Harza, 2005). However, the filtration rate of some biological rapid sand
filters in Denmark can be 3 m/h or lower.
Figure 2.2: Conceptual model of a gravitational rapid sand filter from Lopato (2011).
Biological processes during filtration are carried out by microorganisms colonized in
the filter, present as biofilm in and around the filter material (Gülay, 2014). The micro-
bial community in the filter is dependent on several different parameters including filter
material, water temperature, and backwashing techniques (Gülay, 2014). Microorgan-
isms living in the sand filter remove and convert particles and soluble compounds such
as methane, hydrogen sulfide, iron, ammonium, and manganese (Arvin, 2002).
It is necessary to clean and maintain rapid sand filters in order to ensure the perfor-
mance of filtration. Depending on the volume-metric flow through the filter, the pore
spaces will clog due to precipitation of hydroxides, and accumulation of particles and
biomass within a range of a few days (Arvin, 2002). A clogged filter results in increased
headloss, which can affect the treatment efficiency of the filter. The filter cleaning is
carried out by backwashing, where the filter is being exposed to counter flow at high
water velocities.
==PAGE:22==
6
2 Theory
2.1.3
Water quality and problems with ammonium
removal
The Danish drinking water guidelines stated in the statuary order on water quality and
surveillance, contain concentration constraints for a comprehensive list of organic and
inorganic compounds as well as microbial and aesthetical parameters. The guideline
value for ammonium in Danish drinking water is 0.05 mg NH+
4 /L. This is significantly
lower than the European legislation governed through the Drinking Water Directive with
an ammonium guideline concentration of 0.5 mg/L. The national guideline values vary
for the different nitrogen compounds (Table 2.1).
Table 2.1: Guideline values for nitrogen compounds in Danish drinking water according
to Ministry of Environment and Food of Denmark (2017).
Compound
Constraint
(formula)
[mg/L]
Ammonium (NH+
4 )
0.05
Nitrite (NO−
2 )
0.01
Nitrate (NO3)
50
As stated by the guideline values, it is important to lower the concentration of ammo-
nium without accumulating nitrite, thus facilitating complete nitrification through rapid
sand filtration, Section 2.2. The guideline concentrations for ammonium and nitrite are
the most challenging in the national regulation, and concentrations have been exceeding
guideline values over a long period (Danish Nature Agency, 2009, 2014; Danish Environ-
mental Agency, 2017). In recent years 6 % of Danish water works have not been able to
comply with the national regulation on ammonium and nitrite. However, when looking
only at facilities with a production capacity above 1,000 m3/d the number of recorded
exceedings is above 13 % (Wagner, 2017). Problems with nitrification can occur with
little observed cause. For example, a Danish water works having two identical filters
treating the same inlet water, was found to only meet the ammonium guideline value in
one of the filters (Wagner, 2017).
When electron donors like ammonium and nitrite are not removed, the drinking
water quality is compromised. If these compounds enter the distribution system, they
can potentially cause biological regrowth, oxygen consumption and associated problems
with odor, taste and corrosion (Van Der Kooij, 2000; Zhang et al., 2009; Prest et al.,
2016). Poor removal of ammonium and nitrite can be caused by periodically increased
ammonium loading to the water works, either by inlet concentration changes or shifts
in hydraulic loading (Lee et al., 2014). This could force the water works to lower their
throughput of water (e.i. total production of drinking water) to maintain a water quality
according to guideline values. It is of great importance for the water works to comply
with guideline values to ensure a stable production capacity and a validated drinking
water quality.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Nitrification
7
2.2
Nitrification
Ammonium (NH4) is one of the most dominant nitrogen compounds found in the ground-
water aquifer. It originates naturally from decay of organic matter of low concentrations
in groundwater <0.2 mg/L (WHO, 1996). Elevated ammonium concentration in ground-
water is often associated with antropogenic sources such as agricultural activity and
waste water effluent (Lingle, 2013).
In biological water treatment processes the am-
monium concentration is lowered through biological oxidation, in which ammonium is
oxidized to nitrate. This chemical conversion is called nitrification and is described by
the following Equations 2.1 and 2.2. In drinking water production the nitrification takes
place during filtration in biological sand filters. The nitrification process occurs in two
steps; 1) oxidation of ammonium to nitrite, and 2) oxidation of nitrite to nitrate. The
first step of nitrification is carried out by ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) and archaea
(AOA) (Prosser, 1990; Martens-Habbena and Stahl, 2011). The most commonly recog-
nized AOB is the genus Nitrosomonas, however, Nitrosococcus, Nitrosopira, Nitrosovib-
rio, and Nitrosolobus are also known ammonia-oxidizers (Rittmann and McCarty, 2012).
The genus prefix Nitroso indicates that they are related in the β-subdivision of the pro-
teobacteria (Teske et al., 1994). The second step of nitrification is carried out by nitrite
oxidizing bacteria (NOB), often distinguished by the Nitrobacter and Nitrosipra genus.
The NOB are related within the α-subdivision of the proteobacteria (Teske et al., 1994).
New research has discovered COMplete AMMonia OXidizer (Comammox) being able
to carry both steps of nitrification (Daims et al., 2015). However, their contribution to
nitrification for engineered applications is unknown.
NH3 + 2
3O2
AOB
−−−→
AOA NO−
2 + H+ + H2O
(2.1)
NO−
2 + 1
2O2
NOB
−−−→NO−
3
(2.2)
The microbes carrying out nitrification are chemolithotrophs, autotrophs and aer-
obes, which indicate that they fix an inorganic carbon source, use a nitrogen compound
as electron donor and require oxygen for respiration and as electron acceptor.
This
makes for an energy intensive process with low biomass yield and low maximum growth
rates (Rittmann and McCarty, 2012). Compared to other aerobic heterotrophs, nitrifiers
store very few electrons in biomass which result in a low growth yield.
AOB originating from freshwater environments belong to the Nitrosomonas and Ni-
trosospira lineageas, members of the β-subclass of the proteobacteria (Purkhold et al.,
2003). Nitrosomonas europaea is the most commonly studied ammonia oxidizer, as it
has been available for pure culture growing for more than 60 years (Meiklejohn, 1950;
Engel and Alexander, 1958).
Being biological oxidation processes, nitrification is easily affected by the surrounding
environmental conditions. Physical and chemical parameters are required for activity
and growth of nitrifiers (Wolfe and Lieu, 2001). The nitrification process is known to be
affected by the following parameters:
==PAGE:24==
8
2 Theory
Ammonium
The concentration of ammonium being the substrate of utilization is
very important for nitrification to occur.
The concentration of ammonium in water
is described as the sum of ammonium ions and its uncharged form ammonia (NH3)
according to the following:
NH+
4 + H2O ↔NH3 + H3O+
pKa = 9.25
(2.3)
The dissociation indicates that ammonium reacting as a weak acid will cause a shift
in speciation with pH changes and an increase in pH will result in increasing ammonia
concentration. At neutral pH the concentration of total ammonium is dominated by the
ammonium ions (NH+
4 ). Although ammonia is considered the substrate of nitrification
the acid/base chemistry cause the kinetics to be considered as the sum of ammonia and
ammonium ions often written as ammonium (Grady Jr et al., 2011).
Limitation by substrate availability is often described through Monod kinetics:
µ = µmax ·
Ss
Ks + Ss
(2.4)
where µ is the specific growth rate at the substrate concentration Ss, µmax is the max-
imum specific growth rate, and Ks is the half-saturation coefficient. The lower the Ks,
the higher the affinity for a given substrate. The maximum specific growth rate of AOB
have been reported in the range of 0.3-2.2 d−1 (Jang et al., 2005; Harrington et al., 2003).
Research have found lower Ks values for AOA and Comammox, which is likely why their
contribution in drinking water systems could be negligible (Martens-Habbena and Stahl,
2011; Daims et al., 2015). Ammonium limitation can be critical when other substrates
are available for the heterotrophic bacteria (HB) to grow on. AOB are slow growers and
often out-competed by other organisms if conditions allow for it. As ammonium is a
commonly used nitrogen source by many bacteria, the affinity for its substrate is crucial
(Verhagen and Laanbroek, 1991).
Oxygen
The nitrification process consumes 4.5 mg O2/mg-N according to the chemical
reaction presented in Equation 2.1 and 2.2 , where the oxidation of ammonium to nitrite
alone requires 3.4 mg O2/mg N. If the concentration of oxygen is not sufficient to meet
these requirements, the reactions will be limited. For this reason it is important to keep
the water phase saturated with oxygen. This can be achieved by ensuring a good mixing
with air or by direct addition using an aeration system. Mixing with atmospheric air
containing 21 %. oxygen could allow for equilibrium saturation of 11.3 mg O2/L at 10°C
or 9.1 at 20°C (Association et al., 1915).
pH
The nitrification process consumes alkalinity, as it produces protons, and the pH
will therefore decrease accordingly.
For every one mole of ammonium oxidized, two
moles of protons are produced. The alkalinity consumed by nitrification amounts to 7.1
mg CaCO3/mg NH+
4 -N. Equation 2.5.
2moleH+
1moleNH+
4
· 1moleCaCO3
2moleH+
· 100gCaCO3/mole
14gNH4-N/mole = 7.1mgCaCO3 per mgNH4-N (2.5)
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Nitrification
9
As mentioned the pH value is important for the speciation of ammonium in solution.
At pH values above 9.45 the molar fraction of ammonia becomes greater than the one
of ammonium. A high pH value thus stimulates the nitrification process by providing
more substrate.
However, the consumption of alkalinity during ammonia oxidation
lowers the pH. This would therefore lower the ammonia concentration in solution, which
ultimately affects the nitrification process through substrate limitation (Suzuki et al.,
1974).
Studies have demonstrated that other mechanisms affecting the nitrification
process are accountable for the pH effect.
(Tarre and Green, 2004) suggested that
reduced growth of nitrifiers is a result of stripping inorganic carbon which is required
for the biomass formation. Others suggest that the cell maintenance at low pH requires
a lot of energy, leaving little or no energy left for growth (Bock and Wagner, 2006).
Nitrification can occur in a wide range of pH conditions varying from 4.6-11.2 but has
its optimum in neutral pH between 7 and 8 (Zhang et al., 2009). The effects of alkalinity
consumption on nitrification can be avoided if the process is stabilized using a buffer
system. This is generally not a cause of nitrification problem at water works in Denmark,
as the groundwater is rich in carbonate originating from limestone aquifer.
Nutrients
Microbial growth of any kind is reliant on the availability of macro-nutrients
and trace elements. The chemical composition of a microbe reveals the exact requirement
for biomass growth listed as an empirical formula of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and
trace nutrients (K, Fe, Cu etc.) often specific to the history of the microbial culture
(Zhang et al., 2009). Lack of key nutrients can lower the activity of the microbes and
thus limit nitrification, especially in drinking water systems where nutrients often are
present in low concentrations.
Phosphorus is a common macro-nutrient required to sustain growth of microbes,
and important for both the formation of nucleic acids and the energy conversion (ATP)
(Westheimer, 1987). The effect of phosphor on nitrification has been well-studied (De Vet
et al., 2012; Van der Aa et al., 2002; Kors et al., 1998). Dosing phosphorus can increase
the growth of nitrifying bacteria and ultimately increase the nitrification rate in rapid
sand filtration (Van der Aa et al., 2002). The study by De Vet et al. (2012) found that
the phosphorus concentration should be above 100 µg PO3
4/L in order to fully stimulate
the nitrification process. The complex system of physical-chemical reactions found in
sand filter matricies can, however, challenge the availability of phosphate and other
nutrients by co-precipitation with iron.
Some nutrients are essential for the formation of microbial biomass, while others are
necessary to function metabolic reactions within the organism. Trace metals such as iron,
manganese, copper, etc. catalyze metabolic reactions in most microbes. Nitrification is
known to be affected by the concentration of trace metals, and depending on the metal
and its concentration the nitrification can either be enhanced or inhibited (Figure 2.3).
The optimal concentration depends on the environmental conditions, but trace elements
generally stimulates nitrification at low concentration and inhibits when present in high
concentrations (Sato et al., 1986). For nitrifying bacteria, inhibition by metals occurs
due to blocking of the enzymatic function, shutting down important processes (Martin
==PAGE:26==
10
2 Theory
and Richard, 1982).
Figure 2.3: The effect of trace element concentration on nitrification from Wagner
(2017) adapted from Zhang et al. (2009).
It is difficult to asses the necessary mass of specific nutrients and trace metals to
support the survival and/or formation of nitrifying biomass as it requires pure culture
growing with high precision and low detection limit of chemical speciations.
2.3
Copper and nitrification
Copper is believed to be essential for the nitrification process, as it plays an important
role in the very first step of ammonia oxidation (Ensign et al., 1993). During nitritation
ammonia is converted into hydroxylamine, a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme ammonia
mono-oxygenase (AMO), and copper is required for the activation of the AMO enzyme,
Equation 2.6.
NH3 + O2 + 2H+
AMO
−−−→NH2OH + H2O
(2.6)
AMO is a metalloenzyme located in both the cytoplasm and the membrane of the
bacteria (Gilch et al., 2009). Copper is activating the AMO enzyme by changing its
shape, while the copper ions are not directly used in the chemical reaction that is cat-
alyzed. The copper ions are believed to be taken up by the microbes and recycled within
the biofilm once the cells decay (Van Loosdrecht and Henze, 1999). The specific mode
of action has been described by McCarty (1999), who studied the inhibitory effects of
nitrification due to competition for the active site.
The study of Ensign et al. (1993) investigated the effect of other metals (e.g. zink
and iron) on AMO, but found that no other metal could stimulate its activity but copper.
Studies of copper inhibitors such as thiono-sulfur-containing compounds and allythiourea
both functioning as a Cu-chealating agents binding with copper at the active site are
further evidence of how important copper is to the AMO enzyme (McCarty, 1999; Gilch
et al., 2009). Research has shown that the AMO enzyme is expressed in both AOB and
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Copper and nitrification
11
AOA (Arp et al., 2007; Leininger et al., 2006) and that the recently discovered comammox
microorganisms also express this gene (Daims et al., 2015). The AMO enzyme has not
been successfully purified and studied for the purpose of quantifying its exact content
of copper (Sayavedra-Soto and Arp, 2011). However, research suggests that one mole of
AMO contains approximately 9.4 ±0.6 moles of copper (Gilch et al., 2009).
2.3.1
Bioavailability of copper
The term bioavailable can be defined as the fraction of a compound or element that is
accessible to a microorganism to take up or adsorb through its cell membrane (ASTM,
1998). The bioavailability of copper in water is determined by its speciation in solution
and its binding to receptor sites on cell membranes. The speciation of copper depends
on the different water quality parameters including pH, hardness, and dissolved organic
matter (Campbell, 1994; Sauvé et al., 1997). The rate by which copper complexes form,
is often faster than the rate of binding to membrane transport ligands, thus copper
uptake is strongly correlated to the concentration of free copper ions in solution (Stauber
et al., 2008).
In neutral water with a pH range of 7-8, the speciation of copper is dominated by
the complexation with organic matter (Coale and Bruland, 1988; Apte and Day, 1993).
The concentration of free copper increases at low pH values, and its inhibitory effect on
nitrification is believed to be a direct result of this (Loveless and Painter, 1968). Certain
complexes of copper have been suggested to pose a higher toxicity, and thus not only the
bioavailability but also the effect can be a consequence of speciation (Sato et al., 1988).
The amount of copper ion forming complexes or sorbing to an exchanger increases with
time, and is found to become constant after a contact time of approximately one hour
(Kołodyńska et al., 2009).
A stabilizing agent is a chemical compound often used in solution to maintain the
speciation of another compound.
A stabilizing agent can sustain the availability of
copper ions in solution, by loosely binding the ions to its ligand. The bio-availability of
copper will therefore not only be expressed as the concentration of free ions in solution
(Wenger et al., 2005; Salami et al., 2016). The study of Nybroe et al. (2008) demonstrates
how the bioavailable copper is not directly corresponding to the concentration of free
cupric ions or total dissolved copper in solution. However, in systems without organic
compounds or stabilizing agents the Cu2+ concentration serves as a good indicator. In
groundwater with high alkalinity from limestone aquifer the speciation of copper is
dominated by copper-carbonate (CuCO3), while the fraction of free copper ions are
estimated from 2-3 % of the total copper concentration (Zhang and Edwards, 2010;
Wagner, 2017).
The concentration of copper in Danish groundwater resources have been monitored
below 1 µg/L, and found to decrease with depth of abstraction (Jørgensen and Stockmarr,
2009). In a study covering 10 water works in Denmark the inlet concentration to the
filters were below detection limits of 0.01-0.04 µg Cu/L (Wagner et al., 2017). The low
concentration of copper at the water works could be due to:
==PAGE:28==
12
2 Theory
• Copper complexation and precipitation
• Adsorption to compounds and particles
• Low copper content in groundwater aquifer
2.3.2
Methods to evaluate microbial available copper
Different approaches exist to quantify the microbial available copper in a water sample.
Sensors have been developed to detect the concentration of specific ions.
Computer
software is available for modelling water composition, and experimental approaches using
the response of microorganisms have recently been suggested:
• Sensors: Different commercially produced electrodes are available to detect the
concentration of copper ions by ion-selective electrode (ISE) technique (Sauvé
et al., 1995). The electrodes are designed to measure a potential change due to
the concentration of cupric ions in solution by recording the exchange between the
mixed cupric sulfide/silver sulfide sensing membrane within the electrode (Thermo
Scientific, 2017). The detection range of the available electrodes differ, but manu-
als prescribe a lower detection limit of 0.6 µg Cu/L. Moreover, new electrodes are
being developed using microbial sensors instead of electron flow. A study at the
University of Copenhagen investigated the use of gene modified organisms (GMO)
to measure the bioavailability of metals in aqueous solution (Brandt, 2009). By
incorporating the luciferase enzyme into a well-known nitrifying bacteria it be-
comes luminescent in the presence of bioavailable copper. This approach enables
an identification of what complexes are bioavailable for the nitrifiers.
• Modeling water quality: Using mass balance, reaction kinetics and physical-
chemical constraints the speciation of copper can be calculated in a aqueous so-
lution. This can be done in computer program softwares such as MINEQL and
PHREEQC (Schecher and McAvoy, 1992; Parkhurst et al., 1999). A study on the
effect of copper on nitrification showed a linear relation between the outcome of
the experiment and the modelled copper complexation using MINEQL (Sato et al.,
1988).
• Bioassay: Recording microbial response as growth or activity from a change in
only one parameter - the copper concentration. This is in practise done by com-
paring the sample of interest with a standardized experimental curve in order to
derive the copper availability of the sample. Lehtola et al. (1999) developed a
bioassay for determination of microbial available phosphorus in water using the
growth response from a pure culture of Pseudomonas fluorescens. A standardized
experiment was set up to stimulate the growth of the bacteria culture using an
artificial medium and different concentrations of phosphate. The effect of phos-
phorus on microbial growth was evaluated by direct plate count, and used to
==PAGE:29==
2.4 State of the art
13
formulate a standard curve of cell concentration as a function of available phos-
phor. The standardized experiment was then applied to an environmental sample
enriched with all required nutrients except for phosphorus, to quantify the phos-
phorus concentration in the water sample. The study showed a linear relationship
between phosphorus concentration and maximum microbial growth. By adapting
the method of Lehtola et al. (1999), the study of De Vet et al. (2012) performed a
standardized batch experiment with a mixed culture of nitrifiers originating from
sand filter material. Using rate expressions to describe the effects on nitrification
the study revealed a linear relationship between the microbial available phospho-
rus and the maximum rate of nitrification. The developed bioassay showed very
sensitive, with good correlations in the range of 10-100 µg PO4-P/L.
2.4
State of the art
Ensign et al. (1993) was the first to investigate the effect of copper on the AMO en-
zyme. The activity of whole cell suspension and cell extract from a pure culture of
Nitrosomonas europeae was tested under different concentrations of copper measuring
the oxygen consumption and nitrite production. Through this set-up copper was shown
to stimulate the activity of the AMO. The study, concluded that other metals such as
zink and nickle were ineffective in stimulating the activity of the AMO enzyme. Instead
the study suggests that these metals compete to bind on the active site, thus causing an
inactivation of the AMO enzyme.
The effect of copper on nitrification in wastewater bodies is well documented (Tom-
linson et al., 1966; Loveless and Painter, 1968; Braam and Klapwijk, 1981; Aslan and
Sozudogru, 2017). Waste water environments are characterized by high levels of organic
and inorganic matter. The speciation of copper in waste waters can not be assumed sim-
ilar to those in drinking water resources. Moreover, the waste waters are often subject
to high concentration of heavy metals originating from industrial and household waste
streams. The effect of copper is therefor often tested in a higher range of concentrations
which results in a toxic response. Furthermore, the microbial community within waste
water treatment systems differentiate from the one found in biological sand filters at
drinking water facilities (Gülay et al., 2016). The studies can, however, give a good
indication of the role of copper in the nitrification process, and as limited research exists
on the effect of copper on nitrification in drinking water production, the studies have
been included in the literature review.
Stimulatory effects of copper on nitrification have been reported in the concentration
range of >0.32 - 200 µg Cu/L and inhibition have been observed at concentrations
ranging from 2 - 4,000 µg Cu/L (Table 2.2). The findings do not provide a consistent
answer to which concentrations of copper are stimulating and/or inhibiting the process.
The range of different concentrations can be seen as an expression of the different test
environments and in particular the different contents of organic and inorganic matter.
Literature confirms that the effect of copper on nitrification is greatly depended on
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Theory
interactions with alkalinity, pH, ammonium and phosphate (Zhang and Edwards, 2010;
Braam and Klapwijk, 1981; Sato et al., 1988; Martin and Richard, 1982).
Furthermore, available research suggests that the effect of copper on nitrification is
dependent on the type microorganisms carrying out ammonium oxidation. Current liter-
ature is pre-dominantly made up of pure culture studies of AOB, however, these findings
do not necessarily hold for a mixed nitrifying culture found in a biological sand filter.
The effect of copper on nitrification varies based on the purity of the nitrifying culture.
This was indicated by Tomlinson et al. (1966), who found that in order to obtain the
same inhibition percentage, a mixed nitrifying culture extracted from activated sludge
required a copper concentration 50 times higher than that of a pure culture of AOB. The
study of Amin et al. (2013) examined the copper requirements of pure culture AOA in
artificial seawater and found that the nitrification was limited at copper concentrations
< 0.32 µg/L. However, the results of the study suggested that the marine AOA have a
higher requirement for copper compared to AOB.
Although there are limited studies, Pedroni et al. (1997) reported that dosing of 0.3
µg Cu/L (as part of a trace metal solution) to a full-scale sand filter stimulated the
ammonium removal. The study of Wagner et al. (2016) moreover demonstrated that
dosing trace metals can optimize nitrification in both a lab-scale column assay and in
a full-scale investigation at Danish water works. The results from the column set-up
with filter material showed that the addition of a trace metal solution, increased the
removal rate 17-22 % depending on the ammonium loading. The study also found that
the higher the loading of ammonuim to the column, the higher the effect of the trace
metal addition. Incomplete nitrification at 10 different drinking water treatment plants
in Denmark was remediated through copper dosing in a full-scale investigation Wagner
(2017). The 10 plants had failed to comply with the Danish guideline value of ammonium
concentrations below 0.05 mg/L. The filters were dosed with a concentration <1.5 µg/L
by three different dosing techniques: active through electrodes, active through liquid
form (CuSO4) or passive as solid structure. At water works without primary filtration,
the remediation of incomplete nitrification by copper addition took longer, as a result of
copper sorption to iron oxides. Through amplicon sequencing and qPCR analysis, it was
furthermore found that copper addition to rapid sand filters increases the relative abun-
dance of nitrifying bacteria, of which the abundance of the genus Nitrosomonas increased
7-fold Wagner (2017). The observed effects of copper on nitrification are dominated by
experiments conducted in waste water medium under high copper concentrations (>10
µg Cu/L) and using pure cultures of nitrifying organisms. The optimal concentration of
copper to stimulate nitrification in biological sand filters remains unknown. The many
different water matrices and their physical-chemical interactions with copper challenge
the assessment of true copper requirements in different treatment systems. The available
studies fail to fully investigate the effects of concentrations below 1 µg Cu/L, which has
been observed to be sufficient in drinking water environments. Moreover, research on
mixed cultures extracted from sand filters is lacking.
==PAGE:31==
2.4 State of the art
15
Table 2.2: Reported concentrations limiting, stimulating or inhibiting the growth or
activity of nitrifiers under different test conditions..
Copper
[µg/L]
Conditions
Reference
Limitation
0.32
Nitrosopumilus
maritimus
(AOA) in synthetic seawater
Amin et al. (2013)
Stimulation
0.05-1
Full-scale filter at Danish wa-
ter works
Wagner et al. (2017)
5-30
Nitrosomonas europaea (AOB)
strain isolated from activated
sludge in artificial medium
Loveless and Painter
(1968)
20
Mixed nitrifying culture from
PVC pipes in enriched tap wa-
ter
Zhang and Edwards
(2010) cited in Wag-
ner (2017)
100
Nitrosomonas europaea (AOB)
in diluted sewage water
Tomlinson
et
al.
(1966)
200
Mixed
nitrifying
culture
in
biofilter
treating
synthetic
wastewater
Aslan and Sozudogru
(2017)
Inhibition
2
Mixed culture from wastewater
treatment inoculum
Waara and Wilander,
1985 cited in Zhang
et al. (2009)
4
Nitrosopumilus
maritimus
(AOA) in synthetic seawater
Amin et al. (2013)
10-50
Nitrosomonas europaea (AOB)
in artificial medium
Sato et al. (1988)
50-560
Nitrosomonas europaea (AOB)
strain isolated from activated
sludge in artificial medium
Loveless and Painter
(1968)
100
Nitrosomonas europaea (AOB)
in artificial medium
Skinner and Walker
(1961)
>400
Nitrosomonas europaea (AOB)
in artificial medium
Martin and Richard
(1982)
500
Mixed
nitrifying
culture
in
biofilter
treating
synthetic
wastewater
Aslan and Sozudogru
(2017)
>1000
Mixed nitrifying culture in syn-
thetic wastewater
Cabrero et al. (1998)
4,000
Nitrosomonas europaea (AOB)
in diluted sewage water
Tomlinson
et
al.
(1966)
==PAGE:32==
16
2 Theory
2.4.1
Project motivation
Research within the field of nitrification is fast-developing as attention is drawn to op-
timize the current water treatment techniques. Research is increasingly exploring the
design and operational conditions of water treatment to enhance the performance of
nitrification in rapid sand filters (Lopato, 2011; Lee et al., 2014).
Water works are,
nevertheless, struggling to comply with the regulation on ammonium and nitrite in
drinking water, which emphasizes the importance of additional research. Insufficient or
incomplete nitrification forces the water works to compromise the water quality or lower
their production volume. Current literature suggests that the availability of copper can
play an important role in the performance of nitrification. The optimal concentration
of copper to stimulate nitrification at water works remains unknown, but studies have
shown that copper depletion could be the reason for poor nitrification. Dosing of nutri-
ents as copper in Danish drinking water treatment systems is, however, an intervention
that requires allowances from municipalities, and water works therefore seek evidence
of solution over a trail and error approach. Meanwhile bioassays needed to determine
the concentration of required nutrients to stimulate nitrification have successfully been
conducted (Lehtola et al., 1999; De Vet et al., 2012). Combining the current knowledge
on copper and nitrification with the method behind a bioassay, the development of a
diagnostic tool, to evaluate the effect of copper dosing to source water, could possibly
resolve the issue of poor nitrification at the water works. Moreover, identifying general
stimulation potential via copper dosing could lead to an optimized treatment system
possibly reducing the geographical footprint of future drinking water production.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Method
The method behind this project is chronologically structured in different experiments
introducing knowledge and experience from one which is then incorporated into later
experiments. The first series of experiments are set-up to investigate how to make a
natural mixed culture of nitrifying bacteria in suspension. The prepared cultures are
then used in different experiments in order to determine the effect of copper dosing on
nitrification, and to design a bioassay evaluating if the availability of copper in a water
source is limiting the nitrification. All experiments are conducted as batch set-ups in
closed blue cap bottles incubated on vertical shaking tables.
Table 3.1 summarizes
the details of the different experiments conducted throughout this project. The batch
experiments are described in details in the following section. For elaboration on specific
material and method consult Appendices A-G.
Table 3.1: Overview of performed experiments.
Experiment
Start
Duration
Aim
Test medium
Copper
no.
[date]
[days]
-
type
addition
[µg/L]
1
02/03/18
62
Making inoculum
Tap water
-
-
2
27/03/18
29
Using inoculum
Tap and artificial medium
+/-
1.0
3
13/04/18
21
Optimizing inoculum performance
Tap and artificial medium
+/-
0.1
4
11/04/18
12
Effect of copper dosing
Nærum inlet water
+/-
1.0
5
25/04/18
9
Design of bioassay
Nærum inlet water
+/-
1.0
6
09/05/18
7
Formulation of standard curve
Nærum inlet water
+/-
0.05-5
7
09/05/18
7
Effect of copper dosing
Islevbro inlet water
+/-
1.0
3.1
Stock solutions
A number of stock solutions are prepared for the addition of substrates and nutrients to
the experiments. The stock solutions are prepared in acid washed and burned glassware.
Bottles are immersed in 10 % nitric acid for three hours and then burned at 550°C
for one hour. Stock solutions are prepared with milli-Q water and ACS Reagent grade
chemicals. The right volume of stock solution to obtain the required concentration is
calculated through simple assumptions (Equation 3.1).
Cstock · Vstock = Cbatch · Vbatch
→Vstock = Cbatch · Vbatch
Cstock
(3.1)
==PAGE:34==
18
3 Method
Ammonium stock solution
A stock solution of 1 g NH4-N/L is prepared using am-
monium chloride NH4Cl (￿99.5% Sigma-Aldirch) salt and milli-Q water. A 1 L Florence
flask is thoroughly cleaned and rinsed in milli-Q water. The solution is well-mixed under
magnetic stirring for two hours. The stock solution is stored at 10°C.
Phosphate stock solution
A 200 mg-PO4/L stock solution is made from Postassium
phosphate monobasic KH2PO4 (￿99.0 % SAFC Sigma-Aldrich) salt and milli-Q water.
The solution is mixed by hand, and left to equilibrate for two hours before used in
experiments. The stock solution is stored at 10°C.
Copper stock solution
A copper stock solution containing 20 mg Cu/L is prepared
from copper chloride CuCl2 x2H2O (￿99.0% Sigma-Aldrich) salt and milli-Q water. The
prepared stock solution is also used to make diluted stock solutions with a lower copper
concentration in order to allow for a copper addition down to 50 ng Cu/L to batch
experiments. The initial and diluted copper solutions are stored at 10°C when not in
use.
3.1.1
Artificial growth medium for nitrifiers
An artificial medium is made to support the activity and growth of nitrifying microbes
with respect to all required substrates, nutrients and trace elements adapted by Daims
et al. (2015) and Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991). The artificial medium is prepared
from four different stock solutions. A 1000 fold stock solution of CaCl2 is made by adding
147 g/L to milli-Q water. A 1000 fold stock solution of Selenite-Tungstate wolframate
(SeW) is prepared with 3 g Na2SeO3 × 5H2O, 4 g Na2WO4 × 2H2O, and 0.5 g NaOH
in 1 L of milli-Q water. A 1000 fold trace element solution (TES) is made with 1.6 mM
Na2EDTA, 0.2 mM NiSO4 × 7H2O, 0.2 mM CoCl2 × 6H2O, 0.2 mM Na2MoO4 x 2H2O,
1 mM ZnCl2, and 2 mM H3BO3 in milli-Q water. All solutions are autoclaved by heating
to 121 °C for 20 minutes and stored at 4°C. A 20 fold stock solution of 1 g KH2PO4/L,
1.5 g KCl/L, 1 g MgSO4/L and 11.68 g NaCl/L (Sigma-Aldrich or Merck chemicals) is
mixed in 1 L milli-Q water. The final medium is made from 50 ml of this stock solution
added to 950 ml milli-Q. The pH of the solution is adjusted to 7.63 with NaHCO3 and
the solution is autoclaved. After autoclaving, 1 ml 1000-fold CaCl2, 1 ml SeW, and 0.5
ml TES is added to the artificial medium making up the final composition (Table 3.2).
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Inoculum
19
Table 3.2: Nutrient artificial growth medium for nitrifying bacteria, Macro nutrients
adapted from standard medium recipe for AOB by Daims et al. (2015), and
trace metals adapted from Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
Compound
Quantity
Formula
[mg/L]
KH2PO4
0.05
KCl
0.075
MgSO−
4 x7H2O
0.05
NaCl
0.584
NaHCO3
pH adjustment
CaCl2
0.111
Na2SeO3 ×5H2O
0.003
Na2WO4 ×2H2O
0.004
NaOH
0.5
Na2EDTA (Triplex III)
0.596
NiSO4 x7H2O
0.0562
CoCl2 x6H2O
0.0476
NaMoO4
0.0484
ZnCl2
0.136
H3BO3
0.124
3.2
Inoculum
Different experiments on growing a nitrifying culture are performed in order to make a
suspended inoculum for the experimental investigation of the effect of copper on nitrifi-
cation and the design of a bioasay. These experiments are done with a mixed bacteria
culture originating from filter material at a Danish water works. The bacteria culture is
fed ammonium in order to facilitate the growth and activity of nitrifiers, with the aim
of increasing the ammonium removal rate of the cultures.
The bacteria culture originates from Brøndbyvester water works which is owned and
operated by the Copenhagen municipal utility company HOFOR. The material was
collected midday the 26th of February 2018. Filter sand from an old filter (no. 3) and
from a new filter (no. 2) was taken with an extendable stainless steel scoop from the top
20 cm of the filters. Backwash water was taken after 1 minute of backwash from the old
filter (no. 3) at Brøndbyvester water works. The filter material was stored in plastic bags
and bottles within a cooling bag, and put in a 10°C room upon return to DTU. The filter
material was stored for a total of 5 days before introducing it to a new liquid medium
in a test set-up containing ammonium. The different types of prepared inoculum are
further described under the experimental set-up. For the conducted bioassays inoculum
are used from three different fed-batch experiments (Table 3.3).
==PAGE:36==
20
3 Method
Table 3.3: Overview of inoculum used in bioassays.
Batch
Medium
Inoculum
no.
type
origin
[%]
7i
Tap water
Filter material
-
1t
Artificial1)
7i
10
1A
Artificial1)
1t
5
1) Artificial medium as described in section 3.1.1
adapted from Daims et al. (2015) and Verhagen and
Laanbroek (1991).
3.3
Analysis
The activity of nitrifying bacteria is observed using different analysis tools measuring
either removal of substrate such as ammonium, oxygen and alkalinity, or formation of
products like nitrite and nitrate.
3.3.1
Sampling strategy
Approximately 6 ml of sample volume is taken from the batches with a 10 ml Soft-
ject plastic syringe and 12 cm Stertican syringe needle, and filtered through a 0.2 µm
Millipore nylon filter before transferred into 10 ml sterile Skalar plastic vials.
The
samples are stored at -20°C until analysis.
3.3.2
Ammonium analysis
A Spectroquant ® Ammonium test-kit (Merck no. 1.14752.0001) in accordance with
ISO 8466-1 and DIN 38402 A51 is used to analyze the ammonium concentrations when
a same-day response is needed for the experiments. The method builds on a photomet-
ric measuring technique through which the concentration of ammonium is determined
according to the absorbance. The test-kit has a detection range of 0.01-3 mg-N/L, for
which the samples are diluted into deionized water by 1:4.
All samples taken are assessed for ammonium, nitrite and nitrate concentration us-
ing a skalar automated chemistry analyzer. Prior to Skalar analysis the samples are
defrosted at 4°C over night, and shaken well to avoid any concentration gradients upon
analysis. The samples are analyzed in a Skalar San ++ Automated Wet Chemistry
Analyzer - Continuous Flow Analyzer (CFA). This analyzer allows for determination
of the three nitrogen compounds (NH4, NO2 and NO3), simultaneously one sample at
a time. The analyzer separates the samples through air bubble segmentation leading
sample and reactants to the chemical treatment of mixing, heating dialysis, etc. (Skalar
Analytical, 2017). The concentrations of nitrogen compounds are measured according
to ISO standards (no. ISO 11732:2005 and ISO 13395:1996) using colorimetric reactions
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Analysis
21
and photometic detection. If the samples are exceeding the detection range of 0.1-10
mg-N/L they are diluted for a second measurement.
Test-kit and Skalar analysis
During the studies of this project ammonium test-
kits were used as a method to measure ammonium concentrations with direct response
once batches within experiment were sampled. The skalar analysis was done once 50 ore
more samples were collected. The fed-batch set-ups of nytrifying inoculum re-spiked with
ammonium were therefore monitored based on the results from the test-kit. Comparing
each measured concentration through test-kit method with the same sample analyzed on
the skalar, it is found that the test-kit concentrations are lower than the skalar results
(Figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1: Test-kit measurements as a function of skalar analysis results.
The two concentrations measured via test-kit and skalar are linearly correlated indi-
cating that the test-kit is systematically measuring a concentration 6 % lower the one
found through skalar analysis. Furthermore, the regression illustrates that the test-kit is
unable to measure concentrations below 0.87 mg-N/L, thus the sensitivity of the test-kit
is comparably lower than of the skalar. The primary difference between the two colori-
metric methods is the matter of execution, one being a standardized and automated
analysis and the other a commercial product relying on the personnel application, ac-
curacy and precision of used equipment. It is not unlikely that pipetting could cause
a systematic deviation of 6 % when working with volumes below 1 ml. The standard
deviation of the skalar analysis is, however, typically within 0.5-2% (Skalar Analytical,
2017). Due to these observations all reported concentrations of nitrogen compounds
originate from skalar measurements.
==PAGE:38==
22
3 Method
3.3.3
DO and pH monitoring
The experimental set-up uses bottles filled to a maximum of 90 % of their total volume
and kept under constant shaking on a vertical Gerhardt Laboshaker shaking table at a
minimum of 90 shakes per minute. This allows for a diffusion of oxygen from the air
into the water phase. The concentration of dissolved oxygen (DO) is measured during
the experiment in order to ensure that the available oxygen concentration is not limiting
the nitrification process. The DO is measured using a DO electrode and a WTW Multi
3430 IDS sensor. To lower the risk of contamination, the batches are not monitored
constantly but analyzed at least once throughout the experimental period.
A pH electrode meter (WTW Multi 3430 IDS sensor) is used to control the alkalinity
consumption once during or at the end of the experiment to make sure the pH conditions
are not affecting the nitrification process.
3.3.4
IcP metal analysis
The prepared stock solutions, relevant water samples and inoculum batches are analyzed
for copper content using Inductively coupled Plasma (IcP) mass spectrometry. The sam-
ples are prepared for analysis in 50 ml disposable centrifuge tubes (sterile FisherBrand).
The samples are acidified with nitric acid (67-69 % HNO3 TraceMetal Grade), to a total
of 2 %. The samples are left over night before analyzed in the IcP machine (PerkinElmer
NexION™) in accordance with EPA standard (method 6020A), with a lower quantifica-
tion limit of 50 ng Cu/L (Appendix I).
3.4
Data treatment
The ammonium concentration is measured over time depicting the kinetics of the nitrifi-
cation process. The ammonium removal rate (ARR) is determined by the slope between
the subsequent points on the ammonium concentration graph (Equation 3.2).
ARR = C1 −C2
t2 −t1
(3.2)
The ARR can furthermore be defined in terms of mass by multiplying with the batch
volume, and further by mass of filter sand by dividing with the initial weight of material
added or in terms of volume of total batch when using as inoculum in other batches. The
ARR calculated in these experiments are rough estimations, as it would require small
sampling intervals or continuous data points to reveal the actual ARR of the culture.
The nitrogen balance is checked through the assumption, that what is removed of
ammonium nitrogen is converted into other nitrogen compounds of nitrite and nitrate
(Equation 3.3).
Nitrogen balance = ∆NH+
4 + ∆(NO−
2 + NO−
3 ) = 0
(3.3)
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Inoculum tests
23
The sum of nitrogen added to the batch experiments should be equal to the sum of
nitrogen compounds measured. Any deviation from this nitrogen balance could originate
from biomass formation or method errors.
3.5
Inoculum tests
Different tests are performed on the collected filter material from Brøndbyvester water
works with the aim to extract a natural mixed bacteria culture suspended in the water
phase with a nitrification capacity so that it can function as a nitrifying inoculum.
3.5.1
Inoculum test 1 - Making a nitrifying culture
The first experiment is performed with the aim of testing the nitrification activity of
filter material collected from a rapid sand filter and making a suspended nitrifying
culture. The batches are prepared using bacteria with three different origins: sand from
a new filter, sand from an old filter and backwach water from the old filter. Batches are
prepared in 1 L and 500 ml blue cap bottles with filter material and tap water at different
mixing ratios (Table 3.4). The batches are spiked with an ammonium concentration of
15 mg-N/L and incubated on shaking tables. Batches are incubated at 10°C, while three
of them are incubated at room temperature (20°C) to test the effect of temperature.
Table 3.4: Experimental set-up of Inoculum test 1.
Batch
Tap water
Material ratio
Culture
Temp.
NH+
4
no.
[ml]
[mg/ml]
origin
[°C]
[mg-N/L]
1i
400
12.5
Shake-off filter 2 sand
10
15
2i
400
12.5
Shake-off filter 3 sand
10
15
3i
400
-
Tap water
10
15
4i
400
-
5ml Backwash water
10
15
5i
600
50
Filter sand filter 2
10
15
6i
600
50
Filter sand filter 3
10
15
7i
400
12.5
Shake-off filter 2 sand
20
15
8i
400
12.5
Shake-off filter 3 sand
20
15
9i
400
-
5 ml Backwash water
20
15
3.5.2
Inoculum test 2 - Using inoculum in batch
experiments
The second inoculum experiment is conducted with the aim to test whether the prepared
mixed nitrifying culture in the first experiment, can be transferred to and diluted in a
new medium to function as an inoculum in new batch experiments. The experiments
==PAGE:40==
24
3 Method
are conducted in 250 ml blue cap bottles with a total volume of 200 ml. Inoculum
from batch 7i (shake-off filter 2 sand) is tested in five different media, with and without
supplying nutrients (Table 3.5). The inoculum is added to the batches comprising 10
% of the total volume.
The batches are spiked with ammonium at 15 mg-N/L and
incubated on shaking tables at room temperature.
Table 3.5: Experimental set-up of Inoculum test 2.
Batch
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
PO−
4
Trace metals1)
Cu
no.
type
[pct.]
[mg-N/L]
[mg/L]
[mlstock/L]
[µg/L]
1t
Artificial2)
10
15
2t
Artificial2)
10
15
1.0
3t
Tap water
10
15
4t
Tap water
10
15
0.1
0.5
5t
Tap water
10
15
0.1
0.5
1.0
6t
Tap water
10
2
1) Trace metal solution adapted from Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
2) Artificial medium as described in section 3.1.1 adapted from Daims et al. (2015) and Verhagen
and Laanbroek (1991).
3.5.3
Inoculum test 3 - Optimizing inoculum
performance
The third inoculum experiment is done in order to test if the prepared inoculum can
be further enriched and diluted to make a new inoculum suitable for formulation of a
bioassay. The third set of experiments includes the objectives to evaluate the effect of
copper on the inoculum performance, and to investigate the volume dependency of the
nitrification activity of inoculum. Two experiments are done in 500 ml blue cap bottles
with a total volume of 400 ml.
Inoculum from 1t (10 % diluted inoculum enriched in artificial medium) is used in
two batches. The inoculum is diluted into artificial medium amounting to an inoculum
share of 5 %. Both batches are spiked with ammonium at 15 mg-N/L, and one batch
is further incubated with 0.1 µg Cu/L (Table 3.6). The batches are incubated at room
temperature on shaking tables. Another experiment of two batches is done using batch
5i (nitrifying culture filter 2) as inoculum in different amount to the total batch volume.
The two batches are prepared with 1.2 and 5 % inoculum share in tap water (Table
3.6). The batches are spiked with ammonium at 15 mg-N/L and incubated at room
temperature on shaking tables.
==PAGE:41==
3.6 Bioassay
25
Table 3.6: Experimental set-up of Inoculum test 3.
Batch
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
Cu
no.
type
type
[pct]
[mg-N/L]
[µg/L]
1A
Artificial1)
1t
5
15
1B
Artificial1)
1t
5
15
0.1
5A
Tap water
5i
1.2
15
5B
Tap water
5i
5
15
1) Artificial medium as described in section 3.1.1 adapted from
Daims et al. (2015) and Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
3.6
Bioassay
Different experiments are performed to investigate the effect of copper on nitrification
and to develop a test design for a bioassay evaluating copper availability.
The principle of the proposed method is to determine the activity of nitrifying mi-
crobes when exposed to different concentrations of copper.
The microorganisms are
extracted from a biological sand filter at a water works, as described in previous sec-
tions. The microbes are introduced to a synthetic growth medium supplying all the
necessary substrates, nutrients and trace elements. The method builds on the notion
that everything is kept in excess and at growth optimizing concentrations, except for the
concentration of copper. The activity of the microbes when exposed to different copper
concentrations is determined through monitoring the nitrogen balance by analyzing the
concentrations of ammonium and nitrite/nitrate over time. This approach is allowing
for an assessment of the correlation between the rate of nitrification and the copper
concentration in a water sample.
3.6.1
Tested source water
Water is collected at two different Danish water works:
Nærum Vandværk
Aerated raw inlet water is sampled at Nærum Vandværk, which
is owned and operated by the municipal utility company Novafos. The water works has
previously experienced problems with nitrification, as outlet ammonium concentrations
have been exceeding guideline values, and dosing copper to the filter has resolved this
issue (Wagner et al., 2016). The water is sampled at the end of the stair case aeration
at the inlet to the rapid sand filter. This is done to accurately represent the quality of
the water when undergoing nitrification at the water works. Sampling from a tap at the
water works has previously shown copper contamination from brass fittings. The water
is sampled with an extendable stainless steel scoop and poured into acid washed and
burned 2 L blue cap bottles using a plastic funnel. The water was sampled on the 11th
==PAGE:42==
26
3 Method
of April 2018 and again on the 9th of May 2018. The water is stored at 10°C until used
in batch experiments.
Islevbro Vandværk
Islevbro Vandværk is owned and operated by the municipal util-
ity company HOFOR. The water works has a well-functioning filter treatment, through
which the ammonium concentrations are lowered to comply with guideline values (Lee
et al., 2014). Water is sampled at a transition point between the primary and secondary
filter at the water works right before the inlet to rapid sand filter no. 7. The water is
sampled using an extendable stainless steel scoop and is poured into acid washed and
burned 2 L blue cap bottles through a plastic funnel. The water was sampled on the 9th
of May 2018. The water is stored at 10°C until used in batch experiments.
3.6.2
Copper experiment 1 - Effect of copper dosing
The first copper experiment is set up to test the effect of copper on nitrification using the
prepared inoculum of mixed nitrifying bacteria and a source water sample from a Danish
water works. Two different inocula; 7i (shake-off filter 2) and 1t (10 % diluted inoculum
enriched in artificial medium) are used in the experiment and added at an inoculum
share of 5 %. The experiment is done in 250 ml blue cap bottles with a total volume
of 200 ml. The batches are prepared as duplicates with phosphate, trace metals and
copper (Table 3.7). A batch with tap water and inoculum is made as a control to test
the nitrification potential of the source water. The batches are spiked with ammonium
at 15 mg-N/L and incubated at room temperature.
Table 3.7: Experimental set-up of Copper test 1.
Batch
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
PO−
4
Trace metals1)
Cu
no.
type
type
[pct.]
[mg-N/L]
[mg/L]
[mlstock/L]
[µg/L]
1-2x
Nærum
7i
5
15
3-4x
Nærum
7i
5
15
0.1
0.5
5-6x
Nærum
7i
5
15
0.1
0.5
1.0
7-8x
Tap water
7i
5
15
9-10x
Nærum
1t
5
15
0.1
0.5
11-12x
Nærum
1t
5
15
0.1
0.5
1.0
1) Trace metal solution adapted from Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
3.6.3
Copper experiment 2 - Experimental design and
references batches
The second copper experiment is designed to test different set-up options for evaluating
the effect of copper on nitrification, including reference batches without inoculum and
batches without addition of other nutrients and trace elements. Five different batches
==PAGE:43==
3.6 Bioassay
27
are prepared in duplicates (Table 3.8). The experiment is conducted in 100 ml blue cap
bottles with a total volume of 75 ml. Inoculum from 1t (10 % diluted inoculum enriched
in artificial medium) is used in 5 % of the total volume. A reference batch is prepared
from test water without inoculum addition. The batches are spiked with ammonium at
15 mg-N/L and incubated at room temperature.
Table 3.8: Experimental set-up of Copper test 2.
Batch
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
PO−
4
Trace metals1)
Cu
no.
type
type
[pct]
[mg-N/L]
[mg/L]
[mlstock/L]
[µg/L]
1-2c
Nærum
-
0
15
3-4c
Nærum
1t
5
15
5-6c
Nærum
1t
5
15
1.0
7-8c
Nærum
1t
5
15
0.1
0.5
9-10c
Nærum
1t
5
15
0.1
0.5
1.0
1) Trace metal solution adapted from Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
3.6.4
Copper experiment 3 - Formulation of a standard
curve
The third copper experiment is set-up with the aim of formulating a dose-response curve
of nitrification rates as a function of different copper concentrations. The experiment is
done as duplicates in 100 ml blue cap bottles with 75 ml test volumes. Aerated raw inlet
water from Nærum water works is used as test water. Inoculum from the twice diluted
nitrifying culture (1:200) in artificial medium is used in all batches at a total volume of 5
%, and the tested concentration range of copper is between 0.05 - 5 µg Cu/L (Table 3.9).
The batches are spiked with an ammonium concentration of 15 mg-N/L and incubated
at room temperature.
Table 3.9: Experimental set-up of Copper test 3.
Batch
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
PO−
4
Trace metals1)
Cu
no.
type
type
[pct.]
[mg-N/L]
[mg/L]
[mlstock/L]
[µg/L]
1-2f
Nærum
1A
5
15
3-4f
Nærum
1A
5
15
0.1
0.5
5-6f
Nærum
1A
5
15
0.1
0.5
1.0
7-8f
Nærum
1A
5
15
0.05
9-10f
Nærum
1A
5
15
0.1
11-12f
Nærum
1A
5
15
0.5
13-14f
Nærum
1A
5
15
1.0
15-16f
Nærum
1A
5
15
5.0
1) Trace metal solution adapted from Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
==PAGE:44==
28
3 Method
3.6.5
Copper experiment 4 - Applying method to a
different water source
The fourth copper experiment is done to evaluate the applied method of determining
the effect of copper and its availability when used on a different water source. For this
experiment raw water from Islevbro water works is used as test water. The experiment
is done in 100 ml blue cap bottles with a total volume of 75 ml. Inoculum from the twice
diluted nitrifying culture (1:200) in artificial medium is used in all batches amounting
to a total volume of 5 %. The set-up of the experiment follows the design used in the
second copper experiment with regards to blank and control batches (Table 3.10). The
batches are spiked with ammonium of 15 mg-N/L and incubated at room temperature.
Table 3.10: Experimental set-up of Copper test 4.
Batch
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
PO−
4
Trace metals1)
Cu
no.
type
type
[pct]
[mg-N/L]
[mg/L]
[mlstock/L]
[µg/L]
1-2w
Islevbro
-
0
15
3-4w
Islevbro
1t
5
15
5-6w
Islevbro
1t
5
15
1.0
7-8w
Islevbro
1t
5
15
0.1
0.5
9-10w
Islevbro
1t
5
15
0.1
0.5
1.0
1) Trace metal solution adapted from Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Results and Discussion
The current section presents the results of the experiments performed throughout the
project in order of investigated objectives, which might differ from the chronology of
the experimental execution. The results are presented with short discussions relevant
to the findings. A more general discussion of the project’s methodical approach and
application of discoveries can be found in the following chapter.
4.1
Preparation of nitrifying cultures
The first experiment performed in this project investigated the nitrification activity of
different filter materials in order to identify a nitrifying bacteria suitable for an inoculum.
The results from the experiment showed that the ammonium removal depends on the
type of material, filter origin and temperature of incubation (Figure 4.1. The ammonium
concentration in the batches incubated directly with sand (50 mg sand/ml) were showing
a decrease in ammonium concentrations after only three days of incubation. Comparably
the other batches showed little to no removal within the same time.
Figure 4.1: Ammonium concentrations as a function of time for different filter materi-
als; sand 50 mg sand/ml, shake-off 12.5 mg sand/ml and backwash water,
from filters at Brøndbyvester water works incubated at different tempera-
tures.
==PAGE:46==
30
4 Results and Discussion
The concentration of ammonium when added to the batches at 15 mg-N/L was mea-
sured higher for the blank with only tap water, than for any other batch containing
filter material.
These results are suggesting that when particles from filter material
are present, sorption is occurring, leading to a decrease in ammonium concentration in
the water phase. For the tap water batch, the concentration of ammonium was mea-
sured approximately 2.5 mg-N/L higher than any batch with filter material. However,
no difference was observed between the batches with different material origin and dif-
ferent sand to water ratio. The results also indicate that the sorption process occurs
within minutes after an ammonium spike, as the detected decrease in concentration was
observed in the time from adding substrate to sampling the batches.
The results showed that the ammonium removal of the new sand filter (no. 2) is
higher than that of the old sand filter (no. 3), which is confirming internal findings at
Brøndbyvester water works. The higher ARR for material originating from the new filter
was observed for both the batches incubated with sand and for batches incubated with
shake-off. When looking at the ammonium concentrations in the batches incubated with
backwash water, no sign of nitrification was observed regardless of incubation tempera-
ture. This indicates that backwash water contains little nitrification activity in terms of
nitrifying bacteria.
The batches incubated with shake-off from sand filter material showed little removal
of ammonium within the first week. Hereafter it was found that the batches incubated
with shake-off at room temperature (20°C) had a higher ammonium removal compared
to the once incubated at 10°C. The batches incubated at room temperature had fully
removed the 15 mg-N/L after 21 days of incubation while the batches incubated at
10°C had removed half or less of the spiked ammonium concentration (Figure 4.1). This
suggests that incubating the batches at a higher temperature increases the activity of
nitrifying bacteria.
The batches identified with the highest observed ammonium removal were batches
incubated directly with filter sand and batches with shake-off incubated at room tem-
perature (20°C). These four batches were re-spiked when concentrations were measured
at or below 2 mg-N/L using test-kit measurements, in order to maintain conditions for
nitrifcation activity and/or facilitate growth of nitrifiers (Figure 4.2). A shared result
for all the batches was the rate at which the ammonium is removed did not increase
from the first to the second or third spike. By comparing the slopes of the curves after
each re-spike it is found that the rate remains the same with only little deviation. The
fact that the ammonium concentration curves do not change slopes, could indicate that
the microbes are not growing in cell density nor undergoing decay or that the sum of
these microbial phases are equalizing. Absence of growth could be due to lack of growth
conditions such as nutrients not being provided through the tap water or accumulated
in the filter material. Absence of growth could also be a result of nitrifying bacteria
being slow growers and cell density might therefore not increase remarkably within time
span of the experiment.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Preparation of nitrifying cultures
31
Figure 4.2: Ammonium concentration over time for identified best performing nitrify-
ing cultures from different filter materials; sand 50 mg sand/ml, shake-off
12.5 mg sand/ml, and under different temperatures over full incubation
time with re-spikes of ammonium (15 mg-N/L).
The maximum recorded ARR of the batches ranged from 1.05 to 1.57 mg-N/L/d, the
highest rate being observed for the shake-off with new filter (no. 2) material incubated
at room temperature (20°C). The batches with high ammonium removal showed to
decrease in ARR after the third or fourth spike of ammonium. The pH measurements
showed that the batches had pH values of 6.25 or lower, thus below the optimal range
(Appendix A). The activity of the nitrifying culture originating from filter sand from
the old filter (no. 3) showed to stagnate after having oxidized approximately 40 mg-
N/L. Meanwhile the batch with sand from the new filter (no. 2) showed to continuously
remove ammonium after having oxidized the same amount. These findings suggest that
the nitrification capacity of the new sand filter is less sensitive towards a pH change.
As the composition of particles in the batches differ, the nitrifying cultures are subject
to different limitations by ammonium diffusion and local buffer capacity in terms of
carbonates absorbed to particles. This would further impact the nitrification capacity
and response to alkalinity consumption.
As ammonium is removed the concentration of nitrite and nitrate in the batches
increase over time during the experiment, being evident of nitrification activity. For
batches re-spiked with ammonium, the concentration of nitrite increases more as a
product of nitrification processes is accumulated in the batches (Figure 4.3). The ac-
cumulation of nitrite furthermore indicates that the abundance of Comammox is not
substantially contributing to the activity of the total nitrifying culture.
The batch incubated directly with sand from the new filter (no. 2) showed a decrease
in nitrite concentration after 25 days of incubation having oxidized approximately 28 mg-
N/L ammonium. At this time of incubation, the nitrite within the batch had reached a
concentration of 7.1 mg-N/L. The decreased nitrite concentration was a result of nitrite
oxidation, leading to an increased nitrate concentration (measured NOx-NO2).
The
batch with shake-off from the new filter (no. 2) reached a nitrite concentration of 10
==PAGE:48==
32
4 Results and Discussion
mg-N/L before initiating the nitrite oxidation. At this point the batch had oxidized
approximately 30 mg-N/L ammonium. Batches with old filter sand material did not
show the same trend of nitrite oxidation. For the batch with sand from the old filter the
nitrite concentration leveled out, having an asymptotic behavior, while the concentration
of nitrite in the batch with shake-off from the old filter increased throughout the full
experimental duration. These results can be indicative of a lower nitrite oxidation in
the old filter (no. 3) in terms of a lower density of NOB in this filter material.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: Concentration of nitrogen compounds (a) NO2 and (b) NOX as a function
of time for identified best performing nitrifying cultures from different filter
materials; sand 50 mg sand/ml, shake-off 12.5 mg sand/ml, and under dif-
ferent temperatures over full incubation time with re-spikes of ammonium
(15 mg-N/L).
When looking at the nitrogen balance in the batches, it is found that the sum of
nitrogen compounds measured by skalar is generally lower than the total theoretical
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Use and optimization of inoculum
33
added ammonium-nitrogen.
An estimation of the average difference between added
nitrogen and measured nitrogen compounds indicates that 3-13 % of the theoretically
added nitrogen is not measured through analysis (Appendix H). These findings suggest
that nitrogen is either building into new biomass or adsorbing to particular matter,
which excludes the nitrogen from being measured once filtered through a 0.2 µm filter.
High nitrogen imbalances as seen for batches incubated with sand after second spike
are likely caused by concentrations falling outside detection range of the skalar analysis,
leading to a underestimation of the actual concentration.
The findings of the experimental preparations of a nitrifying culture showed that
batches with new filter (no. 3) material have a higher ammonium removal and facilitate
a complete nitrification. Batches with shake-off showed a nitrogen balance close to the
theoretical, which suggests that sorption processes do not challenge the system to the
same extend as for batches incubated directly with sand. The batches with shake-off,
moreover, implies that microbes are suspended in the water phase, and would therefore
serve as a more homogeneous inoculum. For these reasons the best performing batch,
being shake-off from the new sand filter (no. 2) incubated at room temperature (20°C),
was used as inoculum for subsequent experimental set-ups (Table 3.3).
4.2
Use and optimization of inoculum
The prepared nitrifying culture as described in the previous section, was applied as
inoculum in an experiment investigating its performance in different test media (Figure
4.4). Results showed that using inoculum at a volume of 10 % in different test media
including tap water induces an ammonium removal. The ARR is estimated from the two
measurements, which allows for a rough comparison across batches. The batch spiked
with a low ammonium concentration of 2 mg-N/L, however, 80 % of the total ammonium
mass from the batch was removed. In comparison the tap water spiked with 15 mg-N/L
had only removed 43.5 % of the mass. This estimated removal rate should therefore be
interpreted with caution. However, the findings suggest that the nitrification activity is
maintained when used as inoculum for a new batch experiment. The ARR of the initial
nitrifying culture from which the inoculum originates was 1.57 mg-N/L/d. Results are
showing that diluting the inoculum by a factor 10 does not yield a corresponding decrease
in ARR as the observed ARRs are ranging from 0.97-1.85 mg-N/L/d. This observation
is further supported by the test set-up using 1.2 and 5 % inoculum share yielding ARRs
of 1.02 and 1.70, respectively (Appendix C).
By comparing the concentration changes across the different batches, it is seen that
the tap water has the lowest ammonium removal.
The artificial medium showed a
slightly higher ammonium removal than the tap water, while addition of copper to the
artificial medium caused an increase in the ammonium removal. The tap water medium
with phosphate and trace metals showed the highest ammonium removal over the week of
incubation with an ARR of 1.85 mg-N/L/d. Addition of copper to this medium, however,
resulted in lower ammonium removal.
Through IcP analysis it was found that tap
==PAGE:50==
34
4 Results and Discussion
water from DTU laboratories used in the experiment contains approximately 6 µg Cu/L
(Appendix I). The findings thereby suggest that increasing the copper concentration
to a level above 6 µg Cu/L does not stimulate the nitrification activity, but might
instead cause inhibitory effects. Meanwhile, the copper concentration in the artificial
growth medium was measured to 0.06 µg Cu/L, and additional copper to this medium
is suggested to slightly increase the nitrification activity.
Figure 4.4: Comparing ammonium concentrations in batch experiments using different
growth media with a 10 % volume of nitrifying culture from batch 7i (shake-
off filter no. 2 incubated at 20°C).
The three batches not dosed with copper were re-spiked with ammonium and their
removal kinetics were observed, with the aim to optimize an inoculum for further exper-
imental studies (Figure 4.5). From the observed ammonium concentrations it is seen
that the batch with tap water showed a decrease in ammonium removal after second
ammonium spike, observed as an asymptotic behavior. The tap water medium supple-
mented with phosphate and trace metals shows a slight increase in ammonium removal
after second spike. Meanwhile, the highest removal rate is observed for the artificial
medium, increasing with each ammonium re-spike. The ARR of the artificial medium is
increasing from 1.57 mg-N/L/d at the first spike, to 2.12 mg-N/L/d at the second and
to 3.52 mg-N/L/d after the third. These findings indicate that the nitrification activity
is limited by the availability of nutrients in the tap water medium, while the artificial
medium is supplying nutrients, which can enhance the nitrification rate.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Testing the effect of copper dosing
35
Figure 4.5: Optimizing ammonium removal by inoculum using different growth media
with a 10 % volume of nitrifying culture from batch 7i (shake-off filter no.
2 incubated at 20°C).
The findings of the experiment show that when diluting the prepared nitrifying cul-
ture into new medium, the ARR of the inoculum is maintained. Despite the chemical
composition of the medium, the prepared inoculum provides nitrification activity, which
enables an experimental set-up removing 50 % of the ammonium mass within seven days
of incubation. The experiment furthermore showed that the nitrification capacity of the
inoculum can be improved when transferred to enriched medium providing important
macro-nutrients and trace metals. This emphasized that the inoculum should be further
improved for a bioassay, in which the limitation of other parameters such as phosphate
and trace elements should be excluded. Moreover, the experiment suggests that the
trace of copper in the originally prepared inoculum and tap water medium is above the
concentration range of what is stimulating the nitrifying organisms.
4.3
Testing the effect of copper dosing
An experiment was conducted to investigate how the prepared inoculum could be applied
in a test set-up to evaluate the effect of copper dosing on nitrification kinetics of an inlet
water to Nærum water works. The experiment had a time span of seven days, after
which half of the batches had fully removed the 15 mg-N/L ammonium spiked (Figure
4.6). The experiment was done in replicates, which showed a low uncertainty of the
set-up. The control batch with tap water showed no ammonium removal within the first
five days of incubation, being the batch with the longest lag-phase. The batch with
Nærum water showed a behavior similar to the one of the tap water batch, with a long
lag-phase and an ammonium removal of approximately 4 mg-N/L over the seven days
of incubation.
==PAGE:52==
36
4 Results and Discussion
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Ammonium concentrations as a function of time recorded in bioassay of
inlet water to Nærum water works using a 10 % volume of nitrifying cul-
ture from batch 7i (shake-off filter no. 2 incubated at 20°C) and dosing
phosphate, trace metals and copper (a) and estimated ARR between day
4-5 of incubation (b).
The results from the experiment showed that when dosing phosphate and trace metals
to the source water of Nærum water works the nitrification activity increases. After three
days of incubation the batches dosed with phosphate and trace metals started to show
a decrease in ammonium concentration. Within the following three days of incubation
the batches had fully removed the ammonium spike. Batches with additional dosing of
copper showed an increase in the rate at which ammonium was removed in the batches.
The maximum ARR of the batches dosed with copper was observed between day four
and five of incubation. Here the average ARR of the two replicates was 6.29 mg-N/L/d.
Within the same time interval of incubation an average ARR of 4.7 mg-N/L/d was
observed for the batches only dosed with phosphate and trace metals.
The results
showed that dosing of additional copper enhances the performance of nitrification by 32
%.
IcP analysis of the test set-up showed that the tap water batch had a high concentra-
tion of copper compared to the batches with inlet source water to Nærum, containing
8.4 µg Cu/L and 0.6 µg Cu/L, respectively (Appendix I). The IcP analysis showed that
addition of phosphate and trace metals via nutrient stock solutions did not increase
the concentration of copper in the batches. This confirms that the increase in ARR,
when enriching the inlet source water, is primarily caused by dosing of phosphate and
trace metals, whereas only a small increase is observed for additional dosing of copper.
The IcP results, moreover, showed that addition of copper to the batches resulted in
an increase of 0.7 µg Cu/L, which is lower than the theoretical calculated dose of 1.0
µg Cu/L. This suggests that the set-up has uncertainties in regards to pipetting and/or
copper adsorption to glassware interfering with analysis.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Evaluating inoculum performance
37
The findings showed that a bioassay can be designed using the prepared nitrifying
culture as inoculum. The bioassay has a lag-phase of three days, before ammonium
removal is observed, and a total test duration of approximately one week. The experi-
ment indicated that the kinetics of nitrification in the bioassay resembles the sigmoidal
shape of Monod by having a lag-phase followed by an exponential phase of activity. The
designed bioassay observed an increase in nitrification when dosing phosphate and trace
metals, and a further increase when additionally dosing of 0.7 µg Cu/L.
4.4
Evaluating inoculum performance
Based on the performed experiments throughout this project, two main challenges were
identified regarding the preparation of inoculum; its trace copper concentration and
pH condition. The performance of the inoculum in a bioassay was found to affect the
kinetics of nitrification and the findings of the bioassay in which it is used.
4.4.1
Trace copper concentration
The results of the IcP analysis showed that the initially prepared inoculum had a copper
concentration of 8.9 µg Cu/L originating from tap water and shake-off filter material
(Appendix I). When used in batch experiments with an inoculum volume of 5 %, copper
is transferred to a background concentration amounting to 0.45 µg Cu/L. This disables
the inoculum to be used in a bioassay testing the effects of copper dosing at concentra-
tions below this value. The performance of the inoculum is thus inhibited by its trace
of copper.
Figure 4.7: Observed effects of dosing 1 µg Cu/L on the ARR using inoculum with
different copper concentrations; 1:1 of 8.9 µg Cu/L, 1:10 of 1.86 µg Cu/L
and 1:200 of 0.163 µg Cu/L, measured by IcP analysis (Appendix I).
==PAGE:54==
38
4 Results and Discussion
By diluting the initially prepared inoculum (7i) by a factor 1:10 in artificial medium
with a lower copper content, the trace copper concentration in a batch set-up with 5
% inoculum volume decreased to 0.09 µg Cu/L. A second dilution into the artificial
medium by a factor 1:20 further decreased the possible trace copper concentration to 8
ng Cu/L. This decrease in copper trace through dilution enhanced the inoculum perfor-
mance when used in a bioassay by enabling it to detect the effect of copper dosing at
low concentrations (Figure 4.7). Results showed that when lowering the trace copper
concentration through dilution dosing 1.0 µg Cu/L increases the ARR, thus indicating
the range of copper concentrations stimulating the nitrification process.
During the second inoculum dilution, a small set-up showed that dosing copper to
the inoculum itself caused an increase in the ammonium removal (Appendix C). The
maximum ARR observed for the inoculum increased by 25 % when copper concentrations
increased from 0.16 µg Cu/L to 0.24 µg Cu/L. This indicates that the performance of
the twice diluted and enriched inoculum is able to detect incremental changes in copper
dosing as low as 0.08 µg Cu/L.
4.4.2
Effect of pH
A bioassay was conducted to investigate the effect of copper dosing without simulta-
neously dosing nutrients, and to evaluate the role of the used inoculum by including
control batches without addition of nitrifying culture. However, the results from the
experiment were found to be affected by pH conditions of the used inoculum (Figure
4.8). As the lag-phase of previous experiments was observed to span over three days,
the batches were not sampled within the first three days of incubation. The ammo-
nium concentration in the batches remained unchanged between the third and the sixth
day of incubation. However, on day eight of incubation the sampling showed a change
ammonium concentration.
The batches without inoculum were the only to show no ammonium removal through-
out the full experimental duration. This finding strongly indicates that the prepared
inoculum is able to provide a capacity of nitrifying microbes to support the design and
execution of a bioassay. Moreover, the finding suggests that the raw water of Nærum
itself holds a negligible density of nitrifiers. The batches dosed with copper at a con-
centration of 1.0 µg/L showed the fastest decrease in ammonium concentration, from
zero to complete removal within two days of incubation. The ARR of the batches dosed
with copper was estimated to 7.08 mg-N/L/d. Although concentrations were measured
above 0.1 mg-N/L, it is likely that the actual ARR of these batches is higher, as the
concentration of ammonium approached zero and thus will limit the rate. The batches
dosed with phosphate and trace metals showed similar ammonium removal behavior as
the batches with only inlet water from Nærum with ARRs of 3.52 mg-N/L/d and 3.69
mg-N/L/d, respectively. Both batches showed a difference in ARR amongst replicates,
indicating a higher uncertainty for these batches. Comparably the batch with simulta-
neous addition of phosphate, trace metals and copper showed an increase in ammonium
removal with an ARR of 5.33 mg-N/L/d.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Evaluating inoculum performance
39
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: Ammonium concentrations as a function of time recorded in bioassay of
inlet water to Nærum water works using a 5 % volume of inoculum from
batch 1t (1:10 diluted enriched) and dosing phosphate, trace metals and
copper (a) and estimated ARR between day 6-8 of incubation (b). When
used in bioassay the inoculum had a pH of 6.
The increased lag-phase recorded in this experiment could be a result of the used
inoculum. Batch 1t (10% inoculum enriched in artificial medium) was used as inoculum
for this set-up, due to its ARR improvements and enhanced performance to detect
changes in copper concentrations. The ammonium removal of the batch had, however,
decreased and stagnated around the time when used as inoculum for this experiment (day
29 Figure 4.5). A pH measurement of the batch showed that the ammonium oxidation
had consumed alkalinity to an extent that the pH had dropped to 6, which is below the
optimal range of nitrification. The observed lag-phase when used as inoculum in a new
experiment, suggests that the nitrification activity needs time to restore under the new
buffer capacity added along with the test medium. The pH conditions of the inoculum
used for a bioassay is likely affecting the recorded response of phosphate, trace metals
and copper dosing. Contrary to other findings of this project, the dosing of phosphate
and trace metals did not increase the ARR of the inlet source water of Nærum water
works. A different sampling strategy would possibly have improved the interpretation.
Nevertheless, the changed nitrification kinetics, suggest that the designed bioassay is
challenged by the buffer capacity of the used inoculum.
==PAGE:56==
40
4 Results and Discussion
4.5
Investigation of different inlet water
sources
Two different inlet water sources to Danish water works were used in bioassays testing
the effects of copper dosing on ARR. The two water types had been sampled the same
day and used in bioassays conducted simultaneously using the same inoculum from batch
1A (0.5 % enriched in artificial medium) at a total volume of 5 %. Both bioassays had
a duration of seven days, after which the ammonium had been fully removed only in
batches dosed with copper.
The bioassay on the inlet water from Islevbro water works showed that addition of
phosphate and trace metals did not increase the observed nitrification (Figure 4.9a+b).
The ammonium concentrations recorded in the source inlet water showed the same trend
as for the batches dosed with phosphate and trace metals. The batches dosed with copper
did, however, show an increase in ammonium removal compared to the source inlet water.
Within the first five days of incubation, the batches dosed with only copper had removed
6.9 mg-N/L, compared to the batches dosed with simultaneously phosphate and trace
metals had removed 4.6 mg-N/L. When comparing the ARR of the batches between
day five and day six of incubation it should therefore be noted that the actual rate of
the batches only dosed with copper is likely higher, than the ARR of the batches dosed
simultaneously with phosphate and trace metals. The results showed that dosing of
copper to the source inlet water of Islevbro water works increased the ARR 6.5 times.
The results from the bioassay on source inlet water to Nærum water works showed
that the ARRs are affected by nutrient addition (Figure 4.9c+d). The findings suggest
that dosing of phosphate and trace metals to the inlet water of Nærum increases the
ARR 2.5 times. The batches dosed with copper, and batches dosed simultaneously with
phosphate and trace metals removed the spiked ammonium from the batches in very
similar patterns. However, the batch with only copper dosing had removed a larger
ammonium share by the fifth day of incubation, thus likely having a higher ARR than
the batches simultaneously dosed with phosphate and trace metals. The low sampling
frequency and the substrate limitations are causing a skew to the estimated ARR, that
should be interpreted with caution. The results of the bioassay did, nevertheless, suggest
that the ARR of inlet source water to Nærum water works increased more than 17-fold
when dosed with copper.
The two bioassays conducted on different inlet source waters demonstrate that the
effect of copper dosing on nitrification depends on the water tested. The observed ARR
of the inlet water to Nærum water works is comparably half than that of the inlet
water to Islevbro. This difference in nitrification potential could describe the observed
differences in filter performances at the two water works (Wagner, 2017; Lee et al., 2014).
Volumetric removal rates of the two filters have been reported at 0.74 g NH4-N/m3/h
and 0.22 g NH4-N/m3/h for Islevbro and Nærum water works, respectively (Tatari, 2014;
Wagner et al., 2016).
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Investigation of different inlet water sources
41
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.9: Ammonium concentrations over time recorded in bioassays of inlet water
to Islevbro (a) and Nærum (c) water works using a 5 % volume of inocu-
lum from batch 1A (0.5 % enriched) and dosing phosphate, trace metals
and copper, and estimated ARR between day 5-6 of incubation (b) and
(d). Note: i) actual ARR of copper dosing is greater than ARR of simulta-
neously dosing of phosphate and trace as removal occurred earlier during
incubation, and ii) actual ARR of simultaneously dosing of phosphate,
trace and copper is greater than estimated due to substrate limitation.
Inlet water to Nærum water works contains copper at a concentration of 0.066 µg
Cu/L, and comparably the inlet water to Islevbro water works contains 0.174 µg Cu/L
(Appendix I). This difference in copper concentrations is causing an effect on the signal
recorded from copper dosing. As the results show dosing 1.0 µg Cu/L to Nærum water
has an effect 2.5 times higher than the effect observed for Islevbro water. The recorded
effects of phosphate and trace metal dosing, could suggest that the chemistry of the
inlet water to Nærum water works is also lacking these nutrients. However, the effect of
==PAGE:58==
42
4 Results and Discussion
copper dosing is 7 times higher than the effect of dosing phosphate and trace metals.
4.6
Dose-response curve
Oxygen concentrations were measured above 4.5 mg-O2/L and pH values were observed
in the range of 7-8 for all batches involved in the bioassays (Appendix D-G). This
suggests that nitrification limitations from these parameters can be excluded when in-
terpreting the findings of the performed bioassays. Assuming that the concentration of
copper present to stimulate nitrification follows Monod kinetics of one-substrate limit-
ing microbial activity, plotting the ARRs against the dosed copper concentrations would
reveal a narrow range of concentrations for which the ARR is linearly correlated.
A bioassay dosing a range of different copper concentrations (0.05-5 µg Cu/L) to inlet
source water of Nærum water works was performed with the aim to formulate a standard
dose-response curve of estimated ARR as a function of copper concentrations.
The
results from the bioassay showed that the ARR increased with increased targeted copper
concentration (Figure 4.10). For the high copper concentrations of 1.0 and 5.0 µg Cu/L
the ARR were limited by ammonium concentration, leading to an underestimation of the
rates. Thus, the relation between ARR and copper concentration shows an asymptotic
behavior at dosed concentrations above 0.5 µg Cu/L.
Figure 4.10: Dose-response curve of estimated ARR and targeted copper concentra-
tions in bioassay of inlet source water from Nærum water works using a
5 % volume of inoculum from batch 1A (0.5 % enriched) dosing copper
at 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5 and 1 µg Cu/L.
The prepared inoculum had been diluted in artificial medium (0.5 % original nitri-
fying culture 7i) being enriched with regards to important macro-nutrients and trace
metals. Limitations by nutrients are therefore considered low. The used inoculum had
a trace copper concentration of 0.163 µg Cu/L, thus when used in experiments at a to-
tal volume of 5 %, comprises a possible background copper concentration of 8 ng Cu/L.
==PAGE:59==
4.6 Dose-response curve
43
The measured copper concentrations in the batches without copper or low copper dosing
were, however, measured well-above the possible trace copper concentrations from inocu-
lum and source water. Contamination from work environment such as unclean glassware
used during stock solution addition and uncertainties with IcP measurements at these
low concentrations are possible explanations. Meanwhile, when looking at batches dosed
with higher copper copper concentrations > 0.5 µg Cu/L the measured copper is 9-50
% lower than the concentration dosed. This suggests that copper is either not added
due to pipetting uncertainties or that it is not captured through the means of analysis,
possibly due to copper attaching to glass surfaces within batch experiment. These issues
challenge the formulation of a standard dose-response curve from a single experiment.
When plotting all the recorded ARRs in the conducted bioassays as a function of mea-
sured copper concentrations, a more descriptive dose-response curve is depicted, Figure
4.11. Concentrations over 1 µg Cu/L have been excluded, as these results originate from
bioassys either conducted with inoculum not enriched and therefore possibly affected by
nutrient limitations, or with estimated ARR subject to ammonium limitations. A linear
relationship was indicated between the estimated ARR and the measured copper concen-
trations in the range of 0-1.0 µg Cu/L. The regression suggests that copper is required
at concentrations above 39 ng Cu/L to facilitate nitrification, and the that nitrification
can be limited if copper concentrations approach this value. Results show that copper
concentrations above 0.5 µg Cu/L generally stimulate the nitrification processes.
Figure 4.11: Estimated ARR as a function of measured copper concentration evaluated
through four different bioassays dosing copper to inlet source water from
Danish drinking water facilities.
Connecting the findings of the dose-response to the investigated inlet water sources,
confirms the interpretation of nitrification differences. As the inlet water to Nærum
water works is approaching the suggested limiting copper concentration of 39 ng Cu/L,
the nitrification is likely limited by copper depletion. While the inlet water to Islevbro
water works has a copper concentration notably higher than 39 ng Cu/L, the findings
suggest that the nitrification can be further improved by copper dosing.
==PAGE:60==
44
4 Results and Discussion
Comparing the results of this study with the available literature, the findings of the
bioassay provide new knowledge on the effect of copper on nitrification in drinking water
systems at low concentrations. The findings are comparable to the observed limitations
at copper concentrations of 0.32 µg Cu/L to a pure culture of AOA by Amin et al.
(2013), and to the reported stimulation of the full-scale study by Wagner et al. (2016)
dosing 0.4 µg Cu/L, despite differences in test organisms and environments.
The developed bioassay and its findings are based on estimated ARR derived through
a simple test set-up with low sampling frequency, making it an accessible and applicable
diagnostic tool. The bioassay does not implement modeling of nitrification kinetics as
was done in the bioassay of De Vet et al. (2012), deriving the maximum specific growth
rates through parameter optimization. Uncertainties as to whether the nitrifying culture
is growing in cell density throughout the bioassay, could lead to over-interpretation of the
findings if modeling was applied. The developed bioassay provided results strongly indi-
cating the importance of copper to the nitrification process in drinking water treatment.
By applying it as a diagnostic tool to operating water works, nitrification improvements
by copper dosing were identified.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
The findings of the present study indicate that dosing copper can enhance nitrification
in rapid sand filters.
The designed bioassay to test the effect of copper dosing can
function as a tool to investigate whether copper deficiency is causing inefficient removal
of ammonium. However, the study holds important assumptions to the findings, and
considerations should be done when implementing this bioassay at water works as a
diagnostic tool to overcome challenges with nitrification.
5.1
A diagnostic tool
The observed ARR are absolute values from a bioassay conducted under test environ-
ments, which differ from the conditions in a sand filter. Comparing the rates of nitrifi-
cation from this study to other recorded ARRs, should therefore be done with caution.
The designed bioassay is a constructed system with surface area compared to a sand
filter system, as the nitrifying culture and its substrates are suspended in the water
phase. The recorded copper concentrations stimulating the nitrification process should
therefore be translated as the concentrations within the biofilm of the nitrifying culture.
Achieving these concentrations in the biofilm at a water works would, however, require
higher concentrations in the sand filter matrix due to sorption processes and limitations
by diffusion.
When applying the method to operating water works it should therefore be noted
that the observed improvements of nitrification rates and copper concentrations are not
directly transferable. The findings should instead be used as a scale of measure, which
can translate into a qualitative answer to determine whether copper dosing can resolve
insufficient nitrification. The findings suggest that if ARR improves more than 6-fold
in the bioassay, it is likely that nitrification is limited by copper concentrations. These
translations should be supported by further investigations looking at different water
sources in order to standardize a scale of responses.
The dose-response curve indicated that the required minimum concentration of cop-
per to facilitate nitrification by nitrifiers in a rapid sand filter is 54 ng Cu/L. This value
could be used as a rough guide as to when the copper concentration in a water source
is affecting the nitrification. However, with current available instruments it can be very
challenging to identify concentrations in this low range. Moreover, this concentration
limit can not by applied as a rule of thumb, as the chemistry of the water source can
make the measured concentration of copper more or less available to the nitrifiers. The
==PAGE:62==
46
5 Discussion
principle behind the bioassay will therefore function as a tool to evaluate the microbial
available concentration.
5.2
Comparing findings to other studies
The maximum recorded ARR of the nitrifying inoculum originally extracted from the
filter material was 35.5 ng/min/g sand. This is more than 7-times the ARR observed
in previous batch experiments done at DTU investigating the effect of copper (SBB
project and Sykyta et al. (2016)). This could indicate that the modified batch set-up of
this project by shaking off microbes from the sand grain and constructing a suspended
system with limited amount of particles, increases the nitrification activity by reducing
the limitation of substrate sorption and diffusion. The effects of copper dosing at 1.0 µg
Cu/L in this project were recorded to increase nitrification up to 17 times. This effect
is higher than what was shown in the full-scale study of Wagner et al. (2016), where
the nitrification was doubled when dosing 0.4 µg Cu/L to a sand filter system. The
developed bioassay can be applied to operating water works as a method to evaluate
if copper addition would improve nitrification in their rapid sand filter. Nevertheless,
the method does not provide a 1:1 result on how much the nitrification is improved by
dosing copper. Further elaborations to the study can be done to improve the bioassay
as a diagnostic tool.
The developed bioassay is a simple and applicable method to evaluate the effects
of copper dosing through chemical analysis of nitrogen compounds. The bioassay does
not rely on expensive and time-consuming microbiological analysis or excessive data
treatment and modeling. The test duration of this bioassay is comparably lower than
previously developed methods (Lehtola et al., 1999; De Vet et al., 2012).
5.3
Assumptions of the study
Applying the prepared inoculum to a bioassay as a representative culture resembling
the one found in the sand filter at a water works carries two main assumptions: the
same nitrifiers are growing at room temperature and at 10°C, and the same nitrifiers are
growing at ammonium loading of 20 mg-N/L and at 1-2 mg-N/L.
The optimal temperature for nitrification in drinking water systems have been re-
ported in the range of 25-30°C (Painter, 1977; Wolfe and Lieu, 2001). Increasing the
incubation temperature from 10°C to room temperature yields an increase in the rate
of nitrification according to Arrhenius equation as was observed in this study. However,
the abundance and variation in the nitrifying community could be affected by the tem-
perature change (Fowler et al., 2018). As all nitrifiers (e.g. AOB, AOA and Comammox)
are known to express the AMO gene, thus requiring copper for activation. This study
assumes that the effect from copper dosing will be observed no matter the nitrifying
community, and that only the magnitude of the effect might differ.
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Standardized inoculum for bioassay
47
The bioassay of this study was designed with an ammonium loading of 15 mg-N/L due
to considerations on analysis detection limits and growth stimulation to achieve a short
test duration. The study of Wagner et al. (2016) showed that the effect of copper dosing
on nitrification increases with ammonium loading to the filter material and organisms.
The higher ammonium loading for the bioassay, compared to drinking water systems,
would likely enhance the effect of copper dosing. Investigating the effects under lower
ammonium loading would be of interest to approach the actual filter improvement by
copper dosing. Although the copper concentrations detected in inlet source water are
low, it might still be sufficient to activate the nitrification at lower ammonium loadings.
Another main assumption to the study is that other parameters possibly affecting the
nitrification process have been excluded in set-up of the bioassay. The choice of artificial
medium for inoculum enrichment is important to stimulate activity and to leave the
culture saturated in all nutrients except copper. The bioassay of De Vet et al. (2012)
grew a mixed nitrifying culture from drinking water filter material, adding an artificial
medium resembling the composition of the one used in this study, with exemptions of
iron and manganese which are found in high concentrations in groundwater.
5.4
Standardized inoculum for bioassay
Making a standardized culture of nitrifying bacteria is crucial in order to conduct a
bioassay that is not affected by any microbial imbalance or differences. Making sure
that the rate of nitrification in the inoculum is represented in every batch of the bioassay
will allow for a direct comparison between observed results. However, preservation of
the inoculum can, be very challenging.
The study applied the premise of a fed-batch reactor, a closed system where bacteria
were spiked with substrate once concentrations were low. As seen in the preparation of
the inoculum, its activity will be limited by alkalinity consumption over time. Adding
buffer capacity to the inoculum could resolve this issue by stabilizing pH in the fed-
batch medium. However, addition of a buffer changes the chemistry of the inoculum
and ultimately the test environment of the bioassay. Using a carbonate buffer would
lead to increased copper complexation, which lowers the concentration of free copper ions,
possibly altering the observed effects of its dosing (Wagner, 2017; Zhang and Edwards,
2010). Using an organic buffer, other than copper complexation, could also affect the
performance of the inoculum in a bioassay, as it increases the risk of contamination by
Herterotrophs.
Another solution to standardize the inoculum would be through proper storage.
Known storage methods for microbial preservation are, nevertheless, not easily imple-
mented without interfering with the microbial activity or chemical composition of the
medium. Freezing nitrifying bacteria will likely destroy microbial cells, and ultimately
leave the inoculum with limited nitrifying activity. A nitrifying culture is therefore often
immersed into 20 % glycerol allowing for a gentle treatment when frozen. The impact
of freezing comes from the formation of ice crystals and the osmotic shock (Postgate
==PAGE:64==
48
5 Discussion
and Hunter, 1961). It is suggested that partially dehydration of the cell when glycerol
penetrates into the cell cytoplasm is necessary for bacteria to survive freezing (Hollan-
der and Nell, 1954). However, this will add organic matter to the test system possibly
causing risk of contamination.
For a fed-batch reactor type, as used in this project, it is important to evaluate and
maintain the activity of the inoculum by monitoring the substrate concentrations and
pH conditions. If nitrification stagnates, caution should be taken when using it in a
bioassay. The experiences of this project suggest that the nitrification capacity of the
inoculum should be restored prior to bioassay by diluting it into new artificial medium.
This would ensure that pH conditions would not interfere with findings of a bioassay.
A different approach of the bioassay would be to not develop a standardized inoculum,
but to extract and grow an individual inoculum for the water works of interest. An
argument for this would be that the findings of a bioassay is also a result of the used
inoculum.
A standardized inoculum might differ from the one found in the specific
sand filters, as the copper requirements could also differ. However, this approach would
increase the workload and not allow for a standardized comparison across different water
works and different sand filters.
5.5
Recommendations for further research
Throughout the work of this project, different areas of interest for further research have
been identified:
• Analyze the effect of copper dosing under low ammonium concentrations resem-
bling water works (1-2 mg-N/L). This might approach the actual ARR improve-
ments, and could possibly decrease the duration of the bioassay.
• Investigate different inlet water sources from water works with both well-functioning
and insufficient nitrification. This could lead to the development of a comparative
scale on the effect of copper dosing. A more comprehensive data collection would
support the robustness of the diagnostic tool - to confirm whether copper deficiency
is the actual cause of nitrification problems.
• Evaluate and identify the prepared nitrifying culture to further develop a standard-
ized inoculum. This would allow for a measure of how representative the inoculum
is compared to the bacteria abundant in rapid sand filters. A standardized inocu-
lum could, furthermore, lead to the adaptation of this bioassay to test the effect
of other limiting nutrients and/or conditions possibly challenging the nitrification
process.
• Explore new materials for inoculum preparation from different water works and
from different filters (pre/secondary) to assess wether a standardized medium is a
good approach when identifying causes of insufficient nitrification.
==PAGE:65==
5.5 Recommendations for further research
49
• Increase the number of different tested copper concentrations in a bioassay to
further and better describe the correlation between the nitrification rate and copper
concentrations. This could include concentrations within 0.2 and 0.6 µg Cu/L, or
concentrations outside the tested range of this study (>1.0 µg Cu/L).
• Establish and normalize the critical sampling times needed to best obtain the ARR
in a bioassay.
• Formulate the protocol of a diagnostic tool based on above research and the expe-
rience gained throughout this project:
– Extract a mixed bacteria culture from a rapid sand filter, a volume of shake-off
from 50 mg sand in 50 ml water, is enriched in nutrient medium of important
macro-nutrients and trace metals.
– Sustain the inoculum by ammonium dosing and monitor its activity through
chemistry analysis of nitrogen compounds, and DO and pH measurements.
The copper trace is lowered through means of dilution and buffer capacity is
supplied through artificial medium.
– Clean all glassware achieved by acid washing and burning to avoid copper con-
tamination in experiment. Use sterile disposable plastic tubes when needed
during stock solution addition etc..
– Prepare a standard batch experiment of duplicates or more in closed blue cap
bottles incubated on shaking tables with an inoculum volume of 5 %. Control
batches without inoculum and batches with inoculum in a positive reference
test medium are recommended.
Reference batches with nutrient addition
are also recommended, to evaluate limitations by these. Batches with and
without copper dosing at a concentration of 1.0 µg Cu/L are prepared.
– Sample the batches on day of incubation, again after three days of incubation
(lag-phase), and thereafter each day with a total test duration of one week.
– Analyze the samples for ammonium concentration and estimate the ARR for
each batch within time interval of best performing batch.
– Evaluate limitations by nutrients, substrate, pH, DO etc.
to exclude the
possible interference from the findings.
– Translate the observed effect of copper dosing through a standardized scale
of measure into a result as to whether copper depletion is the cause of nitrifi-
cation limitation.
==PAGE:66==
50
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This project developed a novel bioassay to determine the effect of copper dosing on
nitrification in drinking water rapid sand filters of Danish water works. Empirical work
on both the preparation of a nitrifying inoculum and progression of tests on copper
dosing to inlet water sources, contributed towards the following conclusions:
• Assessment of different filter materials showed that the nitrification activity de-
pends on the origin of material, filter age and the incubation temperature.
• A suspended nitrifying culture was successfully constructed as inoculum in batch
experiments maintaining its rate once diluted, not indicating a linearly dependency
of the volume.
• The performance of an inoculum was improved by: supplying macro-nutrients
and trace metals, decreasing its trace concentration of copper and maintaining
buffer capacity to overcome alkalinity consumption. Through serial dilution into
artificial medium, it was possible to prepare an inoculum sensitive to changes in
copper concentrations of 8 ng Cu/L.
• By determining the nitrification kinetics, the sampling frequency of the bioassay
could be designed to minimize cost and work load of the method, having a lag-
phase of three days and a total duration of one week.
• A linear correlation was found between ARRs and copper concentrations in the
range of 0-1.0 µg Cu/L. The findings of the study indicate that copper is required
at concentrations above 39 ng Cu/L to facilitate nitrification by nitrifying bacteria
from a rapid sand filter. The results generally showed that ARRs were stimulated
at copper concentrations above 0.5 µg Cu/L.
• Copper dosing of 1.0 µg Cu/L to inlet water from a Danish water works increased
the ARR 17-fold. ARR improvements were identified for both well-functioning
filters and those experiencing insufficient ammonium removal.
Using the developed bioassay to test different inlet water sources, it was found that the
effect of copper dosing on nitrification improvement is 2.5 times higher for sources with
copper deficiency. This suggests that the bioassay can be used as a diagnostic tool to
identify whether copper depletion is limiting the nitrification performance in drinking
water rapid sand filters.
==PAGE:68==
52
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
Amin, S. A., Moffett, J. W., Martens-Habbena, W., Jacquot, J. E., Han, Y., Devol,
A., Ingalls, A. E., Stahl, D. A., and Armbrust, E. (2013). Copper requirements of
the ammonia-oxidizing archaeon nitrosopumilus maritimus scm1 and implications for
nitrification in the marine environment. Limnology and Oceanography, 58(6):2037–
2045.
Appelo, C. A. J. and Postma, D. (2004). Geochemistry, groundwater and pollution. CRC
press.
Apte, S. and Day, G. (1993). Organic complexation and partitioning of copper in river
waters: A review. ok tedi mining limited.
Arp, D. J., Chain, P. S., and Klotz, M. G. (2007). The impact of genome analyses on
our understanding of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria. Annu. Rev. Microbiol., 61:503–528.
Arvin, E. (2002). Filtration of drinking water. dtu environment and resources.
Aslan, S. and Sozudogru, O. (2017). Individual and combined effects of nickel and copper
on nitrification organisms. Ecological Engineering, 99:126–133.
Association, A. P. H., Association, A. W. W., Federation, W. P. C., and Federation,
W. E. (1915). Standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater, vol-
ume 2. American Public Health Association.
ASTM (1998). Standard guide for conducting laboratory soil toxicity or bioaccumulation
test with the lumbricid earthworm Eisenia foetida. Philadelphia, PA: ASTM.
Bock, E. and Wagner, M. (2006). Oxidation of inorganic nitrogen compounds as an
energy source. In The prokaryotes, pages 457–495. Springer.
Braam, F. and Klapwijk, A. (1981). Effect of copper on nitrification in activated sludge.
Water Research, 15(9):1093–1098.
Brandt, K. K., H. P. E. . N. O. (2009). Biosensors highlight the bioavailability of metals
in water and soil: copper, nickel and arsenic threaten groundwater quality, in Danish:
Biosensorer belyser metallers biologiske tilgængelighed i vand og jord: kobber, nikkel
og arsen truer grundvandskvaliteten. Philadelphia, PA: ASTM.
Cabrero, A., Fernandez, S., Mirada, F., and Garcia, J. (1998). Effects of copper and zinc
on the activated sludge bacteria growth kinetics. Water Research, 32(5):1355–1362.
==PAGE:70==
54
Bibliography
Campbell, P. G. (1994). Interactions between trace metals and aquatic organisms: a
critique of the free-ion activity model.
Metal Speciation and bioavailability, pages
45–102.
Coale, K. H. and Bruland, K. W. (1988). Copper complexation in the northeast pacific.
Limnology and Oceanography, 33(5):1084–1101.
Crittenden, J. C. and Harza, B. M. W. (2005). Water treatment: principles and design.
Wiley.
Daims, H., Lebedeva, E. V., Pjevac, P., Han, P., Herbold, C., Albertsen, M., Jehmlich,
N., Palatinszky, M., Vierheilig, J., Bulaev, A., et al. (2015). Complete nitrification by
nitrospira bacteria. Nature, 528(7583):504.
Danish Environmental Agency (2017). Quality of the Danish drinking water for the
period 2014- 2016, in Danish (Kvaliteten af det danske drikkevand for perioden 2014-
2016).
Danish Nature Agency (2009). Quality of the Danish drinking water for the period 2005-
2007, in Danish (Kvaliteten af det danske drikkevand for perioden 2005-2007).
Danish Nature Agency (2014). Quality of the Danish drinking water for the period 2011-
2013, in Danish (Kvaliteten af det danske drikkevand for perioden 2011-2013).
Davidson, P. and Wilson, S. (2011). Groundwaters of Marlborough. Marlborough District
Council.
De Vet, W., Van Loosdrecht, M., and Rietveld, L. (2012). Phosphorus limitation in
nitrifying groundwater filters. Water research, 46(4):1061–1069.
Engel, M. S. and Alexander, M. (1958). Growth and autotrophic metabolism of nitro-
somonas europaea. Journal of bacteriology, 76(2):217.
Ensign, S. A., Hyman, M. R., and Arp, D. J. (1993).
In vitro activation of ammo-
nia monooxygenase from nitrosomonas europaea by copper. Journal of bacteriology,
175(7):1971–1980.
EU Council Directive (1998). The European Council Directive: 98/83/EC of 3 November
1998 on the quality of water intended for human consumption.
Fowler, S. J., Palomo, A., Dechesne, A., Mines, P. D., and Smets, B. F. (2018). Co-
mammox nitrospira are abundant ammonia oxidizers in diverse groundwater-fed rapid
sand filter communities. Environmental microbiology, 20(3):1002–1015.
Gilch, S., Meyer, O., and Schmidt, I. (2009). A soluble form of ammonia monooxygenase
in nitrosomonas europaea. Biological chemistry, 390(9):863–873.
Godskesen, B., Meron, N., and Rygaard, M. (2018). Lca of drinking water supply. In
Life Cycle Assessment, pages 835–860. Springer.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
55
Grady Jr, C. L., Daigger, G. T., Love, N. G., and Filipe, C. D. (2011).
Biological
wastewater treatment. CRC press.
Gray, N. F. (1994). Drinking water quality: problems and solutions. DTU Environment
and Resources. John Wiley & Sons.
Gülay, A. (2014). Taxonomic and functional diversity of microbial communities in rapid
sand filters for groundwater treatment. PhD thesis, DTU Environment.
Gülay, A., Musovic, S., Albrechtsen, H.-J., Al-Soud, W. A., Sørensen, S. J., and Smets,
B. F. (2016). Ecological patterns, diversity and core taxa of microbial communities
in groundwater-fed rapid gravity filters. The ISME journal, 10(9):2209.
Harrington, G. W., Noguera, D. R., Bone, C. C., and Kandou, A. I. (2003). Ammonia
from chloramine decay: effects on distribution system nitrification. American Water
Works Association.
Hollander, D. H. and Nell, E. E. (1954). Improved preservation of treponema pallidum
and other bacteria by freezing with glycerol. Applied microbiology, 2(3):164.
Hyman, M. R. and Arp, D. (1992). 14c2h2-and 14co2-labeling studies of the de novo
synthesis of polypeptides by nitrosomonas europaea during recovery from acetylene
and light inactivation of ammonia monooxygenase. Journal of Biological Chemistry,
267(3):1534–1545.
Jang, A., Okabe, S., Watanabe, Y., Kim, I. S., and Bishop, P. L. (2005). Measurement
of growth rate of ammonia oxidizing bacteria in partially submerged rotating biolog-
ical contactor by fluorescent in situ hybridization (fish). Journal of Environmental
Engineering and Science, 4(5):413–420.
Jørgensen, L. F. and Stockmarr, J. (2009). Groundwater monitoring in denmark: char-
acteristics, perspectives and comparison with other countries. Hydrogeology journal,
17(4):827–842.
Kołodyńska, D., Hubicki, Z., and Pasieczna-Patkowska, S. (2009). Ft-ir/pas studies of
cu (ii)–edta complexes sorption on the chelating ion exchangers. Acta Phys. Pol., A,
116:340–343.
Kors, L., Moorman, J., Wind, A., and Van Der Hoek, J. (1998).
Nitrification and
low temperature in a raw water reservoir and rapid sand filters. Water science and
technology, 37(2):169–176.
Lee, C. O., Boe-Hansen, R., Musovic, S., Smets, B., Albrechtsen, H.-J., and Binning,
P. (2014). Effects of dynamic operating conditions on nitrification in biological rapid
sand filters for drinking water treatment. Water research, 64:226–236.
Lehtola, M. J., Miettinen, I. T., Vartiainen, T., and Martikainen, P. J. (1999).
A
new sensitive bioassay for determination of microbially available phosphorus in water.
Applied and environmental microbiology, 65(5):2032–2034.
==PAGE:72==
56
Bibliography
Leininger, S., Urich, T., Schloter, M., Schwark, L., Qi, J., Nicol, G. W., Prosser, J. I.,
Schuster, S., and Schleper, C. (2006). Archaea predominate among ammonia-oxidizing
prokaryotes in soils. Nature, 442(7104):806.
Lingle, D. (2013). Origin of high levels of ammonium in groundwater, ottawa county,
michigan.
Lopato, L. (2011). Granular filters for water treatment: heterogeneity and diagnostic
tools. Technical University of Denmark, Department of Environmental Engineering.
Loveless, J. and Painter, H. (1968). The influence of metal ion concentrations and ph
value on the growth of a nitrosomonas strain isolated from activated sludge. Microbi-
ology, 52(1):1–14.
Martens-Habbena, W. and Stahl, D. A. (2011). Nitrogen metabolism and kinetics of
ammonia-oxidizing archaea. In Methods in enzymology, volume 496, pages 465–487.
Elsevier.
Martin, G. and Richard, Y. (1982). Elements of the inhibition of nitrifying bacteria.
Water Science and Technology, 14(6-7):781.
McCarty, G. (1999). Modes of action of nitrification inhibitors. Biology and Fertility of
Soils, 29(1):1–9.
Meiklejohn, J. (1950). The isolation of nitrosomonas europaea in pure culture. Microbi-
ology, 4(2):185–191.
Ministry of Environment and Food of Denmark (2017). Statuary order on water quality
and surveillence of water supply facilities, in danish: Bekendtgørelse om vandkvalitet
og tilsyn med vandforsyningsanlæg.
Nybroe, O., Brandt, K. K., Ibrahim, Y. M., Tom-Petersen, A., and Holm, P. E. (2008).
Differential bioavailability of copper complexes to bioluminescent pseudomonas fluo-
rescens reporter strains. Environmental toxicology and chemistry, 27(11):2246–2252.
Painter, H. A. (1977). Microbial transformations of inorganic nitrogen. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Nitrogen As a Water Pollutant, pages 3–29. Elsevier.
Parkhurst, D. L., Appelo, C., et al. (1999). User’s guide to phreeqc (version 2): A com-
puter program for speciation, batch-reaction, one-dimensional transport, and inverse
geochemical calculations.
Pedroni, M., Davoli, D., Cavagnoli, G., Madoni, P., Cucchi, A., and Rossi, F. (1997).
Water supply treatment-biological ammonium removal from drinking water: evalua-
tion of water-plants performance. INGEGNERIA AMBIENTALE, 26:642–649.
Postgate, J. and Hunter, J. (1961). On the survival of frozen bacteria. Microbiology,
26(3):367–378.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
57
Prest, E. I., Hammes, F., van Loosdrecht, M., and Vrouwenvelder, J. S. (2016). Biological
stability of drinking water: controlling factors, methods, and challenges. Frontiers in
Microbiology, 7:45.
Prosser, J. I. (1990). Autotrophic nitrification in bacteria. In Advances in microbial
physiology, volume 30, pages 125–181. Elsevier.
Purkhold, U., Wagner, M., Timmermann, G., Pommerening-Röser, A., and Koops, H.-P.
(2003). 16s rrna and amoa-based phylogeny of 12 novel betaproteobacterial ammonia-
oxidizing isolates: extension of the dataset and proposal of a new lineage within the
nitrosomonads.
International journal of systematic and evolutionary microbiology,
53(5):1485–1494.
Rittmann, B. E. and McCarty, P. L. (2012). Environmental biotechnology: principles
and applications. Tata McGraw-Hill Education.
Salami, S., Oluwatosin, O., Oso, A., Fafiolu, A., Sogunle, O., Jegede, A., Bello, F.,
and Pirgozliev, V. (2016). Bioavailability of cu, zn and mn from mineral chelates or
blends of inorganic salts in growing turkeys fed with supplemental riboflavin and/or
pyridoxine. Biological trace element research, 173(1):168–176.
Sato, C., Leung, S. W., and Schnoor, J. L. (1988).
Toxic response of nitrosomonas
europaea to copper in inorganic medium and wastewater. Water research, 22(9):1117–
1127.
Sato, C., Schnoor, J. L., and McDonald, D. B. (1986). Characterization of effects of
copper, cadmium and nickel on the growth of nitrosomonas europaea. Environmental
toxicology and chemistry, 5(4):403–416.
Sauvé, S., McBride, M., and Hendershot, W. (1995). Ion-selective electrode measure-
ments of copper (ii) activity in contaminated soils. Archives of Environmental Con-
tamination and Toxicology, 29(3):373–379.
Sauvé, S., McBride, M. B., Norvell, W. A., and Hendershot, W. H. (1997). Copper
solubility and speciation of in situ contaminated soils: effects of copper level, ph and
organic matter. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 100(1-2):133–149.
Sayavedra-Soto, L. A. and Arp, D. J. (2011). Ammonia-oxidizing bacteria: their bio-
chemistry and molecular biology. In Nitrification, pages 11–37. American Society of
Microbiology.
Schecher, W. D. and McAvoy, D. C. (1992). Mineql+: a software environment for chem-
ical equilibrium modeling. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 16(1):65–76.
Skalar Analytical (2017). Manual on San++ CFA Analyzer.
Skinner, F. and Walker, N. (1961).
Growth of nitrosomonas europaea in batch and
continuous culture. Archiv für Mikrobiologie, 38(4):339–349.
==PAGE:74==
58
Bibliography
Stauber, J. L., Apte, S. C., and Rogers, N. J. (2008). Speciation, bioavailability and
toxicity of copper in the fly river system. Developments in Earth and Environmental
Sciences, 9:375–408.
Suzuki, I., Dular, U., and Kwok, S. (1974). Ammonia or ammonium ion as substrate
for oxidation by nitrosomonas europaea cells and extracts. Journal of Bacteriology,
120(1):556–558.
Sykyta, E., Milanovic, N., Albrechtsen, H.-J., Wagner, B. W., and Lee, C. O. (2016).
Optimization of nitrification process by copper addition, in danish ”optimering af
nitrifikationsprocessen ved tilsaetning af kobber”.
Tarre, S. and Green, M. (2004).
High-rate nitrification at low ph in suspended-and
attached-biomass reactors.
Applied and environmental microbiology, 70(11):6481–
6487.
Tatari, K. (2014). Nitrification biokinetics in rapid sand filters for drinking water treat-
ment. PhD thesis, PhD Thesis, Technical University of Denmark.
Teske, A., Alm, E., Regan, J., Toze, S., Rittmann, B., and Stahl, D. (1994). Evolutionary
relationships among ammonia-and nitrite-oxidizing bacteria. Journal of bacteriology,
176(21):6623–6630.
Thermo Scientific (2017). Orion™Cupric Electrode Manual.
Tomlinson, T., Boon, A., and Trotman, C. (1966). Inhibition of nitrification in the acti-
vated sludge process of sewage disposal. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 29(2):266–
291.
Van der Aa, L., Kors, L., Wind, A., Hofman, J., and Rietveld, L. (2002). Nitrification
in rapid sand filter: phosphate limitation at low temperatures. Water science and
technology: Water supply, 2(1):37–46.
Van Der Kooij, D. (2000). Biological stability: a multidimensional quality aspect of
treated water. In Environmental Challenges, pages 25–34. Springer.
Van Loosdrecht, M. C. and Henze, M. (1999). Maintenance, endogeneous respiration,
lysis, decay and predation. Water Science and Technology, 39(1):107–117.
VandCenterSyd (2017). Vandets vej.
Verhagen, F. J. and Laanbroek, H. J. (1991).
Competition for ammonium between
nitrifying and heterotrophic bacteria in dual energy-limited chemostats. Applied and
Environmental Microbiology, 57(11):3255–3263.
Wagner, F. B. (2017). Importance of copper for nitrification in biological rapid sand filters
for drinking water production. PhD thesis, Department of Environmental Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
59
Wagner, F. B., Nielsen, P. B., Boe-Hansen, R., and Albrechtsen, H.-J. (2016). Copper
deficiency can limit nitrification in biological rapid sand filters for drinking water
production. Water research, 95:280–288.
Wagner, F. B., Nielsen, P. B., Boe-Hansen, R., and Albrechtsen, H.-J. (2017). Remedia-
tion of incomplete nitrification and capacity increase of biofilters at different drinking
water treatment plants through copper dosing. Water research.
Wenger, K., Tandy, S., and Nowack, B. (2005). Effects of chelating agents on trace metal
speciation and bioavailability. ACS Publications.
Westheimer, F. H. (1987). Why nature chose phosphates. Science, 235(4793):1173–1178.
WHO (1996). Health criteria and other supporting information. Guidelines for drinking-
water quality, 2:796–803.
WHO (2004). Guidelines for drinking-water quality: recommendations, volume 1. World
Health Organization.
Wolfe, R. L. and Lieu, N. I. (2001). Nitrifying bacteria in drinking water. Encyclopedia
of Environmental Microbiology.
WWAP, U. (2003). United nations world water assessment programme. the world water
development report 1: Water for people, water for life.
Zhang, Y. and Edwards, M. (2010).
Nutrients and metals effects on nitrification in
drinking water systems. American Water Works Association. Journal, 102(7):56.
Zhang, Y., Love, N., and Edwards, M. (2009). Nitrification in drinking water systems.
Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology, 39(3):153–208.
==PAGE:76==
60
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Inoculum test - 1
The first inoculum experiment is done as batch experiments in closed blue cap bottles.
Glass wear and caps are thoroughly washed with a bottle-brush and soap and autoclaved
before experimental set-up. Bottles are prepared with tap water taken from a laboratory
tap in building 114 at DTU, Lyngby. All the prepared batches are spiked with an initial
ammonium concentration of 15 mg-N/L using the ammonium stock solution.
A total of six different cultures are prepared for incubation. The three different filter
materials are used: sand from a new filter (no. 2) and sand from an older filter (no.
3), and the backwash water from the old filter (no 3) at Brøndbyvester water works.
Bottles are prepared with tap water and ammonium stock solution prior to introduction
of bacteria culture. The batches are prepared as follows:
1. Batches with filter sand: 30 gram of sand is added to 1 L bottles with 600 ml of
tap water.
2. Batches with shake-off extraction from filter sand: 50 gram of sand is added to
a 100 ml blue cap bottle along with 50 ml of tap water. The bottles are shaken
vigorously by hand for approximately 5 minutes.
A volume of 5 ml from the
shake-off is added to the batches made in a 500 ml flask with 400 ml of tap water.
3. Batches with backwash water from sand filter: 5 ml of backwash water is added
to the batch made in 500 ml flask with 400 ml of tap water.
4. Batch with tap water: 400 ml of tap water is added to a 500 ml flask. No other
bacteria culture is introduced. This serves as a control for the other incubation
batches.
In order to facilitate comparison across batches with different concentrations of filter
material an estimation of the sand to water ratio is calculated using:
r[sand/ml] =
msand
Vwater · Vshake−off
Vbatch
=
50[g]
50[ml] · 5[ml]
400[ml]
= 0.0125g/ml
(A.1)
The experiment is set up on Friday the 2nd of March 2018. Batches are prepared
with filter material and tap water. Finally the ammonium is added the the batches
marking the start of the incubation time. Table A.1 lists the detailed composition of
the prepared batches. The batches are depicted in Figure A.1.
==PAGE:78==
62
A Inoculum test - 1
Table A.1: Details on batch set-up.
Batch
Volume
Tap water
Sand
Culture
Temp.
NH+
4
no.
[L]
[L]
[mg/ml]
origin
[°C]
[mlstock]
1i
0.5
0.4
12.5
5ml shake-off filter no. 2
10
6
2i
0.5
0.4
12.5
5ml shake-off filter no. 3
10
6
3i
0.5
0.4
-
Tap water
10
6
4i
0.5
0.4
-
5ml backwash water filter no. 3
10
6
5i
1
0.6
50
30g filter 2 sand
10
9
6i
1
0.6
50
30g filter 3 sand
10
9
7i
0.5
0.4
12.5
5ml shake-off filter no. 2
20
6
8i
0.5
0.4
12.5
5ml shake-off filter no. 3
20
6
9i
0.5
0.4
-
5ml backwash water filter no. 3
20
6
Figure A.1: Pictures of prepared batches from 1i top left to 9i bottom right.
All the batches are incubated on a vertical Gerhardt Laboshaker shaking table at
95 shakes per minute, A.2. Bottles 1-6 are incubated at 10°C and bottles 7-9 at 20°C
(room temperature).
==PAGE:79==
A Inoculum test - 1
63
Figure A.2: Set-up of batches on vertical shaking table.
The batches are sampled on the day of set-up approximately one minute after they
are incubated and shaken by hand, and then again every 3-4 days of incubation. The
batches are re-spiked with ammonium (15 mg-N/L) when the concentration is measured
at or below 2 mg-N/L using the ammonium test-kits. The re-spike concentration is
calculated using:
VNH4,stock = −Vbatch · (CNH4,re-spike −CNH4,batch)
(CNH4,re-spike −CNH4,stock)
= −0.4[L] · (15[mg-N/L] −2[mg-N/L])
(15[mg-N/L] −1, 000[mg-N/L])
= 5.28ml
(A.2)
Dissolved oxygen and pH is measured on March 8th and April 25th. Table A.2 lists
the measured oxygen concentrations and pH values in batch 1i-9i.
Table A.2: DO and pH measurements.
8/3 -2018
25/4 -2018
Batch
DO
pH
DO
pH
no.
[mgO2/L]
at °C
value
at °C
[mgO2/L]
at °C
value
at °C
1i
10.8
8.8
7.4
8.9
10.60
9.2
6.91
9.0
2i
11.1
8.6
7.6
8.6
10.40
8.9
6.92
9.1
3i
11.1
9
7.6
8.8
11.27
8.9
7.79
8.8
4i
10.9
8.9
7.7
8.9
10.80
8.7
7.09
8.6
5i
10.1
8.8
7.1
8.8
8.67
9.1
5.54
8.7
6i
10.1
8.7
7.5
8.8
9.34
9.6
6.25
8.8
7i
8.5
20.1
7.3
20.1
8.26
23.5
5.19
23.6
8i
8.9
19.7
7.5
20.1
7.52
23.0
6.03
23.3
9i
9.0
19.7
7.6
20.1
7.98
22.8
7.13
22.9
The bottles are incubated over a period of two months. Batches with a higher removal
rate is sampled more frequently, and re-spikes are described through sampling prior to
==PAGE:80==
64
A Inoculum test - 1
and right after ammonium addition. Test-kit ammonium concentrations are listed in
Table A.3. Table A.4, Table A.5 and Table A.6 list the sampling days and the measured
concentrations and ammonium, nitrate and NOx respectively.
Table A.3: Ammonium concentrations measured in batch 1-9i using test-kit analysis.
Batch no. /
1i
2i
3i
4i
5i
6i
7i
8i
9i
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
11.6
11.6
14.6
11.8
12.45
11.9
3
11.2
12.1
15.2
11.9
7.6
8.8
11.3
12.6
12.5
7
2.15
3.8
13
8.2
12.2
16.2
13.6
7.9
7.6
3.1
6.15
13.35
18
6.95
10.55
13.3
1.5
2.6
1.3
2.05
21
6.5
10.35
10.9
1.2
<0.25
0.4
21
14.9
14.4
15.7
25
5.55
8.875
6.6
8.65
9.825
10.3
32
3.9
6.3
0.36
2.375
<0.05
6.65
32
13.35
13.18
15.25
35
16.1
10.73
10.3
11.58
14.4
4.5
9.0
40
4.15
8.7
7.85
1.8
45
<0.05
6.7
4.45
0.88
45
12.7
12.05
48
0.8
1.7
15.85
8.15
9.05
6.45
4.85
9.5
6.95
52
5.25
==PAGE:81==
A Inoculum test - 1
65
Table A.4: Ammonium concentrations measured in batch 1-9i using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1i
2i
3i
4i
5i
6i
7i
8i
9i
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
14.49
14.87
17.6
15.02
15.01
14.98
14.68
14.96
14.66
3
13.86
14.44
17.33
14.62
10.62
10.76
14.06
14.67
14.56
7
12.83
14.31
17.51
14.64
5.44
6.95
11.51
14.22
14.64
7
16.22
16.45
13
10.1
13.52
17.11
14.39
9.77
9.64
5.42
7.94
13.84
18
8.63
12.67
17.29
14.42
3.68
4.52
1.99
3.3
14.06
21
7.85
12.08
13.58
2.12
0.19
1.29
21
15.53
15.16
15.81
25
6.45
10.63
7.92
9.85
11.16
13.81
32
4.56
8.5
0.69
2.94
0.15
9.13
32
15.33
15.23
17.34
35
17.07
11.14
11.29
12.45
15.71
6.96
9.74
40
4.79
9.85
9.1
4.1
45
3.46
7.94
6.28
1.68
45
15.15
16.31
48
1.36
4.4
17.75
8.92
10.91
7.84
5.95
13.44
7.67
52
6.43
54
4.62
5.24
54
20.83
58
19.6
60
2.44
60
18.62
62
17.76
15.16
==PAGE:82==
66
A Inoculum test - 1
Table A.5: Nitrite concentrations measured in batch 1-9i using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1i
2i
3i
4i
5i
6i
7i
8i
9i
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
3
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.12
0.10
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
7
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.79
0.32
0.23
<0.1
<0.1
7
1.00
0.37
13
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
3.30
1.53
0.66
2.97
<0.1
18
<0.1
0.20
<0.1
<0.1
5.12
3.17
1.46
5.89
0.12
21
<0.1
0.39
6.25
4.11
1.52
6.95
21
4.09
1.48
6.85
25
<0.1
0.60
7.13
7.10
3.14
7.87
32
<0.1
0.80
4.16
10.77
10.28
10.55
32
3.85
10.75
10.07
35
<0.1
2.51
3.20
11.69
8.87
11.90
4.43
40
1.79
13.92
4.72
15.03
45
2.30
14.20
0.32
16.65
45
0.20
16.51
48
<0.1
0.85
<0.1
4.63
0.22
14.26
0.46
19.24
6.63
52
0.13
54
0.10
0.16
54
<0.1
0.66
58
<0.1
1.69
60
<0.1
60
62
5.98
==PAGE:83==
A Inoculum test - 1
67
Table A.6: NOx concentrations measured in batch 1-9i using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1i
2i
3i
4i
5i
6i
7i
8i
9i
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
3
1.02
0.48
<0.1
0.38
4.54
3.56
1.08
0.48
0.36
7
2.16
0.68
0.38
0.4
9.64
7.78
3.58
1
0.4
7
10.68
8.62
13
4.64
1.22
0.5
0.46
17.4
15.12
9.4
6.84
0.46
18
6.24
2.16
0.38
0.58
20.9
19.26
12.7
11.36
0.6
21
7.14
2.9
21.82
20.88
14.52
13.1
21
20.72
14.08
12.9
25
8.44
4.08
22.76
22.36
17.82
14.88
32
10
6.14
23.74
23.72
23.18
18.9
32
23.88
23.92
23.42
35
0.4
3.6
24.46
24.18
23.82
20.76
5.04
40
49.12
40.3
37.26
25.5
45
53.22
40.96
38.62
26.36
45
52.48
26.6
48
13.34
10.12
0.38
6.2
56.76
41.9
39.5
29.04
7.56
52
61.46
54
64.12
40.5
54
67.32
40.1
58
66.76
41.36
60
66.38
60
62
46.74
==PAGE:84==
68
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX B
Inoculum test - 2
The second inoculum experiment is set-up to observe how the nitrification rate of the
initial inoculum batch is affected when transferred to and diluted in a new aqueous
environment. The experiment is performed in 250 ml autoclaved blue cap bottles, and
a total of six bottles are prepared. The test volume is 200 ml, with an inoculum share
of 10 pct. originating from the initial inoculum experiment batch no. 7i. The inoculum
is introduced as the last element, into bottles with substrate and nutrient composition
as shown in Table B.1. The batches are spiked with an ammonium concentration of 15
mg-N/L in all but one batch (no. 6), which is spiked with only 2 mg-N/L.
Table B.1: Experimental set-up and detailed content.
Batch
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
PO−
4
Trace metals1)
Cu
[no]
type
[ml]
type
[ml]
[mlstock]
[mlstock]
[mlstock]
[mlstock]
1t
Artificial2)
177
7i
20
3
2t
Artificial2)
177
7i
20
3
0.01
3t
Tap water
177
7i
20
3
4t
Tap water
177
7i
20
3
0.1
0.1
5t
Tap water
177
7i
20
3
0.1
0.1
0.01
6t
Tap water
180
7i
20
0.4
1) Trace metal solution adapted from Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
2) Artificial medium as described in section 3.1.1 adapted from Daims et al. (2015) and Verhagen and
Laanbroek (1991).
The experiment was set up Tuesday the 23rd of March 2018. The batches are sampled
at on the day of set-up approximately one minute after they are prepared and shaken
by hand. The batches are incubated at 20°C (room temperature) on a vertical Gerhardt
Laboshaker shaking table at 90 shakes per minute, Figure B.1. The next samples are
taken after 7 days of incubation. The best performing batches are re-spiked with ammo-
nium (15 mg-N/L) once the concentration falls below 2 mg-N/L and sampled every 3-4
days of incubation.
==PAGE:86==
70
B Inoculum test - 2
Figure B.1: Pictures of prepared batches on shaking table.
The concentration of oxygen and pH value in batches are measured on April 25th,
Table B.2.
Table B.2: DO and pH measurements 25/4 -2018.
Batch
DO
pH
no
[mgO2/L]
at °C
value
at °C
1t
7.93
23.8
6.01
23.7
2t
8.29
23.2
7.43
23.3
3t
7.82
23.2
6.65
23.3
4t
7.50
23.1
5.18
23.2
5t
8.36
22.9
7.51
23.2
6t
8.24
22.8
7.55
23.0
Table B.3 lists the measured concentration of ammonium using test-kit method. The
batches with high ammonium were re-spiked after 10 days of incubation, thus length
of data sets differ amongst batches.
Table B.4 lists the measured concentration of
ammonium using skalar analysis. Table B.5 and Table B.6 lists the measured nitrite
and NOx concentrations respectively.
==PAGE:87==
B Inoculum test - 2
71
Table B.3: Ammonium concentrations measured in batch 1-6t using test-kit analysis.
Batch no. /
1t
2t
3t
4t
5t
6t
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
14.03
13.00
14.23
14.15
14.63
2.55
7
6.80
6.20
8.10
2.05
4.10
0.53
10
<0.05
3.6
<0.05
10
12.675
14.25
13.1
15
2.3
9.65
0.375
16
12.65
13.55
20
1.55
7
7.85
20
15
23
16.4
5
6.9
27
15.4
Table B.4: Ammonium concentrations measured in batch 1-6t using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1t
2t
3t
4t
5t
6t
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
15.95
15.65
15.66
15.72
15.69
3.21
7
7.97
7.19
8.85
2.79
5.17
0.62
10
0.28
4.08
0.12
10
14.52
15.4
14.71
15
3.93
10.22
1.09
16
17.12
15.48
20
3.05
7.27
9.28
20
23.44
23
19.32
5.93
7.98
27
18.29
29
18.5
==PAGE:88==
72
B Inoculum test - 2
Table B.5: Nitrite concentrations measured in batch 1-6t using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1t
2t
3t
4t
5t
6t
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
0.35
0.31
0.31
0.31
0.31
0.31
7
7.75
8.04
5.47
9.60
7.61
1.08
10
11.98
9.11
<0.1
10
11.82
9.01
<0.1
15
16.99
13.12
6.12
16
4.45
16.44
20
14.71
15.71
7.18
20
14.34
23
7.55
17.77
0.38
27
2.22
29
1.36
Table B.6: NOx concentrations measured in batch 1-6t using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1t
2t
3t
4t
5t
6t
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
1.98
1.82
2.3
2.3
2.28
2.28
7
9.92
10.1
8.84
14.68
12.4
4.62
10
16.66
13.42
17.04
10
16.54
13.3
16.96
15
29.18
18.62
31.62
16
32.06
32.08
20
40.32
20.52
36.00
20
40.46
23
44.72
22.88
37.48
27
45.42
29
46.66
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX C
Inoculum test - 3
The third inoculum test is done to further investigate the effect of diluting a nitrifying
culture in an artificial medium in order to create a better suitable inoculum with less
limitation of nutrients and lower risk of transferring copper traces. Moreover, the nitri-
fication dependency on inoculum share is assessed through a small set-up of different
inoculum dilutions.
Two batches are prepared in acid washed and burned 500 ml blue cap bottles, Table
C.1. Artificial medium and 5 pct. inoculum taken from Batch no. 1t from inoculum
test 2 is mixed to a total volume of 400 ml. One of the batches is incubated with 0.1 µg
Cu/L. For this experiment and the following a new copper stock solution is prepared by
diluting the initial stock solution of 20 mg Cu/L into milli-Q water following:
Vstock = 1[mgCu/L]
20[mgCu/L] · 10−3 = 50[ml]
(C.1)
Table C.1: Experimental set-up and detailed content.
Batch
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
Cu
no
[ml]
type
[ml]
type
[mlstock]
[mlstock]
1A
380
Artificial1)
20
1t
3
1B
380
Artificial1)
20
1t
3
0.04
1) Artificial medium as described in section 3.1.1 adapted from Daims
et al. (2015) and Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
The experiment is conducted on Friday the 13th April 2018. The bottles are incu-
bated on a vertical Gerhardt Laboshaker shaking table at 90 shakes per minute and at
20°C (room temperature). The bottles are sampled at the beginning of the experiment
approximately one minute after being prepared and shaken by hand. During incuba-
tion the bottles are sampled every 3-4 days. Batches are re-spiked with ammonium (15
mg-N/L) when measured at or below 2 mg-N/L.
Another experiment is set-up to evaluate how the nitrification rate of the prepared
inoculum depends on the volume transferred to a batch experiment.
Two different
batches are prepared in cleaned and autoclaved 500 ml blue cap bottles with tap water
and inoculum from the initial inoculum experiment batch no 5i.
One batch with 5
ml inoculum resembling the shake-off batches of the initial experiment. Another batch
with an inoculum share of 5 pct., Table C.2. The batches are incubated with 15 mg-N/L
==PAGE:90==
74
C Inoculum test - 3
ammonium at 20°C (room temperature) on a shaking table at 90 shakes per minute and
sampled every 3-4 days. The experiment is started Friday the 13th April 2018.
Table C.2: Experimental set-up and detailed content.
Batch
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
no.
[ml]
type
[ml]
type
[mlstock]
5A
400
Tap water
5
5i
3
5B
380
Tap water
20
5i
3
Batch 1A and 1B are monitored through test-kit analysis, measurements listed in
Table C.3. Table C.4 shows the measured concentrations of nitrogen compounds in batch
1A and 1B, and Table C.5 lists the measured oxygen concentrations and pH values at
end of experiment.
Table C.3: Ammonium concentrations measured in batch 1A and 1B using test-kit
analysis.
Batch no. /
1A
1B
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
12.65
11.25
3
11.33
12.70
6
11.75
11.60
10
8.00
7.60
15
1.70
0.34
16
13.10
12.50
18
11.40
10.25
20
9.88
7.80
21
9.00
7.18
24
6.70
5.90
==PAGE:91==
C Inoculum test - 3
75
Table C.4: Ammonium, Nitrite and NOx concentrations measured in batch 1A and 1B
using skalar analysis.
Batch no.
[mg-N/L]
1A
1B
Day
NH+
4
NO−
2
NOX
NH+
4
NO−
2
NOX
0
14.92
0.77
1.7
14.64
0.77
1.72
3
14.80
1.08
2.26
14.65
1.06
2.06
6
13.34
2.52
3.74
13.39
2.51
3.56
10
9.34
6.38
7.62
9.08
6.82
7.86
15
2.6
12.17
13.8
0.15
14.66
15.58
16
14.45
12.92
14.4
15.17
14.83
15.76
18
13.65
15.15
16.9
11.72
18.81
19.78
20
11.59
16.98
19.12
8.84
21.09
22.26
21
10.16
17.86
19.86
7.80
21.55
22.68
Table C.5: DO and pH measurements 16/5 -2018.
Batch
DO
pH
no
[mgO2/L]
at °C
value
at °C
1A
7.79
26.8
7.43
26.5
1B
7.88
26.3
7.32
26.3
Table C.6 lists the measured concentrations of nitrogen compounds in batch 5A and
5B.
Table C.6: Ammonium, Nitrite and NOx concentrations measured in batch 5A and 5B
using skalar analysis.
Batch no.
[mg-N/L]
5A
5B
Day
NH+
4
NO−
2
NOX
NH+
4
NO−
2
NOX
0
14.60
<0.1
1.44
15.08
<0.1
3.64
3
14.51
0.27
1.94
13.96
0.58
4.94
6
9.63
3.42
6.86
6.37
3.69
12.36
8
6.41
4.98
10.06
1.45
5.57
16.66
9
15.79
5.82
11.42
16.32
5.70
17.68
A small side-experiment is conducted in order to assess if nitrification activity can
be restored by adding buffer capacity to the batch experiment. Batch no. 7i is used
as inoculum for several batch experiments, due to its fast ammonium removal rate. A
pH measurement of batch no. 7i had identified a consumption of alkalinity leading to
a decrease in pH down to 5.2. The pH of the batch is adjusted to 7.6 using sodium
bicarbonate, Figure C.1. The batch is then re-spiked with ammonium (15 mg-N/L)
==PAGE:92==
76
C Inoculum test - 3
and the batch is sampled hereafter every 3-4 day to evaluate if nitrification activity is
restored.
Figure C.1: Pictures of prepared batches on shaking table.
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX D
Copper test - 1
The first copper experiment is constructed as a test of how to design a bioassay using the
grown inoculum of sand filter material from Brøndbyvester water works and raw inlet
water to a Nærum water work. The experiment aims to identify the effect of copper
dosing, and sampling frequency in order to describe the kinetics of the nitrifation process.
The experiment is conducted in 250 ml blue cap bottles. The bottles are initially washed
with soap and scrubbed with a bottle brush, then immersed in an acid batch (10 pct.
NHO3) for 3 hours and rinsed with milli-Q water. The clean glass ware is finally burned
at 400°C for one hour.
The total test volume of the experiment is 200 ml, with an inoculum share of 5 pct.,
amounting to 190 ml test water and 10 ml inoculum. The test is done under different
dosing of phosphor, trace metals and copper, Table D.1.
A control is made of tap
water taken from laboratory building 114 at DTU, Lyngby. The experiment is done in
duplicates to indicate the level of uncertainty within test set-up. Bottles are prepared
with test water, phosphate, trace metals and copper stock solutions to which ammonium
is spiked at a concentration of 15 mg-N/L. The last thing added to the batches is the
inoculum. Two different inoculum types are used: 1) Inoculum from Batch no. 7i from
inoculum test 1 and 2) Inoculum from batch no. 1t from inoculum test 2.
Table D.1: Experimental set-up and detailed content.
Batch
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
PO−
4
Trace metals1)
Cu
no.
type
[ml]
type
[mlstock]
[mlstock]
[mlstock]
[mlstock]
1-2x
Nærum
10
Batch 7i
3
3-4x
Nærum
10
Batch 7i
3
0.1
0.1
5-6x
Nærum
10
Batch 7i
3
0.1
0.1
0.2
7-8x
Tap water
10
Batch 7i
3
9-10x
Nærum
10
Batch 1t
3
0.1
0.1
11-12x
Nærum
10
Batch 1t
3
0.1
0.1
0.2
1) Trace metal solution adapted from Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
The experiment is started on Wednesday the 11 th of April 2018. The batches are
sampled at time zero approximately four minutes after inoculum was introduced and
mixed by hand with the test medium. The bottles are incubated on a vertical Gerhardt
Laboshaker shaking table with 90 shakes per minute at 20°C (room temperature). The
bottles are sampled once every day over a week.
==PAGE:94==
78
D Copper test - 1
Table D.2 lists the measured oxygen concentrations and pH values, which is taken
at the end of the experiment on the 25th of April 2018.
Table D.2: DO and pH measurements 25/4 -2018.
Batch
DO
pH
no
[mgO2/L]
at °C
value
at °C
1x
7.88
22.9
7.31
22.9
2x
7.85
23.0
7.23
23.0
3x
7.93
23.2
7.09
23.3
4x
7.92
23.2
7.07
23.3
5x
7.90
23.3
7.05
23.3
6x
7.94
23.4
7.07
23.5
7x
7.55
23.7
7.00
23.6
8x
7.80
23.7
7.20
23.9
9x
7.67
23.6
6.99
23.8
10x
7.70
23.5
6.98
23.6
11x
7.95
23.3
7.06
23.3
12x
8.07
23.2
7.13
23.1
The below Table D.3, Table D.4 and Table D.5 documents the measured ammonium,
nitrite and NOx concentrations respectively measured in the batches of the experiment.
Table D.3: Ammonium concentrations measured in batch 1-12x using skalar analysis.
[mg-N/L]
Batch no.
Day
1x
2x
3x
4x
5x
6x
7x
8x
9x
10x
11x
12x
0
14.74
14.86
14.83
14.43
14.61
14.79
14.48
14.42
14.84
14.69
14.49
14.32
1
14.52
14.78
14.72
14.77
14.48
14.63
14.37
14.26
14.63
14.56
14.33
14.49
2
14.27
14.50
14.38
14.32
14.32
14.28
14.07
14.22
14.66
14.25
14.12
14.04
3
14.03
14.14
13.44
13.43
13.38
13.39
14.11
14.01
13.37
13.57
13.44
13.58
4
13.58
13.59
11.47
11.37
10.58
10.76
13.84
14.01
12.58
12.49
11.06
11.72
5
12.93
12.78
6.81
6.49
4.27
4.49
13.59
13.81
10.89
10.85
5.17
7.07
6
12.12
11.97
0.43
0.23
<0.1
<0.1
12.14
12.74
8.59
8.75
0.27
0.17
7
11.09
11.04
0.13
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
9.03
11.36
6.21
6.47
0.23
<0.1
12
8.10
7.37
0.23
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
5.80
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
==PAGE:95==
D Copper test - 1
79
Table D.4: Nitrite concentrations measured in batch 1-12x using skalar analysis.
[mg-N/L]
Batch no.
Day
1x
2x
3x
4x
5x
6x
7x
8x
9x
10x
11x
12x
0
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.22
0.21
0.22
0.22
0.22
0.82
0.81
0.81
0.81
1
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.18
0.18
0.80
0.79
0.79
0.78
2
0.25
0.24
0.31
0.29
0.28
0.28
0.14
0.13
0.76
0.72
0.77
0.76
3
0.36
0.34
0.62
0.59
0.66
0.66
0.16
0.15
0.66
0.59
0.76
0.77
4
0.49
0.44
1.42
1.42
1.63
1.73
0.31
0.29
0.36
0.31
1.02
1.10
5
0.41
0.37
2.43
2.17
3.70
3.84
0.63
0.55
0.15
0.15
2.38
2.44
6
0.37
0.37
2.15
1.73
1.61
2.06
1.38
1.12
0.21
0.21
<0.1
2.42
7
0.37
0.41
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
3.20
1.96
0.25
0.24
<0.1
<0.1
12
0.36
0.41
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
5.91
4.43
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
Table D.5: NOx concentrations measured in batch 1-12x using skalar analysis.
[mg-N/L]
Batch no.
Day
1x
2x
3x
4x
5x
6x
7x
8x
9x
10x
11x
12x
0
1.92
1.86
1.88
1.86
1.86
1.92
2.48
2.5
1.58
1.56
1.54
1.52
1
2.02
1.98
2
1.98
1.96
1.98
2.48
2.48
1.58
1.58
1.58
1.58
2
2.22
2.2
2.34
2.3
2.28
2.28
2.52
2.58
1.82
1.82
1.88
1.86
3
2.62
2.6
3.12
3.08
3.18
3.12
2.62
2.6
2.36
2.36
2.56
2.46
4
3.3
3.3
5.28
5.44
5.64
5.72
2.9
2.86
3.66
3.62
4.78
4.1
5
3.96
3.9
9.98
10.24
12.38
12.14
3.4
3.24
5.4
5.24
10.94
8.96
6
4.8
4.76
16.16
16.32
16.46
16.4
4.68
4.18
7.66
7.38
15.76
15.72
7
5.64
5.7
16.14
16.46
16.42
16.16
7.86
5.78
10.16
9.64
15.6
15.54
12
8.8
9.62
16.34
16.3
16.38
16.38
16.82
11.3
15.96
15.86
15.88
15.72
==PAGE:96==
80
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX E
Copper test - 2
The second copper experiment is done to evaluate the nitrification performance in ref-
erence batches with no inoculum addition and batches without supply of nutrients and
trace metals. The experiment is set-up in 100 ml acid washed and burned blue cap
bottles with a total volume of 75 ml. The batches are prepared with raw inlet water
from Nærum water works, and inoculum from batch no 1t from inoculum experiment 2.
A control batch is done without addition of inocolum, and dosing of copper is done with
and without other nutrient supply. Inoculum, phosphate, trace elements and copper is
added to the different batches according to Table E.1.
Table E.1: Experimental set-up and detailed content.
Bottle
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
PO−
4
Trace metals1)
Cu
no.
[ml]
type
[ml]
type
[mlstock]
[µlstock]
[µlstock]
[µlstock]
1-2c
75
Nærum
0
-
1.125
3-4c
71.25
Nærum
3.75
1t
1.125
5-6c
71.25
Nærum
3.75
1t
1.125
75
7-8c
71.25
Nærum
3.75
1t
1.125
37.5
37.5
9-10c
71.25
Nærum
3.75
1t
1.125
37.5
37.5
75
1) Trace metal solution adapted from Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
The experiment is conducted on Wednesday the 25th of April 2018. The batches are
incubated at 20°C (room temperature) on a shaking table with 90 shakes per minute,
Figure E.1. Samples are taken approximately 5 minutes after they are incubated and
shaken by hand. The batches are sampled again after three days of incubation and
thereafter every day until ammonium is completely removed in half of the batches.
==PAGE:98==
82
E Copper test - 2
Figure E.1: Pictures of prepared batches on shaking table.
After six days of incubation the oxygen concentration and the pH value in the batches
are measured, Table E.2.
Table E.2: DO and pH measurements 1/5 -2018.
Batch
DO
pH
no
[mgO2/L]
at °C
value
at °C
1c
8.29
23.8
7.92
24.2
3c
8.16
24.0
8.07
24.1
5c
8.14
23.9
8.13
23.9
7c
8.22
23.6
8.15
23.8
9c
8.15
23.8
8.11
23.5
The measured ammonium, nitrite and NOx concentrations are listed in Table E.3,
Table E.4 and Table E.5 respectively.
Table E.3: Ammonium concentrations measured in batch 1-10c using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1c
2c
3c
4c
5c
6c
7c
8c
9c
10c
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
15.42
14.88
15.65
15.75
16.04
16.01
16.15
15.97
16.03
16.26
3
15.63
15.47
16.34
16.21
16.16
16.80
17.18
17.31
17.61
17.96
4
17.45
17.55
18.44
18.78
18.60
19.04
19.57
17.72
17.60
17.62
5
16.57
16.56
16.47
16.53
16.36
16.21
16.22
16.01
16.19
16.34
6
16.06
15.84
14.97
14.67
14.51
14.26
14.76
15.22
14.92
14.58
8
15.36
15.46
6.37
8.53
0.32
0.13
6.40
9.51
3.77
5.59
9
15.86
15.25
1.94
5.66
0.16
<0.1
1.27
5.99
0.12
<0.1
==PAGE:99==
E Copper test - 2
83
Table E.4: Nitrite concentrations measured in batch 1-10c using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1c
2c
3c
4c
5c
6c
7c
8c
9c
10c
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
<0.1
<0.1
0.14
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
3
<0.1
<0.1
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.10
0.10
4
<0.1
<0.1
0.20
0.20
0.19
0.20
0.18
0.17
0.15
0.18
5
<0.1
<0.1
0.53
0.54
0.53
0.59
0.47
0.43
0.42
0.46
6
<0.1
<0.1
1.57
1.58
1.71
1.86
1.33
1.13
1.28
1.31
8
0.10
0.17
8.31
6.47
12.80
12.79
7.78
5.81
10.70
9.34
9
0.13
0.46
10.98
8.23
10.45
10.89
9.97
7.49
11.91
12.66
Table E.5: NOx concentrations measured in batch 1-10c using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1c
2c
3c
4c
5c
6c
7c
8c
9c
10c
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
<0.1
<0.1
2.16
2.22
2.28
2.28
2.28
2.28
2.3
2.32
3
<0.1
<0.1
2.36
2.36
2.36
2.34
2.32
2.28
2.24
2.24
4
<0.1
<0.1
2.18
2.16
2.12
2.12
2.04
1.96
1.98
2.08
5
<0.1
<0.1
2.56
2.64
2.64
2.8
2.68
2.72
2.7
2.78
6
<0.1
<0.1
4
4.04
4.14
4.42
3.76
3.52
3.72
3.7
8
0.2
0.18
12.14
10.06
17.62
17.84
11.6
9
14.66
12.86
9
0.22
0.48
16.36
12.78
17.74
17.9
16.44
12.3
17.72
17.72
==PAGE:100==
84
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX F
Copper test - 3
The third copper experiment is set-up in order to make a dose-response curve describing
the relation between different copper concentrations and the rates of nitrification. The
experiment is conducted in acid washed and burned 100 ml blue cap bottles with a
total volume of 75 ml. The bottles are initially prepared with test water from Nærum
water work measured using a two-digits scale. A range of different copper concentrations
from 50 ng Cu/L to 5 µg/L are prepared from a 1 mg Cu/L stock solution. The stock
solution is further diluted in the preparation of the two lowest concentrations (0.05 and
0.1 µg Cu/L). This is done by diluting 10 ml 1 mg Cu/L into 40 ml milli-Q water. The
addition of copper stock solution is therefore multiplied by five in order to achieve the
right concentration. This allows for addition of lower concentrations by pipetting.
The enriched and twice diluted inoculum from batch no. 1A is used at a share of
5 pct. in all batches. The experiment is done in duplicates. Control batches with no
copper and nutrient addition are prepared along with the standard curve. Table F.1
lists the content of all the prepared batches.
Figure F.1: Pictures taken during experimental set-up adding nutrients, inoculum and
ammonium using Eppendorf Research pipettes.
The experiment is conducted on Wednesday the 9th of May 2018. The batches are
sampled on the day of set-up after being shaken by hand approximately 5 minutes after
inoculation.
The batches are incubated on a vertical Gerhardt Laboshaker shaking
table at 90 shakes per minute and at room temperature. The batches are sampled again
after three days of incubation, and every day thereafter until ammonium is completely
removed in half of the batches.
==PAGE:102==
86
F Copper test - 3
Table F.1: Experimental set-up and detailed content.
Batch
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
PO−
4
Trace metals1)
Cu
no.
type
type
[pct.]
[mlstock]
[mlstock]
[mlstock]
[µg/L]
1-2f
71.25
Nærum
3.75
1A
1.125
3-4f
71.25
Nærum
3.75
1A
1.125
0.1
0.5
5-6f
71.25
Nærum
3.75
1A
1.125
0.1
0.5
1.0
7-8f
71.25
Nærum
3.75
1A
1.125
0.05
9-10f
71.25
Nærum
3.75
1A
1.125
0.1
11-12f
71.25
Nærum
3.75
1A
1.125
0.5
13-14f
71.25
Nærum
3.75
1A
1.125
1.0
15-16f
71.25
Nærum
3.75
1A
1.125
5.0
1) Trace metal solution adapted from Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
Oxygen concentration and pH is measured on the last day of sampling after seven
days of incubation. Table F.2 lists the measured DO concentrations and pH values in
the batches.
Table F.2: DO and pH measurements 16/5 -2018.
Batch
DO
pH
no
[mgO2/L]
at °C
value
at °C
1f
7.71
27.2
7.76
26.6
3f
7.82
26.8
7.88
26.5
5f
7.92
26.4
7.46
26.3
7f
7.86
26.4
7.46
26.3
9f
7.63
26.8
7.46
26.3
11f
7.72
26.9
7.29
26.8
13f
7.71
27.2
7.26
26.5
15f
7.80
27.1
7.61
26.6
Table F.3 and Table F.4 list the measured ammonium concentrations in the 16
batches. Table F.5 and Table F.6 list the measured nitrite concentrations and Table
F.7 and Table F.8 the measured NOx concentrations.
Table F.3: Ammonium concentrations measured in batch 1-6f using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1f
2f
3f
4f
5f
6f
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
15.39
15.69
15.36
15.48
15.60
15.73
3
15.35
15.24
14.86
15.12
15.22
15.15
5
12.77
13.42
12.25
12
10.19
9.37
6
12.15
12.98
11.52
10.12
0.93
0.22
7
10.49
11.75
9.74
6.62
0.26
<0.1
==PAGE:103==
F Copper test - 3
87
Table F.4: Ammonium concentrations measured in batch 7-16f using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
7f
8f
9f
10f
11f
12f
13f
14f
15f
16f
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
15.66
15.60
15.69
15.70
15.69
15.62
15.58
15.49
15.62
15.17
3
15.26
15.18
15.24
15.38
15.18
14.70
14.81
15.02
15.02
15.10
5
12.08
11.99
11.48
11.46
8.59
8.70
8.36
7.81
8.65
9.37
6
9.90
10.26
8.68
7.50
0.31
0.22
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
7
7.79
7.81
4.96
4.52
0.20
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
Table F.5: Nitrite concentrations measured in batch 1-6f using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1f
2f
3f
4f
5f
6f
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
1.10
1.06
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.05
3
1.40
1.36
1.39
1.36
1.49
1.49
5
2.60
2.31
2.62
3.19
5.64
5.96
6
3.62
3.02
3.93
5.32
12.82
13.01
7
4.85
3.69
5.25
8.25
12.96
12.92
Table F.6: Nitrite concentrations measured in batch 7-16f using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
7f
8f
9f
10f
11f
12f
13f
14f
15f
16f
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
1.05
1.06
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.06
1.06
1.06
1.06
3
1.48
1.45
1.45
1.45
1.55
1.54
1.55
1.56
1.48
1.47
5
3.76
3.56
4.32
4.34
7.05
6.94
7.24
7.73
6.75
6.12
6
5.45
5.39
7.08
6.24
13.07
13.05
13.08
13.05
12.99
13.08
7
7.31
7.09
9.72
10.22
12.91
12.94
13.00
13.00
12.93
13.02
Table F.7: NOx concentrations measured in batch 1-6f using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1f
2f
3f
4f
5f
6f
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
1.32
1.24
1.22
1.44
1.36
1.2
3
1.58
1.56
1.56
2.04
1.68
1.68
5
2.82
2.52
2.8
3.94
5.78
6.12
6
3.9
3.36
4.24
6.36
14.7
15.22
7
5.46
4.38
5.86
9.82
15.44
15.44
==PAGE:104==
88
F Copper test - 3
Table F.8: NOx concentrations measured in batch 7-16f using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
7f
8f
9f
10f
11f
12f
13f
14f
15f
16f
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.22
1.22
1.2
3
1.68
1.64
1.66
1.66
1.76
1.74
1.74
1.76
1.68
1.64
5
3.98
3.74
4.54
4.52
7.28
7.16
7.48
7.98
6.98
6.28
6
5.82
5.74
7.58
6.56
15.34
15.26
15.4
15.4
15.26
15.44
7
8.10
7.76
11.00
11.26
15.36
15.42
15.40
15.44
15.42
15.5
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX G
Copper test - 4
The second fourth experiment is performed to investigate the effect of copper dosing on
nitrification when using a different test water source. The experiment is done in 100
ml acid washed and burned blue cap bottles with a total test volume of 75 ml. The
batches are prepared with raw inlet water from Islevbro water works. The test water
is initially measured on a two-digtigs scale, and added to the bottles. Phosphate, trace
metals and copper is then added to the batches, Table Table G.1. Inoculum from batch
no 1A originating from inoculum experiment 3 is used in the experiment at a share of
5 pct.. A control batch without addition of inocolum is prepared along with dosing of
copper with and without other nutrient supply. The set-up follows the second copper
experiment.
The experiment is started on Wednesday the 9th of May 2018. Batches are incubated
at room temperature on a vertical Gerhardt Laboshaker shaking table at 90 shakes per
minute. Samples are taken approximately 10 minutes after inoculation and after being
shaken by hand. The batches are sampled again after three days of incubation and
thereafter every day until ammonium is completely removed in half of the batches.
Table G.1: Experimental set-up and detailed content.
Bottle
Medium
Inoculum
NH+
4
PO−
4
Trace metals1)
Cu
no.
[ml]
type
[ml]
type
[mlstock]
[µlstock]
[µlstock]
[µlstock]
1-2c
75
Islevbro
0
-
1.125
3-4c
71.25
Islevbro
3.75
1t
1.125
5-6c
71.25
Islevbro
3.75
1t
1.125
75
7-8c
71.25
Islevbro
3.75
1t
1.125
37.5
37.5
9-10c
71.25
Islevbro
3.75
1t
1.125
37.5
37.5
75
1) Trace metal solution adapted from Verhagen and Laanbroek (1991).
The oxygen concentration and the pH is measured on the last day of sampling, Table
G.2.
==PAGE:106==
90
G Copper test - 4
Table G.2: DO and pH measurements 16/5 -2018.
Batch
DO
pH
no
[mgO2/L]
at °C
value
at °C
1w
7.80
27.2
7.80
26.4
3w
7.69
27.3
7.76
26.6
5w
7.60
27.3
7.30
26.7
7w
7.70
27.3
7.78
26.8
9w
7.69
27.4
7.47
26.8
Measured ammonium concentrations are listed in Table G.3. The following Table
G.4 and Table G.5 list the measured nitrite and NOx concentrations respectively.
Table G.3: Ammonium concentrations measured in batch 1-10w using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1w
2w
3w
4w
5w
6w
7w
8w
9w
10w
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
15.13
15.42
15.84
15.90
15.76
15.77
15.88
15.41
15.71
15.66
3
15.44
15.40
15.42
15.58
15.31
15.15
15.45
15.38
15.44
15.53
5
15.44
14.92
13.93
14.20
9.58
8.22
14.06
14.16
10.18
11.97
6
15.27
15.47
12.81
12.63
0.31
0.10
12.64
12.99
0.43
4.00
7
13.88
14.20
10.36
10.38
0.28
<0.1
10.33
10.44
0.31
<0.1
Table G.4: Nitrite concentrations measured in batch 1-10w using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1w
2w
3w
4w
5w
6w
7w
8w
9w
10w
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
<0,1
<0,1
1.06
1.06
1.07
1.07
1.07
1.06
1.06
1.05
3
<0,1
<0,1
1.34
1.35
1.47
1.48
1.33
1.33
1.42
1.37
5
<0,1
<0,1
2.61
2.53
7.24
8.45
2.45
2.52
6.63
4.89
6
0.17
<0,1
3.74
3.73
14.30
14.31
3.59
3.67
14.24
12.08
7
0.25
0.10
4.42
4.69
12.80
12.91
4.48
4.65
12.80
12.89
Table G.5: NOx concentrations measured in batch 1-10w using skalar analysis.
Batch no. /
1w
2w
3w
4w
5w
6w
7w
8w
9w
10w
Day
[mg-N/L]
0
0.26
0.22
1.38
1.42
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
3
0.25
0.22
1.69
1.79
1.55
1.92
1.73
1.73
1.83
1.78
5
0.28
0.24
3.14
3.14
7.94
9.24
3
3.02
7.28
5.44
6
0.4
0.28
4.48
4.42
17.26
17.34
4.34
4.32
17.04
13.52
7
0.5
0.28
5.52
5.44
15.2
15.52
5.5
5.5
15.36
15.52
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX H
Nitrogen balance
An estimation of the nitrogen balance was performed for batches under incubation with
multiple ammonium spikes.
The theoretical added nitrogen through ammonium spikes
Table H.1: Calculation of nitrogen balance in batch no. 5i after each spike with am-
monium.
Spike
N added
NH4
NOX
Check
no
mg-N/L
mg-N/L
mg-N/L
mg-N/L
%
1
15
15.01
<0.1
0.01
0.07
2
30
16.22
10.68
-3.10
-10.33
3
45
13.58
21.82
-9.60
-21.33
4
60
15.33
23.88
-20.79
-34.65
5
75
15.15
52.48
-7.37
-9.83
6
90
18.62
66.76
-4.62
-5.13
Figure H.1: Nitrogen balance for batch no. 5i incubated with sand (50 mg/ml) from
the new sand filter at Brøndbyvester water works.
==PAGE:108==
92
H Nitrogen balance
Table H.2: Calculation of nitrogen balance in batch no. 6i after each spike with am-
monium.
Spike
N added
NH4
NOX
Check
no
mg-N/L
mg-N/L
mg-N/L
mg-N/L
%
1
15
14.98
<0.1
-0.02
-0.13
2
30
16.45
8.62
-4.93
-16.43
3
45
15.53
20.72
-8.75
-19.44
4
60
7.84
41.9
-10.26
-17.10
Figure H.2: Nitrogen balance for batch no. 6i incubated with sand (50 mg/ml) from
old sand filter at Brøndbyvester water work.
Table H.3: Calculation of nitrogen balance in batch no. 7i after each spike with am-
monium.
Spike
N added
NH4
NOX
Check
no
mg-N/L
mg-N/L
mg-N/L
mg-N/L
%
1
15
14.68
<0.1
-0.32
-2.13
2
30
15.16
14.08
-0.76
-2.53
3
45
17.34
23.42
-4.24
-9.42
4
60
20.83
40.1
0.93
1.55
==PAGE:109==
H Nitrogen balance
93
Figure H.3: Nitrogen balance for batch no.
7i incubated with shake-off (12.5 mg
sand/ml) from new sand filter at Brøndbyvester water work.
Table H.4: Calculation of nitrogen balance in batch no. 8i after each spike with am-
monium.
Spike
N added
NH4
NOX
Check
no
mg-N/L
mg-N/L
mg-N/L
mg-N/L
%
1
15
14.96
<0.1
-0.04
-0.27
2
30
15.81
12.90
-1.29
-4.30
3
45
16.31
26.60
-2.09
-4.64
Figure H.4: Nitrogen balance for batch no.
8i incubated with shake-off (12.5 mg
sand/ml) from old sand filter at Brøndbyvester water work.
==PAGE:110==
94
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX I
IcP analysis
The method of Inductively Coupled Plasma- Mass Spectrometry (IcP-MS) is applied
for the analysis of copper concentrations in stock solutions, water samples and batches
within experiments. The samples are prepared by transferring 20 ml pure unfiltered
sample to a 50 ml sterile test tube. The sample is acidified to dissolve copper within
solution using nitric acid (67-69% HNO3 TraceMetal Grade) to a total share of 2 % acid:
20[ml] · 0.02 = V · 0.67 →V = 20[ml] · 0.02
0.67
= 0.6[ml]
(I.1)
The samples are well-mixed using a Vibrofix VF1 vortex mixing the samples for 10
seconds. The samples are then left over night to fully dissolve the copper.
A standard calibration curve is prepared by making a standard series of copper
concentrations: 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 10 µg Cu/L. The standard series is made using
a 2 % nitric acid solution made with milli-Q water and 67-69% HNO3 TraceMetal Grade
and copper standard (XXX). Three different blank samples are moreover prepared to
correct for background copper concentration. The An internal standard (Yttrium - 89Y)
is added to all the copper standards, the blanks and the samples being analyzed at a
volume of 10 µl/10 ml sample. The machine used for IcP-MF analysis is a PerkinElmer
NexION 350D, using an ASX-520 autosampler, Figure I.1.
The calibration curve is
initially run on the IcP machine. The samples are analyzed thereafter with blanks in
between every 10 sample. The calibration curve is depicted in Figure I.2.
Figure I.1: Inductively coupled Plasma- Mass Spectrometry (IcP-MF) used for copper
analysis.
==PAGE:112==
96
I IcP analysis
Figure I.2: Standard calibration curve for the IcP analysis with detection range of 50
ng Cu/L - 10 µg Cu/L.
The measured copper concentrations in the stock solutions and water samples are
listed in Table I.1.
The measured copper concentrations in the batches of different
experiments are listed in Table I.2 and I.3.
Table I.1: Copper concentrations measured in used water sources and stock solutions
using IcP analysis.
Sample
Copper
Conc. RSD
content
[µg/L]
-
Tap water
5.983
0.004
Nærum water
0.066
0.063
Islevbro water
0.176
-
Artificial medium
0.061
0.014
Trace metal stock solution
2.029
0.002
Phosphate stock solution
8.074
0.011
Ammonium stock solution
0.455
0.016
Copper stock solution
1114.450
0.003
==PAGE:113==
I IcP analysis
97
Table I.2: Copper concentrations measured in batch experiments using IcP analysis.
Sample
Copper
Conc. RSD
content
[µg/L]
-
5
3.973
0.007
5A
5.831
0.003
5B
7.930
0.015
7
8.946
0.008
1t
1.859
0.020
1A
0.163
0.013
1B
0.238
0.055
1x
0.592
0.020
3x
0.557
0.026
5x
1.273
0.015
7x
8.407
0.006
9x
0.182
0.026
11x
1.021
0.008
==PAGE:114==
98
I IcP analysis
Table I.3: Copper concentrations measured in batch experiments using IcP analysis.
Sample
Copper
Conc. RSD
content
[µg/L]
-
1c
0.222
-
3c
0.379
-
5c
0.757
-
7c
0.284
-
9c
1.025
-
1w
0.325
-
3w
0.252
-
5w
0.704
-
7w
0.184
-
9w
0.800
-
1f
0.149
-
2f
0.875
-
3f
0.258
-
4f
0.230
-
5f
1.002
-
6f
0.671
-
7f
0.232
-
8f
0.153
-
9f
0.219
-
10f
0.182
-
11f
0.697
-
12f
0.527
-
13f
0.814
-
14f
0.892
-
15f
4.581
-
16f
3.305
-
==PAGE:115==
==PAGE:116==
