==PAGE:1==
Supply chain 4.0: How data is
reshaping businesses’ supply
chains
Master’s Thesis, June 2018
Guillermo Altuna Faus
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
GUILLERMO ALTUNA FAUS
Supply chain 4.0: How data is
reshaping businesses’ supply chains
Master’s Thesis, June 2018
Supervisor:
Peter Jacobsen
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2018
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Supply chain 4.0: How data is reshaping businesses’ supply chains
This report was prepared by:
Guillermo Altuna Faus
Supervisor:
Peter Jacobsen
DTU Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
January 2018- June 2018
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Management Engineering
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science in Industrial Engineering and Management at the Technical
University of Denmark. The project is credited to 30 ECTS points. The theme of the
project was suggested by the author, however, small adjustments have been made during
the process in collaboration with the supervisor.
I would like to thank my supervisor for helping me out with valuable advices and tips.
To my friends, both in Denia and Copenhagen, for putting up with me this whole time,
for listening, supporting and taking me out when I needed a break from everything. But
most importantly, I would like to thank my family for always being supportive, for
believing in me and also for being there, even in the distance.
Kgs. Lyngby June, 3 2018
Guillermo Altuna Faus (s161337)
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
The main objective of this thesis is the study and analysis of the impact and inﬂuence
that the innovative and disruptive technologies such as Big Data or the Internet of Things
have on the world today, causing phenomena such as digitalization and globalization. In
order to compete under these new circumstances, companies are driven to encourage and
adopt new approaches, solutions and technologies in their business models, paying
special attention to the supply chain. This report also includes the reasons why these
transformations are taking place, as well as the risks, challenges and beneﬁts of
implementing them in companies.
In addition, the thesis addresses all of the above
focusing on the shipping industry.
To do so, the literature and the most recent and relevant articles and reports have been
collected, read, studied, analyzed and reviewed. At the end of this thesis, the reader,
in addition to having a clearer and more up-to-date view of the current situation, will
understand better what all these innovations entail and their inﬂuence on the world of
today and tomorrow.
Keywords: technologies, digitalization, globalization, supply chains, shipping industry
iii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Resumen
Esta tesis tiene como objetivo principal el estudio y análisis del impacto e inﬂuencia que
tienen en el mundo hoy en día las innovadoras y disruptivas tecnologías como el Big Data
o el Internet de las Cosas. Causas de fenómenos como la digitalización y la globalización.
Para poder competir bajo estas nuevas circumstancias, las compañías se ven empujadas a
fomentar y adoptar nuevos enfoques, soluciones y tecnologías en sus modelos de negocio
prestando especial atención a la logística. En este informe se recogen también las causas
por las que estas transformaciones están teniendo lugar así como los riesgos, desafíos y
beneﬁcios que conlleva su implementación en las empresas. Además, la tesis aborda todo
lo anterior centrándose en la industria del transporte marítitmo.
Para ello, la literatura y los artículos e informes más recientes y relevantes han sido
recogidos, leídos, estudiados, analizados y revisados. Al terminar esta tesis, el lector a
parte de tener una visión más clara y actualizada de la situación actual, entederá mejor lo
que suponen todas estas innovaciones y su inﬂuencia en el mundo de hoy y de mañana.
Palabras clave: tecnología, digitalización, globalización, logística, transporte marítimo
v
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Current State
5
2.1
Globalization and Digitalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
World Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Supply Chain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Industry 4.0
9
3.1
Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Changes and Consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.1
Internet of Things . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.2
Big Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Supply Chain 4.0
41
4.1
Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3.1
Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3.2
IT requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Shipping Industry
51
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Container Liner Shipping Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2.1
Operational Efﬁciency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
vii
==PAGE:14==
viii
CONTENTS
5.2.2
Service Effectiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2.3
Risk avoidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.3
Data in the Shipping Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6
Conclusion
73
Bibliography
77
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Structure
This thesis is written aiming to build a coherent narrative in order to ease and guide
the reader along of all of it.
Therefore, it has been structured in six different but
interrelated chapters. The 1st one, Introduction, is a presentation and a summary of the
content of the thesis. It also states the purpose of the it by the formulation of some
questions. In the 2nd chapter, Current State, the present world situation is introduced to
the reader, stating the problems and challenges to be faced and advancing as well the
concept of supply chain. Along the 3rd chapter, Industry 4.0, all the new technologies,
changes, risks, challenges, beneﬁts and impacts are presented and explained, putting
special effort on both of them, Big Data and Internet of Things. The 4th chapter, Supply
Chain 4.0, explains this new concept, born from the implementation of these innovations
to the supply chain, together with the two main requirements to be fulﬁlled by
companies not to fail in the attempt of carrying them out. The 5th chapter, Shipping
Industry, tackles the present situation of the shipping industry and focuses on the
consequences and impacts that all these transformations have on the sector. Lastly, the
6th chapter, Conclusion, is the recapitulation of the whole thesis where the key facts,
inputs and outcomes are presented.
In addition to this, all the literature, articles, journals and websites used to build and write
this report can be found at the end of the last chapter.
1
==PAGE:16==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.2
Summary
In today’s world, globalization is a fact. For a couple of decades, more and more
interactions between people, companies and countries are taking place. The Earth has
become an interdependent and connected system where the acceleration of technological
changes, the trade liberalization and the importance of supranational rules, among other
phenomena, have exposed national economies to much more intense competition than
ever before [1]. And the trend indicates that this process is unlikely to be reversed.
Nowadays it is common that commerce and trade occur between people and companies
that are geographically distant from each other. This constant ﬂow of information, goods
and funds involves, directly or indirectly, many different parties. All of them play a
signiﬁcant role in the supply chain aiming to fulﬁll the customer’s request. From the
supplier to the customer, there is a notable number of complex operations handled by
many stakeholders such as manufacturers, transporters, distributors, retailers and
warehouses among others [2]. Moreover, customers are demanding quality products to
be delivered faster, customized and at the lowest possible cost [3]. They expect more
choices, more variety of products and the ability to trace them all along their journey.
This will lead to an increase of the market volatility and also to have shorter product life
cycles.
These two facts, complex supply chains and grand expectations from customers,
combined with the disruption that digitalization has caused, are the main challenges that
companies must face if they want to be successful in a competitive and interconnected
environment as today’s.
To do so, companies should migrate from a traditional
perspective of the supply chain to a digital one by adopting and implementing the
technologies and practices that Industry 4.0 brings. The improvements of this transition
will help ﬁrms to create an integrated planning and execution allowing visibility across
the whole supply chain, to raise their performance and to respond ﬂexibly and faster to
changes in the supply or demand [4].
Digital technologies have changed and evolved dramatically in recent years, driven
largely by three key developments: lower computing costs, cheaper storage, and less
costly bandwidth. The conﬂuence of these with the increase of computing power and
technological capabilities has led to exponential changes, enabling organizations to
gather, store, and analyze greater amounts of data than ever before [5]. The use of new
technologies like Big Data, Cloud Manufacturing, Business Intelligence and the Internet
of Things will exploit those developments and transformations to enhance the
data-driven decisions of companies [6]. All these solutions and changes will create a
new whole standard for what used to be a supply chain. From a linear perspective to a
==PAGE:17==
1.2. SUMMARY
3
dynamic, ﬂexible and interconnected system [5]. However, there will be challenges to
overcome in order to complete successfully this migration.
Every organization consists of people, tasks, structure and technology. Therefore, the
interaction between them will determine the success of these organizational changes and
their implementation as well as the success of the company in the new global
environment [7]. To achieve a fully integrated supply chain, a new strategy has to be
deﬁned, new processes designed, new skills and capabilities will be required and also a
new organization structure implemented allowing and encouraging a supportive
environment [8].
Regarding this last, collaboration, trust and knowledge sharing all
along the supply chain and between partners is a must so as to avoid lack of information
visibility and promote transparency, coordination and integration [9]. On top of that, the
available data that enterprises can use to improve their outcomes is growing at
signiﬁcant rates [10]. Nevertheless, the challenge that companies must face is how to use
this data and how to transform this information into a useful asset. Here is where the
Industry 4.0 technologies applied to the supply chain will play a key role.
In order to provide a more speciﬁc and deep view on this matter, this report will focus
on the shipping industry. First, it will be analyzed the industry and the current context
and afterwards, an analysis on this ﬁeld regarding the implementation of data into their
supply chains and its consequences will take place. The reason of choosing this industry is
because apart from being essential for the world economy, it is working in an old fashion
way and it is currently facing all these disruptive innovations. Moreover, the big players
are starting to adopt and implementing measures in order to overcome them and the ﬁrsts
to do it will stand out from the rest and be the leader of the industry.
The purpose of this paper is therefore to answer the following research question as well
as some others derived from it:
• How are the new technologies reshaping the shipping industry?
– What is the current global situation?
– Which are these new technologies and how they emerged?
– How can these technologies be applied into supply chains?
– Which are the challenges faced by the shipping industry nowadays and how
can these be overcome by exploiting these new technologies?
Every sub question is answered through one of the chapters in which the thesis is divided.
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Current State
2.1
Globalization and Digitalization
Globalization is no longer a challenge to be faced the future, rather a recognized fact
in the daily business [11].
It is a phenomenon characterized for the interaction and
integration between people, companies, and governments of different nations [12].
Globalization has also a social, cultural, political and legal impact. In social terms, it
represents
greater
interconnectedness
among
global
populations.
Culturally,
globalization represents the exchange of ideas and values among different cultures. It is
also a trend towards the development of a single world culture. Politically, it has shifted
the political activities of countries to the global level through intergovernmental
organizations. Regarding the ﬁeld of the law, globalization has altered how international
law is created and enforced [13], encouraging the creation of common laws that facilitate
trade and regulate conﬂicts between companies from different nations.
Furthermore, globalization is an economic process driven by the internationalization of
production, the expansion of international trade and the enablement of services that
expand and deepen international capital ﬂows. All this is aided by the accelerating and
disruptive technological changes, by the decrease in the prices of consumer goods and
transport services, by the liberalization of the trade and by the growing importance of
supranational rules and organisms [1]. As a result of globalization, competition between
companies has risen rapidly, becoming overwhelming and much more intense. Every
product to be sold must match the quality of products made in other countries to meet
the requirements of the customer because now they have access to variety and are able to
distinguish between good and just satisfactory products. Hence, companies are required
to provide the best of their products and services to their customers by having a global
procurement network able to support their supply chains, provide quality and compete
5
==PAGE:20==
6
CHAPTER 2. CURRENT STATE
effectively in the market [14]. The international trade, the new ways of production and
sourcing from different parts of the world are enhancing the interdependence between all
the players along businesses’ supply chain all over the globe. Markets are demanding
shorter lead times, traceability and ﬂexibility at the lowest possible cost [11]. In addition
to this, customer expectations are growing moving towards further individualization and
customization [4].
To build on these trends, it is required a reliable, faster, precise,
efﬁcient, and collaborative response from the entire supply chain, because logistics acts
as the main artery of the world’s economy. Today, Supply Chain Management (SCM) is
playing a signiﬁcant role in corporate efﬁciency [15] because the cost and service
improvements which cannot be achieved by individual ﬁrms can be achieved by ﬁrms
which cooperate with others [16].
Information technologies are the key tool to maintain the needed coordination between
supply chain participants but also to provide solutions and strategic support to optimize
the use of resources [17]. Improvements in transportation networks and technology are
reducing the costs of transportation while improvements in information technology have
made an increasing volume of information available close to zero cost [1]. Consequently,
there is an increasing realization in many industries and companies that data is a valuable
resource [18] and should be managed as an asset [19]. This digital revolution is creating
new ways of doing business [20] and different ways to create value through the leverage of
innovative and disruptive technologies. Opportunities are appearing in unexpected places
and ways, originating a whole new paradigm for what used to be the supply chain [3].
2.2
World Context
For the last couple of decades, USA and specially the majority of European countries
have outsourced a great deal of their factories to other countries, specially Asiatic ones,
keeping only the high value adding stages of their processes like the design or
management. Among them, China was and still is the producer of the world. This meant
that western companies have adapted, incorporated and implemented to their supply
chains the requirements needed for their production to be outsourced and far from the
countries they are supplying. Dealing as well with the problems and challenges that this
imply. However, Chinese people are increasing their standards of life and are starting to
demand the same high value products and high skill jobs that in western countries. The
consequence of this will be the migration of most the industry to other places like India
or some African countries where the labor costs are lower. This will have a huge impact
in the supply chain of many companies, new routes will emerge with new challenges and
problems to be solved. Therefore, ﬂexibility and resilience are characteristics that the
==PAGE:21==
2.3. SUPPLY CHAIN
7
supply chains of the companies should have if they are to stay in business and adapt to
the new changing and disruptive environment.
2.3
Supply Chain
Reliable and fast transportation, as well as efﬁcient logistics services play decisive
and relevant roles in the activities of many companies. Consequently, the performance
of the supply chain is not only a source of competitive advantage, but it can also decide
whether the ﬁrm will exist in the market at all [21].
Figure 2.1: Supply Chain stages
A supply chain can be deﬁned as a network consisting of suppliers, manufacturers,
warehouses, distributors and retailers who coordinate their plans and activities in order
to transform raw materials into ﬁnished goods.
It is indispensable that the required
materials and products are provided to the customers in the right quantities and best
quality, at the right location, at the right time and at the lowest cost [22]. Therefore, the
better the product, the faster its production, and the cheaper its cost, the better the supply
chain is performing.
It is the SCM the responsible for supervising the relationships in the network of
organizations, from manufacturers to end customers, using key cross-functional business
processes to create value for customers and other stakeholders [23].
Among these
processes are included product development, procurement, manufacturing, physical
distribution,
customer
relationship
management
and
performance
measurement.
Therefore, SCM aims to support the organization providing the means to link technology
and people, aligning them with the capabilities of the organization as well as enabling
the coordination of processes and information sharing between the different players
along the supply chain [22].
==PAGE:22==
8
CHAPTER 2. CURRENT STATE
Despite the fact that cost, quality, delivery, and ﬂexibility are important competitive
capabilities within supply chains, modern SCM cannot be only about getting products
faster, cheaper, and of better quality but also about getting the right information at the
right time, so that companies can make better and informed supply chain decisions [24]
as well as create value.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Industry 4.0
3.1
Concept
Industry 4.0 is the sum of all the new technologies that blur the lines between
physical and digital worlds [5]. It brings disruptive changes to supply chains, business
models, and business processes [25], enabling the creation of a digital value chain [26].
Among these novelties can be found Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), Internet of Things
(IoT), Business Intelligence (BI), Robotics, Big Data (BD), Cloud Manufacturing or
Augmented Reality, among others. These innovations are implemented by suppliers and
manufacturers to address the trends of digitalization, automation, transparency, mobility,
modularization, customization of production, network-collaboration, human machine
interaction and automatic data exchange and communication [7], [26]–[28].
It is also considered to be the 4th industrial revolution.The 1st one took place around the
end of the 18th century with the invention of the steam engine, a new kind of energy that
enabled the mechanization of many processes. Later on, at the end of the 19th century
with the appearance of new energy sources, like electricity, gas and oil, the combustion
engine was designed. Also with the development of new ways of communication like
the telegraph and the phone and with the development of innovative means of transport,
the 2nd revolution happened. The 3rd industrial revolution occur in the second half of
the 20th century with the development of the nuclear energy, which potential surpassed
their predecessors. Moreover, during these years, electronics, telecommunications and
computers rose, leading to a high level of automation in production. Therefore, this
new revolution to come involves the arrival of a new industrial paradigm that integrates
all elements in a value-adding system leading to the development of more intelligent
manufacturing processes. It is motivated by the rise of the Internet, the massive use of
data, the digitalization of processes and the allowance of devices, machines, production
9
==PAGE:24==
10
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
modules and products to independently exchange information, trigger actions and control
each other, enabling a smart manufacturing environment [26].
The key principles of Industry 4.0 are interoperability, virtualization, decentralization,
real-time capability, service orientation, data integration, ﬂexible adaptation, intelligent
self-organization and secure communication [29].
Figure 3.1: Industry 4.0 principles
Interoperability refers to the capability of humans, machines, processes and technologies
to connect, communicate and work together. It requires an environment which allows a
ﬂuid interaction and a ﬂexible collaboration between them. Virtualization stands for the
process in which a factory or a supply chain is designed and built virtually, allowing the
enhancement of the existing processes, the modiﬁcation and customization of some
elements and enabling test changes or upgrades. By decentralization it is understood that
different elements within a system are enabled to make decisions autonomously
complemented with the ability to do so in real-time. Finally, ﬂexibility and intelligent
self-organization means that the systems can easily adapt autonomously to changing
environments and requirements ensuring minimum disruptions within the system when
doing so. In addition to all of this, companies should have in mind the data security and
also being oriented to offer the best service to the customers.
Based on these principles, the goals of Industry 4.0 are to provide an IT-enabled mass
customization of manufactured products; to make automatic and ﬂexible adaptation of
==PAGE:25==
3.2. CHANGES AND CONSEQUENCES
11
the production chain; to track parts and products; to facilitate communication among
parts, products, and machines; to use the available data properly; to apply human-machine
interaction (HMI) paradigms; to achieve IoT-enabled production optimization in smart
factories; and to provide new types of services and business models. Summarizing, to
achieve a higher level of operational efﬁciency and productivity through a higher level of
automatization [25], [29], [30].
Moreover, the opportunities and beneﬁts that are anticipated to come along with Industry
4.0 seem to be manifold, resulting in highly ﬂexible mass production, real-time
coordination and optimization of value chains, reduction of complexity costs or the
emergence of entirely new services and business models [31].
It is a shift from
optimizing physical assets to optimizing how data and information are leveraged along
the product life-cycle [32]. Digitalization and Industry 4.0 are opening up new cost
savings. However, in order to achieve the beneﬁts of Industry 4.0, companies should
make some changes because many aspects are involved, and many types of difﬁculties
and challenges faced. It will be vital to combine data, integrate systems and processes,
and make decisions based on cross-functional information [6].
3.2
Changes and Consequences
This new industrial paradigm will lead to deep changes in industry, manufacturing
sectors and transportation, having strong impacts along the whole value chains and
providing a set of new opportunities [26].
Therefore, to manage efﬁciently these large and complex systems, networks need to be
standardized, reliable but also avoid being a threat to people and environment. These
networks will allow interconnectivity between different players through the supply chain
and within a company, while preventing unauthorized access to production facilities or
conﬁdential data [33]. Moreover, companies should attract digital talent. They need to
seek data scientist and process experts who can operate at the interfaces between
functions and systems. Always having the data as an asset and managing it strategically
[6]. The introduction of Industry 4.0 will have a huge impact in the logistic area. There,
the most relevant beneﬁts will focus on increasing ﬂexibility, quality standards,
efﬁciency and productivity. This will enable mass customization, allowing companies to
meet customers’ demands by creating value through constantly introducing new
products and services to the market. Furthermore, the collaboration between machines
and humans could socially impact the life of the workers of the future, especially with
respect to the optimization of decision making [6].
==PAGE:26==
12
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
Industry 4.0 practices and technologies will bring new challenges that will signiﬁcantly
change the production and manufacturing systems regarding design, processes, operations
and services. It will allow the appearance and rise of new business models, having large
effects on industry and markets. It will provide a new way of doing business [26] where
time to market and customer responsiveness will be the key factors of competitiveness
[32].
The introduction of these new technologies will have a profound impact in different areas:
Figure 3.2: Fields where Industry 4.0 will have an impact
• Industry.
A new manufacturing vision will appear.
It is characterized by a
decentralized and digitalized production, where the production elements are able
to autonomously control themselves, trigger actions and respond to changes in
their environment [26]. All manufacturing resources (sensors, actuators, machines,
robots, conveyors, etc.)
will be connected and will exchange information
automatically [34] to optimize the production lines, warehouses and transportation
services.
The products and processes will be fully integrated, shifting the
production vision from mass production to mass customization, bringing a higher
level of complexity. Basically, Industry 4.0 will have an important inﬂuence on
industrial processes, manufacturing systems and supply chains by transforming
the current industrial landscape through three main points: (a) digitization of
production,
(b) automation and (c) linking the manufacturing site in a
comprehensive supply chain [26].
• Products and services. Products will become more modular and conﬁgurable,
promoting mass customization in order to meet speciﬁc customer requirements
[35].
Moreover, these new products and services will become responsive and
interactive, being able to be managed and track their activity in real-time,
optimizing the whole value chain and providing relevant information about their
status during their lifecycle [36] to companies.
• Business models. New innovative business models will arise because of these
novel and disruptive technologies. The way products and services are sold and
==PAGE:27==
3.2. CHANGES AND CONSEQUENCES
13
provided will change, allowing a closer interaction with customers and a faster
adaptation to market requirements [26]. Also the elimination of barriers between
information and physical structures and the entry of new players will cause an
increase in competitiveness, margin pressure [32] and a rise in innovation to keep
being on the game.
• Work environment. The increasing relevance of human-machine interfaces will
promote the interaction between both production elements.
The required
communication between smart machines, smart products and employees, will be
enhanced by the Internet of Things and Big Data. The growing implementation of
these new technologies will have an impact on job proﬁles, as well as on work
management, organization and planning.
• Skills development. The future work vision will demand new competencies and it
will be necessary to create opportunities for the acquisition of the required skills
through high quality training [26].
This new industrial paradigm will have a
massive impact on labor market and professional roles. Industry 4.0 will lead to an
increased automation of tasks, which means that workers should be prepared for
performing new tasks. It is expected that employees enjoy greater responsibilities,
acting as decision makers and taking on supervising tasks [31].
• Customers. A new purchasing method will be given to customers allowing them to
order products with whatever functionality they want. In addition, customers will
be able to change their orders and ideas at any time during production even at the
last minute with no charge [34]. Therefore, production must adapt to short batches
and individual needs [27] if the new customers’ requirements are to be satisﬁed.
Companies’ biggest obstacles for implementing Industry 4.0 are the know-how of
processes and controls of employees, a uniform standard for data transfer and data
security and safe-guarding systems.
Regarding this last one, some practices like
prioritization of protection around key assets or integrate cybersecurity into core
processes have started to be implemented. Also, some companies have become reluctant
to use foreign IT providers in order to avoid these cyber risks [32].
Implementing new and thus unknown technologies is rather risky. Most of companies
will carefully weigh the beneﬁts of introducing modern technologies against possible
risks to process reliability. As a result, companies approach fundamental disruptions with
caution, so that change will be rather incremental.
==PAGE:28==
14
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
3.3
Technologies
Once the concept of Industry 4.0 is understood, the players of supply chains must
decide how and on which of these recent technologies invest, and identify which ones
will drive the most beneﬁt for their organizations [37]. These technologies are similar in
that they offer ways of leveraging data to unlock its value potential [32]. Among them,
the followings can be found:
Figure 3.3: Industry 4.0 technologies
• Cyber-physical systems (CPS). Industry 4.0 is characterized by an unprecedented
connection between systems that can bring the physical and the virtual world
together [36].
These systems are called CPS and they can be deﬁned as the
integration of the virtual world and computation with physical processes. In other
words, embedded computers and networks that monitor and control the physical
processes providing a whole new degree of control, surveillance, transparency and
efﬁciency in the production and transportation processes [31].
The proper
alignment and integration between the main actors of the supply chain, the
introduction of CPS and the increasing level of visibility and transparency will
ensure an adequate forecast of resources.
This will boost the optimization of
resources and processes as well as the time to market alignment, making the
supply chain smarter, more transparent and more efﬁcient in every stage [26].
• Business Intelligence (BI). BI is often referred to as the techniques, technologies,
systems, practices, methodologies and applications that analyze critical business
==PAGE:29==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
15
data to help an enterprise to better understand its business, the market needs and
make business decisions on time [7].
BI can be applied in diverse business
purposes like measurements, analytics, reporting, collaboration or data and
knowledge sharing.
• Smart factory.
They constitute a key feature of Industry 4.0, a decentralized
production system, in which human beings, machines and resources communicate
with each other increasing the information transparency and enabling the
autonomous control of a manufacturing facility [7]. Smart factories will make the
expanding complexity of manufacturing processes manageable for the people who
work there and will ensure that production can be simultaneously attractive,
sustainable, proﬁtable and efﬁcient in an urban environment [31]. Smart factories
will provide an opportunity to create a new workplace culture geared towards the
interests of the workforce and also it will allow individual customer requirements
to be met, meaning that even one-off items can be manufactured proﬁtably [36].
• Cloud Manufacturing.
It is a service-oriented manufacturing mode and a
distributed system consisting of an integrated and interconnected service pool of
manufacturing resources and capabilities that provide solutions all along the life
cycle of manufacturing. It is developed from existing advanced manufacturing
models under the support of enterprise digitalization, advanced computing
technologies, virtualization and cloud computing. This last can be deﬁned as a
standard for enabling convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of
conﬁgurable computing resources that can be rapidly provisioned and released
with minimal management effort [38].
In other words,
in these cloud
manufacturing systems the resources can be intelligently connected into internet
and automatically managed and controlled [39].
• Internet of things (IoT). The IoT is expected to open up numerous economic
opportunities and can be considered as one of the most promising technologies
with a huge disruptive potential [31]. Basically, IoT can turn all physical things
into so-called “smart things” by featuring and embedding small computers that are
connected to the Internet [40]. These smart and connected products and devices
offer exponentially expanding opportunities for new functionalities, far greater
reliability, much higher product utilization, and capabilities that cut across and
transcend traditional product boundaries [41].
• Big Data.
Big Data refers to the large volume of data, both structured and
unstructured, which inundates businesses on a day-to-day basis. It can be analyzed
and be treated by companies to improve their processes and performance.
==PAGE:30==
16
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
Managing, collecting and storing this massive amount of data, ideally in real time,
is very complex and costly.
All these technologies have data in common and it is the core driver of Industry 4.0.
Therefore, the last two technologies, Internet of Things and Big Data, will be explained
thoroughly because of the wide range of applications and disruptive impact they will have
all along the supply chain.
3.3.1
Internet of Things
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a concept that refers to the digital interconnection of
daily physical objects with the Internet but also all the elements, sensors and actuators
in manufacturing lines or transportation vehicles. It is an ecosystem of ever-increasing
complexity, fragmented and disorganized but if well managed it could play a vital role in
how people live and how businesses are run [40]. The three distinguishing features of the
IoT are context, omnipresence and optimization. The ﬁrst one refers to the possibility of
advanced object interaction with an existing environment and the immediate and proper
response by it to change. Omnipresence illustrates the fact that today’s devices are much
more than just objects connected to a user network of human-operators. In the near future,
they will also communicate with each other on a larger scale. And last, every IoT object
is meant to optimize their functionality in order to fulﬁll their goals in a more efﬁcient
manner [42].
The IoT industry can be broken down into 3 layers interrelated and integrated with each
other allowing the IoT phenomenon to happen and each one of them plays a key role [43]:
• IoT
applications.
Enables
products and services to end-
users.
• IoT platforms. Software systems
and clouds that allow applications
to function and connect.
• Building
block
providers.
Physical hardware that lay the
foundations of IoT.
Figure 3.4: IoT layers
IoT represents a creative disruption, something that begins to overthrow the existing
==PAGE:31==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
17
processes and technologies and bring forth a completely new way of working and
managing electronic network activities [44]. IoT will create a world in which objects of
all kinds could sense, communicate, analyze, and act or react to people and to other
machines autonomously. IoT will increase the universality of the Internet by integrating
every connected object through embedded systems, which leads to a highly distributed
network of devices communicating with human beings as well as other devices [45]. The
emerging IoT movement is having a huge impact on all the stages and stakeholders of
supply chains of various industries and nearly all market areas [46].
The process behind this phenomenon can be summarized into an Information Value Loop
with discrete but connected stages [10]:
Figure 3.5: Information Value Loop [10]
Basically, an action in the world enable the creation of information about that action,
which is then communicated and aggregated across time and space, allowing ﬁrms to
analyze that data in order to modify future acts depending on the outcome of the analysis.
In the ﬁrst place, the data is created and collected with the use of sensors and then, is
electronically transformed into information that through actuators can be used in the
decision making stage. There is a wide variety of sensors with different characteristics
that determine the suitability for a speciﬁc application. Fundamentally, the choice of a
==PAGE:32==
18
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
speciﬁc sensor is based on the signal to be measured. The three primary factors driving
the deployment of the sensor technology are price, capability, and size. As sensors get
less expensive, “smarter,” and smaller, they can be used in a wider range of applications
and can generate a broader range of data.
The data gathered from the sensors is
communicated to other locations to be aggregated with other data for further analysis.
This involves transmitting data over a network. Here data transfer rates, security and
energy requirements are key considerations when selecting a network technology. Once
the data is collected, it is also aggregated, increasing the value of data, so that
meaningful conclusions can be drawn.
Aggregation is achieved through the use of
regulatory and technological standards. Regulatory standards will play an important role
in shaping the IoT landscape because there is a need for clear regulations related to the
collection, handling, ownership, use, and sale of the data. On the other hand, technology
standards, comprises three elements: network protocols, communication protocols, and
data-aggregation standards. Network protocols deﬁne how machines identify each other,
communication protocols provide a set of rules or a common language for devices to
communicate and the aggregation standards help to collect, combine and process the
data so it can become usable.
Extracting the insights from the data requires it to be analyzed. However, there are some
limitations resulting from the quality of the data, the inability to develop a proper model
or the limited ability to handle unstructured and real-time data. There are different types
of analysis that can be applied to data but they will be explained in depth and expanded
in the section of Big Data:
• Descriptive analytics. They are used to work effectively with much larger or more
complex data sets.
• Predictive analytics. They exploit the large quantity and increasing variety of data
to build useful models that can correlate seemingly unrelated variables [47]. It is
the beginning of keener insight into what might be happening or could happen in
speciﬁc environments and under certain conditions.
• Prescriptive analytics. They include optimization techniques that are based on
large data sets, business rules and mathematical models trying to create causal
models [48].
Lastly, from the analysis, some conclusions will arise leading again to the creation of data
and the restart of the Information Value Loop. These conclusions will trigger some actions
that could involve human decisions or just machine-to-machine (M2M) interactions.
==PAGE:33==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
19
Situation and Future
Nowadays there are around 7,5 billion people on Earth and almost 45% of them are
connected to the Internet.
However, focusing on the young people, the percentage
increases up to 70% of the worldwide population. This fact states that in the future, the
access to Internet and connectivity between devices will not do other thing but increase
and spread to more people and more industries all around the globe [49]. Today, about
25 billion devices such as mobile phones, tablets, wearables, personal computers, PDAs,
data servers and other devices, driven by consumer electronics, medicine and health
care, industrial design and automation, and transportation sectors, are connected to the
Internet [50]. Based on a research [51], nearly 90% of companies from the logistics and
transport sector have already implemented or will implement IoT solutions in these
years and more than 50% expect that IoT will improve the supply chains by increasing
the safety level and cost-effectiveness. Apart from the good opinion of the industry and
willingness of adapting and implementing these changes, there are other factors that are
pushing up and encouraging the whole phenomenon of IoT and connectivity.
Figure 3.6: Average cost per Gb [52]
Figure 3.7: Average cost of sensors [53]
The price of the sensors used to gather and collect data is decreasing as well as the price
to store this data, to be later analyzed. Not only this, but as stated before, the amount of
data generated by people, companies, machines, sensors in different places is growing at
fast rates. Even though the computing speed of computers is also rising up, it may not be
enough to process all this huge data. That is where the technologies brought by Industry
4.0 play their role, specially IoT and Big Data. They are key to overcome this last by
proposing new solutions to treat all this information.
==PAGE:34==
20
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
Figure 3.8: Data generated [54]
Figure 3.9: Computing speed [55]
Moreover, forecasts from specialized sources and companies started to appear all over the
Internet regarding IoT. The number of connected devices is expected to increase during
the following years, meaning that the size and value of the IoT global market will be
considerable.
Figure 3.10: Connected devices [56]
Figure 3.11: Value of the IoT market [57]
Applications
With the rise of the IoT technology and devices, a wide variety of applications can be
developed in many different ﬁelds [58]. Regarding infrastructures, with the use of smart
sensors in roads, bridges or railways, safety can be improved and a predictive
maintenance can be implemented.
In healthcare, data will be collected to automate
processes and provide insights that will enhance the medical workﬂow automation,
enable better analytics and provide personalized treatments. In the agriculture ﬁeld, IoT
can help by tracking the soil temperature, acidity levels and other parameters that will
allow the increase of the crop yields. It can also improve the actual irrigation methods to
==PAGE:35==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
21
reduce water and energy consumption.
Focusing on housing and hostelry, the IoT
devices will enable people to control rooms, save energy, have intelligent surveillance
and personalize other kind of services. Moreover, in the area of utilities (electricity,
water, gas, oil...) these devices will help to measure and manage rising energy demand,
saving energy and minimizing energy transmission losses.
However, a recent report [59] predicts that transportation, retail and manufacturing will be
the hottest areas for IoT growth. In manufacturing, the use of smart sensors will increase
the utilization of the capacity, will lower the unit cost and allow a predictive maintenance.
It will also enable to track movements of products and monitor interactions with them
[43]. Regarding the retail ﬁeld, IoT will make possible to monitor customer behavior and
push relevant advertisement to customers increasing the conversion rate and the number
of new customers. Lastly, in the transport and logistics areas, by placing tracking sensors
on parcels and shipping containers the costs associated with lost or damaged goods will
be reduced and the speed of order processing increased. In addition to these applications,
in transportation, the travel routes and the fuel usage will be optimized as well as enhance
automotive analytics, improved trafﬁc conditions, optimized fuel usage and travel routes.
Summarizing, the applications in which IoT could be applied can be categorized into three
big applications: (a) enhancing situational awareness, (b) sensor-driven decision where
large amounts of data of the environment or events from sensors will be used to take
decision that will enable optimization of processes and resources [60] and (c) automation
and control of processes and systems.
Beneﬁts
The IoT will facilitate the integration of processes and systems across sectors and
technologies and will contribute to a better communication and cooperation between
manufacturers and consumers in a new intelligent way.
It will revolutionize the
production, services provision, logistics and resource planning in a more effective way
and cost-efﬁcient manner [61].
Focusing on the supply chain ﬁeld, IoT can suppress the variation and deviations by
exploiting them, opening new paths through the ability to see and react to them. This
ability to make visible previously unseen information, allows companies to achieve a
greater efﬁciency.
Moreover, by integrating IoT devices all along the supply chain
companies can transform push-driven order systems to pull-driven ones improving the
customer experience, offering a greater differentiation and opening the possibility of
new and innovative business models [24].
==PAGE:36==
22
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
IoT will affect mainly four dimensions of businesses [62]:
Figure 3.12: Areas where IoT will have an impact
• Connectivity. The different stages of traditional production systems will be much
tighter and more automated. These fast digital connections will allow the whole
system to operate as a seamless, cohesive whole.
Integration will change the
production systems in two ways.
First,
performance measurement and
management will be based on precise data.
Sensors will monitor the entire
production
process,
from
the
inspection
of
incoming
materials
through
manufacturing to ﬁnal inspection and shipping. Consequently, all this amount of
data will be combine to set the production system’s targets and measure its
performance continually.
Second, connectivity will support better fact-based
decision making due to the access to comprehensive and up-to-date production
information, together with a complete historical picture.
• Speed. The aim of production systems is to maximize responsiveness and quick
adaptation by emphasizing and implementing discipline and standards. Therefore,
with the introduction of comprehensive, real-time data collection and analysis,
production systems can become more responsive. Deviations from standards can
immediately be ﬂagged for action and the root causes of those deviations can be
identiﬁed faster and also potential countermeasures.
• Accessibility.
Access as well as data storage will be uniﬁed, simplifying and
accelerating the operation of the production system. Employees at every level of
the organization will get the tools and data they need through a single application
that will be the organization’s window into the system’s data. Moreover, using
secure and tightly controlled interfaces, the production-system application can
also be accessible beyond the organization’s boundaries, increasing the knowledge
sharing and collaboration among the players of the supply chain.
• Procedure. The IoT will have a signiﬁcant effect in the organization mindset,
allowing companies to adapt to changes in the environment. Future production
==PAGE:37==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
23
systems will help the organization to collaborate more effectively leading to an
end-to-end view of performance that will break down barriers among functions and
ensure that decisions reﬂect the interests of the business as a whole. In addition, the
communication and information sharing will be greatly enhanced, since a central
knowledge hub and social-media tools will let staff in one area access support,
ideas, and expertise from another. Finally, future production systems will make
performance far more visible, allowing employees to know how the organization
is performing, as well as the precise value of the contribution of their businesses,
plants, or production cells. The result will be not just about where the value is being
created, but also about how.
Finally, IoT will drive the high growth of data both in terms of quantity and quality,
providing the chance to Big Data to develop [44] within the ﬁrms part of the same supply
chain.
Challenges and Risks
As IoT is based on the use of data and its transmission, the challenges and risks are very
similar to the ones faced by Big Data. These include lack of standards, the ability to
scale globally, information security and privacy, management of massive amounts of
data, immature ecosystem or machines’ judgment among others [10], [63], but focusing
primarily in the transmission and connection in real time of the different devices.
Therefore, in order to avoid redundancy they will be explained in depth during the next
section along with the challenges and risk of implementing Big Data.
3.3.2
Big Data
Before digging into the technology of Big Data and develop its characteristics, its
beneﬁts and its risks, the concept of data should be explained.
Data can be deﬁned as a set of characters that has been gathered and translated for a
speciﬁc purpose. It can be classiﬁed into two categories based on the quality: intrinsic
and contextual. Intrinsic data refers to attributes that are objective and native to the data.
Among these attributes can be found accuracy, referring to the degree to which data are
equivalent to their corresponding real values; timeliness, related to the degree to which
data are up-to-date; consistency, meaning that data match in terms of format and structure;
and completeness, described as the degree to which data is full and complete in content,
with no missing data. On the other hand, contextual data refers to attributes that are
dependent on the context in which the data are observed or used. These attributes are
relevancy, value-adding, quantity, believability, accessibility and reputation [64].
==PAGE:38==
24
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
Big Data emerged as a term to describe large datasets that could not be captured, stored,
managed nor analyzed using traditional techniques. Big Data does not only refer to the
data itself, but also to the set of technologies and techniques that enable the
aforementioned functions as well as solving complex problems and unlocking the value
in a more economical way [65]. It allows to quickly and efﬁciently manage, use and
analyze the constantly growing database, separating the important data from the less
important.
Big Data can also be deﬁned taking these 5V concepts into consideration [42], [66]:
Figure 3.13: 5Vs of Big Data
• Variety. Usually, data comes from heterogeneous sources and can be generated in
structured or unstructured formats, being these lasts not suited to traditional forms
of analysis.
• Velocity. It refers to the generation speed of new data and how fast it is analyzed.
This data can be analyzed in batches, real-time, nearly real-time, or streamlines.
• Value. It is related to the process of revealing underexploited values, isolating
from the whole mass of information what is the most important in order to support
decision making in businesses.
• Volume.
The magnitude of data, which has exponentially increased, poses a
challenge to the capacity of existing storage devices.
• Veracity. It stresses the importance of data quality and level of trust due to the
concern that many data sources inherently contain a certain degree of uncertainty
and unreliability.
The technology of Big Data is based on four pillars: Infrastructure, Storage, Processing
and Analytics. First, Big Data needs an infrastructure able to be scalable and ﬂexible to
handle the huge amount of data. The cloud could be a solution. Secondly, this data will
require to be storage. Therefore, new methods will arise solving these challenges. Third,
a new framework needs to be design so as to process this quantity of data. Finally, new
==PAGE:39==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
25
methods and techniques will be developed in order to analyze the data and extract the
value from it [65].
However, Big Data without analytics is just a massive amount of data. To capture, store,
aggregate, analyze data and then extract value is becoming a mandate for all
organizations. Therefore, through the combination of Big Data and analytics, the ability
to extract meaningful insights and turn information into intelligence is enabled [64].
This blending leads to a new concept, Big Data Analytics (BDA). It can be deﬁned as the
application of advanced analytic techniques including data mining, statistical analysis,
predictive analytics, etc. on big datasets as a new business intelligence practice [67],
[68]. It refers to the processes of examining and analyzing a huge amount and variety of
data to draw conclusions by uncovering hidden patterns and correlations, trends, and
other business valuable information and knowledge, in order to increase business
beneﬁts, increase operational efﬁciency, and explore new markets and opportunities [67],
[69].
Summarizing, the goals of Big Data analysis are to develop effective methods that can
accurately predict the future observations [70] and at the same time to uncover hidden
patterns and insights using large sources of data [71].
Situation and Future
Data has the role of changing the world as it is known now. It is becoming essential to the
society. Information is instantly required regardless the location or time and it also allows
the improvement of systems and processes [72]. Moreover, data-driven decision-making
has been prevalent for more than three decades [73], [74] and therefore any improvement
or change in how data is treated will have a signiﬁcant effect when taking decisions.
Society is becoming increasingly more instrumented [75] and monitored. As a result, the
magnitude of data generated and shared by businesses, public administrations, numerous
industrial and nonproﬁt sectors, has increased immeasurably [76]. The volume of digital
data is growing exponentially and it is becoming a challenge for the actual technologies
to handle it. Data is generated much faster and it is bigger than ever before. Today,
people are bombarded with data from every conceivable direction. The availability of
data has rapidly grown in recent years as a result of the globalization of the world’s
economy and also due to the adoption and diffusion of various disruptive digital
information technologies [73]. However, the key issue here is how this data is used in a
constructive way and how it can be calibrated.
The continuous growth of sources is accompanied by signiﬁcant improvements in data
processing capabilities [77] that is allowing enterprises across various industries to
==PAGE:40==
26
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
embark on a path to digitally transform their organization. These changes can range
from the introduction of data processing at every step of existing business processes,
innovative ways to analyze data, new ways to apply the analysis to the business,
exposition to new knowledge, facilitation in responding to emerging opportunities and
challenges, all the way to pivot the enterprise’s business model towards the monetization
of its data assets and the ﬁnding of new channels of revenue [63], [65].
Forecasts, surveys and reports from specialized companies [75], [78] predict that by 2025
the data generated globally will grow to 160 Zettabyte (ZB). To put this in perspective, the
total amount of data generated globally in 2016 was around 16ZB and just 1ZB equals
to 1012 GB. Additionally, it is expected that every day the world produces around 2.5
Exabytes (EB) of data from which the 90% of it is unstructured . Despite this vast amount
of data available, it is required determination and skill to be able to put it to use to unlock a
new world of business opportunities. In 2013, only 22% of the information in the digital
universe would be a candidate for analysis with the actual techniques [9]. Moreover,
it is estimated that at least 40% of this new data generated will require some level of
security, from privacy protection to full-encryption lock. And the amount of data needing
protection will grow as more of the IoT devices comes online [63]. Among the data in
need of security, it can be found corporate ﬁnancial data, personal information, medical
records, user information accounts or KPIs from supply chain partners.
Listed below there are some interesting facts and numbers about data nowadays [79]–[81]:
• The total amount of data being captured and stored by industry doubles every year.
• Every minute 204 million emails are sent.
• Google alone processes on average over 40 thousand search queries per second,
making it over 3.5 billion in a single day.
• Around 100 hours of video are uploaded to YouTube every minute and it would
take you around 15 years to watch every video uploaded by users in one day.
• Facebook users share 30 billion pieces of content between them every day.
Facebook stores, accesses, and analyzes 30+ Petabytes of user generated data.
• 570 new websites spring into existence every minute of every day.
• Walmart handles more than 1 million customer transactions every hour, which is
imported into databases estimated to contain more than 2.5 petabytes of data.
• In 2014, there was over 1.2 billion smart phones in the world, and the growth is
predicted to continue.
• 12 million Radio-frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) tags – used to capture data and
==PAGE:41==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
27
track movement of objects in the physical world – had been sold in by 2011. By
2021, it is estimated that number will rise to 209 billion as the IoT takes off.
Despite challenges relating to privacy concerns and organizational resistance, Big Data
investments continue to gain momentum across the globe [65]. Data analytics software is
already a $40 billion market and it is growing 10% a year. Security products and services
are a $50 billion market whereas Cloud computing accounts for 5% of total IT spending,
growing to 10% by 2020 [63]. Big Data is expected to be one of the top 10 prosperous
markets in the coming century [82].
The next graph (Figure 3.14) shows a revenue forecast for the global big data industry
from 2011 to 2027:
Figure 3.14: Revenue forecast of the Big Data market [83]
Applications
However, data itself does not have an inherent value, and therefore, all data collection
should be approached with the objective of maximizing concrete value drivers across the
business [32]. The use of analytics on Big Data will beneﬁt from large volumes of data
[84] and will become the basis of competition and growth for individual ﬁrms, enhancing
productivity and creating signiﬁcant value for the world economy by reducing waste and
increasing the quality of products and services [85].
The widespread use of digital technologies has led to the emergence of BDA as a critical
business capability. It is meant to provide companies better means to obtain value from
an increasingly massive amount of data and gain a powerful competitive advantage [86].
==PAGE:42==
28
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
Companies are using new approaches, moving from descriptive to predictive and
prescriptive analytics and doing data analysis in real-time. They are also increasingly
adopting self-service business intelligence and analytics, giving executives and front line
workers easy-to-use software tools for data discovery and timely decision-making [63].
BDA can help organizations to make better decisions and to improve their strategy,
operations efﬁciency, and ﬁnancial performance. Such improvements can be realized by
a deeper understanding of business dynamics, intensifying customer engagement,
optimizing daily operations, and capitalizing on new sources of revenue [68].
The diverse ways to analyze data within Big Data are the following [86]:
Figure 3.15: Methods of analysis [87]
• Descriptive analytics scrutinizes data and information to deﬁne the current state
of a business situation in a way that developments, patterns and exceptions
become evident, in the form of producing standard reports, ad hoc reports, and
alerts. They are the simplest form of BDA method, and involve the summarization
and description of knowledge patterns using simple statistical methods, such as
mean, median, mode, standard deviation, variance, and frequency measurement of
speciﬁc events in Big Data streams. They are considered a backward looking and
they reveal what has already occurred allowing businesses to discover useful
patterns or unidentiﬁed correlations that could be used for making business
decisions [75].
==PAGE:43==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
29
• Predictive analytics involve the use of mathematical algorithms, programming and
statistical methods [75] to discover explanatory and predictive patterns within data.
The aim of this type of analytics is to accurately project what will happen in the
future and provide reasons as to why it may happen. All this, being highly reliable
and having a high explanatory power [84]. Predictive analytics is enabled by the use
of techniques such as data/text/web mining, forecasting [88] and learning models.
Because of supply disruptions and demand uncertainty, predictive analytics tools
are essential to design supply chain ﬂexibility into logistics operations.
• Prescriptive analytics involves the use of data and mathematical algorithms to
determine
and
assess
alternative
decisions
that
implicate
objectives
and
requirements characterized by high volume and complexity, with the aim to
improve business performance. It is about is about optimization and randomized
testing to assess how businesses enhance their service levels while decreasing the
expenses [89].
It includes multicriteria decision-making, optimization, and
simulation.
• Inquisitive analytics is about probing data to certify or reject business propositions
[87].
• Pre-emptive analytics is about having the capacity to take precautionary actions
on events that may undesirably inﬂuence the organizational performance [75].
Predictive and prescriptive analytics play a vital role in helping companies make
effective decisions on their strategic direction [88]. They both can be applied to address
problems related to the changes in organizational culture, sourcing decisions, supply
chain conﬁguration and with the design and development of products or services. On the
other hand, descriptive analytics are simpler and they answer questions related to what
happened and/or what is happening.
BDA is reported to be an emerging supply chain game changer [66] of the global logistics
industry. The market has been ﬂooded with real time and a large ever-growing amount
of data, enabling companies to excel in the current fast-paced and ever-changing market
environment. BDA will not only affect SCM operations but will also have an impact on
supply chain performance, relationships and social structures. It is expected that BDA will
be the key driver of digital supply chains by improving the quality of demand planning,
the accuracy of predictions and forecasts, improving the resilience and robustness of the
supply chain and also enabling the transparency along the value chain, facilitating fast
decision making and responses to possible disruptions. Consequently, data will become
a crucial strategic asset [73]. When BDA is used in strategic management, where the
plan of the company and the supply chain strategies are aligned, it can provide an overall
==PAGE:44==
30
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
direction for the entire organization, and a guidance on the operations and supply chain
strategies.
Due to the adoption of Information Technologies (IT), supply chains are enabled to
monitor the information ﬂow and also inclined towards the collection and analysis of a
variety of data for an improvement in management efﬁciency [9]. The ﬁve main sources
of Big Data in supply chains are Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID), Global
Positioning System (GPS), Point of Sale (POS), Suppliers and Manufacturers. RFID and
GPS can help in real-time inventory positioning and warehousing while POS data is one
of the main enablers of demand forecasting and customer behavior analysis. Suppliers
Big Data can help manufacturers monitor supplier performance, and manage risk and
capacity whereas Manufacturing Big Data will help identify production bottlenecks and
imminent machine failures [71].
Supply chains need to be aligned with the changing preferences of customers to enable
the provision of products and logistics services [73]. Therefore, Supply Chain Analytics
(SCA) is fundamental. SCA are the analytical applications available along the entire
supply chain spectrum that helps to identify areas for optimization.
They can be
differentiated into qualitative and quantitative.
Qualitative methods are based on
subjective judgment of consumers or experts and are appropriate when past data is not
available whereas quantitative approaches are used to make predictions as a function of
past data [64]. For example, marketing could be one where SCA can help to optimize.
Marketing analytics applications are customer oriented and are on the sell side of the
supply chain.
The nature of marketing has driven the development of Big Data
applications that focus on capturing customer demand, enabling micro-segmentation,
and predicting consumer behaviors and patterns to achieve a better understanding [64],
[82].
Another important marketing application could be in price optimization [90].
Through SCA, price optimization allows real time analysis at a high granularity of data
on pricing and sales using a variety of data sources [64], [82]. Moreover, it can enhance
the user experience through sensor enabled applications [32].
Focusing into the logistic ﬁeld, SCA can be used to predict and proactively plan different
supply chain activities [71]. It can help to design inventory optimization systems [73]
that are able to handle complex challenges or help in the prediction of these inventory
needs allowing to respond properly to the changing customers’ demands as well as
reducing dramatically the inventory costs [64].
SCA is used to predict supply
disruptions, to forecast the demand and to extract demand patterns that will allow
companies to adopt a proactive response when planning and scheduling as well as when
dealing with supply chain risks or network design problems [71], [73], [91]. It will help
to enhance the visibility by enabling the ability to adjust their production and operations
==PAGE:45==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
31
under demand and capacity ﬂuctuations in a real time basis.
Figure 3.16: Focus of SCA
The insights extracted from the data will assist in the identiﬁcation of optimal
distribution center locations, improve the ﬂeet performance, minimize the transportation
costs and also implement reverse logistics [32], [64], [73]. SCA will allow companies to
put the right products with the right dealers at the right time avoiding delivery delays,
offering alternative routes for distribution vehicles in real time based on unforeseen
events and allowing the tracking of goods throughout the whole supply chain [32], [64],
[71].
Manufacturers can also beneﬁt from SCA to produce high-quality and
competitively priced products that can outperform their competitors [91]. This can be
achieved through the optimization of asset utilization by tracking their conditions,
identifying and ﬁxing system failures as well as anticipating to design ﬂaws. Processes
can be improved by ensuring that the right mix of resources is allocated to the right
production lines making the work ﬂow smoother. Moreover, it enables manufacturers to
understand the different production costs involved and how they inﬂuence the bottom
line. In other words, SCA evaluates potential trade-offs by performing what-if scenario
analysis to assess the effects of product conception and development costs, achieving the
most economical design that meets the quality and reliability criteria [91] giving to their
products a competitive edge.
Analytics applications are becoming increasingly
important in sourcing since in most manufacturing organizations, sourcing represents the
largest single category of spend for the company [64]. Therefore, SCA can yield great
savings as well as facilitate the development of optimal sourcing strategies by
==PAGE:46==
32
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
measuring, analyzing, managing and evaluating supply market trends and suppliers’
inputs but also ensuring that the sourcing strategies are aligned to the organizations
strategic goals and objectives [86], [91].
Summarizing, SCA enables companies to adopt a proactive rather than a reactive
response to supply chain risks.
It helps companies to make the correct decisions
providing a better understanding of the inﬂuence of different factors, reducing the risks
associated, enabling them to benchmark industry best practices, set performance targets,
and implement customized metrics so that they can easily achieve their goals in less time
[86].
However, a prerequisite for any of these BDA applications to succeed is the
availability and quality of the data as well as the existence of trust between supply chain
partners to promote information sharing [73] having as a goal the integration of the
supply chain. This last topic will be developed further in this report.
Beneﬁts
Big Data holds the key to enhance the supply chain maturity and increase the agility and
responsiveness by ensuring data integrity, increasing visibility and control through the
whole chain [71]. Usually, companies want to retain a customer and make them come
back; they want loyal customers. To do so, ﬁrms have to offer new and better services
and products that customers want. BDA will help on improving the customer service
by collecting data about them, exposing people’s hidden behavioral patterns allowing
organizations to have the proper knowledge about their consumers. Using this knowledge,
the appropriated offers and services could be pitched to the customers making them feel
like they are receiving personal care [92], [93].
The beneﬁts of applying BDA to supply chain speciﬁcally are the ability of monitoring
delivery routes, trafﬁc data or the weather in real time.
Also allowing to reroute if
necessary for capacity and asset sharing as well as being more accurate when estimating
the demand by accessing data of sales, market trends, competitors’ data and relevant
local and global economic factors [71].
Another beneﬁt of BDA could be in the
warehouses. It will help to identify inventory levels, delivery mismatches and incoming
deliveries, allowing, in real time, the optimization of complex networks of distribution
hubs, plants and warehouses based on the material ﬂow data. All this will facilitate, ease
and increase the accuracy and optimize the production, distribution scheduling [71] and
levels of inventory. Basically, the inventory is used as a buffer in case of disruptions in
the demand, shortage of essential materials from suppliers or break downs of the
production lines. The use of Big Data can signiﬁcantly reduce the level of inventory
needed to be maintained and save wealth and space [92] by providing full transparency
and by developing automated replenishment systems [71]. This transparency empowers
==PAGE:47==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
33
partners to share data, encouraging trust and allowing only one version of truth through
the whole supply chain [94]. Historic data from past demand can be used to accurately
predict future demands. The same case can be applied to supply patterns of the suppliers
to predict future situations. In addition to this, by analyzing performance data of the
machines, companies will have the capacity of developing preventive algorithms to
maintain the machines before they break down and consequently keeping delivery times
unaffected.
BDA can play a decisive role when trying to improve the operational
efﬁciency and reduce waste and operational costs.
These costs are associated with
multiple factors and variables and an alteration in any one of them might have an adverse
effect on the others.
Therefore, BDA will help in the prioritization of variables by
balancing the reductions in each factor so that they do not increase others. Analysis of
these data would give the ﬁrm insights into the independent cost functions as well as the
relationship between the different variables [92].
Challenges and Risks
Big Data offers substantial value to organizations willing to adopt it. It is also the key to
competitive advantage, but at the same time poses a considerable number of challenges
[95].
There is too much information, it is too diverse, too complex and it is too
effervescent [65], meaning that new data do not stop appearing, making the previous one
obsolete if not used on time. This may be an obstacle for companies to leverage BDA, to
become data-driven [63] and to transform their supply chain operations [64], because if
this data cannot be interpreted or used, it is useless and of no value [82]. However, it is a
source of opportunity for those with the proper tools, skills and attitude to take
advantage of it [63].
Figure 3.17: Big Data Challenges [87]
There is limited understanding of how Big Data technologies are going to affect the
development of BDA in supply chains as well as their impact in social changes regarding
==PAGE:48==
34
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
the functions and tasks of employees involved along the supply chain. Companies need
to understand the capabilities and requirements to translate them into value propositions,
process optimizations [73] and something they can understand and measure.
There are three main concerns or obstacles in the path of achieving an effective
application of Big Data:
1. Data.
As stated in the Situation and Future section, it is a fact that companies are increasingly
generating huge amounts of data and this data has to be analyzed to extract value that
could offer some beneﬁts to them. This growth rate is fast exceeding the ability to both
design appropriate systems to handle the data effectively and to analyze it to extract
relevant meaning for decision making [96]. The large scale and the sheer volume of data
is a big challenge in its own right, but also the management of the high inﬂux rate of
non-homogeneous data, which results in either creating new data or updating the
existing data [97]. However, many challenges emerge regarding the data itself: data
integration complexities, security and privacy issues, inadequate infrastructure and
synchronization of large amounts of data, among others [75].
Big Data presents several concerns related to privacy and security when storing data or
sharing it all along the supply chain [9]. If the economic beneﬁts of Big Data are to be
achieved, these challenges should be addressed. To overcome the unstable reliability and
security issues [82], [85], trust has to be develop as well as an effective data governance
initiative regarding the process of data integration and management in the value chain.
Data scalability is a major technical issue when adopting BDA. Most of the time,
organizations have to dump and discard their data after a particular period so as to store
newly generated data. This can be tackled with the use of more advanced infrastructure,
distributed databases, parallel computing or cloud computing. However, leveraging these
capabilities could mean a ﬁnancial burden and therefore, other strategies to optimize
data collection and reduce unwanted data generation from the source could arise as the
solutions [9], [94].
As supply managers rely on the insights extracted from data to obtain a competitive
advantage, this should have quality [9]. Moreover, quality issues are increasing as ﬁrms’
desires and capability for the analysis of ever larger amounts of acquired data similarly
increase [98]. Consequently, data collection plays an essential role because without an
efﬁcient and effective approach for capturing the data, it is impossible to carry out
data-based analytics, make decisions and induce continuous improvement in the data
production process. The data captured tend to be incomplete, inaccurate and untimely.
The results of decisions based on poor quality data could be costly. It would obstruct the
==PAGE:49==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
35
data analytics activities and affect management decisions [9], [98], leading them to be
unreasonable, unexecutable, and unpresentable.
Thus, the necessity to deal with
inaccurate and ambiguous data is another facet of Big Data, which is addressed using
tools and analytics developed for management and also mining unreliable data [75],
[99].
Moreover, to assist ﬁrms in diagnosing supply chain risks and uncertainties
(SCRU) from a sustainable development perspective, there is a need to ﬁrst identify,
assess and analyze these diverse data sources [91].
There are also many technological issues that need to be resolved to make the most of
Big Data. Diverse collectors such as sensors, and digital devices, have their own speciﬁc
data formats which are commonly heterogeneous, unstructured, and incompatible. These
different forms and quality of data clearly indicate that heterogeneity is a natural property
of Big Data and it is a big challenge to comprehend and manage such data [75], [100].
All this, along with being large sample size, makes data integration extremely difﬁcult,
computational costly and therefore, data standardization is crucial for the succeed of DBA
applications [70], [82].
2. Process
Basically, there are two main concerns here, the implementation of BDA inside
companies and the lifecycle of the data itself within those companies.
The implementation of any BDA technique is costly and therefore, companies must
choose where to direct these efforts. Focusing on applications that try to tackle many
areas can lead to lose sight of the purpose of the implementation itself. First of all,
organizations who are better informed of their current state of BDA capabilities are in
better position to work on the challenges while the adoption is taking place [9], [69].
Therefore, before implementing anything, an assessment of their capabilities should be
done by using maturity models. These can help organizations to measure their current
state of technological competence benchmarked against the industry standards. Once
this is done, the implementation can begin.
Regarding these capabilities, the following dimensions can be identiﬁed [9]:
• Data Generation. The ability of organizations to seek, identify, create, and access
data from heterogeneous sources across organizational boundaries.
• Data Integration and Management. The ability of organizations to utilize tools
and techniques to collect, integrate, transform and store data from heterogeneous
data sources
• Advanced Analytics. The ability of organizations to utilize tools and techniques
to analyze supply chain data in batch wise, real-time, near-time, or as it ﬂows and
==PAGE:50==
36
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
extracts meaningful insights to be used in decision making.
• Data Visualization. The ability of organizations to utilize tools and techniques
to render information visuals and deliver the data-driven insights intuitively in a
timely manner to the decision makers.
• Data-driven culture. Intangible resource that represents the beliefs, attitudes, and
opinions of people towards data driven decision-making.
Figure 3.18: Implementation stages of Big Data [9]
The previous image (Figure 3.18) shows the evolution in terms of BDA maturity. First,
companies are in the incognizant stage, meaning that they lack the knowledge about BDA
and its beneﬁts. In the initiation stage, ﬁrms are aware of BDA and considering it for
leveraging, but have not implemented it yet. Then, the adoption phase starts and it can be
divided in 3 steps. The ﬁrst step is digitizing and structuring the data. This process ensures
that the data generated is clean, structured, and organized in such a way that it can be
used for further analysis; removing errors and guarantying data quality. The second step
requires making the data available to all who need it when they ask for it. However, to be
successful in this step, organizational functions should be aligned and processes and data
integrated along the supply chain. And ﬁnally, the third step is applying basic analytics to
the data, identifying the right metrics, such as basic data comparisons, correlations, and
regression. Many companies can success and improve from this stage without investing in
more advanced technologies because these techniques can provide powerful insights. The
fourth and highest stage, the routinization stage, takes place when the company is mature
enough to introduce and apply advanced analytics, such as predictive analytics, automated
==PAGE:51==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
37
algorithms, and real-time data analysis, into businesses processes that can create radical
new insights. Nevertheless, leveraging Big Data at this level often requires the expertise
of deep analytical talent [9], [64]. It is a mistake for companies to try to jump to the last
stage of the maturity map without ﬁrst going through the ﬁrst three stages. Companies
need to go through the organizational adaptation, learning, and continuous improvement
required to move through the stages. Successful use of BDA does not only depend on the
availability of data and the analytical tools. It also depends on the ability of organizational
members — leaders, managers, and employees — to be able to use them [64].
The lifecycle of the data inside a company could be summarized into ﬁve steps with their
own challenges. First the data has to be acquired from diverse sources and be stored for
value generation. But being the data usually heterogeneous, varying in speed, frequency,
volume, and complexity, and lacking standards, the speed and resolution in the collection
and processing of the data can be compromised involving a challenge. Second, from a
collected pool of large scale unstructured, diverse, interrelated and unreliable data, the
right portion of it has to be extracted. Developing and maintaining this extraction method
is a continuous challenge but also, Big Data users face the dichotomy of quantity versus
quality. Third, these portions, from different sources, have to be aggregated and integrated
for further analysis. However, this data will not be stored in one or few locations, it will
not be just one or even a few types and formats; it will not be amenable to analysis by just
one or a few analytics; and there will not be just one or a few cross linkages among the
different data elements [96]. Once this is done, the fourth step is to analyze and model to
handle the Big Data, but new methods need to be developed for this purpose. And the last
step is the interpretation of the results and ﬁndings from the analysis [75].
3. Management
The technological beneﬁts that BDA will bring are going to inﬂuence the workplace,
tasks and responsibilities of SCM. As operational tasks and decisions are being
automated due to data driven approaches, their job proﬁle and functions would transform
from the creation of forecasts to the maintenance and control of demand planning
systems [73]. A pressing challenge is a most likely shortage of data scientists with the
necessary skills, a combination of analytical skills and domain knowledge, to analyze
and extract value from large volumes of data. Therefore, inexperienced employees, time
constraints, lack of integration and issues with change management are the potential
barriers of the implementation of BDA applications to have into account [9], [71], [85].
Lack of skills is not the only problem, there is an inability of techniques to exploit this
data properly. For example, most of forecasting techniques do not consider exogenous
variables and information sources as well as expert judgment, being these of great
inﬂuence [9].
Big Data also presents new ethical challenges, such as privacy or
==PAGE:52==
38
CHAPTER 3. INDUSTRY 4.0
location-based information being collected by Big Data applications and transferred over
networks is resulting in clear privacy concerns [75].
Moreover, the fact of tracking
employees and continuously measuring their performance introduces a level of oversight
that can repress the human spirit. In fact, one of the major challenges of Big Data is
preserving individual privacy [93].
All these techniques of analysis are time consuming and they include different stages
like developing, testing and adaptation. In complex systems like a supply chain, BDA
implementation, getting the data, combining it and validating it, might take a year or
more to see some results [9]. Moreover, holding, storing and processing these sets of
huge amounts of unstructured or heterogeneous data as well as modify or update it is
time consuming. This cannot be solved by using bigger and faster computer but new
approaches should be developed as well as more sophisticated data centers. Among
these
it
could
be
found
smart
cloud-based
storage,
biological
storage,
new
decision-making mechanism,
self-learning models or intelligent processors [82].
Moreover, growing volume, variety and velocity of data is overwhelming conventional
computing capacities, simulations or statistics [73]. These last challenges, will increase
the operational expenses due to a high investment on these new technologies. The lack
of IT resources and capabilities to share and analyze data in real time across the supply
chain could cause discrepancies and disruptions.
Therefore, collaboration and cross
functional teams should be set up as well as encourage a data driven culture along the
supply chain network [9] in order to maximize its effect and to establish closer
relationships [75].
To effectively deal with the diffusion of BDA technologies into the supply chain,
organizational and behavioral issues related to the adoption and practices have to be
addressed. Despite the potential provided by Big Data, many companies are unable to
generate useful insights from their data for their businesses. Some of the hurdles that
prevent companies from taking advantage are that they suffer a paralysis due to either
lacking the capabilities to analyze large sums of data or to the fact that they are
overwhelmed with the rapid change of technological capabilities. To avoid this paralysis,
supply chains need to correctly identify potential problems, the right set of data and the
proper metrics wanted to be measured. Once the amount and type of data needed to
solve the problem and the correct type of analyses is considered, skills and tools must be
selected to enable the problem to be tackled in the most cost-effective manner. Also,
some companies focus on a speciﬁc process leaving the rest unattended or they analyze
erroneously a portion of data causing the supply chain to incur into signiﬁcant costs
without achieving the desired outcomes [64], [71]. From the behavioral perspective, the
use of real-time data and information could be challenging because decision makers may
==PAGE:53==
3.3. TECHNOLOGIES
39
excessively react to even small changes in the physical world which would worsen the
bullwhip effect, which will be explain later on this report, and increase supply chain risk
and cost of inventory [9]. Moreover, there are some risks related to security. Big Data is
vulnerable to be attacked and the lack of the adequate security controls is an important
challenge to be solved.
SCM will face many challenges that can potentially result in inefﬁciencies and wastage in
supply chains and there is no perfect Big Data management solution yet [96]. However,
BDA presents an opportunity to overcome those challenges [86] and confront the future
to come.
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4
Supply Chain 4.0
4.1
Concept
Supply chains are traditionally linear, discrete, separated in silos and rely on periodic
forecasts and plans that usually become outdated and inaccurate as this information moves
along the supply chain. Nevertheless, today supply chains are transforming into dynamic,
integrated and interconnected systems, that are fully transparent to all the players involved
[8], changing the way of how companies work and compete [5]. Previously in this report,
it has been stated the different innovations and technologies that Industry 4.0 brings.
These, once applied to the supply chain ﬁeld, characterize and describe the new concept
and deﬁnition of Supply Chain 4.0 (SC 4.0) or Digital Supply Chain (DSC), which will
face the new challenges of today’s environment.
The function of any supply chain centers on the movement of materials, ﬁnished goods,
capital, and other assets from place to place, as well as the production of ﬁnished goods
always having on mind the satisfaction of the customer. But by connecting all the stages
to one another via these new technologies, the latency, risk, and waste found in linear
supply chains can be minimize. The main characteristics of a DSC or SC 4.0 are that
they are always on, meaning that data is continuously being transmitted along the supply
chain providing an integrated view. The improvements that SC 4.0 bring will enable a
considerable change in service, cost, capital, and agility [4].
By being connected, all the stakeholders and different systems can communicate and
share information directly, that later on can be analyzed providing insights from critical
areas enabling a better supply and demand balancing as well as decision making [5].
Logistics will take a huge step forward through better connectivity, collaboration and
knowledge sharing, ensuring that all stakeholders in the supply chain steer and decide
based on the same facts [4]. Additionally, supply chains will become more efﬁcient,
41
==PAGE:56==
42
CHAPTER 4. SUPPLY CHAIN 4.0
effective and ﬂexible, ready to adapt to changes [101].
The goal of the SC 4.0 is to deliver the right product into the customer’s hands as quickly
as possible but also to do so responsively and reliably, while increasing efﬁciency and
cutting costs through automation [8]. The result will be full awareness and collaboration
along different time horizons on strategic, tactical, and operational levels as well as a
considerable improve in the level of customer service and the proper adjustment to the
market needs. However, this goal cannot be achieved unless the supply chain is fully
integrated, connected and driven by data, key element of SC 4.0 [8], [61]. And apart from
this, the increasing complexity and interrelation within the supply chain will make hard
to implement any of these technologies.
4.2
Challenges
There are some challenges associated to traditional supply chains that are still there
and will continue to exist in the future. One of the most common goals in supply chain
management includes cost reduction and now with shorter product life cycles and
changing market demands, companies are forced to embark on a lean journey to tackle
it. Moreover, now it has become essentially a requirement for the companies and natural
for the customers to have their goods delivered within a limited period of time and also
to provide the same or even more quality as their competitor to stay in the market.
Therefore, companies that are too reliant on one supplier are vulnerable. Firms should
mitigate and have contingency plans regarding their supply chains to ensure minimum
disruptions in supply due to external and natural factors [92], increasing the resilience of
the chain. Resilience it is understood as the ability of a supply chain to return to normal
operating performance, within an acceptable period of time, after being disturbed. It is
considered a critical capability to maintain the continuity of the operations since supply
chain have increased in length and complexity [102].
Nevertheless, the introduction of Industry 4.0 practices and technologies into companies
has many impacts on the whole supply chain, and one of them is the transformation
from a linear and traditional supply chain into a DSC. This process requires three key
enablers: a clear deﬁnition, new capabilities, and a supportive environment. Deﬁning
the DSC starts with an understanding of the current operation’s digital waste [4]. To do
so, collaboration has to be encouraged and the lack of information visibility along the
supply chain has to be tackled. If not, the ability of companies to access to relevant
insights, make proper business decisions, mitigate risks and satisfy the customers will
be compromised [103]. On the other hand, capabilities regarding digitization need to
be built and they typically require to recruit speciﬁc and specialist proﬁles [4]. Even
==PAGE:57==
4.3. APPROACHES
43
though the number of engineers trained in handling unstructured data and big data tools is
gradually increasing, it still falls far short of anticipated demand [37]. Moreover, leaders
could feel uncomfortable with advanced manufacturing and technologies resulting into
the unwillingness to adopt new approaches [37]. Therefore, companies should take a
proactive attitude and anticipate to these scenarios by encouraging this kind of knowledge
among their actual and future employees. The ﬁnal prerequisite is that the establishment
of the organization and IT landscape must be accompanied by creation of an innovation
and collaborative environment [4].
Many of the systems and applications that SC 4.0 will bring can present challenges when
trying to integrate to the actual ones. Therefore, companies should encourage the creation
and application of standards in order to maximize the value of their investments [37].
Moreover, as data starts ﬂowing through the supply chain, questions will arise regarding
who owns the data generated, how to ensure appropriate privacy, control, and security
and so on. Usually, new technological solutions always carry vulnerabilities, but those
standards will help with these issues [61].
4.3
Approaches
Summarizing, in order to achieve a SC 4.0, it is required a proper IT system that
can handle the new technologies mentioned before in the report, specially IoT and Big
Data, and also to encourage collaboration and knowledge sharing among the stakeholders
within the supply chain.
4.3.1
Collaboration
Knowledge has become a key determinant of enhancing competitive advantage in
supply chains, and therefore it has to be manage properly to facilitate effective sharing
among stakeholders and extract all the potential value [104]. As stated above, in order
to transform a supply chain into a DSC, knowledge sharing and collaboration should
be spread and encourage all along of it. However, collaboration practices are not well
understood among supply chain partners and there is not a one-ﬁts all solution. The right
approach for companies that are planning to join efforts in the supply chain depend on
some factors like the geographical dispersion of customers and suppliers, the demand
pattern of the products and the characteristics, conditions and value of their products
[105].
Successful supply chain collaboration or coordination happens when the following
components take place: information sharing, goal congruence, decision synchronization,
==PAGE:58==
44
CHAPTER 4. SUPPLY CHAIN 4.0
incentive alignment,
resources sharing,
collaborative communication,
and joint
knowledge creation [90]. When relevant, accurate and complete information is willingly
shared among the members of the supply chain to make a strategic and tactical joint
effort like aligning their forecast for capacity and long term planning [105], the
uncertainty is reduced and the supply chain becomes smoother [106]. There must be a
goal congruence between supply chain partners. An objective agreement between them
to the extent that each one of them perceive that their own objectives are satisﬁed by
achieving the supply chain objectives.
In addition to this, their decisions regarding
operations strategy planning, demand management, production planning and scheduling,
procurement, promise delivery, balancing change, and distribution management, have to
be aligned since any change in their plans may affect the whole system. Moreover, to
successfully collaborate there has to be an alignment regarding incentives. Meaning that
each partner share gains and loses equitably and also the outcomes from this
collaboration should be beneﬁcial to all of them. Another good practice of collaboration
is to share resources, assets and capabilities with the partners to make a better use of
them. All of these actions can happen only if exists a collaborative, open, frequent,
balanced, two-way and multilevel communication.
Finally, to succeed in the
collaboration effort, each member will understand better and will respond faster to the
market and the competitive environment by working together and by creating joint
efforts. In other words, by collaborating [90].
But to do so, trust must be built between the partners, because it is key in the success in
inter-organizational relationships [107], [108] and also because the knowledge sharing is
greater when partners have closer relationships [1]. Trust happens when exists conﬁdence
or predictability in one’s expectations about others behavior, and also when there is a
common belief that another individual makes good-faith efforts to behave according to
commitments, is honest and does not take excessive advantage of another even when the
opportunity is available [108], [109].
As stated before,
relationships among supply chain members include sharing
information and knowledge but it means also sharing risks and beneﬁts. By evaluating
and understanding these, companies can facilitate exchanges and reduce conﬂicts that
could arise. The factors that characterize conﬂicts are [110]:
==PAGE:59==
4.3. APPROACHES
45
Figure 4.1: Factors inﬂuencing conﬂicts
• Relational proclivity. Referring to the general tendency by a company to look out,
engage and build close relationships with other companies.
• Connectedness.
Indicates the dependence between companies for assistance,
information,
commitments or respect for other behaviors that encourage
coordination along the supply chain. The greater interdependence the higher the
degree of shared understanding, the stronger and healthier communication and the
lower the frequency of conﬂicts.
• Power symmetry. To have power over others means to condition them. Therefore,
the more equal the power in the relationship, greater the interdependence. However,
if the power is asymmetric among partners, exists a higher probability of conﬂicts
arising.
• Dysfunctional conﬂict. A conﬂict in a relationship refers to disagreements or
incompatibility of activities, shared resources and goals between partners. These
can also be harmful behaviors such as manipulate information to harm other
decision makers, interacting with each other with hostility and distrust or create
barriers during the process of decision-making. All these actions have negative
outcomes since the process of assessing the new information provided and
analyzing it are no longer enabled.
Enterprises tend to collaborate with others in the supply chain if they perceive that this
cooperation will bring beneﬁts and reinforce the knowledge sharing. Usually, valuable
and important knowledge is much more likely to be transmitted through strong ties than
through weak ones. In addition to this, stronger relational ties could play an important
role for process and product innovations because they often entail greater knowledge
complexity, which therefore may require greater levels of trust and coordination [36].
Therefore, to succeed in these relationships, the partners should design and plan
coordination agreements where there is a stronger relational proclivity within them, the
==PAGE:60==
46
CHAPTER 4. SUPPLY CHAIN 4.0
level of connection is also high and exists a symmetry in the power in order to avoid
creating superﬂuous conﬂicts.
There are many types of information that can be shared in a supply chain: the costs of
production and transportation, the demand, orders, etc. In general, the more information
is available, the more room for negotiation and cooperation. Moreover, different types
of supply chains may require different types of information sharing mechanisms, with
different assumptions and conditions [106]. The information can be shared vertically,
horizontally, and completely.
• Vertical information sharing indicates that buyers and sellers in the supply chain
are partners and mutually share information.
• Horizontal information sharing refers to the information sharing between buyers
and buyers, sellers and sellers, or even competitors and competitors. In other words,
sharing information among same type of partners.
• Complete information sharing is a combination of vertical and horizontal
information sharing. It can effectively raise the performance of supply chains with
partners making efforts to increase the proﬁt of the entire supply chain, and thus
maximizing the overall proﬁts.
The supply chain partners involved in a collaboration relationship have a common goal.
To create a transparent, visible demand pattern that paces the entire supply chain reducing
uncertainties and avoiding distortions leading to poor service levels and high inventories
[105]. Therefore, by enabling coordination, the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the supply
chain will improve and also the information ﬂow will speed up enabling a faster response
to the customers’ needs. Because creating a superior customer value is fundamental to a
ﬁrm’s long-term survival and success in supply chains [110].
Beneﬁts
The value created by collaborative practices within the supply chain beneﬁts all parties
and once the partners begin to see some of those beneﬁts, they will value their
relationships and avoid behaving opportunistically in order not to jeopardize that
relationships [110]. The trust between them will increase as well as the probability of
behaving in the best interest for the partnership enabling that a long-term collaboration
strategy is built [111]. By collaborating, supply chain members work together, as part of
a single company, toward common corporate goals. Achieving more beneﬁts, facilitating
competitive advantages, reducing internal conﬂict, developing values, reducing potential
SCRU, increasing competitiveness and enhancing their performances more than by
==PAGE:61==
4.3. APPROACHES
47
acting alone [90], [91], [110]. Therefore, developing these collaborative relationships in
a positive and strong manner is the key for a successful knowledge sharing in the supply
chain [104].
Collaboration plays a decisive role in achieving a higher supply chain performance [111]
and as a cost saver.
The use of these practices will help ﬁrms share risks, reduce
transaction costs, enhance productivity, capacity, ﬂexibility, optimize the resources and
the utilization of transportation, better decision making and improve proﬁt performance
and competitive advantage over time [90], [105]. Moreover, by sharing information,
creating common plans for replenishment and synchronizing the supply, the excess of
inventory can be reduced, the bullwhip effect can be mitigated, the quality and business
synergy will be enhanced, better customer service levels achieved, ﬂexibility will be
provided and this joint will increase the innovation among the supply chain partners
[90], [105], [112]. However, the value of information sharing depends on the type of
information shared, also on the type of the demand, being stationary, constant or volatile
[112] and in addition to this, reciprocity has a signiﬁcant effect on information sharing
[111], meaning that if not all the parts cooperate, most of these beneﬁcial effects will not
be achieved.
The advantage of collaboration and knowledge sharing could be summarized in the
following areas: process efﬁciency, offering ﬂexibility, business synergy, quality, and
innovation [90]. Process efﬁciency values if the collaboration within the supply chain is
cost competitive among their competitors while offering ﬂexibility refers to the support
within the supply chain to changes in products or services in response to market needs
but maintaining the quality creating higher value for customers.
Moreover, business
synergy takes place when partners combine complementary resources and they allow
innovation changes like the introduction of new processes, products or services.
Challenges and Risks
When different companies within the same supply chain collaborate, some risks and
challenges could arise as well as higher costs due to these practices [90]. Some of these
can be categorized as relational risks and among them are included the probability and
consequence that partners do not cooperate in a desired manner [110] and also some
risks associated with partners’ behaviors [104], leading to undesired consequences as the
bullwhip effect.
As has been explained earlier, knowledge and information sharing through close
relationships within the supply chain enables competitive advantages. However, there
are some reasons like sharing sensitive data, the fear of losing competitive advantage and
==PAGE:62==
48
CHAPTER 4. SUPPLY CHAIN 4.0
the arise of problems regarding access and control of information sharing [113] could
become major barriers to share data among the members of the supply chain [9].
Allowing these kind of miscommunications causes conﬂicts and misunderstanding
between supply chain partners, leading to collaboration failures [90], ruined cooperative
relationships and lowered proﬁts overall the supply chain [36].
Relationship risk can be measured based on opportunistic behavior, loss of competence,
and incomprehension between relational partners, among other factors [104]. Usually,
these behaviors are governed by formal contracts.
However, no contract is always
complete. To manage relational risks, it is required a proper relational governance that
allows simultaneously ﬂexibility, control and collaboration in a dynamic environment.
To successfully manage key relationships across the whole supply chain, the ﬁrst thing
to do is to identify the key members with whom to link processes. Then, those processes
have to be determined and which of them should be implemented by each of the supply
chain members. Afterwards, the right level of integration and management to be applied
to each process link has to be established. In all these steps communication problems
may occur due to the fact that each ﬁrm has different number of processes, different
process deﬁnitions or different activities included within each process. Nevertheless,
communication is the glue that holds supply chain partners together through balanced,
two way, multilevel contacts and message services [90]. Communication is the key,
because the long-term success of these organizations will depend on the ability to
collaborate with key partners that enable the building of trust and cooperative
relationships [23], [90].
The actual business environment, characterized by an increasing competition tend to
affect the demand of products and services very volatile. Those ﬂuctuations cause an
increase in the variance of the order quantity as the information ﬂows from the end
customer to the supplier in a supply chain. The order variability tends to transmit and
increase at the upstream suppliers, generating and amplifying instability.
This
phenomenon, a misalignment between the demand and order signal, is deﬁned as the
bullwhip effect and it can be a signiﬁcant problem for supply chains and cause
inefﬁciencies among various channels [114], [115]. Some of these effects are excess of
inventory to face unexpected variations of the demand with a relative increase of
stocking costs, inventory shortages, increase of transportation costs due to volatile
scheduling and premium transport rates, excess or insufﬁcient capacity, reduction of
quality due to unstable production and inefﬁcient production planning and scheduling
[114], [116].
==PAGE:63==
4.3. APPROACHES
49
Figure 4.2: Bullwhip effect
The expression of the bullwhip effect consists of two different parts. The ﬁrst one is
common in all the cases and it shows that the bullwhip effect is due to the error in
forecasting and takes into account the effect of lead time. The problems could be bigger
when the lead-times of replenishment are long and uncertain. Because of the longer
lead-time, the uncertainty in the forecasting of the future demand increases, and
consequently the variability of the order quantity increases.
On the other hand, the
second part varies with respect to the use of type of information sharing method.
Therefore, the importance of sharing relevant information across various stages of the
supply chain is being increasingly realized due to its impact on reducing the overall
bullwhip effect [115].
There are two main causes of the bullwhip effect. One is the process by which supply
chain decisions, like forecasting, are made.
Often, these decisions are taken under
uncertainty environments and conditions, lacking the adequate information [114] or
inﬂuenced by big price ﬂuctuations. Big Data could place a key role to solve this issue.
The other one is the lack of coordination and collaborative environment. When this
occurs, each partner optimizes their own orders based only on the information provided
by the precedent supplier and without considering the consequences on the other
members of the supply chain [116]. This attitude regarding replenishment orders tends
to amplify to cover this uncertainty leading to reduction in the supply chain performance
leading to supply shortages.
To mitigate the bullwhip effect and tackle the two main causes, organizations require
strong data, share information, integrate processes, operational linkages and internal
==PAGE:64==
50
CHAPTER 4. SUPPLY CHAIN 4.0
cooperation. All these elements can be backed by the use of Big Data and IoT, enabling
data to be captured, processed and transferred in real time, avoiding variances in the
orders and shortening the lead times [114], [116]. However, to successfully apply these
organizational models, it is required speciﬁc and important investments in IT systems
that not all the partners could generally afford [116].
4.3.2
IT requirements
As stated before, to successfully migrate to a SC 4.0, it is required an implementation
of a proper IT system, able to handle and process all the data that is collected in real time
in different parts of the supply chain. This will enable a ﬁrm to develop, accumulate,
share and ensure the availability of relevant information and knowledge about its
customers, suppliers, and market demands, which in turn inﬂuences positively the ﬁrm
performance [117], [118]. Through an IT alignment among supply chain partners, a
better coordination can be achieved [119] along with an improvement in the integration
between them.
As standards will be developed, ﬁrms can dramatically reduce
communication and transaction costs as well as combine their resources in an optimized
way to make the most of them.
Moreover, by sharing the required information, IT
systems enables ﬁrm to perform better in cost efﬁciency and customer responsiveness.
The more information is shared, the higher the synergy effects are created from it.
By IT alignment, which is a valuable, rare, inimitable, and non-substitutable resource, it is
meant the similarity, connectivity, and compatibility of IT infrastructures between supply
chain partners [119]. Furthermore, the goals and objectives will be planned together,
increasing the efﬁciency, responsiveness, productivity, and proﬁtability [22] of the overall
supply chain. However, huge expenditures in information and communication technology
do not necessarily result in much anticipated beneﬁts for a ﬁrm [119]. The IT alignment
between partners is difﬁcult to achieve due to technology incompatibility and it also needs
resource commitment and cooperation all along the supply chain. Moreover, due to the
relatively low barriers to imitation and acquisition by other ﬁrms, IT-based advantage
tends to diminish fairly quickly [119].
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5
Shipping Industry
5.1
Introduction
The technologies brought by Industry 4.0 and specially Supply Chain 4.0, such as
Big Data or Internet of Things, are meant to be applied to the whole supply chain. All
along this report, the concept of supply chain has been explained and develop extensively.
It has been seen the challenges, risks and beneﬁts of the supply chain itself and also
when transforming into a DSC or SC 4.0. However, a supply chain can be very wide,
broad and complex, and the application and implementation of these innovations have to
start somewhere within. Therefore, this chapter of the report will focus on the area that
makes possible the connection between producers and customers satisfying the supply
and demand of products and services, the transportation.
Figure 5.1: Transportation stage of Supply Chain
As it can be seen in the previous image (Figure 5.1), from the producer to the customer
there are various stages and different parties. But regarding to transportation it can be
simpliﬁed into two main areas, the inland and the ocean transportation. Even though in
51
==PAGE:66==
52
CHAPTER 5. SHIPPING INDUSTRY
recent times, both sides are very interrelated or even merged as a one company due the
demand of offering multiple logistic services, this chapter will develop a better
understanding of the role of shipping industry in a global supply chain.
The international trade has grown for the last decades, longer and tangled journeys take
place carrying goods all around the globe.
The shipping industry has the key and
essential role for the economy to facilitate these international exchanges by maintaining
competitiveness whilst providing efﬁcient and effective services [120]. Around 90-80%
of the global trade, more than 10 billion of tons, is carried by sea [121] and only in the
EU this industry provides 2.1 million jobs and contributes with 140 billion e to the
European Union GDP [122]. It is a volatile industry and nowadays is in a turbulent
condition due to the current poor economic situation of the pasts years, energy price
ﬂuctuations, technological immaturity and upcoming increases in regulations [123].
Basically, the market of the shipping industry consists of four separated but interrelated
areas: (a) the ship building market, (b) the second-hand ship market, (c) the demolition
market and (d) the freight market that trades sea transport. The freight market is leaded by
the freight rate, the price for the sea transportation services, which it is established trough
the relationship between the demand and supply. This link inﬂuences the market structure,
affecting and guiding decisions to be taken in each of the different areas mentioned before.
To illustrate this impact, let’s say that the level of demand for sea transport in the freight
market is higher than the service capacity, than the supply. Therefore, the prices for the
services will rise and this increase will encourage the building of new ships or the buying
of secondhand ones to increase the capacity to meet the demand. On the other hand, if the
demand is lower than the supply the prices will decrease leading to the demolition of ships
or the stop of the services, incurring in severe economic losses and lower performance
[124].
The following graph (Figure 5.2) shows the global trade by sea, in tons and by type of
cargo. Among them can be found oil, gas, raw material and containers. Around the 20%
of the total sea trade globally is containerized [121]. The majority of consumer goods
that people buy and use every day is carried by containers. Containerization has reduced
signiﬁcantly the transport cost of goods, representing in their ﬁnal price an insubstantial
percentage. The key behind this, is standardization. A container can be transported
efﬁciently from origin to destination by different transport means without the need to
reorganize the content within [125].
These facts demonstrate the increasing role of
container transportation and its contribution to the global economy reducing the
transportation cost [126] and therefore, this chapter will focus mainly in this area of the
shipping industry.
==PAGE:67==
5.2. CONTAINER LINER SHIPPING INDUSTRY
53
Figure 5.2: Sea World trade by type of cargo [121]
5.2
Container Liner Shipping Industry
The business of the container liner shipping (CLS) industry is to offer common carrier
ocean shipping services in international trade [127] and they are one the main players in
the freight market. There are two key elements in the liner shipping operations: trade
demand and the liner shipping network. The trade demand represents the requirements
for shipping services to transport cargo and goods from one point to another derived
from trade whereas the liner shipping network exists to serve this demand [128]. To
serve the demand, CLS companies operate vessels, transporting containers with various
but standardized dimensions, that are put into service on a regular basis according to a
ﬁxed sailing schedule, loading and discharging at speciﬁed ports [129]. As the demand
is uncertain and, as seen earlier, in order to increase the service capacity, it is required
a considerable amount of time, shipping companies need to plan and decide carefully.
They should consider the characteristics of the industry, specially the number and size of
shipping service providers, the extent of concentration among the service providers, and
the degree of homogeneity of their offerings [124].
The CLS industry is complex not only because of border crossing issues or multimodal
transport over long distances, but also because of the huge number of stakeholders and
participants involved, each one of them with their own objectives and goals [125].
Consequently, managing these relationships is of strategic importance.
Usually, the
supply chain where the shipping industry is involved looks like this:
==PAGE:68==
54
CHAPTER 5. SHIPPING INDUSTRY
Figure 5.3: Maritime Supply Chain and Key Stages
The process starts when a buy-sell agreement between the consignor (the seller) and the
consignee (the buyer) takes place. The physical form of this agreement is a contract
where all the terms of sale and payment are covered as well as it is stated who is
responsible for arranging the transport and when and where are the goods to be
transferred to the consignee.
Depending on who is responsible for transporting the
cargo, the role of shipper will be the seller or the buyer. In this stage, freight forwarders
or also known as Non-Vessel Operating Common Carrier (NVOCC) enter into action.
These companies group and aggregate diverse operations and orders, manage their
documentation and are responsible for customs clearance. With this huge amount of
orders and goods to transport, they usually take the role of the shipper easing the job to
the customers.
The shipper will negotiate with a CLS and produce another contract, the bill of lading,
that serves as contract of carriage, as a document of title to the goods and as a receipt for
them. Usually, big shippers and CLS have long term contracts because of their regular
large volume order of containers.
Once these agreements take place, the goods are
transported to a speciﬁc port. There, the vessels dock, are loaded, unloaded and refueled
[128] ready to set sail to the next destination port where the exchange of cargo between
vessels and shore will take place. In every port, containers are storage waiting to be
loaded in future vessels or to be picked up by the consignees if the goods have arrived to
their journey’s end. Ports have three main functions: landlord, regulator and operator
[125].
They manage the port infrastructure and coordinate the activities of different
parties present at the port.
They also focus on solve collective problems as provide
==PAGE:69==
5.2. CONTAINER LINER SHIPPING INDUSTRY
55
proper training and education, marketing and promotion of the port and also its
innovation and internationalization. However, they usually outsource the cargo handling
activities to terminal operators. Basically, the CLS industry can be classiﬁed into the
following segments: (a) Shipment routing and capacity procurement, (b) Container ﬂeet
and repositioning, (c) Vessel ﬂeet and operations, (d) Terminal operations and container
handling and (e) Inland transport vehicle and container handling [125]. Each of one area
is led by one of the stakeholders mentioned before, but all of them interrelated.
Figure 5.4: Evolution of the Freight Rate [121]
CLS companies have to design their container shipping network depending on factors
like competition, cooperation, pricing and relationships with other CLS companies or
other players that intervene in the supply chain. The network consists of a number of
service routes forming a round trip involving a ﬁxed sequence of port calls and each port
call is served at a ﬁxed frequency by a set of vessels. Therefore, the objective is to select
ports, design routes and deploy vessels in order to satisfy the customers’ demand. The
whole planning of these routes covers vessel ﬂeet deployment, schedule design, speed
selection, and dynamic routing and container management.
Speciﬁcally, this can be
understood as determining the planned arrival and departure times on each port call for
service routes, assigning the customer demands into different routes, specifying the
container transit times for each pair of ports or planning the sailings speeds of the
different container ships [125]. Summarizing, it can be said that the provision of liner
container shipping services requires extensive investment in shipping infrastructure in
terms of container ships, advanced information and communications technologies,
==PAGE:70==
56
CHAPTER 5. SHIPPING INDUSTRY
containers, shipping agents and network development among various players in the
industry [128].
Situation
In the recent several years, containerized cargo shipments between North America and
Europe have developed slower than Asian corridors. This was caused by recession in U.S.
and Europe economies, and by the continued growth of Asia’s role in global economy due
to the North American and European companies that have outsourced their production
there. However, the transatlantic corridor between USA and EU has an enormous impact
on the overall shipping industry due to the size of both, the United States and EU, that
together represent 60% of global GDP, 33% of world trade in goods and 42% of world
trade in services [130]. This corridor can be considered as mature and stable, meaning
that cargo ﬂows are predictable with little possibility for unexpected and volatile changes.
Consequently, shippers, ocean carriers, and ports can safely plan their activities, develop
service patterns and prepare investment strategies. On the other hand, the situation in
Asia is different for their fast economic growth whereas the east-west and Paciﬁc markets
are subjects for frequent volatile market ups and downs [131].
Table 5.1: Trade Routes. TEU shipped 2013 [132]
Route
West
East
North
South
Total
Asia-N. America
7,739,000
15,386,000
23,125,000
Asia-N. Europe
9,187,000
4,519,000
13,706,000
Asia-Mediterranean
4,678,000
2,061,000
6,739,000
Asia-Middle East
3,700,000
1,314,000
5,014,000
N. Europe-N. America
2,636,000
2,074,000
4,710,000
Australia-Far East
1,072,016
1,851,263
2,923,279
Asia-S. America
621,000
1,510,000
2,131,000
Europe-S. America
795,000
885,000
1,680,000
N. America-S. America
656,000
650,000
1,306,000
As it can be seen in the previous table, (Table 5.1) and next ﬁgure, (Figure 5.5), and the
major trafﬁc goes from Asia to United States and Europe through either Suez Canal or
Panama Canal. These two sites are very relevant actors in the overall picture of the
shipping industry because they mean a shortcut in travel time but there is also a speciﬁc
capacity they can handle. Even though the Panama Canal is currently under work to
expand their capacity, their negotiation power is high comparing to the carriers.
Moreover, if vessels are going through the Suez Canal they should consider not to sail
cross the shores of Somalia due to the high piracy activity. This happens also in the strait
of Malaysia, one of the few corridors from east Asia to Europe.
==PAGE:71==
5.2. CONTAINER LINER SHIPPING INDUSTRY
57
Figure 5.5: Volume of Vessels in different Routes [133]
In the following table, (Table 5.2), it can be seen the top 10 CLS companies in the world
together with their capacity in TEU and their global market share. Just to highlight that
the ﬁrst 5 players account for more than the 60% of the market share and the sum of all
of the top 10 accounts for more than the 80% of it.
Table 5.2: Top 10 players 2018 [134]
Company
TEU Capacity
World Market Share
APM-Maersk
4,128,928
18,7%
Mediterranean Shg Co
3,260,878
14,8%
CMA CGM Group
2,535,554
11,5%
COSCO Shipping Co Ltd
1,976,289
9,0%
Hapag-Lloyd
1,618,114
7,3%
Ocean Network Express
1,563,716
7,1%
Evergreen Line
1,090,906
4,9%
OOCL
697,123
3,2%
Yang Ming Marine Transport Corp.
643,691
2,9%
Paciﬁc Int. Line
427,624
1,9%
The goals of any CLS company include objectives from diverse areas [120]:
• Financial: proﬁt maximization, increase the shareholder wealth, capital investment
sharing and ﬁnancial risk reduction.
• Economic: cost reduction and economies of scale.
• Strategic:
entry in new markets, wider geographical scope and increase the
purchasing power.
• Marketing: satisfy customer requirements better by providing higher frequency,
ﬂexibility, reliability and expanding the network through the offer of a greater
==PAGE:72==
58
CHAPTER 5. SHIPPING INDUSTRY
variety of routes and destinations.
• Operational: increase in frequency of services, vessel planning and coordination
on a global scale.
They can be summarized into risk and investment sharing, exploit economies of scale,
cost control and ability to adapt to the new dynamic and disruptive environment [120]. To
satisfy all of them CLS companies are continuously seeking for competitive advantages
to outstand their competitors. These competitive advantages may be classiﬁed into three
categories: operational efﬁciency, service effectiveness and risk avoidance [128].
5.2.1
Operational Efﬁciency
Operational efﬁciency can be deﬁned as the ratio between the output gained from a
business and the input to run that operation. In other words, the business has to be
proﬁtable, emphasizing in cost reduction and asset utilization. Among the strategies to
maximize the proﬁts can be found: horizontal integration by forming strategic alliances,
adopting slow steaming in vessels, implementing pricing strategies, deploying larger
vessels for economies of scale, deploying more efﬁcient vessels and sharing resources to
improve utilization [125].
Slow steaming
CLS companies adopt this strategy in their container vessels when the freight rate is low
due to overcapacity of the market, lower demand or increasing fuel prices. The fuel
consumption of vessels increases approximately cubically with the speed of the vessel.
Therefore, by sailing ships at a lower speed than the design one, it is achieved a lower
consumption of fuel and consequently cut costs [125]. However, this has a negative side
as well. As the trips will take longer, planning the routes will become more important
because there may be some products that have an expiry date or maybe some customers
are dissatisﬁed with the length of it.
Empty container repositioning (ERC)
The shipping industry is a two-way with the same capacity while the demand in each way
can notably vary. Analyzing the trade ﬂows around the world, (Table 5.1), it can be seen
that there is a severe imbalance of trade demands. The production and the consumption
are not in the same location or even nearby. Therefore, there are many vessels with full
containers sailing in one direction whereas when coming back, a signiﬁcant amount of
the containers are empty. This has been an important issue and an economic burden for
==PAGE:73==
5.2. CONTAINER LINER SHIPPING INDUSTRY
59
the industry and to tackle this problem, CLS have developed a pricing strategy know as
Empty Container Repositioning (ECR).
Figure 5.6: Containers in a port [135]
This strategy aims to reduce the ﬂow of empty containers, the trade imbalance, by
pricing in two directions. Here the major costs consist of the handling and holding costs.
Consequently, CLS companies have to plan how many empty containers to keep at each
port and when and how many empty containers are to shipped from one port to another
[125]. So, good relationships with ports are essential. They also need to consider that
carrying an increasing number of empty containers to overcome this trade imbalance, is
a cost. Hence, they should know how much cost is incurred in repositioning these empty
containers to price accordingly and charge these costs to the services where the vessels
carry full containers.
Moreover, with a low freight rate, CLS are reducing this cost of moving empty containers
by increasing the demand moving low-value products as waste and scrap in those ﬂows
where the demand is low [136]. Doing this, CLS minimize their costs but also reduce
their environmental and social impacts.
Vessels
Ships are expensive items of capital investment and CLS companies invest in them when
they are optimistic about the seaborne trade volume [124]. Therefore, cost saving is an
important motivation for deploying larger and efﬁcient vessels. The bigger the vessel,
the cheaper the unit cost. But only if this additional capacity is ﬁlled and the utilization
level is maintained. Otherwise the advantage of scale economies will disappear and CLS
companies will incur in losses [136]. Nowadays, the vessels can be categorized into three
==PAGE:74==
60
CHAPTER 5. SHIPPING INDUSTRY
main categories: Container Ships (< 10.000 TEU), Very Large Container Ships (VLCS)
(between 10.000 and 20.000 TEU) and Ultra Large Container Ships (ULCS) (> 20.000
TEU) [131].
Figure 5.7: Percentage of Vessels by TEU capacity [137]
In the previous image, (Figure 5.7), it can be seen that the vessels under 4.000 TEU of
capacity accounts for the 26%, between 4.000 and 10.000 TEU, around 54% and bigger
than 10.000 TEU, the 20%. This information was released in 2015, nowadays there are
more vessels deployed in the last category.
The twenty-foot equivalent unit (TEU) is an inexact unit of cargo capacity used to
describe the capacity of container ships and terminals. It is based on the volume of a
20-foot-long container, meaning that one of this containers is equivalent to 1 TEU. There
are different sizes and standards of containers such as 40ft but there are also containers
with other sizes that are not standard.
The world container markets are currently preparing for a signiﬁcant structural change
which will occur when a larger number of VLCS and ULCS are deployed.
The
introduction of these larger vessels will signiﬁcantly change shipping and operation
patterns for basically all major world routes [139]. And it also will have an important
==PAGE:75==
5.2. CONTAINER LINER SHIPPING INDUSTRY
61
Figure 5.8: Vessel sailing [138]
impact on ports, which will require expansions to increase their capacity and upgrades to
be able to dock these new ships [131] and load and unload them in a competitive period
of time or risk to be skipped by CLS to other ports that have implemented these changes
already [136].
Table 5.3: Fleet of the Top 10 CLS companies 2018 [134]
Company
Vessels
Percentage of Vessels
APM-Maersk
755
12,4%
Mediterranean Shg Co
520
8,5%
CMA CGM Group
498
8,2%
COSCO Shipping Co Ltd
361
5,9%
Hapag-Lloyd
229
3,7%
Ocean Network Express
234
3,8%
Evergreen Line
197
3,2%
OOCL
100
1,6%
Yang Ming Marine Transport Corp.
106
1,7%
Paciﬁc Int. Line
135
2,2%
In the previous table (Table 5.3) it can be seen that the top 3 CLS companies by size
control around the 30% of all vessels in the world.
However, major savings in the future will not come from increasing vessels’ capacity but
from further consolidation, from the optimization of shipping networks by creating
alliances, joint logistics and intermodal operations and also from the optimization of
vessels utilization [131].
==PAGE:76==
62
CHAPTER 5. SHIPPING INDUSTRY
Horizontal integration
The CLS industry is among the ﬁrsts to use the concept of cooperative behavior and
collaboration agreements in order to achieve business objectives [120], originally
through liner conferences and more recently through alliances.
CLS companies
cooperate to reduce cost by enhancing the utilization of facilities, to improve the service
frequency and region of coverage by expanding the capacity, to rationalize the shipping
service network, to reduce risks, to take advantage of scale economies, and to share
management resources [125], [127].
Historically, CLS companies have used liner
conferences as a way to set tariffs, ﬁx prices, allocate output among their members
through quotas and specify terms and conditions of carriage in certain trade routes [125],
[127]. However, the demolition of the conference system in the US in 1998 and the
abolition of exemptions in anti-trust rules by the EU in 2008, have enhanced the
competition within the industry pushing the leading companies to seek other forms of
collaboration in the effort to gain advantages. These new forms of cooperation take
mainly the form of alliances and they play a central role in the operational and long-term
viability of CLS companies [120].
These alliances aim to jointly operate container ships over speciﬁc routes, including
sailing schedules and itineraries, frequency, port selection, sequence of the ports, the use
of joint terminals and also coordinate the use of containers on a global scale [120],
[125].
There are other types of collaborative agreements between carriers within
alliances including vessel sharing agreements and slot sharing agreements. The former
enable members to work together to fulﬁll the demand on particular trade routes through
vessel sharing and also performing joint optimization on vessel departure times and on
the assignment of different orders to vessels whereas the latter requires that some of the
vessels’ capacity are exchanged between carriers over a period of time. This could be
favorable when two members of the alliance are going to deploy vessels on the same
route but with different departure time schedules.
Through these practices, CLS
companies share proﬁt, operating costs and collaborate on the basis of demand
information sharing [120].
However, they are still competitors, so the cooperation
among the members is often limited to ship operations without involving marketing,
pricing, revenue pooling, proﬁt/loss sharing, joint sales, joint ownership of assets, or
joint management and executive functions. This mutual agreement, the alliance, aims for
full integration of the service capabilities of the parties into one whole [120], [125]. CLS
companies must offer complex packages to their customers to differentiate from their
competitors, because the main service and the price are no longer a differentiator.
==PAGE:77==
5.2. CONTAINER LINER SHIPPING INDUSTRY
63
The rise and diffusion of these alliances are due to primarily two factors. First, as said
before, it is required huge investment in vessels and infrastructure to keep the business
running and consequently, CLS companies have tended to limit the economic and
ﬁnancial risk by joining efforts with each other. Secondly, they could also be viewed as
the response to the intensiﬁcation and increasing competition within the sector derived
from factors such as freight rate which is in constant decline, technology developments,
exponential growth in investments, increasing deregulation, loss of power on the part of
conferences, and the emergence of south-east Asian lines in the international competitive
scenario [140], with the objective to reduce this pressure. Summarizing, because of the
globalization of production and markets, as well as the technological developments, a
growing concentration within the sector has taken place and mega CLS companies have
emerged. However, these alliances are very limited. CLS companies tend to develop
these relationships with a single partner or few partners, in a speciﬁc lane and during a
short period of time [140]. The reasons for the instability of the alliances is mainly due
to the individualistic behavior of the members, who are trying to pursue organizational
objectives that may have an impact on the whole alliance, but also it is due to the nature
of their role, the contribution to the alliance and the level of mutual trust between
members [120].
Table 5.4: Alliances in the Shipping Industry 2018 [141]
Alliance
Members
Million of TEUs
Vessels
Market Share
2M
Maersk
MSC
7,4
1275
33,5%
Ocean Alliance
CMA CGM
Evergreen
OOCL
6,3
1156
28,5%
COSCO
THE Alliance
ONE
Hapag-Lloyd
3,8
569
17,3%
Yang Ming
Nowadays there are 3 major alliances [127], [141] and all of the CLS companies in the
top 10 in the world are member of one of these. These 3 alliances together account for
more than 17,5 million TEU, almost 80% of the global container capacity and the same
percentage is for their market share. During the last decades there has been a huge process
of consolidation due to mergers and acquisitions (M&A) within the CLS industry leading
to the creating of huge players and now to enormous alliances.
==PAGE:78==
64
CHAPTER 5. SHIPPING INDUSTRY
Figure 5.9: Time-line of Mergers and Acquisitions in the Shipping Industry [142], [143]
In the previous time line (Figure 5.9) it can be seen the number of operations M&As.
The consolidation before the economic crisis of 2008 was driven by growth. This path
was seen as a way to improve proﬁtability and establish a more sustainable structure for
the industry as a whole.
However, after the crisis, M&A is about survival.
The
motivation behind is to take advantage of the potential synergies to cut costs, to exploit
the economies of scale, to raise the investment required that allows operations with the
appropriate quality of service guarantying a share in the market [143], [144], to provide
an extended and integrated logistic service, to combine complementary geographical
strengths, to increase their power of negotiation [143] and to protect their position in the
market from new competitors that are rising due to the decreasing barriers of entry
[139]. Nevertheless, the outcome of these mergers can differ from the expected. The
market share will not be the exact sum, both companies have weaknesses and strengths,
they have IT systems heavily integrated in their respective organizations and when
merging there is a period where both companies have to reorganize internally to
eliminate duplicates and consolidate departments [143].
Hence, some key points can be extracted from the previous lines. First, the market is
turning into an oligopoly because of frequent M&As, lower market investment, and low
proﬁtability. But depending on the trade lanes size, large (>1.000.000 TEU volume) or
small (<1.000.000 TEU volume), the power of each CLS differs and also their market
share [129]. Second, alliances are growing in scale and scope, creating high barriers
==PAGE:79==
5.2. CONTAINER LINER SHIPPING INDUSTRY
65
of entry and so cut-throat competition is inevitable. Third and last, service quality and
reliability will be the key issues for alliances in the future [125].
5.2.2
Service Effectiveness
Service effectiveness,
on the other hand,
accentuate and focus on service
differentiation and quality of service. An example could be the vertical integration with
partners from the supply chain which leads to the expansion of their logistics services,
shipping network and coverage. But also having a more frequent, ﬂexible and reliable
service thanks to the use of robust IT systems and new technologies as Big Data or
Internet of Things.
Vertical integration
Not only exist both competition and cooperation between carriers, ports and terminals
horizontally but also vertically [125].
This is achieved through internal growth,
acquisitions of or collaboration with container management services providers,
intermodal service providers and container terminal operators or ports [120], [144],
[145].
The CLS industry is essentially a commodity market with little room for differentiation
of service, however the areas mentioned before is where this can occur. Focusing on the
management of containers, the call frequency and cargo security can increase positively
the brand of the CLS company [144]. These companies are the ones in charge to develop
applications and IT systems that optimize and enable a more efﬁcient way to handle the
containers all along the supply chain. Here is where the new technologies explained
through the whole report can have a huge impact. This will be explained more ahead in
this chapter. On the other hand, the intermodal service providers are the ones that focus
on the inland transport, such as rail operators or road hauliers. The acquisition of these
companies by CLS ﬁrms has allowed the latter to extend their services, control the whole
journey from the manufacturer to the customer and differentiate from their competitors.
It is estimated that the proportion of inland transport directly controlled by shipping lines
is around 30% [125]. Furthermore, CLS companies spend a lot of effort on establishing
connections with ports in order to improve their transshipment operations. Therefore,
having good relationships with ports and selecting the appropriate ones is essential. In
the ports, the terminal operators are the ones responsible for loading and discharging
containers, container storage and gate movement operations [128]. Many CLS companies
have integrated and acquired terminal operators in order to control and optimize the ﬂow
of containers in the ports making the process smoother.
==PAGE:80==
66
CHAPTER 5. SHIPPING INDUSTRY
Table 5.5: List of Ports 2016 [146]
Rank
Port
Country
Volume (million TEU)
1
Shanghai
China
37.1
2
Singapore
Singapore
30.9
3
Shenzhen
China
23.9
5
Busan
South Korea
19.8
9
Dubai
U.A.E.
14.7
11
Rotterdam
Netherlands
12.3
12
Port Klang
Malaysia
13.1
13
Antwerp
Belgium
10.4
15
Kaohsiung
Taiwan
10.0
17
Los Angeles
U.S.
8.8
18
Hamburg
Germany
8.9
24
Saigon
Vietnam
5.9
27
Jakarta
Indonesia
5.5
29
Valencia
Spain
4.7
31
Tokyo
Japan
4.7
33
Mumbai
India
4.4
36
Felixtowe
U.K.
4.0
38
Piraeus
Greece
3.7
42
Santos
Brazil
3.3
The previous table (Table 5.5) illustrate the importance of selecting and stay in good terms
with ports, having an appropriate system of handling containers there and collaborating
with or integrating inland transport companies. Depending on how CLS invest on and
how much importance give to these areas will result on how competitive they are, how
much market share they will have and therefore, for how long they will manage to stay
on business.
5.2.3
Risk avoidance
The shipping industry is complex, many stakeholders have inﬂuence over it and the
supply chain within and which is part of is broad. Therefore, many risks and uncertainties
can arise due to geographical distances, the weather, customs in every country, social and
environment impacts due to decisions taken, unstable economic cycles, empty container
repositioning, seafarer shortages, escalating bunker prices, cargo space oversupply, delays
in the scheduling that result in a cascade effect in the followings, ﬂuctuating ship prices,
port closures, or damages to ships due to collisions, ﬁre, explosions, warfare, terrorist
attacks and piracy [125], [147]. These risks should be taken into account and this is
done through a maritime supply chain risk management. It can be deﬁned as the process
of taking decisions that will minimize the adverse effects of accidental losses, based on
==PAGE:81==
5.2. CONTAINER LINER SHIPPING INDUSTRY
67
risk assessment methods involving cooperation and communication between all members
implicated in the maritime supply chain activities [148].
Figure 5.10: Evolution of the Worldwide Capacity (TEU) [149]
The ability of a supply chain to both resist disruptions and recover operational capability
after the disruptions occur is called Supply Chain Resilience (SCR). In order to improve
it, factors and measures as agility, collaboration, information sharing, sustainability, risk
and revenue sharing, trust, visibility, risk management culture and adaptive capability
should be developed, improved and implemented in the different organizations taking
part all along the maritime supply chain [147]. By enhancing the visibility across the
supply chain and sharing information and knowledge, location and statuses of containers
can be known in real time and managed accordingly [148].Here, Big Data and IoT can
play a key role enabling these functionalities. By improving the agility and ﬂexibility of
the supply chain, the effects of disruptions on it will have a less impact and during a less
period of time. However, the most important action that CLS can take is to introduce a
risk management culture in their organizations. It is the overall organizational philosophy
that places risk management as a priority because it inﬂuences on both risk management
performance and on the CLS company’s overall performance. Having a weak one, will
mean a challenge for them to respond to appropriately changes, to increase their ability
to share information between organizations during times of disruption, and to allocate
in advance more resources to deal with incidents related to some of the risks mentioned
before. Therefore, adopting an efﬁcient and strong risk management culture, that will
allow CLS to predict changes in the SC, be prepared to react on time in the face of
==PAGE:82==
68
CHAPTER 5. SHIPPING INDUSTRY
disruptions, and to mitigate possible negative effects and risks, is critical for CLS to
maximize their performance [147].
5.3
Data in the Shipping Industry
Reached this point, it can be said that the shipping industry is essential to the
worldwide economy but it can also be considered as a volatile industry and under a
turbulent condition due to the current poor economic situation, energy price ﬂuctuations,
technological immaturity and upcoming increases in regulations [123].
The new
technological developments that took place recently had and are still having a
considerable inﬂuence on the maritime sector.
Depending on the attitude of the
companies towards them will decide if these recent changes are opportunities or threats
to the achievement of their goals, having an impact on all of the three competitive
advantages explained before, the risk avoidance, operational performance and service
effectiveness.
Currently, there are new and fresh players with more ﬂexibility entering the game. IT
start ups [150] or even giants part of the whole supply chain like Amazon [151], are
expanding their business vertically, integrating more stages into their businesses. They
want their piece of the pie whereas the already established, mature and with a rigid
structure are struggling with these new transformations and disruptions. Therefore, if
they want to continue to stay on business, they will have to adapt and introduce these
innovative technologies, such as Big Data or Internet of Things, into their organizations
[152], [153].
The shipping industry digitalization has already begun and the path
towards the success is through the adoption and embracement of disruptive technologies
[154] and working with IT companies to implement new solutions [155].
CLS companies are starting to apply some of these new technologies mainly into two
areas interrelated. The ﬁrst one is the design and building of smart vessels. Some ﬁrms
have already begun to invest in this new types of ships where data and connection are the
key to exploit new opportunities. For example, Maersk has started to develop vessels
with new propulsion systems more efﬁcient, with more capacity (around 18.000 TEU)
allowing them to carry more containers without requiring more power and lowering the
emissions of CO2 per container transported [156]. This same company is also investing
in the creation of autonomous ships [157] that will be game changer in the sector. The
second area of focus is on IoT and Big Data, including sensors, analytics, advanced
communications or even technologies that are not well understood yet like Blockchain
[152] but with a huge potential to become a differentiator in how companies in the sector
work. Regarding Blockchain, big players like Maersk has begun to work on this with
==PAGE:83==
5.3. DATA IN THE SHIPPING INDUSTRY
69
partnerships with IBM, a company not related to the shipping sector but that nowadays
may have a role in the supply chain ﬁeld [158], [159].
These transformations will
encourage
technological
sophistication,
operational
efﬁciency
and
commercial
performance in the shipping industry.
Applications
Some of the applications derived from the used of Big Data and Internet of Things
applicable to the shipping industry could be [123], [153]:
Figure 5.11: Applications of Big Data and IoT in the Shipping Industry
• Vessel Remote Sensing.
Vessels will be monitored continuously from remote
locations while data is being collected and gathered autonomously into a database.
Later this information will be distributed to the different stakeholders allowing
them access to up-to-date information, to take better decisions, to enable a more
dynamic pricing and to be more responsive to market changes.
• Voyage Planning Optimization. CLS companies will be able to optimize the
voyage planning after analyzing data regarding the routes, vessels performances,
currents, meteorological data and other external factors. The outcome of analyzing
this data will help to identify the most efﬁcient route for the journey, estimate
accurately the arrival time, allocate vessels and capacities to speciﬁc trade lanes,
select particular ports and plan alternative routes to avoid delays.
==PAGE:84==
70
CHAPTER 5. SHIPPING INDUSTRY
• Intelligent Trafﬁc Management. The transmission in real time of data such as
the ship current position, cargo and personnel to the port authorities and terminal
operations would allow them to monitor the congestion, coordinate the arrivals and
improve the cargo handling performance.
• Operational Performance and Condition Monitoring. As the vessels will be
full of sensors gathering and analyzing data, their operational performance can be
monitored in real-time allowing to optimize the vessel and to predict future statuses
of the machinery such as engines, pumps, boilers and compressors giving early
warnings of the need for maintenance.
• Predictive Maintenance System.
This system will detect the need for
maintenance to avoid potential failures.
It will record and analyze data from
machinery, fuel consumption and other sources to indicate and measure the risk of
failure. The system will reduce the cost of asset failures, minimize unscheduled
downtime, dictate when and what maintenance would be required before failure
occurs and reduce the time spend of the crew on maintenance and scheduling
activities.
• Energy Management. As the shipping industry is becoming more aware of social
and environmental issues, their efforts are moving towards more ﬂexible,
eco-friendly and alternative energy systems.
By having an autonomous ship
energy management system, based on real-time data, the power will be distributed
and according to the needs and the emissions of CO2 can be monitored to act
accordingly.
• Vessel Safety and Security. The use of the IoT technology like wireless sensors
and extensive satellite communication systems will increase vessel and crew
safety.
The real-time access and communication of information will prevent
collisions to occur and will avoid happening risks and dangers in some routes like
piracy, congestions or dangerous weather conditions.
• Storage and Container Management. Data can allow the real-time visibility of
all container movements, providing full transparency on shipments, from one end
of the value chain to the other and enabling the prediction of a container’s
availability, arrival times, and so forth. This way, the handling of containers will
be optimized in the ports by speeding up the operations regarding the loading and
unloading of the vessels or the trucks and reducing handovers, waiting times, and
unnecessary handling. But also, during the journeys on the vessels, the containers
can be monitored allowing to know what is happening inside them, like the
temperature, humidity or another factor, creating additional value for the
==PAGE:85==
5.3. DATA IN THE SHIPPING INDUSTRY
71
customers too (132).
Challenges and Risks
As it has been seen, a vessel and what it carries can create a large amount of data in real
time in different formats and from multiple sources like trafﬁc data, cargo data, weather
data or machinery data. Therefore, BDA will be required to extract and exploit all the
opportunities and enjoy the beneﬁts. However, these technologies are new to the shipping
industry, so many challenges are arising now and will do in the future regarding Big Data
and IoT implementation [123]. Digitalization contains a lot of promises for improvements
in the future but CLS companies should not lose sight on the practical applications for
today either.
Figure 5.12: Challenges from implementing Big Data and IoT in the Shipping Industry
• Data Transfer. Vessels have a very large number of sensors on board and a primary
cause of uncertainty comes from data transfer from those sensors. Usually every
sensor requires a speciﬁc communication bandwidth, so it is important to have an
appropriate and secure communication system to transmit the information to the
database and to avoid interferences that could lower the quality of it.
• Data Integration.
The data collected from the sensors is inconsistent and
unreliable. It comes from diverse sources and therefore it needs to be integrated
for analysis. Some of the CLS alliances have shared and integrated most of their
==PAGE:86==
72
CHAPTER 5. SHIPPING INDUSTRY
data on joint logistics solution systems where the process of it than happen easily
and faster (126) but it may require heavy investments.
• Data Quality. It is a big concern because low-quality data can potentially lead to
errors in interpretation and consequently take wrong decisions that end up worsen
the performance or put in danger assets and more important, people.
• Data Protection and Cybersecurity. The safety and security of the data network
and data management is becoming vital for shipping companies in order to prevent
any disruption. Data needs to be protected from external interventions such as
piracy, viruses or terrorist attacks, because a cyber-attack on the network would
interrupt the overall system and could mean signiﬁcant losses for the business.
Moreover, data will move all along the supply chain to different parties, therefore,
sensitive data will need special attention regarding security and privacy.
• Data Ownership. The supply chain of the shipping industry is very complex and
with many parties involved.
The ownership of the data allows access to read,
create, update and delete entries in databases as well as traceability through the
data lifecycle. Thus, the ownership of data as well as the level of authority to
access to it is crucial in order to maintain the appropriate level of quality and
security.
• Adoption and Standards. The industry will need to create speciﬁc conditions
and spread a mindset across the stakeholders to adopt the new technologies, tools,
processes and also to encourage the use of standards.
Moreover, the different
parties from the maritime supply chain like terminals, carriers, freight forwards or
transport companies, are using different IT systems complicating the share of data
and limiting the ﬁnal outcome of the chain. Therefore, a uniform system and same
norms should be used and implemented all along the supply chain in order to take
advantage of Big Data and IoT, to remove duplicate management and support
structures and to provide visibility.
• Business Model and Human Factor.
The industry is facing important
technological changes. Consequently, this will force them to make changes in the
business model so as to stay in the market. It will allow the development of a
transparent supply chain, where the share of knowledge happens and where the
data plays a key role with the help in the decision making.
Moreover, the
connectivity between the crew on the vessels and the personnel in shore, in the
terminals or in the ofﬁces will be crucial to increase the operational efﬁciency and
safety. The employees will require to take additional training to gain the skills
needed and also a robust and friendly user system to support all the processes.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The current global situation is driven primarily by two phenomena: globalization and
digitalization. The world is becoming a united and connected marketplace where every
person, company or government can communicate and make business with people from
the other side of the globe.
The competition is ﬁerce and companies are constantly
moving their production sites from one place to another looking for lowering their costs
in order to be proﬁtable and stay in business. This has signiﬁcant impacts on the supply
chains of many companies. They will need to adapt to new environments, face new
challenges and solve the upcoming problems. Furthermore, with the grow of the use of
computers, internet, telecommunications, data and so on, the way of doing business, of
communicating or even entertaining has changed dramatically.
But focusing on the
business side and specially in the supply chains, many companies have started to
digitalized and virtualized many of their processes that some time ago, they required
physical documentation or meetings in person.
However, this is not an easy
transformation. There are many challenges to be solved, some regarding to companies
like behaviour, trust, knowledge sharing, new skills and others regarding having a proper
and robust IT system that allows to collect, store analyze and protect the data. This
second family of challenges are trying to be solved with the appearance of new methods,
approaches and technologies.
These new technologies emerged under the umbrella of a new concept, Industry 4.0. It
is meant to be the 4th industrial revolution, the one where virtual and physical processes
merge. It is driven by the massive use of data, the rise of the Internet and the increase
number of connected devices that allow to monitor, communicate between them and take
autonomous decisions. The causes of this new industrial paradigm is the lower costs
regarding the transfer and storage of data, the decrease in the price of sensors and devices,
the growth of data and also the increase of computer power. All these factors led to
73
==PAGE:88==
74
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
the development of new methods and innovative technologies to use and share this huge
amount of data on real time. Among them, Big Data and Internet of Things stand out as
the innovations with more potential due to the wide range of applications on which they
can be used.
These novelties, once applied to supply chains, give rise to a brand-new concept, Supply
Chain 4.0. Any supply chain has as objective the movement of goods and information
from producers to consumers. But this new approach connects all the stakeholders on
real time allowing data to be always ﬂowing along the chain, to be shared and
encouraging collaboration practices among all the parties. Moreover, it enables a better
analysis, provides a better big picture of the situation and ensures that every member of
the supply chain take decisions based on the same information.
Supply chains will
become more efﬁcient, effective, ﬂexible, fast and agile but they will also reduce the
costs due to this optimization and due to possible disruptions in the supply or demand of
products and services.
Supply chains can be very wide, long and complex, and the introduction of these
innovations have to start somewhere within. Thus, the focus of the report is which are
the challenges faced by the shipping industry and how they are doing. This sector can be
considered as an oligopoly, where few players control most of the market share. It is
running an old fashion way of and now is trying to adapt to the new environment in
which events like the stagnation of prices, the increase of the oil price, the disruption due
to new technologies, the appearance of new IT players, the world economic crisis, the
overcapacity, risks such as weather, piracy, delays and accidents, the decrease of barriers
of entry or the increasing concentration of players, among others, drive the actions to be
taken in the future.
However, through the implementation of these technologies, these challenges can be
overcome or be even exploited. Applications where Big Data and Internet of Things are
the founding layer. Among them it can be found the remote control and monitoring of
vessels, increase the vessel performance by monitoring it, by having predictive
maintenance and an optimized energy management.Also the vessel safety will increase
and a better vessel trafﬁc and container management at ports can take place, reducing the
time of handling and avoiding unnecessary risks. Moreover, the voyage planning will be
optimized with the proper selection of ports and routes, reducing possible delays and
dangers.
Summarizing, the new technologies are reshaping the shipping industry. All the parties
involved and specially the Container Liner Shipping companies, are rethinking their way
of doing business and which is their place within the supply chain. This shift in which
==PAGE:89==
75
they place data as a key strategic asset, means the beginning of the digitalization of the
industry. Apart from collaborations with IT companies, huge investments are being made
in the sector, and will continue in the future, on having a robust, ﬂexible and proper IT
system. One to handle and use these considerable amounts of data in order to optimize
their processes, exploit the current circumstances and adapt to the coming era.
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
M. Mrak, “Globalization : Trends , challenges and opportunities for countries in
transition”, United Nations Industrial Development Organization, vol. 1,
pp. 1–52, 2000.
[2]
S. Chopra, “Supply Chain Management: Strategy, Planning, and Operation”,
2016.
[3]
Carlos Cordon, “Supply chain 4.0: Companies such as adidas and amazon re-
write the rules on supply chain management”, 2017.
[4]
K. Alicke, D. Rexhausen, and A. Seyfert, “Supply Chain 4.0 in consumer goods”,
McKinsey, pp. 1–11, 2017.
[5]
D. McMurray, “The Rise of the Digital Supply Chain”, MHD Supply Chain
Solutions, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 20–21, 2015.
[6]
B. Tjahjono, C. Esplugues, E. Ares, and G. Pelaez, “What does Industry 4.0 mean
to Supply Chain?”, Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 13, pp. 1175–1182, 2017.
[7]
H.-C. Pfohl, B. Yahsi, and T. Kuznaz, “The impact of Industry 4.0 on the Supply
Chain”, Proceedings of the Hamburg International Conference of Logistic
(HICL)-20, no. August, pp. 32–58, 2015.
[8]
S. Schrauf and P. Berttram, “Industry 4.0: How digitization makes the supply
chain more efﬁcient, agile, and customer-focused”, pp. 1–32, 2016. [Online].
Available:
http://www.strategyand.pwc.com/reports/industry4.0.
[9]
D. Arunachalam, N. Kumar, and J. P. Kawalek, “Understanding big data analytics
capabilities in supply chain management: Unravelling the issues, challenges and
implications for practice”, 2017.
77
==PAGE:92==
78
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10]
J. Holdowsky and M. E. Raynor, “Inside the Internet of Things (IoT)”, Deloitte,
2015.
[11]
Unity.Consulting and Innovation, “Supply chain management. Strategy, control
and operations”, pp. 1–16, 2010.
[12]
What
Is
Globalization?
[Online].
Available:
http
:
/ / www . globalization101 . org / what - is - globalization/
(visited on 02/20/2018).
[13]
Globalization. [Online]. Available: https://www.investopedia.com/
terms/g/globalization.asp (visited on 02/20/2018).
[14]
B. Vogel-Heuser and D. Hess, “Guest Editorial Industry 4.0 - Prerequisites and
Visions”, IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 13,
no. 2, pp. 411–413, 2016.
[15]
J. James, A new introduction to supply chains and supply chain management:
Deﬁnitions and theories perspective. 2012, pp.194–207.
[16]
Lancioni,
“New
developments
in
supply
chain
management
for
the
millennium–determining supplier and buyer effection inventory performance”,
Industrial Marketing Management, vol. Vol.29(1), pp.1–6, 2000.
[17]
A. Z. Acar and M. B. Uzunlar, “The Effects of Process Development and
Information Technology on Time-based Supply Chain Performance”, Procedia -
Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 150, pp. 744–753, 2014.
[18]
A. V. Levitin and T. C. Redman, “Data as resource: Properties, implications, and
prescriptions.”, vol. 40(1), pp. 89–102. 1998.
[19]
D. Laney, “Infonomics: The economics of information and principles of
information asset management.”, 2011.
[20]
J. Yadao, “Turning big data into smart data”, Institutional Investor, pp. 1–8, 2014.
[21]
Conference, “Intelligent Information and Database Systems”, vol. 7198,
no. March 2012, 2012.
[22]
C. Marinagi, P. Trivellas, and D. P. Sakas, “The Impact of Information Technology
on the Development of Supply Chain Competitive Advantage”, Procedia - Social
and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 147, pp. 586–591, 2014.
[23]
D. M. Lambert and M. G. Enz, “Issues in Supply Chain Management: Progress
and potential”, Industrial Marketing Management, vol. 62, pp. 1–16, 2017.
[24]
M. E. Raynor, J. Mariani, and E. Quasney, “Forging links into loops. The Internet
of Things’ potential to recast supply chain management”, Deloitte, p. 13, 2015.
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
79
[25]
Y. Lu, “Industry 4.0: A survey on technologies, applications and open research
issues”, Journal of Industrial Information Integration, vol. 6, pp. 1–10, 2017.
[26]
A. C. Pereira and F. Romero, “A review of the meanings and the implications
of the Industry 4.0 concept”, Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 13, pp. 1206–1214,
2017.
[27]
J. Posada, C. Toro, I. Barandiaran, D. Oyarzun, D. Stricker, R. Amicis, E. Pinto,
P. Eisert, J. Dollner, and I. Vallarino, “Visual Computing as Key Enabling
Technology for Industry 4.0 & Industrial Internet”, IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 26–40, 2015.
[28]
M. M. V. Roblek, “A complex view of Industry 4.0”, SAGE, 2016.
[29]
S. I. Shaﬁq and et al, “Virtual engineering object (veo): Toward experience-based
design and manufacturing for industry 4.0”, 2015.
[30]
D. S. L. Thames, “Software-deﬁned cloud manufacturing for Industry 4.0”,
pp. 12–17, 2016.
[31]
E. Hofmann and M. Rüsch, “Industry 4.0 and the current status as well as future
prospects on logistics”, Computers in Industry, vol. 89, pp. 23–34, 2017.
[32]
D. Wee, R. Kelly, J. Cattel, and M. Breunig, “Industry 4.0 - How to navigate
digitization of the manufacturing sector”, McKinsey & Company, pp. 1–62, 2015.
[33]
K.
Zhou,
“Industry
4.0:
Towards
Future
Industrial
Opportunities
and
Challenges”, 12th International Conference on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge
Discovery (FSKD), pp. 2147–2152, 2015.
[34]
J. Qin, Y. Liu, and R. Grosvenor, “A Categorical Framework of Manufacturing
for Industry 4.0 and beyond”, Procedia CIRP, vol. 52, pp. 173–178, 2016.
[35]
N. Jazdi, “Cyber physical systems in the context of industry 4.0”, 2014.
[36]
W. W. H. Kagermann and J. Helbig, “Recommendations for implementing the
strategic initiative industrie 4.0”, 2013.
[37]
B. Sniderman, “Industry 4.0 and manufacturing ecosystems. Exploring the world
of connected enterprises”,
[38]
G. A. Lewis, “Cloud computing”, Computing: The next 50 years, 2017.
[39]
F. Tao and et al., “Cloud manufacturing”, vol. Advanced Materials Research,
2011.
[40]
E. Fleisch, “What is the Internet of Things? An Economic Perspective”, 2010.
[41]
J. Porter, Michael E and Heppelmann, “How Smart, Connected Products are
Transforming Competition”, 2014.
==PAGE:94==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[42]
K. Witkowski, “Internet of Things, Big Data, Industry 4.0 - Innovative Solutions
in Logistics and Supply Chains Management”, Procedia Engineering, vol. 182,
pp. 763–769, 2017.
[43]
B. Moon, “Internet of Things and Hardware Industry Report”, 2016.
[44]
R. Addo-Tenkorang and P. T. Helo, “Big data applications in operations/supply-
chain management: A literature review”, Computers and Industrial Engineering,
vol. 101, pp. 528–543, 2016.
[45]
L. W. Feng Xia Laurence T.Yang and A. Vinel, “Internet of Things”, International
Journal of Communications Systems, 2012.
[46]
IHS-Markit, “The Internet of Things : a movement , not a market”, 2017.
[47]
C. Anderson, “The end of theory : The data deluge makes the scientiﬁc method
obsolete”, 2008.
[48]
G. Marcus, “Steamrolled by big data”, The New Yorker, 2013.
[49]
B. Sanou, “ICT Facts and Figures”, ITU, 2017.
[50]
S. Mitter, “Will 31 billion ‘connected’ devices expected in 2018, will this be the
year of iot?”, 2018.
[51]
Forrester-Consulting,
“Internet-Of-Things
Solution
Deployment
Gains
Momentum Among Firms Globally”, 2014.
[52]
A. Klein, “Hard drive cost per gigabyte”, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://
www.backblaze.com/blog/hard-drive-cost-per-gigabyte/.
[53]
T. Atlas, “The average cost of iot sensors is falling”, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.theatlas.com/charts/BJsmCFAl.
[54]
Cisco, “The zettabyte era: Trends and analysis”, Cisco. White Paper, 2017.
[55]
Singularity, “Microprocessor clock speed”, 2016. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.singularity.com/charts/page61.html.
[56]
N. Cable and T. Association, “Broadband by the numbers”, 2017. [Online].
Available: https://www.ncta.com/broadband-by-the-numbers.
[57]
Statista, “Size of the global Internet of Things (IoT) market from 2009 to 2019 ”,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.statista.com/statistics/
485136/global-internet-of-things-market-size/.
[58]
GrowthEnabler, “Market Pulse Report, Internet of Things (IoT)”, 2017. [Online].
Available: https : / / www . growthenabler . com / flipbook / pdf /
IOT%20Report.pdf.
==PAGE:95==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[59]
F. Pelino Michele; Gillett, “The Internet Of Things Heat Map 2016: Where IoT
Will Have The Biggest Impact On Digital Business”, 2016.
[60]
M. L. M. Chiu and R. Roberts, “The internet of things”, McKinsey Quarterly,
2010.
[61]
L. Barreto, A. Amaral, and T. Pereira, “Industry 4.0 implications in logistics: an
overview”, Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 13, pp. 1245–1252, 2017.
[62]
R. Gupta Vineet. Ulrich, “How the Internet of Things will reshape future
production systems”, 2017.
[63]
V. Turner, J. F. Gantz, D. Reinsel, and S. Minton, “The Digital Universe of
Opportunities: Rich Data and Increasing Value of the Internet of Things”, IDC
White Paper, vol. 6, no. April, pp. 1–5, 2014.
[64]
N. R. Sanders, “How to Use Big Data to Drive Your Supply Chain”, California
Management Review, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 26–48, 2016.
[65]
Luc-Olivier Erard, “Big data. How it can become a differentiator”, Deutsche
Bank, p. 1, 2016.
[66]
T. Nguyen, L. Zhou, V. Spiegler, P. Ieromonachou, and Y. Lin, “Big data analytics
in supply chain management: A state-of-the-art literature review”, Computers and
Operations Research, vol. 0, pp. 1–11, 2017.
[67]
S. Tiwari, H. M. Wee, and Y. Daryanto, “Big data analytics in supply chain
management between 2010 and 2016: Insights to industries”, Computers and
Industrial Engineering, vol. 115, no. November 2017, pp. 319–330, 2018.
[68]
P. Russom, “Big Data analytics”, TDWI Best Practices Report, 2011.
[69]
e. a. LaValle Lesser, “Big data, analytics and the path from insights to value.”,
MIT Sloan Management Review, pp. 21–31, 2013.
[70]
J. Fan, F. Han, and H. Liu, “Challenges of Big Data analysis”, National Science
Review, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 293–314, 2014.
[71]
S. Rowe and M. Pournader, “Supply Chain Big Data Series Part 1”, KPMG,
no. March, pp. 1–16, 2017.
[72]
J. G. D. Reinsel and J. Rydning, “Total WW Data to reach 163ZB by 2025”, IDC
Corp, 2017.
[73]
B. Roßmann, A. Canzaniello, H. von der Gracht, and E. Hartmann, “The future
and social impact of Big Data Analytics in Supply Chain Management: Results
from a Delphi study”, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, no. January,
pp. 0–1, 2017.
==PAGE:96==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[74]
A. G. Picciano, “The evolution of big data and learning analytics in American
higher education”, 2012.
[75]
U. Sivarajah, M. M. Kamal, Z. Irani, and V. Weerakkody, “Critical analysis of
Big Data challenges and analytical methods”, Journal of Business Research,
pp. 263–286, 2016.
[76]
R. Agarwal and et al., “Editorial – Big Data, data science, and analytics: the
opportunity and challenge for is research”, Information Systems Research, 2014.
[77]
A. McAfee and et al., “Big data: The management revolution”, Harvard Business
Review, 2012.
[78]
StorageNewsletter, “Total ww data to reach 163zb by 2025”, 2017. [Online].
Available:
https://www.storagenewsletter.com/2017/04/05/total-
ww-data-to-reach-163-zettabytes-by-2025-idc/.
[79]
Wikibon, “The big list of big data infographics”, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://wikibon.org/blog/big-data-infographics/.
[80]
W. Technologies, “Big data statistics and facts for 2017”, 2017. [Online].
Available: https : / / www . waterfordtechnologies . com / big -
data-interesting-facts/.
[81]
Qmee, “Online in 60 seconds”, 2013. [Online]. Available: https://blog.
qmee.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Qmee-Online-In-
60-Seconds2.png.
[82]
R. Y. Zhong, S. T. Newman, G. Q. Huang, and S. Lan, “Big Data for supply
chain management in the service and manufacturing sectors: Challenges,
opportunities, and future perspectives”, Computers and Industrial Engineering,
vol. 101, pp. 572–591, 2016.
[83]
Statista, “Big data market size revenue forecast worldwide from 2011 to 2027”,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.statista.com/statistics/
254266/global-big-data-market-forecast/.
[84]
A. Gunasekaran, M. Kumar Tiwari, R. Dubey, and S. Fosso Wamba, “Big Data
and predictive analytics applications in supply chain management”, 2016.
[85]
T. McGuire, J. Manyika, and M. Chui, “Why Big Data is the new competitive
advantage”,
Ivey
Business
Journal,
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://iveybusinessjournal.com/topics/strategy/why-
big-data-is-the-new-competitive-advantage.
==PAGE:97==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[86]
G. Wang, A. Gunasekaran, E. W. Ngai, and T. Papadopoulos, “Big data analytics
in logistics and supply chain management: Certain investigations for research
and applications”, International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 176,
pp. 98–110, 2016.
[87]
P. Bihani and S. Patil, “A comparative study of data analysis techniques”,
International Journal of Emerging Trends and Technology in Computer Science,
pp. 95–101, 2014.
[88]
H. Demirkan and D. Delen, “Leveraging the capabilities of service-oriented
decision support systems: putting analytics and Big Data in cloud”, 2013.
[89]
R. Joseph and N. Johnson, “Big Data and Transformational Government”, IEEE,
2013.
[90]
M. Cao and Q. Zhang, “Supply chain collaboration: Impact on collaborative
advantage and ﬁrm performance”, Journal of Operations Management, vol. 29,
no. 3, pp. 163–180, 2011.
[91]
K. J. Wu, C. J. Liao, M. L. Tseng, M. K. Lim, J. Hu, and K. Tan, “Toward
sustainability: using big data to explore the decisive attributes of supply chain
risks and uncertainties”, Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 142, pp. 663–676,
2017.
[92]
A. D. Singh Jain, I. Mehta, J. Mitra, and S. Agrawal, “Application of Big Data in
Supply Chain Management”, International Conference of Materials Processing
and Characterization, pp. 1106–1115, 2017.
[93]
K. Michael and K. Miller, “Big Data: New Opportunities and New Challenges”,
IEEE Computer Society, pp. 22–24, 2013.
[94]
R. G. Richey, T. R. Morgan, K. Lindsey-Hall, and F. G. Adams, A global
exploration of Big Data in the supply chain, 8. 2016, vol. 46, pp. 710–739.
[95]
M. D. Assunção, R. N. Calheiros, S. Bianchi, M. A. Netto, and R. Buyya, “Big
Data computing and clouds: Trends and future directions”, Journal of Parallel
and Distributed Computing, vol. 79-80, pp. 3–15, 2015.
[96]
S. Kaisler, F. Armour, J. A. Espinosa, and W. Money, “Big Data: Issues and
Challenges Moving Forward”, 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, pp. 995–1004, 2013.
[97]
J. Chen and et al., “Big Data challenge: a data management perspective”,
Frontiers of Computer Science, pp. 157–164, 2013.
==PAGE:98==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[98]
B. T. Hazen, C. A. Boone, J. D. Ezell, and L. A. Jones-Farmer, “Data quality
for data science, predictive analytics, and big data in supply chain management:
An introduction to the problem and suggestions for research and applications”,
International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 154, pp. 72–80, 2014.
[99]
A. Gandomi and M. Haider, “Beyond the hype: Big data concepts, methods, and
analytics”, International Journal of Information Management, vol. 35, no. 2,
pp. 137–144, 2015.
[100]
A. Labrinidis and H. V. Jagadish, “Challenges and opportunities with Big Data”,
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, pp. 2032–2033, 2012.
[101]
I-Scoop, “Logistics 4.0 and smart supply chain management in Industry 4.0”,
2007.
[102]
X. Brusset and C. Teller, “Supply chain capabilities, risks, and resilience”, 2016.
[103]
i-Scoop, “Digital supply chain: The supply chain visibility challenge in
manufacturing”,
[Online].
Available:
https
:
/
/
www
.
i
-
scoop.eu/manufacturing-industry/digital-supply-chain-
supply-chain-visibility/.
[104]
J. H. Cheng and Y. C. Fu, “Inter-organizational relationships and knowledge
sharing through the relationship and institutional orientations in supply chains”,
2013.
[105]
M. Holweg, S. Disney, J. Holmström, and J. Småros, “Supply chain
collaboration: Making sense of the strategy continuum”, European Management
Journal, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 170–181, 2005.
[106]
Y.-S. Huang, J.-S. Hung, and J.-W. Ho, “A study on information sharing for
supply chains with multiple suppliers”, Computers & Industrial Engineering,
vol. 104, pp. 114–123, 2017.
[107]
M. Talay and M. Akdeniz, “In time we trust?: The effects of duration on the
dynamics of trust-building processes in inter-organizational relationships”,
Strategic Management Review, pp. 77–90, 2014.
[108]
A. Singh and J. T. Teng, “Enhancing supply chain outcomes through Information
Technology and Trust”, Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 54, pp. 290–300,
2016.
[109]
L.
Cummings
and
P.
Bromiley,
“The
organizational
trust
inventory:
Development and validation, in trust in organizations”, Frontiers of theory and
research, pp. 303–330, 1996.
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
[110]
J.-H. Cheng, “Inter-organizational relationships and information sharing in supply
chains”, 2013.
[111]
I. L. Wu, C. H. Chuang, and C. H. Hsu, “Information sharing and collaborative
behaviors in enabling supply chain performance: A social exchange perspective”,
International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 148, pp. 122–132, 2014.
[112]
W. Bian, J. Shang, and J. Zhang, “Two-way information sharing under supply
chain competition”, International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 178,
pp. 82–94, 2016.
[113]
A. Radke and M. Tseng, “Design considerations for building distributed supply
chain management systems based on cloud computing.”, 2015.
[114]
E. Hofmann, “Big data and supply chain decisions: the impact of volume,
variety and velocity properties on the bullwhip effect”, International Journal of
Production Research, vol. 55, no. 17, pp. 5108–5126, 2017.
[115]
S. Agrawal, R. N. Sengupta, and K. Shanker, “Impact of information sharing
and lead time on bullwhip effect and on-hand inventory”, European Journal of
Operational Research, vol. 192, no. 2, pp. 576–593, 2009.
[116]
F. Costantino, G. Di Gravio, A. Shaban, and M. Tronci, “The impact of
information sharing on ordering policies to improve supply chain performances”,
Computers and Industrial Engineering, vol. 82, pp. 127–142, 2015.
[117]
F. Wu, S. Yeniyurt, D. Kim, and S. T. Cavusgil, “The impact of information
technology on supply chain capabilities and ﬁrm performance: A resource-based
view”, Industrial Marketing Management, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 493–504, 2006.
[118]
M. Tippins and R. Sohi, “IT competency and ﬁrm performance: Is organizational
learning a missing link?”, Strategic Management Journal, pp. 745–761, 2003.
[119]
F. Ye and Z. Wang, “Effects of information technology alignment and
information sharing on supply chain operational performance”, Computers and
Industrial Engineering, vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 370–377, 2013.
[120]
P. M. Panayides and R. Wiedmer, “Strategic alliances in container liner shipping”,
Research in Transportation Economics, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 25–38, 2011.
[121]
United-Nations, “Review of Maritime Transport”, 2017.
[122]
Oxford-Economics, “The economic value of the EU shipping industry”, 2017.
[123]
I. Zaman, K. Pazouki, R. Norman, S. Younessi, and S. Coleman, “Challenges
and opportunities of big data analytics for upcoming regulations and future
transformation of the shipping industry”, Procedia Engineering, vol. 194,
pp. 537–544, 2017.
==PAGE:100==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[124]
Y. H. Lun, K. H. Lai, C. W. Wong, and T. C. Cheng, “Demand chain management
in the container shipping service industry”, International Journal of Production
Economics, vol. 141, no. 2, pp. 485–492, 2013.
[125]
C. Y. Lee and D. P. Song, “Ocean container transport in global supply chains:
Overview and research opportunities”, Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological, vol. 95, pp. 442–474, 2017.
[126]
M. Scribner, “The Shipping Container Is a Blessing to All Humanity”, Foundation
for Economic Education, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://fee.org/
articles/the-shipping-container-is-a-blessing-to-all-
humanity/.
[127]
W. Sjostrom, “Competition and Cooperation in Liner Shipping”, National
University of Ireland, 2009.
[128]
Y. H. Venus Lun, K. H. Lai, and T. C. Edwin Cheng, “A descriptive framework for
the development and operation of liner shipping networks”, Transport Reviews,
vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 439–457, 2009.
[129]
C. Sys, “Is the container liner shipping industry an oligopoly?”, Transport Policy,
vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 259–270, 2009.
[130]
World-Trade-Organization, “World trade statistical review”, 2017.
[131]
A. K. Prokopowicz and J. Berg-Andreassen, “An Evaluation of Current Trends
in Container Shipping Industry, Very Large Container Ships (VLCSs), and Port
Capacities to Accommodate TTIP Increased Trade”, Transportation Research
Procedia, vol. 14, pp. 2910–2919, 2016.
[132]
World-Shipping, “Top Trade Routes (TEU shipped) 2013”, 2013. [Online].
Available: http : / / www . worldshipping . org / about - the -
industry/global-trade/trade-routes.
[133]
B. Plumer, “This is an incredible visualization of the world’s shipping routes”,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https
:
//www.vox.com/2016/4/25/11503152/shipping-routes-map.
[134]
Alphaliner,
“Alphaliner
top
100”,
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://alphaliner.axsmarine.com/PublicTop100/.
[135]
Ships and Ports, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://shipsandports.com.
ng/.
[136]
K. T. Nguyen and H. Hans-Dietrich, “An empirical study of ﬂeet expansion and
growth of ship size in container liner shipping”, 2014.
==PAGE:101==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
87
[137]
J. Tiedemann, “The container ship market in 2015. ultra-large box vessels:
Scaling effects in the container trade”, Alphaliner, 2015.
[138]
Maersk, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.maersk.com/.
[139]
F. Wang, X. Zhuo, B. Niu, and J. He, “Who canvasses for cargos? Incentive
analysis and channel structure in a shipping supply chain”, Transportation
Research Part B: Methodological, vol. 97, pp. 78–101, 2017.
[140]
P. Evangelista and A. Morvillo, “Alliances in Liner Shipping: an Instrument to
Gain Operational Efﬁciency or Supply chain Integration?”, International Journal
of Logistics: Research and Applications, 1999.
[141]
iContainers, “New shipping alliances: What you need to know”, 2017. [Online].
Available: https://www.icontainers.com/us/2017/03/21/new-
shipping-alliances-what-you-need-to-know/.
[142]
M. Salisbury, “Container Carrier Mergers and Acquisitions, 1977 to present”,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https : / / www . joc . com / maritime - news / container -
lines/container-carrier-mergers-acquisitions.html.
[143]
Drewry-Maritime-Advisors, “Consolidation in the liner industry”, 2016.
[144]
M. Fusillo, “Some notes on structure and stability in liner shipping”, Maritime
Policy and Management, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 463–475, 2006.
[145]
T. Heaver, “The response of liner shipping companies to the evolution of global
supply
chain
management”,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
https : / / lawexplores . com / the - response - of - liner -
shipping-companies-to-the-evolution-of-global-supply-
chain-management/.
[146]
World-Shipping, “Top world container ports”, 2013. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.worldshipping.org/about- the- industry/global-
trade/top-50-world-container-ports.
[147]
C. L. Liu, K. C. Shang, T. C. Lirn, K. H. Lai, and Y. H. Lun, “Supply chain
resilience, ﬁrm performance, and management policies in the liner shipping
industry”, Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 2017.
[148]
J. Vilko and et al., “Risk management abilities in multimodal maritime supply
chains: Visibility and control perspectives”, 2016.
==PAGE:102==
88
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[149]
JOC.com, “Largest container ships on order to rise 13 percent by 2020”, 2015.
[Online]. Available: https://www.joc.com/maritime-news/ships-
shipbuilding/average-size-container-ship-order-rise-
13-percent-2020_20150707.html.
[150]
L. Vodgrup-Schmidt and K. Grønvald, “170 companies racing to digitalize
shipping”, 2018. [Online]. Available: https : / / shippingwatch . com /
secure/suppliers/article10393571.ece.
[151]
C. Wienberg and A. Nightingale, “The World’s Biggest Container Shipping Line
Is Now Worried About Amazon and Alibaba”, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https : / / www . bloomberg . com / news / articles / 2018 - 02 -
12/amazon-threat-has-maersk-racing-to-stop-clients-
becoming-rivals.
[152]
S. Pico, “Maersk Chief Digital Ofﬁcer: Why we are a digital pioneer in shipping”,
2018. [Online]. Available: https://shippingwatch.com/carriers/
article10337108.ece.
[153]
J. Ovcina, “In depth: Nyshex ceo: Digitization is the new normal”, 2018. [Online].
Available: https://worldmaritimenews.com/archives/244804/
nyshex-ceo-digitization-is-the-new-normal/.
[154]
Splash-247, “Shipping’s digitalization path must embrace disruption”, 2018.
[Online]. Available: https : / / splash247 . com / shippings -
digitalisation-path-must-embrace-disruption/.
[155]
J. Churchill, “Maersk partners with microsoft to power digital”, 2017. [Online].
Available: https : / / www . maersk . com / stories / maersk -
partners-with-microsoft-to-power-digital.
[156]
Maersk, “Triple-e: The world’s largest ship”, 2018. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.maersk.com/explore/fleet/triple-e.
[157]
J. Churchill, “The road to autonomous vessel tech”, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https : / / www . maersk . com / stories / the - road - to -
autonomous-vessel-tech.
[158]
Maersk, “Maersk and ibm to form joint venture applying blockchain to improve
global trade and digitise supply chains”, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://
www.maersk.com/press/press- release- archive/maersk-
and-ibm-to-form-joint-venture.
==PAGE:103==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
89
[159]
J. Churchill, “Maersk and ibm target one of trade’s biggest barriers”, 2017.
[Online]. Available: https://www.maersk.com/stories/maersk-
and-ibm-target-one-of-trades-biggest-barriers.
