==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
MASTER THESIS 
Snake venom profiling and target specificity using peptide 
microarrays, data analysis and machine learning methods 
 
 
Konstantinos Kalogeropoulos, s161053 
MScEng Bioinformatics and Systems Biology 
 
 
Supervisor: Cristopher Workman, Associate Professor 
 
 
 
 
May 30th, 2018 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
II 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
III 
 P
The present work, with the title “Snake venom profiling and target specificity using peptide 
microarrays, data analysis and machine learning methods”, is the written result of my Master thesis 
project for the MScEng in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, carried out in the Technical University of 
Denmark (Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine – DTU Bioengineering). The experimental work 
of the project was conducted in buildings 223 and 301. 
In the Introduction section of this report, focus is given in the problem statement, the biological 
context and the aim of this study. The methods and tools used are presented in the Materials and Methods 
section. A brief introduction for each of the methods is attempted to be given in the Results subsections, 
in which these techniques and tools were utilized. The Discussion section presents an effort to explain the 
results of the project, and to provide an outlook in future perspectives of this study with additional 
remarks in their significance and scientific value. 
At this point, I would like to express my gratitude to a number of people that were vital to the 
completion of the project. First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor, Associate Professor Christopher 
Workman. His passion and excitement were profoundly inspirational, and his encouragement was greatly 
beneficial to me. His support, advice, and guidance during our cooperation were of extreme importance, 
and his contribution to the generation of ideas, implementation of methods, as well as the results 
interpretation and troubleshooting cannot be underlined enough. Chris, I am extremely grateful for the 
time and effort you have invested in me. Secondly, I would like to also thank Associate Professor Andreas 
H. Laustsen, for the insights and advice on the project’s directions, and the support he provided by 
introducing me to literature and useful tools. I am obliged to thank laboratory technician Susanne 
Koefoed, for the aid and permission to use the equipment necessary for the experimental part of the 
study. Furthermore, I would like to thank Andreas Treschow and Chrysillis Polhaus, for their valuable 
assistance in the experiments of the project, in which they were instrumental for their success. I would 
also like to extend my gratitude and appreciation for all the members of the 2017 DTU Biobuilders team, 
for the fruitful discussions, inclusiveness and inspiration. 
Last but not least, I would like to thank my parents, Dimitris and Sofia, and my sister, Zoe for their 
endless support, encouragement and caring love throughout my years of study. My companion, Eleni 
Kimioni, for her love and support, both from a psychological and nutritional perspective. To my 
grandfather, Kostas: I’m not sure you are watching from above, but I’m confident you would be proud. 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
IV 
 A
Snakebite is one of the most neglected tropical diseases, resulting in up to 5 million cases annually, which 
lead to an estimated 100,000 deaths, and 400,000 disabilities. Snake venoms are complex mixtures of 
enzymes, non-enzymatic proteins and bioactive peptides. The composition of the venom differs 
depending on the family, genus and species of the snake. The venom of members of the Viperidae family 
is predominantly made up of snake venom proteases. The most abundant protease families in this family 
are snake venom metalloproteinases and snake venom serine proteases. They are the primary factors of 
viper venom toxicity, exhibiting a wide range of targets in biological pathways and systems. The main 
objective of this study was to investigate the enzymatic activities of these proteins, using high throughput 
substrate libraries. The venoms of three medically relevant snake species (B. asper, E. carinatus, D. russelii) 
of the Viperidae family were tested, in experiments with the peptide substrate sets. Along with 
experiments carried out during the DTU Biobuilders project for the 2017 iGEM competition, the 
fluorescence intensity measurements data for six snakes were subjected to further analysis. The present 
study presents an attempt to describe the protease activities of these snake venoms. For that purpose, 
modeling methods were utilized, and profiles for the activities of the venoms in each of the substrates 
were generated. Enrichment analyses and sequence specificity models were used to investigate the 
specificity of these enzymes for selective targets and biological pathways. Unsupervised machine learning 
methods were also employed, in order to examine similarities and contrasts in the activities of said 
venoms. Functional annotation, and annotation of other available information for these molecules and 
the substrates of interest was performed in order to explore the protease targets, and their contribution 
in snake envenoming cases. 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
V 
 A
ADAM 
a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 
AMT 
aminotransferase 
API 
application programming interface 
AFU 
arbitrary fluorescence units 
BLAST 
basic local alignment search tool 
BH 
Benjamini–Hochberg 
BA 
Bitis arietans 
BG 
Bitis gabonica 
BO 
Bothrops asper 
CI 
confidence interval 
CTL 
C-type lectin 
CRISP 
cysteine rich secretory protein 
RV 
Daboia russelii or Russell's viper 
DREME 
discriminative regular expression motif elicitation 
EC 
Echis carinatus 
FRET 
fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
 
GO 
gene ontology 
GOC 
Gene Ontology Consortium 
GSEA 
gene set enrichment analysis 
HYA 
hyaluronidase 
KDA 
kernel density estimation 
KuTi 
kunitz type inhibitor 
KEGG 
Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes 
LAAO 
L-amino acid oxidase 
MEME 
multiple EM for motif elicitation 
NN 
Naja nigricollis 
NCBI 
National Center for Biotechnology Information 
nAChR 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
==PAGE:6==
 
VI 
 
OR 
odds ratio 
ORA 
overrepresentation analysis 
PLA2 
phospholipase A2 
PC 
principal component 
PCA 
principal component analysis 
REST 
representational state transfer 
SP 
serine protease 
SVD 
singular value decomposition 
snaclec 
snake venom C-type lectin 
SVMP 
snake venom metalloproteinase 
 
SVP 
snake venom protease 
SVSP 
snake venom serine protease 
3FTx 
three-finger toxins 
VEGF 
vascular endothelial growth factor 
vWF 
von Willebrand factor 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
VII 
 T
 
Preface and acknowledgements 
III 
Abstract 
IV 
Abbreviations 
V 
Table of contents 
VII 
Introduction 
1 
Venom 
1 
Epidemiology and treatment 
1 
Venom composition and functional role of individual components 
3 
Aim 
8 
Choice of snakes 
9 
Fluorescence and protease assays 
13 
Materials and methods 
14 
Experimental methods 
14 
Computational tools and methods 
15 
Results 
17 
Experimental results 
17 
Statistical analysis of fluorescent signal measurements 
23 
Annotation of available information and analysis for peptide substrates 
25 
Enrichment analyses 
27 
Sequence and motif analysis 
32 
Modeling 
36 
PCA 
41 
Unsupervised machine learning methods 
45 
Discussion 
53 
Conclusion 
58 
References 
59 
Appendix 
64 
 
==PAGE:8==
Introduction 
1 | P a g e  
 I
 
Venom is defined as mixtures of toxins produced by an animal, specifically for the poisoning of other 
species, via a mechanism designed to deliver the toxin to its prey1. Venomous animals are widespread 
across the planet. They can be found in almost all climatic regions of earth. They live in air (such as bees, 
wasps and hornets), on land (including snakes, scorpions, spiders, frogs, toads, salamanders, ants, 
centipedes, caterpillars, leeches, heloderms, ticks, insects and even the platypus) and in seas (for example 
jellyfish, sea anemones, corals, snails, stonefish, urchins, sea snakes, stingrays, octopuses, sea stars and 
gorgonians). They can be found in almost all Animal phyla and to date more than 540,000 species have 
been described, with new species still being discovered2. Venom appears to serve as a system for prey 
acquisition and processing, but also as a defense mechanism3. Venomous animals have developed 
sophisticated machinery for prey capture and digestion, as well as for protection against predators or for 
fighting against competitors2. 
Out of these species, snake venom is of great importance, in terms of clinical relevance and scientific 
interest. Snake venoms present a wealth of compounds with biomedical applications. They represent an 
extremely rich source of pharmacologically active proteins, with significant clinical and medical 
applications4. The characterization and investigation of the function of individual components of snake 
venoms, may lead to a better understanding of their mechanisms of action and role in the toxicity of these 
complex mixtures. More importantly, it will provide a framework in order to realize the potential use of 
these compounds in other fields of therapeutics5. Studies have described the possibility of utilization for 
a number of these compounds in a wide range of applications6. Modern proteomic studies on the 
composition of venoms, and characterization of their proteins, may provide novel activities and targets 
for treatment not only for snakebite envenomations, but other diseases as well7. Information and insights 
in the enzymatic properties of snake venom could be used to provide more specific, effective and robust 
treatment for patients of snakebite envenomings, and other diseases as well. E
For most venomous animals for much of the world, detailed statistics on the number of humans bitten 
or stung, envenomed, or killed each year are unavailable. Published data are replete with conjecture and 
estimates with variable validity3. That is a result of the lack of reporting systems and poor infrastructure 
in areas that are mostly affected. It is clear, however, that certain taxa of venomous animals cause 
significant morbidity and mortality amongst humans. On the top of this list are venomous snakes.  
Snakebite is one of the most neglected tropical diseases, resulting in up to 5 million cases annually, 
which lead to an estimated 100,000 deaths, and 400,000 disabilities from permanent tissue damage8. 
These figures represent the huge toll of morbidity after snakebite, which affects far more cases than fatal 
outcomes, and often results in long-term suffering, and social and economic loss3. The areas mostly 
affected from snakebite can be seen in Figure 1.  
Snakebite mostly affect workers, children and women in developing countries, having a detrimental 
outcome in their income and quality of life. In these resource poor settings, people often have limited or 
==PAGE:9==
Introduction 
2 | P a g e  
 
no access to healthcare, which increases the severity of the injuries and their future consequences. The 
majority of snake bites occurs in South- and South-East Asia, Africa and South America. They are more 
common in rural areas, inhabited by people that depend on farming and other field working occupations 
as their main source of income. In many occasions, the victims are the wage earners or care providers of 
the family. Child victims that suffer disabilities caused by snake bites are in need of greater support 
throughout the rest of their lives. This has further important implications for the population, growth and 
economy of the countries9. 
 
The most effective treatment for envenomings is antivenom. Antivenom is  a mix of antibodies raised 
against whole venom, or venom fractions, in a domesticated animal (horse, sheep, goat, rabbit) and works 
by binding to toxins, at the active site or another area10. A given antivenom contains neutralising antibody 
against only those venoms used in the immunising mix, so utility in treating envenoming by other species 
is dependent on antigenic similarities between venoms. For some venoms, there is considerable similarity 
with venoms from other, usually related, species3. However, that is not common. 
Antivenom treatment is reliant on the identification of the snake responsible for the snakebite. As 
expected, that is not possible in a lot of cases. The general method involves the transport of the patient 
along with the snake that bit them, in order for it to be recognized by the practitioners. That requires the 
snake to be killed after the envenomation, something that is rarely feasible. If the snake responsible is not 
available, the decision of which antivenom should be administered is taken based on the symptoms of the 
envenomation, and the knowledge of the dangerous snake species in the geographical area. 
Furthermore, the development of antivenom is a slow and expensive process. Thus, antivenom is 
scarce, and in some of the cases not in supply, in areas that are most affected by snakebites. In areas with 
poor infrastructure, patients have to travel in remote areas that possess antivenom, reducing their 
chances of survival, or amplifying the damage caused by the envenomation, due to the delay of antivenom 
administration and treatment. In addition, the majority of available antivenoms are polyvalent, which 
Figure 1. Snakebite epidemiology (Source: A.H. Laustsen. Recombinant Antivenoms. doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.17561.21607) 
==PAGE:10==
Introduction 
3 | P a g e  
 
means that they have to be administered in high dosages, increasing the chances of side effects. Acute 
reactions are considered a direct effect of antivenom administration, caused by the manufacturing 
process of the antivenoms. Side effects such as serum sickness and short term sickness of pyrogenic 
endotoxin nature and systemic anaphylaxis, hypotension and cyanosis are observed in up to 40% of the 
patients11. For these reasons, the decision in the administration or not of the antivenom, relies mainly on 
the severity of the envenoming. 
Monovalent antivenoms have shown better results in combating these disadvantages of polyvalent 
antivenoms, without however eliminating them. In recent years, research in the development of 
recombinant antivenoms has shown promise12. V
Most venoms contain an array of toxins, usually with a diversity of actions. Individual toxins might 
potentially have multiple biological functions. For any single species of venomous animal, there will be a 
degree of variability in the composition of venom between individuals and even a single individual may 
have slight variations in venom composition3. 
Snake venom composition is no different. It depends on the family, genus and species of the snake, 
even with intraspecies variations occuring13,14. The evolution of the venoms from common ancestors has 
been shown, with examples of both convergent and divergent evolution15. Several snake venom toxins 
show high similarity with proteins of other species, with their homologs present in other animals and even 
our species16. 
The most prominent snake families, which are also those of major clinical relevance, are the Viperidae 
and Elapidae families. The Viperidae family contains snakes commonly known as vipers, pitvipers and 
rattlesnakes, which differ in their venom composition, physiology and phenotype, but also the pathology 
of snakebites, depending on the area of the globe they are inhabiting. That is also the case for the Elapidae 
family, which includes the widely known cobras and mambas, among other species17. 
As stated above, the venoms of these families are highly complex mixtures, constituted of proteins of 
a large number of protein families. However, the protein families that are of high abundance are in the 
lower single digits. The venom of the Elapidae family exhibits mostly neurotoxic, myotoxic and cardiotoxic 
activities, while the venom of the Viperidae family exhibits mainly cytotoxic and myotoxic activities. These 
pathologies are a direct result of the protein families present in these venoms, and their relative 
abundance. 
The major superfamily of proteins in the Elapidae snake venom is three-finger toxins (3FTx). These 
toxins are nonenzymatic polypeptides, exhibiting a wide range of functional activities, despite their 
structural similarities. Their name stems from their protein folding pattern, which resembles a three finger 
structure18.  They are consisted of three beta stranded loops and a hydrophobic core.  All 3FTx possess 
conserved structural regions and disulfide bridges, which contribute to the proper folding and structural 
integrity of the proteins. They mostly exist as monomers in nature.  Members of this family act as 
antagonists in neuroreceptors (e.g. a-neurotoxins and k-bungarotoxins in nAChR and neuronal nicotinic 
receptors, respectively), block muscarinic receptors (muscarinic toxins), inhibit acetylcholinesterase 
(fasciculins), and block L-type calcium channels (calciseptine). Others exhibit their toxicity by forming 
pores in cell membranes, they are antagonists of cell-adhesion processes, bind to adrenergic receptors, 
==PAGE:11==
Introduction 
4 | P a g e  
 
or inhibit potassium channel binding proteins19. Their most known function is to interfere with cholinergic 
transmission in the nervous system, thereby causing paralysis to the prey. They have been also known to 
interact, and act synergistically with other toxins, forming complexes and enhancing the toxicity of the 
venoms20. A 3FTx toxin can be seen in Figure 2. 
 
The other major protein family in the venoms of elapids are phospholipases A2 (PLA2s)21. Other main 
protein families present are cysteine rich secretory proteins (CRISPs) and C-type lectins (CTLs), snake 
venom proteases and inhibitors, venom factors, peptides,  and toxins with enzymatic activities22,23. These 
protein families are also present in venoms of the Viperidae family, although in different abundancies, 
and will be explained below. 
The venom of the Viperidae family, presents a much richer pool in terms of enzymatic activity. Snake 
venom proteases (SVPs) are the most abundant proteins found in the venom of viperids, along with 
PLA2s24,25. The two families these proteases are classified in are snake venom metalloproteinases (SVMPs) 
and serine proteases (SPs, or SVSPs in snake venom). Aminopeptidases are also present in smaller 
amounts. Enzymes such as nucleotidases and endonucleases, L-amino acid oxidases (LAAOs), 
phosphodiesterases (PDEs), aminotransferases (AMT), hyaluronidases (HYAs), are also part of the viperid 
venoms, in smaller relative abundancies. Other proteins present are Kunitz type inhibitors (KuTi), CRISPs, 
CTLs, disintegrins, cystatin, growth factors, natriuretic and other peptides. 
Phospholipases of A2 type are prominent components of the venom of both elapid and viperid snakes. 
The recruitment of myotoxic PLA2s in both of these families venom pool represents an example of 
convergent evolution26. They are small (119-134 amino acids), secreted enzymes, with a conserved 
structural fold and catalytic mechanism. The differences between the PLA2s of elapids (group I) and 
viperids (group II) are in the position of one of the seven disulfide bonds that the proteins contain, and 
residues in their C terminal regions. PLA2s target the sarcolemma, inducing degeneration of skeletal 
Figure 2. A three finger toxin. The structure represent the alpha-Bungarotoxin, in 
complex with a peptide that has similar sequence with the acetylcholine binding 
protein, an analog of the extracellular domain of the acetylcholine receptor. The 
bound peptide is shown in sticks (PDB: 1HC9) 
==PAGE:12==
Introduction 
5 | P a g e  
 
muscle fibers. They are enzymes that hydrolyze ester bonds in glycerophospholipids, producing 
lysophospholipids and fatty acids. Interaction of myotoxic PLA2s with sarcolemma binding sites provokes 
rapid and drastic alterations in structure and membrane disruption, and rapid depolarization caused by 
the efflux of cytosolic markers such as myoglobin, creatine kinase and by an influx of Ca2+ ions27. Another 
class of PLA2-like proteins, devoid of their enzymatic activity, has been also described. These proteins 
present a change in one of the residues critical for their catalytic machinery, namely Asp49, to Lys in most 
cases. Although these proteins have no enzymatic activity, they also exhibit severe myotoxic effects, 
inducing local tissue necrosis15. PLA2s and PLA2-like proteins play also other roles in snakebite pathology, 
such as lymphocytosis, inflammation, platelet aggregation and interference with the coagulation 
pathways28. 
Kunitz type inhibitors consist of around 60 amino acid residues and three disulfide bridges29, and act 
as protease inhibitors or block ion channels. Their inhibitory activity is conferred by their specific binding 
on the active site of the proteases, where a contact between the inhibitor and the active site is formed. 
In contrast to the substrates of the proteases, the peptide bond undergoes very slow, or limited hydrolysis. 
Amino acid residues on the binding loop of KuTi protease inhibitors determine the specificity for different 
serine proteases30. KuTi inhibitors have retained the same fold, but evolved to inhibit different proteases, 
or have different functions. Some KuTi homologs, such as dendrotoxin, have lost their inhibitory function, 
and evolved to block calcium and potassium channels31. In the envenoming physiology, they mainly act as 
inhibitors of serine proteases of the coagulation cascade32. A KuTi example can be seen in Figure 3. 
 
Cysteine rich secretory proteins are also single chain polypeptides of 200 to 400 amino acid residues, 
with conserved sequences throughout the protein, and extremely conserved cysteine residues, mostly 
clustered in the C-terminal end of the protein. The characterized members of the family possess a range 
of ion channel blocking activities, including calcium and cyclic nucleotide-gated channels (CNG)33. An 
example of a CRISP can be seen in Figure 4. 
Figure 3. Example of a Kunitz type protease inhibitor structure. The displayed structure 
shows Textilinin-1 from the Australian Common Brown snake venom (PDB: 3BYB) 
==PAGE:13==
Introduction 
6 | P a g e  
 
 
C-type lectins from snakes are also known as snaclecs (snake venom C-type lectins). Their name comes 
from their dependence on calcium for binding. Snaclecs have a heterodimeric structure of two subunits, 
α and β, linked covalently with a disulfide bond. They are often multimerized via additional disulfide bonds 
to form larger structures31. Their role in snakebite pathology is the aggregation of platelets and 
interference in the coagulation cascade, acting as anticoagulants34. They activate platelets by linking 
platelet receptors to their physiological ligands, using other proteins, or by multimerisation of their 
subunits. The most known strategy is the induction of binding between von Willebrand factor (vWF) and 
receptor GPIb in platelets, resulting in platelet agglutination35. 
Disintegrins are a family of cysteine-rich small proteins (40-100 amino acids), mostly found a 
monomers, with the capacity to interact with integrins, and inhibit their activity. Disintegrins in snake 
venom play a role in protein interactions with cell-surface integrin receptors, with major importance in 
cell adhesion processes36. The presence of an integrin binding motif (RGD or a variation of these residues), 
determines their ability to interact and their specificity for integrins. Disintegrins have been regarded as 
molecules with applications in numerous studies of biological processes in which integrins have central 
functions, such as cancer37. An example can be seen in Figure 5. 
Figure 4. A Cysteine rich secretory protein. The figure shows Natrin, a snake 
venom CRISP from Taiwan cobra, Naja atra (PDB: 1XTA) 
Figure 5. Bitistatin A from Bitis arietans venom. The RGD motif is shown with sticks 
(PDB: 2MOP) 
==PAGE:14==
Introduction 
7 | P a g e  
 
Cystatins are a family of cysteine protease inhibitors, while LAAOs are flavoenzymes which, as their 
name suggests, catalyze the oxidative deamination of an L-amino acid to an alpha-keto acid38. Their 
biological activities have been shown to include cytotoxic, apoptotic and platelet aggregation effects. 
Hyaluronidases are characterized by their capability to degrade hyaluronan, a polysaccharide playing a 
key structural role in extracellular matrix, to tetrasaccharides. Their activity has been associated with 
allowing other venom constituents to reach their respective targets. Phosphodiesterases, DNases and 
RNases of snake venoms have not been thoroughly studied, with little known in their role in the 
envenomation pathology, although their importance is widely accepted39. Vascular endothelial growth 
factors (VEGF) have shown to be involved in hypotension and enhance proliferation of vascular 
endothelial cells31, while natriuretic peptides are known to decrease blood pressure. 
The focus of this study was in the major protein families in terms of abundance in the viperid venoms, 
the snake venom proteases. Proteases, also called peptidases, are enzymes that have the ability to cleave 
other proteins, by the hydrolysis of peptide bonds. The specificity of these molecules is driven mostly by 
the sequence, structure and interactions of their active site. Their substrates are binding to the proteases 
through the specificity pocket, located in the area of the active site16,40. Other areas and domains of these 
proteins have also been shown to contribute to their specificity. Protease families are classified into 
groups, based on their mechanism of action and their catalytic residues41. Proteases play crucial roles in 
numerous biological pathways, with about 2% of the human genome being genes encoding proteases. 
They are implicated in many pathological conditions, including cancer, inflammation and degenerative 
diseases42. 
 
Figure 6. A snake venom metalloproteinase. The zink and calcium ions are shown in 
grey and green spheres, respectively. The substrate recognition and active site is 
shown in magenta sticks, and the disulfide bridges in orange sticks. The displayed 
structure is Acutolysin from snake venom of Agkistrodon acutus (PDB: 1BUD) 
==PAGE:15==
Introduction 
8 | P a g e  
 
Snake venom metalloproteinases are endopeptidases (cleaving internal peptide bonds of proteins), 
which show high similarity, and are classified in the same subfamily (M12B of the MEROPS database) with 
human ADAMs (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase) proteins43. They are believed to have been recruited 
in the venom pool through duplication and neofunctionalization of the ancestral genes of closely related 
ADAM proteins16. SVMPs are divided in three major classes, depending on the structural domains present. 
The first and the simplest class (P-I) of SVMPs is comprised of only a metalloproteinase domain. The 
second class (P-II) contains proteins with a disintegrin-like domain, and the metalloproteinase domain. 
The third and most complex class of SVMPs (P-III), consist of proteins with signaling peptide sequence, 
pro-domain, metalloproteinase, spacer, disintegrin-like and cysteine-rich domains. These classes are 
divided into subclasses depending on their post-translational modifications44. SVMPs share the binding of 
a metal ion (mostly zinc and in some cases cobalt), on a specific metal binding motif, and are expected to 
have disulfide bonds in their structure.  Activation of SVMPs is regulated by the proteolysis of their pro-
domain, containing a conserved motif, present also in ADAMs and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs)45. 
Their proteolytic mechanism relies on the activation of a water molecule, which is turned into 
nucleophilic, so it can attack the carboxyl group of the peptide, thereby cleaving the peptide bond. In 
envenomation, SVMPs are responsible for the local and systemic hemorrhagic activity, myonecrosis, 
disruption of hemostasis mediated by procoagulant or anticoagulant effects, necrosis or pro-
inflammatory activities46. A metalloproteinase structure example can be seen in Figure 6. 
The other major category of proteases in snake venom, SVSPs, are mainly classified in the same family 
of serine proteases with proteases such as human trypsin and chymotrypsin, which are well characterized, 
thoroughly investigated endopeptidases with specific cleavage patterns, recognizing and cleaving after 
Lys/Arg residues47,48. SVSPs have been categorized into different functional subtypes, including 
defibrinogenating or thrombin like enzymes, kallikrein-like or blood-pressure reducing enzymes, 
plasminogen activators, and platelet aggregation inhibitors or inducers. SVMPs of the trypsin contain six 
disulfide bonds in conserved residues, and further stabilization of the active site occurs with a salt bridge 
between the N- terminal residue and Asp183 (trypsin numbering). Substrate specificity is regulated by 
conserved residues in the enzyme binding pockets, with different variations between subfamilies49. Serine 
proteases have a conserved active site consisting of a catalytic triad of a histidine, a serine and an aspartic 
acid residues. The serine residue (Ser195) becomes nucleophilic through activation from the histidine 
residue, and attacks peptide bonds48,50. SVSPs in snakebite pathology target the coagulation and platelet 
adhesion cascades, among other51. A
The main objective of this study was to investigate the enzymatic activity of proteases from a range of 
snakes from the Viperidae family, using peptide substrates in 384-well microtiter plates. The modeling of 
said enzymatic activity, using data obtained from the experiments, and the construction of profiles for the 
selected snakes utilizing machine learning and data analysis methods, were also among the goals of the 
project. Furthermore, motif recognition and sequence specificity of the proteases was of main focus. 
Finally, functional annotation of the targets of the proteases, and comparison across the investigated 
snakes was also attempted. 
==PAGE:16==
Introduction 
9 | P a g e  
 C
During the previous year, DTU Biobuilders, in which team I was part of, participated in the 2017 iGEM 
competition. The project dealt with the detection of snake venom, in order to identify the species the 
venom was originated from. As part of that project, we tested three snakes with the aforementioned 
peptide substrate sets, to discover substrates unique for the proteases of the venoms. The data from 
these experiments were also used in this study. The venoms used were from the snakes Bitis gabonica 
(gaboon viper), Bitis arietans (puff adder), and Naja nigricollis (black-necked spitting cobra). Gaboon viper 
is one of the largest vipers with an average length of 1.3 meters, and is native to high rainfall areas of 
West, Central, and East Africa. It secretes large amounts of venom in snakebite cases, its venom toxicity 
however is rather low weight for weight, compared with other venomous snakes52. The African puff adder 
belongs in the same genus with the gaboon viper. It is native mostly to sub-Saharan habitats, with an 
average length of 1 meter. Its venom is extremely potent, being one of the most toxic among viperids, 
and its common occurrence and willingness to bite makes it responsible for the most fatalities than any 
African snake53.  The black-necked spitting cobra is a member of the Elapid snake family, and is responsible 
for bites in mainly sub-Saharan Africa, and it is known to possess cytotoxins in its venom54. In this study it 
was used to assess the activity of the viperid snake venoms, compared to the cobra venom. The 
composition of these venoms can be seen in Figure 7, Figure 8 and Figure 9. As previously mentioned, the 
composition of the snake venoms varies even between individuals of the same species. The relative 
abundancies shown in these figures are described in the Venomics Display Tool of the Tropical 
Pharmacology and Biotherapeutics (TPB) group website. 
Figure 7.Composition of Bitis gabonica venom (Source: http://tropicalpharmacology.com) 
==PAGE:17==
Introduction 
10 | P a g e  
 
 
Figure 8. Composition of Bitis arietans venom (Source: http://tropicalpharmacology.com) 
Figure 9. Composition of Naja nigricollis venom (Source: http://tropicalpharmacology.com) 
==PAGE:18==
Introduction 
11 | P a g e  
 
Three additional venoms from snake species from different parts of the world were also screened for 
protease activity using the peptide substrate sets. The main reasons behind the choice of these snakes, 
were their medical relevance, clinical importance, and their venom composition in terms of proteases. 
The venoms of Bothrops asper (fer-de-lance), Echis carinatus (saw-scaled viper) and Daboia russelii 
(Russell’s viper) were selected. The venom of Crotalus durissus was also sought, but was not obtained due 
to availability restrictions. 
Bothrops asper belongs in the Bothrops species, indigenous to Central America, and is the most 
medically relevant species in that area. Its venom potency and its ability to inject large volumes makes the 
snake able to inflict serious envenomations, manifesting local tissue damage, myonecrosis, hemorrhage 
and coagulopathies55. The saw-scaled viper and Russel’s viper inhabit the geographical region of the world 
where the most envenoming cases are reported, specifically South and South East Asia, and are part of 
the “Big four” medically important snakes in India. Russel’s viper is one of the most commonly 
encountered snakes in these areas, and is responsible for a large amount of snakebites, with remarkable 
fatality rates. Envenomation results in tissue necrosis, myotoxicity, coagulopathy, hemorrhage and acute 
kidney injury56. The saw scaled viper and related species are responsible for more snakebite deaths 
worldwide than any other snake genus. Envenomed patients suffer from local and systemic hemorrhage, 
with up to 20% mortality rates without antivenom treatment57. Their venom compositions can be seen in 
Figure 10, Figure 11 and Figure 12. 
 
Figure 10. Composition of Russell's viper venom (Source: http://tropicalpharmacology.com) 
==PAGE:19==
Introduction 
12 | P a g e  
 
 
Figure 11. Composition of the saw-scaled viper venom (Source: http://tropicalpharmacology.com)
Figure 12. Composition of the Bothrops asper venom (Source: http://tropicalpharmacology.com) 
==PAGE:20==
Introduction 
13 | P a g e  
 
The median lethal dose (LD50, dose that kills 50% of the injected mice) values for the selected snakes 
can be seen in Table 1. It has to be noted that venom yields and LD50s reported in literature vary greatly. 
The numbers given are extracted from the snake database. 
 
Table 1. The fang length, max venom yield, intravenous (IV) and subcutaneous (SC) LD50 values for the selected snakes (Source: 
http://snakedatabase.org/pages/ld50.php) 
Snake 
Fangs (mm) 
Yield (mg) 
LD50 IV (mg/kg) 
LD50 SC (mg/kg) 
B. gabonica 
55 
2400 
0.55 
5 
B. arietans 
30 
750 
0.389 
0.6 
N. nigricollis 
5.8 
200 
0.03 
2 
D. russelii 
13 
240 
0.035 
8.25 
B. asper 
25 
1530 
1.175 
- 
E. carinatus 
- 
72 
0.12 
5.5 
 F
Protease activity can be measured in homogenous assays, relying on a physical change following 
substrate turnover. In detection assays, the change is detected by fluorescent or chromogenic signal from 
a synthetic peptide substrate, upon cleavage from the protease. Proteases tolerate some degree of 
substrate modification, making the addition of reporter groups in the synthetic peptides feasible. These 
include fluorogenic or chromogenic moieties for cleavage detection42. 
Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) assays can be used in cases where the integrity of the 
P’ residues of the substrate (Figure 13) must be preserved. To convert these assays into signal increase 
assays, a variation of the assay with an acceptor-donor pair that allow maximum overlap between 
emission and absorption are used (the acceptor acts as a quencher when in close proximity, e.g. before 
cleavage), and the donor emission is measured. The assay used in this project is explained below.
Figure 13. Conventional nomenclature for protease reactions. The amino acids on amino side of 
the scissile bond are labeled with the letter P and the ones on the carboxyl side are labeled with 
P’. Their corresponding binding sites on the protease are labeled with S and S’, respectively42.  
==PAGE:21==
Materials and methods 
14 | P a g e  
 M
The snake venoms of interest were purchased in lyophilized form (LATOXAN S.A.S., France). The 
venoms of B. gabonica, B. arietans and N. nigricollis were obtained during the DTU Biobuilders project, 
while the venoms of D. russelii (L1132A, Pakistan), E. carinatus sochureki (L1111, Pakistan) and B. asper 
(L1209B, Costa Rica) were obtained during the course of this project. The enzymatic activity of each venom 
was tested with the Protease Substrate Set (JPT Peptide Technologies GmbH, Germany). Brij L23, 30% w/v 
(B4184, Sigma-Aldrich, USA), was diluted to create a 0.1% v/v Brij solution. The solution was used for the 
suspension of the freeze-dried peptides in the substrate set (10μl per well), and the suspension of the 
lyophilized venoms. The venoms were suspended until the starting concentration of 300 μg/ml. The 
volume of 5μl of venom was added to each plate well, for a final concentration of 100 μg/ml. The final 
concentration for the peptide-substrates in the wells was 5 μM. In each experiment, nine wells were 
loaded with control solutions (three wells with just Brij solution, three with venom and three with venom 
and Brij). JPT Peptide Technologies™ Protease Substrate Set is a 384 well plate, comprised of 360 different 
peptides of eight residues long, derived from natural protein cleavage sites described in the scientific 
literature and 24 wells left for controls. These peptides containing the cleavage site sequences, flanked 
by a quencher molecule (DABCYL) and a fluorophore Glu(EDANS)-amide at the N-terminus and the C-
terminus, respectively. Subsequent to incubation with protease, these two moieties are separated. An 
illustration of how the substrate screening works can be seen in Figure 14. The fluorescence intensity was 
measured, using Cytation 5 Imaging Reader (BioTek Instruments, USA) at different time points, with 
excitation at 350nm and emission at 490nm, according to the plate manufacturer’s instructions. 
Figure 14. Illustration of the detection of cleavage 
method in the substrate screening (Source: jpt.com) 
==PAGE:22==
Materials and methods 
15 | P a g e  
 C
The data extraction, cleaning and analysis was done in the Python 3.6 programming language 
(https://www.python.org/), using custom scripts. The packages used were the following: 
 
 
Scipy 0.19.1 (https://www.scipy.org/) for mathematical modeling and data analysis 
 
Pandas 0.20.3 (https://pandas.pydata.org/) for data analysis 
 
Numpy 1.13.3 (http://www.numpy.org/) for data analysis 
 
Scikit-learn 0.19.1 (https://scikit-learn.org/) for machine learning and modeling methods 
 
StatsModels 0.8.0 (https://www.statsmodels.org/) for statistical analysis 
 
Biopython 1.69 (http://biopython.org/) for data mining and API tools 
 
Bioservices 1.5.1 (http://bioservices.readthedocs.io/en/master/) for data mining and API tools 
 
Biomart 0.9.2 (http://www.biomart.org/) for database access 
 
GOATOOLS 0.7.11 (https://omictools.com/goatools-tool) for gene enrichment analysis 
 
Matplotlib 2.1.0 (https://matplotlib.org/) for data visualization  
 
Seaborn 0.8.0 (https://seaborn.pydata.org/) for data visualization 
 
Python modules (math, re, os, sys) 
 
Custom modules and algorithms from “Introduction to Machine Learning and Data Mining” (DTU 
course 02450) 
 
The databases used, or accessed through Python scripts for annotation, were the following: 
 
UniprotKB / Swissprot (http://www.uniprot.org/) 
 
Gene Ontology Consortium (GO) (http://www.geneontology.org/) 
 
NCBI BLAST, Gene, Protein (Entrez) databases (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) 
 
MEROPS – the Peptidase Database (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/merops/) 
 
Protein Data Bank (PDB) (https://www.rcsb.org/) 
 
The tools used, or accessed through Python scripts, were the following: 
 
NCBI Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) 
 
Enrichr (http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/) 
 
PANTHER (http://pantherdb.org/) 
 
WEBGESTALT (http://www.webgestalt.org/) 
 
MEME 
and 
DREME 
tools 
(http://meme-suite.org/tools/meme, 
http://meme-
suite.org/tools/dreme) 
 
Protein Guru MotifGen (http://www.proteinguru.com/) 
 
EnoLOGOS (http://biodev.hgen.pitt.edu/cgi-bin/enologos/enologos.cgi) for motif visualization 
 
PyMOL 2.0.4 (https://pymol.org/) for protein examination, analysis and visualization 
 
==PAGE:23==
Materials and methods 
16 | P a g e  
 
The data extraction was performed in Python with the numerical and data handling packages of scipy 
listed. The measurements of each experiment were extracted from the reading instrument output files, 
and written in Excel files. Statistical and data analyses were performed using the same Python packages, 
along with the statsmodels package. 
Biopython and Bioservices methods and functions were used to query available databases, such as 
Uniprot and Blast, for the substrates of interest. The files of MEROPS database were downloaded and 
analyzed. These files were mined for the protein accession codes of the proteins the peptides were 
originating from, and other relevant information for the study using custom scripts. The information and 
data retrieved from these searches were written in annotation files, as described in the Results section 
further below, and used for further analysis. 
The available online tools Enrichr, Panther of GOC, Webgestalt were utilized to investigate the 
enrichment of the full substrate set, and the peptides that exhibited high fluorescence intensity 
measurements for each snake. Biomart services and databases, and the python tool package GOATOOLS 
were also used for that subject. The reduced amino acid alphabet files were generated using custom 
scripts. Motif discovery and sequence analysis was attempted with the MEME and DREME tools of the 
MEME suite. The MEME suite provides a wide number of motif-based sequence analysis tools. 
The non-linear modeling was achieved using the optimize.curve_fit function of the scipy package, with 
different parameters for each iteration, as mentioned in detail in the modeling section of the Results. Sci-
kit learn was used for the linear modeling attempted in this study, using the Least Squares and Ridge 
Regression modules of the package. PCA was performed using custom algorithms and tools developed for 
the DTU 02450 course. The seaborn package was used for the generation of the clustermaps. Custom 
scripts were developed for the similarity measures analyses. The matplotlib and seaborn packages were 
employed for data visualization, plotting and figure aesthetics.
==PAGE:24==
Results 
17 | P a g e  
 R
 All three screening experiments conducted during this study were successful. Activity profiles of 
proteases for the three snakes of interest were acquired. The fluorescence signal readings of the three 
384-well plates (360 different peptides in each well, and an additional 24 wells for control solutions) were 
extracted from the measurements files, generated from the instrumentation. The well is divided in 16 
rows, labeled with capital letters, and 24 columns, marked with numbers 1 through 24. In addition to the 
three snakes screened during the DTU Biobuilders project experiments, 2,160 activity profiles of proteases 
for 360 different peptide substrate targets across six snakes were obtained. For the first three snakes, 
measurements had been collected at seven different timepoints (background (0 min), 30min, 60min, 
90min, 120min, 180min, 240min), while for the experiments conducted during this study, two more 
timepoints were added (0 min, 15min, 30min, 45min, 60min, 90min, 120min, 180min, 240min), for greater 
clarity in the early stages of the enzymatic activity. The data was visualized and was examined for 
investigation of the activity, and the protease targets. Selected plots of the activity measurements of all 
six snakes can be seen in Figure 15 and Figure 16. The titles of these figures are annotated with the well 
number, the Uniprot ID, and the sequence of the substrate. 
 
 
Figure 15. Plots of selected wells, with measurements for the six snakes 
==PAGE:25==
Results 
18 | P a g e  
 
 
Figure 16. Plots of selected wells, with measurements for the six snakes 
==PAGE:26==
Results 
19 | P a g e  
 
The profiles showed unique of similar activities for each of the snakes. Some interesting classifications 
can be seen in Figure 17. The figures are annotated with the well name, the full protein name the sequence 
is originated from, and the sequence of the substrate. 
  
Figure 17. Protease activity in wells A19, E4 and F10. 
==PAGE:27==
Results 
20 | P a g e  
 
Substrates containing sequences of proteins known to be cleaved in literature by SVMPs or serine 
proteases, or proteins known to be involved in the venom pathology of these snakes, demonstrated 
decent activity. Selected wells are plotted in Figure 18 and Figure 19. These results seem to be reasonable, 
compared to the abundance of proteases in the venom of each snake. 
 
Figure 18. Plots of selected wells, with measurements for the six snakes 
==PAGE:28==
Results 
21 | P a g e  
 
 
As previously stated, the substrate sets contain several known cleavage sites from literature. Some of 
these substrates, which did not appear in the literature study carried out as targets of proteases found in 
snake venom, showed noticeable activity. Examples can be seen in Figure 17 and Figure 20. 
Figure 19. Plots of selected wells, with measurements for the six snakes 
==PAGE:29==
Results 
22 | P a g e  
 
 
Figure 20. Cleavage activity of substrates in wells D7, E3 and M18. 
==PAGE:30==
Results 
23 | P a g e  
 S
The relative increase in the cleavage activity over time was investigated. The measurements were 
visualized in relative signal plots (logarithm with base 2, of the difference between the measurements and 
the background measurement of the well), as can be seen in Figure 21. 
 
Figure 21. Relative signal in selected wells. 
==PAGE:31==
Results 
24 | P a g e  
 
In order to access the statistical significance of the signal increase, a two sample t-test was performed 
for each well, across the snake venom activities. To control the false positive rate, the p-values of the test 
were corrected with the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure. The distribution of p-values across snakes was 
visualized (base 10 logarithm of p-values). The plots show noticeable lower significance of increase in the 
activities of N.nigricollis and D.rusellii, compared to the other snakes, as can be seen in Figure 22. 
 
Bitis arietans, Bothrops asper and Echis carinatus were the snakes whose venom showed high 
enzymatic activity over the sum of all wells. Bitis gabonica and Daboia russelii venoms had lower 
enzymatic activities, while the lowest activity, as expected from the protease content of the venoms, was 
observed for the Naja nigricollis venom. 
Matrix plots for a range of attributes were generated, to examine the correlation of the venom 
activities with each other. An example can be seen in Figure 23, where the last measurements of the 
experiments are compared with each other through scatter plots. Again, the plots show a higher 
correlation between the venoms of B. arietans, B. asper and E. carinatus. 
Figure 22. Histograms of p-values for the snake venom activities, stacked (left) and not stacked (right) 
==PAGE:32==
Results 
25 | P a g e  
 
 A
The Protease Substrate Set peptides were supplied with their sequence and Uniprot accession number. 
All the peptides were eight residues long, with the scissile bond intended to be at the middle of the 
sequence. Due to the small number of residues, the chance of observing identical sequences randomly in 
nature had to be investigated. We were particularly interested in finding how frequent these sequences 
were in the human genome, as the focus of the study was the targets of proteases in envenomings. The 
sequences were searched against the human non-redundant protein sequence database (taxid 9606) of 
NCBI, using BLASTp (protein-protein). The search was performed with the Biopython modules available to 
the BLAST API, according to NCBI’s instructions for API usage. The amino acid substitution matrix used was 
PAM30, and the penalties for gaps were set to 9 and 1, for openings and extensions respectively. From 
Figure 23. Matrix representation of scatter plots, for the measurement values of all snakes at 240 min 
==PAGE:33==
Results 
26 | P a g e  
 
the search, the expect values (E-values) the sequences, the names of the protein matches, NCBI reference 
and accession numbers were extracted. The results were annotated to the already known information 
(sequence, Uniprot accession) of the wells. The E-values were, as expected, higher for such small 
sequences that the values of normal BLAST searches. Out of the 360 peptides, 147 had an E-value of more 
than 1, meaning that the BLAST search would present one random hit on average. However, the best 
scoring proteins were in almost all of the cases correct, predicting the origin of the peptide sequence. A 
distribution of the base 10 logarithm of the E-values can be seen in Figure 24. 
 
The Uniprot accession numbers supplied were used to search UniprotKB for the proteins the peptides 
originated from. Querying with the Bioservices module and using Uniprot’s REST API, the entries of the 
proteins of interest were retrieved. Selected features, namely the Uniprot ID, names and alternative 
names of the protein, and gene ontology aspects (cellular component, molecular function, and biological 
process) of the protein, were parsed using regular expressions and annotated to the peptides. A GO terms 
annotation file was also created for the peptides. Using restrictions on the fluorescence data 
(AFU>30000), peptides that showed high activity for each snake were annotated with the GO terms of the 
protein of origin. 
The MEROPS peptidase database is a manually curated database that contains information about 
protease classification, substrate cleavage, cleavage sites, inhibitors and other valuable features. The 
database files were obtained, and mined for different queries in order to answer different questions of 
interest. For example, the proteases known to cleave the substrates of interest, and the protein families 
they belong to were found. The unique proteases known to cleave the peptides were 257. Out of these, 
7% (18) belong to the M12B subfamily of metalloproteinases, and 23% (61) belong to the S01A subfamily 
of serine proteases. The substrates had in their majority 0-5 annotated proteases, as can be seen in Figure 
25, where some outliers had 30 or more. 
Figure 24. Kernel density estimation of E-values (log10) 
==PAGE:34==
Results 
27 | P a g e  
 
 
Using these data, two major annotation files were constructed. The first contained as attributes the 
full protein sequence, Uniprot accession, protein name, organism and taxonomy that the peptides 
originated from, along with all protease codes known to cleave them, the known proteases and their 
names (known meaning characterized, described and named), the location of the scissile bond and the 
range of residues used in the experimental assays. The second file contained the protease codes and the 
location of their cleavage sites in the peptides themselves. 
All mentioned files were used in further analyses. E
In order to identify proteins differentially cleaved from normal conditions, Gene Set Enrichment 
Analysis (GSEA) and Over Representation Analysis (ORA) tools were employed. These approaches follow 
a similar method: decide on a null hypothesis, test the hypothesis for each gene, produce a p-value, and 
adjust these values for false discovery rate. The incorporation of biological knowledge is done by forming 
gene sets prior to the statistical analysis. In ORA, the significance of the over-representation can be 
accessed using the binomial or hypergeometric distribution. A limitation of this approach is that it ignores 
genes not in the candidate list, so it is very dependent on the cutoff used to construct the list. GSEA is an 
aggregate score approach, in which there is no such limitation. Scores are assigned for each gene based 
on specific scores of the used gene set. These scores can be calculated through various methods58. 
For this type of analyses, four different tools were used, with different variations and sets. The tools 
were GOATOOLS in Python (https://readthedocs.org/projects/goatools/), Enrichr59, WebGestalt60 and 
Panther61. 
 
Figure 25. Histogram of annotated proteases of the peptides in MEROPS 
==PAGE:35==
Results 
28 | P a g e  
 
Since the peptide sequences are different, and fluorescence measurements are in arbitrary units, the 
concentration of each of the peptides was not able to be determined. In ORA, a list of peptides cleaved 
by proteases was constructed using a cutoff limit of 30,000 AFU. This specific limit was used due to the 
activity observed in wells, representing 50% of the maximum mean activity (60,000 AFU). In GSEA, the 
weights assigned to the peptides when needed, were calculated based on the maximum activity observed 
for each snake. The peptides and the respective proteins for enrichment analyses were restricted to those 
present in Homo sapiens. These were 54%, or 193 out of 360 peptides of the full set. For the rest of this 
section, the term full substrate set will refer to this part of the total number of peptides. 
In GOATOOLS, the human gene ontology file (obo) was used as the background set, and the full list of 
peptides in the substrate set was used as the study set, in order to examine the enrichment of the full set. 
The analysis showed a lot of GO terms being enriched for the full set of peptides. Most significantly 
enriched GO terms (in term of adjusted p-values) are shown in Figure 26. Overall, 245 biological process, 
49 molecular function and 40 cellular component terms were found enriched in the full substrate set. 
 
With the exception of a few parent terms, no significant enrichment results were observed for sets of 
high activity peptides for each of the snakes, when using the full peptide set as background set. However, 
the visualization of the GO terms using this module was deemed useful, as seen in Figure 27. 
Figure 26. Histograms of the eight most enriched GO terms in MF and BP for the full set, using GSEA in GOATOOLS 
==PAGE:36==
Results 
29 | P a g e  
 
 
The statistical overrepresentation test (ORA) available in the Panther Classification system for the full 
set of peptides was also utilized. The results observed, as far as overrepresented terms were concerned, 
were similar to the GOATOOLS results. In total, 1425 terms were found enriched, with the most significant 
terms being the general parent terms, such as response to stimulus, signaling, cell communication, signal 
transduction and response to stress. 
Both GSEA and ORA methods were utilized when using the WebGestalt tool, in which the focus was 
the enrichment of the peptides cleaved by snake venom, in comparison to the full substrate set. Lists with 
the protein IDs and weights for each snake were used in GSEA, while the peptide list for each snake and 
the full set as reference were provided in ORA. The results showed no significant enrichment for the snake 
peptide lists, neither in GSEA nor in ORA, with the FDR adjusted values being all above 0.05. 
In Enrichr, the full substrate set as standalone, but also combined with weights for each of the snakes 
(each set as a unique instance), were examined for enrichment. Enrichr provides 129 gene libraries to scan 
and find enrichment results, and interactive visualization tools. As in the previous tools, the three gene 
ontology categories were focused. The full set, as in the previous tools, presented numerous enriched 
terms for all three categories. The ten most significantly enriched terms, based on combined score, of the 
full substrate set can be seen in Figure 28. Interestingly, the most enriched terms on pathway libraries 
(KEGG, WikiPathways, Reactome, BioCarta) were terms involved in complement and coagulation 
cascades, focal adhesion, hemostasis, prothrombin activation, integrin signaling and cancer pathways. 
Figure 27. Visualization of GO child terms in the cellular component category. The input genes were the high 
activity peptides of Bitis arietans 
==PAGE:37==
Results 
30 | P a g e  
 
 
 
Figure 28. The ten most enriched terms for three GO categories. Top: Biological process, middle: Molecular 
function, bottom: Cellular component 
==PAGE:38==
Results 
31 | P a g e  
 
The list of protein genes with adjusted weights for each snake were examined afterwards. More than 
a few enriched terms were noticed only on B. arietans, B. asper and E. carinatus. This implies that high 
activity plays a role in the enrichment results. 
 
As before, the ten most enriched terms by combined score for each snake were visualized with the 
Enrichr tool. Enrichr uses the Benjamini-Hochberg method for correction in multiple hypothesis testing.  
 
 
The corrected p-values of the enriched terms ranged from 0.001 to 0.05. Compared to the enrichment 
results of the full set, these values show notably low enrichment results, with marginally enriched terms. 
Examples of the output can be seen in Figure 29, Figure 30 and Figure 31. 
Figure 29. Ten most enriched Biological process terms for the B. arietans set 
Figure 30. Ten most enriched Biological process terms for the B. asper set 
==PAGE:39==
Results 
32 | P a g e  
 
 
Multiple GSEA and ORA methods were utilized to identify enriched terms in the peptide set. The results 
showed the full substrate set to be enriched for numerous terms in all GO categories. The weighted 
peptide sets for each venom, and the high activity peptide sets for each venom, showed little to no 
enrichment. The higher abundance of cleaved targets for the three snakes of this study, and the lower 
abundance for the other three, makes the enrichment analysis hard to validate and compare. S
In order to identify common patterns in the sequence the proteases recognize in their substrates, 
sequence and motif analyses were carried out. Since the venom is a complex cocktail of numerous 
compounds, it usually contains a large number of proteases or even families of proteases. For that reason, 
the collection of cleaved sequences in the substrate set are reasonably targets of a number of different 
proteases, with different motifs. Nevertheless, the discovery of motifs for each snake was attempted. 
The MEME and DREME software, and the EnoLOGOS tool were employed for this part of the project. 
The MEME algorithm uses the expectation maximization technique for fitting mixture models, without 
the need of each sequence to contain an occurrence of the motif. Thus, through unsupervised learning, it 
is able to discover novel, ungapped motifs in the input sequences. DREME uses similar methods, with the 
difference that it discovers motifs relatively enriched in the input sequences, compared to a reference set. 
Both tools provide options for the number of motifs to discover, the length of the motifs, the background 
frequency of the letters and the alphabet used by the sequences62. EnoLOGOS is a web-based tool that 
creates sequence logos from a variety of input options. These can be aligned sequences, energy 
measurements, probability matrices and count matrices. The generated logo represents a visualization of 
the DNA or protein pattern present. The information content and the frequency of each letter for a given 
position are given by the height of the columns and the size of the letters, respectively63. 
As an attempt to capture the complexity of the motifs, and to generalize the patterns in the protease 
family level, different amino acid alphabets and groupings were utilized. The simplest example is the 
grouping of amino acids in only two categories, hydrophobic or hydrophilic. Studies have shown that the 
full number of amino acid may not be necessary to describe sequence patterns, with 10-13 letter 
Figure 31. Ten most enriched Molecular function terms for the E. carinatus set 
==PAGE:40==
Results 
33 | P a g e  
 
alphabets being adequate to describe the protein structure without losing information64,65. Usually 
grouping is based on polarity, size and peptide bonds torsion angles. The alphabets used here stem from 
research in reduced amino acid alphabets from literature, and can be seen in Table 2. They were either 
the result of the grouping of residues based on the correlation of substitution matrices65, or were based 
on sequence alignment and the physicochemical properties of the amino acids66. Others were using 
hierarchical clustering and were taking the local protein structures into consideration64,67. Accounting also 
for the original amino acid codes, ten different alphabets, with increasingly reduced complexity in the 
letters used were investigated. The sequences of the peptides that exhibited high activity for each of the 
snakes, were converted into these alphabets, and used for motif discovery in the aforementioned tools. 
 
Table 2. Amino acids alphabets used for motif discovery. The names are from the author of the study the alphabet is originating 
from, and the number of amino acid clusters 
Alphabet 
Grouping 
Murphy-2 
[I V L M C A G S T P F Y W]                       [E D N Q K R H] 
Li-2 
[C M F I L V W Y]                       [A G S T N Q D E H R K P] 
Murphy-4 
[L V I M C]       [A G S T P]       [F Y W]      [E D N Q K R H] 
Smith-4 
[D E K R H N Q S T]        [I L V F W Y C M]       [A G]        P 
Murphy-8 
[L V I M C]  [A G]   [S T]  P   [F Y W]  [E D N Q]   [K R]   H 
Echebest-9 
G   P  [I V]  [F Y W]  [A L M]  [E Q R K]  [N D]  [H S]  [T C] 
Murphy-10 
[L V I M]   C  A  G  [S T]   P   [F Y W]  [E D N Q]   [K R]   H 
Smith-10 
[D E]  [K R H]  [N Q]  [S T]  [I L V]  [F Y W]  [A G]  P  C  M 
Echebest-13 
G   P   [I V]  [F Y W]  A  L  M  E  [Q R K]  [N D]  [H S]  T  C 
 
After testing of the different options offered by the MEME suite, the optimal parameters for significant 
results were decided to be the search of a single motif on each sequence, with a motif length of 2-6 
residues. The background frequency model of the amino acids was set to the frequency in Homo sapiens, 
with the sum of them when multiple amino acids were clustered. 
The reduced amino acid alphabets resulted in higher information content for each position, but 
performed poorly in the motif discovery. The restriction of the peptides into those of human origin did 
not produce different results. On the contrary, the best results in terms of the motif length and statistical 
significance (lower p-values and E-values) were observed when using the Smith-10, Echebest-13, or the 
normal amino acid alphabet. These results are consistent with the minimum number of letters necessary 
to describe the protein structure in literature. Some examples of the output can be seen in Figure 32 and 
Figure 33 below. 
==PAGE:41==
Results 
34 | P a g e  
 
 
This part of the study was deemed unsuccessful and more investigation on this subject during this 
study was avoided for certain reasons. Firstly, the complexity of the venoms and thus the ignorance of the 
proteases or families of proteases responsible for the cleavage makes motif discovery without separating 
the individual components extremely difficult. Secondly, it was assumed that the low number of 
sequences available for as target for certain snake species reduce the chances of finding significant motifs. 
Finally, since the substrate set is based on literature, it relies heavily on proteases, cleavage sites abundant 
and well characterized, usually of medical relevance. Having a huge subset of substrates biased for these 
proteases (such as caspases that cleave almost uniquely after Asp, or serine proteases that cleave mostly 
after Lys or Arg) presents another problem in motif discovery. 
 
 
Sequence analysis was performed with the information of the MEROPS database. The relatively few in 
number venom proteases, are annotated in subfamilies M12B and S01A for metalloproteinases and serine 
proteases, respectively. The substrates of the proteases belonging in these subfamilies were extracted 
from the database, and specificity models were created, as visualized in Figure 34 and Figure 35. 
Figure 32. Motif discovery with MEME, for the high activity substrate 
sequences of B. asper. E-value: 1.3e-11, present in 31 out of 68 sequences 
Figure 33. Motif discovery with MEME, for the high 
activity substrate sequences of E. carinatus. E-value: 
3.0e-15, present in 22 out of 94 sequences 
==PAGE:42==
Results 
35 | P a g e  
 
 
The M12B subfamily seems to have a preference for Ala in the P1 residue, and Leu in the P1’ residue. 
Small aliphatic amino acids are more frequent. The S01A subfamily has a strong preference for Lys and 
Arg residues, following the most characterized protease of the subfamily, trypsin. 
Figure 34. Heatmap representation of the counts of amino acids for each position, for the substrates of M12B 
subfamily of proteases 
Figure 35. Heatmap representation of the counts of amino acids for each position, for the 
substrates of S01A subfamily of proteases 
==PAGE:43==
Results 
36 | P a g e  
 M
In an effort to describe and develop a method to predict the enzymatic activity of the venoms in the 
substrate set, non-linear modeling was performed on the data obtained from the experiments, estimating 
the mathematical parameters of these biological processes. Additionally, linear modeling was used on 
two datasets, in order to find possible linear relations in the amino acid frequencies of the sequences and 
the rates of the cleavage activities, or the number of known proteases and cleavage sites for the 
sequences and the cleavage activities. 
The equation used to create the enzymatic activity models was adapted from the accumulation of a 
biological product under a steady signal equation, described in Chapter 2 of Uri Alon’s An Introduction to 
System’s Biology68. 
 
𝑌(𝑡) = 𝑌𝑠𝑡(1 − 𝑒−𝛼𝑡) 
Equation 1. Product accumulation equation, where t represents time, Yst the product steady state, and a the product 
degradation 
 
Equation 1 is meant to describe product accumulation in gene regulation, where the degradation term 
plays an important role in biological systems. Here, it is replaced by a rate of the substrate conversion, 
which can be seen as the slope of the fluorescence intensity. The higher the rate, the lower the 
exponential term of the equation, and therefore the closer the fluorescence to the maximum observed 
fluorescence. This equation has been used successfully to describe protease kinetics in experiments 
utilizing fluorescence assays69, and phage substrate methods70, along with equations to convert 
fluorescence in FRET assays, to substrate concentration71. Although the experiments conducted use a 
similar to FRET method to detect enzymatic cleavage, the existence of a quencher and not a donor-
acceptor pair, renders the conversion of fluorescence to substrate concentration difficult. Thus, the 
fluorescence measurement values were used directly in the equation. The equation was also adjusted for 
the background fluorescence measured in the wells before the addition of the venoms, as seen in Equation 
2. 
𝐹(𝑡) = (𝐹𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝐹𝑚𝑖𝑛) × (1 − 𝑒−𝜆𝑡) + 𝐹𝑚𝑖𝑛 
Equation 2.The equation used in the modeling estimations, where Fmax and Fmin are the maximum and minimum fluorescence 
measurements, respectively. The rate is represented with the λ symbol 
 
When the measurement values with the background measurements extracted were used, the Fmin term 
is replaced by zero, and the resulting function can be seen on Equation 3. 
 
𝐹(𝑡) = 𝐹𝑚𝑎𝑥 × (1 − 𝑒−𝜆𝑡) 
Equation 3. The resulting equation when the measurements with extracted background were used 
==PAGE:44==
Results 
37 | P a g e  
 
Using the optimization and curve fit modules of scipy, the parameters of the model (λ, Fmin and Fmax) 
were estimated for each well and each snake. Multiple versions of the estimated parameters were 
formed, testing different initialization, bounds and measurements for the fit function. For every iteration, 
the models were fitted into the original measurements, and their ability to describe correctly the 
enzymatic activity was accessed. Examples of the model fit can be seen in Figure 36 and Figure 37. 
 
The parameter estimation was initially performed with no restriction bounds, with initializations of λ 
= 0.01 (relatively high enzymatic activity), Fmin = background measurement of the well for the given venom, 
and Fmax = maximum measurement of the well for the given venom. The estimated parameters of the 
equation produced and unexpected behavior when estimating with the raw measurement values. The 
fluorescence intensity is measured in arbitrary fluorescence units. For venoms in wells that presented no 
enzymatic activity, it was sometimes the case that the initial measurement was higher than the last 
Figure 36. Examples of model fits. Top: Echis carinatus enzymatic activity and model fit on 
well E13, bottom: Bitis arietans activity and fit on well M14 
==PAGE:45==
Results 
38 | P a g e  
 
measurement. That fact resulted in overestimation of the parameters in the model, showing high rates 
and huge maximum intensities. Adding bounds for the parameters of the model (0 < λ < 0.5, 0 < Fmin < inf, 
0 < Fmax < inf) merely restricted the overestimated rates to the highest upper bound, still presenting 
activity in certain wells and venoms where the enzymatic activity should be non-existent. To overcome 
this problem, the measurements reduced for the background measurements were used in the parameter 
estimation. When applied, the rates of some of the wells with no enzymatic activity, since all of the 
measurement values were zero, stayed exactly at the initialization value. In order to present these 
instances accurately as having no enzymatic activities, the rate initialization values was changed to 0.0001. 
That had no effect to the estimation of the rates of instances with high enzymatic activity, while the 
instances with no enzymatic activity were represented correctly at models (a rate value of 0.0001 is low 
enough to show no activity on the model). 
Figure 37. Examples of model fits. Top: Bothrops asper (initials BA were already in use for B. arietans, hence BO) enzymatic 
activity and model fit on well N22, bottom: Daboia russelii (Russel's Viper, hence the RV initials) activity and fit on well C15 
==PAGE:46==
Results 
39 | P a g e  
 
As expected, the best fits of the model were observed in measurements that were relatively high in 
fluorescence intensity, and had curves that were similar to the exponential curve representing the product 
accumulation. For each snake venom, the wells that passed the statistical significance tests were plotted 
with their model fits. An example can be seen in Figure 38. The estimated rates, minimum and maximum 
fluorescence values of all iterations of model parameter estimations were stored and used for further 
analysis. 
 
The distribution of the rates of all wells for each snake was visualized. As seen in Figure 39, the highest 
rates were observed for B. arietans, closely followed by E. carinatus, B. asper and B. gabonica. D. russelii 
and N. nigricollis venoms exhibited lower rates in general. Enzymatic activities with rates higher than 
0.001 can be viewed as reactions with cleaved substrates, where reactions with rates lower than this 
arbitrary threshold show no enzymatic activity. The wells that kept the rate initialization values (0.0001) 
are also apparent, mostly originating from N. nigricollis, supporting the fact that these wells showed no 
enzymatic activity.  Figure 39 comes from the last iteration of rates estimations. 
Figure 38. Wells with most statistically significant enzymatic activities for Bitis gabonica. The base 10 logarithm of the p-values 
can be seen at the end of the title of each plot 
==PAGE:47==
Results 
40 | P a g e  
 
 
The highest peak in the histogram grouping is exhibited by B. gabonica rates, indicating more wells 
with similar enzymatic activity rates. E. carinatus, B. asper and B. arietans show a slightly shifted 
distribution towards higher rates, implying higher enzymatic activities. 
The proteases responsible for the enzymatic activities observed in the experiments, are recognizing 
the sequences of the peptides. To investigate possible linear relations of the rates of the enzymatic 
activities and the amino acids present in the peptide sequences, as an indication of the specificity of the 
enzymes, linear modeling was performed. The linear model was based in the algebraic operation seen in 
Equation 4. 
 
𝐴 × 𝑐= 𝑦 
Equation 4.Linear model equation, where A is the matrix of amino acid counts for the peptide sequences, c are the coefficients 
vector for the amino acids, and y is the rates vector 
 
A matrix of the amino acid counts for the peptide sequences was created, with the rows of the 
matrix being the wells, and the columns the amino acids. For each venom and the corresponding rates, 
the coefficients were estimated with the scikit-learn package, using Ordinary Least squares and Ridge 
Regression. All the iterations of the estimated rates were used in the linear modeling, to evaluate their 
performance. The best linear regressions for all venoms were observed with the last rate estimation, 
with bound restrictions, low initialization value and measurement values with the background values 
extracted. An additional restriction for rates below 0.1, seemed to also improve the model performance. 
Figure 39. Histogram plot of the rates of the all venoms. Again, the rates are shown in logarithmic scale 
==PAGE:48==
Results 
41 | P a g e  
 
The best coefficients of determination (R2) were observed for the venoms of Bitis arietans and 
Bothrops asper (0.27 and 0.4, respectively). Using the linear model, the rates of each snake were predicted 
once more, as seen in Figure 40. It must be noted that the prediction of the same data that was used to 
train the model, presents a huge bias to the evaluation of the model performance, and the only reason it 
was applied in these circumstances was for visualization of the data. 
 
The linear models of relation between rates and amino acid counts were deemed inadequate for 
further analysis. Other linear models investigating relationships between the protease counts annotated 
for each peptide in the MEROPS database, and their respective rates were also unsuccessful. P
Principal component analysis is a standard data analysis tool, used to reduce the dimensionality of 
datasets, while retaining most of the variance of the observations. It is used in numerous fields as a 
method to reduce the complexity of confusing datasets and produce a way to separate the noise and the 
meaningful information, assisting in the interpretation of results and in drawing meaningful conclusions. 
PCA deploys the mathematical technique of singular value decomposition (SVD)72.  The approach is based 
a covariance matrix, providing information on the correlations of the system. PCA represents a linear 
transformation, producing a diagonalized covariance matrix, thereby removing linear correlations 
between the variables. By ordering the eigenvalues of the transformation decreasingly, a large part of the 
fluctuations of the system can be described in only a few principal components73. The explanation of the 
underlying mathematical operations of PCA is beyond the scope of this study. 
Figure 40. Scatter plot of the estimated rates for Bothrops asper (y axis), and the predicted rates of the 
linear model (x axis), in logarithmic scale 
==PAGE:49==
Results 
42 | P a g e  
 
PCA was performed in two different datasets. The first was the measurement dataset, where each 
unique measurement represents an observation, and the wells of the plate represent the variables. This 
dataset was consisted of 48 rows-observations (all snake measurements were interpreted as different 
observations), and 360 columns. The second dataset contained the estimated rates of each well, for all six 
snakes. This dataset had 6 rows for the rates, and 360 columns for the wells. PCA was also performed for 
the transpose of these matrices also. The datasets were normalized before the analysis. The plot of the 
first and second principal component of the first dataset can be seen in Figure 41. The first principal 
component seems to capture the fluorescence intensity of the measurements, while the second appears 
to express the pattern of enzymatic activity in the measurements. The initial measurements are clustered 
together, while the rest of the measurements seem to produce distinct patterns. 
 
The first two principal components accounted for 79% of the variance of the dataset, as seen in Figure 
43. All of the variance in the dataset can be explained by the first 7 principal components. The variables-
wells that contributed the most variance in the principal components were well A4 for PC1, and well G22 
for PC2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 41. PCA for all snake measurements. The base 2 logarithm of the measurements was used in this dataset 
==PAGE:50==
Results 
43 | P a g e  
 
 
The coordinates of the first and second principal component for the second dataset can be seen in 
Figure 42 below. As with the linear modeling, the last iteration of rates (with bounds, extracted 
background and initialization value of 0.0001) was used in PCA. B. arietans and D. russelii rates are 
distanced, while the other snakes are clustered closely. The variance retained for the two principal 
components is 66%. 
 
Figure 43. Variance explained by the principal components. 
Figure 42. Plot of PC1 and PC2 for rates dataset 
==PAGE:51==
Results 
44 | P a g e  
 
The wells that capture the most variance are N17 for PC1, and K1 for PC2. Given that K1 shows very 
low fluorescence intensity for all snakes, and thus the rates of that well would be of no particular meaning, 
the rates PCA seems to be unsuccessful. 
As mentioned, PCA for the wells was also performed for both datasets. Through the annotation of the 
protease information for the peptide sequences from the MEROPS database, relationships between the 
expression of the wells in the PCA and relevant information for the families and the counts of proteases 
was investigated. 
The PCA for the wells and measurements dataset (360 wells as rows, 48 measurements as columns) 
was labelled for peptides that contained cleavage sites for proteases of the S01A and M12B subfamilies 
of proteases. Known and characterized SVSPs and SVMPs are assigned in these families, respectively. As 
seen in Figure 44, no particular clustering was observed. 
 
The PCA for the wells with the rates dataset was used to visualize the expression of all rates for each 
well. The annotation files produced were used to label wells with the counts of annotated cleavage sites, 
and examine possible clustering. As seen in Figure 45, no relationship between how many proteases are 
known to cleave these peptides, and their rates was observed. 
Figure 44. PCA of wells with measurement dataset. The annotation files were used to label wells with 
S01A and M12B cleavage sites 
==PAGE:52==
Results 
45 | P a g e  
 
 U
In order to examine similarities and differences in the activities of the venoms in the experiments, 
multiple unsupervised learning methods were used. 
The first method was hierarchical agglomerative clustering, a widely used method in multiple fields. 
The aim in hierarchical clustering is to find a hierarchy of partitions which may reveal a structure in the 
data. The method starts with a separate cluster for each point and progressively merges the two single 
clusters until a single cluster remains. Different similarity measures for the clustering merges define 
variations of the hierarchical clustering74. The hierarchical clustering method was employed to obtain 
clusters of the fluorescent activity and the rates for the venoms of interest, as well as the peptides in the 
substrate plate. The average linkage method, where the distance between groups is the average distance 
between the all pairs in the two groups, was used. The distance metric used was the Euclidean distance. 
The z-scores, or standard scores of the last measurements for the venoms (240 min) were calculated 
using Equation 5. The base 10 logarithm of the rates was used to produce the second cluster hierarchy. 
𝑧𝑖= 𝑥𝑖−𝜇
𝜎
 
Equation 5. Calculation of the standard score for a sample/population. The x term represents the given value, the μ the sample 
mean and σ the sample standard deviation 
The clusters produced from the measurement scores and the rates can be seen in Figure 46 and 
Figure 47, respectively. 
Figure 45. PCA of wells with the rates dataset. The wells are labelled with the number of known cleavage 
sites from the annotation files 
==PAGE:53==
Results 
46 | P a g e  
 
 
Figure 46. Hierarchical clustering of the last measurements z-scores 
==PAGE:54==
Results 
47 | P a g e  
 
 
Figure 47. Hierarchical clustering of the base 10 logarithms of estimated rates 
==PAGE:55==
Results 
48 | P a g e  
 
The two clusters seem to reach a consensus in the grouping of Bitis arietans and Bothrops asper 
venoms, followed by Echis carinatus. There is disagreement in the grouping of the rest of the venoms, 
clustering Daboia russelii with Bitis gabonica in the z-score clustermap, and with N. nigricollis in the rates 
clustermap. The enzymatic activities, better expressed from the estimated rates, of D. russelii and N. 
nigricollis venoms follow similar patterns. 
The annotation files containing the cleavage sites of known proteases in the peptides of the substrate 
set were used to construct count matrices of proteases belonging to each protein family, for each peptide. 
Most of the peptides had 0 to 3 proteases annotated, as mentioned above. The family counts were 
examined, in order to discover if the annotated data agreed with the enzymatic activity exhibited in the 
experiments. An example can be seen as a clustermap, visualized in Figure 48. 
 
The comparison of the enzymatic activity in substrates, with the protease families known to have 
cleavage sites in their sequence, did not show a correlation between the two. 
Figure 48. Cluster of annotated proteases for a range of 40 peptide substrates of the set 
==PAGE:56==
Results 
49 | P a g e  
 
The kernel density estimation (KDE), a deterministic approximation of the Gaussian mixture model, 
was another method used. The KDE of the rates for all snakes can be seen in Figure 49. N. nigricollis and 
D. russelii produce distinct density patterns, where the rest of the four snakes can barely be separated. 
However, the highest peak is exhibited by B. gabonica rates, indicating more wells with similar enzymatic 
activity rates. The three remaining snake venoms, and especially E. carinatus show a slightly shifted 
distribution towards higher rates, implying higher enzymatic activities. 
 
The matrix plot of the base 10 logarithm values of the rates for all snakes can be seen in Figure 50. A 
number of rates of enzymatic activities of N. nigricollis can be seen at the initialization value of the model, 
0.0001. This pattern seems to be contained only for that specific venom. It can be observed that the rates 
are mostly clustering around four “boxes”, those that have exhibit activity in both venoms, in one of the 
venoms, or none of them. For example, in the case of B. arietans and E. carinatus, or B. arietans and B. 
asper, most of the rates are clustered in the upper right area, indicating similar high activities.  As 
previously mentioned, it can be clearly seen after model simulations that rates below 0.001 show almost 
no enzymatic activity. 
Figure 49. Kernel density estimation for the estimated rates of the venoms 
==PAGE:57==
Results 
50 | P a g e  
 
 
After these observations, similarity measures, namely Jaccard similarity or Jaccard Index and Odds 
Ratios (ORs), were employed to quantify how similar the activities of these venoms are. Similarity 
measures required binary attributes. A cutoff value of 0.0005 was chosen, to indicate activity if the value 
is higher, and no activity if the value is lower, as seen in Table 3. Jaccard similarity takes values from 0 to 
1, with 0 showing no similarity, and 1 showing identical observations75. The Jaccard similarity is defined 
as seen in Equation 6. 
 
Comparison of snakes 1,2 
Rate of venom 1 > 0.0005 
Rate of venom 1 < 0.0005 
Rate of venom 2 > 0.0005 
f11 
f01 
Rate of venom 2 < 0.0005 
f10 
f00 
 
Table 3. Conversion of rates into binary, and usage in similarity measures 
Figure 50. Matrix plot of all the rates. The values are seen in logarithmic scale 
==PAGE:58==
Results 
51 | P a g e  
 
𝐽(𝑥, 𝑦) = 
𝑓11
𝑓11 + 𝑓01 + 𝑓10
 
Equation 6. Jaccard similarity measure, where f11 the count of observations where both are 1, f01 and f10 the counts of 
observations where one of them is 0 and the other is 1 
 
Odds ratios are used mostly in clinical studies, as a measure of association between exposure and 
outcome. The method compares occurrences of the outcome of interest, and exposure to a variable of 
interest, and quantifies their association76. The odds ratio between these variables is defined as seen in 
Equation 7. The odds ratio is higher than 1 if exposure is associated with higher odds of outcome, and 
lower than 1 if exposure is associated with lower odds of outcome. Log-odds ratios are used to infer 
statistical significance in 95% confidence intervals. In this case, the method was adapted to interpret the 
similarity between the rates of any two given venoms. 
 
𝑂𝑅= 𝑝11 / 𝑝01
𝑝10 / 𝑝00
= 𝑝11  × 𝑝00
𝑝10  × 𝑝01
 
Equation 7. Odds ratio, where p11 is the probability of observations where both are 1, p00 where both are 0, p01 and p10 the 
counts of observations where one of them is 0 and the other is 1 
 
The Jaccard similarity values for the rates of all venoms can be seen in Figure 51. As expected from 
previous results, B. arietans, B. asper and E. carinatus have higher values, and therefore higher similarity. 
D. russelii and N. nigricollis activities show low similarity between them, something that partly counters 
the results observed in hierarchical clustering. 
Figure 51. Heatmap of Jaccard similarity values for the binarized rates of all venoms 
==PAGE:59==
Results 
52 | P a g e  
 
 
The OR values for the rates of all venoms can be seen in Figure 52. The same results of the Jaccard 
similarity were observed, with heightened differences. It should be noted that none of the Odds ratios 
had values lower than 1.  
 
Confidence intervals (CI) are used in order to infer statistical significance of ORs77. A large confidence 
interval indicates a low level of precision, were a small interval indicates high level of precision. If the 
lower 95% confidence interval overlaps with the null value (OR = 1), statistical significance is not reached. 
The CIs are with α = 0.05 are calculated as seen in Equation 8. 
 
𝑈𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 95% 𝐶𝐼= 𝑒
(ln(𝑂𝑅) + 1.96 × √1
𝑓11 + 1
𝑓10 + 1
𝑓01 + 1
𝑓00 ) 
𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 95% 𝐶𝐼= 𝑒
(ln(𝑂𝑅) − 1.96 × √1
𝑓11 + 1
𝑓10 + 1
𝑓01 + 1
𝑓00 ) 
Equation 8. Upper and lower 95% confidence intervals definitions 
 
Statistical significance was confirmed for almost all of the ORs comparison between snake venoms. 
The two comparisons that overlapped with the null value were B. gabonica and E. carinatus, and D. russelii 
and E. carinatus. The comparisons that presented the highest significance were B. arietans and B. asper, 
and B. arietans and E. carinatus (lower CIs at 4.5 and 2.9, respectively).
Figure 52. Heatmap Odds ratios for the binarized rates of all venoms 
==PAGE:60==
Discussion 
53 | P a g e  
 D
The experimental results of the project showed that the Viperidae snake venoms exhibit extensive 
enzymatic activity. With the exceptions of two peptides of the substrate set (wells F10 and G12) for E. 
carinatus, no unique classifications can be observed. However, if the investigated venom space is reduced, 
substrates that can be used to identify snake venoms can be found. The utilization of these substrates as 
a venom detection tool would be extremely difficult, due to the highly variable snake venom composition 
of the same species, and the noise demonstrated in the fluorescence intensity of the measurements. 
Although substantial activity is observed throughout the substrate plates, there were wells that showed 
very low or no enzymatic activity, (such as C18 or F18). These could be seen as negative controls – 
indicators of the presence of snake venom. It also implies that proteases possess at least some type of 
specificity, and are not cleaving substrates indistinctively. Although the controls used for all assays were 
satisfactory, more experiments are needed, to verify the reproducibility of these experiments. The snake 
venom concentration was the same in all experiments, and except for B. gabonica, it is on the upper limits 
of a concentration indicative of envenoming cases. Thus, experiments with lower venom concentration 
would be of great interest in terms of defining the limits of enzymatic activity. The addition of more time 
points for the measurements, especially in the early stage of the reactions, for greater clarity of the 
activities and fidelity in the models, should be considered. 
The highest activities were observed for E. carinatus, followed closely by B. asper and B. arietans, with 
B. gabonica following after them. These venoms had the highest number of substrates (161 for EC, 129 
for BO, 133 for BA, 37 for BG) with important significant increase (p-values less than 0.001) in fluorescence 
intensity. Additionally, the distribution of the estimated rates of the enzymatic activities for these venoms 
are shifted towards higher values. They had the highest number of substrates passing set arbitrary cutoff 
values such as 50% of the steady state, and their steady state intensity values were higher than the other 
snake venoms. D. russelii exhibited low activity compared to the aforementioned snakes, with few wells 
showing high fluorescence, and satisfactory protease activity curves. Close to D. russelii, the lowest 
activity was observed, as expected, for the venom of N. nigricollis. For these two snakes, 11 wells for each, 
out of 360 passed the statistical significance tests. These results can be associated, to a certain extent, to 
the potency of the venoms, and the abundance of proteases in their composition. N. nigricollis has a very 
low percentage of proteases (2.4% according to TPB group), that belong in one of the protease classes, 
SVMPs. Similar reasoning can be followed for D. russelii. The venom of D. russelii used for the experiments, 
originated from Pakistan, where the venom of these species presents a notably low percentage of SVMPs 
(6.9%), compared to the same species in other geographical regions. The lack of SVSPs in these venoms, 
in addition to the bias of the substrate plate towards serine protease substrates that will be explained 
below, and the low content in SVMPs, could explain the lack of activity observed. Although B. gabonica 
venom is rich in proteases (49.3% in total, 22.9% SVMPs, 26.4% SVSPs), and it is the species with the 
highest amount of venom secretion, it is known that it is presents low toxicity when compared with other 
species, and escpecially B. arietans, with which they belong to the same genus. The lack of high toxicity 
might be related with the relatively mediocre enzymatic activity observed in the experiments. The rest 
three snakes are rich in both classes of proteases and their venoms are extremely potent. Their respective 
relative abundancies of proteases are 57.93% (38.45% SVMPs, 19.48% SVSPs) for B. arietans, 59.3% 
(41.1% SVMPs, 18.2% SVSPs) for B. asper, and 61.15% (56.57% SVMPs, 4.58% SVSPs) for E. carinatus. The 
decrease of fluorescence intensity at later time points in certain cases has to also be noted. This fact makes 
==PAGE:61==
Discussion 
54 | P a g e  
 
the comparison between venom activities difficult, and complicates the modeling of the protease 
activities. 
The information supplied along with the substrate plates from JPT Peptide Technologies, along with 
the annotation of available information from databases, revealed the targets of the enzymatic activities 
of the venoms, as also discussed in the results section. A number of cleaved substrates originate from 
proteins known to be targets of these proteases, or proteins involved in biological pathways that are 
important in the snake venom pathophysiology. Examples include fibrinogen16,40,51 (D2, 022), component 
proteins of the complement system49,78 (D8, E19, E20, H19, M2, M7, M5), coagulation factor40,50 (E6, F7, 
F20, G17, I5, K7, L18, M5, N1), plasminogen49 (L9), prothrombin43 (F6, F8) and integrin45 (G8, N11) 
sequences. The venom proteases seem to also target other proteases, such as serine proteases not 
involved in coagulation cascades (F10, O12), trypsin (B5) and pepsin (C21). Protein kinases (D4, I3, J12, 
J15, L11, O15, O18, O21) and ribosomal proteins (C4, C8, N23) were also among their targets. Some other 
targets seem rational when the protease functions are taken into account, such as the degradation of the 
extracellular matrix and membrane proteins (C1, C2, C13, J10, K24, M20, N12), induction of apoptosis 
(E14, E16, I24, M18) and tissue necrosis (D7, M9, M10, M12, M23, N10, N17). Targets that are related to 
transcription (A19, E4, F14, F22, H13, M14, O10), DNA repair (O6) and signal transduction (E23, B20) were 
also present. These targets imply that snake venom proteases interfere with numerous biological 
processes in the victims’ cells and tissue, but also indicate a general lack of specificity. 
The enrichment analyses conducted showed that the substrates sets used for the experiments were 
enriched for a high number of gene ontology terms, as mentioned in the results section. No particular 
enrichment was observed for the substrates of the each of the venoms, selected for high fluorescence 
intensity, with the exception of few general “parent” terms, such as tumor necrosis factor binding, and 
serine endopeptidase activity, that were already enriched in the full substrate set. These results indicate 
that the proteases are not targeting specific molecular functions, or biological processes in human 
physiology, that could be inferred by such analyses. 
The motif and sequence analysis did not produce any conclusive results. The reduced amino acid 
alphabets and groupings of amino acids based on their physicochemical properties did not seem to assist 
in any meaningful way in motif discovery. Statistical significance and adequately low Expect values were 
observed only when searching for a single motif in the sequences. This is inherently problematic, when 
considering that proteases classified in different subfamilies, and surely proteases in different families 
have unique specificities, and more than likely recognize different sequences. In order to overcome that 
and to produce useful specificity models, the cleaved peptides must be mapped to the proteases 
responsible for their cleavage. That was not possible in this study, since whole snake venoms were 
incubated with the candidate substrates.  
Another difficulty encountered was the content of the substrate set in terms of the peptide sequences. 
Since the plate was assembled from substrates of proteases from literature, it presented a bias for well 
characterized proteases. More specifically, as the data annotation showed, a lot of peptides were targets 
of caspases, which show extremely strict specificity for Asp residues at the P1 position, and serine 
proteases such as trypsin, with high preference for Lys/Arg residues at the P1 position. Hints of these 
results were also present in the gene enrichment analysis. The annotation of available information for the 
substrates for the MEROPS database was of particular importance. All the peptides of the substrate set 
were present in the database files, with some of them being well characterized, with cleavage site 
==PAGE:62==
Discussion 
55 | P a g e  
 
positions and the proteases responsible for them. A significant number of them did not contain any known 
cleavage sites for proteases. This indicates a possibility of characterizing new cleavage sites and/or new 
proteases that cleave these substrates, and are present in snake venom. The intention of the substrate 
set suppliers was for the scissile bond to be in the middle of the substrates. However, a significant number 
of the peptide sequences contained cleavage sites in positions, apart from the middle of the sequence. 
That renders the development of specificity models impossible, since it is more than likely that the 
peptides were cleaved in more than on position, and the position of the scissile bond could not be 
determined. 
Snake venom related serine proteases characterized in the MEROPS database belong in the S1 family, 
and specifically in the S01A subfamily of serine proteases. The S01A subfamily is well characterized, with 
tens of thousands substrates known. Proteases of this subfamily exhibit a wide preference for residues 
surrounding the scissile of the substrates. Therefore, specificity models of the whole subfamily are of no 
particular use. In addition, the models are biased towards proteases with large numbers of substrates, 
such as trypsin. Snake venom metalloproteinases seem to be classified in the M12B subfamily of 
metalloproteinases. M12A and M12B subfamilies show very different specificities, with the much better 
characterized M12A subfamily having a preference for Asp and Glu residues at the P1 position, M12B 
having a preference for smaller aliphatic residues, and especially Leu, at the P1’ position.  
The non-linear modeling performed generated profiles of the enzymatic activity of the venoms, in each 
of the peptides of the substrate set. The goodness of fit of these models was in most substrates, especially 
in those with high output of fluorescence intensity in the experiments, extremely satisfactory. Every 
iteration of the model parameter estimations seemed to improve the fits of the model to the enzymatic 
activities. These models seem adequate in describing, and possibly predicting the activity of the venoms 
in these particular substrates. The linear modeling attempted with the estimated rates and the counts of 
amino acids for each substrate position, as well as the known proteases that cleave the peptides, did not 
produce any fruitful results.  
The investigation of a relationship between the enzymatic activities of the substrates and the 
annotation of known cleavage sites of the substrates did not lead to meaningful conclusions up to this 
point, and proved that the venom activities are more complicated. For example, wells F6, F8, and F10 
contain substrates that have cleavage sites for proteases that belong in the S01 family of MEROPS 
database. The highest activity in these wells was exhibited by E. carinatus venom, although that snake 
venom contained a small percentage of serine proteases compared to the other venoms tested. This result 
indicates that the annotation information of proteases characterized in literature for the substrates of 
interest is not enough to describe the venom activities of the experiments. With these studies, it is shown 
that the use of information for the protease families is inadequate for predicting the protease activity in 
characterized substrates. The intraspecies variability of the venom composition, and the potency of the 
venoms may also contribute to this fact. The use of specific information and/or lower levels of 
classification for the snake venom proteases, and the knowledge of each venom composition specifically, 
might be able to overcome these issues. 
The principal component analysis conducted appeared to provide a way to characterize, and 
distinguish the enzymatic activities of the snakes. Furthermore, it was useful in determining the extent of 
enzymatic activity, and a way to compare the activities across snakes. No particular clustering or groupings 
were observed. The use of the annotated data of all proteases, and proteases that belong in the venom 
==PAGE:63==
Discussion 
56 | P a g e  
 
proteases families, that are known to have cleavage sites in the substrates, did not yield any meaningful 
results. The distribution of these substrates seems to be uninfluenced by these attributes. The clustering 
and similarity methods used confirmed the observations of the experiments, and previous analyses. The 
three snakes with the highest enzymatic activities (B. arietans, B. asper, E. carinatus) seem to cluster 
together in these methods. The noticeable result here is the closer similarity of the venom of B. arietans 
with these two snakes, and not B. gabonica, with which they belong to the same genus. The PCA 
projections were also used to investigate if peptides with known cleavage sites, and the number of said 
cleavage sites had any influence on the levels of the enzymatic activities observed in the experiments. 
Future studies of similar aims and objectives would be greatly beneficial in describing further the 
protease activities of snake venoms. As previously stated in this section, similar experiments with lower 
venom concentration to illuminate the limits of enzymatic activity, and duplicate experiments could 
confirm not only the significance of the protease targets, but also the validity and accuracy of the 
enzymatic activity profiles generated in this study. Moreover, the introduction of additional venoms in 
the study, could enrich the datasets, and illuminate differences or similarities in their activities. It would 
also provide insights in the differences in terms of target substrates, and sequence specificities. 
A number of future perspectives involving snake venom proteases can be conceived. As far as substrate 
recognition and residue preferences are concerned, the incubation of HPLC separated fractions of venom, 
containing different protease families, with the substrate sets of this study, or custom substrate sets, 
could generate adequate specificity models for the families of interest. It would also provide a way of 
identifying targets of these families in a more precise way, while also describing the substrates and 
activities of these venom proteases, which are, with a few exceptions, poorly characterized. Proteomics 
studies using MS could also be advantageous in sequence specificity studies. Obtaining information about 
which peptides are specifically cleaved and in which position, would also benefit the modeling of said 
enzymatic activities. Classification and Bayesian probability models taking into account the sequences, the 
amino acid properties and other attributes could be constructed in order to predict cleavage of unknown 
substrates from the proteases. 
The evolution of the arsenal of toxins in snake venoms has been briefly discussed in the introductory 
section. Recruitment of proteins through duplication and recombination events, and evolution of the 
toxins to target selectively receptors, proteins and other components of biological pathways has been 
thoroughly documented in literature. However, the adaptive evolution of animals that the snakes are 
preying on, or predators of these snake species, in order to render themselves resistant to the venom 
toxicity, has often been overlooked. Examples of this adaptation can be seen throughout the Animalia 
kingdom. Amino acid substitutions in residues that reduce the binding affinity of α-neurotoxins in nAChRs, 
without affecting the binding of other ligands necessary for normal function, have been found to evolve 
independently in mongoose, honey badger, hedgehogs, and domestic pigs79,80. The cobra Naja species 
also presents similar mutations to their nAChRs, making them immune to their own venom81. Another 
example can be seen in substitutions of the vWF in opossums, weakening the bond and clustering of 
CTLs82. Opossums and honey badgers also possess serum proteins able to inhibit either the effects of 
SVMPs or PLA2s. These proteins are homologs of the human α1B-glycoprotein and inhibit toxins in 1:1 
stoichiometry83. Incubation of these serum proteins with proteases and known substrates could describe 
the inhibitory function of these proteins, and develop quantitative models of their activities.  
==PAGE:64==
Discussion 
57 | P a g e  
 
Phylogenetic and evolutionary studies on the evolution of snakes and the adaptability to their 
environment and prey preference, should also be of great interest. Australian snake species, and sea 
snakes are highly suitable candidates for these studies, due to their isolation and geographical 
distribution. Similar studies and studies in the composition and the toxin contents of these snakes always 
presents the possibility of discovering novel compounds, with unforeseen uses in different biological and 
medical fields.  
The investigation of the enzymatic activities of the substrate set revealed that targets of the proteases 
included a large number of intracellular proteins. These had a wide range of activities and were involved 
in numerous biological processes, from replication and transcription of DNA, to signal transduction and 
DNA repair. To a large extent, in snakebite envenomings and the phenotypes exhibited, the effects of 
these molecules in the regulation of processes in single cells are ignored, and the accumulating 
consequences are given importance. Transcriptomic studies of cells with the addition of venom proteases 
could help shed some insights about the processes affected in the microscopic level. The elucidation of 
these mechanisms, along with the targets of the toxins, might also provide knowledge that assists in the 
development of methods to distinguish similar envenoming phenotypes, and identify the origin of the 
snake venom responsible. 
Lastly, it is deemed that the role of Ca2+ in the mechanism of action and regulation of venom toxins 
should be addressed. Most SVMPs have a Ca2+ binding site in close proximity to their M domain, with two 
additional binding sites in the D and C domains for P-III SVMPs16. The binding of the calcium ion is believed 
to contribute to the stability of the protein. In aminopeptidases, Ca2+ increases the preference of the 
enzymes for N-terminal acidic amino acids84. Enzyme PLA2s are dependent on calcium binding for their 
activities. C-type lectins are also dependent on calcium for binding. The ability of non-enzymatic PLA2s to 
release Ca2+ from intracellular stores, and enzymatic PLA2s to increase the cell membrane permeability to 
calcium has been shown85. SVMPs are able to open sodium channels, which causes membrane 
depolarization of calcium channels, which results into cytosolic Ca2+ influx28. Other major protein families 
present in snake venoms such as KuTi and CRISPs also appear to regulate Ca2+, by blocking calcium 
channels. Two sequences originating from the hormone calcitonin showed considerable activity for the 
Viperidae venoms, apart from B. asper. Calcitonin acts to reduce calcium levels in blood, and the cleavage 
of these sequences indicates upregulation of Ca2+ levels. The abundance of regulation activity that calcium 
appears to have in venom toxins, and the functions of these toxins in the regulation of Ca2+ levels, imply 
a form of synergism between these proteins, and may prove worthwhile of further examination of these 
events and processes.
==PAGE:65==
Conclusion 
58 | P a g e  
 C
The protease activities of three medically relevant snakes (B. asper, E. carinatus, D. russelii) was 
investigated using substrate sets comprised of 360 peptides. The successful experiments yielded 
fluorescence intensity measurements that corresponded to the cleavage of the substrate candidates. The 
data from these experiments and from experiments of three additional snakes (B. gabonica, B. arietans, 
N. nigricollis) were analyzed. Enrichment analysis on the targets of these venoms was performed, and 
initial studies on the sequence specificity and motif recognition of the proteases of these venoms, as well 
as the families they belong to, was carried out. Datasets and files from available data in databases, for the 
substrates and the proteases, were created and analyzed. 
Models for the activities of these venoms were constructed, and protease activity profiles were 
obtained. The estimated parameters were used for further investigation of the similarities and differences 
of these venom activities. Principal component analysis was performed on the measurements of the 
experiments and the estimated rates of the model, visualizing and comparing the venom activities. 
Clustering methods and similarity measures were also employed, to investigate the differences and 
resemblances of the venom activities. 
The study provides a framework for describing the protease activities of snake venoms through high 
throughput fluorescence intensity measurements. The modeling performed was highly proficient in 
describing the activities of the venom proteases observed in the experiments. The studies of more snake 
venoms with the same experiments would create more activity profiles, and the comparison of the venom 
activities may result in helpful conclusions on the venom similarities, and the functional roles of the venom 
proteases in snakebite pathophysiology.
==PAGE:66==
References 
59 | P a g e  
 R
1.  
Hodgson E. Toxins and Venoms. Vol 112. 1st ed. Elsevier Inc.; 2012. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-415813-
9.00014-3. 
2.  
Oldrati V, Arrell M, Violette A, et al. Advances in venomics. Mol BioSyst. 2016;12(12):3530-3543. 
doi:10.1039/C6MB00516K. 
3.  
White J. Venomous animals: clinical toxinology. EXS. 2010;100:233-291. doi:10.1007/978-3-7643-8338-1_7. 
4.  
Georgieva D, Arni RK, Betzel C. Proteome analysis of snake venom toxins: pharmacological insights. Expert 
Rev Proteomics. 20080;5(6):787-797. 
5.  
Diochot S, Alloui A, Rodrigues P, Dauvois M, Friend V, Aissouni Y, Eschalier A, Lingueglia E, Baron A. 
Analgesic effects of mambalgin peptide inhibitors of acid-sensing ion channels in inflammatory and 
neuropathic pain. Pain. 2016;157(3):552-559. doi:10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000397. 
6.  
Craik CS, Page MJ, Madison EL. Proteases as therapeutics. Biochem J. 2011;435(1):1-16. 
doi:10.1042/BJ20100965. 
7.  
Casewell NR, Wüster W, Vonk FJ, Harrison RA, Fry BG. Complex cocktails: The evolutionary novelty of 
venoms. Trends Ecol Evol. 2013;28(4):219-229. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2012.10.020. 
8.  
Gutiérrez JM, Calvete JJ, Habib AG, Harrison RA, Williams DJ, Warrell DA. Snakebite envenoming. Nat Rev 
Dis Prim. 2017;3(17063). doi:10.1038/nrdp.2017.63. 
9.  
Animal bites. http://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/animal-bites. 
10.  
Chippaux JP, Goyffon M. Venoms , Antivenoms and Immunotherapy. Toxicon. 1998;36(6):823-846. 
doi:10.1016/S0041-0101(97)00160-8. 
11.  
De Silva HA, Ryan NM, De Silva HJ. Adverse reactions to snake antivenom, and their prevention and 
treatment. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2016;81(3):446-452. doi:10.1111/bcp.12739. 
12.  
Laustsen AH. Guiding recombinant antivenom development by omics technologies. N Biotechnol. 2017. 
doi:10.1016/j.nbt.2017.05.005. 
13.  
Castro EN, Lomonte B, del Carmen Gutiérrez M, Alagón A, Gutiérrez JM. Intraspecies variation in the 
venom of the rattlesnake Crotalus simus from Mexico: Different expression of crotoxin results in highly 
variable toxicity in the venoms of three subspecies. J Proteomics. 2013;87(c):103-121. 
doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2013.05.024. 
14.  
Sunagar K, Undheim EAB, Scheib H, et al. Intraspecific venom variation in the medically significant 
Southern Pacific Rattlesnake (Crotalus oreganus helleri): Biodiscovery, clinical and evolutionary 
implications. J Proteomics. 2014;99:68-83. doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2014.01.013. 
15.  
Fernandes CAH, Borges RJ, Lomonte B, Fontes MRM. A structure-based proposal for a comprehensive 
myotoxic mechanism of phospholipase A2-like proteins from viperid snake venoms. Biochim Biophys Acta - 
Proteins Proteomics. 2014;1844(12):2265-2276. doi:10.1016/j.bbapap.2014.09.015. 
16.  
Takeda S. ADAM and ADAMTS family proteins and snake venom metalloproteinases: A structural overview. 
Toxins (Basel). 2016;8(5):8-11. doi:10.3390/toxins8050155. 
17.  
Uetz P. the Reptile Database. Herpetol Rev. 1996;27(4):174-175. http://www.reptile-database.org/. 
18.  
Fry BG, Wüster W, Kini RM, et al. Molecular evolution and phylogeny of elapid snake venom three-finger 
toxins. J Mol Evol. 2003;57(1):110-129. doi:10.1007/s00239-003-2461-2. 
==PAGE:67==
References 
60 | P a g e  
 
19.  
Kini RM, Doley R. Structure, function and evolution of three-finger toxins: Mini proteins with multiple 
targets. Toxicon. 2010;56(6):855-867. doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2010.07.010. 
20.  
Laustsen AH. Toxin synergism in snake venoms. Toxin Rev. 2016;35(3-4):165-170. 
doi:10.1080/15569543.2016.1220397. 
21.  
Dutta S, Chanda A, Kalita B, Islam T, Patra A, Mukherjee AK. Proteomic analysis to unravel the complex 
venom proteome of eastern India Naja naja: Correlation of venom composition with its biochemical and 
pharmacological properties. J Proteomics. 2017;156:29-39. doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2016.12.018. 
22.  
Petras D, Heiss P, Süssmuth RD, Calvete JJ. Venom proteomics of indonesian king cobra, ophiophagus 
hannah: Integrating top-down and bottom-up approaches. J Proteome Res. 2015;14(6):2539-2556. 
doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00305. 
23.  
Tan KY, Tan CH, Fung SY, Tan NH. Venomics, lethality and neutralization of Naja kaouthia (monocled cobra) 
venoms from three different geographical regions of Southeast Asia. J Proteomics. 2015;120:105-125. 
doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2015.02.012. 
24.  
Pla D, Sanz L, Sasa M, et al. Proteomic analysis of venom variability and ontogeny across the arboreal palm-
pitvipers (genus Bothriechis). J Proteomics. 2017;152:1-12. doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2016.10.006. 
25.  
Lomonte B, Fernández J, Sanz L, et al. Venomous snakes of Costa Rica: Biological and medical implications 
of their venom proteomic profiles analyzed through the strategy of snake venomics. J Proteomics. 
2014;105:323-339. doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2014.02.020. 
26.  
Kordiš D. Evolution of phospholipase A2 toxins in venomous animals. Acta Chim Slov. 2011;58(4):638-646. 
27.  
Lomonte B, Gutiérrez JM. Phospholipases A 2 From Viperidae Snake Venoms : How do They Induce Skeletal 
Muscle Damage ? Acta Chim Slov. 2011;58:647-659. 
28.  
Mitrmoonpitak C, Chulasugandha P, Khow O, Noiprom J, Chaiyabutr N, Sitprija V. Effects of phospholipase 
A2 and metalloprotease fractions of Russell’s viper venom on cytokines and renal hemodynamics in dogs. 
Toxicon. 2013;61(1):47-53. doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.10.017. 
29.  
Inagaki H, Kimoto H, Yamauchi Y, Toriba M, Kubo T. Functional characterization of Kunitz-type protease 
inhibitor Pr-mulgins identified from New Guinean Pseudechis australis. Toxicon. 2012;59(1):74-80. 
doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2011.10.005. 
30.  
Earl STH, Richards R, Johnson LA, et al. Identification and characterisation of Kunitz-type plasma kallikrein 
inhibitors unique to Oxyuranus sp. snake venoms. Biochimie. 2012;94(2):365-373. 
doi:10.1016/j.biochi.2011.08.003. 
31.  
McCleary RJR, Kini RM. Non-enzymatic proteins from snake venoms: A gold mine of pharmacological tools 
and drug leads. Toxicon. 2013;62:56-74. doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.09.008. 
32.  
Chen C, Hsu CH, Su NY, Lin YC, Chiou SH, Wu SH. Solution Structure of a Kunitz-type Chymotrypsin Inhibitor 
Isolated from the Elapid Snake Bungarus fasciatus. J Biol Chem. 2001;276(48):45079-45087. 
doi:10.1074/jbc.M106182200. 
33.  
Yamazaki Y, Morita T. Structure and function of snake venom cysteine-rich secretory proteins. Toxicon. 
2004;44(3):227-231. doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2004.05.023. 
34.  
Arlinghaus FT, Eble JA. C-type lectin-like proteins from snake venoms. Toxicon. 2012;60(4):512-519. 
doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.03.001. 
35.  
Kini RM, Clemetson KJ, Markland FS, McLane MA, Morita T. Toxins and Hemostasis. From Bench to 
Bedside.; 2010. 
==PAGE:68==
References 
61 | P a g e  
 
36.  
Arruda Macêdo JK, Fox JW, De Souza Castro M. Disintegrins from snake venoms and their applications in 
cancer research and therapy. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2015;16(6):532-548. 
doi:10.2174/1389203716666150515125002. 
37.  
Calvete JJ. The continuing saga of snake venom disintegrins. Toxicon. 2013;62:40-49. 
doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.09.005. 
38.  
Tan N, Fung S. Snake Venom L-Amino Acid Oxidases and Their Potential Biomedical Applications. Malaysian 
J Biochem Mol Biol. 2008;16(1):1-10. http://ejum.fsktm.um.edu.my/article/597.pdf. 
39.  
Fox JW. A brief review of the scientific history of several lesser-known snake venom proteins: L-amino acid 
oxidases, hyaluronidases and phosphodiesterases. Toxicon. 2013;62:75-82. 
doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.09.009. 
40.  
Menaldo DL, Bernardes CP, Santos-Filho NA, et al. Biochemical characterization and comparative analysis 
of two distinct serine proteases from Bothrops pirajai snake venom. Biochimie. 2012;94(12):2545-2558. 
doi:10.1016/j.biochi.2012.07.007. 
41.  
Rawlings ND, Barrett AJ, Thomas PD, Huang X, Bateman A, Finn RD. The MEROPS database of proteolytic 
enzymes, their substrates and inhibitors in 2017 and a comparison with peptidases in the PANTHER 
database. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018;46(D1):D624-D632. doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1134. 
42.  
Zhang G, Holler T, Napper A. Protease Assays. Assay Guid Man. 2012;(Md):1-14. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK92006/pdf/Bookshelf_NBK92006.pdf. 
43.  
Takeda S, Takeya H, Iwanaga S. Snake venom metalloproteinases: Structure, function and relevance to the 
mammalian ADAM/ADAMTS family proteins. Biochim Biophys Acta - Proteins Proteomics. 
2012;1824(1):164-176. doi:10.1016/j.bbapap.2011.04.009. 
44.  
Fox JW, Serrano SMT. Structural considerations of the snake venom metalloproteinases, key members of 
the M12 reprolysin family of metalloproteinases. Toxicon. 2005;45(8):969-985. 
doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2005.02.012. 
45.  
Moura-da-Silva AM, Almeida MT, Portes-Junior JA, Nicolau CA, Gomes-Neto F, Valente RH. Processing of 
snake venom metalloproteinases: Generation of toxin diversity and enzyme inactivation. Toxins (Basel). 
2016;8(6). doi:10.3390/toxins8060183. 
46.  
Gaz Florea SA, Gaz Florea A, Kelemen, H. MDL. Snake Venom Metalloproteinases. Acta Medica Marisiensis. 
2016;62(1):106-111. doi:10.1515/amma-2008.2296. 
47.  
Zaqueo KD, Kayano AM, Simões-Silva R, et al. Isolation and biochemical characterization of a new 
thrombin-like serine protease from Bothrops pirajai snake venom. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:595186. 
doi:10.1155/2014/595186. 
48.  
Zelanis A, Huesgen PF, Oliveira AK, Tashima AK, Serrano SMT, Overall CM. Snake venom serine proteinases 
specificity mapping by proteomic identification of cleavage sites. J Proteomics. 2015;113:260-267. 
doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2014.10.002. 
49.  
Yang ZM, Yu H, Liu ZZ, et al. Serine protease isoforms in Gloydius intermedius venom: Full sequences, 
molecular phylogeny and evolutionary implications. J Proteomics. 2017;164:19-32. 
doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2017.05.024. 
50.  
Sukkapan P, Jia Y, Nuchprayoon I, Pérez JC. Phylogenetic analysis of serine proteases from Russell’s viper 
(Daboia russelli siamensis) and Agkistrodon piscivorus leucostoma venom. Toxicon. 2011;58(2):168-178. 
doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2011.05.014. 
51.  
Chernyshenko V, Platonova T, Makogonenko Y, et al. Fibrin(ogen)olytic and platelet modulating activity of 
a novel protease from the Echis multisquamatis snake venom. Biochimie. 2014;105:76-83. 
==PAGE:69==
References 
62 | P a g e  
 
doi:10.1016/j.biochi.2014.06.015. 
52.  
Calvete JJ, Marcinkiewicz C, Sanz L. Snake venomics of Bitis gabonica gabonica. Protein family composition, 
subunit organization of venom toxins, and characterization of dimeric disintegrins bitisgabonin-1 and 
bitisgabonin-2. J Proteome Res. 2007;6(1):326-336. doi:10.1021/pr060494k. 
53.  
Fasoli E, Sanz L, Wagstaff S, Harrison RA, Righetti PG, Calvete JJ. Exploring the venom proteome of the 
African puff adder, Bitis arietans, using a combinatorial peptide ligand library approach at different pHs. J 
Proteomics. 2010;73(5):932-942. doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2009.12.006. 
54.  
Nok AJ, Kurfi BG. 218. Purification of a Metalloprotease from Naja nigricollis Venom and Production of 
Polyclonal Antibodies. Toxicon. 2012;60(2):207. doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.04.219. 
55.  
Vélez SM, Salazar M, Acosta de Patiño H, et al. Geographical variability of the venoms of four populations 
of Bothrops asper from Panama: Toxicological analysis and neutralization by a polyvalent antivenom. 
Toxicon. 2017;132:55-61. doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2017.04.002. 
56.  
Tan NH, Fung SY, Tan KY, Yap MKK, Gnanathasan CA, Tan CH. Functional venomics of the Sri Lankan 
Russell’s viper (Daboia russelii) and its toxinological correlations. J Proteomics. 2015;128:403-423. 
doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2015.08.017. 
57.  
Casewell NR, Harrison RA, Wüster W, Wagstaff SC. Comparative venom gland transcriptome surveys of the 
saw-scaled vipers (Viperidae: Echis) reveal substantial intra-family gene diversity and novel venom 
transcripts. BMC Genomics. 2009;10:1-12. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-10-564. 
58.  
Irizarry RA, Wang C, Zhou Y, Speed TP. Gene set enrichment analysis made simple. Stat Methods Med Res. 
2009;18(April 2009):565-575. doi:10.1177/0962280209351908. 
59.  
Kuleshov M V., Jones MR, Rouillard AD, et al. Enrichr: a comprehensive gene set enrichment analysis web 
server 2016 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016;44(W1):W90-W97. doi:10.1093/nar/gkw377. 
60.  
Wang J, Duncan D, Shi Z, Zhang B. WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit (WebGestalt): update 2013. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;41(Web Server issue):77-83. doi:10.1093/nar/gkt439. 
61.  
Mi H, Muruganujan A, Casagrande JT, Thomas PD. Large-scale gene function analysis with the panther 
classification system. Nat Protoc. 2013;8(8):1551-1566. doi:10.1038/nprot.2013.092. 
62.  
Bailey TL, Elkan C. Fitting a Mixture Model by Expectation Maximization to Discover Motifs in Bipolymers. 
Proc Second Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol. 1994:28-36. doi:citeulike-article-id:878292. 
63.  
Workman CT, Yin Y, Corcoran DL, Ideker T, Stormo GD, Benos PV. enoLOGOS: A versatile web tool for 
energy normalized sequence logos. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005;33(SUPPL. 2):389-392. doi:10.1093/nar/gki439. 
64.  
Etchebest C, Benros C, Bornot A, Camproux AC, De Brevern AG. A reduced amino acid alphabet for 
understanding and designing protein adaptation to mutation. Eur Biophys J. 2007;36(8):1059-1069. 
doi:10.1007/s00249-007-0188-5. 
65.  
Murphy LR, Wallqvist A, Levy RM. Simplified amino acid alphabets for protein fold recognition and 
implications for folding. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2000;13(3):149-152. doi:10.1093/protein/13.3.149. 
66.  
Smith RF, Smith TF. Automatic generation of primary sequence patterns from sets of related protein 
sequences. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990;87(1):118-122. doi:10.1073/pnas.87.1.118. 
67.  
Li T, Fan K, Wang J, Wang W. Reduction of protein sequence complexity by residue grouping. Protein Eng 
Des Sel. 2003;16(5):323-330. doi:10.1093/protein/gzg044. 
68.  
Alon U. An Introduction to Systems Biology: Design Principles of Biological Circuits. CRC Press; 2006. 
69.  
Jiang L, Liu Y, Song Y, et al. Internal calibration förster resonance energy transfer assay: A real-time 
==PAGE:70==
References 
63 | P a g e  
 
approach for determining protease kinetics. Sensors (Switzerland). 2013;13(4):4553-4570. 
doi:10.3390/s130404553. 
70.  
Sharkov NA, Davis RM, Reidhaar-Olson JF, Navre M, Cai D. Reaction kinetics of protease with substrate 
phage: Kinetic model developed using stromelysin. J Biol Chem. 2001;276(14):10788-10793. 
doi:10.1074/jbc.M011772200. 
71.  
Liu Y, Liao J. Quantitative FRET (F&amp;#246;rster Resonance Energy Transfer) Analysis for SENP1 Protease 
Kinetics Determination. J Vis Exp. 2013;28(72):1-7. doi:10.3791/4430. 
72.  
Shlens J. A Tutorial on Principal Component Analysis. 2014. doi:10.1.1.115.3503. 
73.  
Altis A, Nguyen PH, Hegger R, Stock G. Dihedral angle principal component analysis of molecular dynamics 
simulations. J Chem Phys. 2007;126(24):1-10. doi:10.1063/1.2746330. 
74.  
Balcan MM, Gupta P. Robust hierarchical clustering. arXiv Prepr arXiv14010247. 2014;15:35. 
doi:10.1109/IMSCCS.2006.167. 
75.  
Vorontsov IE, Kulakovskiy I V., Makeev VJ. Jaccard index based similarity measure to compare transcription 
factor binding site models. Algorithms Mol Biol. 2013;8(1):1. doi:10.1186/1748-7188-8-23. 
76.  
Szumilas M. Explaining odds ratios. J Can Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010;19(3):227-229. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.c4414. 
77.  
Tenny S BS. Odds Ratio (OR). StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK431098/. Published 2018. 
78.  
Menaldo DL, Bernardes CP, Pereira JC, et al. Effects of two serine proteases from Bothrops pirajai snake 
venom on the complement system and the inflammatory response. Int Immunopharmacol. 
2013;15(4):764-771. doi:10.1016/j.intimp.2013.02.023. 
79.  
Drabeck DH, Dean AM, Jansa SA. Why the honey badger don’t care: Convergent evolution of venom-
targeted nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in mammals that survive venomous snake bites. Toxicon. 
2015;99:68-72. doi:10.1016/j.toxicon.2015.03.007. 
80.  
Barchan D, Kachalsky S, Neumann D, et al. How the mongoose can fight the snake: the binding site of the 
mongoose acetylcholine receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1992;89(16):7717-7721. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.89.16.7717. 
81.  
Barchan D, Ovadia M, Kochva E, Fuchs S. The Binding Site of the Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor in Animal 
Species Resistant to β-Bungarotoxin. Biochemistry. 1995;34(28):9172-9176. doi:10.1021/bi00028a029. 
82.  
Jansa SA, Voss RS. Adaptive evolution of the Venom-targeted vWF protein in opossums that Eat Pitvipers. 
PLoS One. 2011;6(6). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0020997. 
83.  
Voss RS, Jansa SA. Snake-venom resistance as a mammalian trophic adaptation: Lessons from didelphid 
marsupials. Biol Rev. 2012;87(4):822-837. doi:10.1111/j.1469-185X.2012.00222.x. 
84.  
Goto Y, Hattori A, Mizutani S, Tsujimoto M. Asparatic acid 221 is critical in the calcium-induced modulation 
of the enzymatic activity of human aminopeptidase A. J Biol Chem. 2007;282(51):37074-37081. 
doi:10.1074/jbc.M707251200. 
85.  
Cintra-Francischinelli M, Pizzo P, Rodrigues-Simioni L, et al. Calcium imaging of muscle cells treated with 
snake myotoxins reveals toxin synergism and presence of acceptors. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2009;66(10):1718-
1728. doi:10.1007/s00018-009-9053-2. 
==PAGE:71==
Appendix 
64 | P a g e  
 A
The amino acid frequency for each position (P4-P4’) of the peptide substrates can be seen in Figure 55. 
The amino acid frequencies of the substrates (determined with arbitrary fluorescence units cutoffs) for 
the snakes with more than a few cleaved peptides can be seen in Figure 56. 
The plots of the experimental measurements of all studied snakes can be seen in the pages below. The 
substrate peptides are annotated with the name of the proteins the sequences are originating from in 
the plot titles. The model fits for the enzymatic activities of all snakes venoms are following the 
measurement plots, and are annotated with the Uniprot ID and their sequence. 
Figure 53. The four top amino acid frequencies per position for the full substrate set. Each position is indicated 
with different color 
Figure 54. Amino acid frequencies per position for the snake venoms with considerable enzymatic activities. 
Again, the four most frequent amino acids per position is shown, with different colors indicating different 
positions 
==PAGE:72==
Appendix 
65 | P a g e  
 
Measurements 
==PAGE:73==
Appendix 
66 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:74==
Appendix 
67 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:75==
Appendix 
68 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:76==
Appendix 
69 | P a g e  
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
Appendix 
70 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:78==
Appendix 
71 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:79==
Appendix 
72 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:80==
Appendix 
73 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:81==
Appendix 
74 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:82==
Appendix 
75 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:83==
Appendix 
76 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:84==
Appendix 
77 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:85==
Appendix 
78 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:86==
Appendix 
79 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:87==
Appendix 
80 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:88==
Appendix 
81 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:89==
Appendix 
82 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:90==
Appendix 
83 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:91==
Appendix 
84 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:92==
Appendix 
85 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:93==
Appendix 
86 | P a g e  
 
Modeling fits 
==PAGE:94==
Appendix 
87 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:95==
Appendix 
88 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:96==
Appendix 
89 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:97==
Appendix 
90 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:98==
Appendix 
91 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:99==
Appendix 
92 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:100==
Appendix 
93 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:101==
Appendix 
94 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:102==
Appendix 
95 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:103==
Appendix 
96 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:104==
Appendix 
97 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:105==
Appendix 
98 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:106==
Appendix 
99 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:107==
Appendix 
100 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:108==
Appendix 
101 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:109==
Appendix 
102 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:110==
Appendix 
103 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:111==
Appendix 
104 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:112==
Appendix 
105 | P a g e  
 
 
==PAGE:113==
Appendix 
106 | P a g e  
 
 
