==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
The Aircraft Assignment Problem with
Prescheduled Maintenance Activities
Master Thesis
Nikolaj Arslev (s134785)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Science
Technical University of Denmark
Supervisor
Richard Martin Lusby
Building 424
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 30 84
rmlu@dtu.dk
Co-Supervisor
Bo Vaaben
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The purpose of this dissertation is to solve the aircraft assignment problem with
prescheduled maintenance activities by implementing the column generation based
algorithm branch-and-price. A range of test instances based on a real-life dataset are
created in order to test the capabilities of the algorithm. The thesis is divided into
two main parts, the first part describes the theoretical foundation of the aircraft as-
signment problem, while the second part provides an in-depth analysis of the problem,
how it has been solved and the results of our approach.
In first part, the problem and how it relates to other planning and scheduling
problems in the airline industry is described. Furthermore, a thorough examination
of the various modelling approaches found in the literature is conducted. The second
part starts with a derivation of a suitable mathematical programming model based on
an analysis of the real-life dataset in combination with the findings from the first part.
It is followed by an in-depth analysis of the structure of the model that provides the
arguments for the chosen solution approach. Then, the branch-and-price algorithm
is introduced and a description is provided of the various configurations made to the
algorithm in terms of branching strategy and column generation strategy. Lastly, the
computational results are presented and discussed.
Our branch-and-price algorithm proves capable of solving the aircraft assignment
problem with prescheduled maintenance activities. However, it is apparent that the
computational requirements experience an exponential growth as the size of the prob-
lem increase. Consequently, it becomes intractable to generate feasible integer solu-
tions to instances larger than 15 aircraft for a schedule with a time horizon of 1 week.
As the problem size increases, the task of generating a sufficient number of columns
becomes too demanding and it prevents the column generation from converging. To
conclude the thesis, we propose two suggestions that aims to solve this issue.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Management Engineering at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a master’s
degree in engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 26, 2018
Nikolaj Arslev (s134785)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to take this opportunity to show my appreciation to the people who
made this project a success. First and foremost, I would like to express my immense
gratitude to my supervisor Richard M. Lusby, for always taking the time to answer
my questions and sharing his thoughts. Whether I wrote an email during the weekend
or if I dropped by his office unannounced, he always was always accommodating and
took the time to help me. I would also like to thank Bo Vaaben for co-supervising
the project. With his years of experience in the industry he provided indispensable
inputs to my project.
I want to thank Skipper af Rosenborg, Simon Søkilde, Jan Arslev and especially Esben
Jørgensen Bager for proofreading my project and provide constructive criticism.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family and friends for the support throughout the
process of making this project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
I
Theory
3
2
OR in the Airline Industry
7
2.1
Schedule Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Fleet Assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Aircraft Assignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Crew Scheduling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Integrated Planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Modelling of Aircraft Assignment
11
3.1
Modelling Considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Flight Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
The Aircraft Rotation Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
The Aircraft Maintenance Routing Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Tail Assignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Choice of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
II Analysis
23
4
Data Analysis
27
4.1
Cleaning the Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Selection of Test Instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Test Instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.4
The Mathematical Programming Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Solution Approach
37
5.1
Dantzig Wolfe Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Column Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
The Master Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
The Subproblem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.5
Column Generation Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.6
Obtaining Integer Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.7
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Computational Results
47
6.1
Column Generation - Scaling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Branch-and-Bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3
Branch-and-Price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.4
Penalizing Medium Gaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
Improvements
61
7.1
Sequential Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.2
Reformulation of the Mathematical Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8
Conclusion
67
8.1
Future Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A Data Analysis
71
A.1 Test Instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B Computational Results
77
B.1
Generic Column Generation - Scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
B.2
Convergence Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
B.3
Branch-and-Price - Branching on the Most Fractional Variable
. . . .
78
B.4
Strong Branching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
B.5
Penalizing Medium Size Gaps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
C Improvements
85
C.1 Reformulation of the Mathematical Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Bibliography
91
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Over the last 60 years the airport industry has experienced continuous growth and
it does not seem to be slowing down. According to the International Air Transport
Association (IATA) the number of passengers is expected to reach 7.2 billion in 2035 1.
This is close to a doubling of the 3.8 billion passengers that flew in 2016. Consequently,
the airline industry faces larger and more complex planning and scheduling problems
in the future. One of the main reasons that airlines have managed to accommodate
the ever increasing demand is due to the application of operations research (OR). By
providing sophisticated decision support tools, OR has made it possible to solve the
large and complex planning and scheduling problems faced by the industry.
Airlines offer a large number of different flights to numerous airports around the
world with only a limited amount of aircraft at their disposal.
The topic of this
thesis is to assess how to assign individual aircraft to flights such that every flight
in the schedule is covered and maintenance requirements are satisfied. Following the
notion of Grönkvist [Grö05], we will use the term aircraft assignment to describe this
problem. The fact that aircraft are subject to strict maintenance requirements only
increases the difficulty of solving this problem. However, with the development of
sophisticated combinatorial algorithms and an increase in computational capabilities
in the past few decades, researchers have managed to present effective methods for
solving this large-scale problem.
The scope of this thesis is to design and implement a column generation based
algorithm capable of solving the aircraft assignment problem based on real-life data.
On the basis of an investigation of how the aircraft assignment problem has been mod-
elled by different scholars and an analysis of the properties of the real-life dataset,
we will develop a mathematical programming model.
A thorough analysis of the
structure of this formulation proves why a column generation based algorithm is an
appropriate solution method for this problem. As feasible integer solutions are the
main concern, a branch-and-price algorithm is developed to ensure that we generate
usable solutions that comply with the requirements of the industry. Furthermore, con-
figurations of the branch-and-price algorithm will be tested to see if we can enhance
its performance. Finally, we analyze the test results and develop two different ap-
proaches that will further improve the capability of our algorithm to properly address
the aircraft assignment problem.
1http://www.iata.org/pressroom/pr/Pages/2017-10-24-01.aspx
==PAGE:12==
2
==PAGE:13==
Part I
Theory
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
1 Introduction
5
Chapter Overview
In the following chapters a brief overview of how aircraft assignment relates to the
airline industry will be provided, along with a theoretical overview of how the problem
has been modelled.
Chapter 2 - OR in the Airline Industry
This chapter will explain to the reader where aircraft assignment originates from and
how it relates to other planning and scheduling problems faced by the airline industry.
Chapter 3 - Modeling of Aircraft Assignment
In this chapter, a review of different modelling approaches to the aircraft assignment
problem will be presented. This includes a description of the general model consider-
ation of the problem and an examination of the methods found in the literature. The
review provides the basis for a discussion on the choice of the mathematical model
used in this thesis.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
OR in the Airline
Industry
Before the day of operation, several planning and scheduling problems must be solved.
Planning and scheduling are mentioned explicitly as they describe two different as-
signments. Planning refers to the task of allocating resources to activities with a fixed
time, while scheduling is the task of determining the time at which an activity is to
take place. In general, four different problems are solved prior to an aircraft taking
off. The problems include, schedule design, fleet assignment, aircraft assignment and
crew scheduling. They are typically solved sequentially in the aforementioned order
as depicted in figure 2.1 and the entire sequence is known as the
airline planning
process. It should be mentioned that the order can be subject to change as some
airlines will do crew scheduling before aircraft assignment.
1. The first step is to decide what flights the airline wants to offer their customers
and combine them into a schedule.
2. Secondly, it is decided what type of aircraft, known as a fleet, that should
operate each of the flights in the schedule.
3. The third step is to determine the flights each individual aircraft in a fleet
should cover.
4. In the final step, personnel is assigned to each of the flights in the timetable, so
that a schedule is created for each individual employee.
Figure 2.1: The airline planning process, which is the sequence of planning and
scheduling problems that must be solved prior to the day of operation.
The reason for dividing the entire planning process into multiple subproblems
is due to the size and complexity of each of the individual problems. It is simply
impossible to solve all the problems simultaneously by combining their features into
==PAGE:18==
8
2 OR in the Airline Industry
one model. Consequently, several models and algorithms have been developed based
on OR techniques over the past decades to take on the challenges faced by the airline
industry.
It should be noted that several other problems exist in the airline industry. How-
ever, these problems are not as strongly connected to the aircraft assignment problem
and as it is the main focus of this thesis, they will not be covered.
2.1
Schedule Design
Initially, airlines must decide what markets they want to serve during a given time
horizon and they have to decide what flights they will offer their customers. This
includes deciding if they should offer new flights and whether or not to close certain
flights they are currently offering. Creating such a timetable is known as schedule
design and it is the first step of the airline planning process.
In order to create the best possible schedule, airlines must conduct a thorough
analysis. They have to generate demand forecasts for the different flight legs, consider
their historical data and other factors such as spill costs and recapture rates. This
process is typically carried out several months before the schedule is actually operated
and has traditionally been done manually by the airlines.
However, according to
Barnhart et al. [BBO03] operations research is starting to play a bigger role in this
process. One example of this is by Erdmann et al. [Erd+01] who present a schedule
generation model and successfully applies it to real world instances from a major
European airline. There are still many challenges that must be overcome before the
development of a single model capable of capturing all the interdependencies that
exist. Further advancement within this field of study will benefit airlines greatly, as
the schedule design plays a crucial role in competitive advantage of airlines.
2.2
Fleet Assignment
When the flight schedule has been determined, the next step of the planning process is
to determine what type of aircraft should operate each of the flights in the timetable.
This is referred to as the fleet assignment problem. Throughout the literate fleet
and aircraft type are used interchangeably. There are several factors that must be
considered when assigning an aircraft type to a flight leg.
These include but are
not limited to passenger demand, seating capacity, fuel costs, crew size, availability
of maintenance at an airport, gate availability and aircraft noise. One of the most
well-known formulations of this problem is by Hane et al. [Han+95] who propose a
large multi-commodity flow problem with side constraints that minimizes the cost of
assigning an aircraft type to a flight leg. It is argued by Barnhart et al. [BKL02]
that this is a basic model, as it only approximates passenger spill and recapture rates,
which are considered complex topics to appropriately incorporate.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Aircraft Assignment
9
The fleet assignment problem is closely linked to aircraft assignment as it creates
the basis for the aircraft assignment problem.
Basically, the solution to the fleet
assignment problem creates one aircraft assignment problem for each different fleet
type.
2.3
Aircraft Assignment
Aircraft assignment refers to the task of assigning each individual aircraft of a fleet to
flight legs in the corresponding schedule such that all flights are covered. The solution
to this problem provides a set of rotations or routings depending on the modelling
scheme used to describe this problem. A rotation is a sequence of flights that starts
and ends at the same airports, whereas a routing is simply a sequence of flights. In
both cases, it is implied that the destination of a flight is equivalent to the origin
of the next flight in the sequence. The main constraints for this problem concern
maintenance requirements and special restrictions on individual flights. The former
is enforced to ensure that all aircraft undergo maintenance checks in accordance to the
regulations, while the latter is related to possible noise level and aircraft equipment
restrictions of a flight.
Throughout the literature, three different names are commonly used to describe
aircraft assignment. In the paper by Clarke et al. [Cla+96], aircraft assignment goes
under the name of the aircraft rotation problem, Gopalan and Talluri [GT85] refer
to it as the aircraft maintenance routing problem while Grönkvist [Grö05] introduced
the term the tail assignment problem. Different approaches, modelling schemes and
levels of detail are what set them apart, but they all provide solutions where every
aircraft of a fleet are given a set of flights to cover.
2.4
Crew Scheduling
The final step in the airline planning process presents yet another complex optimiza-
tion problem called crew scheduling. Crew scheduling as the name implies is to assign
a group of personnel to every prescheduled flight with the objective of minimizing la-
bor costs. Due to the high complexity of the problem, it is often divided into two
subproblems that are solved sequentially. The first, known as the crew pairing prob-
lem, accounts for the restrictions on the maximum number of working hours in a day,
the minimum time period between two shifts, and the maximum number of hours a
crew is allowed to be away from their home base. The objective is to minimize cost
through the creation of pairings. A pairing is a sequence of flights covered by the
same crew typically spanning one or multiple work days. In the following step, pair-
ings are combined and assigned to individual crew members which is referred to as
crew rostering. Constraints describing the qualifications of the crew members, their
vacation periods, and potentially their preferences for the various shifts are accounted
for, while the objective is to minimize some cost function.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 OR in the Airline Industry
Crew scheduling has been subject to extensive research due to the strong con-
nection to optimization and most importantly, its promising potential cost savings.
After fuel, crews make up the second highest operating cost of an airline, so even
the smallest improvements can present substantial savings. Barnhart et al. [Bar+03]
provide a great overview of the challenges and modelling schemes of crew scheduling.
2.5
Integrated Planning
As described in the previous sections, the airline planning process is performed se-
quentially where each step is solved separately without considering the possible im-
plications on the previous or following steps in the sequence. In some cases, a limited
amount of feedback between the steps do occur, but traditionally airlines solve one
problem after another. A major downside to this approach, as noted by Barnhart
et al.
[BBO03], is that a solution to a problem in the sequence will most likely
limit the solution space of the following problem. Consequently, it is only possible
to find suboptimal solutions. However, due to increased computational power and
the development of more advanced algorithms, researchers have been looking into
the possibilities of combining two or more steps into one.
This is known as inte-
grated planning. We refer to Barnhart et al. [BBO03] for more information about the
development of integrated planning.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Modelling of Aircraft
Assignment
As stated in section 2.3, several different approaches have been used to describe
the aircraft assignment problem. Common for all of them is that they describe the
problem of assigning individual aircraft of a fleet to sequences of flights such that
all flights in a given network is covered and maintenance requirements are respected.
The reason for the various approaches is because airlines have different resources at
their disposal. Airlines will either solve the aircraft assignment long in advance of the
operation day or very close to the flight departures. The former is usually the case for
airlines with irregular schedules and a larger number of different aircraft types, while
the latter is done at airlines with regular schedules and large fleets. In this chapter,
the different considerations with respect to constraints and the objective function
behind the modelling of the aircraft assignment problem is presented, followed by a
review of the different approaches existing in the literature.
3.1
Modelling Considerations
One approach to the aircraft assignment problem is to create a model capable of
creating maintenance feasible solutions. This makes the model a feasibility problem
rather than an optimization problem. Since the aircraft assignment problem is solved
for each fleet type, these models typically rely on the assumption that all aircraft
are the same. Consequently, the aspect of cost when using different aircraft is made
redundant. An example of this approach is by Gopalan and Talluri [GT85]. A down-
side to this approach is that it becomes difficult to compare the quality of different
schedules. It might be possible to validate the quality of two different feasible sched-
ules and determine the best one. However, this would require a thorough analysis
of both schedules and there is no guarantee that an unambiguous conclusion can be
made.
In order to provide an aspect of the profitability of a schedule, Clarke et al.
[Cla+96] introduced the use of through value in their modelling scheme. Through
value is a measure of how desirable a one stop connection between two airports is. A
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Modelling of Aircraft Assignment
one stop connection is when passengers have the option of staying on the aircraft at
a stopover point without changing airplanes. The total sum of the through values of
a schedule now provides a measure of how good the solution is and different solutions
can easily be compared. The assumption that a fleet is homogeneous is still present,
but the model describes an optimization problem with the goal of maximizing the
through value of a schedule and not simply a feasibility problem.
Another possible aspect that would allow for a clear validation and comparison of
different schedules is utilization rate. Utilization rate is a key performance indicator
used by airlines to describe the average number of hours an aircraft is in flight in
a 24-hour period. It is desirable to have an utilization rate as high as possible for
an aircraft, but at the same time airlines want to make sure that every aircraft in a
fleet is used equally. A potential objective function could be to maximize the average
utilization rate of a fleet.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no case in the
literature that uses this approach for the aircraft assignment problem.
3.1.1
Connection Constraints
One of the two main considerations of the aircraft assignment is whether a connection
between two flights is possible or not. In general, it is possible to connect two flights
if the airport is the same for both the arriving flight and the departing flight and the
time between the two flights comply with a minimum connection time requirement.
The minimum time requirement entails that the departure time of the outgoing flight
must be less than the sum of the arrival time of the incoming flight and the turn
time. Turn time is the time that is required for getting an aircraft ready for its next
flight after it arrives at a gate. This time is used to disembark and board passengers,
clean the aircraft, fuel the aircraft and load and unload cargo. Typically, the turn
time is about 30-45 minutes, but due to different aircraft types and different airports
it can be both shorter or longer. It should also be mentioned that other factors than
turn time might prolong the connection times between flights.
Connection times
between two domestic flights are typically shorter than between international flights
and connection times at busy airports might also include tow time and transfer times
between gates and terminals.
3.1.2
Maintenance Constraints
The other key consideration of the aircraft assignment problem is regarding main-
tenance requirements. Maintenance restrictions are different from airline to airline,
but they all comply with regulations set by a national agency such as the European
Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in
America. The airlines will typically have one or a few maintenance stations, which
are specific airports where they have the necessary equipment to carry out the ser-
vice checks. Typically, maintenance requirements are based on the amount of flight
hours or number of trips done by an aircraft, so when a specified threshold has been
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Flight Networks
13
exceeded certain service checks must be carried out. Depending on the length of the
maintenance activity it can be categorized as a minor check or a prescheduled check.
The minor checks last for a short period of time and are usually done overnight, while
the prescheduled service checks take a lot of time and will be assigned a time slot
long in advance to a specific aircraft. As the minor checks are short and have to be
done fairly often, most approaches in the literature focus on these and neglect the
prescheduled checks. The different approaches ensure that every aircraft in the fleet
visit a maintenance station with regular intervals. In this way, the aircraft will have
the possibility of undergoing maintenance without planning the specific time slot at
which it has to. This has the advantage of simplifying the mathematical model as
maintenance activities are not included directly, but they are accounted for indirectly.
A further discussion on this approach will be provided later in this chapter.
3.2
Flight Networks
In the literature, the most common way of modelling the aircraft assignment problem
is to develop the model on the basis of a flight network. These networks are made
up of a set of airports and a set of flights and the relationships between the two sets
are given by a visual representation. Flight networks provide a great supportive tool
in the form of a visual aid. There are two main types of flight networks used to
model aircraft assignment in the literature; the time-line network and the connection
network. An example of both will be provided in the following section based on the
list of flights given in table 3.1.
Flight Id
Origin
Destination
Departure
Arrival
Flying Time
F1
B
D
08:00
10:30
2:30
F2
B
A
08:30
09:30
1:00
F3
A
B
10:00
11:00
1:00
F4
D
B
12:00
14:30
2:30
M1
B
B
15:00
18:00
3:00
F5
B
C
19:00
19:45
0:45
F6
C
B
20:30
21:15
0:45
Table 3.1: A small example of a flight schedule consisting of 6 flights and one main-
tenance activity.
3.2.1
Time-Line Network
The time-line network, also known as the time space network, represents the relation-
ship between flights and airports with respect to time and space as shown in figure 3.1.
The nodes are either arrival or departure nodes and the arcs are directed in order to
display the origin and destination of the flights. The solid arcs represent either flight
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Modelling of Aircraft Assignment
or maintenance activities and the dotted lines are ground arcs. Ground arcs give an
aircraft the opportunity to stay on the ground at an airport in order to connect with
a later flight. A sequence of arcs in the network, known as a path, provides a feasible
routing or rotation for an aircraft.
For a connection between two flights i and j to be possible, it is required that the
destination of flight i and the origin of flight j is the same airport. Additionally, the
arrival time of flight i plus the minimum turn time must be less than the departure
time of flight j. The time-line network provides a great tool for verifying the legal and
illegal connections in a network. In the example, displayed in figure 3.1, two aircraft
are needed to cover all of the flights in a day. A possible solution is where aircraft 1
covers F2-F3-(M1) and aircraft 2 covers F1-F4-(M1)-F5-F6. The maintenance activity
is written in parenthesis as both aircraft have the option of doing maintenance at this
time. However, this task quickly becomes intractable as the number of flights and
airports increase, hence the need for computer-aided decision making.
Figure 3.1: An example of a time-line network made up of 6 flights, 1 maintenance
activity and 4 airports based on the example from table 3.1.
3.2.2
Connection Network
In a connection network all flights and maintenance activities are displayed as nodes
rather than arcs. Instead, arcs represent the possibility of a connection between the
two activities it connects. The solid arcs are possible connections between two flights
and the dotted arcs are possible connections between airports and flights.
All of
the arcs are directed, so it is possible to detect the order in which activities can be
carried out. The connection network does not include the times at which the flights
depart and arrive, because they are implied as the network cannot be constructed
without them. According to Barnhart et al. [Bar+98], the time-line network has the
advantage in terms of computational requirements as it typically has fewer arcs, while
==PAGE:25==
3.3 The Aircraft Rotation Problem
15
Figure 3.2: An example of a connection network made up of6 flights, 1 maintenance
activity and 4 airports based on the example in table 3.1.
the connection network provides greater possibilities in terms of modelling. Grönkvist
[Grö05] supports this claim and states that the time-line network is a relaxation of
the connection network as it does not distinguish between individual connections.
3.3
The Aircraft Rotation Problem
One of the earliest contributions to aircraft assignment is by Clarke et al. [Cla+96]
who introduced the aircraft rotation problem. As described by Liang and Chaoval-
itwongse [LC09], this way of modeling the aircraft rotation problem corresponds to
modeling a time-space network for a given fleet. The examples used in [Cla+96] are
all daily schedules and they assume that a schedule repeats itself everyday. Their
approach is an optimization problem with the goal of finding a maintenance feasi-
ble rotation through the network that covers all of the flights while maximizing the
through value. Consider the example given in figure 3.1 and assume that this schedule
is repeated everyday. A possible rotation through the network would be F1-F4-M1-
F5-F6◦F2-F3. The ◦indicates that it is necessary for the aircraft to stay overnight
at an airport in order to complete the rotation. Additionally, this implies that two
aircraft are needed if all flights are to be covered in a single day. To find one single
rotation through the network and have every aircraft in the fleet operate this sequence
of flights is the essence of aircraft rotation problem. The aircraft will then start at
different points in the sequence so that all of the flights will be covered everyday.
They present a mathematical model created on the basis of finding an Euler tour
in the time-line network. The time-line network can be described as a directed graph,
G = (N, A). The set of arcs, A, correspond to flights and ground stays and the set of
nodes, N, are airports in the schedule. An Euler tour is a rotation where every arc in
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Modelling of Aircraft Assignment
the network is covered exactly once. In the airline industry, it is tradition to model
flights with arcs, which is their reason for choosing this terminology. The decision
variables of the model is given by xij, where
xij =
{
1
if i →j,
0
otherwise.
The binary decision variables describe whether two arcs, i and j, are adjacent or not.
Here, i, j ∈A where A is the total set of arcs in the directed graph. With the goal of
maximizing the through value while satisfying maintenance constraints, they derive
the following integer programming model:
max
∑
(i,j)∈C
vijxij
(3.1)
st.
∑
j:h(i)=t(j), j̸=i
xij = 1
∀i ∈A
(3.2)
∑
i:h(i)=t(j), i̸=j
xij = 1
∀j ∈A
(3.3)
∑
i∈S, j∈A\S s.t. h(i)=t(j)
xij ≥1
∀S ⊂A with 2 ≤|S| ≤|A| −2
(3.4)
∑
i∈P ′, j∈A\f(i) s.t. h(i)=t(j)
xij ≥1
∀P ∈P k, k ∈K
(3.5)
Here, C = {i, j ∈A s.t. h(i) = t(j), i ̸= j} is the set of arcs that make up the Euler
tour. It should be noted that the model is equivalent to the assymmetric traveling
salesman problem (ATSP). Maximizing the through value is captured in the objective
function in equation (3.1), where the parameter vij corresponds to the through value
of a connection between two flights. Equation (3.2) and (3.3) are the constraints
ensuring flow balance. Equation (3.4) is known as the subtour elimination constraint,
as it ensures that a rotation through the network will not have continuity breaks.
Finally, equation 3.5 ensures that the maintenance requirements are met.
The maintenance requirements are modeled by eliminating all service violation
paths. A service violation path is defined as a set of arcs where the total time exceeds
the service period of an aircraft. In equation (3.5) P k is the set of all minimal violation
paths for maintenance type k ∈K and P ′ denotes the set of arcs of P ∈P k excluding
the last arc and finally f(i) denotes the follower of i ∈P ′.
This approach does not directly include maintenance activities by assigning air-
craft to a specific time slots where they have to undergo maintenance. Instead, main-
tenance requirements are modelled indirectly through the service violation paths. In
this way, it is ensured that the time length of a rotation of an aircraft will not exceed
the maximum time between two maintenance checks. In other words, they make sure
that the aircraft will make it back to a maintenance station within a given time. This
==PAGE:27==
3.4 The Aircraft Maintenance Routing Problem
17
is done by enforcing at least one connection that breaks with the service violation
path.
The aircraft rotation problem does not provide a model capable of capturing
specific requirements for individual aircraft. Their solution is heavily based on the
assumption that every aircraft in a given fleet is exactly the same and that the schedule
repeats itself on a daily basis. It does however provide a well balanced solution where
every aircraft is equally utilized as they operate the same amount and types of flights.
3.4
The Aircraft Maintenance Routing Problem
The aircraft maintenance routing problem was first introduced by Gopalan and Talluri
[GT85] who create routings for all aircraft in a fleet using lines of flying (LOFs). The
LOFs describe a sequence of flights in a day by the first airport from which it departs
and the last airport it arrives at that day. The LOFs have the advantage of reducing
the complexity of a network of flights significantly, but since they are constructed
using simple rules such as first-in-first-out (FIFO) and last-in-first-out (LIFO) they
limit the quality of the solutions. Furthermore, it is assumed that maintenance can
only be carried out at night and not during the day. A routing is then made up of
a sequence of LOFs for a given time horizon that has to visit a maintenance station
every 3 days. This method can be viewed as a relaxation of the approach to the
aircraft rotation problem used by Clarke et al.
[Cla+96] as it also builds on the
assumption of a homogeneous fleet, but it makes use of a much simpler network.
Barnhart et al. [Bar+98] present a mathematical programming model used to
describe the aircraft maintenance routing problem. It was coined the flight string
model (FSM) and it is a sequence of connected flights, referred to as a string, that
begins and ends at a maintenance station with a maintenance activity at the end.
According to Liang [Lia12] this way of modeling the aircraft assignment problem is
the most well-known and state-of-the-art mathematical programming model. The
model make use of the following sets, parameters and variables:
1. Decision Variables:
a) us =
{
1
if string s is included in the solution
0
otherwise.
b) w−
n is the number of aircraft on the ground before node n.
c) w+
n is the number of aircraft on the ground after node n.
2. Sets
a) S is the set of feasible strings.
b) SO is the number of strings that span the countline O.
c) N is the set of nodes in the network describing arrival and departure points.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Modelling of Aircraft Assignment
d) NO is the set of nodes with corresponding ground arcs g+
n spanning the
countline O.
3. Parameters
a) O referred to as the countline is a point in time where all aircraft are
currently on the ground.
b) cs is the cost of string s.
c) K is the number of aircraft in the fleet.
d) γfs =
{
1
if string s covers flight f
0
otherwise.
e) δs denotes the number of times string s crosses the countline.
As the goal is to find a set of strings that comply with connection and maintenance
constraints, the model is equivalent to the set partitioning problem with side con-
straints.
min
∑
s∈S
csus
(3.6)
st.
∑
s∈S
γfsus = 1
∀f ∈F
(3.7)
∑
h(s)=n
us + w−
n =
∑
t(s)=n
us + w+
n
∀n ∈N
(3.8)
∑
s∈SO
δsus +
∑
n∈NO
w+
n ≤K
(3.9)
us ∈{0, 1}
∀s ∈S
(3.10)
w+
n , w−
n ≥0
∀n ∈N
(3.11)
The goal is to find strings such that the total cost is minimized as seen in the objective
function in equation (3.6). Equation (3.7) ensures that every flight is only covered
once. Flow balance of the network is ensured by the constraints in equation (3.8). In
equation (3.9), the constraint ensures that the total number of aircraft used to cover
all of the flights does not exceed the fleet size. In [Bar+98], it is described how the
model can be extended to integrate fleet assignment into the formulation.
Similar to the aircraft rotation problem, FSM is derived from a directed time-
line network and it also considers maintenance activities indirectly. For flights where
the destination is a maintenance station, a maintenance arc is added to the end
of the corresponding flight arc.
These augmented arcs now have an arrival time
equal to the sum of the length of a maintenance activity and the arrival time of the
corresponding flight. Since all strings are required to end at a maintenance station,
the aircraft assigned to any given string has the opportunity to undergo maintenance.
It is different from the aircraft rotation problem in the sense that it does not require
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Tail Assignment
19
every aircraft to cover the same sequence of flights. However, it is also incapable
of capturing restrictions on individual aircraft. For additional information on the
aircraft maintenance routing problem see [LC09].
3.5
Tail Assignment
Grönkvist [Grö05] presents a model capable of capturing different constraints for each
individual aircraft while solving the aircraft assignment problem. Due to the individ-
uality considerations, the approach is called the Tail Assignment problem (TAS) as
tail numbers are used to identify individual aircraft. We will use the terms tail and
aircraft interchangeably throughout the remainder of this thesis. In this case, a con-
nection network has been utilized in the development of the model. The decision
variables, sets and parameters associated with the formulation of the tail assignment
problem is described in the following.
1. Decision variables
a) xijt =
{
1
if activity i and j are adjacent and operated by aircraft t,
0
otherwise.
2. Sets
a) T denotes the set of aircraft (tails).
b) F denotes the set of activities to be carried out by the aircraft.
c) Pt the set of preassigned activities to aircraft t.
d) Rt the set of activities aircraft t is not allowed to carry out.
e) M is the set of maintenance types.
3. Parameters
a) cijt cost of assigning the two consecutive activities i and j to aircraft t.
b) lm is the maximum interval allowed between two consecutive maintenance
checks of type m.
4. Modeling of maintenance constraints.
a) rim denotes the resource consumption for each activity i of maintenance
type m from the start of the route until the maintenance check.
b) i’ denotes the activity preceding activity i. I.e. xi′it = 1 for some aircraft
t.
c) rim =





sim
if maintenance m can be performed between i′ and i,
rt
m
if i is a carry −in activity for aircraft t,
ri′m + sim
otherwise.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Modelling of Aircraft Assignment
d) sim denotes the resource consumption of maintenance type m for activity
i.
e) rt
m denotes the initial resource consumption at the start of the planning
period for maintenance type m and aircraft t.
The mathematical programming model can be considered as a multi-commodity net-
work flow problem with side constraints, where each commodity correspond to an
aircraft.
min
∑
i,j∈F
∑
t∈T
cijtxijt
(3.12)
st.
∑
j∈F
∑
t∈T
xijt = 1
∀i ∈F
(3.13)
∑
j∈F
xjit −
∑
j∈F
xijt = 0
∀i ∈F, t ∈T
(3.14)
∑
j∈F
xijt = 1
∀i ∈Pt, ∀t ∈T
(3.15)
∑
j∈F
xijt = 0
∀i ∈Rt, ∀t ∈T
(3.16)
rim ≤lm
∀i ∈F, ∀m ∈M
(3.17)
xijt ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈F, ∀t ∈T
(3.18)
The objective function in equation (3.12) describes the total cost of the connections
used, which we want to minimize. In equation (3.13), the constraints ensures that all
flights in the network are only covered once. The constraints in equation (3.14) are
the so called flow conservation constraints. The constraints in equation (3.15) and
(3.16) will make sure that any prescheduled and/or restricted activities for each of the
aircraft are respected. Equation (3.17) is known as resource consumption constraints
and ensures that each aircraft complies with maintenance requirements.
In terms of maintenance, the solution to TAS does not place maintenance activi-
ties at specific points in time for each aircraft, it just ensures that there are enough
maintenance possibilities. Similar to the previous approaches discussed in this chap-
ter, maintenance activities are included indirectly. Unlike the previous approaches,
TAS offers the option of including restrictions on individual tails of a fleet. The two
sets of constraints in equation (3.15) and (3.16) make it so certain activities, including
longer lasting maintenance checks, can be assigned to specific aircraft. Additionally,
the definition of the decision variable provides the possibility of capturing characteris-
tics of individual aircraft. Grönkvist [Grö05] is the first to introduce a mathematical
model for aircraft assignment that does not rely on the assumption of homogeneity
of a fleet.
==PAGE:31==
3.6 Choice of model
21
3.6
Choice of model
Common for all the approaches reviewed in this chapter are the use of connection
and maintenance constraints to appropriately capture the restrictions of aircraft as-
signment. With respect to connection constraints there exist mainly two different
types. The first are flight coverage constraints that ensure every flight is only covered
once by an aircraft. The second type are the flow conservation constraints, which
guarantee that a connection between two flights is only permitted if the destination
of the incoming flight is the same as the origin of the outgoing flight. Furthermore,
the departure time of the outgoing flight must be greater than the turn time plus
the arrival time of the incoming flight. The way in which the different approaches
in the literature model these constraints are very similar. In almost every case, the
thing that sets the approaches apart is the way in which maintenance requirements
are modelled.
Many approaches assume the flight schedule is cyclic, that it repeats itself on a
daily or weekly basis and that every aircraft in a given fleet are interchangeable. The
way in which maintenance is modelled is by creating routings or rotations that visit a
maintenance station within a given time interval. Every aircraft of the fleet will then
operate the same sequence of flights that provides sufficient maintenance possibilities.
As seen in [Cla+96] and [GT85], the aircraft assignment problem is then modelled in
terms of an Euler tour problem or an asymmetric traveling salesman problem with
side constraints. A similar approach is used by Barnhart et al. [Bar+98], but they
model the aircraft assignment problem as a set partitioning problem. Technically,
none of these approaches assign individual aircraft to specific flights in the schedule.
They only construct sequences of flights that will cover all the flights in the network
by a certain number of airplanes. Consequently, all of the methods are very limited in
terms of modelling specific requirements of individual flights or aircraft. They are not
suited to model more dynamic schedules containing irregular flight legs, which makes
it difficult to solve a problem where the planning horizon is a couple of weeks or a
month. It is not to say that these models are not applicable, they are very effective
and highly sufficient within their scope.
To the best of the author’s knowledge, the only model that is capable of capturing
a high degree of individuality is the TAS model by Grönkvist [Grö05]. It is the only
model that solves aircraft assignment by specifying the exact flights in the schedule
that each aircraft has to operate. This enables the model to be more detailed, as it
can capture the irregularities in the schedule and the possible restrictions on specific
flights or aircraft. Furthermore, it provides the possibility of solving schedules with
a longer time horizon than just a week. Consequently, the TAS model is deemed as
the most promising approach for further research on the aircraft assignment problem
and it will provide the basis for the model used in this thesis.
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
Part II
Analysis
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
3.6 Choice of model
25
Chapter Overview
Chapter 4 - Data Analysis
This chapter will provide a presentation and an analysis of the real-life dataset that
has been provided for the thesis. It will be described how the different test instances
used in the thesis have been created.
Finally, we present the formulation of the
mathematical programming model used in this thesis based on a discussion of the
characteristics of the dataset and how it relates to the different modelling approaches
presented in chapter 3.
Chapter 5 - Solution Approach
A presentation of the solution approach in the general case including Dantzig-Wolfe
decomposition, Column Generation, branch-and-bound and branch-and-price is pro-
vided. We then proceed to relate the theory to the aircraft assignment problem and
argue why this solution approach is beneficial.
Chapter 6 - Computational Results
This chapter will document our findings based on the various tests that have been
performed. Initially, we investigate the ability of the column generation to solve the
LP relaxation of the master problem. With the knowledge from these results, we
continue to test how branch-and-bound and branch-and-price can be used to find
feasible integer solutions. Finally, we explore the possibility of creating schedules of
better quality by changing the objective function.
Chapter 7 - Improvements
Based on the key findings from the analysis of the test results, this chapter will
present two techniques that is to improve the current solution approach by reducing
the computational requirements of our algorithm. The first method is based on a
sequential solution approach that will reduce the complexity of larger test instance
while the second suggestion presents a reformulation of the mathematical model that
reduces the amount of variables significantly.
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Data Analysis
A real-life dataset from a mid-sized North American airline has been provided and
it will provide the basis for the creation of a series of test instances. The dataset
contains information on the flights operated by the airline over a period of 201 days
in 2009. The data is divided into four different files; aircraft.xml lists all of the
different aircraft that the airline has at their disposal. aircraft_activity.xml con-
tains a list of all the prescheduled maintenance activities for every aircraft.
air-
craft_flight_duty.xml is a list of all the flights that the airline operates and fi-
nally flight_leg.xml provides an overview of the entire schedule, both flight and
maintenance activities, that was carried out by the airline.
Characteristics
Count
Number of flights
49,355
Number of maintenance activities
3,037
Number of days in the schedule
201
Number of airports
79
Number of aircraft
114
Number of fleet types
9
Average number of flights pr. day
246
Maximum number of flights per day
388
Minimum number of flights per day
22
Table 4.1: A list of key characteristics of the dataset concerning the flights and
maintenance activities.
A total of 49,355 flights are served by 114 aircraft of 9 different types, which
have to go through 3037 maintenance activities and cover 79 different airports within
201 days. In table 4.1 is a list of key characteristics of the dataset. It is seen that
the number of flights per day varies substantially between a minimum of 22 and a
maximum of 388, whereas the average number of daily flights is 246. Recall that the
goal of solving the aircraft assignment problem, is to assign individual tails of one
fleet type to flights so that all flights are covered. The dataset includes 9 different
fleet types and a total of 114 aircraft. The largest fleets consist of 32 aircraft, whereas
the smallest fleets are made up of one single aircraft.
To create the instances that are going to be used for testing, only the first three
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Data Analysis
files are needed. Furthermore, only a subset of the attributes of the observations is
necessary, as certain attributes contain information that is unrelated to our problem.
The important attributes are listed in table 4.2 along with a short description. The
attributes adep and ades describe the origin and destination of a flight respectively.
This notation is also used for maintenance activities meaning that they will be the
same and denote the airport at which the maintenance activity takes place. Common
for the attributes st and et in both files is that the time is given in minutes since
midnight of the 1st of January 1986.
File (.xml)
Attribute
Description
aircraft
(# of observations: 114)
id
The individual ID of the aircraft, also
referred to as the tail number.
actype
The type of aircraft.
aircraft_activity
(# of observations: 3037)
ac
The ID of the aircraft that has been
scheduled for maintenance.
adep
The airport from which the flight departs
ades
The airport at which the flight arrives
st
Time at the start of the maintenance
activity.
et
Time at the end of the maintenance
activity.
aircraft_flight_duty
(# of observations: 49355)
ac
The ID of the aircraft scheduled to
operate the flight.
leg_fd
The ID of the flight, also referred to as
the flight number.
adep
The origin of the flight.
ades
The destination of the flight.
st
The departure time.
et
The arrival time.
Table 4.2: A description of the important attributes of the dataset that are relevant
for creating the test instances and the file they are listed in. The numbers in the
parenthesis are the number of observations in each file.
4.1
Cleaning the Data
Before proceeding with the analysis, any error-prone observations that are included
in the dataset will be identified and removed. Mainly two types of errors have been
observed.
The first is for activities where the departure time is greater than the
arrival time, which is an impossible task. The second is for flights where the origin is
the same as the destination. Common for all these observations is that their required
operation time is small. Since no real explanation could be found as to what these
flights meant, they were deemed unnecessary and excluded from the dataset. A total
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Selection of Test Instances
29
of 26 cases of the first error type and a total of 152 instances of the second error type
have been detected where one observation overlapped. Consequently, 177 observations
are removed before creating the test instances.
4.2
Selection of Test Instances
In table 4.3 is a list of the different fleets in the dataset and their sizes. Since 7A, 7B,
7C and 3A are only made up of either one or two aircraft they are joined together
in order to form one single fleet.
This does violate the characteristic of fleet as
the aircraft are different, but it is done to simplify the visual representation of the
analysis.
Fleet types
Fleet 1
Fleet 2
Fleet 3
Fleet 4
Fleet 5
Fleet 6
Original Fleets
7A
7B
7C
3A
2A
3C
3D
3D
1A
Number of Tails
1
2
2
2
10
11
22
32
32
Table 4.3: A list of the different fleet types and the number of tails in each fleet. In
order to simplify the following analysis a superset of the four smallest fleets have been
created.
Usually airlines will do their planning for a time horizon of between one week and
one month, so the intent is to create a range of test instances that provide schedules
that range from one week to one month.
In terms of testing, this will provide a
foundation for investigating how the solution method depends on the time horizon.
Consequently, three different sets of test instances are created lasting 1, 2 and 4
weeks respectively. In order to determine the weeks that are most representative, the
number of flights and the number of maintenance activities of every week will be
investigated. Recall that the dataset is for an actual schedule of an airline in 2009,
so we divide the observations by the week in 2009 in which they occurred. A week
starts Monday at 00:00:00 and it ends on Sunday at 23:59:59. If a flight departs in
one week and arrives in the following week, it will be included in the week in which
it arrives. A visual representation of the total number of weekly flights is provided
in figure 4.1 while the total number of weekly maintenance activities is depicted in
figure 4.2. The graphs are created on the basis of the information in table A.1 and
table A.2 respectively which can be found in appendix A.
It is seen that Fleet 2 and 6 are not used to cover flights in every week, while the
remaining fleets are. This contributes to a heavily unbalanced schedule throughout
the entire period, where the weekly number of flights deviates from the average of
1645.2 flights per week. However, even if we ignore these two fleets, it is apparent
that the number of flights vary quite substantially. As it is seen by looking at week
15 trough 35, the schedule is irregular both in terms of the total amount of flights,
but also for each of the different fleet types. Fleet 4 and 5 are the two fleet types that
are utilized the most and Fleet 1 is barely used compared to the others. Considering
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Data Analysis
Figure 4.1: A bar graph displaying the number of weekly flights in total and by
fleet type. Considering the entire time horizon, the total number of weekly flight is
irregular
the weekly maintenance activities, it is also subject to an unequal balance with no
prescheduled maintenance activities in week 9, 10 and 12 and an average of 101.2.
The most prescheduled maintenance activities are accounted for by Fleet 4 and 5
followed by Fleet 3, while Fleet 1 only has maintenance scheduled in three different
weeks and Fleet 6 does not have any preassigned maintenance checks.
Figure 4.2: A bar graph displaying the total number of weekly prescheduled mainte-
nance activities in total and by fleet type. Considering the entire time horizon, the
total number of weekly maintenance activities is irregular.
In order to be able to fully test the capabilities of the solution approach, as large
test instances as possible is desirable. Consequently, Fleet 5 with a total of 16097
flights and 1252 maintenance activities is chosen for further investigation. Following
the same argument, the four consecutive weeks in which the most activities occur will
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Test Instances
31
be chosen. This is the case for week 29, 30, 31 and 32, which will be the four weeks
that make up the test instances. As the most activities occur in both week 30 and
31, they will make up the test instances with a 2-week time horizon, while week 30 is
chosen as the basis of the 1-week test instance.
4.3
Test Instances
Based on the analysis in the previous section a total of 72 test instances will be created.
Three different time horizons will be considered; 1, 2 and 4 weeks and for each of the
three cases, the number of tails will vary between 1 and 24. Fleet 5 does consist of
32 tails, but because only 24 of the tails have been assigned flights and maintenance
activities in the actual schedule, this will be the maximum number of tails. We then
create the different test instances by choosing the flights and maintenance activities
assigned to the different tails based on their alphabetical order. A small sample of
the test instances is provided in table 4.4 to give an idea of how they differ in terms
of magnitude. The smallest test instance consists of 30 flights and 1 maintenance
activity, while the largest is made up of 2615 flights and 215 maintenance activities.
All of the test instances can be found in appendix A.1.
Tails
1
8
16
24
1 Week
Flights
30
209
430
656
Maintenance
1
14
34
52
2 Weeks
Flights
55
413
884
1,334
Maintenance
3
31
71
105
4 Weeks
Flights
118
868
1,756
2,615
Maintenance
10
69
146
215
Table 4.4: The total number of flights and maintenance activities for the test instances
of 1, 8, 16 and 24 tails of the three different time horizons.
The test instances are created in such a way that the appropriate amount of
airplanes needed to cover all the flights are given in advance. A subset of flights
are selected based on the specific tails that covered those flight legs in the actual
schedule. By doing so, it is ensured that the minimum number of airplanes necessary
to cover all flights is equal to the number of tails that the subset of flights is based on.
Potentially, the test results might provide solutions where the number of tails needed
to cover the schedule is less than the number of tails it was based on. Although, this
seems unlikely due to the way the test instances have been created.
In the case of the total flights and maintenance activities on a weekly basis, it
was evident that the numbers varied greatly from week to week. Looking at the daily
percentage distribution of the number of flights and maintenance activities through-
out a week the same pattern occurs. The percentage distribution of the total flights
and maintenance activities throughout a week is displayed in figure 4.3. The graph
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Data Analysis
Figure 4.3: A bar graph displaying the percentage distribution of the daily flights
and maintenance activities respectively.
is based on the four weeks that were selected to form the basis of the test instances.
Both in terms of flights and maintenance activities, the total number of activities are
not distributed evenly among the days of the week. The number of daily flights is
more evenly balanced, ranging from 12.77 % to 15.14 %, than the daily maintenance
activities that range from 8.26 % to 20.0 %. Recall the modelling approaches pre-
sented in chapter 3 that seeks to find a sequence of flights (rotations) that repeats
itself on a daily or weekly basis. These rotation approaches do not fit the dataset
considered in this thesis as they rely on a regular schedule. Additionally, this schedule
is subject to prescheduled maintenance activities, which the rotation approaches are
incapable of capturing.
One approach that fits well with the structure of the dataset is the TAS model.
First of all, it offers the possibility of assigning specific activities to individual tails.
Secondly, it is capable of solving problems without relying on the schedule to be
highly regular and thirdly, it can solve problems with a time horizon of more than
one week. Consequently, the mathematical programming model used to describe the
aircraft assignment will be almost entirely based on the TAS model.
4.4
The Mathematical Programming Model
In order to fully capture the structure of the test instances generated in this section, a
mathematical programming model based on the TAS model is chosen. As the dataset
does not provide information on the cost of operating the different aircraft, it is as-
sumed that the fleets in the test instances are homogeneous and do not differ in cost.
It should be noted that if this was not the case, the model would be capable of captur-
ing the cost of using different tails. The dataset does not provide information about
==PAGE:43==
4.4 The Mathematical Programming Model
33
through values either, which leads to a simple objective function. The mathematical
programming model is presented in equation (4.1) - (4.5).
min
∑
i,j∈A
∑
t∈T
cijtxijt
(4.1)
st.
∑
j∈A
∑
t∈T
xijt = 1
∀i ∈A
(4.2)
∑
j∈A
xjit −
∑
j∈A
xijt = 0
∀i ∈A, t ∈T
(4.3)
∑
j∈A\M
xijt = 1
∀i ∈Mt, ∀t ∈T
(4.4)
xijt ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈A, ∀t ∈T
(4.5)
The decision variables are binary and describe whether a connection between two
activities are used in the schedule or not.
xijt =
{
1
if activity i is connected to activity j and is operated by aircraft t,
0
otherwise.
It does not describe potential connections between two maintenance activities as this
is only possible if it is the same tail that has to undergo both the maintenance checks.
If two maintenance activities for the same aircraft are adjacent, they will be joined
into one maintenance activity to simplify the modelling. The model makes use of the
following sets:
• T denotes the set of aircraft (tails).
• M is the set of all prescheduled maintenance activities and Mt is a subset of M
for each tail t.
• F is the set of all flight activities.
• A is the set of all activities, both flights and maintenance, A = F ∪M.
The objective of the model is to minimize the total cost of covering all the flights
and maintenance activities in the network as described by equation (4.1). The param-
eter cijt is the cost of a connection between two activities i and j operated by aircraft
t. Even though all costs are set to 1 in our tests, the cost parameter is included in
the model to establish that the model is capable of dealing with connections having
different costs. The connection constraints are made up of equation (4.2) and (4.3).
Where the former ensures that every activity is only covered by one aircraft and the
latter enforces the flow conservation. Flow conservation ensures that if an aircraft
covers an activity that arrives at a given airport, it must also cover an activity that
leaves from said airport. Equation (4.4) consists of the maintenance constraints as
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Data Analysis
they enforce the prescheduled maintenance activities. The constraints ensure that a
connection between all maintenance activities of each aircraft and a flight that departs
from the airport where the maintenance takes place is present. The flow conservation
constraints will then make sure that a flight to the airport at which maintenance is
taking place, will be operated by the corresponding aircraft. As the model includes
prescheduled maintenance activities, it will be referred to as the prescheduled tail
assignment problem (PTAS) in the remainder of this thesis.
Figure 4.4: A example of the time-line network that provides the basis of the PTAS
model. In addition to the flights and maintenance activities, it includes green dotted
arcs and yellow dotted arcs which are source and sink activities respectively. They
are needed for the implementation of the model.
PTAS is based on a time-line network as displayed in figure 4.4. It should be
noted that this network also includes carry-in and carry-out activities, depicted as
the green and yellow dotted arcs respectively. One activity for each airport is added
at the start of the time horizon and at the end of the time horizon. These are included
for implementation purposes. Additionally, this provides information on the location
of every aircraft at the start and end of the planning period. As schedules are typically
developed for a time horizon between one week and a month, this will make it possible
to connect multiple planning periods by using the position of every aircraft at the end
of a period as the initial conditions of the following period. More on this in section
7.1. For implementation purposes, a set of source activities, So, and sink activities,
Si, are added to the total set of activities A. In order to ensure flow conservation of
these activities, equation (4.3) is slightly modified for these specific activities which
are instead subject to equation (4.6).
∑
j∈A
xjit −
∑
j∈A
xijt =
{
−1
if i is a source activity
1
if i is a sink activity
∀i ∈A, t ∈T
(4.6)
The reason for doing so is that the source activities will not have any proceeding
activities that connects to it and the sink activities have no subsequent activities it
connects to. To provide the reader with an idea of the complexity of the networks, a
time-line network for fleet 5 in week 31 is provided in figure 4.5.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 The Mathematical Programming Model
35
Figure 4.5: A time-line network of all the activities for fleet 5 in week 31. Flights are displayed as blue arcs, while the
black arcs are maintenance activities
==PAGE:46==
36
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Solution Approach
PTAS can be considered as an integer multi-commodity flow problem with side con-
straints, where each aircraft is the equivalent of a commodity.
This well-studied
problem is known to be NP-hard if the number of commodities are 2 or higher as
concluded by Even et al. [EIS75]. As the decision variables describe all the potential
connections between flights, maintenance, source and sink activities, the total num-
ber of variables quickly becomes quite substantial as the size of the network increases.
The total number of variables can be determined by the formula in equation (5.1).
# of variables = T
(
|F|2 + 2|F| · |M| + |So| (|F| + |M|) + |Si| (|F| + |M|)
)
(5.1)
In the case of the largest test instance that consists of 2,615 flights, 215 maintenance
activities, 38 sources, 37 sinks and 24 tails, the model has 196,198,176 variables and
it consists of 72,840 constraints.
Considering the constraints of PTAS, it is seen that the PTAS model has a block
angular structure as depicted in figure 5.1. What this entails, is that the constraint
matrix has a staircase structure represented by the three colored boxes. The boxes
represent the set of constraints in equation (4.3) and (4.4) of the model from sec-
tion 4.4 as they can be divided into independent subsets based on the aircraft they
relate to. The grey box symbolizes the constraints in equation (4.2) known as the
complicating/linking constraints. Because only one tail per flight is needed, the flight
Figure 5.1: A visual representation of the block angular structure and how it relates
to the constraint matrix of the PTAS model.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Solution Approach
coverage constraints link all the aircraft together to form one problem. Dantzig and
Wolfe [DW60] have proposed a technique that exploits the block angular structure of
a problem, known as Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition.
5.1
Dantzig Wolfe Decomposition
In [DW60], Dantzig and Wolfe proposed a decomposition principle of linear program-
ming (LP) problems commonly known as Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition. The method
produces a reformulated model based on the extreme points and extreme rays of the
polyhedron made up of the independent constraints of the model of the original LP.
This reformulation significantly reduces the number of constraints, and it provides a
bound that is at least as good as the LP relaxation and potentially stronger [Lus17].
The downside to the technique is that the reformulation has a huge number of vari-
ables.
Now, consider the case of a generic LP with a block angular structure as
depicted in figure 5.1.
min
cT
1 x1 + cT
2 x2 + · · · + cT
k xk
(5.2)
(OLP)
st.


A1
A2
. . .
Ak
B1
B2
...
Bk




x1
x2
...
xk

≤


b0
b1
...
bk


(5.3)
xi ≥0,
∀i ∈K
(5.4)
The method uses the Minkowski-Weyl’s theorem, which states that any feasible solu-
tion x can be expressed in terms of a convex combination of the extreme points and
a conical combination of the extreme rays of the corresponding polyhedron [Lus17].
The polyhedron made up of all the independent constraints for the original linear
program (OLP) is considered:
Xi = {xi|Bixi ≤bi, xi ≥0}
∀i ∈K
Assuming that the polyhedron is bounded, it is possible to represent a solution ¯xp
i
only by a convex combination of the extreme points of the polyhedron. Using the
Minkowski-Weyl’s theorem with P denoting the set of all extreme points ¯xp
i ∈Xi of
the polyhedron we can write xi as
xi =
∑
p∈P
¯xp
i λp
i
∀i ∈K
(5.5)
Where the real numbers λp
i ≥0 are subject to
∑
p∈P
λp
i = 1,
∀i ∈K
(5.6)
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Column Generation
39
which is known as the convexity constraints. By inserting equation (5.5) and (5.6)
into OLP and substituting xi it is seen that the reformulation becomes
min
∑
p∈P
(
cT
1 ¯xp
1
)
λp
1 +
∑
p∈P
(
cT
2 ¯xp
2
)
λp
1 + · · · +
∑
p∈P
(
cT
k ¯xp
k
)
λp
k
(5.7)
(RLP)
st.
∑
p∈P
(A1¯xp
1) λp
1 +
∑
p∈P
(A2¯xp
2) λp
1 + · · · +
∑
p∈P
(Ak¯xp
k) λp
k ≤b0 (π)
(5.8)
∑
p∈P
λp
i = 1,
∀i ∈K (κi)
(5.9)
λp
i ≥0
∀i ∈K, p ∈P
(5.10)
The decomposition is now complete and it is apparent that the reformulated linear
program (RLP) has far less constraints than OLP, |b0|+|K| compared to ∑
i∈K |bi|. It
is noted that the dual variables corresponding to equation (5.8) and (5.9) are denoted
π and κi respectively.
As previously mentioned, the downside to Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition is that the
reformulated model has a huge number of variables. As the problem size increases, the
number of variables will grow exponential as it corresponds to the sum of the number
of extreme points.
Consequently, it quickly becomes intractable to enumerate all
of the variables, which makes it difficult to solve the reformulated model directly.
Instead, Dantzig and Wolfe proposed a solution method that generates variables
dynamically, known as column generation.
5.2
Column Generation
Column generation is a solution method capable of solving large-scale LPs in an
efficient manner. Instead of explicitly enumerating all of the variables or columns
of the LP, the approach considers a subset of variables initially. As the algorithm
progresses, more and more variables will be added to the problem until it is no longer
possible to find any and an optimal solution is reached.
Consider the example RLP from the previous section which has an exponential
number of varialbes. This problem is referred to as the master problem. By only
including a subset of variables, C ⊆P, the problem size is reduced significantly,
which makes the problem easier to solve. This is called the restricted master problem
(RMP) and it is obtained by substituting P with C in RLP. The dual variables of the
RMP are now used to determine if there exist any nonbasic variables with a negative
reduced cost that should be added to the RMP. To find such a candidate one must
solve the pricing problem or subproblem, which in the case of RLP is given by linear
program PP. As the constraint matrix of the OLP had a block angular structure, the
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Solution Approach
Figure 5.2: A flow chart describing the generic column generation framework.
subproblem splits into |K| individual subproblems with the following formulation:
min
(
cT
i −πAi
)
xi −κi
(5.11)
(PP)
st.
Bixi ≤bi
(5.12)
xi ≥0
(5.13)
A feasible solution to the pricing problem with a negative objective value provides
an extreme point of Xi which can potentially improve the current solution of the
RMP. This comes from linear programming theory which states that in the case of
minimization, the current basic feasible solution can be improved if there exist any
variable with a negative reduced cost. The variables with a negative reduced cost,
if more than one exist, are then returned to the RMP. The RMP is then solved
again to determine a new set of dual variables, which will in turn be passed to the
subproblem to check for new variables with a negative reduced cost. This process is
repeated until it is no longer possible to find a variable with a negative reduced cost,
which implies that the current solution to the RMP is optimal. The framework of
the column generation algorithm is shown in figure 5.2. Desaulniers et al. [DDS05]
provide a good overview of column generation and its application to solving various
OR problems, while Lübbecke [Lüb10] provides a more general review of column
generation and the considerations that follows with the framework.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 The Master Problem
41
5.3
The Master Problem
Recall the PTAS model given by equation (4.1)-(4.5) from section 4.4. By apply-
ing Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition to the PTAS model the polyhedron obtained by
convexifying equation (4.3) and (4.4) is considered.
X = conv



∑
j∈A xt
ji −∑
j∈A xt
ij = 0
∀i ∈A
∀t ∈T
∑
j∈A\M xt
ij1
∀i ∈Mt
∀t ∈T
xt
ij ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈A
∀t ∈T



It is seen that the polyhedron X breaks into |T| independent components due to the
block angular structure.
Xt = conv



∑
j∈A xt
ji −∑
j∈A xt
ij = 0
∀i ∈F
∑
j∈A\M xt
ij1
∀i ∈Mt
xt
ij ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈F



∀t ∈T
We let ¯xtp denote the pth extreme point in Xt and ¯xtp
ij its coordinate and we define
the set of extreme points in Xt as Pt. Using the Minkowski-Weil theorem enable us
to describe a point in Xt by its extreme points as shown in equation 5.16.
min
∑
i,j∈A
∑
t∈T
cijtxijt
(5.14)
st.
∑
j∈A
∑
t∈T
xijt = 1
∀i ∈A
(5.15)
xijt =
∑
p∈Pt
¯xtp
ij λt
p
∀i, j ∈F,
∀t ∈T
(5.16)
∑
p∈Pt
λt
p = 1
∀t ∈T
(5.17)
λt
p ≥0
∀t ∈T,
∀p ∈Pt
(5.18)
xijt ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈A, ∀t ∈T
(5.19)
By relaxing the integer constraint on x and substituting xijt in the formulation we
get
min
∑
t∈T
∑
p∈Pt

∑
i,j∈A
cijt¯xtp
ij

λt
p
(5.20)
st.
∑
t∈T
∑
p∈Pt

∑
j∈A
¯xtp
ij

λt
p = 1
∀i ∈A
(5.21)
∑
p∈Pt
λt
p = 1
∀t ∈T
(5.22)
λt
p ≥0
∀t ∈T,
∀p ∈Pt
(5.23)
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Solution Approach
We define vtp
i
= ∑
j∈A ¯xtp
ij and wt
p = ∑
i,j∈A cijt¯xtp
ij . Finally, by only considering a
subset of the extreme points, Ωt ⊆Pt
∀t ∈T, we arrive at the formulation of the
restricted master problem.
5.3.1
The Restricted Master Problem
We present the formulation of the restricted master problem, which is obtained by
applying Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition to the PTAS model.
min
∑
t∈T
∑
p∈Pt
wt
pλt
p
(5.24)
st.
∑
t∈T
∑
p∈Pt
vtp
i λt
p = 1
∀i ∈A
(πi)
(5.25)
∑
p∈Pt
λt
p = 1
∀t ∈T
(κt)
(5.26)
λt
p ≥0
∀t ∈T,
∀p ∈Ωt
(5.27)
In terms of the real-life problem of assigning aircraft to flights in a network, λt
p
represents a path p through the network for tail t. Ωt is a set of paths for each aircraft
t, while Pt is the set of every possible path through the network. The coefficient wt
p
is equivalent to the cost of having tail t operate the corresponding path p and the
parameter vtp
i
denotes whether activity i is covered by path p operated by tail t.
The dual variables associated with equation (5.25) and (5.26) is defined as πi and κt
respectively.
Recall the time-line network from figure 4.4 in section 4.4 which the PTAS model is
based upon. The PTAS model describes the network of flights in terms of connections
between two arcs, commonly referred to as an arc formulation. The RMP is known as
a path formulation as it describes the network based on sequences of flights through
the network. Compared to the PTAS model where the total number of variables is
described by a polynomial, the RMP has an exponential number of variables. As
previously mentioned, column generation is a suitable solution approach for this type
of model, because we can generate feasible routes through the network dynamically
instead of having to explicitly enumerate all the possible routes through the network.
In order to generate these routes, the subproblem has to be considered.
5.4
The Subproblem
In the column generation framework, the subproblem makes it possible to generate
feasible routes through the network that will be added to the set of paths in the
RMP. Due to the block angular structure of the PTAS model, the subproblem splits
into |T| independent subproblems, i.e. one problem for each aircraft t. So instead
of having to solve one large subproblem with 196,198,176 variables in every iteration
==PAGE:53==
5.5 Column Generation Strategy
43
of the column generation scheme, |T| smaller problems with 8,174,924 variables are
considered. The subproblems are described by the following integer program (IP):
min
Zsub
t
=
∑
i,j∈A
(cijt −πi)xij −κt
(5.28)
∑
j∈A
xji −
∑
j∈A
xij = 0
∀i ∈A
(5.29)
∑
j∈A\M
xij = 1
∀i ∈Mt
(5.30)
xij ∈{0, 1}
∀i, j ∈A
(5.31)
The constraints of the pricing problem ensures that the tail covers its prescheduled
maintenance activities while obeying flow conservation restrictions. If Zsub
t
< 0, there
exists a feasible path through the network for tail t that could improve the current
best solution of the RMP.
5.5
Column Generation Strategy
Consider once again the generic column generation framework as displayed in figure
5.2 in section 5.2.
In order to start the algorithm, an initial solution is needed.
To provide such a solution, we introduce a set of artificial variables; one for each
activity that has a high cost and one for each tail that has no cost. The former will
penalize a solution heavily if an activity is left uncovered, while the latter provides
the possibility of not using every aircraft. This enable us to create an initial solution
where no tails are used and no activities are covered, which provides a set of dual
variables so we can start pricing. Alternatively, a greedy heuristic could be used to
find an initial feasible solution, which has the potential of improving the performance
of the algorithm [Bar+96].
When it comes to generating columns, there exist different strategies [Lüb10].
One approach called full pricing is to solve every subproblem in every iteration of the
column generation scheme in order to generate as many columns as possible. Another
approach known as partial pricing, only solves a subset of all the subproblems in every
iteration. We will use full pricing and two different variations of partial pricing. For
the first variation, the approach will start by solving the first subproblem and then
progress through the remaining subproblems until a column with a negative reduced
cost is found. Consequently, only one column is generated per iteration. For the
second variation, the first subproblem that is solved in every iteration is different. By
cycling through the different subproblems it is ensured that every subproblem have
been solved after a certain number of iterations. Which strategy to choose depends on
the problem being considered. Depending on the difficulty of solving the subproblems,
it might take a long time to solve, so it is desirable to generate as many columns per
iteration as possible. At the same time, this might result in many similar columns
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Solution Approach
being generated which is undesirable. These columns are redundant as they do not
provide the potential to improve the current solution of the RMP and at the same
time, they increase the size of the master problem. As no column generation strategy
have been proven to be strictly better than others, we will test the three different
approaches described in this section.
1. Full pricing - In every iteration of the column generation scheme, each subprob-
lem for every aircraft will be solved and all the columns with a negative reduced
cost is returned to the RMP.
2. Partial pricing - The subproblem corresponding to the first tail will be solved
first, if it does not provide a column with a negative reduced cost, the subprob-
lem for the second tail is considered and so on so forth until a column with
negative reduced cost is identified.
3. Cyclic pricing - This approach follows the same scheme as the partial pricing,
but instead of starting with the first tail in every iteration, it cycles through
the set of all tails and start with a new subproblem in every iteration.
It should be noted that typically, the subproblem is being solved with the goal of
finding the column with the highest negative reduced cost. However, any column
with a negative reduced cost will work which opens up for new possibilities when
solving a computationally intensive problem [Bar+96]. To ensure optimality of the
RMP, it is necessary to solve the subproblem to optimality at least once in order to
conclude that no more columns with a negative reduced cost exist [Lus17].
5.6
Obtaining Integer Solutions
By using column generation to solve the LP relaxation of the RMP, it is not guaran-
teed that the solution is integer. In fact, it is most likely a very fractional solution
that is produced by column generation. In order to arrive at an integer solution,
one approach is to apply a branch-and-bound procedure to the RMP, when no more
columns with a negative reduced cost can be generated.
5.6.1
Branch-and-Bound
The branch-and-bound scheme is used to see if it is possible to obtain a feasible
integer solutions or maybe even the optimal solutions.
It will be applied to the
solution of the RMP obtained by using column generation. Note that solving the
RMP to optimality is equivalent to solving the root node of the branch-and-bound
tree. We will use these two expressions interchangeably throughout the remainder of
the thesis. In regards to our problem of aircraft assignment, we try to see if there is
a combination of the routes, generated by the columns generation, that will cover all
or at least some of the activities in our network. The emphasis is on the possibility
==PAGE:55==
5.6 Obtaining Integer Solutions
45
of finding such a solution, because the standard branch-and-bound scheme does not
guarantee an optimal or feasible solution to the RMP. When branching is done on
the RMP, there is the possibility that a column with negative reduced cost exists, but
it is not included in the master problem. An approach that utilizes this property is
called branch-and-price.
5.6.2
Branch-and-Price
The branch-and-price algorithm combines branch-and-bound with column generation,
by using column generation in each node of the branch-and-bound tree. Branch-and-
price is guaranteed to find the optimal solution although this may be a very time
consuming task [Bar+96]. Multiple decisions about the branching strategy have to
be made when implementing this approach. It should be determined what variables
are going to be the branching candidates, as both variables from the master problem
and the subproblem are a possibility. Branching on a variable in the master problem
entails that an aircraft will be assigned to a specific route. Consequently, there is no
reason to generate more routes for this tail and the flights it covers can be removed
from the formulation of the subproblems. One important thing to consider is that
branching on a variable in the master problem will add an extra constraint to the
formulation. Managing the dual value of this constraint affects how to calculate the
negative reduced cost of a column in the subproblems and makes for a cumbersome
task. This will require several additional configurations to the implementation of the
branch-and-price algorithm.
A way to avoid this, is by branching on variables in the subproblem.
As the
subproblem is an IP, the branching candidate is identified in the solution to the RMP
and enforced in the subproblem. This is done by applying constraint branching, where
two constraints covered fractionally are identified. In the left branch the variables
that cover both constraints will be allowed, while the remaining variables that are not
present in the two constraints are not allowed and vice versa for the right branch. In
terms of our model, this corresponds to enforcing a specific connection between two
activities as this connection was fractionally covered in the solution to the RMP. In
the one branch this connection will always be included when solving the subproblem,
while it will be excluded in the other branch. This method is chosen for the testing
that will be performed as it presents far less challenges in terms of modelling and
implementation than to branch on variables in the RMP.
It is also necessary to decide what type of variable branching that will be used. If
the goal is to find the optimal solution, it makes sense to try and divide the solution
space evenly between the two nodes by branching on the most fractional variable. On
the other hand, it might be of interest to obtain good feasible integer solutions, which
is done by dividing the solution space so the likelihood of finding a good solution is
higher on one side of the branch and bound tree [Bar+96]. In this case where we
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Solution Approach
consider binary variables, the fractional variables that are closest to 1 should converge
to an integer solution quicker than branching on the most fractional variables. We
will test both of the techniques in order to see what provides the best results.
5.6.3
Strong Branching
Consider the branching rule of branching on the most fractional variable of the LP
relaxation. It is likely that more than one variable have a value of 0.5 in the solution
to the LP. Strong branching is a method used to decide between a selected number
of variables, referred to as branching candidates, that follow the branching rule. As
described by Klabjan et al. [Kla+01], the variable selected for branching is chosen
based on how much it increases the lower bound on the child nodes, if it provides a
good integer solution quickly or both. By applying strong branching, the running time
is suspected to increase compared to when only one branching candidate is considered,
while the number of nodes in the branch-and-bound tree is expected to decrease. We
will apply strong branching in order to see if we can obtain better integer solutions.
5.7
Implementation
All of the solution approaches presented in the previous sections will be implemented
in C++ using Computational Infrastructure for Operations Research (COIN-OR)
[COI18]. COIN-OR is an open source software that provides an object-oriented frame-
work to implement different optimization algorithms with the possibility of using
different solvers including but not limited to CPLEX, Gurobi and Clp.
Similar to taking advantage of the independent subproblems in the column gen-
eration algorithm, we can exploit the nature of the independent subproblems in our
implementation. Consider the subproblem model in equation (5.28)-(5.31) and ob-
serve that the flow conservation constraint, equation (5.29), will be the same for
every subproblem. Consequently, it is only necessary to change the objective and
the maintenance constraints every time a new subproblem is considered. In the im-
plementation, the subproblem is simply build once when the algorithm is initialized,
where all the maintenance activities of every aircraft is included with the right-hand
side (RHS) set to 0. When a subproblem needs to be solved, the dual values from the
RMP is used to update the objective so it corresponds to the right tail and the RHS of
the corresponding maintenance activities of said tail is set to 1. This will significantly
reduce the computation time compared to building the subproblem every time it has
to be solved.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Computational Results
In this chapter, we will assess the quality of the solutions found by our solution
approach as well as its performance. The algorithm will be tested on the test instances
presented in section 4.3, which can be found in appendix A.1. Recall that there are
three main test cases with a time horizon of 1, 2 and 4 weeks respectively. In each
case, we consider a schedule for a number of tails between 1 and 24. All tests have
been performed on DTU’s High-Performance Computing (HPC) cluster with the use
of a single processor with a clock speed range between 2.6GHz and 2.8GHz3 and a
maximum running time of 24 hours.
The chapter is divided into 4 sections, one for each configuration of the column
generation algorithm. The first section deals the computational results of the generic
column generation algorithm and its ability to solve the RMP. These results will
be used to asses how the performance of the algorithm scales as the problem size
is increased. Furthermore, an analysis of the convergence of the column generation
algorithm is provided. In the second section, a branch-and-bound scheme is applied
to the solution of the RMP found by column generation while the third section exam-
ines the branch-and-price algorithm. Both of these sections are dedicated to finding
feasible integer solutions to the aircraft assignment problem. Several configurations
of the branch-and-price algorithm will be tested, including three column generation
strategies and two different branching strategies. In all tests we utilize a combined
best bound and diving search strategy when examining the branch-and-bound tree.
Finally in section 4, it is investigated if configurations to the cost structure of the
objective function can generate schedules of better quality. When we report the num-
ber of iterations throughout this section, it will correspond to the global iterations of
the column generation framework, i.e. every time the algorithm goes back and forth
between the restricted master problem and the subproblem.
6.1
Column Generation - Scaling
The first series of tests are conducted on the column generation algorithm in its
simplest form, where it is used to solve the RMP. The tests follow the scheme displayed
in figure 5.2 in section 5.2 utilizing full pricing where all the subproblems are solved in
every iteration. It is of interest to analyze how the performance, in terms of running
time, is affected by the size of the problem. The two key parameters that determines
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Computational Results
the size of the problem are the number of tails and the time horizon. The graph in
figure 6.1 is displaying the running time measured in hours as function of the number
of tails for the three different time horizons 1, 2 and 4 weeks. It is seen that for the
Figure 6.1: The running time in hours for solving the root node of the branch-and-
bound tree using column generation for all the different test instances.
test instances with a time horizon of 1 week, it is possible to solve all the problems
for every tail. The largest instance of 1 week that has 24 tails takes 3.72 hours to
solve. For test instances of 2 and 4 weeks, the column generation manages to solve the
RMP to optimality when the problems consist of 18 and 4 tails respectively. When
the problems include more tails than this, the algorithm does not terminate before it
reaches the maximum running time of 24 hours. In all three cases, the running time
is subject to an exponential growth as the problem size increases.
The graph in figure 6.2 displays the number of pricing iterations, i.e. how many
times the algorithm goes back and forth between the master problem and the sub-
problem. For the test instances of 1 week the number of iterations experience a slight
increase every time the number of tails is incremented by one, which is approximately
linear. For the 2 and 4 week instances, it is seen that the increase in the number of
iteration is substantial compared to the 1 week instances. In both cases, the number
of iterations increase until they reach the point where it is no longer possible to solve
the root node after which the iteration count starts to decrease. Consequently, the
time it takes to generate a sufficient number of columns becomes intractable when
the problem size reaches a certain size. As we cannot generate enough columns, it
is apparent that the solution time required by CPLEX to solve the subproblems in-
creases significantly with the size of the problems. For the largest test instance of 4
weeks and 24 tails, only 14 iterations are performed and 336 columns are generated
in 24 hours as listed in table 6.1. Considering that the largest instance with a 4 week
time horizon that we are able to solve needs 8,784 columns, the time it will take to
solve the 4 week and 24 tail instance is impractical. It is even faster to solve the 1
week and 24 tails instance than the 4 week and 4 tails instance. As the problems
==PAGE:59==
6.1 Column Generation - Scaling
49
Figure 6.2: The number of iterations performed by the column generation algorithm
for solving the root node of the branch-and-bound tree for all the different test in-
stances.
Tails
4
18
24
1 Week
Running Time [h]
2.2e-3
1.14
3.72
Iteration count
46
177
224
Columns
180
3,168
5,376
2 Weeks
Running Time [h]
0.05
17.48
24
Iteration Count
201
747
288
Columns
800
13,363
6,888
4 Weeks
Running Time [h]
3.76
24
24
Iteration Count
2,200
37
14
Columns
8,784
658
366
Table 6.1: The running time in hours, the iteration count and the number of columns
generated for solving the root node of the branch-and-bound tree using column gen-
eration for test instances of 4, 18 and 24 tails and each of the three time horizons.
with a time horizon of 1 week are the only ones that can be solved for every tail, the
computations that are carried out in the following sections will be based on these
test instances. This will also limit the number of different test instances that are
quite substantial, but it is still possible to see the performance of the algorithm as
the problem size increases.
6.1.1
Convergence Analysis
Column generation is known to suffer from tailing off, which entails that the closer the
algorithm gets to optimum, the slower it converges. This is mainly due to an unstable
behaviour of the dual variables [Lüb10]. The convergence of the three different column
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Computational Results
generation strategies are shown in figure 6.3. The results are based on solving the
root node of the branch-and-bound tree for a test instance of 1 week and 5 tails,
which has an optimal solution of 143 as this is the total number of activities in the
test instance.
It is apparent that both full and cyclic pricing converges to the optimal solution of
the RMP significantly faster than partial pricing, reaching the optimum after 84 and
249 iterations respectively. In comparison, partial pricing performs 1,436 iterations
before it terminates, which is about 17 times more than full pricing and about 5 times
as many iterations as cyclic pricing. In all three cases, the tailing off property is
apparent as the objective value is reduced significantly per iteration in the beginning,
but as the algorithm progresses, the size of the reduction per iteration decreases.
In case of the partial pricing, it reaches the optimal objective value after 1246
iterations, but it requires 1,436 iterations before it terminates. The column generation
scheme continues to find columns with negative reduced cost and reaches an optimal
integer solution. Rönnberg and Larssen [RL14] state that this is due to the degeneracy
of the set partitioning problem. As seen in table 6.2 the solution found by partial
pricing is integer as it only consists of 5 variables, one for each tail, while the solutions
found by full and cyclic pricing are very fractional consisting of 110 and 79 variables
respectively.
When looking at the number of generated columns, partial pricing generates about
6 times as many columns as cyclic pricing and more than 3 times as many columns
as full pricing. Just for the first tail alone, it generates more columns than the total
number of columns generated by either full or cyclic pricing. As the partial pricing
always starts by solving the subproblem of the first tail, it keeps generating columns
over and over again for said tail and passing them to the RMP as long as the columns
have a negative reduced cost. This does not have a great impact on the objective
Figure 6.3: The convergence towards optimum for solving the root node of the branch-
and-bound tree of using column generation for the three different column generation
strategies. The results are based on a test instance of 1 week and 5 tails.
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Branch-and-Bound
51
Runtime [s]
Iter
Col per Tail
#Cols
#Vars
Full
26.18
84
83/83/83/83/83
415
110
Partial
124.48
1,436
1099/254/65/12/5
1,435
5
Cyclic
18.52
250
50/50/50/50/49
249
79
Table 6.2: Statistics on the convergence analysis for solving the root node of the
branch-and-bound tree.
Running time in seconds, iteration count, the number of
columns generated per tail, the total number of columns generated and the number
of variables in the solution to the RMP.
value and is the reason for the slower convergence of the partial pricing. In contrast,
full pricing generates a column for each subproblem in every iteration, providing
more opportunities for each tail in the RMP. This has a much greater impact on
the objective value as a route for each tail can be chosen in the RMP, significantly
reducing the amount of uncovered activities in the network. The same applies to
cyclic pricing as it cycles through the tails with each iteration ensuring that routes
are being generated for every tail. However, the converge is slower than full pricing
as it only generates one column per iteration.
Considering the partial pricing, the vast amount of columns it generates for the
first few tails seems beneficial in terms of finding an integer solution. It could suggest
that they provide a wide variety of routes through the network which creates an
opportunity to simply generate routes for the remaining tails that that do overlap
with a selection of routes for the first few tails. These routes of the last couple of
tails will fill out gaps in the schedule in order to obtain an integer solution. As both
full and cyclic pricing arrive at very fractional solutions to the RMP, it could suggest
that they produce similar routes without much variety for each tail. However, this
requires a more thorough analysis of the columns to conclude this definitively.
6.2
Branch-and-Bound
In this section, it is investigated whether applying a branch and bound scheme after
the root node has been solved provides promising results. The idea is to see if all
the columns that were generated by solving the RMP are enough to generate good
quality integer solutions or maybe even optimal solutions. As the cost of a column
generated by the subproblem is equivalent to the number of activities covered by said
column an optimal solution to the RMP is equal to the number of activities of the test
instance. If a route is left uncovered, a penalty will be added corresponding to the
cost of an artificial variable. So instead of displaying optimality gaps, we have chosen
to show the percentage of non-covered activities by a solution as shown in figure 6.4a.
The non-coverage percentage is the percentage of activities in the solution that are
not covered.
It is seen that the optimal solution is only obtained for the test instances of 1, 2
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Computational Results
(a) The percentage of non-covered flights.
(b) The number of processed nodes.
Figure 6.4: Results for applying branch-and-bound to the solution of the RMP based
on the test instances of 1 week and 1-10 tails.
and 3 tails, feasible integer solutions are found for test instances of maximum 10 tails
and the branch-and-bound scheme does not reach an integer solution before it reaches
the maximum running time of 24 hours, when the number of tails is 11 or higher. It
is seen that the number of processed nodes experience an exponential growth as the
number of tails increases, processing 129 nodes for a problem with 4 tails and 497,087
nodes for a problem with 10 tails as displayed in figure 6.4. Consequently, the time
required to search through the branch-and-bound tree becomes intractable for the
larger instances.
In terms of the quality of the integer solutions that were obtained, only four in-
stances (1, 2, 3 and 5 tails) have a non-coverage percentage that is less than 5 %, while
the remaining fail to cover 16 % or more of the total number of activities. Common
for the bad quality solutions is that at least one tail is not covering any activities. In
conclusion, simply applying a branch-and-bound scheme to the root node does not
provide an appealing approach for finding good quality integer solutions.
6.3
Branch-and-Price
In the following sections, the branch-and-price algorithm will be tested and its per-
formance evaluated.
Different configurations in regards to the column generation
strategy and the branching strategy will be investigated. Again, every test run is
allowed a maximum running time of 24 hours and only the test instances with a time
horizon of 1 week are considered.
6.3.1
Column Generation Strategies
Initially the three different column generation strategies, full, partial and cyclic pric-
ing will be tested in the branch-and-price scheme. In each of the three cases, branching
is done on the variable closest to 1 with only one branching candidate. The running
time of the three approaches is displayed as a function of the number of tails in figure
6.5. It is seen that every method fails to solve all of the test instances within the
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Branch-and-Price
53
Figure 6.5: The running time, in hours, of the branch-and-price algorithm where
branching is done on the variable closest to 1 using the three different column gener-
ation strategies.
maximum allowed running time of 24 hours. Full and cyclic pricing manages to solve
12 instances while partial pricing solves 11 instances. When the problem size reaches
9 tails, the running time starts to increase rapidly and every approach experience an
exponential growth in running time. It is apparent that in terms of reaching a solu-
tion, the branch-and-price algorithm is fastest with cyclic pricing and slowest with
the partial pricing.
Looking at the number of iterations, as displayed in figure 6.7, it is seen that
both partial and cyclic pricing perform substantially more iterations than full pricing.
This is caused by the fact that full pricing potentially returns a number of columns
equivalent to the number of subproblems in every iteration, whereas the other two
methods only returns one column per iteration. Out of the three approaches it is
full pricing which produces the largest amount of columns followed by partial and
then cyclic pricing as displayed in figure 6.8. The reason behind partial pricing being
the slowest approach to find a solution is a combination of the substantial amount of
columns it generates and the large amount of iterations it performs.
In terms of the branch-and-bound tree, the number of nodes is considerably less
for partial pricing than the other two methods, as displayed in figure 6.6, while it
is the approach that performs the most iterations. Due to the slow convergence of
the partial pricing as shown in section 6.1.1, it has to perform a lot of iterations in
every node before it solves the LP to optimally. Consequently, it generates a lot more
columns and does not need to branch as much before reaching the optimal solution.
The branch-and-price with full and cyclic pricing process about the same number of
nodes and since the convergence of these two approaches are fast, they manage to
process more nodes than the partial pricing.
However, based on the results displayed in figure 6.9, it is seen that the partial
pricing strategy is the only approach that manages to reach optimality for the all
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Computational Results
Figure 6.6: The number of processed nodes in the branch-and-bound tree for the
branch-and-price algorithm where branching is done on the variable closest to 1 using
the three different column generation strategies.
Figure 6.7: The number of iterations of the branch-and-price algorithm where branch-
ing is done on the fractional variable closest to 1 without strong branching for the
three different column generation strategies.
test instances it solved. The full and cyclic approaches do not reach optimality in 3
out of 12 and 5 out of 12 instances respectively as they are subject to a non-coverage
percentage that is greater than 0. Three of the integer solutions obtained by the
cyclic approach, 7, 8 and 10 tails, are of decent quality as they have a non-coverage
percentage of 5.38 % or less while the remaining integer solutions, including those
found by full pricing, are deemed unacceptable with a non-coverage percentage of 9.29
% or higher. So even though partial pricing is the most computationally expensive
method, it is the strategy that finds the best quality solutions.
The results in this section show that the branch-and-price algorithm is capable of
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Branch-and-Price
55
Figure 6.8: The number of generated columns during of the branch-and-price algo-
rithm where branching is done on the variable closest to 1 for the three different
column generation strategies.
Figure 6.9: The non-coverage percentage obtained by the branch-and-price algorithm
where branching is done on the variable closest to 1 for the three different column
generation strategies.
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Computational Results
solving the PTAS model. However, when the problem size increases beyond 12 tails for
a 1 week time horizon, the computational requirements start to experience a heavily
exponential growth, making it intractable to find a solution within a reasonable time.
6.3.2
Variable Branching Strategy
As the tests performed in the previous section were all done by branching on the
variable closest to 1, this section will test the performance of branch-and-price by
branching on the most fractional variable, i.e. the variable closest to 0.5. The charac-
teristics in terms of running time, number of iterations, processed nodes and generated
columns can be found in appendix B.3. Notice that except for the graphs displaying
the running time, the scale on the vertical and horizontal axis are different compared
to the graphs displaying the results of branching on the variable closest to 1.
Figure 6.10: The average running time in hours for the branch-and-price algorithm
when branching on the most fractional variable or the variable closest to 1 and using
the three column generation strategies
It is apparent that the branch-and-price algorithm still experiences the exponential
growth in computational requirements as the problem size is increased. In general
the computational requirements for solving the same test instances are less when
branching on the most fractional variable compared to branching on the variable
closest to 1. This is evident from the average running time of the three different
column generation strategies for the two branching strategies as shown in figure 6.10.
When the problem size is increased beyond 9 tails, the running time for branching on
the variable closest to one is subject to a greater upward trend. With the reduction in
running time, it is now possible to solve test instances within 24 hours with up to 15
tails, as shown in figure 6.11, compared to test instances with only 12 tails previously.
The most interesting observation is in regards to the quality of the solutions that
this scheme provides. As seen in figure 6.11, the optimal solution is obtained in all but
==PAGE:67==
6.3 Branch-and-Price
57
Figure 6.11: The non-coverage percentage obtained by the branch-and-price algorithm
where branching is done on the most fractional variable for the three different column
generation strategies. Pay attention to the values of the vertical axis.
one case when branching on the most fractional variable. The instances with 13 tails,
that are not optimal solutions are still a good quality solution as it has a non-coverage
percentage of less than 3 %. In conclusion, for the branch-and-price algorithm, the
best results are obtained when branching on the most fractional variable as both the
computational requirements are less and the quality of the solution it finds are better.
6.3.3
Strong Branching
In this section, the effects of strong branching on the branch-and-price algorithm is
demonstrated based on the cyclic pricing where the variable closest to one is chosen
for branching. By looking at the non-coverage percentage, as displayed in figure 6.12,
it is seen that applying strong branching improves the quality of the solution in every
instance except one. Although it is not able to find an integer solution for the instance
of 12 tails as the algorithm reaches the maximum time limit of 24 hours.
For the instances with 7 and 8 tails, using strong branching enables the branch-
and-price algorithm to obtain the optimal solution, which is a significant improvement
of the quality of the solutions. For the instances of 10 and 11 tails it reduces the non-
coverage by 3.57 percentage points and 4.72 percentage points respectively, while the
non-coverage percentage is 3.70 % for the test instance of 9 tails compared to 0 %
without using strong branching. In general, strong branching contributes to finding
integer solutions of better quality as expected. In the 11 instances that it managed to
solve the running time was more or less the same as without the use strong branching.
However, for the test instance with 12 tails the algorithm ran out of time, which is a
big difference compared to the 14.36 hours it took to solve the instance without using
strong branching. These results show that an increase in running time, which is to be
expected when applying strong branching, is apparent when the problem size grows
beyond a certain size. The greater upward trend of the computational requirements
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Computational Results
Figure 6.12: The non-convergence percentage obtained for test instances of a 1 week
time horizon and between 1-10 tails using branch-and-price with and without strong
where branching is done on the variable closest to 1 and cyclic pricing is applied.
Figure 6.13: The running time in hours of the branch-and-price algorithm with and
without strong branching using cyclic pricing where branching is done on the variable
closest to 1.
for the branch-and-price algorithm using strong branching is displayed in figure 6.13.
A graphical representation in terms of iteration count, number of processed nodes
and generated columns for the branch-and-price algorithm with and without strong
branching can be found in appendix B.4.
==PAGE:69==
6.4 Penalizing Medium Gaps
59
6.4
Penalizing Medium Gaps
In this section, it is investigated if it is possible to create schedules with fewer con-
nections that last between 1 and 4 hours, referred to as medium sized gaps, by simply
changing the objective function. The reason for doing so, is that a connection of this
size is useless to the airlines. A maintenance check can not be done within this time,
so the aircraft is just idle until its next takeoff. A connection time larger than 4 hours
presents a maintenance opportunity, while a connection less than 1 hour increases
the utilization of the aircraft. Two different test runs are conducted based on the test
instances of 1 week and between 1 and 10 tails. In the first run, all connections have
the same cost, where in the second run, connections between two activities that last
more than an hour and less than 4 hours are penalized. The idea behind changing
the cost in the objective function is that this will contribute to the creation of routes
that tries to avoid these type of connections. The results of the two test runs are
listed in table 6.3.
Tails
Without Penalty
With Penalty
Reduction
Improvement [%]
1
13
13
0
0.00
2
24
24
0
0.00
3
37
36
1
2.70
4
59
56
3
5.08
5
71
67
4
5.97
6
83
83
0
0.00
7
93
94
-1
-1.06
8
108
101
7
6.93
9
101
92
9
9.78
10
116
112
4
3.57
Table 6.3: The number of medium sized gaps in the solution obtained with and
without penalizing for test instances of a 1 week time horizon and 1-10 tails.
It is seen that penalizing medium sized gaps provides solutions that are better or
at least as good in 9 out of 10 instances. For the test instances of 1, 2 and 6 tails, the
solutions have the same amount of medium sized gaps regardless of the cost structure
while for the test instance of 7 tails, the solution is worse as it has one more medium
sized gap compared to the case of not penalizing gaps. In the remaining 6 instances,
it was possible to reduce the number of medium sized gaps. On average the improved
solutions contain 4.67 fewer medium sized gaps when penalties are included. Overall,
it is possible to reduce the number of medium sized gaps by simply penalizing the
corresponding connections, but the improvements to the schedules are insignificant.
In terms of generating more maintenance opportunities by reducing the number of
medium sized gaps, the tests are deemed unsuccessful. In only one case does the
reduction in medium sized gaps yield more maintenance opportunities in the form of
large gaps, see appendix B.5. Consequently, medium sized gaps are replaced by small
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Computational Results
gaps and the length of the large gaps that were already in the schedule are increased.
One interesting finding based on these test is that the computational requirements are
lessened when introducing penalties on medium sized connections which is beneficial,
see appendix B.5. As penalizing medium sized gaps also do create more desirable
schedules, albeit inconsiderable improvements, this has been used throughout the
testing of the algorithm documented in this chapter.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Improvements
Based on the results in chapter 6, we have shown that a branch-and-price algorithm
is capable of solving the aircraft assignment problem.
However, regardless of the
different column generation strategies and branching strategies, the performance of
the algorithm suffers from intractable computational requirements when the problem
reaches a certain size. In this chapter, we will propose two possible changes that will
enhance the performance of the algorithm.
7.1
Sequential Approach
With this suggestion we aim to create a scheme that can be applied to our current
implementation without the need of drastic changes.
As shown in chapter 5 the
computationally requirements for solving problems with a 1 week time horizon is
substantially less than problems of 2 and 4 week time horizons.
Inspired by the
approach used in the airline industry to solve the entire airline planning process, as
described in chapter 2, it is suggested that the overall problem is divided into smaller
subproblems. The idea is to divide problems with a 4 week time horizon into problems
with a 1 week time horizon and then piece together the solution of each subproblem
into a full 4 week schedule as shown in figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: A visual depiction of the sequential approach where a 4 week schedule is
created by concatenating four 1 week schedules.
If we were to concatenate four solutions of four different problems with a 1 week
time horizon, there is no guarantee that this schedule is feasible. In order to ensure
a feasible solution, it is required that the location of each aircraft at the end of a 1
week schedule is the same as the location of the tails at the start of the following
1 week period. This would require some additions to our current implementation
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Improvements
as constraints must be added to the formulation to ensure that this requirement is
met. Furthermore, it is necessary to make configurations to how the implementation
is currently handling the input data, since a 4 week schedule has to be split into
four different 1 week schedules. With the scheme from 7.1, it is possible that the
constraints ensuring coherence between two schedules cannot be met. In attempt to
make the concatenation of two sequential schedules more robust, it is suggested that
the 4 week schedule is divided into 5 different subproblems with a 1 week time horizon
instead of 4 as shown in figure 7.2. By having the next problem in the sequence
overlap with the last quarter of the previous problem, it creates more connection
opportunities for each aircraft.
As a result, it is more likely that two sequential
schedules will fit together. If this scheme fails to produce good results, there is the
possibility of extending the number of problems the 4 week schedule is divided into,
by increasing the size of the overlap between two problems.
Figure 7.2: A visual depiction of the sequential approach where a 4 week schedule is
created by combining the solutions of five 1 week schedules.
As we did not solve the test instances with a 2 and 4 week horizon using branch-
and-price, we will make our assumptions about the implications of this method based
on the time required to solve the root node of the branch-and-bound tree. If we assume
that the running time of solving a number of 1 week problems scales linearly with the
number of problems that are solved, this approach offers a substantial improvement
compared to solving either 2 or 4 week instances in one go.
As shown in figure
7.3, it would be possible to solve the root node of the branch-and-bound tree for
all test instances within 24 hours by both sequential schemes. The graphs marked
”1 Week (x2)” and ”1 Week (x3)” display the assumed running times of the two
sequential approaches applied to problems with a 2 week time horizon. It is seen that
even if it turns out to be necessary to solve more 1 week problems to ensure robust
schedules, this is still manageable compared to solving the 2 and 4 week problems
individually. Furthermore, if the assumption about the linear scaling of the solution
==PAGE:73==
7.2 Reformulation of the Mathematical Model
63
time proofs inadequate, it is suggested that the sequential approach will decrease the
computational requirements for solving larger test instances.
Figure 7.3: The estimated running times, in hours, of the various sequential ap-
proaches for solving the root node compared to the running time for solving the root
node for problems with a time horizon of 2 and 4 weeks.
7.2
Reformulation of the Mathematical Model
The main reason behind the intractable computational requirements is due to the
time required by CPLEX to solve the subproblems. For the test instance of 1 week
and 24 tails, the time it takes to solve the root node along with the time it spends
solving the subproblem and master problem is given in table 7.1.
It is seen that
98.69 % of the total running time is spent on solving the subproblems, while the
master problem only takes up 1.31 % of the total running time. Consequently, the
greatest reduction of the computational requirements of the algorithm is obtained by
decreasing the time it takes to solve the subproblems.
Subproblem
Master Problem
Full Running Time
Running Time [h]
3.40
0.045
3.445
Percentage [%]
98.69
1.31
100
Table 7.1: The distribution of running time, in hours, between solving the subproblem
and the master problem for solving the root node of the branch-and-bound tree based
on the test instance of 1 week and 24 tails.
In order to address this issue, we suggest that a reformulation of the mathematical
programming model is derived. The objective function and the constraints remain the
same, but we change the definition of the decision variable to only describe possible
connections between activities in the network.
==PAGE:74==
64
7 Improvements
Figure 7.4: The total number of variables in the subproblems for each of the test
instances with a time horizons of 1, 2 and 4 weeks.
If we consider the current mathematical model of the subproblem, it is seen that
it has an extensive number of variables. Displayed in figure 7.4, is the total number
of variables in the subproblems for each of the three different time horizons, 1, 2
and 4 weeks. As the decision variables describe all connections between all activities,
the number of variables grows substantially as the network of flights becomes more
complex.
Due to the nature of the binary variables, there is a large amount of
variables that describe impossible connections. Recall that there are two requirements
that has to be met for a connection to be valid. The first requirement is that the
departure airport of the outgoing flight has to be the same as the arrival airport of the
incoming flight and the second requirement is that the departure time of the outgoing
flight is greater than the sum of the arrival time of the incoming flight and the turn
time. If either one of these requirements are not met, the binary decision variable xij
describes a connection that cannot be made. All the variables that describe impossible
connections are redundant and can be removed from the model. For the three time
horizons of 1, 2 and 4 weeks, the size of the smallest and largest subproblem is given
in table 7.2.
It is seen that the largest instance with a 2 week period has about 4 times as many
variables as the biggest instance with a 1 week time horizon, while the largest problem
with a 4 week time horizon has about 16 times as many variables. Notice that when
multiple subproblems are solved during pricing each of the subproblems are of this
magnitude. By excluding all variables that describe impossible connection the number
of variables can be reduced significantly as shown in table 7.2. For each time horizon,
the number of variables in the all subproblems can be reduced by more than 90 % see
C. In table 7.2, the average reduction over all subproblems in percentage for each of
the time horizons is given. By changing the formulation the running time required to
solve the subproblems should experience a substantial decrease. Consequently, this
contributes to the branch-and-price algorithm being able to perform more iterations
==PAGE:75==
7.2 Reformulation of the Mathematical Model
65
1 Week
2 Weeks
4 Weeks
Formulation
Tails
Var
Con
Var
Con
Var
Con
Original
1
1,611
34
5327
63
18,544
130
24
544,580
762
2,157,548
1,546
8,174,925
3047
Reduced
1
160
34
392
63
1,514
130
24
49,469
762
203,116
1,546
786,058
3,047
Average Reduction
91.40 %
91.19 %
90.76 %
Table 7.2: The number of constraints and variables in the current and reduced model
formulation for the smallest and largest instance of the three different time horizons;
1, 2 and 4 weeks.
and generate more columns, thereby increasing the chances of reaching the optimal
solution within a reasonable time. As a result, bigger test instances, than what is
currently possible to obtain solutions for, should be possible to solve while the running
time for the test instances that we are currently able to solve should be reduced.
Figure 7.5 displays the development of the number of variables for the current
formulation and a formulation that only includes possible connections for problems
with a 4 week time horizon. It is seen that by changing the formulation the sub-
problems for the 4 week instances will be approximately the same size as the 1 week
instances are in the current formulation. However, as the largest instance with a 4
week time horizon for the reduced model contains more variables than the largest
1 week instance of the original formulation, which we could not solve to optimality
within 24 hours. It is suggested that the computational requirements for the largest
test instances might still be too great.
Figure 7.5: The total number of variables describing impossible and possible con-
nections in the subproblems for each of the test instances with a time horizon of 4
weeks.
==PAGE:76==
66
7 Improvements
7.2.1
Concluding Remarks
As the reformulation of the mathematical model presents such an extensive reduction
in the problem size, it is deemed to have a greater impact on the performance of the
branch-and-price algorithm than the sequential approach. However, it might still be
difficult to solve the larger test instances of both 2 and 4 week time horizons. By also
applying the sequential approach, it might reduce the computational requirements of
the largest test instances to a level that is considered reasonable.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this dissertation, we have successfully managed to develop and implement a column
generation based algorithm capable of solving the aircraft assignment problem with
prescheduled maintenance activities. Unlike the majority of the solution methods
found in the literature, our approach specifically assign individual aircraft to flights,
which offers the opportunity to capture a greater level of detail. This feature of our
approach makes it possible to include restrictions and requirements for each individual
aircraft of a fleet. However, due to the characteristics of the provided dataset, it was
unnecessary to utilize this property of our approach to properly describe the real-life
problems from the dataset.
Our solution approach manages to solve a series of real-life test instances of the
aircraft assignment problem with prescheduled maintenance activities. Finding inte-
ger solution to test instances with a time horizon of 2 and 4 weeks have not been
attempted as it is not possible to solve the root node of the branch-and-bound tree
when the number of tails is greater than 18 and 4 respectively. The largest instance
that can be solved to optimality is for a fleet of 15 tails and a time horizon of 1
week. When the problem size becomes greater than this instance, the branch-and-
price algorithm fails to converge to the optimum as it does not generate a sufficient
number of columns. This is due to the time it takes to solve the subproblems that
becomes intractable within a reasonable time. Furthermore, we have tested three
different column generation strategies along with two different branching rules. It
is not possible to definitively define the best configuration as no approach performs
strictly better than the rest. The best results in terms of quality of the solutions
are obtained when using a full pricing scheme and branching on the most fractional
variable, while utilizing cycling pricing and branching on the most fractional variable
finds more integer solutions and has a lower running time. Finally, in an attempt to
generate schedules of better quality, we introduced penalties on connections with a
length between 1 and 4 hours though to no avail.
If our solution approach is to provide a beneficial decision support tool for airlines
in the industry, it is a necessity to reduce the current computational requirements of
our algorithm. Based on our findings, the time it takes to solve the subproblems is the
main reason for our inability to obtain solutions to the larger test instances. To ad-
dress this issue, we have proposed a reformulation of the mathematical programming
model that only includes decision variables describing possible connections. On aver-
age, this will reduce the amount of variables in our mathematical model by 91.12 %
==PAGE:78==
68
8 Conclusion
resulting in a substantial reduction of the computational requirements. Furthermore,
we propose a scheme that will divide the larger test instances into 1 week problems,
that are solved individually and then pieced together to form a complete solution.
By doing a joint implementation of the two approaches, we expect to be capable of
solving even larger test instances.
8.1
Future Research
As previously stated, the performance of the branch-and-price algorithm suffers greatly
as the problem size increases, which is caused by the large amount of time it takes
to solve the subproblems. Addressing this issue is the natural next step and we have
proposed two improvement methods that we would implement given the time. These
are merely two suggestions and since column generation is a well-studied topic, we
would like to extend our studies of the literature to gather inspiration and ideas in
order to improve the performance of our algorithm even further.
As the subproblem presents the task of finding paths through a network consist-
ing of directed arcs, it can be described as the shortest path problem as suggested
by Grönkvist [Grö05]. Because of the maintenance constraints in the formulation, we
would have to solve a shortest path problem between each pair of two consecutive
maintenance activities for every aircraft. This will ensure that all prescheduled activ-
ities are covered in the solution. Dijkstra [Dij59] presented an algorithm capable of
solving the shortest path problem in polynomial time. This would contribute greatly
to the reduction of the solution time of each subproblem and at the same time displace
the need for CPLEX or other commercial solvers.
As we have demonstrated in this thesis, column generation suffers from slow con-
vergence, which leads to three problems. (1) The iteration count grows very large, (2)
an extensive amount of columns, which are not used in the final solutions, are gener-
ated and (3) the size of the master problem grows unnecessarily large. A well-known
method for addressing this issue is dual stabilization. Du Merle et al. [Du +99] pro-
pose a stabilization algorithm that will accelerate the column generation process and
successfully apply it to an crew scheduling problem, reducing the solution time by a
factor ranging from 2 to 10. Two other variations of the dual stabilization approach
are the Boxstep method by Marsten et al. [MHB75] and interior point stabilization
by Rousseau et al. [RGF07]. It is suggested that a thorough investigation of the
three different methods are conducted, in order to decide the appropriate method
to address our problem. The chosen method should be implemented into our cur-
rent framework and its implication documented. Alternatively, instead of focusing
on optimizing the column generation algorithm, it might be beneficial to explore the
other possibilities of utilizing heuristics. Heuristics offer effective and fast ways of
obtaining integer solutions which are essential for the aircraft assignment problem
because we need to generate feasible schedules. We suggest a solution scheme where
the branch-and-price algorithm is terminated when a certain amount of columns have
been generated and then search for an integer solution using a heuristic.
==PAGE:79==
8.1 Future Research
69
In regard to the research of problems in the airline industry integrated planning
presents an exciting line of research with a lot of possibilities yet to be explored. One
option would be to integrate our solution approach with crew scheduling, although
this would require extensive changes to our current solution approach. However, as
our mathematical programming model can capture restrictions and requirements on
individual aircraft, our solution approach is able to consider aircraft of different fleet
types. This create the possibility of integrating fleet assignment with our solution
approach by simply including the corresponding data. However, as we are currently
not able to solve problems for entire fleets, this extension of our model would only be
successful if we reduce the computational requirements first.
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
Data Analysis
Week
Fleet 1
Fleet 2
Fleet 3
Fleet 4
Fleet 5
Fleet 6
Total
7
26
139
193
290
457
1,105
8
64
326
462
652
1,079
2,583
9
64
314
456
658
1,075
2,567
10
60
329
459
673
1,077
2,598
11
66
323
490
628
1,088
2,595
12
60
322
502
614
1,085
2,583
13
61
315
489
632
1,082
2,579
14
60
331
494
664
342
1,891
15
56
305
491
643
1,495
16
56
314
487
667
1,524
17
55
306
492
616
1,469
18
40
286
459
624
1,409
19
30
243
406
400
1,079
20
28
265
434
319
1,046
21
36
258
459
343
1,096
22
44
273
475
388
1,180
23
45
260
475
393
1,173
24
44
263
483
418
1,208
25
46
229
512
490
1,277
26
46
256
503
468
1,273
27
52
257
504
583
1,396
28
55
275
506
633
1,469
29
52
251
520
657
1,480
30
61
252
513
673
1,499
31
66
94
264
505
671
1,600
32
63
496
283
513
629
1,984
33
67
541
295
494
623
2,020
34
52
560
285
457
520
1,874
35
52
560
279
484
458
1,833
36
6
93
45
79
70
293
Total
1,513
2,344
8,143
13,796
16,097
7,285
49,178
Table A.1: A table with the number of flights for each fleet type in every week of the
time horizon.
==PAGE:82==
72
A Data Analysis
Week
Fleet 1
Fleet 2
Fleet 3
Fleet 4
Fleet 5
Grand Total
7
2
3
6
6
17
8
2
11
15
15
43
11
8
14
34
40
96
13
4
11
17
24
56
14
12
21
34
65
132
15
13
23
43
63
142
16
11
27
34
55
127
17
16
30
47
72
165
18
15
29
40
83
167
19
14
30
53
79
176
20
20
25
49
71
165
21
16
27
38
50
131
22
19
25
40
50
134
23
17
24
45
56
142
24
13
26
38
44
121
25
12
17
42
48
119
26
13
24
37
52
126
27
17
23
37
56
133
28
14
22
37
53
126
29
16
19
47
69
151
30
14
24
41
55
134
31
15
14
22
47
57
155
32
13
23
26
40
50
152
33
10
11
13
30
32
96
34
8
2
3
3
16
35
8
1
1
4
14
36
1
1
Grand Total
323
48
519
895
1,252
3,037
Table A.2: A table with the number of maintenance activities for each fleet type in
every week of the time horizon.
==PAGE:83==
A.1 Test Instances
73
A.1
Test Instances
Example
Tails
Activities
Flights
Maintenance
Sources
Sinks
1W_1T
1
31
30
1
11
10
1W_2T
2
61
58
3
15
14
1W_3T
3
85
80
5
17
16
1W_4T
4
119
113
6
20
19
1W_5T
5
143
136
7
21
21
1W_6T
6
168
158
10
22
23
1W_7T
7
200
187
13
24
25
1W_8T
8
223
209
14
24
25
1W_9T
9
243
228
15
25
26
1W_10T
10
280
262
18
26
27
1W_11T
11
318
297
21
26
27
1W_12T
12
350
328
22
27
28
1W_13T
13
380
355
25
28
29
1W_14T
14
404
376
28
28
29
1W_15T
15
437
406
31
29
30
1W_16T
16
464
430
34
29
30
1W_17T
17
493
457
36
29
30
1W_18T
18
522
484
38
30
31
1W_19T
19
557
516
41
30
31
1W_20T
20
591
547
44
30
31
1W_21T
21
621
576
45
32
33
1W_22T
22
648
601
47
32
33
1W_23T
23
678
630
48
32
33
1W_24T
24
708
656
52
32
33
Table A.3: All of the test instances with a time horizon of 1 week, ranging from 1 to
24 tails
==PAGE:84==
74
A Data Analysis
Example
Tails
Activities
Flights
Maintenance
Sources
Sinks
2W_1T
1
58
55
3
17
17
2W_2T
2
115
107
8
23
23
2W_3T
3
166
154
12
24
24
2W_4T
4
229
214
15
27
28
2W_5T
5
288
270
18
27
28
2W_6T
6
341
319
22
28
28
2W_7T
7
407
379
28
29
29
2W_8T
8
462
431
31
29
29
2W_9T
9
509
475
34
29
29
2W_10T
10
582
541
41
29
29
2W_11T
11
657
610
47
29
29
2W_12T
12
717
666
51
30
30
2W_13T
13
781
726
55
30
30
2W_14T
14
836
775
61
30
30
2W_15T
15
901
835
66
31
31
2W_16T
16
955
884
71
31
31
2W_17T
17
1,018
944
74
31
31
2W_18T
18
1,076
998
78
31
31
2W_19T
19
1,141
1,058
83
31
31
2W_20T
20
1,206
1,119
87
31
31
2W_21T
21
1,263
1,173
90
33
33
2W_22T
22
1,318
1,222
96
33
33
2W_23T
23
1,380
1,281
99
34
34
2W_24T
24
1,439
1,334
105
34
34
Table A.4: All of the test instances with a time horizon of 2 weeks, ranging from 1
to 24 tails
==PAGE:85==
A.1 Test Instances
75
Example
Tails
Activities
Flights
Maintenance
Sources
Sinks
4W_1T
1
118
108
10
20
20
4W_2T
2
234
215
19
26
26
4W_3T
3
345
316
29
28
27
4W_4T
4
464
429
35
32
31
4W_5T
5
581
538
43
32
31
4W_6T
6
693
643
50
32
31
4W_7T
7
823
762
61
33
32
4W_8T
8
937
868
69
33
32
4W_9T
9
1,027
952
75
33
32
4W_10T
10
1,160
1,074
86
33
32
4W_11T
11
1,292
1,194
98
34
33
4W_12T
12
1,415
1,308
107
35
34
4W_13T
13
1,541
1,425
116
35
34
4W_14T
14
1,659
1,533
126
35
34
4W_15T
15
1,789
1,651
138
36
35
4W_16T
16
1,902
1,756
146
36
35
4W_17T
17
2,032
1,877
155
37
36
4W_18T
18
2,152
1,987
165
37
36
4W_19T
19
2,274
2,101
173
37
36
4W_20T
20
2,399
2,215
184
37
36
4W_21T
21
2,509
2,320
189
37
36
4W_22T
22
2,613
2,414
199
37
36
4W_23T
23
2,714
2,509
205
38
37
4W_24T
24
2,830
2,615
215
38
37
Table A.5: All of the test instances with a time horizon of 4 weeks, ranging from 1
to 24 tails.
==PAGE:86==
76
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX B
Computational Results
B.1
Generic Column Generation - Scaling
Figure B.1: A table with the number of flights for each fleet type in every week of
the time horizon
==PAGE:88==
78
B Computational Results
B.2
Convergence Analysis
Figure B.2: The convergence towards the optimal solution of the RMP for the three
different column generation strategies.
B.3
Branch-and-Price - Branching on the Most
Fractional Variable
Figure B.3: The running time, in hours, for the three different column generation
strategies using a depth first search where branching is done on the most fractional
variable without strong branching
==PAGE:89==
B.3 Branch-and-Price - Branching on the Most Fractional Variable
79
Figure B.4: The number of processed nodes in the branch-and-bound tree. for the
three different column generation strategies using a depth first search where branching
is done on the fractional variable closest to 1 without strong branching
Figure B.5: The number of iterations of the branch-and-price algorithm for the three
different column generation strategies using a depth first search where branching is
done on the most fractional variable without strong branching
==PAGE:90==
80
B Computational Results
Figure B.6: The number of generated columns during of the branch-and-price algo-
rithm for the three different column generation strategies using a depth first search
where branching is done on the most fractional variable without strong branching
==PAGE:91==
B.4 Strong Branching
81
B.4
Strong Branching
Figure B.7: The number of generated columns during of the branch-and-price algo-
rithm with and without strong branching using cyclic pricing where branching is done
on the variable closest to 1.
Figure B.8: The number of iterations of the branch-and-price algorithm with and
without strong branching using cyclic pricing where branching is done on the variable
closest to 1.
==PAGE:92==
82
B Computational Results
Figure B.9: The number of processed nodes during the branch-and-price algorithm
with and without strong branching using cyclic pricing where branching is done on
the variable closest to 1.
B.5
Penalizing Medium Size Gaps
Tails
Without Penalty
With Penalty
Increase
Improvement [%]
1
4
4
0
0.00
2
11
11
0
0.00
3
15
15
0
0.00
4
19
18
-1
-5.26
5
26
25
-1
-3.85
6
31
29
-2
-6.45
7
35
35
0
0.00
8
39
41
2
5.13
9
52
52
0
0.00
10
53
53
0
0.00
Table B.1: The number of large gaps, a connection time large than 4 hours, for test
instance of a 1 week time-horizon and 1-10 tails.
==PAGE:93==
B.5 Penalizing Medium Size Gaps
83
Figure B.10: The running time, in hours, for the branch-and-price algorithm with
and without penalizing medium gaps
Figure B.11: The number of processed nodes in the branch-and-bound tree for the
branch-and-price algorithm with and without penalizing medium gaps
==PAGE:94==
84
B Computational Results
Figure B.12: The number of iterations of the branch-and-price algorithm with and
without penalizing medium gaps
Figure B.13: The number of generated columns during of the branch-and-price algo-
rithm with and without penalizing medium gaps
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX C
Improvements
C.1
Reformulation of the Mathematical Model
Figure C.1: The number of variables in the original formulation of the PTAS model
and the proposed reformulation where only possible connections are included in the
model for test instance of a 1 week time horizon.
==PAGE:96==
86
C Improvements
Example
Vars in SP
Possible vars
Reduction [%]
1W_1T
1,611
160
90.07
1W_2T
5,481
512
90.66
1W_3T
10,005
899
91.01
1W_4T
18,766
1,564
91.67
1W_5T
26,406
1,948
92.62
1W_6T
35,684
2,692
92.46
1W_7T
49,631
3,902
92.14
1W_8T
60,460
4,688
92.25
1W_9T
71,217
5,586
92.16
1W_10T
92,916
7,502
91.93
1W_11T
117,537
9,846
91.62
1W_12T
141,266
11,969
91.53
1W_13T
165,435
14,408
91.29
1W_14T
185,460
16,239
91.24
1W_15T
215,791
19,203
91.10
1W_16T
241,516
21,583
91.06
1W_17T
270,840
23,477
91.33
1W_18T
302,882
26,378
91.29
1W_19T
342,545
30,408
91.12
1W_20T
383,396
34,531
90.99
1W_21T
423,981
38,483
90.92
1W_22T
459,815
41,058
91.07
1W_23T
501,450
44,914
91.04
1W_24T
544,580
49,469
90.92
Table C.1: A list of all the test instances with a time horizon of 1 week. Vars in
SP shows the number of variables in the subproblem, Possible vars is the number of
variables that describe possible connections and Reduction is the number of variables
that describe possible connections.
==PAGE:97==
C.1 Reformulation of the Mathematical Model
87
Figure C.2: The number of variables in the original formulation of the PTAS model
and the proposed reformulation where only possible connections are included in the
model for test instance of a 2 week time horizon.
==PAGE:98==
88
C Improvements
Example
Vars in SUB
Possible vars
Reduction [%]
2W_1T
5,327
392
92.64
2W_2T
18,451
1,499
91.88
2W_3T
35,380
2,295
93.51
2W_4T
64,811
5,312
91.80
2W_5T
98,460
7,771
92.11
2W_6T
134,893
10,708
92.06
2W_7T
188,471
15,912
91.56
2W_8T
239,279
19,882
91.69
2W_9T
287,447
24,328
91.54
2W_10T
370,799
32,651
91.19
2W_11T
467,546
42,704
90.87
2W_12T
554,508
50,655
90.86
2W_13T
653,796
60,935
90.68
2W_14T
745,335
69,178
90.72
2W_15T
863,307
81,128
90.60
2W_16T
966,194
88,646
90.83
2W_17T
1,093,964
98,933
90.96
2W_18T
1,218,404
111,037
90.89
2W_19T
1,365,734
126,106
90.77
2W_20T
1,521,639
140,845
90.74
2W_21T
1,670,427
156,495
90.63
2W_22T
1,814,896
170,210
90.62
2W_23T
1,988,439
186,417
90.62
2W_24T
2,157,548
203,116
90.59
Table C.2: A list of all the test instances with a time horizon of 2 weeks. Vars in
SP shows the number of variables in the subproblem, Possible vars is the number of
variables that describe possible connections and Reduction is the number of variables
that describe possible connections.
==PAGE:99==
C.1 Reformulation of the Mathematical Model
89
Example
Vars in SUB
Possible vars
Reduction [%]
4W_1T
18,544
1,514
91.84
4W_2T
66,563
5,876
91.17
4W_3T
137,159
12,788
90.68
4W_4T
243,303
22,209
90.87
4W_5T
372,315
33,052
91.12
4W_6T
521,408
45,571
91.26
4W_7T
727,103
65,011
91.06
4W_8T
934,113
82,785
91.14
4W_9T
1,115,859
100,367
91.01
4W_10T
1,413,604
131,132
90.72
4W_11T
1,746,224
166,626
90.46
4W_12T
2,088,411
199,045
90.47
4W_13T
2,467,554
229,536
90.70
4W_14T
2,850,876
265,159
90.70
4W_15T
3,308,496
312,934
90.54
4W_16T
3,731,330
349,428
90.64
4W_17T
4,253,335
398,590
90.63
4W_18T
4,760,975
448,474
90.58
4W_19T
5,307,149
501,765
90.55
4W_20T
5,896,472
557,949
90.54
4W_21T
6,442,517
616,892
90.42
4W_22T
6,978,917
669,492
90.41
4W_23T
7,527,321
720,049
90.43
4W_24T
8,174,925
786,058
90.38
Table C.3: A list of all the test instances with a time horizon of 4 weeks. Vars in
SP shows the number of variables in the subproblem, Possible vars is the number of
variables that describe possible connections and Reduction is the number of variables
that describe possible connections.
==PAGE:100==
90
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[Bar+03]
Cynthia Barnhart et al. “Airline Crew Scheduling”. In: Handbook of Trans-
portation Science 56 (2003), pages 517–560.
[Bar+96]
Cynthia Barnhart et al. “Branch-and-Price: Column Generation for Solv-
ing Huge Integer Programs”. In: (1996), pages 1–33.
[Bar+98]
Cynthia Barnhart et al. “Flight String Models for Aircraft Fleeting and
Routing”. In: Transportation Science 32.3 (1998), pages 208–220. issn:
0041-1655. doi: 10.1287/trsc.32.3.208.
[BBO03]
Cynthia Barnhart, Peter Belobaba, and Amedeo R. Odoni. “Applications
of Operations Research in the Air Transport Industry”. In: Transportation
Science 37.January 2018 (2003), pages 368–391.
[BKL02]
Cynthia Barnhart, Timothy S. Kniker, and Manoj Lohatepanont. “Itinerary-
Based Airline Fleet Assignment”. In: Transportation Science 36.2 (2002),
pages 199–217.
[Cla+96]
Lloyd Clarke et al. “The aircraft rotation problem”. In: Transportation
Research Part A: Policy and Practice 30.1 (1996), page 51.
[COI18]
COIN-OR Foundation. COIN-OR. 2018. url: https://projects.coin-
or.org/Bcp.
[DDS05]
G Desaulniers, J Desrosiers, and MM Solomon. Column Generation. 2005.
[Dij59]
E. W. Dijkstra. “A Note on Two Probles in Connexion with Graphs”. In:
Numerische Mathematik 1.1 (1959), pages 269–271.
[Du +99]
Olivier Du Merle et al. “Stabilized column generation”. In: Discrete Math-
ematics 194.1-3 (1999), pages 229–237.
[DW60]
George Bernard Dantzig and Philip Wolfe. “Decomposition Principle for
Linear Programs”. In: Operations Research 8 (1960).
[EIS75]
S. Even, A. Itai, and A. Shamir. “On the complexity of time table and
multi-commodity flow problems”. In: 16th Annual Symposium on Founda-
tions of Computer Science (sfcs 1975) (1975), pages 184–193.
[Erd+01]
A. Erdmann et al. “Modeling and Solving an Airline Schedule Generation
Problem”. In: Annals of Operations Research 107.1-4 (2001), pages 117–
142.
==PAGE:102==
92
Bibliography
[Grö05]
Mattias Grönkvist. The tail assignment problem. 2327. 2005, pages 1–274.
[GT85]
Ram Gopalan and Kalyan T. Talluri. “The Aircraft Maintenance Routing
Problem”. In: October 2016 (1985), pages 306–330.
[Han+95]
Christopher A. Hane et al. “The fleet assignment problem: Solving a large-
scale integer program”. In: Mathematical Programming 70.1-3 (1995), pages 211–
232.
[Kla+01]
Diego Klabjan et al. “Solving large airline crew scheduling problems: Ran-
dom pairing generation and strong branching”. In: Computational Opti-
mization and Applications 20.1 (2001), pages 73–91.
[LC09]
Zhe Liang and Wanpracha Art Chaovalitwongse. “The Aircraft Mainte-
nance Routing Problem”. In: 30 (2009).
[Lia12]
Zhe Liang. “Column generation and network modeling in large-scale lo-
gistics networks.” In: Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The
Sciences and Engineering 72.12-B (2012), page 7610.
[Lüb10]
Marco E. Lübbecke. “Column Generation”. In: Wiley Encyclopedia of Op-
erations Research and Management Science (2010).
[Lus17]
Richard M. Lusby. Implementing OR Solutions - 42116. 2017.
[MHB75]
R. E. Marsten, W. W. Hogan, and J. W. Blankenship. “The Boxstep
Method for Large-Scale Optimization”. In: Operations Research 23.3 (1975).
[RGF07]
Louis Martin Rousseau, Michel Gendreau, and Dominique Feillet. “Inte-
rior point stabilization for column generation”. In: Operations Research
Letters 35.5 (2007), pages 660–668.
[RL14]
Elina Rönnberg and Torbjörn Larsson. “All-integer column generation for
set partitioning: Basic principles and extensions”. In: European Journal
of Operational Research 233.3 (2014), pages 529–538.
