==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Autonomous Logistics
An applied analysis of technologies and
applications on the digital supply chain
Edoardo Castelli (s161161)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Industrial and Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 426
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 48 00
braa@man.dtu.dk
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Executive Summary
In recent years Artificial Intelligence (AI) improvements have made autonomous
driving into a reality. In the next decades we will see the development of cars, drones
and even flying vehicles hovering on road and in the air without human intervention.
This technological advancement represents a huge step forward for all the transport
industry and especially for the logistics sector. Starting from this foundation, the aim
of this thesis is, in fact, to evaluate and study the impact of autonomous vehicles, in
particular autonomous ground vehicles and aerial vehicles on the supply chain of a
mid-sized 3PL company that offers logistic services. This impact is significant enough
to justify the investments required to implement this innovation?
The first step of the study is to research and consider the current state of the art
of the technology and its already feasible implementations; then the paper will move
on to define the methodology of the analysis, that utilizes a pragmatic philosophy
and a mixed approach (qualitative and quantitative), considering a theory building
case study. Finally, the analysis itself will conduct the investigation over a triple
==PAGE:4==
ii
Executive Summary
bottom line: with economical, logistical and structural evaluations it will try to give
advice to the case company in order to identify the best course of actions in the im-
plementation of this innovation. The two different means of transport are compared
and independently examined, to point out differences and similarities from a manage-
rial and operative standpoint. Considering all the technical, financial and operative
limitations that emerged from the researches on aerial vehicles, the findings of the
paper identify autonomous ground vehicles as the optimal solution for the upgrade
of the delivery operations of a mid-size company, both on long haul and last-mile
delivery scenarios. In fact, AGVs offer an average 44% reduction of the cost per mile
of long haul transportation and an average of 83% reduction of the cost per package
of last-mile deliveries. Even though drones could cut the cost even more, up to half
the cost of AGVs, the latter requires an initial investment of half the magnitude, with
a 2 times faster payback time.
With all the considerations above, taking into account all the topics that should
be further researched, such as cyber-security, regulations, technical limitations and
more, it is very likely that in the not so distant future, many 3PL and logistics
firms will adopt autonomous ground vehicles in order to upgrade the efficiency of
their supply chain operations. Aerial vehicles and their use seem relegated to specific
scenario and are appealing only to the largest companies in the industry, but even this
technology has the potential to be implemented in the future in the logistics sector.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This M.Sc.Thesis was prepared at the department of Industrial Engineering and Man-
agement at the Technical University of Denmark under Supervision of Associate Pro-
fessor Steven Harrod in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master’s degree
in Industrial Engineering and Management.
Kongens Lyngby, June 22, 2018
Edoardo Castelli (s161161)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I want to express my gratitude to all the people that took the trouble to support
me in the writing process of this paper.
I want to start with genuine thanks to
Steven Harrod, who believed in me since the very start and facilitated me in this
work.
Thank you, your guidance has been a right mixture of vision and mental
clarity that channeled my efforts into the right direction. I consider coaching and
being a mentor to be one of the hardest jobs, and you have been an inspiration.
Thanks to Cristiana Sessi and Michele Castelli, my parents, for never pushing
or limiting me in my personal development, leaving it to myself to set my own pace.
Thanks for being good parents, that is even harder than coaching.
A mention is due also to my girlfriend, Clara, and the friends and peers who
supported me in this writing process. Thank you Mario, Patrick, Giulia, Gregory
and Srinivas. I owe you one.
I want to reserve the following lines to pay back someone that I never had the
==PAGE:8==
vi
Acknowledgements
chance to say my sincere thanks to during my academic journey. The first ”thank you”
of this section goes to the Technical University of Denmark itself, as an institution. I
am very grateful to DTU for raising me up, the maturation process I undertook both
academically and personally has been an incredible journey, especially when I look
back at my previous self.
Particularly, I want to acknowledge some of the most inspiring professors I had
the chance to meet and learn from.
Thomas Jacob Riis Stidsen told our class on the very first day, that we will
end up working the day before the deadline naked at 3 a.m. in front of the PC. It
actually happened, clothed. Thanks to him I learned how to work hard, as a team
and problem solve.
Morten Mørup taught me to deeply love what you do. He has been a very positive
figure in my academic learning. Thanks for transmitting me love and passion for
what you do. A tribute to him: ”When in doubt what to answer, always say cross-
validation”.
I thank Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen for teaching me to be open-minded,
flexible, and that there is always a possibility to learn something when you listen,
even if the person talking is less experienced or qualified than you. Thank you, for
teaching me the value of respect and open-mindedness.
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
vii
I thank all the peers I had the opportunity to work with and learn from during
the last two years. Among those I want to specifically mention the peers I met during
my time in China and in the United States.
==PAGE:10==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
3PL
Third Party Logistics
AAV
Autonomous Aerial Vehicle
AGV
Autonomous Ground Vehicle
AT
Autonomous Truck
AVs
Autonomous Vehicles
DC
Distribution Center
ERP
Enterprise Resource Planning
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
NPV
Net Present Value
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer
SAV
Shared Autonomous Vehicle
SKU
Stock Keeping Unit
SME
Small-Medium Enterprise
ICTs
Information and Communication Technology
JIT
Just In Time
Terminology
Automated Vehicle: is characterized by low to high level of automation
Autonomous Vehicle: is characterized by the highest level of automation
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Executive Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
ix
List of Figures
xi
List of Tables
xiii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Historical Relevance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Purpose and Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Scope and Limitation
9
2.1
The Value Chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Literature Review
17
3.1
AV Technology Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Impact of Autonomous Ground Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
AGV Impacts on Logistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Impact of Autonomous Aerial Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.5
AAV Impacts on Logistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.6
Hybrid AVs Logistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Methodology
41
4.1
Domain & Scenario Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5
Analysis
49
5.1
Introduction to the analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Long Haulage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3
Last-Mile Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3.1
AAVs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3.2
AGVs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.3.3
AGVs vs AAVs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5.4
Hybrid AV systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6
Findings
85
7
Conclusion
93
7.1
Limitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7.2
Further Topics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
A Appendix
101
Bibliography
111
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
2.1
CAC Model Scale: sourced from National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology, 2007 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
AGV & AAV coexist in Last-Mile Delivery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1
Sensitivity analysis of AAV system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Air-based last-mile delivery model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Air-Ground integrated last-mile delivery models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1
Order Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Parcel delivery process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Freight delivery process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
Examples of transportation processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.5
Delivery Lead time heat-map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.1
Theoretical supply chain architectures, adapted from (Cook & Goodwin,
2008)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Hub-Spoke supply chain design based on AGVs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.3
Daily orders distribution heat-map for San Francisco Bay Area . . . . . .
61
5.4
Map of the 10 AAV warehouse locations and respective areas of coverage
in the San Francisco Bay area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.5
Sensitivity analysis of AAV system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.6
Coverage map of AGV and related efficiency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.7
Sensitivity analysis of AGVs systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.1 The five levels of vehicle automation, source: (Society of Automotive En-
gineers, 2016) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
A.2 Monthly demand pattern
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
A.3 Long Haul transportation data utilized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
A.4 Geographical coordinates per zip code - Source Decennial Census, Census
Bureau, 2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
==PAGE:14==
xii
List of Figures
A.5 Average daily orders to fulfill by zip code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
==PAGE:15==
List of Tables
3.1
Trucking Industry Top Concerns: source American Association Research
Institute, 2017b . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1
Cost comparison between Human and Autonomous Driving . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
Distribution Center Location and Average order quantity covered . . . . .
67
5.3
Comparison between Delivery Areas regarding Distance, Stops and Parcel
Delivered
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.4
Cash Flow propagation of AAV system in two possible scenarios
. . . . .
73
5.5
Cash Flow propagation of AGV system in two of the possible scenarios . .
77
5.6
Operative cost of delivery a parcel with different means of transportation
79
5.7
Comparison between investing in AGVs and AAVs . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.1
Comparative Recap Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
A.1 Number of Yearly order per area identified
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
==PAGE:16==
xiv
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Twenty years ago, it seemed a futuristic prospect to picture a car driving alone.
Today, Autonomous Vehicles (the world Autonomous has its roots in the ancient
Greek where the two particles autos as ”self” and nomos as ”law” were combined to
identify an entity subject to its own laws) are already a reality and they have totaled
more than 8 million kilometers on public roads (Alan, 2018). The main distinction
between them is whether they are aerial (drones) or ground based (self-driving trucks).
This technology is almost ready to be implemented on a large scale and companies
managing it correctly could change the way logistics is known today and capitalize
on it.
In fact, in the last decade, the technology driving such innovation, Artificial
Intelligence, is developing exponentially fast and taking steps into the everyday life
as well as becoming a reality even in the logistics and transportation industry. Leading
companies across the globe, including tech companies, car makers and chip makers
such as Uber, Waymo (a branch of Google), Microsoft, Lyft, Amazon, Samsung, Bosh,
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
Audi, Mercedes-Benz, Tesla, Toyota, Volvo and Volkswagen, are investing in research
and development in the transportation sector, in order to be able to implement the
concept of autonomous driving as a business viable tool. The interest in logistics
is often speculated on in publications, however really few sources know the actual
impacts that this technological innovation will have on current businesses. The paper
scope is to assess their application and economical impacts on mid sized logistic
providers.
1.1
Historical Relevance
Those who understood the importance of an effective implementation of new tech-
nologies and adopted them first changed the course of history. This is especially true
regarding transportation, which has been one of the major roadblocks in the devel-
opment of society since the ancient Era. The Roman Empire geographical extension
spanned a length of over four thousands kilometers for almost a thousand years. Such
gargantuan empire had a unique feature for its time: the effective exploitation of an
innovation, roads (Forbes, 1993). It would have been nearly impossible to manage
such a large territory without an effective transportation and infrastructure system
(Forbes, 1993).
More recently, another example of how pivotal the implementation of technologies
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Historical Relevance
3
in transportation and logistics can be seen after Richard Trevithick invented the high-
pressure steam engine at the beginning of the 19th century. This new engine enabled
the development of steam locomotives (Burton, 2000) thanks to his relatively small
size and good efficiency. Years later, Standard Oil wiped out its competition thanks
to the brilliant management of transportation systems between the ’70s, when it was
one of many refiners in Cleveland, to the ’80s, when it controlled over eighty-five
percent of the refineries in United States (Chernow, 1998). In fact, transportation
was a relevant cost factor for gasoline refiners, and Rockefeller, Standard Oil founder,
had the intuition to use the railroad system in order to vastly reduce this expense;
starting from the development and the production of tank wagons, to the creation of
the first oil pipeline (Chernow, 1998).
In more recent years, Toyota, one of the most successful companies in the world,
adopted for the first time in 1937 a large scale new supply chain policy called Just-
in-time (JIT) (Austenfeld, 2006). This coordination system developed by Kiichiro
Toyoda did not fully succeed in its early stage, in part due to the chaotic situation of
Japan in the ‘30s (Womack, Jones, & Ross, 1990) and also for the lack of coordination
systems, based upon information and communication technologies (ICTs). With time
though JIT became one of the two pillars of Toyota production system: it states that
in order to be more profitable and efficient, a company should produce only the
necessary units in the necessary quantities at the necessary time (Yasuhiro, 1984).
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
As such, one of the principles of the JIT inventory management system is a little to
null inventory stock. The technological breakthroughs and advancements that took
place in between 1937 and the ‘90s have been an integral part of Toyota success, as is
the adoption of the shipping container, firstly introduced in the U.S. in April 1956 and
that twelve years later reached a widespread use in Japan (1968) (Levison, 2006). This
innovation minimized transportation costs and together with the advent of cheaper
and better ICTs enabled Toyota to establish a communication system (TNS) across
dealers, body-makers, suppliers and overseas dealers to support the Kan-Ban system
in-place to increase the coordination between the whole Supply Chain (Yasuhiro,
1984). To demonstrate Toyota’s success, in 1965 the company was producing half a
million vehicles and twenty-five years later the yearly production was more than four
and a half millions (Austenfeld, 2006).
Another company, a retailer in this case, that made logistics management – the
task of coordinating material and information flows across the supply chain (Harrison
& Hoek, 2008) – the core of their business model is Walmart. In 1973, the Universal
Product Code (UPC) made its first appearance, and since then a wide range of
companies adopted this technology; however, Walmart in particular excelled in its
management (Lewallen, 2004). This technology allowed companies to track the exact
moment in which a sale of a specific item took place, down to the day and the hour.
The adoption of information technology and its capillary use was the shifting point
==PAGE:21==
1.1 Historical Relevance
5
in Walmart growth (Lewallen, 2004). In 1970, when Walmart went public its value
was estimated in 21.5 million dollars, 35 years later it was of over 200 billion (Brunn,
2006).
In 1960, the Department of Defence of the U.S. established the Advanced Re-
search Project Agency (ARPA). Six years later comes the launch of ARPAnet, a
prototype of the modern internet (Shelly & Campbell, 2012). In 1990, internet us-
age was propelled and spread by the advent of the first web browser, the World
Wide Web (Berners-Lee & Fischetti, 1999). Since then e-commerce platforms such
as Amazon.com in 1995 and Alibaba.com in 1999 proliferated. The aforementioned
companies were so successful at implementing e-commerce that in less than 20 years
they entered the Fortune 500. Electronic commerce is one of the most significant and
impactful applications of the Internet on retail and thereafter supply chain manage-
ment and logistics (Jiang & Prater, 2002), because it revolutionized the old concept
of customers travelling to a store to purchase goods to the new paradigm in which the
customer orders at home and the good is delivered at his doorstep. (Gunasekarana,
Marrib, McGaugheyc, & Nebhwanib, 2002). E-commerce adopted the same business
model introduced by mail-order shopping at the end of the 19th century and thanks
to the advent of the internet and its brilliant exploitation wiped the ”cataloguers”
from the retail industry.
Most of the examples reported above attests how mere inventions and infor-
==PAGE:22==
6
1 Introduction
mation can be capitalized into innovations trough the highest caliber management,
(Burns & Stalker, 1969) in order to enhance businesses or completely make them
viable. Especially in the current age, supply chain management plays a great role
in determining the fortune of a firm (Li, Ragu-Nathan, Ragu-Nathan, & Subba Rao,
2006; D. Kim & Lee, 2010) and an appropriate implementation of ICTs in the logistic
industry can lead to a substantial competitive advantage for companies (Chapman,
Soosay, & Kandampully, 2003). The evolution of ICTs has given managers the op-
portunity to efficiently handle logistics and the chance to globalize the companies’
supply chains. As more and more technological solutions are developed, the supply
chain can become more complex and with a higher level of ramification, because the
new advancements simplify the problems to manage.
1.2
Purpose and Research Questions
The purpose of this thesis is to clarify and foresee the impacts of technological
breakthroughs in the field of autonomous driving on logistics, discerning if their ap-
plication affects the same areas or can be applied to different fields; the aim is also
to understand whether their logistical value has to be managed clustered or if they
need to be treated as two completely different entities.
In detail, this paper focuses on the technological management of self-driving
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Outline
7
truck and drones, evaluating if and how these technologies could heighten supply
chain competitiveness. It aims to answer the following research questions:
1. How these technologies should be managed and implemented in order to gener-
ate competitive advantage for a firm?
2. Do I as a manager treat them identically?
3. Should they be classified and controlled from the same department, or do they
require individual management?
4. Are they interchangeable from a supply chain design point of view, or do they
fundamentally result in different supply chains?
1.3
Outline
This paper is organized in six chapters.
Chapter 1 outlined the relevance of
innovations in shaping the power of nations and prompting changes in economic com-
petition, pointing out the reasons on which the choice of the research topic presented
is based. Chapter 2 defines the scope of the thesis and clarifies the nomenclature used
in the document. In Chapter 3, after providing a brief overview of the technology
behind autonomous systems, the current state of art of autonomous vehicle systems
is presented, with a focus on their impacts on society, and especially on logistics.
==PAGE:24==
8
1 Introduction
In Chapter 4, it will be explained the methodology of the research and it will be
presented the case company upon which the Chapter 5 will be based, in order to eval-
uate and assess how to gain a competitive advantage thanks to this new technology.
Chapter 6 presents the findings of the research. Finally, in Chapter 7 the recommen-
dations and implications that this paper entails, its limitations and suggestions for
future topics of research are presented.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
Scope and Limitation
In order to articulate an organic paper that focuses and researches properly a
topic is pivotal to define the scope and the limitations of the paper itself. This is very
relevant to perform a successful analysis that achieves the defined goals and answers
adequately to the research questions.
One of the main challenges in the unmanned systems world emerges when it
is necessary to define autonomy.
Several are the taxonomies proposed to classify
the various levels of automation (LOA), starting from general categorizations that
comprehend all kinds of human interaction with automation (Sheridan & Verplank,
1979; Parasuraman, Sheridan, & Wickens, 2000; Endsley & Kaber, 1999). The first
generates a ten point scale that spans from level 0, where the human has full control,
to level 10, in which the automated system makes decisions by itself, ignoring the
human completely. Then, the 10-point scale was elaborated even further, developing
four functionality classes: information acquisition, information analysis, decision and
action selection, and action implementation (Parasuraman et al., 2000).
==PAGE:26==
10
2 Scope and Limitation
Specifically regarding aerial vehicles, even NASA developed its own framework
to assess the LOA. Here the scale is bi-dimensional and has 4 action classes: observe,
orient, decide and act, with each of them spanning over 8 intensities levels (Proud,
Hart, & Mrozinski, 2010).
In 2004, a widely adopted metric was introduced by the International Society
of Automotive Engineer. Their scale is a 6 level taxonomy designed specifically for
on-road motor vehicles as reported in Figure A.1. One of the most notable observa-
tions of SAE International is the disambiguation of the terminology. Over the words
Unmanned vehicles, Autonomous vehicles, Self-driving cars and Driverless cars the
proper term pointed out by SAE as not ambiguous is Automated Vehicle. A vehicle
is automated until it does not reach the maximum level of automation where it takes
the name of Autonomous Vehicle (Society of Automotive Engineers, 2016). In addi-
tion, the term unmanned is unclear since it doesn’t specify if the vehicle is remotely
controlled or whether the passenger is present or not in the vehicle.
Since 2004, the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology is also clas-
sifying and disambiguating the autonomy levels for unmanned systems. The institute
created the (ALFUS) framework where it introduced the Contextual Autonomous Ca-
pability Model (National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2007), that is based
upon three evaluation criteria: the human interdependence (called LOA in previous
models), the mission and the environmental complexity. These criteria are reported
==PAGE:27==
2 Scope and Limitation
11
in Figure 3.3 as HI, MC and EC. The model once again is based on a ten step scale
(0 no automation to 10 full automation in every environment subject to any kind of
task). This 10 points scale can be clustered into 5 higher level categories (matching
SAE nomenclature):
• level 0: No Automation
• level 1-3: Low Automation
• level 4-6: Medium Automation
• level 7-9: High Automation
• level 10: Autonomous
Figure 2.1: CAC Model Scale: sourced from National Institute of Standards and
Technology, 2007
==PAGE:28==
12
2 Scope and Limitation
The following chapters of the paper will utilize the nomenclature from SAE
International (Society of Automotive Engineers, 2016) and the taxonomy elaborated
by the U.S. NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2007).
The
rationale behind this choice is that the NIST taxonomy (LOA scale) can be applied on
both aerial and ground automated vehicles while the SAE one applies only to AGV.
By contrast, the adoption of the SAE nomenclature aims at dispelling the ambiguity
the term unmanned has on automated cars, since it is not clear whether a passenger
(not the driver) is meant to be on the vehicle.
A level 5 automated vehicle is therefore capable of performing every action (park-
ing, landing, steering, avoiding objects and so on and so forth) under every environ-
mental complexity (dark, windy, rainy, high traffic, bumpy road and so on) with no
human interdependence (automatic fallback, no supervision). This means that an
automated vehicle level 5, ground or air, is capable of performing every aspect of the
driving task under every circumstances. This kind of vehicle in the following sections
of the paper is going to be called autonomous vehicle. The paper focuses on the
assessment of the impact of Autonomous Vehicles (Maximum Level of Automation)
and the evaluation of the steps a firm should take in order to gain a competitive
advantage through this innovation.
==PAGE:29==
2.1 The Value Chain
13
2.1
The Value Chain
From a logistics standpoint, transports are generally divided in three categories:
local, regional and long-haul transportation (Jens Kappauf & Koch, 2012). The Amer-
ican Trucking Association differentiates truck drivers positions by mileage covered in
two classes. Local, P&D and city drivers are the names to define short-haul drivers
that typically drive inside a city. By contrast, Line-Haul or Regional drivers are the
ones that cover long-distances, typically above 200 miles (American Trucking Asso-
ciation, 2010). Another classification can be made about the delivery type: single
and multiple items shipments or hazardous, heavy and valuable goods. Instead, to
identify the shipment by its size there are parcel shipment, break bulk shipment, par-
tial load consignment (LTL - less than truckload) and full load consignment (FTL
- full truckload). Transport modes can be categorized into road, railway, waterway,
sea and air freight (Gudehus & Kotzab, 2012). Previous work already consolidated
the interdependence between shipment size and mode/vehicle choice (Abate & Jong,
2014). The last distinction can be made upon physical properties of the material,
such as gaseous, liquid, bulky, valuable, chilled, fresh and fragile goods that requires
different transportation modes/vehicles.
Due to technological limitation, AAV radius is limited, as it will be explained in
Section 3.1. In last-mile delivery, in a short haul scenario, AAV and AGV coexist as
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Scope and Limitation
can be seen in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: AGV & AAV coexist in Last-Mile Delivery
That is why last-mile delivery is the most interesting scenario and the one that
poses the most challenges, which should be explored and studied in detail. Only in
this particular case both technologies are useful, they compete with each other and
maybe they can work in tandem, because they use the same shipping method even if
they have different strengths and weaknesses.
One of the themes of the paper, already introduced in Section 1.1, is to investi-
gate how an effective management and implementation of the AVs in a firm’s logistics
operations can lead to a hefty competitive advantage. Porter, 1985 identified three
generic strategies to obtain competitive advantage: Differentiation, Cost Leadership
and Focus. The former aims to make the company’s services distinct and more attrac-
tive compared to the ones of the competitors, by means of enhancements of quality,
==PAGE:31==
2.1 The Value Chain
15
speed, innovation of the service and so on and so forth. On the other hand, cost lead-
ership strategy can be achieved mainly pursuing two paths: increasing profitability
by reducing costs, and maintaining industry-average prices or looking at enlarging
the market share and volume thanks to lower prices than the competitors, maintain-
ing a consistent profit due to operational efficiency. Usually this kind of strategy is
achieved either with capital intensive investments that pay off over time, streamlining
processes or relocating in low cost countries. Lastly, the focus strategy relies on target-
ing a particular niche market and developing solid relationships with the customers,
catering to their needs. The focus strategy can be pursued as focus cost leadership or
focus differentiation strategy, similarly to the two paradigm depicted above, but over
a niche market. Additionally, the text will refer to the potential advantages following
the presented framework and will try to identify how a firm could leap from a red
ocean environment, as the logistics industry, to a blue one (W. C. Kim & Mauborgne,
2004). A red ocean context is an environment in which a firm competes with others
in established market spaces, fighting to beat the competition. A blue ocean strategy
instead looks at new market spaces trying to create and capture new demand. These
two frameworks will be utilized to understand the strategic position of a particular
technology application.
==PAGE:32==
16
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Literature Review
The literature review will follow this structure: A brief overview of the technology
behind AVs, followed by individual sections that go more in depth on their applications
and impacts on logistics. Finally, an overview of the state of art of the collaboration
between those elements, with a focus on the advantages that a unique coordination
system would lead to.
3.1
AV Technology Foundations
AV capabilities derive from a large set of hardware and software technologies
that feed and complement each other. Since many players are currently competing
to develop these components (Chan, 2017), there is not yet an established dominant
design (Morgan Stanley, 2013). Generally speaking, AVs rely on the Sense-Plan-Act
(SPA) paradigm, developed in the ‘80s for robotic systems (Siciliano & Khatib, 2008).
AVs have to be able therefore to perform the following actions:
==PAGE:34==
18
3 Literature Review
1. Data Collection
2. Data Interpretation
3. Decision Planning
4. Decision Making
5. Motion Control
Physically, the data collection is carried out by several components such as:
radars, Lidars, cameras, sensors, 4G receivers, and GPS receivers.
The last step is carried out by motion control systems, actuators and mechatronic
units that transform an electronic signal into a physical motion (e.g. steering, accel-
eration).
In between these physical systems there is a domain controller that links them and
supports the software solution that is in charge of data points interpretation – to
perceive and model the environment, decision planning and making (Morgan Stanley,
2013). The software behind the AGV reality understanding is based on a Convolu-
tional Neural Network (CNN), a particular type of Deep Learning algorithm. This
algorithm can be based on three different approaches: mediated perception, behav-
ior reflex and direct perception (Chen, Seff, Kornhauser, & Xiao, 2015). It is already
proven that a CNN with a mediated perception approach using Camera, Lidar, Radar,
==PAGE:35==
3.1 AV Technology Foundations
19
and GPS, processed by a single GTX 780 Ti (a GPU that cost less than 300$) is al-
ready adequate for real-time use in highway driving (Huval et al., 2015).
Although the inputs, and the type of decision making is quite different from
AGVs, AAVs also rely on Convolutional Neural Networks to perceive reality (Lee,
Wang, Crandall, Sabanovi, & Fox, 2017; Carrio, Sampedro, Rodriguez-Ramos, &
Campoy, 2017). It is important to note that AVs require back-up systems that monitor
the performance of the components embedded into the machine itself, so that if any
primary unit fails, they would be able to safely stop and send an alert signal to the
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) (Anderson et al., 2016).
In Figure 3.1 the hardware components that can be found in AGVs and AAVs
are shown. Following the aforementioned Sense-Plan-Act paradigm, the components
necessary for both AGVs and AAVs to collect external information, and aimed at
perceiving the environment, are presented in blue. The sensors that allow the vehicle
to understand its state, measuring variables such as the speed of travel are underlined
in green. Obviously those differ between AGVs and AAVs since the nature of these two
vehicles is different. By contrast, the key hardware components that are responsible
of measuring the environment are similar. In the planning step, both systems have
processors that support the software computations. It is clear that for AAVs the
processor power to weight ratio and its size are much more relevant factors. The
software installed relies on Artificial Intelligence technology for both vehicles. Data
==PAGE:36==
20
3 Literature Review
interpretation is carried out by many algorithms, spanning from pattern recognition
algorithms for classification purposes (e.g. support vector machine (SVM)) to deep
learning algorithms for vision (e.g. convolutional neural networks). Path planning
and motion planning are also powered by AI, with systems such as decision matrix
algorithms for decision making purposes (e.g. AdaBoost). However, the algorithms
implemented in the decision process as well as in the decoding phase are strictly
confidential and the literature on them is very scarce. In fact, it is important to
note that there are companies relying entirely on them to generate profits, and that
disclosing their proprietary technologies would lead to a significant loss of business.
Finally, there is the act part of the process, where the data have been processed
and the real-time decisions have been taken. Here, actuators come to play to elec-
tronically dispatch the information to the motors or mechanical parts of the vehicles.
From an infrastructural prospective, the same technical competences are required
in the building and maintenance phase of the life-cycle of such products. Clearly, the
components installed in AAVs have to respect more stringent constraints in terms of
weight and dimension, however they behave similarly. Additionally, it is quite obvious
but still important to remark the fact that two types of vehicles move over different
elements (i.e.
ground and air); this generates a difference in terms of equipment
required to ”sense” the environment. For example, atmospheric agents, such as wind
and rain, have an exponentially higher impact on AAVs, if compared to AGVs. All
==PAGE:37==
3.1 AV Technology Foundations
21
things considered however, the software part, even if tailored and optimized for the
specific system it is mounted on, requires the same skill-set and competences to
be created and maintained. As seen on Indeed.com and LinkedIn.com, besides an
expertise in perception sensors such as LIDAR, radar and cameras, the knowledge of
applied linear algebra, modern GPU hardware, robotic operating system (ROS) and
the Linux kernel are also required. On top of that other competences are crucial, such
as real-time operation systems and programming languages (e.g. C, C++, Python,
Apache, JavaScript, Java, Scala).
Figure 3.1: Sensitivity analysis of AAV system
AAVs vary over type, LoA, size, weight, and the power source(Custers, 2016),
but they come into three main forms (DHL Trend Research, 2014):
1. Multirotor: the cheapest solution, able of vertical take-off and landing, excels
==PAGE:38==
22
3 Literature Review
in maneuverability at a low cost.
2. Fixed-Wing: the advantage of this type of AAV reside in the endurance and
higher distance range that can be covered, however it can only take-off horizon-
tally and it has reduced maneuverability.
3. Tilt-Wing: this solution combines the advantages of the other two versions, but
has the downsides of a higher technological complexity and cost.
In contrast to AGVs, the technology behind AAVs poses some limitations. In fact
in average, the duration of an AAV battery can span from the 2.2 miles supported by
Stolaroff et al., 2018, to 5 miles as in the case of DHL, 2016. The commercial drones
available on the market at the moment are capped at 4.3 miles range (Flynt, 2018),
with a flight time that span from 20 to 30 minutes. However, it is likely that AAVs
systems merely designed at deliveries would reach in the near future a 6 or 7 miles
radius. Once clarified how the technology behind it works, it is possible to move on
to the assessment of their economical impacts on society and businesses.
3.2
Impact of Autonomous Ground Vehicles
The automotive industry, globally, is foreseen to reach a 1.5$ trillion overall
revenue pool in the next decades, with a forecast growth of around 30% due to
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Impact of Autonomous Ground Vehicles
23
connectivity services, upgrades in features and potential disruptive business models
(McKinsey&Company, 2016a). The autonomous share alone will account up to 560$
billion by 2035, almost a third of the foreseen market (ATKerney, 2016). Such ap-
pealing revenue potential, in addition to several ecological and ethical benefits, is
pushing leading firms to invest heavily in the development of this innovation, start-
ing a real technological race. Almost every company in the automotive industry is
involved in the development, but other major technology players, such as Google,
Uber, Bosh, Didi Chuxing, and Apple have shown interest and dedicated parts of
their R&D budget to this sector. In Chan, 2017 it is shown how most firms forecast
their AV commercialization to be in between 2020 and 2025.
There are many benefits in adopting autonomous technology into ground trans-
portation. The savings associated with AGVs are estimated to be 642$ billion dollars
a year just in the United States: (Ozimek, 2014) accounting 317$ billion from fatal
crashing, 226$ billion from non-fatal crashes, 99$ billion in time savings. An analysis
that considers also fuel optimization and parking savings estimates AGVs economical
value to be 447.1$ billions (Fagnant, 2014). An extensive report issued by the U.S.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration accounted 28$ billion dollars in 2010
as losses due to congestion (Blincoe, Miller, Zaloshnja, & Lawrence, 2015).
In addition to all these economic benefits there are also several impacts on
society, such as: reducing human caused crushes – 93% of the total – (National
==PAGE:40==
24
3 Literature Review
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2008), reducing carbon emissions, limiting
traffic congestion, decreasing parking spaces and infrastructures, optimizing fuel ef-
ficiency meanwhile encouraging the adoption of alternative ones, saving time for
drivers and eventually enabling certain people to drive (too old or affected by motor-
deficiencies/disorders) (Speranza, 2018; Anderson et al., 2016; Bangloee, Tavana,
Asadi, & Oliver, 2016; Fagnant & Kockelman, 2015). In addition, Fagnant and Kock-
elman, 2014 point out how it would be possible to decrease the total number of
vehicles by a ratio of 11:1 due to the widespread use of Shared Autonomous Vehicles
(SAV).
By contrast, Wadud, MacKenzie, and Leiby, 2016 depicts two scenarios following
the mass adoption of AVs: in the first one, the availability of autonomous driving
vehicles leads to a 50% reduction of emissions and the energy consumption related to
transportation, however, in the other one, this technology could cause an increase of
trips and ground movement, due to people not having to drive anymore, effectively
bringing emissions and energy consumption values up to double of current numbers.
Considering the impact of AGVs on industry, it is possible to notice that many sectors
will be affected (Clements & Kockelman, 2017; Hörl, Ciari, & Axhausen, 2016).
==PAGE:41==
3.3 AGV Impacts on Logistics
25
3.3
AGV Impacts on Logistics
There is a strong case for arguing that the logistics industry will adopt AGVs
faster than the majority of other industries. This is due mainly for two reasons:
1. Safe and successful in indoor environments. Autonomous technology has already
proved to be outstanding in indoor environments. It is especially suitable for
warehousing operations (e.g. Amazon Kiva Robots are able to double produc-
tivity concurrently with accountability and flexibility enhancement (Wurman,
D’Andrea, & Mountz, 2018)).
2. Curtailed Liability Issues. Liabilities are less when AVs transports goods instead
of people (Heutger & Kuckelhaus, 2014).
Since 1896, when trucks have been utilized for goods transportation for the first
time, they have gradually become one of the main players of on-road logistics. Hence,
this section addresses the automation impact on trucks. From an operational level
standpoint, in 2017 the American Association Research Institute, 2017b published
the top concerns of the trucking industry, reported in Table 3.1, and followed up
assessing the impacts Autonomous Trucks will have on the matter.
==PAGE:42==
26
3 Literature Review
Table 3.1: Trucking Industry Top Concerns: source American Association Research
Institute, 2017b
Priority
Concerns
1
Driver Shortage
2
Electronic Logging Device (ELD) mandate
3
Hours-of-Service (HoS)
4
Driver Retention
5
Truck Parking
6
Compliance, Safety, Accountability(CSA)
Starting with the top concern, the American Trucking Association (ATA) esti-
mated a shortage of 36,500 drivers in 2016 in U.S., projecting a 175,000 shortfall by
2026 based on the current trend (Costello, 2017). Autonomous trucks will eradicate
the problem at its core, since they do not require an on-board driver. At the same
time, this addresses the related driver retention challenge.
Moving on to parking, many papers infer how full automation will dramatically
reduce the need for parking in the events of breaks, layover and resting, since ATs
do not have drivers and therefore regulatory constraints, allowing 24/7 utilization
(American Association Research Institute, 2016) besides the wait times for refueling
and loading-unloading.
The second and sixth concerns are due to regulatory pressure. The adoption of an
electronic logging device in each truck has been enforced by U.S. laws since December
2017, and this measure aims to ensure that carriers do not abuse of drivers, considering
that the device records their hours of services. On the other hand the Compliance,
==PAGE:43==
3.3 AGV Impacts on Logistics
27
Safety, Accountability (CSA) is a program led by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (FMCSA) that, through 7 ”BASICs” indicators, measures the carrier
performance in terms of safety (Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 2017).
In these regards, it is foreseen a positive impact in both relieving the carrier from
the additional ELD purchases and increasing the overall safety of transportation due
to automation.
Moreover, the autonomous systems in the trucks will be already
programmed according to the current laws and regulation, so the regulatory burden
will shift from carriers to OEMs.
Strategically, ATs are foreseen to have several impacts. From a cost efficiency
perspective, the American Association Research Institute, 2017a estimates the av-
erage transportation cost per mile driven in the U.S. to 1.592$ dollars, divided as
follows: drivers wages and benefits account for 43%; fuel appear as the second largest
cost factor at 21%; then truck purchase or lease amortization accounting 16% and a
5% insurance cost; the remaining 15% is attributed to maintenance, repairs, permits,
licenses, tolls fee and so on and so forth.
Going into detail into cost efficiency, it is apparent that ATs will drastically
reduce the expenses due to drivers wages (Roland Berger, 2016), but the benefits
are not limited to that aspect. Studies show that autonomous driving can lead to
a decrease of overall transportation costs due to fuel economy, considering that fuel
consumption will be reduced up to 25%: 10%-15% due to the elimination of human
==PAGE:44==
28
3 Literature Review
errors (e.g.
sudden acceleration)(McKinsey Global Institute, 2013), and the rest
attributed to truck platooning, a strategy based on a group of trucks that moves in
cooperation, following closely each other, in order to save fuel thanks to the reduction
of aerodynamic drag; the magnitude of this effect had been studied to span in between
5% (Besselink et al., 2016) and 10% (Alam, Gattami, & Johansson, 2010); finally,
there are also routing improvements to be considered.
Another factor to note is
the decrease of the number of accidents, leading to two major benefits: reducing
liabilities, not losing the trucks themselves and the goods transported by them; this
could lead to a potential hefty reduction of motor insurance (Yeomans, 2014). Studies
estimated the additional costs of the autonomous technology installation on a truck
to be around 20,000$ dollars. Considering a truck purchasing cost in between 80,000
$ and 150,000$ dollars, the added cost will span from 20% to 13%. Roland Berger,
2016 estimates a Return on Investments (ROI) shorter than six months in long-haul
scenarios and shorter than a year in regional routes.
Nevertheless, there are a several barriers hampering the development of ATs. For
the first time, on March 18th 2018, a Uber Autonomous car killed a pedestrian in
Arizona. That accident shows that the technology is still under development and that
governments have not yet figured out how to regulate it.
1. Technological barriers: despite the already advanced level of development of
==PAGE:45==
3.3 AGV Impacts on Logistics
29
baseline technologies, this sector needs further development in data acquisition
(e.g. RADARs & LIDARs quality), pattern recognition (e.g. algorithm training)
and artificial intelligence (e.g.
algorithm development), LTE Coverage, geo-
mapping (e.g. elevation mapping), software integration in between the above
mentioned technologies and so on and so forth (McKinsey Global Institute, 2013;
Bangloee et al., 2016; McKinsey&Company, 2016a; Roland Berger, 2016).
2. Regulatory barriers: several studies highlight how regulation could be a limiting
factor in the development of the technology and its diffusion.
In this very
moment, no autonomous trucks are allowed to freely move on public roads, and
decentralized regulation are issued by each U.S. State, making the development
and testing more complex and volatile. Liability issues and ethical consideration
are the foundations on which policy makers have to rely on. However, nobody
seems to know how to proactively regulate it (McKinsey Global Institute, 2013;
Anderson et al., 2016; McKinsey&Company, 2016a; Roland Berger, 2016).
3. Security: once trucks will go full autonomous, violation of privacy, data breaches
and malicious interference will become a daily issue.
In this scenario, logis-
tics firms will need the support of companies specialized in providing security
services and cyber-coverage insurances, in order to address the emerging prob-
lem. (McKinsey Global Institute, 2013; Yeomans, 2014; Wolf & Lampert, 2017;
==PAGE:46==
30
3 Literature Review
Roland Berger, 2016)
The paper suggests how once ATs, after millions of tested miles, will prove their tech-
nological reliability compared to human drivers, regulations will follow and support
its further development. From then on, AV benefits will outshine the intrinsic risks
and barriers of this new technology.
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Impact of Autonomous Aerial Vehicles
31
3.4
Impact of Autonomous Aerial Vehicles
Ground vehicles and trucks are already widespread in society, whereas unmanned
aerial vehicles in the last decades have been utilized almost exclusively in military
missions. However, today AAVs are taking steps into civilian usage and thereafter
into businesses. However, this technology is in a very premature stage, as well as
the studies on it. Besides their military applications (Wall & Monahan, 2011), in
DHL Trend Research, 2014 it is shown how AAVs could impact different industries,
including monitoring energy production infrastructures, spotting and mapping fires
in forestry, data collection in precision agriculture, site and layout planning in the
construction industry, playing a surveillance role in environmental protection, being
used as search-and-rescue devices in emergency situations, offering new angles in film
and photography industry and eventually being the perfect tool for humanitarian aid
missions in dangerous or hard to reach places (Sandvik & Lohne, 2014).
Obviously, AAVs could also have several applications in logistics, but mainly
the following three (DHL Trend Research, 2014): Internal-logistics, Infrastructure
Surveillance and Deliveries.
AAVs deliveries are making their appearance in two scenarios: rural areas and
Last-Mile Delivery. In rural deliveries, AAVs are an attractive solution to address low-
volume remote areas. In fact such areas are a costly part of a firm distribution network,
==PAGE:48==
32
3 Literature Review
requiring a non-standard infrastructure tailored to regional topography (DHL Trend
Research, 2014). The best fit for this technology is to serve places that are hard
to reach by ground, completely overcoming the lack of infrastructures in the region
(e.g. no roads, rivers, sea, desert). AAVs commercial usage has also a huge potential
in Last-Mile deliveries. In fact, the main advantage of AAVs is their capability to
completely avoid ground congestion, and that, in addition to a straight-line-path to
delivery, makes their delivery times much faster compared to a standard truck.
Moreover, due to the exponential growth of e-commerce, last-mile delivery, the
foundation of e-commerce, as already mentioned in Section 1.1, is growing in relevance.
In 2015 U.S. e-commerce market size was 295$ billion dollars (Nicholson, 2017). In
2017, the market size grew by 35% reaching 453$ billion dollars accounting 8.9%
of total retail sales (U.S. Department of commerce, 2018). For this reasons, many
researchers and companies want to explore the opportunities that AAVs offer.
3.5
AAV Impacts on Logistics
In evaluating the impacts on logistic, the main application of AAVs will be con-
sidered to be Last-Mile delivery, taking into account their technological limitation.
Last-Mile deliveries in the U.S. are estimated to double in volume by 2025, leading
to 25 billions potential parcels shipped a year (McKinsey&Company, 2016b). The
==PAGE:49==
3.5 AAV Impacts on Logistics
33
largest driver of such growth is e-commerce.
The most apparent advantage of AAV is its intrinsic airborne transportation nature,
that leads to a decreased delivery time compared to ground transportation (Gattaschi
et al., 2015). This is mainly due to the fact that AAVs do not have to face any ground
congestion and can move in a straight line; these advantages have greater impacts
on random deliveries if compared to scheduled deliveries on routes. In 2016, DHL
parcelcopter delivered a package in 8 minutes compared to the 30 minutes it would
take a car over the same route (DHL, 2016). These deliveries have been carried out
in a low density populated area, and the advantages in urban context will be even
greater.
According to McKinsey&Company, 2016b, 30% of people values the delivery time
over cost (in contrast with the remaining 70% that chooses the cheapest delivery
option independently of the estimated time of delivery). Thereafter, enhanced AAVs
delivery speed could potentially entice those customers. In addition, the same study
shows how 27%, 26% and 20% of people did not purchase online respectively groceries,
medications and books, CDs, DvDs or video games, due to time sensitiveness. An
additional consideration is that delivery time is one of the major limitations to the
delivery of perishable items through e-commerce; potentially AAVs could overcome
this issue. All in all, faster delivery times would potentially increase the market pene-
tration and product portfolio (e.g. groceries, medications) an e-commerce firm offers.
==PAGE:50==
34
3 Literature Review
In addition to the undoubtedly increased delivery speed, a recent study demonstrated
that the environmental impacts of package deliveries by AAVs are lower than the ones
attributed to ground-based deliveries. In particular, it is important to note that a
diesel truck emits four times more greenhouse gases than an AAV would emit to
deliver the same packages (Stolaroff et al., 2018). Furthermore, compared to an in-
dividual consumer driving his personal vehicle back and forth, the emissions savings
surge up to 30 times. However, the same research explain how, due to technological
improvements, the range and weight of the delivery will increase, ultimately leading
to higher emissions per package. Over time then, AAV could progressively become
the worse delivery method, under a sustainability standpoint (Stolaroff et al., 2018).
From a cost perspective, AAV delivery costs are already proven to be business
viable, and D’Andrea, 2014 estimates the overall cost of transport for a 4.4 pounds
payload to a 6.2 miles destination to be 0.1$ dollars. This value can be compared
to the 0.6$ of Kiva Systems in-door warehousing AGV that already demonstrated
his successful application and adoption. AAVs main cost voices are electricity and
battery purchase (D’Andrea, 2014; Park, Zhang, & Chakraborty, 2016).
Some studies have been already conducted to identify which are the main param-
eters that affect AAVs delivery performances. Contrarily to other battery-powered
applications (e.g. in electric vehicles drive-range is significantly affected by the bat-
tery degradation), AAV last-mile delivery suffers less from extended end-of-life in
==PAGE:51==
3.5 AAV Impacts on Logistics
35
terms of performance (Park et al., 2016). In their research Park et al., 2016 found
out that a 5% increase of the end-of-life battery reflects in a 10% decrease of overall
costs. It is also important to note that some studies have already overcome some
of the technical weaknesses of AAVs, such as the long downtime during the battery-
charging in fixed batteries drone models (Suzuki, Filho, & Morrison, 2012), designing
a platform capable to swap batteries autonomously. Ure et al., 2015 developed an
autonomous battery maintenance mechatronic system able to optimize operational
efficiency of AAVs systems, further increasing their economical feasibility. Those au-
tonomous battery swapping systems lay the foundation to a longer coverage AAV
design as shown in Model A of Figure 3.2.
Model A 
Model B 
Model C 
Customer
Distribution Center
Air-delivery
Legend:
Autonomous Battery Swapping Station 
Air-based last-mile delivery models
Figure 3.2: Air-based last-mile delivery model
However, the costs of AAV deliveries and operations are largely dependant on the
specific application, and the current technological literature does not yet address the
==PAGE:52==
36
3 Literature Review
comparison between an AAV and an AGV driven supply chain. Therefore, there are
no definitive proofs to the claim that air-based delivery is cheaper than the ground-
based one. Nevertheless, it is necessary to remark that in a scenario where AAV
delivery costs are significantly lower than the costs of a ground-based approach, as
some infer (Keeney, 2015), ground-based last mile delivery could become obsolete
practice (i.e. 86% of AMAZON e-commerce goods fits the weight cap of AAVs).
Although the impacts are very promising, the list of limitations and risks to
be considered is substantial. Adopting this new technology would mean a complete
paradigm shift in the supply chain strategy: a last mile delivery supply chain model
relying solely on AAV for last-mile delivery would require a 12:1 (Stolaroff et al.,
2018) increase in warehouse density, due to their short range coverage (Lohn, 2017)
as presented in Model B of Figure 3.2. Moreover, companies should address cyber-
security issues, because third parties could jam or spoof deliveries, in order to redirect,
delay, prevent deliveries or even illegally acquire data. (Rao, Gopi, & Maione, 2016)
All these concerns will force firms to comply with a wide array of potential problems,
under the threat of restricting regulations. The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration,
2016 already have in place a very tight set of rules, that among others forbid AAVs
to deliver packages. However, since these rules are still new and have not yet been
vastly applied, only time will unveil possible weaknesses and ambiguities. In fact,
a mass adoption of AAVs would lead to several issues, such as privacy and data
==PAGE:53==
3.5 AAV Impacts on Logistics
37
ownership. This includes problems as the blurring between private and public space,
the possibility of illegitimate surveillance or even the collection, storage and usage of
private data, acquired through cameras and GPS (Rao et al., 2016). There would be
also safety issues, as the need to verify the airworthiness of AAVs before the flight (now
there is no such requirement), in order to reduce the threat of malfunctions that would
ultimately lead to possible injuries on pedestrians (Rao et al., 2016; Barmpounakis,
Vlahogianni, & Golias, 2016) or damages to structures and infrastructures, leading
to a raising concern about liabilities and damage estimations.
Eventually, in the
scenario that envision a widespread adoption of AAVs, even aerial congestion and
noise pollution would become issues that could bring about restrictive regulations
(Lohn, 2017). Thereafter, permits and regulation compliance may be overly costly or
time consuming, or the algorithm technical design could become overly complex due
to a set of rules that would evolve at a fast pace. However, it is likely to believe that
at some point in the future AAVs commercial usage introduction will become reality,
especially due to the macro-economical factors such as the technologic/innovations
”war” between the U.S. and China, that pushes both countries to be more flexible
with regulations in order to not be relegated to second place.
==PAGE:54==
38
3 Literature Review
3.6
Hybrid AVs Logistics
The simultaneous utilization of AAV and AGV in logistics, especially in path
planning and routing problems, is a growing field of interest for researches and studies.
So far, the cooperative models proposed in the literature can be grouped into 2
categories:
1. Utilized in parallel as illustrated in Model A of Figure 3.3, all deliveries from a
Distribution Center that fall in the range of AAV will be allocated to them and
all remaining deliveries are carried out by trucks (Murray & Chu, 2015)
2. Utilized in tandem as pictured in Model B of Figure 3.3, where AAVs are nested
in trucks (Ferrandez, Harbison, Weber, Sturges, & Rich, 2016; Murray & Chu,
2015)(i.e. subsequently )
Model A:  
Parallel distribution 
Model B:  
Sequential distribution
Model C:  
Mixed distribution 
Customer
Distribution Center
Air-delivery
Ground-delivery
Legend:
Air-Ground integrated last-mile delivery models
Figure 3.3: Air-Ground integrated last-mile delivery models
==PAGE:55==
3.6 Hybrid AVs Logistics
39
Among those, the tandem model is far more analyzed from an operational re-
search perspective. Studies show how a combined cooperation leads to further advan-
tages associated with this unique approach; primarily, the extension of the range of
action of AAVs and consequentially the customer pool. In fact, basing AAVs on trucks
is an ideal solution to get the AAVs closer to the customers before releasing them.
Additionally, a tandem approach would leverage AGVs far superior cargo capacity,
ultimately leading the truck to have a twofold role: delivery asset and mobile depot
(Murray & Chu, 2015). In Kraus, 2018; Ferrandez et al., 2016 it is shown how the
AGVs and AAVs combination on a tandem model gives the most benefits, decreasing
delivery lead time and energy consumption, especially if multiple AAVs are allocated
per AGVs (Ferrandez et al., 2016). In addition to those, the paper considers a third
approach as pictured in Model C of Figure 3.3 proposing a hybrid model combining
the above mentioned solutions simultaneously. In this scenario every package could
be delivered within an even greater range of methods, further enhancing the supply
chain complexity but probably decreasing operational costs. However, the limitations
and barriers in such a cooperative systems are the addition if not the multiplication of
the risks identified in each individual chapter, compounded by a higher management
complexity level.
==PAGE:56==
40
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
The methodology section provides the context needed to better understand the
findings of the paper in Chapter 6 and also a framework for the analysis and discussion
in Chapter 5. According to Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill, 2012, the methodology
of a research study should be similar to a six layered onion. The research philosophy
is the outer layer of the method, and passing through research approach, method-
ological choice, strategy adoption and time horizon it is possible to find at its core
the technique and the procedures. The research philosophy of choice for this paper is
pragmatism, due to its inclination to assert and identify the importance of an idea or
research findings in its practical consequences. This philosophy recognizes that there
are many different ways of interpreting the world and undertaking research, and as
such, there is not a single point of view that will ever give the entire picture and
there may be multiple realities. This approach accepts both observable phenomena
and subjective meanings as source of knowledge.
The research approach used in the paper builds upon the inductive method
==PAGE:58==
42
4 Methodology
(Saunders et al., 2012). The logic of such approach is to infer generalizations based
on the analysis of specific cases. Since AV technologies are not yet widespread into
society and, as of today, there are no theories on their utilization in the supply chain,
such path is the most suitable to build a conceptual framework to understand the
impacts autonomous logistics will bring into the digital supply chain.
In terms of methodological choice, the preferred approach is a mixed-method,
which combines a quantitative (the case study itself) and a qualitative analysis (liter-
ature review). A mixed approach is most suitable for a field that is still unexplored,
as it increases the reliability and the validity of the research.
The most suitable strategy to illustrate the findings with an inductive approach
is the case study, where data is gathered from real world observations. All in all, the
paper follows a quantitative procedure structured over a theory-building case study.
According to Dul and Hawk, 2008, it is pivotal in such circumstances to understand
the case study domain and scenario. In section Section 4.1, a fictional third party
logistics company that will serve as baseline for the construction of a theory will
be shortly presented and introduced. In fact, an analysis will be conducted on the
specific company and the findings will be generalized, in order to find answers to the
research questions introduced in Section 1.2.
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Domain & Scenario Description
43
4.1
Domain & Scenario Description
The case company operates in the transportation and logistics industry as a
third party logistics (3PL) service provider. 3PL are companies that provide logistic
services to others. The services offered by the 3PL firm could be limited to a single
aspect, such as warehousing, or extend to manage the whole supply chain of another
company. The company operates solely in the United States for a selected array of
customers. In terms of size, it is considered a mid-size enterprise (SME) according to
international standards, with a turnover slightly below 200 million dollars, growing
at a steady pace year after year. The business relies on 2 main distribution centers,
one located in the San Francisco Bay Area, CA and the other in the Indianapolis
Metropolitan Area, IN. The company manages and fulfills the whole supply chain of
its customers, taking care of both B2B and B2C transportation, resulting in a very
articulated and complex supply chain. The supply chain services are more or less
comprehensive depending on the requirements of each individual client.
For research purposes, the analysis of the case study will only focus on the
distribution of a single product family, which accounts for up to 25% of the total
revenue, making it one of the most relevant product family hold by a single client.
The product family counts over 30 different SKUs, however 3 SKUs alone amount
to 75% of the total volume. The demand pattern is quite stable over the year, with
==PAGE:60==
44
4 Methodology
a monthly average of 1,946,920 units and a standard deviation of 76,315 units as
shown in Figure A.2. In this context, it is important to distinguish between orders
and units. Each order is linked with a ”one to many” relation with units. However
each unit is bounded to and only to a single order. The product family analyzed
in the case study is composed by light-weighted items – less than 1 kg – and of
small size – less than 28x23x9 cm – with a market value in between 30$ and 80$ per
unit. These items can reach the consumer in one of two ways: either through an
e-commerce platform or through retailers. This has a direct effect on the company’s
supply chain. In fact, retailers make single orders with thousands of units that have
to be delivered directly from a distribution center to another, involving in the process
a truck covering a short-to-long distance. In this specific case, 18% of the units are
sold to the final consumers through this channel. The remaining 82% of the volume
is made by small orders (i.e. up to a dozen units per order). Most of these are single
orders (i.e. one unit per order), on average 75%. Each order has to be delivered to a
unique address, resulting into millions of different individual deliveries at households.
This task cannot be performed with the heavy-duty trucks people are accustomed to
see on the highways, but it requires instead smaller vans, capable of delivering the
product right on the doorstep of the customer. This kind of purchase is made directly
by a customer, through an e-commerce platform, accounting in this specific scenario
for 82% of the company demand.
Even though the supply chain is populated of
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Domain & Scenario Description
45
thousands of contractors, subcontractors and partners that take in charge even very
small parts of the supply chain of a product, in the San Francisco Bay area the last-
mile delivery of the selected product family is directly managed and fulfilled by the
company, with an average operative margin per parcel of $0.58.
Figure 4.1 shows the United States demand distribution, grouped by delivery
method. This practice is common in the industry, since retail orders and e-commerce
orders are very different from one another.
((a)) B2C heat-map
((b)) B2B heat-map
Figure 4.1: Order Distribution
Figure 4.4 represents an example of the company transportation process. The
product is handled several times during the delivery process, which involves entities
such as trucks, vans, drivers, warehouses and various practices, such as cross-docking,
sorting, prioritizing, scheduling, route optimization and so on and so forth.
==PAGE:62==
46
4 Methodology
3-5 touches 
3-6 day delivery time 
DC  
in California 
Customer
in Texas
Figure 4.2: Parcel delivery process
2-3 touches,  
3-4 day delivery time 
DC 
in California 
Retailer  
in Texas
Figure 4.3: Freight delivery process
Figure 4.4: Examples of transportation processes
Figure 4.3 depicts the freight transport between two cities, divided into two
segments: long-distance transport and transportation within the urban area (Browne,
Sweet, Woodburn, & Allen, 2005). Between these two points there can be different
warehouses where the goods are unloaded and loaded again the day after (cross-
docking) and assigned to a different vehicle (depending on the distance). Once heavy
vehicles have delivered their goods to a consolidation centre, the products are cross-
docked to smaller vehicles that will carry them to the proper retailers. In Figure 4.2
the parcel delivery process is quite more complex, including a sorting method based
on destination area, then it follows the same procedure shown in Figure 4.3; the main
difference is that the items are not placed on pallets and are usually moved via bins.
Each parcel goes through several cross-docks during its transportation process, until
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Domain & Scenario Description
47
it reaches a DC, where it gets sorted again in order to be assigned to the proper route
(i.e. area code) and is then handled by smaller vehicles such as vans. It is clear that
parcel delivery and freight delivery in the industry share common features but also
have substantial differences. All things considered, parcel delivery is more complicated
and requires an operative infrastructure that is almost completely different compared
to freight transport. In the example given in Figure 4.4, a delivery from California
to Texas, considering the distance of 1,700 miles and the maximum speed of a truck
spanning from 55 miles per hour in California up to the 75-80 miles of Texas, would
take around 26 hours of road transit to complete. However, in real case scenarios,
the delivery, instead of the 1.08 minimum days required for the transit, takes up to
4-6 days. That leads respectively to a 0.27% - 0.18% value added time over the total
delivery time.
Finally, Figure 4.5 shows two heat-maps of the delivery lead times of the package
transportation. Obviously delivery lead time is closely related to the service level. In
order to simplify the analysis, this paper will consider only two service levels, a
comparatively high and a low one. In fact, in the transportation industry, a decrease
in delivery time usually results in higher expenses and a higher service level (both for
the company and the customer). It is also apparent the direct correlation between the
price and the shipping distance. The two maps in Figure 4.5 show a numerical value
that represents the actual volume, whereas the delivery lead time is identified by the
==PAGE:64==
48
4 Methodology
different colors. On the side there is the average delivery lead time for a package to
reach a customer in the current scenario. The company performance is of 1.7 and 4.1
days on high and low service level deliveries respectively.
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
Transit
Orders Lead Time (%)
0%
40%
51%
8%
0.0%
0.0%
0.4%
0.2%
355,097
96,316
63,577
42,179
196,824
65,694
278,218
633,431
24,387
449,454
3,171,616
927,007
760,981
52,367
1,361,647
62,423
419,347
283,600
37,181
422,205
45,672
368,218
28,753
TOTAL
23,363,041 
54,071
319,049
392,571
5,997,040
89,470
339,274
122,083
155,169
136,087
131,503
293,437
1,722,230
82,097
126,552
46,298
224,597
59,555
309,019
165,602
25,845
71,663
443,493
280,053
71,030
166,520
205,219
288,940
59%
41%
West Coast
East Coast
889,771
1.7
Average Delivery Lead Time
6
5
3
4
2
1
7+
0
((a)) High Service Level
FALSE
FALSE
Transit
Orders Lead Time (%)
0%
1%
30%
39%
19%
8%
3%
0.2%
355,097
96,316
63,577
42,179
196,824
65,694
278,218
633,431
24,387
449,454
3,171,616
927,007
760,981
52,367
1,361,647
62,423
419,347
283,600
37,181
422,205
45,672
368,218
28,753
TOTAL
23,363,041 
54,071
319,049
392,571
5,997,040
89,470
339,274
122,083
155,169
136,087
131,503
293,437
1,722,230
82,097
126,552
46,298
224,597
59,555
309,019
165,602
25,845
71,663
443,493
280,053
71,030
166,520
205,219
288,940
5
4
2
3
1
0
889,771
6
7+
58%
42%
West Coast
East Coast
4.1
Average Delivery Lead Time
((b)) Low Service Level
Figure 4.5: Delivery Lead time heat-map
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5
Analysis
The following chapter focuses on finding the answers to the research questions
presented in Section 1.2, as already outlined in Chapter 4. The case study company
will be instrumental as the grounds of the analysis elaboration.
5.1
Introduction to the analysis
First of all, in order to understand the logistical applicability of a new technology
it is important to distinguish and clarify whether or not this technology can fully
replace existing infrastructure and liabilities. In this context it is possible to analyze
the distinction between AVGs and AAVs in terms of their nature. The takeaway of
Section 3.3 is that AGVs are foreseen to be more efficient and effective than standard
trucks. However AGVs are simply an evolution of trucks, considering that they can
be defined as trucks enhanced by an unmanned control system. Thereafter, the term
”upgrade” will be used to define the evolution from a truck into an AGV. In fact,
==PAGE:66==
50
5 Analysis
the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, 2018 defines the word upgrade as it follows: ”to
replace something with a more useful version or alternative”. As such, AGVs and
trucks will be considered as the same entity from a supply chain design point of view
for the rest of the paper.
For the AAV, the scenario is different. As of 2018 nothing like AAVs has ever
been used in logistics, and thus they are a complete new entity, taking their first
steps into the range of alternatives offered to a manager to transport a product. As
such, AAVs will be considered as a brand-new entity entering the transportation
tool-box. Based upon the just mentioned considerations, it is already possible to
identify the first difference between the two new technologies. AGVs are upgrades
of modern trucks and they can reliably fulfill an equal or even extended range of
activities of their predecessors. Considering that trucks are capable of performing all
steps of land transportation, both on short and long distances, urban and suburban
environments, they are the main resource of contemporary transportation, and AGVs
can be a future shoo-in for this role. By contrast, AAVs usage has not already been
seen on large scale and due to the inherent technological limitations and regulation
restrictions, as already mentioned in Section 3.4, the scope of this new entity appears
to be much more limited. The ideal scenario, where AAVs can play an active role in
transportation, is on short distances, delivering small and lightweight items. Follow-
ing these considerations, it is foreseen that AAVs will not be able to cover all aspects
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Introduction to the analysis
51
of a modern supply chain, and that their best application is limited to last-mile de-
livery. Knowing that last-mile delivery is only a part of the transportation industry,
this entails that a company that uses AAVs as a stand-alone technology will not be
able to offer all the services expected by a 3PL firm.
Analyzing the case company, its main client distributes through e-commerce
82% of their small and light-weighted product. This should be the perfect scenario
for AAVs, as previously specified. However:
• 75% of the company’s turnover is generated over long haul shipping. A delivery
system that relies only on AAVs would make it impossible to retain all of the
current clients due to the fact that the company could not offer the service any
more.
• In the product family analyzed, 18% of the products are still shipped as freight
to retailer. The loss of this service could eventually lead to the end of the busi-
ness relations with the clients, since they would have to split their distribution
channels in two different 3PL, leading on their side to duplicate inventories and
higher managerial complexity, eventually resulting in higher costs.
As such,
they could decide to terminate the contract with the firm that is not able to
offer the complete management of their supply chain.
• Nevertheless, even in a last-mile delivery only context, from the simple observa-
==PAGE:68==
52
5 Analysis
tion of Figure 4.1(a), it is immediately noticeable how the deliveries are spread
across all of the United States. As such, an extensive grid of small facilities,
with associated receivers, fulfillment and transpallet operators, overhead super-
visors, local servers, maintenance staff, system administrators, recruiters and so
on would result in around 51,000 fulfillment centers, in order to cover 85% of
the United States, assuming a coverage range of 7 miles per facility. This is just
an estimate, however it is not realistic for a mid sized company to have such a
high number of fulfillment centers, which could be sustained only by logistics
giants that fulfill a much higher volume of orders, like Amazon.
For all the aforementioned considerations, ground transportation is necessary
to enable the case company business. It is also important to underline that in the
modern transportation industry is a common practice to make use of third party
contractors and external carriers to take care of smaller or larger part of the good
transport.
5.2
Long Haulage
Regarding long haul transportation, which includes both parcel and freight moved
for long distances, the supply chain architecture can follow 2 general schemes (Hesse
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Long Haulage
53
& Rodrigue, 2004): Point to Point and Hub & Spoke, as depicted in Figure 5.1. The
main difference between the two is that in a Point to Point architecture every single
warehouse is linked with all the other facilities in the network, while in a Hub &
Spoke design paradigm there are some outlying facilities (i.e. spokes) that are linked
to a central hub. This network structure can be iterated in layers, resulting in some
warehouses that are both Hubs of the lower tier and Spokes of the higher tier. Such
structure, compared to Point to Point, leads to a lower number of links between facili-
ties, resulting in a larger economy of scale on routes and on facilities, since operations
are centralized. Considering its advantages, the leading logistics companies are ex-
tensively using the hub-spoke network when it comes to supply chain design, in order
to increase their operational efficiency and to reduce transportation and inventory
holding costs (Abdinnour‐Helm, 1999).
The main drawback of the hub-spoke architecture is that, as highlighted in Fig-
C
A
B
D
E
F
H
C
A
E
B
D
F
Hub & Spoke
Point to Point
Figure 5.1: Theoretical supply chain architectures, adapted from (Cook & Goodwin,
2008)
==PAGE:70==
54
5 Analysis
ure 5.2, it does not minimize transportation time and distance as well as the point
to point paradigm does. Secondly, it generates interdependency between hubs, ulti-
mately leading in a network structure that is more fragile and vulnerable to disrup-
tions. Some techniques have been already studied to address this issue (An, Zhang,
& Zeng, 2015), however the design alterations to increase resiliency come at a higher
cost. The case study company is planning to implement a Hub & Spoke design con-
figuration for the long term growth and expansion of its business, and based upon
this strategic choice, several benefits could be gained from the utilization of AGVs
for long haul transportation.
First of all, considering the example in Figure 5.2 where the red lines are routes
below 250-300 miles, and the green lines are routes with a distance greater than 300
miles, it is possible to notice how a conventional truck-driven supply chain has to
rely merely on the red routes, due to the limitations of the human driver, already
mentioned in Section 3.3.
The US regulation, issued by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
(FMCSA), enforces for the drivers a 10 hour off-duty rest after every 11 hour drive,
and this limits the total number of driven hours per week to 60 to 70 hours per driver.
Moreover, a driver has to complete its 11 hour shift, with at least a 30 minute break
after 8 hours of driving, in the first 14 hours when he comes on duty. Considering the
time constraints and an average speed of 55 miles per hour, the maximum distance a
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Long Haulage
55
driver may cover in a day is 600 miles, 300 to drive from H to P and 300 from P to H,
and then he has to sleep, rest and start all over again the following day. Drivers that
drive more than 600 miles in one-way are rare and their salaries are more expensive
(it is important to note that in the US the sleeping cab is allowed, in contrast to
what happens in many European countries). Concerning the routes that exceed 600
miles, the 10 hour delay becomes mandatory, and can be circumvented only if there
is a new driver ready to take over the load the moment the previous stops. In this
scenario the management of the scheduling of drivers and trucks becomes even more
complex for a company.
==PAGE:72==
56
5 Analysis
H
Hub & Spoke
P
S
Z
Figure 5.2: Hub-Spoke supply chain design based on AGVs
Introducing the AGV in the picture, the distance of the route becomes theoreti-
cally infinite as long as it moves on land, since the regulatory constraints mentioned
above are no longer an issue. This statement leads to several important conclusions:
• AGVs improve the resiliency of the hub-spoke design, because when a facility
is disrupted, no additional cost are associated with the mitigation strategy of
activating the neighboring routes.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Long Haulage
57
• They allow the hub-spoke design to be designed with no distance constraints,
ultimately leading to more flexibility in the management of the supply chain
network.
• They grant the Hub-Spoke design one of the main advantages of the Point to
Point structure, decreasing overall transportation distance and time since no
distance limitation are in place. The only remaining constraint is related to
volume flow.
• AGVs make drivers scheduling management on long routes an obsolete issue;
some functions and activities related to the driver scheduling will no longer
be in place, ultimately leading to lower cost and a lower level of management
complexity.
• In addition to the decrease of the overall travel distance, the new technology will
greatly boost the efficiency and speed of the transportation system. For the case
study company, the savings per mile on the costs of long haul transportation
are estimated in 44%, as outlined below.
Following this premise, the next step is to calculate the savings offered by the
implementation of the AGV in the described structure.
In order to simplify the
analysis, the most populous city in a state has been considered as a representation
==PAGE:74==
58
5 Analysis
of that state. Thereafter the road distances between the cities represent the distance
between the two states.
The case company allocates demand from each state to
the DC with the least linear distance as reported in Figure A.3. The same table
also shows the number of units and trucks required to perform such transportation.
The truck requirements are calculated considering the space required for a unit in a
11x9x3 inches box to fill a 20.3x7.2x8.5 feet truck cargo (i.e. a single unit truck), and
spreading the operational costs over each single units. The costs allocated are $1.59
per mile as reported in Section 3.3 for ordinary trucks, while the costs associated
with an heavy duty AGV are roughly $0.89 per mile as shown in Table 5.1. The
main cost reduction factor that brings the cost per mile down to $ 0.89 is obviously
the lack of the expenses related to the driver. There is another 25% decrease in fuel
costs due to the better efficiency of AGV, and an increase of $0.06 per mile due to
the additional investment needed to purchase the trucks. The last entry is the costs
of the IT system supporting the AGV, with real time navigation, data storage and
more, that as of today, cannot be estimated.
Table 5.1: Cost comparison between Human and Autonomous Driving
Cost voices
Truck
AGV
Driver
$0.68
$-
Fuel
$0.33
$0.28
Purchasing/Lease
$0.25
$0.31
Others
$0.32
$0.30
IT system
$-
$X
Total
$1.59
$0.89
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Long Haulage
59
Depending on the expenses related to the IT infrastructure required to enable
the utilization of this new technology, the transportation savings can be as conspicu-
ous as 44% per mile. For the case study company, for this specific product the miles
allocated to distribute it across the United States are of the order of 2.9 million as
can be seen in Figure A.3. In this hypothetic scenario in which all trucks depart
with a full load of a single product, savings can amount to $2,055,465 a year only
considering transportation, over a volume of 17.3 millions parcels. Once the technol-
ogy is implemented and the liabilities acquired, the benefits are shared across both
freight and parcel over long haul transport. On the basis of these considerations, it
is possible to infer that with a larger economy of scale, the fixed costs of the required
IT infrastructure will have a lesser negative impact on the savings granted by the
adoption of AGVs.
==PAGE:76==
60
5 Analysis
5.3
Last-Mile Delivery
This section focuses more in depth on the last mile delivery service offered by the
case study company in the San Francisco Bay area. Here, the objective of the paper
is to understand the dynamics and relations between a full AAV system and an AGV
one. The analysis starts describing a scenario in which the demand is fully covered
by AAVs, then it will be considered an AGV based scenario, and finally there will be
a comparison between the two on a common ”playground”, in order to identify the
differences.
First of all, the number of the orders that take place over a year in San Francisco
Bay Area has been calculated, then such orders are sorted by zip code as reported
in Figure A.5. For visualization purposes, the order distribution has been reported
as a heat-map in Figure 5.3. As it can be noticed in Figure 5.3, the highest demand
density (in red) covers the major cities of the area: San Francisco (north-west), San
Jose (south) and Oakland (north-east).
As expected, the areas with the highest
population are the one most likely to receive an order from.
In the following section the paper is going to tackle the difference between the
current model and the new ones. In order to assess the profitability of investments,
the analysis will be conducted using the concept of Net Present Value (NPV), often
used in capital budgeting. The (5.1) formula calculates the sum of the discounted
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Last-Mile Delivery
61
Figure 5.3: Daily orders distribution heat-map for San Francisco Bay Area
positive cash flows on the selected time horizon and compares it to the estimated cost.
According to the IRR rule, an investment is appealing only with NPV greater than
0 and only if the IRR is greater than the cost of capital.
NPV =
t
∑
t=0
Cn
(1 + r)t −Co
(5.1)
Where:
• Cn = Cash flow in the year t
• r = Cost of Capital (in the current analysis is set at 6%)
• C0 = C0i + C0u, respectively known and unknown initial investment cost.
==PAGE:78==
62
5 Analysis
• t = time horizon (5 years time horizon correspond to a t = 4).
C = V (M + (Ca −Cp))
(5.2)
Where:
• V = Volume of daily orders
• M = Actual operative margin
• Ca = Variable cost of actual project
• Cp = Cpi + Cpu, respectively identified and unidentified variable cost of new
project
5.3.1
AAVs
For design purposes, latitude and longitude values have been assigned to each
zip code, as reported in Figure A.4. Subsequently, the aerial distances between each
zip code has been calculated utilizing the geographical coordinates (5.3).
d = arccos(cos(90 −Lat1) ∗cos(90 −Lat2) + sin(90 −Lat1) ∗sin(90 −Lat2)
∗cos(Long1 −Long2)) ∗R
(5.3)
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Last-Mile Delivery
63
• d = aerial distance in miles between two zip codes.
• Lat1 & Lat2 = these numbers represent the latitude coordinates of respectively
the first and the second zip code.
• Long1 & Long2 = these numbers represent the longitude coordinates of respec-
tively the first and the second zip code.
• R = Range of the Earth in miles ( i.e. 3958.756 miles)
Once the distance between zip codes and the average order quantity has been
computed, the next step is to apply a heuristic algorithm in order to find the best
location and the overall number of warehouses required to cover such area.
Employing a Greedy Approach, the aim of the analysis is to find a global opti-
mum (i.e. a set of zip codes where to establish fulfillment centers, in order to cover
the maximum number of orders, ultimately resulting in a higher economy of scale
and profitability), selecting step by step the local optimal solution before moving on.
The iterations will stop when 90% of the demand has been covered. The reason for
choosing the greedy algorithm is that in contrast to the optimization approach that
usually gives a better overall result, the latter does not take into consideration capital
and investments. In fact, an expanding company, with limited assets and resources,
prioritizes a greater net present value (NPV) on investments rather than the best
==PAGE:80==
64
5 Analysis
long-term solution, considering that the latter could not be seen to completion if the
company goes under in the process. Moreover, the displacement of multiple ware-
houses will take time (i.e. setting up a warehouse may take a few years) and the
capital is limited. Based upon these considerations, the more realistic strategy would
be to expand the structure step by step rather than setting up a 10-15 warehouses
optimal solution right from the beginning. The drawback of the greedy algorithm
is the short term orientation of the choices, which results in a less profitable com-
pany long term. One noticeable feature of the greedy algorithm is that is one of the
most utilized and similar to reality decision strategies for managers. That is due to
the nature of the algorithm that searches local optimal points (i.e. investment deci-
sions) that provide the most benefits short term with a comparatively lower resource
expenditure.
In order to conduct the analysis, the threshold value for two zip codes to be
linked has been identified in 7 miles. In fact, this is the radius of coverage offered
by an AAV, assuming current technological capabilities.
Considering the natural
AAV technological progress, this radius assumption can be considered a conservative
number. It is self-explanatory that if AAV’s range of coverage is 7 miles, they will not
be able to deliver to any zip code farther than 7 miles from the starting warehouse.
The aforementioned algorithm is articulated in 4 steps. First of all it researches the
best location; in this step every possible zip code is checked, in order to see if it is
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Last-Mile Delivery
65
possible to ship to the remaining zip codes under the radius constraint of 7 miles.
If the two areas considered are less than 7 miles apart, the demand quantity of the
linked zip code will be added up to the demand of the starting zip code. Once the
algorithm checks all the possible zip codes Partial Coverage capability, it selects
the one with the greater demand value. In the second step the algorithm assesses
the relevance of the warehouse selected and in case of a positive result, it allocates a
warehouse in the selected zip code. Eventually, it removes the orders already fulfilled
by a previously selected DC and it starts the loop again until the sum of the demands
fulfilled by all the warehouses selected it is greater than 90% of the total demand or
the marginal coverage increment is lower than 3%.
==PAGE:82==
66
5 Analysis
Algorithm 1 Greedy algorithm
Satisfied_Coverage = 0
//Starting considering the facility already operative activated as DC in zExisting for
(i = 1; i ≤District_Number; i + +) do
if (distance(zi, zExisting) ≤7miles) then
Satisfied_Coverage+ = Coverage(zi)
Area_To_Serve(zi) = 0
Create_Link(zExisting, zi)
end
else
Area_To_Serve(zi) = 1
end
end
while (Satisfied_Coverage ≤0.90 Total_Coverage) do
Best_Coverage = 0
// Find the best position to place a DC
for (i = 1; i ≤District_Number; i + +) do
Partial_Coverage = 0
for (j = 1; j ≤District_Number; j + +) do
if (distance(zi, zj) ≤7miles) and Area_to_Serve(zi) == 1 then
Partial_Coverage+ = Coverage(zj)
end
end
if (Best_Coverage ≤Partial_Coverage) then
Best_Coverage = Partial_Coverage
Best_i = i
end
end
// Check if the best position to place a DC is worth
if Best_Coverage ≤0.03 Total_Coverage then
break
end
Buy/Lease a DC in zBest_i//Updatedata
for (i = 1; i ≤District_Number; i + +) do
if (distance(zi, zBest_i) ≤7miles) and Area_to_Serve(zi) == 1 then
Satisfied_Coverage+ = Coverage(zi)
Area_to_Serve(zi) = 0
Create_Link(zExisting, zi)
end
end
end
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Last-Mile Delivery
67
In the analyzed scenario the procedure stopped after 10 iterations, due to the
fact that the 11th DC coverage was below the 3% marginal coverage threshold. The
result shows that 10 is the number of warehouses required to cover 90% of the area,
with a demand coverage equal to 88.5%. In the case study, the algorithm already
considers the existing warehouse as selected and it has assigned to it the name DC1.
As shown in Table 5.2, the DC1 warehouse is allocated by default since it is already
the headquarter and the main DC of the company fulfillment operations and last mile
delivery service. As expected by an algorithm using the Greedy Approach, DC2 (i.e.
the first warehouse location selected) is located in San Francisco, the most populous
city of the area analyzed.
In Figure 5.4 is visually clear how the warehouse allocation is positively correlated
with the order density depicted in Figure 5.3. In fact, the results show that DC1,
Table 5.2: Distribution Center Location and Average order quantity covered
Distribution Center
Location - Zip Code
Coverage percentage
DC1
94086
14.0%
DC2
94124
19.4%
DC3
95136
12.8%
DC4
94610
8.6%
DC5
94061
8.0%
DC6
94544
7.9%
DC7
95035
5.9%
DC8
94901
4.5%
DC9
94010
4.0%
DC10
94803
3.3%
==PAGE:84==
68
5 Analysis
DC2 and DC3 alone cover 4033 orders out of the total 8720 allocated to the area.
A relevant 46.2% of the total demand is in fact fulfilled by the above mentioned
DCs. As expected, the most relevant AAV fulfillment center in the bay is located
in San Francisco (DC2). San Jose is ranked second due to its territorial extension,
even though the order quantity is overall higher and it needs two DCs to cover its
whole area. Going down the list there are DC4, DC5, and DC6 that cover about 8%
each, accounting for a total of 24.5%. Due to the greedy nature of the algorithm, the
locations selected first are able to fulfill the most number of orders, as expected.
It is immediately apparent that along the increase in costs related to the main-
tenance of 9 small additional warehouses (from 5 to 10 thousands squared foots of
stocking and fulfillment areas), the operational management complexity of such so-
lution will be much higher. The main issue of this strategy is that the operational
infrastructure of the company has to be separated geographically and reiterate a
model in smaller versions. This will ultimately lead to the loss of the economy of
scale factor, an aspect that is crucial in every operation-oriented company.
From a cost perspective, it is possible to make some additional consideration
on the delivery cost per package.
On average, in the current scenario, the case
study company’s van driver delivers 127 parcels over 102 stops a day in the Bay
area. Table 5.3 reports the amount of miles driven to deliver a variable number of
orders and relative stops for each area identified. The distance driven in Table 5.3 has
==PAGE:85==
5.3 Last-Mile Delivery
69
Figure 5.4: Map of the 10 AAV warehouse locations and respective areas of coverage
in the San Francisco Bay area
been calculated assuming it to be 1.3 times aerial distance and based on the average
delivery distance in urban context, which in the Bay area for the case company it is
around 0.35 miles per stop. Table A.1 reports the total yearly amount of units a DC
has to fulfill.
==PAGE:86==
70
5 Analysis
Table 5.3: Comparison between Delivery Areas regarding Distance, Stops and Parcel
Delivered
Area
Distance
Driven
Stops
Units
Delivered
DC1
45
121
154
DC2
123
108
135
DC3
74
114
142
DC4
125
101
125
DC5
76
106
134
DC6
87
104
129
DC7
66
101
128
DC8
168
79
99
DC9
102
94
116
DC10
152
89
110
It has already been estimated by Gevaers, Van de Vooder, and Vanelsander, 2014
that the average cost of last-mile delivery is about $3.23 per package in Belgium urban
areas. This research points out, in great detail, how there are many factors that affect
the delivery price (i.e. urban density, cost of labor, van used, packages a day and
so on and so forth), therefore its value can change greatly. However, the procedure
to calculate the cost used in the paper is based on a different approach, since the
number of packages delivered in that analysis is about half the volume delivered in
the current case study.
Considering a driver cost of $16 per hour, the standard rate in the San Francisco
Bay area, a gas cost of $0.26 per mile, fueling a 12 mile per gallon consumption
delivery van, and a series of other expenses (e.g. maintenance, licenses, etc.) that
==PAGE:87==
5.3 Last-Mile Delivery
71
amount to $0.32 per mile as suggested in American Association Research Institute,
2017a, the total cost per mile is of $0.58 and a shift (8 hours) costs $128.
It is
possible to compute the cost per package for each zone as follows: (DistanceDriven∗
Costpermile + ShiftCost)/UnitsDelivered, resulting in a $1.51 average operative
cost associated only to the transportation.
Moving on to AAVs, their operative costs, as mentioned in Section 3.4, has been
calculated to be around $0.1 per package under 4.4 pounds over a 6.2 miles distance.
In this analysis the cost/lease of the AAV has not been taken into consideration, and
assuming a conservative average delivery distance of 5 miles, the resulting operative
cost is of $0.08 per delivery. Considering an average delivery distance of five miles,
AAVs are able to make 2.51 deliveries per hour. This value is obtained considering
a delivery every 23.87 minutes, based on these factors: flight time of 17 minutes,
considering a cruising speed of 35 mph (0 mph at the start and arrival, up to 100
mph, the speed limit imposed by the FAA for the AAVs, during the flight); 0.87
minutes waiting for the parcel (Park et al., 2016); 4 minutes to land, collect the
parcel, exchange the batteries; 2 minutes to release the parcel. It is important to
note that the costs associated with the AAV do not include warehousing expenses
as well as those related to the IT infrastructure, including system administrators,
servers or cloud lease and so on and so forth. In Table 5.6, the various costs related
to each means of transportation in last-mile delivery are reported. From the analysis
==PAGE:88==
72
5 Analysis
it emerges that the average operative cost of an actual van is $1.51 per unit delivered
while the AAV one would be $0.08. Comparatively the cost of transportation for an
AAV system is 5% of the current cost, not considering warehousing and IT related
expenses, as mentioned before. However, it has to be considered the initial investment
for AAV, which is influenced by numerous factors (Park et al., 2016). Park et al.,
2016 study utilizes a set of 30 large battery packs and 10 small battery packs totaling
a cost of $9,718. Such large amount of batteries is necessary to have a minute and an
half average parcel waiting time (i.e. time an AAV waits for a battery to be charged
before flying again). The estimated purchasing cost is $4.7 thousand per AAV. As of
today, it is not possible to estimate the cost of autonomous charging and swapping
stations, however realistically they will not cost more than a $1,000 once they will
be mass produced and they could be allocated to multiple AAV following a 1:5 ratio.
This brings up the total investment to $14.65 thousand per AAV.
==PAGE:89==
5.3 Last-Mile Delivery
73
Table 5.4: Cash Flow propagation of AAV system in two possible scenarios
AAVs - DC1
Year
0
1
2
3
4
Cash flow
$(2,021K)
$294,203
$294,203
$294,203
$294,203
PV factor
100%
94%
89%
84%
79%
PV of cash flow
$(2,021K)
$277,550
$261,839
$247,018
$233,036
Cumulative PV
$(2,021K)
$(1,744K)
$(1,482K)
$(1,235K)
$(1,002K)
Net Present Value
$(1,002K)
IRR
-19%
AAVs - DC1 & DC2
Year
0
1
2
3
4
Cash flow
$(3,263K)
$977,834
$977,834
$977,834
$977,834
PV factor
100%
94%
89%
84%
79%
PV of cash flow
$(3,263K)
$922,485
$870,269
$821,008
$774,536
Cumulative PV
$(3,263K)
$(2,340K)
$(1,470K)
$(649K)
$125,130
Net Present Value
$125,130
IRR
8%
Table 5.4 shows the NPV analysis of two possible implementation scenario for
the AAV technology. In the first one AAVs are utilized only on the current facility,
DC1, in the second District 2 has been added, since is the area with the greatest
NPV over 5 years, right after the district covered by the facility that is already in
place (DC1). Figure 5.5 shows the NPV value of a 5 year time horizon investment to
activate an AAV fulfillment center in DC1 and DC2. The different values of the fix
investment cost for the IT infrastructure are shown over the X-axis and the variable
cost for Operations (Warehousing lease in Dc2, overhead personnel in DC2 etc.) and
IT (licenses, administrators etc...) are represented over the Y-axis. In Figure 5.5
==PAGE:90==
74
5 Analysis
it is possible to notice how in the best case scenario (i.e. It infrastructure free, no
license and free warehouse) the NPV of the investment of the case study company is
$2,809,428 dollars, and moving over the X or Y axis it decreases, corresponding to an
increase of either fixed or variable costs.
In Table 5.4 it is possible to notice how under the same scenario ($1,125,000
dollars IT investment, $200,000 dollars for the IT team and licenses and $250,000
dollars in operatives cost linked to facility DC2), adopting AAVs only for the first
facility is a very negative investment compared to leasing a facility in DC2, where the
NPV is positive and the IRR is greater than the cost of capital.
Figure 5.5: Sensitivity analysis of AAV system
5.3.2
AGVs
Moving on to the analysis of the AGV implementation in a last-mile delivery
scenario, the first noticeable feature is that they don’t require any additional facility
to serve a distant area. This means that their operative cost is already allocated in
the facility. The savings on operative cost in a year covering the entire bay area as
==PAGE:91==
5.3 Last-Mile Delivery
75
depicted in Figure 5.6 can be calculated in $1,947,311. The average cost of delivering
via van, as already mentioned, is $1.51 per unit while using an AVG system the
same expenses averages around $0.49, a reduction of about 66%. The cost of AGV
transportation has been calculated removing entirely the driver cost factor from van
delivery, and decreasing the fuel cost by 25%. An IT system cost voice has been
reported as extra and identified as one of the most relevant cost voices AGVs carry
over.
Figure 5.6: Coverage map of AGV and related efficiency
The individual cost of a van is around $33,000, and additionally some researches
==PAGE:92==
76
5 Analysis
outlined the overall equipment cost of an autonomous vehicle system to be around
$20,000, as pointed out in Section 3.3. This amounts to a $53,000 investment, for the
63 minimum AGVs required to fulfill the demand in the San Francisco Bay area. The
minimum number of AGVs needed is calculated as follow: Daily units to fulfill per
zip code (reported in Figure A.5)/Average unit delivered per van per area(reported
in Table 5.3), assuming that an AGV deliver at the same or higher speed compared
to a human driven van. Considering these values, as already done for the AAVs, it
is possible to estimate the profitability of the investment on a 5 years time horizon
using NPV, with a 6% cost of capital. Two scenarios are reported in Table 5.5; the
top one is represented by an IT investment of $0 and no variable costs.
At the
bottom of Table 5.5 the initial investment, instead, includes the above mentioned
$3,339,000 for the AGV and $2,000,000 for the IT infrastructure. Additionally, it has
been considered a variable cost for IT of $600,000. Under those circumstances the
investment will be still viable having a NPV = $3.363.044 and IRR greater than 6%
(i.e. cost of capital). It is noticeable that with the same costs, in the NPV analysis
of the AAV scenario the company would have not been able to recoup its investment
within the desired time.
==PAGE:93==
5.3 Last-Mile Delivery
77
Table 5.5: Cash Flow propagation of AGV system in two of the possible scenarios
AGVs
Year
0
1
2
3
4
Cash flow
$(3,339K)
$3,111K
$3,111K
$3,111K
$3,111K
PV factor
100%
94%
89%
84%
79%
Cash flow PV
$(3,339K)
$2,935K
$2,769K
$2,612K
$2,464K
Cumulative PV
$(3,339K)
$(403,777)
$2,365K
$4,977K
$7,442K
Net Present Value
$7,442,108
IRR
85%
AGVs - with hypothetical investment
Year
0
1
2
3
4
Cash flow
$(5,339K)
$2,511K
$2,511K
$2,511K
$2,511K
PV factor
100%
94%
89%
84%
79%
Cash flow PV
$(5,339K)
$2,369K
$2,235K
$2,108K
$1,989K
Cumulative PV
$(5,339K)
$(2,969K)
$(734K)
$1,373K
$3,363K
Net Present Value
$3,363,044
IRR
31%
From the sensitivity analysis shown in Figure 5.7 two interesting facts emerge.
AGV system technology is capable of serving all current customers, with an invest-
ment as low as $ 3.3 million (63 AGV for $53 thousand each). This investment leads
to $1,947,310 in annual savings. Moreover, it is immediately apparent that in the
AGV scenario, the company is able to recoup its investment and gain a positive NPV
with IT fixed and variable costs much higher than the AAV scenario.
==PAGE:94==
78
5 Analysis
Figure 5.7: Sensitivity analysis of AGVs systems
5.3.3
AGVs vs AAVs
In the following section, an analysis will be conducted to compare AGVs and
AAVs last-mile delivery models in a small district of the San Francisco Bay area
(DC1). To estimate the cost of the initial investment of the implementation of AGVs
and AAVs, it is necessary to consider the total daily demand within the selected area
(DC1 of the San Francisco Bay area), equal to 1224 units. As quoted in Table 5.3,
the maximum number of units delivered per day for an AGV is 154, while for AAVs
is 20.1. Based on these data, 8 AGVs or 61 AAVs are required to fulfill the demand.
Using previously estimated unit costs, this leads to an initial investment for AGVs of
$421,247 and $896,580 for the AAV fleet. In the same scenario, the average operating
margin is $0.58 per unit delivered and considering the average unit savings identified
in the previous chapters and reported in Table 5.6 of $0.83 and $0.92, respectively
==PAGE:95==
5.3 Last-Mile Delivery
79
for AGV and AAV, the total annual operating margin amounts to $449.596 for AGV
and $478.685 for AAV.
Table 5.6: Operative cost of delivery a parcel with different means of transportation
Area
Parcel/Van
Parcel/AGV
Parcel/AAV*
DC1
$1.00
$0.17
$0.08
DC2
$1.47
$0.52
$0.08*
DC3
$1.21
$0.30
$0.08*
DC4
$1.60
$0.58
$0.08*
DC5
$1.28
$0.33
$0.08*
DC6
$1.38
$0.39
$0.08*
DC7
$1.30
$0.30
$0.08*
DC8
$2.27
$0.98
$0.08*
DC9
$1.61
$0.51
$0.08*
DC10
$1.96
$0.80
$0.08*
Is important to note how Table 5.6 does not include warehousing lease and su-
pervisor overheads(*). Therefore, the most meaningful field of comparison is DC1.
With these data, the payback period will be of 11.2 months for the AGV sce-
nario and 22.4 months for the AAV scenario. The Table 5.7 shows the NPV analysis
of both investments, considering the cost of capital for the company equal to 6%.
The analysis does not take into account that the use of AAVs reduces delivery times
and therefore potentially justifies an increase in the price of the service and conse-
quently its profitability. However, according to Section 3.4 only 30% of customers
give preference to time over cost.
==PAGE:96==
80
5 Analysis
Table 5.7: Comparison between investing in AGVs and AAVs
AGVs
Year
0
1
2
3
4
Cash flow
$(421,247)
$449,596
$449,596
$449,596
$449,596
PV factor
100%
94%
89%
84%
79%
PV of cash flow
$(421,247)
$424,147
$400,139
$377,490
$356,122
Cumulative PV
$(421,247)
$2,901
$403,040
$780,529
$1,136,652
Net Present Value
$1,136,652
IRR
100%
AAVs
Year
0
1
2
3
4
Cash flow
$(896,580)
$478,685
$478,685
$478,685
$478,685
PV factor
100%
94%
89%
84%
79%
PV of cash flow
$(896,580)
$451,589
$426,028
$401,913
$379,163
Cumulative PV
$(896,580)
$(444,991)
$(18,963)
$382,950
$762,113
Net Present Value
762,113
IRR
39%
Even though both investment look promising in Table 5.7, they are not including
the IT infrastructure cost, that can reach six figures, and the operative margins used
do not take into account the variable expenses for IT staff and so on. Those two
factors combined would certainly make for a negative NPV on both investments.
This suggests that to invest in these new technologies a certain volume of business
is needed, in order to leverage the economy of scale. Moreover, considering only the
AAV solution, the investment is only feasible where there is already in place a suitable
network of warehouses, capable of sustaining the lower range of delivery. Adding the
cost of building or leasing new DCs, investments in the AAV technology would be
==PAGE:97==
5.4 Hybrid AV systems
81
even less profitable.
5.4
Hybrid AV systems
The combined use of AGV and AAV is undoubtedly an attractive prospect for
supply chain companies. If both these technologies could be used at the same time,
reducing costs and without making the management of the company too complicated,
it would be possible to exploit the strengths of both. From a technical point of view,
although the navigation technology on which they are based on is the same (Artificial
Intelligence), troubleshooting and re-routing problems will require different ”case-
specific commands”. The main benefit of adopting a hybrid AV system comes into
play when the enterprise resource planning (ERP) software has to be designed. In
fact, currently, a unique ERP system is able to manage both freight and parcels
assigning a status or an index to each, and the same can be applied to AGVs and
AAVs, that can be identified as different means of transportation. Thereafter it will
not be necessary to have two different ERP systems but it will be possible to scale it
into one with tailored differentiation shared between the two technologies. However,
the rest of the IT infrastructure, that has to micro manage either technology, is going
to be complex and has to be separate. This entails an increase of IT cost, both fixed
and variable. The real issue though comes when it is necessary to coordinate the two
==PAGE:98==
82
5 Analysis
technologies in tandem, leading to an exponential increase in complexity in the parcel
delivery process. How an AAV will be able to pick the right parcel? How they should
be loaded and sorted on the van? How will they be able to move inside the van? How
much space will they occupy, reducing the quantity of products that can fit inside
the van? What should the van do, keep moving or wait for the AAV to come back?
When the AAV should be deployed on the route? These are only a few of the issues
that need to be solved in order to implement a hybrid solution.
From the operational point of view, the last-mile delivery methods change com-
pletely depending on the use of AGVs or AAVs.
The main discriminating factor
between the two technologies is the delivery method. The AAVs carry single pack-
ages and this means that an operator loads the AAV itself or the station where the
device collects the parcel. As a consequence, material handling and the process of
picking, scanning and manifesting an item will have to be done down to the single
unit, resulting in a process with similarities to a just-in-time approach. In turn, this
leads to the rearrangement of warehousing facilities, which will have to follow a con-
figuration suitable for this kind of fulfillment process, optimizing the time needed to
collect and transport the correct single item, leading to smaller stocking units and to
a more complex sorting method. Moreover, in an AAV fulfillment center there will
be no cutoff time (a fixed time during the day in which all orders received after that
cutoff will be assigned to the next day), so the fulfillment operations will be ongoing
==PAGE:99==
5.4 Hybrid AV systems
83
during the day. This will ultimately result in a different allocation of staff, compared
to the model with AGV/van, because in the latter the orders of a working day can
be prepared in advance and on a larger scale, potentially employing less people for
a short period of time. On the contrary, in the AAV model the number of staff al-
located must be in line with the demand and must be trained to constantly monitor
the functioning of the exchange stations, the collection stations, the batteries and the
AAVs themselves. Finally, the more the demand varies over the course of a working
day, the more the staff must be flexible and it may even be necessary to purchase
more AAVs, in order to maintain a high level of service even in peak demand times
and to keep exploiting the main advantages of AAVs over AGVs. The same issue
can arise using the two technologies in tandem, where the AAVs would be forced to
remain inoperative during AGV travel.
As far as the AGV model is concerned, the loads take place in batches and
this means that time will become a less stringent factor, since the last parcel to be
delivered must wait for all previous deliveries to be completed.
In this case it is
sufficient to order and load the material once every X hours of work, consequently
limiting the requested staff only for monitoring purposes.
The adoption of both technologies in tandem is extremely complex, considering
that the approach to each is completely different from an operational standpoint;
this will drive up the cost and the complexity of the management. At the moment all
==PAGE:100==
84
5 Analysis
these technical and economical limitations suggest that a solution that utilizes AGVs
and AAVs at the same time is still years away and could not be explored as of today.
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 6
Findings
The paper contributes to the literature on Autonomous Vehicles creating a sim-
ple outline for this extensive field of research, which will provide managers with a
framework to start with when evaluating complex decisions such as investments in
this new technology.
Companies dealing with end to end supply chain cannot shun on the importance
of ground transportation. As seen in the analysis, due mainly to the extremely limited
range of delivery of AAVs, almost all firms managing their own supply chain in-house
or outsourcing it to a 3PL will have to rely substantially on ground transportation for
nearly all stages of product handling. The implementation of aerial vehicles should
be considered as a tool that can differentiate a company from its competition in terms
of customer responsiveness and delivery speed.
AGV systems ultimately can be leveraged by a manager as a tool to pursue a
cost leadership strategy, while AAV systems are more appropriate for firms looking
to implement a differentiation strategy and expand their horizon in the blue ocean.
==PAGE:102==
86
6 Findings
Looking into the risks associated with AVs, it is clear that early adopters of
these technologies will have to deal with an unpredictable regulative force, that may
restrict or change the terms or condition of their utilization. Governments have higher
leverage on AAVs than over AGVs, since the latter in the worst case scenario can be
downgraded to be driven by an operator (a solution that has always historically been
accepted), meanwhile investments in the former technology will be completely lost, in
the event that aerial vehicles circulation will be prohibited. Additionally, the analysis
in Section 5.3.3 shows how AAVs are more capital intensive than AGVs, as they require
a higher initial investment in equipment to be implemented and have a longer payback
period, resulting in a higher financial exposure. From an operational standpoint, AAV
systems are a complete unexplored field, meaning that the improvements needed in the
company operations and coordination systems in order to support the new technology
will all have to be experimented and implemented with a trial and error approach
since no definitive best course of action has been developed yet. Another weakness
of an AAV-reliant company is all the constraints imposed by the technology on other
departments, such as marketing, R&D and engineering, which limits the development
of new products or promotional designs for the current merchandise in dimensions
or weight. Thereafter, AAVs systems are more exposed to internal disruptions, both
financially and operationally, while at the same time putting constraints to future
trend opportunities for new products specification development. Analyzing the issue
==PAGE:103==
6 Findings
87
from an outside perspective, as said before, AVs hoist enormous risks associated with
regulations. In fact laws and regulations play a major role and can make or break
a successful implementation and exploitation of such assets. However, even in this
case AGVs represent a safer bet, due to the fact that a supply chain designed with
the utilization of this technology in mind can be reversed with a moderate loss to a
previous model, and can be downgraded. A supply chain relying on AAVs that has
to redesign in order to stop using drones will be completely disrupted, financially and
operatively. Still concerning AAVs, there is also the warehousing problem to consider,
because as seen in the analysis Section 5.3.1, due to the low range of delivery of AAVs,
this technology needs a number of distribution centers exponentially higher than what
is considered acceptable for a van/AGV last-mile delivery system, increasing the
investment needed to implement AAVs even further. This is one of the most limiting
factors that a company has to consider when evaluating the financial feasibility of
the implementation of AAVs, and as such, said technology can be an option only
for the largest players in the industry, which already have a widespread network of
warehouses and fulfillment center.
Regarding the market potential, AVs can drive out of competition the companies
that choose not to implement them. As seen in Section 5.3.2, AGVs are able to cut
transportation costs down to a fraction of what they are today, increasing considerably
the market competitiveness of a firm adopting them, that could offer their service at
==PAGE:104==
88
6 Findings
a much lower price of what is considered industry standard at the moment. Moreover,
considering that AGVs are strictly an upgrade of conventional trucks, they will be
able to cover all of the current demand, with no loss of clients or orders, and they
bring instead an increased level of flexibility, allowing a company that makes use of
them to react better to sudden surge of demand in different areas, mitigating the
temporary issue by means of fulfilling the orders from farther away facilities. This is
possible thanks to the removal of the human driver and the subsequent limitations on
driven hours. On the side of AAVs the scenario is slightly different. The cost reduction
effect remains, and could be even more impactful as shown in Section 5.3.3 than what
has been seen for AGVs, but on top of that this model of last-mile delivery could
potentially lead to a huge technological advantage over the competition, enabling a
firm to deliver their products in a faster and sustainable manner at a competitive
price. The main drawback is that considering the current technical limitation of the
AAVs, the aerial delivery service has to be limited to certain kind of products (in size,
weight and shape), certain kind of orders (mostly single units) and to clients located
in close proximity of a distribution center (low coverage), resulting in a reduction of
the potential market share.
The profitability of the conversion of a supply chain to implement AVs greatly
increases when volumes grow, and particularly AAVs benefits positively from an in-
crease in volume density, the ratio between the volume and the surface that has to
==PAGE:105==
6 Findings
89
be covered. On the other hand, AGVs also benefit from a growth in volume, however
this technology is insensitive to the territorial expansion of the demand, as it does
not need a widespread network of distribution facilities and does not have range limi-
tations. This happens because a larger volume of demand leads to a reduction of the
impact that the fixed costs have on the operative margin per delivery, such as those
related to the IT infrastructure, the facilities and more.
From an operational standpoint AGVs are up to 5.8 times cheaper than the so-
lution that involves human drivers, as seen in the analysis in Section 5.3.3. AAVs
can reduce the cost of transport even more, up to twelve and a half times less of the
industry standards of today in Section 5.3.3. However, it is important to note that
the analysis conducted in the paper omits two main cost factors, that could not be
measured within the scope of the thesis – those related to the IT infrastructure that
has to be built in order to support the implementation of the new technology and
those that refers to the investment needed in order to build or lease the warehousing
space requested by the AAVs solution. Regarding the first cost factor, in Figure 5.7
and Figure 5.5 a sensitivity analysis has been conducted, in order to give a rough
estimate of the profitability of the initial investments to implement the new technolo-
gies, depending on the fixed and variable costs of the IT infrastructure. Warehousing
costs instead have not been considered, because from a preliminary analysis, it is ap-
parent that only the companies that already have a widespread distribution system
==PAGE:106==
90
6 Findings
could implement an AAVs supply chain model, due to the sheer amount of the initial
investment that is needed in order to grow tenfold the space dedicated to stocking
material and fulfilling orders. Such an investment is not realistic for any company,
except the largest ones.
As said in Section 5.2 and Section 5.3.2, the savings in terms of operative costs
of the implementation of AGVs for the transport of the same line of product are
$2,055,465 a year over 17.3 million parcels for long haul, whereas on last mile are
$1,947,310 a year over 2 million parcels.
It is clear then that the automation of
transports has a greater economical impact on last mile delivery if compared to long
haulage. However, the latter benefits more in terms of supply chain design flexibility,
reliability and resilience. Moreover, in that particular scenario, the innovation can
ultimately lead to a decreased labor scheduling complexity as already pointed out in
Section 5.2.
In Section 5.4 of the analysis a hybrid system that utilizes AGVs and AAVs in
tandem or side by side has been considered. As already said several times in the
paper, the two AVs technologies share some common traits, but mainly they are to
be treated differently by a manager. It was shown how the long haul requirements of
the modern supply chain can only be fulfilled by ground transportation and even in
scenarios where the two systems share a common playground (last-mile delivery in a
high density zone), many operative and infrastructural issues emerge, which bring an
==PAGE:107==
6 Findings
91
eventual integration to a very high degree of complexity. The optimal management
of an AAV based supply chain is so peculiar and different from what are the industry
standard today that even under the assumption that the technologies could share
a similar IT infrastructure – that is not the case as of today – the steps needed to
sustain aerial vehicles are so many and complex that they require the creation of new
departments, the development of new methods of operation and the acquisition of new
staff. This makes the implementation of a side by side solution, capable of exploiting
the advantages of both technologies in their preferred playing field, a realistic propo-
sition only for the biggest companies in the industry. Considering a tandem solution
instead, such as AAVs nested inside AGVs, several technical challenges and issues
arise, as presented in Section 5.4, and a possible implementation could not disregard
their solution. Unfortunately, these technical researches go far beyond the scope of
the thesis, and as such, this model cannot be taken into consideration, knowing that
today it is not technically feasible.
==PAGE:108==
92
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this chapter of the thesis the focus is on answering the questions formulated
in Section 1.2, giving strategic advice to the case company about the implementation
of AVs and extrapolating general theories from the analysis of the specific scenario.
The first step was to evaluate if a manager should treat AGVs and AAVs identically
or use two different approaches to evaluate their adoption and implementation. The
analysis clearly showed many differences between the two, over a wide array of aspects,
as depicted in Table 7.1.
The AGV technology is well suited to any firm that is looking to gain a compet-
itive advantage pursuing a cost leadership strategy. The potential of this technology
is significant, being able to cut operative costs up to 44% per mile on heavy duty
vehicles (long-haul) and up to 83% per delivery over light duty vehicles (last-mile).
This would ultimately lead any firm exploiting such technology successfully to have
an edge over competitors. By contrast, AAVs, even though they are able to cut the
operative costs of transport even more, up to 50% less expenses than AGVs, they
==PAGE:110==
94
7 Conclusion
Table 7.1: Comparative Recap Table
.
AGVs
AAVs
Domain
End to end
Supply Chain
Last Mile Delivery
Strategical
Purpose
Cost Leadership
Differentiation
Market
Potential
Full
Limited / Partial
Management
Complexity
High
Very High
Operations
Discrete:
Batches
Discrete:
One-piece-flow
Degree of
Transformation
Low
High
Risks
Medium
High
Investment Entity
Medium
High
Pay-back time
Moderate
Long
need such a complex and customized (depending especially on volume and volatility
of demand) infrastructure that those savings could be completely canceled by the
required investment and variable cost increase. However, this technology could allow
a firm to generate a competitive advantage over competitors when it comes to deliv-
ery lead time and sustainability. At the same time, it is important to note that, as
already pointed out in Section 3.4, in last mile delivery only 30% of the customer are
time sensitive; the remaining 70% still considers price the main factor in the decision
process, and those customer would be mostly served by AGVs.
In addition to the different capabilities and optimal usage of the two technologies,
they also require completely different supply chain designs. On the one hand, AGVs
==PAGE:111==
7 Conclusion
95
could maintain the supply chain as is, and they could even improve the existing
infrastructure, providing increased flexibility in its design and a stronger reliability
over long term; AAVs instead require a tailored solution, consisting of a widespread
network of warehouses that no 3PL mid sized company has today. This will result in
an unsustainable business model, financially and operationally, for firms that have a
similar volume of orders. As a result of those two factors, it is clear how a manager
would have to treat the two technologies differently.
Not only because they are
implemented with a different purpose and over a different domain, but also due to the
different supply chain design they require. Another noticeable difference that emerged
from the paper is the fact that besides differing in so many aspect of performing
the same task, even operations wise they result in a different facility configuration,
with a different labor structure, order fulfillment pattern, and staffing. Where the
implementation of AGVs will require only minimal adaptations of the current model
of operations, a company that utilize AAVs would have to fundamentally revise their
operation model, almost from the ground up. This will mean that in the hypothesis
of a combined implementation of the two technologies, there will need to be two
separate operation department, specialized to either one.
Finally, the recommendation to the case company is to disregard under the cur-
rent circumstances the AAVs implementation and take a closer look at AGVs in the
near future, monitoring the technical feasibility of the technology before assessing as
==PAGE:112==
96
7 Conclusion
normal the infrastructural cost required to commit over such improvement. In ad-
dition to this conclusion, the analysis offers also a specific framework that allows to
evaluate whether expanding the AGV model will be a good financial choice, consid-
ering future scenarios and ongoing operations. This choice is mainly based upon two
factors: the nature of the business of the company, which relies heavily on long-haul
transport to make profits and the low risk, comparatively to AAVs, of an investment
in AGVs, which require a moderate sum with a faster payback time. This type of
investment is the best for the case company, which is medium size and does not have
the financial resources of a public company.
Broadening the horizon, the analysis conducted in the paper provides to a man-
ager a framework to utilize in order to understand the future applications of both
technologies and evaluate the investment opportunities in both. These are practical
and useful data to build upon when a manager has to decide how to develop his
business over a long term period.
7.1
Limitation
The text has been articulated over a single case study and generalized the find-
ings of the research for a wider spectrum of companies, however is important to point
out how some factors are case specific and do not maintain their validity for com-
==PAGE:113==
7.1 Limitation
97
panies that manage a completely different volume of orders, supply chain domain
and geographical presence. Moreover is important to point out how some assumption
are circumstantial and that, due to the lack of information, since the technology has
never been implemented yet, there are no historical data to back up several of the
hypothesis of the analysis.
Many limitations can also be found in the technological deployment of such
solution. For example, in a last mile delivery scenario, as of today there is still no
way for an AGV to deliver the package at the doorstep without human intervention,
and if a system that fix this issue will not be developed, the potential savings offered
by an autonomous van will be of a much lesser significance than what emerges from
the analysis and the validity of the analysis itself will be questioned.
The same
could be said about AAVs, considering that currently there is no definite way to
deliver the package directly to the customer in case of multi-stories buildings, hard to
reach houses and so on. Concerning long-haul transport, another possible technical
limitation is the refueling of the trucks, that will have to be automated in order to not
lose one of the advantages of the technology, routes of a virtually unlimited distance.
Lastly, but not to be underestimated, there is the matter of the regulations regarding
AVs in general, and AAVs in particular, that could severely limit their usage and
ultimately make unsuccessful their implementation in the supply chain.
==PAGE:114==
98
7 Conclusion
7.2
Further Topics
This paper creates the foundations to a framework that allows to evaluate the
technological implementation of AVs for a mid-sized company. However, the analysis
points out how interesting it will be to look into the same opportunity with a large
player in mind. Would AAVs be better than AGVs in that scenario? How probable
is their coexistence and how beneficial a combined use will be for the firm?
An unexplored field of research is figuring out how mixed AVs system would work
together, if it is a feasible solution in operative terms, if it will be profitable, and if
the advantages associated with it will be enough to offset the increased management
complexity of such implementation into an existing business.
Another interesting field of study is finding out solutions to all the practical and
technological limitations of a delivery system that is completely unmanned and relies
solely on AVs. How will they physically deliver the package to the customer, how will
they refuel, AAVs will ever be able to carry heavier packages or for longer distances?
It will also be important to assess the ease of adoption of the new technology:
how high would it be the initial investment required to support this innovation? How
complex and expensive will the IT infrastructure need to be? How these technologies
are going to develop? How are those going to be charged, a lease per license, an
overall lease for the service with smaller percentages over the individual entity? Is
==PAGE:115==
7.2 Further Topics
99
it going to be a single company that own both software and hardware? Or multiple
stakeholders are going to be involved?
A potential field of research could be even the investigation of the minimum
required size of a company to invest in the research and development of this technology
in-house (at least the majority of it). And in that case would it be interesting to
understand the effectiveness of the possible solution.
Eventually, another topic of interest that should be explored is the cyber- and
non-cyber security issue; how heavy is the burden of the required expenses in cyber
security that a firm has to make in order to act as a deterrent to prevent hackers to
disrupt their business? How restrictive will be the regulation associated to the poten-
tial threat of a company that could misuse AAVs to monitor people and gather data
illegally? How easy it will be to steal packages or drones, and how much will these
criminal actions impact the profits of the company? In addition to what is mentioned
in Section 3.2, the impact of shared vehicles has been studied mainly in the field of
mobility, especially in recent years (Speranza, 2018). However, their influence on lo-
gistic is still unexplored. Could it decrease even more the number of trucks required,
decrease liability costs, cut manufacturing and disposal environmental emissions or
hinder congestion? In addition, would this innovation enable or disrupt business mod-
els in the logistic industry? Could it generate a complete different type of partnership
between fulfillment centers, warehousing, carriers and 3PL?
==PAGE:116==
100
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
Figure A.1: The five levels of vehicle automation, source: (Society of Automotive
Engineers, 2016)
==PAGE:118==
102
A Appendix
Terminology of Society of Automotive Engineers, 2016:
• DDT, the dynamic driving task is composed by two parts: the control over
steering and acceleration/deceleration and the ability to detect and respond to
object and events (OEDR object and event detection and response). Basically
this factor influences the capability of a vehicle to sense the environment, plan
the response and act accordingly.
• The DDT fallback is the ability of the vehicle to react when the standard driving
system fails. Noticeable is that DDT and the DDT fallback are distinct func-
tions, and the capability to perform does not necessarily results in the ability
to execute the other.
• ODD is defined as operational design domain (ODD). This comprehends pa-
rameters such as speed, traffic, roadway, environment, geography. These pa-
rameters pose limitations to the level of automation, such as driving only on
highway, during daylight at a maximum speed of 40 mph.
So than:
• Level 0: There is no driving automation, the driver perform every single task
• Level 1: The automated system on the vehicle assists the driver to perform
basic tasks such as longitudinal motion control thanks to cruise control and
==PAGE:119==
A Appendix
103
automatic emergency braking technologies or lateral motion control with lane-
keeping assist technology. However most of the driving task is performed by
the driver.
• Level 2: At this level the system takes over the motion control part of the
driving tasks of the vehicle meanwhile the driver supervise and react to events
and objects.
• Level 3: An automated system is capable of performing every part of the driving
task, however the driver has to be ready to take over in case of a systems fallback.
• Level 4: The automated system performs and supervises the entire driving
task during the trip and there is no need for the driver to intervene in case of
fallback. However the automated system executes only under limited conditions
and environments.
• Level 5: The automated system performs sustained and unconditional driving
tasks without the involvement of a human driver. At this stage the automated
systems supersedes the human driver and can be defined autonomous system.
==PAGE:120==
104
A Appendix
Here it is reported the annual demand fluctuation.
This is a factor not ad-
dressed in the paper that significantly increases complexity in the supply chain and
investment risk. However, the product family analyzed has a steady demand. The
demand volatility influences either the service level negatively or increases the initial
investment to maintain the desired service level.
Figure A.2: Monthly demand pattern
==PAGE:121==
A Appendix
105
The distance between cities is sourced at https://www.mileage-charts.com/chart.
php?p=index&a=NA&b=US.
The maximum number of boxes per truck is 5616,
however 4493 is considered for an 80% utilization/greater boxes dimensions reason.
The number of product to be transported between two states is allocated to find out
how many potential ideal (i.e. full load of a single product, a scenario that never
happens in the regular management of the supply chain) trips are necessary to fulfill
the demand. The total number of mile driven is obtained multiplying distance per
number of trips. To calculate the total cost, the cost of driving a truck and an AT
per mile is multiplied by the distance between two states. Ultimately, the two total
cost of AT transportation is subtracted to the actual truck esteem. It is important
to note, that considering the hypothetical nature of the trips required, this can be
considered a best case scenario regarding the total number of miles driven, which in
ordinary operation will be significantly greater.
==PAGE:122==
106
A Appendix
Figure A.3: Long Haul transportation data utilized
==PAGE:123==
A Appendix
107
In Figure A.4 are reported the latitude and longitude of the zip code analyzed.
Figure A.4: Geographical coordinates per zip code - Source Decennial Census, Census
Bureau, 2010
==PAGE:124==
108
A Appendix
In Figure A.5 the number of units to be fulfilled in average in each zip code are
reported.
Figure A.5: Average daily orders to fulfill by zip code
==PAGE:125==
A Appendix
109
In Table A.1 the yearly amounts of units to be fulfilled in the San Francisco Bay
Area per district identified are reported.
Table A.1: Number of Yearly order per area identified
DC
Orders
DC1
318,240
DC2
440,700
DC3
289,640
DC4
194,220
DC5
182,260
DC6
179,140
DC7
134,680
DC8
101,660
DC9
91,520
DC10
74,880
==PAGE:126==
110
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
Abate, M. & Jong, G. C. D. (2014). The optimal shipment size and truck size choice
- the allocation of trucks across hauls. Transportation Research Part A: Policy
and Practice, 59, 262–277.
Abdinnour‐Helm, S. (1999). Network design in supply chain management. Interna-
tional Journal of Agile Management Systems, 1(2), 99–106.
Alam, A., Gattami, A., & Johansson, K. (2010). An experimental study on the fuel
reduction potential of heavy duty vehicle platooning. In Proceedings of the 13th
International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Madeira,
Portugal, 306–311.
Alan, O. (2018). Waymo is millions of miles ahead in robot car tests; does it need a
billion more? retrieved March 3, 2018from https://www.forbes.com/sites/
alanohnsman/2018/03/02/waymo-is-millions-of-miles-ahead-in-robot-car-
tests-does-it-need-a-billion-more/#799aca2e1ef
American Association Research Institute. (2016). Identifying autonomous vehicle tech-
nology impacts on the trucking industry. American Association Research Insti-
tute.
American Association Research Institute. (2017a). An analysis of the operational
costs of trucking: 2017 update. American Association Research Institute.
American Association Research Institute. (2017b). Critical issues in the trucking in-
dustry. American Association Research Institute.
American Trucking Association. (2010). Glossary of trucking terms. retrieved from
http : / / www . trucking . org / ATA % 5C % 20Docs / What % 5C % 20We % 5C %
20Do/Image%5C%20and%5C%20Outreach%5C%20Programs/Misc%5C%
20Documents/Glossary.pdf
An, Y., Zhang, Y., & Zeng, B. (2015). The reliable hub-and-spoke design problem:
Models and algorithms. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 77,
103–122.
Anderson, J. M., Kalra, N., Stanley, K. D., Sorensen, P., Samaras, C., & Oluwatola,
T. A. (2016). Autonomous vehicle technology: A guide for policymakers. Rand
Corporation, 9–40.
==PAGE:128==
112
Bibliography
ATKerney. (2016). How automakers can survive the self-driving era.
Austenfeld, R. B. (2006). Toyota and why it is so successful. Research Society of
Commerce and Economics, 37(1), 110–126.
Bangloee, S. A., Tavana, M., Asadi, M., & Oliver, T. (2016). Autonomous vehicles:
Challenges, opportunities, and future implications for transportation policies.
Journal of Modern Transportation, 24(4), 284–303.
Barmpounakis, E. N., Vlahogianni, E. I., & Golias, J. C. (2016). Unmanned aerial
aircraft systems for transportation engineering: Current practice and future
challenges. International Journal of Transportation Science and Technology, 5,
111–122.
Berners-Lee, T. & Fischetti, M. (1999). Weaving the web: The original design and
ultimate destiny of the world wide web by its inventor.
Besselink, B., Turri, V., van de Hoef, S., Liang, K., Alam, A., Martensson, J., &
Johansson, K. (2016). Cyber-physical control of road freight transport. Proceed-
ings of the Ieee, 104(5), 1128–1141.
Blincoe, L. J., Miller, T. R., Zaloshnja, E., & Lawrence, B. A. (2015). The economic
and societal impact of motor vehicle crashes, 2010. (revised)(report no. dot hs
812 013). Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
Browne, M., Sweet, M., Woodburn, A., & Allen, J. (2005). Urban freight consolidation
centres final report.
Brunn, S. D. (2006). The world biggest corporation in the global economy: Walmart
world. New York, NY: Routledge: Taylor Francis Group.
Burns, T. & Stalker, G. (1969). The management of innovation. The Economic Jour-
nal, 79(314), 403–405.
Burton, A. (2000). Richard trevithick: Giant of steam. London: Aurum Press.
Carrio, A., Sampedro, C., Rodriguez-Ramos, A., & Campoy, P. (2017). A review of
deep learning methods and applications for unmanned aerial vehicles. Journal
of Sensors, 2017.
Chan, C. (2017). Advancements, prospects, and impacts of automated driving systems.
International Journal of Transportation Science and Technology, 6, 208–216.
Chapman, R. L., Soosay, C., & Kandampully, J. (2003). Innovation in logistic services
and the new business model: A conceptual framework. International Journal of
Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 33(7), 630–650.
Chen, C., Seff, A., Kornhauser, A., & Xiao, J. (2015). Deepdriving: Learning affor-
dance for direct perception in autonomous driving. 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2722–2730.
Chernow, R. (1998). Titan: The life of john d. rockefeller. New York, NY: Random
House.
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
113
Clements, L. M. & Kockelman, K. M. (2017). Economic effects of automated vehicles.
Institute for Transport Planning and Systems, 2602, 279–298.
Cook, G. N. & Goodwin, J. (2008). Airline networks: A comparison of hub-andspoke
and point-to-point systems. Journal of Aviation: Aereospace Education and Re-
search, 17(2).
Costello, B. (2017). Truck driver shortage analysis 2017. American Trucking Associ-
ations.
Custers, B. (2016). The future of drone use: Opportunities and threats from ethical
and legal perspectives. The Hague: Springer.
D’Andrea, R. (2014). Guest editorial can drones deliver? IEEE Transactions on Au-
tomation Science and Engineering, 2(3), 647–648.
DHL. (2016). Successful trial integration of dhl parcelcopter into logistics chain.
retrieved from http://www.dhl.com/en/press/releases/releases_2016/all/
parcel_ecommerce/successful_trial_integration_dhl_parcelcopter_logistics_
chain.html
DHL Trend Research. (2014). Unmanned aerial vehicle in logistics: A dhl perspective
on implications and use cases for the logistics industry. DHL Trend Research.
Dul, J. & Hawk, T. (2008). Case study methodology in business research. Oxford:
Elsevier.
Endsley, M. & Kaber, D. B. (1999). Level of automation effects on performance,
situation awareness and workload in a dynamic control task. Ergonomics, 42(3),
462–492.
Fagnant, D. J. (2014). The future of fully automated vehicles: Opportunities for vehicle-
and ride-sharing, with cost and emission savings (PhD thesis, The University
of Texas at Austin).
Fagnant, D. J. & Kockelman, K. M. (2014). The travel and environmental implications
of shared autonomous vehicles, using agent-based model scenarios. Transporta-
tion Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 40, 1–13.
Fagnant, D. J. & Kockelman, K. M. (2015). Preparing a nation for autonomous ve-
hicles: Opportunities. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 77,
167–181.
Federal Aviation Administration. (2016). Summary of small unmanned aircraft rule
(part 107). FAA News, Federal Aviation Administration, Washington, DC 20591.
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration. (2017). Safety measurement system
(sms) methodology. U.S. Department of Transportation.
Ferrandez, S. M., Harbison, T., Weber, T., Sturges, R., & Rich, R. (2016). Optimiza-
tion of a truck-drone in tandem delivery network using k-means and genetic
algorithm. Transportation Research Part C, 9(2), 374–388.
==PAGE:130==
114
Bibliography
Flynt, J. (2018). 10 best long range drones of 2018. retrieved March 17, 2018from
http://3dinsider.com/long-range-drones/
Forbes, R. (1993). Studies in ancient technologies. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Gattaschi, V., Gatteschi, V., Lamberti, F., Paravati, G., Sanna, A., Demartini, C., …
Venezia, G. (2015). New frontiers of delivery services using drones: A prototype
system exploiting a quadcopter for autonomous drug shipments. IEEE 39th
Annual International Computers, Software Applications Conference, 920–927.
Gevaers, R., Van de Vooder, E., & Vanelsander, T. (2014). Cost modelling and simula-
tion of last-mile characteristics in an innovative b2c supply chain environments
with implications on urban areas and cities. Social and Behavioural Sciences,
125, 398–411.
Gudehus, T. & Kotzab, H. (2012). Comprehensive logistics. Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag.
Gunasekarana, A., Marrib, M. N., McGaugheyc, R., & Nebhwanib, M. (2002). E-
commerce and its impact on operations management. 75(1), 185–197.
Harrison, A. & Hoek, R. V. (2008). Logistics management and strategy: Competing
through the supply chain (3rd ed.). Harlow: Pearson Education.
Hesse, M. & Rodrigue, J. (2004). The transport geography of logistics and freight
distribution. Journal of Transport Geography, 12(3), 171–184.
Heutger, M. & Kuckelhaus, M. (2014). Self-driving vehicles in logistics: A dhl per-
spective on implications and use cases for the logistic industry. DHL Customer
Solutions & Innovation.
Hörl, S., Ciari, F., & Axhausen, K. W. (2016). Recent perspectives on the impact of
autonomous vehicles. Institute for Transport Planning and Systems, 1–14.
Huval, B., Wang, T., Tandon, S., Kiske, J., Song, W., Pazhayampallil, J., … Ng,
A. Y. (2015). An empirical evaluation of deep learning on highway driving.
arXiv:1504.01716.
Jens Kappauf, B. L. & Koch, M. (2012). Logistic core operations with sap. Springer.
Jiang, B. & Prater, E. (2002). Distribution and logistics development in china: The
revolution has begun. International Journal of Physical Distribution Logistics
Management, 32(9), 783–798.
Keeney, T. (2015). How can amazon charge $1 for drone delivery? retrieved from
https://ark-invest.com/research/drone-delivery-amazon
Kim, D. & Lee, R. P. (2010). Systems collaboration and strategic collaboration: Their
impacts on supply chain responsiveness and market performance. Decision Sci-
ences, 41(4), 955–981.
Kim, W. C. & Mauborgne, R. (2004). Blue ocean strategy. Harvard Business Review.
Kraus, R. D. E. (2018). Vehicle routing with drones. arXiv:1705.06431.
==PAGE:131==
Bibliography
115
Lee, J., Wang, J., Crandall, D., Sabanovi, S., & Fox, G. (2017). Real-time object de-
tection for unmanned aerial vehicles based on cloud-based convolutional neural
networks. in Proceedings of the 1st IEEE International Conference on Robotic
Computing (IRC), 36–43.
Levison, M. (2006). The box: How the shipping container made the world smaller and
the world economy bigger. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Lewallen, B. (2004). Wal-mart & the bar code. Public Broadcasting Service. Front-
line. retrieved February 17, 2018from https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/
frontline/shows/walmart/secrets/barcode.html
Li, S., Ragu-Nathan, B., Ragu-Nathan, T., & Subba Rao, S. (2006). The impact
of supply chain management practices on competitive advantage and organi-
zational performance. The International Journal of Management Science, 34,
107–124.
Lohn, A. J. (2017). What’s the buzz? the city-scale impacts of drone delivery. RAND
Corporation.
McKinsey Global Institute. (2013). Disruptive technologies: Advances that will trans-
form life, business, and the global economy. McKinsey Company, 78–85.
McKinsey&Company. (2016a). Automotive revolution – perspective towards 2030.
McKinsey&Company. (2016b). Parcel delivery the future of last mile. McKinsey&Company,
Travel, Transport and Logistics.
Merriam-Webster Dictionary. (2018). Merriam-webster online dictionary. retrieved
from https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/upgrade
Morgan Stanley. (2013). Hacking trucks – cybersecurity risks and effective cyberse-
curity protection for heavy-duty vehicles. Morgan Stanley.
Murray, C. C. & Chu, A. G. (2015). The flying sidekick traveling salesman problem:
Optimization of drone-assisted parcel delivery. Transportation Research Part C,
54, 86–109.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. (2008). National motor vehicle crash
causation survey. U.S. Department of Transportation, Report DOT HS 811 059.
National Institute of Standards and Technology. (2007). Autonomy levels for un-
manned systems (alfus) framework.
Nicholson, J. (2017). New insights on retail e-commerce. Office of the Chief Economist,
Economics and Statistics Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce.
Ozimek, A. (2014). The massive economic benefits of self-driving cars. retrieved
March 19, 2018from https://www.forbes.com/sites/modeledbehavior/2014/
11/08/the-massive-economic-benefits-of-self-driving-cars/#7b2103d63273
Parasuraman, R., Sheridan, T. B., & Wickens, C. D. (2000). A model for types and
levels of human interaction with automation. IEEE Transaction on system,man,
and cybernetics – Part A: Systems and Humans, 30(3), 286–297.
==PAGE:132==
116
Bibliography
Park, S., Zhang, L., & Chakraborty, S. (2016). Design space exploration of drone
infrastructure for large-scale delivery services. IEEE/ACM International Con-
ference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD).
Porter, M. (1985). Competitive advantage: Creating and sustaining superior perfor-
mance. New York, NY: The Free Press.
Proud, R. W., Hart, J., & Mrozinski, R. B. (2010). Methods for determining the level
of autonomy to design into a human spaceflight vehicle: A function specific
approach. NASA Johnson Space Center.
Rao, B., Gopi, G., & Maione, R. (2016). The societal impact of commercial drones.
Technology in Society, 45, 83–90.
Roland Berger. (2016). Automated trucks - the next big disruptor in the automotive
industry? Roland Berger.
Sandvik, K. B. & Lohne, K. (2014). The rise of the humanitarian drone: Giving
content to an emerging concept. Millennium: Journal of International Studies,
43(1), 145–164.
Saunders, M., Lewis, P., & Thornhill, A. (2012). Research methods for business stu-
dents (6th ed.). Harlow: Pearson.
Shelly, G. B. & Campbell, J. T. (2012). Discovering the internet. Boston, Mas-
sachusetts: Shelly Cashman Series.
Sheridan, T. & Verplank, W. L. (1979). Human and computer control of undersea
teleoperators.
Siciliano, B. & Khatib, O. (2008). Springer handbook of robotics. Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag.
Society of Automotive Engineers. (2016). J3016 - taxonomy and definitions for terms
related to driving automation systems for on-road motor vehicles.
Speranza, M. G. (2018). Trends in transportation and logistics. European Journal of
Operational Research, 264, 830–836.
Stolaroff, J. K., Samaras, C., O’Neill, E. R., Lubers, A., Mitchell, A. S., & Ceperley,
D. (2018). Energy use and life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of drones for
commercial package delivery. Nature Communications, 9.
Suzuki, K. A., Filho, P. K., & Morrison, J. R. (2012). Automatic battery replacement
system for uavs: Analysis and design. Journal of Intelligent
Robotic Systems,
65(1-4), 563–586.
Ure, N. K., Chowdhary, G., Toksoz, T., How, J. P., Vavrina, M. A., & Vian, J.
(2015). An automated battery management system to enable persistent missions
with multiple aerial vehicles. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, 29(1),
275–286.
U.S. Department of commerce. (2018). Quarterly retail e-commerce sales 4th quarter
2017. U.S. Department of commerce, Whashington D.C.
==PAGE:133==
Bibliography
117
Wadud, Z., MacKenzie, D., & Leiby, P. (2016). Help or hindrance? the travel, energy
and carbon impacts of highly automated vehicles. Transportation Research Part
A, 86, 1–18.
Wall, T. & Monahan, T. (2011). Surveillance and violence from afar: The politics of
drones and liminal security-scapes. Theoretical Criminology, 15(3), 239–254.
Wolf, M. & Lampert, R. (2017). Hacking trucks – cybersecurity risks and effective
cybersecurity protection for heavy-duty vehicles. Automotive - Safety Security
2017, 45–60.
Womack, J. P., Jones, D. T., & Ross, D. (1990). The machine that changed the world.
New York, NY: Macmillan Publishing Company.
Wurman, P. R., D’Andrea, R., & Mountz, M. (2018). Coordinating hundreds of coop-
erative, autonomous vehicles in warehouses. Association for the Advancement
of Artificial Intelligence, 29.
Yasuhiro, M. (1984). Toyota production system: An integrated approach to just-in-time.
London: Chapman & Hall.
Yeomans, G. (2014). Autonomous vehicles handing over control: Opportunities and
risk for insurance. Lloyd’s.
==PAGE:134==
