==PAGE:1==
Optimization of Electricity
Production in Building-Integrated
Photovoltaics
Author:
Michael Ojiaku - s162288
Supervisors:
Sune Thorsteinsson
Nicholas Riedel
Jørgen Schou
Frederik Blum Winther
Year 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This MSc. thesis project was performed at the Department of Photonics Engineering at Tech-
nical University of Denmark in collaboration with Rambøll DK. The main focus of the study
was to estimate and optimize electricity production on the façade of a building-integrated pho-
tovoltaic system, which in this case was a building which Rambøll at the time was in charge of
building. The thesis project started in late January and concluded in late June 2018.
The ﬁnal release of this project was made possible thanks to many important people which
I would like to express my wide gratitude towards.
I ﬁrstly want to thank my two daily supervisors Sune Thorsteinsson and Nicholas Riedel, which
have been of tremendous help all the way through their strong engagement and exchange of
great knowledge on related topics. I also want to thank the researchers at Risø Campus for
making this thesis possible through their interest.
I want to extend my thanks to Rambøll for showing great interest in the project, and my
co-supervisor Frederik Blum Winther, for his valuable inputs and help throughout project. I
further want to thank his department and co-workers for the received resources and their shown
interest in my thesis.
I also want to thank my family for always being available and helping in all diﬀerent ways
through the whole period, and for always being supportive and motivating, especially through
the tough and stressful days.
I lastly want to thank all my friends for helping me through the days and showing great
interest in my thesis and contributing with inputs on various areas, and that includes all my
fellow alumni at G.A Hagemanns Kollegium.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis has the purpose of estimating the annual electricity production of a building-
integrated photovoltaics (BIPV) system located in Nordhavn, Copenhagen.
Due to limited
roof area, PV panels on the façade will be investigated in the attempt to reach the energy
requirement of generating 251 MWh/pa which this building has to comply with due to strict
energy legislation for new buildings.
Shadings and other loss factors may aﬀect the power production, so an investigation of the
use of diﬀerent PV conﬁgurations will be performed aiming at maximizing the annual energy
production. These losses are mainly inﬂuenced by which type of solar inverters are used and
therefore the performances of four diﬀerent solar inverters were investigated - a string inverter
from SMA, string inverter from SMA with power optimizers from Tigo, string inverter with
power optimizers both from SolarEdge, and a micro inverter from Enphase, respectively. The
system costs of the diﬀerent solutions were also compared. The system was modelled in a PV
simulation software called PVsyst, which is also one of the more popular PV simulation software
used in Europe.
The solar inverter which achieved the highest production was the SolarEdge system, achiev-
ing 87.6% of the annual energy production target and had a total system cost of 2.18 USD/WDC.
This was achieved by eliminating the great mismatch losses that would occur by just using a
normal string inverter, which only yielded 83.6% of the annual energy production target. Fur-
thermore, the electrical shading loss was only reduced by an insigniﬁcant amount of 0.83% of
total energy production of the string inverter, leading to conclude that the shading impact can
not be reduced in an adequately manner. However, the system which had the lowest system
cost, was the string inverter with a cost of 2.05 USD/WDC, while it also had the lowest LCOE
of 0.430 USD/kWh.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Context (Background) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Description of Building & Case Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Main Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
5
2.1
Solar Irradiance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Measurement of Solar Irradiance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Theoretical Calculations of POA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Photovoltaic Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
Solar Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
PV Modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.3
Energy Losses Surrounding the PV Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Inverter Types and Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Building-Integrated Photovoltaics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.5
Simulation Software & Weather Databases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Methodology
34
3.1
Simpliﬁcations & Justiﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2
Model Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3
Design of PV System & System Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3.1
Setup for Conﬁguration 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.2
Setup for Conﬁguration 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3.3
Setup for Conﬁguration 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.4
Setup for Conﬁguration 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4
Results
47
4.1
Annual Electrical Energy Yield from PV System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.1
Global Energy Losses from PV System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2
Annual Solar Insolation on PV Modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2.1
Irradiance & Power Losses at PV Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3
System Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Sensitivity Analysis
58
==PAGE:6==
6
Analysis & Discussion
62
7
Conclusion
66
8
Future Work & Research
67
References
68
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
AC:
Alternating current
AOI:
Angle of incidence
BIPV: Building-integrated photovoltaics
c-Si:
Crystalline silicon
CapEx: Capital expenditure
CIGS: Copper indium gallium selenide
DC:
Direct current
DHI:
Diﬀuse horizontal irradiance
DMI: Danish Meteorological Institute
DNI:
Direct normal irradiance
DRY: Danish reference year
GHG: Greenhouse gas
GHI:
Global horizontal irradiance
IAM: Incidence angle modiﬁer
IPCC: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
LCOE: Levelized cost of energy
MLPE: Module level power electronics
MPP: Maximum power point
MPPT: Maximum power point tracking
NREL: National Renewable Energy Laboratory
POA: Plane of array
PV:
Photovoltaics
PVT: Photovoltaic thermal hybrid solar collectors
rRMSD: Root-mean-square deviation
STC:
Standard test conditions
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The global sea level has been seen rising over the last decades, and has in fact risen 6 cm be-
tween 1993 and 2014 [1]. This could lead to deadly storm surges moving closer inland which can
also lead to more nuisance ﬂooding. Wildlife for arctic animals can also be threatened by the
high sea level. Some of the major causes to rising of global sea level is the fact that the global
temperature has been shown rising, and since water expands with greater temperatures. Higher
temperature also leads to more melting of land-based ice which is also among the major causes.
This has started a great discussion on climate change and what could be the reasons for the
global temperature rise and how to prevent it rising further. Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
and sustainability has been the center of these discussions. Whether global warming is a direct
result of human actions through GHG emissions or if mankind doesn’t play a role in the global
warming at all, but it is merely caused by natural irrepressible factors, is still an ongoing debate.
However, studies shows that more than 97% of the actively publishing climate scientists support
the claim that global warming is due to human activities [2]. The Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) released in 2013 their ﬁfth assessment report which, among others,
discussed the possible reasons for climate changes. One of their conclusions in the report can
be read from the following quote:
• "Human inﬂuence has been detected in warming of the atmosphere and the ocean, in
changes in the global water cycle, in reductions in snow and ice, in global mean sea level
rise, and in changes in some climate extremes. This evidence for human inﬂuence has
grown since AR4. It is extremely likely that human inﬂuence has been the dominant cause
of the observed warming since the mid-20th century" [3].
The strong believe in the global warming due to human inﬂuenced GHG emissions has lead
to countries world wide signing an agreement to contribute to mitigate global warming. This
agreement is known as the Paris Agreement and was introduced in 2015. Each country will
follow their own action plan to work towards a sustainable environment.
Denmark is one of the leading and ambitious countries to sign the agreement and has pledged
to be 100% independent of fossil-fuels by 2050 [4]. One of Denmark’s action plans is to install
more renewable power generation to eventually replace the existing fossil-fueled energy systems.
In 2016, 56% of the gross electricity consumption was produced by renewable energy sources
[5]. This number calls the need for extra renewable energy generation before 2050, to reach
the promised target. Furthermore, approximately 65% of the gross electricity in 2015 was con-
sumed by the residential and commercial sector [6]. An increase in self generation of renewable
1
==PAGE:9==
electricity in these sectors could reduce the amount of non-renewable energy in the electricity
mix and therefore be a great contribution towards the 2050 goal.
The most convenient way of self generation of electricity in buildings is the use of the
photovoltaics (PV). This is because they can easily be installed at the building envelope without
the need for massive land area as required for wind power for instant.
The Sun is also an
inexhaustible energy source and should be utilized to its full potential. On a yearly basis, the
potential of solar energy on Denmark’s land area lies in the range of 40 000 to 50 000 TWh [7].
This is around 1500 times the yearly electricity consumption of Denmark, so there is therefore
a great potential for solar power generation here.
1.2
Context (Background)
PV panels have become more popular and have recently been deployed at a larger scale in new
buildings since PV products are becoming price competitive with conventional façade materials
and strict energy legislation demanding renewable energy supply for new buildings. Building-
integrated PV (BIPV) is therefore a great way of achieving compliance, and implementation in
the design phase of a new building may bring great cost reductions and ensure decent aesthetics,
while simultaneously generating own electricity from an abundant energy source, namely the
Sun.
Rambøll is an engineering, design and consultant company and they are currently working
on a ﬂagship project where a building is planned to be built in Nordhavn, Copenhagen. This
building will serve as an oﬃce building for primarily a pension organization called PFA. Rambøll
is hired to deal with the building design management, and will also lead the project together
with some other architectural ﬁrms. The original idea for the building was to have PV panels
mounted on the roof of the building so that the energy balance of the total building would com-
ply to the building legislation, by supplementing the building with 251 MWh/pa of renewable
electricity.
Due to some changes in plans and design of the building, the roof area will not be suﬃcient
to generate the necessary energy requirement. This has lead them to consider installing wind
mills at another site location to comply with the renewable energy requirement. However, an
optional proposal came to the rise, which was implementing PV panels on the buildings façade
structure.
Therefore, the purpose of this thesis is to investigate the potential of electricity
generation from PV panels mounted on the façade.
2
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Description of Building & Case Study
The building, called Redmolen Spidsen, is planned to have a cylindrical form. It will have 11
oﬃce ﬂoors, each with façades where the PV panels can be installed. The building has a radius
of 25 m and a total height of 55 m, but the ﬁrst 10 meters are just glass without any façade.
There are windows and façades all around each ﬂoor, and the façade module where the PV
panels are planned to be installed (see yellow outline in ﬁgure 1a), are formed as a trapezoid
with the measures as shown in ﬁgure 1b.
(a)
Figure 1
Redmolen Spidsen and a zoom on the
façade module at disposal for PV modules
(b)
Figure 1
Measurement of the façade module
Each façade module has a tilt angle of 90◦and furthermore a horizontal tilt of 32◦from the wall
surface which will also cast some shadows on the façade module next to it.
There are some smaller buildings planned to come next to Redmolen Spidsen, but they have
a height of maximum 25 m. All these buildings will lie northwest (NW) of Redmolen Spidsen.
To comply with the energy legislation in Denmark, every building project has to use the
same meteo ﬁles, for the annual estimation of irradiance.
These are made by The Danish
Meteorological Institute (DMI) and the weather ﬁles are called the danish reference year (DRY),
which is a meteo ﬁle compiled from measurements across Denmark between 2001 and 2009 [8].
The GPS coordinates used for the project is 55.71◦N and 12.60◦E, which is also the site
location of where the building is going to be built.
3
==PAGE:11==
1.4
Main Objective
The main objective of this master thesis project is to estimate the annual energy production
from PV panels integrated into the building façade and try to reach the energy requirement
despite the limited roof area.
As the façade modules on the building has diﬀerent angular
orientations, it may contribute to a power loss depending on system conﬁguration. Shading
would also aﬀect the power production, so an investigation of the diﬀerent system losses and
the performance of diﬀerent solar inverters will be carried out aiming at maximizing the annual
energy production. The economy of the system will also be analyzed, as well as comparing the
beneﬁts and costs of the diﬀerent PV conﬁgurations.
The results obtained by the model simulations, will then be validated and explained. A
sensitivity analysis will also be performed to identify the sensitivities of some of the most
essential parameters.
1.5
Methodology
The building will be modelled in a software called PVsyst and the DRY weather database
will be used to estimate the solar irradiance incident on the façade module. The electricity
production will be estimated through modelling diﬀerent PV conﬁgurations, and the functional
limitations in the software, will require some simpliﬁcations of the model. A comparison of the
diﬀerent system conﬁgurations and power electronics solutions will be performed to establish
the diﬀerences in electricity production. Both the technological characteristics and economic
beneﬁts will be assessed.
1.6
Thesis Outline
The thesis will have a structure and outline as following:
In Chapter 2, some basic theory on the solar irradiance concepts, PV modules and inverter
types are described. Also an introduction to the simulation software is given.
In Chapter 3, an overview of necessary simpliﬁcations are given. The methods used and
model parameters of the system are also described here.
In Chapter 4, the results of the diﬀerent simulations are shown. An economic assessment of
the system is also performed here.
In Chapter 5, diﬀerent sensitivity analysis are performed and their signiﬁcance in the results
are shown.
In Chapter 6, a discussion and analysis of the diﬀerent results are performed. Comments
on the diﬀerent performances are also included here.
In Chapter 7, a ﬁnal conclusion and recommendations are given based on the ﬁndings of the
report.
Chapter 8, includes some ideas and suggestions on interesting topics for future work and
research areas, which were not done in this report.
4
==PAGE:12==
2
Theory
2.1
Solar Irradiance
The Sun sends out light in the form of electromagnetic radiation at diﬀerent wavelengths. So-
lar irradiance is power per unit of area received from the Sun through these electromagnetic
radiations. Solar irradiance integrated over time is called solar insolation or solar irradiation,
and is the energy received from the Sun over a period of time. The amount of energy received
varies with the tilt of the measuring instrument towards the Sun, the Sun’s zenith and azimuth
angle, and the atmospheric conditions. The total measured solar irradiance can be split into
three diﬀerent components.
Direct Normal Irradiance is the measured solar irradiance from the Sun that hits the mea-
surement instrument at an angle normal to the surface of the instrument. This does not include
the irradiance that gets scattered before hitting the measurement instrument.
Diﬀuse Horizontal Irradiance is the scattered solar irradiance measured at a horizontal
plane on Earth. Here, the direct normal irradiance is not included, but just the solar irradiance
hitting the surface after scattering events with molecules and particles in the atmosphere.
Ground Reﬂected Irradiance is the irradiance that gets reﬂected from the ground due
to diﬀerent reﬂective capabilities of the diﬀerent ground surfaces. The albedo coeﬃcient is the
ratio of reﬂected irradiance from the ground and received irradiance at the surface of the mea-
suring instrument, if the second measuring instrument is facing upward toward the sky dome [9].
Global Horizontal Irradiance is also used as the total measured irradiance from the Sun seen
on the horizontal surface on Earth. This can be calculated as the sum of the diﬀuse horizontal
irradiance and the horizontal projection of the direct normal irradiance [10].
2.1.1
Measurement of Solar Irradiance
On a clear blue sky with the Sun at its highest zenith angle, the amount of solar irradiance
hitting the Earth’s surface is around 1050 W/m2 direct beam, and 1120 W/m2 global irra-
diance seen on a horizontal plane. There is a equipment that can be used to measure these
irradiance values at diﬀerent locations and diﬀerent times. One of the instruments used to mea-
sure the global horizontal irradiance is called a pyranometer, which can also measure diﬀuse
or reﬂected irradiance depending on conﬁguration. This instrument is designed to measure the
solar irradiance on a planar surface within short wavelengths of 0.3 µm to 3 µm [11].
5
==PAGE:13==
The instrument used to measure the direct beam (direct normal irradiance) is called pyrhe-
liometer. This is used together with a solar tracker, which follows the Sun’s path throughout the
day. The sunlight will then enter the pyrheliometer through a small window, and a thermopile
inside will convert the heat to an electrical signal which can then be recorded. The wavelength
range here are typically the same as for the pyranometer. The thermopile is an electronic device
which is normally composed of several thermocouples in series and sometimes in parallel. The
thermocouple produce a voltage directly proportional to the temperature diﬀerence of two dis-
similar electrical conductors across the thermal resistance layer, and adding more thermocouple
pairs in series will increase the voltage magnitude [12].
With these two instruments, the diﬀuse irradiance can easily be calculated, but there is an
instrument which can be used together with the pyranometer to measure the diﬀuse irradiance
called rotating shadowband [13]. A pyranometer conﬁgured with a shadow ball are also used
now a days to measure diﬀuse irradiance. This is normally mounted on the sun tracker and to
track the Sun’s position and shade the direct beam [14].
(a)
Figure 2
Picture of a pyranometer, [15].
(b)
Figure 2
Picture of a pyrheliometer, [16].
(c)
Figure 2
Picture of a pyranometer conﬁguration with
shadow ball, [17].
6
==PAGE:14==
2.1.2
Theoretical Calculations of POA
There are many diﬀerent approaches to estimate the plane of array irradiance (POA) from just
the global horizontal irradiance. This is normally done in two diﬀerent steps, through the use of
a decomposition model and transposition model respectively. Depending on which input data
are available, there are various ways of obtaining an estimated POA irradiance. The ﬂowchart
in ﬁgure 3 shows the diﬀerent approaches to take depending on available input data. This lit-
erature review will include some more details and studies of the two steps and diﬀerent models.
Figure 3: Flowchart of how to estimate POA from measured GHI, [18].
Decomposition model
The decomposition model is a way of breaking the global horizontal irradiance into two com-
ponents, diﬀuse horizontal irradiance and direct normal irradiance. There are many diﬀerent
models to choose between when estimating the DNI and DHI from just the GHI and there is no
speciﬁc model which is used as a typical standard. This leads to deviations on the prediction of
DNI and DHI depending on which model used. Some of the most common models are displayed
in the ﬂowchart in ﬁgure 3. The models don’t use equations derived from real physical laws,
but instead use empirical coeﬃcients depending on the location of the measurements. The only
input values common in all of the diﬀerent decomposition models is the clearness index kt which
can be calculated using equation 1 [19].
kt =
GHI
Eacos(Z)
(1)
Where Z is the solar zenith angle, and Ea is the extraterrestrial solar irradiance at the top of
the atmosphere.
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 4: Illustration of the relevant solar angles, [20].
Some of the models also require extra variables such as ambient temperature AmbT, solar
elevation angle SunEl among other things. Table 1 beneath, shows the diﬀerent decomposition
models and the input parameters required for each one [18]. However, since: SunEl = 90◦- Z,
the zenith angle Z will be used throughout the report instead of SunEl as the diﬀerent models
prefers.
The output from the decomposition models would either be the DNI or the DHI, but they
are related to each other.
This means, once one of them is found, the other can easily be
calculated using equation 2.
DHI = GHI −DNIcos(Z)
(2)
Table 1: Decomposition models, [18]
8
==PAGE:16==
Transposition model
These models are used to transpose the solar irradiance on to a plane of array (POA). Also
here, there are many diﬀerent models accepted as an eligible approach. Table 2 lists some of
the commonly used transpositions models.
Table 2: Transposition models, [18]
The plane of array irradiance on the PV module consists normally of three components as
seen in equation 3 below.
POA = POAdirect−beam + POAsky−diffuse + POAground−reflected
(3)
Figure 5: Illustration of the diﬀerent irradiance components on the plane of the PV module [21]
9
==PAGE:17==
The way of estimating the direct beam component are the same for all the diﬀerent models,
as they use the DNI and multiply by the angle of incidence (AOI) as seen in equation 4.
POAdirect−beam = DNI · cos(AOI)
(4)
The AOI is calculated using equation 5.
AOI = cos−1[cos(θZ)cos(θT ) + sin(θZ)sin(θT )cos(θA −θA, array)]
(5)
Where θZ and θA are the zenith and azimuth angle of the Sun, respectively. θT and θA, array
are the tilt and the azimuth angle of the array, respectively. Note that north = 0◦, while south
= 180◦in azimuth. For the solar zenith, the angle is at 0◦when the Sun is at it’s highest and
90◦at the horizon.
The way of estimating the ground reﬂected component is also uniform across the diﬀerent
models, as it only requires measured global irradiance, the reﬂectivity of the ground, albedo,
and the tilt angle of the array, θT . The equation for estimating this component is shown in
equation 6.
POAground−reflected = GHI · albedo · (1 −cos(θT ))
2
(6)
Where albedo is the ratio between the irradiance that gets reﬂected from the ground, and the
total irradiance measured on the same ground surface.
When estimating the sky diﬀuse radiation, the diﬀerent transposition models diﬀerentiate
between the approach for estimating the three diﬀerent components in the sky dome, isotropic
component, circumsolar component, and the horizon brightening component.
The Perez Sky Diﬀuse Model is one of the most commonly used models, and which is also
the default model in the PV simulation software called PVsyst, which will be discussed in more
details in the later chapters.
The Perez model is known as more complex than the other models, as this model include dif-
ferent coeﬃcients to estimate the diﬀerent components [22].
The form of the model is shown in equation 7.
POAsky−diffuse = DHI ·
"
(1 −F1)
1 + cos(θT )
2

+ F1
a
b

+ F2sin(θT )
#
(7)
Where F1 and F2 are functions which describe the circumsolar and horizon brightening compo-
nents, respectively. a = max

0, cos(AOI)

, and b = max

cos(85◦), cos(θZ)

10
==PAGE:18==
F1 and F2 are found using equations 8 and 9.
F1 = max

0,
 
f11 + f12∆+
 πθZ
180◦

f13
!

(8)
F2 = f21 + f22∆+
 πθZ
180◦

f23
(9)
∆is deﬁned as follows:
∆= DHI · AMa
Ea
(10)
Where AMa is absolute air mass.
The air mass can also be estimated using various of
models, but the simplest way has shown to be quite accurate for zenith angles less than 80◦.
Equation 11 shows how the air mass can be estimated using the simple model.
AMa =
1
cos(θZ)
(11)
The diﬀerent f coeﬃcients are deﬁned for diﬀerent bins of clearness, ε, which is calculated
using equation 12.
ε =
(DHI+DNI)
DHI
+ κθ3
Z
1 + κθ3
Z
(12)
The constant, κ, is set at value 5.535 ×10−6 for angles in degrees, and 1.041 for angles in
radians.
There are diﬀerent ε bins deﬁned depending on which values of clearness, ε, found. The diﬀerent
ε bins are deﬁned according to table 3.
Table 3: Sky clearness bin, [23].
11
==PAGE:19==
The f coeﬃcients are deﬁned depending on which ε bin, as displayed in table 4.
Table 4: Perez model coeﬃcients for irradiance, [23].
A study from Sandia National Laboratories performed an evaluation of the accuracy of
diﬀerent transposition and decomposition models. Their study was based on DHI and GHI
measurement from diﬀerent locations around in the US, and compare these measurement to the
most common decomposition and transposition models. The transposition model they found
to have the lowest rRMSD was the Perez model, which had a rRMSD of between 4% and 6%
from the measured POA, compared to the isotropic model, which had a rRMSD between 5.5%
and 9.5%.
12
==PAGE:20==
2.2
Photovoltaic Technology
Photovoltaics (PV) is a term used about the science of converting sunlight into electricity (DC).
A PV system consist of diﬀerent components which are required in the process of generating
electrical power from the sunlight.
They are employed using solar panels, which consist of
solar cells that generate the current. This chapter is aimed at brieﬂy describing the process
surrounding PV and the relation between the solar irradiance and the output DC power.
Figure 6: From a solar cell to a solar array, [24].
2.2.1
Solar Cells
A solar module normally consists of 60 solar cells electrically connected together in series. Each
solar cell converts the power in the solar irradiance to electricity in DC form. This is done in
three steps. Firstly, the photons in the sunlight hits the semiconducting material in the solar cell
and gets absorbed. Secondly, this will then cause an excitation of the electrons and some of the
electrons will move through the semiconducting layers until it reaches an electrode connected
to a load. Thirdly, with the load connected to the solar cell, the electrons can ﬂow through the
load as current, and then back again to the solar cell [25]. The schematic ﬁgure of the solar
cell is shown as an electrical circuit in ﬁgure 7. IL is the photo-generated current source, ID is
the current through the semiconducting material represented as a diode, while Rsh and Rs are
shunt and series reactances represented in the real behavior of a solar cell.
13
==PAGE:21==
Figure 7: Equivalent circuit of a solar cell, [26].
The ideal circuits of a solar cell is shown in ﬁgure 8a and 8b. Figure 8a is showing the open
circuit condition, meaning no current is ﬂowing through the circuit, but still producing max-
imum voltage. Figure 8b is showing the short circuit condition, producing maximum current,
but no voltage.
(a)
Figure 8
Ideal solar cell at
open circuit condition, [27]
.
(b)
Figure 8
Ideal solar cell at short circuit condition, [27]
.
The IV-curve characteristics of the solar cell is shown in ﬁgure 9.
Figure 9: I-V and P-V curve a solar cell, [28].
ISC is the point on the y-axis is where the short circuit occurs and there’s no voltage, and VOC
is the point at the x-axis where there’s an open circuit and no current ﬂow. The red curve is
14
==PAGE:22==
the output current as a function of the output voltage within the cells power producing region.
The blue curve shows the power as a function of the voltage, since power is current multiplied
by voltage. The point at where the solar cell is at max power is seen at Pmax. Therefore, the
maximum power point for operating the solar cell would be at the voltage level of Pmax. These
points are indicated as Vmpp, Impp and Pmpp. As the solar cell may be hit by diﬀerent amount
of sunlight and exposed to diﬀerent temperatures, this will lead to diﬀerent characteristics of
the curve. This may have a maximum power point at a diﬀerent operating location on the I-V
curve due to external conditions, which would need a new maximum power point for the new
maximum power. This is done by the maximum power point tracker (MPPT) which with the
help of DC-DC converters, can change the impedance seen by the PV module by changing the
duty ratio of the DC-DC converter. This will therefore shift the operating point on the I-V curve
to this changed impedance seen by the PV module to operate at the maximum power point.
The tracking device will therefore track any change in MPP, and keep changing the impedance
to it’s MPP. This is normally done at the solar inverter, so that after the inverter has added all
the series connected PV modules together to form an I-V curve, the MPPT at the inverter will
track the MPP for the whole string and operate at this point. Since PV modules basically are
many solar cells connected in series, and a PV string are many PV modules connected in series,
the equivalent I-V curve for a stringed system would be the sum of the diﬀerent I-V curves.
Since the current is the same in a series connection, just the voltages are added. This is also
shown in the graph below, while the current always being limited to the weakest current.
Figure 10: I-V curve for a PV modules with solar cells in series, [29].
15
==PAGE:23==
2.2.2
PV Modules
As mentioned, a PV module is basically multiple solar cells (normally 60 or 72 for crystalline
silicon cells) connected together in series. There are today many diﬀerent types of PV modules,
as they may vary in the kind of solar cell materials. Today, crystalline silicon (c-Si) is the most
dominant type which accounts for over 90% of the PV modules produced worldwide. There are
both multicrystalline and monocrystalline [30]. The rest consist of thin-ﬁlm technologies made
of either cadmium telluride, amorphous silicon and CIGS [31]. The diﬀerent types diﬀers in
eﬃciency and cost due to the material diﬀerences and method of mass production. Monocrys-
talline are well known as the most eﬃcient PV module in the market with eﬃciencies between
15-22%, and also highest lifetime expectancy. They are also the most expensive between the
diﬀerent types [32]. However, eﬃciencies may vary for diﬀerent locations as temperature and
solar irradiance level has a huge impact on the PV module performance. Each PV module has
diﬀerent I-V curve characteristics depending on the solar irradiance and cell temperature, and
the diﬀerent modules have diﬀerent conversion rate for diﬀerent irradiance levels and also how
they respond to diﬀerent ambient temperatures. Therefore to be able to compare the diﬀerent
module types, all PV modules are rated accordingly to standard test conditions (STC). This
is the major testing conditions for solar panel output performance, and are widely accepted by
most of solar panels manufacturers. The speciﬁed testing conditions are when cell temperature
is at 25◦C, solar irradiance of 1000 W/m2 and air mass 1.5 spectrum. All solar panels rated
under STC are therefore tested under these conditions and normally it is the manufactures that
does the performance tests [33].
2.2.3
Energy Losses Surrounding the PV Module
From the point where the irradiance hits the PV modules, to the point where the DC current
ﬂows between modules, there will be some energy losses related. It is therefore important to
understand how these losses arises and understand their signiﬁcance in a PV system. This
chapter will therefore describe some of the more notable losses, and their relevance in a PV
system.
Angle incidence reﬂection loss
When the plane collector is not facing directly towards the sun, some of the irradiance will be
reﬂected across the face of the PV module, air molecules etc. This is also illustrated in ﬁgure
11.
16
==PAGE:24==
Figure 11: Figure of reﬂection losses due to incidence angle, [34].
To be able to represent this loss, an "incidence angle modiﬁer" (IAM) is deﬁned. This loss
derives from the spectral characteristics of the PV module and the IAM will diﬀer depending
on the glass coating, transmittance capability of the material etc. Again, there are various of
methods to represent this loss, but the default method PVsyst uses is called ASHRAE IAM
Model and is one of the simple models. The equation is seen at equation 13.
IAMB = 1 −b0

1
cos(θAOI) −1

(13)
Where b0 is a value usually speciﬁed for the speciﬁc module type. According to PVsyst mea-
surements on real crystalline modules, this value was indicated at 0.05 [34]. The IAM as a
function of AOI will look like the graph in ﬁgure 12 below.
Figure 12: Graph of IAM as function of AOI for diﬀerent coatings, [34].
17
==PAGE:25==
Thermal losses
The voltage in a solar cell increases with lower temperature. That is the reason why PV system
should be closely monitored during cold seasons, as the VOC increases with a ratio known as the
temperature coeﬃcient. This value is normally found in the data sheet of the PV module, and
is normally given in the unit [%/◦C]. Eﬀectively, the eﬃciency of the PV module will change
with the ratio of the temperature coeﬃcient per 1 degree of change from the cell temperature at
STC, 25◦C [35]. Clearly, temperature can have a big impact on the energy yield given extreme
temperature conditions. The cell temperature can be calculated using equations 14.
Tc = Ta + αEPOA(1 −etam)
U0 + U1 · WS
(14)
where:
Tc: Cell temperature (◦C)
Ta: Ambient temperature (◦C)
α: Adsorption coeﬃcient of the module
EPOA: Irradiance incident on the plane of the module (W/m2)
Etam: Eﬃciency of the PV module
U0: Constant heat transfer component (W/m2K)
U1: Convective heat transfer component (W/m3sK)
WS: Wind speed (m/s)
This is the model used by PVsyst, and they have some suggested values for the thermal loss fac-
tors U0 and U1, depending on the mounting mode of the modules and level of insulation on the
back side. U0 is set at 29 W/m2K for free-standing systems with air ventilation when assuming
average wind speed of 3 m/s, and at 15 W/m2K for a system with fully insulated backsheet. U1
is by default set at 0 since assuming average wind speed of 3 m/s, but when reliable wind data
is available, it set at 1.2 W/m3sK and U0 is set at 25 W/m2K for a free-standing system [36].
18
==PAGE:26==
Mismatch losses
Most of panels today includes three bypass diodes in parallel with three cell strings in a mod-
ule, as can be seen in ﬁgure 13. They are used to reduce the mismatch losses between modules
within a string and these are standard on nearly all PV modules today.
Figure 13: Scheme of PV module with bypass diodes, [37].
The purpose of the bypass diode is to create a current pathway around a cell, in the event
where a cell is faulty or open-circuited [38]. As all the solar cells are connected in series, a faulty
cell would lead to the whole module (and eventually the whole string) would be limited to this
reduced cell current. In this case, the bypass diodes then opens a passage for the current to
ﬂow around the shaded cell string and deliver the same current to the other cells to maintain
the string current level, though with a reduced voltage at the output [39].
Under the condition in a string, when one or several modules are shaded, the MPPT tracker
has to ﬁnd a new MPP. This is because current limitations in a string causes for a reduced I-V
curve characteristic, and a new operating point for the MPP needs to be found to maximize the
power output under the new conditions. During strong shading, the P-V curve may show two
diﬀerent peaks, the global maximum when operating at low voltage, and local maximum when
operating at high voltage. These are illustrated in ﬁgure 14.
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 14: Figure of P-V curve of a shaded PV module, [40].
The ﬁrst peak on the P-V curve is when the bypass diode gets activated so the current can
bypass the shaded cell string, and therefore yield a lower total voltage for the whole string.
The second power peak is when the bypass diode don’t get activated, and lets the reduced
current ﬂow through all the cells in the entire string, therefore maintaining the string voltage.
Depending on the inverters MPPT characteristics and in which voltage region it can perform
tracking of the MPP, the string is left with two diﬀerent possible operating points. This is
shown in the ﬁgure 15.
Figure 15: Figure of I-V curve of a shaded PV module, [41].
20
==PAGE:28==
2.3
Inverter Types and Characteristics
Solar inverters is a crucial component in the PV system, as their primary job is to convert
the DC power produced by the modules, to AC power which most heavy household electrical
appliances as washer machine, air conditioning etc. uses. This is also to be compatible with
the grid, if looking at a grid tied system. There are also solar inverter for non-grid tied system,
which are also more used for mobile solutions like in a camping van for instant. The solar
inverters today also has the task of tracking the maximum power point of the PV string or
array.
When talking about grid tied systems, there are three main diﬀerent types of inverters,
central inverter, string inverter, and micro inverters. All have their own characteristics and
operating uses depending on the topology of the PV system. The topology of an inverter might
also diﬀer, as some inverters has transformers, while others do not for instant. An electrical
circuit schematic for an inverter with a transformer is illustrated in ﬁgure 16 below.
Figure 16: Electrical circuit schematic of a high frequency, single-phase inverter,[42].
As seen from the ﬁgure, the DC power needs to go through some diﬀerent electrical com-
ponents for processing before ﬁnally getting converted to AC power. This includes a DC-DC
boost stage, a H-bridge, where the DC current get converted to AC current by switching of
transistors, among others.
These diﬀerent stages naturally leads to some power loss in the
inverter. Normal Euro eﬃciency within solar inverters may vary from 91% to up till 99%, all
depending on topology. Euro eﬃciency is a weighted eﬃciency and is describing the eﬃciency
much better than the peak eﬃciency. This is because the eﬃciency of a solar inverter vary
depending on the ratio between the amount of AC power at the output relative to the rated
power of the inverter. It normally has lower eﬃciency when operating at lower than 5-10% of
rated power, and a peak eﬃciency between 30-60%. So since the PV array never produces at a
21
==PAGE:29==
constant power level over a long period of time, a weighted average is more ﬁtting to represent
the overall eﬃciency of the inverter.
The Euro eﬃciency stated by manufacturers are measured based on nominal voltage level,
and by measuring the conversion eﬃciency for diﬀerent output power levels under that speciﬁc
voltage level. The Euro weighted eﬃciency will therefore vary for diﬀerent voltage levels, as the
conversion eﬃciency might decrease when operating at non-optimal voltage level. The weighting
factors when calculating the Euro eﬃciency is shown in equation 15:
ηEuro = 0.03 · η5% + 0.06 · η10% + 0.13 · η20% + 0.1 · η30% + 0.48 · η50% + 0.2 · η100%
(15)
Central inverter
Central inverters are mostly represented in the commercial and utility-scale market. The rated
powers are normally in the region between 30 KVA and 1 MVA, so they are normally used for
utility scale PV farms [43].
It is common to only have a few solar inverters for a whole PV system, meaning many
diﬀerent strings and arrays needs to be directed into the few central inverters for the ﬁnal
conversion from DC to AC. PV farms usually have parallel strings or arrays which are conﬁgured
to be in the inverters voltage range by having the necessary amount of PV modules in series for a
string. The voltage level at each parallel string is always the same across the strings in parallel,
and will therefore be voltage limited to the string with lowest voltage. With limited MPPT
inputs compared to the amount of PV strings in the central inverter, the MPPT will therefore
track the MPP for multiple strings at a time, and set the maximum power point according to
the summed I-V curve. This may cause a much reduced operating set point wherefore a reduced
power output for the system, should only one or two strings precipitate a reduced current ﬂow
in the string, or a reduced voltage across the string. This inverter is therefore best applied for
a PV system where most of the PV modules face the same orientation and necessarily has the
same power production across the PV panels at all time.
However, modern central inverters are today able to convert with an Euro eﬃciency of 97-
99% [44]. The eﬃciency curve of a central inverter may have a curve as shown in ﬁgure 17.
22
==PAGE:30==
Figure 17: Eﬃciency curve of a central inverter, [45].
The ﬁgure shows how the eﬃciency would diﬀer for diﬀerent output power relative to nom-
inal power. As seen, the peak eﬃciency would not be when the inverter is operating at full
power, but rather at 40% of the rated power. Also seen from the graph, is that the inverter has
a sharp decrease in eﬃciency during output power lower than 10% of rated power indicating
that eﬃciency gets quite low during low light level. This is also one of the factors that has
lead to more PV system oversizing the PV array relative to the inverter, to capture more of
the power produced during the lower irradiance. However, oversizing of PV array may lead to
power clipping when the sun is at peak power. Depending on location, on an annual basis these
losses might be lower than the losses while operating at lower eﬃciency during low light level,
especially at places were full sunlight doesn’t happen regularly. Furthermore, the eﬃciency
depends on the inverters operating voltage, since the nominal voltage which is normally stated
in the data sheet, would yield the highest eﬃciency.
String inverter
String inverters are more common for residential and small farm use, as they are normally
conﬁgured for each string that produce the same amount of power. The rated power varies
from about 1 KVA up to 30 KVA. They normally include up till two diﬀerent MPPT inputs,
which means they can track the MPP of two diﬀerent strings as they may have diﬀerent I-V
curves due to diﬀerences in orientation, potential shadings etc. It is otherwise also normal to
have one string inverter for each string. For residential uses string inverters are more favorable,
as diﬀerent strings or arrays may sometimes be placed on diﬀerent roof orientations, and with
diﬀerent string inverters operating at separate operating points for the diﬀerent orientation, the
23
==PAGE:31==
production on the diﬀerent orientation would optimize independently of each other.
The Euro eﬃciency may however be slightly lower than the central inverter as they range
from 95% to 98%, but because of the lower impact of shading, may still yield higher annual
production. The eﬃciency curve for a string inverter from SMA is shown in ﬁgure 18.
Figure 18: Eﬃciency curve of an central inverter, [46].
Also here, one can observe that the eﬃciency curve has a sharp decrease in eﬃciency below
10%, which means lots of power can be lost at low irradiance level as seen from the eﬃciency
curve. The eﬃciency can also vary by roughly 2%, depending on the voltage level.
Micro inverter
Micro inverters are module level power electronics (MLPE). They are normally rated between
200 to 600 VA, which corresponds to one micro inverter for every one or two modules. With a
MPPT on each module, they are able to maximize the production on each module at all time
independently from the other modules. So they will not be subject to mismatch losses as for
the case with central or string inverters, where the lowest current limits the power ﬂow for the
entire string.
Eﬃciency of the micro inverters tend to vary from diﬀerent manufacturer, but the Euro
eﬃciency range from between 90% to 97%. The picture below, illustrates an example of an
eﬃciency curve for a micro inverter.
24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 19: Eﬃciency curve of a micro inverter, PIGRID250, [47].
The micro inverter normally has lesser eﬃciency than a conventional central or string invert-
ers during operation below 10% of rated inverter power, which may lead to great losses during
low irradiance levels, which would be one of the downsides of the micro inverter.
Power optimizers
Power optimizers, also MLPE, are used to optimize the power at each module. They are not
DC-AC converters which means they still would need a DC-AC inverter in combinations with
the power optimizers. Since a string of PV modules connected in series would be limited by
the weakest current, the power optimizers job is to ﬁnd a solution where the string can still
be producing its maximum power, while having the same string current ﬂowing through all
the modules, even the shaded ones. Diﬀerent power optimizers has diﬀerent approaches and
techniques on how to maximize each module while still having a common current ﬂow through
all modules in the string.
Two of the leading manufacturer of power optimizers, Tigo and
SolarEdge, has their own approach to achieve this.
Tigo oﬀers some power optimizers which are an add-on solution, which are optimizers which
can be added to already mounted PV modules. They also work with diﬀerent kinds of inverters.
The way Tigo optimizes the PV module is by the use of a technique called ’Predictive IV’, which
introduces a parallel connection around the PV module so that some of the current from the
previous module can ﬂow around the weakened module. In this way, the inverter will see the true
MPP for each module, and therefore the whole string, as all modules will produce according to
their own capability and not be limited by other reduced modules. The way this is implemented
is, when a module gets partially shaded, the power optimizer will boost up the current to string
level current, by reducing the voltage at the shaded module. This will allow the module to
keep producing current at the shaded module and send the excess current around the shaded
module through the parallel connection, hence still maintaining the string current level. This is
done by having each power optimizer communicating to one central receiver which controls and
commands the power optimizer on how to operate and set the virtual impedance in the parallel
25
==PAGE:33==
connection to allow the necessary current to ﬂow around [48]. This is a buck only solution,
which means it can only reduce the output voltage [49].
The approach SolarEdge uses, works best when the power optimizers work together with a
string inverter from SolarEdge as well, as they have a diﬀerent type of topology and architecture
in the electrical design than Tigo’s solution. Their optimizers performs MPPT and DC-DC
conversion on each module and since the MPPT is moved to each module, the string inverter
does not have a MPPT and operates at a constant ﬁxed voltage. Each module will therefore
track its MPP and communicate this information to a central receiver which will then set the
operating points for the modules so that each module outputs a common string current, but
with a reduced or increased voltage depending on how the operating points have been set to
keep the Pmpp of the module. So during a partial shading of one of the modules, the power
output will be reduced at that module. For the current not be limiting the other modules, a
new string current will be found to produce maximum power at the ﬁxed voltage level, and
the MPPT on each module will now perform a DC-DC conversion to boost the voltages at
the unshaded modules, and reduce the voltage at shaded modules, to continue producing the
maximum amount of power nonetheless, just at a diﬀerent operating point [50].
26
==PAGE:34==
2.4
Building-Integrated Photovoltaics
Building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPV) have become more popular over the last years, since
PV products are becoming cheaper and has achieved higher eﬃciencies. The working principles
of BIPV is to integrate PV modules into the building structure of a building. In this case,
PV products can replace traditional building materials in parts of the building envelope such
as roofs, façades etc. [51]. By doing this at a wall for instant, the PV products are able to
serve dual purposes, both as a functioning façade and as an electricity generating unit. It is
therefore important for a BIPV system that the PV products which is integrated also fulﬁlls the
"façade" aspect of the system as well, which includes decent aesthetics, decent thermal insula-
tion, good acoustics and other aspects which may come into consideration. This may therefore
lead to some compromise with the energy harvesting aspect of the BIPV. For instant the use
of semi-transparent modules, will probably give better aesthetics and better daylighting, but
will reduce the energy available for electricity conversion. Nonetheless, all of these considered
is what that comprises a good BIPV system, so detailed planning and investigation of all areas
is required in the design stage of a BIPV. An example of a BIPV project is a school located in
Nordhavn, Copenhagen which is also one of the worlds largest BIPV systems.
Figure 20: Copenhagen International School at Nordhavn. Can produce 300 MWh yearly, [52].
There are many ways of integrating a PV panel into the building envelope. How the panel
is integrated into the building, will aﬀect the diﬀerent aspects mentioned above. An example
of how the PV product could be integrated into the façade is shown in ﬁgure 21.
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 21: Figure of a construction system with PV panels integrated into the façade. Axono-
metric view of the system composition, [53].
28
==PAGE:36==
2.5
Simulation Software & Weather Databases
The software used in this thesis to model a PV system is called PVsyst, and was developed by
a graduate from the University of Geneva in 1992. The software is widely used across diﬀerent
institutes and workplaces. It is normally used to model diﬀerent PV farms, PV rooftops or
other installations worldwide. It is capable of doing either a preliminary design of a system or a
more detailed design of a system. The preliminary design is used for a quick and not so detailed
assessment of performance . In the software, there is the option to simulate a PV system which
is either a grid connected, stand alone, or a pumping system.
The few inputs accepted in
the preliminary design are site location, installed capacity, orientation of the planned system,
type of module technology (c-SI, thin ﬁlm etc.), and also a load proﬁle if a stand alone system
with batteries are chosen. However, the preliminary design does not allow to make detailed
alterations to the PV system for instant choice of a speciﬁc inverter, or speciﬁc modules etc.
Therefore it should just be used to make a swift assumption of the yearly performance.
The project design however, allows much more inputs and customization of the PV sys-
tem. PVsyst has a detailed database with most of the available inverters, PV modules, power
optimizers from diﬀerent manufacturers, and the database is continuously updated with new
products. Also here, there is the option to model either a grid connected system, stand alone
system or a pumping system. The grid connected system is the system chosen for the thesis
and therefore it’s features will be elaborated in this section.
Firstly it presents the option to choose a site location with corresponding meteo ﬁles. It
also gives the possibility to choose diﬀerent meteo ﬁles from other sources, or own customized
meteo ﬁles from own weather measurement. Parameters as which transposition models, and
albedo values are also given as an option to alter. However, PVsyst do have default values for
most of the input parameters, so some values should just be altered by a knowledgeable person.
For this project, there were 5 diﬀerent categories for inputs parameters which was set to model
the system, and they are described below.
Orientation
This is where the orientations of the PV panels are set. Both the azimuth and tilt angle of
the plane collectors are conﬁgured under this parameter. There are many diﬀerent tilt types to
choose between, among them are ﬁxed tilted plane and 1- or 2-axis tracking. It is also possible
to choose a system with several orientations. However, the software has a limitation saying that
no more than 8 diﬀerent orientations can be conﬁgured per simulation.
29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 22: Screen shot of input parameters in ’Orientations’
System
Here is where the technical conﬁgurations of the PV module and inverter types are chosen.
First the desired PV module is chosen, and eventually the amount of PV modules. The choice
of using power optimizer at the module is also given. The database includes many diﬀerent
PV module types from diﬀerent manufacturers, and a few power optimizers to choose between.
Type and ratings of inverters are also selected. The amount of PV modules to be connected
together in series or in parallel is chosen here as well. Additionally, up to 8 diﬀerent sub-arrays
can be chosen for simulation of a system.
30
==PAGE:38==
Figure 23: Screen shot of input parameters in ’System’
Detailed losses
This is where the diﬀerent losses are set, such as thermal loss factors, the IAM, mismatch loss
etc. PVsyst usually provide default values according to their measurements and experience, but
they provide options to modify the values, and introduce own measured data if desirable.
Figure 24: Screen shot of input parameters in ’Detailed losses’
31
==PAGE:39==
Near Shadings
Inside here, there is the option to construct a model to investigate the potential shading eﬀect
from near objects close to the PV array. This is done by modelling a 3D model of the array
and of the near objects, such as buildings or trees. It is also possible to import 3D models from
other software platforms, though complex buildings and models should be avoided. How the
strings are set up relative to each other is also possible to design inside here. An eventual shade
factor table, will be calculated within this parameter to compute the eﬀect shading would have
on the yearly yield.
Figure 25: Screen shot of input parameters in ’Near shadings’
32
==PAGE:40==
Module layout
This parameter is modiﬁed to design how the module layout will be. Here, one can choose how
to place each module, and the distances between them. It is also possible to view the I-V curve
of each string.
Figure 26: Screen shot of input parameters in ’Module layout’
33
==PAGE:41==
3
Methodology
3.1
Simpliﬁcations & Justiﬁcations
Due to some limitations within the software, and the complexity of the building construction,
some simpliﬁcations were made. This chapter therefore has the purpose to clarify the simpliﬁ-
cations that were made, and show how they are justiﬁed.
Fixed number of façade modules on each ﬂoor
The top and middle ﬂoor have 72 façade modules, but this amount will probably vary by +/-
one façade module for the other ﬂoors. This is because some of the windows around the building
are bigger than others, therefore requiring more or less windows/façades. For the simplicity of
the model, it is assumed that there are 72 façade modules on all 11 ﬂoors.
Fixed orientation angle between façade modules
A further simpliﬁcation, is that each of the 72 façade modules on each ﬂoor are all displaced
with the same azimuth angle between them. Meaning that there is a 5◦angle between each
façade, as seen in equation 16. This simpliﬁcation will probably lead to a slight underestimation
of solar irradiance on the south side and overestimation on the north side, as the south side
originally has less windows and more façade modules compared to the north side. This diﬀer-
ence has however been disregarded for this thesis. There will also be some diﬀerences regarding
the AOI at each façade if they originally have a slightly diﬀerent azimuth angle relative to the
actual solar elevation, but this has also been disregarded.
Angle between each façade =
360◦
72 façade modules = 5◦/façade module
(16)
Furthermore, for the case of simplicity and the limitations in the software, the façade modules
along a vertical line from the top of the building to the bottom, is modelled as having the same
azimuth orientation. This means that looking at one façade module at each ﬂoor along a vertical
line from the top ﬂoor and down, they will all face the same orientation. In reality, some of
the façade modules are displaced to each other by +/- 5◦. Which is illustrated in ﬁgure 27.
This may have a big impact should the PV modules on the façade be electrically connected in
series along the vertical line. That is because mismatches between the modules will occur, since
in reality they will be facing diﬀerent azimuth orientation and therefore exposed to a diﬀerent
POA irradiance, and the whole string will be limited to the module orientation with the weakest
current.
34
==PAGE:42==
Figure 27: Screen shot of part of the façade on Redmolen
To justify these simpliﬁcations, some PV yield simulations where performed to estimate
the signiﬁcance of this mismatch. A generic PV module and PV inverter with rated power of
3 kWAC were chosen. The building site and DRY data set were used. Firstly, a number of
independent simulations were performed to see how much the annual production would diﬀer
for diﬀerent azimuth and tilt angles. The simulations were performed for tilt angles of 90◦, 85◦,
80◦and 75◦tilt, and with azimuth angles of 15◦change for each simulation. The polar graph in
ﬁgure 28 illustrates the annual production at the diﬀerent orientations, and ﬁgure 29 illustrates
the production mismatch in relative terms to the production at the next adjacent orientation.
35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 28: Yearly production as a function of azimuth. Normalized to the annual production
under 90◦tilt, and 180◦azimuth for a 3 kWAC system.
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 29: Annual production mismatch relative to the production at a 15◦orientation diﬀerence
as a function of azimuth.
Eight independent simulations were performed with azimuth angles of 180◦, 185◦, 270◦, 275◦,
0◦, 5◦, 90◦and 95◦, and a common tilt angle of 90◦. The diﬀerence in yearly production between
the two simulations at the four sides of the building (south, east, north and west) were intended
to represent the mismatch in energy yield due to a possible 5◦displacement between modules in
a vertical string. The results of these simulations are displayed in table 5. The average mismatch
loss of 2.2% will then be added as an additional loss to PVsyst’s default mismatch loss value
to represent the additional mismatch loss due to the orientation displacement. However, this
only applies to the conﬁgurations where mismatch between modules actually inﬂicts losses in
the system.
37
==PAGE:45==
Table 5: Production diﬀerence due to orientation mismatch
Mismatch loss (%)
South orientation (180◦-185◦)
0.1%
West orientation (270◦-275 ◦)
4.2%
North orientation (0◦-5 ◦)
0.6%
East orientation (90◦-95 ◦)
3.9%
Average for whole building
2.2%
Assuming two PV modules per façade module
By utilizing just the rectangular area of the façade module, which is measured to be 3.05 x 1.12
m2, it is assumed to be able to ﬁt two custom made PV modules on each façade with a rating of
295 Wp each. This is because industry standard 60 cell PV modules have an average area of 1.0
m x 1.6 m and 72 cell modules have an average area of 1.0 m x 2.0 m, which don’t precisely ﬁt
onto this façade. This also means that depending on size, cell eﬃciency, spacing between each
cell and module frame size, the rated power of the PV modules that are ultimately installed in
the Redmolen Spidsen building may diﬀer from the 295 Wp used in this thesis.
Assuming fully insulated backsheet
As a worst case scenario, it is assumed that the PV module will be mounted onto a façade
module with no natural air ventilation behind. Therefore the thermal loss factor (described
in section 2.2.3) will be the standard coeﬃcient that PVsyst uses for PV modules with a fully
insulated backsheet (15 W/m2K). Also PVsyst doesn’t take into consideration that the tem-
perature diﬀerence between the top and bottom of the building may be signiﬁcant, as there is
assumed the same temperature regardless of elevation and the diﬀerence in wind speeds that
the top and bottom of the building could be exposed to.
38
==PAGE:46==
3.2
Model Setup
The ﬁrst step in the modelling process was to implement the necessary meteorological meteo
ﬁles from the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI). DMI has publicly available weather mea-
surements from 2001-2010 at six locations in Denmark. These measurements form the DRY,
which is the standardized data set that the Danish energy legislation mandates to be used for
solar PV simulations on Danish buildings. The site location chosen, was the GPS coordinates
of where the actual building will be built, so the sun path used in PVsyst will match the sun
path of the GPS coordinates of the real site location.
Next, the orientation for the system was set.
Due to the limitation of maximum eight
diﬀerent orientations in PVsyst, the model had to be divided into nine segmented submodels
(72 façade/8 orientations) to be simulated. Each model had eight orientations with 5◦azimuth
angle between each orientation, the ﬁrst model had its ﬁrst string oriented at 180◦, and its last
string oriented at 145◦, while the second model went from 140◦to 105◦and so on. The tilt
angle was set at 90◦for all strings in every simulation.
3.3
Design of PV System & System Setup
The next step in the modelling process was to set up the PV system. For this thesis, four diﬀerent
PV conﬁgurations were chosen to analyze the diﬀerence in yearly energy yield. The same solar
panels were used for all the conﬁgurations, but the diﬀerence was in which type of inverters
and power electronics used. This is because the extent of the energy losses from shading and
mismatch, will greatly depend on which inverters and power electronics are used. They all have
diﬀerent topologies and approaches to treat these losses, which will cause diﬀerences in power
production. The diﬀerent conﬁgurations are displayed in table 6 below. The setup procedures
for how the four diﬀerent conﬁgurations were implemented in PVsyst will be elaborated in the
next chapters.
Table 6: Overview of case conﬁgurations
Conﬁguration 1
Conﬁguration 2
Conﬁguration 3
Conﬁguration 4
Inverter type
String inverter w/2 MPPT
String inverter
String inverter
Micro inverter
Inverter manufacturer
SMA
SMA
SolarEdge
Enphase
Power optimizer manufacturer
N/A
Tigo
SolarEdge
N/A
39
==PAGE:47==
3.3.1
Setup for Conﬁguration 1
The desired PV module was chosen to be from the manufacturer, Trina Solar, with a rated
power of 295 Wp as mentioned previously. The module size had to be modiﬁed so that two
modules could ﬁt inside the given size of a façade module. The size of the modules were changed
from 1.650 x 0.992 m to 1.525 x 1.12 m. This way 22 modules could face the same azimuth
angle along the building from top to bottom. For a string inverter with 2 MPPT, it was chosen
to have 11 modules connected to each input. Thus 11 modules in series and two independent
strings, all facing same orientation. The chosen inverter was from SMA, "Sunny Boy 5000-TL",
with a rated power of 5.0 kWAC. It weighs around 16 kg, and the dimensions are (W/H/D) 435
x 470 x 176 mm. PVsyst normally recommends a DC/AC ratio of between 1.25 and 1.3, but this
however may change depending on location and topology of the system. Several simulations
were therefore run, to compare the inverters clipping losses to the inverters eﬃciency losses
during operations, for DC/AC ratio in the range of 1 to 1.6. The DC/AC ratio where the sum
of the clipping loss and the eﬃciency loss under operation was lowest on an annual basis, was
chosen as the best sizing. It was also important to make sure that the maximum voltage and
current ratings of the inverter could withstand the open circuit voltage and the short circuit
current of the PV array. These same settings were applied for all the eight diﬀerent orientations
and the nine diﬀerent submodels. A histogram displaying how many hours of diﬀerent irradiance
level the cite receives in a year, can also be used when sizing the inverter. This will show how
many hours the PV system will be producing at peak power, and at low light levels. With this
information, an estimate of the necessary sizing of inverter compared to the inverter eﬃciency
can be made. A histogram showing the hourly irradiance distribution of GHI measurements
from DRY is shown in ﬁgure 30.
40
==PAGE:48==
Figure 30: Histogram of hourly distribution based on DRY
The next step was to set the parameters for the detailed losses. As mentioned previously, the
thermal loss factor was set at 15 W/m2K. This value describes the heat transfer capability of the
radiant energy (which does not get converted into electricity) between the solar cell and the air.
This value is used for a system with a fully insulated backsheet. This value assumes a constant
wind speed of 3 m/s, and therefore has no wind dependency component in the equation. This
value is also used for the other three conﬁgurations. Furthermore, the mismatch was set at
3.2% which is the default mismatch loss of 1% PVsyst uses (soiling, diﬀerence in degrading,
cell binning etc.) plus the average angular mismatch loss of 2.2% due to orientation diﬀerences.
Otherwise no other loss factors were modiﬁed from PVsyst’s default values.
A 3D model of the building was thereafter made. This was done by using PVsyst’s tool
for constructing a 3D model. The building constructed was the simpliﬁed building, with the
above mentioned assumptions. A building obstacle was also modelled in the scene to represent
the buildings which would be built northwest of the Redmolen Spidsen and contribute to some
of the shadow casts. Because of the limitation of maximum eight orientations, nine exact 3D
models for the nine submodels had to built with diﬀerent array orientations on the building.
This 3D model was used for all the four diﬀerent conﬁgurations. The modelled scene of one of
the submodels is seen in ﬁgure 31.
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 31: 3D model in PVsyst of Redmolen for Submodel 9 with orientation from 220◦-185◦
The placement of each module was the last thing designed for the conﬁguration. For each
orientation, 22 modules were placed along a vertical line with zero spacing between. One string
for the top half, and the second string at the bottom half.
All of the settings were applied for all nine diﬀerent submodels. An overview of the speciﬁ-
cations for the whole PV system is shown in table 7 below.
Table 7: Speciﬁcations for Conﬁguration 1
Module Speciﬁcations
Inverter Speciﬁcations
Manufacturer and model
Trina Solar - TSM-295DD05A.08(II)
SMA - Sunny Boy 5000 TL-21
Number of modules/inverters
1584
72
Eﬃciency [%]
17
96.511
Global DC power rating [kW]
467
N/A
Global AC power rating [kW]
N/A
360
DC/AC ratio
1.30
Mismatch loss [%]
3.2
(1) Euro weighted eﬃciency.
42
==PAGE:50==
3.3.2
Setup for Conﬁguration 2
The same inverter and power rating that was used in Conﬁguration 1 was used for this conﬁg-
uration as well. The diﬀerence with Conﬁguration 2 is that a power optimizer was added onto
each PV module. The power rating of the power optimizer is 375 Wp. The power optimizer
weighs 0.67 kg and has dimensions of 178.5 x 134 x 25.5 mm.
In the parameter for detailed losses, just the value for mismatch losses was changed. This
was changed to zero, as there are no mismatch losses associated when using power optimizers
[54].
The same 3D model shown in Fig 31 was used here as well. The same goes for the module
layout.
The speciﬁcations for the global system is shown in table 8 below.
Table 8: Speciﬁcations for Conﬁguration 2
Module Speciﬁcations
Inverter Speciﬁcations
Power Optimizer
Speciﬁcations
Manufacturer and model
Trina Solar - TSM-295DD05A.08(II)
SMA - Sunny Boy 5000 TL-21
Tigo - MMJ-ES50
Number of modules/inverters
1584
72
1584
Eﬃciency [%]
17
96.511
99.261
Global DC power rating [kW]
467
N/A
594
Global AC power rating [kW]
N/A
360
N/A
DC/AC ratio
1.30
N/A
Mismatch loss [%]
N/A
(1)Euro weighted eﬃciency.
43
==PAGE:51==
3.3.3
Setup for Conﬁguration 3
The chosen inverter for Conﬁguration 3 was a string inverter from SolarEdge. This conﬁguration
also included a power optimizer from the same manufacturer. The best sizing of the inverter was
also found to be a power rating of 5 kWAC. The inverter weighs 9 kg and with the dimensions
280 x 370 x 142 mm, while the power optimizers weigh 0.63 kg and the dimensions were 128 x
152 x 28 mm. The inverter rating was also found through the same way as for Conﬁguration
1, by running several simulations and compare the annual clipping and eﬃciency losses. The
rating of the power optimizer was 320 Wp.
The parameters for the detailed losses, were not changed from Conﬁguration 2, which means
a thermal factor for fully insulated backsheet, and zero mismatch loss was implemented in this
model.
The 3D model and module layout stays unchanged in this conﬁguration as well.
Speciﬁcations for Conﬁguration 3 are displayed in table 9 below.
Table 9: Speciﬁcations for Conﬁguration 3
Module Speciﬁcations
Inverter Speciﬁcations
Power Optimizer
Speciﬁcations
Manufacturer and model
Trina Solar - TSM-295DD05A.08(II)
SolarEdge - SE5000H
SolarEdge - P320
Number of modules/inverters
1584
72
1584
Eﬃciency [%]
17
99.021
99.161
Global DC power rating [kW]
467
N/A
507
Global AC power rating [kW]
N/A
360
N/A
DC/AC ratio
1.30
N/A
Mismatch loss [%]
N/A
(1) Euro weighted eﬃciency.
44
==PAGE:52==
3.3.4
Setup for Conﬁguration 4
In this conﬁguration, the array set up was slightly diﬀerent. Instead of string inverters with
multiple PV modules connected in series, the 22 PV modules were connected as 22 separate
strings with one micro inverter connected to each PV module. The micro inverter chosen for
this installation was a micro inverter from Enphase with a power rating of 0.25 kWAC. This
inverter weighs 1.66 kg, and the dimensions are 179 x 217 x 28 mm This found inverter sizing
was higher than the ones found for the other conﬁgurations when looking at the whole system.
This is because, with no mismatch and optimizer losses subject to a micro inverter, the virtual
array power will be higher at the output of the module, and therefore have a higher peak power
delivered to the inverter. The clipping losses here, will therefore be greater than for the other
conﬁgurations, and after comparing the annual clipping losses with the operating eﬃciency
losses, a higher AC rating was found beneﬁcial.
The detailed losses parameters was the same as for Conﬁguration 2 & 3, 15 W/m2K for the
thermal loss factor and zero mismatch loss.
The 3D model of the building was kept unchanged, but the module layout was designed
slightly diﬀerent. The only diﬀerence from the previous conﬁgurations was that each module
was now a separate string. The placement and spacing of each module was still the same as for
the other conﬁgurations.
An overview of the speciﬁcations for this conﬁguration is shown in table 10 below.
Table 10: Speciﬁcations for Conﬁguration 4
Module Speciﬁcations
Inverter Speciﬁcations
Manufacturer and model
Trina Solar - TSM-295DD05A.08(II)
Enphase - M250-72
Number of modules/inverters
1584
1584
Eﬃciency [%]
17
96.271
Global DC power rating [kW]
467
N/A
Global AC power rating [kW]
N/A
396
DC/AC ratio
1.18
Mismatch loss [%]
N/A
(1) Euro weighted eﬃciency.
The eﬃciency curves that PVsyst uses for the diﬀerent inverters, which also were used in these
simulations are shown in ﬁgure 32.
45
==PAGE:53==
Figure 32: Eﬃciency curves of the diﬀerent inverters
46
==PAGE:54==
4
Results
The ﬁnal results obtained from the simulations of the four conﬁgurations will be presented
in this chapter.
The result will include the annual energy yields and some of the various
losses associated with the conﬁgurations. The system costs and an economic comparison of the
diﬀerent systems will also be shown.
4.1
Annual Electrical Energy Yield from PV System
The conﬁguration which yielded the most electrical energy over a year was Conﬁguration 3,
which was the SolarEdge system. The annual energy yield was found to be 220 MWh, which
meets 87.6% of the total target for on site generation. The graph in ﬁgure 33, displays the
energy yields of the diﬀerent conﬁgurations and the percent of the total target each one meets.
The diﬀerences in total energy output are mainly driven by the diﬀerences in inverter and mis-
match losses as will be shown in the next sub chapter.
Figure 33: Graph of the annual electricity production
47
==PAGE:55==
4.1.1
Global Energy Losses from PV System
The primary energy losses associated with the diﬀerent array conﬁgurations are displayed in
ﬁgure 34.
The MLPE conversion loss represents both the global inverter loss and power optimizer
eﬃciency losses. The global inverter loss includes all inverter losses such as clipping losses,
operating eﬃciency losses, power losses due to min/max voltage, etc. Only Conﬁguration 2 and
3 has power optimizers, so for the other conﬁgurations, the MLPE conversion loss is just the
global inverter loss. For the two MLPE systems, the inverter loss is the bottom part of the
graph, and the power optimizer loss is the top part of the graph. Conﬁguration 3 shows the
lowest MLPE conversion loss of just 9.60 MWh in total, where 3.81 MWh is losses from the
inverter while 5.79 MWh is losses from the power optimizer. Conﬁguration 2 has the biggest
MLPE conversion loss of 18.26 MWh annually.
The electrical shading loss, is all the electrical energy losses the PV array are subject to due
to shading. That includes mismatches between modules due to shading, voltage drop due to
activation of bypass diodes, etc. The electrical shading loss is calculated as follows:
Electrical shading loss = Pmpp(unshaded) −PLoss(Irradiance) −Pmpp(Shaded)
(17)
The conﬁguration with the highest electrical shading loss is Conﬁguration 1. This is the
only conﬁguration that does not perform MPPT on the modular level. The electrical shading
loss here is 23.6% greater than Conﬁguration 3. This means that by using Conﬁguration 3, the
electrical shading loss will reduce by 1.74 MWh compared to Conﬁguration 1 which is equal to
0.83% of the total energy yield of Conﬁguration 1. Also note that Conﬁguration 1 is the only
system that has mismatch losses and the size of the loss relative to it’s annual production is
3.5%.
48
==PAGE:56==
Figure 34: Graph of diﬀerent electric energy losses at each conﬁguration
49
==PAGE:57==
4.2
Annual Solar Insolation on PV Modules
The results presented in this section, show the simulation results of the annual insolation yield
on the diﬀerent orientations of one conﬁguration, as the simulation will show the same solar
insolation incident on the PV modules independently of inverter choice. The side that receives
the most irradiance are the panels with orientation facing south, which also support the results
found in ﬁgure 28. This is also the side that has most near shading losses. Figure 35, shows the
direct, diﬀuse and albedo insolation received at the collector planes over the course of a year.
Results shows that 13% of the annual global solar insolation is lost due to near shading. Figure
35 also shows how the near shading loss is distributed over the diﬀerent orientations.
Figure 35: Annual solar insolation and near shading loss on collector plane
50
==PAGE:58==
4.2.1
Irradiance & Power Losses at PV Module
Angle of incidence reﬂection losses
The losses due to the IAM at diﬀerent hours on a typical day are displayed in the graphs in
ﬁgure 36 and 37. The direct beam component is also shown in the secondary y-axis, as the
magnitude of this component has a great impact on the IAM losses. The losses are shown
in percentage of the irradiance incident on the PV modules. The results are taken from the
simulation at Submodel 1 with the orientation facing south, with azimuth angles between 180◦
and 145◦.
Figure 36: Angle of incidence reﬂection losses and solar irradiance as a function of time, on a
typical sky diﬀused day
The greatest IAM loss happens in the hour of 6AM, which is also the hour where the direct
beam component peaks. The loss here is 7% of the global irradiance on the collector plane.
51
==PAGE:59==
Figure 37: Angle of incidence reﬂection losses and solar irradiance as a function of time, on a
typical clear sky day
The IAM loss in a clear sky day, peaks during the afternoon when the Sun is about to set
at the west orientation, and therefore has a low AOI. The loss here is around 2.3% at its peak.
52
==PAGE:60==
Thermal losses
The graph in ﬁgure 38, presents the losses and gains due to the temperature. Cell temperatures
under 25◦will give a higher production from what assumed at STC, and will be seen as negative.
It is important to be aware that PVsyst does not do a thermal calculation for each PV module
individually, but assumes the same temperature for all PV modules, and calculates it as a whole
system. The loss peaks at 11AM with a loss of 12% when the global incident irradiance and
cell temperature also peaks.
Figure 38: Graph of PV losses due to temperature change
53
==PAGE:61==
4.3
System Economy
In this section, an economic evaluation of the system was performed. A comparison of the
diﬀerent system costs were made, which includes the costs related to purchasing and installing
the system. All the prices used, were based on ﬁndings which NREL released in their report
"U.S. Solar Photovoltaic System Cost Benchmark: Q1 2017" [55]. These prices are based on
a roof mount system across the diﬀerent states in US, so installations cost will most likely
be costlier for a BIPV system, and taxes and other prices might vary between prices in US
compared to in Europe, since the prices might be cheaper here in Denmark in some cases [56].
The cost of also adding a glass additive for better aesthetics, was included [57]. The glass
additive from SwissINSO is called Kromatix and has been used on various BIPV projects around
in Europe. The glass uses nanotechnology to make the glasses in diﬀerent colors, without us-
ing any pigments or dyes. With a variety of colors to choose between, the aesthetics can be
signiﬁcantly improved without loosing too much of the eﬃciency. There are some extra trans-
mittance losses compared to a standard PV module, and depending on the color of glass module,
SwissINSO promises an average transmittance of between 85% and 90% [58]. However, these
losses were not included in the PVsyst simulations.
The prices used were assumed for a commercial system, and the system parameters and cate-
gories are described in table 11. Not all prices were obtained for a commercial system, so the
ratio between the cost for a micro inverter conﬁguration and a string inverter within a residen-
tial system, was applied to the price for a string inverter conﬁguration in a commercial system,
to estimate the price for a micro inverter conﬁguration in a commercial system. The same was
done for a DC optimizer conﬁguration. However, this was not done to the inverter cost, but
just the other cost categories. This is because the cost of the micro inverter component will
most likely be the same whether it is a residential or a commercial system.
54
==PAGE:62==
Table 11: Description of inputs and cost categories
Category
Description
Module cost
Gate factory price
Kromatix glass cost
Gate factory price
Inverter cost
Gate factory price. Prices were originally given in USD/Wac, but were
converted to USD/Wdc by using a standard DC/AC ratio of 1.15
Power optimizer cost
Gate factory price
BOS cost
Balancing of system - Conductors,
switches, fuses, monitoring system, etc.
EPC overhead cost
Costs and fees associated with
engineering, procurement and construction
Install labor cost
Labor rate for installation of system
Developer overhead cost
Includes ﬁxed overhead expenses such as
payroll, travel, facilities, insurance, administration, etc.
Net proﬁt cost
Includes a proﬁt on all costs including
hardware costs, installation, EPC overhead, etc.
The system which had the highest total system cost was Conﬁguration 4 which had a cost
of 2.34 USD/WDC. This is mostly due to the higher inverter cost per Wp, even though the
installation cost was cheaper. The cheapest was Conﬁguration 4 with a cost of 2.05 USD/WDC.
The full comparison can be seen in the graph from ﬁgure 39.
An alternative way of comparing the economic beneﬁts of the diﬀerent scenarios is to look at
the cost of the total system over the lifetime compared to the value of the energy production over
the lifetime. The simple levelized cost of energy (LCOE), was the indicator used for the purpose.
To calculate the LCOE, an online calculator was used, [59]. The inputs to the calculator were
the following:
55
==PAGE:63==
Figure 39: U.S. benchmark: commercial system cost (USD/WDC)
– CapEx cost as seen in ﬁgure 39.
– Maintenance and operational cost of 15 USD/kWDC-yr, from NREL’s report [55].
– Lifetime of 25 years.
– Annual energy production as seen in ﬁgure 33, with a yearly degradation of 0.75%, [55].
– 15% decrease in annual energy production due to the transmittance loss of Kromatix glass.
– One time replacement of inverters, except Conﬁguration 4 since lifetime of a micro inverter
is 25 years.
– Discount rate chosen at 4%, [60].
The conﬁguration which showed the lowest LCOE was Conﬁguration 1, with a cost of 0.430
USD/kWh. Otherwise, the micro inverter still had the highest LCOE of 0.467 USD/kWh even
without the cost of replacing the inverters. This is mostly due to the high capital cost related
to a micro inverter which is still more than double the price of a string inverter. The results
are also displayed in ﬁgure 40.
56
==PAGE:64==
Figure 40: LCOE of the diﬀerent conﬁgurations
57
==PAGE:65==
5
Sensitivity Analysis
This part of the report, will have the purpose to see how the overall PV system would be af-
fected after some slight changes of some key parameters, since some input parameters might
aﬀect the performance of the PV system more than others. A sensitivity analysis is therefore
a great way of studying these eﬀects. The analyses were performed on Conﬁguration 3, the
SolarEdge system.
The ﬁrst parameter that was modiﬁed was the IAM. Throughout the project, the IAM given by
the manufacturer of the PV module was used for the simulations. However, an interesting study
would be to further investigate how diﬀerent types of glass coating could enhance the overall
energy yield. Two types of textured glass known to enhance light transmission, were chosen to
simulate - Albarino P (deep pyramidal structure) and Satin (diﬀuse structure). After simulat-
ing both glasses with Conﬁguration 3, the Satin glass showed the best performance. With a
42.33% decrease in AOI reﬂection losses, the annual energy yield increased by 1.5%. Likewise,
Albarino P had a decrease in reﬂection loss of 31.2% leading to an increase in annual energy
yield of 1.1%. The results are also displayed in ﬁgure 41. These losses assumes that the loss
at normal incident for these textured glass types are the same as for a standard glass module.
Meaning that the eventual gains in transmittance at normal incidence which the textured glass
types would in reality have, were not accounted for here. The AOI-curves are also displayed in
ﬁgure 42.
58
==PAGE:66==
Figure 41: Results from sensitivity analysis 1
59
==PAGE:67==
Figure 42: Incidence angle modiﬁer for diﬀerent glass types
The second sensitivity analysis was done to see how cell temperature aﬀects the yearly
performance. This was done by changing the thermal loss factor, which represents the PV array
with diﬀerent convecting heat exchange capabilities, and observe how the annual performance
would change. With the use of the wind velocity data, the U1 value in equation 13 was changed
from 0 to 1.2 W/m3sK and the U0 value was changed from 15 W/m2K to ﬁrst 25 and then 20
W/m2K. These two values are what PVsyst uses for a system which has air circulation on both
sides, and a semi-integrated system with an air duct behind, respectively. The system with
convecting capabilities equivalent to air circulation on both sides, had the highest decrease in
energy loss due to temperature, with now a gain of 3 MWh compared to operation under STC,
while before having a loss of 5.8 MWh for a system with fully insulated backsheet. With this
leading to an increase in annual energy yield of 4.4%. This is also displayed in ﬁgure 43.
60
==PAGE:68==
Figure 43: Results from sensitivity analysis 2
The ﬁrst sensitivity analysis supports the fact that there can be a some gains by replacing
the standard glass module to other glass types aimed in enhancing the light transmission. Satin,
which has a diﬀuse structure, would be the best performing glass type.
The second sensitivity analysis, shows that cell temperature has a great impact on the yearly
performance. By implementing some some kind of cooling or heat transfer on the back sheet
of the module, there could instead be some energy gains, because of PV modules gets more
eﬃcient when the cell temperature is operating at lower temperature than STC.
61
==PAGE:69==
6
Analysis & Discussion
From the results in chapter 4.1, Conﬁguration 3 was found to give the highest annual energy
yield. With an achievement of 220 MWh/year, this stood for 87.6% of the projected energy
requirement of 251 MWh/year.
The conﬁguration which had the poorest performance was
Conﬁguration 1, which only produced 83.6% of the projected target. This deﬁcit in energy
production comes from both the high electrical shading loss and mismatch losses, while Con-
ﬁguration 3 performed better by having the least energy losses. The combination of SolarEdge
power optimizers with their high eﬃcient string inverter, showed that the losses associated with
the added power optimizers still gave great beneﬁts by completely eliminating the mismatch
losses. Moving the MPPT to each module and performing the DC-DC conversion at the module
instead of the inverter, and operating the inverter at a constant ﬁxed voltage, proved really ben-
eﬁcial as the less power loss is due to the reduced amount of magnetic and cooling components
in the inverter [61].
In total, 13% of the annual insolation is lost due to shading. The shading occurs because of
the 32◦horizontal tilt of the façade module from the wall surface, which since is not laying ﬂat
on the circular building but is pointing slightly outwards, will cause the adjacent façade to block
some of the sunlight for the other façade next to it. Submodel 6 and 7 showed more shading
losses than 8 and 9 respectively because of the building object next to Redmolen Spidsen is
placed on that side, and will naturally cast some additional shading.
An important observations from ﬁgure 34, is that none of the conﬁgurations truly shows
a great reduction in the electrical shading loss. Even though Conﬁguration 3 had a decrease
in electrical shading loss of 23.6% compared to Conﬁguration 1, the beneﬁt of the 1.74 MWh
in loss reduction only accounts for 0.83% of the annual production of Conﬁguration 1. The
reason being that even though the shading mismatch losses will be eliminated, shading would
still cause losses due to bypassing all the other cells that otherwise would be able to produce
electricity. The ideal solution would be to have bypass diodes on every single cell, but this
would also lead to a great voltage drop across all the extra bypass diodes, which would cause
extra power loss, and in reality be too expensive to implement.
An additional observation from the graph in ﬁgure 33, is that Conﬁguration 2 barely out-
performs Conﬁguration 1 even though Conﬁguration 2 also implements power optimizers on
each module to eliminate mismatch losses. Figure 34 shows that the system suﬀers more op-
timizer loss than Conﬁguration 3, even though Tigo has stated a higher Euro eﬃciency than
SolarEdge. The reason for the higher weighted Euro eﬃciency for the Tigo system, is that
the Euro eﬃciency only states the eﬃciency of the power optimizer when operating under the
nominal voltage level. For the SolarEdge, it would mean the weighted eﬃciencies represents
the results from running the tests while operating at the same voltage level, but diﬀerent loads.
The same would be for the Tigo system, which in reality means while the optimizer is not doing
any voltage regulation for the power optimizing. When a module gets shaded, the optimizer
62
==PAGE:70==
would operate at a diﬀerent voltage level to compensate for the reduced current and maintain
the maximum power. The eﬃciency while operating at this new voltage level is not represented
in the Euro weighted eﬃciency. So basically, the weighted Euro eﬃciency is the eﬃciency when
the optimizer is not doing anything, but merely letting the current ﬂow through the optimizer.
However, when the Tigo optimizer is boosting the current up by regulating the voltage, it ac-
tually has a lower conversion eﬃciency than when SolarEdge is regulating the voltage. Since
SolarEdge can operate the optimizer at diﬀerent voltage levels without as much energy losses,
this comes out having the lowest annual eﬃciency loss for this site. Also to be clariﬁed is that
for the SolarEdge system, when there is a partial shading of just one module in a string, all
the modules in the string needs to work together to either regulate their voltages up or down
to ensure the same string current level. For the Tigo system however, when there is only one
shaded module in a string, the power optimizers in the other modules would not need to do any
voltage regulation, but simply let the current ﬂow through, while the shaded module is the only
module that needs to boost it’s current up to string level current, and therefore the reduced
eﬃciency will only be applied to this module.
Being a MLPE system, the micro inverter also beneﬁts the gains of eliminating mismatch
losses, therefore coming out as the second best conﬁguration, falling behind Conﬁguration 3 by
just 0.6% less annual energy production. The micro inverter too, does not have any mismatch
losses as seen from ﬁgure 34, but still has a MLPE conversion loss slightly higher than Con-
ﬁguration 1 and 3. This is to be expected, as the Euro eﬃciency is lower here, than for both
the SolarEdge and SMA inverter, as can be seen from the eﬃciency curves at ﬁgure 32. Micro
inverters are still known to suﬀer poorer eﬃciencies compared to quality string inverters, even
though Enphase are the only micro inverter manufacturer which comes close to match string
inverter eﬃciencies today. It is also important to mention than when comparing inverters, the
inverters within the same year range should always be compared, as eﬃciencies have increased
much over the last couple of years. The inverters used in this thesis are all updated to the
values of 2017 or 2018.
The data source of the input data also has a signiﬁcance when doing these simulations.
PVsyst’s database on inverters and modules are mostly from the manufactures own lab tests
on performances. The numbers from manufactures may be really optimistic or overrated, as
manufacturers tend to overestimate the performance when setting the ratings, such as eﬃciency.
A more reliable source would be to use values from a third party organization, which do not
have anything to gain from overestimating the performances, but just doing their own lab tests
and measurements. This would most likely lead to more pessimistic, but realistic values due
to reduced biases. In this thesis however, all the data sources were given by the manufacturer
which therefore has to be taken into account, when assessing the real system performance. As
the inverter eﬃciency is one of the vital parameters in the system performance, these eﬃciency
proﬁles should preferably be from a third party lab, which would most likely give a more accurate
eﬃciency proﬁle.
The side which received most annual insolation was the side that had orientations from
180◦to 145◦. Figure 35 shows that the beam irradiance is greatest at Submodel 1, and then
63
==PAGE:71==
decreases notably until Submodel 5, which is also the side which is facing north. The diﬀuse
component shows the same decrease pattern, but the magnitude of the decrease is not as high
as for the direct beam. At some sides of the building, the side is receiving more of the diﬀuse
irradiance than beam irradiance. These ﬁnding reveals that a south facing orientation is the ideal
orientation to obtain highest annual solar insolation, and that the insolation will decrease further
towards north. Since annual solar insolation is signiﬁcantly lesser in the north orientation, there
is believably no need for the same high AC rating at the north side, as the clipping losses would
be minimal. Otherwise, an option would be to connect more strings in parallel and then going
in to one inverter and probably increase the AC rating, bearing in mind not to exceed the
inverters short-circuit capability. However, an alternative solution for that would be to have
some of the diﬀerent orientations on the north orientation connected in series, even though they
might be at diﬀerent orientations. Besides for now being aware of the open-circuit voltage,
the mismatch in production due to orientation diﬀerences will also have an impact. Figure 29
shows that a mismatch of 15◦in south facing orientation, have a mismatch of around 0.5%,
while a 15◦mismatch in the north-east side, have a mismatch of nearly 19%. However, since
the annual insolation in the north is not that high, the magnitude of the energy loss may not
be too signiﬁcant. Also to be mentioned, is that the mismatch loss would not be a matter for
one of the MLPE systems.
The reﬂection losses due to angle of incident can also have an impact in the ﬁnal energy
yield as seen from ﬁgure 36 and 37. The sunlight is hitting the PV module with diﬀerent AOI
throughout the year, causing a lot of the irradiance to be reﬂected away, accordingly to the
glass structure characteristics. These losses can be reduced by implementing other types of
anti-reﬂective glass structures which would have a lower reﬂection loss for diﬀerent AOI, and
thereby yield a higher irradiance yield as seen from the sensitivity analysis in section 5. By
changing the glass structure to Satin, which has a diﬀuse structure, would already increase the
total energy yield with 1.5%. Although, when working on a BIPV system, usually the most
important decider for implementing such a system, would be to ﬁrst ensure decent aesthetics.
For most buildings, the vertical façades are the architects signature to the landscape, and they
would necessarily prioritize to maintain a great look. To improve aesthetics, there are some
special glass modules which could be placed on the outside of the PV modules in the diﬀerent
preferred colors. This would make sure no solar cells can be seen from the outside, but instead
reﬂects light in diﬀerent wavelengths to show colors. As more irradiance is lost due to the
reﬂecting of light wavelengths, there will naturally be less transmittance of radiant energy to
the PV module. However, the solution from SwissINSO still ensures an eﬃciency of between
85% to 90% which is still a good compromise for the sake of aesthetics. Nonetheless, these
losses would be essential to take into account if included at the building. Bare in mind, this
would drive up the system cost, as the Kromatix glass has the highest cost as seen in ﬁgure 39.
The cheapest total system cost for the installed system, would be Conﬁguration 1 with a
price of 2.05 USD/WDC, due to it’s simpler conﬁguration without any extra power optimizer,
which naturally increases the total installed cost. The installations of the diﬀerent systems
would also most likely be more expensive for a BIPV system due to more complexity when
64
==PAGE:72==
integrating PV modules into a façade, instead of mounting on top of a roof. Micro inverters
are also shown to be the most expensive system, as the price of micro inverters are more than
twice the price of string inverters. For this reason, it might be more attractive to install a string
inverter system, and implementing power optimizers to ensure a higher annual production.
Figure 40 shows the LCOE of the diﬀerent systems to compare the total cost of the system
over its lifetime, relative to its energy production. Even though Conﬁguration 1 has the lowest
annual energy production, it also has the lowest LCOE, with a cost of 0.430 USD/kWh. This
indicates that the cost of implementing MLPE systems to yield higher energy production, comes
at the cost of a higher energy price, since the gains in energy production is not as cost beneﬁcial
compared to the extra system costs.
The temperature also has a great impact on the annual energy yield, as the PV module
performance greatly depends on the cell temperature. Figure 38 shows that during high PV
penetration at 11 o’clock, the module temperature can rise above 50◦C and result in over 12%
energy losses. This might feel counter intuitive as higher irradiance level both gives more power
to the system, but also heats up the solar cells and therefore yields greater losses. Therefore, a
way to cool down the PV module during these peak hours would prove really beneﬁcial as the
losses can be reduced signiﬁcantly with lower temperatures. Seen from the sensitivity analysis
in section 5, ﬁgure 43 shows that when having a free standing system with air circulation on
both sides of the module, it would secure a 4.4% increase in annual energy production. So a
method of implementing some cooling on the module’s backsheet, by transferring the heat from
the solar cell as eﬀectively as an open air circulation, would yield great beneﬁts. This could be
done by combining the PV modules with a solar collector, which is also known as a PVT module
when it produces both electrical and thermal energy. The PVT module would ﬁrst convert the
radiant energy to electricity and then convert the rest of the radiant energy to thermal energy
by transferring the heat through a heat exchanger, and by doing so also cooling the solar cells.
65
==PAGE:73==
7
Conclusion
Based on the ﬁndings of this report, the PV system which yielded the highest annual energy
production was Conﬁguration 3, the SolarEdge system. Even though the high energy require-
ment for this building was not met, a total of 87.6% of the targeted energy production was
obtained. There is however a diﬀerence in performance between the diﬀerent PV conﬁgura-
tions, as the diﬀerent solar inverters have diﬀerent topologies which results in great diﬀerences
in energy production. The use of MLPE conﬁgurations will give the highest annual energy
production compared to a string inverter. This is because eliminating the mismatch losses will
give great gains in annual energy production. However, a MLPE conﬁguration including Tigo’s
power optimizer would be ill-advised, as their solution by implementing a parallel connection,
would in turn lead to great operating losses when maximizing shaded modules. However, for
a diﬀerent system where the partial shading only occurs on a select few of the modules, Tigo
could probably be the better solution, so that not every module would need to be subject to the
great power optimizer loss. The micro inverter is on the other side a good way to maximize the
annual production, as it almost yielded the same energy production as the SolarEdge system,
but since the micro inverter has a much higher cost and still performing slightly inferior to the
SolarEdge, the latter would be the preferred MLPE system.
There are great beneﬁts in implementing some kind of cooling on the backsheet of the mod-
ule, since the cell temperature can get really high. There is shown to be a 4.4% increase in
annual energy production by cooling the solar cell in an eﬃcient way. The gains of implement-
ing anti-reﬂective glass coating also proved beneﬁcial, with a 1.5% increase in annual energy
production with the use of the Satin glass.
While 13% of the solar insolation is lost due to shading, the electrical shading loss would
diﬀer depending on conﬁguration. However, the best performing conﬁguration (Conﬁguration
3), could just decrease the electrical shading loss by 0.83% compared to the conﬁguration with
the most shading loss (Conﬁguration 1). Leading to conclude that even though shading do have
a big impact on power production, the decrease by reducing the shading impact is marginal
compared to the total production.
The orientation which produced most energy on a yearly basis, is the south facing orientation,
meaning that sizing of the inverter by choosing the DC/AC ratio for the whole system, should
be based on the production on this orientation to maximize the annual energy production. An
alternative solution to reduce the amount of inverters without loosing signiﬁcant amount of
energy production, and also reduce the system cost, would be to decrease the inverter ratings,
or connect more modules together in series or parallel in the north facing orientations without
exceeding the inverters power limits, since the annual solar insolation is not as much here.
The system that has the best economy, is Conﬁguration 1 with a LCOE of 0.430 USD/kWh,
since the energy gains of a MLPE systems are not as beneﬁcial as the cost of mitigating the
energy losses. Conﬁguration 1 also had the lowest system cost of 2.05 USD/WDC.
66
==PAGE:74==
8
Future Work & Research
Since the objective of this thesis was to estimate annual energy production and aim at max-
imizing the energy production, a further interesting research area would be to do a thorough
economic assessment and investigate the cost beneﬁts of BIPV in general oﬃce buildings. As-
pects such as solar incentives or rebates in the country of the chosen site, and savings on the
electricity bill, would be necessary to take into consideration. Traditional building materials
could perhaps also be replaced, and would be interesting to include in the economic assessment.
Other ideas would be to implement a battery system and do some research and simulations
on which level of self-suﬃciency could be achieved and at what cost. A detailed hourly load
analysis would be important in that case to see when the load matches the production, and
perhaps investigate which orientation the PV modules should be facing to achieve highest level
of self-suﬃciency.
The implementation of a PVT system could also lead to be really beneﬁcial, as not only do
they produce thermal energy, but they contribute to the cooling of solar cells, which would also
give a great boost in the electrical energy production.
67
==PAGE:75==
References
[1] https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/sealevel.html
[2] https://climate.nasa.gov/scientiﬁc-consensus/
[3] https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/wg1/WG1AR5_SPM_FINAL.pdf,
[page 17]
[4] http://fnnewyork.um.dk/en/denmark/sustainable-development/denmark-ratify-the-paris-
agreement-on-climate-change/
[5] Energinet, [ENVIRONMENTAL REPORT 2018, 2018].
[6] https://www.iea.org/statistics/statisticssearch/report/?country=DENMARK=product=balances
[7] http://solcelleforening.dk/fakta/tal-og-fakta/
[8] http://irradiance.dmi.dk/irradiance-data/dry-2001-2010/global-irradiance/
[9] http://www.ftexploring.com/solar-energy/direct-and-diﬀuse-radiation.htm
[10] http://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/glossary/gloss_d.html
[11] http://www.kippzonen.com/News/572/The-Working-Principle-of-a-Thermopile-
Pyranometer
[12] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermopile
[13] http://www.ammonit.com/en/products/sensors/solar-sensors-pyranometers
[14] http://www.yesinc.com/products/data/mfr7/index.html
[15] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pyranometer#/media/
File:SR20_pyranometer_1.jpg
[16] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pyrheliometer#/media/
File:DR01_pyrheliometer_1.jpg
[17] http://www.kippzonen.com/News/545/The-Terms-of-Solar-Monitoring
[18] Matthew Lave, Member, IEEE, William Hayes, Andrew Pohl, and Cliﬀord W. Hansen,
[Evaluation of Global Horizontal Irradiance to Plane of Array Irradiance Models at Locations
across the United States, 2014].
[19] https://pvpmc.sandia.gov/modeling-steps/
1-weather-design-inputs/irradiance-and-insolation-2/
direct-normal-irradiance/piecewise_decomp-models/
68
==PAGE:76==
[20] https://pvpmc.sandia.gov/modeling-steps/1-weather-design-inputs/sun-position/
[21] D. Rekioua and E. Matagne, [Optimization of Photovoltaic Power Systems, Green Energy
and Technology, 2012].
[22] https://pvpmc.sandia.gov/modeling-steps/1-weather-design-inputs/plane-of-array-poa-
irradiance/calculating-poa-irradiance/poa-sky-diﬀuse/perez-sky-diﬀuse-model/
[23] Perez, R., Ineichen, P., Seals, R., Michalsky, J., Stewart, R., [Modeling daylight availability
and irradiance components from direct and global irradiance. Solar Energy 44 (5), 271–289,
1990].
[24] https://www.quora.com/What-is-solar-power
[25] http://www.chemistryexplained.com/Ru-Sp/Solar-Cells.html
[26] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_solar_cells#/
media/File:Solar_cell_equivalent_circuit.svg
[27] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QAwEtVPkwL0t=212s
[28] http://suntechsolar.ca/faq/v-curve-report/
[29] https://solarprofessional.com/sites/default/files/
articles/ajax/docs/2_SP7_7_pg34_Grana.jpg
[30] https://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/ise/de/documents/publications/studies/Photovoltaics-
Report.pdf
[31] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solar_cell
[32] http://energyinformative.org/best-solar-panel-monocrystalline-polycrystalline-thin-ﬁlm/
[33] http://sinovoltaics.com/learning-center/quality/standard-test-conditions-stc-deﬁnition-
and-problems/
[34] http://files.pvsyst.com/help/iam_loss.htm
[35] https://www.civicsolar.com/support/installer/articles/how-does-heat-aﬀect-solar-panel-
eﬃciencies
[36] http://files.pvsyst.com/help/thermal_loss.htm
[37] https://solarprofessional.com/sites/default/files/
articles/ajax/docs/SolarPro_10_3_QA_Fig_2.jpg
[38] https://www.electronics-tutorials.ws/diode/bypass-diodes.html
[39] https://www.solaredge.com/sites/default/files/
se_technical_bypass_diode_effect_in_shading.pdf
69
==PAGE:77==
[40] https://help.aurorasolar.com/hc/en-us/articles/115001339907-Global-MPPT-and-Bypass-
Diodes
[41] https://solarprofessional.com/sites/default/files/
articles/ajax/docs/2_SP7_7_pg34_Grana.jpg
[42] http://solarprofessional.com/sites/default/
files/articles/ajax/docs/17_SP2_3_pg68_Worden-10.jpg
[43] DTU Photonics, [Inverters and Grid connected Systems.pdf, 2018].
[44] http://www.fronius.com/en/photovoltaics/products/all-products/inverters/fronius-galvo-
ul/fronius-galvo-3-1-1-208-240
[45] https://library.e.abb.com/public/3a0b707e18f3407a87c862c2a03f56c0/
PVI-134.0-400.0_BCD.00382_EN_RevB.pdf
[46] http://ﬁles.sma.de/dl/28329/SB30-50-DEN1721-V24web.pdf
[47] https://www.aimscorp.net/documents/PIGRID250.pdf
[48] http://powerupco.com/site/wp-content/ﬁles/Inverters/
Tigo%20Energy/Impedance%20Matching%20V7.pdf
[49] https://support.tigoenergy.com/hc/en-us/articles/203065038-What-are-the-Fundamental-
Diﬀerences-Between-Tigo-and-SolarEdge-Optimizers-
[50] https://www.solaredge.com/sites/default/files/
se_application_fixed_string_voltage.pdf
[51] http://www.wbdg.org/resources/building-integrated-photovoltaics-bipv
[52] http://cool-ceiling.com/copenhagen-international-school-cis
[53] https://www.researchgate.net/figure/AAF-Construction-System
-Axonometric-view-of-the-system-composition_fig4_318529094?
_sg=hF4jnpms_ONewORY9DwbAmKihU2piey3NaUOnUSmKaadj6T6RsaN1lyva
BmJq1Oo5Xcek5byNVoDV1YIVzzSNw
[54] http://blog.aurorasolar.com/shading-losses-for-pv-systems-and-techniques-to-mitigate-
them/
[55] Ran Fu, David Feldman, Robert Margolis, Mike Woodhouse, and Kristen Ardani, National
Renewable Energy Laboratory, [U.S. Solar Photovoltaic System Cost Benchmark: Q1 2017,
2017].
[56] https://xn–solcelleanlg-hdb.com/solcelleanlaeg/20-kw/
70
==PAGE:78==
[57] https://electrek.co/2017/10/30/solar-panel-bling-custom-coloring-at-an-aﬀordable-price-
meeting-modern-eﬃciency-expectations/
[58] https://www.swissinso.com/technology
[59] https://www.nrel.gov/analysis/tech-lcoe.html
[60] https://www.fm.dk/nyheder/pressemeddelelser/2013/05/ny-og-lavere-
samfundsoekonomisk-diskonteringsrente
[61] https://www.solaredge.com/products/pv-inverter/single-phase/
71
