==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
Preparation and Testing 
of FDCA Based 
Nanocomposites 
Alexandros Efraim Alexakis 
s172158@win.dtu.dk, aleale@kth.se 
      
Supervisors 
DTU: Anders Egede Daugaard  
adt@kt.dtu.dk 
KTH: Minna Hakkarainen  
minna@kth.se 
21/06/2018 
Copenhagen 
Master Thesis 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Preface 
 
This thesis is the result of my 5-months Master’s project, providing with 30 European 
Credit Transfer and Accumulation System (ECTS) points. This project was carried out 
in collaboration between the Danish Polymer Centre at the Technical University of 
Denmark (DTU) and Polymer Technology Department at Royal Institute of 
Technology (KTH).  
This project initiated from 22nd of January and terminated on the 22nd of June. The main 
supervisor was Anders Egede Daugaard Assistant Professor from the Department of 
Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at DTU. The co-supervisor was Minna 
Hakkarainen Professor from the Department of Polymer Technology at KTH. 
I would like to thank both Assistant Professor Anders Egede Daugaard and Professor 
Minna Hakkarainen for giving me the opportunity to work with this combined project 
between two internationally prestigious universities. I honestly appreciated our 
collaboration and our meetings, which gave a perfect idea of the research world. I would 
also like to thank PhD Daniel Bo Larsen from the Department of Chemical and 
Biochemical Engineering at the Danish Polymer Center of DTU for preparing the 2,5-
furandicarboxylate and for our long discussions about the kinetic analysis that was used. 
Moreover, I would like to thank PhD Karin Adolfsson from the Department of Polymer 
Technology at KTH for preparing the carbon nanospheres and for supervising me while 
being at KTH and for our fruitful discussions regarding my project. Last but not least, 
I would like to thank Senior Researcher Liyun Yu for performing the DSC, TGA and 
rheological measurements as well as Libor Zvěřina for supervising during 
morphological characterization at DTU. 
Finally, I would like to thank my family who supported me in every step of the way 
and gave me the opportunity to study abroad and my girlfriend who filled me with hope 
and motivation and supported me throughout this project. 
 
Copenhagen, 20th June, 2018. 
 
 
Alexandros Efraim Alexakis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Project Formulation 
 
Thermosets based on phthalic acid currently find many applications in materials such 
as composites and coatings. With the current developments towards a bio-based 
economy, there is a movement towards development of novel monomers as 
replacements of petrochemical-based monomers such as phthalic acid. One of the more 
recent examples is the use of 2,5-furanedicarboxylic acid (FDCA) for preparation of 
poly(ethylene 2,5-furanedicarboxylate) (PEF)1, which has been developed by 
Avantium, as a replacement for poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) in bottles and 
packaging materials. The development of PEF has shown a promising potential for the 
replacement of PET, and FDCA would therefore be an interesting candidate to 
investigate for other substitutions of phthalic acid in materials. The project is intended 
to combine the knowledge at DTU on diallyl-FDCA thermosets with the graphene 
oxide nanodots (GONDs) developed at KTH in the group of Prof. Hakkarainen 2–4. The 
project should be initiated with a literature study into nanocomposites based on phthalic 
acid and providing an overview of applications (e.g. unsaturated polyesters, DAP resins 
etc.) particularly covering nanocomposites as well as the status of current FDCA based 
systems  
The objective of this project is to prepare and test GONDs nanocomposites of diallyl-
FDCA based polyesters for preparation of bio-based analogues to phthalic acid based 
thermosets. This should include testing of various crosslinking chemistries such as 
direct crosslinking of allyls using dicumylperoxide (DCP) 5 or thiol-ene reactions 6. As 
part of these tests both, the possibility to incorporate GONDs into the process as well 
as the need to functionalize the GONDs should be considered.  The prepared 
nanocomposites should be characterized using standard techniques such as FT-IR, 
TGA, DSC, dielectric spectroscopy, rheology and mechanical testing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
Learning Objectives 
 
Through this project I want to gain substantial experience in being able to: 
 
• Create a realistic project/problem formulation, describe the underlying motivation, 
and specific project objectives. 
• Survey and describe relevant state-of-art and background literature and theory. 
• Given the available resources, selectively apply the methods and theory to optimally 
achieve the objectives. Provide an argumentation for my choice of method. 
• Plan and continuously manage my project and argument for my management 
decisions. 
• Account for my methods so the results can be reproduced, and evaluate sources of 
errors and result's uncertainty. 
• Critically comment on limitations of the theory and method, and if assumptions are 
made, estimate the sensitivity of my conclusions to the assumptions. 
• Discuss the obtained results in relation to the achievement of objectives and to state-
of-art. 
• Summarize and conclude on the study's answers to the stated objectives and problem. 
• Present an outlook to improvements of the work and how to further advance state-of-
art. 
• Report on the project in a thesis and oral presentation – clear, concise and 
comprehensive with only the necessary and sufficient information. The report will 
account for how I achieved the above list of objectives. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
Abstract 
 
The project focuses on the use of diallyl 2,5-furanedicarboxylate (DAFDC) as a bio-
based alternative for phthalic acid based thermosets.  
Initially, kinetic analysis, by means of Borchardt and Daniels method was performed 
to study the curing conditions. However, this model gave inaccurate results mainly due 
to different conditions apparent during Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) 
measurement which were not able to be simulated in the experimental procedure that 
was followed. Nevertheless, by curing DAFDC with 5 𝑤𝑡% of dicumyl peroxide 
(DCP), which comprise the matrix, and incorporating graphene oxide nanodots 
(GONDs) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in different weight amounts, in a staggered 
temperature and time fashion, nanocomposites based on DAFDC were produced. 
GONDs were oxidized from carbon nanospheres (CNs). The latter were produced from 
plain paper by adding a dialysis step in the protocol found in the literature 2.  
Through the characterization of the nanocomposites, it was concluded that the above 
protocol resulted in partially crosslinked materials which were further cured at elevated 
temperatures during Dynamical Mechanical Analysis (DMA). The fully crosslinked 
nanocomposites produced from this heating ramp exhibited enhanced properties. More 
specifically, the degradation temperature corresponding to 5% loss of mass, i.e. 𝑇5%, 
seemed to be unaffected by the filler content and compared to the matrix it was 
enhanced by roughly 17% and 18% for GOND-filled and CNT-filled nanocomposites, 
respectively. Conductivity measurements gave an insight on the percolation threshold 
of the produced nanocomposites. On the one hand, CNT-filled nanocomposites 
exhibited a percolation threshold at 0.5 𝑤𝑡%  of CNT and their conductivity was 
increasing by increasing filler content. On the other hand, for GOND-filled 
nanocomposites, the filler content seemed to be lower than this threshold, since no 
electrical resistance value could be monitored. The mechanical testing showed 
indications of enhanced properties of the fully cured nanocomposites compared to their 
partially cured analogues. However, due to the geometry and breaking of the cured 
samples during DMA, the mechanical properties could not be verified. Finally, the 
morphology of the nanocomposites was investigated by means of digital microscopy. 
Both sides of the samples were studied, since the side that was in contact with oxygen 
during curing, exhibited different morphological behavior than the side that was not in 
contact with oxygen. In particular, the side which was in contact with oxygen, showed 
a smoother surface than the side which was in contact with the mold.  
In conclusion, the possibility to produce a bio-based alternative of phthalic acid based 
thermosets was verified, giving the opportunity to eagerly investigate this monomer in 
different applications in the future. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
Table of Contents 
Abbreviations .................................................................................................................. i 
Introduction .................................................................................................................. 1 
Literature Study ........................................................................................................... 3 
Thermosets ............................................................................................................. 3 
Petroleum-based Polymers ..................................................................................... 5 
Composites ............................................................................................................. 7 
Graphene and its Derivatives .................................................................................. 8 
Experimental Plan ..................................................................................................... 11 
Results & Discussion .................................................................................................. 13 
Determination of Initiator Content ........................................................................... 13 
Kinetic Analysis ....................................................................................................... 17 
Crosslinked Matrix ................................................................................................... 20 
Oxidation of CNs ..................................................................................................... 26 
Nanocomposites ....................................................................................................... 31 
Conclusions ................................................................................................................. 46 
Experimental Section ................................................................................................. 47 
Materials  .................................................................................................................. 47 
Crosslinking Kinetic Experiments ........................................................................... 47 
Preparation of Large Crosslinked Discs ................................................................... 47 
Preparation of Matrix Samples ................................................................................. 47 
Oxidation of CNs ..................................................................................................... 48 
Preparation of Nanocomposites ............................................................................... 48 
General Characterization Methods ........................................................................... 48 
References ................................................................................................................... 51 
Appendix ..................................................................................................................... 55 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
Page | i  
 
Abbreviations 
 
2𝐷 
 
Two Dimensional 
3𝐷 
  
Three Dimensional 
𝛥𝛨 
 
Enthalpy of Reaction 
𝛥𝛨𝑐𝑢𝑟.  
Enthalpy of Curing 
𝛥𝛨𝑇 
 
Enthalpy of reaction left to proceed at time 𝑡 
𝑎 
 
Conversion 
𝐵𝑃𝑂  
Benzoyl Peroxide 
𝐶𝐻𝑃  
Cumene Hydroperoxide 
𝐶𝑁𝑠 
 
Carbon Nanospheres 
𝐶𝑁𝑇  
Carbon Nanotube 
𝐶𝑂2 
 
Carbon Dioxide 
𝑑𝛼
𝑑𝑡 
 
Conversion Rate 
𝐷𝐴𝐹𝐷𝐶 
Diallyl-2,5-furandicarboxylate  
𝐷𝐴𝑃  
Diallyl Phthalate 
𝐷𝐶𝑃 
 
Dicumyl Peroxide 
𝐷𝐶𝑃𝐴  
Dicumyl Peroxide from Bie & Berntsen 
𝐷𝐶𝑃𝐵  
Dicumyl Peroxide from Sigma Aldrich 
𝐷𝐼 
 
Deionized 
𝐷𝑀𝐴  
Dynamical Mechanical Analysis 
𝐷𝑆𝐶 
 
Differential Scanning Calorimetry 
𝐷𝑇𝐺  
Derivative of thermogravimetric analysis  
𝐸′ 
 
Storage Modulus 
𝐸𝛼 
 
Activation Energy 
𝐸𝐺 
 
Ethylene Glycol 
𝐹𝐷𝐶𝐴  
2,5-furandicarboxylic acid 
𝐹𝑇−𝐼𝑅 
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy 
𝐺𝑂 
 
Graphene Oxide 
𝐺𝑂𝑄𝐷𝑠 
Graphene Oxide Quantum Dots 
𝐺𝑂𝑁𝐷𝑠 
Graphene Oxide Nano Dots 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
Page | ii  
 
𝐻𝑀𝐹  
5-hydroxymethylfurfural 
𝐻𝑁𝑂3  
Nitric Acid 
𝐾(𝑇)  
Temperature Dependent Rate Constant 
𝑀𝑊𝐶𝑁𝑇𝑠 
Multi Walled Carbon Nanotube 
𝑀𝑊𝐶𝑂 
Molecular Weight Cut off 
𝑛 
 
Reaction Order 
𝑛𝐺𝑂 
 
Nano Graphene Oxide  
𝑃𝐸𝐹 
 
Poly(ethylene 2,5-furandicarboxylate) 
𝑃𝐸𝑇 
 
Poly(ethylene terephthalate)  
𝑃𝐿𝐴 
 
Poly(lactic acid) 
𝑃𝐿𝐿𝐴  
Poly(L-lactic acid) 
𝑟𝑝𝑚 
 
Revolutions per Minute 
𝑆𝐸𝑀  
Scanning Electron Microscopy 
𝑠𝑝2, 𝑠𝑝3 
Orbital Hybridization 
𝑆𝑊𝐶𝑁𝑇𝑠 
Single Walled Carbon Nanotubes 
𝑡𝑎𝑛𝛿  
Shift factor 
𝑇𝑐 
 
Crystallization Temperature 
𝑇𝑐𝑢𝑟. 
 
Curing Temperature 
𝑇𝐸𝑀  
Transmission Electron Microscopy 
𝑇𝑔 
 
Glass Transition Temperature  
𝑇𝐺𝐴 
 
Thermogravimetric Analysis 
𝑇𝑚 
 
Melting Temperature 
𝑇𝑃𝐴 
 
Terephthalic Acid 
𝑈𝑃 
 
Unsaturated Polyester  
𝑈𝑉 
 
Ultraviolet 
𝑣𝑖𝑠 
 
Visible 
𝑍 
 
Pre-exponential Factor 
𝑤𝑡%  
Weight Percentage 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
Page | 1  
 
Introduction 
 
In our everyday life, polymeric materials are undoubtedly the most common materials 
used. They find applications in a widely broad spectrum of sciences including consumer 
goods, automotive and aerospace industries. From the beginning of their production, 
the biggest sources of polymers derive from petroleum and fossil fuels. The most well-
known class of petroleum-based polymers are plastics, which have a huge market 
producing hundreds of million tons annually. However, the pollution that has been done 
due to our careless use and disposal of plastics, as well as, due to 𝐶𝑂2 emissions during 
their production, has nowadays made its inevitable appearance, contributing to climate 
change, global warming and the thinning of the ozone layer. 
Fortunately, alternatives which are more sustainable, environmentally friendly and 
renewable with respect to sources of polymers are under development. The resulting 
polymers adopted the term “bio-based polymers” and they derive from biomass 7. These 
new alternatives have gained a great deal of attention the past couple of decades, where 
different materials have been produced providing similar and sometimes superior 
properties compared to those of their petroleum-based analogues. However, the 
research has mainly focused on the synthesis and production of olefins, i.e. 
polyethylene, polypropylene, polylactide and starch based materials and not in the 
synthesis of aromatics. This creates an obstacle with respect to production of bio-based 
engineering plastics.  
Within this category lies the commercially well-known poly(ethylene terephthalate) or 
PET. It is comprised of terephthalic acid (TPA) and ethylene glycol (EG), the former 
of which is an aromatic monomer. Until nowadays both PET’s raw materials, are 
derived directly from crude oil 8. Hence, an alternative monomer based on renewable 
resources in order to replace terephthalic acid is needed. This alternative is given by a 
monomer called 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA), which resembles the structure of 
TPA. Even though FDCA was synthesized for the first time in 1876 9, it has not gained 
a lot of attention until recently. It can now be derived from fructose, glucose and other 
C6 carbohydrates, through first their dehydration into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) 
and then oxidation 10. FDCA has already been used as a replacement of TPA in the 
production of plastic bottles, resulting in the poly(ethylene 2,5-furandicarboxylate) or 
PEF. Furthermore, it is observed not only a significant reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions, during the production of PEF, which is an improvement with respect to 
environmental issues, but also higher barrier properties toward different gases 11. 
An attempt to improve the properties of PET or any kind of polymer is by incorporation 
of other materials. This incorporation results in the formation of a composite, which is 
comprised of a matrix and a dispersed phase which can be any kind of filler with any 
kind of geometry. This freedom in the choice of material, geometry and shape in both 
the matrix and the dispersed phase gives to composites the attention they deserve.  
 
==PAGE:11==
Page | 2  
 
 
A big part of the research in composites is focused on finding a silver lining between 
the matrix and the dispersed phase and trying to improve it without compromising 
(negatively affect) the resulting properties. The applications of composites vary 
depending on the materials which comprise them, but generally they exhibit a 
combination of the properties gained from their components. 
Furthermore, research has shown its multidisciplinary stance by adapting the concept 
of nano scale in the field of composites. This adaptation resulted in the formation of 
nanocomposites which are characterized by the nanosized dispersed phase. The 
advantage of nanocomposites over the regular composites is the enhancement of 
mechanical properties without affecting the inherent processability and properties of 
the polymer matrix 12.  
Special attention is drawn to the fillers which can be used as the dispersed phase. Clay 
or silica nanoparticles, single or multi-walled carbon nanotubes, graphene and its 
derivatives are only some of the fillers which are commonly used. The combination of 
any polymer matrix with the above fillers can result in an extraordinary enhancement 
of their properties whereas in some cases new properties are introduced.  
Recently, graphene oxide (GO), which is the most common derivative of graphene, was 
further downsized into graphene oxide nanodots (GONDs) by following a “green 
microwave assisted technique” 13. The primer source of GO was e.g. coffee ground 13 
or waste paper 2 providing a renewable and low cost carbon source. The properties of 
nanocomposites produced by the incorporation of GONDs and different polymer 
matrices appeared to be similar or better than regular GO.  
This thesis, aims to provide the first project encountering the synthesis of FDCA-based 
nanocomposites where the dispersed phase is GONDs. In other words, this thesis 
includes the synthesis of fully bio-based nanocomposite as well as its characterization 
with various techniques.  
The literature study following this introduction provides an overview on phthalic acid 
as an analogue to FDCA as well as in the form of resins, i.e. unsaturated polyester (UP) 
resins and diallyl phthalate (DAP) resins used in thermoset materials. Thereafter, a 
section on composites and nanocomposites focusing on the state-of-the-art will be 
given. Finally, in the last section primer focus will be given on the mentioned matrix 
polymers as well as on nGO and GONDs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
Page | 3  
 
Literature Study 
 
Thermosets 
Polymers can be grouped into two categories; thermosets and thermoplastics. 
Thermoplastic is a material which has the ability to soften when heated and recoil to its 
previous conformation when cooled, providing the advantage of reshaping 14. A 
thermoset is initially a resin which is cured usually by inducing heat or radiation, 
resulting in a 3D crosslinked polymer network, characterized by its “inability to flow” 
when heated. Unlike a thermoplastic material, the thermoset cannot recoil nor take its 
initial shape 15. 
By comparing the properties of the two types of polymers, a thermoset offers higher 
temperature resistance, greater dimensional stability and it is more cost-effective than 
a thermoplastic. On the other hand, the latter exhibits greater chemical resistibility and 
higher impact strength than the thermoset 16. Therefore, the applications of thermosets 
are diverse including adhesives, car parts, electrical and construction applications. 
The most common thermoset resins are the unsaturated polyester (UP) resins. They 
made their industrial appearance around 1940 and nowadays they occupy a big part of 
the thermoset resin market pie. UPs are low molecular weight esters, in some cases as 
low as 1000 𝑔/𝑚𝑜𝑙, having mainly two features of interest; the unsaturated part and 
the random part 17. The former, provides active sites where the radical crosslinking with 
the diluent, usually styrene monomer, takes place. The latter, is the low molecular 
weight part which makes it possible to dissolve into the diluent. Moreover, the diluent 
itself plays a key role in the processability of the polyester by reducing its viscosity and 
in the crosslinking via double bonds with the polyesters.  
One of the simplest UP resin derived through the polycondensation reaction of maleic 
anhydride and propylene glycol dissolved in styrene. However, the resulted resin was 
brittle due to the high crosslinking density, thus further modification was necessary in 
order to make it more flexible. 
Nowadays, there are different commonly used UP resins which bypass the problem of 
brittleness 17. The first are usually called ortho resins and they are based on phthalic 
anhydride, maleic anhydride and glycol. The use of phthalic anhydride reduces the 
active double bond sites and at the same time enhances the strength and curing 
properties due to its aromatic structure. Additionally, ortho resins are relatively low 
cost and they find applications in automotive industries and in more mechanically 
demanding applications when they have been reinforced. However, due to the ortho 
conformation of their ester groups, ortho resins have poor water resistibility, since they 
are prone to hydrolysis. 
The hydrolysis problem was tackled by another type of UP resin which is made by 
replacing phthalic anhydride with isophthalic acid, thus having the name iso resin. This 
replacement resulted in the increase of viscosity making it necessary to add diluent. 
Isophthalic acid enhanced the chemical and thermal resistance of the resin making it a 
perfect candidate for boat coatings where the corrosion is an obstacle.  
 
==PAGE:13==
Page | 4  
 
Another kind of resins including phthalic anhydride are the so called DAP resins. They 
are made of diallyl phthalate (Figure 1) and they are highly crosslinked thermosetting 
resins. As many monomers, diallyl phthalate takes advantage of the end double bonds 
which with the aid of an initiator, they form the crosslinks through a common radical 
polymerization. Being allyls, DAP resins exhibit excellent electrical properties while 
being stable under high temperature and humidity. They also exhibit dimensional 
stability, low moisture absorbance and good chemical resistance. DAP are the most 
common commercially used thermoset resins and in their applications they are usually 
glass filled. However, they are costly and they lack metal adhesion and hardness.  
 
 
Figure 1: Chemical structure of diallyl phthalate. 
 A way of confining a polymer chain is through chemical crosslinking or curing. The 
polymeric chains are crosslinked with each other either covalently or ionically forming 
a network. A parameter which is of crucial importance since it determines the physical 
properties of the network is the crosslinking density, which is defined as the density of 
the material divided by the molecular weight of the segments between the crosslink. 
When the crosslinking density is low, the polymer exhibits a more elastic behavior, 
whereas when it is high the polymer is more stiff and rigid. Moreover, by changing the 
crosslinking density the glass transition temperate (𝑇𝑔) will vary, since increasing the 
crosslinking density will also increase the 𝑇𝑔. Additionally, when polymers are 
covalently crosslinked their flow behavior is altered as the ability to flow is hindered 
by the crosslinks 18.  
For the purpose of this project, one category of crosslinking is of particular interest, 
called radical curing and it will be overviewed from the scope of its common initiators, 
i.e. peroxides. 
One of the most common curing approaches used for the crosslinking of unsaturated 
polyesters is through radical curing by peroxides 19. Peroxides are substances that 
contain oxygen-oxygen bond (O-O) which can easily be homolytically broken 
producing radicals acting ideally as initiators. Specifically, peroxide groups can be 
cleaved by inducing heat to the system producing radicals, which thereafter react with 
the polymer chain forming new radicals. These new radical polymer chains are highly 
reactive and they react with other polymer radicals forming crosslinks.  
In general, the more stable the peroxide is, the more resistant it is, meaning that higher 
energy is needed in order to break the O-O bond and create the radicals. This underlines 
the trade-off between the temperature applied on the peroxide and the molding 
temperature or time required, allowing peroxides to be thought of as heat-driven. 
Peroxides exhibit excellent heat aging and good electrical properties. 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
Page | 5  
 
Choosing a peroxide in general is mainly based on half-life i.e. the time needed in order 
to consume half of the amount of the peroxide. Hence, half-life depends on the chemical 
procedure employed, in order to produce the peroxide radicals and it varies depending 
on the peroxide itself.  
Among peroxides, dialkyl peroxides is the most stable type. The best representative of 
dialkyl peroxide initiators, mainly due to its low cost, is dicumyl peroxide (DCP) 20. It 
is produced through the condensation of two cumene hydroperoxides (CHP) and as all 
peroxides, it acts as initiator or hardener in the presence of UPs. The creation of radicals 
from DCP is shown in Scheme 1 and it follows the same mechanism for crosslinking 
as all peroxides, i.e. radical. The cleavage of the O-O bond, which eventually produces 
the radicals, is typically initiated at the temperature of 110𝑜𝐶. 
 
 
Scheme 1: Heat induced radical formation of DCP. 
 
Petroleum-based polymers 
Synthetic polymers were the first and most fast growing domain of commercial 
polymers worldwide. These polymers derive directly from petroleum and fossil fuels 
resources. Monomers such as ethylene, styrene and vinyl alcohol are only a small 
number of polymer building blocks which are synthesized based on these resources. 
The reason why petrochemicals are used for the production of commercial polymers is 
the cost and the source itself. Specifically, both petroleum and fossil fuels were 
abundant and their cracking still remains rather low cost. A good example of petroleum-
based polymers are plastics which cover one of the biggest part of the market pie, 
having millions of tons produced per year.  
One of the many representatives of petroleum-based polymers is poly(ethylene 
terephthalate) or PET which is in broad commercial use. It is an aromatic polyester, 
product of the condensation reaction between EG and TPA (Scheme 2) 21. The 
applications in which PET is used commercially, i.e. fibers (60%), bottles and 
packaging materials (30%), are the result of its excellent barrier properties, its low 
impact strength and the fact that its 𝑇𝑔 is 67𝑜𝐶 8,22.   
 
 
Scheme 2: Condensation reaction between EG and TPA, producing PET. 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
Page | 6  
 
When plastics are produced, huge amounts of 𝐶𝑂2 is an inevitable by-product resulting 
in the pollution of the already damaged environment. Additionally, these resources are 
finite and that has made the world’s industries and market to start moving toward more 
sustainable alternatives. PET’s raw materials derive directly from crude oil 8. TPA 
derives from the catalytic reformation of naphtha into benzene, whereas EG comes from 
cracking of naphtha into ethylene, even when nowadays there are renewable 
alternatives for the production of the latter. As a result, an alternative monomer based 
on renewable resources in order to replace terephthalic acid is needed. This alternative 
is advocated to be given by the monomer FDCA, which resembles the structure of TPA, 
but it is still not commercially available. FDCA can be derived from fructose or other 
C6 carbohydrates by first producing 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) through 
dehydration (Scheme 3a) 10. By replacing terephthalic acid with FDCA, the result is a 
PET-like product called poly(ethylene 2,5-furandicarboxylate) or PEF (Scheme 3b) 23. 
Multiple studies indicate a significant reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, during 
the production of PEF, which is a significant improvement with respect to 
environmental issues 11. Furthermore, PEF exhibits higher barrier properties toward 
different gases, which makes PEF promising as a bio-based PET alternative 24,25.  
 
 
Scheme 3: (a) Synthesis of FDCA from HMF and (b) synthesis of PEF from FDCA and EG. 
However, PEF has exhibited different problems regarding its properties. Specifically, 
it has shown coloring, which is the main obstacle in using PEF for bottle applications 
[3]. Moreover, the elastic modulus of PEF is inherently lower compared to PET, 
however, it was shown that PEF/PET blends exhibit higher modulus 9.  
Overall, PEF seems to be a viable alternative to PET and it has already been produced 
at pilot scale level for packaging applications.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
Page | 7  
 
Composites 
A way to enhance the properties of a material is to combine it with other materials. 
Composite materials have gained their place in the spotlight during the past decades 
mainly due to their unique properties 26. A composite material is produced of two or 
more substances. These substances have different chemical compositions and the final 
material exhibits unique properties, different than the ones of its constituents 27. In 
general, a composite is comprised of two phases; the continuous and the discontinuous. 
The former, commonly called matrix, is usually a polymer, a ceramic, a glass or a metal, 
whereas the latter, which is dispersed within the matrix, referred to as fillers, can be of 
the same or different material with any kind of geometry and shape.  
Nanocomposites are the result of the contribution of multidisciplinary sciences and 
specifically that of nanotechnology to the field of composites. As their name suggests, 
nanocomposites are composites where the dispersed phase has at least two of their 
geometrical dimensions below 100 nm 28. The increasing interest in the nanosized 
materials occurred mainly because of the unique properties which were achieved with 
the addition of as low amounts of fillers as 0.02 wt% 29. These properties derive mainly 
from the high aspect ratio and surface to volume ratio of the reinforcing material.  
In the literature there are countless publications about polymer nanocomposites with 
special focus on the nanofillers. There are different nanofillers among which the most 
investigated nowadays are clay or silica nanoparticles, single or multi walled carbon 
nanotubes, graphene and its derivatives with or without their functionalization.  
Around 1980, Toyota was the first to combine polyamide 6 with montmorillonite, 
which is the raw material for clay nanoparticles, as the reinforcement 30. The properties 
due to the above combination were among others heat stability, reduced shrinkage, and 
enhanced gas barrier properties with a minimum loss in impact strength. These 
properties made the nanocomposites suitable for applications such as molding of engine 
covers.  
After that, the interest in the field of nanocomposites is constantly growing. More and 
more research was done by using different polymer matrices and fillers resulting in 
nanocomposites for a wide range of applications.  
One example can be found in PET nanocomposites which have drawn a lot of attention 
mainly due to the low cost production of PET and its widespread use. Specifically, a 
lot of interest has been drawn in the correlation of crystallinity of PET and the type of 
additives. Moreover, in the case of clay nanoparticles, it was found that by controlling 
both the degree of crystallinity and crystallization rate, the microstructure, and thus the 
mechanical properties, can be controlled 31–33.  
In addition, PET nanocomposites with single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) as 
nanofillers were prepared by in situ polymerization. The mechanical properties were 
found to be influenced by the volume fraction of the SWCNTs, achieving an optimum 
at higher fractions 34.  However, the failure at strain was dramatically decreased due to 
the presence of the nanofillers. Furthermore, multi-walled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNTs) were also investigated as nanofillers in PET fiber nanocomposites 35. 
These nanocomposites were prepared by melt-compounding and it was shown that 
through that incorporation, the crystallization was increased whereas the breaking at 
stress became lower than pure PET fibers. Also, it was observed that well dispersed 
==PAGE:17==
Page | 8  
 
MWCNTs disturbed the crystallization of PET molecules due to the highly constrained 
state of the former.  
Other properties induced by carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in polymer nanocomposites are 
electrical and conductive properties. These properties are mainly determined through 
the percolation threshold which is defined as the lower threshold above which long-
range connectivity is achieved. Among the lowest percolation thresholds in 
nanocomposites was found in SWCNTs dispersed into an epoxy matrix 36. This 
nanocomposite was synthesized by employing room temperature ionic liquid and 
through steamed line method. It was observed that the lowest percolation threshold 
possible was achieved at 0.005 wt% of the filler. In another study, the electrical 
properties were also investigated and found to depend on the percolation threshold in 
the case of graphene-incorporated PET nanocomposites. The transition from insulator 
to semiconductor was achieved at low percolation of 0.47 vol% of graphene nanosheets. 
At the same time the electrical conductivity reached a peak at very low graphene 
content 37.   
Following, the case of graphene and its derivatives is being reviewed, since it is the 
filler which will be used in the preparation of nanocomposites in this thesis. 
 
Graphene and its Derivatives 
One of the most popular choices for the dispersed phase is the group of carbonaceous 
structures which include among others graphene 38. Being the product of the exfoliation 
of graphite, graphene is ideally a one-atom-thick 2D sheet comprised of “honeycomb” 
network of sp2 hybridized carbon 39,40.   
The most famous derivative of graphene is the graphene oxide (GO). It was initially 
synthesized through Brodie method in 1859 41  which was basically an oxidation method 
including potassium chlorinate and nitric acid. Thereafter, the method that was used by 
far most commonly is the so called Hummer’s method 41 aiming to simplify the 
synthesis of graphene oxide. This method includes a mixture of concentrated sulfuric 
acid, sodium nitrate and potassium permanganate. It was noted that the whole process 
was not time consuming and it could be performed at temperature lower than 45𝑜𝐶. 
Nowadays, it is more common to use a modified version of the Hummer’s method 13,42–
44. Among these modified versions, the one which is of particular interest for this thesis 
project includes microwave assisted radiation process for producing initially carbon 
nanospheres and thereafter oxidation through an acid catalyzed reaction 45,46.  More 
informations regarding this technique will be given in the nanoscale GO section below. 
GO exhibits a large surface area and superior mechanical, thermal and optoelectrical 
properties, making it a perfect candidate for being chosen as a filler 39,40,47–49. It is 
comprised of graphene regions with oxygen bearing groups such as hydroxyl, epoxy 
and carboxyl groups, in basal planes and edges, providing an overall amphiphilic 
character (Figure 2) 50. Because of that, GO displays good compatibility with several 
different polymer matrices through hydrogen bonding 51. Additionally, GO presents 
interesting energy bandgaps and π-π stacking, due to its sp2 and sp3 hybridized carbon 
atoms 52. The potential applications of GO are vast as direct aftereffect of its unique 
properties. It is widely studied in biomedical applications 53,54 as well as in 
environmental applications, such as water purification and removal of air pollutants 55.  
==PAGE:18==
Page | 9  
 
 
 
Figure 2: Proposed chemical structure of graphene oxide 4. 
Nanoscale GO (nGO), i.e. GO with all three dimensions in the nanoscale 56, is expected 
to be more stable in dispersions than GO due to its smaller size and it is found to be a 
good candidate for biomedical applications 42,56. Because of its nanosized scale it 
displays an even higher specific surface area and barrier properties than GO. In 
addition, the properties of nanocomposites in which nGO was the dispersed phase, were 
enhanced.  
Of particular interest for this project are the GO nano dots (GONDs). GONDs or 
quantum dots (GOQDs) as they may be referred to in the literature, have the 
characteristic of small diameter, as low as a few nm. They can be synthesized through 
different methods which among others are one-pot solvothermal 57 and electrochemical 
approaches 58. However, a different method which involves the synthesis of GONDs 
from bio-based resources will be used in this thesis. Particularly, this method involves 
a microwave assisted technique for production of carbon nanospheres (CN) obtained 
from renewable resources, such as coffee ground 13, starch 59,60 and waste paper 2,3,45. 
This method further involves the acid catalysis of CN with nitric acid in a two-step 
fashion first at 45𝑜𝐶 and then at 90𝑜𝐶 as seen in Scheme 4. 
 
 
Scheme 4: Synthesis of GONDs from CN (two-step process) 2. 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
Page | 10  
 
GONDs were synthesized from coffee ground through the “green” approach mentioned 
above achieving dots with a diameter as low as 20 nm and composited with poly(L-
lactic acid) (PLLA) forming a nanocomposite 13. The resulting properties of the 
nanocomposite were extraordinary even for the lowest amount of GONDs. Specifically, 
only with 0.5 wt% of GONDs, almost 100% UV-blocking was observed in the UV 
region which simultaneously enhanced the visible transparency. GONDs acted as 
nucleation points promoting the crystallization of PLLA and improving the mechanical 
properties significantly compared to the pure matrix even with 1 wt%.  
Moreover, GONDs of 46 nm average diameter produced from a cellulose source, i.e. 
waste paper, were blended with PLA forming a bionanocomposite 3. The GONDs 
increased the nucleation and enhanced the mechanical and gas barrier properties. 
Additionally, GONDs promoted the degradation of PLA through water erosion. 
 In a different study, starch-derived GONDs with a diameter of around 12 nm 
functionalized starch through esterification. The functionalized starch processed into a 
porous scaffold 61. It was shown that the water uptake of the scaffold was proportional 
to the porosity and no cytotoxicity was observed in the investigated cells. Furthermore, 
in the same fashion, nGO was anchored to starch granules through hydrogen bonding 
and acted as a filler in PLA matrix 59. nGO acted as a perfect compatibilizer nucleation 
agent, enhancing the interfacial adhesion between starch and PLA and intensifying the 
thermomechanical properties of the resulted composite. Finally, nGO was incorporated 
with starch forming homogeneous fibers through electrospinning 60. The highest 
biocompatibility of the fibers was achieved for the lowest nGO amount, i.e. 2.5 wt%, 
whereas the presence of the latter promoted the hydrophilicity of the fibers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
Page | 11  
 
Experimental Plan 
 
This project will focused on the synthesis and characterization of novel diallyl-2,5-
furandicarboxate (DAFDC) nanocomposites with GONDs. The nanocomposites will 
undergo curing through radical crosslinking with the use of dicumyl peroxide (DCP) as 
the crosslinking agent, a common crosslinking agent for polyesters. Different 
characterization techniques will be involved throughout the whole experimental work. 
Initially, “probe” samples will be made by mixing DAFDC with DCP with varying 
weight percentage of the latter to investigate the kinetic parameters through Differential 
Scanning Calorimetry (DSC). The obstacle of small amounts of DCP which are needed 
for the DSC “probe” samples will be tackled by solubilizing DCP in acetone. Based on 
the kinetic parameter study, the optimum curing temperature and time will be 
determined. Additional characterization through Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) 
spectroscopy will also take place.  
After that, reference samples with varying crosslinking weight percentage will be 
produced following the mechanics shown in Scheme 5 by applying the following 
protocol. DAFDC will be heated up to 35𝑜𝐶 and it will be mixed with DCP in a 
speedmixer. Then, the homogenized sample will be compound molded by using a hot 
press operating on the optimum conditions defined earlier by the kinetic study. 
Thereafter, the oxidation of CNs will take place resulting in the GONDs, based on a 
two-step process developed at Prof. Hakkarainen’s Polymer Technology laboratory, 
involving the presence of nitric acid 70% (Scheme 4). The morphology of the resulted 
GONDs will be studied accordingly.  
Finally, the synthesis of DAFDC/GONDs nanocomposites will be carried out. 
Specifically, GONDs with varying weight percentages, ranging between 0.5  and 
2 𝑤𝑡% will be incorporated into the crosslinked matrix of DAFDC, by using the 
previously found optimum conditions.  
The characterization of both the reference samples and nanocomposites will be carried 
out through different analytical methods. Thermal measurements in the form of 
Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) and DSC will be employed to study the thermal 
stability and overall thermal behavior. Dielectric spectroscopy (DS) will be used to 
study the electrical properties of GONDs and nanocomposites. FT-IR will be used to 
study the oxygenated groups of the GONDs and Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) 
spectrophotometry to investigate the transmittance and absorbance of the 
nanocomposites. Finally, the mechanical properties will be investigated through tensile 
testing and Dynamical Mechanical Analysis (DMA).  
Therefore, the experimental work will investigate the curing parameters as well as the 
weight percentage of GONDs as fillers in DAFDC crosslinked systems with different 
weight percentage of crosslinking and the influence these parameters have on the 
properties of the nanocomposites.  
==PAGE:21==
Page | 12  
 
 
Scheme 5: Crosslinking of DAFDC monomer with DCP, resulting in a radical chain which will 
further react with other DAFDC monomers and DCP to form a crosslinked network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:22==
Page | 13  
 
Results & Discussion 
 
In this section, the results of the conducted experiments will be explained and discussed. 
All of the different approaches used for the preparation and characterization of the 
samples which led to the final and optimized methods presented in Experimental 
Section will be also addressed. A scheme presenting the experimental approaches used 
for the production of nanocomposites as well as the characterizations employed to study 
them can be found in the Appendix (Schemes A1). For clarification, the nomenclature 
of the samples in this sections will be as followed: DCP refers to 𝐷𝐶𝑃𝐴 unless stated 
otherwise, the matrix sample, i.e the crosslinked matrix with DAFDC and 5 𝑤𝑡% of 
DCP, will simply be mentioned as 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵, apart from the matrix that was produced 
initially with a different protocol and shape, which is mentioned as 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 and 
finally the nanocomposites will be mentioned only by their filler weight percentage 
since the matrix is the same for all of them. For instance, the nanocomposite with 
0.1 𝑤𝑡% of GOND will be referred to as 0.1𝐺𝑂𝑁𝐷. To minimize random errors, three 
sets of measurements were obtained for TGA and conductivity measurements. For the 
mechanical testing, DSC and FT-IR duplets of measurements were performed. All of 
the values presented are the average values and the errors are the standard deviations 
between the different tests. 
 
Determination of Initiator Content 
The thermal behavior of DAFDC, DCP and their combined crosslinked network with 
different amounts of initiator was studied by DSC. The purpose of this investigation 
was to identify the minimum weight percentage of DCP needed in order to initiate 
DAFDC resulting in the formation of a crosslinked network. The polymerization 
mechanism of the desired crosslinked network can be found in the Appendix (Scheme 
A2). In Figures 3 and 4, the DSC curves of DAFDC and DCP are presented, 
respectively. The crystallization (𝑇𝑐), melting (𝑇𝑚) and curing (𝑇𝑐𝑢𝑟.) temperatures as 
well as the normalized enthalpy of curing (𝛥𝛨𝑐𝑢𝑟) derived from the DSC curves are 
listed in Table 1. 
==PAGE:23==
Page | 14  
 
 
Figure 3: DSC curve of pure DAFDC; First heating ramp (blue line), cooling ramp (green line) 
and second heating ramp (red line). 
 
Figure 4: DSC curve of pure DCP; First heating ramp (blue line), cooling ramp (green line) and 
second heating ramp (red line). 
Based on Figure 3 and the data listed in Table 1, the melting of DAFDC occurs at 
around 33𝑜𝐶, whereas the crystallization at 2.5𝑜𝐶. However, the standard deviation for 
𝑇𝑐 is quite large, i.e. ±8.0𝑜𝐶, meaning that for this peak the value is not entirely 
reliable, even though the peak is observed around this area for all of the tested samples. 
Moreover, the initiator (Figure 4), shows a sharp melting peak around 40𝑜𝐶, which 
can be verified by the literature where its melting peak is observed around 39.8𝑜𝐶 62. 
The curing peak of the initiator can be observed between 120𝑜𝐶 and 200𝑜𝐶 exhibiting 
the maximum heat flow around 177𝑜𝐶. Additionally, the second heating ramp of DCP 
(red line) shows that the system is fully cured underlined by the absence of a curing 
peak. 
==PAGE:24==
Page | 15  
 
Based on the above information, the analysis of the DSC curves for the different weight 
amounts of DCP in DAFDC was done.  
The DSC curves of 2 𝑤𝑡% (Figure 5) and 5 𝑤𝑡%  (Figure 6) of DCP in DAFDC were 
chosen to be presented for comparison. The rest of the weight amounts that were tested 
can be found in the Appendix (Figures A1 to A3). 
 
Figure 5: DSC curve of 𝟐 𝒘𝒕% of DCP in DAFDC; First heating ramp (blue line), cooling ramp 
(green line) and second heating ramp (red line). 
 
Figure 6: DSC curve of 𝟓 𝒘𝒕% of DCP in DAFDC; First heating ramp (blue line), cooling ramp 
(green line) and second heating ramp (red line). 
 
==PAGE:25==
Page | 16  
 
Table 1: Crystallization (𝑻𝒄), melting (𝑻𝒎), curing  (𝑻𝒄𝒖𝒓.) temperatures and normalized enthalpy 
of curing (𝜟𝜢𝒄𝒖𝒓) of the investigated samples. The error is the standard deviation between the 
tests. 
a: values were obtained from crystallization peak of DSC curve. 
b: values were obtained from melting peak of DSC curve. 
c: values were obtained from curing peak of DSC curve. 
d: values were obtained from the curing peak of DSC curve and normalized by the weight of the 
samples. 
By comparing Figures 5 and 6 the following differences and similarities could be 
identified. First, the melting peak seems to be the same for both samples around 33𝑜𝐶 
which coincides with the 𝑇𝑚 for DAFDC. However, the effect from the presence of the 
initiator which would presumably drag the peak to higher temperatures closer to its 𝑇𝑚 
could be indicated from the broaden of the melting peak compared to pure DAFDC, 
especially at higher initiator content. The curing peak for 5 𝑤𝑡%  of DCP in DAFDC is 
much more pronounced compared to the one for 2 𝑤𝑡%, which is barely observable 
and still within range of the curing peak of the initiator. This difference is also 
highlighted in their 𝛥𝛨𝑐𝑢𝑟., which for 2 𝑤𝑡% of DCP in DAFDC is lower compared to 
5 𝑤𝑡%. These values were chosen to be normalized by the weight of the samples to 
investigate if their difference is significant, which based on Table 1, they are identified 
as such. However, both of them are significantly lower compared to the value possessed 
by pure DCP, which was expected since the amount of initiator is not comparable. 
Moreover, the crystallization peak as well as the second melting peak are only apparent 
at 2 𝑤𝑡%  indicating that the amount of initiator was insufficient, thus the non-
crosslinked monomer is crystallized and then melted. However, this is not the case for 
5 𝑤𝑡%, meaning that there is no monomer left to be crystallized, thus all of the 
monomer is crosslinked.  
The same observations made for 2 𝑤𝑡% and 5 𝑤𝑡% can also be made for the rest of the 
weight percentages of DCP in DAFDC found in Figures A1 to A3. Moreover, the data 
for 4 and 5 𝑤𝑡% seem to be very similar, but by means of 𝛥𝛨𝑐𝑢𝑟. 5 𝑤𝑡% seems to 
exhibit the highest (Table A2). In other words, for this study 4 𝑤𝑡% of DCP was 
identified to be the minimum amount of initiator needed to successfully crosslink the 
desired monomer. However, for the rest of this thesis and in order to be on the safe side, 
the amount of initiator that was chosen to be used for the preparation of matrix and 
nanocomposites was 5 𝑤𝑡%.  
 
 
Sample 
𝑻𝒄 
[℃]a 
𝑻𝒎 
[℃]b 
𝑻𝒄𝒖𝒓. 𝒑𝒆𝒂𝒌 
[℃]c 
𝜟𝜢𝒄𝒖𝒓. 
[𝑱]d 
DAFDC 
2.5 ± 8.0 
32.9 ± 0.2 
----- 
----- 
DCP 
----- 
40.0 ± 0.3 
176.5 ± 0.3 
3.08 ± 0.14 
𝟐 𝒘𝒕% 
−4.1 ± 2.9 
33.0 ± 0.1 
183.9 ± 2.1 
0.14 ± 0.04 
𝟓 𝒘𝒕% 
----- 
32.3 ± 0.1 
179.6 ± 0.1 
0.63 ± 0.11 
==PAGE:26==
Page | 17  
 
Kinetic Analysis 
Based on the curing peak for 5 𝑤𝑡%  of DCP in DAFDC, kinetic analysis was 
performed by using Borchardt and Daniels method which is explained in the 
Experimental Section. The purpose of this analysis was to investigate the curing time 
and temperature that will be used for the preparation of matrix and nanocomposites. In 
Figure 7, the 𝑅2 values obtained from the data of Equation (𝟒) are plotted against 
different reaction orders. Based on the maximum 𝑅2 value, the corresponding reaction 
order, which in our case is 1.04 is chosen leading to the correct Arrhenius plot (Figure 
8), based on which 𝐸𝑎 and 𝑍 were obtained and listed in Table 2. 
 
Figure 7: 𝑹𝟐 vs reaction order for 𝟓 𝒘𝒕% of DCP in DAFDC. 
 
Figure 8: Arrhenius plot for 𝟓 𝒘𝒕% of DCP in DAFDC; The slope is −𝟏𝟔𝟓𝟗𝟏. 𝟑± 𝟒𝟑𝟓. 𝟓 and the 
intercept is 𝟑𝟒. 𝟖𝟓± 𝟏. 𝟏𝟑.  
==PAGE:27==
Page | 18  
 
 
Table 2: Parameters from the Arrhenius equation for 𝟓 𝒘𝒕%  of DCP in DAFDC based on 
maximum 𝑹𝟐. The error is the standard deviation between the tests. 
Reaction Order 
𝑬𝒂  
[𝒌𝑱/𝒎𝒐𝒍] 
𝒍𝒏𝒁 
𝑹𝒎𝒂𝒙
𝟐
 
1.04 ± 0.22 
137.94 ± 3.62 
34.85 ± 1.13 
0.99932 ± 0.00026 
 
Based on Table 2, all of the parameters listed are within the range of other branched 
allyl systems, found in the literature 63, in which a thiol crosslinker and the same 
monomer were used as in the current study. Moreover, they are in agreement with DAP 
crosslinked matrix with 3 𝑤𝑡% of DCP also found in the literature 64. 
Finally, the isothermal conversion plot (Figure 9) was built, giving an insight on how 
long the respective percentage of conversion will take. For comparison, the time for the 
material to reach 95%  conversion, i.e. 𝑡95%  was calculated for the different 
temperatures and listed in Table 3. 
 
Figure 9: Percentage of conversation vs time; 𝟏𝟐𝟎𝒐𝑪 (red line), 𝟏𝟑𝟎𝒐𝑪 (green line), 𝟏𝟒𝟎𝒐𝑪 (blue 
line), 𝟏𝟓𝟎𝒐𝑪 (purple line), 𝟏𝟔𝟎𝒐𝑪 (cyan line), 𝟏𝟕𝟎𝒐𝑪 (orange line). 
Table 3: Time needed for 𝟗𝟓% of conversion (𝒕𝟗𝟓%) for 𝟓 𝒘𝒕% of DCP in DAFDC at different 
temperatures. The error is the standard deviation between the tests. 
Temperature 
[℃] 
𝒕𝟗𝟓%  
[𝒎𝒊𝒏. ]a 
𝟏𝟐𝟎𝒐𝑪 
82.4 ± 25.4 
𝟏𝟑𝟎𝒐𝑪 
28.9 ± 8.1 
𝟏𝟒𝟎𝒐𝑪 
10.7 ± 2.7 
𝟏𝟓𝟎𝒐𝑪 
4.1 ± 1.0 
𝟏𝟔𝟎𝒐𝑪 
1.7 ± 0.4 
𝟏𝟕𝟎𝒐𝑪 
0.7 ± 0.1 
a: values were obtained from solving Equation (𝟓) for different temperatures. 
==PAGE:28==
Page | 19  
 
Based on Figure 9, a certain trend can be observed. As the temperature increases, the 
slope between conversion and time is also increasing, meaning that less time is needed 
when curing occurs at higher temperatures. This trend was expected since more heat is 
induced in the system and therefore the energy or in other words the probability for a 
radical to find and react with a monomer unit and start propagating, resulting in the 
formation of the crosslinked network is also increased. This observation was verified 
mathematically by solving Equation (𝟓) to obtain the time parameter, i.e. 𝑡95%, which 
is listed in Table 3. For instance, 𝑡95% at 160𝑜𝐶 is 1.7 𝑚𝑖𝑛. whereas at 130𝑜𝐶 is 
28.9 𝑚𝑖𝑛. 
It has to be noted that the kinetics of the reaction became slower while approaching 
higher conversion as seen in Figure 9, meaning that in order to reach 99%  conversion 
at 160𝑜𝐶 it takes about 2.7 𝑚𝑖𝑛. whereas 46 𝑚𝑖𝑛. is needed at 130𝑜𝐶. Hence, the time 
is almost doubled compared to the one of 95% of conversion. 
Based on the information about the curing time, the crosslinked matrix sample with 
5 𝑤𝑡% of DCP in DAFDC was molded. Both a hot press and an oven under vacuum 
were initially used operating at both 160𝑜𝐶 and 130𝑜𝐶 for additional 15 𝑚𝑖𝑛. of the 
calculated curing time based on the above kinetic analysis. In the first case, different 
metallic molds were used and the sample was poured and squeezed by applying 
500 𝑏𝑎𝑟 of pressure. In the second case, the same molds were used in the oven under 
vacuum without the application of pressure. Hence, the differences between the two 
approaches were the vacuum and the absence of pressure in the latter and the presence 
of pressure and absence of vacuum in the former. In both cases, the result was a liquid-
like and sometimes oily product, indicating the lack of crosslinks. Furthermore, this 
liquid-like product was flowing between the gaps apparent in the metallic mold and the 
plates, indicating its low viscosity while increasing temperature. Then, the same 
initiator from a different manufacturer was used (𝐷𝐶𝑃𝐵, Sigma Aldrich), in order to 
check if there is a problem with the specific initiator that has been used, since it was 
old. The results were the same, hence the conclusion that there was no problem with 
the initiator was drawn. For the rest of the thesis, 𝐷𝐶𝑃𝐵 will be used and it will simply 
be referred to as DCP. Thereafter, a different system of initiator was used, to avoid the 
heating of the materials to high temperatures and thus avoiding the flow of the material. 
Specifically, a different peroxide initiator, namely benzoyl peroxide (BPO) was used 
with the same weight percentage as DCP. Since BPO is quite stable, the use of an 
activator, namely 4-N-N-trimethylaniline, was necessary. Also since the amounts of 
BPO were small, it was diluted in acetone with a final concentration of 0.002 𝑔/𝑚𝐿. 
Different ratios of initiator and activator (initiator : activator) were tested, i.e. 
5: 0.5, 5: 0.75, 5: 1, 5: 2  and  5: 3  and cured at room temperature. The respective 
amounts for the different ratios can be found in the Appendix (Table A3). However, 
further studies were needed to find the optimum ratio and thus this approach was set 
aside in order to give a final try to the initial initiator, i.e. DCP. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
Page | 20  
 
Crosslinked Matrix 
The only way that was found to contain the product and avoid flowing of the material 
was a homemade mold (Figure 10) that was used in the vacuum oven at 130𝑜𝐶. 
However, in order to have a final product, curing time had to be further increased and 
eventually the product needed 24 ℎ in the vacuum oven to crosslink, resulting in a large 
disc, which will be referred to as 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 (Figure 11).  
 
Figure 10: Digital pictures of the homemade mold that was used. Starting from the left to the 
right, the procedure of assembling the mold with the Teflon cup is presented. 
 
Figure 11: Digital picture of 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑨, cured at 𝟏𝟑𝟎𝒐𝑪 for 𝟐𝟒𝒉 in the homemade mold of Figure 
8. 
The cured sample of Figure 11, exhibited a transparent yellowish color in conjunction 
with a sweet smell. The odor is mainly due to acetophenone, the by-product created 
during the cleavage of the 𝑂−𝑂 bond of DCP, whereas the color is due to the aromatic 
residues of DCP.  
In order to verify the ability of DCP to initiate and crosslink DAFDC, FT-IR was 
employed. The spectra for the monomer and 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 is shown in Figure 12. The 
spectrum is presented in its full form and the smaller plot is the zoom of the circled area 
for better qualitative observation. 
==PAGE:30==
Page | 21  
 
 
Figure 12: FT-IR of DAFDC (red line) and 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑨 (blue line); the smaller plot is the zoom of 
the spectrum between 𝟑𝟒𝟎𝟎 𝒄𝒎−𝟏 and 𝟐𝟔𝟎𝟎 𝒄𝒎−𝟏 (i.e. functional groups section). 
In Figure 12 (zoom), it can be observed that the height of the stretching peak of olefins, 
i.e. = 𝐶𝐻−, which occurred at 3108 𝑐𝑚−1  in the case of DAFDC is shifted to 
3130 𝑐𝑚−1  and is significantly decreased by introducing DCP (𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴). Moreover, 
the height of coiling vibration of allyl groups, i.e. = 𝐶𝐻2 which occurred at 1647, 
980 and 934 𝑐𝑚−1 was also decreased as seen in Figure 12. Therefore, DCP could 
initiate and crosslink DAFDC under the selected conditions.  
However, a discrepancy between the results from the kinetic analysis and the 
experimental curing time that was used to prepare 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 can be observed.  
This discrepancy was attributed to two main reasons. First of all, it could be because 
the curing is hindered by the conformation of the monomer, since it is not accounted 
for in the employed kinetic model. Second, it could be because in the DSC cup there is 
a pressure built-up during the heating-cooling circles, since no hole was punctured. That 
forced the system to crosslink under pressure and not only temperature, hence the 
curing time of the kinetic analysis compared to the experimental was underestimated. 
Unfortunately, the only way to apply pressure was through the hot press which could 
not be used because of the low viscosity of the pre-cured system as explained above. 
The experimental curing time that was used for the preparation of 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴, i.e. 24 ℎ, 
can also be found in other works in the literature in which the same initiator is used 
64,65. In one of the studies, a staggered combination of curing times at different 
temperatures, i.e. 125𝑜𝐶 (12 ℎ), 150𝑜𝐶 (3 ℎ) and 170𝑜𝐶 (7 ℎ) was used to prepare a 
DAP resin with DCP 65. To our knowledge, no kinetic study has been done in the past 
with DCP by using the specific kinetic model and most of the studies include a protocol 
which is based on a staggered fashion of curing temperatures and times.  
==PAGE:31==
Page | 22  
 
By following the same fashion, our system was cured in a different oven with no 
vacuum at 130𝑜𝐶 for 1,5 ℎ and 150𝑜𝐶 for additional 2 ℎ by using a Teflon mold to 
contain the product and avoiding flow. The crosslinked result of DAFDC and 5 𝑤𝑡%  
of DCP with this protocol will be referred to as 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵. A different oven was used 
to check the hypothesis that the set temperature of the oven that was used for the 
production of 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 was different than the one inside the chamber, which was 
verified. Another important advantage of the Teflon mold over the homemade mold, is 
the rectangular shape of the produced samples, which due to the curvature of the Teflon 
cup that was used in the latter, the resulted product could not be used for any mechanical 
characterization. Additionally, multiple samples could have been prepared in the Teflon 
mold (up to 4), whereas in the Teflon cup only one sample. The above reasons led to 
the preference of Teflon mold over the Teflon cup for the preparation of samples. 
By using the above protocol, i.e. no vacuum, oxygen could not be eliminated and since 
the crosslinking is basically a free radical polymerization, it is expected to hinder the 
polymerization, since oxygen acts as a radical scavenger. Although oxygen is present, 
a crosslinked product was able to be produced and its FT-IR spectrum is shown in 
Figure 13 in comparison with 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴. 
 
Figure 13: FT-IR of 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑨 (red line) and 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 (black line). 
In Figure 13, the comparison between the FT-IR spectra of 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 and 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 
can be seen. The point of interest in Figure 13, is marked with the black circle. This 
indicates the presence of hydroxyl groups between the area of 3630 𝑐𝑚−1  and 
3340 𝑐𝑚−1 in 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵. This can be explained from the fact that 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 was 
produced in an oven with no vacuum, where as 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 had vacuum and thus no 
oxygen was present.  
The presence of −𝑂𝐻 groups are expected to enhance the interactions between the 
matrix and fillers which will be discussed in the section of preparation of 
nanocomposites.  
==PAGE:32==
Page | 23  
 
The thermal degradation between DAFDC, 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 and 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 can be observed 
in Figure 14.  
 
Figure 14: TGA of DAFDC (black line), 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑨 (red line) and 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 (blue line). 
In order to compare the starting point of the degradation of the samples, the temperature 
at which 5% decline from the total initial weight of 100%, i.e. 𝑇5% was chosen as a 
reference for all of the samples and is listed in Table 4. Additional to 𝑇5% which is 
derived solely from TGA, three more degradation temperatures can be derived from the 
derivative of thermogravimetric analysis (DTG) (Figure 15). Each temperature 
corresponds to a peak of the graph in Figure 15 and it is listed in Table 4.  
Table 4: Degradation temperatures of DAFDC, 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑨 and 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩. The error is the 
standard deviation between the tests. 
Samples 
𝑻𝟓%  
[℃]a 
𝑻𝒎𝒂𝒙
𝑨
 
[℃]b 
𝑻𝒎𝒂𝒙
𝑩
 
[℃]b 
𝑻𝒎𝒂𝒙
𝑪
 
[℃]b 
DAFDC 
153.5 ± 6.3 
230.0 ± 4.4 
----- 
----- 
𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑨 
160.6 ± 4.5 
166.2 ± 3.7 
358.1 ± 1.0 
419.9 ± 0.8 
𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 
185.3 ± 9.5 
197.4 ± 7.7 
363.4 ± 0.6 
420.6 ± 0.9 
a: values were obtained from TGA data for 𝟓% loss of initial mass. 
b: values were obtained from DTG of Figure 15. 
As it can be seen in Figure 14, a simple one-step degradation is followed by DAFDC. 
This degradation is due to the burning of the allyl end groups. The TGA curve for both 
𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴  and 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵, however, present a more complex degradation. The 𝑇5% is 
increased by around 13𝑜𝐶 for 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 and 32𝑜𝐶 for 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵, in comparison to the 
pure monomer. Additionally, the shape of the curve is different, suggesting a different 
mechanism for the degradation of the crosslinked network.  
==PAGE:33==
Page | 24  
 
 
Figure 15: DTG of DAFDC (black line), 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑨 (red line) and 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 (blue line). 
Based on Figure 15 and Table 4, it is observed that the first peak (𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝐴
) of the two 
different matrices coincides with the one for the monomer. Also, the second and third 
peaks seem to be identical for the two matrices as their values are also in close proximity 
from each other (Table 4).   
The data listed in Table 4 as well as the observable differences and similarities of the 
investigated samples in Figures 14 and 15, gave rise to the following possible 
mechanism explaining this two-step degradation of 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 and 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵. First, 
there will be unreacted double bonds in the end of different monomer groups or 
completely unreacted monomer units, meaning that these groups will be the first to 
degrade and that coincides with the low degradation temperature observed also for the 
monomer itself. After these groups are gone, a second pseudo-plateau is observed right 
before the second degradation takes place in a two-step fashion, which is assigned to 
the degradation of the fully crosslinked network. In the ideal case where all the allyl 
groups have reacted, the second shoulder could be attributed to the true degradation of 
𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 and 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 at temperatures around 358𝑜𝐶 and 363𝑜𝐶, respectively, 
which is a significant improvement in thermal stability of the matrix.  
A schematic representation of the two-step degradation of the crosslinked system in 
which the above mechanism takes place is presented in Scheme 6. 
 
Scheme 6: Schematic representation of the partially crosslinked system (left) which undergoes the 
degradation of allyl end groups or unreacted DAFDC units leading to the fully crosslinked system 
(right). 
==PAGE:34==
Page | 25  
 
Additionally, 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 seemed to be more flexible than 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 which could be 
either due to the different shape, i.e. 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐴 is much thicker than 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 or to the 
bigger surface that was used for 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 where the radical had to cover more area in 
order to fully crosslink DAFDC, resulting in the higher amount of unreacted monomer 
units which act as plasticizers. 
This could also be verified from the fact that during curing of 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 cracks were 
observed in the sample indicating the shrinkage of the system due to the small length 
of the monomer.  
It has to be noted that, as mentioned in the possible degradation mechanism, the system 
is only partially crosslinked with either protocols. However, for the rest of the thesis 
only the protocol with the staggered curing temperature and time are been used.   
Before the preparation of the nanocomposites, the oxidation step of CNs intro GONDs 
is been discussed, since GONDs are one of the filler types used in the nanocomposites. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
Page | 26  
 
Oxidation of CNs 
In order to oxidize CNs into GONDs a protocol developed at Prof. Hakkarainen’s 
groups was used 2. Even though the desired nanoparticles were obtained, the problem 
faced was its purification. Specifically, the final pH could not be increased to the 
desired value of 6. The low pH value of the product indicating the presence of nitric 
acid, after it was left in the vacuum oven for a week, resulted in a burnt brown-orange 
product as seen in Figure 16.  
 
Figure 16: Digital picture of the burned nanoparticles after one week in the vacuum oven at room 
temperature.  
Although different approaches were used, including the addition of more DI water and 
successive multiple rotary evaporations, the pH remained acidic. More specifically, the 
addition of more DI water did not result in the increase of pH to the desired value. Then, 
filtration under vacuum was performed with a filter paper having a pore diameter of 
450 𝑛𝑚. The size of the nanoparticles should be between 10 and 50 𝑛𝑚 2, meaning 
that most of the nanoparticles passed through and only some aggregates were trapped 
by the filter. This behavior acts as an indication of the good dispersion of nanoparticles 
in the acidic water solution. Finally, multiple rotary evaporations were used, meaning 
that after the first evaporation, DI water was added and evaporated again. The repetition 
of this procedure up to 5  times resulted in successive rotary evaporations with 
discouraging results, meaning that pH was only increased up to 3. 
Therefore, dialysis was deemed necessary to remove the acid, resulting in the optimized 
procedure mentioned in the Experimental Section and its schematic representation can 
be found in the Appendix (Scheme A3). The complete removal of acid, decreased the 
time spent by the product in the vacuum oven from 7 to 1 day, resulting in a fluffy 
brownish powder (Scheme A3). However, the dialysis tube that was used had a 𝑀𝑊𝐶𝑂 
of 1 𝑘𝐷𝑎 and judging by the low yield of the product, the highest of which was 27%, 
most of the nanoparticles passed through the tube. Since pH had to be almost neutral in 
order to use the nanoparticles with a peroxide initiator, dialysis was the only alternative, 
so we further characterized and used the resulted nanoparticles even though the yield 
==PAGE:36==
Page | 27  
 
was low and it was expected the nanoparticles to have bigger size than what is stated in 
the literature 2.  
The characterization of the functional groups of the resulted GONDs, was achieved 
through FT-IR and it can be seen in comparison to the initial CNs in Figure 17.  
 
Figure 17: FT-IR spectrum of CNs (black line) and GONDs (red line).  
Both CNs and GONDs exhibited oxygen rich functional groups and the only difference 
was that some of the characteristic modes of the latter were slightly shifted compared 
to the former. The following identification of modes was accomplished by using 
different literature sources regarding this product 2,3,13,61. Specifically CNs exhibited the 
characteristic modes of carboxylic acids, which include the stretching of 𝐶−𝑂 group 
at 1050, 1158 and 1367 𝑐𝑚−1, the stretching of 𝐶= 𝑂 at 1690 𝑐𝑚−1, the broad 
stretching of 𝐶−𝑂𝐻 between 1827 −3684 𝑐𝑚−1, the aromatic 𝑠𝑝2 carbons trough 
the stretching of 𝐶= 𝐶 at 1690 𝑐𝑚−1  and the 𝑠𝑝3 hybridized 𝐶−𝐻 stretching at 
2913 𝑐𝑚−1. GONDs displayed the stretching of 𝐶−𝑂 group at 935, 1065, 1201 and 
1345 𝑐𝑚−1, the stretching of 𝐶= 𝑂 at 1719 𝑐𝑚−1, the stretching of 𝐶= 𝐶 occurred 
at 1611 𝑐𝑚−1  whereas the broad peak of 𝐶−𝑂𝐻 and the 𝑠𝑝3  hybridized 𝐶−𝐻 
stretching remained the same. Finally, there are two points of interest in Figure 17 
highlighted by the two circles. First, the increase in the broad peak corresponding to 
𝐶−𝑂𝐻 group is more rapid for GONDs at higher values of wavenumber compared to 
CNs (circle 1). This difference could be an indication of the presence of additional 
oxygen functional groups which are introduced during the oxidation step. Second, the 
FT-IR spectrum for GONDs at 1546 𝑐𝑚−1 exhibits a small peak which is not apparent 
for CNs (circle 2). This peak is recognized by the literature as 𝑁−𝑂 nitro compound 
66 and it could be due to the strong acid that was used during the oxidation step. 
Thereafter, the solubility of both CNs and GONDs was qualitatively estimated by 
simple optical observation. Specifically, digital pictures of the dispersion of CNs and 
GONDs in DI water and acetone, as mentioned in the Experimental Section, were 
captured right after 5 𝑚𝑖𝑛. of sonication, 3 ℎ and 24 ℎ of resting and they are presented 
in Figure 18. 
==PAGE:37==
Page | 28  
 
 
Figure 18: Digital pictures of CNs (left on each picture) and GONDs (right on each picture) in 
𝟏 𝒎𝒈/𝒎𝑳 solutions in both DI water and acetone; in DI water (a) right after sonication, (b) after 
𝟑 𝒉 of resting, (c) after 𝟐𝟒 𝒉 of resting and in acetone (d) right after sonication, (e) after 𝟑 𝒉 of 
resting and (f) after 𝟐𝟒 𝒉 of resting. 
Based on Figure 18, CNs seem to be equally soluble in acetone and in DI water right 
after sonication (Figures 18a-left and 18d-left). However, CNs seem to have been 
sedimented in both solvents after 3 ℎ and 24 ℎ (Figures 18b,c-left and 18e,f-left). For 
the case of GONDs, the opposite behavior is observed, meaning that they are more 
soluble in DI water than in acetone (Figures 18a-right and 18d-right), which can be 
explained from the hydrogen bonding between GONDs and DI water. After the 
solutions were left to rest, the one of acetone showed a clear sedimentation (black 
circle), opposing to the one of DI water even after  24 ℎ of resting (Figures 18b,c-right 
and 18e,f-right). The case of GONDs in DI water, since it is fully transparent indicates 
either an amorphous system or small particles, the size of which is smaller than the 
wavelength of light.  
Moreover, the supernatant for both CNs and GONDs in acetone seemed to have the 
same yellowish color (Figure 18f), whereas in DI water CNs seems to be different than 
GONDs (Figure 18c). This could be an indication of the size of nanoparticles and the 
fact that it is affected by their interactions with the solvent.    
Furthermore, SEM imaging gave the opportunity to study the morphology of both CNs 
and GONDs in solution with DI water and acetone as well as in powder form of the 
latter (Figures 19 to 21).  
==PAGE:38==
Page | 29  
 
 
Figure 19: SEM image of CNs in DI water (left) and acetone (right) with the same resolution. 
By comparing the morphology of CNs in the two different solvents (Figure 19), we 
can see that in acetone they tend to aggregate more and to create bigger clusters, 
whereas in DI water, they are better dispersed. This could be explained from the 
presence of oxygen barring groups which create hydrogen bonds with water molecules.  
 
Figure 20: SEM image of GONDs in powder form; Lower resolution (left), higher resolution 
(right). 
GONDs exhibit a different morphology than what is expected. It was expected to be 
more spherical and to have smaller size than CNs as stated in the literature 2. 
Apparently, this is not the case as it can be seen in Figure 20. It seems that there is a 
better comparison between GONDs and pulp fiber than between GONDs and CNs. In 
Figure 20-right, it can be observed that there are some small spherical particles around 
the big chunks and fibers that are present, however, the reason why GONDs seem to 
have this kind of morphology could lie on the different approach that was used during 
the oxidations step, i.e. dialysis. In order to prove and analyze it, further studies are 
needed. 
==PAGE:39==
Page | 30  
 
 
Figure 21: SEM image of GONDs in DI water (left) and acetone (right) with the same resolution. 
As it can be seen in Figure 21, GONDs in DI water tend to create aggregates, whereas 
in acetone they seem to have been better dispersed. The opposite behavior would have 
been expected due to the increase of oxygen groups after the oxidation step. These SEM 
results in conjunction with the simple dilution test shown in Figure 18, suggest that the 
small particles are dissolvable and better dispersed in acetone leaving the big particles 
to sediment, whereas in water all of the particles seem homogeneously dispersed but 
still aggregated. This aggregation in DI water could also explain the color difference in 
Figure 18. However, further tests are needed to explain the reasoning of this behavior. 
Even though these results suggest that we do not have nanodots, the nomenclature will 
be kept the same throughout this thesis for consistency reasons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
Page | 31  
 
Nanocomposites 
By following the protocol used to produce 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵, nanocomposites with 
0.1, 0.5 and 1𝑤𝑡% of GONDs as well as CNTs were produced (Figure 22). The 
amounts used for each weight percentage can be found in the Appendix (Table A4). 
 
Figure 22: Produced nanocomposites by the protocol of 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩; Up are the GOND-filled 
nanocomposites and down are the CNT-filled nanocomposites. 
Based on Figure 22, it is observed that by increasing GONDs content, there is a color 
transition in nanocomposites, where they become from light brown to dark brown also 
losing their transparency. However, by increasing CNT content, it is clear that the color 
becomes black. Another thing that is optically observed, is that for all of the CNT-filled 
nanocomposites, CNTs are not well dispersed in the matrix. A perfect example is 
0.1𝐶𝑁𝑇 where the fillers are observable by naked eye. This is due to the fact that this 
process employs the advantage of low melting point of monomer, which acts as the 
dispersion medium. Even though for GOND-filled nanocomposites this seems to work, 
for CNT-filled nanocomposites this is not the case. Indications of bad dispersity of 
CNTs in the matrix are been discussed throughout the whole analysis. 
The characterization of the nanocomposites started from DSC. In Figure 23, the curing 
peak is shown for the samples which are curing in the DSC cup to investigate the effect 
of the addition of nanoparticles. In Table 5, 𝑇𝑚, 𝑇𝑐𝑢𝑟.and normalized 𝛥𝛨𝑐𝑢𝑟. are listed. 
==PAGE:41==
Page | 32  
 
 
Figure 23: DSC curve of 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 and nanocomposites focusing on the curing peak; 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 
(black line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed line), 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed-dotted line), 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed line) and 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed-dotted line). 
 
Table 5: Melting (𝑻𝒎) , curing  (𝑻𝒄𝒖𝒓.)  temperatures and enthalpy of curing (𝜟𝜢𝒄𝒖𝒓)  of the 
investigated samples. The error is the standard deviation between the tests. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a: values were obtained from melting peak of DSC curve. 
b: values were obtained from curing peak of DSC curve. 
c: values were obtained from the curing peak of DSC curve and normalized by the weight of the 
samples. 
In Figure 23, a certain trend can be observed which is further seen in Table 5. Even 
though the maximum curing peak temperature is the same for all of the investigated 
samples, the addition of fillers increased 𝛥𝛨𝑐𝑢𝑟.. Also, it seems that this increase in 
𝛥𝛨𝑐𝑢𝑟.  is proportional to the increase of GOND content, whereas for CNT-filled 
nanocomposites,  the increase of CNT content seems to decrease 𝛥𝛨𝑐𝑢𝑟.  
Sample 
𝑻𝒎 
[℃]a 
𝑻𝒄𝒖𝒓. 𝒑𝒆𝒂𝒌 
[℃]b 
𝜟𝜢𝒄𝒖𝒓. 
[𝑱]c 
𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 
32.3 ± 0.1 
179.6 ± 0.1 
0.40 ± 0.07 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 
32.0 ± 0.1 
179.7 ± 0.1 
0.67 ± 0.01 
𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 
32.0 ± 0.1 
179.7 ± 0.1 
0.61 ± 0.04 
𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 
32.1 ± 0.1 
179.9 ± 0.1 
0.73 ± 0.01 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 
31.9 ± 0.2 
179.7 ± 0.1 
0.84 ± 0.09 
𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 
31.8 ± 0.2 
179.6 ± 0.2 
0.71 ± 0.04 
𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 
31.9 ± 0.1 
179.7 ± 0.2 
0.61 ± 0.06 
==PAGE:42==
Page | 33  
 
Moreover, the errors for both nanocomposites, discourage the verification of the stated 
correlation between the filler content and 𝛥𝛨𝑐𝑢𝑟..   
In Figure 24, the first DSC heating ramp of 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 and cured nanocomposites are 
be presented for comparison.  
 
Figure 24: DSC curve of 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 and nanocomposites; 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 (black line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red 
line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed line), 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed-dotted line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 
(blue dashed line) and 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed-dotted line). The curves are the first heating ramp. 
 
Based on Figure 24, a residual curing peak is observed for all of the nanocomposites 
at high temperatures, whereas for 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 is less pronounced. This verifies that the 
curing was not complete based on the protocol that was followed, which was stated 
earlier. However, by increasing curing time, the samples developed multiple cracks, 
thus their mechanical characterization could not be possible. Hence, samples produced 
by this protocol were considered partially crosslinked, as stated above for 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 
and they were further characterized by means of TGA and mechanical testing. 
Figures 25 and 26, are the TGA and DTG of the nanocomposites, respectively and the 
degradation temperatures as well as the char yield (residual of mass at highest 
temperature, i.e. 700𝑜𝐶) are listed in Table 6. 
==PAGE:43==
Page | 34  
 
 
Figure 25: TGA of DAFDC and nanocomposites; DAFDC (black line), 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 (black dashed 
line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed line), 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed-dotted line), 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed line) and 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed-dotted line). 
 
Figure 26: DTG of DAFDC and nanocomposites; DAFDC (black line), 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 (black dashed 
line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed line), 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed-dotted line), 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed line) and 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed-dotted line). 
Based on Figures 25 and 26, the same behavior as for 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 is observed for all of 
the nanocomposites. More specifically, there is a two-step degradation, the first step of 
which is the degradation of unreacted monomer units or allyl groups and the second is 
the degradation of the crosslinked network, as suggested earlier. These results are also 
supported from the DSC data which showed a residual curing peak, corresponding to 
the first degradation step.  
 
==PAGE:44==
Page | 35  
 
Table 6: Degradation temperatures and char yield of DAFDC, 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 and nanocomposites. 
The error is the standard deviation between the tests. 
Samples 
𝑻𝟓%  
[℃]a 
𝑻𝒎𝒂𝒙
𝑨
 
[℃]b 
𝑻𝒎𝒂𝒙
𝑩
 
[℃]b 
𝑻𝒎𝒂𝒙
𝑪
 
[℃]b 
𝑪𝒉𝒂𝒓 𝒀𝒊𝒆𝒍𝒅 
[%]c 
DAFDC 
153.5 ± 6.3 
230.0 ± 4.4 
----- 
----- 
0d 
𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 
185.3 ± 9.5 
197.4 ± 7.7 
363.4 ± 0.6 
420.6 ± 0.9 
5.2 ± 0.2 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 
186.4 ± 11.1 
198.8 ± 7.4 
359.9 ± 2.5 
422.7 ± 2.6 
6.0 ± 0.5 
𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 
191.0 ± 6.7 
205.8 ± 3.6 
358.7 ± 1.0 
428.8 ± 5.7 
7.1 ± 0.6 
𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 
176.2 ± 7.8 
198.5 ± 11.6 
358.4 ± 0.3 
424.7 ± 1.3 
6.5 ± 0.1 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 
178.7 ± 6.5 
203.5 ± 5.5 
359.1 ± 3.4 
419.6 ± 1.6 
6.1 ± 1.0 
𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 
184.8 ± 7.0 
204.3 ± 5.8 
355.2 ± 0.9 
418.1 ± 1.5 
7.9 ± 0.6 
𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 
186.8 ± 7.8 
202.6 ± 7.2 
351.7 ± 1.5 
423.9 ± 2.1 
10.8 ± 0.1 
a: values were obtained from TGA data for 𝟓% loss of initial mass. 
b: values were obtained from DTG of Figure 26. 
c: values were obtained from TGA of Figure 25 at 𝟕𝟎𝟎𝟎𝑪. 
d: value was set zero without any error, since all of the tests showed a zero value. 
 
Based on Table 6, all of the degradation temperatures seem to be within the same range, 
making it impossible to identify a clear trend. Also, the char yield is more or less the 
same for 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 and the nanocomposites, apart from 1𝐶𝑁𝑇 which showed the 
highest value. Materials with high char yield show indications of flame retardant 
properties. In this case, 1𝐶𝑁𝑇 seem to exhibit the best flame retardant behavior among 
the nanocomposites. 
Three different mechanical testing experiments were conducted for the mechanical 
characterization of 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 and the nanocomposites.  
Starting from tensile testing, all of the samples, mainly due to their small dimensions, 
i.e. small length, were not able to be tested since they were slipping from the grips of 
the tensile instrument. In order to avoid that, regular tape was used in each end of the 
samples, to reduce slippage. Unfortunately, every sample was still slipping resulting in 
the absence of tensile data.  
Then, the samples were tested in a DMA instrument with a 3-point-bending geometry 
in a regular temperature ramp from 30 −300𝑜𝐶. The obstacle in this experiment, as in 
every mechanical testing, was the dimensions of the tested samples. Specifically, due 
to cracks that were developed in the end of the curing stage, where shrinkage occurs, 
the dimensions of the tested samples were uneven, which resulted in the vertical shift 
of the moduli. This shift had as a result the inability to have any quantitative data, so 
all of the discussion below is focused in a qualitative perspective. 
In Figure 27, the elastic modulus is plotted against temperature for 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 and the 
rest of the nanocomposites. 
==PAGE:45==
Page | 36  
 
 
Figure 27: DMA curves of storage modulus vs temperature in a log-linear scale; 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 (black 
dashed line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed line), 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed-dotted line), 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed line) and 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed-dotted line). 
Based on Figure 27, a non-typical thermoset behavior is observed. By increasing 
temperature, a transition is observed which is underlined by the decrease in modulus 
until reaching a pseudo-plateau and around 150𝑜𝐶 another transition occurs which 
leads to a higher plateau. In this stage, the DMA data can be correlated to TGA data. 
From this correlation, the second transition occurring at 150𝑜𝐶, can be explained from 
the degradation of unreacted monomer units, resulting in a fully crosslinked network 
which, in principle, should have a higher modulus, which is why the modulus is 
increasing to a higher plateau.  
Moreover, all of the tested 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 and 0.1𝐺𝑂𝑁𝐷 samples were broken around 
150𝑜𝐶 thus their second transition and their terminal plateau is not observable. 
However it is safe to assume that it is expected to be within the same region. 
Even though a vertical shift was expected due to the uneven dimensions of the samples, 
the shape of the DMA curves is the same for all of the tested samples.  
Finally, the sample that did not break after the test, i.e. 1𝐶𝑁𝑇 was subjected to another 
temperature ramp after it was left to cool down to ambient temperature. Other samples 
were also subjected to a second temperature ramp, but due to some cracks already 
apparent in the materials from the first ramp, they were broken, thus no data are 
presented. The comparison between the DMA tests for the samples before and the only 
sample after the temperature ramp can be seen in Figure 28. 
==PAGE:46==
Page | 37  
 
 
Figure 28: DMA curve of storage modulus vs temperature in a log-linear scale; 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 (black 
dashed line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed line), 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed-dotted line), 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed line), 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed-dotted line) and 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 after 
heating ramp (orange dashed-dotted line). 
Based on Figure 28, 1𝐶𝑁𝑇 after the heating ramp, exhibits a typical thermoset 
behavior, which is underlined by a plateau at low temperatures followed by a transition 
and a final plateau, which according to theory it should never reached another transition, 
since it is a crosslinked network and it will never flow. Also it can be seen that the 
second plateau is in the same region as for the nanocomposites which were not 
subjected to a second heating ramp. This means, that the final plateau is indeed the 
plateau of a fully crosslinked thermoset as suggested before. Furthermore, each 
transition in moduli results in a peak on 𝑡𝑎𝑛𝛿, which is the ratio between the loss 
(viscous contribution) and storage (elastic contribution) modulus. The clearer and most 
noise-free curves of 𝑡𝑎𝑛𝛿 can be seen in Figure 29. 
 
Figure 29: DMA curve of 𝒕𝒂𝒏𝜹 vs temperature; 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 before heating ramp (black line) and 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 
after heating ramp (red line). 
==PAGE:47==
Page | 38  
 
Based on Figure 29, two 𝑡𝑎𝑛𝛿 peaks are shown for 1𝐶𝑁𝑇 before ramping which 
correspond to two 𝑇𝑔 values that are also apparent for the rest of the nanocomposites 
which can be found in the Appendix (Figure A4). The first 𝑇𝑔 corresponds to 55𝑜𝐶 
and the second to 213𝑜𝐶. On the contrary, the curve of 1𝐶𝑁𝑇 after the heating ramp 
showed one broad 𝑇𝑔 which has a peak at 160𝑜𝐶. This broadness of 𝑡𝑎𝑛𝛿 peak is a sign 
of inhomogeneity of the 1𝐶𝑁𝑇 and it is expected to be the same for the rest of CNT-
filled nanocomposites as it was previously described.   
The last mechanical testing technique that was used was rheometry. This technique was 
used only to verify the DMA data and to get a quantitative perspective on the 
mechanical analysis. This could have been done, since parallel plates with 8 𝑚𝑚 
diameter were used and the samples were able to be cut in the same dimensions, thus 
avoiding the vertical shifting in the moduli. Two different approaches were used. First 
the rheological profile after the DMA heating ramp was measured with no success since 
the sample was tough and the additional force that was probably needed to have full 
contact between the plates and the sample could have destroyed the transducer, since it 
would exceed its maximum force. Hence, all of these samples were not able to be 
measured. The second approach was to re-measure the samples before the heating ramp 
in the DMA to get a quantitative perspective, but since these samples were partially 
cured, they started curing between the plates and making it difficult to measure with 
accuracy the moduli. Also, during the temperature ramp, most of the samples were 
broken. Thus, no useful data were collected from the rheological approach.  
The optical differences between the nanocomposites before and after the heating ramp 
can be observed in Figure 30, where it be seen that the color has become darker and 
transparency is lost for 0.1𝐶𝑁𝑇 and 0.5𝐺𝑂𝑁𝐷. Also, the propagation of crack can be 
observed clearer in 0.1𝐺𝑂𝑁𝐷. Finally, what cannot be shown in digital pictures is the 
shrinkage that occurs from further crosslinking the material mainly due to the small 
length of the monomer unit. 
 
Figure 30: Digital pictures of nanocomposites before (top) and after (bottom) the heating ramp; 
GONDs (left) and CNTs (right). 
This heating ramp is expected to have degraded all of the unreacted monomer and the 
samples after this ramp, which are considered fully cured, were characterized by DSC 
and TGA to further verify this assumption. 
 
==PAGE:48==
Page | 39  
 
Specifically, the DSC heating and cooling ramps of the fully cured 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 can be 
found in Figure 31, which was chosen as a representative. The DSC curves of the 
nanocomposites can be found in the Appendix (Figure A5 to A10). Also based on the 
second heating ramp, a 𝑇𝑔 value could be identified and it is listed in Table 7. 
 
Figure 31: DSC curve of 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 after the heating ramp in DMA; First heating ramp (blue line), 
cooling ramp (green line) and second heating ramp (red line). 
 
Table 7: 𝑻𝒈 values of samples after the heating ramp in DMA. The error is the standard deviation 
between the tests. 
Samples 
𝑻𝒈  
[℃]a 
𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 
82.5 ± 15.4 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 
74.0 ± 1.4 
𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 
74.0 ± 14.7 
𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 
58.2 ± 4.8 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 
64.8 ± 3.9 
𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 
81.3 ± 8.4 
𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 
63.9 ± 3.1 
a: data derived from the second heating ramp of DSC. 
Based on Figure 31, no apparent curing peak can be seen which means that the samples 
are indeed fully crosslinked. Moreover, in Table 7, the 𝑇𝑔 values based on the second 
heating ramp of DSC show no obvious trend and in comparison to the 𝑇𝑔 derived from 
the peak of 𝑡𝑎𝑛𝛿, are much lower. However, the two tests, i.e. DMA and DSC were 
conducted with different heating rates. In DMA it was used 5𝑜𝐶/𝑚𝑖𝑛, whereas in DSC 
10𝑜𝐶/𝑚𝑖𝑛. Hence, the values derived for 𝑇𝑔 from the two characterization techniques 
were expected to be different and thus not comparable. According to theory, with faster 
heating/cooling rates, the 𝑇𝑔 is expected to occur at higher temperatures due to lack of 
relaxation time. This means, that the 𝑇𝑔 value from DSC was expected to occur at 
==PAGE:49==
Page | 40  
 
higher temperatures than the one from TGA. However, as it can be seen in Figure 31, 
the 𝑇𝑔 area is not very well observable which reduces the accuracy and precision of the 
values listed in Table 7. Also, the broadness of the 𝑇𝑔 area in DSC is in agreement with 
the 𝑡𝑎𝑛𝛿 data (Figure 29).  
In Figures 32 and 33, the TGA and DTG curves of the samples after the heating ramp 
in DMA are shown in comparison to DAFDC.  
 
Figure 32: TGA curves of samples after the heating ramp in DMA; DAFDC (black line), 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 
(black dashed line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed line), 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed-
dotted line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed line) and 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed-dotted line). 
 
Figure 33: DTG curves of samples after the heating ramp in DMA; DAFDC (black line), 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 
(black dashed line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed line), 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed-
dotted line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue line), 𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed line) and 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue dashed-dotted line). 
 
==PAGE:50==
Page | 41  
 
Based on Figure 32, the samples after their exposure to the heating ramp in DMA 
exhibited an enhanced thermal stability, indicating that the system is now fully cured. 
Also, the absence of a peak in DTG (Figure 33) corresponding to the one of DAFDC 
is further verifying the complete crosslinking. The values of the degradation 
temperatures and the char yield can be seen in Table 8. 
 
Table 8: Degradation temperatures and char yield of DAFDC, 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 and nanocomposites. 
The error is the standard deviation between the tests. 
Samples 
𝑻𝟓%  
[℃]a 
𝑻𝒎𝒂𝒙
𝑨
 
[℃]b 
𝑻𝒎𝒂𝒙
𝑩
 
[℃]b 
𝑻𝒎𝒂𝒙
𝑪
 
[℃]b 
𝑪𝒉𝒂𝒓 𝒀𝒊𝒆𝒍𝒅 
[%]c 
DAFDC 
153.5 ± 6.3 
230.0 ± 4.4 
----- 
----- 
0d 
𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 
281.2 ± 19.2 
359.4 ± 3.4 
420.3 ± 0.6 
281.2 ± 19.2 
6.2 ± 0.2 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 
266.7 ± 51.3 
357.3 ± 1.4 
423.5 ± 2.8 
266.7 ± 51.3 
6.4 ± 0.8 
𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 
329.6 ± 2.7 
355.6 ± 0.8 
421.5 ± 2.1 
329.6 ± 2.7 
8.8 ± 0.5 
𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 
324.7 ± 2.2 
356.5 ± 1.7 
425.1 ± 2.7 
324.7 ± 2.2 
9.9 ± 0.1 
𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 
332.4 ± 3.2 
357.1 ± 4.7 
419.2 ± 4.2 
332.4 ± 3.2 
8.2 ± 0.3 
𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 
330.1 ± 2.8 
353.0 ± 1.4 
418.8 ± 0.7 
330.1 ± 2.8 
11.0 ± 0.9 
𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 
298.9 ± 28.2 
351.5 ± 1.5 
422.0 ± 1.5 
298.9 ± 28.2 
12.2 ± 0.8 
a: values were obtained from TGA data for 𝟓% loss of initial mass. 
b: values were obtained from DTG of Figure 26. 
c: values were obtained from TGA of Figure 25 at 𝟕𝟎𝟎𝟎𝑪. 
d: value was set zero without any error, since all of the tests showed a zero value. 
By comparing Table 6 with Table 8, both the thermal stability and the char yield are 
enhanced. The highest value for the char yield belongs to 1𝐶𝑁𝑇 and it is around 12%. 
Compared to the partially crosslinked nanocomposites, all of the fully crosslinked 
nanocomposites exhibit improved flame-retardation properties. The same observation 
between the samples before and after the heating ramp in DMA can be done for the 
degradation temperatures, i.e. their values are all in the same region, making it difficult 
to draw any conclusions. The values for the degradation temperatures are in agreement 
with other DAP nanocomposites with clay filler 65. Moreover, the absence of the 
primary degradation peak on DTG corresponding to the degradation temperature of 
DAFDC in conjunction with 𝑇5% and 𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝐴
, verifies the initial assumption that the 
second degradation corresponds to the fully crosslinked network. 
After the mechanical and thermal characterization, simple conductivity measurements 
were performed by using a common multimeter. The conductivity values were derived 
from Equations (𝟏) and (𝟐) and they are listed in Table 9. The average values for the 
dimensions of the samples and the resistances can be found in the Appendix (Tables 
A5 and A6, respectively).  
Table 9: Conductivity values for the CNT-filled nanocomposites before the heating ramp. 
Samples 
Conductivity 
[𝒌𝑺𝒎
⁄
]a 
𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻  
0.68 ± 0.13 
𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻  
14.40 ± 2.48 
a: values were obtained from Equations (𝟏) and (𝟐). 
==PAGE:51==
Page | 42  
 
Two main points of interest can be drawn from the conductivity measurements. First, 
the resistance could only be measured for CNT-filled and not for GOND-filled 
nanocomposites. That gives as an insight on the percolation threshold of the chosen 
fillers. Specifically, CNTs exhibit different percolation thresholds regarding their type 
and their affiliated matrix. However, the most common percolation threshold for 
different epoxy matrices is 0.3 𝑤𝑡%  and in this study for the investigated filler 
contents, the percolation threshold was found to be 0.5 𝑤𝑡% 67. However, CNT content 
between 0.1 𝑤𝑡% and 0.5 𝑤𝑡% were not investigated and thus the probability for the 
percolation threshold to be between the stated weight amounts is high. For GONDs, the 
percolation threshold is above the investigated weight percentage which is also verified 
by the literature where it is stated that the threshold is above 1 𝑤𝑡% 68. The second 
point of interest was that conductivity increases with increasing filler content.  
Finally, the morphology of both 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 and the nanocomposites was studied by a 
digital microscope and the pictures of both sides (𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 𝐴, surface in contact with air 
and 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 𝐵, surface in contact with Teflon mold during initial curing) of the samples 
are shown in Figures 34 to 38. 
 
Figure 34: Digital microscope images of 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 with 𝒙𝟓𝟎𝟎 resolution; 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑨 before (a) and 
𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑩 after (b) heating ramp. The scale is 𝟏𝟎 𝝁𝒎. 
The picture in Figure 34a, seems to have poor analysis and that is due to the fact that 
the sample was almost fully transparent and there was a significant amount of light 
scattering. However, a small part of the surface can be observed. Comparing that with 
the surface of 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 after ramping, some differences are obvious. First, the 
presence of cracks in the second case due to further curing of the material is observed. 
Second, Figure 34b exhibits a darker brown color due to heating at high temperatures, 
i.e. 300𝑜𝐶 cannot be optically observed by the above comparison but it can be clearly 
seen in the Appendix (Figure A11). Finally, the presence of small yellow-brown 
crystals throughout the surface of 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 after ramping can be observed. Their 
presence will be discussed in Figure 37. 
==PAGE:52==
Page | 43  
 
 
Figure 35: Digital microscope images of 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑨  of 𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 with 𝒙𝟓𝟎𝟎 resolution; before (a) 
and after (b) heating ramp. The scale is 𝟏𝟎 𝝁𝒎. 
 
Figure 36: Digital microscope images of 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑩 of 𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 with after heating ramp with 𝒙𝟓𝟎𝟎 
resolution. The scale is 𝟏𝟎 𝝁𝒎. 
0.1𝐺𝑂𝑁𝐷 seems to exhibit a similar behavior as 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 regarding its transparency 
(Figure 35a). The same area was investigated after ramping and it seems that when it 
is fully cured, a typical composite, i.e. smooth, surface is observed (Figure 35b). 
However, 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 𝐵 (Figure 36), exhibits the same morphology as the same surface of 
𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 where small yellow-brow crystals are also apparent.  
==PAGE:53==
Page | 44  
 
 
Figure 37: Digital microscope images of 𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 with 𝒙𝟓𝟎𝟎 resolution ; 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑨 before and after 
heating ramp (a, b) and 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑩 before and after heating ramp (c, d). The scale is 𝟏𝟎 𝝁𝒎. 
For 0.5𝐺𝑂𝑁𝐷, the transparency was reduced, thus the surface of 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 𝐴 could be 
monitored and in comparison with the same surface after the heating ramp, it seems 
that it is similar in morphology (Figures 37a, b). The same observations can be noted 
for Figures 37c, d where the color of the matrix, which in the case of 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 seemed 
to have changed, the color remains the same for 0.5𝐺𝑂𝑁𝐷. This could be due to the 
color change that was present from the addition of GONDs which possess brown color 
and the reason why this was not the case for 0.1𝐺𝑂𝑁𝐷 could be due to the low filler 
content. Finally, a point of interest can be located in the comparison of 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 𝐵 before 
and after the heating ramp. More specifically, the small crystals before the heating ramp 
have a white and almost transparent color, whereas after the heating they possess the 
yellow-brown color as it was highlighted in 𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 and 0.1𝐺𝑂𝑁𝐷. These crystals 
could be either residual initiator, monomer, nanoparticles or impurities. The possibility 
for these crystals to be unreacted initiator was easily rejected, since it can be safely 
assumed that the amount of initiator is small and thus all of it should react even before 
the DMA ramp. Also, the nanoparticles possess the brown color due to the oxidation 
step and this did not change throughout the curing reaction. Therefore, through a 
process of elimination, it can be concluded that they could be either monomer units 
which were unreacted before the DMA heating ramp and since their position is fixed 
and their flow is hindered by the rest of crosslinked matrix, the only change that can be 
observed optically would be the change in color from transparent to brown or 
impurities. In order to verify both possibilities, further tests are needed. 
==PAGE:54==
Page | 45  
 
For 1𝐺𝑂𝑁𝐷, 0.1𝐶𝑁𝑇 and 0.5𝐶𝑁𝑇, the same observations can be made and thus their 
images can be found in the Appendix (Figures A12 to A14) and they are not further 
discussed.  
Figure 38: Digital microscope images of 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 with 𝒙𝟓𝟎𝟎 resolution ; 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑨 before and after 
heating ramp (a, b) and 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑩 before and after heating ramp (c, d). The scale is 𝟏𝟎 𝝁𝒎. 
In Figure 38, 1𝐶𝑁𝑇 seems to exhibit a more interesting behavior. Specifically, 𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 𝐴, 
is covered with small sphere-like structures which are basically the CNTs which are not 
well dispersed as discussed earlier (Figure 38a, b). The temperature transition that 
occurs between before and after the heating ramp, seems to have burnt the white crystals 
and transform them into yellow-brown as stated above (Figure 38c, d). Apart from that, 
the morphology of both sides seem to be unaffected by the temperature ramp. 
Generally, the existence of two different sides in the samples and clearly a different 
morphology as discussed above, is indicating the difference in chemistry while curing 
reaction occurs. More specifically, the surface that was exposed to oxygen (𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 𝐴), 
seems to have a more composite-like, smooth, morphology. On the contrary, the surface 
that was in contact with the Teflon mold (𝑆𝑖𝑑𝑒 𝐵) was not in contact with oxygen and 
also the morphology of the surface is a direct blueprint of the surface of the Teflon 
mold, which could explain the rougher surface.  
 
 
==PAGE:55==
Page | 46  
 
Conclusions 
 
Nanocomposites based on DAFDC with two types of fillers, i.e. GONDs and CNTs, in 
different weight percentages were produced. More specifically, the matrix system was 
comprised of DAFDC and 5 𝑤𝑡% of DCP, whereas the filler content that was studied 
was 0.1, 0.5 and 1 𝑤𝑡%. Also, GONDs were produced from the oxidation of CNs from 
paper as the carbon source, by adding a dialysis step in the procedure found in the 
literature 2.  
Kinetic analysis of the investigated system, by means of Borchardt and Daniels method, 
which employs the curing peak of a DSC curve, resulted in inaccurate curing 
conditions. Nevertheless, by following a staggered curing fashion the nanocomposites 
were able to be produced. However, they were characterized as partially crosslinked. 
Further curing the samples in DMA at elevated temperatures, i.e. up to 300𝑜𝐶, resulted 
in fully cured nanocomposites which were thermally, mechanically, morphologically 
and conductivically characterized.   
The fully crosslinked nanocomposites exhibited enhanced thermal stability compared 
to the matrix, however, the results did not suggest any correlation with the amount of 
filler. Moreover, the mechanical properties showed traces of improved thermoset 
behavior, but further studies need to be done to verify that. From the conductivity 
measurements it was shown that only CNT-filled nanocomposites exhibited a 
percolation threshold, identified at 0.5 𝑤𝑡% of CNT, since the GONDs content seemed 
to be lower than this threshold for this particular system. Finally, the morphological 
characterization gave an insight on the two different surfaces of the nanocomposites. 
Specifically, depending on whether the material was in contact with oxygen or not, the 
surface was smoother.  
Although further studies need to be done to find an optimum procedure to produce these 
nanocomposites and to fully comprehend the advantages and limitations of DAFDC, 
this project verified the hypothesis that this monomer could be used as an alternative 
for phthalic acid based thermosets.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
Page | 47  
 
Experimental Section 
 
In this section, the experimental procedures for the synthesis of GONDs, the 
preparation of crosslinked matrix and nanocomposites will be addressed. The methods 
described below are the optimized procedures found. The problems faced until 
obtaining them were described in the Results & Discussion section. The instruments 
used and the characterization techniques of DAFDC, DCP, CNs, GONDs, the 
crosslinked matrix and the nanocomposites will also be addressed. The characterization 
involves DSC, TGA, FT-IR, mechanical testing by means of DMA, tensile and 
rheology, morphology investigation through SEM and digital microscopy, conductivity 
measurements and solubility tests. The oxidation step, the FT-IR measurement and the 
SEM imaging of CNs and GONDs were performed at KTH under the supervision of 
PhD student Karin Adolfsson. The DSC, TGA and rheological measurements were 
performed at DTU by senior researcher Liyun Yu. 
Materials 
DAFDC was synthesized by PhD student Daniel Bo Larsen at DTU, whereas 𝐷𝐶𝑃𝐴 
was purchased from Bie & Berntsen (98%, 𝑀𝑤= 270.37 𝑔/𝑚𝑜𝑙) and 𝐷𝐶𝑃𝐵 was 
purchased from Sigma Aldrich ( 98% , 𝑀𝑤= 270.37 𝑔/𝑚𝑜𝑙). The CNTs were 
purchased from Nanocyl NC 7000 Belgium (1,5 𝜇𝑚× 10 −20 𝑛𝑚) and the CNs were 
synthesized by PhD student Karin Adolfsson at KTH. Finally, acetone was purchased 
from Sigma Aldrich (99.5%), benzoyl peroxide from Sigma Aldrich (Luperox A75, 
75%, remainder water) and 4-N-N-trimethylaniline from Sigma Aldrich (99%).  
Crosslinking Kinetic Experiments 
Initially, the crosslinking kinetics were investigated by using different amounts of 
initiator ranging from 1 −5 𝑤𝑡% with a step of 1 𝑤𝑡% in DAFDC. 25 𝑚𝑔 of DAFDC 
and DCP were prepared for the above weight ratios. Due to the small amount of DCP 
that was necessary, a stock solution of DCP in acetone was prepared with concentration 
of 0.01 𝑔/𝑚𝐿 (Table A1).  
Preparation of large crosslinked discs 
1 𝑔 of DAFDC and DCP with 5 𝑤𝑡% of the latter were prepared. Since, both of the 
materials were in powder form the sample was heated up to 40𝑜𝐶. Then, the sample 
was mixed by using a speedmixer (SpeedMixer DAC 150.1 FVZ-K) at 2000 𝑟𝑝𝑚 for 
2 𝑚𝑖𝑛. resulting in a homogeneously dispersed solution. Finally, the solution was 
poured into a Teflon cup and molded into a disc by using a homemade mold at 130𝑜𝐶 
for 24 ℎ. 
Preparation of matrix samples 
In total 1 𝑔 of DAFDC and DCP was prepared containing 5 𝑤𝑡% of the latter and the 
same procedure was followed as in the preparation of large crosslinked disc. The 
solution was poured into a Teflon mold and transferred into an oven where it was heated 
up to 130𝑜𝐶 for 1,5 ℎ and then 150𝑜𝐶 for additional 2 ℎ. Finally, some of the samples 
were further heated up to 300𝑜𝐶 in the DMA heating chamber while testing. 
==PAGE:57==
Page | 48  
 
Oxidation of CNs 
The oxidation involves a modified version of the procedure developed at Prof. 
Hakkarainen’s lab 2. Specifically, 15 𝑚𝐿 of nitric acid 70% (𝐻𝑁𝑂3) were slowly 
mixed with 150 𝑚𝑔 of CNs, into a reaction flask. The flask was subjected into 
sonication at 45𝑜𝐶 for 30 𝑚𝑖𝑛. Then, it was transferred and heated into an oil bath at 
90𝑜𝐶 for 30 𝑚𝑖𝑛. under constant magnetic stirring. Special attention was needed to the 
toxic fumes created during this heating step and they were avoided by using a cooling 
system (condenser). After that, the reaction was interrupted and slightly diluted by the 
addition of 50 𝑚𝐿 of cool deionized (DI) water. Then, evaporation of the solution 
occurred by heating it an oil bath at 85𝑜𝐶 under vacuum. Thereafter, 50 𝑚𝐿 of DI 
water were added into the resulted solution and it was transferred into dialysis tubes 
with a molecular weight cut off (𝑀𝑊𝐶𝑂) of 1 𝑘𝐷𝑎. The dialysis procedure was 
followed at room temperature for 4 days with constant change of DI water, until the pH 
reached the value of 6. The resulted material was collected and stored into vials in the 
freezer overnight and then it was freeze dried for 2 days. Finally, the vials were put in 
a vacuum oven operating at room temperature for 1 day to remove any residues of 
acidic water resulting in a brown fluffy powder. 
Preparation of nanocomposites 
1 𝑔 of DAFDC, DCP and GONDs or CNTs was prepared with different weight 
amounts of the dispersed phase, i.e. GONDs and CNTs. Specifically, the weight 
amounts of GONDs and CNTs that were investigated are 0.1, 0.5 and 1 𝑤𝑡%. The 
procedure followed was the same as for the preparation of matrix samples. The only 
difference was that the dispersed phase was also solubilized with DAFDC and DCP 
before the speedmixing.  
General Characterization Methods 
Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) Characterization 
Thermal behavior of DAFDC, DCP, the pre-crosslinked matrix (crosslinking occurs 
during DSC test), the crosslinked matrix, and the nanocomposite was investigated 
through DSC (TA instruments, Discovery series). For the case of the crosslinking 
kinetic experiments, after the evaporation of the solvent occurred in the fume hood at 
room temperature, 2 −5 𝑚𝑔 of DAFDC and DCP were transferred into the DSC cup 
and sealed hermetically. The samples were subjected to two heating and one cooling 
ramps. Specifically, the samples were initially cooled and stabilized at −90𝑜𝐶 for 
5 𝑚𝑖𝑛. and then they were heated up to 230𝑜𝐶 (1𝑠𝑡 heating ramp). After that, they were 
cooled down to −90𝑜𝐶 (1𝑠𝑡 cooling ramp) and finally heated up to 230𝑜𝐶 (2𝑛𝑑 
heating ramp) with a heating rate of 10𝑜𝐶/𝑚𝑖𝑛 under nitrogen atmosphere.  
Finally, for the case of DAFDC, DCP, the crosslinked matrix and the nanocomposites, 
2 −5 𝑚𝑔 were weighed and sealed hermetically in the DSC cup. The same heating and 
cooling ramps were applied.  
 
 
==PAGE:58==
Page | 49  
 
Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) 
TGA measurements (TA instruments Discovery series) were performed in order to 
study the thermal degradation of the monomer, the crosslinked matrix and the 
nanocomposites. Specifically, samples with weight between 10 −20 𝑚𝑔 were used 
over a temperature range of 25 −700𝑜𝐶 with a heating rate of 10𝑜𝐶/𝑚𝑖𝑛 under 
nitrogen atmosphere. 
Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) Spectroscopy 
FT-IR measurements (Thermo Scientific Nicolet iS50 ATR) were initially performed in 
order to verify the crosslinking of the matrix. Specifically, 32 scans were performed 
between 4000 𝑐𝑚−1  and 400 𝑐𝑚−1  for the case of the monomer, the crosslinked 
matrix and the nanocomposites. FT-IR measurements at KTH (PerkinElmer Spectrum 
2000 FT-IR, Norwalk, CT) were also performed to monitor the oxidation step of the 
nanoparticles with 16 scans and the wavenumber was between  4000 𝑐𝑚−1  and 
600 𝑐𝑚−1. 
Tensile Testing 
The mechanical behavior of the crosslinked matrix and the nanocomposites was 
investigated by means of tensile testing (TA instruments ElectroForce) at ambient 
temperature. Small samples with various dimensions were used. 
Dynamic Mechanical Analysis (DMA) Measurements 
DMA measurements (TA instruments, RSA3) were performed by using the 3-point-
bending geometry of 1 𝑐𝑚 length to study the mechanical response of the crosslinked 
matrix and the nanocomposites. The test was performed by having an initial force value 
of 0.02 𝑁, strain of 0.1%, frequency of 1 𝐻𝑧 and a 60 𝑠 equilibration time. Also the 
temperature range investigated was 30 − 300𝑜𝐶 with heating rate of 5𝑜𝐶/𝑚𝑖𝑛 under 
air atmosphere.  
Rheological Measurements 
The mechanical behavior was further investigated through rheometry (ARES G2) by 
using parallel plates geometry of 8 𝑚𝑚 diameter. The maximum applied force to the 
samples was set constant to 10 𝑁, the frequency was 1 𝐻𝑧, the strain was 0.1% and the 
investigated temperature range was 30 − 300𝑜𝐶 with a heating rate of 5𝑜𝐶/𝑚𝑖𝑛 
under air atmosphere. 
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) Observation 
The morphology of the matrix and the nanoparticles was studied by SEM (SE-4800 
SEM Hitachi, Japan). Specifically for the nanoparticles, the solutions prepared with 
1 𝑚𝑔/𝑚𝐿 of CNs and GONDs in both DI water and acetone were used and prior to 
their deposition on the carbon tape they were sonicated for 5 𝑚𝑖𝑛. The accelerated 
voltage was 1 𝑘𝑉 and sputter coating of a 3.5 𝑛𝑚 thick 𝑃𝑡/𝑃𝑑 layer was conducted on 
all samples prior to SEM observation. 
 
==PAGE:59==
Page | 50  
 
Digital Microscopy 
The morphology of both the matrix and the nanocomposites that were produced at 
130𝑜𝐶 for 1,5 ℎ and then 150𝑜𝐶 for 2 ℎ as well as the samples which were further 
heated up to 300𝑜𝐶 in the DMA chamber was further observed with a digital 
microscope (VHX-6000). 
Conductivity Measurements 
The resistance of the nanocomposites was measured by using a multimeter (Fluke 189), 
which was thereafter translated to conductivity through equations (𝟏) and (𝟐). 
𝜌= 𝑅∙
𝐴
𝐿 
(1) 
𝜎=
1
𝜌  
(2) 
Where 𝜌 is the electrical resistivity, 𝑅 is the electrical resistance, 𝐴 is the surface area, 
𝐿 is the length and 𝜎 is the conductivity.  
Preparation of solubility tests 
CNs and GONDs were dissolved in DI water and acetone with a concentration of 
1 𝑚𝑔/𝑚𝐿. Thereafter, the solutions were put under sonication for 5 𝑚𝑖𝑛. and digital 
pictures were captured right after sonication, after 3 ℎ and after 24 ℎ of resting. 
Kinetic Analysis  
For the kinetic analysis of the cured samples, the Borchardt and Daniels method was 
used 69. This method is dividing the curing peak into 20 even integrals of 10% to 50% 
of the temperature, in order to avoid the slow reaction rates at high conversions. Finally, 
by using equations (𝟑) and (𝟒) the result is an Arrhenius plot. 
1 −𝑎=
𝛥𝛨𝛵
𝛥𝛨  
(3) 
𝑑𝛼
𝑑𝑡=
𝑑𝐻
𝑑𝑡
𝛥𝛨 => 𝑙𝑛(
𝑑𝛼
𝑑𝑡) = 𝑙𝑛(𝐾(𝑇)) + 𝑛∙𝑙𝑛(1 −𝑎)  
(4) 
Where 𝑎 is the conversion, ∆𝐻 is the total enthalpy for the reaction, ∆𝐻𝑇 is the enthalpy 
of the reaction left to proceed at time 𝑡, 
𝑑𝛼
𝑑𝑡 is the conversion rate, n is the reaction order 
and K(T) is the temperature dependent rate constant. 
By plotting the 𝑅2 values of the data obtained from (𝟒), for different reaction orders, 
its highest value can be obtained. Its corresponding reaction order leads then to the 
correct Arrhenius plot, based on which the activation energy (𝐸𝑎)  and the pre-
exponential factor (𝑍) can be obtained. In the analysis, the reaction order data is 
presented with two significant digits.  
Finally, an isothermal conversion plot can be built by solving (𝟒) for 𝛼 leading to (𝟓) 
by making the assumption that 𝑎(0) = 0 [Daniel Bo Larsen ref paper].  
𝛼(𝑡) = 1 −𝑒
ln(
1
𝑘𝑛𝑡−𝑘𝑡+1)
𝑛−1
 
(5) 
==PAGE:60==
Page | 51  
 
References 
 
1. 
Gopalakrishnan, P., Narayan-Sarathy, S., Ghosh, T., Mahajan, K. & Belgacem, 
M. N. Synthesis and characterization of bio-based furanic polyesters. J. Polym. 
Res. 21, (2014). 
2. 
Adolfsson, K. H., Hassanzadeh, S. & Hakkarainen, M. Valorization of cellulose 
and waste paper to graphene oxide quantum dots. RSC Adv. 5, 26550–26558 
(2015). 
3. 
Xu, H. et al. Zero-Dimensional and Highly Oxygenated Graphene Oxide for 
Multifunctional Poly(lactic acid) Bionanocomposites. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 
4, 5618–5631 (2016). 
4. 
Nasrollahzadeh, M., Babaei, F., Fakhri, P. & Jaleh, B. Synthesis, 
characterization, structural, optical properties and catalytic activity of reduced 
graphene oxide/copper nanocomposites. RSC Adv. 5, 10782–10789 (2015). 
5. 
Boire, T. C. et al. Reprint of: Pendant allyl crosslinking as a tunable shape 
memory actuator for vascular applications. Acta Biomater. 34, 73–83 (2016). 
6. 
Hoyle, C. E. & Bowman, C. N. Thiol-ene click chemistry. Angew. Chem. Int. 
Ed. Engl. 49, 1540–73 (2010). 
7. 
Kabasci S. in Bio-Based Plastics: Materials and Applications 1–20 (2018). 
8. 
Brydson, J. A. in Plastics Materials 694–743 (1999). 
9. 
Sousa, A. F. et al. Biobased polyesters and other polymers from 2,5-
furandicarboxylic acid: a tribute to furan excellency. Polym. Chem. 6, 5961–
5983 (2015). 
10. 
Ståhlberg, T., Rodriguez-Rodriguez, S., Fristrup, P. & Riisager, A. Metal-free 
dehydration of glucose to 5-(Hydroxymethyl)furfural in ionic liquids with boric 
acid as a promoter. Chem. - A Eur. J. 17, 1456–1464 (2011). 
11. 
Eerhart, A. J. J. E., Faaij, A. P. C. & Patel, M. K. Replacing fossil based PET 
with biobased PEF; process analysis, energy and GHG balance. Energy Environ. 
Sci. 5, 6407 (2012). 
12. 
Stephen, R. & Thomas, S. in Rubber Nanocomposites: Preparation, Properties, 
and Applications 1–19 (2010). 
13. 
Xu, H., Xie, L., Li, J. & Hakkarainen, M. Coffee Grounds to Multifunctional 
Quantum Dots: Extreme Nanoenhancers of Polymer Biocomposites. ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 9, 27972–27983 (2017). 
14. 
Carraher, C. E. in Giant Molecules: Essential Materials for Everyday Living and 
Problem Solving 133–181 (2003). 
15. 
Rolf A. T. M. van Benthem, Lars J. Evers, Jo Mattheij, Ad Hofland, Leendert J. 
Molhoek, Ad J. de Koning, Johan F. G. A. Jansen,  and M. van D. in Handbook 
of Polymer Reaction Engineering. 833–910 (2005). 
16. 
Elias H. G. in Macromolecules: Applications of Polymers (2011). 
17. 
Johnson, K. G. & Yang, L. S. in Modern Polyesters: Chemistry and Technology 
of Polyesters and Copolyesters 697–713 (2003). 
==PAGE:61==
Page | 52  
 
18. 
Stevens P. M. Polymer Chemistry An Introduction. (1999). 
19. 
Loan, L. D. Peroxide crosslinking reactions of polymers. Pure Appl. Chem. 30, 
173–180 (1972). 
20. 
Sanchez, J. & Myers, T. N. Peroxides and Peroxide Compounds, Organic 
Peroxides. Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology (2000). 
21. 
Al-Sabagh, A. M., Yehia, F. Z., Eshaq, G., Rabie, A. M. & ElMetwally, A. E. 
Greener routes for recycling of polyethylene terephthalate. Egypt. J. Pet. 25, 53–
64 (2016). 
22. 
Ė, V. J. & Macijauskas, G. Polyethylene Terephthalate Waste Recycling and 
Application Possibilities : a Review. 14, (2009). 
23. 
Gandini, A. in Biocatalysis in Polymer Chemistry 1–33 (2010). 
24. 
Burgess, S. K., Karvan, O., Johnson, J. R., Kriegel, R. M. & Koros, W. J. Oxygen 
sorption and transport in amorphous poly (ethylene furanoate). Polymer (Guildf). 
55, 4748–4756 (2014). 
25. 
Burgess, S. K., Kriegel, R. M. & Koros, W. J. Carbon dioxide sorption and 
transport in amorphous poly(ethylene furanoate). Macromolecules 48, 2184–
2193 (2015). 
26. 
Nicolais, L., Meo, M. & Milella, E. Composite materials: A Vision for the 
Future. (2011). 
27. 
Sharma, R. & Kar, K. K. in Composite Materials: Processing, Applications, 
Characterizations 599–625 (2016). 
28. 
Öchsner, A., Da Silva, L. F. M. & Altenbach, H. New Frontiers of Nanoparticles 
and Nanocomposite Materials. 4, (2013). 
29. 
Araujo, P. De. Stiffer by design. Nat. Mater. 6, 9–11 (2007). 
30. 
Crainic, N. & Marques, A. T. Nanocomposites: a State-of-the-Art Review. Key 
Eng. Mater. 230–232, 656–0 (2002). 
31. 
Ke, Y., Long, C. & Qi, Z. Crystallization, properties, and crystal and nanoscale 
morphology of PET–clay nanocomposites. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 71, 1139–1146 
(1999). 
32. 
Xiao, W., Yu, H., Han, K. & Yu, M. Study on PET fiber modified by 
nanomaterials: Improvement of dimensional thermal stability of PET fiber by 
forming PET/MMT nanocomposites. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 96, 2247–2252 (2005). 
33. 
Maria T. M. Bizarria, A., L. F. de M. Giraldi, Cesar M. de Carvalho, J. I. V., 
D’A, M. A. & Vila, L. H. I. M. Morphology and Thermomechanical Properties 
of Recycled PET–Organoclay Nanocomposites. Appl. Polym. Sci. 104, 1839–
1844 (2007). 
34. 
Gómez-del Río, T.  Influence of single-walled carbon nanotubes on the effective 
elastic constants of poly(ethylene terephthalate). Compos. Sci. Technol. 70, 284–
290 (2010). 
35. 
Yoo, H. J., Kim, K. H., Yadav, S. K. & Cho, J. W. Effects of carbon nanotube 
functionalization and annealing on crystallization and mechanical properties of 
melt-spun carbon nanotubes/poly(ethylene terephthalate) fibers. Compos. Sci. 
Technol. 72, 1834–1840 (2012). 
==PAGE:62==
Page | 53  
 
36. 
Watters, A. L. & Palmese, G. R. Ultralow percolation threshold of single walled 
carbon nanotube-epoxy composites synthesized via an ionic liquid 
dispersant/initiator. Mater. Res. Express 1, (2014). 
37. 
Zhang, H. Bin et al. Electrically conductive polyethylene terephthalate/graphene 
nanocomposites prepared by melt compounding. Polymer (Guildf). 51, 1191–
1196 (2010). 
38. 
Li, Z., Liu, Z., Sun, H. & Gao, C. Superstructured Assembly of Nanocarbons: 
Fullerenes, Nanotubes, and Graphene. Chem. Rev. 115, 7046–7117 (2015). 
39. 
Allen, M. Honeycomb carbon -- A study of graphene. Am. Chem. Soc. 184 
(2009). 
40. 
Stankovich, S. et al. Graphene-based composite materials. Nature 442, 282–286 
(2006). 
41. 
Hummers, W. S. & Offeman, R. E. Preparation of Graphitic Oxide. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 80, 1339 (1958). 
42. 
Liu, Z., Robinson, J. T., Sun, X. & Dai, H. PEGylated Nano-Graphene Oxide for 
Delivery of Water Insoluble Cancer Drugs (b). J Am Chem Soc 130, 10876–
10877 (2008). 
43. 
Luo, J. et al. Graphene oxide nanocolloids. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 17667–17669 
(2010). 
44. 
Feng, Z., Simeone, A., Odelius, K. & Hakkarainen, M. Biobased Nanographene 
Oxide Creates Stronger Chitosan Hydrogels with Improved Adsorption Capacity 
for Trace Pharmaceuticals. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 5, 11525–11535 (2017). 
45. 
Hassanzadeh, S., Aminlashgari, N. & Hakkarainen, M. Chemo-selective high 
yield microwave assisted reaction turns cellulose to green chemicals. Carbohydr. 
Polym. 112, 448–457 (2014). 
46. 
Hassanzadeh, S., Aminlashgari, N. & Hakkarainen, M. Microwave-assisted 
recycling of waste paper to green platform chemicals and carbon nanospheres. 
ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 3, 177–185 (2015). 
47. 
Dikin, D. A. et al. Preparation and characterization of graphene oxide paper. 
Nature 448, 457–460 (2007). 
48. 
Ponnamma, D. Graphene-Based Polymer Nanocomposites in Electronics. 
(Springer, 2015). 
49. 
Chung, C. et al. Biomedical applications of graphene and graphene oxide. Acc. 
Chem. Res. 46, 2211–2224 (2013). 
50. 
Kim, J. et al. Graphene oxide sheets at interfaces. J Am Chem Soc 132, 8180–
8186 (2010). 
51. 
Cai, D. & Song, M. Recent advance in functionalized graphene/polymer 
nanocomposites. J. Mater. Chem. 20, 7906 (2010). 
52. 
Loh, K. P., Bao, Q., Eda, G. & Chhowalla, M. Graphene oxide as a chemically 
tunable platform for optical applications. Nat. Chem. 2, 1015–1024 (2010). 
53. 
Depan, D., Pesacreta, T. C. & Misra, R. D. K. The synergistic effect of a hybrid 
graphene oxide–chitosan system and biomimetic mineralization on osteoblast 
functions. Biomater. Sci. 2, 264–274 (2014). 
==PAGE:63==
Page | 54  
 
54. 
Liu, H. et al. Gelatin functionalized graphene oxide for mineralization of 
hydroxyapatite: biomimetic and in vitro evaluation. Nanoscale 6, 5315 (2014). 
55. 
Li, F., Jiang, X., Zhao, J. & Zhang, S. Graphene oxide: A promising nanomaterial 
for energy and environmental applications. Nano Energy 16, 488–515 (2015). 
56. 
Sun, X. et al. Nano-graphene oxide for cellular imaging and drug delivery. Nano 
Res. 1, 203–212 (2008). 
57. 
Ahirwar, S., Mallick, S. & Bahadur, D. Electrochemical Method to Prepare 
Graphene Quantum Dots and Graphene Oxide Quantum Dots. ACS Omega 2, 
8343–8353 (2017). 
58. 
Liu B., Xie J., Ma H., Zhang X., Pan Y., Lv J., Ge H., Ren N., Su H., Xie X., H. 
L. and H. W. From Graphite to Graphene Oxide and Graphene Oxide Quantum 
Dots. Small 13, (2017). 
59. 
Wu, D., Xu, H. & Hakkarainen, M. From starch to polylactide and nano-
graphene oxide: fully starch derived high performance composites. RSC Adv. 6, 
54336–54345 (2016). 
60. 
Wu, D., Samanta, A., Srivastava, R. K. & Hakkarainen, M. Starch-Derived 
Nanographene Oxide Paves the Way for Electrospinnable and Bioactive Starch 
Scaffolds for Bone Tissue Engineering. Biomacromolecules 18, 1582–1591 
(2017). 
61. 
Wu, D., Bäckström, E. & Hakkarainen, M. Starch Derived Nanosized Graphene 
Oxide Functionalized Bioactive Porous Starch Scaffolds. Macromol. Biosci. 17, 
1–11 (2017). 
62. 
Dicumyl peroxide. (2013). 
63. 
Bo, D., Sønderbæk-jørgensen, R., Duus, J. Ø. & Daugaard, A. E. Investigation 
of curing rates of bio-based thiol-ene fi lms from diallyl 2 , 5- furandicaboxylate. 
Eur. Polym. J. 102, 1–8 (2018). 
64. 
Xiaoqin, Y., Qilin, M., Zhixiong, H., Peng, W. & Ling, H. Curing reaction and 
kinetic parameters of diallyl orthophthalate resin with initiator dicumyl peroxide. 
1366–1371 (2011). 
65. 
Gu, A. Thermal and mechanical performances of diallyl phthalate/clay 
nanocomposites. Polym. - Plast. Technol. Eng. 45, 957–961 (2006). 
66. 
Ishida, H. Fourier Transform Infrared Characterization of Polymer. (1987). 
67. 
Properties, E. in Carbon Nanotube–Polymer Composites: Manufacture, 
Properties, and Applications 249–282 (2011). 
68. 
Araby, S. et al. Electrical percolation in graphene – polymer composites 
Electrical percolation in graphene – polymer composites. 2D Mater. (2018). 
69. 
2041 Estimating Kinetic Parameters by Differential Scanning Calorimeter Using 
the Borchardt and Daniels Method 1. Astm 14, 1–7 (2015). 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
Page | 55  
 
Appendix 
 
Production Scheme of Matrix and Nanocomposite Samples 
 
Scheme A1: Schematic representation of the procedure for the production and characterization of 
nanocomposite materials with 𝟓 𝒘𝒕% of DCP in DAFDC as the matrix material and 𝟎. 𝟏, 𝟎. 𝟓 and 
𝟏 𝒘𝒕% of filler content. 
 
==PAGE:65==
Page | 56  
 
Polymerization Mechanism of the Desired Crosslinked Network 
 
Scheme A2: Polymerization mechanism of DCP and DAFDC; (a) pre-initiation step, where the 
formation of radicals from the initiator are produced, (b) initiation step, where the radical attacks 
the monomer unit and creates a new radical, which will thereafter propagate and by multiple 
random attacks from radicals created from the initiator or from the propagating radical chain 
part to another monomer will produce the final crosslinked network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:66==
Page | 57  
 
Calculations and Amounts Used for the Different Weight Percentages for DSC 
As an example for the calculations, which resulted the amounts listed in Table A1, 
0.1 𝑤𝑡% of DCP in DAFDC is been used. 
100 𝑔 of DAFDC and DCP from which 1 𝑔 is DCP 
25 𝑚𝑔 of DAFDC and DCP from which 𝑥 is DCP  
=> 𝒙= 𝟎. 𝟐𝟓 𝒎𝒈 
The amount of DAFDC is thus 25 −0.25 = 𝟐𝟒. 𝟕𝟓 𝒎𝒈 
Since the amount of DCP is small, it was diluted in acetone having a concentration of 
0.01 𝑔/𝑚𝐿 thus the volume of DCP in acetone that was mixed with DAFDC is 
25∙10−5 𝑔 𝑜𝑓 𝐷𝐶𝑃
0.01 𝑔/𝑚𝐿
= 𝟐𝟓 𝝁𝑳. 
Table A1: Amounts of DAFDC and DCP used for the DSC tests. 
Samples 
DAFDC 
[𝒎𝒈] 
DCP 
[𝒎𝒈] 
DCP in Acetone 
[𝝁𝑳] 
𝟏 𝒘𝒕% 
24.75 
0.25 
25.00 
𝟐 𝒘𝒕% 
24.50 
0.50 
50.00 
𝟑 𝒘𝒕% 
24.25 
0.75 
75.00 
𝟒 𝒘𝒕% 
24.00 
1.00 
100.00 
𝟓 𝒘𝒕% 
23.75 
1.25 
125.00 
 
The above amounts were calculated by having a total amount of 25 𝑚𝑔. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
Page | 58  
 
DSC Curves on the Determination of Initiator Content 
 
Figure A1: DSC curve of 𝟏 𝒘𝒕% of DCP in DAFDC; First heating ramp (blue line), cooling ramp 
(green line) and second heating cycle (red line). 
 
 
Figure A2: DSC curve of 𝟑 𝒘𝒕% of DCP in DAFDC; First heating ramp (blue line), cooling ramp 
(green line) and second heating cycle (red line). 
==PAGE:68==
Page | 59  
 
 
Figure A3: DSC curve of 𝟒 𝒘𝒕% of DCP in DAFDC; First heating ramp (blue line), cooling ramp 
(green line) and second heating cycle (red line). 
 
Table A2: DSC results for the rest of the initiator contents. 
a: values were obtained from melting peak of DSC software. 
b: values were obtained from curing peak of DSC software. 
c: values were obtained from the curing peak of DSC software.  
d: values were obtained from the curing peak of DSC software and normalized by the weight of 
the samples. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sample 
𝑻𝒄 
[℃]a 
𝑻𝒎 
[℃]b 
𝑻𝒄𝒖𝒓. 𝒑𝒆𝒂𝒌 
[℃]c 
𝜟𝜢𝒄𝒖𝒓. 
[𝑱]d 
𝟏 𝒘𝒕% 
−0.8 ± 6.2 
33.1 ± 0.2 
----- 
----- 
𝟑 𝒘𝒕% 
−4.7 ± 1.0 
33.1 ± 0.1 
181.7 ± 0.5 
0.13 ± 0.01 
𝟒 𝒘𝒕% 
----- 
32.7 ± 0.3 
180.3 ± 0.4 
0.33 ± 0.02 
==PAGE:69==
Page | 60  
 
 
 
 
Calculations and Amounts Used for the Alternative Initiator System of BPO 
As an example for the calculations, which resulted the amounts listed in Table A3, the 
ratio between BPO and 4-N-N-trimethylaniline was 5: 1 and the amount of BPO was 
in all cases 5 𝑤𝑡%. 
100 𝑔 of DAFDC and BPO from which 5 𝑔 are BPO 
0.01 𝑔 of DAFDC and BPO form which 𝑥 is BPO 
𝑥= 𝟎. 𝟓 𝒎𝒈 
 
Since we want a ratio of 5: 1, for 0.5 𝑚𝑔 of BPO we need 0.1 𝑚𝑔 of activator 
and by using the density of the activator (𝑑= 0.937 𝑔/𝑚𝐿) we can calculate its 
volume: 
0.1 ∙10−3 𝑔 𝑜𝑓 𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟
0.937 𝑔/𝑚𝐿
= 𝟏𝟎𝟕 𝝁𝑳 
 
The total amount of DAFDC that was used is thus 10 −0.5 −0.1 = 𝟗. 𝟒 𝒎𝒈 
Since the amount of BPO is small it was diluted in acetone having a concentration of 
0.002 𝑔/𝑚𝐿 thus the volume of BPO in acetone that was mixed with DAFDC is 
5∙10−4 𝑔 𝑜𝑓 𝐵𝑃𝑂
0.002 𝑔/𝑚𝐿
= 𝟐𝟓𝟎 𝝁𝑳. 
Table A3: Amount of used for the alternative initiator system for different ratios. 
Ratio 
Initiator:Activator 
DAFDC 
[𝒎𝒈] 
BPO in acetone 
[𝝁𝑳] 
Activator 
[𝝁𝑳] 
𝟓: 𝟎. 𝟓 
9.45 
250.0 
53.4 
𝟓: 𝟎. 𝟕𝟓 
9.425 
250.0 
80.0 
𝟓: 𝟏 
9.4 
250.0 
107.0 
𝟓: 𝟐 
9.3 
250.0 
214.0 
𝟓: 𝟑 
9.2 
250.0 
320.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:70==
Page | 61  
 
 
 
 
Schematic Representation of the production of GONDs from CNs 
 
Scheme A3: Digital pictures of the oxidation step of CNs for the production of GONDs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
Page | 62  
 
 
 
 
Calculations for the different weight percentages for GONDs in the 5 𝑤𝑡% matrix 
As an example for the calculations, which resulted the amounts listed in Table A4, 
0.1 𝑤𝑡% of nanoparticles are ben used. The amount of initiator is always 5 𝑤𝑡%. 
In order to have 0.1 𝑤𝑡% of nanoparticles in total of 1 𝑔 we need 𝟏 𝒎𝒈 of 
nanoparticles. 
Hence, 1000 −1 = 999 𝑚𝑔 of residual amount after nanoparticles. 
Thus, the amount of DPC is 
999∙5 𝑤𝑡%
100
= 𝟒𝟗. 𝟗𝟓 𝒎𝒈 
Finally, the amount of DAFDC is 999 −49.95 = 𝟗𝟒𝟗. 𝟎𝟓 𝒎𝒈 
Table A4: Amounts of DAFDC, DCP and GONDs used for the preparation of nanocomposites. 
Samples 
DAFDC 
[𝒎𝒈] 
DCP 
[𝒎𝒈] 
GONDs 
[𝒎𝒈] 
𝟎. 𝟏 𝒘𝒕% 
949.05 
49.95 
1 
𝟎. 𝟓 𝒘𝒕% 
945.25 
49.75 
5 
𝟏 𝒘𝒕% 
940.50 
49.50 
10 
 
The above amounts were calculated by having a total amount of 1 𝑔. 
For the CNT-filled nanocomposites, the same weight amounts were used as for the 
GONDs in Table A4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
Page | 63  
 
DMA curve showing the 𝑡𝑎𝑛𝛿 of the rest of nanocomposites 
 
Figure A4: DMA curve of 𝒕𝒂𝒏𝜹 vs temperature; 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 (black line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red line), 
𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed line), 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 (red dashed-dotted line), 𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 (blue line) and 𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 
(blue dashed line). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
Page | 64  
 
DSC Curves of Nanocomposites after the DMA Heating Ramp 
 
Figure A5: DSC curve of 𝟎. 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 after DMA heating ramp; First heating ramp (blue line), 
cooling ramp (green line) and second heating cycle (red line). 
 
Figure A6: DSC curve of 𝟎. 𝟓𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 after DMA heating ramp; First heating ramp (blue line), 
cooling ramp (green line) and second heating cycle (red line). 
==PAGE:74==
Page | 65  
 
 
Figure A7: DSC curve of 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 after DMA heating ramp; First heating ramp (blue line), cooling 
ramp (green line) and second heating cycle (red line). 
 
Figure A8: DSC curve of 𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 after DMA heating ramp; First heating ramp (blue line), cooling 
ramp (green line) and second heating cycle (red line). 
==PAGE:75==
Page | 66  
 
 
Figure A9: DSC curve of 𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 after DMA heating ramp; First heating ramp (blue line), cooling 
ramp (green line) and second heating cycle (red line). 
 
Figure A10: DSC curve of 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 after DMA heating ramp; First heating ramp (blue line), cooling 
ramp (green line) and second heating cycle (red line). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
Page | 67  
 
Dimensions of Samples in Conductivity Measurements 
Table A5: Dimension of samples in conductivity measurements.  
Samples 
Length 
[𝒎𝒎] 
Width 
[𝒎𝒎] 
Thickness 
[𝒎𝒎] 
𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 8.17 8.23 8.21 8.22 8.14 6.37 6.20 6.12 6.12 6.31 0.80 0.82 0.78 0.77 0.87 
Average 
8.19 ± 0.04 
6.22 ± 0.11 
0.81 ± 0.04 
𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 
7.94 7.88 8.10 8.07 7.89 6.26 6.45 6.43 6.23 6.29 0.93 0.91 0.87 0.92 0.88 
Average 
7.98 ± 0.10 
6.33 ± 0.10 
0.90 ± 0.03 
 
By using the above dimensions, an example for the calculation of conductivity for 
0.5𝐶𝑁𝑇 can be found below: 
The average area, i.e. average thickness times average width, was divided by the 
average length and then multiplied by the resistance (Table A6). Then, by using 
Equation (𝟏) the electrical resistivity was calculated and below it is shown only for 
the average. 
𝜌= 2.52 ∙5.03 ∙10−6
8.19 ∙10−3 = 1.55 ∙10−3 𝑀𝛺∙𝑚 
Finally, the average conductivity was calculated by taking the reciprocal of electrical 
resistivity through Equation (𝟐). 
𝜎=
1
1.55 ∙10−3 = 647.43 (𝑀𝛺∙𝑚)−1 
Table A6: Resistance values for  𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 and 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻. 
Samples 
Resistance  
[𝒌𝜴]a 
𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 
2.05 ∙103 
3.00 ∙103 
2.50 ∙103 
Average 
2.52 ∙103 ± 0.48 ∙103 
𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 
80.00 
110.00 
101.00 
Average 
97.00 ± 15.40 
a: values were obtained from multimeter. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
Page | 68  
 
𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 𝐵 Comparison 
 
Figure A11: Digital picture of 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒙 𝑩 before (left) and after (right) the DMA heating ramp. 
 
Morphology of Nanocomposites  
 
Figure A12: Digital microscope images of 𝟏𝑮𝑶𝑵𝑫 with 𝒙𝟓𝟎𝟎 resolution; 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑨 before heating 
ramp (a) and 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑩 before heating ramp (b). The scale is 𝟏𝟎𝝁𝒎. 
 
Figure A13: Digital microscope images of 𝟎. 𝟏𝑪𝑵𝑻 with 𝒙𝟓𝟎𝟎 resolution; 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑨 after heating 
ramp (a) and 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑩 before heating ramp (b). The scale is 𝟏𝟎𝝁𝒎. 
==PAGE:78==
Page | 69  
 
 
Figure A14: Digital microscope images of 𝟎. 𝟓𝑪𝑵𝑻 with 𝒙𝟓𝟎𝟎 resolution; 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑨 before heating 
ramp (a) and 𝑺𝒊𝒅𝒆 𝑩 before heating ramp (b). The scale is 𝟏𝟎𝝁𝒎. 
 
 
 
 
 
