==PAGE:1==
MASTER’S THESIS 
  
 
 
 
 
Synthesis of a sterol-inspired 
compound library  
  
 
 
 
 
Prosper Paidamoyo Mapfumo  
 
S161604 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisor: 
 
Dr. Luca Laraia 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
2 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my advisor, Dr Luca Laraia for his excellent 
guidance, patience, and providing me with an excellent atmosphere for doing research with his 
group. I would like to thank Professor Mads H. Clausen for always being willing to help and 
give his best suggestions. Special thanks go to Philip Charlie Johansen, Brian Brylle 
Dideriksen, and Anne Hector and the department faculty members for their sharing expertise, 
valuable guidance and encouragement extended to me.  
I would like to thank my father, Professor P. Mapfumo for his priceless contribution in 
providing the necessary facilities for the research. Lastly, I would also like to thank my mother 
and siblings for their prevailing encouragement and support. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
3 
 
Abstract  
Sterols are a class of amphipathic compounds with a C3-hydroxyl group and an aliphatic part 
which possess the 1,2-cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene ring system and a side chain that 
originate from isoprenoid biosynthesis. Cholesterol, the major sterol in animals, plays a key 
role as an integral part of the cell membranes, a precursor to vitamins, bile acids and steroid 
sex hormones (e.g. estrogen, and testosterone). Mis-regulation of cholesterol has been linked 
to chronic diseases such as atherosclerosis, prostate cancer, leading to steroid-derivatives as 
therapeutics (e.g. atamestane). Natural products (NPs) including steroid derivatives are 
privileged scaffolds because they are made by nature to carry out specific functions, thus 
making their specificity high.  
The majority of the steroid-derived drugs are a result of structural variations around the 1,2 
cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene ring system and a side chain. Little attention has been paid 
to disrupting the characteristic tetracyclic backbone and use its fragments as precursors that can 
be fused with other functionalised ring structures. We hypothesize that sterol derivatives made 
in this approach will target cholesterol-associated biological pathways. Such compounds could 
be prepared by synthesising indole, thiazole, lactone, lactam, quinoxaline and imidazole 
derivatives of Grundmann’s ketone, a derivative of vitamin D3. These compounds would 
undergo phenotypic screening in the future to identify new regulators of cholesterol amounts 
and localisation in cells. 
The synthesis of the various derivatives above was carried out. The naturally derived 
Grundmann’s ketone trans-6,5-fused ring system was prone to epimerization to the more stable 
cis-conformation. Despite our best efforts to retain the natural stereochemistry, successful 
products were either the cis conformation or mixtures of diastereomers except in one case. This 
resulted in challenges to isolate products resulting in lower yields. Synthesis of lactone (30) 
was successfully carried out by a Baeyer Villiger oxidation to yield a product (52%) with the 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
4 
 
retained cis conformation in a 1:4 ratio in favour of the thermodynamic regio-isomer.  Synthesis 
of lactam (31) was successfully done via the Beckmann rearrangement to yield 26% of an 
epimerized kinetic product and 11% of a mixture diastereomers of the thermodynamic product. 
Synthesis of α brominated Grundmann’s ketone precursor for the aminothiazole-fused 36 and 
quinoxaline-fused 37 steroid analogues was challenging, as the different conditions resulted in 
the formation of a thermodynamic product 35a, while the desired kinetic product xx was not 
formed. This resulted in bromination of both α positions yielding 92% of 35b.  Aminothiazole-
fused 37 and quinoxaline-fused 38 steroid analogues were subsequently synthesised to yielding 
31% and 34% of the eliminated derivatives respectively. Synthesis of Indole-containing sterol 
analogue 29 was challenging, with most of the attempted conditions not yielding a product, 
however, two sets of conditions promising as the cis-configured product was formed. 
Optimization of the yield and purification is ongoing.   
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
5 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
6 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Acknowledgements .................................................................................................................................2 
Abstract ....................................................................................................................................................3 
Resumé  ....................................................................................................................................................4 
Abbreviations  ..........................................................................................................................................4 
Introduction  ............................................................................................................................................7 
Aims and Objectives  ............................................................................................................................ 26 
Results and Discussion  ......................................................................................................................... 28 
Conclusions and Future Work  ............................................................................................................. 45 
Experimental  ........................................................................................................................................ 47 
References ............................................................................................................................................ 57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
7 
 
  
1. Introduction   
1.1. Drug Discovery 
The development of a new drug from an idea to a finished product is a complex process which 
can take up to 15 years with a cost that may be over $1 billion 1. An idea of a potential drug 
comes from various sources which include academia, clinical research and the commercial 
sector. These sources often spend time and resources to provide medical products that can cure 
or treat a disease or clinical condition with unmet clinical needs. Preliminary data is often 
generated in academia and provides a hypothesis that the inhibition or activation of a protein or 
pathway will result in a therapeutic effect in a disease state. The hypothesis is then tested during 
the lead discovery stage in which a chemical library is synthesised and screened to find 
candidates that interact with the proposed target or provide a desired phenotypic response. The 
candidates proceed to preclinical development where they are tested on cells and animal models 
to obtain preclinical efficacy and safety profile of the candidate. After the preclinical 
development the candidates which meet the standard requirements proceed to clinical 
development where they are tested on people in three phases. Ultimately, a candidate which 
meets the standards of regulatory bodies such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 
the USA, is approved and can be marketed 1,2,3. A summarised schematic of the drug discovery 
process is shown in Figure 1. A significant amount of time is dedicated to understanding 
complex biological systems of a disease, to find a pathway or target that can be exploited to 
give a therapeutic effect. This explains why basic research in figure 1 does not have a time 
limit. 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
8 
 
 
Figure 1: The drug discovery process from target ID and validation through to filing of a compound and the approximate 
timescale for these processes. FDA, Food and Drug Administration; IND, Investigational New Drug; NDA, New Drug 
Application. Adopted from (xxx) (1) 
1.2. Chemical genetics 
Analogously to drug discovery, chemical genetics studies biological systems using small 
molecule tools 4. It identifies new target probes and provides more insight on the mode of action 
of a molecule or disease-relevant biological pathways 5-7. Since the aim of chemical genetics 
is not necessarily to discover a drug 8, the molecules do not have to conform to any regulations 
regarding physiochemical properties, allowing more flexibility during research 9. However, 
selectivity of compounds is prioritised more in chemical genetics compared to drug discovery 
process. This is because chemical genetics focuses on understanding biological pathways and 
potential targets, so a compound must be over 50-fold selective for its target for the data to be 
considered reliable 4. In contrast, drug discovery process focuses more on the efficacy, potency 
and safety of a drug candidate 10-12. If a promising drug candidate is discovered during a basic 
research project, it may start the drug discovery cycle.   
Chemical genetics is subdivided into two approaches: forward and reverse chemical genetics. 
In forward chemical genetics, small molecules are used to modulate a target of interest such as 
a protein, gene or RNA to induce a desired biological effect. A small molecule that induces the 
phenotype will be identified together with the target it interacts with. This preliminary data is 
used to further investigate the role of the target and the mode of action of the small molecule 
5,6.   
==PAGE:9==
 
 
9 
 
Reverse chemical genetics starts with a specific protein that is screened against with a library 
of molecules to identify the ones that perturb its function 5. The selection of the target is based 
mostly on existing biological data. The molecule that interacts with the target is subsequently 
identified and introduced to a cell or an organism to find out if it induces the desired biological 
effect 6,13. Significant efforts are made to validate the target because targeting a protein does 
not guarantee a therapeutic effect. This is the reason why recently forward chemical genetics 
has been more widely applied in chemical biology because it allows discovery of new drug 
candidates and targets with potential therapeutic applications 14. A schematic in Figure 2 
shows the two approaches. 
 
Figure 2: Chemical genetics: (a) Forward chemical genetics approach; (b) Reverse chemical genetics approach. Adapted 
from xx et al. (14) 
The discovery of 19 new inhibitors of malaria drug targets by Guy and co-workers is one 
example that shows the impact of chemical genetics (15). 309474 compounds which include 
natural products and known drugs, were screened against Plasmodium falciparum strains in a 
forward chemical genetic approach. 1130 compounds were able to induce a growth inhibition 
of more than 80%. Three independent laboratories re-tested and re-purchased 228 small 
molecules from this set to give 172 cross-validated hits. A target identification study was 
conducted using the 172 active compounds to find their inhibition activity against 
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (Pf-DHOD) (16), falcipain-2 cystein protease (Pf-FP2) (17) and 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
10 
 
dihydrofolate reductase (Pf-DHFR). In addition to using heme crystallization assay to evaluate 
the heme detoxification and hemozoin, they also studied the binding of the 172 compounds 
with 61 recombinant malarial targets using thermal shift assays, ultimately discovering 19 new 
inhibitors. (18,19). A subset of the 19 new inhibitors are shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3: Examples of the 19 new inhibitors of malaria drugs 20 
A successful chemical genetics study follows three general steps: (1) the design and/or synthesis 
of a chemical library; (2) the screening of the library in the system of choice; (3) target 
identification and/or validation. In the first step it is essential to accumulate a library of different 
and potentially bioactive small molecules (21). A compound library can be classified in one of 
two ways: focused library or diverse library. Diverse libraries avoid resembling a specific 
chemical structure and comprise a collection of structurally diverse compounds, which depend 
mostly on the available starting materials and ease of synthesis. This strategy works when there 
is no known bioactive structure for a given target/phenotype and is predicted to increase the 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
11 
 
probability of finding a novel mechanism of action owing to its diversity. On the other hand, a 
focused library typically comprises analogues of a known bioactive compound to generate or 
optimize the structure activity relationship (SAR). A typical screening collection may contain 
a range of functionalised compounds with a common skeleton ranging from flat structures with 
few sterocenters to complex three dimensional structures with more sterocenters. However, one 
of the downsides of this type of focused library is often the lack of structural complexity and 
diversity (22-24).  
1.3. Natural products as tools and drugs 
Natural products (NPs) typically contain privileged scaffolds because they are produced by 
organisms to carry out specific functions. Accepted definitions of therapeutic natural products 
include: (i) FDA-regulated, unmodified natural materials or compounds; (ii) a naturally 
occurring compound that has been chemically modified (also called a semisynthetic); and (iii) 
a purely synthetic medicinal compound inspired by a natural compound 25,26. Natural products 
play a vital role in regulating key cellular pathways such as signalling and other associated 
feedback mechanisms. As a result, natural products and their precursors can interact with a 
range of enzymes with high specificity. Natural products and their derivatives show that three-
dimensional complexity is essential when interacting with macromolecules, which contributes 
significantly to their specificity. The synthesis of natural product derivatives can give access to 
analogues with improved biophysical properties, efficacy and potency (27-29). 
Natural products are often present in low amounts and may not contain a lot of reactive sites 
that can be further modified. However, major advances in synthetic chemistry have gone some 
way towards addressing these challenges and the focus has since shifted to scaling up natural 
products and making derivatives with similar complexities. NPs often have an increased 
fraction of sp3 carbons and stereogenic centres, typically around 0.68 compared to the average 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
12 
 
commercially available compound collection of 0.37 (30-31). Since NPs provide a wealth of 
drugs, there are great advantages in making a compound library that has close structural 
resemblance. Several strategies to synthesise NP-inspired or derived compound collections 
exist. Biology-Oriented synthesis (BIOS) assists in making a structurally simplified compound 
library which contains a core scaffold found in natural products so that the biological activity 
is retained. The goal is to synthesise NP-inspired compounds which may have similar or 
additional biological activities. An extension of BIOS is the fusion of natural fragments in 
which a hybrid natural product is made by combining a fragment of a natural product and a new 
biologically relevant fragment. This offers the possibility to generate compound libraries with 
multiple biologically pre-validated substructures, that have potential biology activity (32-33). 
Figure 4 below shows an example of how a natural product such as Sinomenine can be 
functionalized or hybridized to give analogues with possibly enhanced properties. 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
13 
 
 
Figure 4: Synthesis of a Sinomenine-derived compound library. Adapted from xx et al. (34). 
1.4. Screening small molecules 
The second step in the chemical genetic approach involves the screening of the compound 
library. Generally, there are two main screening strategies: target-based screening and 
phenotypic screening. Target-based screening is based on hypothesising a disease-related target 
that can give therapeutic effects and applying molecular and chemical knowledge often from 
bioinformatics to test this hypothesis. Bioinformatics uses high throughput data from genomic 
and proteomic studies and the associated key information (Figure 5). While this screening can 
apply both small molecule strategies and biological based approaches such as identifying 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
14 
 
monoclonal antibodies, the shortcoming of this approach is that the specific molecular 
hypotheses may not be relevant to the disease pathogenesis (35).  
An extension of the target-based screening approach is fragment-based screening. Fragment-
based drug discovery (FBDD) is based on the principle that smaller molecules can sample more 
chemical space on disease-related targets than bigger molecules cannot. There is increased 
evidence that leads generated by FBDD have better physio-chemical properties compared to 
those generated in the conventional ways (ref). To make a small molecule for fragment-based 
screening, the “rule of 3” guideline is typically followed. Fragments typically have: molecular 
weight <300 Da, ≤3 hydrogen bond donors, ≤3 hydrogen bond acceptors and octanol–water 
partition coefficient (cLogP) ≤3 36,37. 
 
Figure 5: High throughput data generation for the identification of possible drug targets. (38) 
In contrast to target-based drug screening, phenotypic screening does not consider the mode of 
action of the molecule or disease but focuses on measuring a phenotypic reaction of an organism 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
15 
 
or cell after treatment with a small molecule. A phenotype is an observable physical 
characteristic of a cell or organism. Thus, physical characteristics such as morphology, texture 
are observed and measured during a phenotypic screening to find out which test compounds 
interacts with test cells (35). A dye, an organic molecule with characteristic conjugated double 
bonds that enable it to impart colour, are used to label test compounds, specific cellular 
compartments or proteins and observe 39. The drawbacks of phenotypic screening are that if 
there is no prior knowledge of the mode-of-action it is challenging to optimize the properties 
of candidate molecule, and it is also often challenging to identify the molecular target of a hit 
compound 35. 
However, due to the rapid advancement in technology, these challenges are being resolved. The 
increased access to patient-derived cells and tissues in addition to the advance of induced 
pluripotent stem cell (iPS) cellular technology coupled to more complex cellular systems like 
three-dimensional cultures or organs on a chip allows for the possibility of identifying modes-
of-action and making multiple disease-related screens (35). Swinney and Anthony published an 
analysis in 2011 highlighting that between 1999 and 2008, 75 new clinically approved first-in-
class molecular entities with new molecular modes of action were approved by the US FDA. 
Of the 75, 50 were small molecules and 25 were biologics. Delving into the discovery of the 50 
small molecules, 28 (56%) were discovered through phenotypic screening. This compared to 
17 (34%) which were discovered through target-based approaches (40). There are different 
types of phenotypic screening and two of them are summarised in Table 1 below. 
Table 1: Two types of phenotypic screening 3. 
Screen 
Description 
Comments 
High throughput 
Large numbers of compounds 
analysed in an assay generally 
designed to run in plates of 384 
wells and above 
Large compound collections often run 
by big pharma, but smaller compound 
banks can also be run in either pharma 
or academia which can help reduce 
costs. Companies also now trying to 
provide coverage across a wide 
chemical 
space 
using 
computer 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
16 
 
assisted analysis to reduce the 
numbers of compounds screened. 
 
Focused screen 
Compounds previously identified 
as hitting specific classes of 
targets (e.g. kinases) and 
compounds with similar 
structures 
 
Can provide a cheaper avenue to 
finding a hit molecule but completely 
novel structures may not be 
discovered and there may be 
difficulties obtaining a patent position 
in a well-covered IP area 
Phenotypic changes are often detected and analysed through high-content analysis. This is an 
image-based technology which incorporates two primary operations: detection, the creation of 
a two-dimensional representation (an XY array of pixels) with multiple pixels assigned to each 
target, and analysis, the extraction of information from the pixel array (35). The cells containing 
the test compounds are excited via radiation such as laser and the emitted radiation is detected. 
While this is happening a lot of images are taken in a short amount of time, monitoring all 
changes of the cell. When a compound has interacted with a cell and induced a phenotype, 
further research is done to identify the target and the molecular mode of action. This is known 
as target identification and validation. This process is multifunctional and Figure 6 shows 
different validation approaches that can be applied 3,35. 
 
Figure 6: target id validation is a multifunctional process. 3 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
17 
 
Data gathered from high throughput screening is analysed by computational methods which 
can hypothesise a molecular mode of action of the compounds that have induced a phenotypic 
change. The computational interference methods often use existing data for comparisons of 
properties such as chemical and structural similarities or bioactivity profiles, and subsequently 
clustering compounds with similar properties. Since they are compared to existing compounds 
with known targets, this narrows down possible targets which are hypothesised and tested 
experimentally. When a target is identified, it is then validated using in vitro tools such 
biophysical binding experiments including fluorescence polarisation (FP) and isothermal 
titration calorimetry (ITC). Subsequently, whole animal models e.g. transgenic animals can be 
used to study the effect of modulating a desired target in a carrier. 3,35  
1.5. Cholesterol as a crucial sterol. 
Sterols are a class of compounds that originate from isoprenoid biosynthesis within organisms, 
plants and animals. They are amphipathic compounds with a C3-hydroxyl group and an 
aliphatic part which possess the 1,2-cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene ring system and a side 
chain (Figure 7). A sterol molecule contains four essential domains. The first domain plays a 
role in hydrogen-bond interactions owing to the tilt of the polar C3 OH-group. In the second 
domain, the conformation and back face planarity of ring A are affected by the C4 and 14-
methyl groups. The number and position of double bonds within the ring system contribute to 
the shape and tilt of the 17(20)-bond. In domain 3, an R-configuration is the natural 
configuration at C20. In the fourth domain, the stereochemistry, typically 24-alkyl group in 
phytosterols, length of the side chain and the associated conformation are critical to 
intermolecular interactions. 41,42 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
18 
 
 
Figure 7: The characteristic structure of a sterol compound, left, with four domains including the 1,2-
cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene ring system (A-D). 41 
Generally, the function of sterols such as cholesterol can be placed into two categories: (i) 
sterols act either directly or indirectly as hormones or as hormone precursors (43), and (ii) 
sterols are integral components of membranes and might control changes in membrane 
permeability (44). The sterol ring system is made by cyclization of the most direct precursor, 
squalene (figure 8). The first sterol compound made from squalene in higher plants and algae 
is cycloartenol, while in fungi and animals, it is lanosterol (Figure 8). Cycloartenol is a 
precursor to major plant sterols such as sitosterol, stigmasterol, and campesterol, while 
lanosterol is a key precursor in the biosynthesis of cholesterol, the major sterol in animals. 42 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
19 
 
 
Figure 8: The first sterols made by plants and animals which after several biosynthetic routes lead to the production of the 
most common sterols. 42 
In animals, cholesterol is produced in the liver and its levels are regulated by a feedback 
pathway that controls the synthesis, uptake and esterification of cholesterol. Most of the 
cholesterol is made in the endoplasmic reticulum and cells can also acquire it externally by 
Low-density lipoproteins (LDL) uptake. Cholesteryl esters are internalized through the LDL 
receptor and are transported to endosomes, where cholesteryl esters are hydrolysed to free 
cholesterol. Cholesterol levels vary among different organelles, with the lowest levels in the 
endoplasmic reticulum and highest in the plasma membrane (45).  
==PAGE:20==
 
 
20 
 
Cholesterol plays a key role as an integral part of the cell membranes of animals and fungi. The 
structural features of cholesterol are crucial for its function in membranes as flat elongated 
molecules with an approximate volume of 794 A3 (figure 10). Cholesterol has eight stereo-
centres which leads to twenty-eight stereoisomers, however only one natural enantiomer with 
the 3R, 20R configurations is used as a cell membrane insert. It then regulates membrane 
fluidity by increasing membrane thickness and establishing the permeability barrier of the 
membranes. It also modulates the activity of various membrane proteins (46,47). In bacteria, 
pentacyclic compounds known as hopanoids have a smaller volume of 745 A3 mimic the 
function of cholesterol by maintaining cell fluidity of a bacteria. Similarly, ergosterol functions 
by maintaining cell membranes in fungus. Antifungal medication that treat fungal infection in 
humans and fungicides for plants exploit enzymes that produce ergosterol by inhibiting its 
function. Inhibiting the enzyme cuts the production of ergosterol which affects the membrane 
structure making it more porous, consequently destroying the cell. An added advantage of 
antifungal treatments is their selectivity since the targeted enzyme that produces ergosterol only 
exists in fungi 48,49. Cholesterol is also a precursor to steroids such as sex hormones (e.g. 
estrogen, cortisol, and testosterone), bile acids (e.g cholic acids) and vitamin D shown in Figure 
9.  
==PAGE:21==
 
 
21 
 
 
Figure 9: Cholesterol and the presumed conformation that fits in the membrane. Examples of steroids and bile acid made 
from cholesterol. 50 
1.6. Cholesterol related diseases     
Low-density lipoproteins (LDL), a monolayer of phospholipids with a micelle-like structure, 
are made by the body to transport water insoluble lipids such as cholesterol. LDL engulfs 
cholesterol esters and circulates them in the bloodstream around the body to cells that need 
cholesterol.  In the case where too much cholesterol is in circulation, the LDL transporters tend 
to deposit on the artery walls which results in the narrowing and hardening of the artery (Figure 
10a,b). Consequently, the blood vessel is blocked and depending with the clogged artery this 
leads to blood no longer reaching the heart or brain causing a heart attack or stroke respectively. 
This condition is known as atherosclerosis. Therapeutic medicines such as statins (e.g. 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
22 
 
lovastatin) are used to reduce the amount of cholesterol by inhibiting the HMG-CoA reductase, 
the rate-limiting enzyme of the mevalonate pathway, a key step in the production of cholesterol 
(Figure 10c). 50 
 
Figure 10: Normal artery is clogged as plaque accumulates because of excess cholesterol (b). Statins such as Lovastatin 
disrupt cholesterol synthesis by inhibiting the HMG-CoA reductase (c). 50,51 
Prostate cancer has been the most common cancer in men in developed countries with the 
second highest rate of cancer-related mortality (52). Since cholesterol is an essential raw 
material to cell growth, high levels of cholesterol can be linked to uncontrolled growth of cells, 
thus can lead to cancer (53). Although the primary function of the prostate is to contribute to 
seminal fluids, studies have detected cholesterol in its epithelial cells and secretions. The 
prostate is believed to make more cholesterol than the liver (52). Various proteins contribute to 
the production and regulation of cholesterol in the prostate. Sterol regulatory element-binding 
protein 2 (SREBP-2) plays a vital role in increasing the cholesterol levels and when sufficient 
levels have been reached, it is inhibited and ultimately deactivated. On the other hand, (liver X 
receptor) LXR is activated when the levels of cholesterol are too high so that it can facilitate 
reducing the levels. It is suggested that perturbation of these forces that maintain the balance 
leads to accumulation of cholesterol in the prostate, leading to cancer (54,55). 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
23 
 
It has also been postulated that certain tumour cells need cholesterol for their growth through 
the hedgehog pathway. In unstimulated cells, the Patched (Ptch) protein entrenched in in the 
membrane inhibits an oncoprotein Smoothened (Smo), limiting cell growth. When a hedgehog 
signalling ligand interacts with Pathed, it undergoes endocytosis, on the other hand, 
Smoothened moves to the cell membrane where it is activated, realising a Gli signalling protein 
which enters the nucleus activating gene transcription that codes for production of various 
proteins responsible for cell growth (Figure 11). Cholesterol regulates the function of 
Smoothened by with binding with the cysteine rich domain (CRD) (56-58), therefore, if mis-
regulated, it may lead to a suitable environment for cancer cell growth. On the other hand, 
deeper understanding of the hedgehog pathway has led to suggestions that manipulation of the 
pathway may lead to invaluable cancer therapeutics (58). 
 
Figure 11: Schematic of the hedgehog pathway. PTCH1 inhibits SMO resulting in GLI1 sequestration in the cytoplasm by 
SUFU in the absence of Shh ligand resulting in Inactive signalling (left). When Shh is present (right) PTCH1 is suppressed 
while SMO is activated resulting in nuclear accumulation of GLI1 and activation of target genes that promote several 
oncogenic properties to tumour cells. (58) 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
24 
 
Lastly, a treatable genetic disorder in which cholesterol is maldistributed around the body, 
typically the brain, is called Niemann Pick Type C (NPC) disease. This autosomal recessive 
disorder arises when a child receives a mutated NPC gene from each parent. There are two 
types of NPC genes; NPC1 and NPC2 each contributing to 95% and 5% cases respectively. The 
mutated genes result in the inability of cells to transport lipids such as cholesterol through the 
endosomal-lysosomal system. This leads to accumulation and maldistribution of the lipids 
around the body and brain which has adverse effects such as abnormal signalling between cells 
and triggering of death pathways 59.  
In conclusion, research on modulation of cholesterol biosynthesis and efficient trafficking is 
gaining more attention as it could lead to new therapeutics for a range of diseases.  An example 
of how cholesterol levels and distribution can be monitored cells, is the experiment that was 
conducted by Reiko et al. (2011) in which they screened a library of compounds to test 
compounds that can affect levels and distribution of cholesterol in a cell. They used two 
fluorescent agents, EGFP-D4 and filipin, that bind to cholesterol and enable its levels and 
distribution to be monitored during microscopy image screening. Filipin penetrates cells, thus 
is more suitable for monitoring cholesterol distribution inside the cell while EGFP-D4 is more 
suitable for imaging cholesterol in the cell membrane (Figure 12). HMG-CoA reductase 
inhibitor Lovastatin, and cholesterol trafficking inhibitor 3-β-[2-(diethylamino) ethoxy] 
androst-5-en-17-one (U18666A) were used to test the localisation and distribution of 
cholesterol in HeLa cells cultured in DMEM supplemented Fetal bovine serum (FBS) or 
Lipoprotein-deficient serum (LPDS). 60,61 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
25 
 
 
Figure 12: A: HeLa cells were treated with or without lovastatin and U18666A in FBS- or LPDS-containing medium for 18 
h. h. Cells were labelled with EGFP-D4 and Hoechst 33342 B: HeLa cells were labelled with filipin and treated with 
lovastatin and U18666A in LPDS-containing medium for 18 h. The chemical structures of lovastatin, filipin and U18666A 
are also shown (61) 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
26 
 
2. Aims and Objectives  
The key role of cholesterol and its derivatives in animal physiology cannot be overemphasised. 
Mis-regulation of these molecules results in chronic diseases such as atherosclerosis and 
prostate cancer (50,52). The use of steroid-derivatives as therapeutics has long been recognized 
and applied in areas such as cancer treatment (e.g. Atamestane). However, most of the steroid-
derived drugs are a result of structural variations around the tetracyclic steroid backbone and 
side-chain (50) (Figure 7). Little attention has been paid to not using the characteristic 
tetracyclic backbone, but instead taking a fragment of it e.g. the C and D rings, and 
functionalising it with other small functional groups or fusing it with other ring systems while 
maintaining the stereochemistry of the natural precursor.   
We hypothesize that sterol derivatives made in this approach will interact with enzymes or 
proteins that interact with cholesterol, potentially leading to new compounds that can regulate 
the distribution and localisation of cholesterol and more importantly discover new targets, 
which may be further studied and exploited for therapeutic uses.  
The overall objective of this thesis is to synthesise a library of sterol-derived compounds to be 
used in a phenotypic cell-based screen for the identification of new regulators of cholesterol 
levels and localisation. Specifically, starting from vitamin D3, a key precursor (Grundmann’s 
ketone, 2) will be synthesised by ozonolysis (Figure 13). From this ketone precursor, different 
heterocyclic derivatives containing the C and D rings of the sterol core can be accessed. 
Synthesis of a lactone derivative (30) will be attempted using a Baeyer-Villiger oxidation. 
Synthesis of a lactam derivative (31) will be attempted via Beckmann rearrangement reaction. 
Indole derivatives (29, 32) will be synthesised using the Fischer indole synthesis. 
Aminooxazoles (33) and imidazoles (34) may also be accessed in few synthetic steps. From an 
α-brominated Grundmann’s Ketone precursor (35), different steroidal heterocycles including 
thiazoles (36) and quinoxalines (37) derivatives can be accessed. 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
27 
 
 
Figure 13: Overview of the project outline. 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
28 
 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Synthesis of Grundmann’s ketone precursor 
Grundmann’s ketone (compound 2) was the key precursor for all subsequent experiments 
because it was the building block of all cholesterol derivatives. The functionalised 6,5-fused 
ring system derivative could be accessed by oxidative cleavage of vitamin d3. Vitamin D3 
(cholecalciferol) is a derivative of cholesterol, produced by UV-light mediated reaction of 7-
dehydrocholesterol. Thus, ozonolysis of vitamin d3 was essential in making the starting 
material. The experimental procedure was adopted from Lange et al. (2003). The reaction 
scheme and mechanism are shown in figure 14. The ozonolysis reaction takes place by 
oxidatively cleaving the alkene by ozone via a 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition leading to the primary 
ozonide (molozonide, intermediate (i) in Figure 14) which decomposes to give a carbonyl oxide 
and a carbonyl compound.  The alcohol that is used as solvent for the reaction, stabilises the 
carbonyl oxide by forming a hydroperoxy hemiacetals. Since Vitamin d3 has more than one 
alkene functional group, they are all prone to oxidation, giving several side products. The yield 
for the experiment was 52% compared to 97% obtained by the authors. The purification by 
flash column chromatography contributed to the deviation as the rf values of the product and 
one of the side products had a difference of less than 0.05, making them close enough to lose 
some compound to obtain a pure yield. Characterization of the compound was done by NMR 
(appendix 1) with guide from the literature experimental results. 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
29 
 
 
Figure 14: Ozonolysis reaction. 
3.2. Synthesis of Indole-containing A, B-ring sterol analogues. 
The object of this synthesis was to fuse an indole functional group with compound 28 to obtain 
A, B-ring sterol analogue. To do this, a Fischer indole was attempted, a method of converting 
ketones or aldehydes and aryl hydrazones to indoles using Lewis or Bronsted acids. There are 
two essential steps involved in the Fischer indole synthesis, the acid catalysed hydrazone 
formation and the [3,3] sigmatropic rearrangement enforced by elevated temperatures.  
==PAGE:30==
 
 
30 
 
The Fischer indole synthesis was not as straightforward as the theoretical background suggested 
and this may have been due to the substrate (compound 28). Various reagents and conditions 
were used to try and obtain compound 29 as shown in Table 2. 
Table 2: Reaction scheme and the various attempted reagents and conditions 
Entry  
Reagents 
Solvent 
Conditions 
Time 
Comment 
1 
Acetic 
Acid 
Reflux 
Overnight 
No Product 
2 
Acetic 
Acid 
Reflux 
Overnight 
No Product 
3 
Ethanol 
Reflux 
Overnight 
No Product 
4 
Ethanol 
Reflux 
Overnight 
No Product 
5 
 
 
DMF 
Oil 
bath 
105oC 
48 hours 
No Product 
6 
Ethyl 
Acetate 
Microwave 
110oC 
3 hours 
Product formed 
as a mixture of 
epimers  
==PAGE:31==
 
 
31 
 
7 
Acetic 
Acid 
Microwave 
150oC 
4 hours 
Product formed 
as a mixture of 
epimers 
 
The basic Fischer indole reaction mechanism followed by all but entry 5 is shown in Figure 
15. Monitoring the reaction of entry 1 by TLC and LC-MS, it was observed that the hydrazone 
was formed since a new spot occurred on TLC and the corresponding LC-MS analysis showed 
the expected mass of the hydrazone of 355. Extending the reaction time by running it overnight 
did not yield any results as no product was formed. In entry 2, 4-Methoxyphenylhydrazine 
hydrochloride was selected because it was suspected a relatively more activated aromatic ring 
would have an aided advantage on the reactivity leading to formation of the product. 4-
Methoxyphenylhydrazine hydrochloride contains an electron donating methoxy group which 
activates the aromatic ring, on the other hand, 4-Chlorophenylhydrazine hydrochloride used in 
entry 1 contains a halogen that deactivates the aromatic ring.  However, the reaction did not go 
to completion, the observation made from the experiment were like those in entry 1 leading to 
two hypothesis that either the [3,3] sigmatropic rearrangement was not occurring or the 
backward reaction in step one of the reaction (hydrolysis of hydrazone) was more favoured 
since the reaction was run under acidic conditions. 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
32 
 
 
Figure 15: Indole synthesis mechanism noting that the hydrazone formation and the [3,3] sigmatropic rearrangement are the 
vital steps that lead to the formation of the indole. 
The indole synthesis was not as straightforward as the theoretical background suggested and 
this may have been due to the substrate. Various reagents and conditions were used to try and 
obtain compound 29 as shown in Table 2. Monitoring the reaction of entry 1 by TLC and LC-
MS, it was observed that the hydrazone was formed since a new spot occurred on TLC and the 
corresponding LC-MS analysis showed the expected mass of the hydrazone of 355. Extending 
the reaction time by running it overnight did not yield any results as no product was formed.  
In entry 2, 4-Methoxyphenylhydrazine hydrochloride was selected because it was suspected a 
relatively more activated aromatic ring would have an aided advantage on the reactivity leading 
to formation of the product. 4-Methoxyphenylhydrazine hydrochloride contains an electron 
donating methoxy group which activates the aromatic ring, on the other hand, 4-
Chlorophenylhydrazine hydrochloride used in entry 1 contains a halogen that deactivates the 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
33 
 
aromatic ring.  During the experiment, a new spot was spotted on the TLC in addition to the 
hydrazone. The LC-MS did not show presence of the expected product, and compound 28 was 
always present as the reaction progressed, but the compound was isolated for analysis. Since 
the Rf values of compound 28 and the new compound had a difference of 0.03, the isolated 
compound was not entirely pure, with an approximate ratio of 1:4 of (new compound: 
compound 28) established by NMR. Analysis of the 1HNMR showed that it was like that of 
compound 28 with the noticeable difference being the chemical shift of the methyl group as 
shown in Figure 16.  
 
Figure 16: Stacked 1H-NMR of the new compound (red) and compound 28(blue). The Stacked 1HNMR show that the new 
compound is compound 8 and the major product is that which has a methyl group (encircled) that has shifted from δ 0.57 to δ 
0.97 ppm.  
Although not conclusive, the evidence suggested that the compound had epimerized, a process 
by which diastereomers differing in configuration at one chiral center interconvert. The natural 
form of compound 28 is a trans-6,5-fused ring system. Although compound containing protons 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
34 
 
α to a ketone are prone to epimerization under acid or basic conditions, another important factor 
in the case of compound 28 is that fused 6,5 membered rings are more stable in the cis 
configuration, making the compound more prone to epimerization (Figure 17). 
 
Figure 17: The naturally derived Grundmann’s ketone trans conformation (a) is prone to epimerization at the highlighted 
chiral centre to form more stable cis-conformation (b). 
The observation made from the experiment supported that epimerization had occurred, leading 
to two hypothesis that either the [3,3] sigmatropic rearrangement was not occurring or the 
backward reaction in step one of the reaction (hydrolysis of hydrazone) was more favoured 
since the reaction was run under acidic conditions. This led to change in strategy in which 
catalytic amounts of Bronsted acid (Table 2, entry 3) and Lewis acid (Table 2, entry 4) and a 
protic solvent was used compared to the acid solvent in entry 1 and 2. However, these reactions 
did not yield any product. In entry 3, no hydrazone formation was observed. On the other hand, 
the hydrazone was observed in Table 2, entry 4, but no final product despite running the 
reaction for longer. 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
35 
 
In Table 2, entry 5, the reagents were selected on the basis that the reaction undergoes a 
different type of mechanism shown in Figure 15. Compared to the mechanism in Figure 18, in 
the heck-type of mechanism the hydrazone does not undergo the heat facilitated sigmatropic 
rearrangement, instead follows 3 key steps: oxidative addition, 1,2 insertion and β-hydride 
elimination. However, the reaction yielded same results as entries 1,2 and 4, suggesting that the 
second step of the indole synthesis was problematic.  
 
Figure 18: Heck-type mechanism. The hydrazone is formed just as in the other mechanism however the hydrazone formed 
undergoes oxidative addition, 1,2 insertion and β-hydride elimination compared to [3,3] in normal Fischer indole synthesis. 
In Table 2, entry 6, the indole synthesis was carried out under microwave irradiation at 110 oC 
in the presence of propylphosphonic anhydride (T3P). T3P was used because it catalyses the 
formation of the hydrazone by acting as a water scavenger. During this process, T3P reacts with 
water and produces P, P’, P’’- tripropyl triphosphonic acid which also acts as a catalyst. Thus, 
using T3P favoured the forwards reaction, formation of the hydrazone while the microwave 
radiation provided elevated temperatures that favour [3,3] sigmatropic rearrangement leading 
to formation of the product. Although the spot on the TLC with a rf value corresponding to the 
hydrazone was still observed, a new spot was also observed. LC-MS confirmed the masses of 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
36 
 
the hydrazone and the expected mass the indole, compound 12 as 338. After purification with 
FCC, further characterization by NMR confirmed the presence of the compound however it 
was not entirely clean as there was a mixture of compounds.  
After the reactional conditions on Table 2 entry 6 had shown positive results, reactional 
conditions on Table 2 entry 7 was attempted to test the hypothesis that the reaction was not 
going to completion because the heat was not sufficient enough to enforce the [3,3] sigmatropic 
rearrangement. After radiating at 150°C in a microwave with acetic acid for 4 hours showed 
the conversion of the hydrazone to the desired product, compound 12. This was confirmed by 
observing a TLC spot with the same rf value as that witnessed in entry 6 and the corresponding 
expected mass. After purification with FCC, further characterization by NMR confirmed the 
presence of the compound. Like entry 6, the positive results led to more attempts to optimize 
the conditions for better yields and isolation, which are still ongoing. 
3.3. Synthesis of lactone-containing C, D-ring sterol analogues. 
The second new scaffold attempted was the formation of a 7,5-fused ring system which could 
be accessed by oxidation ring expansion of 28. The Baeyer Villiger oxidation is a way to make 
esters by treating ketones with peroxy acids or hydrogen peroxide.  Oxidation of compound 2 
(Grundmann’s ketone) with 3-Chloroperbenzoic acid (m-CPBA), a peroxyl acid under 
microwave irradiation yielded a compound 31 (Figure 19), a lactone. Although, the reactions 
were under acidic conditions and the starting material was prone to epimerization, the final 
product retained the cis configuration, leading to a proposition that owing to the oxidising 
power of m-CPBA step (iii) (lactone formation) occurs faster than the compound can change 
its configuration and the resulting cis-fused 7,5 membered ring conformations is stable. Another 
factor to consider is that in step (iii) the ring expansion can occur from either side of the ketone 
to give two possible regioisomers. The side shown on the mechanism is favoured more due to 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
37 
 
the tertiary carbocation stabilisation compared to the opposite with secondary stabilisation, thus 
the former making a thermodynamic product.  
 
Figure 19: The schematic of the Baeyer Villiger oxidation to form a lactone, 30. The reaction mechanism shows key steps (i-
iii). 
3.4. Synthesis of lactam-containing C, D-ring sterol analogues. 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
38 
 
The next step from after synthesising the lactone-derivative was to attempt another ring 
expansion reaction but making an amide functional group to make the scaffold of the 7,5-fused 
ring system more diverse. The ring expansion of this kind could be achieved by a Beckmann 
rearrangement reaction. Generally, the Beckmann rearrangement from a ketone has two main 
steps: the oxime formation followed by a rearrangement to form an amide.  
In contrast to the Baeyer Villiger oxidation, the Beckmann rearrangement did not work on the 
first attempt. The first reaction, (Table 3, entry 1) did yield the desired product, but the 
observations during the reaction suggested that the oxime was formed.  
Table 3: Reaction conditions for the Beckamann rearrangement reaction. 
 
Entry   
Reagents 
Solvent 
Temperature 
Time  
Comment 
1 
 
TFA 
Reflux 
4 hours 
Product 
not 
formed 
2 
 
Acetic acid 
Reflux 
4 hours 
Mixture 
of 
products formed 
3 
 
Formic acid 
Reflux 
4 hours 
Mixture 
of 
products formed 
In Table 3, entry 2, 50 (hydroxylamine-O-sulfonic acid) was used because compared to 49 
(hydroxylamine hydrochloride) in Table 3, entry 1, it contains sulfonic acid which acts as a 
better leaving group during the rearrangement (Figure 20) compared to the hydroxyl on 49. 
After the reaction and subsequent work up, the TLC of the crude product showed that the 
reaction had gone to completion giving two new spots. This was expected since after the oxime 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
39 
 
formation, kinetic and thermodynamic intermediates are formed which lead to a kinetic and 
thermodynamic product, compounds 31a and 31b respectively (Figure 20). The LC-MS also 
confirmed the presence of the two products by showing two peaks with the same mass of 280 
(ES+). 
 
Figure 20: Mechanism of the Beckmann rearrangement and the final products obtained. 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
40 
 
Interestingly, after purification, NMR analysis of the isolated kinetic product revealed that the 
compound had completely epimerized into a cis configuration. On the other hand, analysis of 
the thermodynamic product revealed the presence of an inseparable mixture of epimers, 
favouring the retained trans configuration in a 1:2 ratio (trans: cis) (see appendix). Since the 
trans fused 7,5 membered rings was also favoured in the Baeyer Villiger oxidation for the 
thermodynamic diastereomer, the same hypothesis applied that it may be the more stable 
conformation, but the ratio may have been because of epimerization compound 2 before the 
oxime formation since the reaction is run in an acid medium which promotes epimerisation. In 
conclusion, isolating the kinetic product and thermodynamic product was challenging by FCC 
as reflected by low yields, consequently their ratios could not be determined.  Table 3, entry 3 
was done in bid to optimize the reaction to obtain better selectivity but yielded same results as 
Table 3, entry 2.  
3.5. Synthesis of α brominated Grundmann’s ketone 
The goal of brominating the alpha position of the ketone was to make a precursor that could 
easily undergo heterocycle synthesis such as thiazole and quinoxaline synthesis (Figure 21). 
Bromination of a ketone takes place via enolate mechanism as shown in Figure 21. Due to the 
unsymmetrical nature of 28, when it tautomerizes, it can give rise to kinetic and thermodynamic 
enolates. The thermodynamic enolate forms a double bond towards the tertiary carbon and since 
it is more substituted, it is more stable due to its electronic inductive nature. This contrasts with 
the kinetic enolate that is formed at a secondary carbon, which is comparatively less stable. Due 
to the nature of the stereochemistry of the heterocycles that would be later synthesised, the 
precursor needed had to be the kinetic product. Ideally, kinetic products are obtained under 
kinetic conditions, that is, low temperatures and low reaction times. While thermodynamic 
products are obtained under high temperatures and longer reaction times. In addition, other 
factors such as sterics of reacting species may also contribute to selectivity. 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
41 
 
 
Figure 21: Bromination of 2 to access a key precursor for heterocycle synthesis: (a) reaction scheme (b) mechanism using 
dibromobarbishowing the more favoured brominated position and ultimately brominating the ketone twice to functionalise 
the kinetically favoured position    
Synthesising 35, the kinetic product, turned out to be challenging as the product desired product 
was not formed. Several different reagents and conditions were used as shown in Table 4, but 
they all yielded compound 35a, the thermodynamic product. In entries 1, 2 and 3, the reactions 
were conducted till completion, with observed products on the TLC. Characterization of the 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
42 
 
two purified by NMR (see appendix 5) showed that they were diastereomers of the 
thermodynamic product.     
In entry 1, 5,5-dibromo barbituric acid was used at room temperature over 24 hours. While the 
long reaction time is a contributing factor to a thermodynamic product, it was expected that the 
its steric property would play a greater part in the selectivity role by favouring the less hindered 
kinetic side. Since the thermodynamic product formed, was it was postulated that since the 
thermodynamic enolate takes a flat conformation like that shown in Figure 21 due to the 
formation of a sp2 carbon, this makes the reaction site from the bottom face accessible such 
that sterics would not have strongly contributed to the selectivity. Reaction with copper bromide 
(Table 4, entry 2 and 3) still gave the thermodynamic product however when the reaction was 
refluxed with a solvent mixture of ethyl acetate and chloroform (Table 4, entry 2), the crude 
NMR showed presence of eliminated products. Lastly, reaction with bromine was done in a 
shorter time and by adding dropwise to try and maintain the temperature constant at room 
temperature and obtain the kinetic product but yielded the same results as in Table 4 entries 1 
and 3. 
Table 4: Different brominating conditions tried, all giving the thermodynamic product. 
Entry 
Reagents 
Solvent 
Temperature 
Time 
Comment 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
43 
 
1 
Dry diethyl ether 
Room 
temperature  
24 hours 
Thermodynamic 
product formed 
2 
CuBr2 
Ethyl Acetate: 
Chloroform (1:1) 
Reflux 
Overnight 
Thermodynamic 
product formed + 
side products 
3 
CuBr2 
THF 
Room 
temperature 
Overnight 
Thermodynamic 
product formed 
4 
Br2 
Chloroform 
Room 
temperature 
2 hours 
Thermodynamic 
product formed 
After these attempts, the only way to circumvent this was to brominate both α positions to make 
35 (Figure 21) by using two equivalences of a brominating agent. While this would 
functionalise the compound at a position we needed for further chemistry, it also meant there is 
an additional step added for the removal of the unreacted bromine. 5,5-dibromo barbituric acid 
was used in two equivalences, and two compounds were observed by TLC with the same Rf 
values as the mono-brominated compounds. After purification, analysis by NMR showed that 
the both compounds had an adopted the cis conformation, but the major product had the 
bromine on the equatorial position which was witnessed by a significantly higher than expected 
chemical shift of the hydrogen on the axial position of 5.56 (see appendix 5), while the minor 
product had the bromine on the axial position. Since the position of the bromine was did not 
matter as the sterocentre would be destroyed in the next step, the diastereomers were stored for 
the next step. 
3.6. Synthesis of an aminothiazole-fused steroid analogue 
Since 35b was synthesised as a precursor, the next step was to attempt synthesis of 
aminothiazole-fused steroid analogue. Since thiazole synthesis forms an aromatic ring, only 
one side of 35b can facilitate this, which desired side thus giving the desired product. 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
44 
 
Interestingly, after the reaction, the product had a corresponding mass of 319 (ES+) on the LC-
MS showing loss of the remaining bromine. After purification and analysis by NMR, the 13C 
NMR showed two carbon peaks in the alkene region and three in the aromatic region (see 
appendix 6). On the other hand, the 1H NMR showed a chemical shift of a proton in the alkene 
region too. Full characterization by NMR and information provided by the LC-MS led to the 
conclusion that the final compound made was 37. In retrospect, the explanation for this result 
was that the compound also underwent an E1 elimination reaction, E1. The bromine is at a 
tertiary position and ethanol, a protic solvent was used for the reaction, these conditions 
promoted an E1 reaction. It is not clear though if the elimination occurs before, after or at the 
same time as the thiazole reaction. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
45 
 
4. Conclusion and future work 
Synthesis of cholesterol derivatives to make up a library of sterol compounds for phenotypic 
screening displayed positive results but with need for further research for optimization as 
summarised in figure 1. The naturally derived Grundmann’s ketone trans-6,5-fused ring 
system was prone to epimerization to the more stable cis-conformation. Despite our best 
efforts to retain the natural stereochemistry, successful products were either the cis 
conformation or mixtures of diastereomers. This was noted in during synthesis of 29 in which 
various conditions were used but could not avoid epimerization. On the other hand, the 
reaction itself proved to be challenging as the product was not formed despite epimerization. 
The attempt with entry 6 and 7 (table xx) however showed that the positive results which 
indicated that 29 needs more heat and also a water scavenger that push the hydrazone 
formation. Isolation of the compound made was also challenging and this is another area that 
will need further optimization such as using reverse HPLC.   
This resulted in challenges to isolate products resulting in lower yields. Synthesis of lactone 
(30) was successful to yield (52%), however there was indication that the regio-isomer was 
also present, with the thermodynamic product being favoured in a 1:4 ratio. The major 
positive result was its ability to retain cis conformation. Compared to 30 synthesis of lactam 
(31) was successfully done via the Beckmann rearrangement to yield 26% of an epimerized 
kinetic product and 11% of a mixture diastereomers of the thermodynamic product. The 
separation of the regio-isomers proved difficult and this will need further optimization, on the 
other hand establishing conditions that favour one epimer of the thermodynamic product    
carried out by a Baeyer Villiger oxidation to a product with the in a 1:4 ratio in favour of the 
thermodynamic regio-isomer.  Synthesis of α brominated Grundmann’s ketone precursor for 
the aminothiazole-fused 39 and quinoxaline-fused 38 steroid analogues was challenging, as 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
46 
 
the different conditions resulted in the formation of a thermodynamic product 35a, while the 
desired kinetic product xx was not formed. This resulted in bromination of both α positions 
yielding 92% of 35b.  Aminothiazole-fused 38 and quinoxaline-fused 39 steroid analogues 
were subsequently synthesised to yielding 31% and 38%  of the eliminated derivatives 
respectively. Synthesis of Indole-containing sterol analogue 29 was challenging, with most of 
the attempted conditions not yielding a product, however two sets of conditions entry 6 and 7 
table xx were promising as the cis-configured product was formed. Optimization of the yield 
and purification is ongoing.   
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
47 
 
 
5. Experimental  
5.1. General procedure 
Commercially available reagents were used without further purification and all solvents were 
of HPLC quality. All reactions were monitored by thin layer chromatography (TLC) and/or 
reversed-phase ultra-performance liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (RP-UPLC-MS). 
 Analytical TLC was conducted on Merck aluminium sheets covered with silica (C60). The 
plates were either visualized under UV-light or stained by dipping in a developing agent 
followed by heating. KMnO4 [3 g in water (300 mL) along with K2CO3 (20 g) and 5% aqueous 
NaOH (5 mL)] was used as developing agents. Flash column chromatography was performed 
using Merck Geduran® Si 60 (40-63 μm) silicagel.  
All new compounds were characterized by 1H NMR, 13C NMR, IR, MS (ESI), HRMS (ESI), 
and optical rotation (byproducts were not fully characterized). For the recording of 1H NMR 
and 13C NMR a Bruker Ascend with a Prodigy cryoprobe (operating at 400 MHz for proton 
and 100 MHz for carbon) was used. The chemical shifts (δ) are reported in parts per million 
(ppm) and the coupling constants (J) in Hz. All spectra were recorded in CDCl3, signal 
positions were measured relative to the signal for CHCl3 (δ 7.26 ppm for 1H NMR and δ 77.0 
ppm for 13C NMR). 
Analytical RP-UPLC-MS (ESI) analysis was performed on a S2 Waters AQUITY RP-UPLC 
system equipped with a diode array detector using a Thermo Accucore C18 column (d 2.6 μm, 
2.1 x 50 mm; column temp: 50 °C; flow: 1.0 mL/min). Eluents A (0.1% HCO2H in H2O) and 
B (0.1% HCO2H in MeCN) were used in a linear gradient (5% B to 100% B) in 2.4 min and 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
48 
 
then held for 0.1 min at 100% B (total run time: 2.6 min). The LC system was coupled to a 
SQD mass spectrometer.  
Optical rotation was carried out using a Perkin-Elmer polarimeter 341. The temperature for all 
recordings was approximately 20 °C. 
5.2. Experimental Procedures 
Synthesis of (3aR,7aR)-7a-methyl-1-((R)-6-methylheptan-2-yl) hexahydro-1H-inden-4(2H)-
one (28) 1 
 
Cholecalciferol (2g, 5.2mmol) was dissolved in methanol (40 ml) and was cooled to -30 oC to 
-40 oC and ozone was bubbled through the solution for 1 hour. The solution was then treated 
with water (20 ml) and extracted with pentane (3 x 40 ml). The combined organic layers were 
dried over magnesium sulphate and concentrated under reduced pressure. The crude product 
was purified with flash column chromatography to (hexane: ethyl acetate 20:1) to yield 0.61g 
(52 %) as a colourless oil. 
Rf –value (hexane/EtOAc 10:1): 0.38. 
1H NMR (400 MHz, , CDCl3) δ 2.44 (dd, J = 11.7, 7.4 Hz, 1H), 2.31 – 2.15 (m, 3H), 2.14 – 
2.08 (m, 1H), 2.04 – 1.94 (m, 1H), 1.93 – 1.83 (m, 2H), 1.74 – 1.66 (m, 1H), 1.61 – 1.30 (m, 
7H), 1.18 – 1.06 (m, 3H), 0.94 (d, J = 6.1 Hz, 3H), 0.87 (d, J = 1.9 Hz, 4H), 0.85 (d, J = 1.9 Hz, 
4H), 0.63 (s, 3H).   
==PAGE:49==
 
 
49 
 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 212.34, 62.15, 56.86, 50.08, 41.12, 39.55, 39.13, 36.12, 35.65, 
28.13, 27.65, 24.22, 23.92, 22.93, 22.67, 19.22, 18.87, 12.62. 
[α]D20 = +30° (c 20 mg/mL in CHCl3). 
 
Synthesis of (5aR,8aR)-5a-methyl-6-((R)-6-methylheptan-2-yl)octahydrocyclopenta[c]azepin-
1(2H)-one 31a. 2 
 
Grundmann’s ketone (50mg, 0.189mmol) was dissolved in acetic acid (3 ml) and to the stirred 
mixture was added hydroxylamine o-sulfonic acid (21mg, 0.189mmol). The reaction mixture 
was heated under microwave for 2 hours and monitored by TLC and LC-MS. After the reaction 
was complete, the reaction mixture was cooled to room temperature and quenched with water 
(3ml) followed by 10 % sodium hydroxide (6ml). The product was extracted with 
dichloromethane (3ml x 3), dried with magnesium sulphate. The final solution was evaporated 
under reduced pressure to yield 50mg of the crude product with two diastereomers (94% yield). 
The diastereomers were separated by flash column chromatography (hexane: ethyl acetate 8:2) 
to yield 14mg (26%) and 6mg (11%) pure diastereomers as a brown oil. 
  Compound 31a 
Rf –value (hexane/EtOAc 8:2): 0.32. 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
50 
 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 5.80 (s, 1H), 3.43 (d, J = 12.9 Hz, 1H), 3.19 (d, J = 14.8 Hz, 
1H), 2.65 (dd, J = 9.2, 4.7 Hz, 1H), 2.45 – 2.19 (m, 1H), 1.92 – 1.81 (m, 2H), 1.74 – 1.64 (m, 
3H), 1.57 – 1.26 (m, 5H), 1.20 – 1.09 (m, 3H), 0.99 (s, 3H), 0.94 (d, J = 6.7 Hz, 3H), 0.89 (d, J 
= 1.5 Hz, 3H), 0.88 (d, J = 1.6 Hz, 3H). 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 177.49, 55.16, 53.36, 45.03, 39.58, 38.78, 35.52, 33.59, 32.57, 
28.15, 26.59, 25.02, 22.93, 22.71, 22.39, 22.19, 20.98, 19.98. 
IR (neat) cm-1: 3233, 3086, 2951, 2930, 2867, 1661, 1467, 1403, 1381, 1363, 1280, 1233, 1100, 
1011, 936, 800.  
[α]D20 = -1,24° (c 14 mg/mL in CHCl3). 
RP-UPLC-MS (ESI) calcd. for [C18H33NO] [M+H]  279.7, found 280.7 
Synthesis 
of 
(5aR,8aR)-5a-methyl-6-((R)-6-methylheptan-2-yl) 
octahydro-2H-
cyclopenta[b]oxepin-2-one (30) 3 
 
Grundmann’s ketone (50mg, 0.189mmol) was dissolved in chloroform (3 ml) and to the stirred 
mixture was added meta-chloroperoxybenzoic acid (m-CPBA) (85mg, 0.492mmol). The 
reaction mixture was heated under microwave for 30 minutes and monitored by TLC and LC-
MS. After the reaction was complete, the reaction mixture was cooled to room temperature and 
washed with 10% sodium sulphite (3ml x3) and 10 % sodium hydrogen carbonate (3ml x3). 
The product was dried with anhydrous sodium sulphate. The final solution was evaporated 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
51 
 
under reduced pressure and purified by flash column chromatography (hexane: ethyl acetate 
10:1) to yield 21mg (52%) as a white oil. 
Rf–value (hexane/EtOAc 10:1): 0.30   
 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 4.35 (t, J = 9.2 Hz, 1H), 2.61 – 2.46 (m, 2H), 2.10 (dt, J = 13.3, 
3.6 Hz, 1H), 2.00 – 1.91 (m, 1H), 1.74 – 1.66 (m, 3H), 1.49 – 1.36 (m, 3H), 1.30 – 1.22 (m, 
2H), 1.10 – 1.00 (m, 2H), 0.87 (d, J = 6.6 Hz, 3H), 0.81 (d, J = 1.7 Hz, 4H), 0.79 (d, J = 1.7 Hz, 
4H), 0.77 (s, 3H). 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 175.61, 85.91, 53.39, 45.52, 41.87, 39.53, 35.31, 34.71, 31.08, 
28.14, 26.90, 24.46, 24.20, 22.91, 22.68, 19.76, 19.63, 11.07. 
IR (neat) cm-1: 2953, 2926, 1790, 1596, 1554, 1467, 1448, 1382, 1365, 1326, 1287, 1255, 1190, 
1165, 1132, 1098, 1072, 1044, 970 
Synthesis of (3aS,7aR)-3a-bromo-7a-methyl-1-((R)-6-methylheptan-2-yl) hexahydro-1H-
inden-4(2H)-one 
and 
(3aR,7aR)-3a-bromo-7a-methyl-1-((R)-6-methylheptan-2-yl) 
hexahydro-1H-inden-4(2H)-one 4 
 
Grundmann’s ketone (50mg, 0.189mmol) was dissolved in dry diethyl ether (5 ml) and to the 
stirred mixture was added 5,5-Dibromobarbituric acid (32.5mg, 0.113mmol). The reaction 
mixture was left stirring under nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature for 24 hours and 
monitored by TLC and LC-MS. After the reaction was complete, the reaction mixture was 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
52 
 
filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure to yield 88mg (92%) of crude product with two 
diastereomers. The diastereomers were separated by flash column chromatography (hexane: 
ethyl acetate 20:1) to yield 19mg (20%) and 11mg (12.5%) pure diastereomers as a yellow oil.   
 
Compound 36a  
Rf –value (hexane/EtOAc 10:1): 0.73   
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 3.44 – 3.33 (m, 1H), 2.47 – 2.33 (m, 1H), 2.31 – 2.23 (m, 1H), 
2.20 – 2.09 (m, 3H), 2.00 – 1.80 (m, 3H), 1.57 – 1.50 (m, 2H), 1.44 – 1.32 (m, 2H), 1.21 – 1.03 
(m, 3H), 0.95 (d, J = 6.5 Hz, 3H), 0.88 (d, J = 2.2 Hz, 2H), 0.87 (d, J = 2.2 Hz, 3H), 0.82 (s, 
2H). 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 205.74, 86.33, 51.48, 51.02, 39.37, 36.14, 35.53 (d, J = 6.8 Hz), 
34.96, 34.19, 32.65, 27.98, 26.29, 24.02, 22.82, 22.53, 21.42, 18.77, 14.63. 
IR (neat) cm-1: 2952, 2928, 2867, 2177, 1637, 1567, 1486, 1466, 1417, 1381, 1258, 1168, 1077, 
921, 727, 638 
 
Compound 36b 
Rf –value (hexane/EtOAc 10:1): 0.56   
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 3.26 – 3.14 (m, 1H), 2.91 – 2.76 (m, 1H), 2.38 – 2.29 (m, 1H), 
2.01 – 1.77 (m, 5H), 1.60 – 1.18 (m, 6H), 1.12 (s, 3H), 0.96 (d, 1H), 0.89 (d, J = 2.2 Hz, 3H), 
0.87 (d, J = 2.2 Hz, 3H). 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
53 
 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 204.14, 75.69, 50.36 (d, J = 54.6 Hz), 42.05, 39.45, 36.12, 
35.89, 35.52, 30.41, 30.10, 28.09, 25.60, 24.20, 22.94, 22.65, 21.12, 20.33, 18.50, 14.28. 
IR (neat) cm-1: 2952, 2928, 2867, 2177, 1637, 1567, 1486, 1466, 1417, 1381, 1258, 1168, 1077, 
921, 727, 638 
Synthesis of (3aR,7aR)-3a,5-dibromo-7a-methyl-1-((R)-6-methylheptan-2-yl) hexahydro-
1H-inden-4(2H)-one 4 
 
Grundmann’s ketone (50mg, 0.189mmol) was dissolved in dry diethyl ether (5 ml) and to the 
stirred mixture was added 5,5-Dibromobarbituric acid (65mg, 0.226mmol). The reaction 
mixture was left stirring under nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature for 24 hours and 
monitored by TLC and LC-MS. After the reaction was complete, the reaction mixture was 
filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure to yield 88mg (92%) of crude product with two 
diastereomers. The diastereomers were separated by flash column chromatography (hexane: 
ethyl acetate 20:1) to yield 24mg (30%) pure diastereomer as a yellow oil.   
Rf –value (hexane/EtOAc 10:1): 0.75   
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 5.56 (dd, J = 13.1, 6.8 Hz, 0H), 2.93 (ddd, J = 12.3, 9.7, 3.1 Hz, 
0H), 2.45 (ddt, J = 13.7, 6.9, 3.6 Hz, 0H), 2.35 – 2.23 (m, 0H), 2.09 (ddd, J = 15.0, 13.3, 3.9 
Hz, 0H), 2.02 – 1.99 (m, 0H), 1.98 – 1.85 (m, 0H), 1.58 – 1.28 (m, 2H), 1.17 – 1.11 (m, 2H), 
0.96 (d, J = 6.0 Hz, 1H), 0.89 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H), 0.87 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H). 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
54 
 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 195.40, 75.17, 52.42, 51.22, 42.36, 39.37, 36.26, 35.47, 33.95, 
31.86, 31.61, 28.06, 25.70, 24.30, 22.93, 22.63, 20.00, 18.48. 
IR (neat) cm-1: 3356, 2953, 2868, 1736, 1708, 1621, 1464, 1372, 1300, 1237, 1170, 1115, 1045,   
Synthesis 
of 
(5aR)-5a-methyl-6-((R)-6-methylheptan-2-yl)-5,5a,6,7-tetrahydro-4H-
indeno[4,5-d] thiazol-2-amine 5 
 
Compound 36c was dissolved in ethanol (3ml) and to it was added thiourea (45mg, 0.0189). 
The reaction mixture was refluxed for 5 hours and monitored by TLC and LC-MS. After the 
reaction was complete, the reaction mixture was cooled to room temperature and quenched with 
10 % sodium hydrogen carbonate and extracted with dichloromethane (3ml x3). The product 
was dried with anhydrous sodium sulphate. The final solution was evaporated under reduced 
pressure and purified by flash column chromatography (hexane: ethyl acetate 10:1) to yield 
16mg (31%) as a yellow oil.  
Rf –value (hexane/EtOAc 8:2): 0.7 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 5.79 (t, J = 2.7 Hz, 1H), 5.20 (s, 2H), 2.77 – 2.64 (m, 1H), 2.57 
(ddd, J = 17.3, 5.9, 1.7 Hz, 1H), 2.43 (ddd, J = 16.6, 7.1, 3.7 Hz, 1H), 2.12 (dddd, J = 10.4, 8.6, 
5.1, 2.3 Hz, 2H), 1.63 – 1.41 (m, 4H), 1.36 – 1.26 (m, 2H), 1.23 – 1.16 (m, 1H), 1.15 – 0.97 (m, 
2H), 0.91 (d, J = 6.0 Hz, 2H), 0.87 (s, 3H), 0.82 (d, J = 1.3 Hz, 3H), 0.80 (d, J = 1.4 Hz, 3H). 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
55 
 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 166.03, 142.80, 141.16, 120.60, 119.69, 56.73, 46.62, 39.46 (d, 
J = 4.0 Hz), 36.74, 36.26, 36.13, 33.89, 28.02, 23.80, 22.82, 22.56, 21.53, 18.96, 15.58. 
IR (neat) cm-1: 3292, 3186, 2952, 2925, 2868, 1692, 1621, 1528, 1464, 1377, 1298, 1261, 1182, 
1161, 1100, 1032, 976, 898, 816, 732, 699 
[α]D20 = +0.34° (c 9 mg/mL in CHCl3). 
Synthesis 
of 
(3aR,11bR)-11b-bromo-3a-methyl-3-((R)-6-methylheptan-2-yl)-
2,3,3a,4,5,11b-hexahydro-1H-cyclopenta[a]phenazine (37) 
 
Grundmann’s ketone (50mg, 0.189mmol) was dissolved in dry diethyl ether (5 ml) and to the 
stirred mixture was added 5,5-Dibromobarbituric acid (65mg, 0.226mmol). The reaction 
mixture was left stirring under nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature for 24 hours and 
monitored by TLC and LC-MS. After the reaction was complete, the reaction mixture was 
filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure to yield 88mg (92%) of crude product with two 
diastereomers. The crude product was then dissolved in ethanol (3ml) and to it was added o-
phenylenediamine (20mg, 0.0189). The reaction mixture was refluxed for 5 hours and 
monitored by TLC and LC-MS. After the reaction was complete, the reaction mixture was 
cooled to room temperature and quenched with 10 % sodium hydrogen carbonate and extracted 
with dichloromethane (3ml x3). The product was dried with anhydrous sodium sulphate. The 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
56 
 
final solution was evaporated under reduced pressure and purified by flash column 
chromatography (hexane: ethyl acetate 10:1) to yield 10mg (34%) as a yellow oil. 
Rf –value (hexane/EtOAc 8:2): 0.6 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.95 – 7.85 (m, 2H, C23, C26), 7.60 – 7.55 (m, 2H, C24, C25), 
6.88 – 6.80 (m, 1H, C7), 3.27 (m, 1H, C1), 3.17 – 2.99 (m, 2H, C1, C8), 2.60 (m, 1H), 2.34 – 
2.19 (m, 2H), 1.84 – 1.75 (m, 2H), 1.43 – 1.32 (m, 3H), 1.17 – 1.06 (m, 4H), 1.03 (s, 3H, C15), 
0.99 (d, J = 6.4 Hz, 3H, C11), 0.84 (d, J = 1.3 Hz, 3H, C17), 0.82 (d, J = 1.3 Hz, 3H, C18). 
IR (neat) cm-1: 3061, 2953, 2928, 2868, 2325, 1731, 1633, 1549, 1465, 1381, 1347, 1259, 1127, 
1013, 907, 800, 759, 731. 
[α]D20 = +0.38° (c 10 mg/mL in CHCl3). 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
57 
 
References 
1. Paul SM, Mytelka DS, Dunwiddie CT, Persinger CC, Munos BH, Lindborg SR, 
Schacht AL (March 2010). "How to improve R&D productivity: the pharmaceutical 
industry's grand challenge". Nature Reviews. Drug Discovery. 9 (3): 203–14.  
2. Takenaka T (September 2001). "Classical vs reverse pharmacology in drug 
discovery". BJU International. 88 Suppl 2: 7–10; discussion 49–50.  
3. Hughes, J., Rees, S., Kalindjian, S., & Philpott, K. (2011). Principles of early drug 
discovery. British Journal of Pharmacology, 162(6), 1239-1249.  
4. Connor, C. J., Laraia, L., & Spring, D. R. (2011). Chemical genetics. Chemical 
Society Reviews, 40(8), 4332-4345. doi:10.1039/c1cs15053g. 
5. B. R. Stockwell, Nat. Rev. Genet., 2000, 1, 116–125. 
6. D. R. Spring, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 472–482. 
7. S. L. Schreiber, Bioorg. Med. Chem., 1998, 6, 1127–1152. 
8. K.-H. Altmann, J. Buchner, H. Kessler, F. Diederich, B. Kra¨utler, S. Lippard, R. 
Liskamp, K. Muller, E. M. Nolan, B. Samori, G. Schneider, S. L. Schreiber, H. 
Schwalbe, C. Toniolo, C. A. van Boeckel, H. Waldmann and C. T. Walsh, 
ChemBioChem, 2009, 10, 16–29. 
9. M. Kawasumi and P. Nghiem, J. Invest. Dermatol., 2007, 127, 1577–1584. 
10. Hopkins AL, Groom CR, Alex A (May 2004). "Ligand efficiency: a useful metric for 
lead selection". Drug Discovery Today. 9 (10): 430–1.  
11. Ryckmans T, Edwards MP, Horne VA, Correia AM, Owen DR, Thompson LR, Tran 
I, Tutt MF, Young T (August 2009). "Rapid assessment of a novel series of selective 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
58 
 
CB(2) agonists using parallel synthesis protocols: A Lipophilic Efficiency (LipE) 
analysis". Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters. 19 (15): 4406–9.  
12. Leeson PD, Springthorpe B (November 2007). "The influence of drug-like concepts 
on decision-making in medicinal chemistry". Nature Reviews. Drug Discovery. 6 (11): 
881–90.  
13. B. R. Stockwell, Trends Biotechnol., 2000, 18, 449–455 
14. Lenci, E., Guarna, A., & Trabocchi, A. (2014). Diversity-Oriented Synthesis as a Tool 
for Chemical Genetics. Molecules, 19(10), 16506-16528.  
15. Guiguemde, W.A.; Shelat, A.A.; Bouck, D.; Duffy, S.; Crowther, G.J.; Davis, P.H.; 
Smithson, D.C.; Connelly, M.; Clark, J.; Zhu, F.; et al. Chemical genetics of 
Plasmodium falciparum. Nature 2010, 465, 311–315. 
16. Gujjar, R.; Marwaha, A.; el Mazouni, F.; White, J.; White, K.L.; Creason, S.; 
Shackleford, D.M.; Baldwin, J.; Charman, W.N.; Buckner, F.S.; et al. Identification of 
a metabolically stable triazolopyrimidine-based dihydroorotate dehydrogenase 
inhibitor with antimalarial activity in mice. J. Med. Chem. 2009, 52, 1864–1872. 
17. Sijwali, P.S.; Rosenthal, P.J. Gene disruption confirms a critical role for the cysteine 
protease falcipain-2 in hemoglobin hydrolysis by Plasmodium falciparum. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 2004, 101, 4384–4389. 
18. Pisciotta, J.M.; Coppens, I.; Tripathi, A.K.; Scholl, P.F.; Shuman, J.; Bajad, S.; 
Shulaev, V.; Sullivan, D.J. The role of neutral lipid nanospheres in Plasmodium 
falciparum haem crystallization. Biochem J. 2007, 402, 197–204. 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
59 
 
19. Weissbuch, I.; Leiserowitz, L. Interplay between malaria, crystalline hemozoin 
formation, and antimalarial drug action and design. Chem. Rev. 2008, 108, 4899–
4914. 
20. Guiguemde, W., Shelat, A., Garcia-Bustos, J., Diagana, T. T., Gamo, F., & Guy, R. 
(2012). Global Phenotypic Screening for Antimalarials. Chemistry & Biology, 19(1), 
116-129.  
21. Kugawa, F.; Watanabe, M.; Tamanoi, F. Chemical biology/chemical 
genetics/chemical genomics: Importance of chemical libraries. Chem-Bio Inform. J. 
2007, 3, 49–68. 
22. Gerry, C. J., & Schreiber, S. L. (2018). Chemical probes and drug leads from advances 
in synthetic planning and methodology. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 17(5), 333-
352.  
23. Spaller, M. R., Burger, M. T., Fardis, M. & Bartlett, P. A. Synthetic strategies in 
combinatorial chemistry. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 1, 47–53 (1997).  
24. Dandapani, S. & Marcaurelle, L. A. Accessing new chemical space for ‘undruggable’ 
targets. Nat. Chem. Biol. 6, 861–863 (2010) 
25. Schmidt, B. et al. (2008) A natural history of botanical therapeutics. Metabolism 57 
(Suppl. 1), 3–9 
26. Koehn, F.E. and Carter, G.T. (2005) The evolving role of natural products in drug 
discovery. Nat. Rev. DrugDiscov. 4, 206–220 
27. Dančík, V., Seiler, K.P., Young, D.W., Stuart L. Schreiber, S.L., and Clemons, P.A. 
(2010). Distinct Biological Network Properties between the Targets of Natural 
Products and Disease Genes. J. Am. Chem Soc 132 (27), 9259-9261 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
60 
 
28. Rodrigues, T., Reker, D., Schneider, P., & Schneider, G. (2016). ChemInform 
Abstract: Counting on Natural Products for Drug Design. ChemInform, 47(30), 531-
541. 
29.  Hattum, H. V., & Waldmann, H. (2014). Biology-Oriented Synthesis: Harnessing the 
Power of Evolution. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 136(34), 11853-
11859. 
30. Lovering, F., Bikker, J., & Humblet, C. (2009). Escape from Flatland: Increasing 
Saturation as an Approach to Improving Clinical Success. Journal of Medicinal 
Chemistry, 52(21), 6752-6756. 
31. Stratton, C. F., Newman, D. J., & Tan, D. S. (2015). Cheminformatic comparison of 
approved drugs from natural product versus synthetic origins. Bioorganic & Medicinal 
Chemistry Letters, 25(21), 4802-4807. 
32. Basu, S., Ellinger, B., Rizzo, S., Deraeve, C., Schurmann, M., Preut, H., . . . 
Waldmann, H. (2011). Biology-oriented synthesis of a natural-product inspired 
oxepane collection yields a small-molecule activator of the Wnt-pathway. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(17), 6805-6810 
33. Laraia, L., Robke, L., & Waldmann, H. (2018). Bioactive Compound Collections: 
From Design to Target Identification. Chem, 4(4), 705-730. 
34. Garcia, A., Drown, B. S., & Hergenrother, P. J. (2016). Access to a Structurally 
Complex Compound Collection via Ring Distortion of the Alkaloid Sinomenine. 
Organic Letters, 18(19), 4852-4855. 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
61 
 
35. Plowright, A. T., & Drowley, L. (2017). Phenotypic Screening. Annual Reports in 
Medicinal Chemistry Platform Technologies in Drug Discovery and Validation, 263-
299. 
36. Congreve, M., Carr, R., Murray, C. & Jhoti, H. A ‘rule of three’ for fragment-based 
lead discovery? Drug Discov. Today 8, 876–877 (2003). 
37. Lipinski, C. A., Lombardo, F., Dominy, B. W., & Feeney, P. J. (2012). Experimental 
and computational approaches to estimate solubility and permeability in drug 
discovery and development settings. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 64, 4-17  
38. Xia, X. (2017). Bioinformatics and Drug Discovery. Current Topics in Medicinal 
Chemistry, 17(15), 1709-1726.  
39. Gung, B.W., Taylor, R.T.; 2004. J. Chem. Ed., 81, 1630. 
40. Swinney DC, Anthony J (July 2011). "How were new medicines discovered?". Nature 
Reviews. Drug Discovery. 10 (7): 507–19.  
41. Nes, W. D. (2011). Biosynthesis of Cholesterol and Other Sterols. Chemical Reviews, 
111(10), 6423-6451. 
42.  Grunwald, C., & Saunders, P. F. (1978). Function of Sterols [and Discussion]. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 284(1002), 
541-558. 
43. Geuns, J. M. (1978). Steroid hormones and plant growth and 
development. Phytochemistry, 17(1), 1-14. 
44. Bergmann, W. (1953). The Plant Sterols. Annual Review of Plant Physiology, 4(1), 
383-425.  
==PAGE:62==
 
 
62 
 
45. Myant, N. B. The Biology of Cholesterol and Related Steroids; William Heinemann 
Medical Books Ltd.: London, 1981; p 1. 
46. Xu, F.; Rychnovsky, S. D.; Belani, J. D.; Hobbs, H. H.; Cohen, J. C.; Rawson, R. B. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2005, 102, 14551. 
47. Rohmer, M.; Bouvier, P.; Ourisson, G. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1979, 76, 847. 
48. Nes, W. R.; Nes, W. D. Lipids in Evolution; Plenum Press: New York, 1980; p 97. 
49. Patterson, G. W. ACS Symp. Ser. 1994, 562, 90. 
50. Salvador, J. A., Carvalho, J. F., Neves, M. A., Silvestre, S. M., Leitão, A. J., Silva, M. 
M., & Melo, M. L. (2013). Anticancer steroids: Linking natural and semi-synthetic 
compounds. Nat. Prod. Rep.,30(2), 324-374. 
51. A. Jemal, F. Bray,M.M. Center, J. Ferlay, E. Ward, D. Forman, Global cancer 
statistics, CA Cancer J. Clin. 61 (2011) 69–90. 
52. C.P. Schaffner, Prostatic cholesterol metabolism: regulation and alteration, Prog. Clin. 
Biol. Res. 75A (1981) 279–324. 
53. A.J. Brown, Cholesterol, statins and cancer, Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 34 (2007) 
135–141 
54. J.R. Krycer, A.J. Brown, Cross-talk between the androgen receptor and the liver X 
receptor: implications for cholesterol homeostasis, J. Biol. Chem. 286 (2011) 20637–
20647 
55. Krycer, J. R., & Brown, A. J. (2013). Cholesterol accumulation in prostate cancer: A 
classic observation from a modern perspective. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta (BBA) 
- Reviews on Cancer, 1835(2), 219-229. 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
63 
 
56. Alcedo, J., Ayzenzon, M., Von Ohlen, T., Noll, M., and Hooper, J.E. (1996). The 
Drosophila smoothened gene encodes a seven-pass membrane protein, a putative 
receptor for the hedgehog signal. Cell 86, 221–232. 
57. Nakano, Y., Guerrero, I., Hidalgo, A., Taylor, A., Whittle, J.R., and Ingham, P.W. 
(1989). A protein with several possible membrane-spanning domains encoded by the 
Drosophila segment polarity gene patched. Nature 341, 508–513. 
58. Rimkus, T., Carpenter, R., Qasem, S., Chan, M., & Lo, H. (2016). Targeting the Sonic 
Hedgehog Signaling Pathway: Review of Smoothened and GLI 
Inhibitors. Cancers, 8(2), 22.  
59. Liao, G., Yao, Y., Liu, J., Yu, Z., Cheung, S., Xie, A., . . . Bi, X. (2007). Cholesterol 
Accumulation Is Associated with Lysosomal Dysfunction and Autophagic Stress in 
Npc1−/− Mouse Brain. The American Journal of Pathology, 171(3), 962-975. 
60. Manzoni M, Rollini M (2002) Biosynthesis and biotechnological production of statins 
by filamentous fungi and application of these cholesterol-lowering drugs. Appl 
Microbiol Biotechnol, 58: 555-564. 
61. Ishitsuka, R., Saito, T., Osada, H., Ohno-Iwashita, Y., & Kobayashi, T. (2011). 
Fluorescence image screening for chemical compounds modifying cholesterol 
metabolism and distribution. Journal of Lipid Research, 52(11), 2084-2094. 
 
 
 
