==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Telecommunication Engineering
Machine learning approaches for
signal detection in eigenvalue
based optical communication
systems
Supervisor:
Darko Zibar
Andrea Galtarossa
Co-supervisor:
Simone Gaiarin
Author: Nicola De Renzis
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 6352
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Everyday the increasing data traffic demand is putting under pressure the
internet backbone system. New services, accompanied by new applications
and higher quality of multimedia broadcasting are filling the current capacity
of deployed systems of communication. Sooner this exponential growth will
be limited to the current fibre optic systems, whose capacity is stretched to
the limit. That is why a lot of research is carried out with the purpose of
better exploiting optical communication systems based on optical fibre.
It is believed and well proved that the current technology is under-exploiting
the optical fibre capacity and more sophisticated transmission methods could
improve the overall scenario.
Recently, eigenvalue based communication gained a lot of interest in dif-
ferent research groups since it can potentially overcome the main impairments
that are currently limiting the fibre capacity, the nonlinearity. Particularly
interesting is the mathematical tool know as “inverse scattering transform”
or “nonlinear Fourier transform (NFT)” since it exploits to some extent the
“hidden” linearity of the fibre governing equation (nonlinear Schrödinger equa-
tion). In this way, it is possible to overcome some severe impairments so far
limiting the transmission.
Being at its dawn, there are still a lot of unanswered question about this
new method of transmission and multiple obstacles need to be overcome be-
fore it can be actualized. Within this work, the receiver is investigated with
a machine learning approach acting on the eigenvalue reception and constel-
lation equalization.
The first part will focus on the foundations of the NFT, followed by the brief
description of some algorithms that are needed at the transmitter and at the
receiver. It will follow the main part of this work, focusing on the receiver and
how it is possible to overcome classification impairments due to noise in the
transmission.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisor Darko, who offered me the op-
portunity to work with an interesting research group on a stimulating topic,
and who made possible the outcome of this thesis. In addition, many thanks
to Simone, who co-supervised my work and helped me throughout the thesis
with his coding skills his knowledge on the topic. Last but not least, many
thanks to Francesco, who despite not being my co-supervisor, he managed to
give me great pieces of advice. Apart from teaching me to drink coffee without
sugar, he provided me with all the necessary support and brilliant insight to
work on this topic.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
v
It is the time you have wasted for your rose
that makes your rose so important.
- Antoine de Saint-Exupéry
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Acronyms
ix
List of frequently used symbols
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Nonlinear Fourier Transform fundamentals
7
2.1
Optical fibre channel model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Nonlinear Schrödinger equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Normalized NLSE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Nonlinear Fourier Transform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Inverse scattering method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Inverse scattering auxiliary problem
. . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Direct NFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.4
Inverse NFT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
NFT algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
INFT algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Simulation setup
29
3.1
Nonlinear frequency division multiplexing . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Simulation framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.1
Transmitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.2
Channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.3
Receiver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
3.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Machine Learning methods
37
4.1
Eigenvalue classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.1
Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm
. . . . . . .
40
4.1.2
Kernel based algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Discussion and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Constellation equalization
53
5.1
Correlation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2
Equalization techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.1
Regression equalizer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2.2
LMMSE equalizer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Results and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.4
Extension to dual-polarization case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Conclusion
75
6.1
Future directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:11==
Acronyms
ASE
amplified spontaneous emission
DAC
digital-to-analog converter
DSP
digital signal processing
DT
Darboux transformation
EDFA
erbium-doped fiber amplifier
EM
Expectation-Maximization
FEC
forward error correction
FWM
four-wave mixing
GVD
group velocity dispersion
INFT
inverse nonlinear Fourier transform
ISI
inter-symbol interference
IST
inverse scattering transform
IVP
initial value problem
MZM
Mach-Zehnder modulator
MZSP
Manakov-Zakharov-Shabat spectral problem
NFDM
nonlinear frequency division multiplexing
NFT
nonlinear Fourier transform
NLSE
nonlinear Schrödinger equation
OFDM
orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
==PAGE:12==
x
Acronyms
OSNR
optical signal-to-noise ratio
PAPR
peak-to-average power ratio
PDE
partial differential equation
SMF
single mode fiber
ZSP
Zakharov-Shabat spectral problem
==PAGE:13==
List of frequently used
symbols
a(λ)
Scattering coefficient
¯a(λ)
Scattering coefficient
b(λ)
Scattering coefficient
¯b(λ)
Scattering coefficient
bb(bλ)
Scattering coefficient estimated at the receiver
d
Bits per data frame (NFDM symbol)
k
Bits per eigenvalue
ℓ
Space coordinate
q(t, z)
Normalized complex envelope of the electric field
eq(t)
q(t, 0) modified by the DT
r1, r2
Radius of the constellations associated to the eigenvalues λ1, λ2
r
Digital received NFDM-symbol
s
Digital transmitted NFDM-symbol
t
Normalized time coordinate
u
ϕN(t, λ) propagated forward in the forward-backward method
v
Solution of the ZSP / MZSP
¯v
Darboux transformation auxiliary solution
==PAGE:14==
xii
List of frequently used symbols
w
ϕN(t, λ) propagated backward in the forward-backward method
z
Normalized space coordinate
Cr
Reference b(λi) constellation for optimization
D
Fiber dispersion parameter
E(τ, ℓ)
Complex envelope of the electric field
ERx(τ)
Received optical waveform
ERx(τn)
Received digital waveform
ETx(τ)
Transmitted optical waveform
ETx(τn)
Transmitted digital waveform
G0
Darboux transformation matrix
K
Number of samples of the time domain signal q(t)
S
Number of symbols transmitted
L
Fiber link length
Ld
Dispersion length
Ls
Fiber span length
L
Lax operator
L
Nonlinear Schrödinger equation length normalization factor
M
Constellation order
M
Lax space-evolution matrix
N
Number of eigenvalues
Ns
Number of spans constituting a fiber link
P
Nonlinear Schrödinger equation power normalization factor
Ptx
Average power of the transmitted optical signal
P
Lax time-evolution matrix
==PAGE:15==
List of frequently used symbols
xiii
Qc(λ, z)
Continuous spectral amplitude
bQc(λ)
Continuous spectral amplitude estimated at the receiver
Qd(λ, z)
Discrete spectral amplitude
Rs
Symbol rate
T
Total time duration of the transmitted signal ETx(τ)
Tb
Bit period
Ts
Symbol period
T0
Nonlinear Schrödinger equation time-normalization factor
Vπ
Mach-Zehnder modulator half-wave voltage
W
Bandwidth containing 99% of the power of the signal
α
Fiber-loss parameter
β2
Fiber group velocity dispersion
γ
Fiber nonlinear parameter
¯γ
Fiber nonlinear parameter averaged over one span length
θe
Relative angle between constellations for the two eigenvalues
θp
Relative angle between constellations for the two polarizations
λ
Eigenvalue
bλ
Eigenvalue estimated at the receiver
τ
Time coordinate
ϕP (t, λ)
Jost solution
¯ϕP (t, λ)
Jost solution
ϕN(t, λ)
Jost solution
¯ϕN(t, λ)
Jost solution
ψ(t, λ)
MZSP solution in the trapezoidal method (after change of variables)
==PAGE:16==
xiv
List of frequently used symbols
ψP (t, λ)
Jost solution in the trapezoidal method (after change of variables)
ψN(t, λ)
Jost solution in the trapezoidal method (after change of variables)
Θ
Darboux transformation auxiliary solution matrix
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In a world based on exchange of information, sharing of media contents, com-
munication at all levels, public and private, the channels through which infor-
mation is transmitted are put continuously under pressure and stretched to
their limit. Society has evolved in the direction where everything is required
and expected to be fast and high quality. Streaming services, 4K technology
et similia, are willing to continuously expand and on demand contents down-
load is becoming every day accessible to more people, who in turn expect an
excellent service. Social networks, which in particular now more than ever are
characterized by image and video content-sharing are gaining a huge share
on the global traffic chart, becoming by far one of the main reason for traffic
increase. In addition, Artificial Intelligence and deep learning are nowadays
hot topics and they have gained a lot of interest lately, both in academic and
private sectors, leading to a growth in the usage of cloud computing, requiring
significant bandwidth worldwide. These few examples suggest that this trend
is enormously increasing the traffic that every day is exchanged across the
globe [1], where peaks never reached before have now been attained.
Optical fibres played a fundamental role in this scenario, starting from its
dawn during the 80s [2] till now, thanks to the fact that the traffic growth could
be handled only thanks to the backbone network being based on optical fibres.
Since the beginning, fibres had a huge impact on almost all aspects of our lives
[3]. Its main property that really differentiate it from standard cables is the
propagation of electromagnetic waves through silica, whose most important
feature is the extremely low propagation losses along with the ability to carry
remarkable high frequency carrier, hence increasing the modulation speed [2].
Despite having really low losses, for long haul scenarios losses are in fact a
problem, which is overcome by deploying optical amplifiers at the cost of
introducing noise in the transmission.
Noise, along with dispersion and nonlinearity are the three main limiting
factors in the transmission [3]. With the arrival of fast digital signal processing
(DSP) dispersion could be handled easily leaving noise and nonlinearity as
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
main problems to be addressed. Nonlinearity is identified as the Kerr effect. It
is a power dependent effect that mixed with dispersion changes the frequency
content of the signal: as a consequence, by increasing the launch power at the
transmitter longer distances can be reached but at the cost of introducing more
nonlinearity. Nonlinearity is a problem as far as the digital compensation is
not trivial and it is time and power consuming [4], thus not easily deployable.
While all channels are affected by noise, nonlinearity mitigation is directly
related with the channel itself and this is a step that must be looked; as a
consequence great effort is put into this problem.
The channel model that is been vastly used and proved to be by far the
best approximation for the fibre propagation is the nonlinear Schrödinger equa-
tion (NLSE). The NLSE is a partial differential nonlinear equation which can
be met several times in the world of physics, especially when modelling natu-
ral effects that can be associated to some extent to wave propagation (Bose-
Einstein condensates, fluid-dynamics etc.). Considering it has been a while
since this equation started being used to model several phenomena, mathe-
maticians began as well to spend time on how it could be possible to solve
this partial differential equation. The most important method is the so called
inverse scattering transform (IST), which allows to find exact solutions for
this equation.
Starting from this point, it was possible to develop the soliton theory, which
soon will have led to the eigenvalue based communication.
A soliton is a
particular solution of the NLSE for which a wave can propagate unaltered
throughout time and space within the propagation medium [4]. This is possi-
ble thanks to the fact that dispersion and nonlinearity modelled in the NLSE
are counterbalancing each other. As a consequence, nonlinearity is not any
more seen as a negative aspect of the propagation but instead as a feature to
be exploited. In this way, by deploying the NFT (other way to refer to the
IST) it is possible to increase and exploit even more the optical fibre capacity
[3].
Being at its dawn, soliton theory was soon left aside due to the non-
competitiveness against current fibre-based communication systems, but lately
re-gained a lot of interest mainly due to the technological improvement on the
DSP side.
The first idea behind eigenvalue-based communication was pro-
posed in [5] derived directly from the soliton theory: as a matter of fact,
eigenvalues are a set of parameters that are associated to the soliton proper-
ties which they do not change during the transmission, mirroring the property
of the soliton. Differently from the standard modulation techniques, instead
==PAGE:19==
1 Introduction
3
of encoding the information in the amplitude or the phase of the electromag-
netic wave, information is encoded within the NFT domain, associating the
information to these eigenvalues that remain unaltered during propagation [5].
More advance encoding schemes have been proposed in order to increase the
spectral efficiency by encoding the information into the discrete spectrum, a
complex quantity related to the mathematical result of the NFT operation,
which will be analysed in chapter 2. In this way, it is possible to associate to
each eigenvalue a constellation of discrete spectral amplitudes.
Thanks to this new approach, nonlinearity and dispersion are to some ex-
tent compensated (at least theoretically) but noise still has a strong impact
on the system and becomes the limiting factor. In a optical fibre communi-
cation system, the main source of noise is due to the optical amplifiers such
as erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) and Raman amplification. The am-
plified spontaneous emission (ASE) introduced by the amplifiers corrupt the
signal which then drifts away from the theoretical solution of the NLSE. More-
over, for long haul purposes the noise builds up along the propagation due to
the amplifiers chain that is needed to compensate for such long distances. As
a consequence, what in a noiseless scenario is meant to be unaltered, in the
presence of noise the eigenvalues are corrupted and noisy as well. Differently
form the standard communication schemes where the noise is addictive with
respect to the information encoded (such as in a orthogonal frequency-division
multiplexing (OFDM) system), in the NFT domain the noise affects the eigen-
values in a different way since they are a result of a nonlinear operation (NFT)
which changes nonlinearly the behaviour of the noise too [6, 7].
A lot of work is recently being done on the noise statistics for eigenvalue-
based communication systems, but given the fact that the underlying theory
is most of the time extremely complicated and not always reducible to solv-
able equations, approximations are the best that has been derived. During
recent years, machine learning techniques and concepts are often applied to
problems in order to easy the process of compensate whatever impairment
concerns the system under investigation (which could be a communication
link or a robot stability problem, image processing, computer vision etc.) and
often algorithms can overcome these obstacles without a clear “grasp” of how
the impairment is affecting the system from a mathematical point of view.
By using these algorithms as tools, systems performances can be improved
after tuning the algorithms on the particular instance of the system under
investigation with some degree of generalization. Therefore, it is possible to
compensate to some extent for the presence of noise with machine learning
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
techniques. These aspects will be investigated in chapters 4 and 5.
1.1
Motivation and purpose
The aim of this thesis is to improve the performances of a system based on
eigenvalues communication by deploying some machine learning techniques.
Even if the NFT solves a lot of problems concerning nonlinearity mitigation,
the algorithms used within this framework are introducing other kind of im-
pairments. However, the most important is the fact that the presence of noise
as stated above, changes the behaviour of the eigenvalues in a nonlinear way.
This work is focused on the receiver, where the noise built up during the prop-
agation is affecting the NFT operation that transforms the signal from the
time domain to the NFT domain, where the eigenvalues are. If more than one
eigenvalue is used in the transmission, then at the receiver all the eigenvalues
are affected by noise, and since each one of them is carrying different infor-
mation (eigenvalue multiplexing), it is fundamental to recognize and classify
them correctly after they have been corrupted by noise.
In addition, noise will also corrupt the constellation associated to each eigen-
value, and therefore some equalization need to be carried out. Underlying
correlations between eigenvalues and spectral amplitudes are analysed and
exploited in order to equalize the received constellations and improve the per-
formances.
1.2
Structure of the thesis
The thesis is divided in 6 chapters. After the introduction, the theory un-
derlying the NFT is presented in chapter 2. The chapter will focus on the
theoretical derivation of the NFT operation which is strictly linked to the
NLSE. In addition, some algorithms will be discussed in order to perform
the NFT operation and also the inverse nonlinear Fourier transform (INFT),
analysing performances and problems that they have.
Chapter 3 focuses on the main structure of a nonlinear frequency division
multiplexing (NFDM) system with its basic properties and features. It fol-
lows the description on the simulation framework used in order to simulate a
communication link based on NFT transmission.
Chapters 4 and 5 deal with the problem of classifying the eigenvalues by
using Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm and Kernel methods, while
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Structure of the thesis
5
some linear estimators and nonlinear regression are used for equalizing the
constellations.
Chapter 6 summarizes the overall results and discusses future directions
may be worth investigating.
==PAGE:22==
6
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Nonlinear Fourier
Transform fundamentals
This chapter presents the theory behind the concept of the nonlinear Fourier
transform (NFT), focusing both on the theoretical derivation and on the
algorithms point of view.
In section 2.1 the nonlinear Schrödinger equa-
tion (NLSE) is presented as it is the model governing the propagation through
the optical fibre, followed by section 2.2 where the NFT concept is intro-
duced. First the IST method is presented to solve partial differential equa-
tions (PDEs) which immediately leads to the derivation of NFT thanks to the
definition of an auxiliary problem. In sections 2.3 and 2.4 the algorithms for
performing the direct and inverse NFT operations are discussed, along with
the work done concerning the improvement on them.
2.1
Optical fibre channel model
Before entering the details of the NFT, the starting point is the NLSE. This
is by far the most important cornerstone of wave propagation through optical
fibre. Understanding the behaviour of an electromagnetic wave inside the opti-
cal fibre is the first step for finding a way to make dispersion and nonlinearity
compensate each other.
2.1.1
Nonlinear Schrödinger equation
The scalar NLSE (2.1) is a partial differential nonlinear equation which de-
scribes the behaviour both in time and space of a slow-varying complexed-
value envelope of the scalar electric field E(τ, ℓ) propagating in a single mode
fiber (SMF) [4].
==PAGE:24==
8
2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform fundamentals
∂E(τ, ℓ)
∂ℓ
= −iβ2
2
∂2E(τ, ℓ)
∂τ 2
+ iγ|E(τ, ℓ)|2E(τ, ℓ)
(2.1)
where 0 ≤ℓ≤L is the space propagation direction with L being the fibre
length, τ is the time in the frame moving accordingly to the group velocity of
the envelope, β2 is the group velocity dispersion (GVD) and γ is the nonlinear
coefficient.
This equation illustrates that the envelope of the signal modifies during the
propagation starting from E(0, 0) both in time and space, accordingly to the
fibre parameters (β2, γ) and the channel length.
Despite its complexity, still this equation cannot capture all the phenomena
occurring within a SMF when an electromagnetic wave is propagating. In
fact, it discards higher-order dispersion effects, attenuation, four-wave mixing
(FWM), Raman effect and noise. Nevertheless, this is the crucial point when
looking at the inverse scattering transform (IST) method, because (2.1) in
this form has the property of integrability, further discussed in section 2.2.
Integrability would not hold if the equation had accounted for all the other
effects (despite the noise, which it does not break integrability). Among all
assumptions, the lossless scenario is the furthest away from the real case, and
some methods exist to account losses in the NFT, but in this thesis only the
lossless case is investigated.
2.1.2
Normalized NLSE
Before moving to the IST method, usually (2.1) is normalized in order to
decouple the equation from the parameters of a specific channel (such as length
of the link and the dispersion) and the result is more convenient to work
with [8]. The quantity that needs normalization are time, space and electric
potential, accordingly to the following normalizations:
q =
E
√
P
,
t = τ
T0
,
z = −ℓ
L
(2.2)
with P = |β2|/(γT 2
0 ), L = 2T 2
0 /|β2| and T0 is a free normalization parameter.
From this point it is trivial to reach (2.3):
i∂q(t, z)
∂z
= ∂2q(t, z)
∂t2
+ 2|q(t, z)|2q(t, z)
(2.3)
where z and t represent the normalized space and time variables. The fac-
tors P, T0 and L have physical units of power, time, and length respectively.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform
9
According to this, (2.3) is a unitless equation. It is noteworthy that several
normalizations exist, and particular attention must be paid when comparing
different approaches. Despite the purpose being the same, the meaning of the
variables may change based on which normalization has been adopted [8–10]
and moreover, the result of the NFT operation changes. In this thesis the
approach in [10] is followed.
2.2
Nonlinear Fourier Transform
As it has been anticipated previously, the beauty of (2.3) lies in the fact that
despite its incompleteness in modelling propagation effects, it belongs to a
class of PDEs for which it is possible to calculate an exact solution thanks
to a mathematical procedure called IST. This class of equations is referred
to as integrable equations. Integrability is a complex property of differential
equation and can be simplified without rigorous explanation as the property
for which the equation can be linearised thanks to a clever choice of local
coordinates, thus transforming the current system of coordinates into another
one through a particular paradigm shift for which the new set of coordinates
undergo to a linear behaviour across time and/or space propagation.
Summarizing, the NFT is an operation that maps some quantities that behaves
nonlinearly accordingly to (2.3) into some other quantities that evolve linearly
within this new domain.
2.2.1
Inverse scattering method
Integrable equations belong to a more general class of PDEs that can be
solved by using the Fourier method.
The solution of these equation relies
on the deployment of the Fourier transform which fits the linear behaviour
of these linear PDEs. The natural extension of this method (even if quite
different in both procedure and complexity) is the so called IST method, also
known as NFT thanks to this parallelism with the Fourier method. In both
cases, the approach is similar even if the maths underneath is different. Both
the Fourier method and the NFT suit to solve the initial value problem (IVP)
for a PDE, a particular instance of the problem for which initial conditions
are set [11].
The IVP of associated to the NLSE is the following:
∂q(t, z)
∂z
= i∂2q(t, z)
∂t2
+ 2i|q(t, z)|2q(t, z) = 0,
q(t, z0) = q0
(2.4)
==PAGE:26==
10
2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform fundamentals
Figure 2.1: Principle of IST method procedure [12].
where q0 is a known envelope of the signal at some point is space z = z0.
The method is briefly shown in fig. 2.1. The three steps are the transform
operation from the time domain to the spectral domain, the propagation in the
spectral domain, and the inverse operation to get back to the time domain.
The first step for defining the NFT operation is to associate an auxiliary
problem to the NLSE. This problem is called the Zakharov-Shabat spectral
problem (ZSP) thanks to the authors who first applied the IST method to the
NLSE [8] and it consists of a system of two equations. This problem depends
on the signal q(t, z) and once solved the scattering data is obtained. After
this first step, the second equation represents the relation between scattering
data and the signal evolution which can be used to retrieve the signal in any
point in space.
2.2.2
Inverse scattering auxiliary problem
As previously specified, the auxiliary problem associated to the NLSE is de-
fined by the following pair of linear differential equations (2.5) [13]:
∂v
∂t = P v
(2.5a)
∂v
∂z = Mv
(2.5b)
where v is an eigenvector belonging to a Hilbert space and the matrices P ,
M are called the Lax pair. These matrices depend on the signal q(t, z) and
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform
11
on a quantity λ ∈C called eigenvalue (further discussed later). The terminol-
ogy eigenvalue is due to the fact that (2.5a) can be written as an eigenvalue
problem [8]:
Lv = λv
(2.6)
where L is a linear operator called the Lax operator.
It is shown that L
depends on P [8].
Two conditions are now necessary:
1. the condition that the eigenvalues are invariant upon spatial propagation:
∂λ
∂z = 0,
2. the compatibility condition:
∂
∂t
∂
∂zv = ∂
∂z
∂
∂tv
thanks to which the system (2.5) can be written in a form called zero-curvature
condition [8]
∂P
∂z −∂M
∂t + [P , M] = 0
(2.7)
where [P , M] = P M −MP is the commutator operator of the two matri-
ces. By properly choosing the matrices P and M it is possible to match the
compatibility condition (2.7) to be exactly the NLSE, thus relating the orig-
inal time-domain problem to the spectral problem. It is noteworthy that it
does not exist an analytical method to derive the matrices and they need to
be guessed [14]. As it turns out, (2.7) shows that exists a “hidden linearity”
within the NLSE, as it was possible to rewrite this equation in a linear way
[8]. The matrices P and M have been found by Zakharov and Shabat and
they are defined as
P =
(
−iλ
q
−q∗
iλ
)
,
M = j
(
−2iλ2 + i|q|2
2λq + iqt
−2λq∗+ iq∗
t
2iλ2 −i|q|2
)
(2.8)
where ∗denotes complex conjugation.
So far, (2.5a) is used to calculate the scattering data, while (2.5b) defines
the evolution of the known solution q0(t) along the space.
Note that this
equations are general for solving an integrable PDE, but the choice of the
matrices P and M determines which equation is being associated with the
problem (in our case the choice leads to match the NLSE). The operation
of finding the scattering data given the signal q(t) is called direct scattering
problem or direct NFT, while the inverse operation is called inverse scattering
problem or inverse nonlinear Fourier transform (INFT) (also showed in figure
2.1).
==PAGE:28==
12
2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform fundamentals
2.2.3
Direct NFT
in order to define the direct NFT operation some assumptions must hold [8]:
1. q(t) ∈L1(R), thus
∫+∞
−∞|q(t)|dt < ∞;
2. q(t) satisfies the vanishing boundaries conditions |q(t)| −→0 for |t| −→∞.
As a consequence, the system (2.5a) reduces to
∂v
∂t =
(
−iλ
0
0
iλ
)
v,
|t| −→∞
(2.9)
whose general solution is
v(t, λ)
(
αe−iλt
βeiλt
)
,
α, β ∈C.
(2.10)
A possible set of solutions of the spectral problem (2.5) matching the general
solution (2.10) are the Jost solutions [8]:
ϕN(t, λ) →
(
1
0
)
e−iλt;
¯ϕN(t, λ) →
(
0
1
)
eiλt
t →−∞
(2.11a)
ϕP (t, λ) →
(
0
1
)
eiλt;
¯ϕP (t, λ) →
(
1
0
)
e−iλt
t →+∞.
(2.11b)
where the operator ¯· is the adjoint operator of a vector v(t) =
(
v1
v2
)
in a
Hilbert space
¯v(t) =
(
v∗
2
−v∗
1
)
(2.12)
The adjoint solutions are the result of solving the ZSP for the conjugate of λ
(λ∗) in C−= {λ : ℑ(λ) < 0} and the non barred one are for the solutions for
λ in C+ = {λ : ℑ(λ) > 0}. Since the eigenvector v was assumed to lie in the
Hilbert space, it is then possible to apply the Wronskian operator (defined as
W(u, v) = uv −vu for u and v being vectors in the Hilbert space), of the two
solutions ϕN(t, λ) and ¯ϕN(t, λ) when t →−∞:
W(ϕN(t, λ), ¯ϕN(t, λ)) = 1
(2.13)
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform
13
and the same holds for ϕP (t, λ) and ¯ϕP (t, λ) when t →+∞:
W(ϕP (t, λ), ¯ϕP (t, λ)) = −1.
(2.14)
As a consequence, the vectors of each pair are linearly independent from the
other given that their Wronskian is not identically zero [8].
According to
this, {ϕN(t, λ), ¯ϕN(t, λ)} and {ϕP (t, λ), ¯ϕP (t, λ)} form two bases for the
eigenspace associated to λ and they are linearly dependent one from the other.
It is possible to choose to write the solutions ϕN(t, λ) and ¯ϕN(t, λ) as a lin-
ear combination of the basis vectors {ϕP (t, λ), ¯ϕP (t, λ)} (vice-versa is also
possible):
ϕN(t, λ) = ϕP (t, λ)b(λ) + ¯ϕP (t, λ)a(λ)
(2.15a)
¯ϕN(t, λ) = ϕP (t, λ)¯a(λ) + ¯ϕP (t, λ)¯b(λ)
(2.15b)
where a(λ), b(λ), ¯a(λ) and ¯b(λ) are the linear coefficients of the transforma-
tion. These coefficients are called scattering coefficients and they are time
invariant but they are spatial dependent. From these scattering coefficients
(in particular only from a couple of them, the adjoint version or the other ones)
it is possible to reconstruct the signal q(t) as they carry all the information of
the signal [8].
Since the scattering coefficients are time invariant, it is possible to compute
them at an arbitrary time t. If we consider (2.15a), the boundary solutions
(2.11) can be computed at t = +∞and at this instant both ϕP (t, λ) and
¯ϕP (t, λ) are known. In addition, it is possible to derive ϕN(t, λ) by propagating
it from t = −∞, where it is known, to t = +∞by integrating (2.15a). As a
result of this, the first two scattering coefficients are given by:
a(λ) = lim
t→+∞
[
ϕN
1 (t, λ)¯ϕP
1 (t, λ)−1]
(2.16a)
b(λ) = lim
t→+∞
[
ϕN
2 (t, λ)ϕP
2 (t, λ)−1]
(2.16b)
where the subscript indicates the component of the Jost solution vector. Using
(2.11) leads to
a(λ) = lim
t→+∞ϕN
1 (t, λ)eiλt
(2.17a)
b(λ) = lim
t→+∞ϕN
2 (t, λ)e−iλt.
(2.17b)
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform fundamentals
At this point two cases arise.
The first case occurs when λ ∈R.
In this case the Jost solutions are
bounded, so that (2.15) are well-defined and as a consequence so are the
scattering coefficients. The eigenvalues λ ∈R form the so called continuous
spectrum of the Lax operator and are referred to as nonlinear frequencies, as
a parallelism with the Fourier transform.
The second case arises when ℑ(λ) ̸= 0. In this case one of the Jost solutions
diverges as |t| −→∞(for example, if t →+∞then {ϕP (t, λ), ¯ϕP (t, λ)} diverge
accordingly with sign(ℑ(λ)) ). Once realized that a solution is necessarily lost
because of divergence, in order to ensure that at least one of the other set
of solutions ϕN(t, λ) in (2.15a) is not divergent, the condition a(λ) = 0 must
hold if λ ∈C+ (on the other hand, if λ ∈C−then ¯ϕN(t, λ) would not diverge).
a(λ) has a finite set of zeros that corresponds to the discrete eigenvalues of the
problem (2.5a) [8, 15]. The condition a(λ) = 0 defines a discrete spectrum of N
eigenvalues {λi, i = 1, . . . , N} of the Lax operator. If λi is an eigenvalue also its
complex conjugate is an eigenvalue [8]. As a consequence, it is possible to have
the complete set of eigenvalues associated to the Lax operator by considering
only the eigenvalues such that λi ∈C+. For the discrete spectrum, under the
condition a(λ) = 0, the scattering coefficients corresponding to the discrete
eigenvalues from (2.15a) are reduced to:
a(λi) = 0
(2.18a)
b(λi) = lim
t→+∞ϕN
2 (t, λi)e−iλit.
(2.18b)
2.2.3.1
Nonlinear spectrum
Once determined whether we are in the first or the second case (thus the
eigenvalues being real or complex), the scattering data can be expressed as
continuous or discrete spectral amplitudes. The continuous spectral ampli-
tudes are defined as
Qc(λ) = b(λ)
a(λ)
λ ∈R
(2.19)
while the discrete spectral amplitudes as
Qd(λi) = b(λi)
a′(λi)
λi ∈C+, i = 1, . . . , N
(2.20)
with a′(λi) = da(λ)
dλ |λ=λi such that a(λi) = 0 ∀λi ∈C+, i = 1, . . . , N.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform
15
Figure 2.2: Absolute value of the continuous (blue) and discrete (red) spec-
tral amplitudes corresponding respectively to the nonlinear fre-
quencies λ ∈R and the complex discrete eigenvalues λi ∈
C+, i = 1, 2, 3 [12].
The continuous and discrete eigenvalues along with their spectral ampli-
tudes form the nonlinear spectrum of the signal q(t, z). As mentioned in the
introduction, the discrete nonlinear spectrum of the signal is associated with
the solitonic components of the signal where the dispersion and the nonlinear-
ity compensate each other, while the continuous spectrum is associated with
the dispersive or radiative waves. A visual representation of the nonlinear
spectrum of both continuous and discrete part is shown in Figure 2.2.
2.2.3.2
Spatial evolution
The evolution of the scattering coefficients in the space dimension derives from
(2.5b) [8]:
a(λ, z) = a(λ, 0)
¯a(λ, z) = ¯a(λ, 0)
(2.21a)
b(λ, z) = b(λ, 0)e−4iλ2z
¯b(λ, z) = ¯b(λ, 0)e4iλ2z.
(2.21b)
The linearity of the spatial evolution of the scattering coefficients is the main
feature of the IST method because it proves what we have been saying so far
about the “hidden” linearity of the NLSE. From this point it is now possible
to derive the spatial evolution for the spectral amplitudes both in continuous
==PAGE:32==
16
2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform fundamentals
Figure 2.3: Representation of the nonlinear evolution of the signal q(t, z) in
the time domain and the corresponding linear evolution of its
nonlinear spectrum in the nonlinear domain [12].
and discrete case
Qc(λ, z) = Qc(λ, 0)e−4iλ2z
λ ∈R
(2.22a)
Qd(λi, z) = Qd(λi, 0)e−4iλ2
i z
λi ∈C+, i = 1, . . . , N
(2.22b)
As it can be seen from (2.22), it is possible to define the nonlinear domain
transfer function of the channel modelled by the NLSE as
H(λ, z) = e−4iλ2z.
(2.23)
Figure 2.3 summarizes the process of the NFT transmission, showing the
relation between time and NFT domain and the spacial evolution in both the
domains.
2.2.4
Inverse NFT
As shown in Figure 2.3, once defined the direct operation of NFT, there is the
need to define the inverse operation as well, referred to as INFT.
Starting from both the discrete and the continuous spectrum, there is a way
to generate the time-domain signal q(t, z) from the set of eigenvalues and
their spectral amplitudes. As far as this thesis is concerned, the continuous
spectrum is not taken into account from both a theoretical and simulation
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform
17
point of view, as only the discrete spectrum will be analysed and taken into
account when encoding information. Therefore, the only aspect worth saying
about the continuous spectrum is that in order to fully exploit the capacity of
the fibre, both spectra must be taken into account, and some methods exist in
order to perform the INFT of the signal with both spectra. The algorithm that
will be shown in section 2.4 regards only the discrete spectrum and it is based
on the Darboux transformation (DT). Here we briefly present a theoretical
approach called Riemann-Hilbert system [4].
Given a finite set of discrete eigenvalues λi ∈C+, i = 1, . . . , N and their
associated discrete spectral amplitudes Qd(λi, 0) it is possible to define the
time-domain signal as follow [4]
q(t, 0) = −2ei π
2
N
∑
i=1
α∗
i ψ∗
2i
(2.24)
where αi =
√
Qd(λi, 0)eiλit and
ψ =


ψ11
ψ12
...
ψ1N
ψ∗
21
ψ∗
22
...
ψ∗
2N


(2.25)
is the solution of the linear system of equations resulting from Cψ = α, where
α =


01:N
α∗
1
α∗
2...
α∗
N


C =
[
IN
A
B
IN
]
(2.26a)
where the elements of the matrices A and B are defined as
aj,k =
αjα∗
k
λj −λ∗
k
bj,k =
α∗
jαk
λ∗
j −λk
(2.27a)
==PAGE:34==
18
2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform fundamentals
Following this procedure, it is possible to calculate the signal in time starting
from the definition of its nonlinear spectrum. This system of equation is time
dependent and it must be solved for each time instant of interest (note the
dependency with time in the definition of αi). In the case of one eigenvalue, it
is possible to derive a close form which relates the eigenvalue and its spectral
amplitude with the time-domain signal [9].
q(t, 0) = 2ℑ(λ1) sech(2ℑ(λ1)(t −t1))e−i(2ℜ(λ1)t+ Qd(λ1)+π/2)
(2.28)
where
t1 =
1
2ℑ(λ1) ln
(|Qd(λ1|
2ℑ(λ1)
)
(2.29)
Since it has been proven that transmission with information encoded in
Qd(λ) is less robust to noise due to its intrinsic definition (2.2.3.1) (both
transmission noise but also algorithmic precision) [16, 17], it is more convenient
to encode the information in the b(λi) scattering coefficients. The resulting
equation for one eigenvalue is then rewritten
q(t, 0) = 2ℑ(λ1) sech(2ℑ(λ1)(t −t1))e−i(2ℜ(λ1)t+ b(λ1)+π)
(2.30)
where
t1 =
1
2ℑ(λ1) ln (|b(λ1)|)
(2.31)
It is noteworthy that this equation represents the fundamental solution of
the NLSE and it is known as the fundamental soliton. A soliton is associated
with the discrete spectrum and it has the intrinsic property (for how the NLSE
has been solved) that it will propagate unaltered. Higher order solitons exist
and they are associated to signals with more than one eigenvalue (N > 1).
The properties of the soliton still applies but in this case there is a periodic
change in the time and frequency domain of the higher order soliton.
(2.28) and (2.30) show that the soliton scales in amplitude (and so in
power) proportionally to the imaginary part of the eigenvalue while it is in-
dependent on the spectral amplitude. Moreover, the time width of the signal
is inversely proportional to the imaginary part of the eigenvalue. The phase
scales accordingly with the phase of the spectral amplitude while the real part
of the eigenvalue determines the frequency of the soliton which in turns set
the propagation speed within the optical fibre. In addition, the spectral am-
plitude determines the time shift of the soliton with regard to the reference
signal sech(t) (centred around zero).
==PAGE:35==
2.3 NFT algorithm
19
2.3
NFT algorithm
There are really few examples of signals whose NFT can be computed analyt-
ically. For most of the signals besides being mathematically complex, a close
form equation does not even exist [8]. Therefore, it is really important to have
the right algorithms that can perform the numerical NFT in a reliable way.
Speaking of direct NFT (the inverse NFT is dealt with in section 2.4), there
exists several methods for computing NFT [3, 18].
The first part of this thesis work is focused on the NFT and INFT algorithms,
for which some improvements have been introduced compared to the algo-
rithms that are currently available at the research group in DTU Fotonik.
First, after a small overview of the existent methods, one of the algorithm is
briefly explained and then the improvement is presented.
In literature some algorithms are considered to better calculate the con-
tinuous spectrum while others are focused on the discrete spectrum or work
with both the spectra. The precision of the algorithms depends on a number
of reason, and the choice must rely on the purpose of the NFT operation. Fur-
thermore, the lack of theoretical expressions of NFT results proves hard the
comparison between the output of the algorithms and the exact theoretical
results.
It is possible to distinguish between two main classes of algorithms.
The first class is focused on finding only the discrete eigenvalues and the
discrete spectrum.
These algorithms are based on solving a large matrix-
eigenvalue problem since the ZSP can be rewritten as an eigenvalue problem
[18] and the search of the eigenvalues is reduced to computing the eigenvalues
of this matrix. Despite its simple approach, the computational effort of these
algorithms is considerable as the problem for its structure requires the inver-
sion of large matrices that scale accordingly to the number of samples of the
signals.
The second class is focused on computing the scattering coefficients (a(λ),
b(λ) and a′(λ)) by directly integrating the Zakharov-Shabat system. As a
consequence, this class of algorithms is suitable for computing both the con-
tinuous and discrete spectrum. The integration is aimed at finding the Jost
solutions (2.11) of the problem, from which the scattering coefficients follow
immediately.
The differences among the algorithms within this class lie on how the inte-
gration is performed based on how the problem is mathematically modelled.
==PAGE:36==
20
2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform fundamentals
Figure 2.4: Starting from a random initialization at point x = X0, the first
tangent in f(x0) updates the root to x1. Calculating the tangent
in f(x1) updates the root to x2.
Among the most used there are the Forward and central discretization, Layer-
Peeling method, Crank-Nicolson method, Ablowitz-Ladik Discretization and the
Forward-Backward [10, 18]. The procedure starts from an initialization of the
Jost solutions which are iteratively updated along the integration.
If for the calculation of the continuous spectrum the algorithms are straight
forward, the discrete spectrum requires particular attention, since the discrete
eigenvalues are defined as the solution of (2.18) a(λi) = 0, which is a root-
searching problem. Root-searching problems are known to be hard and despite
several methods have been studied during the years, the problem may not be
trivial to solve. One of the method deployed is the Netwon-Raphson method.
The Netwon-Raphson method is proved to converge quadratically for a
single root but it can work also with multiple roots (multiple eigenvalues to
be located). In order to find the root of the function f(x) this method has
a random initialization of the root point at the first iteration (state of the
root at the k-th iteration is called xk, in figure 2.4 is x0) and iteratively the
root position is updated (xk+1) at the intersection between the x-axis and the
tangent calculated in f(xk). Figure 2.4 shows the basic concept. This method
can be easily extended in a space with more dimensions, such as the complex
plane.
==PAGE:37==
2.3 NFT algorithm
21
Once the continuous scattering coefficients are found, the eigenvalues-
location phase begins and this search phase ends when a certain condition
is met. The stopping criteria for locating all the eigenvalues is determined
by checking the difference between the energy of the signal computed by inte-
grating the time-domain waveform (2.34) and the energy calculated using the
NFT spectrum (2.32). When the energy difference is below a certain threshold
it is believed that all the eigenvalues have been located and the search-phase
stops. If the eigenvalues are not all located then the resulting energy would
be less than the actual one, since each eigenvalue carries part of the signal en-
ergy. Energy is the first conserved quantity (thus it does not change under an
operator, such as the NFT operator) but there are also other quantities that
are conserved under the NFT operation (such as momentum and Hamiltonian
[18]). The following equations express the conserved quantities starting from
the NFT spectrum. When evaluated with k = 1 the energy equation appears
and it can be compared with (2.34) for the stopping criteria. A conserved
quantity of the signal can be calculated from the NFT domain as
E(k) = E(k)
disc + E(k)
cont
(2.32)
where it has been decomposed into discrete and continuous part according to
E(k)
disc = 4
k
N
∑
i=1
ℑ(λk
i )
(2.33a)
E(k)
cont = 1
π
∫+∞
−∞
λk−1 ln(1 + |Qc(λ)|2)dλ
(2.33b)
The energy of the time-domain signal is obtained when k = 1 from
E(1) =
∫+∞
−∞
|q(t, z)|2dt
(2.34)
and it is compared to (2.32) for the stopping criteria. In our case, the energy
will be in the discrete spectrum only as there is no continuous part.
Root-search improvement.
One way to improve the algorithm that will
be used in the simulations is to initialize the search in some strategical points.
For example, they can be initialized close to the known eigenvalues position.
Since the transmission is supposed to be known and the eigenvalues are in-
variant to the propagation it is most likely that the algorithm will stop soon
if the initialization is already close to the real eigenvalues. Due to noise in
==PAGE:38==
22
2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform fundamentals
the transmission the eigenvalues will move from the reference position. Being
an optimization method, the search area in principle should be the entire set
C+, but for computational-time reasons it can be reduced around the known
eigenvalues (the region is kept wide enough to consider the displacement due
to the noise).
Nevertheless, assuming few notions are known about the eigenvalues posi-
tion, without loss of generality it is possible to reduce the number of visited
points along the searching phase by memorizing the position of the points
already seen and avoiding to analyse the same paths multiple time. The con-
dition for which a root at a certain iteration is declared to be the real root
of the function, is by looking how far from the previous iteration the point
has moved. If it has not moved by a certain threshold it means the root has
been located. An iteration counter must also be used in order to avoid infinite
loops in updating the roots.
During the searching-phase for locating the eigenvalue λi the searching
method can either succeed (the root is found) or fail (the updated point is
outside the search-region or the root found does not decrease the error).
Let’s assume we already located λ1. If during the localization of λ2 an iteration
leads to a certain root position xk, and this position xk has already been
visited when searching for λ1, it is reasonable to assume that the outcome of
updating the root xk will be the same (either failure or success). Both the two
cases (locating again the eigenvalue λ1 or going outside the searching region
or locating a “fake” eigenvalue) are undesired results because in both cases
the new eigenvalue λ2 will not be found.
By memorizing the searching path covered and stopping the iteration when the
current position xk is close to a point already visited, it is possible to improve
the performance of the root localization. This has the cost that memory must
be used in order to store the visited points. Figure 2.5 shows the plane search
with the paths visited while locating the seven eigenvalues with and without
improvement.
It is remarkable how many times the same eigenvalues are located without
the path memorization, while there are exactly seven paths (red) that locates
them when skipping the already visited points. In order to better compare
the performances, it is possible to count the number of visited points in both
cases for several run of the NFT algorithm (table 2.1). The time required for
visiting a point is the same so this is a good criteria for the comparison.
As it is possible to observe, the number of visited points decreases dras-
tically, and as a consequence the algorithm is faster.
The impact on the
==PAGE:39==
2.4 INFT algorithm
23
Figure 2.5: The red paths are the points visited that led to the location of
an eigenvalue (also multiple times) while the blue paths are the
points visited that led to failure of the location process (either
outside the searching region or the criteria on the energy was
not met). The green spots are the eigenvalues location.
Standard Newton-Raphson
Path memorization
2647
1176
2447
1560
2574
1097
Table 2.1: Number of point visited for locating all the eigenvalues. Compar-
ison between deploying the path memorization and the standard
method.
eigenvalue localization makes a sensible a difference if no other approaches are
deployed in order to speed up the root-searching . In case where the search
region is considerably small and the initial points are set close to the actual
eigenvalues the algorithm may not benefit much from this improvement.
2.4
INFT algorithm
Once the direct NFT operation is defined, this section deals with the algorithm
for the inverse NFT operation, also known as INFT. Since the focus of this
thesis is on the discrete spectrum, the presented algorithm is for the discrete
==PAGE:40==
24
2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform fundamentals
spectrum only. The algorithm is known as Darboux Transform (DT).
The DT is a recursive algorithm that can build a time-domain signal start-
ing from its NFT discrete spectrum from a set of N eigenvalues. The algorithm
has a complexity of O(N2), much faster than the Riemann-Hilbert system of
equations which is O(N3). A complete explanation and proof of this method
is in [10]. The main feature of this algorithm is the ability to add iteratively
each of the N eigenvalues by an update phase starting from the vacuum signal
q(t) = 0 and generating the solution eq(t). The Darboux theorem provides the
updating equation that links the iterative steps one with the other proving
that the final signal is the solution of the ZSP (2.5). If ¯v = (¯v1, ¯v2)T is a so-
lution (auxiliary solution) of (2.5) for the starting signal q(t) and the current
eigenvalue is λ0, then the update of the signal follows
eq(t) = q(t) −2i(λ0 −λ∗
0)
¯v∗
2¯v1
|¯v1|2 + |¯v2|2
(2.35)
Being a recursive algorithm, parameters initialization is required. We al-
ready said that the starting point is the vacuum signal q(t) = 0 which is
associated with the absence of eigenvalues. The second initialization required
is for the auxiliary solutions ¯v(0)
i
(t), one for each of the N eigenvalues for which
we have to solve the ZSP (2.5). The initializations of the auxiliary solutions
is proved to be ¯v(0)
i
(t) = (Aie−iλit, Bieiλit)T [10], where Ai and Bi are the
initialization constants that depend on the spectral amplitudes [10]
Qd(λi) = (λi −λ∗
i )
N
∏
k=1,k̸=i
λi −λ∗
k
λi −λk
× −Bi
Ai
.
(2.36)
For simplicity it is possible to set Ai = 1 and so we have Bi = −b(λi). In this
way it is easy to relate the spectral amplitudes to the scattering coefficients
and it is easy to modify the algorithm input with the scattering coefficients
instead than the spectral amplitudes. This is useful when the information is
encoded in the scattering coefficient and not in the spectral amplitudes.
After having initialized all the necessary parameters, the signal update
takes place, followed by the update of the auxiliary solutions. In this phase,
ZSP is solved by adding a new eigenvalue [10, 12]. Figure 2.6 shows the basic
working scheme of the DT algorithm.
==PAGE:41==
2.4 INFT algorithm
25
Figure 2.6: The S-nodes are the signal updates operation and the E-nodes
correspond to the auxiliary solutions update. Note that for the
case N = 1 the auxiliary solutions ¯vi(t) only need to be initial-
ized as the update phase will not be performed [12].
The algorithm implemented for this thesis follows the Algorithm 2 in [10]
and it has been adapted for allowing the input to be the scattering coefficients.
This algorithm is faster than Algorithm 1 and a brief time-performances test
follows.
Algorithm 2 is based on defining the new quantity ρ as the ratio
between the two components of the auxiliary solution ρ = −¯v2
¯v1 . Here follows
the pseudo-code for the DT algorithm with the adaptation for the scattering
coefficients as input.
Performances.
As for the performances, this version of the algorithm is
faster than the first version since it skips some steps while updating the aux-
iliary solutions.
Hence, the algorithm is faster.
It is possible to test the
algorithms by running them several hundred times and averaging the time
performance for a sweep w.r.t. the number of eigenvalues (N) and also to the
number of samples per signal (K). If then we compute the ratio between the
two time performances, it is possible to compare them by noting that if the
ratio is above 1 then the second algorithm is faster (fig. 2.7).
==PAGE:42==
26
2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform fundamentals
Algorithm 1 INFT from Darboux transformation - Version 2
1: procedure INFT(λ1, . . . , λN, b(λ1), . . . , b(λN))
2:
q(0)(t) ←0
▷The signal is initialized to the vacuum solution
3:
for i ←1 to N do ▷Initialization of the N auxiliary solutions of ZSP
4:
ρ(0)
i (t) ←b(λi)e2iλit
5:
end for
6:
for i ←1 to N do
7:
ρ(t) ←ρ(i−1)
i
8:
q(i)(t) ←q(i−1)(t) −2i(λi −λ∗
i )
ρ∗(t)
1+|ρ(t)|2
▷Signal update
9:
for k ←i + 1 to N do
▷Auxiliary solutions update
10:
ρ(i)
k (t) ←
(λk−λi)ρ(i−1)
k
(t)+
λi−λ∗
i
1+|ρ(t)|2
(
ρ(i−1)
k
(t)−ρ(t)
)
λk−λ∗
i −
λi−λ∗
i
1+|ρ(t)|2
(
1+ρ∗(t)ρ(i)
k (t)
)
11:
end for
12:
end for
13:
return q(N)(t)
14: end procedure
It is also possible to compare the precision that the algorithms have w.r.t. the
number of samples per signal (K). This can be achieved by comparing the
output signal of the DT with the one generated with the Riemann-Hilbert
method using a lot of samples in order to better approximate a continuous
time axis. Figure 2.8 shows the precision in terms of normalized MSE averaged
over several simulations w.r.t. the number of samples for different number of
eigenvalues (N from 1 to 5).
The plot 2.8 shows also the difference in precision between the two algorithms,
but it is safe to say that there is not tangible difference between the two of
them since the difference detected by the simulations is below the sensitivity
of the software used for the simulations (Matlab sensitivity is 10−16 while
the detected precision difference between the algorithms is in the order of
magnitude of 10−30).
==PAGE:43==
2.4 INFT algorithm
27
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Number of discrete eigenvalues
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Computational time ratio
Computational time ratio Alg1 / Alg2
K = 35
K = 65
K = 100
threshold
Figure 2.7: Computational time ratio between the two DT algorithms.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
K samples
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
E [ NMSE ]
Error from theoretical results
N = 5
N = 4
N = 3
N = 2
N = 1
Figure 2.8: The 5 lines refer to different numbers of eigenvalues, starting
from the bottom (yellow) with N = 1 till the upper one (blue)
with N = 5.
==PAGE:44==
28
2 Nonlinear Fourier Transform fundamentals
2.5
Summary
Within this chapter we explored the concept of the nonlinear Fourier trans-
form as a method for solving the NLSE. Particular emphasis was paid on
the theoretical derivation of the NFT operation along with the inverse oper-
ation (INFT). Thanks to this method, information can be encoded in some
quantities (eigenvalues and spectral amplitudes) that match the behaviour of
the channel, thus the optical fibre modelled by the NLSE. By doing so, it is
possible to exploit the nonlinearity of the channel instead of considering it
as a weakness. However, several approximations from the real world had to
be made, among the most important the lossless scenario and the presence of
noise. Since it is an intrinsic property of the channel, the lossless condition is
a strong assumption and more complex methods exist in order to take losses
into account.
For the purpose of this thesis, the losses are not taken into
account and only noise is considered as main impairment of the transmission
link.
The chapter investigated also the algorithms needed for computing the NFT
and INFT operations, presenting also some improvement. Despite several al-
gorithms exist, since the thesis is focused on the eigenvalue communication,
only the discrete spectrum is taken into account and thus the Darboux trans-
formation is used as INFT algorithm and the Trapezoidal method is used
for the NFT algorithm (belonging to the class of the search method for the
eigenvalues localization).
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3
Simulation setup
In this chapter the concept of nonlinear frequency division multiplexing trans-
mission is introduced with particular focus on the discrete spectrum modula-
tion. In addition, the simulation setup is explained along with the parameters
choice.
The simulation framework is the environment where everything take place.
Being a simulation, several degrees of realism can be implemented. To keep
the setup neat some idealizations are made, in order to have a better grasp
of the theory underlying the NFDM system, without interfering with other
sources of impairments.
3.1
Nonlinear frequency division multiplexing
The concept of NFDM was introduced in [8] as parallelism with the orthog-
onal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) system, where the information
is encoded in orthogonal subcarriers in order to avoid inter-symbol interfer-
ence (ISI) and inter-channel interference. In a OFDM system, the information
is encoded in the Fourier coefficients associated with the different subcarriers
(fixed values) modulated accordingly to standard modulation formats (PSK,
QAM, etc.).
In the same way, a NFDM system stresses the independence (orthogonality) of
the different channels that can propagate within the fibre without interference.
The relation with the OFDM system is the close correspondence between the
Fourier frequencies with the nonlinear frequencies {λ1, . . . , λK} λ ∈R, and th
fact that the information is encoded in their the nonlinear continuous spectral
amplitudes Qc(λ) in a similar way as for the Fourier coefficients. In addition,
in a NFDM system information can be encoded in other orthogonal “sub-
carriers” identified by the eigenvalues of the discrete spectrum: the complex
discrete eigenvalues has the property of remaining unaltered during transmis-
sion and so they are exempt from interference (in absence of losses and noise).
==PAGE:46==
30
3 Simulation setup
Encoding the information in the spectral amplitudes (both discrete and con-
tinuous spectrum) is one way to exploit the NFT transmission, but other
techniques exist, for example by encoding the information in the eigenvalues,
such as position or presence/absence [19].
The two main features of a NFDM system, which differentiate it from
other methods are:
• to have a fixed number of λ, real or complex, at precise locations;
• to have information encoded in the spectral amplitudes Qc(λ), Qd(λi)
(or equivalently in the scattering coefficients b(λi)) corresponding to the
set of chosen λ.
Since the thesis is focused on the eigenvalues communication, the NFDM sys-
tem will encode information only in the discrete spectrum.
Here will follow a brief description of the basic components used in the simu-
lation from a general point of view. Section 3.2 will explain the details of the
setup and of the parameters choice.
Transmitter.
The transmitter has the function of generating the electro-
magnetic wave that will propagate through the channel starting from the
information (bit stream) that needs to be encoded in the signal. Realistic
speaking, the electromagnetic wave in a coherent system is modulated by
an IQ modulator (a Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM) is often used) which
modulates a laser source driven by a time-domain digital signal where the
information is encoded. To keep the setup without additional impairments,
the signal launched in the channel is directly the digital signal, leaving aside
the modulation of the laser source and all the nonlinearity introduced by the
MZM and the digital-to-analog converter (DAC).
Once the discrete eigenvalues have been chosen {λ1, . . . , λN}, λi ∈C+ along
with a modulation format for the scattering coefficients b(λi) (such as PSK,
QAM, etc.), the data stream is encoded thanks to a bit mapper to the scat-
tering coefficients accordingly to a Gray coding scheme.
From the discrete eigenvalues and the discrete spectrum, it is possible to per-
form the INFT operation thanks to the DT algorithm.
The time-domain
signal generated needs to be denormalized matching the same normalization
that will be carried out at the receiver. The signal, that now is noise-free, is
corrupted by adding some noise in order match a certain optical signal-to-noise
ratio (OSNR) level.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Simulation framework
31
Channel.
The signal is propagated through a fibre link formed of different
spans (Ns) each of them with a certain length (Ls). Each span is simulating
an optical fibre with no losses, specifically a single mode fiber (SMF), where
at the end of the span there is an attenuator that accounts for the neglected
losses of the fibre. In this way, the propagation through the fibre matches
perfectly the NLSE but for the presence of noise. Once the signal is attenu-
ated an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) restores the power of the signal
before entering the next span. The amplifier introduces also noise due to
amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) and the noise will build up during the
propagation through different spans.
Receiver.
The receiver has the task of collecting the received signal, syn-
chronizing the time-frame of each symbol received in order to sample correctly
the signal received and then perform the NFT operation. To keep the setup
lighter, the synchronization is left aside and the digital signal is normalized
and fed to the NFT, that can extract the eigenvalues bλi and discrete spectrum
bb(bλi). After compensating the scattering coefficients accordingly to the chan-
nel transfer function within the NFT domain (2.23), a decision must be taken
for classifying the eigenvalues correctly in order to look at the correct constel-
lation. This is necessary since each eigenvalue has a different constellations
associated, each of them carrying different information.
3.2
Simulation framework
In this section we will explore the details of the parameters chosen for the
simulation.
3.2.1
Transmitter
In the case of discrete NFDM transmission systems, the power of the signal is
bound to the choice of the eigenvalue and of the time duration of each symbol.
As it was explained in subsection 2.2.4 equation (2.30) links the position of the
eigenvalue to its time-domain waveform and also to its time-width. This holds
both for the fundamental soliton (N = 1) but also for higher order solitons
(N > 1). In general, the power of the signal is dependent on the choice of the
eigenvalues as well as its duration. Hence, if the symbol rate of the system is
Rs then the symbol period is Ts = 1/Rs. The parameter that can be chosen
==PAGE:48==
32
3 Simulation setup
for the denormalization/normalization of the signal is the parameter T0, and
it can be defined for simplicity as a fraction of the symbol period (T0 = a×Ts).
By reducing T0, the duration of the pulse can go from the extreme where the
signal is narrow and isolated by null guard bands within the symbol period
Ts, to the other extreme where its duration is so broad that part of the signal
is cut because it exceeds the symbol period. In the first case the power of
the signal is high and its bandwidth is broad, while in the second case the
power and the bandwidth are both reduced. While choosing the parameter,
both these extreme cases are not useful, the first because a lot of bandwidth
is being wasted due to large guard bands between pulses, the second because
the signal is not any more a solution of the NLSE as it is required that the
signal satisfies the vanishing boundaries conditions |q(t)| −→0 for |t| −→∞(see
subsection 2.2.3). Figure 3.1 shows the time and frequency domain of such
two extreme cases.
0
0.5
1
Time [s]
10-9
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Amplitude
T0 = 0.02 
 TS
0
0.5
1
Time [s]
10-9
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Amplitude
T0 = 0.2 
 TS
-20
-10
0
10
20
Frequency (GHz)
-140
-138
-136
-134
-132
Power/frequency (dB/Hz)
-20
-10
0
10
20
Frequency (GHz)
-135
-130
-125
Power/frequency (dB/Hz)
Figure 3.1: The two plots show the time domain (up) of the signal with
two different choice of the normalization constant T0. The bot-
tom shows the respective frequency domain. The plots are the
denormalized result of the DT with λ1 = 0.5i and b(λ1) = −i.
The trade off was chosen as T0 = 0.05 × Ts, where Rs = 1 GHz. The small
value of T0 is also due to the fact that in the case of multiple eigenvalues
transmission, the spectral amplitudes change the position of the pulses within
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Simulation framework
33
the time-slot, hence making the tails of the pulse closer to the boundaries.
The choice of the eigenvalues are related to the power of the signal and to
the travelling speed of the soliton components within the pulse. As demon-
strated in (2.30), the real part of an eigenvalue corresponds to the propagation
speed of the soliton within the optical fibre, and this hold also for multiple
eigenvalues.
So for simplicity, in order to have all the soliton components
travelling at the same speed, the real part of the eigenvalues is chosen to be
ℜ(λi) = 0.
The imaginary part of the eigenvalues determines the power peak of the pulse
generated with the DT (2.30). The two eigenvalues has been chosen to be
λ1 = 0.3i, λ2 = 0.6i not to trigger too much the nonlinear effects of the fibre.
The constellation choice tries to minimize the peak-to-average power ra-
tio (PAPR) following the work in [12].
The phase difference at which the
two constellations give the minimum PAPR is the case when θ = π/4. As
a consequence the first eigenvalue has been associated with a QPSK and the
second with a 4-QAM. Nevertheless, also the other combinations of constella-
tions were simulated and analysed in order to show similarities and differences.
Figure 3.2 shows the basic scheme for the transmitter.
Figure 3.2: Starting from the input bit stream, the transmitter maps these
bits into an optical signal thanks to the INFT algorithm..
3.2.2
Channel
The channel consists in Ns = 10 with Ls = 80 km. The fibre is the SSMF
with chromatic dispersion D = 17 ps/nm/km, slope S = 0 and propagation
losses α = 0 in order to match the NLSE.
At the end of each span there is an attenuator that accounts for the losses, sim-
ulating them in a clumped approach. The attenuator is set to 0.2 dB/km×Ls =
==PAGE:50==
34
3 Simulation setup
16 dB, where the value 0.2 dB/km is the propagation loss. After the attenu-
ator, in order to amplify the signal there is an EDFA with a gain coefficient
matching the attenuator value, thus G = 16 dB. The amplifier introduces
noise due to the ASE and chosen noise figure is NF = 4.5. Figure 3.3 shows
the basic scheme of the channel. Figure 3.4 shows how the time domain second
order soliton evolves during the propagation at different points in the link.
Figure 3.3: The input optical signal is propagated through Ns spans each
with length Ls.
Each span is equipped with attenuator and
EDFA.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Time [s]
10-9
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Power [W]
Power envelope
L = 800 Km
L = 400 Km
L = 80 Km
Figure 3.4: The image shows one of the solitons transmitted within its time
slot (Ts = 1 ns) at different points in space, in particular after
the first span (purple), 5 spans (orange), 10 spans (blue).
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Summary
35
Figure 3.5: The output optical signal is propagated to the NFT algorithm
and then, the discrete spectrum is classified, equalized and the
symbols are retrieved and compared to the transmitted ones, in
order to obtain the BER.
3.2.3
Receiver
The receiver has the function to segment the signal at the output of the chan-
nel, dividing each symbol from the other. Then, the signal is normalized and
fed to the NFT algorithm. The NFT returns the received eigenvalues bλi and
discrete spectrum bb(bλi). At this point it is necessary to classify the eigenval-
ues correctly, in order to perform symbol decision on the correct constellation.
Decision is performed with different methods discussed in details in chapter
4. Once the noisy eigenvalues have been classified, it is possible to perform
decision on the symbols carried on the constellations.
After applying the inverse transfer function of the channel (2.23), hard detec-
tion is performed on the constellation domain. Previously, it is possible to
perform phase recovery or other kind of equalization methods on the constel-
lations. Figure 3.5 shows the structure of the receiver.
3.3
Summary
In this chapter we investigated the basic concept of NFDM communication
system, with particular attention to the discrete part of the NFT spectrum.
In addition, the setup is explained, in which several idealization were made
in order to keep the impairment under control. The main simplification is
==PAGE:52==
36
3 Simulation setup
the fibre with no propagation losses, but other idealizations are the absence
of digital-to-analog converters, MZM as the signal is kept on a digital level
without simulating the laser source with all its impairments.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4
Machine Learning
methods
In this chapter we will move into the core of the thesis. A brief explanation
of what machine learning is and why it is useful is provided as well. With
particular emphasis we will discuss the machine learning methods used in
order to classify the eigenvalues.
Since the first programmable computers were conceived, there has been
the interest in whether theses machines might become intelligent or capable
of performing tasks adapting themselves to the external environment automat-
ically [20]. During the years, artificial intelligence made huge progress and it is
possible to categorize machine learning methods as a sub-field of AI. Machine
learning is a data-analysis oriented method aimed at performing a series of au-
tomated tasks on some acquired data whose nature can be whatsoever. These
automated tasks range from classification, probability estimation, clustering,
curve fitting, prediction, or in general tasks where the human intellect can
easily fail. With some particular algorithms it is possible to provide robust
answers to a set of noise-corrupted data, or data where some hidden patterns
are believed to exist. The success of these algorithms relies on dividing the
job into two major steps, a learning phase, and a testing phase [21]. The pur-
pose of the learning phase is to extract information form the data set that can
generalize enough the trends and the patterns hidden within it. Once these
features are extracted, it is then possible to extrapolate a model that is able
to determine the behaviour of unseen data based on what it has been possible
to observe so far.
For example, if the task is to classify a picture as “it contains a face” and “it
does not contain a face”, the observed data, also knows as training set, will
consist of a set of pictures labelled accordingly to the classification task we are
going to perform. The machine learning algorithms will extract some features
form the pictures and will build a model, y(xtr), which can take as input new
==PAGE:54==
38
4 Machine Learning methods
unlabelled pictures called test set xte and provide as output the belonging
class of these new pictures.
The standard work-flow for applying a machine learning method begins
with gathering known data, thus the training set. By this we mean a set of
data with additional information such as the belonging class if it is a classifi-
cation task, or a set of real numbers if we are doing prediction based on past
realizations of a certain process. Once the data is prepared, it is possible to
train a model in order to get a routine that can perform this task successfully
on the training set, thus providing a low error on this set. During the learning
phase it is important to pay attention not to overfit the data, thus there is
the risk that the trained model will not be able to generalize the behaviour of
unseen future data since it has been trained on a particular instance and the
algorithm, if not properly tuned, has built a model that works only for that
particular training set.
In order to avoid this, the performance of an algorithm is checked by using
another set of data, the test set. This set is also labelled but the algorithm
used is different as it does not train, but it performs the task it is supposed
to do. The output of the algorithm is then compared to the labels of the test
set and then the error can be calculated. Often these algorithms have a lot
of tuning parameters that are used to keep the overfitting (and underfitting)
under control, called hyperparameters. These have the cost that they need
to be optimized and their optimization region is large enough to become the
main obstacle during the training phase of some algorithms.
Machine learning can be seen as a field on its own, and it is so since
the vastness of the topic and lately it has gained huge interest from both
academic and private sectors. However, this is just as interesting as using
machine learning for simplifying tasks in other fields of study. It can be seen
as a tool for different and the most variegate purposes. Despite the concept
is fairly straightforward, the algorithms for learning can be quite complicated
depending on the task. In our case, the task we are going to investigate is a
possible way to perform the classification of received discrete eigenvalues bλi
which are corrupted by noise.
In section 4.1 an introduction to the classification problem is given, fol-
lowed by the deployment of two different methods, respectively in subsections
4.1.1 and 4.1.2.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Eigenvalue classification
39
4.1
Eigenvalue classification
The need of classifying the eigenvalues rises form the fact that in multiple
eigenvalue transmission, each eigenvalue has a constellation encoded in the
respective discrete spectral amplitudes. In order to retrieve the symbols en-
coded in the constellations we must know which constellation we are looking
at, and this is possible only if we know which eigenvalues has been received.
In order to better understand this, let’s take a look at the following example.
Let’s assume that we transmitted the following discrete spectrum, λi =
{0.3i, 0.6i} b(λi) = {1, 0.707 + 0.707i} where the first eigenvalue is associated
with a QPSK constellation while the second with a 4-QAM. Since at the re-
ceiver the NFT operation will locate the eigenvalues with a search method, it
is not trivial to determine which eigenvalue will be found first. As a matter of
fact, the eigenvalues can be found in different orders, and in a noisy scenario
the eigenvalues can be really close to each other. Let’s assume the received
discrete spectrum is bλi = {0.52i, 0.41i} bb(bλi) = {0.689i + 0.89i, 0.81 + 0.02i}.
It is possible to deduce thanks to the low noise introduced that the NFT rou-
tine found first λ2 and then λ1. This leads to the inversion of the scattering
coefficients as well. If now we perform the symbol decision on the constella-
tion encoded in the scattering coefficients we will end up with errors since the
decisor will perform decision based on a QPSK constellation within the first
scattering coefficient while 4-QAM within the second. Hence sorting/classify-
ing the eigenvalues is required before looking at the constellations. Another
issue is that the eigenvalues found by the NFT could be more than the ones
transmitted. This happens when the signal is heavily corrupted by noise and
the algorithm is more likely to fail. As a consequence, in addition to the sort-
ing of the eigenvalues, there is the need to identify and delete the spurious
eigenvalues.
A basic method has been proposed and used in [12] where a minimum dis-
tance metric is deployed. This method looks at the eigenvalues received and
compare them with the reference eigenvalues, thus the transmitted noise-free
eigenvalues. An example of the effect of sorting the eigenvalues is represented
in figure 4.1 [12].
The difficulty in this scenario is that there is no training set with labels.
This is due to the fact that when we transmit multiple eigenvalues, the received
eigenvalues are not labelled since it is the task in itself to assign the labels.
This is a case of unsupervised learning, whose aim is to discover groups of
similar examples within the data [21]. The first method presented is based on
unsupervised learning while in subsection 4.1.2 we will present a method that
==PAGE:56==
40
4 Machine Learning methods
Figure 4.1: The sorting of the eigenvalues allows to correctly reconstruct the
constellations and perform decision on the symbols [12].
needs the labels in order to train the model (supervised learning) and for this
case some results obtained with the first method will be used.
4.1.1
Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm
This subsection introduces the basic concepts behind EM algorithm thanks to
which it is possible to cluster the received data and perform classification.
Expectation-Maximization.
The EM algorithm is a powerful method for
finding maximum likelihood solutions [21]. It is a clustering algorithm that
works for unsupervised learning and it is useful in our scenario.
Given a
set of N unlabelled points, the algorithm proceeds iteratively updating some
quantities in order to cluster the points in K different sets, where K must be
specified, and assigns to each point a responsibility γni. The responsibility is a
posterior probability, thus a measure of how likely the n-th point is to belong
to the i-th cluster. The algorithm is iterative as the initialization is random
and it converges to the optimal solution when the likelihood function is maxi-
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Eigenvalue classification
41
(a)
−2
0
2
−2
0
2
(b)
−2
0
2
−2
0
2
(c)
L = 1
−2
0
2
−2
0
2
(d)
L = 2
−2
0
2
−2
0
2
(e)
L = 5
−2
0
2
−2
0
2
(f)
L = 20
−2
0
2
−2
0
2
Figure 4.2: Several iterations (d) (e) (f) of the EM algorithm on a bi-
dimensional dataset, showing how the E (b) and M (c) steps
lead to the convergence (f) [21].
mized. In our case, the clusters that the algorithm will identify are modelled
as gaussian distribution, hence our data set is assumed to be described as a
mixture of gaussian.
Being modelled as gaussian, each of the K clusters can be statistically
described completely by two quantities, their means µi and their covariance
matrices Σi. Once these two quantities are initialized at the beginning (fig.
4.2(a)), the algorithm is then divided into two steps that are repeated until
convergence. Accordingly to the name of the algorithm, there is the Expecta-
tion step and then the Maximization step:
1. E step. Based on the current iteration, from the values of the means
and covariances it is possible to calculate the responsibilities of each
point (fig. 4.2(b), fading colours).
2. M step. Based on the current values of responsibilities, it is possible to
update the means and covariances of the clusters for next iteration.
==PAGE:58==
42
4 Machine Learning methods
Figure 4.3: The basic scheme for sorting the eigenvalues. At the receiver, the
NFT output is fed to the EM algorithm as bi-dimensional points,
the real and the imaginary part. The results of the algorithm
are a predictive function and the statistics of the clusters.
It is proved that the repetition of E and M steps leads to the convergence
of the algorithm [21]. In figure 4.2(d), (e) and (f) it is possible to observe
complete EM steps for different iterations, where (f) is the final one.
It is noteworthy that at the end, the algorithm returns both the clustering of
the points but also their distribution parameters, thus the means and covari-
ance matrices of each cluster.
Applying EM predictive function.
Once the EM algorithm has been
performed on a 2-eigenvalue based communication, with λi = {0.3i, 0.6i} (re-
gardless on the spectral amplitudes which do not condition the eigenvalues in
a substantial way), the model is trained and it is possible to use it for clas-
sifying new values. In other words, given a new NFT output of two or more
eigenvalues, the EM predictive function provided by the EM algorithm which
takes as input one or more unseen data points and it returns the belonging
probability for each of the trained classes. The predictive function depends on
the means and covariances of the clusters (µi, Σi) and on the assumption that
the clusters follow a gaussian distribution (this assumption will be discussed
later). In this way it is possible to sort the eigenvalues accordingly.
Figure 4.3 shows the work-flow for classifying the eigenvalues deploying an
EM algorithm.
In figure 4.4 it is possible to see how the EM algorithm classifies the re-
ceived eigenvalues received using the simulation setup explained in chapter 3.
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Eigenvalue classification
43
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Re( )
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Im( )
1
2
reference
Figure 4.4: The colour code refers to how the algorithm classifies the re-
ceived eigenvalues: the blue points are the eigenvalues classified
as λ1 while the red points as λ2.
4.1.2
Kernel based algorithm
As touched upon previously, the assumption that the eigenvalues received
follow a gaussian distribution is far fetched. We must keep in mind that eigen-
values are a result of the NFT operator, which is a nonlinear transformation
from the time domain. So processes behaving in a specific way in time domain
(in our example the process associated with noise) will behave differently after
the NFT operation. As a matter of fact, if the transmission is based on one
eigenvalue only there are analytical expressions that can prove how the noise
modifies the eigenvalue distribution [7], but as far as more than one eigenval-
ues is concerned, there is no deep understanding on how the noise affects the
distribution [6].
Before looking into the other method deployed, it is interesting to look a
bit more closer at the eigenvalues distribution. An interesting way to analyse
the eigenvalues behaviour, and in particular what happens to them in case
of a multi-eigenvalue communication in presence of noise, is to compare the
==PAGE:60==
44
4 Machine Learning methods
distributions with N = 1 and N = 2 eigenvalues.
In order to enhance the differences between having a single eigenvalue or more
than one, it is possible to perform a transmission where only one eigenvalue
at the time is sent. In particular, the first time there will be only λ1 = 0.3i
and the second one only λ2 = 0.6i. In this way, it is possible to learn the
statistics of the received eigenvalues when sent separately.
With the term
statistics, we refer to the mean µi and the covariance matrix Σi of the i-th
received eigenvalue. The associated discrete spectral amplitudes b(λi) do not
condition the eigenvalues transmission in a significant way for this phase, and
they are just set to simulate a QPSK constellation scheme. Figures 4.5 show
the difference between sending two eigenvalues at the same time and one at
the time. In figure 4.6 it is possible to appreciate better the overlap between
the single transmission.
NFT discrete eigenvalues
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Re( )
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Im( )
NFT discrete eigenvalues
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Re( )
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Im( )
Figure 4.5: The left picture is the case of a 2-eigenvalue transmission, while
the right picture is an artificial image that overlaps the eigenval-
ues transmitted singularly.
It is remarkable how the eigenvalues are more displaced from the reference
position when sent together with the same amount of noise. It is also proved
that the variance of the cloud of received eigenvalues grows along with the
imaginary part in case of a single eigenvalue [7] and this holds for both N = 1
and N = 2. The different impact of the noise between the two cases is probably
due to some interaction between the eigenvalues. In the time domain, this can
be seen as the fact that the profile of a second order soliton changes during
the propagation (as it is periodic) and thus the part of the pulse where most
of the energy is stored enlarges in time and so the noise affects a “larger” part
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Eigenvalue classification
45
NFT discrete eigenvalues
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Re( )
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Im( )
1 2
reference
1
2
Figure 4.6: The black points are the eigenvalues received in the case of single
transmission, while the blue points are the eigenvalues received
in the 2-eigenvalue case.
of the signal. In case of a single eigenvalue, the profile of the pulse is kept
during propagation and then the energy remains concentrated in a short time-
window, making the impact of noise less evident. Figures 4.7 shows how the
profile changes during propagation for N = 1 and N = 2. This also impacts
the NFT operation since during the integration of the time-domain waveform
there is more noise affecting part of the signal with considerable amount of
energy within it.
In the light of these new facts, it is now interesting to analyse what happens
if the gaussian assumption is dropped. One way to determine whether the
received eigenvalue is in class 1 or 2 is to train a model that can estimate
the probability density functions (pdf). Once the pdfs are learnt (one for each
eigenvalue, p(λ|Ci)), at the receiver it is possible to evaluate the posterior
probability p(Ci|λ) of the received eigenvalue to be in class Ci with i = 1, 2
and classify it accordingly.
Differently from the EM algorithm, by estimating the pdf we eliminate the
prior knowledge regarding the gaussian distribution of the eigenvalues and
instead the real pdf is used for the classification purpose. The next paragraph
introduces briefly how it is possible to estimate pdfs.
==PAGE:62==
46
4 Machine Learning methods
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Time [s]
10-9
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
Power [W]
Power envelope
L = 800 Km
L = 400 Km
L = 80 Km
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Time [s]
10-9
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Power [W]
Power envelope
L = 800 Km
L = 400 Km
L = 80 Km
Figure 4.7: The upper picture shows the propagation in case N = 1, while
the bottom one N = 2. Both the pictures show the signal in
time at the same point in space.
Kernel method.
The kernel density estimation is a non-parametric way to
estimate the probability density function (pdf) of a random variable [21]. The
core of the function is the kernel function, which is a non-negative function
that extracts information about the distance of each realization from all the
other realizations. In our case, let D = C1 ∪C2 = {λi,1, λi,2, . . . , λi,S} with
i = 1, 2 be the set of all the eigenvalues received for S symbols transmitted,
thus the union of both the classes in a case where N = 2. The kernel function
k(λ|λi,k) fits every point in order to obtain a smooth function of λ obtained as
a linear combination of kernel functions evaluated in each data point λi,k. The
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Discussion and conclusion
47
function can weight the different points in several ways and we chose the most
used kernel function, which is the exponential kernel. The only parameter
of this function is the bandwidth h which is set to a trade-off value in order
not to overfit the dataset. The pdf for the i-th eigenvalue can be modelled as
follows taking into account all the Si eigenvalues received belonging to class
Ci
p(λ|Ci, h) = 1
S
Si
∑
k=1
k(λ|λi,k, h)
(4.1)
where the kernel function is
k(λ|λi,k, h) = exp
(
−1
2h2 ∥λ −λi,k ∥2
)
(4.2)
In order to build the pdf it is necessary to classify a training sequence of
eigenvalues, and this is possible by deploying the EM algorithm previously
presented. The steps necessary for the training of the kernel estimator are the
following:
1. Transmit a sequence of symbols with 2 eigenvalues and classify the NFT
output using the EM predictive function;
2. Once the received eigenvalues bλi are classified into the two classes it is
possible to compute the pdf for each class thanks to (4.1) (fig. 4.8);
3. It is now possible to generate a predictive function, henceforth referred
to as kernel predictive function. This function takes as input the real and
imaginary part of one or more new received eigenvalues and it returns
the posterior probability p(Ci|bλ) for each class i = 1, 2. The eigenvalue
will belong to the class with higher probability.
Figure 4.9 shows the work-flow for training the pdf estimator and generating
the predictive function.
4.2
Discussion and conclusion
Proving that one method is better than the other is not trivial. As a matter
of fact, a conspicuous amount of time has been used on this. The problem
is that there is nothing to check the performances of eigenvalue classification
alone, but the best achievable was to use also the information encoded in the
spectral amplitudes. The scattering coefficients have the bit encoded in the
==PAGE:64==
48
4 Machine Learning methods
0
50
100
150
0.6
p(  | C2)
200
0.1
250
0.55
300
Im( )
0.05
0.5
Re( )
0
0.45
-0.05
0.4
-0.1
0
50
100
0.1
150
200
p(  | C1)
250
300
Re( )
0
0.2
0.25
Im( )
0.3
0.35
-0.1
0.4
0.45
Figure 4.8: The left picture shows the pdf for λ2 while the right picture for
λ1. The eigenvalues have been transmitted together.
Figure 4.9: The first part of the algorithm uses the result obtained with the
EM method in order to label the eigenvalues. It is then possible
to use this labelled data in order to estimate the pdfs and create
a predictive function.
constellations, thus it is possible to compare the received bit sequence with the
transmitted one. In this way it is possible to compare the bit error rate (BER)
with different classification methods. Nonetheless, with this approach we are
moving the classification problem a step ahead, by measuring the performances
on the received symbols instead than measuring it directly on the eigenvalues.
This has the drawback that we are incorporating the noise on the spectral
amplitudes as well, and when an error occurs on the received bit sequence, it
may be due to an error on the eigenvalue classification but also to the noise
on the constellations.
In fact, after several simulations it is safe to conclude that the main source of
errors within this approach is due to the noise in the constellations, making the
eigenvalue classification not a dominant factor on the overall communication
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Discussion and conclusion
49
NFT discrete eigenvalues
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Re( )
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Im( )
NFT discrete eigenvalues
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Re( )
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Im( )
Figure 4.10: The left picture shows eigenvalues received for a launch
OSNR = 22 dB, while the right one for OSNR = 20 dB.
For 20 dB the clouds are mixed while for 22 dB the clusters
are easily separable.
performances (fig. 4.11).
Moreover, the eigenvalues analysed showed that even for low values of
OSNR the classification could be carried out easily with both methods with
no particular difference between them. This can be seen also visually in figure
4.10(left). If we decrease the OSNR level, this has the implication that both
the eigenvalues and the spectral amplitudes will be more displaced from their
reference position, and so the performances of the system degrades consider-
ably. In a low OSNR scenario, the eigenvalues received (fig. 4.10(right)) are
mixed together and once the two clusters overlap in a random way there is not
much that can be done in order to discern between them. Even though a good
classifiers could be useful in this case, its utility would be proved useless by
the fact that in a low OSNR case the symbols in the constellations would be
so corrupted that a good classification of the eigenvalues would be worthless
compared to the overall system performances. However, as we will explore
in the next chapter, a good classification also in low OSNR scenario can be
useful if equalization is performed on the constellations, where the noise can
be reduced substantially.
We can conclude that, based on this analysis putting more focus on the
noise mitigation in the constellation domain would increase much more the
system performances than trying to classify correctly the eigenvalues. This
will be the main topic in chapter 5.
Nevertheless, further inquiry on the
==PAGE:66==
50
4 Machine Learning methods
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
launch OSNR [dB]
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
BER
Kernel
EM
Figure 4.11: The picture shows the performances in terms of BER when
using the kernel method or the EM algorithm for a 800 km
transmission for different launch OSNR values. The only ap-
preciable difference is at the first point.
eigenvalues side could be beneficial for scenarios where other assumptions are
relaxed, such as if the losses of the fibre are taken into account.
4.3
Summary
Within this chapter we investigated some alternative methods for classifying
the received eigenvalues on a NFDM system than a simple distance detector.
These methods are the EM algorithm and the kernel density estimation. The
classification is required since the received eigenvalues are corrupted by noise
and to each of them there is a different constellation associated on the spectral
amplitudes domain which carries the information.
The EM algorithm deals with the received eigenvalues as a mixture of gaus-
sian, in particular each of the two set of received eigenvalues (λ1 and λ2) are
assumed to follow a gaussian distribution. Based on this assumption, the algo-
rithm can find similarities between the received points and successively cluster
them into two groups, hence the classification. The second method is based
on removing the gaussian assumption and thanks to the kernel method it is
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Summary
51
possible to estimate the probability density functions (pdf) of the two classes
of eigenvalues in order to learn their real distribution and use this knowledge
at the receiver. Once the pdfs are learnt, it is possible to calculate the pos-
terior probability of unseen data at the receiver and determine whether the
received eigenvalue belongs to class C1 or C2.
However, due to absence of a method to check the performances of the
classification directly on the eigenvalues domain, the performances must rely
on whether the received bits encoded in the constellation within the spectral
amplitudes domain are correct or wrong compared with the transmitted bits.
This has the drawback that now also the noise in the constellation will affect
the performances and so the eigenvalues classification is not checked properly.
Furthermore, analysing closer the discrete domain, it is possible to state that
the impact of noise is dominant on the constellations, which determine the
BER performances of the entire system, leaving the eigenvalue classification
a marginal problem. In the next chapter we will investigate how it is possible
to mitigate the noise in the constellation domain.
==PAGE:68==
52
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Constellation
equalization
As proved in the previous chapter, a correct eigenvalue classification is a nec-
essary condition for high system performances but is not sufficient as long as
the constellation domain, in which the information is encoded in the scatter-
ing coefficients, is heavily corrupted by noise. It is possible to understand this
better by looking at figures 5.1: even if the eigenvalues are clearly separable
(each one can be classified correctly), the constellations are noisy, resulting in
a high bit error rate (BER) due to misclassification of the received symbols.
In order to improve the performances, investigation must be carried out on
NFT discrete eigenvalues
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Re( )
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Im( )
-1
0
1
Re(b( ))
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Im(b( ))
1 = 0.3i
NFT discrete spectral amplitudes
-1
0
1
Re(b( ))
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Im(b( ))
2 = 0.6i
Figure 5.1: Discrete spectrum of NFDM transmission over 800 km with
launch OSNR = 22 dB with QPSK and 4-QAM in the first
and second eigenvalue respectively. Eigenvalues (left) and scat-
tering coefficients (right).
==PAGE:70==
54
5 Constellation equalization
the spectral amplitudes domain, and in particular it is necessary to equalize
in some way the received scattering coefficients bb(bλi) which carry the informa-
tion on the bits. Constellation equalization is not a new feature as it has been
vastly studied and deployed since the very first transmissions carried out with
information encoded in the constellation. Hence, a lot of methods and tech-
niques already exist, some of them are mainly phase-recovery oriented while
others also adjust the radius of the constellation.
The aim of this chapter is to investigate some equalization techniques that
suit better the NFT operation, thus including in the equalization also infor-
mation not strictly related only to the constellation domain, but also with
the entire NFT discrete spectrum, trying to extrapolate information from the
eigenvalues as well.
Within this chapter it is shown how it is possible to exploit the correlation
between received eigenvalues and spectral amplitudes for equalizing the phase
and the radius of the received constellations. The first part is focused on the
study of the correlation and later this correlation is used for equalization pur-
poses. Results comparing different methods are presented at the end, thanks
to BER curves obtained by sweeping different values of launch OSNR, from
20 dB to 30 dB.
5.1
Correlation
Given two random variables, correlation describes to which extent the be-
haviour of one variable depends on the other, and vice-versa. In other words,
if there is correlation between two random variables it means that they be-
have in a similar way under certain conditions. Correlation reflects how the
noise is distributed among the dimensions of the data it also points out the
presence of linear relationships between the random variables, but it can not
catch nonlinear phenomena.
Correlation can be expressed in several ways.
One way is to compute the
covariance matrix between the two random variables (X,Y ), or another rep-
resentation is the correlation coefficient rX,Y which is a good measure of the
correlation strength:
rX,Y = Cov [X, Y ]
σXσY
(5.1)
where X and Y are two random variables and σi is the standard deviation of
the i-th random variable. For our purpose, X and Y can be seen as a set of
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Equalization techniques
55
1
0.8
0.4
0
-0.4
-0.8
-1
1
1
1
-1
-1
-1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Figure 5.2: Correlation coefficients associated to the random variables X
and Y . Each picture represents a different behaviour of the two
variables.
measures corrupted by noise. Figure 5.2 shows the coefficients for two random
variables X and Y behaving in different ways for each plot. It is noteworthy
that the central image has no coefficients because the y dimension has no
noisy, hence σY = 0 and the coefficient is not defined. It is also interesting
how the same coefficient can be associated to different shapes of the variables
regardless of their linearity or nonlinearity (fig. 5.2(bottom row)).
5.2
Equalization techniques
In our scenario, it is interesting to discover, if any, correlation between the
eigenvalues and the spectral amplitudes. More in particular, if there is any
correlation between the displacement of the eigenvalues and the displacement
of the constellation points, which in our case reflect the random variables X
and Y aforementioned. With the term “displacement” we will refer henceforth
to the distance of a noisy realization from its reference location
∆x = ˆxi −xref.
(5.2)
However, the quantity we are dealing with are complex numbers and as such
they requires a scalar representation in order to be used. A natural decompo-
sition of the complex numbers for the eigenvalues are the real and imaginary
part, while for the constellation it is natural to decompose them into radius and
phase of each received point. For example, if λ1 = 0.3i and bλ1 = 0.01 + 0.25i
then the displacements are ∆ℜλ1 = 0.1 and ∆ℑλ1 = −0.05.
==PAGE:72==
56
5 Constellation equalization
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Re( )
0.2
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.3
0.32
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.4
Im( )
NFT discrete eigenvalues
( )
( )
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Re(b( 1))
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Im(b(
1))
NFT discrete scattering coefficients
Figure 5.3: Left: detail on the eigenvalue bλ1 showing visually the displace-
ment of a received eigenvalue. Right: received constellation bb(bλ1)
with visual representation of phase and radius displacement.
The main idea behind the equalization is to exploit the potential corre-
lation between the displacement of the eigenvalues and displacement of the
spectral amplitudes as showed in figures 5.3. Looking at these figures it is
interesting to wonder if an eigenvalue far away from the reference position
is associated to a spectral amplitude far away from the reference location
as well, and vice-versa. In details, the quantities whose correlation will be
analysed are all the permutation of the four scalar values resulting from the
decomposition of the eigenvalues (into cartesian coordinates) and the spectral
amplitudes (into polar coordinates). In addition, also cross-correlation can
be analysed, where in this scenario we will refer to cross-correlation as the
correlation computed between the displacement of λi and constellation b(λk)
with i ̸= k. Overall there are 42 = 16 different correlation coefficients and the
next list represents them all. For clarity’s sake we will abbreviate the radius
and the phase displacement as ∆|b(λi)| = ∆ρi, ∆b(λi) = ∆θi respectively:
• ∆ℜλi, ∆ρk
• ∆ℑλi, ∆ρk
• ∆ℜλi, ∆θk
• ∆ℑλi, ∆θk
where i, k = 1, 2.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Equalization techniques
57
Correlation coefficients.
Thanks to several simulations it has been possi-
ble to calculate the correlation coefficients and to prove whether there is this
dependence or not. In this case, the modulation formats of the constellations,
and the different combinations between them, can lead to different correlation
patterns. In other words, using different modulation formats for each eigen-
value creates different behaviour from the correlation point of view than using
the same modulation format. Thus we will analyse four different transmission
setup, in which all the combinations of QPSK and 4-QAM are deployed.
The next table (tab. 5.1) shows the 16 correlation coefficients for each combi-
nation of modulation formats. The setup used is the one explained in chapter
3.
QSPK - 4QAM
4QAM - QPSK
Corr. coeff.
∆ρ1
∆ρ2
∆θ1
∆θ2
∆ρ1
∆ρ2
∆θ1
∆θ2
∆ℜλ1
0.632
-0.497
0.086
-0.081
0.627
-0.482
-0.168
0.139
∆ℜλ2
-0.530
0.583
-0.003
0.027
-0.506
0.540
0.031
-0.076
∆ℑλ1
0.406
-0.239
0.811
-0.680
-0.272
0.307
0.784
-0.634
∆ℑλ2
-0.409
0.296
-0.595
0.822
0.432
-0.317
-0.522
0.788
QPSK - QPSK
4QAM - 4QAM
Corr. coeff.
∆ρ1
∆ρ2
∆θ1
∆θ2
∆ρ1
∆ρ2
∆θ1
∆θ2
∆ℜλ1
0.596
-0.412
-0.008
0.008
0.585
-0.4231
-0.072
-0.041
∆ℜλ2
-0.492
0.490
0.008
-0.010
-0.466
0.472
-0.010
0.023
∆ℑλ1
0.007
0.009
0.390
-0.195
0.269
-0.036
0.364
-0.178
∆ℑλ2
-0.021
-0.011
-0.023
0.534
-0.058
0.064
0.043
0.494
Table 5.1: The four tables show the correlation coefficients for different mod-
ulation formats used to encode the information to the two eigen-
values.
From this table it is possible to appreciate the similar behaviour of the
correlation between using the same modulation format and using inverted
formats. As a matter of fact, the correlation when using the same modulation
format is quite low (as we will see from pictures later), while there is a higher
correlation in the case where we are deploying different modulation formats.
Further, we can appreciate a certain trend among the correlation coefficients
for all the four cases analysed: there is a strong dependence between the
real part displacement of the eigenvalue and the radial displacement of the
==PAGE:74==
58
5 Constellation equalization
constellation, and between the imaginary part displacement of the eigenvalue
and the phase displacement of the constellation.
This means that the noise affecting the real part of the eigenvalue is more likely
to displace the scattering coefficient along the radial direction, while for the
imaginary part of the eigenvalue, the scattering coefficient is more likely to be
corrupted by phase noise. This results are in accordance with [16], where the
same analysis is carried out on a similar setup. The next subsection explains
a first approach on how to exploit this correlation, approach used in a similar
way also in [22].
5.2.1
Regression equalizer
Given the fact that there is a quite strong correlation between the couples
(∆ℜλi, ∆ρk) and (∆ℑλi, ∆θk), this first approach disregards the correlation
among other quantities as well as the cross-correlation between different eigen-
values (disregards the case when i ̸= k and consider only i = k). The following
figures (5.4 - 5.7) show the correlation plots of all the quantities taken into
account. The images are obtained after the propagation of 800 km of 5000
symbols and they show the overlap of different OSNR launch values (24 to
30 dB). Each plot shows the correlation for four different configurations of the
transmitter: the modulation format used for the scattering coefficients of each
eigenvalue is set to all the possible combination of QPSK and 4QAM formats.
It is worth noticing that deployed the same modulation format or the
inverted combination leads to very similar results (this was also deducible
from the table 5.1 in a less obvious way), and the equalization techniques
have been deployed for the two main groups of constellations, the shifted
one (QPSK-4QAM, 4QAM-QPSK) and for the identical one (4QAM-4QAM,
QPSK-QPSK).
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Equalization techniques
59
Figure 5.4: Modulation formats: QPSK-4QAM (blue), 4QAM-QSPK (or-
ange). Correlation plot of quantities within the same eigenvalue
(i = k).
Figure 5.5: Modulation formats: QPSK-4QAM (blue), 4QAM-QSPK (or-
ange).
Correlation plot of quantities in a cross-correlation
configuration(i ̸= k).
==PAGE:76==
60
5 Constellation equalization
Figure 5.6: Modulation formats: QPSK-QPSK (blue), 4QAM-4QAM (or-
ange). Correlation plot of quantities within the same eigenvalue
(i = k).
Figure 5.7: Modulation formats: QPSK-QPSK (blue), 4QAM-4QAM (or-
ange).
Correlation plot of quantities in a cross-correlation
configuration(i ̸= k).
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Equalization techniques
61
It is also interesting to notice how the correlation of the couples (∆ℜλi, ∆ρk)
and (∆ℑλi, ∆θk) represented in figures 5.4(left), 5.5(left), 5.6(left) and 5.7(left)
is visible also from the graphs and it is in accordance with the previous table.
Figures on the right side show the correlation between the couples (∆ℜλi, ∆θk)
and (∆ℑλi, ∆ρk) and they show low levels of correlation, as foreseen in table
5.1.
Leaving aside the cross-correlation scenario and disregarding the quantities
whose correlation is low, from the remaining combinations it is possible to fit
the correlation data in a way that two linear functions are created thanks to
a linear regression obtaining by MSE minimization
∆ρi = fr(∆ℜλi)
(5.3a)
∆θi = fp(∆ℑλi)
(5.3b)
where f(x) = ax + b, fr is the function that accounts for the radial displace-
ment while fp for the phase displacement. Figure 5.8 shows the main idea
behind this method, where an example of linear regression is carried out on
the correlation between ∆ℜλ1 and ∆ρ1. The approach for generating the other
3 functions is the same, where the 3 remaining functions relate the following
couples: (∆ℜλ2, ∆ρ2), (∆ℑλ2, ∆θ2) and (∆ℑλ2, ∆θ2).
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
i
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
i
correlation data
Linear regression
Figure 5.8: Linear regression carried out on the correlation between ∆ℜλ1
and ∆ρ1 for the case QPSK-4QAM.
As it is possible to observe for example in 5.4(left), the correlation data
seems to have a segmented behaviour as for the imaginary part of the eigen-
value and the phase of the constellation. This phenomena is not captured by
==PAGE:78==
62
5 Constellation equalization
a simple linear regression, and it is possible to perform a segmented regression
by diving the region over which we will perform the fit into two parts. Keeping
the radial regressions linear (fr), it is worth performing the segmented regres-
sion on the phase regression (fp is now nonlinear). An example of segmented
regression is shown in figure 5.9
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
2
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
2
correlation data
segmented fit
Figure 5.9: Segmented regression carried out on the correlation between
∆ℜλ2 and ∆θ2 for the case QPSK-4QAM.
The equalization of the constellation is now based on those four regression
functions generated so far, thus the linear regression for the radial direction
and the segmented regression for the phase. Part of the received points can
be used to estimated those functions and then it is possible to equalize unseen
data in the following way.
Every Ts the receiver returns the NFT output of the received symbol, thus the
discrete spectrum. Once the eigenvalues are classified as bλ1 and bλ2, it is then
possible to compute the displacement from the reference positions, ∆ℜλi and
∆ℑλi for i = 1, 2. With these values we are able to perform the regressions
and to generate the functions (5.3), fr and fp, one for each eigenvalue. The
compensation follows by subtracting from the radius and from the phase of
the received constellation point b(λi) the regression function evaluated on the
respective eigenvalue displacement. The received constellation point (one for
each eigenvalue) can be expressed as b(λi) = rieiϕi, where ri = |b(λi)| and
ϕi =
b(λi).
The equalized constellation point bEQ,i can be generated as
follows:
bEQ,i = (ri −fr(∆ℜλi)) ei(ϕi−fp(∆ℑλi))
(5.4)
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Equalization techniques
63
A visual example of how the constellations can improve by applying this equal-
izer is provided in figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: Comparison between constellations equalized (black) and non-
equalized (blue) for the case QPSK-4QAM with the regression
method. The constellations show the received scattering coef-
ficients after propagating for 800 km with an OSNR launch of
23 dB.
5.2.2
LMMSE equalizer
So far, we have taken into account only four correlations, disregarding the
cross-correlation possibility and the correlation between the pairs (∆ℜλi, ∆θi)
and (∆ℑλi, ∆ρi).
Even if these correlation coefficients are not as strong
as the one so far taken into account, there is some information that with
the method just presented is wasted and that potentially could improve even
more the equalization.
To peruse this goal, we can implement a LMMSE
equalizer (Linear Minimum Mean Square Error), approach used also in [16].
As a matter of fact, the equalizer is an extension of the linear regression done in
==PAGE:80==
64
5 Constellation equalization
the previous section, where instead of considering only some of the correlation
combinations, it is possible to consider them all. This can be done thanks to
the matrix-oriented approach to the problem, and to the formalization of an
error function that we want to minimize.
As suggested by the name, the purpose is to minimize the mean square
error thanks to a linear regression carried out on a multidimensional vector
(while before we were considering one dimension at the time). Let ⟨x⟩be the
mean of the quantity x, the terms that we want to minimize are ∆ρ and ∆θ,
thus the error function is defined as follows
argmin
ˆρ
= E
[
(∆ρ −⟨∆ρ⟩−ˆρx)2]
(5.5a)
argmin
ˆθ
= E
[(
∆θ −⟨∆θ⟩−ˆθx
)2]
(5.5b)
where E[·] is the expected value and x = [∆ℜλ1, ∆ℑλ1, ∆ℜλ2, ∆ℑλ2]T is our
feature vector. The quantities ˆρ and ˆθ are the solutions of the optimization
problem (5.5) and they can be computed on a set of received symbols if we have
also the information on the transmitted symbols. Let’s denote the training
sequence with the underscore tr. The transmitted symbols are required in
order to calculate the displacements ∆ρtr and ∆θtr, and this set of information
leads to
ˆρ = E
[
(∆ρtr −⟨∆ρtr⟩) xT
tr
]
· Cov[xT
tr]−1
(5.6a)
ˆθ = E
[
(∆θtr −⟨∆θtr⟩) xT
tr
]
· Cov[xT
tr]−1
(5.6b)
where Cov[xtrT ] is the covariance matrix of the feature vector xT
tr.
Once the equalizer is trained, the quantities necessary for the equalization are
ˆρ, ⟨∆ρtr⟩, ˆθ and ⟨∆θtr⟩. The first two contain the radial information while the
last two the phase information required to compensate unseen constellation
points. In order to perform the equalization, once a new symbol is received,
the eigenvalues are classified and the feature vector xte can be calculated for
this particular received symbol.
Let’s define two new parameters, one for
compensating the radial direction and one for the phase:
r = ⟨∆ρtr⟩+ ˆρ · xte
(5.7a)
p = ⟨∆θtr⟩+ ˆθ · xte
(5.7b)
where r and p are 1 × 2 vectors, one component for each eigenvalue. The
received constellation point (one for each eigenvalue) can be expressed as
==PAGE:81==
5.2 Equalization techniques
65
b(λi) = rieiϕi, where ri = |b(λi)| and ϕi =
b(λi). The equalized constellation
point bEQ,i can be generated following the same principle in (5.4):
bEQ,i = (ri −r[i]) ei(ϕi−p[i])
(5.8)
It is noteworthy that in this way the mean of the displacement is removed as
well, and the equalized symbol is locked to the correct reference point. If it
was not removed, the equalization does not relocate the symbol around the
correct reference position.
A visual representation of the equalized constellations is presented in figure
5.11.
Figure 5.11: Comparison between constellations equalized (black) and non-
equalized (blue) for the case QPSK-4QAM with LMMSE
method.
The constellations show the received scattering co-
efficients after propagating for 800 km with an OSNR launch
of 23 dB.
As far as the feature vector x is concerned, it has been defined as x =
[∆ℜλ1, ∆ℑλ1, ∆ℜλ2, ∆ℑλ2]T , and this definition takes into account also the
==PAGE:82==
66
5 Constellation equalization
cross-correlation terms. It is possible to define it differently, and compare what
happens if the constellation are equalized disregarding the cross-correlation
combinations.
This is achievable by defining two features vectors, one for
each eigenvalue and then the equalization is carried out independently for
each eigenvalue: x1 = [∆ℜλ1, ∆ℑλ1]T , x2 = [∆ℜλ2, ∆ℑλ2]T . This method
has also been tested and the results will be presented in the next section.
5.3
Results and conclusion
In this section the results are presented and they are focused on the BER
performances w.r.t. different OSNR launch values. The scenario where the
inverted modulation formats are used, thus for the cases QPSK-4QAM and
4QAM-QPSK is investigated. The plots show the BER curves for whole trans-
mission over 800 km, and as an example, also the BER for the single eigenval-
ues (only one case).
The black arrows indicate the limit for the error-free transmission, which is
bound to the number of transmitted symbols. In our case we simulated the
transmission of S = 20000 symbols, hence the minimum BER perceivable is
1.25 · 10−5 (minBER = 1/ (S · Neig · log2(M)) where M = 4). The eigenvalue
classification is carried out using the kernel method. In the figures there are
4 different curves:
• no EQ. (red): refers to the case where no equalization is performed and
the decision on the constellation is taken after the classification of the
eigenvalues.
• LMMSE (blue): refers to the case where the LMMSE equalizer is used
in a disjoint configuration, thus were the cross-correlation terms are
disregarded. Hence each constellation is equalized independently, using
as feature vectors x1 = [∆ℜλ1, ∆ℑλ1]T , x2 = [∆ℜλ2, ∆ℑλ2]T .
• LMMSE cross (green): refers to the case where the LMMSE equalizer
is used in a cross-correlation configuration, using the cross-correlation
terms and the feature vector x = [∆ℜλ1, ∆ℑλ1, ∆ℜλ2, ∆ℑλ2]T .
• Regression (yellow): refers to the case where the regression method is
used. The radial compensation uses a linear regression (fr) while the
phase compensation deploys the segmented regression (fp).
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Results and conclusion
67
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
launch OSNR [dB]
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
BER
QPSK - 4QAM
BER tot - LMMSE
BER tot - no EQ.
BER tot - LMMSE cross
BER tot - Regression
Figure 5.12: BER for a transmission of 800 km compared among several
equalization schemes.
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
launch OSNR [dB]
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
BER
1: QPSK - 4QAM
BER 
1 - LMMSE
BER 
1 - no EQ.
BER 
1 - LMMSE cross
BER 
1 - Regression
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
launch OSNR [dB]
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
BER
2: QPSK - 4QAM
BER 
2 - LMMSE
BER 
2 - no EQ.
BER 
2 - LMMSE cross
BER 
2 - Regression
Figure 5.13: Left: BER performances for λ1 = 0.3i. Right: BER perfor-
mances for λ2 = 0.6i.
==PAGE:84==
68
5 Constellation equalization
Figure 5.12 shows the overall BER curves for the QPSK-4QAM setup
with different equalization schemes. It is interesting to have a look the BER
performances per eigenvalue (fig. 5.13). The overall performances are dictated
by the trend of the second eigenvalue λ2 = 0.6i, as it is the one with the
largest imaginary part. Having the largest imaginary part implies having the
highest variance compared to eigenvalues with lower imaginary part.
The
first eigenvalue, λ1 = 0.3i is always error free regardless of the equalization
method.
From these first images it is possible to appreciate that all the equalizers
enhance the performances of the transmission. In order, the methods that
improve more the BER are: LMMSE with cross-correlation, LMMSE, regres-
sion equalization. The best method is in accordance with the intuition that
exploiting all the correlation information the improvement is the highest, with
almost 5-6 dB from the case without equalization, and around 1.5 dB from the
regression method. The LMMSE with the disjoint configuration is in between.
Figure 5.14 shows the transmission results for the configuration 4QAM-QPSK.
The comparison can be observed in figure 5.15.
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
launch OSNR [dB]
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
BER
4QAM - QPSK
BER tot - LMMSE
BER tot - no EQ.
BER tot - LMMSE cross
BER tot - Regression
Figure 5.14: BER for a transmission of 800 km compared among several
equalization schemes.
==PAGE:85==
5.3 Results and conclusion
69
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
launch OSNR [dB]
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
BER
BER total - inverted constellation comparison
QPSK-4QAM - no EQ.
QPSK-4QAM - LMMSE cross
QPSK-4QAM - Regression
4QAM-QPSK - no EQ.
4QAM-QPSK - Regression
4QAM-QPSK - LMMSE cross
Figure 5.15: BER for a transmission of 800 km compared between the two
modulation format configurations: QPSK-4QAM (solid line)
and 4QAM-QSPK (dotted line). The disjoint LMMSE equal-
izer is not shown.
Comparing the two constellation configurations, it is possible to appreciate
that the second configuration (4QAM-QPSK) performs a bit better than the
second for high OSNR, but after equalization the first configuration (QPSK-
4QAM) performs better, with a gain around 0.5 dB.
For sake of completeness, we report in figure 5.16 the performances of
the LMMSE equalizer in cross-correlation mode for all the combinations of
the modulation formats. The performances are quite similar, even though in
the cases where the same modulation format is used for the two eigenvalues
(QPSK-QPSK, 4QAM-4QAM) the equalizer leads to lower improvement com-
pared to using different modulations formats (QPSK-4QAM, 4QAM-QPSK).
Overall the performances are quite similar, even though the configuration
QPSK-4QAM performs slightly better than the others (0.5 to 1 dB better).
==PAGE:86==
70
5 Constellation equalization
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
launch OSNR [dB]
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
BER
4QAM-4QAM
QPSK-4QAM
4QAM-QPSK
QPSK-QPSK
Figure 5.16: BER for a transmission of 800 km compared among all the
modulation format configurations. The LMMSE equalizer is
used in cross-correlation mode.
5.4
Extension to dual-polarization case
With reference to the Ph.D. thesis in [12], it has been possible to extend the
NFT propagation to the dual-polarization case, hence it is possible to encode
information on both the orthogonal polarizations that a single-mode optical
fibre supports. In this way, the SMF becomes fully exploited. For a complete
theoretical explanation, the reader is referred to [12].
In collaboration with the NFT research group at DTU it was possible
to test the LMMSE equalizer also on some experimental data. The experi-
mental setup used involves a 2-eigenvalue transmission as in the simulations
performed for the previous results but with dual polarization scheme. This
implies that each eigenvalue has two polarizations associated, X and Y direc-
tions. The choice of the constellation radius was based on an optimization
process explained in [12] and the modulation formats used were QPSK-QPSK
for X and Y polarization for eigenvalue λ1 = 0.3i and 4QAM-4QAM for X
and Y polarization for eigenvalue λ2 = 0.6i. The experiment tested also the
discrete spectrum in dual polarization for several lengths of propagation, with
multiple spans of Ls = 50 km up to 2000 km.
==PAGE:87==
5.4 Extension to dual-polarization case
71
Figures 5.17 and 5.18 show the constellation of the received scattering
coefficients before and after equalization after propagating for 2000 km. The
improvement is remarkable especially in the radial direction for the first eigen-
value, and for the phase in λ2.
Figure 5.19 shows the distribution of the
eigenvalues at the receiver. Figure 5.20 shows the BER w.r.t. different propa-
gation lengths with the equalization and without. The dotted line is the BER
threshold for performing successfully forward error correction (FEC).
The
equalization used is the LMMSE in cross-correlation mode performed inde-
pendently on each polarization, thanks to which the FEC threshold can be
improved by 200 km using the full LMMSE cross equalizer.
X pol.
Y pol.
2 = 0.6i
1 = 0.3i
Figure 5.17: Constellation of received scattering coefficients without equal-
ization. The columns show the polarizations while the rows the
eigenvalues. The propagation distance is 2000 km.
==PAGE:88==
72
5 Constellation equalization
X pol.
Y pol.
1 = 0.3i
2 = 0.6i
Figure 5.18: Constellation of received scattering coefficients with equaliza-
tion. The columns show the polarizations while the rows the
eigenvalues. The propagation distance is 2000 km.
NFT discrete eigenvalues
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
( )
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
( )
Figure 5.19: Eigenvalue distribution at the receiver for a 2000 km transmis-
sion.
==PAGE:89==
5.5 Summary
73
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Distance [km]
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
100
BER
w/ EQ.
HD-FEC
w/o EQ.
Figure 5.20: BER with and without equalization for a sweep in distance
propagation.
5.5
Summary
In this chapter we introduced the problem of the equalization in the constel-
lation domain, hence where the information is encoded. In particular, the
equalization methods that have been investigated were based on exploiting
the correlation existing between the eigenvalues and the scattering coefficients,
leaving aside other classic equalization techniques for constellations. The focus
was on observing how the displacement of the eigenvalues from their reference
position affects the displacement of the constellations.
After a brief introduction on what correlation is, the primary results were
a strong correlation between the behaviour of the real part of the eigenvalues
and the radius of the constellations, and between the imaginary part of the
eigenvalues and the phase of the constellations. Several correlation coefficients
were computed (reported in table 5.1) among all the possible combinations,
including the cross-correlation terms between the different eigenvalues.
From this point, two equalizers were developed taken inspiration from
[16, 22], with the aim of exploiting this correlation for equalization purposes.
The first equalizer, performs a regression between the most relevant correla-
==PAGE:90==
74
5 Constellation equalization
tion terms in order to compensate the radial and phase displacement of the
constellation.
In particular, a linear regression is performed for the radial
part, while a nonlinear regression (piecewise linear regression) for the phase
compensation. Once these regression function are estimated, it is possible to
equalize unseen data points.
The second method exploits all the correlation terms, also the cross-correlation
ones. The equalizer is based on performing a linear regression among all the
terms, as a natural extension to the previous method developed. The equalizer
is called LMMSE (Linear Minimum Mean Square Error) as it tries to minimize
the MSE with a linear operation. The quantities object of the minimization
are the radial and the phase displacement of the constellations.
Once the
equalizer is trained and the necessary parameters are learnt, new unseen data
points can be equalized.
Several BER curves are presented in different configuration of the con-
stellations, and the best-performing equalizer is the LMMSE equalizer with
also the cross-correlation terms taken into account.
The improvement on
the BER curves w.r.t.
the launch OSNR is about 5-6 dB. This equalizer
has also been tested successfully on some experimental data regarding dual-
polarization transmission [12]. The equalizer has been used in this configura-
tion proving its worthiness.
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
Everyday the increasing data traffic demand is putting under pressure the
telecommunication infrastructure. In particular single-mode fibres are stretch
to the limit of their capacity with the technology so far deployed.
Lately,
the nonlinear Fourier transform (NFT) gained a lot of interest as tool for
increasing the capacity of optical fibres allowing to accommodate the increas-
ing global traffic. This potentially can be achieved by overcoming the main
impairments in the fibre propagation, such as dispersion and nonlinearity.
Electromagnetic-wave propagation through SMF is modelled with the non-
linear Schrödinger equation (NLSE), a partial-derivative nonlinear equation.
Being nonlinear, the time-space solution of this equation will behave nonlin-
early both in time and in space. However, thanks to the NFT operation (also
known as inverse scattering transform (IST)) it is possible to find some quan-
tities that behave linearly within this new domain. This is useful because
instead of encoding the information on the classic phase/amplitude domain
which are related to the time domain of the signal, it is possible to encode the
information in this quantities that behaves linearly within the NFT domain,
hence the propagation can be compensated at the receiver with a linear oper-
ation.
By solving the Zakharov-Shabat spectral problem (ZSP) it is possible to find
those quantities, which compose the nonlinear spectrum of the signal, as a
parallelism with the Fourier transform (where there is instead a linear spec-
trum). The mathematical solution of this problem leads to two sets of non-
linear spectra, the continuous nonlinear spectrum and the discrete spectrum.
Each spectrum is made up of nonlinear frequencies called eigenvalues of which
a set exists for the continuous and discrete part of the spectrum. As it happens
with the Fourier transform, there are also the associated spectral amplitudes,
differentiated into continuous and discrete as well.
Once the NFT operation is defined as the transformation from the time
domain of the signal into the NFT domain in which all these aforementioned
quantities exist, it is necessary to defined also an inverse operation, the INFT,
==PAGE:92==
76
6 Conclusion
which takes the nonlinear spectrum and create the associated time-domain
signal.
The theoretical goal is now reached, since it is possible to encode
information into the spectral amplitudes as they evolve linearly within the
NFT domain and once the signal reaches the receiver, by performing the NFT
operation it is possible to retrieve those quantities by compensating linearly
for the propagation in space. This work was focused on the discrete spectrum
only, leaving aside the continuous spectrum.
Despite being a quite simple concept, the underlying maths is not trivial.
Moreover, the algorithms developed for performing the NFT and INFT opera-
tion are computationally demanding and their precision is heavily dependent
on the noise of the signal, especially for the direct transformation. The first
part of this work was aimed at investigating the NFT and INFT algorithms, in
which some ideas are presented on how to possible improve the performances.
The second part is focused on the equalization of the received discrete
spectrum. The simulations carried out for the study of the discrete spectrum
were based on a 2-eigenvalue transmission propagating for 800 km of lossless
SMF for different values of launch OSNR at the transmitter. The lossless
assumption is made as a consequence of the NFT operation definition, which
it depends on absence of the loss terms in the NLSE. This assumption can be
relaxed if the NFT operation is revised (not taken into account within this
work).
The basic scheme is to associate to each eigenvalue a constellation of points in
the spectral amplitudes domain, by deploying standard modulation formats
as QPSK and 4QAM. In this way each eigenvalue carries different informa-
tion, suggesting an orthogonal division of the nonlinear sub-carriers (discrete
eigenvalues) as a parallelism with the orthogonal frequency-division multi-
plexing (OFDM). This method of encoding the information is referred to as
nonlinear frequency division multiplexing (NFDM).
Once each eigenvalue has its own constellation of spectral amplitudes (where
the information is encoded) the time-domain signal is generated and the propa-
gation can take place. At the receiver the NFT operation is performed and the
discrete spectrum is calculated and compensated for the spacial propagation.
At this point the received eigenvalues are corrupted by noise and distin-
guishing which eigenvalue is which is important, as each of them carry different
information. The classification can be performed through minimum distance
from the reference location of the eigenvalues or by deploying some machine
learning techniques. In this scenario, where the losses were absent, the differ-
ent methods provided similar results and no particular advantage is obtained
==PAGE:93==
6.1 Future directions
77
by deploying one or the other.
Potentially, the methods tested in chapter
4 can become useful when the number of eigenvalues is increased and the
classification is less trivial.
The performances through different classifiers were similar also because,
the impact of the noise mainly affects the spectral amplitudes, thus the con-
stellations where the information is encoded.
In chapter 5 different equal-
ization techniques are successfully investigated, as the BER curves can be
improved from the non equalized case. The equalization techniques are based
on analysing the correlation between the eigenvalues and the constellation
points. All the three methods investigated improve the performances but the
best method is the LMMSE equalizer.
6.1
Future directions
Starting from this point several directions can be pursued. The equalization
of the constellation is a promising direction as for noise mitigation in NFT
transmission. In particular, being the NFT a nonlinear operation, the noise
behaves nonlinearly as well, leading to the natural conclusion that using a
nonlinear equalizer could improve even more the performances. In fact moving
from a LMMSE, which is a linear equalizer, to a nonlinear equalizer could be a
promising goal to follow, focusing the attention on the correlation between the
eigenvalues and the constellations but potentially also among other quantities.
Another interesting approach would be to step back and look at the rela-
tion between the time-domain signal corrupted by noise at the receiver and the
eigenvalues distribution after the NFT, corrupted by noise as well. A useful
solution, to deploy before the constellation equalization, would be to create a
filter for the time-domain signal received in order to solve partially the noise
problem before the NFT operation is performed. The difficulty is that the
waveform must be filtered in a way that matches the nonlinearity of the NFT
operation. Both these directions seems promising especially for the potential
benefits of eigenvalue-based communication.
==PAGE:94==
78
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
Cisco, “Cisco visual networking index: Forecast and methodology, 2016–
2021,” Cisco white paper, 2017.
[2]
G. P. Agrawal, Fiber-optic communication systems. John Wiley & Sons,
2012, vol. 222.
[3]
S. K. Turitsyn, J. E. Prilepsky, S. T. Le, S. Wahls, L. L. Frumin, M. Ka-
malian, and S. A. Derevyanko, “Nonlinear Fourier transform for optical
data processing and transmission: advances and perspectives,” Optica,
vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 207–322, 2017. doi: 10.1364/OPTICA.4.000307.
[4]
G. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear fiber optics, 5th ed. Academic Press, 2012.
[5]
A. Hasegawa and T. Nyu, “Eigenvalue communication,” J. lightwave
technol., vol. 11, pp. 395–399, 1993.
[6]
S. Wahls, “Second order statistics of the scattering vector defining the
dt nonlinear fourier transform,” in Scc 2017; 11th international itg con-
ference on systems, communications and coding; proceedings of, VDE,
2017, pp. 1–6.
[7]
Q. Zhang and T. H. Chan, “A Gaussian noise model of spectral ampli-
tudes in soliton communication systems,” in Signal processing advances
in wireless communications (spawc), 2015 ieee 16th international work-
shop on, IEEE, 2015, pp. 455–459.
[8]
M. I. Yousefi and F. R. Kschischang, “Information transmission using
the nonlinear Fourier transform, part I: Mathematical tools,” Ieee trans-
actions on information theory, vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 4312–4328, Jul. 2014,
issn: 00189448. doi: 10.1109/TIT.2014.2321143. eprint: 1202.3653.
[Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/
wrapper.htm?arnumber=6808480.
[9]
S. Desbruslais, “Inverse scattering transform for soliton transmission
analysis,” Optical fiber technology, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 319–342, 1996.
==PAGE:96==
80
Bibliography
[10]
V. Aref, “Control and detection of discrete spectral amplitudes in non-
linear Fourier spectrum,” Arxiv:1605.06328, May 2016.
[11]
J. Satsuma and N. Yajima, “B. initial value problems of one-dimensional
self-modulation of nonlinear waves in dispersive media,” Progress of the-
oretical physics supplement, vol. 55, pp. 284–306, 1974. doi: 10.1143/
PTPS.55.284. eprint: /oup/backfile/content_public/journal/
ptps/55/10.1143/ptps.55.284/2/55-284.pdf. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1143/PTPS.55.284.
[12]
S. Gaiarin, “Nonlinear fourier transform for dual-polarization optical
communication systems,” PhD thesis, Denmark Technical University
(DTU), 2018.
[13]
M. J. Ablowitz, D. J. Kaup, A. C. Newell, and H. Segur, “The inverse
scattering transform-fourier analysis for nonlinear problems,” Studies in
applied mathematics, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 249–315, 1974.
[14]
P. D. Lax, “Integrals of nonlinear equations of evolution and solitary
waves,” Communications on pure and applied mathematics, vol. 21, no.
5, pp. 467–490, 1968.
[15]
A. Shabat and V. Zakharov, “Exact theory of two-dimensional self-
focusing and one-dimensional self-modulation of waves in nonlinear me-
dia,” Soviet physics jetp, vol. 34, no. 1, p. 62, 1972.
[16]
T. Gui, T. H. Chan, C. Lu, A. P. T. Lau, and P. K. A. Wai, “Alternative
decoding methods for optical communications based on nonlinear fourier
transform,” Journal of lightwave technology, vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 1542–1550,
May 2017, issn: 0733-8724. doi: 10.1109/JLT.2017.2654493.
[17]
V. Aref, “Detection of multi-soliton pulses: Decoding schemes and in-
formation rates,” in Workshop on nonlinear fourier transform, florence,
N. B. Labs, Ed., 2018.
[18]
M. I. Yousefi and F. R. Kschischang, “Information transmission using
the nonlinear Fourier transform, part ii: Numerical methods,” Ieee trans-
actions on information theory, vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 4329–4345, 2014.
[19]
M. I. Yousefi and F. R. Kschischang, “Information transmission using
the nonlinear Fourier transform, part III: Spectrum modulation,” Ieee
transactions on information theory, vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 4346–4369, Jul.
2014, issn: 0018-9448. doi: 10.1109/TIT.2014.2321155. arXiv: 1302.
2875. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1302.2875.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
81
[20]
I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep learning. MIT Press,
2016, http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[21]
C. M. Bishop, Pattern recognition and machine learning (information
science and statistics). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2006, isbn:
0387310738.
[22]
H. Bülow, V. Aref, K. Schuh, and W. Idler, “Experimental nonlinear fre-
quency domain equalization of QPSK modulated 2-eigenvalue soliton,”
in Optical fiber communications conference and exhibition (ofc), 2016,
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–3.
==PAGE:98==
