==PAGE:1==
 
THE TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STRATEGIC CAPABILITY OF 
MANAGEMENT OF SOCIO-
TECHNICAL CONTROVERSIES IN 
WIND POWER DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
Master Thesis for the degree of Engineering Management 
 
Lise Hahne Jensen, s093550 
 
Supervisor: Kristian Borch 
June 23, 2018 
 
==PAGE:2==
1 
 
STRATEGIC CAPABILITY OF MANAGEMENT OF SOCIO-TECHNICAL 
CONTROVERSIES IN WIND POWER DEVELOPMENT  
Lise Hahne Jensena 
a DTU Management Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Anker Engelunds Vej 1, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
E-mail: s093550@student.dtu.com 
Submitted and accepted dates (use style Received dates, or Alt + Ctrl + R) 
Abstract. Studies show a gap between national and local level of support in wind power projects, with recent projection 
indicating an overall decrease in MWh installed in Denmark. Recent data show that projects have been turned down due 
to opposition, thus conflicts in wind power development in Denmark have fostered the interest of public participation. Often 
projects are deployed with a rigid technical/scientific attitude, whereas it is suggested engaging the local community with a more 
appropriate collaborative approach. This paper applies an adapted framework to analyse the influence of public participation 
approaches on the boundary dimensions between stakeholders. The analysis features three cases, each with a different approach 
towards public participation. The conclusion is that public participation has an influence on the boundary dimensions of wind 
power projects. It is important to include the local community early in the planning process, acquire the capability of brokering 
between communities of practice is crucial and empowering members of the local community in wind power projects will 
increase social acceptability. 
Keywords: Social acceptability, community of practice, public participation, brokering, boundary dimension, wind 
power, renewable energy. 
Introduction 
Over the past decades, green energy production has increased and more focus has been on CO2 neutrality and reducing 
CO2 emission1. Globally, most governments have set ambitious goals aiming to reduce their national CO2 emissions2. 
Denmark is no exception, and is one of the forerunners with an ambitious goal of a fossil free energy production by the 
year of 2050. In 2020 the national CO2 emission should be reduced by 40%, compared to 1990 measurements and 50% 
of the “classical” power consumption should be delivered by wind power (Danish Energy Agency, 2012). 
Installation of wind turbine has been utilised by Denmark since 1970 and the over past 10 years wind power capacity in 
MW has expanded from 3160 MW to 5475 MW of which onshore wind power accounts for 77% of the total wind power3. 
In terms of support, studies show a gap between the national and the local level of support. This gap has for many years 
been referred to as NIMBYism (not-in-my-back-yard). Many articles have been written and discussed the phenomenon 
NIMBY and it originated in the 1980 in context of wind power. Recent studies argue that protest exist but referring to 
NIMBYism alone is inadequate. It has become recognized that social acceptance is an important factor to achieve 
renewable energy goals, and it can potentially be a powerful barrier if neglected (Wolsink, 2012Würstenhagen et al., 
2007; Devine-Wright, 2004). The social dimension has become a factor of equal importance to technology in the wind 
farm implementation and in less than a decade social acceptance has become interesting since it has gone from a marginal 
and narrow studied field to be at the foreground of broader debates in the social science (Fournis, 2017).  
Although Denmark has had positive progression over the last decade, recent projections indicate a decrease in use of 
Wind Power after 2022 based on the closure of the green scheme and, that new actions has not been implemented (Danish 
Energy Agency, 2018). The green scheme provided economic benefits to local communities in wind power projects, and 
the purpose was to increase local acceptability. The scheme is supported by the government but was withdrawn primo 
February 2018. And in relation to recent data in 2017 alone 305MW of project was shot down due to opposition, 
insinuating challenges in reaching the national goals of 2030 (Borch, personal communication). 
The Danish regulation of green projects mostly concerned with technical restrictions, such as level of noise, distances, 
shadow flickering etc. The technical specifications are very precise and well defined in the proclamation (Environmental 
Protection Agency, 2015). However, the definition and regulation of community involvement is vague and inadequate. 
According to the guidelines, the developer has the to inform the local community about the upcoming project, facilitate 
                                                 
1 https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/indland/stor-stigning-i-vedvarende-energi 
2 https://ens.dk/ansvarsomraader/energi-klimapolitik/fakta-om-dansk-energi-klimapolitik/dansk-klimapolitik 
3 http://www.windpower.org/da/fakta_og_analyser/statistik/det_danske_marked.html 
 
==PAGE:3==
2 
 
at least two public meetings and public hearings, which is today not considered a collaborative approach nor involvement 
of the community (Walker et. al, 2015; Devine-Wright et. al, 2016; Nature Agency, 2012). 
In 2009 the Danish society for Nature Conservation, Local Government Denmark, the Danish Wind Turbine Owners’ 
Association and the Danish Wind Industry Association compiled a guideline to describe the “The good process” between 
stakeholders in wind power project implementation. It emphasizes early public participation and holistic solutions (Nature 
Agency, 2009). 
Public participation and involvement in wind power projects have received considerable attention the last decade because 
there has been a tendency that projects have been prevented due to the lack of social acceptability (Borch, personal 
communication; Devine-Wright et. al, 2016). Furthermore, municipalities have postponed and cancelled future planning 
of wind turbines in their respective municipalities because of opposition. Ole Bigum Nielsen, Country Manager Denmark, 
emphasizes that local support is very crucial and Erik Christiansen, Chairman of Middelgrundens Vindmøllelaug I/S, 
adds that offering 20% shares is insufficient and communities wants to be included in the planning process4. 
 
This paper investigate the role of boundary dimensions in wind energy development to understand the effect on creating 
new practices between developer, municipality and the local community. The hypothesis is that the adapted framework 
can give a better understanding of how public participation approaches influence the boundaries and increase social 
acceptability. To investigate the role of these dimensions the framework is applied at three cases in Denmark; Ulvemosen 
& Bækhede plantage (hereafter, Ulvemosen), Østrup and Nørrekær Enge II.  
 
This paper contain the following sections: Section 1 draw upon the methodology used for gathering empirical data and 
introduces the theory and theoretical framework applied for the analysis of the cases. Section 2 provides a case description 
and an analysis based on the elements of the framework. Section 3 includes a discussion the paper and section 4 the 
conclusion.      
1. Methodology 
Discourse analysis was applied to identify different groups of stakeholders and their relative view of the project. The 
study combine hearing statements, local media coverage, and online information and were supported by interviews of 
stakeholders to identify different views. The following three cases was analysed: Ulvemosen, Østrup, and Nørrekær Enge 
II.  
This paper apply the theory of Community of Practice and Appropriate Collaboration and conduct the elements of 
Technical Regulatory (TR) versus Appropriate Collaboration (AC) approach with boundary dimensions. The collaborate 
elements was categories and applied to the boundary dimensions to better understand the TR or AC approach influence 
on boundaries in communities of practice in the three cases of wind power projects. These elements were organized into 
a framework to scope the analysis of this paper.  
1.1. Public Participation 
Public participation and involvement in wind power projects has received considerable attention the last decade (Devine-
Wright). It has become a barrier and even forced municipalities to lose focus5 and Walker distinguish between two 
different trajectories; Technical Regulatory (TR) and Appropriate Collaboration (AC). 
The TR trajectory’s view upon management of environmental projects are affected by two perspectives. The first one is 
the value or focus given to a technical solution or technical innovation to a specific problem and secondly the perception 
that regulations are needed to deploy those technical innovations. This view address these problems with a 
science/engineering attitude. The “tech” suppose that if you do not understand this approach “they just don’t understand 
the science” (Walker et. al. 2015, 127) whereas “reg” refers to the assumption that regulations can be connected with the 
best science and create a strong argument. Walker argues, based on their research, that these two perspectives of technical 
and regulation have formed the decision-making approach that has privileged agencies over communities, and technical 
facts over community knowledge and values. This rigid approach with conventional public participation activities such 
as meetings and public hearings in wind power projects can be perceived as the planning process was “decide, announce, 
defend” (Hendry, 2004; Walker et. al., 2015). 
AC focus on a collaborative approach towards decision-making, which include dialogue, transparency and open 
interactive processes. This approach emphasize constructive interaction and two-way communication that fosters 
                                                 
4 https://politiken.dk/indland/art5886978/Vindm%C3%B8llerne-er-ved-at-tabe-pusten-i-vindkraftlandet-Danmarks 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
3 
 
processes of mutual learning and understanding. Furthermore, it promotes creativity, commitment, trust and create 
relationships across stakeholders (Walker et. al, 2015). 
 
Developing a wind turbine farm require the right amount of balance between TR and AC. Wind power projects require a 
large amount of technical knowledge to be able to adapt the valid regulations, see figure (Walker et al., 2015, 131). 
 
Figure 1. Tech-reg and appropriate collaboration integration 
 
 
The figure illustrates that the need for an AC approach is higher when a local community is more influenced and effected 
by the project. Whereas large projects e.g. large offshore win farms has a lower need for AC but higher need of a TR 
approach due to less amount of stakeholders and increased regulatory needs. 
 
1.2. Community of practice 
Community of practice is essential of a social learning system. A social learning system, consists of the competences that 
the community have acquired over time, and the ongoing experience from the surroundings.  Learning in the system is 
defined as coaction between social competences and personal experience. Wenger distinguished between three 
dimensions of belonging to a social learning system, of which each mode of belonging contributes to different facets of 
the social learning system; Engagement, doing things together, producing artifacts and helping each other with problem 
solving. How a community engages with each other shape the perception of who they are. Imagination, a constructed 
image of how the community see themselves and see the community in the world around them. Alignment, make sure 
local activities and other processes are adequate aligned (Wenger, 2000). 
Community 
Wind power projects consist of multiple communities of practice. The local municipality (local authority), the developer 
and the local community. The first two communities are already well defined in it practices and processes, where as local 
communities are the opposite. They are most often related solely geographical. For this purpose, the definition of 
community by Etienne Wenger was used to understand which elements a local community consist of and how it can 
initiate themselves into a community of practice in relation to create common ground in wind power project. 
When a community is designing itself, it should pay attention to the following six elements. Events; Organizing public 
events can bring the community together and if they are well executed it will help the community develop a shared 
identity. Individuals in local communities are often connected in various ways such as geographical affiliation or in formal 
ways such as local societies, school, sport activities and public events in relation to wind power projects will help bring 
the community together on the cause of wind power. Leadership; A community of practice depends on internal leadership 
and leaders who takes the role of “community coordinator” and assure day-to-day tasks. The local community needs 
leadership in the matter of establishing the community and ensure progress. Connectivity; is a matter of enabling 
connectivity between people and this could include brokering relationship in order for people to talk together. The local 
community can benefit from this connectivity, which enables people to help each other, and it is important to make it 
possible for people to communicate and interact through various platforms. Membership; the members of the community 
must have interest in the membership. The focus of the community should not be too wide or diffuse so that the 
participation will conflict with the interest of the membership. Learning Projects; is activities exploring the knowledge 
domain and such learning, could include literature search, doing research or include interviews of experts within a given 
==PAGE:5==
4 
 
field. If a local community has not acquired internal competences through its members it would benefit from learning 
projects to gain this knowledge. Artifacts; covers documents, stories, websites etc. which a community of practice can 
produce. The community has to consider the maintenance of these artifacts in order to be updated and useful to the 
community over time.  A common artifact in wind power projects is the use of websites. These are easy to maintain over 
time and can ensure updates about the project are accessible at any time to its members and everybody who might be 
interested. 
 
Boundary dimensions 
Etienne argues that there are two essential reasons to why boundaries are important to a learning system; connect 
communities and offer learning opportunities (Wenger, 2000).  
The first dimension is coordination between communities. Coordination demand new practices that opens the possibility 
of collaboration and joint coordination. This shared coordination enables coordination of shared work and actions. The 
second dimension transparency refers to the aspect of understanding the underlying of the coordination and processes 
between communities. The third dimension, negotiability, reflects whether the processes are one-way or a two-way 
between communities.   
 
Boundary processes 
Based on the three dimensions of boundary, two types of bridges across boundaries are highlighted for this purpose; 
Brokers, Boundary Objects. These bridges are important elements along the boundary dimensions in achieving a coherent 
and analogues social learning systems. These bridges are essential for mutual understanding and increased acceptability. 
Brokers; some people are more obvious brokers by nature due to their personality and experience. Brokers have the ability 
to introduce elements from one practice to another. The broker could take care of one specific barrier, create connection 
between practices, transfer knowledge or carrying news back and forth. Brokering is often carried by the personal 
relationship between individuals from different communities of practice. This is an important supporting element in 
building trust. Brokers are found in many professions e.g. the estate agency industry where they manage both sides of a 
trade. The role of the brokers in wind power projects are rarely defined and the responsibility often neglected. However, 
“the good process” suggest it is the local authority who is responsible. 
 
Boundary Objects; describes the different objects which supports the connection between practices which allows 
information flow, mutual language and shared processes. One of the objects is artifacts which connects multiple practices. 
One example is the Environmental report. This is a legal document containing information about the local environment, 
animal habitat, and provide basic information about the project specifications. Another element is the discourses. Wenger 
stresses the importance of a common language for people to communicate and negotiate across practices. It is especially 
important in wind projects when technical innovation meets local societies. Shared processes, the last element of the 
boundary objects, allow practices and people to coordinate and interact across boundaries. Shared processes, in wind 
power projects are primary public hearings, which allow the community to submit their concerns and suggest changes.  
 
1.3. Framework 
The adapted framework combines the table of boundary dimensions of community of practice and the elements of 
appropriate collaboration. The table consist of the three boundary dimensions (Coordination, Transparency, Negotiability) 
crossed with the three modes of belonging (Engagement, Imagination, Alignment). These nine parameters are connected 
with the elements of public participation. The cases will be analysed based on these nine parameters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
5 
 
Table 1. Boundary Dimensions and elements in decision-making approaches. (Etienne Wenger 2000, Walker 2015) 
 
Coordination 
Transparency 
Negotiability 
Engagement 
Primary public participation 
methods 
(joint activities, problem-solving, 
workshop, community events) 
Procedural goal/ 
Communications philosophy 
(explanations, coaching, mutual gains 
outcome, inclusive process, respectful 
interaction) 
Negotiation 
(perspectives can meet, appreciate others 
competences, fostered mutual gains 
interaction) 
Imagination 
Inclusiveness 
(understanding, anticipate 
misunderstanding, efforts made to include 
sceptics and critics) 
Transparency 
(build a picture of another practice, exceeding
legal requirements) 
Collaborative potential 
(both sides see themselves as members, 
common interest and needs)  
Alignment 
Substance goal 
(goals and methods understandable, local 
knowledge, community interest and 
values) 
Prospects for consensus 
(Are intentions made clear to reveal common 
ground, clear expectations) 
Decision space/ 
Decision authority 
(who has a say in negotiation, devising 
promises, flexible, significant and clear) 
 
 
2. Case description 
In this section the three cases will be described and analysed according to the nine elements of the framework. 
Furthermore, each case consist of a summary and an overview of the identified public participation approaches used. 
2.1. Case 1 - Ulvemosen 
Project Ulvemosen consists of 10 wind turbines located in a curved line. The wind turbines have a total height of 
150m and a capacity of 3.3 MWh. The first application for the project was submitted in 2013 by European Energy 
(hereafter, EE). In October 2013 the municipality of Varde approved the local plan and the environmental report. 
September 2014, the project was temporarily suspended because the environmental report was insufficient. 
The 15th of September 2014, Natur- og Miljøklagenævnet condemned the charges, that in the Environmental report have 
not adequately been described the short-term as well as the long-term effects on the environment due to the influence of 
surface and groundwater systems. 
The city council decided to renew the application on 7 October 2014. They take into account that 10 old wind turbines 
should be demolished at Gunderup og Rousthøje. 
On June 20, 2016, the building permission was granted for the construction of the 10 wind turbines in Ulvemosen. 
Varde municipality has previously had challenges in setting up wind turbines in the area. This happened back in 2010 
where four wind turbines were installed in Ovnbøl. The project was approved by the City Council despite protests from 
its neighbours. Although there were a number of protests, the project was implemented without delays. This history has 
influenced the project of Ulvemosen and made citizens more aware of wind turbine projects and its process. 
 
Primary public participation methods 
The primary involvement of the public have been through the public meetings as well as the hearings, where citizens 
could submit their concerns and suggest changes, a process required by law. This is not a guarantee of response or 
influence. They felt overheard, that they could not make any objections, and that they had no say. 
"It seems very closed and as if everything is actually decided in advance. It should simply be enforced at 
all costs.” 
(Interview: Karsten Drøjdal) 
This approach is described by Walker, that the public may conclude that decisions were made before public comments, 
leading the public to believe that the planning approach was one of “decide-announce-defend” (Hendry,2014; Walker, 
2016, p. 130). 
In addition, the municipality nor did the developer utilize any joint activities, community events or problem-solving 
approaches to reduce barriers 
 
==PAGE:7==
6 
 
Procedural goal/communication philosophy 
The public felt that the municipality was trying to hide information and documents from them, and they had difficulties 
in acquiring information and answers from the local politicians. Bent Peter Larsen says; 
“I understand that the neighbours may be unhappy, but we have made sure everyone is being heard and 
tries to answer what people are asking for." 
(Interview: Bent Peter Larsen) 
 
However, Karsten Drøjdal disagree;  
"Yes, I requests for access a lot, but that's because they do not answer our questions and keep things 
secret. E.g. we know that there have recently been a meeting between 15 city council members, 
landowners who will give land to the wind turbines and European Energy without letting us knowing 
what has happened." 
(Interview: Karsten Drøjdal) 
This approach did not create transparency across the communities and did not increase trust in the process and 
commitment of the local community. On the contrary, their distrust in both the developers and the municipality increased 
and did not promote common understanding of their practices. 
In addition, during the project period, the municipality was responsible for updating their own website regarding progress 
in the project, but they did not keep this updated to the great annoyance of the community, which limited their access to 
information. 
”In Varde Municipality we feel totally overheard. [...] The municipality's website has not been updated 
since its adoption on October 1. Although the case is not finally completed and the building permit is not 
issued.” 
(Reader comment: Anonymous) 
 
Negotiation 
With a TR approach to negotiation, it is not likely to continue without appeals. The community felt left outside of any 
influence and nor did the developer include the community in negotiation which led to controversies. It did not foster 
interaction of mutual gains and created a barrier for understanding of both practices. 
”I have no problem with people making money, who does not want that. But the tendency here is that the 
people being bothered massively and gets the rest of their lives destroyed because of constant noise are 
getting nothing, those who are proponent, they get everything and that's what makes the resistance so 
massive locally.” 
(Interview, Karsten Drøjdal) 
 
Inclusiveness 
As stated by Karsten Drøjdal, the community felt excluded from the process, and on the contrary, they felt strongly 
overtaken and excluded from "secret" meetings between landowners, politicians and EE. This may have cause 
misconception and hinder a common understanding of each other's perspectives. In addition, Karsten Drøjdal and the 
opponents were annoyed by the fact that the landowners did not even live in the area. 
”The landowners do not even live by the wind turbines, they live far from there in most cases.” 
(Interview, Karsten Drøjdal) 
 
Additionally, the community gained access to an email sent by Preben Friis-Hauge to the municipal director, officials and 
Mayor Erik Buhl. This did not mean that sceptics and critics from the local community felt more included, on the contrary. 
At the end of his mail he wrote; 
”The rest should be a “walk in the park”, where you can risk a few rotten tomatoes, but you will not die 
from it.”  
(Email: Preben Friis-Hauge) 
Which did not suggest that they have had an understandable access to resistance and would neglect the opposition. 
 
==PAGE:8==
7 
 
Transparency 
The developer did not manage to construct a future image or a common vision of new practices between the communities 
to promote green energy and local moderation. This could otherwise help promote a desire to form common practices. 
On the contrary, the developer did not exceed any legal requirements and kept the environmental report at a basic legal 
level. After the project was completed, there was still doubt as to whether the developer lived up to the regulations and 
new measurements was conducted of which the municipality concluded all requirement for noise was met. 
This has previously been questioned in the light of an email correspondence between developer and the Environmental 
Report consultant, Plan Energy. According to Karsten Drøjdal, Plan Energy expressed they had trouble not exceeding he 
maximum requirements of noise.  
 
Collaborative potential 
One could argue that the collaborative potential was harmed by local history of the Ovnbøl case and it has had a dull 
harmful effect on possible collaboration across communities. It was difficult to change the perception of wind turbines 
without any further collaborative approach and therefore mistrust became more entrenched in local community. 
 
Substance goal 
Wind power projects are technically complex projects which are based on sound science, but implemented with science 
only, you risk losing or not acquire local support. In order to achieve local support and anchorage, developer should 
involve local knowledge and implement projects with local interest and values. This was not achieved in Ulvemosen, and 
this triggered misalignment, and did not help to break down barriers between the communities 
”As a minimum, you must ensure that the process is done correctly.” 
(Interview: Karsten Drøjdal) 
But this turned out to their favour when Natur- og Miljøklagenævnet accepted their complaint regarding the environmental 
report for not being carried out thoroughly and it had significant deficiencies. This stopped the implementation of the 
wind turbines. 
 
Prospect of consensus 
With no inclusiveness of the locals, the project failed define a shared and common ground across the communities and 
therefore lacked commitment from a large part of the local community.  
“Should you, in a democratic society, not find solutions that support a community, and do not create 
divisions and insecurity between people.”  
(Borch et. al 2016) 
This approach did not promote a prospect for consensus and was therefore not likely. 
 
Decision Authority /Decision Space 
The decision authority was up-held by EE, because of the large support from the city council. The decision-space was 
limited to consist of only the landowners and EE, which made the majority of the community felt neglected in this process.  
 
Table 2. Boundary Dimensions by Etienne Wenger 
 
Coordination 
Transparency 
Negotiability 
Engagement 
TR 
TR 
TR 
Imagination 
TR 
TR 
TR 
Alignment 
TR 
TR 
TR 
 
==PAGE:9==
8 
 
2.2. Case 2 - Østrup  
In the spring of 2013 the municipality of Jammerbugt sent out information about the up coming project south of Østrup. 
In this information flyer the municipality inform general about the project and the future public meeting. Additionally, 
they explain about possible for economic growth available for the local community. The first phase ran from start 21th of 
May and until the 18th of June 2013. The first public hearing was held the 6th of June 2013. At the public meeting, 
participants could ask question and present ideas for the project. Later in the fall the municipality and the developer 
finished the environmental report. The feedback period of the Environmental report ran from 23th of April until 23th of 
June 2014. In that period on the 21th of May the second public meeting was held. The purpose of the meeting was to 
inform about the compensation- and purchase scheme. In August 2014 the project was pending the final political approval. 
Later in the fall the final stage before construction, the shares were put up for sale. In the winter of 2014/2015 the 
construction of the wind turbines started and it finished in 2015. The project in Østrup was develop by JyskVindEnergi 
(hereafter, JVE) and Jammerbugt municipality. It consist of six wind turbines (Vestas V112) each with a height of 150m 
and capacity of 3.3 MW.  
 
Primary public participation 
JVE engaged with the community through conventional methods required by law, such as the two public meetings. These 
meetings were used to inform and educate the community about the project and gather feedback. During “debatfasen” 
and “offentlighedsfasen” everybody had the opportunity to comment and oppose changes. This is a formal process for 
people to engage with the project, developer and the municipality. The feedback is not a guarantee of changes but a formal 
procedure required by law. This process was primary a one-way communication and a non-inclusive process.  
”at the meetings they just inform about the project in general.” 
(Interview: Anonymous neighbour A) 
Procedural goal/communication philosophy 
The JVE deviated from tech-reg approach and made use of dialogue and deliberation of peoples concerns. This approach 
was more an inquiry of concerns instead of a command and control approach based on false assumptions. Providing 
explanations across practices results in more appropriate gathering of information and local know-how. This was done 
with face-to-face meetings with stakeholders in the local community. 
Negotiation 
JVE was able to include both local interest and values, which resulted in both communities achieving mutual gains. This 
fostered a sense that the members of both communities could see themselves as part of this overarching community and 
there was not a claim for further negotiation. 
 
Inclusiveness 
The Borgerforening, specific neighbours of Østrup6, the municipality, and the landowners were the key institutions and 
JVE engaged with these institutions in an early stage of the project, before any public meetings was arranged. The focus 
of the key institutions resulted in more and widespread social acceptability of the project. One could assume that all key 
institutions all received benefits, which exceed the legal aspect and which weighted high enough to support the project 
regardless whether they were supporters or critics. Data showed that the Borgerforeningen benefit of the green scheme 
and the establishment of the local wind turbine cooperative. Specific citizens were payed with a settlement, the 
municipality received an information center and local economy, and the landowners benefit from the economy of the 
wind turbines.  
”There are thing you can make easier with lubricate.” 
(Interview: Anni Stonor) 
 
Additionally JVE approached most of the closest neighbours at the early stage but some of the neighbours who were 
critical or sceptical towards the project was later ignored by JVE.  
                                                 
6 Selected neighbours in Østrup who did not apply for refund and received a closed settlement. Based on data from “taksationsmyndighedsn” 
overview of applications in Østrup and interviews.  
http://www.taksationsmyndigheden.dk/DA/Afgoerelser/Nordjylland/Jammerbugt-Kommune/Sider/Oestrup.aspx 
==PAGE:10==
9 
 
 “I have tried to contact them several times over the phone or by email, but they never replied [..] and 
when I got in contact with them they were arrogant.” 
(Interview: Anonymous neighbour B) 
 
Transparency 
As described previously, JVE approached the closest neighbours at an early stage by knocking on doors. Their goals was 
to inform and analyse their concerns regarding the upcoming wind turbines. National public polls indicates that noise and 
visual effects is the most concerned aspects, but the key concerns, which arose from their experience was shadow 
flickering. This was later included in the Environmental report. 
Apart from the conventional approach required by law about fauna, birds, environmental etc. in the Environmental report, 
JVE included some additional features exceeding the legal requirements in pursuit of meeting some of the local concern: 
- 
the 20% shares at a lower prices (depending on the distance to the wind turbines) 
- 
0 hours of shadow flickering (maximum legal limit is 10 hours per year)  
- 
An education/information center (Information center available for schools)  
 
”The most important thing in the process, it was that the profit of the two turbines go to society, so we get 
350,000 kr per year the next 20 years to spend on what we want.” 
(Interview: Anni Stonor) 
 
JVE managed to involve most the locals. This applied especially to the majority of the community (+1.5km) where JVE 
early in the process included the local Borgerforening and Anni Stonor the chairman.  
”So what really was good about JVE is that they included the community from the start - that's 
democracy, and that's what those who do not show up, do not have any influence. That’s how it is. [...] If 
you want influence, you have to show yourself and have to make an effort.” 
(Interview: Anni Stonor) 
 
Collaborative potential 
The collaborative potential could have been higher but in this case, it was low to moderate due to the lack of public 
participation and inclusiveness. However, they managed to exceed legal requirements and thereby acquired a satisfied 
and compliant community. 
 
Substance goal 
Based on local knowledge and empirical data collected, JVE incorporated community interest and values into the project. 
The design of the cooperative as well a clear narrative of community gains, benefitted the collaborative process, and 
decreased the opposition and increase the social acceptability. 
”Generally speaking, we have not had much resistance to the project [..] I think that is because we had 
dialogues about things and people were offered to join the cooperative, so that people would get the entire 
story, not only that there are any genes and you could see the wind turbines, because of course you can 
see the wind turbines, but there is also something you can get out of it.” 
 (Interview: Jens Vangsø) 
 
Prospect of consensus 
The instruments utilized in wind power projects had significant impact on the prospect of consensus between the 
developer and the community. Exceeding the legal requirements increased the possibility of consensus more likely to 
happen. This revealed a common ground where intentions and commitment were clear and involved both parties. 
 
Decision Authority / space 
The decision-making is often a one-way process and allow little to no negotiation in wind power projects and the decision 
authority solely lies with the developer. Danish regulation does not initiate a two way process in the decision space. 
==PAGE:11==
10 
 
However, in the case of Østrup, the decision space was limited but substituted with compromises which was supported 
by the city council. 
Table 3. Boundary Dimensions - Østrup 
 
Coordination 
Transparency 
Negotiability 
Engagement 
TR / AC 
TR 
AC 
Imagination 
AC 
AC 
AC 
Alignment 
AC 
AC 
TR 
 
 
2.3. Case 3 - Nørrekær Enge II 
Nørrekær Enge has transformed several times since the first wind turbines was installed back in 1981, on the land field 
along the shore near Løgstør in northern Jutland. The first project developed by I/S Nordkraft consisted of 77 small wind 
turbines, with a yearly production of 55.000 MWh. During a replacement scheme in 2004 Vattenfall replaced the 77 wind 
turbines with 13 more effective ones. They produced more than twice the capacity compared with the old ones. Nørrekær 
Enge II is an expansion of the original wind farm Nørrekær Enge I, which will deploy 40 new ones along with the previous 
13 wind turbines. This gives a total of 53 wind turbines in Nørrekær however in the initial project description 5 of the 
original wind turbines would have to be removed and it ends with a total of 48. If the project is realized it will become 
the largest wind farm on land in Denmark. 
In September 2014 the city council of Vesthimmerland and Aalborg was ready to initiate the planning of the potential 
project and in connection with this, invited to the first public meeting in October 2014.  
In February 2016 Vattenfall applied for the project Nørrekær Enge II and in relation to it, two artist in the local area 
arranged a seminar for the local community with the subject “Can a wind turbines save the school, Toppedal?” This was 
the first movement, which initiated the beginning of the local union. The local community managed to constitute 
themselves 31st of October 2016, Nørrekær Enge Vindmølleforening (Hereafter, NEV). This later became a community 
representing almost half of the people living in a radius of 4.5 km from the farm (950 members). At the very last minute 
they objected to the municipalities and demanded to be giving a mandate in the planning process. 
In late 2016 and in the beginning of 2017 the negotiation between Vattenfall and NEV started and as of today, the project 
is still being negotiated. Vattenfall expect the construction to begin in 2019 and it to be finished and running at the end 
of 2020 7 (Aalborg & Vesthimmerlands Kommune, 2017). 
 
Primary public participation methods 
So far, Vattenfall and NEV have used collaborative approaches for engaging the community. In the early stage, NEV 
facilitated workshops to involve the community and created a forum for debating the upcoming project. Everyone had 
the opportunity to discuss and share concerns about wind turbines.  This meeting was an important element in creating a 
shared idea of the opportunities, a sense of membership and connectivity to the local community. 
”So, the attitude was that we are in favour of renewable and green energy, but the problem was that it 
seems a bit unfortunate that a large multinational company will come and take all the profit out of the area 
and leave only the nuisance to the locals.” 
(Interview: Emil Olsen) 
 
” We have a little more collective interest in it as citizens here. We are already an area that has very little 
economic and political interest from the city councils.” 
(Interview: Emil Olsen) 
                                                 
7 https://corporate.vattenfall.dk/vores-vindmoller-i-danmark/vindprojekter/norrekar-enge-II/ 
   
==PAGE:12==
11 
 
Vattenfall used one of the public meetings to allow citizens to get further information about the project and talk to expert 
directly. They created this forum by setting up booths with experts and then open the meeting earlier so the citizens had 
time to ask questions before the actual meeting. This approach should allow the community to acquire knowledge about 
the practices, but Emil Olsen disagree; 
”What they think is public involvement is what they call public meetings – that is no public involvement, 
that is information.” 
(Interview: Emil Olsen) 
 
Procedural goal/communication philosophy 
The collaboration between the communities result in mutual gains outcome and NEV feel they are included in the process; 
however this was not case before NEV gained a mandate by the politicians. Emil Olsen explain: 
”It is our opinion that it has been pain in the ass that we are some active people in this area here.” 
”It is my impression that Vallenfall is doing everything they can to stop our [..] Our lawyer, who by 
stands us in the negotiation, says he has never experienced such thing with other professional 
organizations.” 
(Interview: Emil Olsen) 
 
This indicates that there are still boundaries between the two communities and they have not succeeded sharing practices 
and accept one another as part of the project, but the collaboration forces both communities to engage in dialogue and 
limited the prospect of command and control. Both communities communicate primary though their respective websites 
with updates and minutes which opens for a more transparent process towards the public.  
 
Negotiation 
Negotiation and a modified community ownership was not part of the initial prospect, but it became a necessity due to 
the power of the community. The seminar held by the two artist and the workshop open the mind-set of the community 
that wind turbines could actually benefit the local area and that they could have influence on how the profit was spend. 
The negotiation is structured in joint activities such as meetings, and to succeed, both communities have to accept multiple 
perspectives and appreciate each other competences such as the developer’s technical know-how and the community’s 
local knowledge and values. 
 
Inclusiveness 
Early in the project, Vattenfall included landowners and people living close to the wind turbines, according to the project 
draft. These stakeholders were consulted but rest of the community was neglected. The Community then later forced to 
be part of the project to be able to feel included and valued. Vattenfall did not do much of an effort to include sceptics or 
critics, but they did listen to local request about reducing the number of wind turbines and rearrange them differently. 
This is included in the Environmental Report as several alternatives. Emil Olsen thinks that due to the organization and 
work of NEV a lot resistance diminished.  
 
Transparency 
The inspiration sown, by the artist and with help from Lea Vangstrup, initiated a dream of being an empowered 
community of practice with influence and control. Emil criticized the municipality’s ability to exploit the green scheme 
payout from the previous project, Nørrekær Enge I: 
”It is not even a guarantee for locals that the green scheme is being used in the area, because it is the 
municipality that receives them. Last time, they used to clean a lake in Farsø”(about the green scheme).” 
(Interview: Emil Olsen) 
This opportunity to gain influence on how local profit could be allocated, was an important factor of the community and 
thereby seeing themselves cooperating with Vattenfall. 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
12 
 
Collaborative potential 
The collaborative potential between the Vattenfall and the NEV increased significant when the negotiation process began.  
Both communities see themselves, as part of a shared solution otherwise other would have be stated and the project would 
have been dropped. The main challenge is how and when they are able merge both demands, compromises and economy, 
if possible. Therefore, it is difficult to analyze because the project is still being negotiated but it has potential if they can 
find common ground. 
 
Substance goal 
Reaching the national goal of 100% green energy supply by 2050 is understood by the majority of the local community 
and the developer with the incentive to gain profit along the way. The prospect of profit for both the locals and Vattenfall 
is a strong factor across boundaries, incorporating community interest and values. The combination of science and local 
values increase the social acceptability. Emil Olsen mention, there was a positive attitude towards green energy, but they 
had a feeling a fair distribution of compensation was needed; 
“We believe that our wind must create prosperity in our area.” 
(Interview: Emil Olsen) 
 
Prospect of consensus 
The NEV had prepared a declaration of intent with two models (A and B) describing two alternatives (Nørrekær Enge 
Vindmølleforening, 2017). Both alternatives contain specific demands from NEV, and both parties signed the declaration 
in May 2017. Vattenfall’s intentions are supporting green energy growth and gain an economic profit. This is the base for 
the ongoing negotiation and prospect of consensus has become more likely.  
 
Decision Authority / Decision Space 
In wind power projects, the decision space is often limited and the decision authority somewhat rigid but NEV managed 
to acquire a strong mandate with the support from the local politicians:  
”The municipalities have indicated to us that they will not process the political process until there is 
something concrete about something on the table with the local community out there.” 
(Interview: Emil Olsen) 
This change the power of the game and one must accept compromises to reach common goal. It is unfortunately a 
disadvantage that there is no impartial broker in this case to connect communicate compromises. This can be a barrier for 
success if the NEV becomes too rigid and will not compromise. Emil Olsen explained their 0-alternative: 
” Nor is it a disaster for us if they (Vattenfall) say "Well, there is no economy in it" [...] We have some 
conditions if there should be a wind turbine project here and if they cannot be met, it is fine with us if 
there is no wind turbine project.” 
(Interview: Emil Olsen) 
 
Table 4. Boundary Dimensions – Nørrekær Enge II 
 
Coordination 
Transparency 
Negotiability 
Engagement 
AC 
TR/AC 
AC  
Imagination 
TR  
TR/AC 
AC 
Alignment 
AC 
AC 
AC 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
13 
 
Discussion 
This analysis is a snapshot of three different projects in Jutland and applied a core focus on elements of public participation 
to decrease the boundaries between stakeholders. The analysis has some limitations. First, the research does not consider 
geographical differences. All three cases are locations in the outskirts of Denmark placed near small communities. 
Christina Friis-Hasché, project manager at Aarhus Municipality, explains that there is a big difference between 
implementing wind power projects in rural areas of Denmark compared to areas near the largest cities. She says the 
difference is local incentives and the amount of space for deployment. Second, the analysis consist of a small amount of 
cases and is therefore not representative of the whole of Denmark, but it clarify tendencies in the planning process. It 
could be interesting to do a proactive study of a wind power project with the right balance of appropriate collaboration 
and tech-reg approaches. Implementation of a 100% community owned wind power can be utilized but it is difficult. 
Local communities and the local authorities do not have the same expertise and knowhow like the developers. This is one 
of the barriers. Also, soon a new EU regulation will change the procurement process of green energy project. The 
procurement will be energy neutral, so that both wind-, solar- and bioenergy will compete about the same projects. This 
approach sets higher standards and requirements, which is very costly. This could become a barrier for future locally 
100% owned projects. The technological perspective is ready for this new set up. Vestas has recently developed solutions 
that combines multiple energy sources, called hybrid plants8. In 2017 they became part of implementing a large hybrid 
facility in Australia working with Windlab, who is the largest company in Australia within renewable energy. This new 
technological approach accommodate the new legal requirements and demand. This could probably help decrease the 
barriers for locally owned projects however the preconstruction work is very high and still a barrier. 
 
Another observation from the study show that it is not possible to acquire every person in local communities. Some will 
be opponent towards any projects. Chairman Emil Olsen from Nørrekær Enge Vindmølleforening and the developer Jens 
Vangsø from JyskVindEnergi agree. Varde City Council has recently endorsed the proposal that 95% of all neighbours 
within the distance of six times the height of the wind turbines shall give a written consent before exceeding the planning 
process. This approach is, as I know, not illuminated by any studies or research. But highlight the same problem and 
acknowledge that it is impossible to receive 100% consent.  
Conclusions 
This paper was made to test the hypothesis that the adapted framework could give a better understanding of how public 
participation approaches influences the boundary dimensions in wind power projects and give a normative 
recommendation to the planning process.  
 
The case, Ulvemosen was not a success in term of community involvement or implementation and the public participation 
was not existing. This tech-reg approach along with the history of the community, the neighbours were able to gather 
themselves in a community of practices, who became a strong opponent. This resulted in large media coverage and the 
community successfully stopped the project due to technical deficiencies. The community was able to act upon this 
because of their knowledge and experience from the previous project, Ovnbøl. This case demonstrates how a solid tech-
reg approach in wind power project can lead to a community finding common ground and become a resource-demanding 
unit.  
 
The case, Østrup is a great example of how early public participation can be effectuated in an appropriate collaborative 
approach. The analysis of the neighbours’ concerns conducted in the early stage, was a key factor for a successful 
implementation. Ideally, it would be optimum if it was possible to include 100% of the community, however the project 
had to accept that it was not possible to include everyone - that is a compromise that comes with large projects like wind 
power. 
 
The case, Nørrekær Enge II was somewhat different. In the very last minute, the local community managed to come 
together and unite to a community of practice. Prior, Vattenfall did little to include the local community and the NEV 
gained crucial support from the municipality, which empowered them to have a strong mandate. It could not have 
happened without the help and expertise from Wind People and Green Power Partners. This approach is very interesting, 
and it required strong local initiative. It is often impossible for the community to organize themselves before the project 
and contracts have been signed due to lack of time to act.  
Negotiation between NEV and Vattenfall have been in progress for more than a year, and this collaborative approach 
seems to influence the flow of the process. Whether it is caused by complexity or willingness to cooperate is not clear. 
                                                 
8 https://www.energy-supply.dk/article/view/561784/vestas_med_i_banebrydende_hybridanlaeg 
==PAGE:15==
14 
 
 
The framework demonstrates the importance of community involvement as the community can acquire strong power and 
influence if not approached in an appropriate way.  
 
A number of conclusions arise from the analysis of public participation and gives rise for several recommendations. First, 
the question of who has the responsibility that the community and the right stakeholders are invited in the planning process 
is not stated explicit. “The good process” pinpoint that the responsibility lies with the local authorities, however it is 
questionable whether they have the knowledge to facilitate such a project or limited by the lack of resources. It could be 
interesting to research on how an independent broker could benefit the planning process. Theory imply that it could 
increase transparency, trust and might ease the negotiation process, if managed properly. 
 
Second, that early public participation is an important element in creating local anchoring and development of a 
foundation for generating new practices across communities of practice. It is acknowledge that not everybody can or will 
not be part of such projects.  
 
Thirdly, the case of Nørrekær Enge II fostered a rather interesting model of implementing wind power projects. A solution, 
based on some of the premises of the community. The analysis indicates that there is a potential for local communities to 
be part of the planning process on equal terms in relation to power distribution. 
To the very least, one could argue that a fiercely fight between community and developer will affect the project with 
delays, mistrust and lawsuit and that it is more costly than a collaborative and including approach. Such an approach 
would result in no resource-demanding conflict, increase the progress flow and increase social acceptability. 
 
References  
Aalborg & Vesthimmerlands Kommune, 2017 “Vindmøller ved Nørrekær Enge 2” 
       https://www.vesthimmerland.dk/media/5161871/820_2017_132658_miljoerapport___hovedrapport_endelig_ver.pdf  
   (Accessed: 20.5.2018) 
Borch, K., Dahlgaard, V., 2016: Borgers bekymringer og forbehold vedrørende omkring opførelse af vindmøller I nærområdet:  
Analyser og indsigelser og artikler I lokalpressen vedrørende Ulvemose, Ovnbøl (Varde) og Nørrekær Enge 
(Aalborg/Vesthimmerland). Technical University of Denmark, Institut of Engineering Management.   
Den korte avis, 2014 (Reader comment: Anonymous) 
      https://denkorteavis.dk/2014/varde-kommune-patvinger-os-kaempe-vindmoller-og-vil-ikke-lytte/# (Accessed: 18.5.2018) 
Devinde-Wright, P., Devine-Wright, H., Cowell, R., 2016: What do we know about overcoming barriers to siting energy infrastructure 
in local areas. Placewise Limited. School of Geography and Planning, Cardiff University. 
      Link: https://orca.cf.ac.uk/93905/1/DECC_Infrastructure_PlacewiseLtd.pdf 
Devine-Wright, P., 2004: Beyond NIMBYism: towards an Intergrated Framework for Understanding Public Perceptions of Wind 
Energy. Wind Energy 2005 8. 125-139. Doi: 10.1002/we.124  
DR Nyheder, 2011 (DR News)  
       https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/indland/stor-stigning-i-vedvarende-energi (Accessed: 5.5.2018) 
Energy Supply DK, 2017 
https://www.energy-supply.dk/article/view/561784/vestas_med_i_banebrydende_hybridanlaeg (Accessed 17.5.2018) 
Energistyrelsen, 2012 (Danish Energy Agency) 
       https://ens.dk/ansvarsomraader/energi-klimapolitik/politiske-aftaler-paa-energiomraadet/energiaftalen-22-marts-2012 
       https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/EnergiKlimapolitik/aftale_22-03-2012_final_ren.doc.pdf (Accessed: 9.5.2018) 
Energistyrelsen (Danish Energy Agency) 
       https://ens.dk/ansvarsomraader/energi-klimapolitik/fakta-om-dansk-energi-klimapolitik/dansk-klimapolitik  
(Accessed: 10.5.2018) 
Energistyrelsen, 2018 (Danish Energy Agency) 
       https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Analyser/basisfremskrivning_2018.pdf  (Accessed: 2.5.2018) 
EnergyWatch 2013 (Interview: Karsten Drøjdal & Bent Peter Larsen) 
       https://energiwatch.dk/secure/Energinyt/Renewables/article5991993.ece (Accessed: 28.5.2018) 
Miljøstyrelsen, 2015 (Environmental Protection Agency) 
       https://www.retsinformation.dk/pdfPrint.aspx?id=176330 (Accessed: 25.5.2018) 
Naturstyrelsen, 2009 (Nature Agency) 
       http://naturstyrelsen.dk/media/nst/Attachments/VindDengodeproces110609.pdf (Accessed: 25.5.2018) 
Nørrekær Enge Vinmølleforening, 2017 
http://noerrekaersenge.dk/onewebmedia/N%C3%B8rrek%C3%A6r%20Enge%20-
%20aftale%20om%20fondsm%C3%B8ller%20og%20naboanparter%20maj%202017.pdf (Accessed: 15.5.2018) 
Politikken 2017 (Politikken News Paper) 
       https://politiken.dk/indland/art5886978/Vindm%C3%B8llerne-er-ved-at-tabe-pusten-i-vindkraftlandet-Danmark 
==PAGE:16==
15 
 
       (Accessed: 22.5.2018) 
Regeringen (The Government) 
       https://www.regeringen.dk/nyheder/danmark-som-foregangsland-paa-energi-og-klima/  (Accessed: 15.5.2018) 
Fournis, Y. & Fortin, M.-J., 2017: Form social ”acceptance” to social “acceptability” of wind energy projects: towards a territorial 
perspective. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management 60 (1): 1-21. Doi: 10.1080/09640568.2015.1133406. 
Taksationsmyndigheden, 2018 
http://www.taksationsmyndigheden.dk/DA/Afgoerelser/Nordjylland/Jammerbugt-Kommune/Sider/Oestrup.aspx  
(Accessed 1.5.2018) 
Vattenfall, 2017 
       https://corporate.vattenfall.dk/vores-vindmoller-i-danmark/vindprojekter/norrekar-enge-II/ (Accessed: 20.5.2018) 
Vindmølleindustrien (Windpower) 
       http://www.windpower.org/da/fakta_og_analyser/statistik/det_danske_marked.html (Accessed: 12.5.2018) 
Vindmølleindustrien (Windpower) 
       http://www.windpower.org/da/fakta_og_analyser/statistik/nationale_tal.html (Accessed: 12.5.2018) 
Vindmølleindustrien (Windpower) 
       http://www.windpower.org/da/energipolitik_og_planlaegning/energiforliget_og_2020.html (Accessed: 12.5.2018) 
Vindmølleindustrien (Windpower) 
       http://www.windpower.org/da/energipolitik_og_planlaegning/onshore.html (Accessed: 12.5.2018) 
Walker, G. B., Daniels, S. E., Emborg, J., 2015: Public Participation in Environmental policy Decision Making – Insights form twenty 
years of collaborative learning fieldwork, I: Hansen, A. & Cox, J. R. (ED): Routledge Handbook of environment and 
communication. Abingdon, Oxon. Routledge. 123-143  
Wenger, E., 2000: Communities of Practice and Social Learning System. Organization articles Vol. 7 (2). 225-246.  
Wolsink, M., 2012: Wind Power: Basic Challenge Concerning Social Acceptance, I: Meyers, R. A. (ED): Encyclopedia of 
Sustainability Science and Technology. Springer New York. 12218-12254 
Wüstenhagen, R., Wolsink, M., Bürer, M. J., 2007: Social acceptance of renewable energy innovation: An introduction to the concept. 
Energy Policy 35. 2683-2691. Doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2006.12.001 
 
 
