==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
MASTER OF SCIENCE THESIS
Identifying neural codes of probabilities
using fMRI encoding models
Author:
Sébastien DEMORTAIN
s161041
Supervisors:
Florent MEYNIEL
Lars Kai HANSEN
A thesis submitted in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for the degree of MSc in Mathematical Modelling and Computation
June 22, 2018
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
iii
Preface
The thesis is prepared at the Unité Inserm-CEA de NeuroImagerie Cognitive
(UNICOG), NeuroSpin, CEA-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France and DTU Compute and
was supervised by Florent Meyniel, Researcher, UNICOG, NeuroSpin, CEA-Saclay
and Lars Kai Hansen, Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark. The work of the project
was performed in the period from the 22nd of January 2018 to the 22nd of June 2018
and covers 30 ECTS. Unless otherwise noted, the work presented in this thesis was
done by myself.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
v
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
Abstract
DTU Compute & NeuroSpin
MSc in Mathematical Modelling and Computation
Identifying neural codes of probabilities using fMRI encoding models
by Sébastien DEMORTAIN
s161041
keywords: probability, uncertainty, encoding model, functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI), neural code, Bayesian inference
To cope with uncertainty and make predictions about the future, the human
brain uses powerful algorithms well modelled by Bayesian statistical inference, for
which uncertainty and probability are strongly related. Experimental data suggest
that the brain encodes uncertainty about future events by means of parameters of
probabilistic models (or "probabilities"). The way the brain represents probabilities
remains unknown, which motivates proposing neural codes and testing them on
neuroimaging data. In this study, codes mapping probabilities to neural activities
have been developed considering probabilities are represented either through sum-
mary statistics or distributions. Then, I derived and implemented encoding models
to test the identiﬁability of these neural codes on functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) data.
Under some assumptions and by means of simulations, I
quantitatively showed that the proposed neural codes can be distinguished in spite
of fMRI noise level. I also used simulations both for ﬁxing encoding models’ com-
plexity parameters and showing that non stationnary transition probabilities are pre-
ferrable to non stationnary Bernoulli probabilities in terms of experimental design
to maximize identiﬁability.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
vii
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to express my gratitude to my local supervisor Florent Meyniel,
who welcomed me for ﬁve months at UNICOG lab in Gif-sur-Yvette and gave me
the opportunity to work on this exciting project of probability encoding. He has
been very involved in my supervision, always taking the required time to help me
when I was facing issues. His precision, great knowledge, scientiﬁc mind and teach-
ing skills were of great inspiration for me.
My next acknowledgment goes to my DTU supervisor Lars Kai Hansen, who
was very active and helpful during my thesis, regularly ﬁnding generous time in
his schedule to discuss with me. Skype sessions with him were always a wonderful
opportunity for me to synthetize my current thoughts and to get a relevant, experi-
enced feedback on my work.
I also would like to thank UNICOG and Parietal teams of NeuroSpin, with who
I shared ideas and obtained new helpful inputs to my project.
Finally, I address a big thank you to the "intern team": Pauline, Jonathan (my
pingpong partner), Lorenzo, Cindy, Léo and Jade who made this experience at Neu-
roSpin deeply humane.
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
ix
Contents
Preface
iii
Abstract
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
General introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Related work
11
2.1
Neural codes of ordered information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
fMRI methods to ﬁnd neural codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Neural codes for probabilities and translation to global ﬁring activity
21
3.1
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Identiﬁability of neural codes in fMRI
35
4.1
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Conclusion
53
A Probabilistic Population Coding
61
B
From PPC to Van Bergen’s encoding model
63
C From neural codes of probabilities to global ﬁring activities
65
C.1
Rate coding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
C.2
Probabilistic Population Coding (PPC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
C.3
Distributional Population Coding (DPC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
D Github link to my code
67
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
xi
List of Abbreviations
2D
Two-dimensional
BOLD
Blood-Oxygen-Level Dependent
DPC
Distributional Population Coding
fMRI
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
HRF
Hemodynamic Response Function
MAP
Maximum A Posteriori
MLE
Maximum Likelihood Estimate
MSE
Mean-Squared Error
PPC
Probabilistic Population Coding
SNR
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
xiii
List of Symbols
Symbol
Description
D
Posterior distribution
L
Likelihood function
I
Current available information
r
Activity vector
s
Stimulus value
g
Neural gain
f
Tuning curve vector
N
Number of tuning curves
K
Tuning curve gain
t
Tuning curve variance parameter
y
BOLD signal
w
Mixture coefﬁcient vector
X
Design matrix
r2
r2 coefﬁcient measuring the percentage of variance explained by the model
¯a
Global ﬁring activity
a
Stochastic global ﬁring activity
S
Prewhitening matrix
t
Time
x
Abstract variable
c
Abstract numerical constant
E
Set of elements depending on its index
n
Number of elements depending on the context
h
PPC kernel vector
B
PPC set of basis functions
θ
Probability parameter
µ
Mean of the posterior distibution
σ
Standard deviation of the posterior distribution
α
First parameter of the beta distribution
β
Second parameter of the beta distribution
∆
Spacing between tuning curves
π
Vector of L2-projections of the posterior distribution onto the tuning curves
δ
Dirac delta function
ϵ
fMRI noise
Σ
fMRI noise covariance matrix
κ2
fMRI noise variance when the covariance matrix is isotropic
Π
Identiﬁability confusion matrix
η
Neural noise
ν
fMRI noise
ξ2
Isotropic neural noise variance
γ
Proportionnality coefﬁcient approximating the HRF convolution
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
1
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
General introduction
The world in which we evolve is inherently uncertain. Sometimes our daily train
is on time, sometimes it is late. When we ﬂip a coin, sometimes it falls on heads,
sometimes on tails. While in the second example, making the "wrong guess" is usu-
ally not an issue, in the ﬁrst case we can leave home unnecessarily too early, or more
sadly we can miss our train. This illustrates the need of making accurate predictions
on uncertain scenarii in order to make appropriate decisions [11, 44].
Probability theory has been developed by mathematicians to optimally cope with
uncertainty and help predicting the future [72]. For a given situation where differ-
ent outcomes may happen, it provides a value between 0 and 1 to each possible
outcome, quantifying how much this outcome is likely to occur. This value, called
the probability of the outcome, is derived from a well chosen mathematical formula
(the model) that may contain some parameters.
One way to obtain a model is to learn it, i.e. adjust the shape of the formula and
the parameters involved, from observing a ﬁnite number of outcomes, so that the
predictions of the model are in accordance with the past observations. This process
is called statistical inference. We shall distinguish statistical inference to select the
shape of the model and statistical inference to select the parameters involved given
a model.
Hence, with pen & paper and maybe a good scientiﬁc software, one mathemati-
cian could infer a probabilistic model given a sequence of observations and attribute
to each possible outcome one probability to occur, given a future context, and there-
fore make some desired predictions. But is this ability reserved to mathematicians?
The answer is clearly no. Humans can also make their own statistical inference
regarding future events. Their subjective output is not a number between 0 and 1,
but a sense of conﬁdence regarding possible outcomes. Built from their prior knowl-
edge and available observations, they can use this conﬁdence to make predictions
and decisions [4]. For example, if it has been several days the train is late, they
may feel more certain about the fact it will be late today and leave home later. In-
terestingly, when humans report their sense of conﬁdence as numerical value, there
is a strong correlation between these values and probabilities derived by the math-
ematician [59, 49, 4, 47], even for humans without any mathematical background.
It seems that probability theory, more speciﬁcally the Bayesian framework -later de-
ﬁned in this thesis- can describe well how humans deal with uncertainty, in spite of
the numerous cognitive biases listed by Kahneman and Tversky [30, 31].
==PAGE:16==
2
Chapter 1. Introduction
This motivates a deeper investigation on the human statistical inference machin-
ery, inside the human information processing tool: the brain. Human statistical in-
ference has two main aspects :
• a computational aspect, making the link between available information (obser-
vations, prior knowledge) and the sense of conﬁdence. It corresponds to the
algorithm the brain uses to compute the sense of conﬁdence;
• a representational aspect. As subjects are able to report their sense of conﬁdence,
it shall be internally stored and accessible. This aspect corresponds to the for-
mat of representation the brain uses for the sense of conﬁdence.
Although these two aspects are closely related, the purpose of this master thesis
is to address the second one: How does the brain represent uncertainty about future
events?
1.2
Motivation
The main motivation of this project is about understanding better humans. Know-
ing how the brain encodes uncertainty about future events would contribute to not
only understanding better the general functioning of the brain, but also inspiring
new curing strategies for people with uncertainty impairement, as this is the case
for some cognitive pathologies. For example, strongly biased statistical inference
(called circular inference) has been identiﬁed in schizophrenia [28]. Some attention
disorders may also be related to impairment in learning [1].
As the problem of uncertainty about future events is complex, it is necessary to
break it down into several smaller pieces before reformulating the research question
in a more accurate manner. The ﬁrst crucial piece is the link between uncertainty
and probability, supported by the Bayesian framework.
1.2.1
Uncertainty and probability
Let us bridge uncertainty and probability theory reminding some fundamentals
concepts of probability. We illustrate those using the heads (H) or tails (T) scenario.
Let us consider the coin is ﬂipped once.
A set of possible outcomes for this situation Ω= {H; T} can be deﬁned. The proba-
bility of an outcome to occur, for example heads, written p(H), is contained between
0 and 1 and describes how likely heads will occur. By convention, all possible events’
probabilities sum to 1 (p(H) + p(T) = 1). If p(H) is close to 1, it means that the coin
is more likely to fall on heads, and less likely to fall on tails, since p(T) gets closer
to 0. During everyday experience, coins are balanced and we usually approximate
p(H) = p(T) = 0.5. But one assumes the coin may be biased, how to ﬁnd p(H)?
There are two main methods to proceed. The ﬁrst one, not the easiest, relies on
breaking down the coin ﬂip phenomenon into elementary well understood phenom-
ena: knowing the coin geometry, its mass, the (deterministic) equations governing
the coin mechanics, the initial conditions of the world (e.g. the initial force given by
the ﬁnger), etc. it may be possible to build a probabilistic model giving p(H) and
p(T), or even to fully determine the outcome.
But obviously nobody has access to such information and enough computational
==PAGE:17==
1.2. Motivation
3
resources. Therefore, the only way to estimate p(H) is to do statistical inference,
making some assumptions and using information on the coin from what has been
observed in the past. For avoiding future confusion, let us deﬁne θ = p(H). Let
us consider we have access to a sequence I = {(H, T, H, H, T, ..., H)} of results per-
formed with this coin. If trial independence (i.e. one trial does not inﬂuence the next
one) and identical distribution (the properties of the coin does not change over time)
are assumed, a so-called Bernoulli process of parameter θ, B(θ), is followed. θ can be
seen as both the probability of head for the future trial or the main parameter of the
Bernoulli process. As illustrated later, during statistical inference, θ shall preferably
be seen as a parameter.
If we deﬁne the likelihood function L describing the probability to observe the se-
quence I given θ [11]
L(I|θ) = p(I|θ) = θnH(1 −θ)nT
(1.1)
with nH the number of heads in I and nT the number of tails. The value of θ max-
imizing the likelihood function is called the Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE). Al-
though it is asymptotically efﬁcient, this estimate tends to overﬁt when not enough
data are available, i.e. to lead to low likelihoods for other sequences of observations.
For example, let us consider some unbiased coin (θ = 0.5) that can lead to three ob-
servations I = {H, H, H}. In this case, θMLE = 1 which is quite a bad estimate, too
much oriented towards current observations. One way to overcome overﬁtting is to
integrate prior knowledge into the inference. A reasonable prior knowledge about
a coin may be, for example, that θ shall be close to 0.5, and therefore brings back
the estimate of θ towards more realistic values. A way to express this prior is to use
a probability distribution p(θ). This view is the core of the Bayesian framework. The
peak(s) of this distribution expresse(s) the most likely value(s) given by the prior,
and its spread expresses how much certain the estimate is. Strong prior knowledge
regarding one value is thus represented by a narrow distribution centered around
this value, while a ﬂat prior means that no particular value is preferred.
Current observation from I and prior knowledge can be combined using Bayes’
formula, leading to the posterior distribution over θ
p(θ|I) = p(I|θ)p(θ)
p(I)
(1.2)
Exactly as for the prior, the mode of the posterior distribution corresponds to the
most likely value of θ. In this case, it is called the Maximum A Posteriori (MAP). Its
width corresponds to the uncertainty. Strong prior usually avoids overﬁtting, but
can drastically change the estimate. Choosing the prior is a critical step.
Bayesian statistical inference is a powerful tool in two sides:
• It provides an estimate, the MAP, that takes into account both current observa-
tions and prior knowledge;
• It conveys a lot of information: since the posterior is a distribution, it can rep-
resent several estimates (multimodal distributions) and represent some uncer-
tainty through its spread.
Bayesian statistical inference is well suited for mathematicians, and machine
learning has its own Bayesian branch where prior are widely used to infer various
==PAGE:18==
4
Chapter 1. Introduction
types of parameters, such as the weights in linear regression.
But the Bayesian statistical inference is also well suited for describing how hu-
mans learn their sense of conﬁdence.
1.2.2
Humans report probabilities from Bayesian inference
During the past decades, evidence toward Bayesian functioning of the brain has
summed up. Its spirit may be summarized by one famous sentence from the mathe-
matician Pierre Simon Laplace: "One may even say, strictly speaking, that almost all our
knowledge is only probable; and in the small number of things that we are able to know with
certainty, the principle means of arriving at the truth - induction and analogy- are based on
probabilities"[38]. Laplace had the intuition that the sense of conﬁdence we have re-
garding our knowledge refers to some probability of our knowledge to be true. For
example, saying that I know that Michael Jackson died means in fact that "I internal-
ized the probability p(Michael Jackson is dead), and this probability is very close to
1". For less certain knowledge, this works the same way. Taking the heads and tails
example again, thinking that the next ﬂip will be a head more than a tail means "I
internalized p(H), and p(H) > 0.5". This has been largely supported by behavioral
studies[59, 49].
The Bayesian approach has been mostly and fruitfully applied in the perception
ﬁeld, suggesting that knowledge humans have from their sensory inputs also works
in a probabilistic manner. They receive the sensory information I and internalize a
stimulus value s. From Bayes’ perspectives, the stimulus is inferred from the likeli-
hood P(I|s) (describing how likely the current sensory information is, given a true
stimulus value) and the prior probability P(s) (describing information on the stim-
ulus expected a priori) using Bayes theorem to lead to the posterior distribution
P(s|I). A large number of experiments have established the validity of the Bayesian
framework for perception. Subject inferred stimulus values close to the MAP, with
degree of certainty correlated with the posterior distribution width [36, 33].
Behavioral data suggest that uncertainty about future events is also well ac-
counted for by the Bayesian framework. Meyniel et al. [49, 48] presented to sub-
jects sequences of auditory and visual stimuli taking two possible values (A or B).
Subjects were aware that the law governing whether A or B will appear is given by
a probabilistic model depending on the previous outcome, controlled by the transi-
tion probabilities pA→B and pB→A unknown, constant for some time until changing
at some non speciﬁed change points (non stationnarity condition). They were given
no prior knowledge regarding pA→B and pB→A. Several times, the sequence was
stopped and subjects were asked to report, on a scale from 100% B to 100% A, how
likely they think that the next stimulus will be A or B (see Figure 1.1).
For example, if B was the last stimulus, they were ask to rate how likely it is
that A appears next, given that B was the last stimulus (as they knew the value of
the last stimulus fully conditioned the next stimulus). Interestingly, this estimate
was highly related to Bayesian predictions: in this example, they would rate their
conﬁdence of A to appear as being approximately the value (pB→A)MAP one could
derive using the framework described in Section 1.2.1 (the MLE, considering a ﬂat
prior), see Figure 1.2.
Even more interestingly, subjects were asked how conﬁdent about their estimate
they were. Their conﬁdence on their guess is strongly (negatively) correlated with
==PAGE:19==
1.2. Motivation
5
(omitted)
(omitted)
Previous stimulus: B
Not at all
Completely
Are you sure of 
your estimate?
[ ]      [ ]      [ ]      [ ]
Training
(1 session)
fMRI task
(4 sessions)
A Observed sequence
(detail of the display)
B Occasional questions
(detail of the display)
Question 1
Estimate probability
Question 2
Confidence in estimation
B
B
^
^
B
A
50-50
100%
100%
Not at all
Completely
Are you sure?
Screen to report a jump
(triggered by subjects)
Jump detected
When did it happen?
 
10 stimuli ago
 
B
B
^
^
B
A
50-50
100%
100%
...  B  B  A  A  A  A  B  B  A  B  A  A  A  A  A  B  B  A  A  A  A  A  ...
 
In visual sessions
1s
0.3-0.5s
1s
0.3-0.5s
In auditory sessions
'O'
0.1s
1.2-1.4s
0.1s
1.2-1.4s
'A'
B
B
^
^
B
A
50-50
100%
100%
FIGURE 1.1: Experimental conditions: sequences of stimuli A or B
governed by transition probabilities are shown to subjects. They are
asked to rate the probability of the next stimulus to occur, as well as
the conﬁdence they attribute to this probability. From Meyniel et al.
(2017) [48].
the width of the posterior distribution of pA→B and pB→A one would compute from
Section 1.2.1. Finally, they also reported accurately when jump in generative prob-
abilities occurred. Similar behavioral results have been observed and conﬁrm this
tendency [59], for example when subjects had to infer probabilities on events gener-
ated from non stationary Bernoulli processes [20].
In addition to serve Laplace’s point of view, these results are consistent with
Bayesian inferential process in human subjects. Human internalization of probabili-
ties has been conﬁrmed by neuroimaging data.
1.2.3
Bayesian inference quantities are visible in the brain
The human brain represents information through the neural activity. It contains
about 100 billions neurons. Each neuron is able to generate a binary electrical signal
(called action potential, "ﬁring" or "spike"), as well as propagating this signal to its
neighbors. When some stimulus is perceived, when we think, and more generally
when we process information, speciﬁc neurons ﬁre following a speciﬁc pattern [73]
i.e. a speciﬁc neural code. From philosophy of mind perspectives, this is this ﬁring
that is the physical manifestation of the subjective experience of perceiving, know-
ing, thinking [34]. This neural code can be based on the neural ﬁring rate (infor-
mation is represented through the dominant frequency of neural spikes during one
time window) or the temporal sequence of spikes (information is contained within
the temporal spacing between each spike).
As for any other information internalized by humans, there should be a neural code
for uncertainty about future events. Interestingly, it seems that there exists a neu-
ral code for probabilities, according to functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
==PAGE:20==
6
Chapter 1. Introduction
FIGURE 1.2: Human inference leads to results close to Bayesian infer-
ence. Left: transition probabilities derived from MLE VS transition
probabilities reported by subject. Right: conﬁdence on these transi-
tion probabilities from Bayesian predictions (log precision of poste-
rior distribution) VS conﬁdence reported by subjects. Results from
Meyniel et al. (2015) [49].
data.
fMRI is one the most widely used method to study the brain. When neurons
ﬁre, they require more oxygen and glucose, leading to an increase in blood volume
in activated regions. As neurons do not consume all the oxygen provided by this
blood supplement, hemoglobin is more concentrated in oxygen around these re-
gions. Since hemoglobin is paramagnetic, local magnetic properties vary, and fMRI
scanner can detect these changes using fMRI magnetic ﬁeld. This results in a change
in the relaxation time T2∗, measured by the so-called Blood-Oxygen-Level Dependent
signal (BOLD) [56, 61, 43]. There is one BOLD signal per 3D-pixel of the brain, called
voxel. One voxel is about some cubi millimeters and can contains several millions of
neuron [42]. Temporal resolution of fMRI is typically about 2s [35].
In Meyniel et al.’s study [48], subjects were presented sequences of stimuli in-
side a fMRI scanner. Signiﬁcant correlations between probability updates (the KL-
divergence between two successive posterior distributions derived from Bayesian
inference) and BOLD signal have been found in voxels from the inferior frontal
gyrus. They also identiﬁed correlates of surprise (the negative log-likelihood −log(L)
). Finally, they found correlates of the conﬁdence −log(σ) (σ being the width of the
posterior distribution) in the right intraparietal sulcus and the right inferior tempo-
ral gyrus, as shown on Figure 1.3. These correlations have been observed for both
auditory and visual sequences, denoting that the neural activity was not speciﬁc to
the sensory input but to the inference process itself.
Let us underline that correlates between neural activity and KL-divergence, −log(L)
and −log(σ) do not mean that the brain exactly encodes these three quantities. It
means that change in these quantities induces a change in neural activity, but other
quantities sufﬁcient to describe Bayesian inference could be represented.
1.2.4
Debates around probability representation in the brain
As explained in Section 1.2.2, subjects internalize both a sense of conﬁdence
regarding future events and a sense of conﬁdence regarding this sense of conﬁ-
dence. The former can be well-modelled by the MAP of the posterior distribution
==PAGE:21==
1.2. Motivation
7
FIGURE 1.3: Signiﬁcant correlations between the conﬁdence −log(σ)
and fMRI neural activity, from Meyniel et al. (2017) [48]. These corre-
lations are in the right intraparietal sulcus and the right inferior tem-
poral gyrus.
from Bayesian inference and the latter by the (log-precision of the) width of this dis-
tribution. But this is not because Bayesian predictions are built from a distribution
that humans necessarily encode this distribution. The literature proposes two differ-
ent views.
One view is that subjects indeed internalize the full distribution (the black distri-
bution p(θ|I) on Figure 1.4), and from this distribution they read out some estimates
(θMAP and the conﬁdence −log(σ),for example) [50]. This type of representation is
called the distributional representation and is often proposed in the literature [77, 65].
σ
μ
θ
-log(σ) = conﬁdence
FIGURE 1.4: Posterior distribution of the probability parameter θ.
The distributional representation assumes that the brain encodes the
full black distribution, whereas the summary representation consid-
ers that only two scalars are encoded: for example the mean µ and
the conﬁdence −log(σ).
==PAGE:22==
8
Chapter 1. Introduction
However, such a representation may contain more information than needed (sub-
jects only reported the probability and the conﬁdence, but other aspects of the distri-
bution have not been tested and may be not necessary). Alternatively, Karl Friston
proposed a general, parcimonious functioning of the brain: the variational approach
[19]. It assumes that the brain compresses information using a list of parameters
to describe this information. For example, if the brain needs to encode a Gaussian
distribution, it will only encode its mean µ and its standard deviation σ (the log
precision in the literature) as they are sufﬁcient to characterize Gaussians. Friston
assumes that the brain performs Laplace approximation, meaning that any type of
distribution is approximated using Gaussians. This approximation leads to com-
putational simplicity. For example, when encoding a beta distributions (the type
of distributions deriving from non stationnary Bernoulli and transition probabilities
processes), Friston considers that instead of using the two parameters α and β such
that the probability density h is given by
h(x; α, β) =





xα−1(1 −x)β−1
R 1
0 uα−1(1 −u)β−1 du
for x ∈[0, 1]
0
otherwise
the brain uses the mean µ and the standard deviation σ of this distribution, allowing
to access α and β, hence to access h



α = (1 −µ
σ2
−1
µ)µ2
β = ( 1−µ
σ2 −1
µ)µ2( 1
µ −1).
For probability inference, the variational approach would assume that only two
estimates are encoded, as two single scalars. For example, µ the mean of the distri-
bution over θ and the conﬁdence −log(σ), as illustrated in Figure 1.4. This is called
the summary representation. The update of µ and variance precision (obtained from
the conﬁdence by a monotonic transformation) as new observations appear has been
shown to be possible with such a representation [47].
The choice of representation is critical as it induces encoding different mathemat-
ical objects: while the distributional representation deals with functions, the sum-
mary representation consists in encoding two scalars. No clear evidence towards
one or the other view has been established.
1.3
Research question
Important concept have been introduced and allow to rephrase the research ques-
tion more accurately. The main project goal is to ﬁnd what the neural code for un-
certainty about future events is. As Bayesian probabilistic view is well-suited for
describing how uncertainty is internalized by humans and represented in the brain,
I make the assumption that the neural code of uncertainty about future events and
the neural code of probabilities are one unique code. Here, a probability shall be
interpreted as a parameter of a probabilistic model, well-described by the posterior
distribution from Bayesian inference. The general question I am interested in is thus
the following: How is information related to Bayesian posterior distribution of
==PAGE:23==
1.3. Research question
9
probabilities represented in the brain?
This raises the question of the mathematical quantities that the brain represents:
does the brain encodes the full posterior distribution or only summary quantities?
But also the way these mathematical quantities are represented: which neural code
does the brain use for representing these quantities?
These two questions pushed me to propose different neural codes (Section 3) in-
spired from existing codes (Section 2.1), assuming either the distributional or the
summary representation. This quickly forced me to question the testability of these
neural codes using modern neuroimaging techniques. Temporal codes need to be
tested using techniques having excellent temporal resolution, i.e. electroencephalog-
raphy (EEG) [12] or electrophysiology [62], requiring to know where exactly in the
brain the neural activity of interest is located. As no speciﬁc region of interest has
been accurately deﬁned for probabilities, temporal codes cannot be tested for now.
Only ﬁring rate codes have been formulated, aiming to be tested using fMRI, allow-
ing to analyze the whole brain with high spatial resolution.
As for any neuroimaging technique, fMRI data contain noise challenging pat-
tern recognition. One critical question shall be addressed: Are the proposed neural
codes identiﬁable on fMRI?
Inspired from state-of-the-art fMRI analysis (Section 2.2), for each neural code I
built and implemented a so-called fMRI encoding model mapping the encoded Bayesian
quantities directly to BOLD signal (Section 3 and 4). I simulated fMRI data with re-
alistic noise level and quantiﬁed the identiﬁability of neural codes evaluating how
likely a neural code at the origin of fMRI data is retrieved using its fMRI encoding
model. I optimized the encoding models’ parameters and experimental design in
order to maximize identiﬁability.
==PAGE:24==
==PAGE:25==
11
Chapter 2
Related work
2.1
Neural codes of ordered information
Probability encoding requires representing either scalars (summary representa-
tion) or functions (distributional representation) both deﬁned on an interval from R,
thus an ordered set. In this section, I present state-of-the-art neural codes to repre-
sent ordered information in the brain.
The encoded quantity is either a stimulus s (when talking about scalars) or a
probability distribution D over the stimulus s. The neural activity of a population of
N neurons is represented through the activity vector r = (ri)1≤i≤N, which represents
their ﬁring rates during a given time window.
2.1.1
Rate coding
Rate coding assumes that information is encoded through the summed ﬁring rates
of a set of speciﬁc neurons. Combined with recruitment (increase in the number of
encoding neurons) rate coding has successfully explained motor strength, especially
fast contractions [15]. It has also explained neuroimaging data related to auditory
stimuli intensity [27].
Considering N rate neurons, encoding the stimulus s means
N
∑
i=1
ri ∝s.
By construction, rate coding can be used for encoding scalars, but not functions.
2.1.2
Population coding
Population coding involves a population of neurons of different types. The idea
is the following: each neuron of the population ﬁres more when the information
contains some aspects speciﬁc to this neuron, what is called its receptive ﬁeld.
Two types of population coding are approached here: Probabilistic Population Coding
(for encoding scalars) and Distributional Population Coding (for encoding distribu-
tions).
Probabilistic Population Coding (PPC)
To encode scalar quantities, especially orientations in visual perception, Proba-
bilistic population coding (PPC) gives an interesting theoretical framework. The key
concept behind PPC is the notion of tuning curve. Each neuron has its own tuning
curve, taking in argument the encoded quantity. The higher the tuning curve at the
==PAGE:26==
12
Chapter 2. Related work
stimulus value is, the more the neuron ﬁres, as illustrated on Figure 2.1 with 10 neu-
rons with Gaussian tuning curves.
stimulus value
Neuron index
s
Firing rate (Hz)
FIGURE 2.1: PPC illustration with 10 neurons encoding a stimulus
value s. The 10 Gaussian tuning curves (one per neuron) lay stimulus
space. Each tuning curve has a speciﬁc value giving the mean ﬁring
rate of their associated neurons.
In addition, PPC assumes that the activity of each neuron is stochastic, centered
around the value of its tuning curve. One PPC population activity can be repre-
sented through the activity vector r. Because of its stochasticity, two identical r can
come from different s, and the same s can lead to different r. Hence, PPC implies
that the perceived s cannot be perfectly determined (otherwise, there would be a
one-to-one mapping between r and s). As r is the only physical support for subjec-
tive experience, there will always be some feeling of uncertainty regarding s.
This uncertainty can be understood using Bayes’ formula. Knowing the proba-
bilistic model that links r with s and given some prior knowledge on s, some values
of s are more plausible given a r. The plausibility of the stimulus given a ﬁring
rate can be summarized by a probability distribution over the stimulus value (on
contrary to rate coding, which implies no distribution at all). The peak of the distri-
bution represents the most likely value of the stimulus.
FIGURE 2.2: Bayesian decoding of the orientation of a bar from PPC
neural activity. Left : neural activity of the PPC neurons. Right : de-
coded posterior distribution of the orientation. From Ma et al. (2006)
[45]
Formally, for Poisson neurons (among the most popular probabilistic modelling
for PPC [45]), the stimulus s is encoded by the activity vector r through the proba-
bilistic formula
==PAGE:27==
2.1. Neural codes of ordered information
13
p(r|s, g) =
N
∏
i=1
(g fi(s))ri
ri!
e−g fi(s)
(2.1)
where fi is the tuning curve of the ith neuron and g is the gain of the signal (in case
of visual perception, it can be related to the contrast [41]). Given the prior about the
stimulus, p(s), the posterior distribution on s can be decoded using Bayes rule
p(s|r, g) ∝p(r|s, g)p(s).
The PPC approach has been successful in many visual perception studies [3, 29].
It has been shown that multisensory integration (unifying information from visual
and auditory signals, for example) can occur through a simple procedure: a linear
combination of activities between neurons, as soon as p(r|s, g) is part of the expo-
nential family with linear sufﬁcient statistics [45]. Biologically speaking, summing
the spiking of neurons would be an efﬁcient way to combine different sources of
information [60], therefore it is more suitable to consider PPC with a probabilistic
modelling belonging to exponential family (what Poisson model does, under some
hypothesis described later).
Similarly to multisensory integration, the prior distribution can be easily inte-
grated. In addition, marginalization can be computed easily under some reasonable
hypothesis [2, 46]. Finally, computation of Maximum Likelihood Estimate (i.e. the
MAP of the distribution, when the prior is ﬂat) has been shown to be doable with
PPC, thanks to the structure of the cortex and its recurrent networks [14]. See Ap-
pendix A for a more exhaustive theoretical presentation of PPC.
Interestingly, Nieder points out that the way numbers are encoded in the brain is
well-explained by a PPC behavior of neurons having Gaussian tuning curves laying
on a log-scale [54]. This conﬁrms the behavioral results discussed in Section 3.1 and
makes PPC a plausible candidate for probability encoding.
An important aspect of the PPC posterior distribution shall be pointed out. As-
suming that the gain g and the variance of the tuning curves t2 (both are constrained
by the brain) and given the posterior’s MAP, the posterior’s width is automatically
constrained [77]. In other words, PPC posterior’s MAP and width are linked. PPC
posterior distribution cannot represent distributions where MAP and width are
independent. Hence, a PPC population is relevant to represent one scalar but not
distributions, as Bayesian inference does allow the MAP and the width to be inde-
pendently deﬁned.
On contrary to PPC, Distributional Population Coding allows to represent a proba-
bility distribution with its own mode, width, shape.
Distributional Population Coding (DPC)
Distributional Population Coding (DPC) is the equivalent of PPC for distributions
[77, 65]. Like PPC, each neuron from the population has one speciﬁc tuning curve.
However, one neuron ﬁres more when the encoded distribution overlaps more with
its tuning curve. Said more mathematically, the ﬁring of this neuron is stochastic,
centered around the L2-projection of the distribution onto the tuning curve (see
Figure 2.3 for an illustration with Gaussian tuning curves when the function is a
==PAGE:28==
14
Chapter 2. Related work
bell-shaped probability distribution). Using a Bayesian decoder (a bit more complex
than for PPC [77]), the function can be unravelled.
s
Probability density
s
s
Firing rate (Hz)
Neuron index
FIGURE 2.3: DPC illustration with 10 neurons. The black distribution
(of variable s) is encoded by 10 DPC neurons, whose mean ﬁring rates
are the L2-projection of the distribution onto each tuning curve.
Noting D(s) the function to be encoded and considering Poisson noise, the DPC
activity vector can be modelled
p(r|D, g) =
N
∏
i=1
(gπi(D))ri
ri!
e−gπi(D)
with
πi(D) =
Z
x fi(x)D(x) dx.
This modelling allows DPC to represent any particular distribution shape and
width, including multimodal distributions, quite usual for visual [70] and auditory
[17] stimuli. DPC has been successful to explain MT neurons behavior in random
dot patterns [76].
Tuning curves
In order to fully characterize PPC and DPC, the last piece to be deﬁned are the
tuning curves, giving the average response of a neuron given the stimulus. The
choice of the tuning curve is critical: different tuning curves can lead to different
results [45].
In the literature, various types of tuning curves were proposed. Unlike in [45]
where sigmoids are considered, the tuning curves in the literature are bell-shaped,
as summarized in Table 2.1. Cosines are used a lot since encoded stimuli were ei-
ther colors or orientations (hence had some circularity aspects). One shall note that
sigmoids is not the most parcimonious choice of tuning curves types as they imply
that some neurons keep ﬁring at their maximal rate even when encoding stimuli far
from the sigmoid sensitivity area.
Deciding the type of tuning curves is not the only thing to do: how many tuning
curves should be considered? How can their variance, their amplitude, their domain
be found?
All tuning curves from Table 2.1 are translated from each other, hence have the
same variance and spacing between each other. But unfortunately, the literature is
quite poor regarding other aspects and choices are often arbitrary. In [45] giving the
main theoretical aspects of PPC and illustrating their functioning through simula-
tions, the tuning curve’s variance and amplitude have been drawn uniformly ran-
domly from an arbitrary space. Their domain is also arbitrary and N = 51 tuning
curves have been chosen, without any justiﬁcation. Studies presented in the Table
==PAGE:29==
2.1. Neural codes of ordered information
15
TABLE 2.1: Different types of tuning curves used in the literature.
Reference
Function used as a tuning curve
[7, 5]
max
 0, cos
  π
90(s −s∗)
2
[66]
max
 0, cos
  π
90(s −s∗)
4, Kronecker δ function
[6] [10] [71]
max
 0, cos
  π
90(s −s∗)
5
[41]
max
 0, cos
  π
90(s −s∗)
7
[16]
max
 0, cos
  π
90(s −s∗)
8, Kronecker δ function
[45]
K exp

−(s−s∗)2
2t2

+ c,
K
1+exp(−( s−s∗
t )) + c
[29]
K exp (κcos (s −s∗))
[3]
K exp (κ (cos (s −s∗) −1))
2.1 have considered arbitrary numbers of tuning curves (usually between 5 and 10)
and arbitrary variance of tuning curves.
However, one guiding criterion has been implicitely given in [45] to help ﬁxing
tuning curves hyperparameters. As Poisson processes have been observed in neural
activities [60], tuning curves may be chosen so that the associated Poisson law is
part of the exponential family. As presented in Appendix A, this is equivalent to the
following conditions on the tuning curves fi
∃c ∈R, ∀s,
N
∑
i=1
fi(s) = c.
(2.2)
This consideration will be discussed in Section 3.1.
2.1.3
Sampling-based coding
Sampling-based coding is a neural code challenging PPC and DPC for perception.
One or several neuron encode the values of samples taken from the encoded distri-
bution D [26, 39].
D can be multivariate, each neuron being associated with one variable. The activity
vectors from successive short time windows correspond to different samples drawn
from the distribution. Considering a long enough time window, an histogram of D
can be obtained from all the r’s [18], see Figure 2.4.
The sampling-based approach is interesting in the sense that it can model any
particular distribution, while distributions’ shapes from PPC and DPC are restricted
by the number of neurons, and for PPC by the shape of the tuning curves. However,
on contrary to PPC and DPC, it is still discussed whether enough samples can be
drawn within a reasonable time window so that distributions can be accurately and
quickly represented [18].
Several famous neural codes based on ﬁring rates have been presented. Section 3
introduces the neural codes proposed speciﬁcally for probabilities. The next section
presents how one can use fMRI to unravel neural codes.
==PAGE:30==
16
Chapter 2. Related work
FIGURE 2.4: Sampling-based coding of a bivariate distribution D in
the (y1, y2) plane by 2 neurons, from Fiser et al. (2010) [18].
2.2
fMRI methods to ﬁnd neural codes
Neural codes map the encoded quantities to the neural ﬁring rates of some spe-
ciﬁc neurons. fMRI does not access individual ﬁring rates directly, but the BOLD
signal in each voxel, which is linked to the average ﬁring rate of all neurons in the
voxel, what we call the global ﬁring activity of the voxel. Understanding this link is
necessary to build fMRI encoding models mapping the encoded quantities to BOLD
signal, which will be useful for identifying neural codes.
2.2.1
Link between global ﬁring activity and BOLD signal
The so-called Balloon Model established by Buxton et al. (1998) proposes a link
between global ﬁring activity and BOLD signal [8]. One simpliﬁed version of it con-
sists in approximating the BOLD signal in one voxel as the temporal convolution
between its global ﬁring activity and the so-called hemodynamic response func-
tion (HRF) (see Figure 2.5) [9, 24].
In many studies, global ﬁring activity along time is represented as a sequence of
Dirac delta functions. There is one delta function per stimulus. The center of each
delta function is at the stimulus trigger and its amplitude is proportional to the the-
oretical global ﬁring activity induced by the stimulus (see Figure 2.5) [24, 63]. Such
an hypothesis assumes that a stimulus produces an instantaneous, non lasting ﬁr-
ing activity. Other possibilities to account for extended neural activity is to consider
the global ﬁring activity to be sequences of step functions. For neural activity last-
ing much shorter than the HRF characteristic delay (about 10s), the choice of model
(delta, step function, ...) lead to equivalent results [64].
==PAGE:31==
2.2. fMRI methods to ﬁnd neural codes
17
FIGURE 2.5: The simpliﬁed Balloon model as a convolution between
global ﬁring activity and the HRF. Left : sequence of stimuli, that can
be mapped to the global ﬁring activity approximated as a sequence
of delta functions of the same amplitude. Middle : the HRF. Right
: corresponding BOLD signal, being the temporal convolution be-
tween the global ﬁring activity and the HRF. From Henson and Fris-
ton (2007) [24].
Until the blood comes back to its resting-state oxygenation level (about 25s after
the stimulus trigger), manifestation of the stimulus is visible in the BOLD signal. As
the convolution is linear, BOLD signal is a superposition of different neural activities.
Typically, fMRI provides one scan every 2s giving a picture of the BOLD value in
all the voxels. Each scan constitutes one data point.
Most of the time, fMRI is used to ﬁnd neural correlates. It means that a t-test is
performed on every voxel to see whether its BOLD level is signiﬁcantly correlated
with the variable of interest, for example a stimulus value [58]. This results in a so-
called t-map where signiﬁcantly correlated voxels are shown (as in Figure 1.3).
But fMRI can also be used for identifying neural codes.
2.2.2
fMRI encoding models
fMRI encoding models aim to map information (usually the stimulus perceived)
to the BOLD signal observed in the brain, assuming one neural code. Whether this
mapping generalizes well to new BOLD data validates or not the neural code.
Naselaris et al. (2011) [53] formalized a two-step process for building a fMRI
encoding model, after having deﬁned a region of interest:
1. A (usually non-linear) transformation is made between the raw stimulus value
and some intermediate features. These intermediate features are called lin-
earized features ;
2. A linear transformation converts the linearized features to the BOLD signal
using mixture coefﬁcients. Mixture coefﬁcients differ from voxel to voxel, as
they depend on the proportion of each type of neuron present in the voxel and
the neural gain (as shown on an example in Appendix B).
Building linearized features is a critical step, driven by the choice of neural code.
Usually, machine learning algorithms such as Ordinary Least Square regression are
used to ﬁt the mixture coefﬁcients. This approach consists in a mass-univariate analy-
sis [21], as regressions are performed independently on each voxel.
==PAGE:32==
18
Chapter 2. Related work
Literature contains numerous fMRI encoding models, especially for visual per-
ception [68, 32, 55, 52, 51, 7]. One notable example is provided by Van Bergen et
al. (2015) [71]. They presented gratings with different orientations to subjects and
recorded their fMRI activity in V1, V2 and V3. To build their encoding model, they
mapped the orientation of the stimulus to a linear combination of the activation of
8 bell-shaped tuning curves (pieces of cosines raised to the power 5). In Appendix
B, it is shown that Van Bergen et al.’s approach assumes PPC neural code [45] with
neural Poisson process and under some hidden assumptions. Van Bergen proposes
here a mesoscopic description of neural tuning. At a neuronal scale, it is very likely
that two neurons never have exactly the same tuning curve. But at the voxel scale,
as underlined in [23], neurons with slightly different tuning curves can be gathered
and lead to an effective number of tuning curves visible at fMRI. Although the num-
ber 8 is quite arbitrary, such an approximation is important to reduce the complexity
of the model (if many tuning curves are considered, many mixture coefﬁcients shall
be ﬁtted and overﬁt may occur).
The encoding model process inspired from Van Bergen et al.’s study is shown in
Figure 2.6.
Van Bergen’s approach is exactly the one described by Naselaris [53]. Consider-
ing the sequence of stimuli (sj)1≤j≤nstimuli, the tuning curves ( fi)1≤i≤N and assuming
the global ﬁring activity to be a sequence of weighted delta functions, the global
ﬁring activity in one voxel can be expressed as a function of time
N
∑
i=1
ˆwi
nstimuli
∑
j=1
fi(sj)δj(t)
with ( ˆwi)1≤i≤N the estimated mixture coefﬁcients in the voxel and δj the delta func-
tion centered around the jth stimulus’ trigger. As the convolution is linear, the BOLD
signal predicted by this encoding model for the kth scan taken at time tk is
ˆyk =
N
∑
i=1
ˆwi
 nstimuli
∑
j=1
fi(sj)δj ⊛HRF
!
(tk).
The linearized features at time t are therefore
  
nstimuli
∑
j=1
fi(sj)δj ⊛HRF
!
(t)
!
1≤i≤N
.
The performance of the encoding model is not only related to the relevance of the
linearized features, but also to the estimation of the mixture coefﬁcients (wi)1≤i≤N.
To account for fMRI noise, the classical approach is to assume the general linear
model
yk = (Xw)k + ϵk
(2.3)
with (yk)1≤k≤nscans the BOLD signal for nscans scans, (ϵk)1≤k≤nscans ∼N (0, Σ) the
fMRI noise and
==PAGE:33==
2.2. fMRI methods to ﬁnd neural codes
19
X =









 
nstimuli
∑
j=1
f1(sj)δj ⊛HRF
!
(t1)
. . .
 
nstimuli
∑
j=1
fN(sj)δj ⊛HRF
!
(t1)
...
...
...
 
nstimuli
∑
j=1
f1(sj)δj ⊛HRF
!
(tnscans)
. . .
 
nstimuli
∑
j=1
fN(sj)δj ⊛HRF
!
(tnscans)









the design matrix. Prewhitening (discussed in Section 4.1.1) can help making the
covariance matrix independent and isotropic i.e. Σ = κ2I. The likelihood of the
model 2.3 is then deﬁned by
L(y|w) ∝
nscans
∏
k=1
exp
−(yk −(Xw)k)2
2κ2

and its maximization is equivalent to minimize the mean squared error
MSE =
nscans
∑
k=1
(yk −(Xw)k)2
given by the Ordinary Least Squares solution [11]
ˆw = (XTX)−1XTy.
(2.4)
Once the linearized features computed and the mixture coefﬁcients ﬁtted, the
relevance of the neural code can be assessed through the performance of the encod-
ing model on a test set of ntest scans scans, where predictions given by the encoding
model ( ˆytestk)1≤k≤ntest scans are compared to the test data (ytestk)1≤k≤ntest scans, usually us-
ing the mean squared error as a performance metric [40] or a derived quantity, the
r2 coefﬁcient [41]
r2 = 1 −
ntest scans
∑
k=1
(ytestk −ˆytestk)2
ntest scans
∑
k=1
(ytestk −¯ytest)2
.
r2 represents the percentage of variance explained by the encoding model on
the test set. It also compares the performance of the encoding model with the per-
formance of the constant model equal to the mean on the test set: ˆyk = ¯ytest, ∀k.
r2 = 1 means perfect generalization, while r2 < 0 means that the model is perform-
ing worse than the constant average model. Each voxel has its own MSE and r2,
depending on how strong the signal is and how well the ﬁt generalizes.
Let us note that Van Bergen et al. were more interested in decoding rather than en-
coding performance. They aimed to predict what the raw stimulus values were from
the BOLD signal. This reconstruction process is based on Bayes’ rule [53]. It consists
in some extent to "read in one’s mind" and can complement encoding model metrics.
The next section introduces the neural codes I proposed inspired from the ones
described in Section 2.1.
==PAGE:34==
20
Chapter 2. Related work
 
Activity
Time
PPC global ﬁring
t
Temporal sequence of gratings
...
...
Time t
 
Orientation = 60°
60°
PPC activations
 
Convolution with HRF
Linear 
transformation
Tuning curve 
reading
Experimental test data
Neuron index
Firing rate (Hz)
BOLD
Time
PPC predictions
Experimental training data
Fit
Model assessment
BOLD
Time
FIGURE 2.6: Illustration of the encoding model process in one voxel,
inspired by the experiment from Van Bergen et al. based on PPC [71].
A sequence of gratings is shown to the subject. For each time t cor-
responding to one orientation trigger, the activations tuning curves
are calculated as intermediate features. These features are linearly
combined using mixture coefﬁcients ﬁtted through linear regression
from experimental training data and lead to the global ﬁring activity
in the voxel at time t. Convoluting this sequence with the HRF, the
predictions of the encoding model are obtained. The quality of this
encoding model is assessed comparing these predictions to experi-
mental test set.
==PAGE:35==
21
Chapter 3
Neural codes for probabilities and
translation to global ﬁring activity
This section presents plausible neural codes for probabilities. Their global ﬁring
activity pattern are derived and discussed to give a ﬁrst insight on their identiﬁabil-
ity at the voxel scale.
The probability θ is encoded.
3.1
Methods
Two family of neural codes have been developed: summary codes inspired by
codes for scalars seen in Section 2.1 and distributional codes inspired by state-of-the-
art codes for distributions. This section presents the general methods to build these
codes: the choice of encoded quantities and the tuning curves modalities, as many
state-of-the-art codes are involving tuning curves.
3.1.1
Encoded Bayesian quantities
For summary codes, I assume that both the mean of the posterior distribution
µ and its conﬁdence −log(σ) are encoded.
There are some justiﬁcations for such an assumption. One shall mind that prob-
abilistic models I generate sequences from in Section 4 are from non stationnary
Bernoulli and transition probability processes’, involving only beta distributions.
• They are sufﬁcient and efﬁcient. As seen in Section 1.2.4, the mean and any
quantity mapped to the standard deviation enable to fully characterize beta
distributions. Such quantities are widely used in the variational approach [47].
• The mean approximates well the MAP for beta distributions. Bayesian theory
assumes that subjects’ estimate is given by the MAP, not the mean. However,
for beta distributions, mean and MAP are close (see Figure 3.1a), hence as-
suming one or the other shall not change drastically the resulting code in my
analysis.
• They are consistent with representation of numbers. Comparing Western
adults with Amazonian indigenous free of any formal education, Dehaene et
==PAGE:36==
22 Chapter 3. Neural codes for probabilities and translation to global ﬁring activity
al. [13] showed that humans tend to represent numbers onto a log-scale. It
means that individuals discriminate more easily (in terms of reaction time and
error rate) two small numbers (e.g. 2 and 3) rather than two large numbers
(e.g. 1000 and 1001). Encoding −log(σ) instead of σ is therefore the natural
choice.
This is slightly different for µ. Encoding log(µ) would mean that a higher
encoding resolution is given to small probabilities, which is inconsistent with
symmetric patterns observed in subjects’ probability reporting [49]. One pos-
sibility could be to encode the log-odds log(
µ
1−µ), which is equivalent to the
linear scale for the range of probability sequences generated, as shown on Fig-
ure 3.1b and on the histograms Figure 3.6. Hence, encoding µ is also consistent
with number scaling.
• Transformations are not critical anyways. For example, if the brain encodes
σ and not −log(σ), when ﬁtting the encoding model the monotonic relation
of the −log would lead to a change in weights in the linear regression, but
dependency between BOLD and σ shall still be visible using −log(σ). This is
especially true since fMRI noise level is high: monotonic relations shall lead to
a similar ﬁt performance.
In the distributional representation, the full posterior distribution D(θ) = p(θ) is
encoded. We assume that D is represented on [0, 1] using a linear scale, invoking
the same argument as for µ’s linear scale.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
p(H)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Density
Mean
MAP
(A) Beta distribution example.
MAP
(green) and mean (red) are not identical
but close to each other.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Linear
Log odd
(B) Log-odds VS linear model.
The linear
scale (yellow) and the log-odds scale (blue)
are equivalent for non extreme values of µ.
FIGURE 3.1: Plots supporting justiﬁcations of selecting the mean of
the posterior distribution µ as one encoded quantity for the summary
representation.
3.1.2
Tuning curve models’ reduction
Most of the neural codes and their fMRI encoding models presented later are
involving tuning curves. Tuning their hyperparameters would require fMRI data,
which are already precious to assess the encoding models’ performance. One should
preferably apply prior knowledge to set these hyperparameters and reduce the com-
plexity of the models.
First, I assume that tuning curves share common hyperparameters, to reduce
complexity and be consistent with the literature. Since probabilities do not have any
==PAGE:37==
3.1. Methods
23
cyclic pattern, circular functions (like cosines raised to some power, from Table 2.1)
have not been selected. Two types of tuning curves are proposed:
• Gaussian curves: fi(x) = K exp(−(x−xi)2
2t2
)
• Sigmoid curves: fi(x) =
K
1+exp

−
 x−xi
t
 (increasing) or fi(x) =
K
1+exp
 x−xi
t

(decreasing)
The involved hyperparameters are illustrated on Figure 3.2:
• The proportion of increasing and decreasing sigmoids;
• The front coefﬁcient K;
• The lower and upper bounds of the tuning curves’ domain;
• The spacing between the tuning curves ∆, which may be irregular. This infor-
mation is contained in the xi’s;
• The parameter t controlling for the variance of the tuning curves;
• The number of tuning curves N.
As in the literature, I make the distinction between neural codes involving Gaus-
sian and sigmoid tuning curves, not considering any heterogeneous mixture of tun-
ing curve types.
For neural codes based on sigmoids, considering only increasing or decreasing
tuning curves may result in a code similar to rate coding. Indeed, as the encoded
quantity increases, more and more increasing (resp. less and less decreasing) sig-
moids are saturated. Therefore, I assume balanced mixtures of increasing and de-
creasing sigmoids. I constrain the number N of sigmoids to be even to ensure no
bias towards one monotony. This results in N
2 increasing and decreasing sigmoids.
K is a gain parameter appearing in the mixture coefﬁcients w (as shown in Ap-
pendix B where K = g), therefore it can be arbitrarily chosen. I choose K = 1.
To set the tuning curves’ domain boundaries, one can assume that the coverage
of one region by tuning curves should be proportional to the representativity of this
region within the world, as the brain adapted itself to the statistics of the world both
during development and evolution [37, 67]. This means that the spread of tuning
curves along their axis is similar to the spread of the quantity they encode in terms
of statistical occurrence. The boundaries of the histograms of the encoded quantity
over representative trials provides the tuning curves’ domain.
The scale of the encoded quantities (linear for µ and D, −log for σ) directly
refers to the spacing between tuning curves: assuming the right scale means an
equal spacing of tuning curves. ∆is therefore homogeneous, constrained by the
domain boundaries and the number of tuning curves N. In order to account for the
limited number of very low and very high values at the extremities of histograms,
the ﬁrst (resp. last) tuning curve’s mean is at one ∆from the right (resp. left) extrem-
ity of the domain.
==PAGE:38==
24 Chapter 3. Neural codes for probabilities and translation to global ﬁring activity
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Δ
Δ
K
t
Upper bound
Lower bound
Δ
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Firing rate (Hz)
 (
Firing rate (Hz)
N : number 
of tuning curves
Δ
Δ
Δ
Upper bound
Lower bound
K
N : number 
of tuning curves
1/4t
Gaussian tuning curves
Sigmoid tuning curves
FIGURE 3.2: Tuning curves hyperparameters for Gaussians and sig-
moids (equal proportion of increasing and decreasing sigmoids and
homogeneous spacing ∆).
Then, for a ﬁxed number of tuning curves N is ﬁxed, which variance parameter
t shall be deﬁned?
One intuition is that if t is too high, tuning curves will be too smooth and it can
be hard to discriminate one encoded quantity from others from the resulting activity
vector: they will not be speciﬁc enough. If t is too low, the tuning curves will be
able to encode accurately a reduced set of values but will not be able to represent
values within some non sensitive areas: they will not be selective enough. This raises
a selectivity-speciﬁcity tradeoff, illustrated on Figure 3.3. As explained in Section
2.1.2, PPC theory [45] implicitely proposes one way to tackle this tradeoff. It requires
that the sum over the tuning curves is a constant (Equation 2.2). Originally, this
criterion has been used for making a Poisson distribution of neural ﬁring compatible
with PPC theory (i.e. to allow the Poisson distribution to be part of the exponential
family, see Section 2.1.2 and Appendix A). For Gaussians, interestingly, this criterion
seems to solve the selectivity-speciﬁcity tradeoff. Figure 3.4 displays the sum over
the tuning curves along the encoded quantity axis, for a ﬁxed N and different values
of t, for Gaussians and sigmoids.
For Gaussians, when t is too small, the sum oscillates and tuning curves are not
selective enough. All t bigger than 0.03 for which Equation 2.2 is veriﬁed in most of
==PAGE:39==
3.1. Methods
25
the domain and lead to a satisfying selectivity. For maximizing speciﬁcity, t shall be
taken to be as low as possible. In the example of Figure 3.4, the optimal t is 0.05 for
Gaussians with N = 10. Decrease of the sum on the boundaries is due to the choice
of position of the ﬁrst and last tuning curve.
Firing rate (Hz)
Firing rate (Hz)
Firing rate (Hz)
Firing rate (Hz)
μ
μ
μ
Not selective
Not speciﬁc
Gaussian
Sigmoid
μ
FIGURE 3.3: Illustration of too extreme cases: not selective tuning
curves and not speciﬁc tuning curves.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
4.8
4.9
5.0
5.1
5.2
Sum over the tuning curves
Sum over the tuning curves
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2
4
6
8
t=0.005
t=0.01
t=0.03
t=0.05
t=0.08
t=0.1
t=0.15
t=0.2
t=0.25
t=0.3
t=0.4
t=0.5
μ
Not speciﬁc
Not selective
Gaussian
Sigmoid
μ
FIGURE 3.4: Sum over the probability tuning curves for different val-
ues of t, to solve the selectivity-speciﬁcity tradeoff by selecting the
optimal t. For Gaussians, the optimal t is 0.05 for N = 10. The trade-
off cannot be solved with this method for sigmoids as the sum is in-
dependent of t.
There are as many increasing sigmoids as decreasing ones, therefore sigmoids
always sum to N
2 whatever t is. Although the selectivity-speciﬁcity tradeoff clearly
exists for sigmoids, it cannot be solved using Equation 2.2’s criterion.
However, sigmoids can be viewed as an approximation of Gaussians’ cumulative
distributions. Assuming that the sensitivity-speciﬁcity optimal solution t∗
Gaussian for
Gaussians is the same as for their cumulative distribution, I selected the optimal t
for sigmoids, t∗
sigmoid, so that they resemble as much as possible to the cumulative
distribution of optimal Gaussians. To do so, I compared sigmoids’ slope at their
==PAGE:40==
26 Chapter 3. Neural codes for probabilities and translation to global ﬁring activity
inﬂection point (at xi),
1
4tsigmoid , to the slope of the cumulative distribution for optimal
Gaussians at their inﬂection point,
1
√
2πt∗
Gaussian . t∗
sigmoid can be found using the relation
t∗
sigmoid =
√
2π
4
t∗
Gaussian.
(3.1)
The only remaining hyperparameter is the number of tuning curves N. This
parameter controls the complexity of the resulting fMRI encoding model. If N is
too low, the encoding model cannot capture the relationship between the encoded
Bayesian quantities and fMRI signal. If N is too large, the model overﬁts and is likely
to capture irrelevant patterns from fMRI noise. In both cases, setting an appropriate
N is critical for the encoding model performance. As literature does not give any
direction to set it, simulations have been performed to ﬁnd the most suitable N for
the population codes. These simulations are presented in Section 4.1.3. To control
the model complexity, populations from the same code have the same N.
In the next section, the tentative neural codes for probabilities are proposed
based on the previous neural codes and methods. The resulting global ﬁring ac-
tivities at the voxel scale are computed and discussed.
3.2
Models
Three neural codes based on summary representation have been established: rate
coding, Gaussian PPC and sigmoid PPC. Two codes based on distributional repre-
sentations have been built: Gaussian DPC and sigmoid DPC.
3.2.1
Rate coding
As presented in Section 2.1.1, rate coding assumes that the neural activity is pro-
portional to the encoded quantity. It assumes that Nµ probability neurons are in-
volved in encoding µ through the activity vector rµ = (rµ
i )1≤i≤Nµ and Nσ conﬁdence
neurons encode −log(σ) through rσ = (rσ
i )1≤i≤Nσ. Here and for the next symbols,
the exponent (µ or σ) is not a variable, but indicates the nature of the population.
Rate coding assumes









Nµ
∑
j=1
rµ
j ∝µ
Nσ
∑
j=1
rσ
j ∝−log(σ).
For simplicity, I assumed that all neurons within one population ﬁres have the
same ﬁring rate rl
0 (l = µ, σ). The ﬁring rate of each population is then proportional
to the quantity related to the population, as illustrated on Figure 3.5.
As a consequence, mixture coefﬁcients wµ and wσ speciﬁc to the voxel can be
deﬁned such that the global ﬁring activity ¯a in this voxel is
¯a(µ, −log(σ)) = wµµ −wσ log(σ).
(3.2)
Global ﬁring activity is a linear combination between the mean and the conﬁ-
dence. One shall note that choosing to represent the log-odds of µ with rate coding
==PAGE:41==
3.2. Models
27
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability density
-log(σ)=1.9
μ=0.6
Probability neuron
Confidence neuron
Firing rate (Hz)
θ
Rate coding
FIGURE 3.5: Firing rate of probability neurons and conﬁdence neu-
rons are respectively proportional to the mean µ (here 0.6) and the
conﬁdence −log(σ) (here 1.9). To know what the subject supposedly
encodes, we can read out µ and −log(σ) from the posterior distribu-
tion over p(H) mathematically calculated.
would have led to exploding neural activity for µ close to 0 or 1, which is not suitable.
On Figure 3.9 in Section 3.3, the global ﬁring activity for different means and con-
ﬁdences is shown. To ensure to have the same variance in neural activity when µ and
−log(σ) cover their domain, the gain ratio shall be
q
Var(µ)
Var(−log(σ)). Demonstrations
are detailed in Appendix C.
3.2.2
Probabilistic population coding (PPC)
Applying PPC to probabilities requires dealing with two different populations:
the population related to µ (probability population) and the population related to
−log(σ) (conﬁdence population). Neural behaviors can be summarized by Nk tun-
ing curves ( f l
i )1≤i≤Nl (l = µ, σ), each tuning curve being associated to a substantial
number of neurons. Two codes emerge from PPC, one per tuning curve type: Gaus-
sian PPC and sigmoid PPC.
According to the methods, the probability (resp. conﬁdence) tuning curves’ do-
main is the range of the histograms drawn from a large number of representative µ
(resp. −log(σ)). I make the assumption that non stationnary Bernoulli and transi-
tion probability processes from Meyniel et al.’s studies [49, 48] are representative of
the probabilistic processes in the world. According to histograms from Figure 3.6,
the probability tuning curves’ domain is [0, 1] and the conﬁdence tuning curves’ do-
main is [1.1, 2.6].
Figure 3.7 illustrates Gaussian and sigmoid PPC for probabilities with N = 10
and other hyperparameters set according to the methods.
==PAGE:42==
28 Chapter 3. Neural codes for probabilities and translation to global ﬁring activity
FIGURE 3.6: Histograms of the mean and the conﬁdence of posterior
beta distributions generated for a large number of trials. They either
refer to non stationnary transition or Bernoulli probabilities.
As shown in Appendix C, the global ﬁring activity is a linear combination of
the probability tuning curves’ activations and the conﬁdence tuning curves’ acti-
vations
¯a(µ, −log(σ)) = ¯aµ(µ) + ¯aσ(−log(σ)) =
Nµ
∑
i=1
wµ
i f µ
i (µ) +
Nσ
∑
i=1
wσ
i f σ
i (−log(σ)).
(3.3)
Figure 3.9 displays the global ﬁring activity for PPC models considering arbitrary
mixture coefﬁcients.
3.2.3
Distributional population coding (DPC)
In DPC, one unique neuron population is encoding the distribution D(θ). N
tuning curves ( fi)1≤i≤N are involved. Each neuron ﬁres in average proportionally
to the L2-projection of D onto its tuning curve. Both Gaussian and sigmoid tun-
ing curves are considered, which results in two distinct codes: Gaussian DPC and
sigmoid DPC. Given N, Gaussian (resp. sigmoid) DPC tuning curves are the Gaus-
sian (resp. sigmoid) PPC probability tuning curves. However, N will be set inde-
pendently for DPC and PPC in Section 4.1.3. Figure 3.8 illustrates DPC applied to
probabilities.
The global ﬁring activity is a linear combination of the L2-projections (see Ap-
pendix C)
==PAGE:43==
3.2. Models
29
0.6
Probability density
-log(σ)=1.9
μ=0.6
Gaussian PPC
Sigmoid PPC
1.5
2.0
2.5
log( )
Firing rate (Hz)
0.0
0.5
1.0
Firing rate (Hz)
1.9
0.6
1.5
2.0
2.5
log( )
Firing rate (Hz)
0.0
0.5
1.0
Firing rate (Hz)
Firing rate (Hz)
Firing rate (Hz)
Firing rate (Hz)
Firing rate (Hz)
0.6
Probability density
-log(σ)=1.9
μ=0.6
0.6
1.9
θ
θ
FIGURE 3.7: Firing rate of probability neurons (resp. conﬁdence neu-
rons) are read from the probability tuning curves values at µ (resp.
conﬁdence tuning curves at −log(σ)). Up : Gaussian tuning curves.
Down : sigmoid tuning curves. To know what the subject supposedly
encodes, one can read out µ and −log(σ) from the posterior distribu-
tion over θ doing mathematical Bayesian inference.
¯a(D) =
N
∑
i=1
wiπi(D)
(3.4)
with
πi(D) =
Z 1
0 fi(θ)D(θ) dθ.
See Figure 3.9 to see the global ﬁring activity for DPC models, considering arbi-
trary mixture coefﬁcients.
Another relevant distributional code, sampling-based coding, is unfortunatly
hard to test using fMRI.
3.2.4
Limitations of sampling-based coding
Sampling-based coding can also be applied to encode D. D is unidimensional,
therefore only one neuron (or a set of neurons in synchrony) draws samples from D
==PAGE:44==
30 Chapter 3. Neural codes for probabilities and translation to global ﬁring activity
Probability density
0.0
0.5
1.0
Firing rate (Hz)
0.0
0.5
1.0
Firing rate (Hz)
Increasing 
sigmoids
Decreasing 
sigmoids
Probability density
0.0
0.5
1.0
Firing rate (Hz)
0.0
0.5
1.0
Firing rate (Hz)
Firing rate (Hz)
Firing rate (Hz)
Probability neuron index
Conﬁdence neuron index
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
Gaussian DPC
Sigmoid DPC
FIGURE 3.8: Firing rates are read from the overlapping between tun-
ing curves and the encoded distribution (in black). Up : Gaussian
tuning curves. Down : sigmoid tuning curves.
through its activity r. However, one major aspect limitates the possibility to explore
sampling-based coding at fMRI. It is reasonable to assume that many samples are
drawn during fMRI temporal resolution (about 2s). Therefore, BOLD signal can
only represent the average ﬁring rate of sampling-based coding neurons, which is
the mean of D, µ(D). Hence, sampling-based coding is very likely to behave like
rate coding without the conﬁdence component
¯a(D) = wµ(D).
Two distributions with the same mean but very different conﬁdence encoded
through sampling-based coding would show the same fMRI results. This is one ma-
jor limitation as information contained in the conﬁdence is of help for characterizing
the neural code.
Since rate coding is already investigated, I do not focus on sampling-based coding
in this analysis. This does not mean that sampling-based coding is not a serious
candidate. If rate coding explains well experimental data, the possibility of a hid-
den sampling-based neural code shall be further investigated (especially if the ﬁtted
mixture coefﬁcient ˆwσ is close to 0).
3.3
Discussion
Five different neural codes are proposed for probability encoding: rate coding,
Gaussian PPC, sigmoid PPC, Gaussian DPC and sigmoid DPC. While rate coding is
deﬁned without any ambiguity, other codes are controlled by the complexity param-
eter N, the number of tuning curves, that will be further discussed in Section 4.1.3.
I can now address the major question: Can these codes be identiﬁed using
fMRI?
I will quantitatively provide an answer to this question by means of simulations
of fMRI data in Section 4. But a qualitative analysis on these codes’ speciﬁcities is
==PAGE:45==
3.3. Discussion
31
provided here.
Five different voxels have been modelled and confronted to simulated posterior
distributions:
• One rate voxel with equal proportions of probability and conﬁdence neurons;
• One Gaussian PPC voxel with equal proportions of probability and conﬁdence
neurons, but heterogeneous neural mixtures within one population;
• One Gaussian DPC voxel. Its population has the same mixture coefﬁcients as
the Gaussian PPC probability population;
• One sigmoid PPC voxel with equal proportions of probability and conﬁdence
neurons, but heterogeneous neural mixtures within one population;
• One sigmoid DPC voxel. Its population has the same mixture coefﬁcients as
the sigmoid PPC probability population.
For population codes, I set N = 10. A set of beta distributions have been gen-
erated from the 2D-grid (µ, −log(σ)) ∈[0.25, 0.8] × [1.8, 2.6] ensuring proper distri-
butions. I input these distributions to each voxel and plotted slices of global ﬁring
activity for constant µ or constant −log(σ), see Figure 3.9.
Various patterns can be identiﬁed.
By construction, rate coding has a linear behavior. Its global ﬁring activity in-
creases as the mean and the conﬁdence increases.
On contrary to rate coding, both PPC voxels have a non monotonic global ﬁr-
ing activity, which is explained by the neural mixture heterogeneity. Indeed, the
peaks in Gaussian PPC activities are located at the peaks of tuning curves with high
mixture coefﬁcient. The drops (resp. the rises) in sigmoid PPC activities occur at the
drop of highly-represented decreasing sigmoids (resp. increasing sigmoids). Inter-
estingly, like rate coding, PPC slices are shifted of each other, but unlike rate coding,
whether the slice moves up or down depends on the mixture coefﬁcients of the
other population, which is a critical and fortunate aspect for neural code identiﬁa-
bility.
Finally, activities of DPC and PPC with common tuning curves have the same
monotony (as they share the same mixture coefﬁcients). However, DPC slices are
not shifted but have different curvatures. This is because DPC is made of only one
population. When the conﬁdence of the encoded distribution increases, the distribu-
tion overlaps with a reduced number of tuning curves. The resulting activity is more
and more all or none- all if the overlapping tuning curves are highly represented in
the voxel, none otherwise. When the mean is ﬁxed and the conﬁdence varies, DPC
activities also behave differently as PPC or rate coding.
It is harder to compare Gaussian and sigmoid-based codes from this ﬁgure. But
one can expect different behaviors, because sigmoids are asymmetric functions and
Gaussians are symmetric functions. A voxel where only Gaussian tuning curves on
extremities are represented would have almost no activity, while for sigmoids even
extreme tuning curves carry information (they are equal either to 0 or to 1, indicating
==PAGE:46==
32 Chapter 3. Neural codes for probabilities and translation to global ﬁring activity
where the encoded quantity is located compared to their inﬂection point).
All the differences between the proposed neural codes are fortunate and qual-
itatively indicate their identiﬁability, at least in the global ﬁring activity space and
without noise. The last part of this thesis aims to provide an answer for real fMRI
data, ﬁnishing building fMRI encoding models and applying them on simulated
fMRI data with appropriate signal-to-noise ratio.
==PAGE:47==
3.3. Discussion
33
0.4
0.6
0.8
Global firing activity (Hz)
confidence=1.8
confidence=2.0
confidence=2.2
confidence=2.4
confidence=2.6
μ
2.00
2.25
2.50
Global firing activity (Hz)
=0.25
=0.38
=0.52
=0.65
=0.79
Rate coding
Gaussian PPC
Gaussian DPC
Sigmoid DPC
0.4
0.6
0.8
Global firing activity (Hz)
2.00
2.25
2.50
-log(σ)
Global firing activity (Hz)
μ
-log(σ)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Probability tuning curve mean
Neural fraction
Mixture in this voxel
Within-population 
mixture coeﬃcients
1.5
2.0
2.5
Confidence tuning curve mean
Neural fraction
Mixture in this voxel
Fixed conﬁdence
Fixed mean
0.4
0.6
0.8
Global firing activity (Hz)
μ
2.00
2.25
2.50
Global firing activity (Hz)
-log(σ)
Sigmoid PPC
2.00
2.25
2.50
Global firing activity (Hz)
-log(σ)
0.4
0.6
0.8
Global firing activity (Hz)
μ
1.5
2.0
Confidence tuning curve inflection point
Neural fraction
Mixture in this voxel
Increasing sigmoid
Decreasing sigmoid
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Probability tuning curve inflection point
Neural fraction
Mixture in this voxel
Increasing sigmoid
Decreasing sigmoid
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Probability tuning curve mean
Neural fraction
Mixture in this voxel
0.4
0.6
0.8
Global firing activity (Hz)
μ
2.00
2.25
2.50
Global firing activity (Hz)
-log(σ)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Probability tuning curve inflection point
Neural fraction
Mixture in this voxel
Increasing sigmoid
Decreasing sigmoid
None
raction
Mixture in this voxel
Probability neurons
Legend
Increasing sigmoid
Decreasing sigmoid
Gaussian
Conﬁdence neurons
Probability neurons
Conﬁdence neurons
FIGURE 3.9: Global ﬁring activity of 5 voxels, each associated to one
neural code, on a 2D-grid of beta distributions with varying µ and
−log(σ).
On the left column (resp.
on the middle column), the
continuous evolution of the global ﬁring activity over µ (resp. over
−log(σ)) for slices of constant conﬁdence (resp. mean) are repre-
sented. For all population codes, N = 10 tuning curves are consid-
ered and their hyperparameters have been ﬁxed as described in Sec-
tion 3.1 and 3.2.2. The neural mixture in the voxel is represented in
the right column (abscisses : mean of the tuning curve for Gaussians,
inﬂection point for sigmoids; ordinates : neural fraction coefﬁcient
w).
==PAGE:48==
==PAGE:49==
35
Chapter 4
Identiﬁability of neural codes in
fMRI
Identiﬁability of the tentative neural codes for probabilities in fMRI will be as-
sessed by means of fMRI encoding models. The general process to generate BOLD
predictions from Gaussian PPC encoding model on heads and tails probabilities in-
ference is illustrated on Figure 4.1.
Encoding models need some last steps to be fully characterized. Neural codes
map Bayesian quantities (either summary or distributional quantities) to activity
vectors. For each code, the global ﬁring activity has been computed at the voxel
scale, given the mixture coefﬁcients. The last piece to map Bayesian quantities to
BOLD signal and have a proper encoding model is to convolute the global ﬁring
activity to the HRF, before ﬁtting the mixture coefﬁcients doing linear regression on
real data (see Section 2.2). The former is only a mathematical operation, but the
latter requires fMRI data to train the model on. fMRI data collection is expensive
money and timewise. This motivates simulating realistic fMRI data to train encod-
ing models and estimate identiﬁability without building any experimental pipeline.
The Methods section describes the full process to simulate realistic fMRI data as well
as the proposed procedure for testing neural codes’ identiﬁability.
As a reminder, population codes’ encoding models have not been fully charac-
terized. The complexity parameter N provides one more degree of freedom. As
already discussed, ﬁxing N appropriately is critical for the encoding model perfor-
mance and thus for neural codes’ identiﬁability. Simulations are an excellent oppor-
tunity to simplify the encoding models derived from population codes providing an
optimal value for N. The Methods section proposes a pipeline for such simulations.
Finally, designing the best experiment to collect data from is critical: on which
kind of sequences shall subjects perform probability inference? Could the choice of
sequence lead to differences in identiﬁability? Simulations can also help answering
this question. Identiﬁability results from two state-of-the art probabilistic models
will be compared: non stationnary Bernoulli processes VS non stationnary transition
probabilities processes.
==PAGE:50==
36
Chapter 4. Identiﬁability of neural codes in fMRI
 
Activity
Time
PPC global ﬁring
t
Temporal sequence of heads and tails
Time t
 
 
Convolution with HRF
Experimental test data
BOLD
Time
PPC predictions
Experimental training data
Fit
Model assessment
...
...
 
Current sequence of heads and tails
Gaussian PPC activations
σ
μ
Posterior on θ 
2.0
0.5
-log(σ)
μ
⊙
⊙
Σ
...
Tuning curve 
reading
Linear 
transformation 
and sum
BOLD
Time
FIGURE 4.1: Illustration of the encoding model process based on
Gaussian PPC and Bernoulli probabilities for one voxel. A sequence
of heads and tails is shown to the subject. For each time t correspond-
ing to one outcome, the activations of probability and conﬁdence tun-
ing curves are calculated and serve as intermediate features. These
features are linearly combined (weights found through linear regres-
sion from experimental training data) and summed and lead to the
global ﬁring activity in the voxel at time t. Convoluting the sequence
of activities to the HRF, the predicted BOLD signal is obtained. The
quality of this encoding model is assessed comparing these predic-
tions to an experimental test set.
==PAGE:51==
4.1. Methods
37
4.1
Methods
4.1.1
Simulation of realistic fMRI data
In encoding models’ analysis, mixture coefﬁcients are ﬁtted independently voxel
per voxel. This mass-univariate analysis is fortunate: it reduces the simulation of
one brain to the simulation of independent voxels. Each voxel can be simulated
with its own properties and BOLD signal.
Sequences generation
Simulating fMRI voxels from Bayesian inference requires sequences of posterior
distributions D, from which µ and −log(σ) can be read out. I generated sequences
of non stationnary Bernoulli posteriors computed from stimuli sequences using the
Matlab code developed by Meyniel, following mathematical derivations from [20].
Generating sequences also requires information about the experimental proce-
dure. To be consistent with experimental conditions from typical fMRI study[48],
for each experiment:
• 4 independent experimental sessions are considered;
• 380 stimuli per session are generated (hence 380 posteriors);
• There is a probability of
1
75 to have a change in generative probabilities θ for
each stimulus (non stationnarity);
• One stimulus is shown every 1.3s;
• Some regular breaks of 10 ± 2s corresponding to subjects’ reports of probabili-
ties and conﬁdence are taken every 15 ± 3 stimuli;
• One fMRI scan is collected every 2s.
1000 experiments have been generated to provide various posterior distribu-
tions. An example of µ and −log(σ) sequences corresponding to one session is
shown on Figure 4.2.
Regressors computation
Then, the pipeline from Figure 4.1 is followed. For each distribution sequence,
according to the neural code of interest, mean ﬁring rates involved in the neural
code are computed. They correspond to µ and −log(σ)’s sequences directly for
rate coding, fi(µ)’s and fi(−log(σ))’s sequences for PPC codes, R
θ fi(θ)D(θ) dθ’s
sequences for DPC codes.
==PAGE:52==
38
Chapter 4. Identiﬁability of neural codes in fMRI
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Stimulus index
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
 sequence
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Firing rate (Hz)
Probability tuning curves
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Stimulus index
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Firing rate (Hz)
Activations of tuning curve n°5
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time (s)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
BOLD
Regressor BOLD sequence (TC n°5 for )
Scans
Tuning curve index
Design matrix (  part)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Stimulus index
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
log( )
log( ) sequence
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
log( )
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Firing rate (Hz)
Confidence tuning curves
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Stimulus index
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Firing rate (Hz)
Activations of tuning curve n°3
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time (s)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
BOLD
Regressor BOLD sequence (TC n°3 for 
log( ))
Scans
Tuning curve index
Design matrix (
log( ) part)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
FIGURE 4.2: From the distribution sequences to the regressors: il-
lustration with Gaussian PPC (N = 5) for non stationnary Bernoulli
probabilities.
Sequences of delta functions weighted by the corresponding activation of each
neuron are convolved with the HRF. One data point is stored every 2s (fMRI scans):
this results in the regressor sequence. Concatenating all the regressors together leads
to the design matrix X of the neural code (see the bottom of Figure 4.2).
Let us note that regressors regularly relaxe taking zeros or negative values. This
is due to the breaks in the experimental design and HRF relaxation.
Mixture coefﬁcients generation
As soon as the regressors are computed, mixtures coefﬁcients w in the voxel are
generated. This raises the question of how populations of neurons are distributed in-
side voxels. This can be related to locality principles the brain uses. Neurons having
the same or similar functions will tend to be localized within the same brain area.
Therefore, one should expect some sparsity principles inside voxels: some voxels
shall contain only a reduced number of neuron types. But no prior on how this
sparsity manifests in the case of probability encoding can be formulated, hence
some arbitrary choices have been made to generate mixture coefﬁcients. However,
==PAGE:53==
4.1. Methods
39
one can reasonably assume that the sparsity level depends a lot on the voxel, thus
introducing diversity in voxel sparsity levels is realistic. I generated voxels with
several sparsity levels as the following:
• I controlled for the between-population sparsity level: the proportions be-
tween probability and conﬁdence neurons (relevant for rate coding and PPC
codes);
• I controlled for the the within-population sparsity level: it quantiﬁes how ho-
mogeneous one population is in the voxel (relevant for PPC and DPC). I de-
ﬁned the sparsity index to adjust the sparsity level.
To compute mixture coefﬁcients within one population, I sampled uniformly
numbers summing up to 1. I raised these numbers to the power of the sparsity
index and normalized them so that they sum up to 1 again.
Tables 4.1 and 4.2 show the different between-population proportions and within-
population sparsity indices used.
Between-population
sparsity level
Ratio between probability
and conﬁdence neurons
average weights
Homogeneous
0.5
Slightly unbalanced
towards probability
neurons
0.67
Slightly unbalanced
towards conﬁdence
neurons
0.33
Only probability
neurons
1
Only conﬁdence
neurons
0
TABLE 4.1: Between-population modalities for mixture coefﬁcient
generations.
Within-population
sparsity level
Sparsity index
Homogeneous
1
Slightly sparse
2
Intermediately
sparse
4
Very sparse
8
TABLE 4.2: Within-population modalities for mixture coefﬁcient gen-
erations.
==PAGE:54==
40
Chapter 4. Identiﬁability of neural codes in fMRI
To have various sparsity levels, for each experiment, I generated a 2D-grid of
mixtures over the between and within population sparsity intensities, combining
each between-population sparsity level with each within-population sparsity level.
This results in 5 × 4 = 20 mixtures per experiment.
The regressors are linearly combined with the mixture coefﬁcients. For each
code, I standardized the resulting signal so that its average standard deviation on
each session is 1. Weights w are also adjusted such that the resulting ytrue is given
by ytrue = Xw. Before adding fMRI noise, the so-called prewhitening process shall be
applied to make fMRI data realistic.
Prewhitening
As a consequence of high relaxation time of HRF, noise in BOLD response is tem-
porally correlated. In order to minimize the number of fMRI false positive rate when
ﬁnding neural correlates [75] and avoid to use Generalized Least Squares methods
with Gaussian correlated noise, one fMRI technique consists in transforming both
the BOLD signal and the design matrix to make the noise independent. This process
is called prewhitening [74]. As explained by Henson [25], it consists in multiplying
equation 2.3 by a speciﬁc prewhitening matrix S well-chosen so that
Sy = S(Xw) + Sϵ
(4.1)
such that Sϵ can be considered independent and isotropic. Prewhitening im-
poses to multiply both the BOLD signal and the design matrix by S.
0
10
20
30
40
50
Scan index
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Scan index
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(A) Prewhitening matrix used in [48] to cor-
rect for fMRI correlated noise, based on AR(1)
modelling from SPM. Visualization for the
ﬁrst 50 scans.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Filter index
50
100
150
200
250
300
Scan index
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
(B) High-pass ﬁlter matrix computed by
SPM. 10 regressors of low frequency are
used for preventing from fMRI within-
session signal oscillations.
FIGURE 4.3: Two SPM matrices correcting for fMRI artifacts.
Computation of the prewhitening matrix is based on a time-series AR(1) mod-
elling and can be performed given a BOLD dataset [25]. In their study on neural
correlates of uncertainty [48], Meyniel et al. used the prewhitening matrix shown
on Figure 4.3a, computed from the Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) Matlab tool-
box [58]. To correct for temporal correlation, this matrix contains values slightly
higher than 1 on its diagonal and values slightly lower than 0 next to the diagonal
elements. At this step of the process, I multiplied X and ytrue by the prewhitening
matrix S from Figure 4.3a.
==PAGE:55==
4.1. Methods
41
Noise injection
Prewhitening allowed to realistically add gaussian independent isotropic noise.
To be realistic, injected noise shall lead to a realistic signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), which
compares the strength of the signal to the noise level.
One possible deﬁnition of the SNR is given by
SNR =
Var(signal)
Var(signal) + Var(noise)
(4.2)
where the signal is Xw and the noise ϵ. Here the variance is the average variance
of the true signal over all voxels generated, given an encoding model.
While no signal means a SNR of 0, a signal without any noise has a SNR of 1.
A good SNR is critical for identifying the right neural code using encoding models.
An order of magnitude of the SNR for probability encoding has been established by
Meyniel (not published) using the data from [48].
After having removed head motion components, he ﬁtted a model in a well-chosen
region of interest where Bayesian quantities have been identiﬁed. He used the pre-
dicted value on a test set as an estimate of the signal, the residuals as an estimate
of the noise. The model is a linear combination between the conﬁdence and the
surprise, which was the best generalizing model from [48]. The selected region of
interest is the set of voxels where the conﬁdence was the most correlated in the in-
traparietal sulcus.
This approach targets brain area where processes involving probabilities are likely
to take place and approximates the signal by a linear combination that explains some
of the observed variance. Hence, I assume that it provides an estimate of the SNR.
However, there are some limitations of this approach, requiring to consider this SNR
estimate as an order of magnitude and not an accurate value. For example, the ﬁtting
model involves an extra regressor, the surprise, that is not part of the supposedly en-
coded Bayesian quantities, thus does not refer to any code for probabilities. It is also
biased as the region of interest has been chosen to maximize where the conﬁdence
correlates the most.
The histogram on the SNR over voxels is shown on Figure 4.4.
The SNR histogram has a skewed beta distribution shape of mode 0.1. I con-
sider 0.1 to be an order of magnitude of the SNR. Gaussian noise has been added
accordingly.
High-frequency ﬁltering to compensate fMRI signal oscillations within sessions
fMRI data have a low-frequency oscillatory behavior within sessions. To prevent
from this artifact to pollute the analysis, high-pass ﬁltering is usually applied to
the data taking the residuals from a linear regressions using cosines regressors of
different low frequencies [74]. SPM considers by default 10 low-frequencies to ﬁlter
the fMRI signal [58], as represented on Figure 4.3b.
This high-pass ﬁltering may alter the quality of the data by removing some fMRI
independent low-frequency components from the true signal (this can be the case,
for example, if the stimuli sequence has some low frequency components). It is
therefore important that the simulated data are also ﬁltered to approach the real
fMRI data treatment conditions.
==PAGE:56==
42
Chapter 4. Identiﬁability of neural codes in fMRI
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
SNR
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Frequency
FIGURE 4.4: SNR histogram over the 1332 voxels of the region of in-
terest from the data of Meyniel et al. (2017) [48] using on their best
generalizing linear model as a signal.
Linear regression using the high-pass ﬁltering regressor matrix presented on Fig-
ure 4.3b has been performed, the residuals of the regression being the resulting ﬁl-
tered BOLD signal.
The entire process for simulating BOLD data from the true signal to its ﬁnal shape is
illustrated with one example on Figure 4.5.
4.1.2
Fitting procedure and performance measure
The design matrix has been generated during fMRI data simulation. The mix-
tures coefﬁcients can be ﬁtted by each model through linear regression by mean of
Equation 2.4 before making predictions. However, computing predictions without
considering one last fMRI artifact is dangerous. This artifact relates to changes in
fMRI signal properties between experimental sessions. fMRI scanner makes some
calibrations inducing a slight change in signal gain and some offset between ses-
sions. As a consequence, training a model using several sessions can lead to poor
predictions on one left-out test session if sessions differ too much.
Centering and scaling
To correct for the between-session fMRI offset, I centered every BOLD signal sub-
stracting the signals by their means for each session. I also centered the regressors
per session and rescaled them so that their overall order of magnitude is 1. However,
to cope with gain change, the problem is more complex. If some sessions contain less
signal due to mixture coefﬁcients, scaling the BOLD signal for these sessions (for ex-
ample standardizing them) would result in losing precious information.
==PAGE:57==
4.1. Methods
43
FIGURE 4.5: Simulation of fMRI data from the true signal to the end
of the pipeline.
Cross-validation
The training set and the test set shall be as homogeneous as possible to avoid gain
issues, therefore I deﬁned the training set to be three sessions and the left-out session
to be the test set. To make use of experimental data as much as possible, cross-
validation is preferrable, hence I used cross-validation for model assessment on the
simulated data too. 4-fold cross-validation is followed, each fold corresponding
to one session. This allows the test set to have a uniform fMRI gain. However,
the training set may not. This is why most of the time no adjustment is made on
the gain when training a model on different sessions. It shall be assumed that the
gain between sessions does not drastically change. This is one limitation of cross-
validation for fMRI. When using real data, gain differences shall not be too big across
sessions (and this is not the case here: the simulated data all have the same fMRI
gain). However, when testing the model, a simple linear regression on this session
can help to cope with gain change.
Second level regression
The BOLD signal on this session is the target, while the only non constant regres-
sor is the prediction of the model on the test session. Taking the same notations as
in Equation 4.1, I introduced a second level regression training linear regression on
the test session looking for c0 and c1 such that we maximize the likelihood of the
following model
(Sy)test = c1(SXw)predicted + c0 + Sϵ′
(4.3)
==PAGE:58==
44
Chapter 4. Identiﬁability of neural codes in fMRI
with Sϵ′ some independent isotropic gaussian noise. c1 is an estimate of the ra-
tio between the gain of the test session and the effective gain of training sessions
merged. This method allows to not penalize a model because of a change in left-out
session gain. It may introduce some bias in the performance, for example if there
is no gain change and the model is intrinsically poor, but somehow its predictions
follows the same monotony as the test data (hence it takes advantage of the homo-
thetic transformation from Equation 4.3). It is assumed that such a scenario does
not occur with the current encoding models. One major advantage of this second
level regression is that it smoothes r2 results. Indeed, before this second level, r2 re-
sults were spread on a bimodal histogram with sometimes strongly negative values,
which complexiﬁes performance analysis. The second level regression forces r2 to
be positive and provides a unimodal histogram over r2 values on second model (the
second ﬁtted model cannot be worse than the constant model Sy = S ¯ytest).
One ﬁt example and the corresponding weights are shown on Figure 4.6 and 4.7.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Time (s)
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
BOLD
Training set fit
Data
Fitted
True
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time (s)
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
BOLD
Test set predictions
Data
Predicted
True
FIGURE 4.6: Fit example on a training set of three sessions (separated
by dash lines) and predictions on the test set (after the second level
ﬁt) with SNR = 0.1. The raw signal is in blue. The generative true
signal (green) is Gaussian PPC with Ntrue = 5 tuning curves. The
ﬁtted model (yellow) is Gaussian PPC with Nf it = 8 tuning curves.
==PAGE:59==
4.1. Methods
45
Prob TC n°1
Prob TC n°2
Prob TC n°3
Prob TC n°4
Prob TC n°5
Conf TC n°1
Conf TC n°2
Conf TC n°3
Conf TC n°4
Conf TC n°5
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
True weights
Prob TC n°1
Prob TC n°2
Prob TC n°3
Prob TC n°4
Prob TC n°5
Prob TC n°6
Prob TC n°7
Prob TC n°8
Conf TC n°1
Conf TC n°2
Conf TC n°3
Conf TC n°4
Conf TC n°5
Conf TC n°6
Conf TC n°7
Conf TC n°8
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Fitted weights
FIGURE 4.7: True weights and ﬁtted weights from the ﬁrst step of the
two-level ﬁtting procedure illustrated on Figure 4.6.
In this example, the predictions and the true signal on the test set after the two-
level regression are quite close to each other (r2
true = 0.8 when comparing to the true
signal, r2 = 0.05 when comparing to the test data), although a different number of
tuning curves is used.
Model assessment
In order to assess the ability of a neural code to retrieve one other, ﬁts and tests
shall be performed on a sufﬁcient number of data, exploring various scenarii (dif-
ferent input sequences, different mixture coefﬁcients). The pipeline is made so that
the variety of scenarii is only controlled by the number of generated experiments,
nexperiments.
Performing cross-validation for a given nexperiments, one can plot his-
togram over r2 values on test sets, being an estimate of the probability distribution
p(r2). This distributation is associated to both the true neural code (used to gener-
ate data) and the ﬁtted encoding model. When nexperiments becomes big enough, the
histogram is stable and representating p(r2). Comparing two encoding model per-
formance consists in comparing their r2 histograms.
As histograms after two-level regressions are unimodal, the mean of the r2 sta-
ble histogram on the left-out sessions is used as a performance metric. I can men-
tion that the MSE or the r2 provided similar results.
The next Section presents in more details the simulations performed, based on
the aforementioned data generation, ﬁtting procedure and model assessment meth-
ods.
==PAGE:60==
46
Chapter 4. Identiﬁability of neural codes in fMRI
4.1.3
Simulation procedures
Simplifying population codes’ encoding models
The goal of this simulation is to choose the hyperparameter N for each PPC
and DPC code. More speciﬁcally, it consists in choosing Nf it, the number of tun-
ing curves to use for identiﬁability simulations and real data treatment. An effective
number Ntrue of tuning curves may be relevant to describe fMRI data. But no one
knows Ntrue. Literature ﬁtting PPC encoding models indicated good performance
with Nf it between 5 and 10, implying Ntrue may be contained in this range. The crite-
rion I chose to select Nf it is the following: The optimal Nf it maximizes the encoding
model performance for any Ntrue. To ﬁnd the optimal Nf it, for each population code
(Gaussian PPC (gPPC), sigmoid PPC (sPPC), Gaussian DPC (gDPC), sigmoid DPC
(sDPC)), I simulated BOLD signals deriving from Ntrue tuning curves and ﬁtted its
respective encoding model using Nf it tuning curves. I let both N’s be part of the set
EN = {2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 14, 20} for Gaussian codes and EN = {2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 14, 20}
for sigmoid codes. I deliberately increased the resolution of the grid for small val-
ues of N, as I have stronger prior towards small N according to the literature (this
remains partly arbitrary though). Taking the mean of the r2 histograms for each
combination, this results in a r2-matrix.
Considering a ﬂat prior over EN, I choose Nf it that maximizes the mean of r2
means over all Ntrue (mean over the rows).
I ensured that the number of simulated experiments nexperiments led to stable r2
histograms.
The pseudo-code for this simulation is the following:
for code ∈{gPPC; sPPC; gDPC; sDPC} do
for Nf it ∈EN do
for experiment ∈J1; 1000K do
Generate X(code, Nf it, experiment);
for Ntrue ∈EN do
for w ∈Ew do
Generate y(code, experiment, w, Ntrue);
for session ∈J1; 4K do
Train model(code, Nf it) on
y(code, experiment, w, Ntrue, J1; 4K \ {session});
Compute r2(code, Nf it, experiment, Ntrue, w, session);
end
end
end
end
end
For each Nf it and Ntrue compute the average r2 over w, experiment, session
r2(code, Nf it, Ntrue) (r2-matrix);
Select Nf it that maximizes the mean of the r2-matrix over Ntrue;
end
Algorithm 1: Finding the optimal Nf it to simplify population codes’ encoding
models.
==PAGE:61==
4.1. Methods
47
Ew is the set of the 20 mixture coefﬁcients computed according to Section 4.1.1,
changing from experiment to experiment.
Assessing identiﬁability of neural codes on fMRI
Section 3.3’s qualitative results show structural differences between the ﬁve pro-
posed neural codes when no noise is applied. This simulation aims to answer whether
there is a chance to identify neural codes for real fMRI data. Results of this simula-
tion are critical to know whether it is worth pushing further the project.
The principles are similar as for the previous simulation: I simulate BOLD sig-
nals from each of the ﬁve neural codes and ﬁt the ﬁve encoding models. For PPC
and DPC codes, I ﬁx both Nf it and Ntrue to the optimal values of Nf it obtained from
the previous simulation.
Let us motivate the choice of result representation for this simulation. When un-
der real fMRI conditions, the experimenter will ﬁt and test the ﬁve encoding models
on the different available sessions and see which model generalizes the best by com-
paring r2’s. For each left-out session, there is some probability that the encoding
model leading to the best r2 is derived from the true code (hit) and some probability
that it refers to another code (miss). To identify the right code, the probability of
hits shall be above chance i.e. above 1
5 = 0.2.
A 5-by-5 confusion matrix Π is computed. For each neural code, Π shows the prob-
ability of each encoding model to have the best r2. Good identiﬁability means high
diagonal values of Π.
The pipeline of this simulation is given by the following pseudo-code:
Initialize Π=zeros(5, 5);
for code f it ∈{gPPC; sPPC; gDPC; sDPC; rate} do
for experiment ∈J1; 1000K do
Generate X(code f it, experiment);
for codetrue ∈{gPPC, sPPC, gDPC, sDPC, rate} do
for w ∈Ew do
Generate y(codetrue, experiment, w);
for session ∈J1; 4K do
Train model(code f it) on
y(codetrue, experiment, w, J1; 4K \ {session});
Compute r2(code f it, codetrue, w, experiment, session);
For code f it that maximizes this r2, do
Π(code f it, codetrue)=Π(code f it, codetrue)+1;
end
end
end
end
end
Normalize Π;
Algorithm 2: Compute the identiﬁability confusion matrix of neural codes.
==PAGE:62==
48
Chapter 4. Identiﬁability of neural codes in fMRI
Task optimization: Bernoulli VS transition probability processes
Having established the identiﬁability of neural codes using Bernoulli sequences,
I investigated whether another type of sequence could improve identiﬁability per-
formances. I applied exactly the same data simulation and ﬁt procedures as de-
scribed in Sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 using transition probabilities, as in Meyniel et al.
(2015, 2017) [49, 48]. The Matlab code to generate non stationnary transition proba-
bilities sequences and posteriors has been developed by Meyniel, following mathe-
matical derivations from [49].
4.2
Results
The r2-matrices to simplify population codes’ encoding models is visible on Fig-
ure 4.8.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10 14 20
Ntrue
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
14
20
Nfit
gaussian_dpc, SNR=0.1
0.10
0.04
2
4
6
8
10
Mean over the row
0.10
0.10
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10 14 20
Ntrue
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
14
20
Nfit
gaussian_ppc, SNR=0.1
0.10
0.04
Mean over the row
0.10
Mean over the row
2
4
6
8
10
14
20
Ntrue
2
4
6
8
10
14
20
Nfit
sigmoid_dpc, SNR=0.1
0.10
0.04
0.10
Mean over the row
2
4
6
8
10
14
20
Ntrue
2
4
6
8
10
14
20
Nfit
sigmoid_ppc, SNR=0.1
0.10
0.04
Mean over the row
Best value
FIGURE 4.8: r2-matrices from the simulation to simplify population
codes’ encoding models. It displays the mean of the r2 histogram
over left-out sessions, for various mixtures and Bernoulli sequences.
On the left of each matrix is represented the mean over the different
Ntrue’s. Nf it shall be selected to maximize this mean (red mark).
From these results, Nf it has been selected so that it maximizes the mean of the r2
matrix over its rows :
• Nf it = 6 for Gaussian PPC;
• Nf it = 2 for sigmoid PPC;
• Nf it = 5 for Gaussian DPC;
==PAGE:63==
4.2. Results
49
• Nf it = 2 for sigmoid DPC.
The identiﬁability confusion matrix based on these values of Nf it for Bernoulli
sequences is presented on Figure 4.9.
FIGURE 4.9: Identiﬁability confusion matrix for Bernoulli sequences.
It displays the probability of each true neural code (or scheme) to be
ﬁtted by each neural codes’ encoding model.
Finally, I checked that transition probability data lead to exactly the same op-
timal N’s for population codes. The difference between the transition probability
confusion matrix and the Bernoulli confusion matrix is shown on Figure 4.10.
==PAGE:64==
50
Chapter 4. Identiﬁability of neural codes in fMRI
FIGURE 4.10: Difference between transition probability confusion
matrix and Bernoulli confusion matrix.
4.3
Discussion
Having a look on Figure 4.8, performance decreases signiﬁcantly from Nf it = 14
for all neural codes. This is due to overﬁtting, as expected when the model complex-
ity becomes too large.
Interestingly, Gaussian codes present a similar diagonal pattern (more visible for
PPC than DPC). In other words, as Nf it and Ntrue differ from each other, performance
gets lower. This is not the case for sigmoids matrices that are quite homogeneous
along one row. This is probably due to the fact that sigmoids are redondant, hence
more robust to sparse mixture than Gaussians. Indeed, as already mentioned, voxels
containing only neurons with Gaussian tuning curves on extremities would have al-
most no activity, while even sigmoids on extremities carry information regarding the
location of the encoded quantity compared to their inﬂection points. The upper right
part of sigmoid codes’ matrices shows that increasing the true number of sigmoids
does not prevent from a few sigmoids to catch the signal very well, not to say better
(e.g. Nf it = 2 ﬁts as well the signals from Ntrue = 2 tuning curves as the signals
from Ntrue = 20 tuning curves), which also supports that sigmoid redondancy plays
a signiﬁcant role. Signal loss and overﬁt are responsible for diagonal pattern for
Gaussians codes, whereas sigmoid redondancy explains homogeneous patterns
along columns for sigmoid codes, and overﬁt explains decrease in performance
along rows.
Regarding the means for each row, one can see a very smooth plateau for Gaussian
codes from 4 to 8, for sigmoids from 2 to 8. This indicates that the choice of Nf it
inside this range is not very critical, which is fortunate and helps understanding
success of the literature choosing arbitrarily N in this range.
Results from Figure 4.9 are very fortunate: under our assumptions, neural codes
are identiﬁable. Indeed, for each code, the diagonal contains a probability higher
==PAGE:65==
4.3. Discussion
51
than 0.2. Especially, Gaussian codes have an identiﬁcation probability on the diago-
nal greater than 0.5.
Interestingly, sigmoid codes and rate coding are hard to distinguish from one an-
other. Sigmoid DPC and rate coding resemble each other (probabilities 0.17 and 0.19
of probabilities of misses) but are mostly conﬂated with sigmoid PPC. This is not so
much a surprise: as only two sigmoids are used in PPC and DPC, sigmoid codes
can realistically behave like rate codes as they have monotonic behavior. The area
around their inﬂection point (which is extensive for N = 2) can be well approxi-
mated by a straight line i.e. can be related to rate coding. Sigmoid DPC and PPC are
also harder to distinguish from each other than Gaussian DPC and PPC are. Mono-
tonic behavior of sigmoids should play a role here.
I analyzed the impact of voxel sparsity on the confusion matrix. On Figure 4.11
two confusion matrices are represented: one considering only very sparse within-
population mixtures (sparsity index of 8) and one considering only homogeneous
within-population mixtures (sparsity index of 1). Clearly, homogeneous voxels are
harder to identify than sparse voxels. Gaussian codes, especially Gaussian PPC,
have a major increase in identiﬁcation probability on sparse voxels (+43% from ho-
mogeneous to sparse voxel!). This is interesting as sparse Gaussian voxels contain
less signal than homogeneous Gaussian voxels covering the entire probability range.
But in fact, the Gaussian restricted receptive ﬁeld is also a strength, as sparse Gaus-
sian voxels are strongly activated for only speciﬁc distributions, mean or conﬁdence
values, which makes Gaussians codes very speciﬁc compared to sigmoid and rate
codes that constantly convey some signal. This sheds light on the fact that Gaussian
codes are easier to identify thanks to Gaussian’s restricted receptive ﬁeld.
Let us note that there is no change in identiﬁability between rate coding and sig-
moids codes. This means that their similarities is independent to the number of
sigmoids represented in the voxel.
(A) Bernoulli confusion matrix on very
sparse voxels only (sparsity index of 8).
(B) Bernoulli confusion matrix on homo-
geneous voxels only (sparsity index of 1).
FIGURE 4.11: Bernoulli confusion matrices for extreme sparsity lev-
els.
According to Figure 4.10 transition probabilities increase sigmoid DPC identiﬁ-
ability by 8% (from 34 to 42%), sigmoid PPC identiﬁability by 2% (from 41 to 43%),
while it reduces by 1% Gaussian PPC identiﬁability (from 59 to 58%). From Figure
==PAGE:66==
52
Chapter 4. Identiﬁability of neural codes in fMRI
4.9, sigmoid DPC is the code whose identiﬁability needs to be the most enhanced.
An increase of 8% is therefore suitable, while losing 1% on Gaussian PPC is accept-
able as this is the most identiﬁable code. According to this simulation pipeline, tran-
sition probabilities are more suitable than Bernoulli probabilities for identifying
the neural code of probabilities.
Taking a more general view on this analysis, overall results are encouraging.
Simulations show that, under the made assumptions, the proposed neural codes are
identiﬁable on fMRI. This indicates that it is worth pushing further the experimental
design and data collection. However, one may point out some important limitations
of these assumptions.
I may have made wrong assumptions regarding voxel sparsity levels, tuning
curves’ hyperparameter estimations or non biased second level regression. But even
if not, these results are asymptotical (1000 experiments have been generated per
simulation!). Statistical analysis shall be performed to estimate how many subjects
would be necessary to ensure signiﬁcant identiﬁcation of neural codes, and whether
this number is realistic.
The association between the ﬁtted encoding models and neural codes’ expression
on fMRI can also be questioned. One can see from Figure 4.6 that generalization can
occur even though real and ﬁtted weights differ a lot. Indeed, conﬁdence weights
retrieved by the model are negative without hurting performance, although all true
weights are positive. By experience, this scenario occurs when the ﬁtted model is
more complex than the true one. One can see that positive ﬁtted weights are higher
than negative ﬁtted weights, to compensate for this sign difference. A very different,
but seemingly equivalent model is learnt. Since performance is acceptable and result
patterns are interpretable, I chose to stick on Ordinary Least Squares regression, but
one possibility to obtain a model closer to the neural code could be to apply Non-
Negative Least Squares, forcing the ﬁtted weights to be positive.
Finally, one question not covered shall be pointed out: is p(H) or p(T) encoded?
Does the brain encode both? Only one? Literature is poor on answering this ques-
tion. No evidence suggests that the probability regarding one speciﬁc event should
be encoded more than those regarding other events. Some voxels may encode p(H)
during one experimental session and p(T) during the next one. Such a scenario
would require speciﬁc caution when ﬁtting encoding models.
==PAGE:67==
53
Chapter 5
Conclusion
At this stage, one cannot answer the question of which neural code for probabil-
ities the human brain uses nor how it represents them. However, this project con-
tributed to getting closer to understanding uncertainty about future events, propos-
ing different fMRI encoding models derived from ﬁve original neural codes map-
ping probabilities to neural activities. I have simpliﬁed these models using literature
arguments, home-made justiﬁcations and simulations sticking as much as possible
on realistic fMRI data treatment pipeline. Then, I have shown under some assump-
tions that these neural codes are identiﬁable in fMRI, especially for sparse voxels that
tend to contrast each code speciﬁcities. I propose that sequences governed by tran-
sition probabilities are more suitable for a future experimental task than Bernoulli
probabilities. These encoding models shall be confronted to real data not only to
have tangible results on probability encoding, but also to analyze their possible lim-
itations.
This master thesis is the ﬁrst step of a probably long and exciting journey of
neural codes for probabilities. As next steps, in addition to perform the analysis on
real data set, optimization of the future experimental task can be pushed further,
for example investigating the inﬂuence of the stimuli sequence parameters (time
between stimuli and break modalities) and other types of probabilistic models to
propose to subjects.
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
55
Bibliography
[1]
J Yu Angela and Peter Dayan. “Uncertainty, neuromodulation, and attention”.
In: Neuron 46.4 (2005), pp. 681–692.
[2]
Jeffrey M Beck, Peter E Latham, and Alexandre Pouget. “Marginalization in
neural circuits with divisive normalization”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 31.43
(2011), pp. 15310–15319.
[3]
Jeffrey M Beck et al. “Probabilistic population codes for Bayesian decision
making”. In: Neuron 60.6 (2008), pp. 1142–1152.
[4]
Timothy EJ Behrens et al. “Learning the value of information in an uncertain
world”. In: Nature neuroscience 10.9 (2007), p. 1214.
[5]
Gijs Joost Brouwer and David J Heeger. “Categorical clustering of the neu-
ral representation of color”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 33.39 (2013), pp. 15454–
15465.
[6]
Gijs Joost Brouwer and David J Heeger. “Cross-orientation suppression in hu-
man visual cortex”. In: Journal of Neurophysiology 106.5 (2011), pp. 2108–2119.
[7]
Gijs Joost Brouwer and David J Heeger. “Decoding and reconstructing color
from responses in human visual cortex”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 29.44 (2009),
pp. 13992–14003.
[8]
Richard B Buxton, Eric C Wong, and Lawrence R Frank. “Dynamics of blood
ﬂow and oxygenation changes during brain activation: the balloon model”. In:
Magnetic resonance in medicine 39.6 (1998), pp. 855–864.
[9]
Richard B Buxton et al. “Modeling the hemodynamic response to brain activa-
tion”. In: Neuroimage 23 (2004), S220–S233.
[10]
Edmund Chong, Ariana M Familiar, and Won Mok Shim. “Reconstructing rep-
resentations of dynamic visual objects in early visual cortex”. In: Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 113.5 (2016), pp. 1453–1458.
[11]
M Bishop Christopher. PATTERN RECOGNITION AND MACHINE LEARN-
ING. Springer-Verlag New York, 2016.
[12]
Olivier David and Karl J Friston. “A neural mass model for MEG/EEG:: cou-
pling and neuronal dynamics”. In: NeuroImage 20.3 (2003), pp. 1743–1755.
[13]
Stanislas Dehaene et al. “Log or linear? Distinct intuitions of the number scale
in Western and Amazonian indigene cultures”. In: science 320.5880 (2008), pp. 1217–
1220.
[14]
Sophie Deneve, Peter E Latham, and Alexandre Pouget. “Reading population
codes: a neural implementation of ideal observers”. In: Nature neuroscience 2.8
(1999), p. 740.
[15]
Roger M Enoka and Jacques Duchateau. “Rate coding and the control of mus-
cle force”. In: Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 7 (2017), a029702.
==PAGE:70==
56
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[16]
Edward F Ester, Thomas C Sprague, and John T Serences. “Parietal and frontal
cortex encode stimulus-speciﬁc mnemonic representations during visual work-
ing memory”. In: Neuron 87.4 (2015), pp. 893–905.
[17]
Albert S Feng and Rama Ratnam. “Neural basis of hearing in real-world situ-
ations”. In: Annual review of psychology 51.1 (2000), pp. 699–725.
[18]
József Fiser et al. “Statistically optimal perception and learning: from behavior
to neural representations”. In: Trends in cognitive sciences 14.3 (2010), pp. 119–
130.
[19]
Karl Friston et al. “Variational free energy and the Laplace approximation”. In:
Neuroimage 34.1 (2007), pp. 220–234.
[20]
Charles R Gallistel et al. “The perception of probability.” In: Psychological re-
view 121.1 (2014), p. 96.
[21]
David M Groppe, Thomas P Urbach, and Marta Kutas. “Mass univariate anal-
ysis of event-related brain potentials/ﬁelds I: A critical tutorial review”. In:
Psychophysiology 48.12 (2011), pp. 1711–1725.
[22]
Moshe Gur and D Max Snodderly. “High response reliability of neurons in
primary visual cortex (V1) of alert, trained monkeys”. In: Cerebral cortex 16.6
(2005), pp. 888–895.
[23]
John-Dylan Haynes. “A primer on pattern-based approaches to fMRI: princi-
ples, pitfalls, and perspectives”. In: Neuron 87.2 (2015), pp. 257–270.
[24]
R Henson and K Friston. “Convolution models for fMRI”. In: Statistical para-
metric mapping: The analysis of functional brain images (2007), pp. 178–192.
[25]
RNA Henson. “Analysis of fMRI time series: Linear time-invariant models,
event-related fMRI and optimal experimental design”. In: Elsevier, 2003.
[26]
Patrik O Hoyer and Aapo Hyvärinen. “Interpreting neural response variabil-
ity as Monte Carlo sampling of the posterior”. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems. 2003, pp. 293–300.
[27]
L Jäncke et al. “Intensity coding of auditory stimuli: an fMRI study”. In: Neu-
ropsychologia 36.9 (1998), pp. 875–883.
[28]
Renaud Jardri and Sophie Deneve. “Circular inferences in schizophrenia”. In:
Brain 136.11 (2013), pp. 3227–3241.
[29]
Mehrdad Jazayeri and J Anthony Movshon. “Optimal representation of sen-
sory information by neural populations”. In: Nature neuroscience 9.5 (2006),
p. 690.
[30]
Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan, 2011.
[31]
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. “Prospect theory: An analysis of deci-
sion under risk”. In: Handbook of the fundamentals of ﬁnancial decision making:
Part I. World Scientiﬁc, 2013, pp. 99–127.
[32]
Kendrick N Kay et al. “Identifying natural images from human brain activity”.
In: Nature 452.7185 (2008), p. 352.
[33]
Daniel Kersten, Pascal Mamassian, and Alan Yuille. “Object perception as Bayesian
inference”. In: Annual review of psychology 55 (2004).
[34]
Jaegwon Kim. Philosophy of mind. Routledge, 2018.
[35]
Seong-Gi Kim, Wolfgang Richter, and Kˇamil Uˇgurbil. “Limitations of temporal
resolution in functional MRI”. In: Magnetic resonance in medicine 37.4 (1997),
pp. 631–636.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
57
[36]
Konrad P Körding and Daniel M Wolpert. “Bayesian integration in sensorimo-
tor learning”. In: Nature 427.6971 (2004), p. 244.
[37]
Konrad P Kording et al. “How are complex cell properties adapted to the
statistics of natural stimuli?” In: Journal of neurophysiology 91.1 (2004), pp. 206–
212.
[38]
Pierre Simon Laplace. Théorie analytique des probabilités. Courcier, 1820.
[39]
Tai Sing Lee and David Mumford. “Hierarchical Bayesian inference in the vi-
sual cortex”. In: JOSA A 20.7 (2003), pp. 1434–1448.
[40]
Chien Heng Liao et al. “Estimating the delay of the fMRI response”. In: Neu-
roImage 16.3 (2002), pp. 593–606.
[41]
Taosheng Liu, Dylan Cable, and Justin L Gardner. “Inverted encoding models
of human population response conﬂate noise and neural tuning width”. In:
Journal of Neuroscience 38.2 (2018), pp. 398–408.
[42]
Nikos K Logothetis. “What we can do and what we cannot do with fMRI”. In:
Nature 453.7197 (2008), p. 869.
[43]
Nikos K Logothetis et al. “Neurophysiological investigation of the basis of the
fMRI signal”. In: Nature 412.6843 (2001), p. 150.
[44]
Wei Ji Ma and Mehrdad Jazayeri. “Neural coding of uncertainty and probabil-
ity”. In: Annual review of neuroscience 37 (2014), pp. 205–220.
[45]
Wei Ji Ma et al. “Bayesian inference with probabilistic population codes”. In:
Nature neuroscience 9.11 (2006), p. 1432.
[46]
Wei Ji Ma et al. “Behavior and neural basis of near-optimal visual search”. In:
Nature neuroscience 14.6 (2011), p. 783.
[47]
Christoph D Mathys et al. “Uncertainty in perception and the Hierarchical
Gaussian Filter”. In: Frontiers in human neuroscience 8 (2014), p. 825.
[48]
Florent Meyniel and Stanislas Dehaene. “Brain networks for conﬁdence weight-
ing and hierarchical inference during probabilistic learning”. In: Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 114.19 (2017), E3859–E3868.
[49]
Florent Meyniel, Daniel Schlunegger, and Stanislas Dehaene. “The sense of
conﬁdence during probabilistic learning: A normative account”. In: PLoS com-
putational biology 11.6 (2015), e1004305.
[50]
Florent Meyniel, Mariano Sigman, and Zachary F Mainen. “Conﬁdence as
Bayesian probability: from neural origins to behavior”. In: Neuron 88.1 (2015),
pp. 78–92.
[51]
Tom M Mitchell et al. “Predicting human brain activity associated with the
meanings of nouns”. In: science 320.5880 (2008), pp. 1191–1195.
[52]
Thomas Naselaris et al. “Bayesian reconstruction of natural images from hu-
man brain activity”. In: Neuron 63.6 (2009), pp. 902–915.
[53]
Thomas Naselaris et al. “Encoding and decoding in fMRI”. In: Neuroimage 56.2
(2011), pp. 400–410.
[54]
Andreas Nieder. “The neuronal code for number”. In: Nature Reviews Neuro-
science 17.6 (2016), p. 366.
[55]
Shinji Nishimoto et al. “Reconstructing visual experiences from brain activity
evoked by natural movies”. In: Current Biology 21.19 (2011), pp. 1641–1646.
==PAGE:72==
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[56]
Seiji Ogawa et al. “Brain magnetic resonance imaging with contrast dependent
on blood oxygenation”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 87.24
(1990), pp. 9868–9872.
[57]
IZUMI Ohzawa, GARY Sclar, and RALPH D Freeman. “Contrast gain control
in the cat’s visual system”. In: Journal of neurophysiology 54.3 (1985), pp. 651–
667.
[58]
William D Penny et al. Statistical parametric mapping: the analysis of functional
brain images. Elsevier, 2011.
[59]
Cameron R Peterson and Lee Roy Beach. “Man as an intuitive statistician.” In:
Psychological bulletin 68.1 (1967), p. 29.
[60]
Alexandre Pouget et al. “Probabilistic brains: knowns and unknowns”. In: Na-
ture neuroscience 16.9 (2013), p. 1170.
[61]
Marcus E Raichle. “Behind the scenes of functional brain imaging: a histori-
cal and physiological perspective”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 95.3 (1998), pp. 765–772.
[62]
David Regan. “Human brain electrophysiology: evoked potentials and evoked
magnetic ﬁelds in science and medicine”. In: (1989).
[63]
Matthew D Robson, Jennifer L Dorosz, and John C Gore. “Measurements of
the temporal fMRI response of the human auditory cortex to trains of tones”.
In: Neuroimage 7.3 (1998), pp. 185–198.
[64]
Alard Roebroeck, Elia Formisano, and Rainer Goebel. “The identiﬁcation of
interacting networks in the brain using fMRI: model selection, causality and
deconvolution”. In: Neuroimage 58.2 (2011), pp. 296–302.
[65]
Maneesh Sahani and Peter Dayan. “Doubly distributional population codes:
simultaneous representation of uncertainty and multiplicity”. In: Neural Com-
putation 15.10 (2003), pp. 2255–2279.
[66]
Sameer Saproo and John T Serences. “Attention improves transfer of motion
information between V1 and MT”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 34.10 (2014), pp. 3586–
3596.
[67]
Eero P Simoncelli and Bruno A Olshausen. “Natural image statistics and neu-
ral representation”. In: Annual review of neuroscience 24.1 (2001), pp. 1193–1216.
[68]
Bertrand Thirion et al. “Inverse retinotopy: inferring the visual content of im-
ages from brain activation patterns”. In: Neuroimage 33.4 (2006), pp. 1104–1116.
[69]
David J Tolhurst, J Anthony Movshon, and Andrew F Dean. “The statistical
reliability of signals in single neurons in cat and monkey visual cortex”. In:
Vision research 23.8 (1983), pp. 775–785.
[70]
Stefan Treue, Karel Hol, and Hans-Jürgen Rauber. “Seeing multiple directions
of motion—physiology and psychophysics”. In: Nature neuroscience 3.3 (2000),
p. 270.
[71]
Ruben S Van Bergen et al. “Sensory uncertainty decoded from visual cortex
predicts behavior”. In: Nature neuroscience 18.12 (2015), p. 1728.
[72]
Kevin S Van Horn. “Constructing a logic of plausible inference: a guide to cox’s
theorem”. In: International Journal of Approximate Reasoning 34.1 (2003), pp. 3–
24.
[73]
Robert W Williams and Karl Herrup. “The control of neuron number”. In: An-
nual review of neuroscience 11.1 (1988), pp. 423–453.
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[74]
Mark W Woolrich et al. “Temporal autocorrelation in univariate linear model-
ing of FMRI data”. In: Neuroimage 14.6 (2001), pp. 1370–1386.
[75]
Keith J Worsley and Karl J Friston. “Analysis of fMRI time-series revisited—again”.
In: Neuroimage 2.3 (1995), pp. 173–181.
[76]
Richard S Zemel and Peter Dayan. “Distributional population codes and mul-
tiple motion models”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems. 1999,
pp. 174–182.
[77]
Richard S Zemel, Peter Dayan, and Alexandre Pouget. “Probabilistic interpre-
tation of population codes”. In: Neural computation 10.2 (1998), pp. 403–430.
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
61
Appendix A
Probabilistic Population Coding
One important contribution has been made by Pouget et al, who formalized the
theoretical framework of the probabilistic population coding in [45]. In this frame-
work, one stimulus is encoded through a probability distribution generated by a
population of N neurons whose the activity vector r within a predeﬁned time win-
dow is stochastic, centered around its mean g fi(s). Here, fi(s) represents the value
of the tuning curve of the ith neuron of the population when the stimulus value is s.
g is called the gain: it is common for all neurons from the population and represents
a nuisance parameter that can ﬂuctuate. For visual areas, the gain has been shown
to increase as the contrast of the image is higher [57].
In order to ﬁnd a well-suited model for p(r|s), Pouget considered two differ-
ent cues providing evidence on the stimulus s. The two activity vectors r1 (from a
population of N neurons of gain g1) and r2 (from a population of N other neurons
of gain g2) aim to encode the stimulus probability distribution through p(s|r1) and
p(s|r2) respectively. The cue integration leads to the creation of the activity vector r3
for N new neurons, aiming to represent the stimulus probability distribution after
the cue integration p(s|r3). r3 is built from r1 and r2 through the transformation F :
r3 = F(r1, r2). He listed the different conditions to be respected:
• The multisensory integration should occur without any loss of information:
p(s|r3)=p(s|r1, r2)
• For computation ease, F should have a linear shape and be independent of the
gain of each population: ∃A1, A2 ∈RN×N, r3 = F(r1, r2) = A1r1 + A2r2
If these conditions are respected, F is said to be Bayes optimal.
Pouget showed that these conditions are satisﬁed when p(rk|s, gk) (k = 1, 2) are part
of the exponential family with linear sufﬁcient statistics. Formally:
If
p(rk|s, gk) = φk(rk, gk) exp(hk(s)Trk)
, k = 1, 2
(A.1)
with the condition
∃B(s),
h1(s)
h2(s)

=
A1B(s)
A2B(s)

(A.2)
with φk a regular function, A1 and A2 two constant matrices, B(s) a set of basis
functions and hk(s) a kernel built linearly from B(s),
Then F(r1, r2) = A1r1 + A2r2 is Bayes optimal.
==PAGE:76==
62
Appendix A. Probabilistic Population Coding
In this statement, one can see that there is no speciﬁc condition on hk but the con-
straint that the two kernels shall be built from the same set of basis functions.
Pouget notes the critical fact that, in order to be Bayes optimal, no gain should ap-
pear in the exponential, otherwise the linear transformation F would have to ﬂuc-
tuate according to the gain values, which is not tolerable for neuronal computation.
He also emphasizes that φk should not depend on s not to violate shift invariance
and be compatible with the limit case rk →0.
Finally, it is to be noted that the exponential family with linear sufﬁcient statis-
tics contains a constant Fano factor (ratio between the mean and the variance) that
is independent to the gain. This is consistent with the fact that the Fano factor has
been observed to ﬂuctuate within the restricted interval : from 0.3 and 1.8 [69, 22].
Independent Poisson distribution is a particular type of exponential family, with
a Fano factor of 1, if we assume that the tuning curves veriﬁes the following condi-
tion
∃c ∈R, ∀s,
N
∑
i=1
fi(s) = c.
(A.3)
Indeed, N independent Poisson noise of mean g fi(s) (i = 1..N) have the follow-
ing likelihood
p(r|s, g) =
N
∏
i=1
(g fi(s))ri
ri!
e−g fi(s).
(A.4)
which can be simpliﬁed using the relation A.3
p(r|s, g) =
exp
 N
∑
i=1
ri log(g) −gc

N
∏
i=1
ri!
exp
 
N
∑
i=1
ri log( fi(s))
!
(A.5)
which reﬂect the form of equation A.1 identifying each term.
==PAGE:77==
63
Appendix B
From PPC to Van Bergen’s
encoding model
This Appendix aims to explain under which assumptions Probabilistic Popula-
tion Coding theory leads to Van Bergen et al’s encoding model in their paper [71]
illustrated on Figure 2.6. This is my personal contribution.
Let us consider one voxel containing neurons from one PPC population with
Poisson noise. Notations are the same as in the previous Appendix, although here
it is assumed that ni neurons share the same tuning curve fi. The activity vector of
these neurons is given by (ri,q)1≤q≤ni. By deﬁnition of PPC and Poisson noise
ri,q ∼Poisson(g fi(s))
The contribution of all neurons associated to fi results in the stochastic global
ﬁring activity
ai(s) =
ni
∑
q=1
ri,q ∼Poisson (nig fi(s)) ≃N (nig fi(s), nig fi(s))
considering its stochastic aspects. The approximation is only valid for large ni.
Summing over all neurons from the population in the voxel
a(s) =
N
∑
i=1
ai(s) =
N
∑
i=1
(nig fi(s) + η′
i(s))
(B.1)
with η′
i(s) ∼N (0, nig fi(s)). Van Bergen et al approximated the HRF to be a step
function, which means that, locally, the convolution product is simply a multiplica-
tion by a factor γ. Considering fMRI noise ν ∼N (0, Σ) due to random physiological
and measurement ﬂuctuations, the BOLD signal at scan k is
yk(s) =
N
∑
i=1
γai(s) + νk =
N
∑
i=1
wi( fi(s) + ηi(s)) + νk
(B.2)
with the neural noise ηi(s) ∼N

0, γ fi(s)
nig

and the mixture coefﬁcients wi =
γnig. Equation B.2 is the resulting model assuming PPC neurons in the voxel.
Van Bergen et al assume the following model
yk(s) =
N
∑
i=1
w′
i( fi(s) + ηi) + νk
(B.3)
==PAGE:78==
64
Appendix B. From PPC to Van Bergen’s encoding model
with νk still the same, ηi ∼N
 0, ξ2
, w′
i = γnig. Both models are very similar,
but in the expression of the variance of the neural noise that is supposed to depend
on s, fi and ni (hence, to the voxel). Implicitely, Van Bergen assumed PPC code
with neural noise independent to the properties of the voxel and the stimulus,
and to be indentical for groups of neurons with different tuning curves. Under
such hypothesis, PPC derivation and Van Bergen’s model are identical. The mix-
ture coefﬁcients deﬁned in the main corpus are the products between the number
of neurons present in the voxel by the neural gain.
Van Bergen et al showed using simulations that estimating the mixture coefﬁ-
cients wi’s from model B.3 neglecting the neural noise and assuming diagonal pat-
tern of Σ gave satisfying predictions. Hence, weights wi can be found performing
Ordinary Least Squares regression in spite of the complex noise pattern. The en-
coding model used to make predictions is thus given by
yk(s) =
N
∑
i=1
w′
i fi(s) + ϵk
(B.4)
with ϵ independent and gaussian (eventually after prewhitening). Replacing
back γ by a convolution with the HRF, we obtain the model described Equation 2.3
with isotropic independent noise.
==PAGE:79==
65
Appendix C
From neural codes of probabilities
to global ﬁring activities
This Appendix presents the mathematical demonstration to establish the global
ﬁring activity from neural codes proposed for probabilities encoding. A Poisson
noise is assumed here to illustrate and provide the most common PPC and DPC
framework, however the global ﬁring activities remain the same for other type of
noise.
This Appendix is my personal contribution too.
C.1
Rate coding
Rate coding assumes that the neural activity is proportional to the encoded quan-
tity. Assuming that Nµ probability neurons are involved in encoding µ through the
activity vector rµ = (rµ
i )1≤i≤Nµ and Nσ conﬁdence neurons encode −log(σ) through
rσ = (rσ
i )1≤i≤Nσ:









Nµ
∑
j=1
rµ
j ∝µ
Nσ
∑
j=1
rσ
j ∝−log(σ).
For simplicity, we can assume that each neuron from the same population ﬁres
at the same ﬁring rate rl
0 (l = µ, σ). Therefore, there exists gµ and gσ such that :

Nµrµ
0 = gµµ
Nσrσ
0 = −gσ log(σ).
If we assume Nµ and Nσ to be equal, ensuring the signal from µ and the sig-
nal from −log(σ) to have the same range and variance means that the g’s shall be
set accordingly. Common variance means Var(gµµ) = Var(−gσ log(σ)) i.e. gσ
gµ =
Var(µ)
Var(−log(σ)).
Having set correctly the g’s, the global ﬁring activity for a voxel containing nµ prob-
ability neurons and nσ conﬁdence neurons is
a(µ, −log(σ)) = nµrµ
0 + nσrσ
0 = nµgµ
Nµ µ −nσgσ
Nσ log(σ).
==PAGE:80==
66
Appendix C. From neural codes of probabilities to global ﬁring activities
This is the linear combination of Equation 3.2 with wµ = nµgµ
Nµ and wσ = nσgσ
Nσ .
C.2
Probabilistic Population Coding (PPC)
Taking the same notation as in B, Equation B.1 is recalled
a(s) =
N
∑
i=1
ai(s) =
N
∑
i=1
(nig fi(s) + η′
i(s))
with η′
i(s) ∼N (0, nig fi(s)) if a stimulus s is considered. Here no averaging has
been performed yet. For two populations encoding µ and −log(σ), the spirit is the
same as rate coding. The stochastic global ﬁring activities sum up
a(µ, −log(σ)) =
Nµ
∑
i=1
aµ
i (µ) +
Nσ
∑
i=1
aσ
i (−log(σ))
which leads to
a(µ, −log(σ)) =
Nµ
∑
i=1
(nµ
i gµ f µ
i (µ) + η′µ
i (µ)) +
Nσ
∑
i=1
(nσ
i gσ f σ
i (−log(σ)) + η′σ
i (−log(σ)))
with η′µ
i (µ) ∼N
 0, nµ
i gµ f µ
i (µ)

and η′σ
i (−log(σ)) ∼N
 0, nσ
i gσ f σ
i (−log(σ))

.
Taking the mean, we obtain the global ﬁring activity in the voxel
¯a = ¯aµ + ¯aσ =
Nµ
∑
i=1
nµ
i gµ f µ
i (µ) +
Nσ
∑
i=1
nσ
i gσ f σ
i (−log(σ))
.
which is Equation 3.3 with wµ
i = nµ
i gµ and wσ
i = nσ
i gσ.
C.3
Distributional Population Coding (DPC)
One should repeat the process of PPC with only one population for DPC, assum-
ing the average ﬁring rate of the DPC neurons to be g R 1
0 D(θ) fi(θ) dθ when encoding
D. The stochastic ﬁring rate activity is
a(D) =
N
∑
i=1

nig
Z 1
0 D(θ) fi(θ) dθ + η′
i(D)

with η′
i(D) ∼N

0, nig R 1
0 D(θ) fi(θ) dθ

. Taking the mean one can obtain Equa-
tion 3.4 with wi = nig.
==PAGE:81==
67
Appendix D
Github link to my code
Codes related to this project are on my Github:
https://github.com/sebastiendemortain/neural-coding-of-probabilities
