==PAGE:1==
A Study of CT-based
Visualization and Analysis of
White Matter in Rat Brain
Author:
Heng Wang
s161101
Supervisor:
Anders Bjorholm Dahl
Carsten Gundlach
Henning Friis Poulsen
Matteo Busi
Ulrik Lund Olsen
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Animal brain is a very common research object in many ﬁelds.
In order to
understand the microstructure of it, numerous studies have been implemented,
resulting a great number of visualization approaches. This research attempted
to visualize the microstructure of white matter from rat brain with X-ray com-
puted tomography techniques. To optimize the quality of the projections and
reconstruction results, methods for processing the projections and reconstructed
images are applied in this research. The bad pixel detection and correction,
stripe deletion and oﬀ-center correction works well in optimizing the projec-
tions. Gamma correction and gray stretch could upgrade the contrast of the
reconstructed slices. The image segmentation techniques are also discussed and
examined in our project, and we have successfully visualized the 3-dimension
structure of vessels and a brain tissue which are extracted from the volume of
white matter. Finally, in order to ﬁnd out the characterization of the vessels,
we applied a structure tensor method for analyzing the vessel orientation, and
analyzed the result we got. The results can be used to provide references about
projection and reconstructed image optimization, to understand the microstruc-
ture of white matter from rat brain, and to oﬀer suggestion to related future
researches.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering degree at Technical University of Denmark
(DTU).
This report represents 30 ECTS work from 22th Jan. 2018 to 22th Jun. 2018,
which is carried out in DTU Compute and supervised by Anders Bjorholm Dahl,
Carsten Gundlach, Henning Friis Poulsen, Matteo Busi and Ulrik Lund Olsen.
Lyngby, 22-June-2018
Heng Wang
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis supervisor, Anders Bjorholm Dahl, Professor
MSO, Head of Section in DTU Compute. He is always welcoming me, squeezing
time from his heavy work, giving me answers and suggestions whenever I ran
into a trouble spot or had a question about my project. He consistently allowed
this project my own work, but ensure me running in the right direction whenever
I’m missing.
I would also like to thank all co-supervisors in the project team, for their patience
and support in overcoming numerous obstacles I’ve been faced in the project.
Henning Friis Poulsen, Prof., provided me a chance of doing this project, so that
I can ﬁnish my master thesis. Carsten Gundlach, allowed me to use the high
performance computers in the image center, so I am able to process the big data
set of this project. Ulrik Lund Olsen and Matteo Busi, gave me a great number
of suggestions about the projection preprocessing and reconstruction.
I sincerely thank my cooperator, Jinning Lyu, explained the physical theories
involved in this project to me, made the background of the data set compre-
hensible to me. We achieved a lot together during this projection, and it is
impossible for me to do so much without her. My sincere thanks also goes to
Jan Kehres, for consistently setting up and ﬁxing the Housing machine, mak-
ing every scan in this project possible; and Mariam Andersson, gave me a brief
understanding of the rat brain sample.
Last but not the least, I would like to thank my family: my husband and my
parents, for saving me from inﬂuenced by depression, supporting me spiritually
throughout writing this thesis and my my life in general.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope of this Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Outline of this Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Reconstruction and CT Image Processing
5
2.1
Reconstruction with Astra-Toolbox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Study of the Reconstruction and Toolboxes . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Reconstruction Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Image Enhancement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Study of the Image Enhancement Methods
. . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Application in Match Head Images . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
Application in Brain Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Projection Preprocessing
19
3.1
Method to Detect Bad Pixels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Method to Correct Bad Pixels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Median Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.2
Calibration with Referenced Projection
. . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Stripe Removal in Sinograms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.1
Processing Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Oﬀ-Center Correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4.1
Problem Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3.4.2
Simulation of Oﬀ-center Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.3
Application in our sinogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Analyzing of 3D Volume
39
4.1
Image Segmentation Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.1
Thresholding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.2
Contextual Segmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Brain Vessel Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.1
Deleting the background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.2
Extracting the vessel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.3
Visualizing the Vessel Orientation
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Discussion
51
5.1
Achievements and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A Other Figures
57
Bibliography
61
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Research Motivation
Computed tomography(CT) is an important and widely used tool for medical
imaging. Researches with X-ray CT images have contributed a great number
of scientiﬁc achievements in the past decades. Imaging of the animal (includ-
ing human) organs is also a critical process for biology and medical studies,
considering the visualization of an organ or components in it helps a lot to
the researchers who are willing to see the small parts, like tissues, clearly in a
zoomed image or volume.
Animal’s brain, which is a good object for the relative researches, is also being
CT-imaged in a number of projects.
In 2014, Sahar Ghanavati’s team pub-
lished a research [GLLS14], cast a perfusion procedure for imaging the mouse
cerebal vasculature (the small vessel system in the brain) by X-ray micro-CT.
In Ghanavati’s project the mouse brain was stained by hematoxylin. Another
project publish by M. Q. Zhang’s team was looking forward to achieve a three-
dimensional(3D) visualization of rat brain microvasculature, with a rat brain
in a condition of permanent focal ischaemia by synchrotron radiation. Instead
of the full microvasculature system, we haven’t found the 3D imaging result of
the small components, like vessels, in the white matter of rat brain. Thus, we
decided to do a project to visualize the 3D structure of the white matter.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
And in order to get a clear images of the brain sample, the study of the X-ray
scan and projection processing is also a necessary point in our project. So for
reaching the goal, which is visualizing the 3D structure of the white matter,
ﬁnding good techniques to optimize the projections and reconstruction results
would also be an important part of our project.
The sample we used is a white matter of a perfusion ﬁxated rat brain, extract
with a 1mm biopsy punch. The sample is stained by OsO4. The X-ray CT
scan is ﬁnished with the DTU PCXCT system and the Zeiss micro-CT system
in DTU Imaging Center.
Figure 1.1: The DTU PCXCT system.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Scope of this Project
3
Figure 1.2: The Zeiss X-ray micro-CT system. This system gives much better
result than DTU PCXCT system.
1.2
Scope of this Project
During our project, we ﬁrstly examined the DTU PCXCT system with a match
head.
In order to get the 3D volume, we studies some reconstruction tools,
and ﬁnally we chose the Astra-Toolbox. After the ﬁrst data set of projections
are obtained, we found that there are bad pixels which would impact the SNR
of the recontructed images. In order to reduce such impacts we tried to ﬁnd
out method for detecting and correcting the bad pixels. The contrast of the
reconstructed image was also not acceptable, so we studied and applied some
image enhancement techniques in order to make the images clearer. Afterwards,
we scanned the rat brain, and tried our optimization methods for the brain
projections. However, with a long-period test, we found that it is hard to get
images with an SNR making the image analysis possible. Thus, we scanned the
brain sample with Zeiss scanner, then received projections and reconstructed
images with hardly any noise. The new data set made the analysis of the white
matter volume possible, so we segmented the volume, elected the biggest vessels,
and attempted to analyze their orientation with the structure tensor method.
After all we discussed the process and results of our projects, and summarized
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
the conclusions of this project.
1.3
Outline of this Thesis
The ﬁrst chapter of this thesis gives a brief introduction of the motivation,
the scope of this projection, and the outline of the full thesis.
The second
chapter shows our study of the reconstruction algorithms and toolboxes, the
reconstruction results with the Astra-toolbox, and image enhancement eﬀorts.
The third chapter explains our attempts of optimizing the projections, including
the bad pixel detection, bad pixel correction and the oﬀ-center correction. The
fourth chapter introduced our study about the image analysis techniques for the
white matter in rat brain, and the analysis results of the sample. Chapter 5
states the discussion of our project and results, discusses the achievements and
limitions of our work, and gives an outlook of the future works.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Reconstruction and CT
Image Processing
2.1
Reconstruction with Astra-Toolbox
2.1.1
Study of the Reconstruction and Toolboxes
Reconstruction is an mathematical process, which means generating a set of
tomographic images based on X-ray projections. A lot of reconstruction methods
are found and developed, and they are used for diﬀerent types of X-ray sources
and scans. Generally, for 2D CT scan we are using parallel beam and fan beam.
For 3D CT scan, parallel beam and cone beam are utilized. Considering DTU
PCXCT system supports only cone beam scan, our study is mainly about the
methods for 3D cone beam reconstruction.
[FDK84] and [NWX+10] introduced the process of cone beam CT scan, and
the related reconstruction formulae. Figure 2.1 is a demonstration of a 3D cone
beam CT system. The main components involved in the system are the source,
the detector and the sample.
The sample is placed between the source and
the detector. During the acquisition, the source is emitting the X-ray, and the
detector units are counting how many photons hit on them after being absorbed
==PAGE:16==
6
Reconstruction and CT Image Processing
Figure 2.1: A demonstration of a cone beam CT system.
by the sample. And the sample rotates after each scan, in order that a set of
projections from diﬀerent directions are taken.
A lot of algorithms for 3D cone beam reconstruction are discovered, like Fil-
tered Back-Projection (FBP), Feldkamp-Davis-Kress (FDK), Simultaneous Al-
gebraic Reconstruction Technique (SART)[KSW02], Simultaneous Iterative Re-
construction Technique (SIRT)[Gil72], and Conjugate Gradients Least Squares
(CGLS)[HS52]. Also, there are toolboxes which have already implemented such
algorithms, like Tomopy[GDCXJ14], Astra-Toolbox[PBS13], TIGRE[BDHS16],
etc. The comparison of them is shown in Table 2.1.
Toolbox
3D Reconstruction Algorithms
GPU
Sup-
porting
Programming
Language
Astra-Toolbox
FDK, SIRT, CGLS
YES
matlab
Tomopy
ART, BART, FBP, GRIDREC
,MLEM, OSEM, OSPML, PML,
SIRT
YES
(with
Astra-
Toolbox)
python
TIGRE
SART, OS-SART, SIRT, CGLS,
MLEM and Total Variation Al-
gorithms
YES
matlab,
python
Table 2.1: A comparison of the 3 toolboxes.
After a discussion with teammates and supervisors, the Astra-toolbox was cho-
sen as our reconstruction tool. In our opinion, Astra-toolbox has a better docu-
ment which could give us a clearer tutorials and code examples. Another point
was that considering we had to do the processing of projections and recon-
structed images with Matlab Image Processing Toolbox, a reconstruction in the
same environment was more convenient for us to handle the working process
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Reconstruction with Astra-Toolbox
7
and the data. Based on these preferences we had a study on the Astra-toolbox.
After reading the example code, our ﬁrst step was testing diﬀerent algorithms
for reconstruction: BP3D, FDK, SIRT and CGLS. We tested it with a cube and
a cube which has a cavity in the center of it. We ﬁrstly created such volumes,
then used the simulation functions provided by Astra-toolbox to generate the
sinograms of the objects. After we got the data set of sinograms, we used them
as input of the diﬀerent algorithms to get the reconstructed 3D volumes, and
had a look at slices of the volumes. Figure 2.2 and Figure 2.3 are the results of
the test.
Figure 2.2: Test Result of the tube.
Figure 2.3: Test result of the cube.
It is easy to ﬁnd that for the tube, the FDK, SIRT and CGLS are all working
well. And the FDK algorithm doesn’t work well for the cube scan. In order
to ﬁnd more about the diﬀerence between SIRT and CGLS, we tested the 2D
version for them with the phantom image generated by the maltab build-in
function. Figure 2.4 shows the test result:
==PAGE:18==
8
Reconstruction and CT Image Processing
Figure 2.4: Test result of the phantom image.
From the result of SIRT and CGLS, we can ﬁnd that the both SIRT and CGLS
images have the artifact. The diﬀerence between them is that the SIRT image is
blurred, which making the artifact looks better; and the CGLS image is clearer
in details, which is also making the artifacts sharp. Under our preference and
the suggestion from the project team, we decided to use SIRT as the main
algorithm, and CGLS as the spare method being used when required.
2.1.2
Reconstruction Results
Figure 2.5 is the reconstructed slices of a match head. Projections were output
by the DTU PCXCT system. 500 projections were photoed during the scan.
The acquisition time was 1s, and the detector counted the photon 3 times.
The source-sample-distance was 330mm and the sample-detector-distance was
834mm.
Figure 2.5: Reconstruction results of the match head.
From the reconstruction result we could ﬁnd that the main part of the match
head was projected and reconstructed, but not with a high SNR. Also, the ring
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Reconstruction with Astra-Toolbox
9
artifacts caused by the bad pixels were clear in the slices. And the background,
which was inﬂuencing the clarity of the match head, looks having very small
value less than 0. In order to comprehend the result more deeply, we had a look
at the histogram, which is shown in 2.6:
Figure 2.6: The histogram of the reconstructed volume. X-axis is the grayscale
value and Y-axis represents the number of pixels.
Ideally, there should be a Gaussian distribution in the histogram. However, in
our result, the "Gaussian distribution" looks bending, and the peak is 0. This
ﬁgure has a y-axis limit of 200000; in fact, the pixels having the values near
0 is much more than we can see in this ﬁgure (the number of zero pixels is
approximately 3.5 × 106.
With choosing some window in the background, we have found that almost all
backgrounds were having the value smaller than 0. So we tried to set the pixels
smaller than 0 to 0, and had a look at the slices shown in Figure 2.7 again:
==PAGE:20==
10
Reconstruction and CT Image Processing
Figure 2.7: Test reconstruction results of the match head, in which the nega-
tive values are removed.
Compared with 2.5, we can see that both the background and some pixels in
the match head were erased. With this volume we would be able to see the
structure of the match head shown in Figure 2.8:
Figure 2.8: The volume of the match head. The 3D volume is displayed by
Fiji-ImageJ Toolbox.
Which looks like a match head should be in reality. Also, another scan made by
the DTU PCXCT system with the brain sample is also processed, giving result
shown in Figure 2.9:
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Reconstruction with Astra-Toolbox
11
Figure 2.9: Test reconstruction results of the brain sample.
From 2.9 we could ﬁnd that the brain sample could be seen in the slices, but the
SNR is even worse than that of the match head reconstruction. Furthermore,
we tried to delete the negatives as well, and obtained results shown in Figure
2.10:
Figure 2.10: Test reconstruction results of the brain sample, in which the neg-
ative values are removed.
And we found that the background noises were partially removed, but it was
still noisy. Also, we can see the sample part was clearer than before, although
the inner structure was still invisible to us. Moreover, in Figure 2.11, we can
ﬁnd that the the noisy background inﬂuenced us greatly, which made us can
hardly see the brain sample.
==PAGE:22==
12
Reconstruction and CT Image Processing
Figure 2.11: The volume of the rat brain. The 3D volume is displayed by
Fiji-ImageJ Toolbox. The noise surrounding the sample formed
a cube.
We deleted the values smaller than 0 in both results, in order to get better
images. However, there is a risk that we cannot make sure that whether the
negative-removal process detected other important information which is not in
the background. Thus we tried to ﬁnd out whether there are image enhancement
method for processing the reconstructed images, then we needn’t to delete the
background violently.
2.2
Image Enhancement
Generally, the values in the output 3D volume are not in the range of [0, 1] or
other standard color ranges. Since sometimes the computer programs only take
the values in range [0, 1] in consideration while rendering or outputting, some
detail may be invisible if we do nothing to the voxel value intensity. Thus, the
image normalization and enhancement methods should be implemented before
analyzing the image.
2.2.1
Study of the Image Enhancement Methods
When we think about image enhancement, the ﬁrst method we come up with
is very likely to be histogram equalization. Histogram equalization is a general
used method, the main idea of it is adjusting the original histograms which are
concentrated in one area to a balanced distributed ones. With mathematical
expression, the histogram of a grayscale image can be represented by:
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Image Enhancement
13
Ps(sk) = nk/n
0 ≤sk ≤1,
k = 1, ..., L −1
Where Ps(sk) is the probability of the occurrence of k-th gray level, and L is
the number of levels. Then as [Gon16] discussed the expression of histogram
equalization would be:
ts = HE(sk) = Σk
i=0(Ps(si))
0 ≤sk ≤1,
k = 1, ..., L −1
Thus, we can calculate the adjusted grayscale value of each pixel with the orig-
inal histograms.
Histogram equalization is good for enhance the images whose grayscale distri-
bution is very concentrated, however, it sometimes gives an output with some
over-enhanced details if there are some high peaks in the histogram. Thus we
studied another method, gamma correction, which is also widely used in image
enhancement. The main idea of this method is using the power-law formula
to compress the ranges of grayscales, in order that the visibility of the detail
information in the image is optimized. The formula of this method is:
s = crγ
Another solution is gray stretch, which is also used for emphasize one or some
components in the images. Doesn’t like gamma correction with this method, we
are able to stretch the dynamic range of the images. The most simple version of
gray stretch is linear contrast stretch. For emphasize the interesting information
of each image, we divide the pixels into three sections with the gray value: Sa, Sb
and S. The main idea of this method is compressing the Sa and Sb parts of the
image, and stress the S, the components we want to enhance. A mathematical
expression of this method is:
Iout(i, j) =















ga
fa
Iin(i, j)
Iin(i, j) ≤fa
ga −gb
fa −fb
(Iin(i, j) −fa) −ga
fa < Iin(i, j) ≤fb
255 −gb
255 −fb
(Iin(i, j) −fb) + gb
Iin(i, j) > fb
(2.1)
Where Iin(i, j) and Iout(i, j) represents the pixel at column i, row j in the input
and output images. [0, fa] and [fb, 255] (in double matrix image it is [0, fa] and
==PAGE:24==
14
Reconstruction and CT Image Processing
[fb, 1]) are the two ranges deﬁning the pixels in Sa and Sb, as well as pixels with
gray value in [fa, fb] are in S. Also, ga and gb deﬁnes the slope of the linear
transformation.
Thus, after our study we have 3 methods for enhancing our reconstructed im-
ages. Then we will know that which is the best methods for enhancing our
images.
2.2.2
Application in Match Head Images
Before using the enhancing the images, a image normalization is suggested con-
sidering some technique requires the range of values. Thus we could normalize
the image with the following formula:
Inew = (I −min(I))(max(Inew) −min(Inew))
max(I) −min(I)
+ min(Inew);
(2.2)
Where I is the original image, and Inew is the normalized image.
min(I)
and max(I) represents the minimum and maximum value in I, and min(Inew)
and max(Inew) is deﬁned by user, determining the value range of Inew. After
normalization, we could try the techniques we mentioned above and see their
performance of processing our slices.
We could see that after the the HE enhancement, both the noise and the main
part of the match head turned brighter, which is shown in 2.12. The match
head was clearer after the enhancement; however, the noises, like ring artifacts,
were also greatly enhanced. So we can say that after histogram equalization the
contrast it grater than before but it is still hard to make the image clearer.
From the result in Figure 2.13, we could see that this enhancement made the
noises in background unclear than the original one (see 2.12). Especially the
result with gamma = 2 looks similar to the method setting the negative pixels
to 0 we mentioned above. The similarity can be seen clear with a comparison
between their histograms, which is shown in 2.14.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Image Enhancement
15
Figure 2.12: The result and histogram of the original and Histogram-
Equalization enhanced slice.
Figure 2.14: The histograms of negative-deleted normalized image and the
gamma corrected with γ = 2
==PAGE:26==
16
Reconstruction and CT Image Processing
Figure 2.13: Results of gamma correction.
Then with a comparison, the histogram of negative-deleted normalized image,
we call it left histogram, looks like a crooked version of the histogram of the
gamma correction result, we call it right histogram. The right histogram looks
more like a normal distribution. And the value range of pixels in the two images
are also similar, which could explain the similarity of the two pictures.
For
ensuring the two images are really similar, we calculated and compared the
hash value of two images. The length of their hash is both 16384, and there are
14416 common characters in the same location in two hash values. So the two
results could considered to be similar.
For the gray stretch method, we have already know the this technique can be
used to reduce the background of the image, and enhance the part we interested,
if we could give it property values. After choosing some windows in background
and ﬁnd the value range of them, we found that the background pixels are mostly
smaller than 0.4, and the biggest value in the match head was smaller than 0.7.
Thus we set fa = 0.4, ga = 0.2 to reduce the background, and fb = 0.7, gb = 0.9
to stretch the match head.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Image Enhancement
17
Figure 2.15: The results of gray stretch.
The results shown in 2.15 is also giving us surprise: the technique is giving the
similar result of negative-deletion and the gamma correction with γ = 2, which
means this algorithm also works well for us to enhance the contrast so that the
match head is visible. Then we decided to apply these methods in brain images.
2.2.3
Application in Brain Images
In order to attempt to obtain a set of better images of the brain, we tried the
enhancement with the brain slices as well. The images in Figure 2.16 are the
results of the attempts.
From the results we can see that the HE-enhancement didn’t work good as
well; and the gray stretch and gamma correction, which were giving us good
results of match head, worked not so good in this time. According to the result
and our study about the values in matrices, we can ﬁnd that the values in the
background are very closed to the values in the brain, which means the contrast
of the original image was poor. It is easy for us to make backgrounds invisible;
however, if we do that, the information in the sample part will also be reduced.
Thus in such condition, an optimization on the system takes more eﬀect than
struggling on the bad slices.
In summary, gamma correction and gray stretch can help us with optimizing
the reconstructed results. Also, the techniques doesn’t work well in all images,
just like in our experiment, the enhancement gives us better match head slices,
but image slices in which information is lost.
==PAGE:28==
18
Reconstruction and CT Image Processing
Figure 2.16: The attempts of enhancing brain sample images.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Projection Preprocessing
Projects are the 2D matrices storing the result of the x-ray scan. With the
matlab image viewer, the projection could be visualized so that a brief check
of the projections could be implemented. Generally there would be problems
in the projections, like bad pixels, oﬀ-center, etc. Thus, a preprocess for the
projections could be introduced before reconstruction in order that images with
a higher quality can be obtained.
3.1
Method to Detect Bad Pixels
It is hard to ﬁnd an authoritative deﬁnition of "bad pixels", as [RMS14] says,
the deﬁnition of "bad pixels" or "cosmetic defects" are seldom discussed. In
[RMS14], they deﬁned the bad pixels as the super set of those deemed inopera-
ble by the manufacturer, and the pixels which the user prefer to exclude in the
belief that such pixels would downgrade the science although there are calibra-
tion eﬀorts. Another thesis [BKZV04] discussing the detection and correction
from the sensor aspect, cast that bad pixels are resulted by a number of bad
photodetectors on the sensing device array. An article [JMLA02] classiﬁed bad
pixels into 3 species. They are (1) dead pixels, which are always producing the
same signal; (2) noisy pixels, which are having the noise greater than a ﬁxed
==PAGE:30==
20
Projection Preprocessing
threshold; and (3) blinking or drafting pixels which are having temporal behav-
ior diﬀerent than the pixels deemed as the good ones. Hot pixel is also mention
by [HLC+], with an deﬁnition of the pixels with a high dark current, resulted by
the detector units warmer than their operating temperature; while leaving them
alone they would continually increase. In summary, we could say that the bad
pixels are the ones giving abnormal values, which is diﬀerent than the actual
number of quantum that one detector unit should response. In our projections,
we also found the diﬀerent types of bad pixels. One kind satisﬁed to the deﬁni-
tion of dead pixels in [JMLA02], which are always giving similar value to 1, 0
or NaN. The second kind of them are giving diﬀerent value in scans, but having
a more sensitive response than the good pixels with the increasing acquisition
time.
The clearest bad pixels are those dot which visibly has the diﬀerent value with
its neighbours when we are plotting the projection matrices with "imshow"
or "imagesc" tools of matlab. Moreover, there are some pixels have diﬀerent
(higher or lower) reﬂections to the beam, resulting a brighter or darker points
on the projections. Thus, for a better imaging result, detecting and correcting
the bad pixels is suggested to be attempted.
Figure 3.1: Bad pixels in match head projections.
Another method is the gradient method. As we know, the dead pixels on the ﬂat
ﬁelds always have a value much bigger or smaller than their neighbours (unless
their neighbours are also dead pixels). A suddenly decrease or increase from
the neighbour might results a big gradient. So a gradient method can also be
considered for detecting the dead pixels.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Method to Detect Bad Pixels
21
Figure 3.2: The ﬂat ﬁeld, its gradient magnitude and the mask made with the
magnitude.
Figure 3.2 shows a ﬂat ﬁeld and the gradient magnitude of it. In the magnitude,
we can ﬁnd that there are bright dots, which are the detected bad pixels. With
this pixels, we can then generate a mask used for the correction, which would
be discussed us in the next section.
Dead pixels are the most easily detected bad pixels. Two slices of match head
containing such pixels are shown on Figure 3.1. Visibly such pixels are the very
bright or dark pixels compared with their neighbours, so human could directly
ﬁnd the pixels appear in the matrices. However, another kind of the bad pixels,
which are named ’abnormal pixels’ in [Lyu18], are not really easily to be found
considering sometimes it looks like the relative detect units are working well
considering the value on such locations changes with the rotation of the sample.
So we have to ﬁnd the methods for full-ﬁll the set of the bad pixels.
Generally, the ﬂat ﬁeld is the best choice for detecting the bad pixels, as there
would be no scanned sample impacting the output of detector. If the pixel is
acting abnormal in the ﬂat ﬁeld then we could know that such a bad pixel is
resulted by the detector instead of the movement or other speciﬁc properties of
the sample.
==PAGE:32==
22
Projection Preprocessing
Figure 3.3: Flat ﬁelds of the match and the brain sample scan.
Figure 3.3 are two ﬂat ﬁelds from the match and brain scan. We can easily see
the dead pixels in the ﬁgure, but not the abnormal pixels. For visualizing the
performance of the pixels, [Lyu18] cast a method, which is observing the count
of each pixel in diﬀerent acquisition times.
Each pixels on the detector are able to measure the number of photon while they
are exposed in the beam. According to the working principle of the detector,
the output value of one pixel should be in proportion to the acquisition time, if
the acquisition time is not too long:
R = kt
Where R is the output of the pixel on the detector, and t is the acquisition
time. Ideally, the coeﬃcient k of each pixel should be similar, considering they
are exposed in the same beam.
However, because of the defect of detector,
some pixels might have more or less sensitive response to the increase of the
acquisition time.
For visualizing the response of each pixel clearly, we could plot the ﬂat ﬁeld data
on a Cartesian Coordinate, where y-axis is the response (count) R and x-axis is
the acquisition time t. So for the points of each pixel, a linear regression result
of such points could represent how the acquisition time is inﬂuencing the output
of that pixel; and the slope, which is represented by k, can show the sensitivity
of a speciﬁc pixel. By plotting the ﬁtting results of all pixels, it would be easy
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Method to Detect Bad Pixels
23
for us to see that some pixel are having a higher of lower k value:
Figure 3.4: The linear regression result of the pixels.
Figure 3.4 shows the slopes, in other words, k values of the pixels obtained by
the linear regression. By plotting them in a coordinate, we can see that most
lines appear in one area, which represents the well-working detector units; and
the lines which are not plotted in this area are resulted by the abnormal units.
With the histogram shown in 3.5, we can see the distribution of the values
clearer:
Figure 3.5: The histogram of the slope values.
We can see that in the histogram there is a Gaussian distribution in the center.
==PAGE:34==
24
Projection Preprocessing
Also, there are a lot of pixels having the slope 0, which means the dead pixels.
Considering their value seldom changes, the made the slope 0. In [Lyu18], J. Lyu
suggested a method, which is using the Gaussian ﬁt to obtain the expression of
the Gaussian distribution, then choose the pixels lied in the conﬁdence interval.
With this approach we could ﬁnd out almost all (sometimes more than) dead
pixel and abnormal pixels.
3.2
Method to Correct Bad Pixels
We mentioned that the bad pixels are not representing the actual number of
photon caught on the detector unit. With a set of abnormal measure results,
the bad pixels would produce artifacts in the reconstructed image, making it
hard to identify and analyze the content of the image by algorithm or even by
human eyes. Also, if the normalized projection has NaN values, some algorithms
will be not able to work. A lot of articles are introducing how to ﬁx the detector
in order to reduce or remove the bad pixels; however, our duty is trying to
correct the projections without doing works on the detector. Thus, it is better
for us to ﬁnd and study one or some good correction methods with which we
can estimate or directly get the real values which should have been returned on
the bad pixels.
3.2.1
Median Filter
The most simple way to correct the NaN pixels in normalized projections is set-
ting them to zero. However, although it makes the algorithm work, such pixels
are still producing artifacts (ring artifacts) considering they are transformed to
the dead pixels which are giving the same values. So we have to think about
solutions setting them to non-equal values, and the values should be a good
estimate of the actual value otherwise the correction is pointless. On general
method is median ﬁlter, which means replacing the bad pixel with its neigh-
bours’ median value. Normally we are using a 3 × 3 or 5 × 5-size-window, and
the center of the window is the bad pixel we are correcting. Figure 3.6 is a
demonstration of median ﬁlter:
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Method to Correct Bad Pixels
25
Figure 3.6: A demonstration of the median ﬁlter The median of the value is
calculated and chosen for correcting the NaN pixel.
One problem here is that if the bad pixels are closed enough (or the window is
big enough), it is possible that there are more than 1 bad pixels in a window.
Our solution is then ignore the pixels which are also bad, and only choosing the
median value of the right-measured ones.
After using the bad pixel detection method we introduced in previous section,
we could get a mask which covering the detected bad pixels. Then we would
not only be able to correct the dead pixels but also the abnormal pixels in the
un-normalized projections, just like the result of Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: The result of correcting a projection with median ﬁlter.
3.2.2
Calibration with Referenced Projection
From the previous section, we have known that the bad pixels are resulted by
the problem with the detector units. And our target is to get the true values
of every unit despite which approach we used. Thus, if one unit is not working
well for counting the photon from the beam which is inﬂuenced by a part of the
==PAGE:36==
26
Projection Preprocessing
sample, we can move the sample a little (by some pixels) and use another normal
unit to count the missing part. A mathematical expression for this process is:
P(i, j) = Pc(i + σ, j + γ)
Where P(i, j) is the value the pixel at column i, row j on the projection supposed
to have, which means the number of photons hit on the detector unit at column
i, row j, we call it U(i, j). Pc is the projection for calibration, which is obtained
by moving the sample σ pixel to the right and γ pixel to the bottom. It is
easy to know that then the detector unit U(i + σ, j + γ) is counting the photon
number passed though the same part as U(i, j) in the previous scan. Thus, we
are able to calibrate the bad pixels by the second scan. Figure 3.8 shows the
original projection and another one used for calibration.
Figure 3.8: Original projection, reference projection and the calibration result.
Normally, the pixel pointed by the red arrow in the original projection has the
same value as the pointed pixel in the referenced projection. However, from
the projection we could see that the pixel on the original projection is a bad
pixel. So we are able to assign that pixel value with the corresponded one in
the referenced projection. Here we used σ = 0, γ = 6 for the second scan, which
means in the second scan we moved the sample 6 pixels down. In the projection
after calibration, we could easily ﬁnd that the number of bad pixels is reduced.
The advantage of this method is that we do not need to guess the right values
of the bad pixels, but ﬁnd the actual value of them. However, one condition
should be considered, which is U(i, j) and U(i + σ, j + γ) are both bad pixels.
Then we cannot get the actual value of P(i, j). So we suggest making sure that
each U(i + σ, j + γ) is a good pixel before the second scan. If we cannot ﬁnd
such a pair (σ, γ), the third scan could be taken in account; if the third scan
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Stripe Removal in Sinograms
27
is still impossible to cover every bad pixel, then there might be too many bad
units in the detector.
3.3
Stripe Removal in Sinograms
Sinogram is a set of projections in diﬀerent angles, and one sinogram consists
of the same row in each projection. If we show the sinogram vertically, we can
easily ﬁnd that the rows are the same to them in original projections, and the
y-axis represents the number of one projection in the serial, which also means
the angle of that projection.
So we could know that, if there is a bad pixel in a row of the detector, then in
each projection there would be a bad pixel in that row. Thus, a stripe would
be visible in a sinogram containing this row in all projections. So our target
here could be removing stripes from a image instead of correcting the pixels
from a number of projections. Thus, we have to ﬁnd methods for detecting and
correcting the stripes in sinograms.
[MTMS09] cast a method for removing the stripes in images, including sino-
grams. In this article, a combined wavelet-fourier ﬁltering is introduced. For
detecting the stripes in the images, Beat Münch and his team suggested a single-
level wavelet decomposition, with which we could get a approximation coeﬃ-
cients matrix, and the detail coeﬃcients matrices in horizontal, vertical and
diagonal. Hence, we are able to get the information of stripes of the image in
each decomposition level with the detail coeﬃcients matrix in vertical Cv.
==PAGE:38==
28
Projection Preprocessing
Figure 3.9: The steps of a wavelet decomposition, referenced from [Mas09]
After the Cv is obtained, the article proposes to run a Forier transform with
Cv under the theorem that there would be no frequency components resulted
by the vertical stripes in ˆy of the frequency domain F(ˆx, ˆy) of f(x, y). So the
solution is damping the vertical information by removing the Fourier coeﬃcients
F(ˆx, ˆy) at all ˆx for ˆy = 0. And the damping is achieved by multiplying the FFT
coeﬃcients with a Gaussian Function:
g(ˆx, ˆy) = 1 −e−ˆy2
2σ2
(3.1)
Then by the inverse FFT with the damping result, a new vertical band C′
v in
which the information of stripes is removed could be obtained.
Finally, the
authors did a wavelet reconstruction (NOT tomographic reconstruction) for the
new image, with the new vertical band and the other bands without changes.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Stripe Removal in Sinograms
29
Figure 3.10: Decomposition of one sinogram.
Figure 3.11: The new sinogram after a wavelet-Fourier ﬁlter. The decompo-
sition level L = 4, sigma is 4 and the wavelet is DB3.
==PAGE:40==
30
Projection Preprocessing
3.3.1
Processing Results
Figure 3.12: Testing the inﬂuence of the number of vanishing moments.
Results in Figure 3.12 shows that the bigger the vanishing moments is, the
cleaner the stripes are erased. In the ﬁrst sinogram processed with DB1, the
stripes could still be seen, and became fatter; however, in the DB4 image, the
stripes are almost vanished.
Results in Figure 3.13 tells us that more decomposition level could give us a
sinogram with less stripes. In the result of 1 level, 2 levels and 3 levels, the
stripe are easy to see but in the last result the stripes are erased well.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Stripe Removal in Sinograms
31
Figure 3.13: Testing the inﬂuence of decomposition level (L in image).
Figure 3.14: Testing the inﬂuence of sigma value.
==PAGE:42==
32
Projection Preprocessing
Results in Figure 3.14 gives us the inﬂuence of the sigma value. The bigger the
sigma, the more information of the stripe is lost. The change is not clear in the
main body of sinogram, but easy to see in the sinogram background.
Like Beat Münch said in his article, there is a contradict with this algorithm:
the clearer we erase the stripes, the more information is lost. We could of course
use decomposition level of 64, or a DB42 wavelet; however, after that we cannot
make sure how much information is damped. That’s way we suggest a balance
between the performance of the algorithm, and the information loss we could
tolerance.
3.4
Oﬀ-Center Correction
3.4.1
Problem Analysis
Oﬀ-center is also a general problem in the CT imaging. Normally, the center of
the sample should be aligned with the center of rotation. However, sometimes
it is not easy to achieve such thing considering the sample and the rotating
plate could be very small for us to put the sample at the appropriate position.
Then during the scan, while the sample is rotating, it is possible that in the
projections photoed by the detector, the graph of sample is moving left and
right. Figure 3.15 demonstrates the oﬀ-center problem and how it is impacting
the sinogram graphically:
Figure 3.15: Description of the oﬀ-center problem.
Normally, the well centered project looks like 3.15 (a). If the sample is not well
aligned, just like that in 3.15 (b), an offset(i) would appear at i-th column,
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Oﬀ-Center Correction
33
which comes from i-th projection. Then the sinogram is bending, and the oﬀset
in the projection offset(i) is equal to the column oﬀset in sinogram which is
shown in 3.15 (c).
We could see considering the columns in the sinograms equals to the same row
of diﬀerent projections, while the sample is moving, the oﬀset of the sample,
refers to the oﬀset of a row in the projection, would equal to the oﬀset of the
correspond column.
If we consider the relationship between position of the
sample and the center of rotation, which is demonstrated in Figure 3.16:
Figure 3.16: Relationship between the position of the sample and center of
rotation. (a) shows the initial position of the sample, where the
center of rotation is not the center of sample. (b) demonstrates
the i-th scan, and the rotate angle is θ.
Thus, we could see that the oﬀset in the i-th projection, refers to that in i-th
scan, can be calculated by the rotation angle θ and the distance d between the
sample center and the rotation center:
offset(i) = d ∗cosθ, where
θ = θall
n ∗(i −1)
i = 0, 1, ..., n −1
(3.2)
Where n is the total number of projections, and θall is the rotation angle of the
full scan. Generally, θall is π or 2π in the CT scans.
==PAGE:44==
34
Projection Preprocessing
3.4.2
Simulation of Oﬀ-center Conditions
In the previous section, we have explained the oﬀ-center problem. In order to
study the relationship between the change of sinogram bewtween the oﬀ-center
distance in the horzonital and vertical directions, we designed and implemented
an experiment. We want to simulate the sinograms of the 3D tube which is
located in the center of the volume (see Figure 3.17 with Astra-toolbox, which
is going to be introduced in next chapter. Then we move the tube, simulate the
new volumes again and look at how the sinogram changes.
Figure 3.17: The tube volume used for the simulation.
Figure 3.18: A demonstration of the movement of sample in the simulation.
For getting a sinogram from the oﬀ-centered samples, we decided to move the
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Oﬀ-Center Correction
35
tube to X-direction (vertical) and Y-directions (horizontal) by x and y pixels.
The movement of the sample is shown in Figure 3.18. Then a set of sinograms
would be obtained. Figure 3.19 shows the simulation result of the movements:
Figure 3.19: The original sinogram and the changed sinogram by moving the
sample.
With the simulation, we can easily ﬁnd that the shape of the sinogram is chang-
ing to the graph of a sine function, cosine function or the Fourier series. By plot-
ting the each middle point in the sinogram columns, the changes looks clearer:
Figure 3.20: The middle points compared with the corresponding Fourier ﬁt-
ting result.
The top, middle and bottom graphs are the re-
sult of movement x = 0, y = y, x = 5, y = 0 and x = 5, y =
5,respectively. The X-axis represents the angle of the projection
and Y-axis is the position of middle points.
==PAGE:46==
36
Projection Preprocessing
The ﬁtting of the points gives a good result, which means that the movement
of columns of the sinogram follows a Fourier series graph. This also conﬁrms
the mathematical relationship, that is, if the sample is misaligned x pixels in
vertical and y pixels in horizontal, from the perspective of i-th scan with a
current rotation angle θ, the offset(i) reﬂects the combination of the impacts
of the oﬀ-center in two directions.
3.4.3
Application in our sinogram
Thus, for testing the result we got from the simulation, we chose a sinogram
from the match head scan, and removes the background of it:
Figure 3.21: Removing the background of a sinogram.
And then we plotted the middle point of each sinogram columns, and run a
Fourier ﬁtting for the curve of such plot (the input of the curve ﬁt is the column
numbers, and the output is the position of the middle points). Figure 3.22 shows
the curve and the ﬁtting result:
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Oﬀ-Center Correction
37
Figure 3.22: The curve of middle points and the ﬁtting result. The X-axis
represents the angle of the projection and Y-axis is the position
of middle points.
By the ﬁtting, we can know that the expression of the curve could be:
y = f(x) = a0 + a1cos(ωx) + bbcos(ωx)
(3.3)
Where we can easily understand that the a0 is approximately equals to the
middle point of the i0-th column from the projection of i0-th scan, in which the
center of sample coincides the center of rotation best. Thus, for obtaining the
oﬀset in each column, the oﬀset of i-th column can be computed with:
offset(i) = f(i) −a0 = a1cos(ωθ) + bbcos(ωθ)
(3.4)
where we have
θ = θall
n ∗(i −1)
i = 0, 1, ..., n −1
(3.5)
for all projections. So after the alignment, the middle points of the sinogram
columns would have the same vertical position, just like Figure 3.23 shows:
==PAGE:48==
38
Projection Preprocessing
Figure 3.23: The aligned sinogram compared with the original one.
We could see that after the alignment, the sinograms are in the middle of the
image, which means the oﬀ-center problem is solved.
One thing we should
notice is that after the correction, the stripes we mentioned in previous section
got bending than before, which may inﬂuence the stripe removal result. Thus we
suggest that the wavelet-FFT ﬁlter should be implemented before the oﬀ-center
correction algorithm.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Analyzing of 3D Volume
Image analysis is a process of extracting the meaningful, interesting or special
information from a 2D image or 3D volume. After the CT scans and recon-
structions by Zeiss system, we have obtained the 3D volume of a small part of
rat brain. While looking at the slices and volumes of them, some points trig-
gered our interest and reminded us some questions looking forward to study
with. After all we decided to do the following analysis to the volumes: image
segmentation ,and vessel analysis for the rat brain.
4.1
Image Segmentation Study
Image segmentation, just like how we call it, is segmenting the image into dif-
ferent sets based on the grayscale value, the shape, the content, etc. An article,
[HS85], which is published in 1985, cast a deﬁnition of "good segmentation",
which is the regions should be uniform and homogeneous, with respect to some
characteristic such as the texture or the gray tone. So in our segmentation,
we expect that the brain vessels could be independently displayed and saved,
without containing other parts which has the same grayscale value as them. So
with a good segmentation, the accuracy of our analysis could be ensured.
==PAGE:50==
40
Analyzing of 3D Volume
Nowadays a lot of articles, like [PP93], [Eﬀ00] and [DD12], are trying to re-
view the image segmentation techniques. And considering the high demand of
methods with higher eﬃciency and performance in ﬁelds like computer vision
and medical imaging, a lot of algorithms are discovered. Under a study of such
methods, we ﬁnd out some techniques which could be applied in our analysis
process. One thing should be noticed is that our images are all in grayscale
colormap, so the algorithms for processing the color images would not be con-
sidered by us.
4.1.1
Thresholding
The most comprehensive method in image segmentation is thresholding, con-
sidering we could frequently see images (including daily photos) showing that
diﬀerent part are having the diﬀerent grayscale values. The main idea for this
method is setting a value as the threshold T, and the pixels with value lower than
T are assigned to one set, otherwise it is put in another set. A mathematical
expression of this method is:
I(i, j) ∈
(
S1
I(i, j) < T
S2
I(i, j) ≥T
(4.1)
We could easily understand that while using this method, the choice of T would
be the main problem. Also, sometimes we cannot make sure that whether there
exists a threshold making the two sets well distinguished.
And in practical,
it is highly possible that we have to ﬁnd out more than one threshold, and
segmenting the image into a number of sets. For this problem, our entry point
is the histogram of the image, with which we could see the distribution of the
pixels in the grayscale value bins.
During our theoretical study, we found that the Gaussian distribution in images
are mentioned and discussed, like [GS98] and [BBM07]. Also, with the study
of our brain images from Zeiss system, the Gaussian distribution are clearly
seen in the histograms. Thus in such images, we are able to ﬁnd the optimal
threshold(s), which could be a valley between two peaks; and for obtaining an
accurate value of such valleys, a gaussian ﬁtting could be used for ﬁnd the func-
tion representing the relationship between the grayscale values and the number
of pixels in each bin. Then the local minimums could be easily calculated, and
the ones between two local maximums would be the thresholds we are looking
for.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Image Segmentation Study
41
4.1.2
Contextual Segmentation
Thresholding methods are segmenting the images with only grayscale values,
but not taking the relationships of the pixel locations. However, in images it is
highly possible that the pixels belongs to one element is neighboured or closed to
each other. So The techniques take such cases in consideration are implemented,
which are called contextual segmentation.
Region growing is a typical and generaly used contextual segmentation technical.
The main idea of this method is we choose one or some seeds in the image,
and for each seed we ﬁnd out whether the neighbours are having the same
properties (like grayscale value) as the seed, then we check the outer neighbours
(i.e. neighbours of neighbours) iteratively until no other neighboured pixels can
be found [AB94]. An expression for the region growing with grayscale diﬀerence
is:
δi,j = |I(i, j) −
P
y∈R
y
|R| |
(4.2)
R =
(
R + (i, j)
δi,j ≤∆
R
δi,j > ∆
(4.3)
Where R is the set of pixels which have already been found and ensured to be
in one region, and ∆is the maximum grayscale value diﬀerence used to check
whether one pixel is similar to the elements in R. In practical, we could use an
FIFO queue as the data structure: the neighbours of current pixel are pushed
into the queue, and the next pixel we are checking is the top member in the
queue, so a Breadth-First Search(BFS) is applied.
There are also a comprehensive segmentation method implemented with the
techniques of edge detection. The main idea of such method is ﬁrstly detect the
edges in the image; after the edges are obtained, the regions surround by pairs
of edges could be considered as the diﬀerent objects.
Edge detection with operators is a general used technique, according to the
reviews in [AAKK10]. For example, the Sobel operators, which is shown below,
is a good and widely used tool for computing the partial derivation:
Sx =


1
0
−1
2
0
−2
1
0
−1


Sy =


−1
−2
−1
0
0
0
1
2
1


==PAGE:52==
42
Analyzing of 3D Volume
Sobel operators are masks in the form of matrices. With using the Sobel op-
erators as a ﬁlter, we are able to get the gradient Gx and Gy in vertical and
horizontal direction. Then we can calculate the gradient magnitude ∆fwith:
|∆f| =
q
G2x + G2y
(4.4)
Also, there are other operators which are also widely used in edge detection,
like Roberts cross edge detector, Prewitt detector, etc. In practical each edge
detector would give diﬀerent results, so it is better for us to test them on the
image and choose the one ﬁts our expectation best.
Connected-component labeling, which is also called region extraction, is a widely
used segmentation method as well. The main idea of this method is checking
the connectivity of the pixels, and the pixels connected with each other in one
blob would be a independent region.
There are several version of this algo-
rithm, which is introduced in [HCS08] and [Eﬀ00].
The most simple one is
one-component-one-time version:
1. Starts at one unvisited pixel and set it to an unused label l.
2. Check its neighbours. If one neighbour does not belong to the background,
and has not been labeled, then label it by l as well.
3. Repeat step 2 until the neighbours are all backgrounds.
4. Starts with another unvisited pixel and run from step 1 to step 3 again
until all unlabeled pixels are the background.
There are also another versions, like two-pass algorithms (also known by Hoshen–Kopelman
algorithm) or the run-based two-scan algorithm suggested in [HCS08] are im-
plemented. In MATLAB, there is a build-in function bwconncomp(BW, conn)
supporting the connected-component detection. The theory of this function is
introduced by Steve Eddins in [Edd], with the following steps:
1. Use ﬁnd function to ﬁnd the non-zero elements in a image.
2. Make a list of which nodes are connected to each other. Two nodes are
connected with each other if and only if they are neighboured by each
other.
3. With the pairs of connected pixels, a sparse adjacency matrix could be
built. Then run the Dulmage-Mendelsohn decomposition function dmperm
for the matrix.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Brain Vessel Analysis
43
4. Find out which block each element belongs to with the permutation vectors
and block boundaries returned by dmperm
Above are the image segmentation we studied and planned to use for our brain
images. In practical, more than one technique would be used in the analysis for
one sample. In the following sections we will introduce how we are analyzing
our sample.
4.2
Brain Vessel Analysis
4.2.1
Deleting the background
Figure 4.1: 3 slices of the brain volume. We could easily ﬁnd that there are 3
parts in each image.
By looking at slices of the rat brain, which is shown in 4.1, it is easy for us to
ﬁnd that each slices has three parts: the outer big circle, the EPON and the
brain. Considering it is clearly that these three parts are in diﬀerent grayscale
ranges, we could ﬁrstly have a look at the histogram of the volume:
==PAGE:54==
44
Analyzing of 3D Volume
Figure 4.2: The histogram of the brain volume. X-axis is the grayscale values
and Y-axis is the number of pixels in each bin.
In 4.2, a perfect condition for us is exposed: three gaussian distributions are
contained by the full histogram, and each distributions is not mixed with another
one too much. Considering the brain part in the slices are having the biggest
grayscale values, the rightmost gaussian distribution in the histogram should
represents the brain part. Fortunately, this distribution is far from the one on
the left, so the threshold for segmentating this part could be directly obtained
by ﬁnding the minimum between it and the one on the left.
Following the logic we introduced in previous section, we implemented a gaus-
sian ﬁtting to the data sets X and Y , where X is each grayscale value and Y
represents how many pixels has value x. The plot of the ﬁtting and the original
curve is shown in Figure 4.3:
Figure 4.3: The original curve and the ﬁtting graph. X-axis is the grayscale
values and Y-axis is the number of pixels in each bin.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Brain Vessel Analysis
45
We ccan see that the ﬁtting graph is covering the original curve well, and the
coeﬃcient of determination (R2) which is 0.9986 also proved the credibility of
the ﬁtting. For calculating the minimum on the left of the rightmost peak, a
theorem is used:
f ′(x) = −f(x) =⇒peak(f ′(x)) = valley(f(x))
(4.5)
Which means that we ccan run the build-in function ﬁndpeaks(data) in MAT-
LAB with −f(x) if the ﬁtting result is f(x). The output was 32316, and there
were 899 pixels has this grayscale value. After we segmented the image with
threshold 32316, we obtained a new volume, and Figure 4.4 shows some slices
of it:
Figure 4.4: 3 slices of the segmented brain volume. The brain part were ex-
tract out and the background were deleted.
==PAGE:56==
46
Analyzing of 3D Volume
4.2.2
Extracting the vessel
With a discussion of the brain structure, we found that the black part in the
brain should be the vessel:
Figure 4.5: The vessel parts in the brain visible in slices from diﬀerent direc-
tions.
Considering the vessel has the same gray scale value to the EPON background
which is containing the brain sample (because the OsO4 can not stain the vessel),
and the vessel part in the brain is connected to the outside, we had to cut the
part and keeps only the vessels in the data set. For cutting the outer part,
we ﬁrstly chose the top slice, morphologically closed it with a disk structure
element, and a mask was obtained. Then we extracted the part covered by the
mask in each slice; however, the sample has an irregular shape, so there were
still some outer part left in the volume, and connected with the biggest vessel
part; so we attempted to cut some bottom slices until the outer part is invisible
in the volume. Finally, the biggest three vessels in the sample, which is shown
in Figure 4.6 is obtained by us.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Brain Vessel Analysis
47
Figure 4.6: 3D shortcut of the vessels.
Besides the vessels, we also used the region growing algorithm, and extracted
one of the tissue out from the brain volume. In the xz_plain slice in 4.5, there
==PAGE:58==
48
Analyzing of 3D Volume
are two big white dots, which are cross-sections of the two tissues.
Figure 4.7: 3D shortcut of one of the tissues.
4.2.3
Visualizing the Vessel Orientation
In [Cha16], Lucie Chapelle introduced a technique for determining the ﬁber
orientation, which may also be useful for the study of vessel. The tool suggested
in the article is gradient structure tensor, which is a tensor matrix representing
the partial derivatives in an image. In [KHB+10], a deﬁnition of strucutre tensor
matrix is cast by M. Karuse, which is :
Jρ(x) = Kρ ∗∇Iσ(x)∇IT
σ (x)
(4.6)
where
∇Iσ(x)∇IT
σ (x) =


I2
x
IxIy
IxIz
IxIy
I2
y
IyIz
IxIz
IyIz
I2
z


Ix, Iy and Iz are the partial derivatives over the x, y and z axises respectively.
And the formula for calculating the orientation vector is:
w(x) = argmin
v [I(x + v) −I(x)]2 = argmin
v vT Jρ(x)v
(4.7)
And according to [KHB+10] it is easy to know that the eigenvector correspond-
ing to the smallest eigenvalue determines the ﬁber orientation vector w(x). Con-
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Brain Vessel Analysis
49
sidering the orientation of each vectors could be described by the elevation angle
θ and the azimuth angle φ, it is easy for us to ﬁnd that the two angles, θ and
φ, can be calculated with the following method if the eigenvectors are already
known by us:
φ = π
2 + arctan
wy
wx

and θ = π
2 + arcsin(wz)
(4.8)
Thus we can use the technique to visualize the orientation of the vessels. We
chose the biggest vessel, which is called vessel 1 in Figure 4.6 as our research
object considering it has most branches. From the results in 4.6 we could see
that the vessel has very diﬀerent radius in each part of it, so it is hard to ﬁnd
a perfect ρ value without giving incorrect results. Thus we down-scaled the
volume, in order that there is a ρ closed to the radius in every part. The result
of the vessel orientation is shown in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: 3D shortcut of the colored vessel.
The vessel volume is down-
scaled, the size of it is
1
64 of the original volume.
We can see that in the two results, most parts are colored well, but some branch-
ing points are experiencing the sudden change of the color. And considering we
have used the same method for analyzing the ﬁber orientation, the approach
should not be invalid. We tried to ﬁnd out the method to ﬁx this problem, but
they doesn’t work. Regarding this problem, we cast a hypothesis: the ρ value is
hard to choose for orientation analysis of vessels. In [Cha16], the author stated
that the error is resulted by the diﬀerence between ρ and radius of ﬁbers r; and
the minimal error is obtained when ρ = r. Considering there are two diﬀerences
between vessels and ﬁbres: ﬁrst, the vessels are branching in some position, but
==PAGE:60==
50
Analyzing of 3D Volume
the ﬁber sample we analyzed was not overlapped in 3-dimension space (in other
words, crossing and inserting into each other); and the ﬁbers has approximately
the same radius, but vessel doesn’t, considering big vessels are branching into
small vessels. (In the 2d orientation of the ﬁber slices, there are also color sud-
den changes in the branching points.) That might be why analyzing the vessel
orientation is harder than ﬁber.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
Achievements and Limitations
This master project ﬁnished the works we outlined in the introduction. As a
preparation, we have applied the projection preprocessing techniques. The bad
pixel detection methods are well detected the bad pixels in the projections, and
the correction approaches removed the bad pixels. The detection of the pixels
could also provide a good reference to the technicians who are maintaining the
equipment, as a report about the condition of the CT system. By the result
of the bad pixel detection, the technicians can easily ﬁnd out which units are
experiencing errors, then ﬁx the detector or the other components of the CT
system (like the cooling system) and uses the detection method again in order
to see how many bad pixels are reduced. In conclusion, this method might be
helpful for the people who want to know how to improve the CT system and
the quality of the images from it.
Among the bad pixel detection methods, the most recommended one is the slope
method. In chapter 3, we have discussed that the slopes of the acquisition-time-
count lines are the evidence for detecting the abnormal pixels. Moreover, the
dead pixels, whose lines can be represented by y = c where c is a constant
number. So the slope of such lines is 0, which is also an abnormal value. Conse-
quently, we ﬁnd that the slope method could ﬁnd both dead pixels and abnormal
==PAGE:62==
52
Discussion
pixels; that is the biggest advantage of this method.
However, ﬁxing the bad pixels could be a long and diﬃcult work, and it is
also hard to ensure all units working well in the detector. Then our bad pixel
correction approaches could solve this problem, by using mathematical methods
instead of waiting for the repair of the detector. The median ﬁlter and the stripe
removal method can be used for removing the bad pixels in the projections
without another scan; and the calibration could be implemented while we have
the time for a new scan for fulﬁlling the pixels with wrong values. The calibration
method is most suggested by us, considering it is giving the pixels real values
instead of guessing the values with the mathematical tricks.
Nonetheless, there is still some of limitations to the methods.
Firstly, the
method might not work while there are too many bad pixels. For the math-
ematical approaches, the calculation of the output relies on the values of the
pixel’s neighbour. If there are too many other bad pixels lied on the neighbour
of the correcting one, the value we got is hardly approximated to the actual
value there should be. For example, a extreme condition is that while we are
using the the median ﬁlter, and in the window all pixels are bad pixels, then
there would be no reference to the pixel for the bad pixels to be corrected.
In such conditions, attempts of the correction is not better than waiting for
the maintenance of the equipment, considering no matter we correct it or not,
the projection is losing too many information, sometime it might be the critical
information. Just imagine that in some slices the small vessel part is covered by
the bad pixels, then it is impossible to get the vessel images reﬂecting the real
shape of it.
The stripe removal method also has a limitation, which is also discussed by
Beat Munch in [MTMS09]. The wavelet-Fourier ﬁlter is reducing the stripes by
damping some information in the sinogram. Idealy, we expect it only erases the
stripes, and do nothing to the good part; however, in practical the algorithm
is both removing the stripes and the useful information. From the result of
our test, we could see that the increasing of the decomposition level, vanishing
moment and sigma, makes more good information lost. Furthermore, after the
correction, we could see blurred fat rings in the reconstructed image. In 5.1,
the reconstruction result of the stripe-free sinograms of match head, original
ring artifacts are not covering too many useful information, so the result looks
not bad; however, in the projections of the brain sample shown in 5.2, the ring
artifacts are covering the brain part so after the damping of the sinogram, the
brain parts are hardly to see considering the fat rings are bloking them.
The limitation of the calibration is easy to comprehend. Considering we are
using the values in the second scan to correct the projections from the ﬁrst
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Achievements and Limitations
53
Figure 5.1: The original match head slice (a) and the one reconstructed with
a stripe-free sinogram (b).
Figure 5.2: The original (a) and stripe-free-reconstructed brain slices (b).
==PAGE:64==
54
Discussion
scan, there is a precondition that the a pixel in the second scan is not bad if
it is used for correcting a bad pixel in the ﬁrst scan; otherwise, we are using a
bad pixels to correct the other bad pixel. In order to achieve this precondition,
there should not be so many bad pixels in the projections. Furthermore, in
some institutions a high utilization of the X-ray CT equipment is frequent, so
this approach which is using a longer time for one experiment might not be
welcomed.
The performance of our oﬀ-center algorithm works good regarding to our sim-
ulation and the result. After the correction, the match head is located well in
the center of the image. Furthermore, the stripes in the sinogram are bent after
the oﬀ-center correction, so we highly suggest that the stripe-removal algorithm
should be implemented before the oﬀ-center correction considering there would
be hardly stripes in the aligned sinogram.
With the experiment testing the performance of image enhancement techniques,
we found that gamma correction and gray stretch sometimes can give good
results, and sometimes cannot help so much with the contrast. The eﬀect of the
techniques has already shown in the match head enhancement results; however,
the limitation is also visible in the attempts with brain sample. Thus we could
see a limitation of this method: the performance relies on the original images to
some extend. It is easy to understand: if we want to enhance the contrast of two
parts in one image, at least the two parts should have diﬀerence on grayscale
values. Otherwise reducing one part would also make another one invisible.
Unfortunately, no matter how we process the projections, the clarity (SNR or
CNR) of the brain images could not support our requirement for the analysis, so
we have to use the Zeiss system instead. This tells us that before planning the
image analysis, we have to evaluate the performance of the CT equipment; it
is not always impossible to see the structure with low SNR images, considering
there are too many abnormal values. Thus, we cannot ensure that the analysis
result is right or useful.
By looking at the 3D image of the vessel in brain sample, we could say that
our segmentation method works well for extracting the vessel out, even though
the connection between the vessel and the background inﬂuenced us a lot. In
such images which has isolated parts in the histogram, using Gaussian ﬁtting
for calculate the threshold is a good idea. Also, by using the region growing and
connected-component methods, we could both pick the vessel out; however the
region growing is an iterative algorithm, it takes longer time than the connected-
component labeling. For segmenting out the vessels from the volume contains a
lot of connected components, the labeling algorithm is a better choice; however
while we want to segment something from a connected image, like the white
tissue, region growing is more recommended.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Future Work
55
Based on the orientation analysis result, we suggest a hypothesis that the choos-
ing of ρ for the Gaussian ﬁlter is a big problem in vessel orientation. The diﬀer-
ence of the radius in parts of vessel and the branching may aﬀect the performance
of vessel orientation analysis. So in conclusion, we suggest some preprocessing
of the vessel before analyzing.
5.2
Future Work
In this thesis we used a sample stained with OsO4, giving the components in
the white matter higher grayscale values except the vessels. However from the
theory study, we have known that there are some reagents which are able to stain
the vessels, like hematoxylin. So the future work could focus on segmenting the
white matter with hematoxylin, segment the blood vessel out and analysis the
performance of it.
In previous section, we mentioned the hypothesis in order to explain the reason
why the result in the orientation analysis is not good enough. Thus, future
work to prove or falsiﬁcation the hypothesis is expected. And if it is proved, the
method of ﬁnding out how we should analyze the orientation could be watched
for as well.
We also look forward the studies on the structure of the white
matter, like the nerves or other tissues. Other characterization of the vessels in
white matter, like the diameter or the density, is also going to be studied.
Another future research is to study more about the bad pixel detection and
correction method, including deﬁning the limitation of the methods quantita-
tively. For example, we have know that if there are too many bad pixels, the
calibration method would not work, so we could ﬁnd a number or expression in
order to ﬁnd the maximum number or density of the bad pixels in a projection
(detector).
Finally, we are interested in whether the oﬀ-center correction could helps the bad
pixel avoidance. For example if we can ﬁnd a region in the detector without bad
pixels, we would be able to keep the sample scanned in that region. However if
the sample is oﬀ-centered, during the rotation the sample part in the projection
might contains some bad pixels. If we could calculate the oﬀset, and move the
sample in every scan in order to keep the sample part in the region without bad
pixels, we are able to avoid the impact of the bad units on the detector.
==PAGE:66==
56
Discussion
5.3
Conclusion
To conclude, the works of this master project are valuable for the future use of
the DTU PCXCT system and the forthcoming studies about the white matter
in the rat brain. The method we attempted to process the projections, that is,
optimizing the result of the reconstructions, is also a good reference for the other
users of that system. We sincerely hope that our result could help the users of
the DTU PCXCT system obtain better image sets, and help the maintainer ﬁnd
out how to improve it.
==PAGE:67==
Appendix A
Other Figures
==PAGE:68==
58
Other Figures
Figure A.1: Some projections of brain samples taken by DTU PCXCT system,
with 1-80 KeV energy bin. In order to see the projections clearer,
we colored the images of them.
==PAGE:69==
59
Figure A.2: Reconstruction result with the slices. In order to see the slices
clearer, we colored the image and deleted some background noises.
==PAGE:70==
60
Other Figures
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[AAKK10]
Salem Saleh Al-Amri, NV Kalyankar, and SD Khamitkar. Image
segmentation by using edge detection. International Journal on
computer science and engineering, 2(3):804–807, 2010.
[AB94]
Rolf Adams and Leanne Bischof.
Seeded region growing.
IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
16(6):641–647, 1994.
[BBM07]
Yakoub Bazi, Lorenzo Bruzzone, and Farid Melgani. Image thresh-
olding based on the em algorithm and the generalized gaussian
distribution. Pattern Recognition, 40(2):619–634, 2007.
[BDHS16]
Ander Biguri, Manjit Dosanjh, Steven Hancock, and Manuchehr
Soleimani. Tigre: a matlab-gpu toolbox for cbct image reconstruc-
tion. Biomedical Physics & Engineering Express, 2(5):055010, 2016.
[BKZV04]
Izhak Baharav, Ramakrishna Kakarala, Xuemei Zhang, and Diet-
rich Werner Vook. Bad pixel detection and correction in an image
sensing device, May 18 2004. US Patent 6,737,625.
[Cha16]
Lucie Chapelle. Characterization and modelling of the mechanical
properties of mineral wool. 2016.
[DD12]
Rajeshwar Dass and Swapna Devi. Image segmentation techniques
1. 2012.
[Edd]
Steve
Eddins.
Connected
component
labeling.
https://blogs.mathworks.com/steve/2007/03/20/
connected-component-labeling-part-3/. Accessed: March 20,
2007.
==PAGE:72==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Eﬀ00]
Nick Eﬀord. Digital image processing: a practical introduction us-
ing java (with CD-ROM). Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing
Co., Inc., 2000.
[FDK84]
LA Feldkamp, LC Davis, and JW Kress. Practical cone-beam al-
gorithm. JOSA A, 1(6):612–619, 1984.
[GDCXJ14] Doga Gürsoy, Francesco De Carlo, Xianghui Xiao, and Chris Jacob-
sen. Tomopy: a framework for the analysis of synchrotron tomo-
graphic data. Journal of synchrotron radiation, 21(5):1188–1193,
2014.
[Gil72]
Peter Gilbert. Iterative methods for the three-dimensional recon-
struction of an object from projections. Journal of theoretical biol-
ogy, 36(1):105–117, 1972.
[GLLS14]
Sahar Ghanavati, X Yu Lisa, Jason P Lerch, and John G Sled. A
perfusion procedure for imaging of the mouse cerebral vasculature
by x-ray micro-ct.
Journal of neuroscience methods, 221:70–77,
2014.
[Gon16]
Rafael C Gonzalez. Digital image processing, 2016.
[GS98]
Lalit Gupta and Thotsapon Sortrakul. A gaussian-mixture-based
image segmentation algorithm. Pattern Recognition, 31(3):315–325,
1998.
[HCS08]
Lifeng He, Yuyan Chao, and Kenji Suzuki.
A run-based two-
scan labeling algorithm. IEEE transactions on image processing,
17(5):749–756, 2008.
[HLC+]
Robert S. Hill, Wayne B. L, Hughes Stx Corp, Don Lindler, and
Richard Shaw. S. casertano, et al., eds. cosmic ray and hot pixel
removal from stis ccd images.
[HS52]
Magnus Rudolph Hestenes and Eduard Stiefel. Methods of conju-
gate gradients for solving linear systems, volume 49. NBS Wash-
ington, DC, 1952.
[HS85]
Robert M Haralick and Linda G Shapiro.
Image segmentation
techniques.
Computer vision, graphics, and image processing,
29(1):100–132, 1985.
[JMLA02]
Javier Alda Jose Manuel Lopez-Alonso. Bad pixel identiﬁcation
by means of principal components analysis. Optical Engineering,
41:41 – 41 – 6, 2002.
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
63
[KHB+10]
Michael Krause, Jan-Marcel Hausherr, Bernd Burgeth, Christian
Herrmann, and Walter Krenkel.
Determination of the ﬁbre ori-
entation in composites using the structure tensor and local x-ray
transform. Journal of Materials Science, 45(4):888, 2010.
[KSW02]
Avinash C Kak, Malcolm Slaney, and Ge Wang. Principles of com-
puterized tomographic imaging. Medical Physics, 29(1):107–107,
2002.
[Lyu18]
Jinning Lyu. Experimental study of feasibility of multi-energy k-
edge imaging using photon-counting detectors. 2018.
[Mas09]
Mario Mastriani. Denoising and compression in wavelet domain
via projection onto approximation coeﬃcients. 35, 11 2009.
[MTMS09]
Beat Münch, Pavel Trtik, Federica Marone, and Marco Stam-
panoni. Stripe and ring artifact removal with combined wavelet
— fourier ﬁltering. Opt. Express, 17(10):8567–8591, May 2009.
[NWX+10]
Peter B Noël, Alan M Walczak, Jinhui Xu, Jason J Corso,
Kenneth R Hoﬀmann, and Sebastian Schafer.
Gpu-based cone
beam computed tomography. Computer methods and programs in
biomedicine, 98(3):271–277, 2010.
[PBS13]
Willem Jan Palenstijn, K Joost Batenburg, and Jan Sijbers. The
astra tomography toolbox.
In 13th International Conference on
Computational and Mathematical Methods in Science and Engi-
neering, CMMSE, volume 2013, pages 1139–1145, 2013.
[PP93]
Nikhil R Pal and Sankar K Pal. A review on image segmentation
techniques. Pattern recognition, 26(9):1277–1294, 1993.
[RMS14]
Peter Wizinowich Roger M. Smith, David Hale. Bad pixel mapping,
2014.
