==PAGE:1==
Sensor Based Control of Robotic Arm
Alexander JГіhannesson (s161275)
Master of Science in Engineering
2018
==PAGE:2==
Sensor Based Control of Robotic Arm
Report written by:
Alexander JГіhannesson (s161275)
Advisor(s):
SГёren Hansen, Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Nils Axel Andersen, Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
22. Januar- 22. June
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
В©Alexander JГіhannesson, 2018
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The purpose of this graduation project is to resemble assembly lines in production com-
panies and develop an assembly process using a robotic arm. Assembly lines are widely
used all over the world, and this thesis investigates whether those processes can be im-
proved with the use of robotic arms.
In this project a camera and a force torque sensor was successfully used to develop an
assembly process. With the use of computer vision library a method was successfully
developed to detect all objects needed to be interacted with. Different methods to con-
trol the robot arm were created to search and find different objects.
This report shows how the assembly process was created and the steps to solve different
problems that came up throughout the development phase.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc.
degree in Electrical Engineering.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors SГёren Hansen
and Nils Axel Andersen for their continuous support, guidance and patience.
Their
guidance have been helpful during the process of this project and the writing of this
thesis. Furthermore, I would like to thank the Automation department for providing me
with all the equipment I have used to carry out this project.
I would also like to thank my friend, GuГ°mundur HГЎkon, for countless stimulating
discussions throughout this project and for reviewing this report. Lastly, thanks to my
family for all of their continuous support.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goals to achieve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
3
3
Setup
5
4
Analysis
9
4.1
Controlling the robot arm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.2
Analysis of puzzle project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Assembly project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Results
27
5.1
Puzzle project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Assembly project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Conclusion
35
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Appendices
37
A Flowcharts
39
Bibliography
41
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
3.1
The aluminum plate and the screws used in the project . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Final setup of the assembly project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Final setup of the puzzle project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.1
The rotation between camera frame and the robot gripper frame . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Different brightness of the image captured of the puzzle . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Different brightness of the image captured of the bricks . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
Difference between histogram of dark and bright puzzle image . . . . . . . .
15
4.5
Difference between histogram of dark and bright bricks image
. . . . . . . .
16
4.6
Measurements of the force in Z-direction from the force sensor . . . . . . . .
17
4.7
Example of search algorithm for puzzle project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.8
Initial image captured by the camera . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.9
Histogram of the grayscale image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.10 Image transformation: Isolation of objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.11 Image transformation: Morphological opening followed by a morphological
closing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.12 Measurements of the force in Z-direction from the force sensor . . . . . . . .
22
4.13 Examples of spiral search with different Оё and r increments . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1
Captured images of the puzzle and the bricks with a suitable brightness value 28
5.2
Tests to make sure the isolation works as well as the image coordinate calcu-
lations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Illustration on how accurate the puzzle is found . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
The search pattern and the sensor readings while searching . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5
Resulting image coordinate calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.6
Illustration of the spiral search for finding center of hole
. . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.7
Force readings in z-direction while the spiral search is running . . . . . . . .
33
A.1 Flowchart of the puzzle project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
A.2 Flowchart of the assembly project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
1.1
Requirements to fulfill . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
4.1
Summary of steps in both projects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Center values of the histograms in Figure 4.4 and 4.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Local maximum and minimum points in the histogram . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Color ranges for isolating the two plates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.1
Test results for different speeds when searching for a hole . . . . . . . . . . .
33
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Robotics is a fascinating subject. Today robot arms are widely used in industries to
automate processes and reduce human errors. One of the biggest use of robot arms is
in production lines, but still, the use of robot arms could be higher. There are many
production companies that use a lot of workers in their production lines which could be
replaced by robot arms. This is the main motivation for doing this project; to reduce
the amount of workers that are doing manual labour all day long in assembly lines.
This thesis focuses on the use of robot arms in assembly lines, and investigates whether
the assembly processes can be made faster using a robot arm instead of workers.
The project to be solved in this thesis is to automate the screwing of a plate or a
lid to an object. To solve this project, a 6 degree of freedom robot arm is used and two
sensors; a camera and a force torque sensor. To start with, a puzzle project is going to
be solved first. This project is relatively easier than the assembly project but should
still use the robot arm and sensors in similar way as the assembly project. By doing
this, the solutions used to solve the projects, will improve between projects and the main
assembly project ends up being more robust.
1.1
Requirements
Throughout the design phase of this project many problems occurred. To get a good
and acceptable solution to the project, those problems have been faced and solved in the
best possible way. The requirements that this project must fulfill to have a satisfactory
solution are listed in the table below.
Table 1.1: Requirements to fulfill.
# ID
Requirements
1
Frequent feedback from the robot arm to the controller.
2
The camera must detect all objects the arm should interact with.
3
The robot arm should find objects within 5mm located by the camera.
4
Robot arm movements and force sensor readings should happen simultane-
ously.
5
The force sensor must be able to find the exact location of the holes.
6
Robust and fast process.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Goals to achieve
Imagine an assembly line in a large production company, where one of the stations in
the line is to screw a plate or a lid, fixed on to an object. This project focuses on
resembling that part of an assembly line and making that process faster than it would
take human workers. This project also focuses on creating methods that can have the
robot arm automatically carry out different screw assembly processes.
To have the
solution, provided in this project for these methods, usable it is also focused on to have
the methods robust and as fast as possible.
Therefore the three main goals to achieve in this project are:
вҖў The robot arm should be able to automatically carry out different screw assembly
processes.
вҖў Robust process.
вҖў Faster assembly process than with human workers.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
The idea of using a force and vision feedback for controlling a robot arm for industry is
not a new idea. Robot arms have been used in industries for years now.
In Lee E. Weiss studies from 1987 [1] it is discussed how industrial arms require
sensing capability to adapt to new tasks without explicit intervention or reprogramming.
The formulation of sensory feedback models for systems which incorporate complex
mappings between robot, sensor and world coordinate frames is discussed. In his paper
the visual feedback is the main focus. The paper suggests that adaptive image-based
visual servo control strategy may provide speed and accuracy improvements.
David P. Gravel paper for Ford Motor Company in 2007 [2] discusses a production
robotic assembly processes using a robot technology called force control. The paper
states that force controlled assembly robots achieves adequate contact stability with
relatively low damping, enabling robots to exceed human capability in terms of cycle time
performance for assembly operations. Then the paper discusses how the optimization of
assembly parameters are solved to optimal the robots performance.
A paper from 2009 written by Torgny BrogГҘrdh [3] the general robot control is dis-
cussed with industrial perspective, focusing on joint control, modeling, identification,
design, trajectory planning and learning. This paper concludes that robot control devel-
opment has made it possible to improve the quality of robot-based manufacturing and
increase the productivity of robot automation. However, it is also stated that in order
to increase the use of industrial robots, further robot control development is needed,
especially with respect to sensor-based control.
In this thesis the goal is to find a solution to an assembly process, mainly for industry.
The first two papers cited in this chapter discuss how a visual feedback may provide
speed and accuracy and how a force control enables robots to exceed human capabilities
in terms of cycle time performance for assembly processes. This thesis will therefore
be using feedback of visual and force sensors to try to further improve the assembly
processes.
As stated in BrogГҘrdhs paper a sensor-based robot control needs further
development to increase the use of industrial robots.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Setup
This chapter contains a description of the hardware used in this project as well as the
setup of the two projects.
In this project the UR10 robot arm is used. This is the biggest arm available at
Universal Robots (UR) and has a payload of 10 kg and a working radius of 1300mm.
The arm has 6 rotational joints, which all have a range of Вұ 360в—Ұ. The first joint is
called base, the next two are called shoulder and elbow. The last three joints are called
wrist 1, wrist 2 and wrist 3. [4]
To be able to pick up different objects, like the screws, a gripper is needed. An
adaptive gripper from Robotiq, called 2-Finger 85, is used.
This gripper has a flat
surface, it has a 85 mm opening range and a grip payload of 5kg. [5]
Two sensors are used in this project, a camera and a force torque sensor. The object of
the camera sensor is to find the approximate location of objects needed to be interacted
with. Therefore there are no specification requirements for the camera besides being
able to capture an image. A 1080p HD camera from Microsoft is used in this project.
The force torque sensor used is the FT 300 Force Torque Sensor from Robotiq. This
sensor measures both force and torque values in all three major coordinate axes in the
cartesian coordinate system with an output rate of 100 Hz. The force range is Вұ300 N
with a signal noise of 0.1 N. The torque measuring range is Вұ 30 Nm with a signal noise
0.005 Nm in X and Y direction and 0.003 Nm in Z direction. [6]
The reason why this hardware is chosen is two-folded. Firstly, the specification of
this hardware is sufficient enough for this project and secondly this hardware can be
found in-house.
The setup of the assembly project should resemble an assembly station in a produc-
tion line. It should resemble when a plate or a lid is screwed fixed on to an object. An
aluminum plate with four holes with screw threads is used for this task, see Figure 3.1(a).
The screw threads in the plate are 8mm wide so, M8 screws are used in the project. To
be able to grab the screws better with the gripper and get a better handling off the
screws, the screw heads are cut off, see Figure 3.1(b).
To make sure the robot arm can grab the screws before screwing them in, a plate out
of wood was made to hold the screws. Four holes, with diameter 8.5mm, were drilled
into the plate. This plate is used as a support for the screws in the project. The final
==PAGE:18==
6
3 Setup
(a) The aluminum plate used in the project.
(b) The screw used to screw in the plate.
Figure 3.1: The aluminum plate and the screws used in the project.
setup of the project can be seen in Figure 3.2(a), and then in Figure 3.2(b) it can be
seen how the project looks after it is solved.
(a) Initial setup of the project.
(b) The project after it is solved.
Figure 3.2: Final setup of the assembly project.
The puzzle project should resemble a popular developmental puzzle for children. The
puzzle is to pick up a brick and place it at the same color in the puzzle. The setup for
this project is a cut out cardboard box, which resembles the puzzle and then 8 bricks,
two of each color. The surface of the bricks are 3x3 cm and the cut out holes in the
==PAGE:19==
3 Setup
7
cardboard box are made 4x4 cm, or 5mm wider than the bricks for each side. The final
setup for this project can be seen in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Final setup of the puzzle project.
==PAGE:20==
8
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 4
Analysis
To be able to solve these projects, number of different tasks needed to be considered.
This chapter discusses how the projects were solved, or the steps taken to solve the
projects. Firstly, it is discussed how the robot arm is controlled in general. Then the
steps taken to solve the projects are discussed in details. First the steps to the puzzle
project, and then the steps to solve the assembly project. As expected, the steps to solve
these two projects are similar. However, as it can be seen in the following chapter, they
have improved between the two projects, making the assembly project more robust.
In Table 4.1 a summary of the steps to solve these projects are shown before they are
discussed in more details in the sections below.
Table 4.1: Summary of steps in both projects.
Puzzle project
Assembly project
вҖўAn image is captured by the camera.
вҖўAn image is captured by the camera.
вҖўA controller makes sure the image has
a suitable brightness value.
вҖўThe
image
is
transformed
to
grayscale.
вҖўSpecific colors are isolated in the im-
age.
вҖўThe color range for the two plates is
found.
вҖўThe image coordinates of those colors
are found.
вҖўThese colors are isolated on the im-
age.
вҖўThe image coordinates are trans-
formed to robot gripper frame.
вҖўImage coordinates are calculated and
transformed to robot base frame.
вҖўThe robot arm picks up a specific col-
ored brick.
вҖўThe robot arm picks up the first
screw.
вҖўThe robot arm moves over the same
colored brick in the puzzle.
вҖўThe robot arm moves over one of the
holes.
вҖўThe robot arm moves down until the
surface is detected.
вҖўThe robot arm moves down until the
surface is detected
вҖўA searching algorithm is used to find
the hole.
вҖўA searching algorithm is used to find
the hole.
вҖўThe brick is dropped in the hole.
вҖўThe screw is screwed into the hole.
вҖўNext brick is picked up and the steps
repeated.
вҖўNext screw is picked up and the steps
repeated.
==PAGE:22==
10
4 Analysis
4.1
Controlling the robot arm
The robot arm operates on a driver called ROS control, which is the robot operating
system. ROS provides a frame work for communication between robot components that
is independent of hardware and runtime context. For example, the ROS takes as input
the joint state data from the robotвҖҷs actuatorвҖҷs encoders and an input set point. It uses
a generic control loop feedback mechanism, typically a PID controller, to control the
output, typically effort, sent to the actuators. [7]
The ROS control works well, but can however be slow and provides a lack of feedback
to the user, which is what is needed in these projects. Therefore a driver was installed to
deal with this, called UR modern driver. This driver is compatible with the ROS control.
It reacts quicker, takes care of command queuing for the robot and provides the user
with frequent feedback of, for example, joint states [8]. With this driver requirement #1
in Table 1.1 is fulfilled. The robot arm is operated through a socket connection, meaning
that one command is sent at a time. In this project, only two types of commands were
used to move the robot arm. The movel and the speedl commands. The movel command
is a simple cartesian space move command and the speedl command sets the speed of
the end effector in cartesian space. Both of these commands describe a movement in the
cartesian space and are easy to plan. The speedl command was used when surfaces are
being found with the use of the force sensor. Otherwise the movel command was used.
To communicate with the gripper a modbus communication protocol was used.
The receiving frequency of the robot arm is 125 Hz [9], while the force sensor is
operating at 100 Hz frequency and the camera operates at even lower frequency. Three
threads were constructed in the projects to make sure there will be no interruptions
when running all these at the same time. One thread is the main thread where the
robot arm movements and all the control takes place. A vision thread was constructed
which has the task to capture images and return information about them to the main
thread. Another thread was created for the force sensor. This thread initializes the force
sensor and sends sensor readings to the main thread. With these threads constructed,
requirement #4 in Table 1.1 is fulfilled as the arm movement and sensor readings can
now happen simultaneously.
In order to get the correct positions, of the robot joints or the end effector, when
controlling the robot arm, the robot kinematics are essential. The forward kinematics
calculates the robots end effector position, knowing the values of the joint parameters.
The inverse kinematics calculates the values of the joint parameters which will achieve
some desired position of the end effector. The UR10 robot arm has a built-in forward
and inverse kinematics, but still local kinematic files might be needed, in order to control
the robot position better. However, in this project it was concluded that local kinematic
files were not to needed, since both the position of the end effector and the joints can
easily be accessed through the UR modern driver.
==PAGE:23==
4.2 Analysis of puzzle project
11
4.2
Analysis of puzzle project
Solving the puzzle project, required two main parts, vision and feeling with the use of a
force sensor. The vision part is about to detect different objects while the force sensor
is used to find exact location of the object with the use of a feeling with the end effector.
A thorough analysis of these two parts can be found below.
For a better understanding of the project flow, a flowchart of the project is provided in
Figure A.1 in Appendix A.
4.2.1
Vision
A vision is needed in this project to be able to know the surroundings. The main task
of the vision part is to capture an image with the camera and distinguish on that image
what it is the robot arm should interact with. Then the vision part should also find the
image coordinates of the object and transform those into 3D coordinates in the camera
frame. Furthermore, the coordinates in camera frame are transformed into robot base
frame. The robot base frame 3D coordinates are then what the vision part returns to the
main thread. The image processing is done with a library called OpenCV (Open Source
Computer Vision Library). OpenCV is an open source computer vision and machine
learning software library, aimed at real-time computer vision [10]. How these steps were
solved, will now be explained in more details.
After an image has been captured, the first thing to do was to isolate one color in
the image. That was done by searching the image for a color on a specific range of RGB
color codes, using the built in OpenCV function inRange();. To know the correct RGB
values for each color, an image was captured and uploaded to the image editor software
GIMP. There the RGB values for each color were extracted. However, those values had
to be tuned to find the range of high and low RGB codes. After the right values were
found, they were used as an input to the function inRange();, which outputs a black
and white image. White, where the RGB color range matches, black elsewhere.
Now this isolated image can be used to find out the image coordinates, [u,v], of the
correct colored brick. The method used to do that was to locate every single white pixel
in the image. An OpenCV function called findNonZero(); is used to locate every white
pixel. The function inputs the image wanted to being searched, and outputs an array
of locations of non-zero pixels. Since the image at hand is only black and white, every
non-zero pixel must be a white pixel. When the location of the white pixels has been
found a simple loop was constructed to find the center of mass of those pixels. First, the
center of mass for the X-direction was found and then the Y-direction. The center of
mass for each direction was found by adding all the white pixel locations in that direc-
tion and then divide by the total number of white pixels. The center of mass location
now represent the image coordinates u and v.
After the image coordinates had been found the only thing left to do was to trans-
form those coordinates. Using a pinhole camera model, the transformation from image
coordinates of the object, to 3D coordinates in camera frame, [Xc, Y c, Zc], is:
==PAGE:24==
12
4 Analysis
u вҲ’px
fx
= Xc
Zc
,
v вҲ’py
fy
= Y c
Zc
(4.1)
Where fx = 677.6 and fy = 685.2 are the camera focal length, [px, py] = [328.16, 204.9]
is the principal point in the image. From measurements Zc was found to be a constant
of Zc = 0.34m, since an image was always captured at the same height. The pinhole
camera model only works if the image frame is parallel to the table surface, which it
always was in this project.
With equation 4.1, the coordinates of the object in camera frame were now known. The
values, [Xc, Y c, Zc], represent the distance the camera must move, in its own coordi-
nate system, to be at the objects location. Since the objects are always on the same
height on the table surface, and the camera is always capturing the images at the same
height above, it was assumed that the Z-distance is always known. Therefore the goal
at hand was to transform the [Xc, Y c] camera coordinates to the gripper coordinate sys-
tem. It was known that the Z-axis of both those coordinate systems are always parallel.
Therefore, the easiest way to transform the coordinates was to just rotate the image
coordinates around the Z-axis so the X- and Y-axes matches the robot base frame. And
then to translate them to the robot base frame. To find the rotational transformation
between the camera frame and the robot gripper frame, a ruler was placed on the table
parallel to the X-axis of the robot gripper frame. An image was capture from the camera
and the rotation of the ruler calculated. The image can be seen in Figure 4.1. On that
image a straight line has been drawn which represents the Y-axis of the camera frame,
480 pixels long. Another line has been drawn along the ruler, representing the X-axis of
the robot gripper frame, 482 pixels long.
The angle between those lines can be calculated as arccos(480/481) = 3.7в—Ұ. It can
now be seen that the rotation from the camera frame to the robot gripper frame must
be 90в—ҰвҲ’3.7в—Ұ= 86.3в—Ұclockwise around the Z-axis. However, this rotation did not give
the correct solution. After some testing it was found out that the Z-axis of the camera
frame and the robot base frame are parallel but point in opposite directions. So in order
to get the right rotation, the camera frame must be rotated 86.3в—Ұaround the Z-axis and
then the frame must be rotated 180в—Ұaround the X-axis. The following matrices describe
a rotation around the X- and Z-axis.
Rx(Оё) =
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈ°
1
0
0
0
cos(Оё)
вҲ’sin(Оё)
0
sin(Оё)
cos(Оё)
пЈ№
пЈәпЈ»
(4.2)
Rz(Оё) =
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈ°
cos(Оё)
вҲ’sin(Оё)
0
sin(Оё)
cos(Оё)
0
0
0
1
пЈ№
пЈәпЈ»
(4.3)
==PAGE:25==
4.2 Analysis of puzzle project
13
Figure 4.1: The rotation between camera frame and the robot gripper frame.
Now a complete rotational matrix between the camera frame to the robot base frame
is shown in Equation 4.4. First, a 86.3в—Ұrotation around the Z-axis and then a 180в—Ұ
around the X-axis.
R = Rx(Оё = 180в—Ұ) В· Rz(П• = 86.3в—Ұ)
=
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈ°
1
0
0
0
cos(Оё)
вҲ’sin(Оё)
0
sin(Оё)
cos(Оё)
пЈ№
пЈәпЈ»В·
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈ°
cosП•)
вҲ’sin(П•)
0
sin(П•)
cos(П•)
0
0
0
1
пЈ№
пЈәпЈ»
=
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈ°
cos(П•)
вҲ’sin(П•)
0
sinП•) В· cos(Оё)
cos(П•) В· cos(Оё)
вҲ’sin(Оё)
sin(П•) В· sin(Оё)
cos(П•) В· sin(Оё)
cos(Оё)
пЈ№
пЈәпЈ»
(4.4)
The translation transformation from the camera frame to the robot gripper frame was
found by measurement. The translation was measured to be, [TX, TY ] = [0.06, вҲ’0.055].
Now the total transformation, rotation and translation, from the camera frame to the
robot gripper frame is:
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈ°
XG
Y G
ZG
пЈ№
пЈәпЈ»= R В·
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈ°
XC
Y C
ZC
пЈ№
пЈәпЈ»+
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈ°
T X
T Y
T Z
пЈ№
пЈәпЈ»
(4.5)
Where G stands for the gripper frame and C for the camera frame. R is the rotational
matrix from equation 4.4 and T is the translation between the two frames.
==PAGE:26==
14
4 Analysis
Even though the Z-coordinate was not used in this project, it is still in the equation
above, since that is the full equation. However, in this project the Z-coordinates were
set to zero. To make the calculations easier for c++ programming, equation 4.5 was
derived for XG and Y G.
XG = (cos(П•) В· XC вҲ’sin(П•) В· Y C) + T X
(4.6)
Y G = (sin(П•) В· cos(Оё) В· XC + cos(П•) В· cos(Оё) В· Y C) + T Y
(4.7)
Where [XG, Y G] are the coordinates the gripper must move to be directly above the
object found by the camera. Оё is the rotational angle around the X-axis while П• is the
angle around Z-axis. [T X, T Y ] is the translation between the two frames.
One problem occurred while testing the vision part. The problem is that at one
instance in the project, the camera needs to capture an image of the bricks inside the
puzzle, which has a very bright background.
At another instance the camera must
capture image of the bricks outside the puzzle, which has a very dark background. When
the camera is switching between these two positions, the brightness is not automatically
adjusted. A different brightness of the camera was needed for the different backgrounds.
What happened was that the images get too dark or too bright. An example of that can
be seen in Figures 4.2 and 4.3.
(a) To dark image.
(b) To bright image.
Figure 4.2: Different brightness of the image captured of the puzzle.
As it can be seen in these figures, the colors of the bricks were changing to much
between images, therefore they can not be identified when trying to isolate a specific
color. To solve this, a simple controller was created. When an image has been captured
it was changed to grayscale, because then there is only one dimension of colors. From
that image a histogram of the pixel values was calculated with the OpenCV function
calcHist(); and normalized to the range from 0 to 255. The center of the histogram was
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Analysis of puzzle project
15
(a) To dark image.
(b) To bright image.
Figure 4.3: Different brightness of the image captured of the bricks.
found, to estimate the brightness of the image. The histogram for the images in Figures
4.2 and 4.3 can be seen in Figures 4.4 and 4.5.
(a) Histogram of the dark puzzle image.
(b) Histogram of the bright puzzle image.
Figure 4.4: Difference between histogram of dark and bright puzzle image.
The center of the histogram for these images was then used to estimate a suitable
brightness. The center of the histograms is shown in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Center values of the histograms in Figure 4.4 and 4.5.
Image
Dark
Bright
Puzzle
128.8
224.6
Bricks
26.8
118.5
The histogram center was then the input to the controller. In every iteration a new
image was captured. The controller turns the brightness of the camera up or down
==PAGE:28==
16
4 Analysis
(a) Histogram of the dark bricks image.
(b) Histogram of the bright bricks image.
Figure 4.5: Difference between histogram of dark and bright bricks image.
depending on the histogram center of the previous image captured. The controller keeps
on running until the histogram center of the last image captured was the same as the
desired set-point of the controller. In other words, when a desired brightness of the
image was reached.
A separate thread was needed for the vision part, since the camera was running on
a much lower frequency than the robot arm. The input to the vision thread was the
initialization of the VideoCapture and whether the captured image should be of the
bricks inside or outside the puzzle. It is essential to have the VideoCapture as an input
to the thread, so it was only initialized ones in the main thread. Rather than multiple
times in the vision thread. The vision threadвҖҷs job was to carry out the steps described
above and return the robot base coordinates, of the objects the arm should interact with,
to the main thread. While the vision thread was running the main thread was inside
an infinite while loop, which doesnвҖҷt break until the vision thread had been carried out,
and the coordinates returned.
4.2.2
Force sensor
The force sensor is essential to solve this project. Another thread was constructed for
the force sensor which purpose was to initialize the sensor and send the sensor readings
to the main thread. The force sensor had two main purposes; to find the height of the
puzzle surface and to find the exact location of the holes in the puzzle. This section
explains the steps taken to fully achieve the sensors purpose.
After the vision thread had returned the X- and Y-coordinates of the desired hole and
the robot arm had moved above it, the force sensor was used to find the hole. That was
accomplished by first moving the gripper downwards in Z-direction, using the command
speedl, while constantly reading the force value of the sensor in Z-direction. When that
value changed in magnitude of 1 N, the arm was stopped by setting all joint velocities
to zero. There were some problems regarding this, sometimes the robot arm stopped
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Analysis of puzzle project
17
without having reached the puzzle, and sometimes it stopped at the right place. After
plotting the data from the sensor, see Figure 4.6, it was seen that the noise of the sensor
was fluctuating in magnitude above 1 N, which is ten times more, than is stated in the
sensors specifications.
Figure 4.6: Measurements of the force in Z-direction from the force sensor.
To minimize the effect of the signal noise, the stop criteria was set to 10 times more
magnitude than the noise fluctuation, or 10 N.
Now when the robot arm has found the puzzle, the force sensor had to make sure that
the arm would find the hole it was looking for. This part was split into two sub-parts.
First the sensor looked if the robot arm initially hit inside the hole or next to it. To find
out if the arm hit inside the hole, the arm moved in Y-direction in small steps. After
each step the force value in Y-direction was read and if it changed in magnitude it was
known that the hole was found, because then the arm was hitting the side inside the
hole. If it did not change in magnitude the hole had not been found and the arm moved
back to the initial place where it hit the puzzles surface and searches for the hole.
To find the hole a search algorithm was created. The idea behind the search algorithm
is that the arm moves in squares which constantly groves bigger until the hole is found.
An explanatory figure of this is shown in Figure 4.7.
This example shows how the search algorithm works. The (0,0) coordinate is the
initial position of the search process. Then the arm moves these steps as shown in the
figure and after each step the force value in Z-direction is read. If it changes the arm
must be directly above the hole. The stop criteria here was the same as before, 10 N.
A step size for the search was chosen to be 5 mm because the holes in the puzzle are
==PAGE:30==
18
4 Analysis
Figure 4.7: Example of search algorithm for puzzle project.
5 mm wider on every side than the bricks are. So by having the step size of 5 mm the
hole will always be found in one of the steps.
4.3
Assembly project
In this section the steps taken to solve the main project of this thesis are discussed. With
the solution of the puzzle project, the assembly project was easier to solve, since these
two projects are similar and therefore the steps are similar. However, as it can be seen
in this section, the steps used to solve this project improved from the puzzle project,
and became more robust.
For a better understanding of the project flow, a flowchart of the project is provided in
Figure A.2 in Appendix A.
4.3.1
Vision
Like in the previous project, a separate thread was created for the vision part, which
purpose was to capture an image and return the robot base frame coordinates of objects
needed to be interacted with. This thread had the same purpose as the one before.
However, the steps to achieve this purpose are a bit different and will be explained here.
To start with only one image was captured, instead of two images before. This made
the image analysis easier since there was only one image to work with.
The image
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Assembly project
19
captured looked something like Figure 4.8(a). Where the objective was to locate the
center of the aluminum plate and the center of the wooden plate.
(a) Initial image.
(b) Grayscale transformation.
Figure 4.8: Initial image captured by the camera.
To make the analysis easier the image was transformed into grayscale, see Figure
4.8(b). It was transformed into grayscale because then each pixel had only one dimension
of color code instead of three. From the grayscale image it was seen that the image had
roughly three different colors; the aluminum plate, the wooden plate and the background.
To find the different color codes of the image a histogram of the image was plotted which
can be seen in Figure 4.9(a)
(a) Histogram.
(b) Gaussian filter applied to the Histogram.
Figure 4.9: Histogram of the grayscale image.
From the histogram it can easily be seen that there are three peaks, which stand
for the background, the aluminum plate and the wooden plate. To further analyze the
peaks a Gaussian filter was applied to the histogram by using the OpenCV function
GaussianBlur();. The resulting histogram can be seen in Figure 4.9(b). With the filter
==PAGE:32==
20
4 Analysis
applied it was easy to isolate the different ranges of color codes for the aluminum plate
and the wooden plate. A for loop was constructed to find all the local maximum points
and local minimum points in the histogram. For this image the local maximum and
minimum points are shown in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Local maximum and minimum points in the histogram.
Pixel value
Local max/min
13
Max
32
Min
47
Max
77
Min
103
Max
122
Min
With those points the color range for the aluminum and wood plate were found.
The aluminum plate color range was defined as the range between the first two local
minimum points Вұ5 pixels to make sure to only isolate the aluminum plate. Similarly,
the range for the wood plate was defined as the range between the last two minimum
points Вұ5 pixels. The resulting color range for these two plates are shown in Table 4.4.
Table 4.4: Color ranges for isolating the two plates.
Object
Color range
Aluminum plate
[37, 72]
Wooden plate
[82, 117]
With those color ranges, the two objects were isolated using the OpenCV function
inRange();. The resulting images after the isolation can be seen in Figure 4.10.
(a) Isolation of aluminum plate.
(b) Isolation of the wooden plate.
Figure 4.10: Image transformation: Isolation of objects.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Assembly project
21
To get satisfied results, the objects needed to be isolated better.
To do that a
morphological transformation was applied. First, a morphological opening was applied
to erase the irrelevant white pixels. Then a morphological closing was applied to close
the shape of the object. The morphological opening is obtained by the erosion of an
image followed by a dilation. While the closing is the opposite, obtained by the dilation
of an image followed by an erosion [11]. In both morphological opening and closing a
structuring element was defined. For both the images a rectangular structuring element
of the size 13x13 was chosen, which was efficient to erase the irrelevant white pixels
without removing the correct ones. For the morphological closing operation an ellipse
structuring element of the size 61x61 was used for the aluminum plate, and a rectangular
structuring element of the size 41x41 for the wooden plate. With these transformations
the resulting images can be seen in Figure 4.11. It can be seen that the isolation of both
plates is effective.
(a) Aluminum plate.
(b) Wooden plate.
Figure 4.11: Image transformation: Morphological opening followed by a morphologi-
cal closing.
With the isolation of the two objects completed, the final task of the vision part was
to find the image coordinates of the objects and transform them to the robot base frame
coordinates which were then returned to the main thread. These tasks were the same
as in the puzzle project. The image coordinates were found using the center of mass of
the white pixels, and then they were transformed to camera coordinates using equation
4.1. To obtain the robot base frame coordinates, the same rotation and translation
transformation as in equations 4.6 and 4.7 were used and then they are returned to the
main thread.
The coordinates that were returned to the main thread were only the center of the two
plates. It was decided that these coordinates were sufficient enough since the geometry
of the plates is always the same and the location of every screw and every hole can be
found from the center point of the plates.
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Analysis
4.3.2
Force sensor
The tasks of the force sensor in this project were the same as in the puzzle project.
However, there were two main differences from the setup in this project. First of all,
the holes and the screws were circular instead of squares in the other one and a lot less
margin to find the holes in this project. The second is that the surface of the aluminum
plate does not bend like on the cardboard box puzzle. With these differences on the
projects, some changes were made to the methods used with the force sensor. Firstly, the
stop criteria for finding the surface of the plate was decreased to 2.5 N. This was done
because the surface does not bend at all and because the force rises quickly after the
surface had been found because the robot arm does not stop at the exact same instance
as the stop criteria is met. A plot of the force readings in Z-direction is shown in Figure
4.12, which illustrates how quickly the force rises after the surface was found.
Figure 4.12: Measurements of the force in Z-direction from the force sensor.
In one iteration the force rose to 3.9 N which met the stop criteria and commands
were sent to the robot to stop. In the next iteration the robot had stopped, but the
force had risen to 19.3 N.
The second change from the puzzle project was to detect if the screw initially hit
exactly in the hole. With a rigid plate that detection was much easier. The height of
the plate was known and it was simply verified if the gripper had gone below that height
or not. If it had the hole was found, if not the search algorithm should find the hole.
The last thing that changed from the puzzle project is the search algorithm. Because
now the hole and the screw being placed in the hole are both circular, a spiral search
pattern was created. The equation for the spiral search can be seen in equation 4.8.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Assembly project
23
x = cos(Оё + вҲҶОё) В· (r + вҲҶr)
y = sin(Оё + вҲҶОё) В· (r + вҲҶr)
(4.8)
Where x and y are distances the end effector must travel from the starting position
of the search algorithm in each iteration. Оё and r are the initial angle and radius of the
calculations, which are both zero. вҲҶОё and вҲҶr are the increment values for the angle
and the radius, meaning that in every iteration the angle was incremented by вҲҶОё, and
correspondingly for the radius. This means that the x and y values for the spiral search
were always incremented in every iteration until the hole was found. Tests were made
to find suitable values for вҲҶОё and вҲҶr and few plots of these tests can be seen in Figure
4.13.
Figure 4.13: Examples of spiral search with different Оё and r increments.
As it can be seen, the spiral search is more circular like with smaller вҲҶОё and each
round has a smaller diameter with smaller вҲҶr. The search pattern should be close to a
circular path so a small вҲҶОё should be chosen. The вҲҶr must be chosen small enough to
make sure that the hole is never missed. The diameter of the hole is about 9mm and
the tip of the screw which faces the surface of the plate is 6mm. This means that the
difference in distance between each round of the search pattern can not be greater than
3mm. Of course the distance between each round increases, but it was assumed that
the starting position of the search algorithm was close to the hole, because of the vision
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Analysis
part, and therefore the hole will be found in the first few rounds. From the bottom right
example search in Figure 4.13, it can be seen that the distance between the rounds after
3 rounds is about 2mm and the search is circular like. Therefore, a spiral search with
вҲҶОё = 12.5в—Ұand вҲҶr = 0.075mm was chosen.
Using this spiral search to find the hole, the force value in Z-direction was read from
the sensor in each step of the search and ones the stop criteria was met the hole had
been found. The stop criteria varied for each hole depending on how much force built
up when finding the aluminum plate, because that was the force reacting on the arm
while the search algorithm was running. So the stop criteria for each hole was set to
be the difference between the force after the plate was found and before the plate was
found minus 5N to minimize the effect of the signal noise of the sensor.
One problem was discovered with the spiral search algorithm, regarding the diameter
difference of the holes and the screws. The problem was that when the hole was found,
the screw was not in the center above the hole. To solve this the spiral search was
extended with a 1.5mm straight line from the last two points in the search. This means
that the last step of the search pattern was extended so the screw got closer to the
center of the hole. The extension of 1.5mm was chosen because the diameter of the hole
is 9mm and the tip of the screw 6mm. That means that if the hole is found when the
screw is at the edge of the hole, there are 1.5mm to the center of the hole.
To calculate the line extended from the last two points, the slope of the line between
the last two points needed to be calculated.
m = yi вҲ’yiвҲ’1
xi вҲ’xiвҲ’1
(4.9)
Where m is the slope of the line, x and y are the points on the search pattern and i
is the last step of the search.
Using the rule of Pythagoras the x and y coordinates of the extended line, relative to
the last step of the search, can be found from equations 4.10 and 4.11.
L =
вҲҡ
x2 + y2 =
вҲҡ
x2 + (m В· x)2 вҮ”x = Вұ
вҲҡ
L2
1 + m2
(4.10)
and
y = Вұm В· x
(4.11)
Where L is the length of the extended line and m is the slope of the line. The Вұ sign
in the equations was to make sure the line was extended in the correct direction. If the
x-value of the last step of the spiral search was greater than the previous step, the plus
sign was used. Otherwise the minus sign was used.
After the center of the hole was found the arm was moved 2.5mm downwards, which
was exactly the distance from the surface of the plate to where the screw thread starts.
After that the screw was screwed in by rotating wrist 3 of the robot arm clockwise.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Assembly project
25
However, since there is a limit of rotational movement of wrist 3 joint in the UR10 and
there were few cables attached to the end effector of the robot arm, it was decided to
rotate the wrist only 180в—Ұclockwise before letting go of the screw, rotate back and then
screw again.
==PAGE:38==
26
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Results
This chapter contains results from the steps taken, described in chapter 4, to solve this
project, and shows that those steps are valid and works as expected.
5.1
Puzzle project
To make sure the solution to the puzzle project was acceptable, few tests were made for
the vision part and the force sensor part. The results from these tests can be seen in
the sections below.
5.1.1
Vision
After the solution to the vision part was found, some problems occurred regarding the
brightness of the images captured by the camera. A simple controller was constructed to
control the brightness of the camera. A new image was captured if the previous image
had too low or too high brightness value. After the controller was included to the thread,
the final image had always a suitable brightness value, in every execution of the camera
thread. In Figure 5.1, an example of images of the puzzle and the bricks with a suitable
brightness value can be seen.
From Figure 5.1 it can be seen that every brick on both images can easily be isolated
from the rest of the images. To make sure of that, and to test that the RGB color ranges
for the bricks were correct, an isolation image for every brick in Figure 5.1(b) is showed
in Figure 5.2(a). To test the calculation of the image coordinates of the bricks using the
center of mass calculation, the image coordinates were drawn on the isolated image of
the bricks. That can be seen in Figure 5.2(b).
As it can be seen in Figure 5.2, the isolation of the bricks and the calculations for
the image coordinates are satisfactory. This test was performed multiple times, both for
the image of the bricks inside and outside the puzzle. Every single time the bricks were
detected and the image coordinate calculations always fell within the bricks. This result
was expected since the brightness level of the image was always similar as a result of the
controller. However, in some cases, the isolation part captured more than just the brick
it was supposed to isolate. This did not have much effect on the results of the image
coordinate calculations, so no further actions were taken. It is noted though that this
problem was solved in the assembly project.
==PAGE:40==
28
5 Results
(a) Suitable image of the puzzle.
(b) Suitable image of the bricks.
Figure 5.1: Captured images of the puzzle and the bricks with a suitable brightness
value.
(a) Isolation for every brick.
(b) The image coordinate for every brick.
Figure 5.2: Tests to make sure the isolation works as well as the image coordinate
calculations.
Now the last test from the vision part was to test the transformation from the image
coordinates to the robot base frame. These calculations used the image coordinates to
find the two dimensional coordinates, [x, y], in the robot base frame. To test this an
image was captured and a brick isolated. Then the image coordinate was found followed
by a transformation to robot base frame coordinates. After they were found the robot
arm was moved to those x, and y robot base frame coordinates and a predefined z value
and examined if the gripper was directly above the brick. Multiple tests were performed,
with a different location of the bricks, and every time the gripper was able to pick
up the bricks and was never more than 5mm away from the bricks center. Therefore,
requirement #3 in Table 1.1 is fulfilled.
==PAGE:41==
5.1 Puzzle project
29
5.1.2
Force sensor
Regarding the force sensor in this project, two things were tested. First how well the
robot arm managed to find the puzzle surface using the force sensor, and secondly how
well the searching algorithm worked to find the holes. Both those tasks were quite a
challenge because the cardboard box is of course not rigid. The box bent under load,
and the bend varies from place to place on the cardboard box, resulting in different force
readings in the sensor.
As stated in the analysis chapter, the stop criteria for finding the puzzle should be
10N to make sure the effect of the noise was minimized. With this criteria the robot arm
always manages to find the puzzle surface and stop before the bend on the cardboard
box is to much. Figure 5.3 illustrates this, where the upper figure is a result of the
force sensor readings, and the lower figure is the location of the gripper compared to the
location of the puzzle surface.
Figure 5.3: Illustration on how accurate the puzzle is found.
The bend of the cardboard box can be seen in the lower figure where the blue line
crosses the red one. The final bend in this test was 4.2mm, when the force reading of
the sensor reached 10N. The bend of the box was always similar between tries and these
results were considered acceptable.
The searching algorithm was executed multiple times to test if the algorithm works
as expected. In most of the runs, the hole was found with no problems. But in few
runs, the hole was either not found even though the bricks crossed the hole. Or the
algorithm found a hole where there was no hole. Both of these failures are due to the
bend on the cardboard box when the arm was pressing against its surface. When the
==PAGE:42==
30
5 Results
arm was searching on the surface of the cardboard box, the bend of the box was not
always the same everywhere, which results in huge fluctuations of the sensor readings.
However, like it was mentioned before, most of the runs were successful. Overall this
searching method was considered to be acceptable, since the main project in this thesis
will have a rigid surface, minimizing this fluctuation. In Figure 5.4(a) an illustration of
the search pattern for one of the tests is showed. The red square marks the center of
the hole that was being searched, and the blue line marks the center of the brick that
was searching on the surface of the puzzle. This run was successful, since the hole is
40x40 mm wide and the brick is 30x30 mm wide. In Figure 5.4(b), the sensor readings
for the force in Z-direction is plotted for the same run as in Figure 5.4(a). It can be seen
that the fluctuations of the readings were very high, up to 10N from the lowest to the
highest value. Each iteration in the sensor readings stands for every 5mm movement in
the search pattern.
(a) Search pattern to find the hole.
(b) Sensor readings of the force in Z-direction.
Figure 5.4: The search pattern and the sensor readings while searching.
5.2
Assembly project
After the tests have been performed for the puzzle project, it was known before going
into the assembly project what was working well and what was not. Still, a lot of tests
had to be made since there were many changes made to the solution of the this project.
The solutions that were re-used from the puzzle project were not tested again, but results
from all other tests can be seen in the sections below.
5.2.1
Vision
The vision part of this project was tested as a whole. That is the image analysis part
throughout the calculations of the image coordinates were tested as a whole. To test
this the calculated image coordinates were drawn on to the isolated image and a visual
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Assembly project
31
comparison, between the original image captured and the resulting image coordinates,
was conducted. Multiple tests were performed with a different positions of the two plates,
the aluminum and the wooden plate. From the visual comparison, the image coordinates
calculated always fell within the center of the plates, resulting in a satisfactory solution
to the image analysis. In Figure 5.5, an example of the test is provided where it can be
seen that the image coordinates lie in the center of each plate, fulfilling requirement #2
in Table 1.1. This example is a result of the image in Figure 4.8(a).
(a) The aluminum plate.
(b) The wooden plate.
Figure 5.5: Resulting image coordinate calculations.
The transformation from the image coordinates to the robot base frame was not
tested here, since the same calculations are used as in the puzzle project. Therefore, this
concludes the results for the vision part with a satisfactory results.
5.2.2
Force sensor
In this part it was not considered necessary to test how well the arm can find the surface
of the aluminum plate, since that was already tested in the puzzle project. However, few
tests had to be performed regarding the spiral search algorithm. Both because a spiral
search is used now and in this project the force in Z-direction while searching is much
higher than before, which is a result of the rigid surface. Whether the center of the hole
is found needed to be tested as well.
For finding the holes, the stop criteria for the force in Z-direction is based upon the
force that builds up on the surface of the plate. Thus, the stop criteria varies for every
hole. Multiple runs were executed to find the holes with the spiral search. In every
run, the hole was found, but as stated earlier the center of the hole was not found. In
addition to the spiral search, the movement from equations 4.10 and 4.11 was added at
the end of the search. After that the arm was moved down and the screw was screwed
in. With this addition the tests were conducted again. As expected, the screw was never
exactly at the center of the hole, but because there are some margin for errors, the screw
==PAGE:44==
32
5 Results
always managed to screw in to the screw threads. Thus, the spiral search to find the
center of the hole is concluded to be acceptable. An example of a test run is illustrated
in Figures 5.6 and 5.7. Figure 5.6 illustrates the search pattern, where the blue line is
the center of the screw and the red circle marks the center of the hole. As it can be seen
in Figure 5.6(a), the hole was found when the screw was quite far away from the center
of the hole. In Figure 5.6(b) the extension line has been added and the screw became
closer to the center of the hole. Figure 5.7 shows the value of the force in Z-direction
while the search was being executed. It can be seen that the force sensor finds the hole
accurately, fulfilling requirement #5 in Table 1.1. Even though there was a drop after
about 30 iterations, there were still more than 10N to reach the stop criteria.
(a) The spiral search
(b) The spiral search with the extension line
added
Figure 5.6: Illustration of the spiral search for finding center of hole.
5.2.3
Overall results
When these two parts for the assembly project were combined, everything ran quite
smoothly and robust. However, the implementation of the solutions and the tests for
them were all executed on a very slow speed. The maximum speed of the tool for the
UR10 is 1 m/s, and the tests were executed at 0.1 m/s. As one of the requirements of this
project, the process must be fast. Thus the speed was increased. For every movement
where no searching took place, that is when moving between objects, the speed of the
tool was instantly set to 1 m/s. For the movements where precision was needed, that
is searching for the holes, the speed was tested with increments of 0.1 m/s until failure.
The results of those tests are noted in the table below. From these results the speed
0.5 m/s was chosen for the use of finding holes. So when the arm had to be precise the
speed was set to 0.5 m/s otherwise the arm ran at full speed, or 1 m/s.
With this speed set to the robot arm, multiple runs were performed on the assembly
process. On average, one run out of twenty runs failed to complete. That was due to
the robot gripper. Because of the grippers flat surface, the handling of the screws was
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Assembly project
33
Figure 5.7: Force readings in z-direction while the spiral search is running.
Table 5.1: Test results for different speeds when searching for a hole.
Speed [m/s]
Results
Notes
0.1
The hole is found.
0.2
The hole is found.
0.3
The hole is found.
0.4
The hole is found.
0.5
The hole is found.
0.6
The hole is not found.
For 0.6 and 0.7 m/s the arm runs
0.7
The hole is not found.
over the hole without detecting it.
not optimal. When performing the search algorithm, the screw moved around in the
gripper resulting in a failure. However, in 19 runs, the process was completed, making
the assembly process near to robust, though not fully robust. Therefore requirement #6
from Table 1.1 is not fulfilled.
This thesis investigates whether the arm can do the assembly process faster than
humans. With all the solutions to the process satisfactory or acceptable and with the
arm running at fastest speed possible without failing, the arm was recorded to finish
the whole process in 1:45 minutes up to 1:55 minutes depending on how accurately the
holes were found. This time was considerably slower than it would take humans to do
the same process. After few experiments, it was estimated that the average time for
humans to finish this process is 0:30 minutes. Which results that the robot arm was
not faster than humans to finish the assembly process. However, if it was estimated
that on a normal working day, a worker works for 6 hours, it can be calculated that it
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Results
would take the robot arm 23 hours to accomplish the same amount of work as a human
would do in one working day. So in the long term the robot arm could accomplish more
work. However, this UR10 robot arm is not ideal to be used in an assembly project like
this, since the wrist 3 joint has a rotational limit of two full rotations. Meaning that
the screws can only be screwed a limited distance at a time, before the robot arm must
release the screw and rotate in the opposite direction before continue to screw in. This
takes a lot of time and a much better results could be obtained with a more suited robot
arm. For example the UR3 robot arm, has a limitless rotation on the wrist 3 joint. With
the use of that robot arm the over all process would be much faster.
To conclude the results it is stated that the robot arm is not faster than humans
to finish this process, but on the long term, the robot arm accomplishes more work.
However, much better results, can be obtained with a different robot arm that is more
suited to this kind of assembly process.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this thesis a UR10 robot arm, with the use of two sensors, was used to first solve
a puzzle project and then a assembly project. To solve these projects a camera and a
force torque sensor were used with the robot arm. The camera was used to find the
estimated location of objects the arm needed to interact with. A computer vision was
used through the OpenCV library.
Two methods were introduced to make sure the
image analysis works no matter what the brightness of the surroundings was. In the
first method a simple controller was constructed to control the brightness of the image
taken by the camera. The second method analyzed the pixel values of the images with
the use of histograms and a Gaussian filter.
The force sensor was used to find, with feeling, the objects with more precision. Two
different methods were introduced to place objects inside a hole. A square search pattern
and a spiral search pattern. In this thesis it was also showed how the robot arm easily
found the surfaces of any object with the use of the force sensor.
Overall, this thesis shows a robust solution to solve the assembly project. With the
solution, of the image analysis and force sensor usages, provided in this thesis, it is also
showed that the robot arm can carry out different screw assembly processes given the
geometry of the objects. It was also found out that the robot arm was not faster than a
human to finish the assembly process but on the long term the robot arm can accomplish
more work than the human.
6.1
Future work
To get even better results in this assembly process, few things could be optimized or
done better. Firstly, the way the robot arm finds the center of the hole when screwing
the screws in can be optimized. The solution used in this project works well. It is
fast but the exact center of the hole is not always found. A fast solution with precise
accuracy would be needed to make the process even more robust.
Requirement #6 in Table 1.1, which states the process should be fast and robust,
was not fulfilled in this project. The reason why this requirement was not met is because
the process is not robust enough, due to the robots gripper. However, the process can
be made robust, with different grippers on the robot. With grippers that have the shape
of the screws would give more handling to the screws and the movement of the screws
would be more robust.
==PAGE:48==
36
6 Conclusion
Another thing that can be improved in this project is to integrate this solution to
a different robot arm. A robot arm that is more suited for the purpose of this project,
assembling. One robot arm that would achieve this is the UR3. The UR3 is a much
smaller robot arm than the UR10, but still has all the specifications needed for this
project, and most importantly, can rotate limitless on wrist 3 joint. This means that the
screw could be screwed all the way into the hole in one movement. Reducing process
time.
Therefore, the main future work tasks are the following three tasks.
вҖў Better way to find center of hole
вҖў Better robot arm that would suite this kind of a project, i.e. UR3
вҖў Better grippers, or build some extension on grippers, for better handling of screws.
==PAGE:49==
Appendices
==PAGE:50==
==PAGE:51==
APPENDIX A
Flowcharts
Figure A.1: Flowchart of the puzzle project.
==PAGE:52==
40
A Flowcharts
Figure A.2: Flowchart of the assembly project.
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
L. E. Weiss, A. C. Sanderson, and C. P. Neuman, Dynamic Sensor-Based Control
of Robots with Visual Feedback, 1987.
[2]
D. P. Gravel, Efficient Method For Optimization of Force Controlled Robotic As-
sembly Parameters, 2007.
[3]
T. BrogГҘrdh, Robot Control Overview: An Industrial Perspective, 2009.
[4]
UniversalRobots,
UR10
Technical
specifications,
available
at
https://www.
universal-robots.com/media/50895/ur10_en.pdf, [Accessed 29.01.2018].
[5]
Robotiq, Adaptive Grippers - Robotiq, available at https://robotiq.com/products/2-
finger-adaptive-robot-gripper, [Accessed 29.01.2018].
[6]
вҖ”вҖ”, FT 300 Force Torque Sensor - Robotiq, available at https://robotiq.com/
products/ft-300-force-torque-sensor, [Accessed 29.01.2018].
[7]
Robotnik, ROS CONTROL, an API to control them all, available at https://www.
robotnik.eu/ros-control-an-api-to-control-them-all-2/, [Accessed 01.02.2018].
[8]
T. T. Andersen, ur modern driver, available at https://github.com/ThomasTimm/
ur_modern_driver, [Accessed 01.02.2018].
[9]
O. Ravn, N. A. Andersen, and T. T. Andersen, UR10 Performance Analysis, Tech-
nical University of Denmark, Department of Electrical Engineering, 2014.
[10] OpenCV, OpenCV library, available at https://opencv.org/, [Accessed 05.03.2018].
[11] вҖ”вҖ”, More Morphology Transformations, available at https://docs.opencv.org/2.
4/doc/tutorials/imgproc/opening_closing_hats/opening_closing_hats.html,
[Ac-
cessed 30.04.2018].
==PAGE:54==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Гҳrsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
