==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Measuring the uniqueness of technologi-
cal capabilities
A data-driven network exploration
Duarte Oliveira e Carmo (s160951)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Enginnering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 426
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
==PAGE:3==
Briefing
What?
This project is a master’s thesis written by Duarte O.Carmo, an Engineering Man-
agement Student at the Technical University of Denmark. In summary, the project
aims to measure the technological capabilities of countries, time periods, or organi-
zations with the goal of understanding their intricacies and help policy makers and
stakeholders make better informed decisions.
Why?
The idea for this master’s thesis was born from two other initiatives:
• EURITO: this European Commission Project brings together a consortium
of organizations with the goal of utilizing new data sources and methods to
improve Research and Innovation.
In summary, the European Commission
believes that there is a need to improve R&I policies and that science data can
play an important role in helping resolve this need.
• AMICa: AMICa stands for Advanced Mapping of Industrial Capabilities. The
project aims at mapping worldwide industrial capabilities to support the de-
velopment of new technologies, products, and services with a positive climate
change impact. Its first proof of concept uses the development of sustainable
biofuels as a proof of concept for capability mapping.
It is believed that this MSc. Project will help push these two initiatives forward
by providing a proof of concept on how the data collected can be used to help entities
develop better policies, and answer questions that might arise during the decision
==PAGE:4==
ii
Briefing
making process.
Who?
• Project Responsible: Duarte Ribeiro Oliveira e Carmo
• Supervisor: Pedro Parraguez Ruiz
• Supervisor: Anja Maier
• Institution: Technical University of Denmark
• Department: DTU Management Engineering
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Engineering Management at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring
a master degree in Engineering Management.
Kongens Lyngby, June 7, 2018
Duarte Oliveira e Carmo (s160951)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would first like to thank my thesis supervisor Pedro Parraguez Ruiz, a postdoc-
toral researcher at the Engineering Systems Division of the Management Engineering
department at the Technical University of Denmark. When I first contacted Pedro
in December 2017, I had no idea of the great choice I had just made. Throughout
the semester he was always available to help me structure my thoughts, to enlighten
me about possible research paths, and to discuss the endless possibilities that such
research can have.
Moreover, his passion for this research field and his complete
availability at all times, made this experience one of the most fulfilling throughout
my academic journey at DTU.
I would also like to thank my main supervisor Prof. Anja Maier, Head of Division
at DTU Management Engineering for her support and guidance. This allowed me to
develop what I strongly believe is my own work.
Moreover, I would also like to thank the Technical University of Denmark. It seems
like yesterday that I was browsing possible Master’s programmes to apply for, since
then, not one day has passed where I have regretted to participate in the Engineering
Master’s degree at DTU. I strongly believe that the incredible academic staff, the
talented students with whom I have interacted, and the out-of-this-world conditions
have all contributed equally to prepare me for the future.
Finally, I have to thank my family and my close friends for listening to me geek
out about topics that have absolutely nothing to do with their interests but also for
endless years of unconditional support in all its dimensions.
This project would not have been possible without any of the above mentioned.
Thank you.
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Briefing
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Research Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Challenge and related literature
13
2.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Analytical and conceptual approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Method
29
3.1
Description of data set and data model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Network/Graph model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
Quantitative Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.4
Tools and data management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4
Results
43
4.1
Macro Level: The biofuel research system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
Meso Level: Technological Capabilities of Nations . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
4.3
Micro Level: Technological Capabilities and Organizations . . . . . . .
73
4.4
Patents and Publications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
4.5
Technological Capabilities: An Alternative Approach . . . . . . . . . .
88
5
Discussion and Perspectives
91
5.1
Macro Level: Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.2
Meso Level: Countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
5.3
Micro Level: Organizations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
5.4
Complementary Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
6
Conclusion
105
6.1
Implications for theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
6.2
Implications for practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
6.3
Further research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
A Figure Appendix
113
Bibliography
119
List of Figures
125
List of Tables
128
Listings
129
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the first chapter of the report, the project will be introduced. This introduction is
essential for the comprehension of the scope of the work that is going to be developed.
Several parts shape this chapter:
• Purpose: the reason why this project took place under the academic context.
• Context: the previous work that has been developed by the Engineering Systems
department at the Technical University of Denmark.
• Research Approach: the overall approach that was taken for researching the
project.
• Report Structure: How the report is structured and how the results are pre-
sented.
1.1
Purpose
This project was developed as a Master’s Thesis project for the Engineering Manage-
ment MSc degree at DTU. The Master’s program in Engineering management seeks
to shape “engineers capable of working at the interface between business and engi-
neering“(DTU 2018). This reinforces the idea that both qualitative and quantitative
competencies are relevant for a project of this scope. This research should not only
satisfy certain learning objectives but also touch upon more specific fields that were
studied during the program. It is believed that the subject of this thesis is highly
connected to at least 4 topics that were studied during the above-mentioned degree.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Sustainability
Sustainability is an intricate part of DTU’s strategy, as mentioned in its mission
statement: “The University will apply significant research strength to laying the foun-
dations for technologies and processes that promote innovation and sustainability, and
which address major societal challenges”(DTU’s strategy 2014-2019 - DTU).
Not only as an important part of this particular institution, Sustainability is also a
global concern that should be addressed with a high degree of importance. As shown
in several research works such as, for example, the work of Karel Mulder where he
mentions that various civilizations throughout the world have collapsed as a result of
unsustainable practices in different areas such as agriculture (Mulder 2006).
For this reason, this project focuses on sustainability as a core part of eco-innovation
by exploring the knowledge network behind biofuel research and how it can help stake-
holders make more transparent and environmentally aware decisions.
Management and Innovation
Management is another core pillar of the master’s degree. It constitutes the qualita-
tive field of research and is made up of several different areas. This project is highly
related to management by focusing on areas such as:
• Innovation: By studying the knowledge network behind biofuels, there is an
opportunity for understanding not only how it works, but also how companies
create and retain value in the context of eco-innovation. For example, patents
and publications are quantitative measures of innovation.
• Levels: Complex systems can be studied in levels. For example, one can dis-
tinguish the world, the national, and the organizational, levels. Throughout
this research, all of these levels will be taken into consideration, as well as the
complex networks that characterize them and their development through time.
• Differentiation: Technology is one of the ways of strategically differentiating
a country or an organization. In this research, the factors that differentiate
entities will try to be understood, as well as the intricacies of the relationships
between countries, organizations and universities.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Context
3
Data Science
The data revolution is upon the world - by data it is meant “lose information”. For this
reason, it is hard to understand why this revolution should not serve as a catalyzer for
solving other problems that may lie in other areas such as management, sustainability,
or even innovation.
Preparing, studying and analyzing large data sets is another important characteris-
tic of this project. The dataset that is going to be studied is composed of 4585 patents
and 5313 scientific publications; moreover, the complex dataset is stored in a graph
database composed of more than 100 countries and 10,000 distinct organizations.
Data science per se is not enough to solve problems, in order to make sense of the
vast amount of information that such a database carries, one must apply efficient and
effective techniques for the analysis.
One of the reasons why this project exists is to help organizations, policymakers,
and researchers to make sense of this type of information. For this reason, the project
also focuses on the application of algorithms that would be classified as Unsupervised
Learning, as a way of trying to understand the hidden patterns that might lie in the
data.
In the next section, more on this will be discussed.
1.2
Context
The following project is not the first effort in this direction, in reality, two other
projects have carried out efforts in connecting the fields in the previous section. On
the broader side, the EURITO project, funded by the European Commission and on
the narrower, the more specific side, the AMICa-Pathfinder project at the Technical
University of Denmark. In this part of the report, a more in-depth explanation will
be given on each one of these initiatives.
EURITO - EU Relevant, Inclusive, Timely, Trusted, and Open Research Innovation
Indicators
This project created and funded by the Community Research and Development In-
formation Service of the European Commission has the high-level goal of: “better
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
integration of evidence on the impact of research and innovation in policy making”.
Furthermore, it carries a total contribution of around €1.5M. The project consists of
the participation of three institutions: the Fraunhofer research organization (GER),
the COTEC innovation foundation (ESP), and the Technical University of Denmark
(DK).
This project’s main goal is to bring
big data and data analytics to the heart
of Research and Innovation(R&I) pol-
icy.
By first defining the R&I policy
user needs and then turning those needs
into analytics data pilots in an explo-
ration stage.
Moreover, by creating
new R&I indicators, and communicating
them through interactive visualizations,
the project expects to make R&I policy-making more transparent and democratic.
Also, the project description includes several considerations about big data and ma-
chine learning but argues that there are concerns about representativity, accuracy,
and interpretability in what concerns the sources of data.
The success of this project would mean that R&I policies are better informed,
better targeted, and that new innovation opportunities could surface. This is because
of the open data, code, and knowledge developed alongside the project. (EURITO,
2018)
AMICa - Advanced Mapping of Industrial Capabilities for Climate
AMICa is a project led and executed
by the Engineering System Division
at DTU Management Engineering and
funded by Climate-KIC. The partic-
ipating members in this project are
Chalmers
University,
MASH-Biotech,
The Nordic Initiative for Sustainable Aviation (NISA) and Novozymes.
The project’s main goal is to facilitate better data-driven decision making, and
providing assistance for designing, developing and implementing more sustainable pro-
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Context
5
duction systems using pre-existing capabilities. With a specific technological target
in scope, the project hopes to answer questions such as: are there untapped research
gaps? Are there hotspots of unexploited but complementary capabilities? What or-
ganizations are unique? An innovative approach is applied to this research problem:
AMICa focuses on technological capabilities instead of flows of material and makes
use of a complex system view. This complex system view ultimately results in an
input-process-output model.
Success for the AMICa project would translate into a fruitful mapping of world-
wide industrial capabilities that can support the development of new technologies,
products, and services with a positive climate change impact.
The first proof of
concept utilizes biofuel research as a starting point for this mapping.
More on the technical specifications for this project will be given in Chapter 3.
(AMICa, 2018)
Thesis - Measuring the uniqueness of technological capabilities
AMICa and EURITO are two complementary projects in technical terms. In fact,
EURITO proposes a theoretical possibility (or idea), and the AMICa project seeks
to get closer to the practical applications and implications of such an idea.
By taking biofuel research and trying to map the capabilities of such a field, this
thesis aims to provide a proof of concept that is highly modular. By modular, it
is meant that the procedures applied to biofuel research can possibly be applied
to virtually any field of research, following the complex system approach.
Some
visualizations and practical applications have already been tested by AMICa, such
as the Data Exploration Dashboard or the Sankey Diagram visualizations. However,
there is a need to:
• Further understand the how this data can be explored and used by industry
and government.
• Provide more visualizations with other dimensions.
• Show possible applications of Big Data processing tools.
In this context, this project appears as a natural extension of the AMICa pathfinder
project, by exploring this biofuel-related data, but also as a source of potential an-
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
alytical approaches for the EURITO project, given the importance of data-driven
insights for policymakers and other institutions.
1.3
Research Approach
Research Motivation
There is a need of companies, countries, and organizations to improve Re-
search and Innovation policies. Most approaches rely on methods that are not
reusable, applicable to other fields and produce hard to prove results.
Research Goal
Helping decision makers understand highly interconnected technological land-
scapes and as a result make better R&I decisions using knowledge data. For
this purpose biofuels will be used as testing ground.
Based on this research goal, several research questions were developed. These re-
search questions offer a more concrete and quantifiable way of evaluating the research
and more particularly, how these stakeholders would be helped. On section 2.1, the
reasoning and the more practical aspects of these research questions will be described.
Research Questions
The research is structured following the scale of the examined levels of analysis, from
macro to micro. The first level shows the dynamic analysis of the studied system as
a whole (worldwide biofuel research and innovation), and serves as an introduction
to the complex system model. The second level of analysis focuses on a meso level
focusing on the country level.
After the meso level, the study narrows with the
analysis of the system at the micro level, this corresponds to organizations such as
universities and businesses. Finally, two complementary analyses will be made. The
first focuses on the intricacies of the system itself and the elements that compose it -
patents and publication in this case - . The second is a validation exercise where, as
a baseline, a more basic approach will be used and compared the general approach
taken throughout the thesis.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Research Approach
7
The research questions follow:
Macro Level
General:
• How does the research of different terms develop over time?
Differences in research:
• How to characterize the similarity between two periods in time?
Clustering:
• What differences exist when comparing different years in scientific re-
search?
• Are all years linearly related or do research gaps exist?
Context:
• Is biofuel research correlated with the price of oil? What exact terms
are the most related to it?
• Is the price of a consumer good related with the research volume? What
terms are most affected by it?
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
Meso Level
General:
• How to characterize the scientific capability of a country?
• How are countries related from a capability perspective?
Clustering:
• Do international capability clusters exist?
Context:
• Does the amount of money of you have (GDP per capita) determine the
space of possibilities or your technological freedom?
• Does the GDP per capita play a part in the capability similarity of
countries?
Collaboration:
• Is capability similarity related to international collaboration?
Differences in research:
• How to characterize the similarity between two countries?
Country Spectrums:
• Is there value in characterizing a country’s capability as a spectrum?
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Research Approach
9
Micro Level
General:
• How to characterize the capability of a given organization?
Clustering:
• Do organizational clusters exist?
Comparing:
• How to compare two organizations from a capability perspective?
Collaboration:
• Do universities collaborate more with universities or businesses?
Do
businesses collaborate more with universities?
Organizational Spectrums:
• Is there value in characterizing an organization’s capability as a spec-
trum?
Patents and Publications
Evolution:
• How does the volume of patenting and publishing of a certain scientific
term evolve over time?
Differences:
• Is there a bias towards patenting or publishing? An analysis of feed-
stocks, processing technologies and outputs.
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Introduction
Basic Approach, term frequency
General:
• Can we apply unsupervised learning techniques to visualize scientific
clusters?
• Term frequency vs term pair frequency? What characterizes better the
scientific capability of a country or organization?
Research Approach
As a guiding approach to these research problems, the Design Research Methodology
(Blessing and Chakrabarti 2009)was adopted. Figure 1.1 provides an outline of the
elements that characterize this method: which include criteria definition, descriptive
study 1, prescriptive study, and descriptive study 2. These correspond to criteria def-
inition, literature analysis, method development, and application/success evaluation.
Although the DRM approach makes for the richest analysis possible, this frame-
work was used as more of a guideline than a step by step methodology. In fact, some
elements of the framework require extensive validation and cycling throughout all of
the levels that compose it. For this reason, the thesis focuses on two main elements
of the DRM.
Figure 1.1: Design research methodology representation.
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Report Structure
11
The first element used is the descriptive study 1, where, taking as a starting point
the criteria (e.g. research questions), the analysis and pattern detection in the dataset
was made. The second element used, to a less extensive extent, is the prescriptive
study 2b where using the experience and some basic assumptions about the behavior
of the research landscape, conclusions were reached. It should be pointed out that
throughout the analysis; an effort was made to continuously validate the results,
through investigation of underlying behavior.
Finally, as this thesis seeks to assist a group of stakeholders in making better deci-
sions through data, these individuals, utilizing their experience and superior domain
knowledge, can draw on their own conclusions using the data provided, which by
itself leads to a type of prescriptive study.
1.4
Report Structure
As previously mentioned , this project uses the DRM framework as a guideline for
the research. Based on this same methodology, the project was structured in the
following manner:
• Chapter 2 includes the statement of the practical motivation for the project.
Following this statement, a literature review is provided. This literature review
details the necessary studies across the macro, micro, and systems described
above. Finally, a description of the analytical and conceptual approach will be
provided.
• Chapter 3 describes the in-depth methodology. It starts with a description
of the data model and dataset. Following this description, the graph model is
introduced as a way of relating the data. This chapter concludes by providing
an overview of the quantitative analysis and techniques used to achieve it.
• Chapter 4 presents the results of the application of the methodology to the
different dimensions of the dataset.
This includes the chronological, macro,
micro, and complex system dimension.
• Chapter 5 develops a discussion of the different topics developed in the previ-
ous chapter. This includes an interpretation of the results but also a statement
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Introduction
of possible limitations that arise during the analysis. It is worth noting that
only relevant results will be discussed.
• Chapter 6 closes the thesis by providing a statement of the theoretical and
practical implications of the research, including connections to the literature re-
view and recommendations for industry and political stakeholders. This chapter
ends with considerations about further research.
This project can also be read online or downloaded as a .pdf. All of the code for
this project can be consulted in the GitHub repository.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Challenge and
related literature
In the second chapter of this report, two important preliminary themes will be ad-
dressed:
• Motivation: the motivation part of the chapter will consist in outlining the
starting point of this project as well as the practical implications that the project
might have.
• Literature Review: in the second part of the chapter, previous work on these
topics will be covered. This coverage consists of a three part literature review
that
• Analytical and Conceptual Approach: in the final part of this chapter consid-
erations about the viability of a system approach to both the macro, meso and
micro levels.
2.1
Motivation
“If data had mass, the earth would be a black hole“- Stephen Marsland
We live in the age of information, or, as many refer to, the age of data. Every day,
2.5 quintillion bytes of data are created - 90 percent of it in the last two years (IBM
Analytics). This information comes from a wide range of different fields and in a wide
range of shapes. One of the biggest challenges in the forthcoming years will consist
of successfully leveraging it. People, companies, countries, and even international
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Challenge and related literature
organizations have started to realize it.
The European Union, for example, with
the funding of the EURITO project (EURITO, 2018) has already started to tackle
this challenge. The project wishes to help countries and organizations make better
informed R&I policies, create new innovation opportunities and enhance the under-
standing of these systems, all by leveraging vast amounts of information, bringing
benefits to both policymakers, researchers, and businesses.
As the scope tightens, the Technical University of Denmark is one of the organiza-
tions that wants to help advance this initiative by taking part in the EURITO project.
In partnership with companies and institutions, AMICa, seeks to help solve a num-
ber of challenges related to the positive impact that industry can have on climate
change. Such impact includes leveraging data to support management of complex
value chains, identification of new research opportunities, and development of a new
system layout design. As a general rule, this master thesis project wants to provide
stakeholders with better tools to make data-driven decisions in what regards their
business or operational logic. These stakeholders, just like in the project EURITO,
include technology developers, organizations, and policymakers.
To prove the concept, researchers at DTU started by creating a database of tech-
nological assets (patents, scientific publications and projects) which will be further
described in chapter 3.
These are all related to biofuel research.
After cleaning,
preparing and analyzing the data, some results have already started to surface. Data
exploration dashboards (AMICa, 2018), which help understanding how technological
assets are distributed, and sankey diagram implementations that help to understand
in what country or organization focuses on in terms of biofuels research.
However, another need soon surfaced, what more insights lie in this vast amount
of data?
How can this information help decision makers and other stakeholders
understand the technological landscape and make better R&I decisions by further
exploiting this knowledge data? The possibilities of the analysis of this knowledge
data are almost endless, but the problems that need solving can easily be quantifiable
(see chapter 2). With the goal of not losing the focus, this project benefits participants
in three different levels.
The macro level, wishes to help policy makers, as the first stakeholder, in assess-
ing and understanding the “big picture” biofuel research landscape at a global level,
and how this system might evolve over time. One problem, for example, can be the
need for understanding the differences and similarities between two periods in time:
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Motivation
15
How has biofuel research changed from 2000 to 2010? Another important problem,
which is addressed in this work, might be the need for comprehending how external
factors might impact research. For example, does the price of oil affect the research
in any important way? After the macro level, countries become the object of focus.
The meso level of the analysis serves as a tool that assists in understanding the
technological landscape by taking countries as units of research. This is particularly
interesting for policy makers trying to make sense of, for example, what characterises
countries in the research landscape. Here, questions such as: “How can a country be
characterized in terms of its scientific capability?” or, “Are any countries related from
a research perspective?” will be addressed. Other questions related to collaboration
and similarity between countries might be critical in policy making, and will be
addressed in this project.
The micro level, seeks to assist organizations. Between countries and organi-
zations, even if the scope is different, the types of questions are highly connected.
For example, as a president of a university one might want to understand what are
the best options in business terms, the university should collaborate with.Moreover,
one might want to comprehend the clusters of universities and organizations that
exist throughout the world. This can help organizations and universities understand
the underlying landscape of innovation and research strategies, and accurately design
their own strategy.
In the system level, the understanding of the particularities of the system can
benefit stakeholders at the national, organizational or even research level.
These
problems, although being more general, are highly relevant. For example, is sugarcane
more researched or more patented? Is wood more patented or researched? Moreover,
what are the external factors that affect research and do the price of goods influence
it in any way?
Helping stakeholders make decisions at different levels and understand the research
landscape is the primary goal of this work. It is believed that data, in its most pure
form, has advantages not only in terms of the quality of the decisions but most
importantly in the transparency of those same decisions.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Challenge and related literature
2.2
Literature review
There are multiple possible ways and angles of studying all of the underlying factors
that appear when studying knowledge as a system. In order to stay in scope of the
goal of the project, three main areas will be covered in this literature review. The
first area, corresponding to the macro and meso levels focuses on (1) the study of
innovation and innovation measurement at the global and national level,
which is, taking countries as the units or entities of the system and studying the
global system over time. One should point out the intense relationship between the
macro and meso level in terms of literature. Most macro level analysis also focus on
the evolution of the global system, and for this reason, these levels will be merged for
the sake of the literature review.
The second area of the literature review chapter focuses on (2) open innovation
as a core strategy in organisations. The third and final part of the analysis focuses
on the (3) engineering systems perspective, as a core part of the analysis, this
perspective could be applicable to both organisations and countries.
These three
areas have some intersecting concepts, for example, many regional innovation studies
focus both in countries and organisations. These areas are illustrated in Figure 2.1.
2.2.1
National Innovation Systems
The macro level of this literature review starts by focusing on the field of research of
National Innovation Systems (NIS) as the more classical approach of understanding
innovation as a quantifiable characteristic of a certain region, in this case, a country.
Although a lot of research has been developed on this topic, one might argue that
its pillars come from three distinct areas of research: growth theory (Romer 1990)
which states that an increase in productivity (due to innovation) leads to growth
of a country’s economy; the cluster based theory (Porter 1998) which argues that
in a global economy “one would expect location to diminish in importance.
But
the opposite is true.” and finally, research on the innovation systems (Nelson 1993)
of nations carried by Richard.R.Nelson where he famously describes the innovation
systems of 15 both high and low income countries. Nelson argues, for example, that
differences between countries in terms of innovation systems are closely related to the
differences in economic and political circumstances of those same countries.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Literature review
17
Figure 2.1: Literature review Venn diagram.
Taking these three perspectives, a new field emerges that wishes to further under-
stand the underlying factors between divergences in innovation across countries and at
the same time its quantification it in a satisfactory way. This is done by the introduc-
tion of the concept and framework of National Innovative Capacity (NIC) (Furman,
Porter, and Stern 2002) as “the ability of a country to produce and commercialize a
flow of innovative technology over the long term”. By using international patenting
data from 17 countries members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) the authors managed to determine that the patenting volume
was well characterized by a set of indicators. First, that while the discrepancy be-
tween countries is due to the difference between research and development (R&D)
resources and spending, another very important factor is the R&D productivity. By
R&D productivity it is meant policy choices, share of academic and private research,
as well as specialization of a certain country.
Moreover, other general indicators
such as population, gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, and openness to in-
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Challenge and related literature
ternational trade and investment also proved to be highly related to this volume of
patenting. This paper and research is considered to be the core of the NIC area and
gave birth to a number of derived studies on this same topic.
The dynamic innovation system framework (Castellacci and Natera 2011) (Castel-
lacci and Natera 2013) showed that absorptive (human capital, trade and infrastruc-
ture) and innovative capabilities drive the NIC of a certain country. Studies such
as “Innovation capabilities of European nations” (Faber and Hesen 2004) test the
framework on 14 European Union countries and show that patents depend on the
sales of product innovations but that at the same time, while some innovation indi-
cators depend on the same economic indicators, governmental regulation and firm
specific conditions may also affect innovative output. Some other studies (Filippetti
and Peyrache 2011) work on developing a composite indicator that consists of patents,
R&D resources, personal computers, internet users and others to find that there is a
convergence in technological capabilities is occurring.
Although the classical view has certainly produced more than enough interesting
studies on how to measure, characterize, and quantify the innovation capacity of a
certain country or group of countries, one should not discard the critical role that the
economic dimension might play in the understanding of a country’s productivity.
Economic complexity (Hidalgo and Hausmann 2009) is a framework that inter-
prets economic growth and development that stresses the importance of the com-
plexity of the country’s economy. It does so by utilizing a network structure and
connecting countries to products they export. The characteristics of this network are
highly correlated with the GDP of a certain country or even its potential economic
growth. Moreover, the authors also argue that the more economically complex, or
product diverse, a country is, the more economically complex it becomes. This view
is particularly interesting not because of the economic growth per se, but because
of the different methodology in the quantification of the assets of a country.
For
example, instead of taking the volume of patents (such as in the classical view in the
beginning of the segment), this view emphasizes the idea of a network structure.
In what regards cluster based theory and the proximity of countries, recent studies
have also taken advantage of a network based view. Recent work (Bahar, Hausmann,
and Hidalgo 2014) has shown for example that a country is 65% more likely to export
a certain product if it possesses a neighbour country that exports that same product,
or that the growth of exports is 1.5% per year if its neighbour has a comparative
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Literature review
19
advantage in this product.
However, as distance increases, this probability tends
to decrease as well. Hence the title ‘Evidence of knowledge diffusion?’. This study
also shows the importance of interpreting countries and products as pairs and not as
isolated entities, and the value of network interpretation.
Finally, one can conclude that the research field of regional studies and national
innovations systems is very heterogeneous. On the one side, the classical view tries to
approach a perfect indicator that can perfectly describe the innovation capability of a
certain country and all of the external and internal factors that might influence it. On
the other side, the economic view, where there seems to be an increasing importance in
the network view of the international innovation system, and indicators that economic
development and innovation are highly related to the characteristics of this network.
2.2.2
Open innovation
Innovation is not a new field, particularly in what regards scientific research. The
dictionary defines it as simply being the “introduction of something new” (Merriam-
Webster Dictionary 1828), others (Freeman, C. and Soete 2000) define it as the design
manufacturing, management and commercialization of a new process or equipment.
However, when observing the extensive list of possible definitions on classical litera-
ture, a pattern emerges: they all give equal importance to not only invention, but to
the exploitation and development of unseen knowledge.
One particular field of innovation that quickly became of interest to a wider au-
dience and that is also a special focus of this project is the field of so-called “open
innovation”. It started by being described as a model where companies commercial-
ize both their own innovations and innovations from other firms. Moreover, in this
model, companies should find ways of bringing in-house ideas to market by building
bridges outside their current business (Gassmann 2006). This field evolved over time
into what can be described as 8 main areas of research (Giannopoulou et al. 2010):
the concept of open innovation, organizational design and boundaries of the firm,
open strategy, the human factor in open innovation, communities and distributed
co-creation, patenting and appropriation, the innovation intermediaries’ model, and
the triple helix model. In the scope of this project, it was deemed appropriate to
focus on three of these fields, which will be reviewed below.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Challenge and related literature
2.2.2.1
Open strategy
Open strategy is one of the main fields of research on open innovation which has
highly impacted the way firms and organizations operate. For example, companies
are increasingly adopting innovation ecosystems across countries in order to match
the escalating demand for innovation from customers (OECD 2008). Other findings
in this OECD report come to find some characteristics of firms that are highly con-
nected to the scope of this project such as the fact that “large companies are four
times more likely to collaborate”, that geographic proximity plays a crucial role in
the development of these networks, or that firms usually rely on external sources to
develop technologies and processes outside their core competencies. Furthermore, it
was also discovered that universities and public research institutions have an increas-
ingly important role in this strategy, that staff mobility is crucial, and that national
R&D programmes should be as open as possible.
In this scope, some work (Morgan and Finnegan 2008) in the field shows the
importance of collaboration with universities, research institutes, communities and
governments in order to create and exploit knowledge. Other works (Bessant 2008)
demonstrate other strategies firms use such as scout sending, web usage, and work
with customers (in this case active users), to achieve a higher level of innovation.
2.2.2.2
Patenting and appropriation
In the same OECD report cited earlier, research shows that industries where intel-
lectual property rights (IPR) are highly protected, companies mainly look outside of
the business to keep up to date with research. On the other hand, industries where
IPR are “softer”, companies mainly employ collaboration as a way of attaining that
same objective.
Although normally one possibly think of patents as something that might throttle
open innovation and the sharing of knowledge, and that they directly contrast with
something like open source software development, research (Pénin and Wack 2008)
has shown that adequate use of this system of IPR protection can positively impact
the preservation of freedom of access to research tools. Pénin and Wack do this by
giving examples on how a certain patent might require a certain technology to be used
by all but only under certain special conditions, thus leading to the creation of an
environment where: “a material or invention can be improved by the ideas of many,
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Literature review
21
but access is maintained for all who agree to the terms, without exclusive capture by
anyone”.
2.2.2.3
Triple helix: industry, academia and government policy
The triple helix is a non-linear innovation model that describes an industrial society
as something that has shifted from industry-government to an industry-government-
university relation (Lewontin 2000). It was first developed by Etzkowitz in the 1990s.
Etzkowitz states that knowledge and universities play an increasingly important role
in the development of technology and technology based firms (Etzkowitz and Leydes-
dorff 2000). Moreover, he argues that this interaction is crucial in order to improve
conditions for innovation. With the emergence of globalization and its decentraliza-
tion, regional university networks will fuel innovation by creating “discrete pieces of
intellectual property”.
Perman and Walsh described the university-industry relationships by establishing
a list of possible links between them that include research partnerships, research
services, academic entrepreneurship, human resource transfer, informal interaction,
commercialization of property rights and scientific publications (Perkmann and Walsh
2007). These are also organized into a hierarchy of relational involvement that ranges
from high to low.
The researchers also point to the crucial importance of these
relationships in the context of open innovation.
On a final note, there is evidence (Léon 2007) that countries and international
organizations such as the European Union have already realized the importance of
these relations, by creating specialized knowledge transfer structures such as research
centers to foster the exchange of knowledge and catalyse innovation. Léon also il-
lustrates the benefits of government-industry-relations by taking the example of grid
service deployment and the long and short term instruments developed by the EU to
foster these same relationships.
2.2.3
Engineering systems perspective
Engineering Systems is undeniably growing as a research field, the term was report-
edly born in the Bell Laboratories in the 1940s, ten years later, G.W.Gilman - then
director of systems engineering at Bell - made the first attempt at teaching it in
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Challenge and related literature
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Hall 1962).
During the next decades,
systems engineering, its tools, definition and implementation “continued to evolve”
(Brill 1998). Among a vast number of definitions, Olivier L. de Weck (Weck et al.
2011) defines an engineering system as:
“A class of systems characterized by a high degree of technical complexity, social
intricacy, and elaborate processes, aimed at fulfilling important functions in society.”
Piaszczyk (Piaszczyk 2011) developed a conceptualization for engineering systems,
where he argued that some domains are common to almost all engineering projects:
• Environmental: the external drivers or consequences of the engineering sys-
tem.
• Social: the human components of the system.
• Functional: the objectives and goals that the system wishes to achieve.
• Technical: the non-human components of the system (assets, information, in-
frastructure).
• Process: the processes that take part in the core of the system.
• Temporal: how the system develops or changes over time.
These five domains are critical to be understood in the presence of any engineer-
ing system and served as a point of departure that the author used to develop his
own conceptual model of engineering systems, known as the Engineering Sys-
tems Multiple Domain Matrix (ES-MDM). This is not the first conceptual model that
was created to categorize engineering systems, other frameworks include the Design
Structure Matrix (Browning 2001), the popular House of Quality (Moran 1994), and
CLIOS (Complex, Large-Scale, Interconnected, Open, Sociotechnical System) (Dod-
der, Sussman, and McConnell 2004).
Diving deeper, the notion of complex system emerges, de Weck (Weck et al. 2011)
defines a complex system as a system where the components, interconnections,
interactions or interdependencies are particularly difficult to describe, understand,
predict, manage, design or change. In his work, the author also states that a complex
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Literature review
23
system has not only a technical dimension but also a management and social dimen-
sion. Furthermore, he establishes two types of complexity: behavioral complexity
- where the difficulty lies in the prediction, analysis, description and management -
and structural complexity where the number of elements and the nature of their
relationship are intricate.
However, engineering systems are not only objects of study, engineering systems
are also an approach that is used to solve or understand complex problems; it is a
“technique for the application of a scientific approach to complex problems” (Miles
1973) that takes a holistic view. This perspective is highly related to the work that
will be developed in the forthcoming project. One should stress the different method-
ologies that have been used to study these systems, in particular, two popular ones.
The first approach that is widely used is the graph-based or network ap-
proach where system components and relationships are described as networks would
be. While the network approach to a system analysis can be strong in its “ability to
visualize and perform statistical analysis on the properties of the network and isolate
particularly interesting or important system elements or clusters of elements that may
be present” (Weck et al. 2011), this approach can also become quickly overwhelming.
For example, Eppinger states that “A boxes-and-arrows depiction of the design pro-
cess for a car’s suspension, for example, would run to more than 30 pages.” (Eppinger
2001). This approach allows the study of systems as diagrams, flows, and essential
visual representations but also allows the study of a system through network analy-
sis in some systems, through different network indicators such as degree centrality,
clustering coefficient, degree, and others (Albert-László Barabási 2016). One popular
application of this approach is the Program evaluation and review technique (PERT)
diagrams, which can be used for example, to visualize a power system restoration
(Assis Mota, Mota, and Morelato 2007).
The second approach is the matrix-based approach. One can generally rep-
resent a network as a matrix using the adjacency matrix of a network, or its co-
occurrence matrix, where Aij is equal to 1 if node i and j are connected.
One
popular application of this approach is the Design Structure Matrix (DSM) where
each task or element is laid out in rows and columns, and one can visualize the in-
formation and sequential dependencies of the entire project (Eppinger 2001). Others
such as the derived domain mapping matrix (DMM) can combine domains to show
interdependencies across domains and synchronize several inter domain dependencies
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Challenge and related literature
(Danilovic and Browning 2007). This matrix representation is convenient because of
the easy “manipulation by the tools of linear algebra” (Weck et al. 2011) and allows
the understanding of the more general characteristics of the engineering system.
2.3
Analytical and conceptual approach
The final part of this chapter seeks to understand the viability of using an engineering
systems approach as a methodology of describing the macro, meso and micro levels of
research. As previously stated, one of the most important challenges of this project is
the understanding of the dynamics inherent to both levels of analysis, an interesting
question is: Is it a viable strategy to analyse both the macro, meso and micro levels
with the same engineering systems conceptual approach?
Let us revisit the macro, meso and micro level literature with an engineering
systems state of mind.
2.3.1
A systems approach to the world and country levels
When analyzing the macro (world) or meso (national) levels, in the roots of the
National Innovations Systems research area, lies the work of Richard R.Nelson (Nelson
1993), here he justifies the term “system” as:
“[...] The concept is of a set of institutions whose interactions determine the
innovative performance, in the sense above, of national firms. There is no
presumption that the system was, in some sense, consciously designed, or even that
the set of institutions involved works together smoothly and coherently. Rather, the
”systems” concept is that of a set of institutional actors that, together, play the
major role in influencing innovative performance. [...]“
Several elements allow a direct connection between this approach and a pure
engineering systems approach: there are several elements (institutions), which have
a relationship between each other (interactions). Moreover, this citation might even
lead us to a certain complex system due to the inherent randomness of its design.
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Analytical and conceptual approach
25
Figure 2.2: Important Elements of national innovation systems of the United States
(Furman, Porter, and Stern 2002).
Another clear example is in the work of Jeffrey L. Furman, which describes (Fur-
man, Porter, and Stern 2002) the important relationships and connections between
the institutions of a country as a base to the National Innovative Capacity framework.
An example of this concept can be seen in Figure 2.2.
2.3.2
A Systems Approach to the organizational level
When analyzing the micro, or organizational level, the compatible system oriented
literature is not as obvious. Open innovation research is horizontal to an important
number of areas that focus on management, research and development, product de-
velopment, strategic thinking and more. Perhaps the most system-compatible area
of open innovation is the Triple Helix framework (Etzkowitz 2003). In this area, uni-
versities, organizations and the government are all involved in an open innovation
system where their interactions are crucial to advance the technological field; in fact
these are described as “tri-lateral networks”. This is illustrated in Figure 2.3.
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Challenge and related literature
Figure 2.3: Triple-Helix illustration (Etzkowitz 2003).
The work of Perman and Walsh (Perkmann and Walsh 2007) takes the triple helix
further by describing the different nature that these relationships, or edges that these
elements, or nodes, might have between them.
2.3.3
System compatibility
After dissecting the possibility of applying an engineering system conceptual approach
to both levels of the analysis, one should analyse if they in fact constitute an engi-
neering system. This would validate the possibility of applying the methodology to
both levels. Let us take the definition of a more complex engineering system, known
as complex systems (Sheard and Mostashari 2009). Complex Systems:
• Have many autonomous components.
• Are self-organizing.
• Display emergent macro-level behaviour.
• Adapt to surroundings.
Let us understand how the macro, meso and micro level fit in this definition,
taking innovation by the use of technological assets as an example in Table 2.1.
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Analytical and conceptual approach
27
As one might note from the table above that these systems appear to be highly
related, one could even say they are different scales of the same system, or even a
system-of-systems (Sheard and Mostashari 2009). It is also apparent that the micro
level system highly influences the macro level system and vice-versa. For example: a
very strong relationship between a university of country A and a university of country
B, will lead to a strong relationship between country A and country B, it is simply
a matter of scale. One could even go further and try to understand the nano-level,
which would consist of analysing a particular university or organization as its own
system.
Finally, generally speaking it seems possible to apply the same engineering systems
perspective to the macro, meso, and micro level. However, this is highly dependent
on the type of analysis; for example, some particularities of the organizational level
system might not be reproducible in the meso level system and vice versa.
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Challenge and related literature
Complex
Systems
Definition
Meso/National Level
Micro Level
Autonomous
components
Countries, policies, organi-
zations, universities, tech-
nological assets (patents,
publications, projects), re-
searchers
Universities,
businesses,
organizations, technologi-
cal assets
Self-
organizing
Countries
form
partner-
ships and international or-
ganizations, such as the
EU or OECD.
University-University
partnerships,
University-
Organization
partner-
ships,
Organization-
Organization
partner-
ships.
Macro-level
behaviour
The types of relationships
are not determinable from
the type of technological
asset being analyzed
The types of relationships
are not determinable from
the type of technological
asset being analyzed
Adapt to sur-
roundings
Research direction might
inherently be related to
the global sustainability
concerns at that particu-
lar time.
Research direction might
inherently be related to
the global sustainability
concerns at that particu-
lar time.
Table 2.1: Application of the complex system definition to Macro, Meso, and Micro
level.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Method
In the third chapter of this project, the background related to the datasets, the data
models used, and the tools and methods used to analyze them will be covered. The
high-level contents of this chapter are:
• Description of data set and data model: Diving deeper into the data model
this part of the chapter will introduce the database used, its architecture and
intricacies.
• Network/Graph model: The description of the graph model will give an insight
into the transformation of the original database into a network representation
of an engineering system.
• Quantitative analysis: The final part of this chapter will give insights into the
quantitative tools used throughout the analysis.
• Tools and systematic approach: description of high level tools.
3.1
Description of data set and data model
The first part of the chapter describes the original data model used, provided by
the AMICa pathfinder project.
This explanation is an essential starting point of
the analysis since the representation of the engineering system under analysis is a
reflection of the way the original data was modeled.
Original Data Sources
In what regards the original sources of data, the AMICa pathfinder project focused
on gathering the following types of data as a representation of the biofuels research
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Method
ecosystem:
• Research Projects: Through the European Commission’s community research
and development information service (CORDIS) (CORDIS 2018), several re-
search projects were retrieved.
• Patents: the OECD REGPAT (OECD 2018) Database provides patent data
linked to geographical regions.
• Scientific Publications: the Crossref (Crossref 2018) database was used as a
source of scientific publications.
• Industry Facilities and Organizations: with the goal of accessing the names and
specifications of organizations and facilities, several sources were used such as
ETIP Bioenergy, Biofuels Digest, reegle and more.
• Knowledge graph and data reconciliation services: the Global Research Identi-
fier Database and DBpedia were used to enrich and reconcile the original data
After compiling information from the sources above, all of the data had to be pre-
processed using the open source software OpenRefine (OpenRefine 2018) with the
goal of finally building the graph database in Neo4j. An overview of the sources can
be seen in Figure 3.1.
From a theoretical model to a data model
Originally, the data extracted from the above sources came in a format that was, to
say the least, hard to work with. A mix of explicit information and expert knowledge
related to biofuels research.
With the goal of extracting the knowledge structure
behind such data, it was decided that each knowledge asset (patent, publication,
project) can be looked at as a combination of the following categories of terms:
• Feedstocks: the raw material used to fuel a machine or industrial process (eg.
wood, sugar, corn, waste, etc.)
• Processing Technologies: The processes that feedstocks undergo in order
to achieve a desired output, which in the case of biofuels are mainly chemical
processes (fermentation, gasification, catalysis, etc.).
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Description of data set and data model
31
Figure 3.1: Overview of data sources from the AMICa pathfinder technological brief-
ing (AMICa, 2018).
• Outputs: The result of feedstocks undergoing a certain process, or in other
words, the result. (Biogas, ethanol, biodiesel, etc.)
It is quite clear that each piece of knowledge extracted from the database will very
likely contain one of the above types of terms. For example, there might be 4 patents
in the database that contain the term “waste” and 17 scientific publications that
contain the term “fermentation”.
However, a bag-of-words approach to this data might be too simplistic. At the
end of the day, feedstocks, technologies and outputs possess an intricate relationship
between them.
And these relationships is information which should be preserved.
Through the development of the project, the project participants understood that
the interesting aspect of these terms was to study the combinations of these terms:
“A key finding of our meetings and literature review is that exploring all relevant
combinatorial possibilities between potential feedstocks (e.g. microalgae), processing
technologies (e.g. microwave-assisted transesterification) and outputs (e.g.
biodiesel), is a difficult but crucial task in the development of new sustainable
biofuels.” - Amica technical brief (AMICa, 2018)
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Method
This ‘alternative’ approach is more useful in the project context, remember, one of the
goals of the project was to understand if there might be untapped areas of research.
Let us take the following as an example: we are in the presence of feedstock F1 and
feedstock F2 and processing technology PT. There is a high frequency of assets with
the F1/PT pair, but a low frequency of the F2/PT pair.
This might mean that
F2/PT is an untapped area of research. Such conclusions would be much harder to
reach if the focus was not in the combinations.
Figure 3.2: Combinatorial model of the AMICa pathfinder model.
3.1.1
Database Architecture
One of the main reasons why a graph database was adopted for this project was its
capacity of preserving these important relationships while, at the same time, main-
taining an acceptable response time and scalability. Some of the elements that make
for this database follow.
• The first group of elements, or the nodes are the asset nodes. These come
directly from the database; there are 5 types of asset nodes: patents, projects,
facilities, organizations, and publications.
Each one of these types of nodes
contains attributes such as year, owner or abstract.
• The second group of elements are asset attributes, these are loose elements
that possess an intricate relationship with asset nodes. Some of these are coun-
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Network/Graph model
33
tries, locations, types or asset owners. These attributes can be understood as
metadata for the asset nodes.
• The final group of elements, and perhaps the most relevant to for the project in
scope, is the group of terms. Process terms are the various outputs, processing
technologies and feedstock terms that appear in assets.
All of the above groups have relationships to each other, for example, a patent
might contain several feedstock terms and output terms. Since an extensive descrip-
tion of these relationships would be out of the scope of this thesis, Figure A.1 provides
a simplistic overview of the different relationships these nodes possess with each other,
as well as the attributes of each node.
3.2
Network/Graph model
Model Criteria
In the third part of the chapter, the focus will lie in the description of the engineering
systems representation that was developed.
The developed model would have to
respect a number of important criteria:
• Accurately portray the biofuel research landscape dynamics.
• Preserve the complexity of term combinations. Simply describing the fre-
quency of a certain term throughout documents would not be enough.
• Be scalable to different dimensions, particularly the global level, the coun-
try level and the organizational level.
• Statistical analysis and pattern detection should be possible in order
to detect patterns and answer quantitative questions.
One possible way of respecting these constraints with the available data goes back to
the graph/network system approach. As previously stated, one of the advantages
of this approach relies in the visualization and statistical analysis of a
particular system. But the graph system approach is not per se a mathematical
definition of how a system should be expressed; however, one of the possibilities that
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Method
appear in the literature is the creation of a matrix that expresses the frequency of
pair combinations.
Adjacency Matrix
An adjacency matrix is a mathematical term that seeks to express a network through
a matrix. Let us mathematically define it as:
Aij = x
(3.1)
• The value of x is equal to 0 if node i and j are not connected.
• The value of x is proportional to the weight of the edge between node i and
node j.
The adjacency matrix is purely symmetrical:
Aij = Aji : ∀i,j
(3.2)
In this case, the connection of a node with itself is discarded, therefore the diagonal
of the adjacency matrix is equal to zero if a:
Aij = 0 : ∀i,j:j=i
(3.3)
Model
The model proposed is based on the adjacency matrix; it treats every term (feedstock,
output, processing technology) as a node in the network. If two terms appear in the
same document, then these nodes are connected. The weight of the edge connect-
ing these nodes is proportional to the number of times that these appear together
throughout the database. For example, let us say that “fermentation” and “corn”
appear together in assets 45 times in a database, then, the edge that connects them
will have a weight of 45.
In the model, the rows and columns of the matrix are all of the process variable
terms that exist in the database (in total 342 distinct terms). Which will create a
342x342 adjacency matrix, with a total of 116964 values, of which 58 482 are unique
(due to symmetry). This is represented in Figure 3.3.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Network/Graph model
35
Figure 3.3: Graphical Representation of the graph model.
This graph model is highly powerful not only because of its capacity to capture
all of the pairwise combinations of terms but also because of its scalability. In fact,
one can apply this model to several levels of the analysis by pre-filtering
the technological assets used to build the adjacency matrix. This process is
illustraded in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Illustration of filtering and scalability of graph model.
If only documents from a particular year, country, or organization serve as input,
then the subsequent model will represent the technological capability of that partic-
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Method
ular unit, or its capability matrix. It is important to note that whatever the filtering
(per organization, per country) applied to the data, the capability matrix will always
have the same dimensions; this is because the extraction of all of the process variable
terms was made beforehand. This allows the application of the same quantitative
analysis techniques to all of the levels of the project.
Finally, looking back at the graph model constraints established at the beginning
of the section, it can be said that this model appears to respect them entirely. By
representing the entirety of term pairs used across documents, it not only represents
the research landscape, but also preserves the scientific complexity of such research.
Moreover, the pre-filtering of documents allows for scalability of the model, and the
fixed matrix structure allows for the quantitative analysis.
3.3
Quantitative Analysis
During the analysis, several measures had to be normalized in order to focus on
patterns rather than volume of occurrence. For example, the United States of America
is the country that produces the most patents in the world and therefore, if one wants
to compare its capability matrix to the capability matrix of another country, the
results should be normalized:
Let us define the normalized capability matrix as:
Bk
ij = Ak
ij
Nk
(3.4)
Where, Ak
ij is the capability matrix of a certain category k, Bk
ij the normalized capa-
bility matrix of that same category, and Nk the total number of technological assets
owned by or located in that category.
Another important normalization is related to the chronological evolution of records.
There is a tendency for an increase in the number of technological assets over time,
and therefore if the study is focused on the proportion of technological assets of a
particular type in a year, a normalization should also be applied:
T k
Norm = T k
Abs
Nk
(3.5)
Where T k
Norm is the normalized number of records in k, T k
Abs is the absolute
number of records in k, and Nk the total number of records in that period k.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Quantitative Analysis
37
Capability Matrix Operations
The second important quantitative analysis operation is related to comparing capabil-
ity matrices of different entities. In order to compare two or more capability matrices,
a python script was developed to transform a capability matrix into a list:
1 def get_list_from(matrix):
2
only_valuable = []
3
extension = 1
4
for row_number in range(matrix.shape[0]):
5
only_valuable.append(matrix[row_number, extension:matrix.shape[0]].
tolist())
6
extension += 1
7
return [element for column in only_valuable for element in column ]
Listing 3.1: Python script to transform capability matrix into list.
This script takes all of the unique values of a capability matrix (58482) and places
them in a vector with a total of 58482 entries which will be referred to as a capability
list.
In order to compare two capability matrices, the first step is to create two ca-
pability lists, after doing this, the Pearson correlation index was chosen as an
indicative of the similarity between them:
r =
∑(x −¯x)(y −¯y)
√∑(x −¯x)2 ∑(y −¯y)2
(3.6)
Where r is the Pearson correlation index, a value between 0 and 1. The program
built also returns the p-value of the correlation as a measure of the confidence of the
correlation between two capability matrixes.
Correlation Matrix
Another important concept when comparing capability matrixes is the concept of a
correlation matrix.
When comparing units (countries, years, organizations), in order to understand
how there capability matrices differ, the Pearson correlation index was used (as above
described). Let us say that there are a total of 100 countries to compare. By com-
paring every country to each other, a correlation matrix between all of the countries
can be created. Figure 3.5 illustrates this concept.
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Method
Figure 3.5: Correlation matrix creation workflow.
Hierarchical Clustering
In order to find the clusters of entities whose capability matrices are more similar
and consequently find “capability groups” the main technique used derives from un-
supervised learning: hierarchical clustering. This method seeks to form a hierarchy
of clusters from data points and is usually expressed through a dendrogram of con-
nections.
This method was applied by the use of the scipy python library which also allows
for the determination of a particular hierarchical clustering method.
A hierarchi-
cal clustering method is usually defined by the distance measurement that helps in
building clustering, such measures include: ward, single, complete, average. Through
trial and error, it was determined that the average distance method was the most
appropriate for the analysis.
Collaboration
Another important measure that was used throughout the analysis is the relationship
between countries, universities or organizations. To quantify this measure, as previ-
ously described in the triple-helix framework in the literature review, the properties
of the graph database were used.
1 colabQuery = """ MATCH (a:Asset)-[:LOCATED_IN]->(ac:Country)
2
MATCH (b:Asset)-[:LOCATED_IN]->(bc:Country)
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Quantitative Analysis
39
3
WHERE a.id = b.id AND ac.name <> bc.name
4
RETURN ac.name, bc.name ,count(a.id)
5
ORDER BY count(a.id) DESC"""
Listing 3.2: Collaboration query.
Using the cypher language, it is possible to retrieve technological assets that are
located (in the case of countries), or owned by (in the case of organizations), by two
different entities. For instants, when comparing France and Denmark, if the query
above returns 45 documents, this means that France and Denmark collaborated in
45 different technological assets. The same logic applies to organizations.
External data and considerations
Throughout the analysis, several external data was used, mainly for considerations
regarding the relationship between these externalities and the patterns detected in
the data treated.
The first data was the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), extracted from the
World Data Bank (World Bank 2017). This indicator was extensively used in national
innovation studies previously mentioned in the literature review, and serves as com-
parative index of economic development between two countries. However, in order to
preserve the scale of the analysis, the GDP per capita was used. Moreover, the GDP
per capita average and difference of country pairs was also used. Since only consider-
ing the GDP per capita difference could provide a too “simplistic” analysis, the GDP
per capita average gives information about the relative richness of the country pair,
and not only how different the two countries are.
On a second note, the analysis also sought to relate chronological development of
certain technological assets with the evolution of external factors, in order to under-
stand their intricate relationship (if there is one). As a proof of concept, two indexes
were used, a more general one and a more specific one. The more general index, price
per gallon of oil in $US, and the more specific index, price per kg of sugar. In
the introductory part of the analysis, their evolution over time is compared to the
usage of specific terms as a possible way of understanding the behavior of the biofuel
research landscape.
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Method
3.4
Tools and data management
In this part of the thesis, some of the more technical high level tools are introduced,
these are mainly made of programming languages, libraries and protocols that were
essential in reaching the goals for the analysis.
Data Storage and Retrieval
The first tool that is worth mentioning is the graph database where all of the patents,
scientific publications and projects were stored, work developed in the context of the
AMICa pathfinder project at DTU. Graph databases are a special type of database
that use network structures composed of nodes and edges, to represent and store
data. This is opposed to the relational database model where data is separated into
different tables. The advantage of “graph databases” lies in the relationships, and
the fact that these are explicit.
The database used is managed in Neo4j, an open source graph database manage-
ment system that allows not only to easily run a database server in a machine, but
also allows the direct interaction and querying of the data.
To query the data, Neo4j requires the usage of a programming language know as
Cypher. Cypher can be understood as the graph database equivalent of SQL, and
allows for fast relational queries to the data. As a simple example to the cypher
language, let us retrieve all of the technological assets located in Denmark:
1 MATCH (a:Asset)-[:LOCATED_IN]->(c:Country)
2 WHERE c.name = "Denmark"
3 RETURN a.type, a.owner, a.title
Listing 3.3: Using the Cypher language.
A snippet of the response is represented in Figure 3.6.
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Tools and data management
41
Figure 3.6: Resulting table from Cypher query.
Data Handling and Analysis
The main programming language used to analyze and handle the data was Python,
more particularly its 2.7 version. This was not only because of the familiarity of the
author with it but also because of its power and flexibility with data handling.
As a way of interfacing with the Neo4j database, the py2neo open source library
was used.
This is a particularly convenient way of interacting with the original
database through the python environment, since it allows one to write cypher queries
directly in the python console and to extract data in a convenient format (numpy
matrix, pandas dataframe).
For handling the data, an extensive list of python libraries was used, the most
important ones follow:
• Numpy: An essential package for scientific computing that includes a very good
matrix object implementation known as the numpy matrix.
• Pandas: Provides an easy to read and handle data structure that is especially
useful for table visualizations.
• Math: Some mathematical functions are not available out-of-the-box with the
python language.
• Itertools: A library that allows for efficient looping cycles. For visualizations,
three toolkits were recurrently used:
• Matplotlib: An easy to use tool for producing visualizations such as graphs,
bar plots, and others.
• Seaborn: Based on matplotlib, seaborn provides a more visually appealing and
statistics focused visualization library.
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Method
• Plotly: Used to create dynamic - web based - visualizations.
If you wish to download a comprehensive list of the libraries used please visit this
link.
Code Management and Presentation
To present the data in a narrative format jupyter notebooks. These notebooks con-
stitute an interesting way of presenting not only the code, but also allow a narrative
from for the analysis, which is written in markdown. Notebooks are a popular tool
in data science and an easy way of presenting data science procedures.
To store the code for the analysis, GitHub was used as a tool for keeping ev-
erything in cloud storage. Moreover, by creating a repository for this project, this
means that the code is available 24/7 for anyone that wants to consult it or request
any modifications.
Repository link: www.github.com/duarteocarmo/technological_capabilities
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4
Results
In the fourth section of this master´s thesis, the results of the analysis will be pre-
sented. This section follows the structure of the macro, meso, and micro levels, and
contains the following sections:
• Macro Level: In the first subsection, the result of the analysis at the macro
level will be presented. Here, contents such as the characterization of years, the
relationship between them, and the influence of external factors will be studied.
• Meso Level: In the country level analysis, the focus will lie in the country as the
unit of scientific capability. Coverage will start from the capability matrix of a
country, and will reach topics such as collaboration, similarity between countries,
and the role of the GDP per capita in the national innovation landscape.
• Micro Level: At the micro level, the results of the application of the meso
level methods to organizations will be addressed. With a special focus on the
collaboration types of different organizations.
• Patents and Publications: In the first part of the complementary analysis, re-
sults of the comparison between terms used in publications and patents will be
shown.
• An alternative approach: Finally, as the closing part of the results section, and
as validation of the methodology chosen, results of an analysis focusing on term
frequency instead for term-pair frequency will be addressed.
A model of this approach is represented in Figure 4.1.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Results
Figure 4.1: Structure of result presentation.
4.1
Macro Level: The biofuel research system
4.1.1
Characterization of Years
Capability Matrices
As a first result, the whole database will be considered without any sort of filter-
ing. The functions built using python, allow the rendering of two different capability
matrices: a normalized version and an absolute version (Figure 4.2). Here, one can
notice some columns and rows of the matrices that have a higher number of tech-
nological assets. These correspond to biofuel related terms that are more frequently
used. In general, the structures of both matrices are similar, which is expected since
the normalized version is proportional to the absolute one.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Macro Level: The biofuel research system
45
Figure 4.2: Capability matrices of the AMICa database.
As a validation of this approach, the clustered version of this capability matrix
was also produced (Figure A.5), although visualization is tough, one can notice two
different areas of higher density particularly in the top left and bottom left part of the
matrix. While investigating the clustered term pairs, related terms from a scientific
perspective stand out, some examples of clusters follow:
• Pal waste, food waste, organic waste, municipal solid waste, industrial waste.
• Sawdust, woody biomass, wood waste.
• Beverage waste, garden waste, brewery waste, biodegradable waste.
• Mixed prairie grass, cereals/sugar, corn/barley, grain, agriculture, agricultural
waste.
• Sugarcane, cellulosic ethanol, corn, cellulosic biomass, yeast.
• Rice straw, wheat straw.
From the general clustering, the algorithm tends to accurately separate terms
that are somehow related. These relations are a result of the composition of certain
feedstocks, the type of derivatives of certain raw materials, or the proximity of certain
outputs.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Results
Capability Matrices of years
Taking a year as a unit of analysis, the first step produced is the characterization
of a certain year in terms of its technological capability. This methodology was first
described in section 3. In this matrix, each row and column represent a term of the
dictionary of biofuel relevant terms, each value of that matrix takes the number of
documents queried that possess both the term in the column and the term in the row.
As a point of departure, all of the documents related to the year 2017 were queried.
As a result, the matrix in Figure 4.3 was produced.
Figure 4.3: Annotated version of the capability matrix of 2017. (Binary).
Here, the visualization is rather challenging because of the large size of matrix,
remember, there are a total of 352 rows and columns. Another interesting matrix
to produce, because it allows for a fairer comparison of years between themselves is
the production of a normalized capability matrix, where the above matrix is divided
by the total number of documents present in the database for that year. In the case
of 2017, where there are a total of 670 documents (patents, publications, projects),
the normalized version of the matrix has the properties described in Table 4.1 and
is illustrated in Figure 4.4. One important thing to point out is the number of zero
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Macro Level: The biofuel research system
47
values in the matrices above. Moreover, there appear to be “areas” where the value
is higher.
Figure 4.4: Capability Matrix of the year 2017, Normalized.
Capability Lists
After being capable of reproducing a capability matrix for each year, this same matrix
was transformed into a vector, or list, utilizing the function previously described in
the methodology. Below, a visualization of two years, particularly 2012 and 2013 is
provided. In Figure 4.5, each row corresponds to the normalized capability lists of
each one of the years.
Property
Value
Shape
352x352
Max
0.23
Min
0.00
Mean
2.47e-04
Table 4.1: Normalized capability matrix of 2017.
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Results
Figure 4.5: Normalized capability lists for 2012 and 2013.
4.1.2
Year Correlation Matrix
After successfully visualizing the capability matrix of a certain year, and character-
izing it in terms of an adjacency matrix, or list, the next goal lies in successfully
comparing different years between themselves, to do this, we must first choose ex-
actly which years to include in this comparison.
In the database, the number of
documents over time is not regular, on the contrary, there is a large amount of years
with low-to-no documents. Figure 4.6 represents the number of documents per year
in the database. Until 1997, the number of documents is almost or even equal to
zero, and therefore, it was chosen that this year-to-year comparison would focus on
the year of 1997 until 2018.
Figure 4.6: Number of technological assets over time.
To compare two years between themselves, the Pearson correlation index was used
(as described in the methodology), between their capability lists. For example, the
years 2012 and 2013 (as seen in the figure above) have a Pearson correlation of 0.90,
which indicates a very high relation between them. Applying the same methodology
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Macro Level: The biofuel research system
49
to every year between 1997 and 2018, a year correlation matrix can be produced, as
seen in the figure below. In Figure 4.7 the lighter the color, the higher the similarity,
in terms of research. For example, the year 2003 is more similar to 2000 than to 2002.
It can be observed that recent years are on average more similar than less recent years.
However, there seems to be some exceptions.
Figure 4.7: Year Correlation Matrix of the last 15 years.
After producing the year correlation matrix, clustering was applied to the matrix
as a way of identifying “clusters” of years that are more related between themselves
(Figure 4.8). To do this, hierarchical clustering with average distance was the chosen
methodology.
The application of this methodology led to the figure below where
the clustering algorithm orders the matrix in a way that years that are more similar
appear closer together. Moreover, one can also notice a dendrogram as a visual aid to
that same algorithm. In general, more recent years (2010 onwards) form a cluster of
their own. The results of this clustering confirm that from a year-to-year correlation
perspective the period 2010-2017 shows few changes, the period 2005-2009 shows a
medium level of changes and all the rest of the years are characterized by relatively
large year-to-year changes.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Results
Figure 4.8: Clustered Year Correlation Matrix of the last 15 years.
4.1.3
Correlation of years over time
Following the comparison of all of the years between themselves, it is interesting to
understand if the relationships and similarities between those years are at all con-
nected to a chronological timeline e.g. are consecutive years more connected between
themselves? To help in assess this question the correlation of consecutive years was
also studied. Figure 4.9 represents how one year is correlated with the previous year.
For example, 2005 has a 0.5 correlation with 2004, on the other hand, 2006 has a 0.35
correlation with 2005. One can observe a tendency of rise of the correlation of years
over time. In other words, more recent years are more related to each other. On the
other side, before 2007, the correlation between years follows a less obvious pattern.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Macro Level: The biofuel research system
51
Figure 4.9: Pearson Correlation with previous year.
4.1.4
Comparing Years
The final result of the Macro level analysis concerns the comparison of two years, and
particularly the understanding of the intrinsic differences that may result in a high
or low similarity between years. Taking as a point of departure, and as a proof of
concept, the capability matrices of the years 2017 and 2010, the first step was to build
their capability matrices. Due again, to the high number of terms and term pairs,
the visualization and understanding just from the visualization of the matrices side
by side is rather poor (Figure 4.10).
Figure 4.10: Capability matrices of the years 2017 and 2010.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Results
In order to try to visualize the differences and areas of the matrix that differ from
one year to the other, taking the normalized capability matrices of both years, the
difference between these two was also produced. Knowing that these years have a
relatively high Pearson correlation (e.g. they are similar in terms of capability), the
matrix of differences serves as a simple way of directly comparing two years.
To understand and compare the years at a term-pair level, the tables of the most
frequent terms pairs for the years of 2010 and 2017 were produced (Table 4.2 and
4.3). When observing these tables some factors stand out:
• The number of documents in 2010 is far superior to the number of documents
for the year of 2017.
• The pair ethanol-fermentation is the top term pair on both years appearing in
at least 17% of all of the technological assets of both years.
• In general, the most used term-pairs are made of output-processing technology
terms (e.g. ethanol-hydrolysis) and output-feedstock terms (e.g. waste-ethanol
or sugar-ethanol).
• Some pairs seem to diminish in importance, for example sugar-fermentation is
important in both years but sugar-ethanol is not present in the top 10 for the
year 2017.
First Term
Second Term
Documents
Percentage
fermentation
ethanol
319
0.350935
hydrolysis
ethanol
225
0.247525
transesterification
biodiesel
168
0.184818
anaerobic digestion
biogas
152
0.167217
catalysis
biodiesel
131
0.144114
fermentation
bioethanol
120
0.132013
sugar
ethanol
106
0.116612
sugar
fermentation
102
0.112211
hydrolysis
bioethanol
95
0.104510
enzymatic hydrolysis
ethanol
85
0.093509
Table 4.2: Top term pairs for 2010.
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Macro Level: The biofuel research system
53
First Term
Second Term
Documents
Percentage
fermentation
ethanol
154
0.229851
anaerobic digestion
biogas
137
0.204478
pyrolysis
bio-oil
101
0.150746
hydrolysis
ethanol
76
0.113433
fermentation
bioethanol
76
0.113433
sugar
ethanol
60
0.089552
waste
ethanol
58
0.086567
sugar
fermentation
57
0.085075
waste
biogas
53
0.079104
fermentation
biogas
53
0.079104
Table 4.3: Top term pairs for 2017.
Finally, as a way of directly comparing these years, a table of the term pairs and
their evolution from 2010 to 2017 was created. Here, the main question that was
sought to answer was: If term pair A-B was in x% of assets in year X, what was
that same percentage in the year X+Y? Moreover, what were the term pairs that
most differed in terms of usage between these two years?
Table 4.4 is a possible
representation of that same question, in it, one can see the term pairs that differed
the most greatly between these two years in terms of usage. For example, the term
pair “bio-oil-pyrolysis” appears in only 0.26% of the documents in the year of 2010,
against 1.15% in 2017:
• The term pairs with the most important differences in usage are not necessarily
the term pairs with the most usage in each of the years. With the exception of
the pair “ethanol-fermentation”.
• Most term pairs contain output terms such as “ethanol”, “biodiesel”, “biogas”
etc.
• There is a relative balance between the number of term pairs that decreased in
usage and the number of term pairs that increased in usage.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Results
First Term
Second Term
2010
2017
Difference in %
hydrolysis
ethanol
0.247525
0.113433
0.134092
transesterification
biodiesel
0.184818
0.050746
0.134072
fermentation
ethanol
0.350935
0.229851
0.121084
catalysis
biodiesel
0.144114
0.023881
0.120234
pyrolysis
bio-oil
0.041804
0.150746
0.108942
vegetable oil
transesterification
0.080308
0.007463
0.072845
catalysis
ethanol
0.079208
0.010448
0.068760
transesterification
ethanol
0.089109
0.023881
0.065228
catalysis
methanol
0.061606
0.001493
0.060114
anaerobic digestion
ethanol
0.008801
0.067164
0.058363
gasification
syng
0.005501
0.059701
0.054201
vegetable oil
biodiesel
0.084708
0.032836
0.051873
vegetable oil
catalysis
0.063806
0.011940
0.051866
transesterification
methanol
0.073707
0.022388
0.051319
fermentation
gasoline
0.055006
0.004478
0.050528
pressing
ethanol
0.045105
0.002985
0.042119
solvents
biodiesel
0.033003
0.074627
0.041624
seed oil
biodiesel
0.038504
0.000000
0.038504
anaerobic digestion
bioethanol
0.001100
0.038806
0.037706
anaerobic digestion
biogas
0.167217
0.204478
0.037261
Table 4.4: Top term-pairs with the most important differences in usage between
2010 and 2017.
4.1.5
Biofuel-related terms over time
After analyzing the evolution of the correlation of years over time and providing
visualizations that allow the comparing of two years, the study re-focuses on seeing
how the usage of different biofuel-related terms evolve over time. To this, the same
framework of term division is respected: biofuel related terms can be feedstocks,
processing technologies, or outputs. To study their evolution over time and due to
the inconsistency in terms of the volume of documents over time, one should focus on
the normalized quantity of terms rather than their absolute values. Three different
graphs were produced, each related to one type of term (Figure A.2, Figure A.3 and
Figure A.4). The terms chosen to represent each group were selected due to their
high occurrence in each group.
The same behavior can be generally observed across the three types of terms, until
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Macro Level: The biofuel research system
55
the year 2000, the normalized quantity of terms is rather “turbulent”, while after that
year there seems to be a more regularized behavior across the normalized usage of
different terms. Moreover, there seem to be some spikes in terms such as “sugar” or
“ethanol”, which means that all of the documentation related to that particular year
in the database contains that same term.
4.1.6
Contextual Relationships
The following section shows the result of the comparison of external factors with
the usage of certain terms. To do this, two external factors were used as a proof of
concept.
Price of Oil
Taking the evolution of the price of the barrel of oil in $US from inflationdata.com
(Data 2018), which is inflation adjusted, it was decided to compare how its evolution
compared with the relative presence of terms over the years in the database of assets.
As a first visual tool, a double axis plot with the normalized usage of three example
outputs (biogas, bioplastic, and butanol), and the price of oil from 1990 to 2017 was
produced, and can be seen in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Normalized term usage and evolution of the price of oil from 1990 to
2017.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Results
One can first observe that there seems to be a rise in both the term usage over
the years, and at the same time a regular augmentation of the price of oil until about
2014. Moreover, there are patterns that appear in the evolution of the price of oil
that seem to repeat themselves in the usage of terms, such as the period of the usage
of the term “biogas” between 2000 and 2005, and the evolution of the price of oil
between 2003 and 2008.
But a chronological visualization has drawbacks; there is no way of consistently
comparing all of the terms and their correlation with the price of oil. To achieve this
comparison, the evolution of the price of oil was compared to all of the different terms
in the database. For each term, the Pearson correlation between its usage in every
year and the evolution of the price of oil was calculated. As a result, a ranking of
the terms with the highest positive correlation with the price of oil can be observed
in the following table. In Table 4.5, the top 10 terms with the highest correlation
with the price of oil are presented. For example, the evolution of the usage of the
term “butanol” has an 85% correlation with the evolution of the price of oil, the
term “bioplastic” a correlation of 80%. Moreover, a table with the terms with the
most important negative correlations was also produced and can be consulted in the
jupyter notebook.
Output Name
P-value
Pearson Correlation Index
butanol
1.603189e-08
0.844547
bioplastic
2.463734e-07
0.804599
biodiesel
7.978637e-07
0.784034
fatty acid ethyl ester
1.427601e-06
0.772960
adipic acid
1.048009e-05
0.729790
bioethanol
2.862862e-05
0.704439
syng
3.649295e-05
0.697899
biobutanol
5.140385e-05
0.688369
cellulosic ethanol
1.301892e-04
0.660616
biopolymers
3.263515e-04
0.630094
Table 4.5: Top 10 terms with the highest positive correlation with the price of oil
from 1990 to 2017.
==PAGE:67==
4.1 Macro Level: The biofuel research system
57
Price of Sugar
The second example was based on a more traditional asset, the price of sugar. To
do this, the exact same approach as the price of oil was applied but now taking the
evolution of the price of sugar over time from the DataBank (World Bank 2017). As
previously noted, the general behavior over time in the double axed chart in Figure
4.12 is rather poor in expressing the relationship between the price of the kilo of sugar
in $US and terms such as “sugar”, “sugarcane”, or “wood”. For this same reason, a
table with the top 10 terms with the most important Pearson correlation index was
produced (Table 4.6).
Figure 4.12: Normalized term usage and evolution of the price of the kilo of sugar
from 1990 to 2017.
When observing the term ranking in Table 4.6, some interesting observations can
be made. Firstly, almost all of the terms in this top ranking are in fact feedstock
terms, raw materials used for biofuel production. Secondly, the two terms with the
highest correlation with the price of sugar are highly related to it, particularly “sug-
arcane”, and “cellulosic sugars”. Finally, there is a presence of flowering plants such
as “jatropha”, and “sorghum” that also have an important Pearson correlation index
with the price of the kilo of sugar.
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Results
Feedstock Name
P-value
Pearson Correlation Index
sugarcane
6.074365e-07
0.789014
cellulosic sugars
1.263220e-06
0.775341
jatropha
1.521222e-06
0.771713
sorghum
3.083429e-06
0.757299
dry biomass
3.454736e-06
0.754884
beets
4.105286e-06
0.751165
dedicated energy crops
6.915371e-06
0.739525
algae
1.103076e-05
0.728562
hybrid poplar
1.490683e-05
0.721206
soy
2.631077e-05
0.706675
Table 4.6: Top 10 terms with the highest correlation with the price of the kile of
sugar from 1990 to 2017.
4.2
Meso Level: Technological Capabilities of Nations
In the second part of the fourth section, the focus will lie in the study of the tech-
nological capabilities of countries. The methods used in this part of the analysis are
closely related to the methodologies presented in the third section and the analyses
made in the first part of this section, except for some small differences and additional
analysis.
4.2.1
Characterisation of Countries
Capability Matrices
The first result produced relied on the representation of the biofuel research ecosystem
of a country as a capability matrix. This capability matrix is the result of the same
application of the term-pair methodology as previously presented at the macro level,
but instead of filtering the documentation by year, the documentation was filtered by
its location. For example, when creating the capability matrix for Denmark, the term-
pair matrix is related to technological assets (patents, publications, projects) located
in Denmark or owned (or even co-owned) by Danish organizations.
To introduce
this concept, taking Sweden and Denmark as examples, the normalized capability
matrix for each one of these institutions was produced. Figure 4.13 and Table 4.7, a
visualization of both matrices side by side, as well as some indicative properties are
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Meso Level: Technological Capabilities of Nations
59
shown.
Figure 4.13: Normalized Capability Matrices of Denmark and Sweden.
When looking at the properties of both matrixes, some observations can be made:
• Both matrices are symmetrical and equal in dimensions which is expected given
the same dictionary of biofuel related terms.
• The maximum, minimum and mean values of both matrices are generally simi-
lar.
• The standard deviation of the capability matrix of Denmark is 40% higher which
would mean that Denmark has a wider usage of different term pairs. On the
other hand, Sweden’s capabilities are more “focused”.
Property
Denmark
Sweden
Dimensions
352x352
352x352
Mean
1.71e-05
1.71e-05
Standard Deviation
3.95e-04
2.80e-04
Max
3.90e-02
3.06e-02
Min
0.00
0.00
Symmetry
Yes
Yes
Table 4.7: Denmark and Sweden capability matrix properties.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Results
Capability Lists
Following the same approach as the macro analysis, a capability matrix can be trans-
formed into a capability list by taking its upper triangle and adding each entry to a
vector. In this level of the analysis, and as a proof of concept, the capability list of
the United States of America and the capability list of China are presented side by
side in Figure 4.14. However, due to the large number of entries in these lists (58482)
the visualization of the differences becomes rather difficult. Consequently, in the final
part of this subsection, this concept will be revisited in a more detailed manner.
Figure 4.14: Country capability lists of China and the USA.
4.2.2
Country Correlation Matrix and Profiles
Country Correlation Matrices
With the goal of applying the same engineering systems approach to the meso level,
as was applied to the macro level, the Pearson correlation index was used as an in-
dicator of the similarity between the capability lists of two countries. For example,
the Pearson correlation index between the US and China lists has the value of ap-
proximately 0.65, or 65%. This could mean that the biofuel research between these
two countries is 65% similar. To visualize this, the country correlation matrix was
created in Figure 4.15.
After creating this matrix, and just like it was done for each year, a hierarchical
clustering algorithm was applied to the matrix as a way of possibly identifying clusters
of countries that are more similar between themselves.
Moreover, this clustering
technique also produced a dendogram as a way of quickly identifying the countries
that are more related to another (Figure 4.16).
For example, if this dendrogram
was to be cut in the level n=2, forming clusters of two countries, Denmark would
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Meso Level: Technological Capabilities of Nations
61
be connected to Portugal, and the United States would be clustered with Taiwan.
Interestingly, one can observe three main cluster areas in the ordered matrix:
• On the top left side of the matrix, an area of highly related countries that range
from France to Serbia. (see axis of second figure)
• On the bottom right side of the matrix, an area of related countries, which on
average are less related than the top left but separated. (Belgium, Hong Kong,
Hungary Tunisia...)
• In the middle, a cross like area of countries which are not particularly related
to each other or any other country. (El Salvador, UAE, Scotland...)
Figure 4.15: Country
capability
correlation
matrix.
Interactive
version:
https://plot.ly/ duarteocarmo/24.
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Results
Figure 4.16: Clustered country capability correlation matrix.
Country Correlation Profiles
While clustering is an interesting way of visualizing the general trends that would
possibly occur between countries, it does not explicitly show what countries are more
related to each other. To visualize this, country profiles were created. A country
profile is built by “cutting” the capability matrix for a particular row (country) and
ordering the results. In Figure 4.17 below, the country profile of Denmark is presented.
On the y axis, the Pearson correlation index (x100) is used as a measure of similarity
between countries.
This graph is a simple way of quickly visualizing the most similar countries to
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Meso Level: Technological Capabilities of Nations
63
Denmark in terms of biofuel research.
For example, the most related country to
Denmark is Spain, with an index of about 60%, following Portugal with an index
of
58%, etc. Interestingly, the most similar countries are not necessarily close in
geography to Denmark, but close to themselves. Sweden for example is related to
Denmark by a factor of 50%, and Norway by only 30%. Following this method one
could say that in terms of biofuel-related capability matrices Norway is as similar to
Denmark as Colombia is.
Figure 4.17: Country profile of Denmark.
4.2.3
Contextual Relationships
4.2.3.1
GDP per capita
Using the world bank as a source of data to get the values in $US of the Growth
Domestic Product per capita, the GDP per capita difference for every country pair
was calculated. After calculating this, the goal is to understand if the GDP per capita
of two countries is telling of the technological similarity of those two countries. In
Figure 4.18, presented below, each data point is a pair of countries. In the x axis, the
Pearson correlation (0-1) between the country pairs, and in the y axis, the absolute
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Results
GDP per capita difference of those same country pairs. For readability purposes, if
two countries have a capability similarity of less than 10%, or 0.1, this pair would be
excluded from the graph.
When observing the graph, one can notice that most country pairs have less than a
40% capability correlation and less than 40000$US GDP per capita difference. On the
other hand, when looking at the dashed guidelines in the graph, the further from the
origin of the graph a guideline is, the less country pairs appear. Moreover, generally,
countries that are more related (higher capability correlation), have a more similar
GDP per capita. For example, Brazil and Zimbabwe, have a capability correlation of
88.60% (0.88), and a GDP per capita difference of 7620.87$US, which is rather low.
Figure 4.18: Capability correlation and GDP per capita difference of country pairs.
However, the graph above loses an important dimension: it is hard to distinguish
country pairs just from the GDP per capita difference. For example, let us take as
an example the country pairs Sweden-Singapore, and Romania-Brazil. These two
country pairs have a low GDP per capita difference; however, the first pair is made of
economically developed countries, and the second, generally underdeveloped countries.
The graph above treats them equally.
In order to add an extra dimension to this visualization, Figure 4.19 produced.
Here, one can also see the average GDP per capita of each country pair as a color
scale. For instants, Sweden-Singapore is light blue, and Romania-Brazil is red.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Meso Level: Technological Capabilities of Nations
65
Figure 4.19: Capability correlation and GDP per capita difference of country pairs.
Interactive version: https://plot.ly/ duarteocarmo/32/.
4.2.3.2
Collaboration
The second contextualization is not necessarily from an external data source, instead,
it was obtained from the database itself. By querying the database, it was possible
to retrieve, for each country pair, the number of technological assets where these
countries collaborated.
By taking the number of shared assets between a country pair and the capability
correlation between that same country pair, Figure 4.20 was produced.
In it, 4
different areas can be observed (in italic, example pairs):
On one hand, most country-pairs are located in the “Different and not collaborat-
ing” quadrant. On the other hand, there is a high number of country pairs that are
similar in terms of capability but are not collaborating.
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Results
-
Low number of shared as-
sets
High number of shared as-
sets
High
capability
correla-
tion
Similar and not collab-
orating
Argentina - Iran
Belgium - China
Brazil - Costa Rica
Canada - Denmark
Similar and collaborat-
ing
Austria - Germany
Belgium - Germany
Denmark - Germany
Finland - Germany
Low capa-
bility cor-
relation
Different and not col-
laborating
Argentina - Australia
France - Servia
Indonesia - Malaysia
Brazil - Portugal
Different and collabo-
rating
Austria - France
Belgium - France
Denmark - Netherlands
El Salvador - Germany
Table 4.8: Examples of collaborations and categories.
Figure 4.20: Capability correlation and collaboration between country pairs.
When looking at Figure 4.20, one can consider the number of shared assets in-
dicator as an unfair index. This because not all countries possess the same number
of assets. For example, the US has an extremely high number of documents, while
other countries such as Costa Rica or Lebanon have a very low number of documents.
For this reason, a new index, the normalized number of shared assets was created, as
a way of valuing collaborations as a percentage of total documents produced by the
country pair, its definition follows:
==PAGE:77==
4.2 Meso Level: Technological Capabilities of Nations
67
• Old collaboration definition: Country i and country j have z assets that have
both their name as location.
• New normalized collaboration definition: normalized collaboration = (number
of shared assets between country i and j)/(number of total possible collabora-
tions between i and j)
For example, for the country pair Portugal-Denmark:
• Number of assets Denmark: 351
• Number of assets Portugal: 180
• Number of shared assets: 25.0
• Number of normalized shared assets: 0.13 (=25/180)
In Figure 4.21, the same graph, but with the normalized shared assets between
each country pair is presented. One can notice that there is less saturation generally,
and country pairs are more distributed. Moreover, some outliers appear: such as
France-Lebanon.
Figure 4.21: Capability correlation and normalized collaboration between country
pairs. Interactive version: https://plot.ly/ duarteocarmo/34/.
==PAGE:78==
68
4 Results
4.2.4
Comparing Countries
Coming back to the more general analysis, in the same way as two years were com-
pared in terms of capability, two countries will now be compared in terms of term
pairs usage. It is worth noting that this approach is simply a deep dive into the
capability matrices of two different countries and looking at the most common term
pairs in each of them.
As an example, the countries Brazil and Denmark will be compared, their capabil-
ity correlation is around 30%. The first result is the top term pairs for each of these
countries presented in Tables 4.9 and 4.10. One can note that in the top term pairs
of Brazil, there is a high number of term pairs related to sugar, sugarcane and cellu-
lose. One the other hand, in the Denmark table, there is more stress on processing
technologies (digestion, fermentation, hydrolysis), and outputs.
Similarly to what was done with the macro level analysis, the table of the most
important term-pair usage differences was produced, and can be seen in Table 4.11.
One can note a high number of term pairs that are not used at all by Denmark, and
used in Brazil: “sugar-sugarcane”, “advanced biofuel-cellulosic ethanol”, “sugarcane-
ethanol”.
On the other hand, there is lower number of terms that are only used
in Denmark (“straw-hydrolysis”). Moreover, feedstocks and related term pairs are
common in this table, with terms such as sugar, sugarcane, or straw, being divisive
between countries.
First Term
Second Term
Documents
Percentage
anaerobic digestion
biogas
31
0.088319
ethanol
fermentation
26
0.074074
ethanol
hydrolysis
23
0.065527
ethanol
straw
14
0.039886
bioethanol
fermentation
14
0.039886
yeast
fermentation
12
0.034188
ethanol
enzymatic hydrolysis
12
0.034188
ethanol
cellulosic ethanol
12
0.034188
hydrolysis
bioethanol
12
0.034188
fermentation
cellulosic ethanol
11
0.031339
Table 4.9: Top term pairs Denmark.
==PAGE:79==
4.2 Meso Level: Technological Capabilities of Nations
69
First Term
Second Term
Documents
Percentage
sugarcane
sugar
416
0.525917
ethanol
fermentation
401
0.506953
fermentation
sugar
210
0.265487
ethanol
cellulosic ethanol
208
0.262958
ethanol
sugar
207
0.261694
ethanol
advanced biofuel
200
0.252845
advanced biofuel
cellulosic ethanol
200
0.252845
fermentation
sugarcane
198
0.250316
ethanol
sugarcane
195
0.246523
ethanol
hydrolysis
42
0.053097
Table 4.10: Top term pairs Brazil.
First Term
Second Term
Denmark
Brazil
Difference
sugarcane
sugar
0.000000
0.525917
0.525917
ethanol
fermentation
0.074074
0.506953
0.432879
advanced biofuel
cellulosic ethanol
0.000000
0.252845
0.252845
ethanol
advanced biofuel
0.000000
0.252845
0.252845
fermentation
sugar
0.014245
0.265487
0.251242
fermentation
sugarcane
0.000000
0.250316
0.250316
ethanol
sugar
0.014245
0.261694
0.247449
ethanol
sugarcane
0.000000
0.246523
0.246523
ethanol
cellulosic ethanol
0.034188
0.262958
0.228770
anaerobic digestion
biogas
0.088319
0.015171
0.073148
ethanol
straw
0.039886
0.002528
0.037358
straw
hydrolysis
0.031339
0.000000
0.031339
fermentation
mixed biomass
0.025641
0.000000
0.025641
hydrolysis
bioethanol
0.034188
0.010114
0.024074
straw
wheat
0.022792
0.000000
0.022792
biogas
waste
0.025641
0.003793
0.021848
biodiesel
transesterification
0.000000
0.020228
0.020228
straw
fermentation
0.019943
0.000000
0.019943
vegetable oil
transesterification
0.000000
0.018963
0.018963
fermentation
cellulosic ethanol
0.031339
0.012642
0.018697
Table 4.11: Top term pairs usage differences in Denmark and Brazil. Percentages
are 0-1.
==PAGE:80==
70
4 Results
4.2.5
Country Spectrums
Representing Country Spectrums
As a way of diving deeper into the country capability spectrums, understanding their
composition, and making the analogy between term pairs and amino-acid pairs in
DNA representations, in the following section the country spectrum concept was
further developed.
Instead of focusing in the frequency of the appearance of a certain term pair, let
us focus on whether a term-pair appears or not in the capability list of a country or
not.
In Figure 4.22, for 7 countries, and the first 45 term pairs of the capability spec-
trum are represented. Even though this is a very small part of the spectrum (<1%),
one can already see some term pairs that appear in several countries. “Natural Gas /
Anaerobic Digestion” for instance, appears in Finland and Denmark. Moreover, there
are a wide range of terms that only appear in one country. Such as terms related to
“animal fats”, in the case of Spain.
Figure 4.22: Country capability spectrum (first 45 term pairs) for a set of 7 coun-
tries.
Generalizing this capability spectrum concept to all of the countries all of the
terms pairs, is a good way of visualizing the biofuels capability “DNA” of all of them.
However, in order to improve the quality of this visualization, two adjustments were
made:
==PAGE:81==
4.2 Meso Level: Technological Capabilities of Nations
71
• The order of the countries in the left hand side was adjusted to reflect the result
of the clustering in the country correlation matrix.
• Only term pairs that were used by at least 2 countries were represented. This
allowed the reduction of the original size of the capability spectrum from 58482
values, to 6236 values.
This representation can be consulted in Figure A.6.
The uniqueness of countries
Taking the capability spectrum of a country as a starting point, the next and final
step of the analysis seeks to understand how unique each country is in terms of usage
of terms pairs. Denmark, for example, in its capability spectrum, uses a total of 256
different term pairs. Of these 256 term pairs, there are a total of 21 that are only
used by documents located in Denmark, these can be consulted in Table 4.12.
Taking this approach and applying it to all of the countries in the database, a
uniqueness index was developed.
The uniqueness index of a country is the ratio
Term
pairs
unique to
Denmark
various grasses/straw
various grasses/waste
various grasses/garden waste
various grasses/ethanol
various grasses/enzymatic hydrolysis
various grasses/hydrolysis
industrial waste/gas cleaning
sewage/gas cleaning
mixed biomass/biogas
mixed biomass/cellulosic ethanol
mixed biomass/fermentation
straw/garden waste
grass/garden waste
rapeseed oil/solvents
garden waste/ethanol
garden waste/enzymatic hydrolysis
garden waste/hydrolysis
rapeseed/solvents
biogas/cellulosic ethanol
Table 4.12: Unique term pairs for Denmark.
==PAGE:82==
72
4 Results
between the total number of term pairs used by a country and the number of term
pairs that are unique to that country. In the case of Denmark, this value would be
equal to 21/256 = 0.082.
With this approach, a table of the top 20 most unique countries was created. Table
4.13, presented below, one can see that the most unique country is the US, with an
index of almost 0.50. This means that half the term pairs used by the US are only
used by the US (!). The rest of the countries in the ranking have a relatively low
number of term pairs, Lebanon, for example, with only 5 term pairs, of which 1 is
unique. The top 20 most unique countries have either a very large number of term
pairs or a very low number of term pairs.
==PAGE:83==
4.3 Micro Level: Technological Capabilities and Organizations
73
4.3
Micro Level: Technological Capabilities and
Organizations
On the third and final part of the main analysis, the results of the application of
the methodology to the micro level will be presented. Here, the focus will rely on
studying organizations as the units of technological capability. Moreover, the analysis
will focus on the study of the Technical University of Denmark and of organizations
based in Denmark.
4.3.1
Characterisation of organizations
The first part of the micro level analysis seeks to characterize an organization by its
capability matrix, as previously done for years at the macro level, and countries at the
meso level. By filtering all of the documents whose owner contained the “Technical
University of Denmark”, the technological capability matrix of the University was
achieved.
The normalized version of this matrix, has the properties described in
Table 4.14. In its capability matrix, DTU has the maximum value in the position
(200, 286) with the value of 103.8.
This position refers to the terms biogas and
anaerobic digestion
4.3.2
Organization correlation matrix and organization profiles
Following the methodology applied in sections 4.1.2 and 4.2.2, organizations become
the focus. A comparison was made between the capability matrices of 112 organiza-
tions, by the means of the calculation of the Pearson correlation index between them.
The database contains a total of 10638 organizations; therefore, in order to maintain
the quality of visualizations, a triage of the organizations was made. By only retriev-
ing organizations with 7 assets or more and for reference purposes added a number of
Danish organizations. As a result the list was reduced to a total of 112 organizations.
The Danish organizations added manually were: DTU, Novozymes, Aalborg Univer-
sity, Aarhus University, University of Copenhagen, University of Southern Denmark,
DTU Riso, and Dong Energy.
By comparing every organization’s capability matrix and calculating the correla-
tion between each of them, the capability matrix of organizations was created (Figure
==PAGE:84==
74
4 Results
Country
Uniqueness
Unique Pairs
Total Pairs
United States of America
0.477474
2215
4639
Ukraine
0.263158
5
19
Indonesia
0.210526
12
57
Lebanon
0.200000
1
5
Bangladesh
0.200000
7
35
Cyprus
0.157895
3
19
Sweden
0.156250
70
448
Austria
0.150685
11
73
European Patent Office
0.140145
155
1106
El Salvador
0.132530
11
83
Australia
0.132296
34
257
Uganda
0.130435
3
23
South Africa
0.125749
21
167
Hong Kong
0.125000
3
24
Turkey
0.120773
25
207
People’s Republic of China
0.113377
139
1226
Thailand
0.111111
9
81
Brazil
0.110672
56
506
United Kingdom
0.106870
70
655
Canada
0.106061
84
792
Table 4.13: Uniqueness ranking.
Property
Value
Shape
352x352
Max
0.82
Min
0.00
Mean
3.7e-04
Standard Deviation
7.8e-03
Symmetry
Yes
Table 4.14: Normalized capability matrix for DTU.
==PAGE:85==
4.3 Micro Level: Technological Capabilities and Organizations
75
4.23). In the figure below is the clustered version of this matrix. In this clustering,
Danish organizations do not appear as particularly related. DTU for example, ap-
pears in a cluster with a majority of Chinese organizations (Tsinghua University,
Shanghai University and Beijing University). On another note, Dong, Riso, Aalborg
and the University of Copenhagen are highly connected in this clustering. Novozymes
appears rather isolated, while the University of Southern Denmark and Aarhus ap-
pear in the same cluster. The organizations in focus are highlighted in red in the
graph below.
When cutting this correlation matrix in the rows corresponding to DTU (4.24) and
Novozymes (4.25), we are able to access the profiles of both of these organizations.
In the case of DTU, its top 3 correlations are with Shanghai Jiao Tong University
(70%), Tsinghua University (70%) and the Portuguese University of Minho (69%).
The organization that is not a university with the highest correlation with DTU is
CSIR (African Research Organization). In the case of Novozymes, the correlations
are on average lower. The Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (57%) and the
University of Copenhagen (55%) make for the most related organizations.
==PAGE:86==
76
4 Results
Figure 4.23: Organization correlation matrix: Clustered Version (Danish organiza-
tions in red).
==PAGE:87==
4.3 Micro Level: Technological Capabilities and Organizations
77
Figure 4.24: Country correlation profile: Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:88==
78
4 Results
Figure 4.25: Country correlation profile: Novozymes AS.
4.3.3
Comparing organizations
In order to prove the concept of comparing the capabilities of two organizations, the
Technical University of Denmark and the University of Tsinghua were selected. These
organizations are similar by a factor of about 70%, and for this reason the differences
in the usage of term pairs across documentation is not necessarily important.
Comparing the usage of all term pairs and then ordering the absolute relative
difference, resulted in Table 4.15. Here, the top 20 term pairs that differed mostly in
usage between these organizations are presented. The first observation to be made
is the fact that several of these term pairs are simply not used by one organization.
“Biodiesel-hydrolysis” and “sorghum-fermentation” for example, are simply not used
by DTU; however, they both appear in 1.15% of all documents owned by Tsinghua
University.
Another interesting note is the difference in terms of feedstocks used.
Tsinghua University for example, uses “sewage” and “waste” and “gasoline” in a
more important way, while on the other side, “algae-anaerobic digestion” is not used
==PAGE:89==
4.3 Micro Level: Technological Capabilities and Organizations
79
at all.
4.3.4
Collaborations
A particularity of the micro level analysis is the study of the types of collaboration
made between organizations. By applying the same methodology as section 4.2.3.1
for each organization in the list, details about the nature of the collaborations that
were put in place was obtained. By filtering these partners, and detecting the word
”Univ” in their names, the program designed was able to detect the nature of the
collaboration, and categorize them into “University Partnerships” or “Organizational
Partnerships”.
In the two bar charts below, the organizations in the database are ordered accord-
ing to the percentage of partnerships of Universities.
Figure 4.26, presents all of the organizations in the original list. The Agricultural
Research Service (ARS) appears in the first position with 70% of partnerships made
with universities and 30% with other organizations. Approximately a third of the
organizations queried, have no university partnerships, and only collaborate with
businesses or organizations. The Danish organizations and universities (in red), all
collaborate with universities, the one that does so the least is “Riso DTU”, where
university partnerships make up for approximately 48% of all collaborations. When
looking at businesses, Novozymes’ collaborations are 60% with universities, and Dong
Energy 57%.
The second chart, Figure 4.27 is derived from the first, but on the x axis, only
universities are presented. DTU, for example, is balanced in terms of university and
organizational collaborations with ratios of 58% and 42% respectively. On the other
side of the spectrum, two Brazilian universities (Universidade Federal do Parana
and Universidade Estadual de Campinas) and one Canadian university (University
of Alberta), only collaborate with businesses and research organizations.
There are no organizations that collaborate exclusively with universities, but or-
ganizations that collaborate exclusively with non-universities do exist. Moreover, the
Danish organizations in focus (red) all collaborate with universities in at least 50%
of their shared assets. Finally over half of the non-universities queried, collaborate
almost exclusively with other non-universities.
==PAGE:90==
80
4 Results
First Term
Second Term
DTU
TSINGHUA
Difference %
bioethanol
fermentation
0.656250
0.188679
0.467571
anaerobic digestion
biogas
0.828125
0.452830
0.375295
ethanol
fermentation
0.734375
0.490566
0.243809
anaerobic digestion
algae
0.218750
0.000000
0.218750
anaerobic digestion
biodiesel
0.203125
0.000000
0.203125
hydrolysis
biogas
0.203125
0.000000
0.203125
biodiesel
transesterification
0.171875
0.000000
0.171875
ethanol
catalysis
0.171875
0.000000
0.171875
biogas
manure
0.203125
0.037736
0.165389
straw
fermentation
0.203125
0.037736
0.165389
ethanol
bioethanol
0.218750
0.075472
0.143278
methanol
catalysis
0.140625
0.000000
0.140625
methanol
transesterification
0.140625
0.000000
0.140625
ethanol
transesterification
0.140625
0.000000
0.140625
hydrolysis
bioethanol
0.250000
0.113208
0.136792
fermentation
sorghum
0.000000
0.132075
0.132075
hydrolysis
biodiesel
0.000000
0.132075
0.132075
hydrolysis
cellulose
0.187500
0.056604
0.130896
ethanol
straw
0.203125
0.075472
0.127653
algae
biogas
0.125000
0.000000
0.125000
Table 4.15: Term pair comparison of DTU and Tsinghua University.
Figure 4.26: Collaboration by type of partnership: All organizations.
==PAGE:91==
4.3 Micro Level: Technological Capabilities and Organizations
81
Figure 4.27: Collaboration by type of partnership: Universities.
4.3.5
Organizational spectrums
Similarly to the analysis and results carried out in section 4.2.5, the same approach
was applied to organizations.
When observing the first representation of the organization spectrums (Figure
4.28) for DTU, Novozymes, the University of California Berkeley and Tsinghua Uni-
versity, one can notice immediately some differences and similarities between the
organizations and the source of their differences. Some term pairs such as “sugar/-
cellulose” appear in all of the 4 organizations. While others are exclusive to some
organizations such as “willow/miscanthus” for DTU or “paper/grass” for the Univer-
sity of Berkeley. This representative visualization serves as a proof of concept to the
following one, where all of the countries and term-pairs are presented.
In the full picture visualization (A.7), the countries were ordered according to the
result of the hierarchical clustering of section 4.2.2. The first observation to be made
is related to the long vertical lines along all of the organizational spectrums, these
long bars are the representation of term pairs that are widely used by a large num-
==PAGE:92==
82
4 Results
ber of organizations, thus producing this effect. Moreover, some of the organizational
spectrums seem more widely distributed than others. For instance, the organizational
spectrum of Shell (5th to bottom) has a number of condensed black areas correspond-
ing to many interrelated term pairs; on the other hand, the organizational spectrum
of DTU appears to be more diverse and well distributed. Finally, one can note that
the quality of clustering, this is because organizations and groups of organizations
that use the same term pairs appear closer together.
Figure 4.28: Organizational spectrums: Limited to 45 term pairs and 4 organiza-
tions.
==PAGE:93==
4.4 Patents and Publications
83
4.4
Patents and Publications
4.4.1
Patent and Publication Matrix: Characterisation and
differences
In this first part of the complementary analysis, the focus will not be in the macro,
meso or micro level, but rather in comparison of two different types of assets present
in the database, particularly patents and scientific publications. As a first result of
the analysis, is the creation of two capability matrixes, one for patents and another
for scientific publications. These matrices, represented as heat maps in Figure 4.29,
are obtained through the same term-pair approach in conjunction with a filtering of
the technological assets by type.
Figure 4.29: Heat maps of the capability matrices for patents and publications.
Following the same approach as before, and with the goal of understanding the
differences in terms of utilization of different term pairs between patents and publica-
tions, these two normalized matrices were compared. As a result, a table of the most
divergent term pairs in terms of usage was created (Table 4.16). Here, one can see
the term pairs that are more published than patented and vice-versa, ordered by the
absolute difference in percentage of utilization. For example, in the first position, the
term pair “biogas-ethanol/anaerobic digestion” is used in 36% of publications, but
only 0.44% in patents. Moreover, it should be noted that most of the term pairs in
this table are either processing technologies (e.g. anaerobic digestion, fermentation,
pyrolysis, hydrolysis) or output terms (e.g. biogas, ethanol), and that the presence
==PAGE:94==
84
4 Results
of feedstock term pairs is rather unimportant.
4.4.2
Evolution of asset types over time
In order to study the evolution of the systems of the two types of assets over time, the
total number of records of each type from 1990 until 2017 was plotted in Figure 4.30.
An explosion in the number of assets can be noted from the year of 2007, moreover,
there seems to be a sharp downfall of the total number of assets from 2015. When
comparing patents and publications, while the years of 2004-2010 have a far superior
number of patent assets over published assets, this trend seems to be overcome after
that same period, following a sharp rise in published assets.
First Term
Second Term
Patents
Publications
Difference
anaerobic digestion
biogas
0.000488
0.016448
0.015960
pyrolysis
bio-oil
0.000561
0.008202
0.007641
bioethanol
fermentation
0.002560
0.009282
0.006722
hydrolysis
bioethanol
0.001609
0.006748
0.005139
biodiesel
catalysis
0.000488
0.005337
0.004850
biogas
waste
0.001439
0.006182
0.004743
butanol
fermentation
0.006925
0.002377
0.004548
ethanol
catalysis
0.000317
0.004606
0.004289
ethanol
butanol
0.005364
0.001115
0.004250
ethanol
pressing
0.004828
0.000601
0.004227
biodiesel
transesterification
0.002975
0.007192
0.004217
anaerobic digestion
waste
0.000415
0.004441
0.004026
ethanol
enzymatic hydrolysis
0.002585
0.006574
0.003989
hydrolysis
biogas
0.001170
0.004937
0.003767
methanol
catalysis
0.000073
0.003474
0.003401
Table 4.16: Top term pairs usage differences in Patents and Publications. Percent-
ages are 0-1.
==PAGE:95==
4.4 Patents and Publications
85
Figure 4.30: Evolution of biofuel patents and publications from 1990 until 2017.
Furthermore, another focus of this subsection is to understand how different terms
are patented vs. published. As a proof of concept, 8 feedstock terms were chosen
(waste, algae, cellulose, sugar, paper, wood, residues and corn) and their evolution
over the period of time of 1990-2017 was studied. In Figure A.8, both the normalized
and absolute versions are shown. Where one shows the total number of assets of
each type with that term, the other shows the number of assets as a ratio of the total
number of assets in that year. It can be noted that the behavior of the different terms
follows the general pattern: they appear more in patents until a certain moment in
time, and after that period, they appear more in scientific publications.
4.4.3
Term distribution by type of asset
The final part of this complementary analysis, seeks to understand the behavior of the
different types of terms (feedstocks, processing technologies, and outputs) in terms of
their balance in presence in patents or publications.
To understand this, the same approach was applied to 3 groups. In this approach
all of the different terms are plotted in a graph where the x axis corresponds to
percentage of patents, and the y axis corresponds to the publications.
A perfect
balance would align the terms perfectly following the x=y curve (a term is as patented
as published). The further away from the x=y diagonal the data point is, the bigger
the bias (towards publications or patents) towards one type of technological asset.
Though the three different groups were analyzed in this subsection we will focus
on feedstocks as a proof of concept. As can be noted in Figure 4.31, there seems
to be a relative balance between publications and patents in the case of feedstocks.
==PAGE:96==
86
4 Results
Moreover, in Table 4.17, the assets with the biggest distance to x=y were printed.
The term “starch” for example, has a bias towards patents (3.04%) when comparing
to publications (0.88%). However, when counting the global number of feedstocks, in
170 terms, 80 appear more in patents and 90 appear more in publications.
Figure 4.31: Distribution of Feedstock terms across asset type.
After analyzing the three different types of terms, another graph was produced,
where all of the different biofuel related terms appear (Figure 4.32). It can be observed
that, in a general manner, most terms have a rather low patenting and publication
rate. Furthermore, a big discrepancy does not seem to exist between patents and
publications when looking at all of the terms
==PAGE:97==
4.4 Patents and Publications
87
Name
Patent
Publications
Distance to Mean
Bias
starch
0.030417
0.008816
0.015274
Patents
grain
0.029412
0.008946
0.014472
Patents
agriculture
0.008798
0.024893
0.011381
Publications
sugar
0.064605
0.050823
0.009745
Patents
waste water
0.006662
0.020420
0.009729
Publications
algae
0.077049
0.063788
0.009376
Patents
paper
0.031674
0.044470
0.009048
Publications
blend
0.023504
0.010956
0.008873
Patents
energy crops
0.004022
0.016271
0.008661
Publications
sewage
0.010935
0.022689
0.008311
Publications
Table 4.17: Most unbalanced feedstock terms.
Figure 4.32: Distribution of all biofuel related terms by type.
==PAGE:98==
88
4 Results
4.5
Technological Capabilities: An Alternative
Approach
In the final part of the complementary analysis, two unsupervised learning methods
will be applied to the dataset at the meso level. In this approach, instead of focusing
on term-pairs, the methodology will be based on simple term frequency.
By sim-
plifying the approach, one can possibly compare this approach with the one used
throughout the analysis.
4.5.1
T-SNE algorithm implementation
The first step of the analysis is the creation of a matrix, X where each row represents
a country, and each column a term related to biofuels. Each entry of that matrix
corresponds to the number of times that particular term was used in documentation
located in that. Finally, each row of that matrix was normalized in relation to the
documents produced by that country. For example, the country of the US was divided
by the total number of documents located in it. As a result, X has the shape (137,
352) which corresponds to 137 countries and 352 terms.
After creating this matrix, the t-sne algorithm was applied to it. The t-Distributed
Stochastic Neighbor Embedding algorithm serves as a way of visualizing high dimen-
sional data, in a two or three dimensional way((Maaten 2018)). For example, matrix
X has a total of 352 dimensions, this number of elements is simply not possible to vi-
sualize. The algorithm applies a mathematical transformation that turns this matrix
into a (137, 2) or (137,3) matrix, turning the visualization possible.
This algorithm can be fed with two arguments, the number of iterations and the
perplexity. In general, the author of the algorithm advises the use of a perplexity
parameter between 30-100. In Figure 4.33, the application of this algorithm with
different values of perplexity can be observed. In them, each data point corresponds
to one country, and the color-scale provides context as to the “richness” of that
country (using the GDP per capita). The application does not result in any type
of noticeable clustering, however, one can observe that from a perplexity of about
30, countries with a higher GDP per capita appear to be centered in the plot, while
countries with lower GDP per capita, appear scattered around them.
==PAGE:99==
4.5 Technological Capabilities: An Alternative Approach
89
Figure 4.33: Application of the t-sne algorithm at the meso level.
4.5.2
Hierarchical clustering based on term frequency
The final result to be presented in this section is the result of application of hierarchi-
cal clustering in two different ways: Using term frequency first, and using term-pair
frequency after. For both applications hierarchical clustering using the average dis-
tance was applied.
In the first figure (Figure 4.34), the dendogram that resulted from the application
of hierarchical clustering to the term frequency matrix X is presented. When cut-
ting the dendrogram where cluster have a size of 20 or less countries, the group that
contains Denmark also contains the following countries: Austria, Belgium, Czech Re-
public, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Netherlands,
Norway, Poland, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.
In the second figure (Figure 4.35), the same algorithm was applied to a matrix
containing term-pairs - as in the main analysis presented in this section. When cutting
the dendogram at the same level, Denmark’s cluster also contains: Canada, Finland,
France, Germany, India, Italy, Netherlands, China, Poland, Portugal, South Korea,
Spain, Sweden, Taiwan, the United Kingdom and the US.
When observing both dendogram, one can notice that generally, the term-pair
application seems to have more balanced clustering: Clusters are more equivalent in
sizes, and the distance of the clustering (y-axis) is well distributed.
==PAGE:100==
90
4 Results
Figure 4.34: Hierarchical Clustering applied to the country level: Using term fre-
quency approach.
Figure 4.35: Hierarchical Clustering applied to the country level: Using term-pair
frequency approach.
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion and
Perspectives
This chapter of the project will focus on creating a discussion and providing the
author’s perspectives on the results described in the previous chapter. Before diving
into it, it should be noted that not all of the results will be discussed extensively, but
only the ones that are related to the research questions. The chapter contains the
following sections:
• Macro Level Analysis: A discussion and interpretation of the world-level results,
including static and dynamic year-to-year analyses.
• Meso Level Analysis: A discussion and interpretation of the most relevant
country-level results.
• Micro Level Analysis: A discussion and interpretation of the most relevant
organisation-level results including important considerations on how organiza-
tions interact in relation to their technological capabilities related to biofuels.
• Complementary Analysis: A discussion of the outcomes of the patent and pub-
lications analysis as well as an interpretation of the alternative methodologies
used.
Each section will finish with a discussion of limitations.
==PAGE:102==
92
5 Discussion and Perspectives
5.1
Macro Level: Time
A look at the whole dataset
The first result worth discussing is related to the application of the developed model
to the whole database overall years.
When applying clustering to the capability matrix of the entire database, the
natural relationships between every term can be observed. As described, the most
related terms appear together in this clustering. For example, terms related to sugar,
straw, waster or wood, show a high relationship in terms of usage. This serves as
a validation and proof that in fact, the clustering makes sense.
It is interesting
to discuss two different phenomena that resulted from this analysis.
First, most
terms are clustered because of their scientific similarity, this happens particularly
to feedstock terms. Secondly, some other terms such as outputs, are clustered in a
not so linear form. For example, biogas, ethanol, and other types of fuels are also
clustered. This second clustering can be due to a variety of factors, one possibility is
the fact that they are researched using the same feedstocks or processing technologies.
Another possibility is the fact that they are clustered for being intensely researched,
and the “the goal” of most technological assets.
Correlation of Years
When observing the capability correlation matrix of the years, and particularly its
clustered version, one cannot help but notice that as time goes on, years are increas-
ingly related to each other. For example, the last 7 years (2010-2017) form a cluster
where their correlation is of at least 70%. On the other hand, from 2004 to about
2009, years have on average a far inferior correlation between themselves. Finally,
the years before 2004, make up the cluster of less related years. This might indicate
a decrease in the experimentation in the field of biofuels research in the years of 2004-
2009, and a consequent consolidation of the field in the modern years. This increase
in consolidation can be related to factors such as: globalization, increase of knowledge
sharing, the prevalence of information systems such as the internet, or even others.
Looking at the correlation of years with the year before, there appear to be years
that somehow are almost unrelated to years before. From 1999 to 2001, the correla-
==PAGE:103==
5.1 Macro Level: Time
93
tion seems to increase until it drops considerably in 2002, and then regularly increases.
This seems to indicate that there are “gaps” or “breaks” in scientific research partic-
ularly apparent in the years of 2002 and 2006. These gaps might be related to a
change in scientific direction, the appearance of a breakthrough technology, or more
generally, something that leads researchers to stop using a certain set of term combi-
nations and start using a different one. Moreover, this correlation behaviour might
be connected to the fact that in earlier years, less data is available, and therefore
sparser, leading to a lower correlation (see limitations).
Another interesting concept worth noting and that can be easily validated is re-
lated to the concept of first, second, and third generation biofuels (Saladini et al.
2016). First generation biofuels are mainly related to crops and feedstocks related to
human consumption, second generation biofuels are related to non-human consum-
able feedstocks and third generation biofuels which are related to aquatic feedstock.
The normalized evolution of terms is compatible with this concept. When looking at
the evolution of algae, sugar and wood, one can notice that sugar has a considerable
usage in early years, wood follows with a high frequency after 1995. Finally, in recent
years, the prevalence of the term algae is clear.
In summary, there are several models and reasons that can explain the relationship
between the years and the evolution of the research landscape. One should note that
the terms in the framework are based in all years; therefore, it is normal that the
matrix is more and more saturated as the years go by.
Comparison of Years
When comparing two years in the database and the main term pairs that make up
their capability matrices. Some results are worth discussing.
In the case of the comparison of 2010 and 2017, the years have the same term pairs
generally speaking. However, the percentages of these term pairs can differ greatly.
This leads to the belief that the research ecosystem is more “distributed” than older
years. This somehow confirms the considerations in the previous section.
Furthermore, it is also interesting to note some areas of research that have highly
increased or decreased in frequency.
This behaviour supports the fact that some
areas of research lose or gain interest over time. The reasons behind the behaviour
can range from a general loss of interest, commercialization, or general trend towards a
==PAGE:104==
94
5 Discussion and Perspectives
particular research area. Anaerobic digestion for example sees an increase of about 1%,
which can indicate a focus of the ecosystem on this particular processing technology.
Although 1% might not sound like such an important increase, if the global panorama
is considered, this has weight.
The comparison of two years and the calculation of the Pearson correlation index,
also serves as a proxy for their similarity. This similarity (or lack of) can be due to a
high number of small changes in term pair usage (likely), a number of large changes
(less likely), or a combination of both (likely).
Contextualization
The contextualization part of this analysis is perhaps one of its most interesting as-
pects. This is because it tries to understand the relationship between certain external
factors and the research ecosystem.
The adjusted price of barrel of oil is an indicator that was chosen mainly due
to its reach as an external factor. The price of oil is known to influence a series of
macro and micro economic indexes. When comparing it to the frequency of output
terms over the years in the research ecosystem, some correlations are surprisingly
high (butanol 85%, bioplastic 80%). A positive correlation means that the higher
the price of oil, the bigger the number of produced records with that term. Several
factors could explain this:
• Oil becomes more valuable, and therefore biofuels become more valuable as a
way of addressing competition. This could lead to increased research.
• Oil becomes expensive, and companies look for alternate fuels, therefore increas-
ing R&D focus on alternatives.
Butanol, biodiesel, and bioethanol are all used as alternative fuels, and all have a
correlation of at least 70%. To understand more exactly the nature of this relationship,
more research would need to be carried out, perhaps even a time series analysis.
The price of the kilo of sugar and its influence on the biofuel research ecosystem
comes to evidence a more important series of facts, but also questions. One would
naturally think that the price of sugar affects “sugar related” research. The analysis
carried out confirms this: sugarcane and cellulosic sugars for instance, have an 80%
==PAGE:105==
5.1 Macro Level: Time
95
correlation with the price of sugar. However, when trying to understand exactly why
if the price of a good increases, the research using that same good also increases,
some questions surface. One would hope that if the price of goods increase, access
to them becomes more economically challenging, and therefore research using them
would decrease, causing a negative correlation. An opposing view is that as these
goods become more valuable, the interest in it from an R&D perspective becomes
greater. For now, this research can confirm that a relationship between the price of
goods and their research exists, but the nature of it remains to be determined.
Limitations
When studying the system at a macro level, there are a few limitations that should
be pointed out.
Firstly, the study is related to the entire system in a given year. This might not
seem big, but in fact, the study is related to all of the patents and publications, from
every organization, in every country in the world. One can therefore expect that a
big part of the chronological behaviour is rather “smooth”. This is because it is very
possible that a certain phenomenon self-corrects when looking at the whole world.
The system per se can be categorized as saturated.
Secondly, the volume of data along the years is not regular. In fact, there is an
explosion of the number of technological assets in the more recent years. Although
this was addressed by normalizing, one cannot forget the fact that the quality of
documentation and general access to information has improved in the last years,
causing recent documentation to be far richer than previously . This might make the
analysis rather unbalanced, chronologically.
Finally, the use of the Pearson correlation index can also be seen as a limitation.
Although this indicator is mathematically accurate in describing the relationship be-
tween two functions, it can be scarce in providing more information about the exact
nature of a relationship. When analyzing the influence of external factors such as the
price of sugar, carrying a time series analysis would allow a better understanding of
the nature of the behavior observed.
==PAGE:106==
96
5 Discussion and Perspectives
5.2
Meso Level: Countries
Country Correlations
When observing the correlations in the correlation matrix produced in the results
there is a wide range of possible interpretations. However, some hypothesis can be
formulated as to the configuration of this clustering.
Language can play a big role as to the correlation of countries: the UK and USA
have a 68% correlation, China and Taiwan a 70% correlation.
Distance between
countries also seems to be a source of correlation between them; Costa Rica and
Guatemala have between themselves a correlation of 71% and a low correlation with
every country with the exception of Brazil. However, there are some relationships
that can be due to other factors such as economic partnerships (South Korea and USA
- 65%), climate (Brazil, Zimbabwe and Philippines >80%), or simply the volume of
research activity (the case of India).
Moreover, some relationships would need a
higher level of investigation to be understood, such as the high correlation (>58%) of
Denmark with Portugal and Spain.
GDP per capita
In order to provide further context as to the reasons for the correlation among the
capability of different countries, as suggested by literature, the GDP per capita of
countries was extensively used.
One general trend that is worth commenting on is the fact that most country pairs
are locked in an “area” characterized by a low GDP per capita difference (<40000$)
accompanied by a low capability correlation among themselves (<40%).
The highest capability correlations are more frequent as the GDP per capita differ-
ence decreases. In fact, countries such as Brazil and Zimbabwe, which have a similar
GDP per capita but a very high capability correlation (88%). On the other hand,
some country pairs such as Denmark and India, or the US and China counter this
trend, with high divergences in terms of GDP and high correlations, due perhaps to
the unbalanced economic development of certain countries.
Generally speaking, the introduction of the average GDP per capita of a country
pair comes to confirm the fact that lower GDP differences are related to a higher
==PAGE:107==
5.2 Meso Level: Countries
97
capability correlation. This can be related perhaps to the fact that countries that
are closer to each other tend to have a more similar economic capability, and more
collaboration, but this cannot be said for certainty.
Collaborations
When studying the collaborations and similarity of countries a general trend surfaces:
most countries are different in terms of capability and do not collaborate among
themselves. This was expected.
All countries that are similar and collaborate are European Union countries (Por-
tugal, Germany, Austria, Italy, and Belgium). This could indicate that the EU is a
driving force of collaboration but that collaboration is not necessarily “innovative”,
since the countries are similar in terms of research. Moreover, in the global landscape,
countries that are similar tend to not collaborate, which seems counterintuitive, but
for purposes of innovation makes sense.
Furthermore, most collaborations are made of countries that are different in capa-
bility (Canada-Kuwait, El Salvador-Germany, France-Lebanon), rather than similar.
This would indicate that most countries decide that collaboration is a way of accessing
a research space that they have previously not seen, instead of a way of intensifying
the research into their core areas of interest. This is the example of pairs such as
France-Lebanon, Canada-Kuwait, Germany-Ukraine, Hungary-UK. The factors that
lead to these relationships seem to be a mix of historic, economic and political factors.
Comparing Countries
When comparing countries, in the particular case of Brazil and Denmark there is one
interpretation that could be made. The top term pairs in the Denmark capability
matrix are highly related to outputs or processing technologies such as biogas, ethanol,
or fermentation. The only feedstock term that appears in Denmark’s top terms is
“straw”. On the other hand, looking at Brazil, there is a high prevalence of sugar,
sugarcane and other feedstocks.
This can indicate that countries that have a higher prevalence of a certain indus-
try/ raw material tend to focus their research in that particular term and what they
can use it for. While on the other hand, countries that are less reliant on a particular
==PAGE:108==
98
5 Discussion and Perspectives
raw material tend to focus on the outputs and results of that research, without giving
so much importance to the raw material that is used.
Country Spectrums
The country spectrum is enlightening as to the extreme heterogeneity and inequality
in the world of research.
Most of the spectrum is empty which indicates that most countries have very little
research when comparing to others. In contrast, the US is particularly impressive as
its spectrum is almost entirely completed. This would mean that the US uses almost
all term pairs that appear in the database. This can be due to their tradition in
leading the research field, their economic development or even the intensive patenting
culture. Other countries such as China or India only come close it.
The spectrum also shows if a country is adopting one of two strategies: focusing on
certain areas, or distributing its capability across areas. Brazil for instance, seems to
follow the first strategy distributing its interest in certain areas across the spectrum,
one of them probably related to sugar. The second strategy is the one use by bigger
players such as the US, India, or even China which have widely spread research
interests.
Uniqueness
The uniqueness index comes to confirm the previous premise, the US leads with
almost 50% uniqueness. Which means that most term pairs used by the country are
only used by it. This shows not only the intensity of research but also the amount of
innovation and accessing unresearched areas. When comparing to countries of similar
size, such as China, one can say that the US is 40% more unique than China (10%),
which sounds impressive. However, does more term usage necessarily indicate more
innovation? Or more saturation?
Interestingly, there is a very large number of small countries in the uniqueness
ranking such as Ukraine, Lebanon, Cyprus, or Bangladesh. This could mean that
countries with no particular research intensity and low economic development tend
to focus on areas that are special to them, or their location, and relatively “exotic”.
Possibly this is made through collaborations (France-Lebanon example) where a more
==PAGE:109==
5.2 Meso Level: Countries
99
established country accesses an untapped area through a small country with a par-
ticular capability, using it as a “research proxy”.
Limitations
The first limitation worth mentioning is the usage of the Pearson correlation index.
Similarly to the macro analysis, the Pearson correlation index can be criticized by
not giving the full picture when comparing countries and establishing a correlation
matrix between them.
The second limitation is related to the use of the GDP as contextual information
additional to the correlation index.
Throughout the literature, several other eco-
nomic, social and political indicators are used to explain the innovation in countries
(Filippetti, A., Peyrache, A., 2011). Therefore it can be seen as naive to only use one
indicator. It is interesting to think of other indicators that could further explain the
relation between technological capabilities of countries: language, population, educa-
tion, or even geography. Moreover, the relationships might also be a combination of
different factors rather than a consequence of one.
The third limitation is related to collaboration. Throughout the analysis, a divi-
sion was made between countries that collaborate and countries that do not. However,
there is no quantitative index for “collaboration”, only the number of collaborations
between two entities, For example, should countries that only worked once together,
be seen as countries that collaborate, or should it be only considered as collaboration
if they collaborate more than X times?
The fourth and final limitation worth mentioning is the spectral representation
used to display the capabilities of countries. The sheer amount of term pairs in the
database makes the visualizations rather difficult. Although an effort was made to
reduce this number, some countries appear as almost empty spectrums while in fact,
they used term pairs (as can be seen by the data).
==PAGE:110==
100
5 Discussion and Perspectives
5.3
Micro Level: Organizations
Organizational Correlations
When creating the correlation matrix of organizations and directly comparing it with
the matrix of correlations at the meso level, several differences stand out.
Generally speaking, the correlations of organizations are more scattered and spread
out. For instance, the matrix is made of a higher number of clusters of correlation
that vary in the size of its organizations. The cluster that contains the Technical
University of Denmark for example, is quite diverse: with presence of universities
from China, the US, Singapore, Portugal and Sweden. This particular cluster is only
made of universities and contains no businesses or associations. Other clusters follow
this pattern, the fact of being made of only a particular type of institution, which
means that universities and the industry still have a “gap” between them.
When focusing on organizations another pattern emerges, these are rarely highly
related to other organizations, and instead only strongly connected to a smaller num-
ber of institutions. Finally, one can say that universities tend to aggregate themselves
in clusters of innovation, while organizations tend to be more dynamic and targeted in
their capabilities. This because the correlation matrix seems to separate universities
and businesses. Thinking of the university-industry relationships, these relationships
seem to be in the early stages of development: organizations are still “shy” in what
regards the targeting of capabilities, while universities are more open and related to
themselves.
Comparing Organizations
The organizational profiles of correlation are very good proxies for the innovation
strategy that organizations follow. On one side, universities have a fuller spectrum
with a higher average correlation, which indicates a more scattered field of capability.
On the other side, organizations have a lower average which indicated that they focus
on particular areas of interest in a more “closed” fashion.
The Technical University of Denmark is a good example of the above. The top 5
organizations that are more related to it, 3 are Chinese universities, with correlations
upwards of 65%. The Chinese university of Tsinghua follows the same pattern. On
==PAGE:111==
5.3 Micro Level: Organizations
101
the other hand, American universities are characterized by higher collaboration with
associations (ARS, CSIR) and other American universities.
Finally the comparison tables between DTU and Tsinghua Universities are a good
example of how a high correlation expresses itself. The top 10 tables of term pairs
have 7 term pairs in common. This indicates that the research strategies of these
two universities are extremely aligned, at least in terms of area.
This could also
be an expression of research partnerships, which are known to exist between these
institutions (Tsinghua 2018), and would be a good quantitative measure of the success
of these partnerships.
Collaborations
The characterization of the nature of collaborations has several aspects worth dis-
cussing.
On the first hand, most universities (more than 90%) appear to have at least
some sort of collaboration with other universities, which is an expression of the above
hypotheses. Danish universities are particularly well classified in the spectrum with all
having at least 60% of collaborations made with other universities. This same pattern
occurs in Chinese and American universities. However, the bottom 4 universities that
collaborates the least with other universities are the 2 Brazilian and the 2 Canadian
institutions. This might be related to several factors: the fact that these countries are
vast in size and their universities are “isolated”, or the fact the organizations in these
countries do not see value in academic collaboration. A report was found (Montreal
Metropolitain 2011) where 37% of Canadian organizations did not find collaboration
with universities to be relevant for example.
On the other hand, while observing non-universities, the landscape is quite the
opposite. Most organizations simply do not collaborate with universities of any sort.
This is more evidence of the fact that organizations are still closed to outside ventures.
Of the organizations that collaborate with universities, most are associations such
as ARS, ACAD, or USDA ARS. Which could mean that associations serve as a
bridge between universities and the industry. Meanwhile, Danish organizations such
as Novozymes or Dong Energy tend to go against this trend by collaborating more
intensely with universities, this might be due to cultural factors (more openness to
industry-university collaborations in Denmark), or strategic factors.
==PAGE:112==
102
5 Discussion and Perspectives
In summary, perfect university-industry collaboration seems to be still in its very
early stages. Universities form clusters of academic partnerships and collaborations,
but industry is still cautious, and reserved in opening up. Denmark is one of the
countries “swimming against the current” and investing more seriously in these types
of collaborations which is clearly shown by the data.
Limitations
The first limitation that was the most challenging in this subchapter of the analy-
sis was related to the database itself. The AMICa pathfinder project successfully
organized a database where every asset was connected to an owner. However, this
characterization is not perfect, particularly in the names of organizations across the
database, some names are not particularly well formatted, and other organizations
are repeated under different names. This is a consequence of the fact that the AMICa
project mixed a number of different databases. Although this does not seem to affect
the “big picture” perspective, it could have some repercussions such as misinterpre-
tation etc.
The collaboration part of this analysis was based on the simple detection of the
string ‘Univ’ in an organization’s name.
Although this serves as a good proof of
concept, not all universities and academic institutions use ‘Univ’ in their name, which
could distort some of the collaboration numbers.
Finally, throughout the micro analysis, a distinction between Universities and
Non-universities was made. However, the world is made of a wide range of different
types of organizations: universities, businesses, associations, research centers, and
more (Etzkowitz, 2001). Therefore, this simplification is limitative on the type of
conclusions that could be drawn.
5.4
Complementary Analysis
Publications and Patents
When discussing the patents and publications analysis, the analysis tried to under-
stand if they are unbalanced or if there is a presence of out of the ordinary behaviour.
==PAGE:113==
5.4 Complementary Analysis
103
Normally, one would expect scientific publications to lead the way in quantity:
this is confirmed by the data. In fact, there is sharp rise in the number of scientific
publications related to biofuels from 2006 to 2016. But contrary to what one would
expect, patents are at the origin of this explosion, in fact, between 2006 and 2011,
patents were more important. What appears to happen is that patents are guiding
the direction of research, when their number rises; publications tend to rise, with
some delay. When patents fall, publications fall sharply. This could be explained by
the fact that biofuels is an “industry first” technology and that it is also becoming
a more mature technology which is way past its exploration phase.
This pattern
repeats when looking at particular feedstock terms, where a small change in the rate
of patenting, seems to disturb the rate of research on that particular term, with a
certain delay.
When looking at the rate of patenting and the rate of publication of every term,
one can notice the terms that are more mature and the ones that are still in the
research/publication stage. Generally speaking, there seems to be a balance between
patenting and publication of every term. One would expect some terms to be lost in
the research phase and not adopted by patenting, but the imbalance of some terms
(such anaerobic digestion) might be indicative that these are still in its research phase
and will be adopted later.
Some of the limitations of this complementary study include the fact that an
analysis on the global ecosystem is being made, which is quite saturated on that
scale. Moreover, in order to really understand the relationship between patenting
and publications, a time series analysis would be perhaps more telling. Finally, the
fact that terms instead of term-pairs were used for this analysis can also be seen as
a limitation, since the observation of term-pairs tends to add more granularity. This
of course would have to be done carefully due to the very high number of term pairs.
Alternative Methods
One other part of the complementary analysis was the application of some unsuper-
vised learning techniques to the data, in order to find some patterns.
However, both the application of the principal component analysis and the t-sne
algorithm showed that these techniques are not as directly applicable and explanatory
==PAGE:114==
104
5 Discussion and Perspectives
as the system perspective. This is because the clustering of different countries was
not directly evident from the application of the transformations.
An obvious limitation of this study is the study level for this part of the analysis. A
very large number of other techniques for clustering, association mining, and density
estimation exist for inferring a structure to data. However, the application of these
techniques was deemed to be out of the scope of this thesis.
Clustering Quality
When comparing the quality of the clusters made with term frequency and term-pair
frequency, the fact that term pair produces a much cleaner and reasonable clustering
is quite obvious. In fact, just as predicted by the AMICa pathfinder briefing, a term
per se is much less explanatory than the several associations to it.
For example
if only observing the term “anaerobic digestion”, all of the countries that use this
processing technology would be deemed similar. But if we observe the term pairs
“sugar/anaerobic digestion” and “wood/anaerobic digestion”, then the clustering will
consider these as different features and cluster the countries that use each of them
separately, therefore providing much more granularity to the analysis.
Of course, judging the clustering quality only conceptually and visually can be
seen as a limitation. Techniques such as the Rand index, the Jaccard similarity, or
the entropy of partitions exist to provide context on the clustering made. Although
the application of these indicators is not in the range of this project , these could be
applied with relative simplicity.
==PAGE:115==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In the final chapter of this project, a conclusion on the most important aspects of it
will be made. The main focus of this part will be on the implications for academia
and industry. The sections in this chapter are:
• Implications for theory: Here, the most relevant connections between the liter-
ature review and the project will be pointed out.
• Implications for practice: An overview of the main consequences this project
will have for policy makers, industry stakeholders and researchers.
• Further Research: By taking the limitations and conclusions as a starting point,
considerations on further academic research will be drawn.
6.1
Implications for theory
Macro and Meso level
When revisiting the academic study of national innovations systems of countries, most
research focuses on the volume of technological assets, such as patents, produced by
a certain country. Throughout this project, in order to characterize the innovation
or capability of nation, the focus relied on the usage of field related term-pairs. This
allowed us to obtain a more nuanced view on how different countries and regions
conduct research on a certain industry topic. Although the volume of patents is a
good indicator of the intensity of the research from a certain country (Furman, Porter,
and Stern 2002), it fails to describe exactly how this country innovates. Furthermore,
the analysis of industry terms allows for a quantitative comparison of countries, which
the volume of patents does not. For these reasons, it is fair to deduce that in order
==PAGE:116==
106
6 Conclusion
to fully understand the nuances of a country’s research ecosystem, more focus should
be put on industry specific terminology.
The literature review clearly showed that researchers have realized that innovation
capability is related to a number of external indicators: GDP per capita, RD spending,
openness to international trade etc. (Filippetti and Peyrache 2011). Although this
project does not refute this in any way, it does allow for a simple verification of the
relationship between external factors and the national innovation of countries. Just as
was done with the GDP per capita and its relation to the capability correlation matrix,
this project provides a framework which allows the usage of any external indicator
and the consequential visualization of its influence in the research ecosystem. By
doing this, the technological capability framework provides an additional tool that
can help to find the perfect national innovation capacity indicator.
Most NIC studies focus on the evolution of the patenting volume over the course
of a number of years. (Furman, Porter, and Stern 2002) It is worth noting that by
combining the macro and meso levels of the analysis, it is possible to understand how
the capabilities of countries change over time. For example, just as the capability
correlation matrix of countries was produced, one could create one of these for each
year, thus understanding in a deeper manner, the behaviour of the system.
Finally, the last area of the literature review related to the macro and meso level
touched on Hidalgo’s view on economic complexity(Hidalgo and Hausmann 2009).
This project comes to validate the importance of the complexity of an ecosystem as
a way of understanding its behaviour. Furthermore, just as the economic complex-
ity view, this thesis focused on understanding the innovation systems as a network
and the study of its characteristics. This could mean that the economic complexity
methodology and way of thinking are applicable to other areas, such as the study of
technological capability and innovation. The value of the system lies in its complexity,
not in its volume or size.
Micro Level
In what concerns the micro or organizational level, the main focus of the literature re-
view relied on the understanding of how open innovation is expressed in the ecosystem
of research.
==PAGE:117==
6.1 Implications for theory
107
The first part of the analysis touched on open strategy as a crucial part of the open
innovation process (OECD 2008). When looking at the correlations in the industry
and the collaboration landscape between organizations, one cannot help but state
that open strategy seems to be, at least at this moment, a utopian view. Although
universities are intensely collaborating and seeking knowledge outside their premises,
businesses are focused on targeted innovation topics and are very skeptical to the idea
of open collaboration with universities. This would mean that at least in the biofuels
ecosystem, businesses are betting on other types of open strategies, or simply not
interested in pursuing that type of strategy.
In what regards patenting and appropriation of intellectual property (Pénin and
Wack 2008), this project has shown that although patents influence scientific research,
the number of patents has decreased over the last 4-5 years. However, the project
does not seek to understand if this is due to a smaller rate of patenting or simply the
expression of the maturity of a certain technology.
Finally, the study of the nature of the collaborations in the micro level presents
a simple proof of concept that aims at quantifying exactly the triple helix relation-
ships (Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff 2000). Researchers have stressed the importance
of industry-academia-government relationships through case studies and examples.
This project directly quantifies these relationships as a quota of the collaborations
of every organization, thus quantifying the helix. However, in the biofuel ecosystem,
this helix seems to be still in its embryonic phase, at least from the industry side.
Engineering Systems Perspective
This project serves as the direct application of the engineering systems perspective
(Weck et al. 2011) to different levels of analysis of the biofuel research ecosystem.
The first implication that this project has towards theoretical studies on the topic
is the fact that the engineering systems approach is a valid approach to describe,
understand, and study the behaviour of a research ecosystem. Through the appli-
cation of a network or graph based model, visualizations and quantitative studies
(Albert-László Barabási 2016) allowed to deepen the knowledge of the system.
A second implication that this project might have is the demonstration of the
scalability of the engineering systems perspective. By establishing a rigid framework
==PAGE:118==
108
6 Conclusion
of term pairs, and filtering the input of documents, the same set of quantitative tools
can be applicable to different levels of the system.
The third and final implication is the under explored relationship between big data
analytics and the engineering systems view. The access to a large amount of informa-
tion and the understanding of it, is a very serious modern challenge. By combining
the raw information of big data (EURITO, 2018) and the structured thinking of an
engineering systems perspective, several advances can be made in understanding how
the world works.
6.2
Implications for practice
General outcomes
One of the objectives of this work and the AMICa project is to support data-driven
decision making in industry and the public sector. As a result, this work is has impli-
cations for practitioners in both sectors. The following are some general implications
that this project can have:
• The methodology applied to the biofuels research landscape serves as a tool
that allows the understanding and characterization of any research
area. It serves as a set of guidelines that will transform a database of techno-
logical assets into a characterization of the several units that make it, and how
these are connected.
• The workflow applied during this thesis also allows, as demonstrated, to study
a particular research area at different levels, macro, meso and micro.
• This thesis also provides an example of some of the many visualizations and
characterizations that the AMICa pathfinder project can have, and bridges the
gap between industrial mapping and the practical implications of such mapping.
Countries and International Organizations
For countries and international organizations, some of the main practical implications
follow:
==PAGE:119==
6.2 Implications for practice
109
• This project provides answers to relevant international level questions
related to the research ecosystem of biofuels. Through visualizations and
quantifications, one can think of a multitude of other questions that could also
be answered by the application of the same tools.
• Support of transparent decision making was mentioned as one of the main
goals of the project. By developing this research, publishing it, and open sourc-
ing the code that was developed, this framework can be used as a platform
that not only helps countries in understanding the ecosystem but that also sup-
ports transparency in the decision making process. This because of the high
quantitative degree of the analysis.
• By using the work developed in this thesis, countries can use the framework
as a way of evaluating their political strategies. For example, the ‘similar
and collaborating’ countries is proof that the European Union, to some degree,
influences countries to collaborate: this research quantifies it.
• Finally, this project also allows for the discovery of untapped research ar-
eas and the raising of new questions about the research ecosystem and
its functioning. This is critical for the sustainable development of research
and the advance of the scientific field.
For organizations and industry
Some practical implications for organizations, the industry and researchers:
• The first practical implication is that organizations and businesses are now ca-
pable of quantifying and evaluating the success of their innovation
strategies. Similarly to what can be done with financial statistics, organiza-
tions and universities will now be able to see if collaboration or investment in
a particular area actually materialized or not. Moreover, this project will allow
institutions to really understand their capability DNA.
• This analysis will also allow organizations to develop market analyses that
will allow them to elevate the knowledge on a particular research
subject, such as biofuels. This contextualization is crucial to the development
of new innovations in the field.
==PAGE:120==
110
6 Conclusion
• Furthermore, as for countries, organizations and researchers will be able to find
untapped areas where innovation is possible or new partners that
suit a certain strategy. This work thus creates a sandbox for innovation
exploration.
• Finally, this framework allows for the quantification of university-industry-
government collaboration, and consequently gives a method to quantify it.
This is one way in which this project allows a push for open innovation and
industry wide collaboration.
6.3
Further research
The final part of this chapter will establish some recommendations and ideas for
further research on this topic. These recommendations are based on some of the lim-
itations previously established, or were noted during the development of the analysis.
A list of the most important ones follows:
• The most important further research topic is the expansion of the framework
and the experimentation with it in other research areas. As a proof of concept,
this project was based on the biofuels ecosystem; however, it’s certainly inter-
esting to think of the possibilities of its application to other fields. For instance,
after the design of a database one could easily use exactly the same approach.
• The second area of research is related to the relation between external factors
(price of sugar and oil) and the production of technological assets. To study
this, this project used the Pearson correlation, which produced very interesting
results. However, a relationship of this nature should be studied using a time-
series analysis, in order to understand exactly how the behaviour changes (or
not). The application of a time series analysis and a wide range of external
factors is a very interesting research topic.
From its application, one could
understand exactly what moves the research field.
• Although the GDP per capita and the GDP difference between countries was
widely used, academia has shown that these indicators might be just the tip of
the iceberg in explaining the innovation systems of countries. One possibility is
==PAGE:121==
6.3 Further research
111
to dive into this topic is the application of a very large number of indexes (GDP,
HDI, alphabetisation, number of universities etc.) and to study their influence
when comparing to the capability correlation matrix. This is a direct way of
understanding the impact of every index. Moreover, one could mix different
indexes and see which combination better explains the capability correlation
matrix.
• The uniqueness of countries and of their usage of term pairs served as proof of
concept to a notion of “specialization” of countries in a certain area. This could
obviously be expanded to periods of time, or organizations. What made this
year, organization, special? The notion of uniqueness is very valuable in the
context of innovation, and further work should be developed in this area.
• In the study of patents and publications, the volume of terms of every type was
used. A more interesting and granular analysis would be to conduct the same
study but with the usage of term-pairs.
As previously demonstrated, term
pairs provide a richness to the analysis that term frequency simply does not
deliver. Also regarding the complementary analysis, the application of more
unsupervised learning techniques in order to discover other clusters is definitely
an interesting area of research.
• In what regards the study of the nature of collaborations, a very rudimentary
analysis was carried out by the detection of the string ‘Univ’ in the name of
organizations.
One can envision a deeper study into the types of collabora-
tions in the industry, which would serve even better the triple helix quantifi-
cation. Here, a distinction between university-industry, industry-government,
and government-university could be made. To do this, several natural language
processing techniques (such as regex) would have to be used.
==PAGE:122==
112
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX A
Figure Appendix
Figure A.5: Clustered version of the AMICa database capability matrix.
==PAGE:124==
114
A Figure Appendix
Figure A.1: Simplified data model retrieved from the AMICa pathfinder repository (AMICa, 2018).
==PAGE:125==
A Figure Appendix
115
Figure A.2: Normalized quantity of terms over time: Feedstocks.
Figure A.3: Normalized quantity of terms over time: Processing Technologies.
Figure A.4: Normalized quantity of terms over time: Outputs.
==PAGE:126==
116
A Figure Appendix
Figure A.6: Country capability spectrum for all countries (only term pairs that appear in at least 2 countries).
==PAGE:127==
A Figure Appendix
117
Figure A.7: Organizational spectrums: Complete spectrum visualization.
==PAGE:128==
118
A Figure Appendix
Figure A.8: Absolute and relative quantity of assets with a certain feedstock term over time: Patents and publications.
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
Albert-László Barabási (2016). Network Science: February, p. 456. isbn: 978-1107076266.
url: http://barabasi.com/book/network- science{\%}5Cnhttp://www.
amazon.com/Network-Science-Albert-L-225-Barab/dp/1107076269.
AMICa, 2018. url: https://amica-pathfinder.net/ (visited on 05/24/2018).
Assis Mota, Alexandre, Lia Toledo Moreira Mota, and Anfre Morelato (2007). “Visu-
alization of power system restoration plans using CPM/PERT graphs”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems 22.3, pp. 1322–1329. issn: 08858950. doi: 10.
1109/TPWRS.2007.901118. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
4282007/.
Bahar, Dany, Ricardo Hausmann, and Cesar A. Hidalgo (2014). “Neighbors and
the evolution of the comparative advantage of nations: Evidence of international
knowledge diffusion?” In: Journal of International Economics 92.1, pp. 111–123.
issn: 00221996. doi: 10.1016/j.jinteco.2013.11.001. url: https://scholar.
harvard.edu/files/dbaharc/files/bhh-jie.pdf.
Bessant, John (2008). “Dealing with discontinuous innovation: the European expe-
rience”. In: International Journal of Technology Management 42.1/2, p. 36. issn:
0267-5730. doi: 10.1504/IJTM.2008.018059. url: http://www.inderscience.
com/link.php?id=18059.
Blessing, Lucienne T.M. and Amaresh Chakrabarti (2009). DRM, a design research
methodology. Vol. 1, pp. 1–397. isbn: 9781848825864. doi: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 -
84882-587-1. arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3. url: http://books.google.com/
books ? hl = en{\ & }lr = {\ & }id = KdR4OmWtQdIC{\ & }oi = fnd{\ & }pg = PA1{\ &
}dq=DRM, +a+Design+Research+Methodology{\&}ots=Ocn1JOFcN1{\&}sig=
pc7NahqVKKe8U0{\_}ugmMUAbtYm98.
==PAGE:130==
120
Bibliography
Brill, James H. (1998). “Systems engineering? A retrospective view”. In: Systems Engi-
neering 1.4, pp. 258–266. issn: 1098-1241. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1520-6858(1998)
1:4<258::AID-SYS2>3.0.CO;2-E. url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/
{\%}28SICI{\%}291520-6858{\%}281998{\%}291{\%}3A4{\%}3C258{\%}3A{\%
}3AAID-SYS2{\%}3E3.0.CO{\%}3B2-E.
Browning, T. R. (2001). “Applying the design structure matrix to system decompo-
sition and integration problems: A review and new directions”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Engineering Management 48.3, pp. 292–306. issn: 00189391. doi: 10.
1109/17.946528. arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3.
Castellacci, Fulvio and Jose Miguel Natera (2011). “A new panel dataset for cross-
country analyses of national systems, growth and development (CANA)”. In: In-
novation and Development 1.2, pp. 205–226. issn: 2157-930X. doi: 10.1080/
2157930X.2011.605871. url: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.
1080/2157930X.2011.605871.
— (2013). “The dynamics of national innovation systems: A panel cointegration anal-
ysis of the coevolution between innovative capability and absorptive capacity”. In:
Research Policy 42.3, pp. 579–594. issn: 00487333. doi: 10.1016/j.respol.2012.
10.006. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.10.006.
CORDIS (2018). European Commission’s community research and development in-
formation service. url: https://cordis.europa.eu/.
Crossref (2018). url: https://www.crossref.org/.
Danilovic, Mike and Tyson R. Browning (2007). “Managing complex product develop-
ment projects with design structure matrices and domain mapping matrices”. In:
International Journal of Project Management 25.3, pp. 300–314. issn: 02637863.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2006.11.003. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/abs/pii/S0263786306001645.
Data, Inflation (2018). Inflation Data. url: https://inflationdata.com/Inflation/
Inflation_Rate/Historical_Oil_Prices_Table.asp.
Dodder, Rs, Jm Sussman, and Jb McConnell (2004). “The Concept of the ’CLIOS
Process’: Integrating the Study of Physical and Policy Systems Using Mexico
City as an Example”. In: … Engineering Systems …, pp. 1–48. issn: 0011-3131.
url: http://esd.mit.edu/symposium/pdfs/papers/dodder.pdf.
DTU (2018). Engineering Management DTU. url: http://www.dtu.dk/english/
Education/msc/Programmes/industrial_engineering_management.
==PAGE:131==
Bibliography
121
DTU’s strategy 2014-2019 - DTU. url: http://www.dtu.dk/english/About/
ORGANIZATION/Strategy (visited on 05/24/2018).
Eppinger, Steven (2001). Innovation with the Speed of Information.pdf. url: https:
//hbr.org/2001/01/innovation-at-the-speed-of-information.
Etzkowitz, H. (2003). “Innovation in innovation: the Triple Helix of university-industry-
government relations”. In: Social Science Information Sur Les Sciences Sociales
42, pp. 293–337. issn: 0539-0184. doi: 10.1177/05390184030423002. arXiv: 0911.
2730. url: //000185234300002.
Etzkowitz, Henry and Loet Leydesdorff (2000). “The dynamics of innovation: from Na-
tional Systems and “Mode 2” to a Triple Helix of university–industry–government
relations”. In: Research policy 29.2, pp. 109–123.
EURITO, 2018. url: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/211945{\_}en.
html (visited on 05/24/2018).
Faber, Jan and Anneloes Barbara Hesen (2004). “Innovation capabilities of Euro-
pean nations: Cross-national analyses of patents and sales of product innova-
tions”. In: Research Policy 33.2, pp. 193–207. issn: 00487333. doi: 10 . 1016 /
S0048- 7333(03)00122- 7. url: https://ac- els- cdn- com.proxy.findit.
dtu.dk/S0048733303001227/1- s2.0- S0048733303001227- main.pdf?{\_
}tid=ad647b70-188c-11e8-817f-00000aacb35f{\&}acdnat=1519385500{\_
}ad3ad89a5a4a416f9a0b08cd5a27fc43.
Filippetti, Andrea and Antonio Peyrache (2011). “The Patterns of Technological Ca-
pabilities of Countries: A Dual Approach using Composite Indicators and Data En-
velopment Analysis”. In: World Development 39.7, pp. 1108–1121. issn: 0305750X.
doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2010.12.009. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
worlddev.2010.12.009.
Freeman, C. and Soete, L. (2000). The Economics of Industrial Innovation, Cam-
bridge, MA, MIT Press. 2nd. isbn: 1844800938. url: https://mitpress.mit.
edu/books/economics-industrial-innovation.
Furman, Jeffrey L., Michael E. Porter, and Scott Stern (2002). “The determinants
of national innovative capacity”. In: Research Policy 31.6, pp. 899–933. issn:
00487333. doi: 10.1016/S0048-7333(01)00152-4. arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3.
url: https://ac-els-cdn-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/S0048733301001524/1-
s2.0-S0048733301001524-main.pdf?{\_}tid=spdf-af419319-4cfb-4c5f-
af1f-66fe11d57d41{\&}acdnat=1519380813{\_}c003162172b639276aea6702fe9935ba.
==PAGE:132==
122
Bibliography
Gassmann, Oliver (2006). “Opening up the innovation process: towards an agenda”.
In: R&d Management 36.3, pp. 223–228.
Giannopoulou, Eleni et al. (2010). “Implications of openness: A study into (all)
the growing literature on open innovation”. In: Journal of Technology Manage-
ment and Innovation 5.3, pp. 162–180. issn: 07182724. doi: 10.4067/S0718-
27242010000300012. url: http://www.jotmi.org.
Hall, Arthur David (1962). A methodology for systems engineering. Van Nostrand,
478p. isbn: 0442030460. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2351747888.
Hidalgo, C. A. and R. Hausmann (2009). “The building blocks of economic com-
plexity”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106.26, pp. 10570–
10575. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0900943106. arXiv: 0909.3890. url:
http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0900943106.
IBM Analytics. url: https : / / www . ibm . com / analytics / hadoop / big - data -
analytics (visited on 05/24/2018).
Léon, Gonzalo (2007). “Cooperative Models for Information Technology Transfer in
the Context of Open Innovation”. In: Organizational Dynamics of Technology-
Based Innovation: Diversifying the Research Agenda. Vol. 235. Boston, MA: Springer
US, pp. 43–61. isbn: 9780387728032. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-72804-9_5. url:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-0-387-72804-9{\_}5.
Lewontin, Richard (2000). Triple helix. url: http://triplehelix.stanford.edu/
triplehelix (visited on 05/24/2018).
Maaten, Laurens van der (2018). t-SNE. url: https://lvdmaaten.github.io/
tsne/.
Merriam-Webster Dictionary (1828). Shift | Definition of Shift by Merriam-Webster.
url: https : / / www . merriam - webster . com / dictionary / shift (visited on
05/24/2018).
Miles, R. F. (1973). “Systems concepts: Lectures on contemporary approaches to
systems.” In: issn: 0018-9472. doi: 10.1109/TSMC.1974.4309372. url: https:
//ntrs.nasa.gov/search.jsp?R=19730050770.
Montreal Metropolitain, Chambre du commerce du (2011). “A look at Canadian
university-industry Collaboration”. In: http://www.ccmm.ca/documents/activitiespdf/autres/2010
savoir2011en.pdf.
==PAGE:133==
Bibliography
123
Moran, J J (1994). The qfd book - the team approach to solving problems and satisfying
customers through quality function deployment - guinta,lr, praizler,nc. Vol. 11. 3.
Amacom, pp. 275–276. isbn: 081445139X.
Morgan, Lorraine and Patrick Finnegan (2008). “Deciding on open innovation: An
exploration of how firms create and capture value with open source software”.
In: IFIP International Federation for Information Processing. Vol. 287, pp. 229–
246. isbn: 9780387875026. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-87503-3_13. url: http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/978-0-387-87503-3{\_}13.
Mulder, Karl (2006). Sustainable Developement for Engineers.
Nelson, Richard R. (1993). National Innovation Systems: A comparative Analysis,
pp. 3–21. isbn: 0195076168. doi: 10.1016/0048-7333(96)00880-3.
OECD (2008). “Open Innovation in Global Networks”. In: OECD Policy Brief Novem-
ber, pp. 9–13. doi: 10 . 1787 / 9789264047693 - en. url: http : / / www . oecd -
ilibrary . org / science - and - technology / open - innovation - in - global -
networks{\_}9789264047693-en.
— (2018). OECD Database. url: https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-
technology/the-oecd-regpat-database_241437144144.
OpenRefine (2018). OpenRefine. url: http://openrefine.org/.
Pénin, Julien and Jean Pierre Wack (2008). “Research tool patents and free-libre
biotechnology: A suggested unified framework”. In: Research Policy 37.10, pp. 1909–
1921. issn: 00487333. doi: 10.1016/j.respol.2008.07.012. url: http://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0048733308001601.
Perkmann, Markus and Kathryn Walsh (2007). “University-industry relationships
and open innovation: Towards a research agenda”. In: International Journal of
Management Reviews 9.4, pp. 259–280. issn: 14608545. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-
2370.2007.00225.x. url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1468-2370.
2007.00225.x.
Piaszczyk, C (2011). “Model Based Systems Engineering with Department of Defense
Architectural Framework”. In: Systems Engineering 14.3, pp. 305–326. issn: 1098-
1241, 1098-1241. doi: 10.1002/sys. url: http://ezproxy.lib.ucf.edu/login?
url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/926281441?accountid=10003{\%
}5Cnhttp://sfx.fcla.edu/ucf?url{\_}ver=Z39.88-2004{\&}rft{\_}val{\_
}fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal{\&}genre=article{\&}sid=ProQ:ProQ:
civilengineering{\&}atitle=Model+Based+Syste.
==PAGE:134==
124
Bibliography
Porter, M. E. (1998). “Clusters and the new economics of competition.” In: Harvard
business review 76.6, pp. 77–90. issn: 00178012. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111451. arXiv:
/dx.doi.org/10.1016/0048-7333(84)90018-0 [http:]. url: http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10187248.
Romer, Paul M. (1990). “Endogenous Technological Change”. In: Journal of Political
Economy 98.5, Part 2, S71–S102. issn: 0022-3808. doi: 10.1086/261725. url:
http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/261725.
Saladini, Fabrizio et al. (2016). “Guidelines for emergy evaluation of first, second
and third generation biofuels”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 66,
pp. 221–227.
Sheard, Sarah A and Ali Mostashari (2009). “Principles of complex systems for sys-
tems engineering”. In: Systems Engineering 12.4, pp. 295–311.
Tsinghua (2018). Collaborative Programs. url: http://www.tsinghua.edu.cn/
publish/enven/6296/index.html.
Weck, Olivier de et al. (2011). Engineering Systems: Meeting Human Needs in a
Complex Technological World, p. 224. isbn: 978-0262016704.
World Bank (2017). DataBank | The World Bank. url: http://databank.worldbank.
org/data/home.aspx (visited on 05/24/2018).
==PAGE:135==
List of Figures
1.1
Design research methodology representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1
Literature review Venn diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Important Elements of national innovation systems of the United States
(Furman, Porter, and Stern 2002) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3
Triple-Helix illustration (Etzkowitz 2003)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1
Overview of data sources from the AMICa pathfinder technological brief-
ing (AMICa, 2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Combinatorial model of the AMICa pathfinder model
. . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Graphical Representation of the graph model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
Illustration of filtering and scalability of graph model . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.5
Correlation matrix creation workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.6
Resulting table from Cypher query . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1
Structure of result presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
Capability matrices of the AMICa database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Annotated version of the capability matrix of 2017. (Binary)
. . . . . . .
46
4.4
Capability Matrix of the year 2017, Normalized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.5
Normalized capability lists for 2012 and 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.6
Number of technological assets over time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.7
Year Correlation Matrix of the last 15 years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.8
Clustered Year Correlation Matrix of the last 15 years . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.9
Pearson Correlation with previous year
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.10 Capability matrices of the years 2017 and 2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.11 Normalized term usage and evolution of the price of oil from 1990 to 2017
55
==PAGE:136==
126
List of Figures
4.12 Normalized term usage and evolution of the price of the kilo of sugar from
1990 to 2017
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.13 Normalized Capability Matrices of Denmark and Sweden
. . . . . . . . .
59
4.14 Country capability lists of China and the USA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.15 Country capability correlation matrix. Interactive version: https://plot.ly/ duar-
teocarmo/24
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.16 Clustered country capability correlation matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.17 Country profile of Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.18 Capability correlation and GDP per capita difference of country pairs
. .
64
4.19 Capability correlation and GDP per capita difference of country pairs.
Interactive version: https://plot.ly/ duarteocarmo/32/ . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.20 Capability correlation and collaboration between country pairs . . . . . .
66
4.21 Capability correlation and normalized collaboration between country pairs.
Interactive version: https://plot.ly/ duarteocarmo/34/ . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.22 Country capability spectrum (first 45 term pairs) for a set of 7 countries .
70
4.23 Organization correlation matrix: Clustered Version (Danish organizations
in red) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
4.24 Country correlation profile: Technical University of Denmark . . . . . . .
77
4.25 Country correlation profile: Novozymes AS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
4.26 Collaboration by type of partnership: All organizations
. . . . . . . . . .
80
4.27 Collaboration by type of partnership: Universities
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
4.28 Organizational spectrums: Limited to 45 term pairs and 4 organizations .
82
4.29 Heat maps of the capability matrices for patents and publications . . . . .
83
4.30 Evolution of biofuel patents and publications from 1990 until 2017 . . . .
85
4.31 Distribution of Feedstock terms across asset type . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
4.32 Distribution of all biofuel related terms by type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
4.33 Application of the t-sne algorithm at the meso level
. . . . . . . . . . . .
89
4.34 Hierarchical Clustering applied to the country level: Using term frequency
approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
4.35 Hierarchical Clustering applied to the country level: Using term-pair fre-
quency approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
A.5 Clustered version of the AMICa database capability matrix . . . . . . . . 113
==PAGE:137==
List of Figures
127
A.1 Simplified data model retrieved from the AMICa pathfinder repository
(AMICa, 2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
A.2 Normalized quantity of terms over time: Feedstocks
. . . . . . . . . . . . 115
A.3 Normalized quantity of terms over time: Processing Technologies . . . . . 115
A.4 Normalized quantity of terms over time: Outputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
A.6 Country capability spectrum for all countries (only term pairs that appear
in at least 2 countries) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
A.7 Organizational spectrums: Complete spectrum visualization . . . . . . . . 117
A.8 Absolute and relative quantity of assets with a certain feedstock term over
time: Patents and publications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
==PAGE:138==
List of Tables
2.1
Application of the complex system definition to Macro, Meso, and Micro
level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1
Normalized capability matrix of 2017 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Top term pairs for 2010 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3
Top term pairs for 2017 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4
Top term-pairs with the most important differences in usage between 2010
and 2017
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.5
Top 10 terms with the highest positive correlation with the price of oil
from 1990 to 2017
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.6
Top 10 terms with the highest correlation with the price of the kile of
sugar from 1990 to 2017 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.7
Denmark and Sweden capability matrix properties . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.8
Examples of collaborations and categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.9
Top term pairs Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.10 Top term pairs Brazil
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.11 Top term pairs usage differences in Denmark and Brazil. Percentages are
0-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.12 Unique term pairs for Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.13 Uniqueness ranking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.14 Normalized capability matrix for DTU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.15 Term pair comparison of DTU and Tsinghua University . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.16 Top term pairs usage differences in Patents and Publications. Percentages
are 0-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
4.17 Most unbalanced feedstock terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
==PAGE:139==
Listings
3.1
Python script to transform capability matrix into list . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2
Collaboration query
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3
Using the Cypher language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:140==
