==PAGE:1==
 1
2. Research & Analysis
REPORT
Concepts for Play Equipment 
with Focus on Learning
Sine Storm Pedersen
s133687
Master Thesis
MSc in Design & Innovation
DTU, Kgs. Lyngby
Spring 2018 
Supervisor: Claus Thorp Hansen, DTU Mechanical Engineering  
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
 I
“Children learn as they play. Most importantly, in play children learn how to learn.”
 
- O. Fred Donaldson
==PAGE:4==
II
Title Page
Master Thesis 
Sine Storm Pedersen
s133687
10. Semester (F18)
Design & Innovation 
DTU MEK
The Technical University of Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby 
Project title: Concepts for Play Equipment with Focus on Learning 
Collaboration partners: Ledon A/S and Capital of Children (Børnenes Hovedstad)
Supervisor: Claus Thorp Hansen, DTU Mechanical Engineering  
Produced by: 
Sine Storm Pedersen, Date  _____________________________________________________________
==PAGE:5==
 III
Abstract
Children learn through play and by using their skills over and over again. This is explored within the thesis. 
This thesis analyses, examines and shows the steps of the conceptualisation process leading up to the concept 
Loading Carousel. The Loading Carusel is a concept suggestion for a play equipment to be implemented in 
LEDON A/S´s sortiment. The play equipment is developed for 4 - 6 year olds and focuses on bringing learning 
into the play experience. From playing on the play equipment the users learn within the field of six different 
knowledge areas: Mathematical Knowledge, Body- and Physical Knowledge, Knowledge about Nature, Per­
sonal Knowledge, Social Knowledge and Linguistic Knowledge. The Loading Carousel gives the users great 
learning possibilities through a familiar, yet innovative play equipment with a hidden loading feature. 
Leading up to the concept development a literature study has be conducted, gathering existing knowledge 
within the field and analysing it according to the relevance for the thesis. The relevant stakeholders has been 
identified and their interpretation needs have been included in a goal specification. Through the design pro­
cess, the concept has been constructed with the users in mind and has had a focus on learning. The thesis 
shows how the concept development was constructed with co-creation, allowing the users to be part of the 
the design process and by critically analyse and observe their needs. Resulting in a concept the users will use.
==PAGE:6==
IV
Preface
The work is completed as part of the final thesis of my Masters in Design and Innovation at the Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark, DTU. The project concerns conceptualisation of play equipment for children in the age 
from 4 - 6 years old with a focus on learning. The project is made in collaboration with the companies LEDON 
A/S and The Capital of Children.
In connection to writing the thesis I have been meet by several interested and helpful persons in various age 
and with various background. Their interested in my work have inspired me even further and made me want 
to work harder. 
A special thanks is given to my supervisor Claus Thorp Hansen for his dedication and guidance throughout 
the process. 
Thanks to LEDON A/S for letting me be part of your world, here thanks to Søren Skøtt for the collaboration. 
Thanks to Thomas Aakjær Jensen and the Capital of Children, for the sharing of knowledge and interest in the 
project. 
Thanks to every participants who have help me throughout the design process; in observations, workshops 
and testing. 
Finally thanks to everyone, who have helped me through the thesis and who have showed interest in my work. 
 
==PAGE:7==
 V
Reading Guide
The thesis consists of 4 different elements
•	
Report - documents the entire process of the thesis
•	
Idea Catalogue - presents the 52 ideas
•	
Concept Catalogue - presents the 11 concepts
•	
Appendices - additional work in relation to the process
Throughout all four elements, colour coding have been used in order to illustrate which chapther the work 
belongs to. This is marked by having a coloured elephant pressent on the page (figure 0.1). 
1.	 Introduction 
2.	 Research & Analysis
3.	 Exploration Loop
4.	 Ideation
5.	 Conceptualisation
6.	 Concept Selection
7.	 Detailing & Justification
8.	 The Final Concept
9.	 Conclusion
10.	Reflection
Figure 0.1 Colour Code
==PAGE:8==
VI
Table of Content
Title Page
II
Abstract
III
Preface
IV
Reading Guide
V
1. Introduction
1
1.1 Introduction to the Project
2
1.1.1 Problem Statement
2
1.2 Motivation
2
1.3 Learning Objectives 
3
1.3.1 General Learning Objectives for a Master Thesis at DTU
3
1.3.2 Project Specific Learning Objectives
3
1.4 Project Process
3
1.4.1 Phase 1 - Research and Analysis 
3
1.4.2 Phase 2 - Conceptualisation
4
1.4.3 Phase 3 - Concept Selection
4
1.4.4 Phase 4 - Detailing and Justification 
4
1.5 Planning
4
1.6 Collaboration 
4
1.6.1 LEDON A/S
4
1.6.1.1 Play Equipment Sortiment
5
1.6.2 The Capital of Children - Børnenes Hovedstad 
6
2. Research & Analysis
7
2.1 Literature Study - Search
8
2.1.1 Search Procedure 
8
2.1.1.1 On Findit.dtu.dk
9
2.1.1.2 On Lyngby Library and bibliotek.dk 
9
2.1.1.3 Expert Knowledge 
11
2.1.1.4 Specific Knowledge 
12
2.2 Literature Study - Children, Play and Learning
12
2.2.1 Introduction to Literature Study 
12
2.2.2 The Playground Users 
12
2.2.3 Boys and Girls Different Learning and Play Patterns 
12
2.2.4 Age and Development 
14
2.2.5 The Play Experience 
16
2.2.6 Different Types of Play 
18
2.2.7 Human Knowledge and Learning 
20
2.2.8 Learning Through Play 
22
2.2.9 Interaction and Learning 
23
2.2.10 Design for Play with Children 
24
2.2.11 Co-creation and Co-design in General 
26
2.2.12 Co-creation with Children 
27
2.3 Conclusion on Literature Study 
28
2.3.1 Focus Area for Play Equipment and Design Requirements 
28
2.3.2 Children Co-designing 
29
3. Exploration Loop
33
3.1 Exploration of Context
34
3.1.1 Fieldwork 
34
3.1.2 Interviews 
37
==PAGE:9==
 VII
3.2 Stakeholder Analysis 
39
3.3 Need Analysis
41
3.4 Design Paradoxes
42
3.4.1 Discourses and Interpretation Needs
42
3.4.2 Design Paradoxes
43
3.5 Design Task Formulation
44
3.6 Goal Specification
44
3.7 Sub Conclusion
45
4. Ideation
47
4.1 Idea Loop 
48
4.1.1 Inspiration Interview 
48
4.1.2 Co-creation with Children 
49
4.1.2.1 Workshop 1: Himmelrummet Kindergarten 
49
4.1.2.2 Workshop 2: Siblings 
54
4.1.3 Play Dough Ideation 
55
4.1.4 Brainstorming
56
4.1.5 Ideas  
57
4.2 Sub Conclusion
59
5. Conceptualisation
61
5.1 Narrowing Down 
62
5.2 Concept Analysis and Improvements
67
5.2.1 1. Triple Tire Swing
67
5.2.2 8. Free Multi Seesaw
67
5.2.3 13. Ball Build
68
5.2.4 15. Tuberoom
68
5.2.5 22. Boat
68
5.2.6 26. Water Station
68
5.2.7 31. Pipe Master
69
5.2.8 33. Multi People Swing
69
5.2.9 34. Loading Carousel
69
5.2.10 38. Animal Labyrinth
69
5.2.11 49. Scare Holes
70
5.3 Concept Development 
70
5.4 Sub Conclusion
71
6. Concept Selection
73
6.1 Concept Vulnerability with LEDON A/S
74
6.1.1 Universal Virtues
74
6.1.2 Comparison of Concepts
74
6.2 Concepts in the Eyes of LEDON A/S
75
6.3 LEDON´s Top 3
76
6.4 Selected Concepts
76
6.5 Sub Conclusion
77
7. Detailing & Justification
79
7.1 Description and Analysis of the Selected Concepts
80
7.1.1 Free Multi Seesaw
80
7.1.2 Loading Carousel
80
7.2 Comparison
81
7.2.1 Similarities 
81
7.2.2 Differences
81
==PAGE:10==
VIII
7.3 Combinations 
81
7.4 Important Organs 
82
7.5 Concept Selection 
83
7.6 Safety Precautions 
84
7.6.1 Dangerous Social Media Trends
84
7.6.2 Safety Regulations Dansk Standard (DS/EN) 
85
7.7 Strengths and Weaknesses of the Concept 
87
7.8 Testing and Analysis
88
7.8.1 Platter Organ
89
7.8.2 Spinning Organ
89
7.8.3 Gripping Organ
91
7.8.4 Pushing Organ
92
7.8.4.1 Rod Shapes
92
7.8.4.2 3D Prototyping and Mockups
93
7.8.4.3 Testing of Rods
94
7.8.4.3.1 Test Set-up
94
7.9.4.3.2 User Tests - Children
94
7.9.4.3.3 User Tests - Adults
95
7.8.4.3.4 Test Outcome
96
7.8.5 Loading Organ
97
7.8.6 Overload Organ 
98
7.8.7 Speed Regulation Organ 
99
7.9 Concept Improvements 
99
7.10 Sub Conclusion
100
8. The Final Concept
103
8.1 Loading Carousel - The Play Equipment 
104
8.2 The Idea With and the Idea In
107
8.3 Knowledge Areas Obtained 
107
8.4 Technical Details 
108
8.4.1 Component Durability 
108
8.4.1.1 Spiral Spring
108
8.4.1.2 Bearings 
108
8.4.2 Free Space and Falling Space 
108
8.5 Visual Expression 
110
8.6 Cost 
111
9. Conclusion
113
10. Reflection
117
10.1 The Difference in the Human Mind
118
10.2 When is Enough, Enough?
118
10.3 Relevant Stakeholders
118
10.4 The Understanding of Working with Children in Co-creation
118
10.5 Best Concept vs. Best Concept for the Company 
119
10.6 Testing Methods
119
10.7. Project Plan
120
References
122
Persons 
124
Experts 
124
Observed and Interviewed Children
124
Workshop and Test Participants
124
==PAGE:11==
 IX
Himmelrummet Kindergarten
124
Siblings 
125
Adults
125
List of Figures 
125
List of Tables
127
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1. Introduction
==PAGE:14==
2
1.1 Introduction to the Project
The master thesis is about conceptualisation of play equipment, to be placed on playgrounds, with focus on 
learning. The thesis is made in collaboration with LEDON A/S and The Capital of Children (Børnenes Ho­
vedstad). The conceptualisation is made based on knowledge and information gathered throughout an iterative 
process including fieldwork and interviews. The thesis is focussing on the relevant stakeholders and is inclu­
ding them throughout the design process. 
1.1.1 Problem Statement
How to create play equipment for playgrounds, which will help the users to develop and learn through play?
The thesis is structured based on the encapsulation model (figure 1.1), which creates a structured design pro­
cess throughout the thesis. 
The thesis covers:
•	
Exploration (task)
•	
Concept Synthesis (concept)
•	
Product Synthesis 
•	
Product Development (design)
•	
Detailing and Justification 
1.2 Motivation
In my master thesis I will work with creating play equipment for the company LEDON A/S and I will work in 
collaboration with the company The Capital of Children (Børnenes Hovedstad) to share knowledge. I will here 
make a conceptualisation of play equipment which enhances learning, to be placed on playgrounds all around.
The motivation for the master thesis lays on creating play equipment, which will establish the right settings for 
children to learn through play. I want to continuously include the users in the design process and listen to them, 
while giving them the best possible experience with playing and learning without noticing. I want to create a 
play equipment which focuses on the users and takes the users thoughts into mind. The aim is to create play 
equipment with the users in focus, but also give it meaning for the buyers and in that way give LEDON A/S 
a new product to introduce on the market, and furthermore to give LEDON A/S the foundation for including 
learning through play in their future concepts.
Figure 1.1 The Encapsulation Model (Andreasen, Hansen & Cash, 2015, p. 108 ) 
==PAGE:15==
 3
1. Introduction
1.3 Learning Objectives 
1.3.1 General Learning Objectives for a Master Thesis at DTU
(“MSc in Design & Innovation”, n.d.)
•	
Can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction between the various 
components that make up an issue.
•	
Can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at international level to 
develop ideas and solve problems.
•	
Masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity to take a holistic view 
of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader academic and societal perspective and, on this 
basis, propose a variety of possible actions.
•	
Can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes for solving technologi­
cal problems.
•	
Can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing.
•	
Is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her specialist area.
•	
Can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development and specialization.
•	
Masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the capacity to work with 
and manage all phases of a project – including preparation of timetables, design, solution and documen­
tation.
1.3.2 Project Specific Learning Objectives
•	
Analyse the needs of the relevant stakeholders on the basis of research. 
•	
Collect and evaluate data from a need- and market analysis and field studies.
•	
Explore and analyse existing solutions.
•	
Interpret results of the analysis and formulate a design task, design paradoxes and a goal specification.
•	
Create ideas and concept proposals.
•	
Stretch out a total solution space by combining systematic and creative techniques.
•	
Create comprehensive and integrated solutions.
•	
Evaluate conceptual vulnerability (attractiveness and tractability).
•	
Detailing and justifying the concept.
1.4 Project Process
In order to fulfil the general and project specific learning objectives different methods and tools need to be 
applied throughout the project process. The thesis is split into 4 phases (appendix 1 & 2), which will all be 
documented in a final report.
1.4.1 Phase 1 - Research and Analysis 
In the research and analysis phase a literature study will be conducted by doing online searches, using DTU 
and public libraries in combination. An exploration loop will here be made for exploring the opportunities, 
hereby gain knowledge of existing solutions through fieldwork with user studies and interviews with experts 
(e.g children, pedagogues and landscape architects). A stakeholder analysis will likewise be made to make 
sure every stakeholder is taken into consideration. This will all be done in order formulate a design task and 
a goal specification. After phase 1, milestone 1 will result in a report describing the process and results of the 
research and analysis phase. 
==PAGE:16==
4
1.4.2 Phase 2 - Conceptualisation
In the conceptualisation phase an iterative process will begin and an idea loop will take place, including brain­
storming, ideation and co-creation with children, which will end up in a list of ideas to be formed into concept 
in a concept loop. In the concept loop, the different ideas are combined and made into concepts by using e.g 
a morphology scheme. The different concepts will then be compiled in a concept catalogue, here the concepts 
will be described in text and illustrations in combination with a scenario of the use. The idea with and idea in 
will furthermore be made for whom of the stakeholders it is relevant, along with the strengths and weaknesses 
of the concept. 
1.4.3 Phase 3 - Concept Selection
In order to do the concept selection phase and here select a concept, different socio-technical methods and 
models will be used to analyse and evaluate the concept and its vulnerability. A comparison between the con­
cept and a selection will be made in collaboration with LEDON A/S. After phase 3, milestone 2 will result in 
a report describing the concepts and the selection process.
1.4.4 Phase 4 - Detailing and Justification 
In the last phase the development and validation phase, the selected concept will be further developed and 
improved, here prototyping and user-validation will make sure the final concept is feasible. The design process 
will here furthermore be discussed and reflected upon. 
1.5 Planning
The plan for the project is made in relation to concurrent engineering with overlapping phases, which allows 
the process to be iterative throughout the entire project. To create an overview of the process and make sure 
that there is sufficient time for each part of the project, a timetable (appendix 1) has been made along with a 
Gantt diagram (appendix 2).
1.6 Collaboration 
The master thesis is made in collaboration with two companies: LEDON A/S and The Capital of Children.
1.6.1 LEDON A/S
LEDON A/S is a Danish family owned company, currently with three generations working together. The com­
pany was founded in 1969 by Leo Donbæk and is creating play equipment in high quality. The company has 
had a focus on play, development and safety for more than 40 years.
Figure 1.2 LEDON´s Logo 
==PAGE:17==
 5
1. Introduction
LEDON A/S (figure 1.2) has since 1981 been based in the South of Denmark in the village Arnum and has by 
the 26th of January this year moved their department for product development to Kolding. They started out 
with producing products to Denmark and is now exporting products to over 25 different countries (“Historie 
- LEDON A/S”, n.d.).
The company has a vision and a mission mainly concerning children, which they continually seek to fulfil. 
“LEDON´s vision is to support and inspire children in their physical, communicational and cognitive devel­
opment.
LEDON A/S’s mission is to create a safe environment in which children can evolve their bodies and minds by 
developing new and better playground items all the time.”(“Mission/Vision - LEDON A/S” n.d.). 
“At LEDON A/S are we just like kids and they are our best playmates. The children are part of insuring that 
the final product contains fun.”(Skøtt) At LEDON A/S it is important to include users in the design process. It 
is important for them to make the work and creation of products into a fun experience.
1.6.1.1 Play Equipment Sortiment
LEDON A/S has a sortiment of different play equipment reaching from individual play equipment such as 
seesaws, swings and modular pipe slides systems to complete theme playgrounds. All of the products can be 
bought individually or as part of a bigger package.
In the company’s current sortiment, 8 different themes exist (figure 1.3):
•	
Adventure
•	
City
•	
Classic
•	
LEDON Castle
•	
LEDON Explore
•	
Marina
•	
MiniPlay
•	
Pirates
Figure 1.3 Playground Themes (“Themes - LEDON A/S”, n.d.)
The themes play equipment is designed in a way where it is possible to buy a small package of play equipment 
and then expand with more later. The systems within the themes are modular and there can therefore easily be 
added more to the playground as it grows or as the need for more space or new play equipment and inspiration 
occurs (“Themes - LEDON A/S”, n.d.).
==PAGE:18==
6
For LEDON A/S it is important to maintain a high quality in their products and they reach for being as en­
vironmental as possible towards the future. 
1.6.2 The Capital of Children - Børnenes Hovedstad 
The Capital of Children (figure 1.4) is a Danish cooperation made in 2012 between the municipality of Bil­
lund and the LEGO group. Capital of Children believes that “playing is one of the most important ingredients 
in creating creative, social and problem solving children - and grown-ups- who takes part in a globale and 
changeable world and creates good lives for themselves and their surroundings.”(“Børnenes Hovedstad - 
Børnenes Hovedstad”, n.d.).
Their vision is to create: 
•	
“A good place for children to grow-up and unfold as a whole citizen of the world
•	
A good place to live and work
•	
A national and international centrum for new experience, knowledge and research, which support lear­
ning through play for children all over the world.“(“Børnenes Hovedstad - Børnenes Hovedstad”, n.d.)
The coorperation has 3 main focus areas:
1.	 Play, learning and creativity
2.	 The city within children’s reach
3.	 Playful Innovation 
They aim to include children in in their work, share knowledge, create new and make success stories which 
can be shared among others. 
Figure 1.4 Capital of Children Logo
==PAGE:19==
2. Research & Analysis
==PAGE:20==
8
The research and analysis phase is made in order to gain knowledge about the subject and the involved stake­
holders. The research and analysis phase contains a literature study, in which the study themes children, play 
and learning are explored and the thoughts about co-creation with children are touched upon. 
The literature study has here been done by using a combination of structured and unstructured searches on 
online and physical platforms, in combination with the use of expert knowledge. In order to get useful know­
ledge and get in debt with the topic, it is important to know the topic and be able to narrow it down to what 
is important. By exploring both online and physical libraries have different benefits. The online search can 
inspire, by showing a similar text or a text which is cited from it. It can likewise show literature from all over 
the world, where searching in libraries gives another way of being inspired by searching for one topic and 
looking at the books surrounding it on the shelves. 
When designing for children, it is known from personal experience that it is important to create a bond with 
the children, observe them and listen to what they are saying. There are certain precautions, which needs to 
be taken during the process such as remembering that what children say they need, not always is what they 
really need. When adults interact with children, the children are looking up to the adult and can in some cases 
mirror themselves and be fascinated by the adult. This can in some cases result in the children saying, what 
they think the adult wants to hear, instead of what they actually think. It is furthermore important to remember 
that children has a vivid imagination and when children are playing, they create their own world. This means 
that the designers inscription with a product, is not always followed and the users are describing the intended 
use, in order to make the product fit into their world. The product can therefore be interpreted differently. 
When designing play equipment, it is for the users of the playgrounds. The users (mainly children) aren’t 
going to the playgrounds themselves and they are not the ones in charge of buying the play equipment for the 
playgrounds. It is therefore important to find all the relevant stakeholders and analyse their needs.
2.1 Literature Study - Search
In order to have a fulfilling search for knowledge a strategic search has been conducted, with the use of online 
searches, physical searches at libraries and by getting expert knowledge on the subject.
2.1.1 Search Procedure 
In order to do a proper literature study and get in dept with the theory, a list with search themes and search 
words has been conducted and has expanded throughout the iterative search process (table 2.1). The list of 
search words has been created by ideation on the three most important search themes and by finding different 
synonyms. 
The search words have been used alone to a quick and dirty search in order to get an idea of which direction 
to go, followed by a more structured block search on different platforms such as findit.dtu.dk and bibliotek.dk.
Search Themes
Search Words 
Children
Kids, Boys, Girls, Children, Babies, 0-2 years, 
2-4 years, 4-6 years, 6-8 years, Kindergarten, Kin­
dergarten child, Toddler, Before school, Nursery, 
Minor, Youth
Learning
Learn, Motor coordination, Movement, Personal 
development, Progress, Teaching, Training, Growth, 
Develop, Experience, Master, Study, Gain
Table 2.1 Search Themes and Search Words
==PAGE:21==
 9
2. Research & Analysis
Play 
Play, Games, Competition, Fun, Toy, Playground, 
Play equipment, Friends, Pretend, Move, Flow, Per­
form, Experience, Entertain, Playing field, Jungle 
gym 
2.1.1.1 On Findit.dtu.dk
The structured block search resulted in several hits, which were reduced to relevant texts (table 2.2). The 
search was made with words in both danish and english, in order to make sure a broad selections of useful text 
was explored. 
The criteria for being considered a relevant text, comes from containing information about:
•	
Play 
•	
Learning
•	
Children 
•	
Combinations of the above mentioned 
Search String
Hits
Relevant Texts
(kids OR children) AND play 
AND learning
13,530
Madej, K. (2016). Physical Play and Children´s 
Digital Games. Springer. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-42875-8
Lastowka, G. (2009). Rules of play. Ga­
mes and Culture, 4(4), 379–395. http://doi.
org/10.1177/1555412009343573
Roussou, M. (2004). Learning by Doing and Le­
arning Through Play: An Exploration of Inter­
activity in Virtual Environments for Children. 
ACM Computers in Entertainment, 2(1). Retri­
eved from http://delivery.acm.org.proxy.findit.
dtu.dk/10.1145/980000/973818/p10-roussou.pd­
f?ip=192.38.67.116&id=973818&acc=ACTIVE 
SERVICE&key=36332CD97FA87885.5A225593D­
1BFDB6E.4D4702B0C3E38B35.4D4702B­
0C3E38B35&__acm__=1516969121_4272fe792b­
111bacfb38121031c40399
Leg og læring 
183
Pedersen, A. (2008). Leg og læring. Reflexen, 3(1), 
1–4.
Table 2.2 Search Strings on DTU Findit
2.1.1.2 On Lyngby Library and bibliotek.dk 
The physical search at the library (table 2.3) resulted in relevant books.
The criteria for being chosen from the shelf at the library and to be considered relevant comes from containing 
information about:
•	
Play 
•	
Learning
•	
Children 
•	
Combinations of the abovementioned 
==PAGE:22==
10
Search String
Hits
Relevant Texts
Leg AND læring
60
Karoff, H. S., & Jessen, C. (2014). Tekster om leg. 
Akademisk Forlag. Retrieved from https://www.saxo.
com/dk/tekster-om-leg_helle-skovbjerg-karoff_haef­
tet_9788750043188
Johansson, E., Pramling Samuelsson, I., Broström, S., 
& Kåre Dag Jensen. (2011). Lærerig leg : børns læ­
ring gennem samspil. Dafolo. Retrieved from https://
www.saxo.com/dk/laererig-leg_eva-johansson_paper­
back_9788772815749
Pramling Samuelsson, I., & Sheridan, S. (2002). Grobund 
for læring : pædagogik og undervisning i førskoletiden. 
Gyldendal Uddannelse. Retrieved from https://nota.dk/
bibliotek/bog/grobund-læring#audio
Jensen, J.-O., & Andersen, K. (2012). Motorik og bevæ­
gelse i børns liv. ViaSystime. Retrieved from https://www.
saxo.com/dk/motorik-og-bevaegelse-i-boerns-liv_jens-
ole-jensen_haeftet_9788790833954
Winther-Lindqvist, D. A. (2006). Skal vi lege? : leg, iden­
titet og fællesskaber i børnehaven. Frydenlund. Retrieved 
from https://www.saxo.com/dk/skal-vi-lege_ditte-alexan­
dera-winther-lindqvist_epub_9788778874511
Trageton, A. (2004). Konstruktionsleg i børnehave og 
børnehaveklasse : konstruktionsleg 1-7 år. Kroghs Forlag. 
Retrieved from http://www.academicbooks.dk/konstruk­
tionsleg-i-boernehave-og-boernehaveklasse/arne-trage­
ton/9788762405127
 
Sederberg, M., Kortbek, K., & Bahrenscheer, A. (2017). 
Bevægelse, sundhed og trivsel - i skole og fritid. Hans 
Reitzel. Retrieved from https://www.gucca.dk/bevaegel­
se-sundhed-og-trivsel-bog-p362873
Keiding, T. B., & Laursen, E. (2005). Interaktion og læ­
ring : Gregory Batesons bidrag. Kbh.: Unge Pædagoger.
Author search:
Jørn Martin Steenhold
311
Steenhold, J. M. (2014). Legenes kendetegn: bogen om 
legens semiotik. Saxo Publish.
Steenhold, J. M. (2016). Legende læring i børnehøjde: 
åbne dagtilbud - viden og kultur formidling i børnehave, 
sfo og bibliotek. Excellent Play & Saxo Publish.
Table 2.3 Search Strings on Library
==PAGE:23==
 11
2. Research & Analysis
2.1.1.3 Expert Knowledge 
In addition to searches on information platforms online and physical, experts in different forms have further­
more been used to collect information. Articles, newspapers and books have been collected and interviews 
have been performed in order to gain knowledge within the field of play, children and learning. 
Besides the interviews some of the experts have provided relevant information in form of assignments, texts, 
books and newspapers (table 2.4). The relevant information and personal communication comes from what 
the expert finds relevant to share and which gives new input to the literature study. 
Steenhold, J. M. (2015). Barndomskanon. Excellent Play 
& Saxo Publish.
Steenhold, J. M. (2008). Børn og klogskab: klog på 100 
måder. Saxo Publish.
Expert
Expertise
Relevant Information and 
Personal Communication
Jeanet Annie Olsen 
Pedagogue (Leader)
Avisen. (2017). 4.
Nursery and kindergarten structure 
folders
Rikke Hansen
Pedagogue (Student Kolding)
Hansen, M., & Nagbøl, S. (2008). Det 
ny skoleliv: om krop, rum, bevægelse 
og pædagogik. In Det ny skoleliv: om 
krop, rum, bevægelse og pædagogik(pp. 
134–140, 143–147, 153–154, 165–169). 
Århus: Klim.
Bjerre, S. (n.d.). Bevægelses Glæde 
Designguide - metode til kortlægning og 
forandring af skolens bevægelsesmiljøer. 
Aarhus Kommune.
Flaskager, A. (2008). Inspirationshæfte, 
0. – 2. klasse. Aktiv Rundt.
Martin Olsson 
DGI Head of department - Sports 
and exercise
Jørgensen, J. K., & Olsson, M. (2014). 
Kandidatspeciale Familieidræt i Tennis­
foreningen.
Hanne Schmidt
Pedagogue
Lyhne, J., & Langhoff Nielsen, A. M. 
(2016). Dansk pædagogisk udviklings­
beskrivelse 0 til 6 år. Dansk Psykologisk 
Forlag. Retrieved from https://www.
saxo.com/dk/dansk-paedagogisk-udvik­
lingsbeskrivelse-0-til-6-aar_joer-
Table 2.4 Information and Personal Communication from Experts
==PAGE:24==
12
gen-lyhne-anna-marie-langhoff-niel­
sen_haeftet_9788771582888?g­
clid=CjwKCAjwypjVBRANEiwAJAx­
lIkQSc6-2f9aOyuxW2T612TUcHN­
j4OWYUoO7U9BVO398iQJhbKz­
HQ6RoCtYIQAvD_BwE&gclsrc=aw.ds
2.1.1.4 Specific Knowledge 
When needing specific knowledge about a field, in order to get facts straight or know more about it, additional 
searches on the specific issue was made on DTU Findit and Google. 
2.2 Literature Study - Children, Play and Learning
2.2.1 Introduction to Literature Study 
When designing play equipment for playgrounds with focus on learning, different factors become vital. It is 
important to have thorough knowledge concerning play and learning on playgrounds. It is likewise important 
to have knowledge about the impact the two things has on each other. Therefore a literature study have been 
made in regards to children’s learning experience through play. The literature study gathers common know­
ledge about children, play and learning. The playground users are defined, with focus on when children play 
at playgrounds and is put in relation to what and where they learn and benefit from learning. 
Furthermore co-creation and the inclusion of children in the design process is analysed in order to get the best 
foundation for having the users, in form of children, to participate in designing the products they later will 
become the users of. 
2.2.2 The Playground Users 
The main users of playgrounds in Denmark are children and the persons taking them to the playground such 
as parents, grandparents, teachers and pedagogues. According to Lærkes (appendix 3) and research done 
by the company By X in relation to the newly established Literature playground in Gladsaxe. The primary 
users of play equipment at playgrounds is children in the ages from 3 - 9 years, other ages are also using the 
equipments and families spend quality time together at the facilities, which makes them users as well. Users 
of playgrounds comes in many different kinds. They are different ages, gender, size, maturity, comes from dif­
ferent families, have different humor, traditions, religions and abilities. It is here seen that the size and age of 
the users have a meaning for what is being used by the users and that it is difficult to have one play equipment 
fitting everyone.
Takeaways
Even though the users of the playground mainly are children in the age between 3 - 9 years. They are not the 
only stakeholders and therefore not the only one which needs to be taken into consideration when design play 
equipment. Without a parent or an adult supervisor, the child will not be using the playground. Therefore the 
playground has to welcome adults as well as children. This means that there are several different stakeholders, 
which has to be included in the design thinking, when designing new play equipment for playgrounds. 
2.2.3 Boys and Girls Different Learning and Play Patterns 
From Knudsen (2017) it is stated that the human brain develops by what it is exposed to. The brain is not like 
the rest of the human body, it has it´s main growth before birth and in the first years after the child is born. 
It is therefore while the child is young that the brain can be impacted most. In the child’s first years a cutting 
==PAGE:25==
 13
2. Research & Analysis
process is happening in the brain, where the nerve cells which are being used will develop and the ones which 
are not will die. The same is valid in the later years. If the nerves are not used, they will disappear. 
Brains develop in a different pace from brain to brain. If a child does not follow the age related development, 
it can be related to their brain. Some children’s brains develop slower than others. It is therefore important to 
look at the individual child’s needs and challenge them in a positive way. 
It has been scientifically proven that the brains of boys and girls are not developed the same way and that there 
are structural differences between them. One of the most interesting differences is about the connection bet­
ween the different parts of the brain; in form of corpus callosum, commissura anterior and massa intermedia 
(connecting through thalamus), which is bigger in female brains, than in male brains. This means that while 
females are bilateral and are using both sides of their brain to solve tasks, males are often unilateral and are 
using one half at the time. The difference in size is visual from birth and the effects are therefore also visual 
in the way children learn. 
In accordance with pedagogue Olsen (appendix 4) there is a scientific difference between boys and girls. She 
mentions an experiment she has heard about, where children are learning to tell the time. The experiment here 
showed that telling the time on a regular wristwatch is easier for girls, than it is for boys, while it for boys is 
easier to tell the time on a digital watch. Boys finds it easier to think in numbers, while girls finds it easier 
to learn what is considered to be abstract. Even though Olsen knows that science sees a difference between 
genders, she states that what the children play with and what they learn, depends on what they are exposed to 
by the adults surrounding them and not by their gender. She states that children whether they are boys or girls 
become what adults teach them to be.
According to Knudsen (2017) Freud’s Phallic stage is the most important stage, when dealing with gender ro­
les and identity. Most children goes through the phallic stage, when they are 4 - 6 years old. Some starts early, 
when they are 3 years old, while others continue within the stage through the first years of school. 
They start exploring what being a boy/girl means, and what difference there is between them, but they are still 
playing with each other. When observing smaller children the differences between boys and girls are not very 
big. Their gender is different, but their behaviour is not. According to pedagogue Larsen (appendix 5) it is al­
most the same play equipment children uses and the same things they do. He states that the difference in what 
the children play with, comes from the options they have. If e.g. a bucket of princess LEGO is placed in front 
of a group of children, both boys and girls will play with it together. Whereas if there is an option between two 
buckets, one with princess LEGO and one with knight LEGO, the boys will 9 out of 10 times go play with the 
knights and the girls will play with the princess LEGO, because this is what they are use to from home. 
Takeaways 
When talking about the difference in boys and girls development and learning curves, it has been proven 
scientifically that there is a difference in the brain. They use their brains different from each other and girls are 
often better than boys at abstract thinking, where boys are better at concrete and digital things. Even though 
it is scientifically proven that there is a difference, the difference is not of big impact on the play patterns of 
children. When the children are still young and have not begun school, they still play together without thin­
king too much about gender. When they are 4 - 6 years old the phallic stage is starting and the children is just 
starting to know the difference between boys and girls. Though they are starting to explore gender, they still 
play together and form groups which are both split in gender and mixed. Furthermore the difference in how 
they play and what they play with, is not affected by the difference. They are more affected by what options 
is given to them by the surroundings, in form of what is available for them and to a greater extent by what the 
adults and older children primes them to. It is therefore important to create play equipment where both genders 
can play together, have fun and learn, without being affected by whether they are boys or girls. 
==PAGE:26==
14
2.2.4 Age and Development 
In contrary to gender it is seen that age and development has an impact on what children are capable of. Larsen 
(appendix 5) finds that children benefits from playing with each other across ages. By playing up and down 
they learn from each other, both good and bad things. According to Schmidt and Bøgevige (appendix 6) chil­
dren play and learn throughout their entire life and their age is often linked to the development. The children’s 
age is mainly parallel to its stage of development, but here the age on its own do not indicate much, where 
which stage of development they are on, have a big impact on the what the child is capable of.  
When talking about children’s development stages there are different theories. The stage of development is 
linked to the Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD), which was developed by Vygotsky in the late 1920´s. 
The ZPD is defined as “the distance between the actual development level as determined by independent 
problem solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem solving under adult 
guidance or in collaboration with more capable peer“ (Shabani et al., 2010, p. 238).
When children grow and learn, they have a better change of evolving when they are within their ZPD. The 
child needs to be challenged with something new, yet achievable. “The idea is that individuals learn best when 
working together with others during joint collaboration” (Shabani et al., 2010, p. 238) in an area where the 
goal is challenging, but still possible to reach. This is done best by working within the individual child’s ZPD, 
yet having the child work together with others side by side. 
From the book “Tekster om Leg” where Karoff and Jessen (2014) is approaching different theories from the­
oristians and philosophers, Vygotsky and his ZPD theory is likewise mentioned as being the span between the 
place where the child is capable of doing something on its own and the place where they need help from the 
surroundings. Karoff and Jessen (2014) have analysed one of his text and found that play is an example of 
a ZPD, where the child is ahead in its growth in collaboration with others. Play is according to Vygotsky an 
activity which is highly relevant for the child’s development. 
Also focusing on children’s development in the right zones, a similar theory made by Lyhne & Langhoff Niel­
sen, is often applied by danish pedagogues when helping children develop. They have split development for 
children in the ages from 0 - 6 years into nine different development areas (Lyhne & Langhoff Nielsen, 2016).
Development areas:
1.	 Attention 
2.	 Memory
3.	 Play and activity
4.	 Language and communicative competences 
5.	 Social competences
6.	 Self regulation 
7.	 Gross motor function 
8.	 Fine motor function
9.	 Everyday skills
Even though the development areas are divided into nine areas, they still overlap each other. In the first years 
of a child’s life, the overlap and connection between each step is difficult to define. Each of the nine devel­
opment areas is split into 13 development steps where the first six steps is covered within the first 18 months 
of the child’s life, where each of the six step is meant to take approximately three months each. The next five 
steps is covered while the child is 1.5 - 4 years, where each step takes 6 months. The last two steps is covered 
from the child is 4 years until they are 6 years old, where each step takes a year.  
==PAGE:27==
 15
2. Research & Analysis
Takeaways 
When looking at the ZPD and the development areas from Lyhne & Langhoff Nielsen.
The meaning of the theory is the same and both mentions that it is important for children to learn while being 
in the right state of mind. Lyhne & Langhoff Nielsen has developed a tool for pedagogues to use, to make sure 
the children learn all they need. The nine development areas can be compared to the Maslow’s needs pyramid 
(“Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs | Simply Psychology”, n.d.), where the nine development areas covers the 
same 5 needs in the pyramid (figure 2.1). 
Self-actualization
Esteem needs
Belogingness need
Safety needs
Physiological needs
Individual potential
Self-esteem and esteem for others
Love, friends, family, beign part of something
Protection from danger
Food, shelter, water, sleep 
Figure 2.1 Maslow’s Pyramid of Needs
As also mentioned by Lyhne and Langhoff Nielsen the different areas is overlapping each other and is conne­
cted. They are therefore likewise connected when solving Maslow’s needs (table 2.5). 
Maslow’s Needs 
Development Areas 
Reasoning
Self-actualization 
Memory 
Self regulation
In order to achieve self-actualization, individual potential 
needs to be achieved. This can be done through self regula­
tion and covers the ability to take initiative, regulate, plan, 
monitor and execute actions according to others and also 
control impulses and stay focused with a motivation, in 
what is going on at the moment.The memory is furthermo­
re crucial in order to store the experiences the child have 
and makes it easier to reach the information, that have been 
saved. 
Esteem needs
Play and activity
In order to fulfil the need of esteem, achievement, status 
and confident has to be created for the child. This can be 
done by playing and doing activities which helps the child 
gain new skills and experiences and in this way believe 
Table 2.5 Juxtaposition between Maslow’s Needs and Development Areas 
==PAGE:28==
16
more in themselves. Even though play itself is not a goal, 
it is an activity which makes the child develop and achieve 
new knowledge. 
Belongingness needs
Language and 
communicative 
competences
Social competences
In order to fulfil the need of belongingness. It is important 
to be around others and be able to communicate. This can 
be achieved by developing language and communicative 
competences where children learn to express themselves 
and creates a contact to others with an understanding bet­
ween them. In addition to this, social competences has to 
be achieved to create relations with other humans, commu­
nicate and adjust to others while still being an individual. 
Safety needs
Gross motor function
Fine motor function
Attention
In order to fulfil the safety needs of a human, the mind and 
body has to be secure and danger has to be removed.
By creating attention it becomes possible for the child to 
orientate themselves in what is happening around them 
and give the ability to concentrate the attention towards a 
specific topic and in this way being able to detect danger. 
In order to avoid getting hurt, the child’s gross and fine 
motor functions becomes important. The gross motor fun­
ctions concerns the movement of the large muscles, where 
fine motor functions is the smaller muscles in the body. By 
developing the motor functions, the child can move safe 
around and help themselves by e.g. holding onto something 
and not lose their balance. 
Physiological needs
Everyday skills
Attention
For the physiological needs to be fulfilled the basic needs 
for the child in form of food, rest and protection needs to 
be present. 
The everyday skills such as hygiene, putting on clothes, 
eating and helping is here important. If the child is willing 
to help and be aware when the different things should be 
done, the physiological needs are fulfilled.
The child here needs to create attention and be aware of the 
fact that they have needs and that it take the time to fulfil 
them. 
2.2.5 The Play Experience 
Playing and using the imagination has been done among humans as long as they have existed. Play is creating 
a new world, where everything is possible. It is possible to make new rules, realities, along with personal roles 
and in this way allows a change in what is normally occurring. It hereby offers an oasis for creative problem 
solving and experimenting with personal mode of expressions. The point of playing is to great extent to try 
new things without being affected by it in reality (Pedersen, 2008). 
According to Huizinga there are seven characteristics which defines play for children and adults. 
“Play is a voluntary and free activity
Play is not “ordinary” or “real” life
Play is disinterested
Play is limited in time and space
Play has or is order
==PAGE:29==
 17
2. Research & Analysis
Play has rules
Play creates special communities“(Madej, 2016, p. 11)
Pramling Samuelsson and Sheridan (2002) state something similar. Even though they have found many diffe­
rent definitions of play, they find that play is pleasurable, voluntary, spontaneous and symbolic. They likewise 
state that play is an expression for an active engagement and has social aspects.   
From the characteristics of Huizinga, Caillois identified four psychological attitudes 
Agon: Competitive, demonstrated superiority and artificial equality
Alea: Chance, appeal to fortune and surrender to destiny
Mimicry: Imaginary universe, make-believe and illusory personas
Ilinx: Destabilization, intoxication, panic and shock
Along with two different principles of play. Paidia, which is spontaneous, improvised and impulsive and Lu­
dus, which is rule driven, structured and disciplined.
The two principles work as two counterparts, where Paidia is the imagination, by being fantastical and capri­
cious, Ludus is the more controlled play, with disciples and rules (Madej, 2016).
According to the hungarian psychologist Csikszentmihalyi play is not something happening once in a while, 
it is a constant flow in which the child is entered. Flow is here defined by Csikszentmihalyi. He is not only 
presenting flow together with play, he is presenting play as flow and later, flow as a state of mind. Flow is an 
optimal state of mind, where the feeling of being engaged positive in a moment is present. We forget about 
the past and future, while being focused only on the here and now. When in flow, we are completely focused 
on the activity we are doing and the feedback we are getting from it comes instantaneous. When being in flow 
in play the children are in a place with a feeling of control, they are focused, offer a goal and gives feedback. 
Flow can be experienced in two ways, challenges and skills (Karoff & Jessen, 2014).
“The conditions of flow include: 
•	
Perceived challenges, or opportunities for action, that stretch (neither overmatching nor underutilizing) 
existing skills; a sense that one is engaging challenges at a level appropriate to one’s capacities
•	
Clear proximal goals and immediate feedback about the progress that is being made.” (Nakarmura & 
Csikszentmihalyi, 2009, p. 90)
According to Nakarmura and Csikszentmihalyi (2009) a balance between perceived action capacities and 
perceived action opportunities needs to be established, in order for children to enter a flow. When in flow, the 
individual child is in a good state of mind and operates at full capacity and the play can happen. 
Takeaways 
Over time play has been defined by different experts including philosophers. The different experts agree on 
most points, but as it is different people, they also have different opinions and theories. Play is therefore de­
fined in different ways at some point, where other points is the same. In the main parts of the understanding 
of play the experts agree, whereas in others there are disagreements. One point where the disagreement is of 
significant meaning for the understanding of play, happens when talking about time. 
Huizinga states that play is limited in time and space, meaning that it has a beginning, middle and end. Hui­
zinga states that the play happens as a temporary world inside the real world, whereas Csikszentmihalyi states 
that play is not happening once in a while, but is a constant flow in which the child is in. The two statements 
contradict each other, but it can be argued that both is right. Children plays almost all the time and can easily 
go from one type of play and transit into another. In this way the flow is constant due to that fact that it transiti­
ons from one play to another straight away, but when looking at one play itself, the play is limited, by starting 
==PAGE:30==
18
and at some point ending, for something else to start. Therefore playing is a constant, whereas play is limited. 
Children are playing their way through life and is going from one play to another all the time. They may not be 
the best at staying focussed at one thing for longer periods of time and they can easily be inspired to new plays 
by their surroundings and is therefore changing their play. The play here becomes limited to time and place.
2.2.6 Different Types of Play 
When talking about play, different types of play exists. Different children plays different types of games and 
the way which is being played varies as well. 
Steenhold (2015) states that play is the biggest of the life’s existential experiments. He states that every human 
is born with a social drive and that everyone use it to experiment in play. Play is used in order for the child to 
get to know life. It contains dreams, stories, scenes and themes. Play is one of the most direct ways for the one 
playing, to create connections to others. Children uses play to learn about others and pass on parts of them­
selves. Play is a place for being curious, ask question, investigate and explore new. According to Steenhold 
(2016) play contains different action forms and behavior patterns, which leads to expressions forms including 
ways to act and behave. Based on this, Steenhold (2016) has defined 16 different types of play (table 2.6).  
Play type 
Description 
Aggression play
Play and games which allows the child to experience and expresses physi­
cal and metal anger, discomfort and dislike
Dramatic play
Play and games where the child can play and create dramatic situations 
and stories which are both real and imaginary
Fantasy play
Play and games which allows the child to imagine and express themselves 
through, by acting out something they have e.g. dreamt or experienced 
without being limited by what actually happened
Function play
Play and games where the child gets an emotional experience through 
simple and repetitive muscle movements
Guessing game
Play and games where the child has to use a combination of their intellect 
and intuition
Conversation play and story­
telling
Play and games where the child is communicating with another person, by 
both listening and talking to the person
Construction play
Play and games which allows the child to create and build something phy­
sical e.g out of sand, wood and paper
Rule play
Play and game where rules (often made beforehand) is setting the scene 
for the child and is dictating the game
Sense play
Play and games where the child senses come into use and where the child 
can sense an emotional experience
Observation play
Play and games where the child is observing other persons and animals 
behaviour, situations, pictures and activities
Romp play
Play and game which activates the child physically and is embracing the 
importance of a bit of chaos and romp
Role play
Play and games where the child undertakes a new role and act it out with 
others
Approximation play
Can be considered a play between play (break play). The child is playing 
its own game in order to be part of someone else’s play
Transition play
Break play, where the child is using one game to transition into another
Table 2.6 Description of Play Types
==PAGE:31==
 19
2. Research & Analysis
Repetitions play
Break play where the child is repeating previously played games
Unfocused play
Break play where the child is unfocused and it can be difficult to see the 
difference between what is play and what isn’t play
Every type of play has its own characteristics, which is experienced when playing. The 16 different types of 
play can be expressed through different expression characters (Steenhold, 2015) such as: 
•	
Solo Play (The child plays alone)
•	
Parallel Play (Children play the same, parallel to each other )
•	
Group Play (Children play together)
•	
Free Play (Play for the sake of playing)
•	
Applied Play (Planned activity in a playful atmosphere)
•	
Action Play (Transcendent activities, where boundaries are broken through play)
•	
Simulation Play (Pretending to be something else in a story being told)
•	
Mimicry Play (Children tries to mimic, situations and each other)
•	
Chance (Taking a change, trying something uncertain and do something risky)
•	
Competition (Children play against themselves and each other to be the best, while having fun) 
In order to sum up his results concerning play and the configurations of play, Steenhold has created a model 
called The Play Wheel (figure 2.2). 
Figure 2.2 The Play Wheel of Steenhold (Steenhold, 2015, p. frontpage) 
==PAGE:32==
20
The Play Wheel is a semiological model, expressing what play is. It contains the different play types and 
expression characters. The play types are all beneficial for different knowledge areas. Some are only relevant 
for one, while others is covered by several types of play. In order to visualise what is covered by the different 
colours. The colours are presented in the model, in order to show which kind of knowledge the play is helpful 
for.
Yellow - Personal knowledge
Grey - Social knowledge 
Black - Mathematical knowledge
White - Spatial knowledge
Green - Knowledge about nature
Indigo (dark blue) - Existential knowledge
Blue (light blue) - Intuitive knowledge 
Red - Musical knowledge
Pink - Body and physical knowledge
Purple - Linguistic knowledge 
This means that e.g. Linguistic knowledge can be gained through both conversation play and storytelling, 
Body and physical knowledge can be gained through romp play, aggression play and repetitions play, while 
Social knowledge can be gained through rule play and role play. According to Steenhold (2015) the Play Whe­
el contains everything which can happen in any kind of play. The model represent the ideal form, which lays 
before play and the child can move between plays inside the wheel, while they play. 
Takeaways 
When talking about play and playing, play is not just play. There is many different types of play, which all 
have their individual characteristics. 
Children learn while playing and the different play types is beneficial for different types of learning. Children 
not only play one type of play, they move from one type of play to another and in this way, they likewise have 
the possibility to move from one knowledge area to another. They are hereby expanding their learning. When 
children are learning, it is beneficial to use play and in order to gain specific types of play to improve specific 
knowledge areas. Steenholds model “The Play Wheel” can here be a good visual tool to make a plan with. By 
knowing where children gain knowledge and through which kinds of plays, makes the child gain knowledge 
from all the different fields. 
2.2.7 Human Knowledge and Learning 
According to Pramling Samuelsson and Sheridan (2002) learning is happening throughout the entire life of a 
human. From the person is born until the person dies, the person learns. When a baby is born, it has the ability 
to perceive and adjust to what experiences it is being exposed to. The experiences a baby have in its early 
years, shapes the baby’s behaviour and perception of life towards becoming a child and later an adult. 
Babies and children develop and learn through experience and by adjusting to the unknown, through what is 
known. Every child is unique, which means that what a child learns and needs to learn, depend on the specific 
child and when the child learns it will continuously result in new experiences (Pramling Samuelsson & Sheri­
dan, 2002).
According to Steenhold (2008) wisdom takes time to gain and a lot of knowledge needs to be gathered over 
time and it needs to be learned through practicing. Knowledge and competences is what we learn through life. 
“Viden og kunnen er det, vi lærer og derved bliver kloge på. Viden er derfor det samme som kendskab, kund­
skab, kunnen, at have lærdom om noget, herunder erfaring og kyndighed. At vide noget er det samme som at 
==PAGE:33==
 21
2. Research & Analysis
kende til noget bestemt, at forstå og erkende - men også være sig bevidst om noget bestemt, fordi man kender 
til det.” (Steenhold, 2008, p. 20).
Steenhold (2008) states that old and new theories about knowledge can be combined. He states that there are 
10 types of knowledge, which can be seen in the Knowledge Wheel (figure 2.3).
Figure 2.3 Knowledge Wheel (Steenhold, 2008, p. frontpage)
The 10 knowledge areas, can be connected to Aristoteles 3 knowledge areas: 
1.	 Theoretical - Scientific knowledge (Natural science, mathematics, theology and metaphysics)
2.	 Productive knowledge (Art, handicraft and rhetoric)
3.	 Practical knowledge (Everyday knowledge, politic, ethics and moral)
The connection is not one to one, meaning that the 10 knowledge areas are not necessarily connected to one 
of the Aristoteles 3 knowledge areas, but can in some cases be related to more (table 2.7). 
Knowledge Area
Description
Aristoteles Knowledge Area
Personal knowledge (P)
Self-knowledge and insight in which actions 
fit the self-knowledge
2. Productive knowledge
3. Practical knowledge 
Social knowledge (So)
Knowledge about others and the ability to act 
and communicate with others
2. Productive knowledge
3. Practical knowledge
Table 2.7 Knowledge Areas Old and New Knowledge
==PAGE:34==
22
Mathematical knowledge 
(Ma)
The knowledge about numbers and the abili­
ty to apply the knowledge in practice
1. Theoretical - Scientific 
knowledge
2. Productive knowledge
Spatial knowledge (Sp)
The ability to understand the spatial wor­
ld, know the different colours, shapes and 
dimensions
1. Theoretical - Scientific 
knowledge
2. Productive knowledge
Knowledge about nature 
(N)
Knowledge about nature and the ability to 
understand natures powers on humanity
1. Theoretical - Scientific 
knowledge
2. Productive knowledge
3. Practical knowledge
Existential knowledge (E)
Knowledge about life and understanding of 
ethics, esthetics and balance between factors
1. Theoretical - Scientific 
knowledge
2. Productive knowledge
3. Practical knowledge
Intuitive knowledge (I)
Sensesing what will happen next, mindrea­
ding and synchronous thinking
2. Productive knowledge
3. Practical knowledge
Musical knowledge (Mu)
Expressing sounds, rhythms and melodies
2. Productive knowledge
Body- and physical know­
ledge (B)
Understanding the human body and use it to 
express ideas and emotions
1. Theoretical - Scientific 
knowledge
2. Productive knowledge
Linguistic knowledge (L) 
Expressing thoughts and emotions through 
languages, by speaking in sentences and be 
able to learn new words
1. Theoretical - Scientific 
knowledge
2. Productive knowledge
3. Practical knowledge
Takeaways 
Learning is happening continuously through life and knowledge is here gained. In order to remember what is 
learned. First the knowledge has to be achieved, next it has to be saved in order to be remembered and lastly 
it has to be used in order to not be forgotten. But even though learning happens throughout life, it is seen that 
children are better at receiving new information than adults. In order to learn as much as possible, it is there­
fore beneficial to start gaining new knowledge as soon as possible and apply it through life. 
When looking at theory about knowledge, it is clear to see that it has been discussed over several decades. 
Where Aristoteles had divided knowledge into three, Steenhold had divided into ten, but even though they had 
different opinions, they could still be connected, due to the fact that the essentials is the same and the 10 know­
ledge areas which Steenhold has created is covering Aristoteles’ three areas. Knowledge is about self-insight 
and learning about others. It is the ability to express opinions and share ideas, it is about trying new and don´t 
be afraid of what might come. It is furthermore the understanding of others and the ability to communicate 
with them to fulfil both individual and common needs. Knowledge is about growing as a human and gaining 
new skills. The 10 knowledge areas in the Knowledge Wheel is in close connection to the 16 plays in the Play 
Wheel. Learning and gaining knowledge is connected to play. It is easier to remember newly gained knowled­
ge if it is applied often and to greater extent if it is connected to a good memory in form a fun experience and 
playing. By playing different kinds of plays, knowledge within the different knowledge areas can be obtained. 
It is important for the children to play diverse, to gain knowledge in all the areas. 
2.2.8 Learning Through Play 
In order for children to grow up and move from e.g. kindergarten to school, the children needs to learn new 
and be challenged within the following areas: senses, the vestibular system, the tactile system, the visual sy­
==PAGE:35==
 23
2. Research & Analysis
stem, the proprioceptive system, the somatosensory system and motor coordination, while they are in nursery 
and kindergarten (“Avisen”, 2017). Learning through play comes from children evolving through new experi­
ences, challenges, plays, games and competitions. In order for children to learn, they continually needs to be 
exposed to new. 
From Johansson et. al (2011) it is stated that learning as an action, is about how children learn, e.g. through 
observing, imitating, listen to, participate in, try, experiment, choose and test. Johansson et. al (2011) likewise 
states that children learns best by using play to enhance the learning. This can be done by having games pus­
hing children to spontaneously communicate with others and adjust the games accordingly. When children are 
young, it can be seen from studies made, that they can talk about play and learning as two seperate things. Play 
is fun and they love to do it, while learning is something you do at school, when you are older and you need 
to do it. They do not divide play and learning into two different boxes, but sees everything as the same and as 
long as it is fun and challenging, they are up for it. 
Pedagouge Olsen (appendix 4) states that children learns best when the body experience while the brain learns. 
She states that the body learns everything it feels and experience and it thereby is easier to remember e.g. if a 
child learns to write his or her name with their feet on a big keyboard placed on the floor, the child will memo­
rise it both mentally and physically. The child will then remember where the letters on the keyboard are and 
how to spell his/her name on it, with muscle memory and pattern recognition. She states that we use all the 
five senses to learn with and that the senses are stored in the human body, which she calls the house of senses. 
Takeaways 
Children learn while they are playing and in many cases they are not aware of it. They learn by doing and 
by challenging themselves. After learning something new, the mind and body saves the knowledge for later. 
When the learning mentally is connected to a feeling, motion or memory it is easier for the child as well as an 
adult to recall the knowledge.
When talking to children about play and learning, they understand and experience it differently, which to high 
extent is expressed when communicating with children, depending on what you ask children about and in 
which way you ask them. In the ear of the child, certain words have certain meaning and it can be difficult for 
the child to separate. For some children a playground is related to outdoor play areas, where indoor play equip­
ment at e.g a playcenter, is something completely different even though it might be the same play equipment. 
The same counts when discussing play and learning with children. They can easily tell you, what they have 
learned, how they learned it and who help them learn it. On the same time they can likewise easily explain, 
what they have played, with who and so on, but if you ask them directly; What is play? and What is learning? 
Their answers may change. Due to the fact that children do not see a difference between play and learning. It 
can not only be beneficial according to teaching the children new while they grow up, it can also make them 
learn new through playing. 
The knowledge about the use of words differing from child to adult, can be used when co-creating with chil­
dren. It is here important to ask questions and choose words wisely when engaging with children. Especially 
when bringing the children into a design process. It becomes important to get into the mind of the children and 
in that way create a common goal, so that the outcome will be useful for both parts. 
2.2.9 Interaction and Learning 
According to Bateson interaction from the surrounding has an impact on learning. He states that if interaction 
is contextualised as play, different actions can be interpreted differently in another context. Bateson finds that 
there is a close connection between interaction, learning and the forming of relations (Keiding & Laursen, 
2005). Play is expressing that the actions we do not necessarily means, what it means in reality. This means 
that what in some cases can be seen as a one thing in one context, can be consider something else in another 
==PAGE:36==
24
context. 
Play referees to the frame or context for the interaction and not the interaction itself. Play is characterised by 
which signal/messages is being exchanged in the play, true and untrue. Things being said and done during play 
is not always of the same meaning outside the play experience. 
Even though play is not reality, play is often related to reality. It is therefore possible for children to experience 
other options and try out new relations in a safe environment, in form of the play and test it before making it 
real. The commenting of the interaction of potential creativity of play, contributes to a reflection of new and 
known elements within the interaction (Keiding & Laursen, 2005).
Takeaways
Play, learning and interaction is related to each other. The interactions from the surroundings has a big impact 
on what is being played and therefore also on what is learned. Everything is connected. It is therefore impor­
tant to make it part of the equation, if there is a goal towards teaching a child a specific thing. 
The interactions can come from the fixed surroundings such as nature and playground, but can also come from 
other stakeholders e.g. parents, siblings, passer-bys and pedagogues, which can do or say something affecting 
the play. When children are playing, a lot of different factors becomes relevant. The outside impact is one 
thing, but impact from experience also plays a big role in what children are playing. They like to test new, but 
forms the basis of what they play, from what they have seen or experienced prior to the play. 
2.2.10 Design for Play with Children 
When designing something with specific users, it is beneficial to include users from the target group in the 
design process, which can happen through co-creation and co-design. 
The inclusion of users can be done in many different ways, where the inclusion ways needs to fit the specific 
user. According to Castella, Professor of Art Center College of Design, Pasadena (appendix 7); Play can be 
used in a design process to inspire the participant. Play happens when a flow is created and can happen across 
all ages. She states that play is the source to cognitive, social/emotional, physical and creative benefits for both 
children and adults and that play can be used in the design process. 
Castella mentions 11 different patterns in which play can happen and which can be used in a design process 
with both children and adults: 
1.	 Active play
2.	 Object play (Build stories - humor or sillyness)
3.	 Nature play (Biomimicry)
4.	 Pretend play
5.	 Constructive play
6.	 Role play (e.g. puppets - personas)
7.	 Media play (a specific role)
8.	 Storytelling
9.	 Games with rules (e.g. board games and hide & seek )
10.	Creative play
11.	Free play
When designing for play, with the use of playing, the play which has to be used depends on the engaging 
participants, their age, the settings and the mood. According to Skovbjerg, Professor MSO Design for Play, 
Kolding (appendix 8) mood is important for play, due to the fact that it creates feelings and can create so­
==PAGE:37==
 25
2. Research & Analysis
mething in us, which makes us remember and can make us want to go back. The playful moods are related to 
the context. It is therefore important to have in mind, which feelings the play creates and remember that mood 
can change during play and that depending on which mood the person is in. The learnings and takeaways from 
the experience is depended on it. 
Takeaways 
When designing with others, which are not necessarily use to designing products, it is an advantage to make 
use of familiar methods and activities and make the design process fun for the participants. This counts for 
co-creation with adults as well as children. By using elements such as different play types creates memories to 
the childhood for the adults, while it for children is an activity similar to what they spend their day doing and 
they are therefore more comfortable doing it. Different types of play can be used for designing and is good for 
different things, just like Steenholds 16 play types is connected to different knowledge areas (section 2.2.6). It 
is therefore beneficial use different play types in the design process. 
Castellas 11 play types for designing for play, can be compared to Steenholds 16 play types (table 2.8). The 
different knowledge areas likewise follow and can be used in a co-creation process. 
Castella´s play types for designing
Play types (Steenhold)
Active play
Aggression play
Function play
Romp play
Sense play
Object play
Fantasy play
Nature play
Observation play
Sense play
Pretend play
Guessing play
Approximation play
Repetitions play
Constructive play
Construction play
Role play
Role play
Dramatic play 
Fantasy play
Media play
Role play
Storytelling
Conversation play and storytelling
Dramatic play
Games with rules
Rule play
Repetition play
Creative play
Fantasy play 
Role play 
Free play
Unfocused play
Transition play
Table 2.8 Comparison of Play Types and Design Play Types
==PAGE:38==
26
When designing for play, with the use of play elements. It is likewise important to remember that not every 
person, adult or child is strong in the same disciplines. Not everyone is strong in the discipline of drawing or 
telling stories, which can put a stop for their imagination and participation. A combination of different play 
types can be used to embrace and capture everyone. Besides using the right form of play or in some cases the 
right combinations of play in the design process to get a useful outcome, the right mood likewise needs to be 
created and hereby the best conditions for designing has to be created. With the right mood the participants 
can remember certain situations, memories, emotions and be inspired by them.
 
2.2.11 Co-creation and Co-design in General 
“Within this landscape, in the area of participatory design, the notion of co-creation and co-design have been 
growing.”(Sanders & Stappers, 2008, p. 8) it has been growing in a way, were it is more and more common to 
include the users in the design process. 
According to Sanders and Stappers the roles in the design process are changing and the design process are to 
a greater extent moving from a classical design approach with theory, report based information and insight to 
a more inclusive co-design process, where the users are part of the design process. 
According to Lee (2008) there are different participation tactics which needs to be done when co-designing. 
There is likewise three different types of roles within co-design processes, which have been mapped by Lee:
“(1) Design Developers working with design community to transform design processes for participation. 
(2) Design facilitators designing with people to transfer design knowledge to emancipate people to improve 
their lives.
(3) Design Generators collaborating with professionals to explore design thinking to different implications.“ 
(Lee, 2008, p. 48)
Lee states that there is a difference in working with designers, contrary to working with people and the tactics 
need to address the people, which are being worked with. 
Takeaways 
Co-creation and co-design in general is more common in the designing of new products and has a big impact 
of the usability of design products. The products are more user friendly and the inscripted purpose are more 
likely to be fulfilled, than with designs where the users have not been part of the design process. When the 
users have not been part of the process, a description can happen and the use of a product can in some cases 
change. It is therefore relevant to included the users, to make the product as relevant and user friendly for the 
users, as possible. 
As mentioned by Lee there is a difference in which type of persons, that are participating in workshops and 
hereby also the roles of the one in charge. He mentions three different leading roles: design developers, design 
facilitators and design generators. All of the three roles are viable and can be beneficial to use in a design pro­
cess, but when talking about making a product for the users with the users input, the most relevant role is the 
design facilitator who is designing with people. 
The different roles within the co-design process is important to be aware of and to have a clear separation 
between, when doing a workshop. It is important that the different roles is known internally between everyone 
in the workshop, so that all the participant are away of who is who and how to act around them. The facilitator 
has to let people know that he/she is in charge, but still give room for the participants to express their ideas 
and work creatively, yet controlled. Given that the facilitator is in charge of the workshop, the outcome of the 
workshop will have a noticeable impact by how good a job is being done by the facilitator.
As there is a difference in the leading role in a workshop based on whom the participants are and what their 
knowledge is. There will also be a differentiation in the participants groups. People are not just people and can 
==PAGE:39==
 27
2. Research & Analysis
not always be put in the same category. Meaning that workshops and what is been done during workshops has 
to be adjusted to the participants. 
As there is a difference between co-designing with designers, people and experts, there will also be a diffe­
rence within the groups. One place where the difference in people is very visible, is when looking at adults vs. 
children. Both parts are people, but their experience, knowledge, imagination and way of acting is diverse and 
the workshop therefore needs to be adjusted accordingly. It can be argued that the difference between how to 
act around children and adults could be the reason for at fourth leading type added to the three Lee had made, 
by splitting the facilitator into facilitator (adults) and facilitator (children). 
2.2.12 Co-creation with Children 
When designing with children it is important to have a good process, fitted to the role of the children. Accor­
ding to Marcus (2015) there is four different types of roles that children can have in a co-creation process. 
They can be users, testers, informants and design partners. The difference in the roles comes from how much 
influence and power the individual child has, which means that a design partner likewise can be a user and a 
tester, where the users stays users unless they get more influence. When working with children, it is important 
to know which techniques, can be used, some of the techniques could be low-tech prototyping, drawings, te­
chnology immersion and mixing ideas. 
When doing co-design, co-creation and working with children there are different things, which need to be 
taken into account during a workshop. It is important to:
•	
Break the ice and make the participants feel welcome
•	
Set the scene
•	
Establish a common ground and a common language
•	
Framing the sessions in order get the right outcome
Takeaways 
The role which children plays as participators in a co-creation process can differ. It is therefore important to 
know which role the child should have before the workshop begins and the outcome which is wanted need to 
be defined before and a plan with guidelines for the workshop has to be made. 
 
In order to make sure that the important preparation is made, an initial plan for the workshop has to be made. 
It is here important to have in mind that children are all different, which is likewise clarified from the literature 
study. The plan should therefore be adjustable in order to fit the individual child. It is here the facilitators job 
to make sure the workshop is running smoothly and make sure there is a flow towards the wanted outcome. 
If the participants get bored, loss focus or don’t understand what is going on. It is the facilitator who needs to 
step in and get the workshop back on track, by getting the participants attention, explaining what to do and in 
some cases change what is planned.
At first a good connection needs to be made between facilitator and the participators (children). The child 
needs to feel safe and trust the facilitator. This can be done in several ways. One way of making the child feel 
comfortable is by having a familiar person or place e.g. a parent at their home or a pedagogue in the kinder­
garten with them when doing the co-creation. Another way to create comfort and trust is by getting down on 
their level, placing the facilitator on the floor next to the children and by using familiar elements such as toys. 
In order to set the scene with children, different tools can be taken into use. Pictures, drawings and story­
telling, can be used to create an image for the children of what everything is about. The scene also helps to 
create a common language, when the participants know what it is all about, it is easier to get a useful outcome. 
==PAGE:40==
28
The creation of a common language is vital when co-designing with children. It is not only important that 
the children understand the facilitator. It is likewise important, if not even more important that the facilitator 
understand the children. What may seem obvious for the facilitator has another and maybe not so obvious 
meaning for the child. The common language therefore needs to go both ways and the facilitator has to learn 
how the child thinks to make sure the important information is captured during the workshop. To get the right 
outcome, the framing of the session is important the different parts of the workshop needs to have a purpose 
and the purpose should be fulfilled.
When doing co-creation, fieldwork and observing persons, filming and photography can be a good tool. It 
can be used to process and document the results, but it is important to know that different precautions needs 
to be taken and rules needs to be followed. If visual material in form of videos and pictures are illustrating a 
situation among several persons, the material is allowed to be used without a declaration of consent, but when 
focusing on the individual person the rules are different. In order to obtain the Danish Act on Processing of 
Personal Data (“Datatilsynet: Sammenskrevet Udgave Af Persondataloven”, n.d.), a declaration of consent 
needs to be made for the involved person. When collecting personal data here also pictures of the individual 
person e.g. portraits and interviews from children the declaration of consent (appendix 9) needs to be signed 
by their parents or caretaker (“Datatilsynet: Billeder på internettet”, n.d.). It is therefore important to make 
both the user and the caretaker comfortable with what is going to happen. 
2.3 Conclusion on Literature Study 
From the literature study information two major aspects related to the thesis was explored, resulting a nar­
rowing down towards a more specific focus area and design requirements for a play equipment for children in 
relation to learning, together with gaining a better understanding of the inclusion of children in a co-creation 
process.
2.3.1 Focus Area for Play Equipment and Design Requirements 
All children are different. They play and learn differently from each other and they develop at their own pace. 
It can therefore be difficult to make play equipment, which embraces everyone’s needs and make sure that 
the children learn something valuable while they are playing. The children which mainly characterise the 
playground users is in the age group from 3 - 9 years. During the 7 years, where the children is a playground 
user, a lot of big changes is happening for the children and the knowledge they have to learn in order grown, 
is very different across the age span. Therefore it is beneficial to focus on a more specific age group and look 
at their needs, when designing for children. One place where learning is of big importance for the children 
and where a big change is happening for the children, is when they are in close connections with others and is 
becoming aware of their own skills compared to others. Playing with others is here part of understanding and 
communicating with others. It creates the foundation for starting school. Even though the children have started 
to explore gender, they still play together in a mix of boys and girls forming different playgroups and evolving 
together. The play is not impacted by gender roles from the sides of the children, but they can in some cases 
be impacted by outsiders e.g. adults or older children. 
From the literature study the focus area has been made more specific, by focusing on:
•	
Children 4 - 6 years old 
•	
Preschool children
•	
Gender neutral 
•	
Playing together
•	
Sharing the play experience
•	
Challenging experience 
==PAGE:41==
 29
2. Research & Analysis
As found in the literature study, children are different and they all learn at a different pace. It is therefore a good 
idea to take into consideration, that a new play equipment needs to be diverse to capture as many as possible. 
Based on the fact that different play types is beneficial for learning different types of knowledge. It is wise to 
allow different types of play to be played around a play equipment and not limit the children’s development. 
In order to have the best opportunities to learn. The children has to be allowed to explore and play together, 
across gender and age. Playing together and being able to share an experience with others is a big part of the 
child’s life, when they are reaching the age of 4 - 6 years, but when designing for them it needs to be take into 
consideration, that children prior to this have been playing parallel to each other and that it would be benefi­
cial to embrace this as well for a smooth transition between the different ways of playing. It is important to 
continually challenge the children with a suiting challenge, which fits the individual child’s zone of proximal 
development, in order for them to evolve in a good progressive way. The assignments the children meet at the 
playground, has to be challenging, yet possible for the child to achieve. If it is to easy, it might not be fun, or 
if it contrary is to difficult, the child might give up and they will not learn anything. Children wants surprising 
elements which is exiting, new and which might seem a bit dangerous and wild. Yet in order to fulfil regula­
tions and demands from the government and parents, the safety on play equipment needs to be meet and here 
the safety comes before the children’s wish for something crazy.  
After experiencing something new, new skills and knowledge is gained. In order for the child to remember the 
newly gained knowledge, they need to use it over and over again. To do so they need to be able to go into their 
memories and collect the knowledge. This is done easiestly by connecting the knowledge with a memory or 
feeling. When involving both the mind and body, the information in the brain is more approachable and it is 
hereby both easier to learn and to apply later on. It is not only the learning experience which is important, the 
application of new knowledge is important too. If the knowledge is only used once, when learning it, it will 
not be part of the skillset of the child. Knowledge and skills has to be used in order to not be forgotten. One 
thing which can help the application to begin, is if the children have connected the experience with something 
fun where they were in a good mood. 
 
When designing for children in the age of 4 - 6 years old, it is not only their wishes which has to be meet, their 
mental and physical capabilities and needs likewise has to be meet. The play equipment which is developed 
should fit the size of the children and challenge them within their ZPD. The height of children varys from child 
to child, according to sundhed.dk the average height for 4 year old boys is 104 cm, where it for 6 years is 119 
cm (“Vækstkurve, drenge 0-20 år”, n.d.). For girls it is almost the same, 104 cm for 4 year old girl and 118 cm 
for 6 year old girls (“Vækstkurve, piger 0-20 år”,, n.d.). In relation to height, it means that the play equipment 
should be designed for children in the height of approximately 100 - 125 cm. 
When the children are in the age from 4 - 6 years old they are in place in life, where sharing what they are 
doing with others is important. They want others to be part of their journey and acceptance from others is vital 
for their belief in themselves and to fulfil Maslow’s need of belongingness and esteem (section 2.2.4). The 
users needs to be able to share the experience with not only their playmates, but also their parents, siblings, 
grandparents, pedagogues or who else is talking them to the playground. They also like to differ from others, 
especially the younger children. They want to have their own place for older children and a potential hiding 
place from the adults who are watching. The switch between sharing what they are doing and having their own 
place is at a fine line and can change very quickly for the individual child.
2.3.2 Children Co-designing 
When designing for children it is sensible to include the children in the design process and in this way have the 
users, in form of children, work as experts within the field of playing. The children are the primary users of the 
playground. They are the ones going to play on the playgrounds play equipment and they know how they will 
==PAGE:42==
30
use it. By including the children in e.g. workshops, their ideas and way of seeing life, becomes more clear for 
a designer and the potential for having a more userfriendly and successful final product is better, than without 
them. The chance for having the intended and inscripted use of a new product is enhanced when including 
the users during the design process and less children will describe the use of the product. A away to gain the 
knowledge from the users is to co-create and co-design with them in different workshops. 
When co-designing and having co-creation workshops, it is always important to have a plan, know the wan­
ted outcome should be and to figure out how to achieve it. A workshop has to have a facilitator in charge of 
making the rules of the different activities. The facilitator furthermore needs to be the one setting the scene, 
without taking up to much space in the creative room. It is important to create a common language among the 
participants and make sure everyone is heard, e.g. by planning that everyone is presenting something during 
the workshop.
Doing workshops with adults and children are two different things. Where children have a bigger imagination, 
adults have a greater knowledge from years of experience. They think and behave different from each other 
and needs to be approached differently. When doing co-design with children, there are additional things which 
needs to be taken into consideration compared to co-creation with adults. How to approach them and which 
activities are being done during the workshop needs to be adjusted to the participants. 
There need to be a clear definition of:
•	
The plan for the workshop
•	
The different roles 
•	
The rules of the activities 
•	
The wanted outcome
The children need to be aware of what they are participating in and why they in particular are chosen to parti­
cipate. They need to be told what is happening, how things will be and why it is so. Before starting the actual 
workshop, it is important to get the participant to feel comfortable and to create trust. This can be done in 
several ways, such as sharing stories, wear playful clothing, holding the workshop in familiar surrounding for 
the participant, having a familiar person present or nearby during the workshop. The different roles between 
everyone participating in the workshop needs to be clear for everyone. If e.g. a pedagogue is present at the 
workshop, it is important that they step in the background and let the facilitator take charge. The facilitators 
(children) job is to control the workshop and make sure everything is running smoothly. To do so they need to 
connect with the participants. The facilitator needs to get on a level with the children and understand what they 
mean, with what they are saying. The facilitator needs to be present almost all the time, but be able to take a 
step back and observe what is happening. It can in some cases be a good idea to use video and photographs in 
order to get every detail captured. Another option is to have another person helping to observe and take notes 
(a notetaker). The notetaker has to blend in and step even more in the background than the facilitator. 
Children think fast, have a great imagination and are very creative at some points, but as seen in the literature 
study every child is different and they are strong in different disciplines. Therefore a planned workshop might 
work absolutely fine with some children, where others will find it difficult to do an activity and they will the­
refore possibly give up and be bored. It is important for the facilitator to be aware and make small adjustments 
or changes to capture the interest of the participants if needed. When doing workshops with children fun and 
games are essential. To get as much from the children as possible, they should enjoy themselves. The best 
workshop would be getting the wanted result without the children feeling that they have done anything else 
than playing and enjoying themselves. The workshop needs to end before the participants ask when they can 
do something else. It is better to have the participants wanting to do more, than leave them with a feeling that 
they could have spend their time on something else. 
==PAGE:43==
 31
2. Research & Analysis
When ending a workshop it is important to let the participants know, what they have done and in which way 
they have helped. It is important to say thanks for their help and leave them with an expression, feeling like 
their time have been appreciated. 
When in the age from 4 - 6 years old and the participants is about to move from kindergarten to school, they 
are here preparing to go to school, by being placed with the rest of the pre-school children in their kindergar­
ten, interacting with peers and learning new. In this age the children has started to play with each other and has 
begun exploring what gender is. They have likewise started to investigate who they are themselves and play 
their way into life.
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
3. Exploration Loop
==PAGE:46==
34
Upnext an exploration loop (Andreasen, Hansen & Cash, 2015) was made, here the existing context was 
explored, the relevant stakeholders were found and analysed, resulting in design paradoxes and a specific de­
sign task. The exploration loop has been conducted by using the exploration model (figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1 The Exploration Loop (Andreasen, Hansen & Cash, 2015, p. 119) 
The exploration loop deals with creating the foundation for further conditions in order to create concepts. 
Within the exploration phase a broad search was carried out and an overview has been created, the stakehol­
ders have been identified, their needs have been analysed, design paradoxes have been found and a narrowing 
down process has led to a more specific design task in combination with a goal specification. 
The exploration phase covers:
•	
Exploration of context
•	
Fieldwork and interviews
•	
Stakeholder and need analysis
•	
Design paradoxes
•	
Design task formulation
•	
Goal specification
3.1 Exploration of Context
When looking at playgrounds there are many different types of playgrounds and in relation to this, there is also 
many different types of play equipment. In order to determine what to focus on, an exploration of the context 
has been made and existing solutions have been looked upon. 
3.1.1 Fieldwork 
There are many solutions on the market, where some are more successful, by being used more than others. The 
existing solutions are therefore explored through fieldwork (table 3.1).
Place
Play
Comments
Appendix
Experimentarium
Learning Facility
Challenging the 5 senses 
is the most attractive 
place
13
Table 3.1 Comments from Playground Fieldwork
==PAGE:47==
 35
3. Exploration Loop
Frederica Playground
Private Playground
Regular play equipment 
are used  such as swing, 
trampolines and climbing 
frames
14
Arken Playground
Kindergarten Playground Children likes to be chal­
lenged
Children play in the 
same places, together 
and side by side
Children wants attention 
15
Exercise Playground 
DTU
Outside Gym Equipment
Functional for adults can 
be played on by children
16
Brøndby
Apartment Complex
Playground
Safety needs to be kept
Many different option for 
play both in equipment 
and placement
17
Odden - Århus Ferry
Play Equipment
Construction play
18
Skanderborg City
City Playground
Entertainment and art
19
Skanderborg Morten 
Børup School
School Playground
Many options 
Letters and numbers 
Active play equipment 
for older children
20
Århus Rush Trampoline 
Park
Trampoline Park
Indoor trampolines
Rule based play 
21
Århus City
Playground
Entertainment and art
22
Ice rink - Århus
Temporary Play Area
Family event 
Requires extra equip­
ment (skates)
23
Den gamle by - Århus
Play Equipment
Play equipment from the 
1990’s
New technology
24
LEGO House
Learning and Playing 
Facility
Construction play 
Divided into zones
Divided according to age
Inspiration 
Colourfull 
25
Mindeparken
Playground
Divided according to age
Multi Person swing 
26
Literature Playground - 
Gladsaxe
Theme Playground 
Learning
Connected to public 
library
Created for the children 
Nordic literature 
27
From the fieldwork it became clear that there are many different types of playgrounds (figure 3.2). 
==PAGE:48==
36
Private Playground
Outdoor Playground
Alternative Playground
Public Playground
Standardised Playground
Temporary Playground
Indoor Playground
Theme Playground
Figure 3.2 Different Types of Playgrounds.
==PAGE:49==
 37
3. Exploration Loop
Even though the playgrounds are different from each other, they have the same goal. They exist in order to 
entertain the users in form of children and create play. It can be seen that many different playgrounds have 
many of the same elements in form of play equipment, e.g. there is often something to climb on, swing in, hide 
behind and create/build something with (figure 3.3, 3.4 & 3.5). 
Figure 3.3 Climbing Tower
Arken
Figure 3.4 Climbing Tower 
Brøndby
Figure 3.5 Climbing Tower 
Fredericia
Playgrounds are places where children can be active, while using their imagination and learn different skills. 
They can play alone, side by side and together depending on their mood. 
Playgrounds are used by different age groups, where some play equipment is more suitable for specific age 
groups than others. Both the kindergarten/nursery Arken and Himmelrummet are of the belief that when the 
child is big enough and have the skills to use certain equipment, they are allowed to use it. From the fieldwork 
it has become clear that children and their families benefits from having a play area in order for the play to get 
into flow, but that the play area itself can be many thing. Due to the fact that play is almost always happening, 
the children easily move from one play into another without thinking to much about it. 
3.1.2 Interviews 
In order to know the relevant stakeholders, semi structured interviews have been conducted (table 3.2).
Interviewee
Comments
Appendix
Naja Kirstholm Bjarnov Brandt 
Nanna Frederiksen 
Alexander Bang 
The most fun at the experimentarium was the 
sensing tunnel.
Playgrounds for them is connected to outside 
playgrounds.
Play equipment needs to be wild and they want to 
be challenged. 
11
Jesper Larsen 
Pedagogue - Arken
The children can decide when and how often they 
want to be at the playground.
Safety needs to be fulfilled, but children quickly 
learns when something is not safe for them and 
avoid it later on. 
5
Table 3.2 Comments from Interviews 
==PAGE:50==
38
Hanne Schmidt 
Pedagogue - Arken
Mette Bøgevige
Pedagogue (Leader) -Arken
Children might not learn what you want them to 
learn at a specific time, but then they learn so­
mething else.
6
Rikke Hansen
Student (Pedagogue) - Kolding 
Children learns through play, when there is room 
for the individual.
10
Jakob Lærkes
Head of library - Gladsaxe hoved­
bibliotek
The playground should be designed for the child 
but also for the persons taking the child to the 
playground. 
People should want to spend time at the area. 
The basic needs has to be fulfilled in order for 
people to stay at the playground.
3
Jeanet Annie Olsen
Pedagogue (Leader) - Himmel­
rummet
Children is affected by the adults surrounding 
them. 
Children has a vivid imagination. 
The body is the house for all the senses. 
4
After conducting the different interviews it became clear how children are playing and which stakeholders are 
interacting with a playground. From the children’s point of view fun and challenges experiences is important 
for them wanting to play (figure 3.6).
Figure 3.6 Alexander (in the front) Meeting a Fun Challenge with a Friend
The three interviewed children all agrees that play needs to be fun and they need something a bit wild and 
crazy to catch their attention. For the interviewed children growing up is a big deal. They want to stand out 
from everyone younger than themselves and be challenged in a suiting maner where they can evolve, while 
still succeed within a reasonable time frame. From the adults expert knowledge and their personal experience 
based on years in the field, children learn best while playing. Children are different and what they learn might 
not be the same even though they are playing the same thing. They learn in different paces and each child has 
to be looked at individually. 
The children are the main users of play equipment on playgrounds and the equipment therefore works best if 
it is accommodated to the target group using it. In order to suit most users at once, there needs to be room for 
different play types to take place. The children has to be able to be inspired and use their imagination over and 
over again, without being limited in options. 
==PAGE:51==
 39
3. Exploration Loop
When the children are young they do not go to the playground themselves. They have adults or teenagers to 
accompany them and supervise them while they are playing. Therefore the company are relevant stakeholders 
when designing for a playground and they need to be taken into consideration when developing new play 
concepts.
 
Takeaways 
•	
Children learn through play, not always what you think they learn, but they learn.
•	
Children have a vivid imagination and do not limit themselves by what is intended by the designer. 
•	
The best way for children to learn, is by being challenged with their ZPD.
•	
All of the body’s five senses is used, when children are playing.
•	
Children wants to explore, be challenged and test boundaries. 
•	
In order for the play to continue the basic needs for a human needs to be fulfilled.
•	
Both children and adults should like to be at the playground, to let the flow continue. 
3.2 Stakeholder Analysis 
In general, playgrounds are made for children in various ages and the different play equipment relates to diffe­
rent age groups. When dealing with playgrounds a lot of different stakeholders come into play, whereas some 
are more important than others (figure 3.7). 
Children
Teenagers
Siblings
Municipalities
Parents
Safety Inspectors
Passer-bys
Playground Owners
Designers
Kindergarten Teachers
Landscape Architects 
Pedagogues
Pedagogue Leaders
Grandparents
Figure 3.7 Stakeholders
==PAGE:52==
40
The definition of each stakeholder can be seen in the table 3.3 below. 
Stakeholders
Definition
Children
They are the primary users of the playground, they are playing, having fun 
and learning at the same time
Parents
They are the ones taking the children to the playground
Siblings
They are going to the playground with their younger siblings
Pedagogues
They are taking care of children on a daily basis and is teaching them how 
to behave and play
Pedagogues (Leaders)
They are in charge of nurseries and kindergartens, and is planning what the 
children need to do
Municipalities
They are they the ones buying or founding new playgrounds
Playground Owners
They own the playground and decides which equipment is on it
Designers
They design the play equipment to be placed at the playgrounds
Landscapes Architects
They design entire areas into playgrounds
Kindergarten Teachers
They are preparing children for school and takes them to the playground
Safety Inspectors
They make sure that the safety regulations are kept at all time, to make sure 
no one is hurt
Teenagers
They are using the playgrounds to hang out on in the evening
Passer-bys
They live in the area surrounding the playgrounds
Grandparents 
They are taking their grandchildren to the playground and sit and watch 
them play
All the stakeholders influence each other and are impacted by the playground and play equipment. At the same 
time they are also impacting the playground itself. Some of the stakeholders are more central to the playg­
round than others, but the most important ones are the children, which are users of the playground. 
In order to understand the main users four personas have been made in the age from 3.5 to 6 years, which can 
be seen in figure 3.8. From the research observations and theory it became apparent that playgrounds are used 
equally by boys and girls. Even though gender do not play an essential part of the play, the personas are made 
with two girls and two boys to have diversity.
Table 3.3 Stakeholder Definition
==PAGE:53==
 41
3. Exploration Loop
Elinor Simonsen, 3.5 years
She loves the colours pink, purple and everything that sparkles. Her favorite Disney 
character is Tinkerbell and she loves to play fairy on the big bird nest swing, when on the 
playground.
“Look mom - I am flying just like Tinkerbell now” 
Emil Carl Williamson, 5 years
He is on the playground as much as possible and loves everything, which can be climb 
upon. The higher and more wild it is, the better it is, according to him. 
“I will never fall down - I want to go higher and higher until I reach the sky”
Dagmar Kronborg-Hansen, 6 years 
She loves to dance, sing and listen to music. 
She just started school and is excited about learning to write and read, and loves playing 
with her new school friends in their secret tower on the playground when they have play­
time and breaks. 
“In this tower no teacher can see us. It is our secret place, right?”
Aleksandar Libovic, 4 years
He plays with his siblings everyday. He is an explorer and loves to explore new things 
and see where it takes him. It needs to be new and exciting, but he still don’t likes to 
walk too far away from his siblings. 
“Aldin, Aldin come, come with me I have found something” 
Figure 3.8 Personas
3.3 Need Analysis
All of the stakeholders have different needs in relation to playgrounds and play equipment in general. In order 
to analysis the different needs the Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs (“Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs | Simply 
Psychology”, n.d.) is used, which can be seen in table 3.4. 
Stakeholders
Maslow’s Hierarchy
of Need
Stakeholders
Maslow’s Hierarchy
of Need
Children
Self actualization
Designers
Esteem needs
Parents
Safety needs
Landscapes Architects
Esteem needs
Siblings
Belongingness and love 
needs
Kindergarten Teachers
Safety needs
Pedagogues
Safety needs
Safety Inspectors
Safety needs
Pedagogues (Leaders)
Safety needs
Teenagers
Belongingness and love 
needs
Municipalities
Esteem and Safety needs
Passer-bys
Esteem needs
Playground Owners
Esteem and Safety needs
Grandparents
Physiological needs
Table 3.4 Stakeholders in Relation to Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs
==PAGE:54==
42
When looking at the stakeholders all five of the human needs form Maslow comes into use.
The majority of the stakeholders have the need for safety and esteem. For the main stakeholders the children 
the need based on Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs is self actualization, but in order for this to happen the other 
needs has to be fulfilled first. E.g. if the child is hungry or tired it is no longer the right conditions to achieve 
individual potential and likewise it is more optimal to self actualize when having a high self-esteem and get­
ting acceptance from others.
Where it for the children is on the top of the pyramid, the need for some of the other stakeholders such as the 
grandparents lays in the bottom. Most grandparents are elderly and have the basic need to sit down and rest 
sometimes.
3.4 Design Paradoxes
3.4.1 Discourses and Interpretation Needs
For each stakeholder there is a discourse, which is identified based on the need analysis and an interpretation 
need (table 3.5).
Stakeholders
Discourses
Interpretation need
Children
Want to play and have fun
Play area/play equipment
Parents
Want their child to play and 
grow, while being safe
Learning elements
Secure play equipment
Siblings
Want to join the play
Play together
Pedagogues
Want to entertain and 
challenge children
Play area
Learning elements 
Pedagogues (Leaders)
Want to create the best 
possible environment for the 
children, to make the better 
“humans”
Accessible and safe
Municipalities
Want an area for the 
citizens
Family friendly area
Playground Owners
Want people to use the 
playground
Cohesive playground
Designers
Want to design useful play 
equipment
User oriented design
Landscapes Architects
Want to create a useful and 
cohesive play area, that pe­
ople appreciate
User oriented design
Cohesive playground
Kindergarten Teachers
Want a safe place, for
children to play and learn
Play area
Learning elements 
Secure play equipment 
Safety Inspectors
Want to make sure the 
playground obey the safety 
regulations
Secure play equipment 
Maintenance 
Table 3.5 Discourses and Interpretation Needs
==PAGE:55==
 43
3. Exploration Loop
Teenagers
Want a place to hang out
Open access after hours 
Light 
Passer-bys
Want a place pleasant for the 
eye
Simple design
Maintenance 
Grandparents 
Want to go to the playg­
round and be able to watch 
their grandchildren play
Overview 
Resting places
3.4.2 Design Paradoxes
The stakeholders often intersect in their paths and influence each other, which can create both options and 
contradictions. The contradictions result in several design paradoxes (table 3.6). 
Conflicted Stakeholders
Conflicts
Children - Parents 
Children - Grandparents 
The grown-ups wish to fulfil the physiological 
needs, and can hereby shorten the stay at the playg­
round, while the children just wants to play
Children - Parents 
Children - Grandparents 
Children - Pedagogues 
Children - Pedagogues (Leaders) 
Children - Kindergarten Teachers 
The grown-up wants the child to learn new stuff and 
grow as a human, while the child just want to play
Children - Siblings
The different size and ability of the child and sibling 
can affect which equipment can be played on
Children - Teenagers
Teenagers can scare the children away and take up 
space on the playground
Passer-bys - Children
Playground Owners - Children
The esthetic wishes from the passer-bys can affect 
the use for play equipment for the children
Safety Inspectors - Designers
Safety Inspectors - Landscape Architects 
Safety Inspectors - Playground Owners 
The safety regulations need to be followed and 
maintained in order for the playground to be legal, 
which limits the options for the design of the playg­
round
Municipalities - Playground Owners
The municipality decided where the playground can 
be build
Pedagogues - Children
Pedagogues (Leaders) - Children
Kindergarten Teachers - Children
The grown ups needs to keep an eye on several chil­
dren at the time and can lose track of the individual
Designers - Children
The designer wants to design something useful and 
the children uses stuff in unexpected ways
Municipalities - Children
The municipality can block the possibility to play 
by making the playground too much for everyone
Table 3.6 Design Paradoxes
==PAGE:56==
44
3.5 Design Task Formulation
The original design task is to solve the prior mentioned problem statement:  
How to create play equipment for playgrounds, which will help the users to develop and learn through play?
After analysing the subject a more specific design task formulation has been created in order to narrow down 
the design task and make it more specific. 
The design task is to create implementable play equipment concepts for LEDON A/S, which will enhance 
learning and personal development through play for the 4 - 6 year old children, while allowing family to par­
ticipate in the play experience.
3.6 Goal Specification
In order to keep track when navigating in the solution space a goal formulation is made according to Andrea­
sen, Hansen and Cash 2015 (figure 3.9).
Figure 3.9 Goal formulation (Andreasen, Hansen & Cash, 2015, p. 165)
The goal formulation results in a goal specification (table 3.7) where the former goals, intentions, and needs 
are translated into reliable, functional and valid requirements and criteria. The goal specification is made in 
order to be used for later evaluation of ideas and concepts.
Factors
Requirements
Criteria
Comments
Functionality
Should create play 
Should have a learning 
element
Be able to entertain
Be able to include sever­
al persons
Be able to challenge the 
users within their ZPD
In the ages 4 - 6, the chil­
dren have started to play 
together and should be 
allowed to do this on the 
play equipment
Size
Should be made for the 
4 - 6 year olds
Be able to allow different 
sizes in the play experi­
ence
Modular play equipment 
to fit into many playg­
rounds
Material
Should be stable
Should be robust
Should be easy to main­
tain 
Be able to challenge the 
body’s senses
Table 3.7 Goal Specification
==PAGE:57==
 45
3. Exploration Loop
Safety
Should follow the safety 
regulations for danish 
play equipment 
Should be safe for the 
user to play on 
Be able to pass excepti­
ons
It is important that the 
parents find the play 
equipment safe for their 
child to use 
The play equipment must 
look safe
Maintenance
Should be easy to main­
tain
When a play equipment 
looks new, it attract more 
users
Look
Be able to starts chil­
dren’s imagination
The play equipment is 
integrated better, then it 
fits into its surroundings
Cost
Cost and functionality 
should be consistent with 
each other. 
Could be made modular, 
allowing buyers to invest 
gradually
Implementation
Be able to implement at 
many different playg­
rounds
Play type
Be able to play together
3.7 Sub Conclusion
The exploration of the context and literature gave an insight in the world of playgrounds, play, children and 
learning. It became clear that play and learning are connected to each other and are always present. From a 
person is born until the person dies. The person learns and the person plays.
The literature study has shown to be resourceful for gathering knowledge about the subject and likewise to be 
inspired by what other persons have done. By starting with a “quick and dirty” new search themes and search 
words became apparent, for later use and then a more structured search gave a deeper knowledge within the 
field. An interesting aspect of making a literature study is that other people not always are of the same believes 
and they don’t always agree, which leads to interesting points to be discovered more thoroughly. 
Doing fieldwork, interviews and collecting data resulted in a lot of new information, which through analysing 
and internal comparison made the topic more clear and the framing was easier defined. Looking at existing 
concepts not only allows the competition to be visualized, it also inspires for new ideas.
By analysing the different stakeholders and interpreting their needs, it was possible to narrow down and move 
form convergent thinking to divergent by formulating a design task and a goal specification (Cross, 2005). The 
problem statement given at first was setting the scene for the project, but in order to solve the problem best, 
the design task needed to be more specific to benefit the users most. 
The new design task in combination with the goal specification, sets the foundation for the future work, which 
needed to be done and is to be used both for the initial ideation and the later evaluation of concepts, to make 
sure every need is fulfilled. 
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
4. Ideation
==PAGE:60==
48
When conceptualising new concepts different aspects needs to be covered: The play equipment needs to ap­
peal to the main users as well as the relevant stakeholders. It is important that learning comes through playing 
on the equipment and that it is challenging, yet fun for the age group 4 - 6 years. In order to do so, an ideation 
process and later a conceptualisation process has to take place. 
4.1 Idea Loop 
Based on the literature study and the exploration phase an idea loop take place. 
In the idea loop an ideation process takes place to create, combine, visualise and complete ideas (Andreasen, 
Hansen & Cash, 2015) which fulfil the design task and brings learning into play equipment. In order to include 
the users in the process, co-creation with children has been conducted. Their ideas and knowledge has hereby 
been made part of the idea process. Throughout the ideation process different types of ideation techniques 
have been used, such as brainstorming, play dough ideation and co-creation workshops with children. The 
ideation process and the idea loop has resulted in an idea catalogue, where all the ideas are explained and 
visualised (Idea Catalogue). 
4.1.1 Inspiration Interview 
Before starting the ideation process an email interview with the landscape architect Thrane from TT+ land­
skabsarkitekter Aps (figure 4.1) was made (appendix 12). Thrane has lots of experience in designing play 
areas. She works with creating playgrounds and experience-, activity- and movement- settings/landscapes for 
both public and private institutions including kindergartens, schools and urbane spaces. Thrane states that the 
design process varies depending on the individual project, but that the first step always is about knowing who 
the users are.
Figure 4.1 TT+ Logo
It is likewise important to know where the play equipment should be placed, in order to start the design pro­
cess. According to Thrane the most important when designing playgrounds is to fulfil the users wishes and ne­
eds. It is about designing an area with high play value, having room for movement, learning, various activities, 
and likewise create common space and have the possibility to challenge the senses.
When Thrane is designing playgrounds, she is getting inspired from her knowledge and experience from 
architecture, art, culture, tendencies for the time. In combination with observations and knowledge about 
how children learn, what play, movement and learning is for children and how they use play areas in general. 
Concerning learning it is not only learning in connection to school subjects such as mathematics, but also in 
relation to physical, social, psychological and cognitive aspects.
According to Thrane it is always beneficial to include the users in the design process. It is important to acknow­
ledge, that it might not be possible all the time, due to time and money pressure. If the resources is there, the 
aim should be to include users as much as possible throughout the entire design process from start to finish.
==PAGE:61==
 49
4. Ideation
Takeaways
By learning what others do within the same field of designing play equipment educate and inspires for new 
design methods. As Thrane mentions she takes inspiration from other places, which is beneficial to use further 
in the ideation process as well. Learning is again defined as many different things, which makes the learning 
part of playing very broad and different elements can be included in the play.
It is furthermore important to design products for the users, which is fulfilling the users needs and wishes. This 
is done best by including the users in the design process from the beginning to end. The users can here be part 
of the design process through co-creation workshops and user validation. 
4.1.2 Co-creation with Children 
In order to make sure that the new play equipment will fit the users, some of them is included in the design pro­
cess. By co-creating with users, the final product have a bigger opportunity to be successful on the markedet. 
In order to do the co-creation workshop, proper preparation is essential. The preparation includes planning of 
the workshop and getting signatures on the declaration of content (appendix 9) from the parents of the par­
ticipants. In order to have acceptance to use information and pictures taken while the workshop takes place.
When making a plan for a the workshop. The most important thing is to know what the desired output for each 
phase and exercise of the workshop, in order to aim for it throughout the workshop. To do the workshop an 
initial plan (appendix 29) containing phases, title, desired output, exercises, material, time and comments has 
to be made. During a workshop all phases are important in order to get the best results. At first comfort needs 
to be created to create the foundation to a good workshop exercise. Breaks and changes between different 
exercises and during the workshop in general are essential for keeping the concentration and stay inspired. 
It is important to be prepared, but be able to adjust exercise´s content and time spend on each exercise accor­
ding to the participants. As learned from the literature study, all children are different and their experience 
and skills are different. It is therefore important to get inputs from various children. Therefore two different 
workshops with the same content about creating the Dream Playground was made. The first was made with six 
participants within the age of the target group, whereas the second one is made with a set of siblings, slightly 
older than the intended target group, in order to see if they could pull from their experience, from when they 
were in the target group and help improve play equipment for younger children in the future. 
4.1.2.1 Workshop 1: Himmelrummet Kindergarten 
The first workshop (appendix 30) was made with six participants in the age from 4 - 6 years whom were all 
about to start school in august. The participants were 4 girls (Emma Martins Juliao, Mathilde Redsø, Emilie 
Bygsø Strauss & Augusta Uhl Wohlert) and 2 boys (Mohammed Ayoub Jebali & Frederik Rødbro Busch). 
The main focus with the workshop was to create comfort and include the children in designing new play 
equipment, which is interesting for children in age of the target group. The focus on the workshop lays on 
creating a dream playground, were everything is possible. 
The workshop was divided into three sections:
1.	 Introduction & comfort
2.	 Drawing exercise
3.	 Play dough exercise
The workshop took place by having a short introduction about how the workshop takes place, together with 
what the participants role is, in order to reach the wanted outcome and a comfort between facilitator and par­
ticipants was created. 
Next a drawing exercise took place (figure 4.2 & 4.3), where the participants were asked to draw playgrounds 
and play equipment. Here every colour was available for them to use as they pleased and later they had to 
explain, what they had drawn to the other participants.
==PAGE:62==
50
Figure 4.2 Frederik Draws
Figure 4.3 Emilie, Augusta, Emma & Mathilde Draws
The drawing exercise was made in order to get new ideas, but mainly to figure out what the users (children in 
the age 4 - 6 years) consider being a playground and which existing play equipment they were most intrigued 
by. 
From the exercises the difference in the six participants became clear and their drawings were different from 
each other. Many of the girls had similar drawings and it became clear that they were inspired by each other, 
resulting in several drawings of the Birds Nest Swing (figure 4.4 & 4.5) and play houses, with a lot of details 
on the users.
Figure 4.4 Mathilde´s Drawing
Figure 4.5 Augusta´s Drawing
Contrary to the girls, the boys drawings was very different from each other and likewise from the girls. Mo­
hammed (figure 4.6) was not very fond of drawing and was not drawing anything on the paper. He was talking 
about playing instead. Whereas on the contrary Frederik had a very structured way of illustrating a playground. 
Frederik based his drawing on his knowledge and started drawing the layout of the kindergarten playground, 
with a bird perspective and was very detailed in explaining every play equipment and the placement according 
to the rest of the playground (figure 4.7).
==PAGE:63==
 51
4. Ideation
Figure 4.6 Mohammed’s Drawing
Figure 4.7 Frederik´s Drawing
The second exercise a play dough exercise, was about building dream play equipment out of play dough. The 
participants were here limited to using only one colour at the time. The exercise was made to allow different 
competences to get into use and in order to visualise their imagination and thoughts by building in 3 dimen­
sions.
Figure 4.8 Play Dough Exercise Takes Place
Figure 4.9 Mohammed Focused on the Exercise
The participants here started the exercise by playing with the play dough, getting to know what they were 
capable of doing with it and later they created play equipment and jewelry out of it (figure 4.8 & 4.9). The 
participants had a lot of fun with the play dough and different types of ideas was brought to the table such as 
Mohammed making a mask and calling himself Superman (figure 4.10). Even though Superman do not nor­
mally wear a mask, Mohammed had made a connection between mask and superheros, which substantiate the 
importance of getting to know the mindset of the users. 
When showing each other what they were doing. Different ideas were presented, among them was swings, 
skipping ropes and climbing frames. One of the most interesting things was a hotdog (figure 4.11), which the 
participants agreed on should be a size, allowing them to go inside. The users here wanted the room to be 
specifically for them (pre-school children) and have a password so that they were the only one to enter. They 
here gave an expression of needing a place where they can differ from others and connect with their peers. 
==PAGE:64==
52
Figure 4.10 Mohammed as Superman
Figure 4.11 Play Dough Hotdog 
From doing fieldwork at the LEGO House it was made clear that they intentionally had split the bricks in 
the yellow zone (appendix 25) into a mixed pile and a pile with only yellow bricks. They here saw that their 
visitors tended to build in larger scale, when only using the yellow bricks. Whereas when using the bricks in 
all colours, the smaller details, was made more clear. Therefore it was chosen to test the same theory in the 
workshop by giving the participants all possible colours for the drawing exercise and limitate the play dough 
exercise to one colour pr. idea and only one colour at the time. By doing so, it became clear which impact co­
lour options has on the imagination. According to the colours used for drawing, no limitations was given, still 
many of them only included one main colour and that the extra colours was used for enhancing smaller details. 
Concerning the single colour play dough exercise, there was looked more at the play dough´s flexibility and 
properties, than what colour it was and every idea was possible. The combination of the two was therefore 
good for the ideation, due to the fact, that it on one side avoided limiting to colours, and on the other side be 
used to show details. 
Lastly a wrap-up of everything was planned to happen, but when dealing with children it is important to keep 
them occupied and interested in what they are doing. At the same time it is important to listen to their needs, 
take breaks and make changes if needed. Therefore some adjustments was made before wrapping up and the 
workshop moved from being inside on a table, to outside on the playground. At the playground the existing 
play equipments was present by the participants (figure 4.12 & 4.13), together with them explaining what 
could be changed and what the changes could be (figure 4.14 & 4.15).
Figure 4.12 Participants in Bird Nest Swing
Figure 4.13 Removing Frozen Dirt from Table 
==PAGE:65==
 53
4. Ideation
Figure 4.14 Showing Placement for Play Equipment
Figure 4.15 Showing Placement for Play Equipment
By going outside the energy level for the participants increased and they were hereby ready to be inspired from 
the surroundings and generate new ideas e.g. a communications system or phone-like device and secret club 
houses for the different age groups. By going outside and letting the participants explain what was on “their” 
playground, gave a picture of which play equipments is most used and how they uses it. E.g. Their all time 
favorite play equipment; the bird nest swing is not only used as a swing for one person. It is also a multiple 
people swing, a meeting point, a hangout place and a frame for different games, depending on what the users 
of it want it to be. 
After doing the workshop it became clear that children affect each other, which can be both inspiring and li­
miting. The one taking the leading role, can easily take charge and effect what the rest of the participants are 
doing. It can therefore be beneficial to split up and change up the exercises. It was seen through the workshop 
that depending on which exercise was conducted, the participants had different strengths and the leading role 
switched depending on the moment. When dealing with children and co-creating with them, it is important to 
remember that they can lose track of what they are doing easily and start doing other things. This can result in 
less useful ideas, but on the other hand, they can also be inspired by their surroundings and create new ideas.
Ideas
•	
Swing 
•	
Trampoline 
•	
Phone 
•	
Candy Land
•	
Hotdog
•	
Water Station
Takeaways 
•	
The pre-school children would like to stand out from the younger children and be more independent. 
•	
They want their own place to play and take ownership over the place. 
•	
Fun everyday elements such as food e.g a Hotdog can be implemented to the playground in a new manner.
•	
The users are playing together, and need a play equipment, which embraces that.
•	
They want a place, where they can differ from others, but still show that they are the bigger ones. 
•	
Children wants to be able to play different games at the same place. 
•	
They like to make their own world and share it with others.
==PAGE:66==
54
4.1.2.2 Workshop 2: Siblings 
The second workshop (appendix 31) was made with the siblings Clara Pontoppidan Holst, 9 years and Martin 
Pontoppidan Holst, 6 almost 7 years. The workshop took place in the participants home, while having their 
parents nearby to create comfort. 
The workshop is taking the same starting point as the previous and is build on the same workshop plan (ap­
pendix 29).
1.	 Introduction & comfort
2.	 Drawing exercise
3.	 Play dough exercise
This is done to see the difference in outcome, based on the difference in the participants. Martin has just started 
school and is at the edge of the target group, where Clara is a bit older and is therefore outside the target group. 
Based on the fact that they are both slightly outside the target group, they have been chosen in order to pull 
from their experiences of recently being in it. The fact that they are close to being within the user group makes 
it easier for them to remember what the found interesting and what they were missing. They are likewise an 
age where they have learned what school is and they have become better at communicating their ideas. The 
main focus on the workshop lays on creating a dream playground, with new ideas for play equipment. 
After creating comfort, the drawing exercise took place. The interaction from the two participants was very 
different. Clara was very happy about drawing and had many ideas which was all put to paper (figure 4.16), 
whereas Martin was less happy about the exercise. He did not find himself good at drawing, which meant that 
the exercise was changed for him and instead of drawing, he explained all his ideas orally (appendix 31). 
Figure 4.16 Clara Draws
Figure 4.17 Colourful Jumping Swing 
Clara was making drawing after drawing, showing of her ideas for new play equipment. A lot of details was 
put on the different drawings and her favorite idea, a swing with tons of colours and springs, got extra attention 
(figure 4.17). During Clara´s period of drawing she choose to colour one of her ideas more than the rest. She 
did it for several reasons. One being that it was the idea she liked the most, and second she said “De små børn 
skal have noget med farver på, de er ikke til så noget sort noget” (Clara) she wants something colorful and 
fun for the users to play on.While Clara was drawing, Martin was talking and a lot of ideas was brought up, 
including slides, seesaws and other things for multiple people. Even more ideas was illustrated by changing 
to the play dough exercise, here both Clara and Martin participated (figure 4.18 & 4.19) and they made a plan 
among the two, to build all their prior ideas, out of the play dough. They here spilt the ideas between them and 
started forming them.
==PAGE:67==
 55
4. Ideation
Figure 4.18 Martin Builds
Figure 4.19 Clara Builds
The workshop here resulted in a lot of different ideas: 
•	
Triple Tire Swing
•	
Jumping Swing 
•	
Running Court
•	
Obstacle Court
•	
Fireman Pole
•	
Seesaw - with springs
•	
Trampoline 
•	
Sandpit
•	
Labyrint 
•	
Ropes 
•	
Balance Court
•	
Climbing Frame 
•	
Slides in Different Sizes
Takeaways
•	
The participants want to be able to play together on the play equipment.
•	
The participants want the play equipment to be fun and colourful.
•	
Older children find it easier to take charge and lead the way. 
•	
Not all children like to draw, but it do not mean that they do not have good ideas. It is therefore important 
to find a suiting way for them to express themselves.
By having fewer and older children doing the workshop, the focus was easier to keep, but they had less people 
to be inspired by, which means that the combination of the two workshop has shown to be important for as 
many ideas as possible. 
4.1.3 Play Dough Ideation 
To stay in the creative corner and continue the ideation in same direction as in the workshop, an ideation with 
play dough took places. Here the ideation was kept broad and divergent, everything is possible and play dough 
was used to ideate on play equipment. Different colours of play dough was used for generating ideas for new 
play equipment. Each idea was made with a single colour clay and varied from being traditionel ideas such 
as a swing (figure 4.20) to more innovative ideas in form of a twisting slide (figure 4.21) and round building 
blocks (figure 4.22). 
==PAGE:68==
56
Figure 4.20 Swing
Figure 4.21 Twisting Slide
Figure 4.22 Round Building Blocks
By building in 3 dimension gave another understanding of what is possible and allowed the imagination to 
flow freely and new shapes and functions could appear by testing different things out.  
The play dough ideation resulted in a list of ideas (appendix 32):
•	
Swing
•	
Twisting Slide
•	
Round Building Blocks
•	
Cave Climber 
•	
Slide 
•	
Hat Hide-out
•	
Sponge 
•	
Fireman Pole
•	
Seesaw 
•	
Balance Bricks
4.1.4 Brainstorming
After the email interview, the workshops with children in different ages and the play dough ideation, further 
ideation took place. In order to cover the entire ideation space, brainstorming was taken into use. The main 
focus point was to create play equipment in relation to learning, here different essential parameters needed to 
be covered:
1.	 How to make play equipment for the 4 - 6 year olds?
2.	 How to get learning into play?
3.	 How to make play equipment seem wild, but still be safe?
4.	 How to make gender neutral play equipment?
5.	 How to be able to share the play experience?
In order to make sure this was all fulfilled, a brainstorm for each of the parameters was made.
The brainstorm (figure 4.23) was made by having five min ideation for each of the five parameters (appendix 
33).
•	
Balance Boom
•	
Fake Snowman
•	
Climbing Challenge Tower 
•	
Trampoline 
•	
Large Scale Filter Glasses
•	
Tilting Top
•	
Boat
•	
Bee Climber
•	
Tuberoom 
==PAGE:69==
 57
4. Ideation
3in1 slide
Glass Bridge
Secure underlay
Surprising elements
Turn pipe for less/
more danger
Transparent 
material
Safety regulation
Floating court
- water 
Illusions 
Scare holes
Changable play 
equipment
Safety net
Figure 4.23 Five min Ideation Wild but Safe
4.1.5 Ideas  
All the ideas from the ideation processes was gathered in the table underneath (table 4.1). The users ideas from 
the workshops and the play dough ideation ideas are placed next to the five parameters and in this way all the 
ideas are present. Here some ideas can stand alone, whereas others will work better when combined. 
Co-creation 
Ideas
Play Dough 
Ideation
1. 4-6 year 
olds
2. Learning 
Through 
Play
3. Wild but 
Safe
4. Gender 
Neutral
5. Share the 
Experience
Triple Tire 
Swing
Swing
Multiple Pe­
ople Seesaw
Mix & match 
Guess the 
code
3in1 slide
Different 
levels
Pictograms
Collaboration 
parts
Obstacle 
Court
Trampoline
Climbing 
Frame
Interactive 
Playground
Unlock new 
parts
Safety regu­
lations kept
Information
Adult follow
Move bench
Climbing 
Frame
Climbing 
Challenge 
Tower
Pipe Court
Movable 
Walker
Balance to 
move
Floating 
court In 
water
Challenges 
Body, mind, 
creativity
Play around 
adults
Balance 
Court
Fake Snow­
man
Pipe Laby­
rinth
Collaboration 
Seesaw
Solve quest
Glass Bridge
Movement 
Balance, 
slide, swing, 
hide, climb
Video com­
munication
Labyrinth
Balance 
Bricks
Balance 
Court
Multiplicati­
on table clim­
bing
Scare holes
Attitude
Changeable 
size
Table 4.1 Ideas
==PAGE:70==
58
Ropes
Balance 
Boom
Foam Pit
Labyrinth 
animal style 
Follow sound 
slide out their 
mouths
Illusions
Play Area
Windows
Transparent 
sections
Sandpit
Twisting 
Slide
Multi People 
Swing
Make words 
court
Surprincing 
elements
Pictures, 
sound, light, 
touch
Changeable 
design
Parents walk 
beside it
Trampoline
Round Buil­
ding Blocks
Building 
Blocks
Create Music
Changeable 
play equip­
ment
New each 
time
Open themes
Storytelling
Slides in dif­
ferent sizes
Cave Clim­
ber
Carusel - 
Load speed
Safety net 
Jump to it
Children in 
charge
Pictures
Seesaw with 
springs
Slide
Tilting Ca­
rusel
Secure un­
derlay
Multiple 
colours
Lookout 
point
View over 
play equip­
ment
Fireman Pole
Hat hide-out
Obstacle 
Court
light/dark, 
climb/walk, 
sense
Transparent 
material
Sounds 
music
Room for se­
veral persons
Running 
court
Sponge
Seesaw 
Swing
Turn Pipe 
Less/more 
danger
Animals
Jumping 
swing
Fireman Pole
Balance 
Trampolines
Numbers
Swing
Seesaw
Ball Tower - 
Soft balls
Letters
Trampoline
Bee Climber
Caves
Phone
Boat
Tilt Ball
Candy Land
Tilting Tower
Hotdog
Tuberoom
Water Station Large Scale 
Filter Glasses
After gathering all the ideas it could be seen that some of them are familiar to each other and can therefore be 
described as one idea, which later can be developed with changes. An idea catalogue (Idea Catalogue) was 
made in order to explain the ideas more in dept. Here the ideas were given a number, title and a description 
was made in writing, highlighting the most important factors about the idea. 
An illustration was furthermore made together with a definition of which learning elements it approaches and 
strengths and weaknesses are found for each idea (figure 4.24). 
==PAGE:71==
 59
4. Ideation
Strengths
Weaknesses
Description
1
Triple Tire Swing
A three person tire swing. Three tires are placed in 
connection to each other, where the two outer tires is 
fasten to a secure frame. The tires are here inscribed 
to be used as seating, which means that the swing is 
meant to be used by three sitting users at the time. 
The users can use it as a swing, where they can chose 
to collaborate to make it swing high and coherent or 
swing out of step and see how the rest of the users 
will be affected by it.
• Can be used by different types of users
• Can be used by several persons at the same time
• Enhances collaboration
• Creates possibility for competition
• Trains the users balance
• The users trains their gross motor skills
• Can be placed everywhere
• In order for the tires to be leveled, the wires con­
necting them has to be relatively tensioned, which 
can limite the swing
• The tires can tilt  
• The users might slide of the tire towards the 
middle one
• The swing can seem uncontrolled 
Title 
Number
Learning Elements 
Illustration 
of idea
Description 
of idea
Strengths & Weaknesses
Figure 4.24 Idea Catalogue Layout
Besides the play equipment ideas, different additional elements was found through the ideation, containing 
ideas for add-ons, which can be combined with the individual play equipments. Some for the ideas such as 
movement and challenges, was already included in many of the solutions, whereas others can be so in a bigger 
scale if wanted.
•	
Pictograms
•	
Information
•	
Attitude
•	
Changeable design
•	
Open themes e.g animals 
•	
Children in charge
•	
Colours
4.2 Sub Conclusion
Ideation can take place in many different ways and different ideation processes can inspire in different ways. 
It can therefore be good to use a combination of different processes, in order to have a broad ideation. A good 
way to kickstart the ideations, is to be inspired by others and in this way see things differently and use others 
experience in addition to your own. In this way the ideation can be done even more in dept. 
When designing concepts for users, the users is the essential focus point. The concept needs to fulfil the users 
needs and the users should be willing to use it, once it is put to the market. Including the users in the design 
•	
Sounds 
•	
Letters
•	
Numbers 
•	
Pictures
•	
Cameras
•	
Storytelling points
•	
Transparent vs. non transparent material 
==PAGE:72==
60
process from beginning to finnish increases the chances of a concept fitting for the users, due to the fact that 
they are the ones whom will be using the product once it is launched to the market. 
When dealing with children as the users, it is important to acknowledge that what they say, might not always 
make sense for adults. They have a huge imagination, which open ups for ideas, which might not have been 
thought of by adults. 
In order to include the users in the design process, co-creation workshops can be performed. It is here impor­
tant to have in mind that every person is different and have different skills, it is therefore good to appeal to 
different types of people and be ready to make changes to the plan in order to capture the users and participants 
of the workshop the best. When the participants are young, the comfort for them is very essential. They need 
to feel safe in order to open up and create useful information. This can be created by familiar elements and 
by using tools they know such as drawing and play dough. To get the best ideas it is important to observe the 
participants and know when there is a need to have a break, changes exercise and in some cases even change 
venue. 
As it is for children, different types of ideation method gives different ideas. It is therefore important as an 
addition to the workshop, to perform different types of ideation as the designer parallel to the workshops to 
get as many ideas as possible. It is important to both have unlimited possibilities along with more specific and 
focused subjects to ideate from. 
By using different types of ideation and combining the outcome gives plenty of ideas, where some of them 
might be similar to each other, but with a small twist. They can then be combined when describing the ideas. 
A good way to get an overview of all the ideas, is to collect them in an Idea Catalogue and describe the idea 
with a short text and an additional drawing, while also identifying the strengths and weaknesses of the idea. 
The ideation process resulted in 52 ideas. If there was a wish for more, even more ideas could be found. It 
will always be possible to find more ideas, both brand new ideas and ideas similar to existing ideas with small 
differences. At some point you need to stop the ideation and divergent process and begin to think convergent. 
The main part of the ideas have arised with a starting point in users ideas and the ideation have been more 
focussed. The users created the foundation, and the ideas was created with their needs in mind while ideation 
through brainstorming on focussed subjects.
Within the solution frame each of the 10 different knowledge areas was covered. The ideas all covered diffe­
rent knowledge areas, where most of them covered more than one. The ideas varied from stationary concepts 
to dynamic. The ideas contained a mixture of different sizes play equipment, which is both electrically con­
trolled, manual controlled or not controlled at all. The ideas vary as much as the users and can be considered 
very different from each other. 
==PAGE:73==
5. Conceptualisation
==PAGE:74==
62
In order to go from idea to concept, the ideas needs to be sorted and then developed upon. This results in a 
divergent process at first and later a convergent process, where the ideas evolve into concepts (Cross, 2005). 
5.1 Narrowing Down 
After generating the 52 ideas and describing them in the Idea Catalogue, the ideas needed to be narrowed 
down and a divergent process has to take place. In order for the ideas to be narrowed down, they were com­
pared to each other. In the cutting down process it was important to look at the bigger picture and make sure 
that the ideas were fulfilling the purpose and was solving the design task. The segregation was therefore made 
according to the learning elements, which is of huge importance for a new play equipment. 
By doing the segregation according to the learning elements might result in a need of “killing your babies”, 
which was necessary in order to find the best solution.
In order to solve the design task, learning was of crucial importance and the more different knowledge areas 
which comes into use while the users play, the more versatile the idea is. 
The 52 ideas was compared to each other (table 5.1), according to which of them activates most knowledge 
areas (figure 5.1).  
Personal Knowledge (P)
Social Knowledge (So)
Mathematical Knowledge (M)
Spatial Knowledge (Sp)
Knowledge about Nature (N)
Existential Knowledge (E)
Intuitive Knowledge (I)
Musical Knowledge (Mu)
Body- and Physical Knowledge (B)
Linguistic Knowledge (L)
Figure 5.1 Knowledge Areas Illustration and Abbreviation
Idea
Knowledge Areas
Total
1. Triple Tire Swing
I, B, P, So
4
2. Obstacle Court
I, B, P
3
3. Climbing Frame
B
1
4. Jumping Swing
B
1
5. Sand Pit
N, B, So
3
6. Labyrinth
Sp, Ma, I, B
4
7. Running Court
B, P, So
3
8. Free Multi Seesaw
B, P, So
3
9. Rope Forest
Sp, B
2
Table 5.1 Comparison of Learning Elements pr. Idea
==PAGE:75==
 63
5. Conceptualisation
10. Hotdog Clubhouse
L, E, Sp, B, So
5
11. Multi Slide
B, P, So
3
12. Climbing Challenge Tower
I, B, P
3
13. Ball Build
N, Ma, P, Sp, B, So
6
14. Hat Hide-Out
P, So
2
15. Tuberoom
B, P, So
3
16. Twisting Slide
B, P, So
3
17. Tilting Tower
B, P, So
3
18. Sponges
B
1
19. Kinetic Sand
N, P
2
20. Bee Climber
N, B
2
21. Seesaw Multi Transform
B, So
2
22. Boat
B, P, So, N
4
23. Large Scale Filter Glasses
Sp, P
2
24. Communication System
E, P, L, So
4
25. Cave Climber
I, B, P
3
26. Water Station
N, Ma, B
3
27. Center Swing
B, P
2
28. Fireman Pole
B
1
29. Trampoline
So, I, B, P
4
30. Candy Land
E, Sp, So, P
4
31. Pipe Master
So, Sp, B, P
4
32. Foam Pit
B, P
2
33. Multi People Swing
P, So, B
3
34. Loading Carousel
Ma, So, B, P
4
35. Tilting Carousel
N, B
2
36. Seesaw Swing
B, P, So
3
37. Moveable Walker
Ma, B, So
3
38. Animal Labyrinth
Mu, I, Sp, B, N
5
39. Table Climbing
Ma, B, P
3
40. Word Count
L, B
2
41. Mega LEGO
Ma, B
2
42. Balance Trampoline
B, P
2
43. Interactive Playground
So, L, Sp, B, P
5
44. 3in1 Slide
So, B, P
3
45. Floating Court
B
1
46. Glass Bridge
P
1
47. Safety Net
B, P
2
48. Create Music
Mu, L, B
3
49. Scare Holes
So, I, Sp, B
4
50. Turn Pipe
B, P
2
51. Illusion House
N, E, L, B, P
5
52. Bench Turn
P
1
==PAGE:76==
64
In order to narrow down, the ideas with less than three knowledge areas were cut from the list. The same 
counts for the ideas, which are too similar to existing solutions. The cutting process led to 24 ideas. In order to 
narrow down even further the Weighted Objectives Method (Cross, 2005) was used based on the Goal Specifi­
cation (section 3.6), to make sure the ideas fulfilled all requirements and criteria, which is represented through 
nine factors. Each of the factors were weighted from 1 - 5 in relation to the importance of it, where 1 was the 
not that important, and 5 was of high importance. Each of the ideas were then likewise given points from 1 - 5 
according to how well they fulfilled the factor (1 being low and 5 being high).
Functionality
Size
Material
Safety
Maintenance
Look
Cost
Implementation
Total
Max 120
Weight
5
1
3
5
3
2
2
3
1. Triple Tire 
Swing
4
3
4
2
4
4
4
4
85
6. Labyrinth
4
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
76
8. Free Multi 
Seesaw
4
4
4
3
4
4
4
4
91
10. Hotdog 
Clubhouse
3
4
3
3
2
3
2
3
71
11. Multi 
Slide
4
2
4
2
2
4
3
2
70
12. Climbing 
Challenge 
Tower
5
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
77
13. Ball 
Build
5
4
4
3
2
4
4
4
90
15. 
Tuberoom
4
4
3
3
3
4
4
5
88
16. Twisting 
Slide
3
3
3
2
2
2
3
3
62
17. Tilting 
Tower
3
4
3
3
3
3
3
4
76
22. Boat
3
4
4
5
2
3
4
4
88
25. Cave 
Climber
4
3
2
3
2
4
3
2
70
26. Water 
Station
4
4
3
4
3
4
4
4
90
31. Pipe 
Master
4
3
4
4
3
3
3
3
85
Table 5.2 Weighted Objectives Method Based on the Goal Specification
==PAGE:77==
 65
5. Conceptualisation
33. Multi Pe­
ople Swing
4
4
4
3
3
4
4
4
88
34. Loading 
Carousel
4
4
3
2
3
4
4
4
80
36. Seesaw 
Swing
2
4
3
3
2
4
4
4
72
37. Movable 
Walker
2
4
3
3
3
4
4
4
75
38. Animal 
Labyrinth
5
2
3
3
3
4
3
3
83
39. Table 
Climbing
3
4
4
2
3
4
4
4
78
43. 
Interactive 
Playground
4
2
2
5
1
3
2
3
75
44. 3in1 
Slide
3
3
4
3
3
4
3
3
77
49. Scare 
Holes
3
4
4
5
3
4
4
4
93
51. Illusion 
House
4
2
2
4
1
2
2
3
68
The maximum possible point would be 120 if all factors was fulfilled completely. Non of the ideas were doing 
so, meaning that there was room for improvement for every idea. In order to get the best ideas and further 
develop them, the ones having over 80 in total was chosen. The limit was set at 80 based on the fact, that by 
keeping the limit relatively high. The results will be good and it still leaves an area for improvement. 
The cutting down process led to 11 ideas (figure 5.2) which could be further developed into concepts. In order 
to keep track of the development process for each of the chosen ideas, the ideas keeps their reference num­
bers throughout the development from idea to concept. This makes it possible to track the changes back and 
forward and improve the concept without losing track of where the idea initial came from. 
==PAGE:78==
66
1. Triple Tire Swing
31. Pipe Master
8. Free Multi Seesaw
33. Multi People Swing
13. Ball Build
34. Loading Carousel
15. Tuberoom
38. Animal Labyrinth
22. Boat
49. Scare Holes
Water Station
Figure 5.2 11 Ideas
==PAGE:79==
 67
5. Conceptualisation
5.2 Concept Analysis and Improvements
Due to the fact that neither of the ideas fulfilled every factor to the maximum, indicated an opportunity for im­
provement. By looking at the strengths and weaknesses for each of the ideas, furthermore led to improvements 
possibilities. By keeping the strengths and attempting to add more, while reducing the weaknesses increases 
the changes for getting a better solution. Therefore each of the 11 ideas was analysed and further developed.
In order to do the improvements a new ideation were initiated for minimising the weaknesses. At the same 
time, additional initiatives was made in order to give the concepts even more strengths. When creating con­
cepts it is important to acknowledge, that it is almost impossible to have a concept with only strengths. There 
will always be some weaknesses. The weaknesses therefore needs to be made clear and the extent of the we­
aknesses needs to be as low as possible. 
5.2.1 1. Triple Tire Swing
The Triple Tire Swing had four weaknesses:
•	
In order for the tires to be leveled, the chains connecting them has to be relatively tensioned, which can 
limited the swing
•	
The tires can tilt
•	
The users might slide of the tire towards the middle one
•	
The swing can seem uncontrolled 
For all of the weaknesses, it could be seen that they existed in relation to the placement and numbers of chains. 
This means that by changing the number of chains, their placement and connection points, the main part of 
the weaknesses can be removed. In order to avoid the need for having the chains very tens, more chains can 
be added, having each of the tires attached to two chains. The extra chains allows the swing to not be limited 
and at the same time it also insures, that the users will not slide towards the middle tire.
By making some of the chains optional, and adding carabiners to the chains connecting each tire to the other, 
leaving it up to the users, whether they want an ordinary swing or having the element of swinging together 
with others, makes sure that the users can decide how much control they want as individuals and together. By 
having carabiners the users can also choose how many tires should be connected; non, two or three. The new 
changes not only reduced weaknesses, it also results in new strengths. It makes the concept more changeable, 
allowing the users to decide what they want. 
5.2.2 8. Free Multi Seesaw
The Free Multi Seesaw had the weaknesses:
•	
The seesaws tilting mechanism can be difficult to adjust, when it is both for individual and groups of users
•	
The users can get jammed in the spring
Here the main weaknesses are related to the spring, having to adjust it and make sure that no one gets jammed 
in it. Due to the fact that the seesaw can be used by both individuals and groups of varying sizes, makes the 
adjustment almost impossible to make while still having it safe. The seesaw will therefore be made with safety 
as first priority and then having the tilting depending on how much weight is in the seesaw, meaning that it will 
be possible for a group of users to tilt it more than an individual. 
In order to makes sure that the users will not get jammed, different solutions are possible such as burying the 
spring in the ground, having the spring strong enough to not squish the users body parts if they climb under it, 
or by having a protecting layer of stretchable material around it. 
==PAGE:80==
68
5.2.3 13. Ball Build
The Ball Build had the weaknesses:
•	
The building blocks can be too heavy for some of the users to carry 
•	
The users can fall down if they climb up on them
•	
The bricks can be removed from the playground and be stolen 
It can be difficult to make precautions for theft, when having a concept with loose parts. The building blocks 
can have built-in alarms, which will be activated when the building blocks leaves the playground. This will 
create a new weakness in form of the need the sensors all over the playground, therefore the concept itselves 
do not have a built-in solution against theft, but the playground owners can choose to put the elements away at 
night. For the building blocks to stay on top of each other and create a stable foundation for the users to climb 
on, the building blocks has to have a certain weight and the robber material needs to create a friction, holding 
them stable. They likewise need to have a surface where the users shoes and bare skin from hands do not slide 
down. In order for the users to carry the heavy building blocks, they need to be easy to grab onto which can 
be done by having the material being able to change form. 
5.2.4 15. Tuberoom
The Tuberoom had the weaknesses: 
•	
The Tuberoom can be removed from the playground and be stolen 
•	
Other users on the playground can get stuck under it, when rolling 
The size of the Tuberoom needs to be bigger than the gate to the playground, to keep outsiders from being 
able to remove it. In order to avoid people from getting stuck under it when rolling comes by making it bright 
colours having it very visible and adding a bell to it, allowing the users to hear it coming in their direction. 
The bell also adds a possibility for making music by moving the Tuberoom around. The Tuberoom can also be 
given a certain area of the playground with a notch for it to roll in, depending on what each playground finds 
suiting for their surroundings.
5.2.5 22. Boat
The Boat had the weakness:
•	
Water from rain will be stuck inside it
To make sure that the boat will not be full of water after rainy days, different adjustments to the concept can 
be made. Either to avoid the water from entering the boat e.g A roof can be put up over the boat, but this will 
create a new weakness by increasing the cost of the concept and limiting the feeling of sailing. Therefore it is 
better to find a way for the water to get out. This can be done simply by including holes in the bottom of the 
boat. In order for having more actions which the user can play with a tiller to the back of the boat allowing 
them to pretend they are steering it.
5.2.6 26. Water Station
The Water Station had the weaknesses:
•	
Not functional at wintertime 
•	
The pipes and lanes can be removed and stolen from the playground
Water games are not meant to be played all year round, but even though the water station itselves might not 
be used for getting water through the pipes and lanes, do not mean that the lanes and pipes can not be used for 
other things. It can be used for a racing court with cars or as a slide for dolls. This means that by giving the 
concept new functions by using the imagination, makes sure that the concept work all year round. In order to 
protect the pieces from theft. The playground owners can put them away at night. In order to make it easy for 
==PAGE:81==
 69
5. Conceptualisation
the playground owners, the parts are made in a way where they can easily be stacked and takes up little space. 
5.2.7 31. Pipe Master
The Pipe Master had the weaknesses:
•	
Takes up a lot of space
•	
The transparent material can after some time be matte and loose the scary effect
•	
During summertime it can be very hot inside the plastic pipes
•	
It can be difficult to remove dirt or water if it comes inside
To make sure that the Pipe Master will not be to big for the individual playgrounds. It is made as a modular 
construction, where the playground owners, can buy the amount of pieces, which suit the playground and the 
size can hereby be adjusted. In order to make sure that it will not be to hot inside the pipes, air holes can be 
added in the pipes and domes. Another way is to create shade, which can be created by using the formerly 
generated idea Turn Pipe and implement it in the concept, hereby also adding the feature of removing the 
danger of climbing in the air. By having the holes placed in the lower part and underside of the pipes makes 
sure that air can move in and out and create an airflow, while avoiding water from rain to enter. The holes can 
furthermore be used to push out potential dirt. 
5.2.8 33. Multi People Swing
The Multi People Swing had the weaknesses:
•	
If different ages plays together, the speed can be suiting for one users and be to much for another
•	
It can be difficult to swing high while being alone
The Multi People Swing can be difficult for one person to swing, but by having the handles allows the user to 
have the possibility to get the swing started. They also allows the users to hold on, while swinging and if the 
speed is to fast they can hold on tight, while they ask the others to slow down. 
5.2.9 34. Loading Carousel
The Loading Carousel had the weaknesses:
•	
If the spring is to tight the users can lose grip of the carousel 
•	
The users might be dizzy when using it 
The possible effects of dizziness can not be controlled by others. The users need to figure out, when enough 
is enough. To make sure that the users do not lose their grip when spinning around, can be done by adding 
handles which can be used both while pushing the carousel around and while being on it. In order to make sure 
that the spring will not be spun to tight, an overload device is added to the spring, making sure that there is a 
limit to how tense it can become. 
5.2.10 38. Animal Labyrinth
The Animal Labyrinth had the weakness:
•	
The users might be scared of the dark
To make sure that the users will not be afraid of the dark, but still keep the dark pressent, can be solved by 
having different routes, where some sections on the way, lets in light, and by adding glowing elements contai­
ning pictures of animals and clues to guide which way to go. 
==PAGE:82==
70
5.2.11 49. Scare Holes
The Scare Holes had the weaknesses:
•	
The play value need to be made by the users
•	
Most fun with several users
By having the users creating the play value is not only a weakness. It allows the users to use their imagination 
and play whatever they feel like. It gives a lot of different possibilities and by having more possibilities, crea­
tes fun for both groups and individuals. The different holes in the wall can be used for more than scare holes. 
They can be used to climb up the wall in, the holes can also be used for shooting footballs through or simply 
handing different things through. The wall can likewise be used for playing different rules games e.g. Hide 
and Seek.
5.3 Concept Development 
After analysing the ideas and beginning to improve them by developing them further resulted in more comple­
te concepts, which was described and illustrated in a Concept Catalogue (Concept Catalogue). The Concept 
Catalogue contains different parts for analysing and describing the concept based on theory from Andreasen, 
Hansen and Cash (2015) (figure 5.3).
The idea with - for whom 
The idea in
Description
Strengths
Weaknesses
Scenarios
Use activity
Play equipment for multiple users, made changeable to challenge the users in their Zone of Proximal 
Development (ZPD).
The difference that matters
1
Triple Tire Swing
A three person tire swing. Three tires are used as 
seats on three swings. Each tire is connected to a 
secure frame with two chains. The tires are here 
inscribed to be used as seating, which means 
that the swing is meant to be used by up to three 
sitting users at the same time. Between each of 
the tires is a chain with a carabiner in one of the 
ends, allowing the users to choose whether they 
want the swings to be connected or not. The users 
can use it as three individual swings or connect 
them as two and one or have all three combined. 
They can chose to collaborate to make it swing 
high and coherent or swing out of step and see 
how the rest of the users will be affected by it. 
Giving the users a play equipment to play 
with others
- Users
Giving the users the possibility to change the play
- Users
Giving the users safe and stable play equipment
- Users & parents
Three seats (tires)
Adjustable chains 
Two chains on each tire
• Can be adjusted to the users
• Can be used by different types of users
• Can be used by several persons at the same time
• Enhances collaboration
• Creates possibility for competition
• The users trains their gross motor skills
• Can be placed everywhere 
• The swing can seem uncontrolled
The user wants to play
Walks to Triple Tire Swing
Sits on seat/tire
Attach chain
Detach chain
Swing alone
Swing two persons
Swing three persons
Collaborate
Compete
Collaborate
Compete
Step of swing
END PLAY
”It is so fun to swing connected to another, then we can help each other 
to get really high and if one of us is making a funny movement, the other 
one will do the same.”
- Dagmar Kronborg-Hansen 6 years
Strengths & Weaknesses
Title 
Number
Learning Elements 
Use Activity  
Illustration 
of Concept
Idea with & Idea in
Description of Concept
Scenarios Illustration
The Difference that Matters
Persona Comment
Figure 5.3 Concept Catalogue Layout
==PAGE:83==
 71
5. Conceptualisation
•	
Number
•	
Title
•	
Illustration of Concept
•	
Description of Concept
•	
The idea with and the idea in (for whom it is 
      relevant)
•	
Scenarios illustration
•	
Use activity 
•	
Strengths and weaknesses
•	
The difference that matters 
•	
Persona Comment
The number and title are kept from idea to concept and allows the changes to be tracked throughout the design 
process. In the process of describing the concept a written description and an illustration is used. The two 
ways of expressing the concept works together to visualise the concept and explain what the essential parts 
are. 
In order to clarify each concept the idea with (for whom it is relevant) and the idea in is defined. The idea with 
describes what the stakeholders want and need to have achieved, while the idea in, explains how it is achieved. 
In order to show how the concept can be used by the users, illustrations of scenarios are made to visualise it. 
The use is furthermore described step by step in a use activity model. 
In order to know where the concept distinguish itselves from others, the difference that matters is defined and 
a persona comment is added. Lastly the strengths and weaknesses are defined to know where the concept is 
good and where there is a need for acknowledging weaknesses and can have room for improvements. 
5.4 Sub Conclusion
When having a big bunch of ideas, there is a need for a convergent process, where the ideas are analysed and 
narrowed down based on which ideas are best at fulfilling the users needs. 
In order to find the best ideas for concepts in the future, is by comparing them to each other. This can be done 
over several rounds of comparison. E.g by focusing on one important thing, like in this case learning or by 
analysing it according to the goal specification made for the concept. When dealing with several concepts, it is 
good to have a weighted comparison, due to the fact that each factor not always has the same significance for 
the concept, therefore the Weighted Objectives Method (Cross, 2005) can be used. 
The 52 ideas was first reduced to 24 based on their ability of fulfilling learning elements and knowledge areas, 
followed by a reduction to 11 ideas, which could be made into concepts for play equipment with focus on le­
arning. The final 11 ideas did not necessarily fulfil all the 10 knowledge areas, but had other important values 
instead. 
After the convergent process, the concepts needed to evolve. This was done by opening up again and having 
a divergent process, where the concepts are improved and made more specific, by allowing changes and ad­
ditions. 
All concepts have both strengths and weaknesses. The weight of them is what matters. In order have the best 
concepts the strengths need to exceed the weaknesses. It can therefore be a necessity to make changes to the 
concepts in order to remove weaknesses and increase strengths. 
To present the different concepts, before they are created in real life, can be done in a Concept Catalogue, 
where deeper explanations compared to the idea catalogue. The idea with and idea in for the concepts needs to 
be expressed, as well as the use of it. Here mapings of the use activity is good for explaining the use, together 
with illustrations of possible scenarios. By defining the difference that matters makes it easier for the readers 
to know where the concept stands out from others and hereby what to focus on.
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
6. Concept Selection
==PAGE:86==
74
6.1 Concept Vulnerability with LEDON A/S
To conduct a well documented concept selection suiting for both the users and the company, LEDON A/S was 
included in the selection process of comparing the concepts to each other.
In order to do a comparison of the 11 concept, each concept was analysed according to how well they fulfil the 
universal virtues (Andreasen, Hansen & Cash, 2015). 
6.1.1 Universal Virtues
Cost - The price compared to what the products value is for the users, is most beneficial to be as low as pos­
sible, while giving as much value as possible. 
Quality - The quality of the material and the durability has to be as high as possible, in order to last longer 
and have minimal maintenance. 
Time - How much time the users are occupied, when using the concept and have a feeling of wanting to use 
it again. The more time the user spends using the concept the more successful it is. 
Efficiency - How efficient the concept fulfils the task of learning through play. The higher the efficiency is, 
the better the concept.
Flexibility - Flexibility according how many types of users the concept is suitable for. The flexibility has to be 
as high as possible, in order to reach the most users. 
Risk - Risk according to safety. The risk has to be as low as possible, in order to keep the users safe. 
Environmental effects - To fit into communities playgrounds, the concept needs to be environmental friendly 
and have as low impact on the environment as possible.
6.1.2 Comparison of Concepts
The comparison was made in collaboration with LEDON A/S in order to see which concept was most suitable 
and desired from their side. Each universal virtues was weighted from 1 - 5 according to importance from LE­
DON A/S´s side. All the concepts were then ranked from 1 - 5 according to how well, they fulfil the universal 
virtues, with 1 being the lowest and 5 being the highest.
Cost
Quality
Time
Efficiency
Flexibility
Risk
Environmental 
Effects
Total Score
Weight
5
5
2
1
3
4
5+
Grade
High ►
Low
Bad ►
Good
Low ►
High
Low ►
High
Low ► 
High
High ► 
Low
High ► 
Low
1. 
Triple 
Tire Swing
5
5
3
4
5
1
2
89
8. Free Multi 
Seesaw
2
5
3
3
2
4
1
71
13. Ball 
Build
2
4
3
5
4
1
1
62
15. 
Tuberoom
4
4
3
2
5
5
3
98*
22. Boat
3
5
3
3
2
2
2
73
Table 6.1 Universal Virtues Comparison
==PAGE:87==
 75
6. Concept Selection
26. Water 
Station
5
2
5
5
4
5
3
97
31. Pipe Ma­
ster
1
5
3
3
4
1
3
70
33. Multi Pe­
ople Swing 
4
5
1
3
4
3
4
94
34. Loading 
Carousel
5
4
4
5
4
2
2
88
38. Animal 
Labyrinth
1
1
3
2
2
5
4
64
49. Scare 
Holes
3
5
3
2
3
1
3
76
*The concept already exist successfully on the market
The weighted evaluation resulted in having the top five concepts being:
•	
Tuberoom (98 points)
•	
Water Station (97 points)
•	
Multi People Swing (94 points)
•	
Triple Tire Swing (89 points)
•	
Loading Carousel (88 points)
6.2 Concepts in the Eyes of LEDON A/S
After the comparison with LEDON A/S, Skøtt was likewise asked some questions about the concepts, to get 
LEDON A/S´s perspective on them and to be sure that the concept which is further developed, will be suiting 
for the users as well as LEDON A/S. 
Which concept is best concerning learning for 4-6 year old?
26 Water Station is the best solution for learning for the 4-6 year old. Water play is always fun and full of po­
tential for learning. If it is further developed and additional elements are made for the concept, it will be even 
stronger. 
As a strong runner up is 13 Ball Build. If the round shapes are change from bening only round to being diffe­
rent types of geometrical shapes. The geometrical building blocks would easily be used by kindergartens and 
schools to teach the users about shapes and give them a better understanding of how the different shapes can 
be put together and e.g. have two triangles forming a square.
Which concept is most interesting for LEDON A/S?
Currently LEDON A/S do not have any dynamic products, but it is something which is being aimed for to 
implement in the future, therefore 34 Loading Carousel is an interesting concept. It is something familiar to 
the users, but with an extra twist, giving the concept a new dimension of being dynamic and supricing at the 
same time.
Which concept is most likely to be implemented by LEDON A/S?
As it is now, the concept 8 Free Multi Seesaw is the concept, which is most likely to be implemented by LE­
DON A/S. Based on the fact that it is possible for them to produce it, keep a good quality, sustain a high safety 
and keep the product within a reasonable price range. The concept, can easily be included in LEDON A/S´s 
existing themes by adjusting the colours to the themes. The concept can furthermore be implemented easily on 
the playgrounds, due to the size and simplicity of it and the fact that multiple persons can benefit from using 
it. It will be a good addition to their exciting products. 
==PAGE:88==
76
Which concept is most LEDON-like?
The concepts most LEDON-like according to which concepts is most in the spirit of LEDON A/S, is 34 Loa­
ding Carousel and 8 Free Multi Swing. The Loading Carousel is missing from the sortiment at the current 
moment, but would fit in and improve the sortiment by adding a dynamic part to the existing theme concepts. 
It could furthermore easily work side by side with the existing part. Likewise would the Free Multi Seesaw, 
which could be thematiced with small adjustments and be implemented next to existing play equipment or as 
part of completely new playgrounds.
The questions here showed that the concepts which was found most interesting according to LEDON A/S was:
•	
26 Water Station
•	
13 Ball Build
•	
34 Loading Carousel
•	
8 Free Multi Seesaw
6.3 LEDON´s Top 3
After the the comparison and questions Skøtt was asked to rank the concepts as a top 3, which resulted in:
•	
8 Free Multi Seesaw 
•	
34 Loading Carousel 
•	
26 Water Station
The choice for the three concepts Skøtt finds most interesting according to the future of LEDON A/S is made 
based on what he sees as being most beneficial and marketable for the company. As a side note Skøtt menti­
ons that the concept with the biggest potential learning wise lays in 13 Ball Build, if the concept is changed 
slightly, by adding other geometrical shapes and pitching the idea to kindergartens and schools. Even though 
Skøtt finds it very interesting, he acknowledge that LEDON A/S as it is now, would not be the company for 
developing it, due to lack of knowledge within the field of materials and surface texture. 
6.4 Selected Concepts
Based on the evaluation of the concepts according to its vulnerability in relation to the universal virtues, LE­
DON A/S´s thoughts about the concepts strengths, marketable possibilities in the future and the wishes from 
LEDON A/S towards what they see fitting into their sortiment of products. The two concepts 8 Free Multi 
Seesaw (figure 6.1) and 34 Loading Carousel (figure 6.2) is chosen for further development.
Figure 6.1 8 Free Multi Seesaw
Figure 6.2 34 Loading Carousel 
==PAGE:89==
 77
6. Concept Selection
Even though it might not be the concepts scoring the highest, which is chosen to further development. It is the 
concepts working best with LEDON A/S´s company values. 
6.5 Sub Conclusion
When deciding which concept to further develop, when working with a company needs to be made in close 
collaboration in order to fulfil the company’s needs as well as the users needs. The concepts vulnerability ne­
eds to be evaluated with the company, which can be done by evaluating according to the 7 Universal virtues; 
Cost, Quality, Time, Efficiency, Flexibility, Risk and Environmental effects. In order to get a proper outcome 
it is vital to have a clear definition of the virtues. 
It is important to acknowledge that even though one concept is getting a high score in the comparison and is a 
good concept, it might not be a suiting concept for the company. It is therefore important to ask about the com­
pany’s thoughts and take them into consideration as well, when deciding which concept to further develop. 
In the case of designing play equipment for children in the age of 4 - 6 years old in relation to learning for 
LEDON A/S two of the concepts is both scoring high in the comparison and is suiting and realisable for the 
company to implement in the nearest future, therefore these two; 8 Free Multi Seesaw and 34 Loading Ca­
rousel are chosen to look deeper into and has the possibility of combining the concepts, if it makes senses, to 
figure out the best solution for the company. 
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
7. Detailing & Justification
==PAGE:92==
80
In order to get the best possible concept, the two chosen concepts need to be analysed and improved further. 
The possibility of combining the two also needs to be taken into consideration. 
7.1 Description and Analysis of the Selected Concepts
The two selected concepts; 8 Free Multi Seesaw and 34 Loading Carousel were described side by side, to open 
up for possible shortcomings. They were likewise analysed to figure out which concept to proceed with for 
final development. 
7.1.1 Free Multi Seesaw
Figure 7.1 Free Multi Seesaw Illustration
A seesaw with seating shaped as a bowl placed on top of a strong spring (figure 7.1). The bowl can contain up 
to three users in the age from 4 - 6 years at the same time. A grib is placed alongside the edge of the bowl, for 
the users to hold on to while they tilt from side to side. The users can make the seesaw tilt by moving back and 
forward or sideways, thereby changing the center of gravity, making the bowl change direction. The spring 
itself is equipped with a stretchable material, which follows the spring as the seesaw tilts. The stretchable 
material works as a safety precaution, making sure that the users can not get jammed in it. The seesaw needs 
to have room around it in order for it to tilt freely and give the users the best experience possible. Having free 
space furthermore opens up for other activities to take place around the seesaw and can include even more 
users, by e.g. having the users play around it or push it to tilt it even more when others are placed inside it. 
7.1.2 Loading Carousel
Figure 7.2 Loading Carousel Illustration
==PAGE:93==
 81
7. Detailing & Justification
A carousel where the users manually can make the carousel spin around (figure 7.2). The Loading Carousel 
is a familiar element in form of a carousel, but has a twist in form of an option of loading the carousel and 
then use the power to spin. The carousel spins around the center of the platter in a speed depending on the 
users. The users have two options when spinning the carousel. One being the traditional way, where the users 
run around pushing the carousel, giving it the speed and allows it to spin as long as they keep moving. The 
other being the option of loading a spring and releasing the tension to make it spin. The two different ways of 
making it spin depends on which direction the users push it. In order to make the pushing easier the carousel 
is equipped with handles, which are extended over the ground, allowing the user to walk and run besides the 
platter and push the handle in front of them. For the loading option an overload devices is placed at the spring, 
to make sure the users can not load the carousel to tight. A limitation is set, in order to avoid spinning too 
fast no matter which power source is chosen. The handles used for pushing the carousel around are extending 
towards the center of the carousel, allowing the users to hold on to it while spinning.
7.2 Comparison
As described and illustrated in the Concept Catalogue, both 8 Free Multi Seesaw and 34 Loading Carousel are 
concepts, which are being versatile and which are capturing many different users at the same time. Between 
the two concepts there are several similarities as well as differences. 
7.2.1 Similarities 
•	
The size of the play equipment within the concept is relatively small
•	
The products can be implemented easily on playgrounds 
•	
They can be used by both individuals and multiple users 
•	
They accommodates different levels of users
•	
They both have an element of movement
•	
They train the users gross motor functions 
•	
They are beneficial for the knowledge areas: Social Knowledge, Body - and Physical Knowledge and 
Personal Knowledge
•	
They can easily be made part of LEDON A/S´s sortiment
7.2.2 Differences
•	
Their movement pattern differ from each other. One tilts, whereas the other spins
•	
The placement of the users while they are on the play equipment is different on the Seesaw they sit and on 
the carousel they stand
•	
The handles are designed differently
•	
The users can easily jump on and of the carousel
7.3 Combinations 
By looking at the two concepts it can be seen that there is a possibility of combining them to new concepts.
The two combined concepts can result in different concepts, two combinations can be: 
1) The Seesaw Carousel, where a carousel is placed on top of a a spring allowing the entire carousel to tilt 
while it spins around.
2) The Carousel Seesaw, where a seesaw is placed on top of a carousel, likewise allowing the users to spin 
around and tilt at the same time.  
The combinations would be feasible to implement on playgrounds, and can be used by the company. They will 
bring new elements to the market and can be used by various users. As it is now LEDON A/S are seeking to 
add more dynamic play equipment to their solutions. In order to do so successfully, the dynamic part has to 
be a main part of the play equipment and has to be kept simple. The users can give the play equipment new 
==PAGE:94==
82
meaning without putting to much work into it. This means that it often is beneficial to focus on one specific 
thing. Go all in on the specific element and then let it be up to the users to make different applications for it 
and play what they feel like. 
When designing for children it is important to remember that their imagination is huge and that they learn 
from experience, from what they have seen and done (section 2.2.7). This means that they do not always use 
products as the are inscribed to do and even though the play equipment is simple, the play on it can be endless 
depending on the users. 
When doing simple concepts, the quality can be raised and the users gets a great product which works. There 
is no need to try to capture everything at once. The product is designed to be placed at a playground alongside 
other play equipment and the users can be inspired by the surroundings and their imagination.
7.4 Important Organs 
The essence of each concept manifests itself through its functions. In order to have the functions, different 
organs need to be present (table 7.1). 
Organ
Function
8. Free Multi Seesaw
Tilting organ
Allowing the Seesaw to tilt in every direction, while 
keeping the users placed over ground
Seating organ
A place for the users to be seated while they use the 
play equipment
Gripping organ
Something to hold on to while using the play equip­
ment and works as a safety precaution
Danger of clamping organ
Safety precaution for the users not to get clamped
34. Loading Carousel
Platter organ
A place for the users to be while using the play 
equipment
Spinning organ
Allowing the carousel to spin around
Gripping organ
A safety precaution for to hold on to while using the 
play equipment
Pushing organ
A way to push the carousel around
Loading organ
Allowing the users to load and release power to the 
carousel
Overload organ
Making sure that the tension of the loading organ 
will not be too tense
Speed Regulation organ
An organ, regulating the possible speed given to 
protect from unintended use
Table 7.1 Organ Description 
==PAGE:95==
 83
7. Detailing & Justification
Counting for both concepts, is that they need organs for safety, a place for the user to hold on to and for mo­
vement. The same counts if the two are combined (section 7.3). All the organs are vital for the concepts to 
succeed and for the users to spend time on the play equipment. In order for the concepts to be successful, the 
organs therefore need to be made in the best possible way. 
7.5 Concept Selection 
In order to develop the best concept, different things need to be investigated. For the concepts to be realisable, 
different tests according to shape, material and look need to be conducted. This is best done by focussing on 
one specific concept. 
Both concepts have potential for LEDON A/S and both concepts is seen as similar products in the company’s 
sortiment. LEDON A/S has several different seesaws (figure 7.3) fitting into their different themes, here the 
main part of them are made for one person and in some cases two. The Free Multi Seesaw hereby stands out 
by having room for more and by being able to tilt in every direction, while holding on to a handle. 
LEDON A/S´s carousels (figure 7.4) are made in different designs and the users can make them spin around 
the center with manual power either by turning around the center or by pushing on the side. The Loading Se­
esaw have the same essentials, but adds something extra compared to the rest by having a loading option and 
makes the product dynamic.
Figure 7.3 A Selection of LEDON A/S Existing Seesaws 
(“Vippedyr Til Børn - Vælg Mellem 30 Godkendte Vippe Dyr På Fjedre”, n.d.)
==PAGE:96==
84
For LEDON A/S the safe choice is the Free Multi Seesaw. It is easy to implement in their existing themes 
and they already have the knowledge from similar products to further develop it. They therefore knows which 
strength and size e.g. the springs shall have. Even though the Free Multi Seesaw is the safe and easy choice, it 
might be too easy and the result will not give the company a big enough difference compared to their exiting 
seesaws.
When looking at the carousel the basic knowledge is existing in relation to e.g. ball bearings, size, material, 
hight and safety. Here the loading organism and overload organism is what needs to be incorporated. 
According to what would give LEDON A/S´s the best addition to their sortiment and add new existing ele­
ments the Loading Carousel is chosen for further development. 
7.6 Safety Precautions 
When building and designing play equipment, different safety precautions need to be taken and safety regu­
lations need to be followed. 
7.6.1 Dangerous Social Media Trends
When further developing the Loading Carousel, it is important to look at safety for intended and unintended 
users. Over the last couple of years it has become a trend for teenagers to use carousels in a new way and post 
the use on social media (figure 7.5). The teenagers and young adults places themselves in the carousel and a 
scooter´s tire is placed right next to the platter of the carousel. They start the scooter and spin the platter, by 
using the power from the scooter. By doing so the carousel spins extremely fast and the users inside the carou­
sel, sometimes fall out due to the speed and they can get hurt badly. 
Figure 7.4 A Selection of LEDON A/S Existing Carousels 
(“Karruseller, Spinners Og Svævebaner - LEDON A/S”, n.d.)
==PAGE:97==
 85
7. Detailing & Justification
Figure 7.5 Scooter Carousel Complications on Youtube.
(“Carousel Scooter - YouTube”, n.d.)
7.6.2 Safety Regulations Dansk Standard (DS/EN) 
Besides the safety needs, which are made strongly visible on social media in form of people inscribing the 
products in new ways, the basic needs for safety furthermore needs to be kept. 
In Denmark products need to fulfil certain standards called Dansk Standard. For playgrounds in general DS/
EN 1176 and DS/EN 1177 needs to be fulfilled and more specific for carousels DS/EN 1176-5. 
DS/EN 1176-1 is describing the safety regulations according to general safety requirements and test methods 
for playgrounds (Standard, 2008b).
DS/EN 1177 is describing safety regulations concerning the impact attenuating playground surfacing and is 
e.g  determining what is considered critical fall height (Standard, 2009).
DS/EN 1176-5 is describing safety regulations according to playgrounds with a specific focus on carousels 
(Standard, 2008a). According to the standards, the safety precautions differ according to which design the ca­
rousel has. In the standards 5 different types of carousels are defined (figure 7.6) all with different designs and 
hereby also to some degree different safety regulations, which applies for the specific design.
The five types of carousels
•	
Carousel type A) Rotating Chairs		
•	
Carousel type B) Classic Carousel
•	
Carousel type C) Hanging Glides		
•	
Carousel type D) Track-driven Carousel
•	
Carousel type E) Giant Revolving Disks
When looking at the different types of carousels. It can be seen that the one which is most similar to the Loa­
ding Carousel is  B) Classic Carousel. It is therefore the regulations for this, which the concept should be build 
around. Among other things, the regulations include different specifications (table 7.2).
Here some of the specifications are not concerning the play equipment itselves. 
==PAGE:98==
86
Carousel type A) Rotating Chairs
Carousel type B) Classic Carousel
Carousel type C) Hanging Glides
Carousel type D) Track-Driven Carousel
Carousel type E) Giant Revolving Disks
Figure 7.6 Carousel Types (DS/EN 1176-5)
==PAGE:99==
 87
7. Detailing & Justification
Regulation Area
Regulation Specification
Free height of fall
No more than 1000 mm at any point
Impact area around carousel
No less than 1000 mm
Free space above carousel
At least 2000 mm
Free space around carousel
At least 2000 mm
Axis
Maximum incline of 5° from vertical
Speed of rotation
No more than 5 m/s
Superstructures
Shall not overlap the platform edges
Design of platform
Shall comprise a circular enclosed solid platform
Table 7.2 Regulation Areas and Specifications (DS/EN 1176-5)
The implementation of it mainly concerns placement and underlay. Even though it is not part of the equipment 
it still needs to be thought into the concept. If not, the concept will not be approved and the play equipment 
can not be implemented anywhere.
7.7 Strengths and Weaknesses of the Concept 
After analysing and reducing the number of concepts to one, the strengths and weaknesses are once again 
defined and new have arised (table 7.3). 
Strengths
Weaknesses
Allows single and multiple users to play on it 
Accommodates different levels of users
Allow others to take part in the play experience
Adds a new feature to something familiar 
Has a surprising element
Can easily be implemented on playgrounds 
Can quickly be fitted into different theme playg­
rounds
Challenge the users understanding of actions and 
reactions 
The safety regulations need to take unintended use 
into consideration
The users might be dizzy when using it 
It can be difficult to calculate the overload device to 
fit one and more users
Stopping the carousel in high speed can be difficult 
for the users 
The part which the users, can use when pushing the 
carousel around (superstructures) can not extend the 
carousel platform
The speed of rotation has to be limited, to not ex­
ceed 5 m/s 
Table 7.3 Strengths and Weaknesses for Loading Carousel
Especially the weaknesses need to be looked upon and solutions to the most important ones need to be found. 
Like mentioned in section 5.2 it is not possible to remove every weakness, but they can be limited. Some 
weekensess have greater meaning than others, therefore the weaknesses have been ranked according to im­
portance. 
==PAGE:100==
88
1.	 The safety regulations need to take unintended use into consideration
2.	 The speed of rotation has to be limited, to not exceed 5 m/s 
3.	 The part which the users, can use when pushing the carousel around (superstructures) can not extend the 
carousel platform
4.	 It can be difficult to calculate the overload device to fit one and more users
5.	 Stopping the carousel in high speed can be difficult for the users 
6.	 The users might be dizzy when using it 
Most of the weaknesses are safety measures and the most important one is not related to the intended use and 
users, but to what other secondary users can decide what to use the concept for. If there in a weaknesses for 
the concepts is a completely lack of fulfilling the safety, a solution needs to be found and be fulfilled for the 
concept to be launched on the danish market. If the weaknesses on the other hand has the safety obtained, but 
can be improved it would be beneficial for the concept to improve and will increase the potential for sale. The 
two most important weaknesses are concerning safety regulations for unintended use and the maximum speed 
and can be considered related to each other. By making sure that the limit of speed can not exceed 5 m/s also 
ensures that unintended use in form of the social media trend with scooters (section 7.6.1) can not occur and 
will hereby prevent that type of danger. 
7.8 Testing and Analysis
In order to have the concepts as good as possible, testing can be used to validate and improve the concept. To 
test the solution ideas, simple prototypes and mockups of the concept and the different elements have been 
used.
Solutions need to be found for the different important organs and testing needs to be done to verify the solu­
tions. In order to do so ideation was used to find the different possible solutions (table 7.4). The solutions in 
many cases consist of different parts including e.g smaller things like screws and bolts, which in itselves is 
not giving the organ it´s function, but without it the function will not be possible. The function was possible 
through the interaction between more and less function giving parts. 
Organ
Solutions
Comments
Platter organ
Metal 
- Stainless Steel
- Cast iron 
Plastic 
- Polyethylene
- Nylon
- Polycarbonate
Wood
Composite
Enhanced material 
The platter needs to enclosure all 
the inner parts and make sure that 
the users can not get jammed.
Spinning organ
Ball bearing 
Plain bearing
Roller bearing
Magnetic bearing
Fluid bearing
Thrust bearing
The spinning organ needs to spin 
smoothly, while keeping a lot of 
weight on a horizontal platter.
Table 7.4 Solutions and Comments Concerning Organs
==PAGE:101==
 89
7. Detailing & Justification
Gripping organ
Metal rod
Plastic rod
Rubber handle 
Leather 
Surface texture 
Rod design 
The size of the gipping organ is 
important for the users to hold on 
to it with their small hands.
The placement of the holding 
point can make it easier to hold 
on to.
Pushing organ
Handle - Push
Handle - Pull
Fixed
Foldable 
Rope 
The users should have something 
they can easily hold onto when 
pushing the carousel around, but 
which fulfils the safety regulations 
and do not exceed the platter.
Loading organ
Spiral Spring
Clockwork toys
Elastic Band - Rubber 
Gearing 
The loading organ is going to be 
used by turning one way and must 
not limitat the other way.
Overload organ
Overload mechanism
The overload mechanism needs 
to work when loading the loading 
organ.
Speed regulation organ
Friction 
Limitation 
Stop function 
Brakes 
The speed shall fulfil the safety 
regulation, yet be fun and seem 
fast.
7.8.1 Platter Organ
The platter organ needs to be made according to DS/EN 1176 - 1, 3.3 “a closed rotating platform whose user 
stations are defined by the upper side of the platform itself and/or by additional seats or handholds that are ri­
gidly fixed on the platform and/or the central shaft.”(Standard, 2008b, p. 6) This means that the platter should 
have as little as possible elements going beyond the platform itself. The surface of the platform shall cover all 
the loose parts and make sure that they are covered for the users.
The platter organs main part is a platform on which the users can stand on while they spin around. The platter 
organ is the biggest and most visible organ. It is the organ on which users are placed on. It contains the spin­
ning organ and is covering for the loading, overload and speed regulation organ. In order to carry the weight 
of the users and have a high durability the base of the platform is made in stainless steel. Carousels made with 
a stainless steel platforms already exist in LEDON A/S´s sortiment, which means that they have the techno­
logy to produce it. Steel can be slippery when wet if no structure is added. Structure in metal can be painful 
if the users fall on it. For that reason a layer of rubber with a rough surface is applied to the top surface of the 
platform. The rubber furthermore softens the fall if the users fall. 
To fit many users on the platform at the same time, the diameter of the platform is selected to be 2000 mm, 
where a center rod is placed in the middle. The top surface of the platform is slightly bended from the center 
towards the edges to avoid rain water from being collected on top of it. To avoid having shape edges on the 
platform the edges of the platform is rounded. The round edges protect the users from getting hurt and helps 
prevent unintended use from e.g. teenagers and young adults with scooters (section 7.6.1). By having a round 
surface it becomes more difficult for the wheels of a scooter to stay on it. 
7.8.2 Spinning Organ
In order to decide which parts for the spinning organ are most suitable for the concept, the different solutions 
==PAGE:102==
90
was compared to each other. Here especially the bearings are of great importance. The bearings are compared 
according to their capabilities and different factors, where each is assessed and graded with: Low, Moderate 
and High (table 7.5). According to load it is better the higher it is. Whereas the rest is best, when it is low. 
The bearing needs to be able to spin around, while carrying the weight of a platter with users on top. It has 
to be placed on an axis and hereby have the load placed as axial/thrust loads on the bearing. The axial load is 
therefore the most important load. Friction needs to be as low as possible to have a smooth slide, but at the 
same time the friction can be good for keeping the speed limit and fulfil the safety regulations. By adding 
lubrication to the bearing the friction can change. Whether the type of bearing is using lubrication or not, is 
market under Friction in brackets with +/- L. For some of the solutions both options is viable. They work both 
with and without lubrication, but is having a lower friction when the lubrication is added. 
Besides having an influence on the smoothness of the bearings turning, lubrication and friction likewise has 
an influence on maintenance. According to maintenance it can in some cases be valuable to use lubrication, 
but can in other cases make the maintenance more difficult to keep. If the bearing slides more smooth, it will 
last longer. If the friction is low, the bearing will last longer, but if using lubrication it needs to be added once 
in a while. 
The cost of the bearing is not that important, if everything else works, the price is insignificant. But the chea­
per it is while fulfilling the needs, the cheaper the final product can be sold and it can hereby be sold to more 
playground owners and be used by more users (“Bearings Catalog | AST Bearings”, n.d.; “Hydrostatic and 
Hydrodynamic Bearings Information | Engineering360”, n.d.; “Linear Flexure Bearing | Flex Pivots”, n.d.; 
“System Details | Waukesha Magnetic Bearings”, n.d.).
Radial load
Axial load
Maintenance
Cost
Friction
Grading
Low ► High
Low ► High
High ► Low
High ► Low
High ► Low
Ball bearing
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
(+/- L)
Spherical Plain 
bearing
High
Low
Low
Low
Moderate
(+/- L)
Roller bearing
High
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
(+/- L)
Magnetic bea­
ring
Moderate
Moderate
Low
Low
Low
(- L)
Fluid bearing
High
High
High
High
Low
(+ L)
Thrust bearing
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
(+/- L)
Table 7.5 Comparison of Bearings 
After analysing the different bearing options, it was seen that all of them were possible solutions, but that some 
of them were better than others. According to the main factor axial load the two best options are fluid bearing 
and thrust bearing due to the fact that it has a high performance. When looking at the other factors it can be 
seen that the best option is the thrust bearing due to the fact that maintenance and cost are moderate as well as 
friction. A thrust bearing was therefore picked for the Loading Carousels top bearing. 
Even though the Loading Carousel is designed mainly for the 4 - 6 year olds, it also needs to be able to carry 
the weight from multiple adults. It is possible for adults to step onto the carousel and the chance is therefore 
==PAGE:103==
 91
7. Detailing & Justification
high for them to do it, either to play themselves or in all probability to participate in the play experience with 
the child users. The weight from the stakeholders, whether it is children or adults need to be carried above 
ground and the platter furthermore needs to be able to spin. Therefore the spinning organ likewise consist of 
a fixed center rod which can be fastened into the ground with a concrete foundation. The carousel can then be 
hung on top of it with a moveable center rod carrying the weight of the platform with users. 
Based on the fact that the carousel is hung as a moveable center rod attached to the platform  at a fixed center 
rod. The fixed rod and the moveable rod has to be supported in both ends to have a smooth and secure spin. 
This is done by having two bearings in the play equipment. One placed in the top of the construction and one 
incorporated in the platform in the bottom. The bearing in the top is carrying the axial force and a thrust bea­
ring is therefore placed here, whereas the bottom bearing is used for stabilising the structure and making sure 
that it won’t move from side to side therefore a ball bearing is placed here. 
7.8.3 Gripping Organ
When the carousel is spinning around a centrifugal force is applied to the users. The force will seek to move 
the users away from the center. If the centrifugal force is big enough it can cause the users to fall of the carou­
sel. This can be helped by giving the users something to hold onto while the carousel spins. This is done by 
having a gripping organ.
When deciding which material and design the gripping organ shall have the circumference is important. The 
users need to be able to hold on to it. Childrens hands in the age from 4 - 6 years has an average length of 12 - 
13 cm (“Størrelsesguide Til Børnetøj Og Babystørrelser”, n.d.). The grip needs to fit the users hands and fulfil 
the regulations DS/EN 1176 - 1. Here the size differ depending on how long the fingers reach around it. This 
can be defined as either grip (figure 7.7) or grasp (figure 7.8), depending on if the users can close their hands 
around it or not. 
Figure 7.7 Grip (Standard, 2008b, p. 12)
Figure 7.8 Grasp (Standard, 2008b, p. 12)
According to DS/EN 1176 - 1 the size for grips needs to be no less than 16 mm and has to be smaller than 45 
mm across the center at all time, where it for grasp has to have a width which do not exceed 60 mm. The best 
way of holding onto something is to use the entire palm against the surface and it is even better if it is possible 
to reach all the way around the handle, therefore it is chosen to make a grip (figure 7.7). 
To make it possible for the user to have a tight and comfortable grip around the handle rod, a circular geometry 
is chosen for the cross section. This allows the user to hold on to the rod in whatever height they feel most 
secure. In order for the users to be able to grab all the way around the rod and create a strong holding point, the 
perimeter needs to be smaller than the main users average length of 12 - 13 cm. The smaller the rod perimeter 
is, the easier it is for the user to wrap their palms around it. The rods not only need to be held on to. They li­
kewise need to be able to carry a lot of weight. By that reasoning the rod needs to have a certain strength and 
here the size can help provide the strength.
==PAGE:104==
92
When buying pipes the standard size pipes are measured in inches. It is therefore sensible to choose a standard 
size to keep the price low. By choosing a standard size likewise insures that the supplier can deliver the pro­
duct without the necessity to custom-make it. The 1 ¼ inch rod is therefore picked. The rod has a diameter of 
31.75 mm. This means that the perimeters is 99.75 mm, which is less than the main users hand length and they 
can hereby hold on tight.
The material needs to be as durable and as eco-friendly as possible in order to fulfil both the users need and 
the companies wishes for the future. During the analysis of the different concepts with LEDON A/S, Skøtt 
mentioned that the company has a long term plan about being more sustainable and use eco-friendly material. 
This can be obtained by having the material being made by reusable materials and by having materials which 
last longer. The material needs to have a good strength and should be able to withstand all sorts of external 
impacts and weather. Therefore it is chosen to make it in stainless steel and add a lay of rubber on the surface 
to make sure that it will not get burning hot in the sun or really cold in the winter. The rubber also enhances 
the strength of the grip and makes sure that the hands of the users do not slip easily.
7.8.4 Pushing Organ
The carousel needs something which the users can hold on to while pushing the carousel around. The pushing 
organ needs to work in both directions, the normal direction and the loading direction. As the DS/EN 1176 - 5 
declares, no part of the carousel is allowed to overlap the edges of the platform. Therefore a solution where 
the pushing organ is kept inside needs to be found. 
To keep the Loading Carousel as simple as possible, the pushing organ is made from the same stainless steel 
rods. The rods are hereby both used for holding on to and pushing the carousel around. In order to both allow 
the users to collaborate in pushing the carousel around and have as many users as possible being able to use 
it as the gripping organ at the same time, the number of rods which are being used is selected to three. In this 
way the option to hold on to something and collaborate in pushing the carousel is possible for several users, 
while still allowing room on the platter organ for the users during use.
The design of the rods is important. They need to be simple to produce, be able to carry weight from the 
users and have a design in which it is easy to push around for both the users in form of children, but likewise 
for parents, grandparents, older siblings, kindergarten teachers and other stakeholders having an interest in 
participating in the play experience. Therefore the height and angle of the rods gets substantial for the use 
experience. 
7.8.4.1 Rod Shapes
The rods can be shaped in many different ways, while fulfilling the regulations. Here three possible rod shapes 
can be seen in figure 7.9.
Figure 7.9 Rod Cross Section
==PAGE:105==
 93
7. Detailing & Justification
In figure 7.10 an illustration of the rods shapes can be seen in 2D. All the three different shapes are exiting the 
center of the carousel from the top of the movable center rod. 
Type A is making a soft 90° bend to the edge of the platform. 
Type B is making a soft 45° bend and is going back to the center, were it fastens at the bottom of the center rod. 
Type C is making multiple bends back and forward, before it fastens to the edge of the platform.
7.8.4.2 3D Prototyping and Mockups
In order to see which design is best and which will work in reality, a physical 3D prototype was made (figure 
7.11). 
Type A - Single 90° Bend
Type B - Single 45° Bend
Type C - Multiple Bends
Figure 7.10 2D Rod Shapes
Type A - to the left
Type B - to the left
Type C - to the left
Figure 7.11 3D Prototypes
From making the physical model in a small prototype, it can be seen that all three ideas are viable. To figure 
out which shape is the best solution for both children and adults, real size mockups are made (figure 7.12).
Type A - 1 m *1 m
Type B - 1 m *1 m
Type C - 1 m *1 m
Figure 7.12 1:1 Mockups of Handles
When making the three different mockups in 1:1 it became apparent that type C was the most complex shape 
to construct from one pipe. When bending pipes it requires high precision and the right tools. The more bends 
the pipe is going to have, the more stress is applied to the material and the strength can be affected. The thick­
er the wall thickness of the pipes are, the better the pipe reacts on being bended and it take longer time for it 
to deform. It is important to know if each bend is relevant and how relevant it is. If the bend is not used, it is 
==PAGE:106==
94
better to avoid making it and save cost in material and processing. 
7.8.4.3 Testing of Rods
To test the functionality of the three types of handles, the three handles were attached to a turnable middle 
piece. Each handle was then tested to see if it was possible for the stakeholders to use it. The test was moreover 
conducted in order to see where and how the stakeholders were holding on to and using the rods while they 
were spinning the “carousel” around. 
7.8.4.3.1 Test Set-up
The handles was made as mockups (figure7.13) in order to test which one was best. To make it possible to spin 
around, the handles were attached to a turnable center rod and placed on top off a wooden board with a wheel 
fasted underneath. The set-up is made in a way, where the handles easily could be changed. To simulate the 
platform a circle with a diameter of 2000 mm was drawn on the ground. The circle represented the platform 
and showed the participants, were they could not place their feets while doing the testing.
Figure 7.13 Test Set-up
7.9.4.3.2 User Tests - Children
Clara and Martin Pontoppidan Holst from the workshop in section 4.1.2.2 tested each of the handles. For each 
of the handles, they ran around the circle in order to turn the mockup around. Before they began they were 
asked to think about which of the types they liked the most. 
After trying out the three different handles (figure 7.14), it was made clear that each type could be used for 
pushing the carousel. To figure out which one worked best, the participants were asked to rate the handles from 
1 to 3, where 1 was the best (table 7.6).
Handle Type
Clara
Martin
Type A
1
2
Type B
2
1
Type C
3
3
Table 7.6  Rating of Handle Types
==PAGE:107==
 95
7. Detailing & Justification
Clara testing type A 
Clara testing type B 
Clara testing type C
Martin testing type A 
Martin testing type B 
Martin testing type C
Figure 7.14 Testing of Handles
After the rating of the handles it became clear that the two participants agreed on which one they liked the 
least, but not which one they liked the most. Clara liked type A the best, whereas Martin liked type B. 
7.9.4.3.3 User Tests - Adults
Due to the fact that they did not agree on one solution, it was chosen to test the two top choice even further. 
When at the playground adults often participate in the play by working as the power source to play equipment 
which moves. It is therefore beneficial to meet both the children and the adults demand concerning handles. 
The two best solutions according to the children, were therefore likewise tested by adults. To get a broad 
perspective the age of the adult participants ranged form 17 to 75 years old. This made sure that the selected 
solution was suitable for older siblings as well as parents and grandparents.
The adults were asked to do the same as the children and walk around the center while spinning the handles 
around. They were likewise asked to stay outside the circle drawn on the ground (figure 7.15). Just as the chil­
dren, the adults were asked to select the solution they liked the most and hereby also least (table 7.7).
==PAGE:108==
96
Nete testing type A 
Lasse testing type A 
Charlotte testing type B
Silke testing type A 
Kathrine testing type A
Inger testing type B
Figure 7.15 Adults Testing Handle Solutions
Type A
Type B
Charlotte Storm Pedersen
X
Nete Storm Pedersen
X
Kathrine Storm Pedersen
X
Silke Werther
X
Frederik Ginderskov
X
Claus Ginderskov
X
Lasse Storm Pedersen
X
Inger Storm Pedersen
X
Score
1
7
Table 7.7 Adults Rating of Handle Solutions
The testing here showed that the solution the adults liked the most were type B. All except one participant 
found the solution type B best. They found it easier to push the carousel mockup around, they had a better 
grip and liked the aesthetic better for type B than type A. Silke disagreed with the others according to which 
solutions she found the easiest to control, but agreed with them according to the aesthetic expression. 
7.8.4.3.4 Test Outcome
During the testing it was seen that the stakeholders in form of the main users (children) and adults are pushing 
the handles a little bit different from each other. The height of children and adults varies. The same counts 
==PAGE:109==
 97
7. Detailing & Justification
for the strength they are able to apply on the rods in order for the carousel to be loaded and spin. The handles 
therefore need to be made as suitable for both parts as possible. This is best done by listening to what the par­
ticipants in the testing had to say. 
When children are pushing the carousel, they hold on to the handle on the side (figure 7.16) whereas the adults 
is pushing while holding on the top of the handle (figure 7.17).
Figure 7.16 Clara Holding on to the Handle on the Side
Figure 7.17 Lasse Holding on to the Handle on Top and Slightly on the Side
With the different grips in mind, it is important that the handle is designed for the different stakeholder types. 
The type of handle which solve this best, is the solution which the majority of stakeholders finds best. Based 
on the participants rating type B was chosen as the design for the Loading Carousels handle. 
7.8.5 Loading Organ
In order to load the carousel a loading organ needs to be present. This can come with inspiration from clockwork 
toys, as a spiral spring or by using an elastic band. The elastic band can give the right effect, but do not last 
as long as a spring made of metal. For that reason it is decided to use a spiral spring also known as a clock 
spring or power spring. 
Spiral springs creates a circular movement from a torque force. There exist two different kinds of spiral 
springs. Type A with open coils, which works without friction (figure 7.18) and type B with tight coils (figure 
7.19) (“accuratesprings.com”, n.d.).
==PAGE:110==
98
Figure 7.18 Spiral Spring with Open Coils  
(“accuratesprings.com”, n.d.)
Figure 7.19 Spiral Spring with Tight Coils  
(“accuratesprings.com”, n.d.)
For the users to experience the feeling of putting force into the carousel, the spring has to have a large piece 
of material to spin around the center. The spring needs to be able to have a large deflection, allowing the users 
to load it and later release the tension, to transfer power to the platform. It is therefore chosen to have a type 
B spiral spring, with tight coils in the Loading Carousel. The spiral spring needs to have a firm connection in 
order to work, it is therefore placed in connection to the center rod.
In order to allow the carousel to be loaded when going one way, but run freely the other. The energy needs to 
be transferred from the spring to the platform, yet let the carousel spin freely. This requires an additional part 
in combination with the spiral spring. The additional part needs to be able to transfer power to the platform 
as long as the spring is tense and then release. This is done by having a one way clutch bearing (figure 7.20) 
on the outside of the spiral spring. The bearing is equipped with springs tensioned towards small cylinders. 
When turning in one direction the spring will be pressed together and allow the cylinders to spin around and 
the carousel can run freely. If turning the other way, the springs stays tense and the bearing will be locked, 
resulting in the entire bearing can turn around and the spiral spring will hereby be tensioned and power can be 
transferred to the carousel. 
Figure 7.20 One Way Clutch Bearing 
(“One Way Clutch | SKF India Limited | Manufacturer in Chinchwad, Pune | ID: 10606876997”, n.d.)
7.8.6 Overload Organ 
The overload organ needs to be able to obtain a maximum load. By having a spiral spring as the main part 
in the loading organ, allows an automatic overload organ to be presented for the concept. The spiral spring 
spins together and tighten up itself. When the metal of the spring is spun to its maximum, an automatic wheel 
chock will occur and the carousel can not be loaded more. Besides the automatic wheel clock a slip clutch is 
installed on the inside of the spiral spring making sure that if too much power is put towards the spring it will 
begin turning around. 
==PAGE:111==
 99
7. Detailing & Justification
7.8.7 Speed Regulation Organ 
To regulate the speed of the carousel friction within the spinning organ can keep the speed under the maximum 
allowed speed of 5 m/s (DS/EN 1176 - 5). The friction is occurring inside the bearings, between the bearing´s 
sides and the bearing balls.
7.9 Concept Improvements 
After looking deeper into the different organs and making sure that their functions are fulfilled, the Loading 
Carousel is going to consist of a wide range of main parts, which can be seen in figure 7.21.
Thrust Bearing
Ball Bearing
One Way Clutch Bearing
Non-slip Surface
Spiral Spring
Foundation
Fixed Center Rod
Moveable Center Rod
Platform
Handles
Ground
Figure 7.21 Cross Section of Loading Carousel
The Loading Carousel is fastened to the ground by having the fixed center rod casted into a concrete founda­
tion under the ground. The rest of the play equipment is placed above ground along with the interfaces which 
the users interact with. The concept has here been improved and the details about the functions and organs 
have been established. The different functions are made possible by different main parts (table 7.8).
Organ
Parts
Platter organ
Platform
Non-slip Surface 
Spinning organ
Thrust Bearing
Ball Bearing
Fixed Center Rod
Moveable Center Rod
Table 7.8 Organs and Parts
==PAGE:112==
100
Gripping organ
Handles *3
Pushing organ
Handles *3
Loading organ
Spiral Spring 
One Way Clutch Bearing 
Ball Bearing 
Overload organ
Spiral Spring 
Slip Clutch
Speed regulation organ
Spiral Spring 
Slip Clutch 
Ball Bearing
Thrust Bearing 
7.10 Sub Conclusion
When deciding which of concepts to continue with their possibilities needed to be explored, which was done 
by looking at what is different and the same for the concepts. The possibility for making a combination needed 
to be explored, while remembering that simplicity in play equipment is a good thing in order to let the users 
give the concept multiple use options. When choosing which concept to be the final concept, the company 
played an essential role. LEDON A/S needed a concept which is fitting into their current sortiment, yet brings 
something new. This is the main reason why the Loading Carousel was selected. 
In Denmark it is essential to obtain the safety regulations given by Dansk Standard for play equipment DS/EN 
1176 and DS/EN 1177, here specifically DS/EN 1176 - 5 is directed towards carousels in particular. The rules 
are very specific and sets the scene for which possibilities there is for a carousel and insures safe play. The 
safety is not only essential for the main users, but likewise other stakeholders such as teenagers, which like 
described in section 7.6.1 teenagers and young adult who has descripted the initial use of the play equipment 
and is finding alternative ways to spin the carousel around in high speed. 
The safety regulation have great impact on the technical details. They decide how high the play equipment 
can be without the need to worry about the users falling down, they decide the maximum speed, the maximum 
diameter for handles and how much free space is needed around the play equipment. 
To figure out the specific details necessary to give the Loading Carousel its functions, Organ Theory (Andrea­
sen, Hansen & Cash, 2015) is applied on the concept. In order for the concept to work as intended its functions 
such as spinning and holding the users has to be accomplished. This is done by defining and analysing the 
different organs for the concept. All the organs has to be represented for the concept to be viable. Some of the 
most essential organs for the Loading Carousel is the Spinning organ, Pushing organ and Loading organ it is 
therefore also the organs which are explored and tested most. 
In order to find the right solution, the solutions need to be explored. In some cases theory can be used to take 
the decision, whereas in other cases the possible solutions need to be tested. According to the choice of bea­
ring (section 7.8.2) in the spinning organ, theory is used to selected the thrust bearing, while according to the 
handle (section 7.8.3 & 7.8.4) for both the pushing and gripping organ, both theory and testing with users is 
required in order to get the best possible solution for the stakeholders. 
In order to make the concept suiting for all stakeholders the testing furthermore needs to include a broad vari­
ety of stakeholders in different age groups. Even though it is important to focus on the main users it is likewise 
important to have the parents and other adults who could choose to be part of the play in mind when making 
decisions. 
==PAGE:113==
 101
7. Detailing & Justification
Testing was here done by having first having the main stakeholders in form of children test three mockups of 
handles, and next having adults stakeholders test the top two. 
When using mockups in testing the set-up of the test is essential. The participants in the test needed to be 
aware of what they were testing and why they were doing so. They needed to understand the context, to get 
the best solution. 
After selecting all the different elements, they need to be combined into one, with all the elements fitting to­
gether as one unit. 
==PAGE:114==
==PAGE:115==
8. The Final Concept
==PAGE:116==
104
All the pieces need to be put together in order to form the final concept - the Loading Carousel. 
8.1 Loading Carousel - The Play Equipment 
In order to visualise the concept, the Loading Carousel is constructed as a CAD 3D model in SolidWorks 
(figure 8.1).
Figure 8.1 CAD Model of the Loading Carousel
The concept consists of several parts put together and working together to give the users the wanted play 
experience (figure 8.2).
Each of the different parts need to be placed in connection to each other in order to function (figure 8.3). The 
internal placement can be seen in (figure 8.4).
==PAGE:117==
 105
8. The Final Concept
Moveable Center Rod
Thrust Bearing
Handles
Non-slip Surface
Platform
Ball Bearing
Foundation
Fixed Center Rod
One Way Clutch Bearing
Spiral Spring
Slip Clutch
Figure 8.2 Exploded View 
==PAGE:118==
106
A
A
Figure 8.3 Cad Drawing
Figure 8.4 Cross Section 
==PAGE:119==
 107
8. The Final Concept
8.2 The Idea With and the Idea In
The idea with and idea in was again made for whom it is relevant (table 8.1). 
In order to go even deeper the stakeholders defined in section 3.2 was looked upon to make sure that as many 
as possible needs are fulfilled. 
The Idea With - for whom
The Idea In
Giving the users a play equipment to play on as 
individuals and as groups
- Users, Designers, Municipality, Playground Ow­
ners & Landscapes Architects
Giving the users a new feature 
- Users, Playground Owners, Municipality & Desig­
ners 
Giving the users safe and stable play equipment
- Users, Kindergarten Teachers, Safety Inspectors & 
Parents
Allowing different age groups to participate in the 
play experience
- Users, Siblings, Pedagogues, Teenagers, Grandpa­
rents & Parents
Allowing the users to be observed while playing 
- Grandparents, Parents, Pedagogues & Kindergar­
ten Teachers 
Fitting to the surroundings 
- Designers, Landscapes Architects & Passer-bys
Carousel 
Loading organ
Overload device
Friction
Pushing organ
Open plan play equipment  
Simple design 
Table 8.1 The Idea With and Idea In for the Loading Carousel 
By doing further development and looking deeper into the concept, several new ideas with and likewise ideas 
in became apparent and by focusing on the relevant stakeholders. It can be seen that their interpretation needs 
(section 3.4.1) to some degree are fulfilled by the Loading Carousel.
8.3 Knowledge Areas Obtained 
The Loading Carousel creates a foundation for many different learning elements in form of six different know­
ledge areas:
•	
Mathematical Knowledge 
•	
Knowledge about Nature
•	
Social Knowledge
•	
Body- and Physical Knowledge 
•	
Personal Knowledge
•	
Linguistic Knowledge
Each of the knowledge areas are different and are obtained by the Loading Carousel concept in different ways 
(table 8.2).
==PAGE:120==
108
Knowledge Areas Obtained
Obtained by
Mathematical Knowledge (Ma)
Is obtained by allowing the users to test how the action-reaction 
interplay is, by loading and releasing the carousel (spiral spring) and 
experiencing the results.
Knowledge about Nature (N)
Is obtained by giving the users two different options for power and 
having them see and experience on themselves how the two solutions 
work. They likewise feel the power of the centrifugal force applied on 
their body while and can here experience the force varying depending 
on the speed of the carousel.
Social Knowledge (So)
Is obtained by allowing several users to play at the play equipment at 
the same time. The users have to interact with each other and work 
together in order to spin the carousel around. The users have to com­
municate with others and is gaining knowledge about others as well as 
how to interact with them.
Body- and Physical Knowledge 
(B)
Is obtained by having the users needing to use their body. They train 
their fine motor functions by holding on to the handles and are trai­
ning their gross motor functions when pushing the carousel around.
Personal Knowledge (P)
Is obtained by challenging the users in what they are ready to try. 
Their self-knowledge is slowly expanded, by gradually spinning faster 
and faster.
Linguistic Knowledge (L)
Is obtained by having several users at the same place and having them 
communicate with each other. The carousel is creating a meeting 
point for the users to play and spend time.
Table 8.2 Knowledge Areas Obtained Within the Loading Carousel
8.4 Technical Details 
When designing play equipment for playgrounds there are many technical details which need to be obtained 
and maintained over time. The technical details need to meet the safety regulations and make sure that the 
concept is durable on the market for playground play equipment.	
8.4.1 Component Durability 
8.4.1.1 Spiral Spring
The spiral spring has to be made to work over and over again. It needs to be able to meet the demands of being 
loaded and released multiple times each day. Spiral springs and springs in general can withstand being expo­
sed to high forces, but as with anything else there is a limit for how many times the spring can change shape, 
without deforming permanently. 
8.4.1.2 Bearings 
The three different types of bearing likewise needs to be durable for being used several times a day. The thrust 
bearing needs to be able to carry the weight of the platform constantly and spin whenever the play equipment 
is in use. The ball bearing needs to run smooth every time the carousel spins and lastly the one way clutch 
bearing has to withstand being locked and turn around, the springs consequently has to keep its tension. 
8.4.2 Free Space and Falling Space 
When planning to install and while installing the Loading Carousel at playgrounds it is important to follow 
==PAGE:121==
 109
8. The Final Concept
the safety regulations made for free space and falling space according to DS/EN 1176 - 5, p. 9 for carousels as 
described in section 7.6.2, have a free hight over the carousel of minimum 2000 mm and likewise minimum 
2000 mm free space all around the carousel as illustrated with grey in figure 8.5. 
Ø2000
Ø6000
1000
3000
Free space 
Free space 
Figure 8.5 Grey Area Marking the Free Space Around the Carousel
==PAGE:122==
110
8.5 Visual Expression 
To fit into LEDON A/S´s existing themes the expression can easily be changed by changing the colours of 
respectively the non-slip rubber surface and the handle surface. By changing the colours can be changed to the 
same colour or two different according to which expression is wanted from the designers and buyers side. By 
e.g. changing the colours to different shades of blue the Loading Carousel could easily be incorporated in the 
existing theme Marina (figure 8.6). 
The colours of the play equipment has a lot to say about the visual expression. If the colours are changed ac­
cording to figure 8.7 light and dark purple, the carousel will get a very different look and could almost look 
like something from a Barbie playground.
Figure 8.6 Blue Edition
Figure 8.7 Purple Edition
Figure 8.8 Multi Colour Edition
The three handles do not necessarily have to have the same colour, but can like shown in figure 8.8 be three 
different ones giving the play equipment a fun and colourful expression.
The colours of the carousel can easily and without many extra cost be changed in order to fit the the surroun­
dings and the rest of a playground, if it is placed in connection to one. The visual expression is important for 
the children as the main users, due to the fact that it is part of creating attention. The colours and the design 
are not only meaningful for the users but also in high degree for the passer-bys how want the aesthetic of their 
community to be nice.
When adding colour to outdoor equipment, it needs to be able to keep the quality in the colour and it therefore 
has to be able to withstand the weather conditions. 
==PAGE:123==
 111
8. The Final Concept
8.6 Cost 
Even though the Loading Carousel is meant to be free for the user to play on, the Loading Carousel itselves 
is not free of cost to create for the designers. The different organs and parts needs to be made from scratch or 
bought from tire suppliers. In order to keep the quality as high as possible yet still attempt to have a cost which 
is beneficial for both the Designers (here also the company), the Municipalities and the Playground Owners. 
It is attempted to use as many standard components as possible. 
The handles is therefore made in standard size stainless steel rods, which needs to be bent in order to get the 
desired shape. The platform needs to have a specially designed notch for the bearings and spiral to be inside, 
which can be done with simple machining initiatives as well as the movable center rod. The fixed center rod 
can be bought as a standard part together with the non-slip rubber material for the surface of the platform and 
the handles. The different types of bearings can be bought for tier suppliers. Both can due to their size have a 
relatively high cost compared the rest of the parts. 
Some of the the parts raise the cost for the entire play equipment, but even though the Loading Carousel is 
not cheap, it gives something new to the stakeholders. The children is given a fun familiar play equipment 
with a twist, whereas the playground owners gets a 2 in 1 play equipment on their playground. Depending on 
the number of carousels being made the production price can vary according to special agreements and price 
reductions. The more of the same product being bought the bigger til reduction in price is and price per unit 
will be smaller. 
==PAGE:124==
==PAGE:125==
9. Conclusion
==PAGE:126==
114
Throughout the thesis the learning objectives for both a general thesis at DTU and my thesis in particular have 
been fulfilled by starting from a clean sheet and then observe, analyse and explore the world of children, play 
and learning with the focus on playground play equipment. 
Different initiatives such as literature study, exploration, ideation, conceptualisation and testing needed to be 
made in order to develop a concept which fulfils the problem statement of creating play equipment for playg­
rounds, which will help the users to develop and learn through play and which furthermore fulfils the design 
task.
The design task is to create implementable play equipment concepts for LEDON A/S, which will enhance 
learning and personal development through play for the 4 - 6 year old children, while allowing family to par­
ticipate in the play experience.
To figure out how children behave, how they play, how they learn and likewise how to approach the topic 
a literature study was conducted. From the literature study it became apparent that humans and children in 
particular develop and learn in each of their own way and that children have a huge imagination. The study 
showed that the users is of great importance for the design process. The product has to be made for a specific 
target group in order to fulfill the needs of those particular users best. Based on that fact the each human is an 
individual whom will act and develop differently it is difficult to embrace everyone at once and it is therefore 
necessary to limit the scope of the project to get a better result. 
The study here showed some of the important focus areas: Children in the age from 4 - 6 years, Preschool 
children, Gender neutral play equipment, play equipment where it is possible to co-play, Sharing the play 
experience and have a challenging experience which challenges the users within the ZPD (Zone of Proximal 
Development). Besides the focus areas for the concept, it was in the literature study explored how to include 
children in the design process. It was here figured out that the common language is essential and that the mo­
vement between each exercise in a workshop needs to be fluent. The users have to enjoy what they are doing 
and feel like they are playing while doing as intended. It is better for the users to ask for more than having them 
get bored during the workshop.
An iterative process took place to get the best design process. The process went from being divergent to con­
vergent switching back and forward several times. To explore as much of the solution space as possible, users 
and relevant stakeholders were brought into the process and experts within the field were interviewed. The 
users were brought into to workshops where their ideas and thoughts were made visual through drawings and 
play dough. 
The workshop created a foundation of ideas to be build from and showed that users in the age group likes to 
be challenged and wants a play equipment were they can play together. In order to give a useful result the 
workshop had to be adjusted to the individual participant and the exercises varied among them. The workshop 
showed that the participants are inspired by each others and they are quick to agree on an idea if suggested by 
one of the more leading participants. It is therefore important to listen to every participant and make sure to 
capture different participants strengths to change the leading role. 
The design process has led to the concept the Loading Carousel. Where the size is made suitable for the 4 - 6 
year old. The play equipment furthermore needs to take other stakeholders into consideration in order fulfil as 
many of their interpretation needs as possible. The solution elements are tested by both children and adults and 
the carousel can therefore be used by the children while having the adults participate in the play experience. 
==PAGE:127==
 115
9. Conclusion
The Loading Carousel is a familiar play equipment with a twist, which gives comfort to the users, but adds so­
mething extra in form of the loading option. The Loading Carousel obtain 6 of the knowledge areas and brings 
learning into the play experience. The users gain knowledge in the areas: Mathematical Knowledge, Body- 
and Physical Knowledge, Knowledge about Nature, Personal Knowledge, Social Knowledge and Linguistic 
Knowledge.
In order to detail and justify the concept, the concept´s organs and parts have been explored and lastly put 
together in order to give the play equipment its functions. All the work done during the thesis resulted in a 
literature study, a report, an idea catalogue, a concept catalogue and  appendices to describe and illustrate the 
work done.
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
10. Reflection
==PAGE:130==
118
When writing a thesis the process is developing over time. It is not always going the way which was initially 
planned and new initiative needs to be made over time. 
10.1 The Difference in the Human Mind
As the literature study showed, many different persons have different ideas of what learning and play is and 
how children develop through play. It have therefore been relevant to look at different opinions, gather the­
ories from various persons and bring them together with my personal experiences. Humans are different, they 
learn different and they think different. 
The difference in the human mind not only affect the theory about play and learning, it also affects the co-crea­
tion and interaction with the users. The results and analysis is therefore characterised by the individual humans 
involved in the preparation of the thesis; whether they have published texts, have been interviewed or partici­
pated in the co-creation workshops. 
10.2 When is Enough, Enough?
During the design process one of the most important and at some point most difficult parts is to know when 
enough is enough. It is always possible to do more, ideate more, detail more, test more and so one, but at some 
point the limit for relevant “more” is reached. There comes a point when the additional initiatives are of low 
meaning for the concept and it is therefore time to make a decision and move on. 
The right time to do so can be difficult to find and can require some going back and forward in an iterative 
process. In some cases it is better to make a decision and move on to something else and then go back later, to 
see if a more optimal solution can be found. 
10.3 Relevant Stakeholders
In order to make sure the concept is reaching and fulfilling as many of the stakeholders needs as possible, the 
stakeholders first and foremost have to be defined. When thinking about playgrounds the first stakeholders 
which comes to mind are the children.
The concept for a play equipment needs to not only fulfil the needs of the main users (children). It also needs 
to provide a good investment for the playgrounds owners. It needs to be pleasant for the eyes of the passer-bys, 
be marketable for the designers and company, bring safety for the parents and allow siblings to participate in 
the play. The definition of which stakeholders are most relevant are difficult to decide due to the fact that they 
all must have their needs fulfilled. 
In order for the concept to be marketable the concept first and foremost needs to be used and the main focus 
is therefore mainly laid on the users (children) and then later the details to meet the other stakeholders needs 
were looked upon. 
10.4 The Understanding of Working with Children in Co-creation
When designing concepts for the users it is wise to include the users in the design process from beginning to 
end in co-creation. Co-creation with adults and children are here two different things and it is important to be 
aware of the difference in the participants. 
The existing theory about co-creation with children has been limited, which has resulted in the use of theory 
for co-creation in general, together with theory about children in combination with a trial and error process 
which took place during the workshop. Meaning that the workshop in some cases had to change fluently as the 
workshop took place to be sure to get a useful result. In some cases it was necessary to adjust the workshop 
==PAGE:131==
 119
10. Reflection
according to the individual participants. The different users have different times, when the need for change 
appears and it was therefore difficult to find the right times for all of the participants at once. 
When co-creating a common language is always essential, but when doing it with children it is even more 
important. What the children understand and think, can in some cases be very black and white where one thing 
has one specific meaning e.g. the word playground is in the understanding of children connected to outside 
playgrounds only. When the same play equipment can be at a play facility, it is for the children not at all as­
sociated as the same. 
This was especially discovered through the initial interviews, which meant that the future work with children 
needed to be more precise and the questions and exercises had to be formulated and explained very simple. 
In other cases the children’s imagination takes over and what for adults might seem as one thing, is 10 different 
things during a day, depending on what the child wants it to be. E.g. the bird nest swing is for adults a swing, 
but for the children it is sometimes the bridge for playing Three Billy Goats Gruff, at other times it is a chri­
stmas tree which can be danced around and in some cases it is used as intended for swinging in. This means 
that children attribute much more meaning into one play equipment than initially inscribed by the designer. It 
was important as a designer to know how the participants understand the words being used and the participants 
need to understand the facilitator. This was counting for both interviews and co-creation workshops and took 
some time to figure out. The understanding created between participants and facilitator impacted the results 
and decisions made throughout the design process. 
10.5 Best Concept vs. Best Concept for the Company 
The most innovative concept is not always the concept which is best for the company. The company’s interests 
are important to be meet, yet still challenge them in order to bring the company something new. When the 
concepts were compared and evaluated in order to choose which concepts to develop further. It was first and 
foremost done by me in order to cut down the ideas from 52 to 24 and down to 11 concepts. 
The 11 concepts is the only ideas which was presented to the company for only to show the ones which brings 
learning into play and fulfil the goal specification. In this way it was easier for the company to evaluate them 
and they could go more in dept. It also meant that they did not seen all of the ideas, which potential could fit 
into the company’s sortiment with small adjustments. When the company was judging the concept, it was done 
from their point of view in order to select the final one. 
The company were asked to rank the concepts according to the universal virtues and weigh them according to 
their importance. In this way the best concepts became apparent, but to make sure that they were also realistic 
for the company to produce, Skøtt was asked a number of questions, which changed the top choices to fit the 
company’s thoughts for future play equipment. 
10.6 Testing Methods
Testing and validating can be done in many different ways. No matter which approach is picked, the set-up 
and the explanation of the prototype and mockup is of great importance. If the users do not know what to do, 
the results will not be useful. 
When doing the testing of the handles with the children Clara and Martin, they were so excited to try out the 
mockup, that they began spinning the handle before all of the explanation were done. It was therefore necessa­
ry to step in and make some guidelines for them to follow as the testing took place. When the children tested 
type C the mockup was a bit shaky which could possibly have influenced them in their use and choice.
==PAGE:132==
120
The mockups being used in the testing needs to be realistic, thus it is okay for the visual expression not to be as 
a finished look. The look shall be open for the test participants to have confident in criticising them and come 
with other ideas. If the mockup has a too put together look, it can prime the users to choose the most polished 
solution. 
10.7. Project Plan
When doing a longer project it is essential to have a good plan and aim to follow it. The initial plan can in 
some cases be necessary to adjust. Due to unexpected things it can be a necessity to rearrange the plan and add 
in new assignments. 
During the beginning of the project it was found, that the initial information found in the literature were more 
essential than first thought and for this reason it took more time to gather and analyse the knowledge gained, 
which gave a more thorough literature study. 
The choice of spending more time than initially planned, made it necessary to move some assignments around, 
but paid of in the end. The outcome of the literature study gave a deeper understanding of the topic and gave 
a better foundation for developing concepts, it hereby saved time later in the process. 
==PAGE:133==
 121
10. Reflection
==PAGE:134==
122
References
•	
accuratesprings.com. (n.d.). Retrieved May 23, 2018, from http://www.accuratesprings.com/products.ht­
ml#spiral_springs
•	
Andreasen, M. M., Hansen, C. T., & Cash, P. (2015). Conceptual Design Interpretations, Mindset and 
Models. Switzerland: Springer. http://doi.org/10.1007/SpringerReference_168514
•	
Avisen. (2017). 4.
•	
Bearings Catalog | AST Bearings. (n.d.). Retrieved May 21, 2018, from https://www.astbearings.com/
catalog.html
•	
Bjerre, S. (n.d.). Bevægelses Glæde Designguide - metode til kortlægning og forandring af skolens bevæ­
gelsesmiljøer. Aarhus Kommune.
•	
Børnenes Hovedstad - Børnenes Hovedstad. (n.d.). Retrieved January 24, 2018, from http://www.boerne­
neshovedstad.dk/om-os/
•	
carousel scooter - YouTube. (n.d.). Retrieved June 13, 2018, from https://www.youtube.com/results?­
search_query=carousel+scooter
•	
Cross, N. (2005). Engineering Design Methods - Strategies for Product Design. Design(3rd ed.). John 
Wiley & Sons, LTD.
•	
Datatilsynet: Billeder på internettet. (n.d.). Retrieved January 26, 2018, from https://www.datatilsynet.dk/
borger/internettet/billeder-paa-internettet/
•	
Datatilsynet: Sammenskrevet udgave af persondataloven. (n.d.). Retrieved January 26, 2018, from https://
www.datatilsynet.dk/lovgivning/persondataloven/
•	
Flaskager, A. (2008). Inspirationshæfte, 0. – 2. klasse. Aktiv Rundt.
•	
Hansen, M., & Nagbøl, S. (2008). Det ny skoleliv: om krop, rum, bevægelse og pædagogik. In Det ny sko­
leliv: om krop, rum, bevægelse og pædagogik(pp. 134–140, 143–147, 153–154, 165–169). Århus: Klim.
•	
Historie - LEDON A/S. (n.d.). Retrieved January 24, 2018, from https://www.ledon.dk/historie/
•	
Hydrostatic and Hydrodynamic Bearings Information | Engineering360. (n.d.). Retrieved May 21, 2018, 
from 
https://www.globalspec.com/learnmore/mechanical_components/bearings_bushings/hydrostatic_
hydrodynamic_bearings
•	
Jensen, J.-O., & Andersen, K. (2012). Motorik og bevægelse i børns liv. ViaSystime. Retrieved from htt­
ps://www.saxo.com/dk/motorik-og-bevaegelse-i-boerns-liv_jens-ole-jensen_haeftet_9788790833954
•	
Johansson, E., Pramling Samuelsson, I., Broström, S., & Kåre Dag Jensen. (2011). Lærerig leg: børns læ­
ring gennem samspil. Dafolo. Retrieved from https://www.saxo.com/dk/laererig-leg_eva-johansson_pa­
perback_9788772815749
•	
Jørgensen, J. K., & Olsson, M. (2014). Kandidatspeciale Familieidræt i Tennisforeningen.
•	
Karoff, H. S., & Jessen, C. (2014). Tekster om leg. Akademisk Forlag. Retrieved from https://www.saxo.
com/dk/tekster-om-leg_helle-skovbjerg-karoff_haeftet_9788750043188
•	
Karruseller, spinners og svævebaner - LEDON A/S. (n.d.). Retrieved May 17, 2018, from https://www.
ledon.dk/karruseller-spinners-og-svaevebaner/
•	
Keiding, T. B., & Laursen, E. (2005). Interaktion og læring: Gregory Batesons bidrag. Kbh.: Unge Pæ­
dagoger.
•	
Knudsen, A.-E. (2017). Pæne piger og dumme drenge: hvorfor er der ingen børn, der opfører sig, som 
de har hjerne til? Gyldendal. Retrieved from https://play.google.com/books/reader?id=iW46DwAAQ­
BAJ&printsec=frontcover&output=reader&hl=da&pg=GBS.PT2
•	
Lastowka, 
G. 
(2009). 
Rules 
of 
play. 
Games 
and 
Culture, 
4(4), 
379–395. 
http://doi.
org/10.1177/1555412009343573
•	
Lee, Y. (2008). Design participation tactics: the challenges and new roles for designers in the co-design 
process. CoDesign, 4(1), 31–50. http://doi.org/10.1080/15710880701875613
•	
Linear Flexure Bearing | Flex Pivots. (n.d.). Retrieved May 21, 2018, from http://flexpivots.com/flexural-pi­
vot-products/linear-flexure-bearing/
==PAGE:135==
 123
•	
Lyhne, J., & Langhoff Nielsen, A. M. (2016). Dansk pædagogisk udviklingsbeskrivelse 0 til 6 år. Dansk 
Psykologisk Forlag. Retrieved from https://www.saxo.com/dk/dansk-paedagogisk-udviklingsbeskrivel­
se-0-til-6-aar_joergen-lyhne-anna-marie-langhoff-nielsen_haeftet_9788771582888?gclid=CjwKCAjw­
ypjVBRANEiwAJAxlIkQSc6-2f9aOyuxW2T612TUcHNj4OWYUoO7U9BVO398iQJhbKzHQ6RoC­
tYIQAvD_BwE&gclsrc=aw.ds
•	
Madej, K. (2016). Physical Play and Children´s Digital Games. Springer. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-42875-8
•	
Marcus, A. (2015). Design, User Experience, and Usability Interactive Experience Design. Retrieved from 
https://link-springer-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-319-20889-3.pdf
•	
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs | Simply Psychology. (n.d.). Retrieved May 12, 2018, from https://www.
simplypsychology.org/maslow.html
•	
Mission/vision - LEDON A/S. (n.d.). Retrieved January 24, 2018, from https://www.ledonplay.com/mis­
sionvision/
•	
MSc in Design & Innovation. (n.d.). Retrieved January 23, 2018, from http://sdb.dtu.dk/2017/30/575#Stu­
dy_Activity_Requirements_and_Deadlines
•	
Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2009). The Concept of Flow Optimal Experience and Its Role in 
Development. Oxford Handbook of Positive Psychology, 89–105. Retrieved from http://eweaver.myweb.
usf.edu/2002-Flow.pdf
•	
One Way Clutch | SKF India Limited | Manufacturer in Chinchwad, Pune | ID: 10606876997. (n.d.). Retri­
eved June 9, 2018, from https://www.indiamart.com/proddetail/one-way-clutch-10606876997.html
•	
Pedersen, A. (2008). Leg og læring. Reflexen, 3(1), 1–4.
•	
Pramling Samuelsson, I., & Sheridan, S. (2002). Grobund for læring: pædagogik og undervisning i førsko­
letiden. Gyldendal Uddannelse. Retrieved from https://nota.dk/bibliotek/bog/grobund-læring#audio
•	
Roussou, M. (2004). Learning by Doing and Learning Through Play: An Exploration of Interactivity in Virtual 
Environments for Children.  ACM Computers in Entertainment, 2(1). Retrieved from http://delivery.acm.org.
proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1145/980000/973818/p10-roussou.pdf?ip=192.38.67.116&id=973818&acc=AC­
TIVE 
SERVICE&key=36332CD97FA87885.5A225593D1BFDB6E.4D4702B0C3E38B35.4D4702B­
0C3E38B35&__acm__=1516969121_4272fe792b111bacfb38121031c40399
•	
Sanders, E. B.-N., & Stappers, P. J. (2008). Co-creation and the new landscapes of design. CoDesign, 4(1), 
5–18. http://doi.org/10.1080/15710880701875068
•	
Sederberg, M., Kortbek, K., & Bahrenscheer, A. (2017). Bevægelse, sundhed og trivsel - i skole og fritid. 
Hans Reitzel. Retrieved from https://www.gucca.dk/bevaegelse-sundhed-og-trivsel-bog-p362873
•	
Shabani, K., Khatib, M. & Ebadi, S. (2010). Vygotsky’s Zone of Proximal Development: Instructional 
Implications and Teachers’ Professional Development. English Language Teaching, 3(4). Retrieved from 
www.ccsenet.org/elt
•	
Standard, D. (2008a). DS/EN 1176- 5 Dansk standard Legepladsredskaber og -underlag – Del 5: Karrusel­
ler – Supplerende specifikke sikkerhedskrav og prøvningsmetoder (4), 0–20.
•	
Standard, D. (2008b). DS/EN 1176-1 Dansk standard Legepladsredskaber og -underlag – Del 1 : Generel­
le sikkerhedskrav og prøvningsmetoder, (4), 0–88.
•	
Standard, D. (2009). DS/EN 1177 Dansk standard Stødabsorberende legepladsunderlag – Bestemmelse af 
den kritiske faldhøjde Impact attenuating playground surfacing – Determination of critical fall height, (3), 
0–17.
•	
Steenhold, J. M. (2008). Børn og klogskab: klog på 100 måder. Saxo Publish.
•	
Steenhold, J. M. (2014). Legenes kendetegn: bogen on legens semiotik. Saxo Publish.
•	
Steenhold, J. M. (2015). Barndomskanon. Excellent Play & Saxo Publish.
•	
Steenhold, J. M. (2016). Legende læring i børnehøjde: åbne dagtilbud - viden og kultur formidling i bør­
nehave, sfo og bibliotek. Excellent Play & Saxo Publish.
•	
Størrelsesguide til børnetøj og babystørrelser. (n.d.). Retrieved May 22, 2018, from https://www.smafolk.
dk/da/footer/other/sizeguide/
==PAGE:136==
124
•	
System Details | Waukesha Magnetic Bearings. (n.d.). Retrieved May 21, 2018, from https://www.wauk­
bearing.com/en/magnetic-bearing-systems/system-details/
•	
Themes - LEDON A/S. (n.d.). Retrieved June 5, 2018, from https://www.ledonplay.com/themes/
•	
Trageton, A. (2004). Konstruktionsleg i børnehave og børnehaveklasse: konstruktionsleg 1-7 år. Krog­
hs Forlag. Retrieved from http://www.academicbooks.dk/konstruktionsleg-i-boernehave-og-boernehave­
klasse/arne-trageton/9788762405127
•	
Vippedyr til børn - Vælg mellem 30 godkendte vippe dyr på fjedre. (n.d.). Retrieved May 17, 2018, from 
https://www.ledon.dk/vippedyr/
•	
Vækstkurve, drenge 0-20 år - Patienthåndbogen på sundhed.dk. (n.d.). Retrieved March 6, 2018, from ht­
tps://www.sundhed.dk/borger/patienthaandbogen/boern/illustrationer/tegning/vaekstkurve-drenge-0-20/
•	
Vækstkurve, piger 0-20 år - Patienthåndbogen på sundhed.dk. (n.d.). Retrieved March 6, 2018, from htt­
ps://www.sundhed.dk/borger/patienthaandbogen/boern/illustrationer/tegning/vaekstkurver-piger-0-20/
•	
Winther-Lindqvist, D. A. (2006). Skal vi lege?: leg, identitet og fællesskaber i børnehaven. Fryden­
lund. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.saxo.com/dk/skal-vi-lege_ditte-alexandera-winther-lindqvist_
epub_9788778874511
Persons 
Experts 
•	
Aakjær Nielsen, Thomas. Børnenes Hovedstad
•	
Bøgevige, Mette. Pedagogue Leader, Arken Kindergarten
•	
Castella, Krystina. Professor Art Center College of Design, Pasadena
•	
Hansen, Rikke. Pedagogue student, Kolding
•	
Larsen, Jesper. Pedagogue, Arken Kindergarten
•	
Lærkes, Jakob. Head of library, Gladsaxe hovedbibliotek
•	
Olsen, Jeanet Annie. Pedagogoue Leader, Himmelrummet Kindergarten
•	
Schmidt, Hanne. Pedagogue, Arken Kindergarten
•	
Skovbjerg, Helle Marie. Professor MSO Design for Play, Design School Kolding
•	
Skøtt, Søren. LEDON A/S
•	
Thiel Beck Thrane, Tina. Landscape Architect, TT+ Landskabsarktekter Aps
Observed and Interviewed Children
•	
Bang, Alexander
•	
Frederiksen, Nanna
•	
Frederiksen, Valentin
•	
Guldfelt, Lauge
•	
Guldfelt, Liva
•	
Harlov, Oliver
•	
Kirstholm Bjarnov Brandt, Naja
•	
Laugesen, Magnus
Workshop and Test Participants
Himmelrummet Kindergarten
•	
Ayoub Jebali, Mohammed
•	
Bygsø Strauss, Emilie
•	
Martins Juliao, Emma
•	
Redsø, Mathilde
•	
Rødbro Busch, Frederik
==PAGE:137==
 125
•	
Uhl Wohlert, Augusta
Siblings 
•	
Pontoppidan Holst, Clara
•	
Pontoppidan Holst, Martin
Adults
•	
Ginderskov, Claus
•	
Ginderskov, Frederik
•	
Storm Pedersen, Charlotte
•	
Storm Pedersen, Inger
•	
Storm Pedersen, Kathrine
•	
Storm Pedersen, Lasse
•	
Storm Pedersen, Nete
•	
Werther, Silke
Figure 0.1 Colour Code
V
Figure 1.1 The Encapsulation Model (Andreasen, Hansen & Cash, 2015, p. 108 ) 
2
Figure 1.2 LEDON´s Logo 
4
Figure 1.3 Playground Themes (“Themes - LEDON A/S”, n.d.)
5
Figure 1.4 Capital of Children Logo
6
Figure 2.1 Maslow’s Pyramid of Needs
15
Figure 2.2 The Play Wheel of Steenhold (Steenhold, 2015, p. frontpage) 
19
Figure 2.3 Knowledge Wheel (Steenhold, 2008, p. frontpage)
21
Figure 3.1 The Exploration Loop (Andreasen, Hansen & Cash, 2015, p. 119) 
34
Figure 3.2 Different Types of Playgrounds.
36
Figure 3.3 Climbing Tower Arken
37
Figure 3.4 Climbing Tower Brøndby
37
Figure 3.5 Climbing Tower Fredericia
37
Figure 3.6 Alexander (in the front) Meeting a Fun Challenge with a Friend
38
Figure 3.7 Stakeholders
39
Figure 3.8 Personas
41
Figure 3.9 Goal formulation (Andreasen, Hansen & Cash, 2015, p. 165)
44
Figure 4.1 TT+ Logo
48
Figure 4.2 Frederik Draws
50
Figure 4.4 Mathilde´s Drawing
50
Figure 4.3 Emilie, Augusta, Emma & Mathilde Draws
50
Figure 4.5 Augusta´s Drawing
50
Figure 4.6 Mohammed’s Drawing
51
Figure 4.7 Frederik´s Drawing
51
Figure 4.8 Play Dough Exercise Takes Place
51
Figure 4.9 Mohammed Focused on the Exercise
51
Figure 4.10 Mohammed as Superman
52
Figure 4.11 Play Dough Hotdog 
52
Figure 4.12 Participants in Bird Nest Swing
52
Figure 4.13 Removing Frozen Dirt from Table 
52
Figure 4.14 Showing Placement for Play Equipment
53
Figure 4.15 Showing Placement for Play Equipment
53
List of Figures 
==PAGE:138==
126
Figure 4.16 Clara Draws
54
Figure 4.17 Colourful Jumping Swing 
54
Figure 4.18 Martin Builds
55
Figure 4.19 Clara Builds
55
Figure 4.20 Swing
56
Figure 4.21 Twisting Slide
56
Figure 4.22 Round Building Blocks
56
Figure 4.23 Five min Ideation Wild but Safe
57
Figure 4.24 Idea Catalogue Layout
59
Figure 5.1 Knowledge Areas Illustration and Abbreviation
62
Figure 5.2 11 Ideas
66
Figure 5.3 Concept Catalogue Layout
70
Figure 6.1 8 Free Multi Seesaw
76
Figure 6.2 34 Loading Carousel 
76
Figure 7.1 Free Multi Seesaw Illustration
80
Figure 7.2 Loading Carousel Illustration
80
Figure 7.3 A Selection of LEDON A/S Existing Seesaws (“Vippedyr Til Børn - Vælg Mellem 30 
Godkendte Vippe Dyr På Fjedre”, n.d.)
83
Figure 7.4 A Selection of LEDON A/S Existing Carousels (“Karruseller, Spinners Og Svævebaner - 
LEDON A/S”, n.d.)
84
Figure 7.5 Scooter Carousel Complications on Youtube.(“Carousel Scooter - YouTube”, n.d.)
85
Figure 7.6 Carousel Types (DS/EN 1176-5)
86
Figure 7.7 Grip (Standard, 2008b, p. 12)
91
Figure 7.8 Grasp (Standard, 2008b, p. 12)
91
Figure 7.9 Rod Cross Section
92
Figure 7.10 2D Rod Shapes
93
Figure 7.11 3D Prototypes
93
Figure 7.12 1:1 Mockups of Handles
93
Figure 7.13 Test Set-up
94
Figure 7.14 Testing of Handles
95
Figure 7.15 Adults Testing Handle Solutions
96
Figure 7.16 Clara Holding on to the Handle on the Side
97
Figure 7.17 Lasse Holding on to the Handle on Top and Slightly on the Side
97
Figure 7.18 Spiral Spring with Open Coils (“accuratesprings.com”, n.d.)
98
Figure 7.19 Spiral Spring with Tight Coils (“accuratesprings.com”, n.d.)
98
Figure 7.20 One Way Clutch Bearing (“One Way Clutch | SKF India Limited | Manufacturer in 
Chinchwad, Pune | ID: 10606876997”, n.d.)
98
Figure 7.21 Cross Section of Loading Carousel
99
Figure 8.1 CAD Model of the Loading Carousel
104
Figure 8.2 Exploded View 
105
Figure 8.3 Cad Drawing
106
Figure 8.4 Cross Section 
106
Figure 8.5 Grey Area Marking the Free Space Around the Carousel
109
Figure 8.6 Blue Edition
110
Figure 8.7 Purple Edition
110
Figure 8.8 Multi Colour Edition
110
==PAGE:139==
 127
Table 2.1 Search Themes and Search Words
8
Table 2.2 Search Strings on DTU Findit
9
Table 2.3 Search Strings on Library
10
Table 2.4 Information and Personal Communication from Experts
11
Table 2.5 Juxtaposition between Maslow’s Needs and Development Areas 
15
Table 2.6 Description of Play Types
18
Table 2.7 Knowledge Areas Old and New Knowledge
21
Table 2.8 Comparison of Play Types and Design Play Types
25
Table 3.1 Comments from Playground Fieldwork
34
Table 3.2 Comments from Interviews 
37
Table 3.3 Stakeholder Definition
40
Table 3.4 Stakeholders in Relation to Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs
41
Table 3.5 Discourses and Interpretation Needs
42
Table 3.6 Design Paradoxes
43
Table 3.7 Goal Specification
44
Table 4.1 Ideas
57
Table 5.1 Comparison of Learning Elements pr. Idea
62
Table 5.2 Weighted Objectives Method Based on the Goal Specification
64
Table 6.1 Universal Virtues Comparison
74
Table 7.1 Organ Description 
82
Table 7.2 Regulation Areas and Specifications (DS/EN 1176-5)
87
Table 7.3 Strengths and Weaknesses for Loading Carousel
87
Table 7.4 Solutions and Comments Concerning Organs
88
Table 7.5 Comparison of Bearings 
90
Table 7.6  Rating of Handle Types
94
Table 7.7 Adults Rating of Handle Solutions
96
Table 7.8 Organs and Parts
99
Table 8.1 The Idea With and Idea In for the Loading Carousel 
107
Table 8.2 Knowledge Areas Obtained Within the Loading Carousel
108
List of Tables
==PAGE:140==
128
