==PAGE:1==
Plastic Waste in Road Construction in
Iceland: an Environmental Assessment
Guðrún Fjóla Guðmundsdóttir
A thesis presented for the degree of
M.Sc. in Environmental Engineering
Residual Resource Engineering study line
Department of Environmental Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
June 2018
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This study investigates the environmental consequences of utilizing residential source sep-
arated plastic waste for a wearing course of a road constructed in Iceland. The study is
speciﬁcally adjusted to Icelandic conditions, both in the context of the road construction,
maintenance, service and recycling and how the plastic waste management is currently
executed. The most relevant application method of plastic to asphalt mixtures was found
to be polymer-coated aggregate (PCA) method. The ﬁve most common types of waste
polymers were investigated in the context of being used for road construction. The liter-
ature review was used for the evaluation of the road parameters; Abrasion, Wheel track
formation, Fracturing, Lifespan and Recycling. As a result it was concluded that liter-
ature indicates that hot asphalt mix properties will be enhanced by using 3-15% waste
plastic using a polymer-coated aggregate (PCA) method.
Data speciﬁc to Icelandic conditions were gathered and reported in order to perform a
quantitative environmental assessment. The assessment was then made by modelling two
scenarios using the software EASETECH. Scenario 1 consists of the processes included
in a life cycle of a traditionally constructed wearing course in Iceland and the processes
included in plastic waste management for residential source separated plastic waste from
Iceland. Scenario 2 consists of the processes included in a life cycle of a plastic waste
enriched wearing course constructed in Iceland, in which plastic waste requires cleaning
and pelleting before use. A life cycle assessment (LCA) based on the ISO14040 standards
(14040:2006 (2006) and 14044:2006 (2006)) was then performed accompanied by a sensi-
tivity analysis and uncertainty propagation. According to the LCA performed Scenario 2,
has statistically lower impact scores than Scenario 1 connected to every impact category
investigated. Although there are uncertainties connected to the quality of data used, the
most critical assumptions were tested for in perturbation analysis, scenario analysis and
uncertainty propagation. The results of the study should not be used to evaluate the en-
vironmental consequences of using virgin plastic in road construction nor the application
method of polymer modiﬁed bitumen (PMB).
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The present study is a Master’s thesis for the degree of environmental engineering with
a focus on residual resource engineering written at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU). The study was made under the supervision of Senior researcher Anders Daamgard
working within the department of environmental engineering at DTU. External supervisor
of this study are, R&D manager, Jamie McQuilkin and, CEO and Head of Development,
Nicolas Marion Proietti from the company ReSource International ehf based in Iceland.
The thesis is written in the period of January 22nd to June 22nd 2018 and is credited with
30 ECTS points.
My sincere thanks go to my supervisors; Senior researcher Anders Daamgard at DTU
and Nicolas Marion Proietti and Jamie McQuilkin from ReSource International ehf. for
their support, valuable inputs and guidance throughout the project. I would also like to
thank all of the professionals that took the time to meet with me and explain various
procedures. In this context I would like to mention;
• Birkir Hrafn Jóakimsson, Civil engineer at the Road Administration of Iceland
(Vegagerðin)
• Bjarni Hjarðar, Chief engineer at SORPA bs.
• Elín Ásgeirsdóttir, Quality and R&D manager at Malbikunarstöðin Höfði hf
• Gísli Eymarsson, Head of quality department at Malbikunarstöðin Hlaðbær Colas
hf
• Skúli Thordarson, Dr.ing. Specialist, service department at the Road Administra-
tion of Iceland (Vegagerðin)
• Steingrímur Bragason, Production manager at Malbikunarstöðin Hlaðbær Colas hf
Disclaimer
The author of this study is responsible for its content. The results of the study should
not be considered to be a declared policy of Vegagerðin nor does it represent the opinion
of DTU, Vegagerðin, Malbikunarstöðin Hlaðbær Colas hf. or ReSource International ehf.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
6
1.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory
8
2.1
Roads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1
Important Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Plastic Additives in Roads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Application methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Plastic Waste Additives in Roads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.3
Eﬀect on Road Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3
Introduction to Life Cycle Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3.1
LCA of Roads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Inventory
25
3.1
Scenario description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Inventory, Considerations and Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
Road: Material, Manufacturing, Use, Disposal & Transport . . . .
26
3.2.2
Plastic Waste in the Capital Region of Iceland . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.3
Other Energy Considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.4
Road Improvements Eﬀecting Longevity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Critical Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Life Cycle Assessment
35
4.1
Goal and Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.1
Goal Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.2
Scope Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.3
Basis for Impact Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Life Cycle Inventory Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.1
LCI Model at System Level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.2
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.3
System Modelling Per Life Cycle Stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.4
Basis for Sensitivity and Uncertainty Analysis . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.5
Calculated LCI Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3
Life Cycle Impact Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.1
Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.2
Sensitivity and uncertainty analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
1
==PAGE:5==
5
Summary, Results and Discussion
66
5.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.3
Discussion and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6
Conclusion and Recommendation
72
A Theory appendix
78
A.1 Road Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.2 Plastic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A.3 Life Cycle of Roads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
B LCA appendix
87
B.1 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Method and Normalisation Factors . . . .
87
B.2 Bill of Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.3 List of Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
B.4 Unit Process and LCI Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
B.5 Sensitivity Ratios and Coeﬃcients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
B.6 Scenario analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
B.7 Uncertainty propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
B.8 Uncertainty propagation, no lifetime change
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
B.9 Choice of representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
2
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
AC Asphalt Concrete
AUTL Asphalt for Ultra-Thin Layer
EASETECH
Environmental Assessment System for Environmental TECHnologies
HFO Heavy Fuel Oil
HMA Hot Mix Asphalt
ILCD International Reference Life Cycle Data System
ISO
International Organization of Standardization
LCA Life Cycle Assessment
LCI
Life Cycle Inventory Analysis
LCIA Life Cycle Impact Assessment
MRF Material Recovery Facility
PCA Polymer-Coated Aggregate
PE
Polyethylene
PET
Polyethylene Terephthalate
PMA Polymer Modiﬁed Asphalt
PMB Polymer Modiﬁed Bitumen
PP
Polypropylene
PROSUITE
PROspective SUstaInability assessment of TEchnologies
PS
Polystyrene
PVC Polyvinyl Chloride
RAP Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement
RCA Recycled Concrete Aggregate
SBS
Styrene-Butadiene-Styrene
SC
Sensitivity Coeﬃcient
SMA Stone Matrix Asphalt
SR
Sensitivity Ratio
TT
Type Testing
VMA Void of Mineral Aggregate
3
==PAGE:7==
Glossary
Abrasion: The process of scraping of wearing of material.
Bleeding/creeping of asphalt: Bleeding is the term used when binder material
ﬁlls aggregate voids during hot weather or compaction.
Dynamic viscosity: is a measure of a ﬂuid’s resistance to shear ﬂow when an external
force is applied
Fraas breaking point: the temperature at which the ﬁrst crack appears in the coating while
ﬂexing a thin layer of bitumen at descending temperatures
Fracturing: are cracks or potholes which are formed in asphalt. Cracks can form due to
the stiﬀness characteristics of the asphalt mixture. Potholes form due to weathering,
defects in the pavement or other impact.
Grain distribution: is a test performed on an aggregate sample which indicates the amount
of each size of gravel in the sample. Grain size of a sample is given as a distribution.
Kinematic viscosity: is a ratio of a particular ﬂuid’s dynamic viscosity to its density
Los Angeles abrasion (LA) test: The Los Angeles abrasion test is a test method
applied to demonstrate the toughness of the aggregate and abrasion characteristics.
Marshall test: Marshall test includes a Marshall hammer to test void and
compression characteristics of an asphalt sample.
Marshall stability: is the peak resistance to a load during a constant
deformation loading.
Marshall ﬂow: is a measure of deformation of an asphalt sample that
has undergone the Marshall test.
Marshall Quotient: is an index of stiﬀness, Marshall stability divided by Marshall ﬂow.
Moisture absorption: Moisture absorption is the characteristic of a material
to absorb moisture from its environment.
4
==PAGE:8==
Prall test: In a Prall test asphalt specimens are ﬁrst submerged in water and then put into
frames with 40 stainless steel ball bearings and pressed
Rutting resistance: The practice of minimizing rutting and/or improving the
pavement performance against rutting.
Soundness test: The soundness test determines an aggregate’s resistance to
disintegration by weathering and, in particular, freeze-thaw cycles.
Strippind test: Stripping test is a test method to demonstrate the cohesion of
binder and aggregate.
Surface resistance/Skid resistance: Skid resistance is the power generated
between a tire and road surface when a vehicle brakes.
Viscoelasticity: is a physical property of a substance. A substance that is viscoelastic
exhibits both elastic and viscous behaviour. Therefore the application of stress causes
temporary deformation if the stress is quickly removed, but permanent deformation
if it is maintained.
Wheel path rut: Rutting is a depression or a groove formation in a road or a path.
Wheel path rut is the subsequent depression after wear by wheels and/or by deformation
of the asphalt pavement or subbase material.
5
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Road construction is heavily reliant on fossil fuels and virgin materials. Traditionally,
roads are made of 95% aggregate and 5% bitumen (binder) by weight of the road. In 2011
there were 15 companies in the asphalt business in Iceland; one focused on production
only, four producing and laying asphalt and ten focusing on laying only. That same year
there were four stationary asphalt production sites and four mobile plants producing 0.2
million tonnes of hot and warm mix asphalt (Marchand (2015)). The total amount of
material used for road construction in 2008 in Iceland was about 60% of the total aggre-
gate used that year. Similar proportions are seen in the Nordic countries however the
total amount of material used per inhabitant is much higher in Iceland compared to other
European countries (Vegagerðin (2017)).
Icelandic asphalt has the reputation of having a short lifetime expectancy compared to
other European countries. Regardless, if it is due to the diﬀerent type of aggregate used,
constant frost-thaw ﬂuctuations, high precipitation and/or because of the frequent use of
spiked tires it has a need to be improved.
The waste reception and classiﬁcation center of the capital region of Iceland (managed
by SORPA bs.) received approximately 900 tons of sorted plastic in 2016 (Björnsdóttir
(2016)). This amount of plastic waste received is expected to rise in the next few year
after SORPA bs. has implemented and established a new air classiﬁer system for plastic
waste called Kári (Hjarðar (2018)). Residential source separated plastic waste in Iceland
is bailed and shipped to Sweden for recycling or incineration.
There is a consensus among researchers that polymer and latex asphalt modiﬁcation
can improve road properties. Quality diﬀerences can be seen in increased cohesion, in-
creased elasticity, better temperature susceptibility in high and low temperatures which
lowers the risk of bleeding/creeping of the asphalt and wheel-path ruts (Kalantar et al.
(2012), Salomon (2006) and Giavarini (1994)). Additionally, the addition of plastic waste
has been found to decrease the amount of bitumen and aggregate needed for a good
asphalt mixture (Vasudevan et al. (2012)). The explanation is that the plastic waste
occupies space in the mixture.
The aforementioned improvement possibilities due to polymers and waste polymers
in road construction need to be investigated in the context of how they aﬀect endurance
6
==PAGE:10==
(lifetime) of a road layer. Yet, there is reason to believe that there might be consequential
environmental impact savings connected to utilizing plastic waste for road construction
in Iceland in comparison to the current management.
1.1
Objective
This study aims to investigate the environmental consequences of utilizing plastic waste
for road construction in Iceland.
The study is speciﬁcally aimed at:
• Residential source separated plastic waste
• Hot asphalt mixtures used for bound surface layers
• Plastic waste management used for Icelandic source separated plastic waste (in
2018)
• Road construction standards used in Iceland
• The capital region of Iceland
• Icelandic conditions, e.g. material extraction, pavement construction, wearing due
to weather and spiked tires, recycling of reclaimed asphalt pavements and plastic
waste
• Life cycle assessment based on the ISO14040 standards (14040:2006 (2006) and
14044:2006 (2006))
The study is speciﬁcally adjusted to Icelandic conditions, both in the context of the
road construction, maintenance, service and recycling and how the plastic waste manage-
ment is currently executed. The study starts with a theory chapter that aims to provide
evidence that plastic waste additives improve road quality. Firstly, the methods of apply-
ing plastic to roads are considered. Second, the ﬁve most common types of plastic will be
assessed in the context of polymer modiﬁed asphalt. Lastly, possibilities of improvements
of roads will be assessed. It is important to keep in mind that the literature on plastic
waste additives in road construction is more often than not based on results found in
warmer climate than typically found in Iceland. Moreover, the theory chapter is made
from an environmental perspective and is not exhaustive from a civil engineering point
of view.
Next, an inventory describes the scenarios and situations speciﬁc to Iceland.
In this
chapter, data collection on material extraction for road construction and energy use in
all stages of the scenarios is considered as well as the plastic waste management situation
in Iceland.
Thereafter, a life cycle assessment is performed which is based on the ISO14040 stan-
dards. The life cycle assesement is performed on two scenarios which are deﬁned in the
chapter. The study does not aim to be a hotspot analysis for road construciton. Results,
discussion, conclusion and recommendations are summarised for the ease of the reader.
7
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Roads
Roads are constructed of aggregate and bitumen in diﬀerent layers which diﬀer in number,
thickness and materials depending on the type of road. A traditional structure of a road
consists of a subgrade, sub-base, base course and wearing course (see ﬁgure 2.1).
Figure 2.1 Road layers of a typical road in Iceland
Diﬀerent amounts of road material is used in each layer. To give an example of the
diﬀerent magnitudes of aggregate used in each layer, in Iceland in 2008 the total amount
of material used for road construction was 5 million cubic meters of which approximately
77% was used for the sub-base layer, 21% for the base course and 2% for the wearing
course (Vegagerðin (2017)).
The subgrade is the underlying soil at each location. The sub-base is made of material
found on location or other nearby sources, which is then pressed and has the purpose of
evening out the surface of the subgrade. The sub-base should have a gradient and the ad-
jacent base course should prevent water from ﬂowing through to the sub-base and be able
to carry the traﬃc load. The base course adjacent to the wearing course should prevent
the deformation of the wearing course and it needs to be strong but partly permeable.
The wearing course ensures a ﬁrm and even layer for vehicles and it oﬀers resistance be-
tween the wheels and road that minimizes skidding and should (particularly in Iceland)
withstand spiked tires. The wearing course can be bound or unbound where the binding
element is either bituminous or concrete materials. The road shoulders have similarities
8
==PAGE:12==
with the wearing course and more often than not they are identical to the wearing course
(Vegagerðin (2017)).
The thickness of each layer is designed according to traﬃc patterns and the layer sepa-
ration is mostly due to the diﬀerent standards the layers need to fulﬁll. In general, the
closer to the traﬃc the layer is the stricter are the standards. Similarly, the carrying
capacity of the layers should gradually grow as the layers are closer to the traﬃc. The
right road materials are essential in order to meet these standards (Vegagerðin (2017)).
For more information on road materials and how they are chosen see appendix A .
2.1.1
Important Parameters
In order to enforce the quality standards of roads, series of tests are made according to
the European technical guide EN13043. There are multiple variables that ensure road
quality. A high quality road has good adhesion between aggregates and binding materi-
als. The binder should have good cohesion, a low temperature susceptibility in extreme
temperatures and low viscosity at normal temperatures. The susceptibility to loading
time should be low along with a high permanent deformation resistance, high breaking
strength and high fatigue characteristics. Moreover, there is need to consider the aging
characteristics of the bitumen (McQuilkin (2017) and Vegagerðin (2017)).
These quality parameters inherently have an eﬀect on abrasion, wheel track formation,
fracturing, temperature susceptibility, volume and voids, surface- and skid resistance,
safety, usability and lifespan of the road.
Apart from these variables the mixing and application characteristics of the asphalt should
be such that the asphalt is applicable to machinery currently used. Therefore the stiﬀness,
ﬂow and viscoelasticity of the mixture should be such that paving eﬀorts are unchanged
or easier.
Asphalt types
European standards for asphalt mixing indicates 9 diﬀerent types of asphalt (Vegagerðin
(2017));
1. Asphalt Concrete (AC)
2. Very Thin Layer Asphalt Concrete
3. Soft Asphalt
4. Hot Rolled Asphalt (also known as hot mix asphalt (HMA))
5. Stone Mastic Asphalt (SMA)
6. Mastic Asphalt
7. Porous Asphalt
8. Reclaimed Asphalt
9
==PAGE:13==
9. Asphalt for Ultra-Thin Layer (AUTL)
The type of road chosen depends on the location, estimated traﬃc and designer of road.
Each of these types have diﬀerent quality standards (ÍST EN 13108-1 to -9). In this study
there will be a focus on warm and hot mix asphalts (asphalt types 3 to 5).
Deﬁnition of road quality
In order to ensure a quality road aggregate, bitumen and asphalt specimen need to be an-
alyzed. There are several test included in each analysis made, some of which are speciﬁc
for Icelandic conditions. These tests are described in "Efnisrannsóknir og efniskröfur"
published by the Road administration of Iceland (Vegagerðin (2017)).
The aggregate analysis performed by evaluating the following tests; grain distribution,
moisture, humus, compression strength and rock quality (strength and resistance to
weathering) and sometimes Los Angeles (LA) test. The performance requirements of
the aggregate are dependent on the assumed volume of traﬃc (for additional information
see Vegagerðin (2017), chapter 64.5).
To perform an analysis on the quality of bitumen the following test are made; Needle test,
softening temperature, ignition temperature, solubility, dynamic viscosity, kinematic vis-
cosity and Fraas breaking point (Vegagerðin (2017)). The performance requirements of
these tests are dependent on if the bitumen is considered "soft", "hard" or "in between".
Each test performed for aggregate and bitumen analysis have speciﬁc performance re-
quirements dependent on the which type of asphalt mixture it will be used for. Because
there are nine diﬀerent types of asphalt these performance requirements will not be listed.
Therefore, for the purpose of this study, it will be assumed that aggregate and bitumen
meet the requirements for the respective asphalt type.
Asphalt sample analysis Asphalt sample analysis is made by evaluating the following
tests; (i) Before asphalt is paved; Marshall test, moisture absorption and fracturing test
and (ii) after the asphalt has been paved; void, surface resistance and surface roughness.
The Road administration of Iceland suggests performance values of the aforementioned
tests based on which type of asphalt type is made (see table 2.1).
10
==PAGE:14==
Table 2.1 Suggested performance values of asphalt samples in the design stage (before
asphalt is paved). This table is a part of a table found in Vegagerðin (2017). SMA 8,
11 and 16 indicates that the aggregate is good for stone matrix asphalt, 8-11-16 mm
diameter stones respectively. Similarly, AC 8, 11 and 16 indicates the aggregate is good
for asphalt concrete.
Type of
asphalt
Marshall test
Moisture absorption,
fracturing resistance
[%]
Void
[%]
Stability
[kN]
Flow
[mm]
Stability/Flow
[kN/mm]
AC 8
1,0-3,0
5,0
1,5-5,0
>1,0
>70
AC 11
1,0-3,0
5,0
1,5-5,0
>1,0
>70
AC 16
1,0-3,0
5,0
1,5-5,0
>1,0
>70
SMA 8
1,5-3,5
5,0
1,5-5,0
>1,0
>70
SMA 11
1,5-3,5
5,0
1,5-5,0
>1,0
>70
SMA 16
1,5-3,5
5,0
1,5-5,0
>1,0
>70
Moisture absorption and fracture resistance is here referring to the interplay between
the two characteristics which determines the resilience of asphalt to frost-thaw ﬂuctua-
tions.
When the asphalt has been paved and compressed, AC pavements are allowed to have a
void volume of 1.0-4.0% of the total volume and SMA pavements 1.5-4.5%. The surface
resistance of the paved road is dependent on the allowed speed on the road. However,
the surface resistance should not be below 0.4 in any case, no upper limit was found
(Vegagerðin (2017)). The surface roughness is suggested to be 6 mm for roads with a
traﬃc of >3000 ÁDU, (ÁDU is a unit that indicates the average daily traﬃc in a year
on two lanes). No upper or lower limits were found for surface roughness.
According to Vegagerðin (2017) a road of high traﬃc (>8000 ÁDU) with road material
SMA 11/SMA 16 with the hard bitumen (70/100) can contain polymers if tests are made
that indicate that the asphalt withstands quality standards in wheel track formation and
Prall testing. Asphalt needs to meet the requirements of type testing seen in table 2.2.
Table 2.2 Asphalt quality requirements of type testing for high traﬃc roads (>8000
ÁDU) according to Icelandic standards (Vegagerðin (2017))
Test
≥8000 (ÁDU)
≥15000 (ÁDU)
≥30000 (ÁDU)
Wheel track test, mm*
6
5
4
Prall test, ml
24
24
20
Water sensitivity test, %
70
70
70
Because of high humidity, frequent frost-thaw ﬂuctuation and abundant use of salt
for ice-thawing in Iceland there is a need for good adhesion properties between bitumen
and aggregate (Vegagerðin (2017)). The road administration of Iceland additionally has
an intricate discussion on how asphalt should be paved which, for the sake of this study,
is assumed to be followed.
If all of the aforementioned parameter suggestions and requirements are fulﬁlled a wearing
course is considered of good quality.
11
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Plastic Additives in Roads
Additives are primarily added in order to improve important parameters of roads, to make
them cheaper or to utilize otherwise discarded resources. Additives either compensate for
natural aggregates, bitumen or improve the cohesion between the two. Generally, bulky
and low quality additives are added to the sub layers of the road and the ﬁner and high
quality additives are added to the wearing course.
There is a consensus among researchers that polymer and latex asphalt modiﬁcation can
improve road properties. Quality diﬀerences can be seen in increased cohesion, increased
elasticity, better temperature susceptibility in high and low temperatures which lowers
the risk of bleeding/creeping of the asphalt and wheel-path ruts (Kalantar et al. (2012),
Salomon (2006) and Giavarini (1994)). Polymers typically increase the stiﬀness of bi-
tumen which improves rutting resistance and allows the use of relatively softer bitumen
and better low temperature performance (Awwad and Shbeeb (2007)). Latex is partic-
ularly suited to the modiﬁcation of emulsions and the most commonly used in paving
grade emulsions are SBS, polychloroprene and natural rubber (Salomon (2006)). The
aforementioned additives have been used globally since the 1990s and since the 2000s
low grade mixed waste polymers have been rapidly-developing and used notably in India,
Iran and China (McQuilkin (2017)). Polymer additives have been used in Iceland for the
purpose of reducing the risk of separation of bitumen and aggregate in the process of
mixing and transporting of asphalt. However, polymer additives have only been used for
SMA pavements (Vegagerðin (2017)).
The optimum modiﬁer content has the maximum bulk density and Marshall stability
with a minimum ﬂow, air void content of 4% and maximum void of mineral aggregate
(VMA) (Awwad and Shbeeb (2007)).
2.2.1
Application methods
Achievable improvements of the polymer modiﬁed asphalt (PMA) are heavily dependent
on how the polymers are applied. There are predominantly three diﬀerent methods of
adding plastic in an asphalt emulsion; (i) Polymer modiﬁed bitumen (PMB), (ii) Plastic-
coated aggregate (PCA) and (iii) Plastic and aggregate mixture.
(i) Polymer modiﬁed bitumen (PMB)
In this method the plastic is melted at approximately 160◦C and mixed with the warm
bitumen where it is stirred for about 30 min (Becker et al. (2001)). The plastic will
replace 10% or less of the binder material.
Considerations. In some cases the PMB yields a poor asphalt compatibility, higher
cost and higher viscosity during asphalt processing and application (Becker et al. (2001)).
A myriad of polymers have been used as binder modiﬁers and in table 2.2 the character-
istics of the PMB of the ﬁve most common polymers are listed reported by Becker et al.
(2001).
12
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2 Characteristics of polymers used to modify bitumen (Kalantar et al. (2012)
and Becker et al. (2001))
13
==PAGE:17==
As described by Kalantar et al. (2012) polymer characteristics such as chemical com-
position, structure, crystallinity and molecular weight aﬀect the PMB mixture. Giavarini
(1994) reports that a number of researchers have studied the complex interrelationships
between polymer and bitumen and in conclusion found three main factors inﬂuencing
their compatibility. The factors are (1) amount and molecular weight of asphaltenes, (2)
aromatic of the maltene phase, and (3) storage temperature.
Even though the polymer and bitumen are considered compatible there is need to con-
sider the mixing conditions such as the mixing equipment and time-temperature proﬁle
(Kalantar et al. (2012)). This statement is backed up by Giavarini (1994) who refers
to the diﬀerent procedures of implementing thermoplastic- and thermosetting polymers
among others.
Despite, the diﬃculties with PMBs there are a great number of them oﬀered on the mar-
ket. Many of these PMBs are produced by petroleum and petrochemical companies and
are more often than not based on SBS plastic types (see more about SBS in appendix A).
Bitumen manufacturers may also oﬀer diﬀerent types of PMBs based on speciﬁc climate
conditions (Giavarini (1994)).
(ii) Plastic-coated aggregate (PCA)
This method includes heating the aggregate to approximately 160◦C and adding plastic
particles, stirred in a tumbler for about 30 sec. This way the plastic coats the aggregate.
The plastic particles need to be the right size, clean and somewhat homogeneous mixture.
Vasudevan et al. (2012) suggests that the use of plastic waste coated aggregate can reduce
the quantity of bitumen needed for a good mix by 0.5% of the total weight of the road.
Hence, a 10% reduction of bitumen used.
Considerations. The method implies that the inﬂuential polymer characteristics is
melting temperature, thermoset/thermoplastic classiﬁcation and the presence of toxic
additives. This method has been found to increase the roughness of the road and more
eﬃciently bind the bitumen to the aggregates (Awwad and Shbeeb (2007) and Ahma-
dinia et al. (2011)). The grain size of the plastic makes a diﬀerence in outcome as Awwad
and Shbeeb (2007) reported. Pelleted plastic provides a better coating of the aggregate
leading to a good cohesion between bitumen and aggregate but non-pelleted plastic was
found to provide a rougher surface texture.
(iii) Plastic and aggregate mixture
This method uses plastic granules with aggregate which reduces the amount of aggregate
used in the road construction. Using traditional asphalt production methods, plastic
granules (usually large particles) are mixed with aggregate and bitumen at the same
time. In this method the plastic is partly melted, coating aggregate and binding to bitu-
men, and on the other hand not melted which replaces aggregate. While the other two
methods use about 0.5 to 1% plastic, this method gives about 12% total plastic content
by the weight of the road (Zoorob and Suparma (2000)).
14
==PAGE:18==
Considerations.
This method technically describes the behavior of those types of
plastic that have a melting point above 180◦C (working temperature of HMA). This is
supported by Ahmadinia et al. (2011) who concluded by investigating PET (melting
point around 250◦C) that it gave stiﬀer mixture and higher stability because of the glass
transition temperature (70◦C for PET) allowed the PET particles to become more or
less crystalline. However, this method has not been researched to the same extent as the
other two methods.
2.2.2
Plastic Waste Additives in Roads
Waste polymers may help to improve the performance of pavement and at the same time
solve a waste disposal problem (Kalantar et al. (2012)). If waste polymers improve pave-
ment performance their use would be beneﬁcial from an economical and environmental
point of view.
This study will focus on the PCA method since it has less uncertainties regarding ap-
plication, it is applicable to machinery currently used in asphalt production in Iceland
and a good reference base in literature. Additionally, the PMB method has proven to
be energy intensive (due to mixing and storage methods) which is not typically positive
for environmental impact assessment. However, it would be possible to investigate the
PMB methods and Plastic-aggregate mixture method in the regards of an environmental
assessment.
The type and amount of waste plastic used proportional to aggregate and bitumen is
inﬂuential to the quality retained. However, the best outcomes usually fall between the
range of 5-8% of waste plastic to the weight of bitumen (Kalantar et al. (2012)).
Since this study intends to simulate the quality eﬀect of using a constantly variable het-
erogeneous mixture of waste plastic in road construction it is important to consider how
the most common types of plastic aﬀect road quality.
To begin with the PE, PP and PS polymers soften easily around 130-140◦C without any
evolution of gas (Vasudevan et al. (2012)). PVC however releases hydrogen chloride at
around 250◦C that forms hydrochloric acid upon contact with water vapour.
Polyethylene (PE)
In general, Attaelmanan et al. (2011) found PE to give high thermal expansion but low
stiﬀness. Awwad and Shbeeb (2007) investigated diﬀerent PE types on HMA using soft
bitumen. Although the study did not investigate waste polymers it gives an excellent
overview of high- and low density polyethylene (LDPE and HDPE) behavior in HMA
and recommends using the PCA method at 180-190◦C. The study found that in general,
PE reduces pavement deformation, decreases fatigue ﬂaws and provides better adhesion
between bitumen and aggregate.
HDPE - Awwad and Shbeeb (2007) recommend HDPE for HMA and found increased
stability, reduced density and increased air voids and voids of mineral aggregate by using
12% grinded HDPE by the weight of bitumen. Furthermore, HDPE is reported to have
15
==PAGE:19==
good impact resistance, light weight, low moisture absorption and high tensile strength
(Awwad and Shbeeb (2007)). This is conﬁrmed by Ahmadinia et al. (2011) who studied
how 8% HDPE plastic bags to the weight of bitumen with recycled concrete aggregate
(RCA) mixtures gave an 30-15% increase to Marshall stability and high tensile strength.
LDPE -Awwad and Shbeeb (2007) report that LDPE oﬀers good resistance to abrasion
and low moisture permeability but lacks in the ﬁelds of stiﬀness and structural strength.
Another research by Al-Hadidy and Yi-qiu (2009) on using LDPE on stone matrix as-
phalt (SMA) achieved the results that the overall durability of the original asphalt was
signiﬁcantly improved. Moreover, Ahmadinia et al. (2011) found that the method could
meet the various requirements of diﬀerent climates such as; with extreme temperature
ﬂuctuations and excessive rain fall.
Polypropylene (PP)
PP has the reputation of providing good chemical and fatigue resistance. However, it has
been found that the binder is susceptible to oxidative degradation and thermal expansion
(Attaelmanan et al. (2011)). A study made by Vasudevan et al. (2012) investigated PP,
PE and PS using the polymer coating (PCA) method and soft bitumen. The samples
made were tested for moisture absorption, soundness, Los Angeles abrasion (LA), strip-
ping of bitumen and Marshall stability. The amount of voids and moisture absorption
declined as the plastic content was increased resulting in low disintegration. The LA test
showed that the PCA had a better resistance to abrasion compared to a traditional road
and stripping test found a stronger binding of the bitumen and aggregate. Moreover, a
bitumen extraction test found that the higher the plastic content, the harder it was to
remove bitumen using trichloroethylene. Finally, the results showed that as long as the
percentage of plastics was below 15% to the weight of bitumen it showed an increase in
Marshall stability value. PP was found to be a better additive than PE and PS.
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)
PVC is made ﬂexible with the addition of plasticizers and it is not uncommon for PVC to
contain other additives such as heat stabilizers (Kaley et al. (2006) and Wypych (2016)).
PVC releases toxic gases such as hydrogen chlorides and dioxins when burnt or heated
which can cause issues for the work force during production and therefore it is are not
recommended as additives in wearing courses.
Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET)
Ahmadinia et al. (2011) researched waste PET bottles as additives for SMA and found
signiﬁcant increase in Marshall stability, increased air void and lower bulk speciﬁc gravity
by using 6% PET by weight of bitumen.
Polystyrene (PS)
PS asphalt samples seem to give a lower bending strength, compression strength and
binding property compared to PE and PP. Nonetheless, PS gives the same test results as
16
==PAGE:20==
were discussed in "Polypropylene" section above (Vasudevan et al. (2012)). There seems
to be less literature on PS as road additives than other types of plastic. This could be
due to the fact that the recycling of PS is problematic, therefore it is not common that
it is source separated and collected, hence it is not easily accessible for research.
Styrene-Butadiene-Styrene (SBS)
SBS has been widely researched and used in the context of being used as a bitumen mod-
iﬁer. Attaelmanan et al. (2011) found SBS to have a good fatigue resistance, high creep
rate but susceptible to oxidation. In general, SBS modiﬁed bitumen increases tensile
strength, increases the elasticity of the asphalt, performs better at lower temperatures
and can be recycled. However, as has been mentioned before some researchers have ex-
perienced a problem with the storing and aging eﬀects of the PMB (Yildirim (2007)).
To summarize the characteristics of each plastic type using the PCA application
method, tables 2.3 and 2.4 were made. SBS was not included in the table since the
literature found used the PMB application method.
17
==PAGE:21==
Table 2.3 Characteristics of waste polymers used for the polymer-coated aggregate (PCA) application method summarized. Listing
softening temperature, advantages, disatvantages, uses and sources of Polyethylene (PE), high-density and low-density. The table
is inspired by Becker et al. (2001)
Polymer
Softening
temperature
Advantages
Disadvantages
Uses
Sources
Polyethylene
(PE)
100-120◦C
High thermal
expansion
High thermal
expansion
12% of weight
of bitumen
Attaelmanan et al. (2011)
Reduced pavement
deformation
Low stiﬀness
HMA at 180-190◦C
Awwad and Shbeeb (2007)
Decreased fatigue
characteristics
Less than 15%
of weight
of soft bitumen
Vasudevan et al. (2012)
Good adhesion
-HDPE
120◦C
Increased
air voids
Increased air voids
12% of weight
of bitumen
Ahmadinia et al. (2011)
Good impact
resistance
Grinded HDPE
Awwad and Shbeeb (2007)
Low moisture
absorption
HMA at 180-190◦C
High tensile strength
Increased
Marshall stability
-LDPE
not found
Abrasion resistance
Decreased stiﬀness
12% of weight
of bitumen
Al-Hadidy and Yi-Qiu (2009)
Low moisture
permeability
Decreased structural
strength
Grinded LDPE
Awwad and Shbeeb (2007)
HMA at
180-190◦C
Overall increased
durability
and SMA
18
==PAGE:22==
Table 2.4 Characteristics of waste polymers used for the polymer-coated aggregate (PCA) application method summarized. Listing
softening temperature, advantages, disatvantages, uses and sources of Polypropylene (PP), Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC), Polyethylene
Terephthalate (PET) and Polystyrene (PS). The table is inspired by Becker et al. (2001)
Polymer
Softening
temperature
Advantages
Disadvantages
Uses
Sources
Polypropylene
(PP)
110-160◦C
Good chemical and
fatigue resistance
Oxidative
degradation
Less than 15%
of weight
of bitumen
Attaelmanan et al. (2011)
Low moisture
absorption
High thermal
expansion
Soft bitumen
Vasudevan et al. (2012)
Low disintegration
PP foam
and grinded
Good adhesion
Resistance to abrasion
Increased Marshall
stability
Polyvinyl
Chloride
(PVC)
apr. 95◦C
Not suitable
Becker et al. (2001)
Polyethylene
Terephthalate
(PET)
apr. 140◦C
Increased Marshall
stability
Needs more evidence
6% of weight
of bitumen
Ahmadinia et al. (2011)
Increased air void
SMA
Polystyrene
(PS)
110-140◦C
Good adhesion
Low bending strength
Less than 15%
of weight
of bitumen
Vasudevan et al. (2012)
Increased Marshall
stability
Low compression
strength
Soft bitumen
Good chemical
resistance
Needs more evidence
Low moisture
absorption
Low disinte-
gration
20
==PAGE:23==
To summarize, polymers used as additives in road construction can be classiﬁed into
three groups; Thermoplastic elastomers, plastomers and reactive polymers. Thermorplas-
tic elastomers tend to increase the elastic properties of binders. Plastomers and reactive
polymers on the other hand help enhance stiﬀness and strength of heavy loads (Ahma-
dinia et al. (2011), Al-Hadidy and Yi-qiu (2009) and Al-Hadidy and Yi-Qiu (2009)).
2.2.3
Eﬀect on Road Parameters
This sections aims to connect the results of the asphalt sample results found in literature
to road parameter behavior. The variables chosen for evaluation are: Abrasion, Wheel
track formation, Fracturing, Lifespan and Recycling. These parameters are holistic and
not easily distinguished from one another, excluding recycling. The variables are chosen
because of their relevance to the environmental outcome of the study. Abrasion will give
an idea of the particulate matter formation; Wheel track formation relates to the main-
tenance required for the road due to bleeding/creeping of asphalt; Fracturing connects to
the temperature susceptibility and tensile strength of the road. Eventually, all of these
variables relate to the achievable lifespan of the road which eventually and hopefully is
recycled.
Abrasion
A good adhesion between aggregate and bitumen reduces abrasion. When aggregate is
damp with water the bitumen binds poorly with the aggregate since bitumen is essen-
tially oil. Similarly to bitumen, PE, PP and PS waste polymers are long hydrocarbon
chains. Therefore when aggregate is coated with polymers bitumen binds with more ease
to aggregate, creating a good adhesion and lowering abrasion.
When abrasion is reduced there is less risk of particulate matter formation. Particulate
matter are small particles which travel long distances via the atmosphere and can set on
any type of surface, ocean or lungs.
When plastic is used as additives in roads there will be microplastic particles in the par-
ticulate matter (although, probably tightly bound with bitumen). Microplastics are a
severe problem for aquatic ecosystems. However, it can be argued that because of the
increased rutting resistance by the addition of plastic in roads there will be less bitumen
in the environment and bitumen is a secondary product derived from crude oil just like
plastic.
A high air void content combined with frequent frost and thaw periods leads to fracturing
and abrasion. However, a low air void content leaves the wearing course impermeable
and non-expandable which is important to prevent bleeding and ﬂushing (Awwad and
Shbeeb (2007)). Air void content can be altered in the construction stage of the road by
pressing more to compensate for high air void content. If however the pavement has too
low air void there might be need for repaving.
Wheel track formation
The softening point of the asphalt layer is determining for the bleeding of the asphalt that
leads to wheel track formation. Although the temperature is not high in Iceland, 50◦C
has been measured at 20 mm depth on the roads and the softening temperature of hard
bitumen is in fact around 43-51 ◦C (Vegagerðin (2017)). Several researchers have shown
21
==PAGE:24==
that the softening temperature is increased with the addition of plastic. An example of
that is that Costa et al. (2013) found increased softening point of asphalt to 71.1◦C using
5% HDPE and 59.5◦C using LDPE PMB.
Rut formation in Iceland is also due to the use of spiked tires. The spiked tires are used
because of slippery and icy roads. Weather conditions in Iceland will not be changed so
the use of spiked tires is inevitable. However, the strengthened bond between bitumen
and PCA gives hope for there being less wheel track formation. As an example the lowest
wheel track test results measured in Iceland was measured at 2.4 mm in a sample mixed
with 6% SBS mixed PMB (Vegagerðin (2017)).
Fracturing
Fracturing includes cracking and pothole formation.
The higher tensile strength, the
higher cracking resistance and as has been mentioned before HDPE and LDPE were re-
ported to give a high tensile strength. Pothole formation is interconnected to the air
void and adhesion strength and PP, PE and PS have been found to improve adhesion
strength. Lastly, a good temperature susceptibility lessens the frequency of fracturing
and the softening point of asphalt has been found to increase.
In general, plastic waste additives have been found to improve Marshall stability. Mar-
shall stability describes the maximum load required to produce shear failure of a substance
using a Marshall test device an is dependent on internal friction and cohesion. Therefore,
an increased Marshall stability could be described as an increased resilience of a sample.
However, because the test is also dependent on cohesion it can determine the optimum
binder needed for a speciﬁc asphalt mix.
According to literature Marshall ﬂow seems to either increase or decrease with the ad-
dition of plastic waste. Marshall ﬂow describes the deformation of a compact sample
under a maximum load found by the Marshall stability. Marshall quotient (MQ) is an
index of stiﬀness and is Marshall stability divided by Marshall ﬂow. Plastic additives give
improvements in MQ and as an example Al-Humeidawi (2017) found 35% improvement
using 8% plastic bags. The MQ describes how slope of deformation under increasing
pressure, therefore Al-Humeidawi (2017) found that there is less deformation per load of
the sample before it breaks.
Lifespan
The parameters mentioned above have an eﬀect on lifetime. It is uncertain to what ex-
tent the lifespan could be improved. On the other hand, Shukla et al. (2003) calculated
that by using SBS PMB in India they would be able to decrease the surface layer and
simultaneously almost double its lifespan.
The eﬀects of mixing of the diﬀerent plastics are unknown i.e. either an antagonistic or
synergistic mix response dependent on the diﬀerent types. This would eﬀect the quality
improvements that collectively have an impact on the lifespan of the road.
In spite of the uncertainties of lifetime expansion of the PMA the Inventory chapter will
try to make a conservative estimation by assuming synergistic mix response. The sole
purpose of the estimation is to be able to perform an environmental investigation.
Recycling
At the end of the lifespan the road will be recycled. The fairly recent application of the
22
==PAGE:25==
waste polymer mixed asphalt (10-15 years) results in the lack of data on its recycling
possibilities. However, SBS has been used for PMB for more than two decades and Mo-
hammad et al. (2003) recovered an eight year old polymer modiﬁed asphalt binder from
a wearing course mixture located on route US61 in Livingston Parish, Louisiana. The
binder was quite brittle at low temperature and extensive oxidative age hardening had
occurred. In spite of this SBS PMB was found to be recyclable.
2.3
Introduction to Life Cycle Assessment
A life cycle assessment (LCA) is the quantiﬁcation of all relevant environmental impacts
of a life cycle of a product or a system. A life cycle includes every process of a product
from cradle-to-grave or from the material extraction to the disposal. Essentially, a LCA
aims to convert complex systems into communicable numbers which can aid decision
making to achieve improvements in a system set up, choice of technology or operation.
The environmental impacts that are covered in the assessment are dependent on how the
LCA is performed. Therefore, the reporter has an inﬂuence on coverage of environmental
impacts that can be from local to global and may span over decades or centuries. An
LCA is typically comparative in which the alternatives must provide an equal service or
function in quantitative and qualitative terms.
The LCA starts with a deﬁnition of the goal and scope. From there the life cycle inventory
(LCI) is accounted, followed by a life cycle impact assessment (LCIA). Programs are
commonly used to calculate results that are presented in an LCIA chapter via impact
categories which support the comparison or further analysis. The working phases of LCA
are further described in ISO14040 (14040:2006 (2006) and Hauschild et al. (2017)).
2.3.1
LCA of Roads
The life cycle stages of roads are; material stage, manufacturing stage, use stage and
recycling stage. The material stage is composed of the processes of extracting bitumen
and aggregate. The manufacturing stage combines the processes of production and con-
struction of asphalt roads and the use stage is combined by fuel combustion and emission
of the diﬀerent machinery throughout the life cycle of a road. For information on the life
cycle of roads see appendix A.
According to Birgisdóttir (2005) the processes that are the most inﬂuential to the envi-
ronmental outcomes of the LCA of roads are related to the emissions of carbon dioxides
and nitrogen oxides associated with the burning of fossil fuels. Material- and construction
stages reportedly contribute to approximately 50% of these outcomes and the other half
is inﬂuenced by the use stage of the road (assuming 100 years of operation).
However, it is unusual that a wearing course is continuously used for a 100 years and to
emphasize the diﬀerences in LCA results in the ﬁeld of LCA of roads a couple of examples
are given. By focusing on the vehicle emissions of the use stage Araújo et al. (2014) found
that by lowering the rolling resistance of the wearing course, it could lower the emissions
from users and compensate for the emissions and fossil fuel burnt during construction
of the road. However, these results are heavily dependent on the operation time of the
wearing course.
23
==PAGE:26==
Additionally in the use stage, the eﬀects of salting could potentially pollute groundwater
as has been the case in many countries (Blomqvist and Johansson (1999) and Kaushal
et al. (2005)) and the clearing of snow can scrape and damage the wearing course. How-
ever, these services diﬀer considerably dependent on weather and the location of the
road.
It is expected that most water enters through unpaved shoulders. However there is a
knowledge gap on how much water percolates dependent of the road structure, location
and condition.
The inﬁltration rate is estimated to be between 1-20% of the annual
precipitation (Birgisdóttir (2005)). The melting of ice during freezing/thawing cycles
are relevant in Icelandic climate and the cracks developed over time due to these cycles
gives access to considerable amounts of water (Apul et al. (2002)). The amount of water
penetrating the road is important for the fracturing of a wearing course and the potential
leaching of the plastic utilized.
These aﬀects on the use stage doubtlessly have an eﬀect on an LCA of a road and the
way in which these LCAs are conducted either embolden or diminish these eﬀects.
There are several models available for making LCA of roads such as SimaPro, ROAD-
RES, PaLATE, BE2ST and EASETECH. SimaPro is the most commonly used LCA
program, ROAD-RES, PaLATE and BE2ST are speciﬁcally designed for LCA of roads
but have not been updated recently (Birgisdóttir (2005)). Finally, EASETECH special-
izes in LCA of heterogeneous material streams and is most commonly used for waste
management systems. Since this study aims to assess the use of plastic waste in road
construction, EASETECH has been chosen to bridge the waste and road modelling.
24
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Inventory
As the scenarios are framed it is essential to keep them as simple as possible without
compromising a sensible and practical idea of what can be achieved or expected.
3.1
Scenario description
Road construction in Iceland requires imported bitumen and excavation of aggregate.
Aggregate extraction for this study is assumed to be local although it is in some cases
imported. In order to assess a road that utilizes plastic waste that is comparable to the
scenario of a traditional road there is need to consider the plastic waste management
system. In table 3.1 the included processes of the two scenarios are shown. Scenario 1:
A traditionally constructed road and plastic waste management in Iceland. Scenario 2:
Plastic waste utilized in road construction, the plastic needs to be cleaned and pelleted
before use. Scenario 2 will produce a road that has diﬀerent road parameters and a longer
lifetime.
Table 3.1 Processes included in each scenario
Processes
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Road
Bitumen extraction
Bitumen extraction
Aggregate extraction
Aggregate extraction
Construction
Construction
Use
Use
Demolition
Demolition
Plastic waste
Bailing
Cleaning & Pelleting
MRF
Recycling
Incineration
Subsitution
Virgin plastic
Aggregate
Heat
Electricity
Transportation
Transoceanic
Truck
Truck
25
==PAGE:28==
The theory is that utilizing plastic waste for road construction will result in savings
in environmental impact scores in comparison to the current management.
However,
there is need to consider the composition of the residential source separated plastic waste
available in the capital region of Iceland and the avoided recycling of this plastic waste.
3.2
Inventory, Considerations and Limitations
Some of the information in the following chapters will be repeated in the sub chapter
Life Cycle Inventory Analysis. This chapter should be considered as a more detailed
description of the data used and its collection.
3.2.1
Road: Material, Manufacturing, Use, Disposal & Trans-
port
The processes of a life cycle of a road is listed in appendix A.
Materials
The speciﬁc amount of material needed for the two alternative roads can be found in
appendix B, table B.2 and table B.5 along with energy use, transportation distances and
their sources. It is assumed that 8% of plastic waste to the weight of bitumen will be
utilized in the asphalt mixture. For that amount of plastic, Vasudevan et al. (2012) found
that a reduction of bitumen by 0.5% of the total weight is obtained for a good mix. The
amount of bitumen needed in the plastic enriched road was found to be 89.5% of the
weight needed for the traditional road and likewise the amount of aggregate was found
to be 99.5% of the weight.
The extraction of the bitumen used in Iceland is assumed to take place in Venezuela
and the process is assumed to be identical to that of the rest of the world with the ad-
dition of oceanic transport (assumed to be 11000 km). Additionally, the extraction of
aggregate in Iceland is also assumed to be identical to the processes used in rest of Europe.
Manufacturing
The manufacturing includes asphalt production and paving. Average data for these pro-
cesses were given by Hlaðbær Colas. The reason for using average data is that production
and paving can consume diﬀerent amount of energy according to weather conditions, de-
sign of production facility and distance of road from asphalt production facility etc. An
average day in May an asphalt production facility consumes 90 kWh electricity per ton
ﬁnished product and 87 kWh fuel per ton ﬁnished product (Bragason (2018)). Note, that
this does not include the maintenance and does not assume drying of aggregate due to
rain. There could be some added energy use in the asphalt production stage because of
the implementation of plastic aggregate which is neglected.
Fuel consumption of asphalt paving was also estimated by Hlaðbær Colas which they
calculated from an average paving job. It was assumed that the paving would take place
52 km away from asphalt production facility, ﬁve diﬀerent types of machines would be
used and it includes paving and the transportation of material, workers and machinery.
The average fuel consumption was calculated as 4.1 L fuel for each ton of asphalt (Þras-
26
==PAGE:29==
tardóttir (2018)).
Use
The use stage assumes maintenance and service of the roads throughout a whole year.
Emissions of traﬃc on road is neglected but if it had been included there could be more
or less emissions from traﬃc in proportion to surface resistance change due to plastic
additives. Included services are road painting, pothole ﬁlling, salting, sweeping and snow
removal and can be seen in table 3.2. Transportation of maintenance and service ma-
chinery to road location, upstream impacts and environmental impacts of the materials
are not included. Maintenance due to traﬃc accidents were also neglected.
Data about use stage in table 3.2 has mostly been gathered by email and personal com-
munication with professionals. The majority of the data is speciﬁc to Icelandic conditions
and represents what can be expected in an average year.
Table 3.2 Maintenance and services included in the use stage. Frequency, speed and
fuel consumption of road painting, pothole ﬁlling, salting, sweeping and snow removal.
Maintenance/Service
Amount
Unit
Source
Road paint
Frequency
1
times/year
Jóakimsson (2018)
Speed
12
km/hour
KONTUR (2018)
Fuel consumption
3.8
l/h
KONTUR (2018)
Fuel type
Diesel
KONTUR (2018)
Pothole ﬁlling
Amount
3
holes/km
Assumption
Fuel consumption
3.5
l/hole
Wilson and Romine (2001)
Fuel type
Diesel
Wilson and Romine (2001)
Salt
Salt
60-240
kg/km
Þórðarson (2018)
Frequency
85-100
times/winter
Þórðarson (2018)
Fuel consumption
0.3
l/km
Þórðarson (2018)
Fuel type
Diesel
Þórðarson (2018)
Sweeping
Frequency
2
times/year
Assumption
Fuel consumption
0.3
l/km
Þórðarson (2018)
Fuel type
Diesel
Þórðarson (2018)
Snow removal
Frequency
85-100
times/winter
Þórðarson (2018)
Fuel consumption
0.4-1
l/km
Þórðarson (2018)
Fuel type
Diesel
Þórðarson (2018)
Disposal
The demolition of the road at end-of-life includes an asphalt miller, dumping truck and
transportation to the storage site, seen table 3.3.
27
==PAGE:30==
Table 3.3 Data on the demolition of an average road
Operation
Amount
Unit
Reference
Asphalt miller
Speed
200
m^3/hour
Wirtgen (2008)
Speed
15
m/min
Wirtgen (2008)
Fuel consumption
0.9
l/m^3
Wirtgen (2008)
Fuel type
Diesel
Assumption
Dumping truck
Speed
15
m/min
Wirtgen (2008)
Fuel consumption
0.3
l/km
Assumption
Fuel type
Diesel
Assumption
Transportation to storage
50
km
Assumption
The sources for table 3.3 are gathered from a job report published by Writgen GmbH
in 2008 along with some assumptions. It is evident that this is not high quality data.
However, the demolition of a road does not have an environmental eﬀect to the same
extent as other processes since it happens once and takes only a few hours.
When the wearing course has been removed it is transported to storage. Storage involves
reclaimed asphalt pavement (RAP) that is kept in piles outside until it can be used in
the sub-layers of other roads. According to Marchand (2015) the amount of available
reclaimed asphalt in Iceland in 2011 was 15 thousand tonnes, 25% of which is used in
unbound layers and 2.5% of the new hot and warm mix production contains reclaimed
material. In comparison to the 15 thousand tonnes of reclaimed asphalt, the produc-
tion of hot and warm mix asphalt that same year was reported to be 0.2 million tonnes
(Marchand (2015)). Because of this small amount of reclaimed asphalt used the RAP for
this study was assumed to be stored and the storage does not require energy. Therefore,
RAP is not re-used or recycled in a way that involves aggregate substitution. Rather, it
is to be stored in diﬀerent locations since it was not clear if the RAP was being re-used
or landﬁlled.
Transportation
All assumptions about transportation is gathered in table 3.4. If the locations were known
within one country transportation were assumed to be by truck and distances were found
by road distances on maps. All transportation between countries were assumed to be via
ship and distances found were aerial distances. If the locations were not known (con-
nected to the actual location of the road) they were estimated. The transportation is
also gathered in table B.4 and partly repeated in table B.5 in appendix B.
28
==PAGE:31==
Table 3.4 Assumed transportation distances for the two scenarios, connected to the
traditional and plastic waste enriched roads
Transportation
Road type
Traditional
[km]
Plastic waste
additives [km]
Aggregate from mine
to asphalt production
30
30
Bitumen from production
to asphalt production
11100
11100
Bitumen from port
to asphalt prodution
20
20
Plastic wate from Gufunes
to Gothenburg, SE
2000
-
Plastic waste from Gothenburg, SE
to recycling in Bredaryd, SE
150
-
Plastic waste from Gothenburg, SE
to incineration in Sävenäs
in Gothenburg, SE
10
-
Plastic waste from recycling Bredaryd
to Sävenäs, SE
140
-
Plastic waste from Gufunes
to asphalt production
-
20
Recoverd asphalt
to storage
52
52
3.2.2
Plastic Waste in the Capital Region of Iceland
The collection of the plastic waste is not considered important in this study and the fo-
cus will be on the residential source separated plastic that arrives at Gufunes, the waste
reception and classiﬁcation center of the capital region of Iceland. The waste reception is
handled by a company named SORPA bs. There are mainly three sources of plastic waste;
from households, from collection containers and from recycling stations. The plastic from
households and collection containers are mainly plastic packaging (more than 80%). The
packaging plastics are highly valuable to SORPA. On the other hand, plastic collected at
recycling stations falls into a category of having less than 20% plastic packaging which is
less valuable to SORPA. All of the diﬀerently sourced plastic waste however are sent to
Sweden for recycling (Hjarðar (2018)).
Plastic waste from households
When the plastic has reached the reception facilities it is separated by a air classiﬁer,
packaged and made ready for shipment. The air classiﬁer’s electricity use will be left out
29
==PAGE:32==
of both scenarios. This is done because it is unnecessary to account for its electricity use
since it is identical in both scenarios.
Plastic waste from collection containers
The plastic waste does not have to be separated when it reaches the reception facilities
and is immediately packaged. The baling of plastic is assumed to use 11.4 kWh/ton
plastic waste (Liljenroth (2014)).
The fractions of diﬀerent types of plastics in a sample collected by ReSource International
ehf in February 2018 can be seen in table 3.5. It is assumed that plastic waste coming
from households and collection containers have the same fractions as are shown in table
3.5, i.e. containing more than 80% plastic packaging.
Table 3.5 The fractions of diﬀerent types of plastic from two sources of residential
source separated plastic waste from the capital region of Iceland, sampled by ReSource
International ehf in February 2018.
Households*
Collection Containers**
Total
kg
%
kg
%
kg
%
PET
2.38
10.60%
4.50
18.53%
6.88
14.72%
HDPE
3.72
16.54%
3.58
14.75%
7.30
15.61%
PVC
0.00
0.00%
0.12
0.47%
0.12
0.25%
LPDE
3.56
15.85%
5.68
23.40%
9.24
19.77%
PP
5.93
26.37%
4.51
18.58%
10.44
22.33%
PS
2.08
9.25%
1.23
5.07%
3.31
7.08%
Other plastics
2.06
9.16%
1.91
7.85%
3.96
8.48%
Non-plastics
2.75
12.23%
2.75
11.34%
5.50
11.77%
Total
22.48
100.00%
24.26
100.00%
46.74
100.00%
*Household source separated plastic waste from Reykjavík (græna tunnan) **Collection
containers collecting residential source seperated plastic waste from Reykjavík
(grenndargámur)
From table 3.5 it is evident that PP, LDPE, HDPE and PET make up the largest part
(73%) of the plastic waste sample collected followed by non-plastic items. The non-plastic
impurities are for example missorted items or paper labels.
Plastic waste from recycling stations
The plastic waste in this case is bailed on site and the fractions of plastic types from this
source is unknown (Hjarðar (2018)). It is likely however that the actual plastic fractions
coming from recycling stations are diﬀerent than from households and collection contain-
ers shown in table 3.5. For this study however, it is assumed to be the same since there
does not exist data on the plastic fraction collected via recycling stations (Hjarðar (2018)).
The waste reception and classiﬁcation center of the capital region of Iceland (managed
by SORPA bs.) received approximately 900 tons of sorted plastic in 2016 (Björnsdóttir
(2016)). Of those 900 tons, 494 tons were collected from recycling stations which receives
plastic that falls under the category of having <20% plastic packaging (Björnsdóttir
30
==PAGE:33==
(2016)). When SORPA bs. sends plastic waste to be recycled they receive payment from
a company called Úrvinnslusjóður according to a tariﬀ. Plastic waste that has <20%
plastic packaging has the least value according to the tariﬀand therefore it could be
obtained from SORPA bs (Bjarni Hjarðar, personal communication, May 4, 2018). The
plastic will either be obtained for free, for a low price or it would be possible to obtain
compensation for eradicating the waste.
Plastic Recycling in Sweden
When all plastic has been collected and bailed the plastic waste is shipped to Gothen-
burg (approximately 2300 km) to IL Recycling in Sweden. Il Recycling is a subsidiary
of Stena recycling in Sweden and categorises the waste into either recyclable plastic or
non-recyclable plastic. It is assumed that of the total plastic waste input, 70% is re-
cycled and 30% is incinerated. The recyclable plastic waste is next transported via a
truck (approx. 150 km) to Swerec in Bredaryd. There it is pre-washed before it is sent
through a Near infrared (NIR) sorting machine and ﬁnally mechanically recycled (Liljen-
roth (2014)). The washing is expected to use 78 L water/kg, 10.9 MJ/kg (for 40 ◦C) and
0.5 kWh/ton waste plastic. The NIR technology can sort PET, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP
and PS and is estimated to use 27kWh/ton waste plastic (Ren (2012)). The mechani-
cal recycling considers shredding (24 kWh/ton) and extrusion (270kWh/ton) with a 2%
material loss (Liljenroth (2014)). The aforementioned companies were not contacted in
the making of this study and literature values were considered suﬃcient in addition to
information from SORPA bs (i.e. Ren (2012) and Liljenroth (2014)).
The fractions which are discarded from the recycling process is incinerated. Incinera-
tion is assumed to take place in Sävenäs in Gothenburg (owned by Renova) which is the
closest incineration plant from the port which receives the plastic waste from Iceland.
Plastic has a high caloriﬁc value and the energy required when plastic is burned is ei-
ther used for the local district heating system or for the electricity grid. According to
Renova’s website 87% of the recovered energy is used for the district heating and 13%
is used to generate electricity. Bottom ash and ﬂy ash collected from the incineration
process is used to ﬁll up old mines and where it is assumed that it substitutes gravel.
It is assumed that Renova’s incineration plant performs as an average danish incinera-
tion plant since Renova’s speciﬁc air pollution control and other data was not available.
The substitution possibilities are therefore in heat, electricity, plastic and aggregate. Re-
cycled plastic is often credited for virgin plastic albeit the declined quality characteristics.
Villanueva and Eder, 2014 discusses that there are two basic distinct ranges of recy-
clate output currently marketed in the EU: Type 1 and 2. According to those categories
the sample described in table 3.5 would be an example of Type 2 recyclate output where
the non-plastic impurities falls within the range of 5-15%. Type 2 recyclate outputs are
traded to a limited extent due to their low value or about 200-50 EUR/tonne (decreasing
value proportional to the amount of non-plastic impurities) (Villanueva and Eder (2014)).
Because of all of the known limitations of traditional recycling of plastic waste it can be
concluded that the recycling of the Icelandic plastic waste taking place in Sweden is less
environmentally and economically proﬁtable than some might believe. Hence, there is
31
==PAGE:34==
reason to believe that recycling a sample such as the one in table 3.5 will lead to a low
quality product. To compensate for this the recycled product is not credited as virgin
plastic of the same amount. Recycled PE and PP substitutes for 80% virgin plastic of
the same type and recycled PS and PET substitutes for 30% virgin plastic.
3.2.3
Other Energy Considerations
For scenario 2 plastic waste needs to be cleaned and pelleted before it can be used for
road construction. It is assumed that the washing requires the same amount of water,
electricity and heat as in the recycling station in Sweden with the diﬀerence of using
energy derived from Iceland. The pelletizer can make pellets from any type of plastic
and its estimated energy consumption is 380 kWh/ton (Liljenroth (2014)).
The energy derived from Iceland is assumed to be hydro from reservoir in a non-alpine
region and deep geothermal. In 2014 Sweden’s electricity consumption was 42% based
on hydro power, 41% based on nuclear power and the remaining 17% was based on other
power sources (Energi (2016)). Electricity derived from Sweden is assumed to be nuclear,
speciﬁcally pressure water reactor although it is a mixture of power sources. Further-
more, the electricity substitution due to the incineration of plastic waste in Sweden is
also assumed to be nuclear. On the other hand, heat produced in the incineration plant is
assumed to substitute heat and power co-generation from natural gas from a conventional
power plant. All of the data on energy originates from Ecoinvent database.
Fuel used for the construction, use and disposal of road was assumed to be diesel. Fur-
thermore, all fuel consumption related to these stages were quantiﬁed and an external
process was used from Ecoinvent that accounts for the production and combustion of
the fuel. The database was chosen because of its unspeciﬁc nature since it was diﬃcult
to approximate machinery used, their age, condition and emission ﬁlters. The database
states that the diesel is burnt by a truck from 1998.
Additionally, the amount of energy used in production of asphalt using plastic waste is
assumed to be the same as for a traditional road.
3.2.4
Road Improvements Eﬀecting Longevity
It is assumed that 8% of plastic waste by the weight of bitumen can be added to the
road mixture in scenario 2. The values found in literature on this subject range from
2-15% plastic waste to the weight of bitumen. Therefore, 8% was chosen as an average.
Moreover, the PCA method could lead to an increase in surface roughness which would
change the rolling resistance of the road consequently eﬀecting the fuel consumption of
the vehicles driving on the road. Nonetheless, weighing all the results of the literature
found on plastic additives in road construction there seemed to be an harmonious positive
results and it is therefore assumed that overall there are positive beneﬁts for the road
quality with the addition of plastic waste.
Although the eﬀects of mixing diﬀerent types of plastic is uncertain the following table
3.6 was constructed as a general, non-speciﬁc, way to assume quality improvements. An
average lifetime of 7 years was assumed for a traditional wearing course for the purpose
of conducting an environmental assessment. The average lifetime of a wearing course is
32
==PAGE:35==
actually on the scale of 2-14 years dependent on its location, traﬃc load and quality that
was achieved (Jóakimsson (2018)).
Table 3.6 Lifetime of the two alternative roads are diﬀerent and calculated by the
assumed parameter improvements; Abrasion, Wheel track formation, Fracturing
Quality property
Road type
Comment
Traditional
Plastic waste additives
Abrasion
1
1.3
30% improvement
Wheel track formation
1
1.25
25% improvement
Fracturing
1
1.3
30% improvement
Lifetime
7
8.5
years
As is indicated in table 3.6 it is assumed that abrasion can be improved by 30%,
wheel track formation by 25% and fracturing by 30% between the two alternative roads.
Collectively these improvements enhance the lifetime of the road in scenario 2 from 7 to
8.5 years.
3.3
Critical Assumptions
Most assumptions have already been mentioned in the subsection above so the only the
most critical ones will be emphasized.
The most critical assumption is the lifetime of the plastic enriched road. The lifetime is
based on a number of other assumptions such as; (i) the implementation of the plastic
will have no eﬀect on the energy used in the asphalt production, (ii) will not require ad-
ditional machinery in the construction stage, (iii) will improve road quality as tested in
laboratories, (iv) will suit Icelandic climate to the same degree as experienced in warmer
climate, (v) the skid resistance will not be aﬀected over time etc. These assumptions
however stem from the fact that a plastic road has not been paved in Iceland and the
modelling can only be improved by acquiring measured data.
This environmental assessment cannot quantify the eﬀects of excessive use of salt, road
paint, the leaching of plastic additives due to degradation nor the eﬀects of microplastics
due to abrasion. Microplastics are a severe problem for aquatic ecosystems. However, it
can be argued that because of the increased rutting resistance by the addition of plastic
in roads there will be less bitumen in the environment. As has been mentioned before,
similarly to plastic, bitumen is a secondary product derived from crude oil. Conversely, an
increased rolling resistance might increase the wear of tires which are thought to be heav-
ily inﬂuential to the amount of microplastics currently in the ocean (Hartmann (2017)).
Yet, given that the lifetime of a plastic enriched road would be extended there would be
savings in asphalt production and demolition, savings in bitumen produced and aggre-
gate extracted which, on a global scale, could compensate for the increased microplastic
generation. Plastic additives and plastic degradation is discussed further in appendix A.
Albeit, there is room for improvement concerning inventory and data collection. (a) Data
on the extraction of aggregate in Iceland, (b) fuel production and combustion in construc-
tion, use and demolition stages, (c) data on earthwork and road signs, (d) maintenance
33
==PAGE:36==
of road (e) recycling of RAP and (f) data on the speciﬁc plastic recycling facility that
handles Icelandic waste plastic are some of those processes. Several other assumptions
were made which are show in table B.3 in appendix B.
34
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Life Cycle Assessment
4.1
Goal and Scope
The goal deﬁnition contains six sub chapters which are based on the ISO14040 standards
(14040:2006 (2006) and 14044:2006 (2006)). These six aspects are; Intended application
of the study, Method assumptions and impact limitations, Decision context and reason for
carrying out the study, Target audience, Comparison intended to be disclosed to the public
and Commissioners of the study and other inﬂuential actors (Hauschild et al. (2017)).
The scope deﬁnition declares the assessed product system and contains eight aspects; De-
liverables, Function, functional unit and reference ﬂow, LCI modelling framework, Sys-
tem boundaries and completeness requirements, Representativeness of LCI data, Basis
for impact Assessment, Requirements for comparative studies and Critical review needs
(Hauschild et al. (2017)).
4.1.1
Goal Deﬁnition
Intended Applications
This study aims to make a life cycle analysis from cradle-to-grave of a wearing course
constructed in Iceland. Two scenarios will be compared; Sc1 - traditional composition
used for the construction of wearing course as well as the current method of disposing
residential source separated plastic waste in Iceland and Sc2 - residential source separated
plastic waste used as additive in wearing course construction in Iceland. The compari-
son will therefore illustrate the consequence, on an environmental basis, of using locally
sourced plastic waste in road construction in Iceland.
Scenario 2 is theoretical since no road has been paved using plastic waste additives in
Iceland. However, there is an abundance of literature investigating the use of plastic
waste in road construction which has been discussed in chapter 2 and will be used as
validation for assumptions made in the study.
35
==PAGE:38==
Method Assumptions and Impact Limitations
This study quantiﬁes the consequential life cycle impact of two diﬀerent types of roads
following the EU-recommended practice for characterization modelling. In other words,
consequential life cycle impact assesses the impacts that can be expected as a consequence
of choosing one alternative over another.
The impacts of individual technologies are not the items of assessment and the upstream
impacts of machinery used is neglected. The study is geographically framed to Icelandic
conditions and situations and should be applied with caution to other geographical areas.
Normalization was done to relate impact scores to European societal activity. Normalisa-
tion factors of toxicity related impact categories are thought to be underestimated which
results in an overestimation of normalised impact scores for freshwater ecotoxicity and
human toxicity.
Decision Context and Reason for Carrying out the LCA study
The results of the study will aid the Road Administration of Iceland (Vegagerðin) in the
decision making of whether or not to use waste plastic in road construction. Vegagerðin
wishes to improve its economical and environmental sustainability as well as improving
road quality and customer service. Vegagerðin’s decision will result in structural conse-
quences since it will partly aﬀect plastic recycling in Iceland, energy generation in Sweden
and the global market for recycled plastic. Therefore the decision context is situation B
(see ILCD guideline Commission (2010)) where multifunctionality will be solved by a mix
of long term marginal processes and the LCI modelling framework is consequential.
Target Audience
The design department at Vegagerðin is the target audience of this study. The company
uses life cycle concepts and is familiar with LCA.
Comparisons Intended to Be Disclosed to the Public
This consequential LCA study is not intended to be disclosed to the public.
Commissioner of the Study and Other Inﬂuential Actors
This study is commissioned by Vegagerðin. The author of the LCA is a student studying
environmental engineering at Denmark’s Technical University (DTU). Furthermore, the
study is done in collaboration with the company ReSource International ehf. and is a
part of a master thesis at DTU. ReSource Inernational ehf. is a consultant company
specializing in environmental engineering in Iceland.
4.1.2
Scope Deﬁnition
Deliverables
The deliverables include a life cycle inventory, a life cycle impact assessment in charac-
terized and normalized form and an interpretation of the results.
36
==PAGE:39==
Function, Functional Unit, and Reference Flows
Function. The two types of roads are made of diﬀerent materials with diﬀerent propor-
tions. The location of the roads should be a high traﬃc road located in a close proximity
of the capital region of Iceland. The location of the two roads are assumed to be identical.
Their main function (obligatory property) is to provide a bound surface on which vehicles
can drive safely. The safety standard and road markings are set by the road designers at
Vegagerðin (Vegagerðin and Gatnamálastofa (2004)).
Positioning properties are also set by Vegagerðin and carried out by asphalt paving com-
panies. Positioning properties are those who are dependent on the desires of the buyer.
Those properties are e.g. aggregate size, bitumen hardness, cost, quality and lifetime (see
table 4.1).
Table 4.1 Obligatory and positioning properties of roads
Obligatory properties
Positioning properties
-Provide a bound surface for vehichles to drive
-Aggregate size, colour and country of origin
-Safety standards
-Bitumen properties and country of origin
-Road markings according to laws
-Eco-friendly
-Withstand traﬃc load
-Cost
-Quality
-Lifetime
Functional Unit. The two roads are compared on the basis of the functional unit:
"Provide 1 km of conﬁned and bound asphalt based surface on which vehicles can drive
durable for a high traﬃc load every day for 7 years in Iceland. A high traﬃc load is
deﬁned by the Icelandic guidelines on bound asphalt, set by the road administration of
Iceland (Vegagerðin (2017)), as >8000 ÁDU, average daily traﬃc in a year on two lains."
Reference Flow. A wearing course; 1km long, 6m wide and 4.5 cm thick.
The average lifetime of a wearing course is between 2-14 years in Iceland (Jóakimsson
(2018)) but in this case the traditional road is assumed to have a lifetime of 7 years. The
two types of roads are generally diﬀerent quality wise which has an eﬀect on lifetime.
The quality of roads is based on several parameters as mentioned in chapter 2. Four
parameters were chosen and in table 3.6 the aforementioned properties have been given
reference numbers that together eﬀect the lifetime. Abrasion is assumed to be improved
by 30%, wheel track formation by 25%, fracturing by 30% and lastly surface resistance
is assumed to remain unchanged between the two alternative roads. It is assumed that
these improvements can enhance the lifetime of the wearing course in scenario 2 from 7
to 8.5 years. This is assumed to give a relatively conservative estimation on the lifespan
improvement possibilities of the plastic enriched road compared to what has been found
in literature (see basis of the assumptions made in chapter 2). The impact scores of the
plastic road will be scaled down for the two alternatives to be comparable from a lifespan
perspective, i.e. the environmental emissions of the plastic road is 1 - 1.5 years/ 7 years
= 78.6% that of a traditional road.
37
==PAGE:40==
LCI Modelling Framework
The introduction of the plastic waste in road construction will partly aﬀect structural
changes on the market. It would have the eﬀect that part of the plastic waste collected
in Iceland would need to be cleaned and pelletized instead of being packaged and sent
by ship to Sweden. Moreover, it has an eﬀect on road construction in Iceland. The scale
of change made on the plastic waste management and road construction is dependent on
the decision makers at Vegagerðin.
Nonetheless, if 8% of plastic waste to the weight of bitumen is added to a 1 km wearing
course it gives approximately 2.5 tonnes plastic waste. In 2006 there were 13,034 km of
roads in Iceland, 32% of which are bound wearing courses (Vegagerðin (2006)). Which
means 10,430 tonnes of plastic waste would accommodate the wearing courses of Iceland
in 2006. The source separated plastic waste received at SORPA in 2016 were 900 tonnes
(Björnsdóttir (2016)).
Thus, the decision context is macro-level, i.e. situation B in the ILCD Guideline (Commis-
sion (2010)), suggesting that the consequential principle is to be chosen as LCI modelling
framework. Multifunctionality was solved through system expansion using marginal pro-
cesses and some through crediting.
System Boundaries and Completeness Requirements
System boundaries. The life cycle analysis includes all life cycle stages of a wearing course
from cradle-to-grave and the plastic waste management of Iceland for source separated
residential plastic waste from grave-to-cradle. Grave-to-cradle means that the life cycle
of plastic waste starts after it has been collected and ends when it has become a new
product.
Processes that were included in the life cycle of the wearing course are raw material
extractions of aggregate and bitumen which includes mining, drilling, distillation and
transportation. The construction stage includes the production and paving of asphalt.
The use stage includes snow removal, sweeping, pothole ﬁlling, painting and measure-
ments preventing ice-skidding (using salt or gravel). At the end of life the pavement is
demolished and transported to storage, until it is 100% recycled (re-used in the sub-bases
of a road). For further information see chapter ??.
Completeness requirements. Although this is not a hotspot analysis, most of the construc-
tion, use and recycling stages were included into the assessment because of the diﬀerent
quality and lifetimes of the two road types. Yet some processes were excluded:
• (i) Earthwork needed before wearing course can be laid was excluded.
• (ii) Road signs and other additional work during the construction stage was not
included .
• (iii) Road work due to road accidents were not included in the maintenance stage.
• (iv) Capital equipment such as buildings and manual labor waste generation is
excluded and therefore the design stage of the road is also excluded.
38
==PAGE:41==
• (v) The emissions of vehicles related to the use of the road.
• (vi) Microplastics and leaching due to plastic waste could not be quantitatively
added into the LCA.
• (vii) The environmental eﬀects of salt and road paint could not be included into
the LCA.
• (viii) The re-use of the reclaimed asphalt is assumed to be stored in the road’s base
layer and is therefore excluded.
Representativeness of LCI Data
Technological representativeness
The LCI data represents the technology currently used for production and construction of
roads in Iceland. The technology used in the plastic recycling processes in Sweden is rep-
resented by literature values reported by Ren (2012). Other data used in the foreground
processes is primarily from the companies; Vegagerðin, Malbikunarstöðin Hlaðbær Colas
or - Höfði, SORPA and Swerec AB in Bredaryd.
Data for background processes, such as production of bitumen and properly sized aggre-
gate is represented by the average technology currently used globally. Data from generic
databases are thought to be suﬃcient for these processes.
Geographical representativeness
The geographical representativeness of the energy use was carefully examined as well as
the amount of maintenance and service needed due to the extreme weather conditions in
Iceland. The marginal energy substituted by the incineration of plastic was geograph-
ically framed to Swedish energy system (see table 4.2). Moreover, in the case of using
plastic waste in road construction, the pre-processing of the plastic waste would be done
using energy from Iceland.
Table 4.2 Geographical scope for life cycle stages in the study of using plastic waste in
road construction in Iceland
Stage
Road type
Plastic waste
Traditional
Plastic waste additives
Disposed
Pelleted
Materials
Bitumen: Venezuela - Sweden - Iceland
Plastic waste: Iceland
Aggregate: Iceland
Manufacturing
Asphalt production: Iceland
Pre-processing : Sweden
Iceland
Earthwork: Iceland
Recycling: Sweden
-
Road construction: Iceland
Incineration: Sweden
-
Use
Iceland
Iceland
Global
Iceland
Disposal
Iceland
Iceland
Credited: Sweden
-
Temporal representativeness
The development stage of the road was not considered to be important (assumed to be
half a year). The manufacturing processes should be representative to the time frame
2018-2023, i.e. 5-year time frame.
39
==PAGE:42==
The use and recycling stages, on the other hand, should be representative from 2018 to
2032, i.e. about 14 years (see ﬁgure 4.1).
Figure 4.1 Temporal scope of the study. Manufacturing starts in 2018 and continues for
5 years. The use stage is assumed to last 7 years after the end of the manufacturing but
could last for 2 years longer (expressed by the grey area). The disposal/demolition stage
might start as soon as the manufacturing commences and is assumed to end 2 years after
the use stage.
4.1.3
Basis for Impact Assessment
The life cycle impact assessment method includes characterisation modelling recom-
mended by the ILCD (Commission (2010)). All characterisation factors in any life cycle
impact assessment (LCIA) method used are associated with uncertainties. These uncer-
tainties are inherent and stem from the diﬀerently modelled elementary ﬂows and pro-
cesses which consequently lead to variable uncertainties across impact categories. How-
ever, these uncertainties will be tested by comparing results of two diﬀerent LCIA method.
The life cycle impact assessment method used is ILCD recommended with normalisation
factors found by the PROSUITE project conducted by the EU. The impact categories,
their units and normalisation factors of the ILCD recommended LCA method can be
seen in table B.1 in appendix B.
The modelling was done in EASETECH, and the impact categories "Ionizing radiation",
"land use" and "resource depletion, water" were not added to EASETECH although pre-
sented in ILCD. The aforementioned impact categories were not implemented because of
strong uncertainties, geographical dependence or due to method uncertainties. Moreover,
the results from the impact categories "Human toxicity, cancer eﬀects", "Human toxic-
ity, non-cancer eﬀects" and "Ecotoxicity freshwater" should be interpreted with caution
because there is still need for improvement in the scientiﬁc knowledge about chemical
toxicity.
Requirements for Comparative Studies
When a comparative study is to be disclosed to the public the comparison should be fair,
i.e. the systems/processes compared should be of the same quality, based on the same
quality data. Moreover, if processes are excluded then there should be an identical exclu-
sion in both systems/processes. This comparative study is not intended to be disclosed to
the public. However, the case study has been done using the same functional unit, same
system boundaries, similar data quality and excluded processes are equally inﬂuential to
both systems.
40
==PAGE:43==
Critical Review Needs
Since this study is not intended for public disclosure there is no obligation for an external
critical review. However, this study is a master thesis project which will be analyzed by
an external examiner.
4.2
Life Cycle Inventory Analysis
4.2.1
LCI Model at System Level
Flow diagrams show the system model ﬂow of the two scenarios (Figures 4.2 and 4.3).
When comparing the two ﬂow diagrams it is clear that many processes are the same, e.g.
material stages, construction, use and recycling stages. However, the magnitudes of ﬂows
are diﬀerent and because of the adjustments needed to be made in order for the roads
to have comparable longevity all of the processes need to be included. It is also evident
that the handling and recycling of the plastic waste is the main diﬀerence between the
two ﬂow diagrams.
Figure 4.2 System model ﬂow of Scenario 1 which includes a Traditional road’s life cycle
and the current Plastic waste management of Iceland of source separated residual waste
which mostly takes place in Sweden. Note that the traditional road has an expected
lifetime of 7 years. The red dotted line indicates the system boundaries and below the
grey dotted lines are the avoided production of products.
41
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.3 System model ﬂow of Scenario 2 which includes a Plastic enriched road’s life
cycle and the pre-processing of the plastic waste. Note that the plastic enriched road has
an expected lifetime of 8.5 years. The red dotted line indicates the system boundaries
and below the grey dotted lines are the avoided production of products.
Figure 4.4 shows the consequential system model ﬂow. This diagram expresses the
diﬀerences of the two alternative scenarios. The consequential system ﬂow can therefore
be compared to business-as-usual. Business-as-usual expresses if no change were to made
to the system. In ﬁg. 4.4 there would be a 100% avoidance of the plastic waste recycling,
its energy use, the transportation needed and its virgin material substitution. Moreover,
there is a 21.4% avoided impacts of a road’s life cycle. This is due to the lifetime diﬀerence
of the two alternative roads (8.5y - 7y) / 7y = 21.4%. Lastly, there is an added impact due
to the pre-processing needed before plastic waste can be added to the asphalt mixture.
This process includes cleaning and pelleting of the plastic waste.
42
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.4 Consequential system model ﬂow by adding Plastic waste additives in road
construction to business-as-usual in Iceland. There is a 100% avoidance of the plastic
waste management system including the substitution of virgin material and some energy
and transportation.
Note that the avoided road life cycle is due to the diﬀerence in
lifetime of the two alternative roads in the two scenarios. Red dotted line indicates the
system boundaries and below the grey dotted lines are the avoided production of virgin
material.
Yet, it should be noted that when comparing the two road alternatives there is an
exaggerated inﬂuence on the results due to the savings in bitumen and aggregate. The
amount of bitumen needed in the plastic enriched road was found to be 89.5% of the
weight needed for the traditional road and likewise the amount of aggregate was found
to be 99.5% of the weight. To explain the exaggerated inﬂuence lets imagine that "a" is
any process within the life cycle of a road, "x" is the amount of aggregate and "y" is the
amount of bitumen:
a −0.786a = 0.214a
(4.1)
x −0.786 ⇤(0.995x) = 0.218x
(4.2)
y −0.786 ⇤(0.895y) = 0.296y
(4.3)
However, what equations 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 show is considered realistic. The savings
in the amount of bitumen and aggregate used has an eﬀect that less amount of material
requires less fuel during construction and recycling stages.
43
==PAGE:46==
4.2.2
Data Collection
Collection of data for the life cycle inventories were mainly from (i) Vegagerðin, who
provided primary data about the lifetime, maintenance and service of the roads (ii) Mal-
bikunarstöðin Hlaðbær Colas, who provided primary data related to the production and
construction stages of the roads, (iii) SORPA, who provided data on the recycling facility
of plastic waste in Sweden and (iv) Ecoinvent database from which aggregate and bitu-
men extraction processes were retrieved as well as the environmental eﬀects of the energy
systems, both in Iceland and Sweden. In addition to this, some data was collected via
an internet search at websites of relevant companies or average data found for speciﬁc
processes. The data collected is organized in appendix B in tables B.5,B.6 and B.7. How-
ever, data quality assessment is presented in table 4.4. The data speciﬁcity categories
(very high – very low) are explained in table 4.3.
Table 4.3 Classiﬁcation of data speciﬁcity categories are inspired by Wenzel et al. (2000)
Very high
Measured directly at speciﬁc process site or scaled from measurement
High
Derived from measurements at speciﬁc process site via modelling
Medium
LCI database process or data from literature speciﬁc to actual process
Low
Generic LCI database process or data from literature
Very low
Judgment by expert or LCA practitioner
The quality assessment category "very high" speciﬁcity indicates that the data has
been measured directly at speciﬁc process site or scaled to ﬁt the system/process which
is examined. These quality assessment categories are inspired by Wenzel et al. (2000).
44
==PAGE:47==
Table 4.4 Data quality assessment of the data used for the two scenarios. This speciﬁcity table is inspired by Wenzel et al. (2000)
Process
Speciﬁcity
Type
Source
Access
Very high
High
Medium
Low
Very low
Materials
Bitumen
x
Amount
Calculated
Functional unit
Aggregate
x
Amount
Calculated
Functional unit
Plastic waste
x
Amount
Publications
Literature
Plastic waste
x
Composition
Measured
by
company
Email from com-
pany
Manufacturing
Production of bitumen
x
Process
LCI database
Online search
Production aggregate
x
Process
LCI database
Online search
Plastic recycling
x
Process,
Emis-
sions, Eﬃciency
Publications
from company
Online search
Plastic Incineration
x
Process,
Emis-
sions, Eﬃciency
Publications
Online search
Production of asphalt
x
Process
Measured
by
company
Direct dialogue
Paving of asphalt
x
Process
Measured
by
company
Email
Use
Maintenance
x
Process,
Emis-
sions, Amount
Assumed
Online search
Service
x
Process,
Emis-
sions, Amount
Measured
by
company
Email with com-
pany
Disposal
x
Process,
Amount
Publications
Online search
Transportation
x
Process,
Emis-
sions, Amount
Judgment
Online search and assumptions
45
==PAGE:48==
The diﬀerences in data quality between the two scenarios are mostly related to the
low quality data used for the plastic waste management in scenario 1 and the low quality
data assumed to be connected to the cleaning and pelleting of plastic waste in scenario
2. However, it is not thought to have a large impact on the overall LCA results since the
environmental eﬀects of the road construction is considerably larger in comparison.
4.2.3
System Modelling Per Life Cycle Stage
Information about data collection, treatment and major assumptions is crucial for the
interpretation of the results. The data collection is explained in great detail in the In-
ventory chapter. This sub chapter shortly summerises the information already stated in
the Inventory. Additionally, a list of all minor and major assumptions can be found in
appendix B in table B.3 and B.4.
Materials stage. The activities required to produce a road is given in appendix B in
tables B.5, B.6 and B.7 and the amount of material required for the two alternative roads
can be found in appendix B, table B.2. It is assumed that the aggregate is mined in the
same fashion as is practiced in Europe and bitumen goes through the same process as is
recorded as the average global production (data provided by Ecoinvent). Moreover, the
upstream impacts of the plastic waste is cut oﬀ. The data shows that there is a diﬀerence
of 3312 kg of bitumen and 3078 kg of aggregate for one kilometer of road. This is due to
the fact that when 2520 kg of plastic waste (8% of weight of bitumen) is added to the
road which occupies space in the asphalt mixture.
Manufacturing stage. Data on electricity used in the manufacturing of asphalt and
construction of road comes from Hlaðbær Colas and is considered of high quality. The
process and electricity used for the recycling of plastic waste in Sweden was adjusted
from values reported by Ren (2012). This data is not considered of high quality. The
major assumptions made in the manufacturing stage is (i) The mixing of asphalt will
be optimum, (ii) Loss of material during production is neglected and (iii) Upstream im-
pact and maintenance of the machinery used in the manufacturing stage is not considered.
Use stage. Data on maintenance and service was given by Vegagerðin and is consid-
ered of high quality. Nevertheless, several assumptions were made; (i) Transportation of
maintenance to desired location is cut oﬀ, (ii) Eﬀects of micro-plastics, road paint and
excessive salt on the environment was cut oﬀ, (iii) Upstream impacts of road paint and
material for pothole ﬁlling not considered, (iv) Emissions due to traﬃc on road is also
cut oﬀ.
Disposal stage. Demolition of the two road alternatives are assumed to require iden-
tical amount of energy and is assumed to be executed with a cold asphalt miller and a
dumping truck as reported by Wirtgen (2008). The recovered asphalt is then assumed
to be transported 52 km to storage. The disposal strategy used in Iceland is to re-use
the RAP in one of the sub layers (other than wearing course) of a new road. However,
construction waste in Iceland seems to be an untapped resource and therefore the RAP
could be used as a ﬁller elsewhere. Because it was not clear if the reclaimed asphalt was
46
==PAGE:49==
re-used or landﬁlled it was decided that it would be deﬁned as storage.
Transportation. Transportation distances are assumed in most cases and are consid-
ered uncertain. All distances between countries were calculated in aerial distances and
the transportation between countries was assumed to be via ship. The age of the ma-
chinery and their standards relating to emissions was not accounted for.
4.2.4
Basis for Sensitivity and Uncertainty Analysis
Sensitivity analysis is made to see how assumptions inﬂuence the results of the LCA. In
addition, an uncertainty and variability analysis was made.
Basis for perturbation analysis
Sensitivity Ratios (SR) were calculated for a variety of parameters to identify which were
the most inﬂuential for the results of the LCA. The equation for SR is as follows 4.4:
SR =
∆Result
InitialResult
∆Parameter
InitialParameter
(4.4)
There is a limitation to the SR which is when the overall results are close to zero.
This limitation refers to the mathematical problem of eq. 4.4 (this limitation was not en-
countered in this study). A parameter is considered to have a medium or large sensitivity
if either one of the following statements are fulﬁlled (see equations 4.5 and 4.6):
Max|SR| ≥0.3
(4.5)
Max|SR| ≥0.5
(4.6)
The Sensitivity Coeﬃcient (SC), on the other hand, is an important element of esti-
mating measurement uncertainty and is used to convert uncertainty components to units
of measure and magnitude relative to the uncertainty analysis. SC has the following
equation 4.7:
SC =
∆Result
∆Parameter
(4.7)
By ﬁnding the most inﬂuential parameters in the perturbation analysis the most crit-
ical assumptions can also be found. Due to the complexity of the system however, there
are countless parameters that could be tested. Based on the contribution analysis, the
following parameters were chosen for testing. The parameters tested were: the lifetime
improvement of the plastic enriched wearing course, amounts of bitumen, aggregate and
plastic waste, the eﬃciecies of the extraction of bitumen and aggregate, the fuel used in
the construction and use stages, the transportation distance of bitumen to Iceland, the
substitution percentages of the plastic waste to virgin plastic and the electricity use of
cleaning and pelleting of plastic waste. All input parameters were perturbed by 10%. If
a SR = 1 it means that a 10% increase of a parameter results in a 10% increase in the
47
==PAGE:50==
relevant impact score.
Basis for scenario analysis
A separate sensitivity check was performed where two parameters were changed at once.
This is called a scenario analysis. These should not be mixed with the names of scenarios
1 and 2 and therefore they are called Scenario A1, B1 and C1 and Scenario A2, B2 and
C2 (1 indicating scenario 1 and 2 indicating scenario 2). An overview of the scenarios is
given in table 4.5.
In the analysis of scenario A the goal is to show the results of the study if the amount of
bitumen and aggregate were not reduced by the addition of plastic in the asphalt. This
scenario is expected to lower the diﬀerence in impact scores between the two scenarios.
Scenario B was made by changing the source of energy used for the plastic waste man-
agement system in Sweden and the electricity acquired from the incineration of plastic
was credited for another type of electricity. In this scenario the energy used for MRF,
pre-washing, NIR sorting and mechanical recycling was hydro power produced in Sweden.
Additionally, the electricity generated in the waste-to-energy plant was credited for elec-
tricity produced burning hard coal in Sweden. Although the type of energy used is often
highly inﬂuential in LCA results, in this case it is not assumed to have a large impact do
to the results of the contribution analysis.
Scenario C was made to see the diﬀerence in ranking between the two scenarios com-
pared to the base scenario due to LCIA method used. The ReCiPe impact method is
used in Scenario C to calculate the results of the LCA. The speciﬁc impact method
used is ReCiPe v.1.11, Midpoint (H) Hierarchist, Europe without long-term emissions.
The impact categories presented by ReCiPe are; Climate change, Ozone depletion, Ter-
restrial acidiﬁcation, Freshwater eutrophication, Marine eutrophication, Human toxicity,
Photochemical oxidant formation, Particulate matter formation, Terrestrial eco-toxicity,
Freshwater eco-toxicity, Marine eco-toxicity, Ionising radiation, Metal depletion and Fos-
sil depletion. The impact categories, units and normalistaion factors of the ReCiPe LCIA
method can be seen in table B.12 in appendix B, section Scenario analysis.
Table 4.5 Scenarios analyzed and corresponding model parameter changes from baseline
scenario. In the LCIA methods w/o LT means without long-term emissions.
Sensitivity scenario
Baseline scenario
Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario C
Sensitivity
parameters
Sc 1
Sc 2
Sc A1
Sc A2
Sc B1
Sc B2
Sc C1
Sc C2
Bitumen [kg]
3.2E+04
2.8E+04
3.2E+04
3.2E+04
Aggregate [kg]
6.0E+05
6.0E+05
6.0E+05
6.0E+05
Electricity Sweden
Nuclear
-
Hydro
-
Heat substitution
Natural gas
-
Hard Coal
-
LCIA methodology
ILCD recommended,
Global w/o LT
ReCiPe
hierarchist
Europe w/o LT
Basis for uncertainty and variability analysis
In an analysis like this, the result will always contain some variance. The variance is
either due to the parameter uncertainties or by the inherent variance of by unexpected
48
==PAGE:51==
occurrences.
With less variance it is easier to make predictions to the actual results
and therefore it will be easier to make valuable recommendations. The parameter uncer-
tainty and variability was assessed by using a Monte Carlo simulation. Only parameters
that were found to be important were assessed (medium to high sensitivity according to
equations 4.5 and 4.6). Six parameters were considered. The amounts of material were
assumed not to vary considerably, which is based on the quality of the data, and therefore
it was estimated that the actual value would be within a 5% range of the default value.
The lifetime of the plastic enriched road, eﬃciencies of the extraction processes and fuel
consumption parameters were assumed to be within a 10% range of the default which
was also estimated from the data quality, see table 4.6. These percentages of deviance
from the default values should be considered when analyzing the Monte Carlo results.
Table 4.6 Uncertain or variable parameters and their relative standard deviation of 5 or
10% used for the Monte Carlo simulations
Uncertain or
variable parameter
Mean (relative standard deviation)
Unit
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Lifetime
1 (0%)
0.786 (10%)
fraction of a
7 year lifetime
Amount of bitumen
31.7 (5%)
28.4 (5%)
tonnes
Amount of aggregate
601.5 (5%)
598.4 (5%)
tonnes
Bitumen extraction
1 (10%)
1 (10%)
process eﬃciency
Aggregate extraction
1 (10%)
1 (10%)
process eﬃciency
Fuel in use stage
0.00962 (10%)
0.00962 (10%)
kWh
It was assumed that all parameters follow a normal distribution pattern. Diﬀerences
in impact scores were considered signiﬁcant if the ranges of the impact scores from 10
thousand iterations did not overlap.
4.2.5
Calculated LCI Results
The calculated LCI results can be seen in table B.5 in appendix B.
4.3
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
Characterised results
The characterised impact scores of all impact categories are listed in table 4.7. The two
scenarios give positive impact scores of the same order of magnitude which is expected
and scenario 2 has lower environmental impacts in all impact categories.
49
==PAGE:52==
Table 4.7 Characterised impact scores for the 14 impact categories represented by the
ILCD recommended LCA method. Red indicates a higher impact score of the two sce-
narios.
Impact category
Unit
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Climate change
kg CO2-Eq
7.13E+04
5.56E+04
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11 Eq
2.29E-02
1.63E-02
Human toxicity, ce
CTUh
2.73E-04
2.14E-04
Human toxicity, nce
CTUh
1.37E-02
1.04E-02
Particulate matter
kgPM2.5-eq
3.26E+01
2.48E+01
Ionising radiation human health
kBq U235 eq
7.44E+03
5.35E+03
Photochemical ozone formation
kg NMVOC
6.73E+02
5.14E+02
Terrestrial acidiﬁcation
mol H+ eq
6.41E+02
4.83E+02
Eutrophication Terrestrial
mol N eq
2.21E+03
1.70E+03
Eutrophication Freshwater
kg P eq
5.31E-01
4.13E-01
Eutrophication Marine
kg N eq
1.97E+02
1.52E+02
Ecotoxicity freshwater
CTUe
2.18E+04
1.66E+04
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
kg Sb eq
2.38E+06
1.79E+06
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
kg antimony-eq
1.00E+00
7.71E-01
Table 4.7 portrays that scenario 2 has less negative environmental impact compared
to scenario 1. Interestingly, scenario 2 has a lower impact score in the impact category
"Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil & elements" which implies that the savings in aggre-
gate and bitumen in scenario 2 has more inﬂuence than the savings in plastic production
due to the recycling of plastic waste.
Normalised results
The normalised impact scores can be seen in ﬁgure 4.5. Similarly to the characterised
impact scores, scenario 2 has lower impact scores in all impact categories. The unit in
which normalised impact scores are presented is personal equivalents (PE). The impact
scores are derived from the characterised results and scaled to normalisation factors that
represent the annual impact of an average person in the European Union (EU27) in
2010 (see normalisation factors in table B.1 in appendix B). In other words, the value
1 PE is equivalent to the yearly environmental emissions of one average person in the
EU within that impact category. The highest impact scores are found in the impact
categories "Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil and elements", "Ecotoxicity freshwater",
"Eutrophication Terrestrial" and "Eutrophication Marine".
50
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.5 Normalised impacts scores in PE for the two scenarios, 7 years of operation
Figure 4.5 shows that scenario 2 has less negative environmental impact in every
impact category. It is important to keep in mind that these results represent a 7 year
lifetime of a 1 km of each road which is divided by an normalisation factor of PE/year
and therefore the impacts seem to be high.
4.3.1
Interpretation
In order to provide ﬁnal recommendations it is necessary to interpret the results of the
LCA.
Process contribution of the two scenarios are identical because the processes bitumen
extraction, aggregate extraction, construction, use and recycling stage make up 98-100%
of the impacts in each category. Of course the process contributions of scenario 2 is not
exactly the same as scenario 1 but it is not easily detectable from a ﬁgure. Therefore, it
was deemed unnecessary to showcase both process contributions. Process contributions
can be seen in ﬁgure 4.6.
51
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.6 Process contributions of the impact scores within each impact category.
The process bitumen extraction includes the production of bitumen and transport via
ship and truck. Aggregate extraction includes the transportation of aggregate. Construction-
and use stage include use of electricity and the production and combustion of fuel. The
recycling stage has negative environmental impacts since it only includes the fuel con-
sumption of demolition and transportation to storage. The impacts of the recycling stage
could be reversed in the case if reclaimed asphalt pavement (RAP) was crediting for ag-
gregate extraction.
Figure 4.6 shows that bitumen extraction is the main driver of the environmental impacts
in seven of the impact categories (Ozone depletion, Human toxicity (cancer eﬀects), Par-
ticulate matter formation, Ionizing radiation (human health), Euthrophication freshwa-
ter, Ecotoxicity freshwater and Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil). Construction- and
use stages have environmental impact in similar places which is expected since electricity
and fuel consumption are the processes included in both stages. Lastly, the aggregate
extraction has the largest impact on the depletion of elements which could also have been
foreseen.
However, since the purpose is to compare the diﬀerent scenarios it is important to
investigate the non-identical processes in the scenarios. The processes that are diﬀerent
include the transportation, recycling and incineration of plastic waste in scenario 1, a
22% savings in impact scores due to lifetime diﬀerences of the two alternative roads and,
ﬁnally, the cleaning and pelleting processes of plastic waste before it is used as additive
in roads. Table 4.8 shows the summed characterised impact scores of aforementioned
processes.
52
==PAGE:55==
Table 4.8 Investigation of the characterised impact scores of the non-identical processes
of the two scenarios. Column Plastic waste; SE refers to the bailing, shipping, recy-
cling and incineration of plastic waste in Sweden. Column 21.4% of road impacts refers
to the savings in impacts scores due to the increased lifespan of road alternative in
sc2. Column Cleaning&pelleting refers to the impacts of the energy used to cleaning
and pelleting plastic waste before it is used in road alternative in Scenario 2. Finally,
"Cleaning&pelleting"-"21.4% of road impacts"-"Plastic waste; SE"="Diﬀerence".
Impact category
Unit
Plastic
waste; SE
21.4% of
road impacts
Cleaning&
pelleting
Diﬀerence
Climate change
kg CO2-Eq
-1.3E+03
1.7E+04
5.0E+01
-1.6E+04
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11 Eq
-2.0E-04
6.9E-03
4.7E-07
-6.7E-03
Human toxicity,ce
CTUh
-1.6E-05
7.5E-05
4.2E-07
-5.9E-05
Human toxicity, nce
CTUh
3.8E-05
3.2E-03
7.5E-07
-3.2E-03
Particulate matter
kgPM2.5-eq
-8.5E-01
8.6E+00
9.9E-03
-7.8E+00
Ionising radiation, hh
kBq U235 eq
-1.4E+02
2.2E+03
1.8E-01
-2.1E+03
Photochemical ozone form.
kg NMVOC
-6.7E+00
1.7E+02
2.5E-02
-1.6E+02
Terrestrial acidiﬁcation
mol H+ eq
-5.9E+00
1.6E+02
2.3E-02
-1.6E+02
Eutrophication Terrestrial
mol N eq
-8.8E+00
5.2E+02
7.6E-02
-5.1E+02
Eutrophication Freshwater
kg P eq
-2.9E-02
1.5E-01
4.4E-04
-1.2E-01
Eutrophication Marine
kg N eq
-8.9E-01
4.6E+01
6.5E-03
-4.6E+01
Ecotoxicity freshwater
CTUe
-8.6E+02
6.1E+03
7.5E+00
-5.2E+03
Fossil depletion
kg Sb eq
-8.0E+04
6.7E+05
9.9E+01
-5.9E+05
Elements depletion
kg antimony-eq
-1.3E-02
2.5E-01
2.5E-04
-2.3E-01
The column "Diﬀerence" in table 4.8 is refers to the savings in characterised impact
scores if scenario 2 was chosen over scenario 1. These savings are also shown in ﬁgure 4.7
in normalised form. The impact scores are negative to indicate that these values would
be subtracted from the impact scores of Scenario 1 if Scenario 2 would be chosen.
53
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.7 Investigation of the normalised impact scores of the non-identical processes of
the two scenarios. Savings in PE by choosing to build roads with plastic waste additives
shown for each impact category for each year of operation
Figure 4.7 illustrates that building roads with plastic waste additives in Iceland would
greatly reduce environmental impacts, especially those related to the depletion of abiotic
resources, ecotoxicity of freshwater and euthrophication of the sea and terrain. Further-
more, it was calculated that in order for there to be no savings in PE scores, the lifetime
of the plastic road would have to be in the range of 6.5 to 6.8 years.
4.3.2
Sensitivity and uncertainty analysis
The assumptions made during the modelling of the two scenarios have inﬂuenced the
results of the LCA. The extent of the inﬂuence will be determined by investigating result
sensitivity due to data collection and quality, individual parameter change and multiple
parameters change.
Sensitivity and uncertainty was analysed by performing a perturbation analysis, scenario
sensitivity and uncertainty propagation. In the perturbation analysis, sensitivity ratios
were calculated for diﬀerent parameters (see ﬁgure 4.8). In the scenario sensitivity, three
scenarios were built and compared to the baseline scenario (see ﬁgures 4.5 and 4.10 and
table 4.9). Finally, in the uncertainty propagation, a Monte Carlo simulation was per-
formed on sensitive parameters according to the perturbation analysis (see table 4.6).
Perturbation analysis
The aim of a perturbation analysis is to ﬁnd the parameter that has the most inﬂuence
on each scenario.
From the process contribution analysis it is evident that the most
inﬂuential processes to the results are bitumen, aggregate, construction- and use stage.
Therefore, a perturbation analysis was performed on parameters concerning: amount and
production eﬃciencies of bitumen and aggregate, amount and substitution eﬃciencies of
54
==PAGE:57==
plastic, diesel use of machinery during construction- and use stage, electricity used during
cleaning and pelleting and transoceanic transportation distances.
The results of the perturbation analysis can be found in table B.8, B.9 in appendix B. The
most sensitive parameters for both scenarios were found to be the amount of bitumen
and aggregate (BitAmount and AggrAmount) and the eﬃciencies of the bitumen and
aggregate extraction (BitEﬀand AggrEﬀ). This could be expected since the extraction
of bitumen and aggregate were found to be heavily inﬂuential to the results (see ﬁgure
4.6) and the construction and use stages’ fuel consumption are dependent on the amount
that will be handled.
Figure 4.8 Sensitivity ratios of the most sensitive parameters plotted, scenario 1. Notice
that the x-axis starts at SR = 0.3. All parameters represented by bars surpassing the
black line are considered to have high sensitivity.
From ﬁgure 4.8 it is evident that two parameters have a medium sensitivity (Con-
strDiesel and UseDiesel) and four have a high sensitivity (BitAmount, BitEﬀ, AggrAmount,
AggrEﬀ). The sensitivity of bitumen amount and eﬃciecy is especially high, since a 10%
increase in parameter values almost results in a 10% increase in impact scores for the
impact categories "Ionising radioation human health" and "Ozone depletion". Of those
two, the amount of bitumen has a high sensitivity in more impact categories. This is
explained by the fact that BitEﬀonly has an eﬀect on the amount extracted of bitu-
men but BitAmount has an eﬀect on the extraction of bitumen as well as the amount
of fuel burnt in construction and use stages of the road. The same explanation can be
used about the diﬀerence between AggrEﬀand AggrAmount.
The impact categories
"Depletion of abiotic resources, elements", "Eutrophication Marine", "Eutrophication
Terrestrial", "Terrestrial acidiﬁcation", Photochemical ozone formation", "Human toxic-
ity (non-cancer eﬀects)" and "Climate change" are all heavily inﬂuenced by the amount
55
==PAGE:58==
of aggregate used. Together, the four high sensitive parameters inﬂuence all 14 impact
categories.
Fuel consumption of the construction and use stage are found to have a medium sensi-
tivity on 5 out of 14 impact categories. The results from scenario 2 are strikingly similar.
Hence, ﬁgure 4.8 and tables B.10 and B.11 in appendix B are thought to be suﬃcient for
its interpretation. The environmental savings connected to the diﬀerence of impact scores
between the two scenarios are consequently aﬀected to the same order of magnitude as
shown in ﬁgure 4.8.
The amount of plastic used, the percentage of virgin plastic credited for, the electricity
used for the cleaning and pelleting of plastic waste and transportation distances were
shown to have low sensitivity.
Considering the data quality connected to these sensitivity results, there are improve-
ments to be made on the robustness of the results by gathering information on the bitu-
men extraction eﬃciency and maintenance of the use stage. The perturbation analysis
shows that there is considerable amount of bias connected to the results of the study.
Scenario analysis
The scenarios A, B and C were analyzed and compared to the baseline scenario. The
results are presented in normalised form for each impact category (see table 4.9).
56
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.9 Sensitivity analysis of the consequential savings by choosing to build plastic
enhanced roads over traditional roads in Iceland shown in normalised form. Scenario A
represents if there were no savings in the amount of bitumen and aggregate with the
addition of plastic in asphalt. Scenario B was made by changing the power source used
in the plastic recycling and the source of the heat credited for in the incineration process
of plastic waste. Scenarios A and B are compared to the baseline scenario for 7 years of
operation.
Scenario A has lower savings in all impact categories compared to the baseline scenario
and scenario B. This could be expected since, as has been shown in the perturbation
analysis, the amount of bitumen and aggregate are highly sensitive parameters to the
results. Nonetheless, it is clear that there are savings connected to every impact category.
In Scenario B, small changes are observed in each impact category compared to the
baseline scenario, all of which lower the consequential savings of choosing to build roads
enhanced with plastic waste. However, these changes are not heavily inﬂuential to the
ﬁnal outcome of the LCA.
Scenario C could not be illustrated in the same ﬁgure as scenarios A and B because
of the diﬀerent impact categories presented by the ReCiPe LCIA method. The results
of scenario C are shown in characterised form in table 4.9 and normalised form. The
normalised results shown are the consequential savings due to choosing to build plastic
enriched roads compared to business-as-usual, see ﬁgure 4.10.
57
==PAGE:60==
Table 4.9 Characterised impact scores and their units using the ReCiPe LCIA method.
Note that the impact categories and their units are diﬀerent than those represented by
the LCIA method recommended by the ILCD.
Impact category
Unit
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Diﬀerence
Climate change
kg CO2 eq
7.13E+04
5.56E+04
-1.58E+04
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11-Eq
2.29E-02
1.63E-02
-6.63E-03
Terrestrial acidiﬁcation
kg SO2-Eq
4.88E+02
3.68E+02
-1.20E+02
Freshwater eutrophication
kg P-Eq
5.31E-01
4.13E-01
-1.18E-01
Marine eutrophication
kg N-Eq
2.32E+01
1.78E+01
-5.34E+00
Human toxicity
kg 1,4-DB eq
5.39E+03
3.94E+03
-1.45E+03
Photochemical oxidant form.
kg NMVOC
6.73E+02
5.14E+02
-1.58E+02
Particulate matter formation
kg PM10-Eq
1.71E+02
1.31E+02
-4.09E+01
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
kg 1,4-DB eq
3.44E+01
2.39E+01
-1.05E+01
Freshwater ecotoxicity
kg 1,4-DB eq
6.15E+01
4.50E+01
-1.65E+01
Marine ecotoxicity
kg 1,4-DB eq
6.77E+01
4.96E+01
-1.81E+01
Ionising radiation
kg U235-Eq
7.43E+03
5.35E+03
-2.08E+03
Water depletion
m3
4.71E+05
3.77E+05
-9.43E+04
Metal depletion
kg Fe eq
1.98E+03
1.46E+03
-5.17E+02
Fossil depletion
kg oil eq
5.83E+04
4.36E+04
-1.47E+04
Similarly to results obtained by the ILCD LICA method, the characterised results of
the ReCiPe LCIA method show savings in every impact category. However, there is a shift
in focus, partly due to the diﬀerences in how the environmental emissions are categorized
into impact categories and partly due to the diﬀerences in normalisation factors. Lastly,
in some cases it is not possible to compare the results to the ILCD results due to the
diﬀerence in units. All characterisation factors in any LCIA method are associated with
uncertainties. These uncertainties are inherent and stem from the diﬀerently modelled
elementary ﬂows and processes which consequently lead to variable uncertainties across
impact categories. These uncertainties are rarely known but they are expected to be of
statistical signiﬁcance for ecotoxicity and human toxicity impact scores. The elementary
ﬂows connected to climate change, acidifying and eutophying impact categories however,
are similar between diﬀerent impact assessment methods.
58
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.10 Normalised results for 7 years of operation; the consequential savings due
to choosing to build locally derived plastic waste enriched roads compared to business-
as-usual.
As can be seen from ﬁgure 4.10 there are savings connected to each impact category,
yet there is a shift of focus and scale compared to the results of the ILCD method. These
results emphasize the impacts of terrestrial acidiﬁcation and do not show normalised
results of water, fossil and elements depletion. Moreover, the ReCiPe LCIA method has
low impact related to marine eutrophication.
Table 4.10 Normalisation factors of impact categories that have the same unit of two
LCIA methods; ReCiPe Midpoint (H) Hierarchist and ILCD recommended method from
2013, PROSUITE project.
Impact categories
Unit
ReCiPe Midpoint
(H) Hierarchist
ILCD re-
commended 2013
Climate change
kg CO2 eq/p/yr
1.12E+04
8.10E+03
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11 eq/p/yr
2.20E-02
4.14E-02
Photochemical oxidant formation
kg NMVOC/p/yr
5.68E+01
5.67E+01
Freshwater eutrophication
kg P eq/p/yr
4.15E-01
6.20E-01
Marine eutrophication
kg N eq/p/yr
1.01E+01
9.38E+00
Table 4.10 illustrates the normalisation factors of the two impact methods which have
the same units. The diﬀerence between the normalisation factors partly explains the
diﬀerences in impact results found in ﬁgure 4.10 compared to the baseline scenario.
The scenario analysis shows that there are consequential savings connected to changing
the mix of asphalt for every impact category, even though: (A) there would be no savings
in the amount of bitumen and aggregate needed for a 1 km road, (B) the power sources
of the Swedish energy systems are changed and (C) another LCIA method is chosen.
59
==PAGE:62==
Uncertainty propagation
The uncertainty propagation was investigated using a Monte Carlo simulation.
The
parameters included were the lifetime change of the plastic enriched road, amount of
bitumen and aggregate, the extraction eﬃciencies of bitumen and aggregate and the fuel
consumption of the use stage (default values and relative standard deviations can be seen
in table 4.6). The results; average values and their standard deviations can be seen in
table 4.11.
Table 4.11 Results obtained from a Monte Carlo simulation. Average impact scores and
their standard deviations are shown for all impact categories of scenarios 1 and 2
Impact category
Unit
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Climate change
kg CO2-Eq
7.12E+04
1.37E+03
5.42E+04
1.40E+03
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11 Eq
2.37E-02
2.07E-03
1.59E-02
1.53E-03
Human toxicity, ce
CTUh
2.80E-04
8.51E-06
2.10E-04
8.41E-06
Human toxicity, nce
CTUh
1.37E-02
2.52E-04
1.02E-02
2.72E-04
Particulate matter
kgPM2.5-eq
3.30E+01
6.18E-01
2.44E+01
7.76E-01
Ionising radiation, hh
kBq U235 eq
7.70E+03
6.54E+02
5.21E+03
4.88E+02
Photochemical ozone form.
kg NMVOC
6.73E+02
9.68E+00
5.02E+02
1.34E+01
Terrestrial acidiﬁcation
mol H+ eq
6.44E+02
8.98E+00
4.73E+02
1.34E+01
Eutrophication Terrestrial
mol N eq
2.20E+03
5.07E+01
1.66E+03
4.85E+01
Eutrophication Freshwater
kg P eq
5.50E-01
1.77E-02
4.09E-01
1.87E-02
Eutrophication Marine
kg N eq
1.96E+02
4.56E+00
1.48E+02
4.35E+00
Ecotoxicity freshwater
CTUe
2.23E+04
1.01E+03
1.62E+04
8.41E+02
Fossil depletion
kg Sb eq
2.43E+06
1.32E+05
1.74E+06
1.05E+05
Elements depletion
kg antimony-eq
1.05E+00
4.07E-02
7.72E-01
3.25E-02
Three impact categories were chosen for representation on the basis that they had
relatively the highest standard deviations. These impact categories are; "Ozone deple-
tion", "Ionising radiation (human health)" and "Fossil depletion" and can be seen in
ﬁgures B.2, B.6 and B.13. The columns represent the average value and the error bars
represent two standard deviations. Since we assume that all parameters follow a normal
distribution, 95% of the time the impact scores will be within the range of the error bars.
To examine what seem to be the crossing of error bars for Ozone depletion and Ionis-
ing radiation (human health) impact categories, probability distribution and cumulative
distribution (ﬁgures 4.12 and 4.13) graphs were generated for these impact categories.
The data used for the graphs were generated through the Monte Carlo simulation using
parameters that were most inﬂuential to the respective impact category which were found
by the perturbation analysis.
The most sensitive parameter (found by the perturbation analysis) is the lifetime of the
plastic enriched road. Consequently, a separate Monte Carlo simulation was run using the
same parameters and parameter variance where probability and cumulative distributions
were made if there would be no lifetime improvement of the plastic enriched road. These
graphs can be seen in appendix B and will not be discussed further in this section.
Unintentionally, the same two parameters had the most inﬂuence on both categories,
namely bitumen amount and bitumen extraction process eﬃciency. For the sake of sim-
60
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.11 Monte Carlo sensitivity for Ozone depletion, Ionising radiation (human
health) and Depletion of abiotic resources, elements impact category. The error bars
represent two standard deviations and show the 95% certainty range of results for each
impact category.
plicity, only one probability and cumulative distribution will be shown for each impact
category.
Figure 4.12 Probability and Cumulative distribution graphs of the Ozone depletion
impact scores generated from the results of a Monte Carlo simulation (10 thousand iter-
ations) for scenarios 1 and 2
The probability and cumulative distribution graphs for the Ozone depletion category
show that both scenarios have a similar probability range by simulating a 10% range on
the process eﬃciency of bitumen extraction. The probability distributions overlap at a
frequency of 200 out of 10 thousand iterations, which is 0.02%. The cumulative distribu-
tion supports this and illustrates the cumulative scores of the overlap (ﬁgure 4.12, right).
Moreover, because the impact category is inﬂuenced by bitumen process eﬃciency sce-
nario 2 could not have higher inﬂuence on the ozone depletion category than scenario 1,
given that the same bitumen extraction process provides the binder for both road options.
61
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.13 Probability and Cumulative distribution graphs of the Ionising radiation
(human health) impact scores generated from the results of a Monte Carlo simulation (10
thousand iterations) for scenarios 1 and 2
The probability and cumulative distribution graphs for the "Ionising radiation (hu-
man health)" category show that the both scenarios have a similar probability range
by simulating a 5% range on the amount of bitumen. The probability distributions in
ﬁgure 4.13 seem to have a smaller overlap compared to ﬁgure 4.12 but that is because
of the diﬀerence in variability ranges chosen for the diﬀerent parameters. Also, unlike
the bitumen process eﬃciency, the amount of bitumen used between the scenarios are
not internally linked. In those cases where the amount of bitumen used in a traditional
asphalt mixes is lower than the amount used for plastic enriched roads, an overlap may
occur. The frequency cannot be read from ﬁgure 4.13 but it is 47 out of 10 thousand
iterations and equals 0.005%. The cumulative distribution supports this and illustrates
the cumulative scores of the overlap (ﬁgure 4.13, right).
The Monte Carlo simulation shows that there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the re-
sults of the two scenarios. No further uncertainty propagation was deemed necessary
since there was negligible overlapping of the results.
Choice of representation
In this sub-section the choice of representation will be analyzed. Choice of representation
regards to, the way in which the system boundaries and system model are deﬁned in this
study. This analysis is conducted because in fact there could be little diﬀerence in the
use stages between the two scenarios in general. The processes included in the use stage
such as pothole ﬁlling was assumed to be reduced along with other use related activities
which were initially were thought to be important. The recycling of recovered asphalt
(RAP) was, on the other hand not included in the study. The reason for this is that,
in the process of collecting data it was understood that very little RAP is "recycled".
However, in retrospect this process could be considered re-use and was not included
because initially it was not thought to be important. The system boundaries and system
model ﬂow with the use stage cut-oﬀand added recycling is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.14.
62
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.14 Consequential system model ﬂow for the characterised and normalised re-
sults of the sensitivity sub-section "Choice of representation". Here the use stage has
been cut-oﬀand recycling stage has been added in comparison to the system model ﬂow
used in the rest of the study. The red dotted line indicates the system boundaries and
the grey dotted line indicates the avoided production.
The analysis was done keeping the same functional unit, reference ﬂow and intended
application. In table 4.12 and ﬁgure 4.15 are the characterised and normalised results of
the study if the use stage had been cut-oﬀand if 1 kg of RAP would substitute 1 kg of
aggregate.
Table 4.12 Characterised results of the study with diﬀerent system model; no use stage
and recycling of reclaimed asphalt pavement (RAP) substitutes the same amount of
aggregate.
Impact category
Unit
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Diﬀerence
Climate change
kg CO2-Eq
4.66E+04
3.62E+04
-1.04E+04
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11 Eq
2.27E-02
1.61E-02
-6.58E-03
Human toxicity (cancer eﬀects)
CTUh
1.96E-04
1.54E-04
-4.18E-05
Human toxicity (non-cancer eﬀects)
CTUh
9.04E-03
6.82E-03
-2.22E-03
Particulate matter
kgPM2.5-eq
2.31E+01
1.74E+01
-5.66E+00
Ionising radiation human health
kBq U235 eq
7.25E+03
5.21E+03
-2.05E+03
Photochemical ozone formation
kg NMVOC
4.51E+02
3.41E+02
-1.10E+02
Terrestrial acidiﬁcation
mol H+ eq
4.65E+02
3.46E+02
-1.20E+02
Eutrophication Terrestrial
mol N eq
1.38E+03
1.05E+03
-3.30E+02
Eutrophication Freshwater
kg P eq
3.33E-01
2.57E-01
-7.52E-02
Eutrophication Marine
kg N eq
1.23E+02
9.33E+01
-2.93E+01
Ecotoxicity freshwater
CTUe
1.81E+04
1.37E+04
-4.40E+03
Depletion of abiotic resources, fossil
kg Sb eq
2.04E+06
1.52E+06
-5.18E+05
Depletion of abiotic resources, elements
kg antimony-eq
3.05E-01
2.24E-01
-8.10E-02
63
==PAGE:66==
There are substantial diﬀerences in characterised impact scores for each category
compared to the baseline for each scenario. Nonetheless, these diﬀerences in characterised
impact scores between the scenarios seem to be linear because there is not a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in the consequential savings (see ﬁgure 4.15). From the characterised results
in table 4.12, it is clear that there are consequential savings connected to every impact
category if the representation of the system is changed by cutting oﬀthe use stages of
the roads and crediting RAP for aggregate.
Figure 4.15 Normalised results of the consequential savings connected to building a
plastic waste enriched road compared to business-as-usual. There is a change of rep-
resentation of the system model shown in orange, here the use stage is not considered
and the reclaimed asphalt is credited for aggregate. These results are compared with the
baseline results
The normalised results of the new system model can be seen in ﬁgure 4.15. The ﬁg-
ure shows the consequential savings are shifted and e.g. there are noticeable diﬀerences
in scores connected to the impact categories eutrophication terrestrial and marine and
element depletion. However as has been stated before, there are consequential savings
connected to every impact category.
A Monte Carlo simulation was performed on scenarios 1 and 2 in the case of changing the
system model. The average impact scores and their standard deviations for each impact
category can be seen in table B.13 in appendix B. These results were obtained using the
same parameters and parameter deviations as before which can be seen in table 4.6.
Completeness and Consistency Checks
Completeness check. The cut-oﬀof processes has been consistently applied to both road
alternatives in order to ensure completeness of the study. The processes that were cut-oﬀ
64
==PAGE:67==
would increase the contribution of the construction and use stages of the two alternative
roads to the overall results with the exception of the recycling stage (referring to the
list of excluded processes (i) to (viii) in section "System Boundaries and Completeness
Requirements"). These processes were left out, either due to diﬃculties in ﬁnding data
or they were initially not thought to be important.
Firstly, earthwork and additional road work needed was cut-oﬀ, which is assumed to in-
crease the fuel required in the construction stage and the amount of aggregate needed.
The expected results are that there would be increased consequential savings in all impact
categories except for ozonedepletion, ionising radiation (hh) and depletion of elements.
Similarly, the vehicle emissions due to the use of road would increase the fuel produced
and burnt in the use stage. These processes were expected to remain unchanged between
the two scenarios. These assumptions as well as the aggregate substitution of RAP, were
covered by the subsection 4.3.2.
The road work due to accidents that may occur on the road was excluded because of the
diﬃculty of estimating their extent and because no evidence has been given that they
would decrease with the enhanced quality of the road. Additionally, the microplastics and
leaching due to plastic waste could not be quantitatively added to the model. Similarly,
the reason being the diﬃculty of estimating their quantity, the knowledge gap of the
amount of water percolating through the road layer and the variety of plastic additives
present in diﬀerent types of plastic. The contribution of this data is not expected to
reduce the consequential savings with the exception of the leaching of plastic additives.
The leaching is expected to have an eﬀect on toxicity (human and freshwater) related im-
pact categories and, as has been mentioned before, the toxicity related impact categories
have an inherent uncertainty.
Overall, given that the assumptions made in the system models are correct it is estimated
that the calculated consequential savings represent 70-85% of the actual total impacts.
Consistency check
The major source of inconsistency in data quality is the limited knowledge on the possi-
ble leachate formed due to the degradation of plastics and the quantity of microplastics
formed due to the abrasion of the road. If this data were to be implemented there would
also be a need for assessing the leachate formed in a traditional road and the chemicals
found in bitumen. This inconsistency, however, is not assumed to change the conclusion
of the study since the concentrations of the leachate and its eﬀects are thought to be
neglectable compared to the consequential savings found in the study.
Cut-oﬀof processes and credits given to plastic waste management have been applied
consistently to both scenarios as well as other assumptions, methods and data.
65
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5
Summary, Results and Discussion
5.1
Summary
Theory
The most relevant method of use to add plastic to asphalt mixtures was found to be
polymer-coated aggregate (PCA) method. This is based on the fact that the method was
found to be less energy intensive and have lower reported default rate in the application of
the polymers to the asphalt mixtures compared to the polymer modiﬁed bitumen (PMB)
method. Moreover, the PCA method has a better literature base than the plastic and
aggregate mixture method.
A consensus was found among researchers that waste polymers could improve quality of
wearing course by using the PCA method with the addition 3-15% of polymers to the
weight of bitumen (Attaelmanan et al. (2011), Awwad and Shbeeb (2007), Vasudevan
et al. (2012), Ahmadinia et al. (2011), Kalantar et al. (2012) and Al-Hadidy and Yi-Qiu
(2009)). The aforementioned addition of plastic waste occupies space of the total mix
which reduces the amount of bitumen needed for a good mix by about 0.5% of the total
weight of the road (Vasudevan et al. (2012) and Al-Hadidy and Yi-Qiu (2009)). The ﬁve
most common types of waste polymers were investigated in the context of being used
for road construction as well as the polymer commonly used for bitumen modiﬁcation,
namely Styrene-Butadiene-Styrene (SBS). The ﬁve types of plastics investigated were;
Polyethylene (PE; HDPE and LDPE), Polypropylene (PP), Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC),
Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) and Polystyrene (PS). Each plastic type had their
pros and cons where thermoplastic elastomers tend to increase the elastic properties of
binders, plastomers and reactive polymers help enhance stiﬀness and strength to heavy
loads (Ahmadinia et al. (2011), Al-Hadidy and Yi-qiu (2009), Al-Hadidy and Yi-Qiu
(2009) and Attaelmanan et al. (2011)). Most polymers provide better adhesion between
aggregate and bitumen and decrease binder temperature susceptibility, which is favorable
for hot climates (Al-Hadidy and Yi-Qiu (2009), Awwad and Shbeeb (2007) and Vasude-
van et al. (2012)).
The literature review was used for the evaluation of the road parameters; Abrasion,
Wheel track formation, Fracturing, Lifespan and Recycling. Although these parameters
are inherently connected, they were evaluated separately. In order to identify the ef-
fects on these parameters the theoretical consequences of the test results of the diﬀerent
studies were used. It was assumed that: (i) abrasion would lessen due to the increased
66
==PAGE:69==
adhesion between bitumen and aggregate, (ii) wheel track formation would lessen due
to the increased softening point of the asphalt mixture and (iii) fracturing was assumed
to decrease due to the tensile strength, air void and Marshall test results of the various
studies reviewed. The parameters mentioned, theoretically, have an eﬀect of the lifespan
of plastic waste enriched roads which is consequently assumed to increase. Lastly, the
plastic waste additives should not have an eﬀect on recycling possibilities of reclaimed
asphalt pavements (RAP).
Inventory
The deﬁned scenarios (scenarios 1 and 2) called for data collection that was listed in
the inventory chapter and all data was quantiﬁed and referenced. The inventory chapter
was divided into data concerning the life cycle of a road built in Iceland, plastic waste
management taking place in Sweden, considerations on energy used and the lifetime im-
provements were quantiﬁed for the purpose performing a LCA.
Data concerning the life cycle of the road includes the material, manufacturing, use and
disposal stage. The extraction processes of materials were collected from the database
called ecoinvent although the amounts of materials were calculated. The manufacturing
stage was based on data given by a asphalt manufacturing station (Malbikunarstöðin
Hlaðbær Colas) located in the capital region of Iceland. Hlaðbær Colas gave an approxi-
mation of the average fuel burnt and electricity used for asphalt production and paving as
well as an idea of the diﬀerent types asphalt recipes. The data collected on the use stage
of the road was given by the road administration of Iceland (Vegagerðin) which included
an approximation of the fuel used during the service of a typical road for an average
year. Data on the disposal stage was approximated via an online search and assumed
to be a general process of demolition and transportation to storage. The re-use of the
reclaimed asphalt was assumed to be equivalent to storage. All transportation distances
were estimated by the help of maps and/or average distances.
Data on residential source separated plastic waste collected in the capital region of Iceland
was either given by the waste collection company SORPA bs. or from a sample investi-
gated by ReSource International ehf. The electricity use, process order and technology of
the plastic waste management of Sweden was assumed to be the same as was reported by
Liljenroth (2014). The report was given by SORPA bs as well as the fraction of plastic
waste recycled vs. incinerated (a general assumption of 70:30). Next, the substitution
possibilities of plastic waste to virgin plastic were assessed as well as electricity and heat
credited due to the incineration of plastic.
Energy sources were considered to be a mixture of hydro and geothermal.
The en-
ergy source of Swedish production was known to be a mixture but because an ecoinvent
database was not found representing a mixture of energy nuclear was chosen as a baseline
power source which was then analyzed in the LCA. The diesel production and consump-
tion was represented by an ecoinvent database. The database was chosen because of its
unspeciﬁc nature since it was diﬃcult to approximate machinery used, their age, condi-
tion and emission ﬁlters. The database is therefore not technologically, geographically
nor temporally speciﬁc.
The most critical assumption made was the increased longevity of the plastic enriched
road. This assumption was made for the sole purpose of making an life cycle impact
assessment and is the reason for the subject of the theory chapter and the extended sen-
67
==PAGE:70==
sitivity and uncertainty analysis of the LCA. The lifetime expectancy of the traditional
road was assumed to 7 year and the plastic enriched road was assumed to have a lifetime
of 8.5 years.
Life Cycle Assessment
This study was intended as a decision support tool for the Road Administration of Ice-
land (Vegagerðin) who are also the target audience. Because of the scale of the decision
it was considered to be a macro-level situation which was solved using a consequential
LCI modelling framework. The functional unit is: "Provide 1 km of conﬁned and bound
asphalt based surface on which vehicles can drive durable for a high traﬃc load every day
for 7 years in Iceland. A high traﬃc load is deﬁned by the Icelandic guidelines on bound
asphalt, set by the road administration of Iceland (Vegagerðin (2017)), as >8000 ÁDU,
average daily traﬃc in a year on two lains". The refernce ﬂow was deﬁned as a wearing
course; 1 km long, 6 m wide and 4.5 cm thick.
The consequential system model ﬂow includes an avoidance of the current plastic waste
management system of Iceland, a partly avoided life cycle impact of a plastic waste en-
riched road due to a longer lifetime expectancy and the pre-processing of the plastic waste
before it can be added to an asphalt mixture (all transportation and energy included).
5.2
Results
Scenario 2, including plastic waste enriched roads, has statistically lower impact scores
than Scenario 1 connected to every impact category investigated by the LCA practitioner.
According to the normalised results the biggest consequential savings of utilizing plastic
waste for road construction in Iceland are connected to the impact categories; "Depletion
of abiotic resources (fossil and elements)", "Eutrophication of terrain and marine" and
"Ecotoxicity of freshwater".
The most inﬂuential processes to the impact scores of both scenarios are; Bitumen ex-
traction, aggregate extraction, construction-, use- and recycling stages. Consequently, the
amount of bitumen and aggregate used and the process extraction eﬃciency of bitumen
and aggregate were found to be the second most sensitive parameters after the lifetime
improvement of the plastic waste enriched road according to a perturbation analysis.
A scenario analysis was performed investigating the change in results if: (A) If there were
no savings in bitumen and aggregate due to the addition of plastic waste to asphalt, (B)
If a diﬀerent power source is used for the plastic waste management in Sweden and heat
generated by incineration of plastic was credited for a diﬀerent power source and (C)
Another impact assessment method were used to calculate the results. In all three cases
the results were that, there are consequential savings related to each impact category by
choosing to use plastic waste additives in road construction.
A Monte Carlo simulation was performed using the parameters found to be most sensitive
to the outcome of the study according to the perturbation analysis with the addition of
the amount of fuel burnt in the use stage. These parameters were assumed to deviate
by 5-10% of their default values. The Monte Carlo simulation was run with 10 thousand
iterations and gave average impact scores and standard deviations for each impact cate-
68
==PAGE:71==
gory of the two scenarios. From those results it was concluded that it is 95% certain that
scenario 2 has lower impact scores in every category compared to scenario approximately
99% of the time.
Choice of representation refers to the way in which the system boundaries and system
model ﬂow were deﬁned. The system model ﬂow was changed in this analysis by cutting
oﬀthe use stage and crediting reclaimed asphalt pavement for aggregate but keeping the
same functional unit, reference ﬂow and intended application. The results of the analysis
showed the consequential impact of using plastic waste in road construction compared
to business-as-usual if there were no savings connected to the use stage and decreased
savings due to the crediting of the reclaimed asphalt. The analysis showed that there
are savings connected to every impact category. Normalised results of this analysis was
compared to the baseline and as could be expected, there were less consequential savings
when the use stage was cut-oﬀand substitution added. The largest diﬀerence was con-
nected to the impact category "Depletion of abiotic resources, elements".
Two additional Monte Carlo simulations were run and their results added to appendix
B (B.8 and B.9). The sub appendix B.8 "Uncertainty propagation, no lifetime change",
probability and cumulative distribution graphs were generated by running a Monte Carlo
simulation (10 thousand iterations), using the same parameters and parameter variabili-
ties as before. The results were tested if there were no lifetime change between the two
alternative roads. The graphs therefore show the normal distribution of the results of
each scenario if the only diﬀerence between the two road alternatives where the amount
of bitumen and aggregate needed.
The graphs show that there is some likelihood of
consequential savings connected to impact categories "Ozone depletion" and "Ionising
radiation (human health)".
The sub appendix B.9 "Choice of representation" shows the average impact scores of each
impact categroy for both scenarios assuming a changed system model ﬂow and system
boundaries as was discussed earlier. The results were generated using a Monte Carlo
simulation and the same parameters and parameter variance as before. The results show
that there is a 90% certainty that there are consequential savings connected to all im-
pact categories 100% of the time except for the impact category "Depletion of abiotic
resources, elements".
5.3
Discussion and Limitations
Critical assumptions
As has been mentioned, the lifetime enhancement of the plastic waste enriched road is the
most critical assumption made. Thereafter, it is worth to mention all assumptions made
that inﬂuence the most sensitive parameters in the model. However, all these assump-
tions were tested for in the sensitivity analysis of the LCA. The sensitivity concluded
that the impact scores are signiﬁcantly lower for scenario 2 than for scenario 1 in all 14
impact categories.
Other assumptions
The application and mixing of the plastic waste is assumed to be optimum and is assumed
that it will not require additional energy or machinery. The amount of bitumen needed in
69
==PAGE:72==
the plastic enriched road was found to be 89.5% of the weight needed for the traditional
road and likewise the amount of aggregate was found to be 99.5% of the weight. The
explanation is that the plastic waste occupies volumetric space in the mixture. However,
these assumptions were tested for in the sensitivity and uncertainty analysis.
The PCA method implies that the inﬂuential polymer characteristics is melting tem-
perature and in a mixed plastic waste composition there are several diﬀerent melting
temperatures. The PCA method has also been found to increase the roughness of the
road and more eﬃciently bind the bitumen to the aggregates. An increased roughness of
the road could decrease skidding and/or increase fuel consumption of vehicles and wear
oﬀtires. The grain size of the plastic makes a diﬀerence in outcome as Awwad and Shbeeb
(2007) reported. In order to reduce grain size of the plastic more energy could be needed.
Data limitations
The literature review is not exhaustive from a civil engineering point of view. To increase
the certainty of the possible quality improvements due to PMA that were addressed
ideally measured data would be needed for Icelandic conditions. Alternatively, ﬁeld mea-
surements and literature data from India and various other countries near the equator
was used for the literature review. Since a test road has not been paved in Iceland the
lifetime expectancy of the plastic waste enriched road remains relatively uncertain for
Icelandic conditions. In general, the amount and quality of literature data used for the
study could also been improved by making sure there were no bias in the sense that the
researchers did not research for the purpose to ﬁnd improvements of road parameters.
The data used for the models could be improved. Inﬂuential processes such as aggregate
extraction process speciﬁc to Icelandic conditions and more detailed information on the
disposal process of the reclaimed asphalt pavements in Iceland should be improved. Ad-
ditionally, the speciﬁc machinery used in the manufacturing stage of the roads, their age,
emission rates, ﬁlters and other uncertain factors would reduce the uncertainties of the
analysis. The aforementioned processes would however, inherently connected between
the two scenarios.
Less inﬂuential data (but not connected between the scenarios) such as plastic waste
recycling and incineration technologies, process and eﬃciencies speciﬁcally linked to Ice-
landic waste plastic could have been improved.
The eﬀects of microplastics and leaching due to plastic additives and bitumen could not
be included in the study. The eﬀects due to leaching could result in a lowered consequen-
tial savings by building plastic enriched road compared to business-as-usual in impact
categories such connected to toxicity (human and freshwater) and possibly acidiﬁcation
of land.
Lastly, more relevant ecoinvent databases could have been used for the electricity used
in Sweden and for the production and combustion of diesel fuel used in the construction,
use and recycling stages. The changes in heat mix and heat demand in Iceland in the
future was disregarded since heat supply is not assumed to change considerably within
the time frame of the study.
Considerations
The waste hierarchy is a tool used where processes are evaluated in order to protect the
environment. The hierarchy therefore evaluate processes and establishes preferred pro-
70
==PAGE:73==
gram priorities by categorizing processes into the most and least favorable actions based
on sustainability. According to the waste hierarchy the most favorable action is to reduce
the amount of waste produced and used. Less favorable are the acts of re-using, recycling
and energy recovery and the least favorable is disposal.
The act of utilizing plastic waste in road construction could be considered recycling since
the waste is re-purposed with a diﬀerent function than initially intended. In other words,
the polymeric properties of the plastic is used to enhance the roads longevity. At the
same time the plastic waste is eradicated in a way that it is sequestered in the road
layer. Contrarily, when plastic is incinerated there is a release of carbon dioxide into the
atmosphere.
If however, the lifetime of the plastic enriched road is not extended and there are no
bitumen nor aggregate savings the plastic waste is not being re-purposed. In those sit-
uations, plastic waste should not be used in road construction, rather the plastic waste
should make use of the current waste management system of recycling and incinerating.
The results of the study should not be used to evaluate the environmental consequences
of using virgin plastic in road construction. The reason being that in that case the up-
stream impacts of virgin plastic would need to be considered. Additionally, the results do
not support the method of polymer modiﬁed bitumen (PMB) as there would be need to
consider the energy used in the mixing and storage processes connected to that particular
method.
The presentation of the normalised results should be noticed as the impact scores from
the categorised results of 7 years operation are divided by normalisation factors of the
average personal equivalence emission per year. The normalised savings results in the
interpretation sub section however, presents the estimated savings per year of operation.
If the functional unit of the study would assume an operation time of 1 year and we would
assume the same proportional improvement of lifetime of the plastic enhanced road the
normalised results would be similar to what was shown in sub section Choice of represen-
tation but for one year operation. Therefore, the results are scaled proportional to the
lifetime change except for the environmental emissions of the plastic waste management
which is only connected to the amount of plastic used.
For further investigation of plastic waste in road construction it would be feasible to
research the possibilities of chemical exposure of the additives found in plastics. The
research would then focus on the risk of chemical exposure of plastic additives into the
environment via leaching through the wearing course layer. Additionally, a risk assess-
ment of the chemicals themselves in this situation as well as a chemical assessment of the
diﬀerence between a binder with and without plastic waste additives. The goal for this
additional investigation would be to assess if plastic waste additives in road construction
would create a relatively worse environmental toxicological outcome compared the cur-
rent situation.
71
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and Recommendation
Conclusions
I. Literature indicates hot asphalt mix properties will be enhanced by using 3-15% waste
plastic using a polymer-coated aggregate (PCA) method.
II. The amount of bitumen needed in the plastic enriched asphalt was found to be 89.5%
of the weight needed for the traditional road and likewise the amount of aggregate was
found to be 99.5% of the weight. The explanation is that the plastic waste occupies
volumetric space in the mixture.
III. A conservative estimation was made of the possible lifetime enhancement of the plas-
tic waste enriched wearing course for the purpose of making a life cycle assessment (LCA).
A traditional asphalt mixture was assumed to have an average lifetime of 7 years and the
plastic waste enriched alternative was assumed to have a lifetime of 8.5 years respectively.
IV. There are consequential savings connected to all 14 impact categories by choosing to
build plastic waste enriched roads in Iceland compared to business-as-usual.
V. Processes of bitumen and aggregate extraction and fuel consumption of the construc-
tion, use and recycling stages contribute the most to the results of the LCA.
VI. The overall environmental performance diﬀerence between the two scenarios is due
to the enhanced lifetime of the plastic enriched road. Savings in the amount of bitumen
and aggregate used due to the addition of plastic which occupies space in the asphalt
mixture is also greatly inﬂuential.
VII. The most critical assumptions made were connected to the most inﬂuential processes.
VIII. Transportation, the amount of plastic waste recycled and incinerated and plas-
tic substitution was not heavily inﬂuential to the results of the study.
IX. Conclusion IV does not change even if; (A) there were no savings in the amount
of bitumen and aggregate needed for the plastic waste enriched asphalt mixture, (B)
energy sources of the plastic waste management are tested, (C) a diﬀerent impact assess-
72
==PAGE:75==
ment method is used .
X. In order to reverse the results of the study a combination of factors would need
to co-exist. Factors that could reverse the results are: (i) if there would be no lifetime
enhancement of the plastic waste enriched road, (ii) no savings in amount of bitumen and
aggregate, (iii) the mixing method of the PCA would be energy intensive
XI. The results do not support the use of virgin plastic nor the use of the polymer
modiﬁed bitumen (PMB) method.
Recommendations
Recommendations are given to the commissioner of the study to support environmentally
conscious design of a new hot asphalt mixture used for a wearing course utilizing plastic
waste as additive for Icelandic conditions. The environmental evaluation was made con-
sidering the whole value chain and life cycle of plastic waste management currently used
for Icelandic plastic waste:
I. To ensure a better environmental performance of wearing course the design should
focus on optimizing lifetime enhancements of a new asphalt mixture.
II. The asphalt mixture should preferably consider using alternative material than bi-
tumen and aggregate, which can enhance the cohesion between the two and/or enhance
other road performance parameters.
III. The best environmental performance would be achieved by using alternative ma-
terial that otherwise is discarded. Alternatively a material can be chosen that has lower
environmental positive eﬀects by recycling than could be achieved by enhancing the life-
time of the bound surface layer.
IV. Utilizing residential source separated plastic waste from the capital region of Ice-
land is a environmentally feasible option for a new asphalt mix if there is a lifetime
enhancement connected to its utilization.
V. In general, a better environmental performance can also be achieved by using bitumen
and aggregate that have the best extraction process eﬃciency. Secondly, the fuel burnt
in the manufacturing and demolition stages can be reduced.
VI. An enhanced recycling method of reclaimed asphalt pavements (RAP) has a great
aﬀect on the environmental outcome.
73
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
14040:2006, B. E. I. (2006). Environmental management - life cycle assessment - principles
and framework.
14044:2006, B. E. I. (2006). Environmental management - life cycle assessment - require-
ments and guidelines.
Ahmadinia, E., Zargar, M., Karim, M. R., Abdelaziz, M., and Shaﬁgh, P. (2011). Us-
ing waste plastic bottles as additive for stone mastic asphalt. Materials & Design,
32(10):4844–4849.
Airey, G. D. (2003). Rheological properties of styrene butadiene styrene polymer modiﬁed
road bitumens. Fuel, 82(14):1709–1719.
Al-Hadidy, A. and Yi-qiu, T. (2009). Eﬀect of polyethylene on life of ﬂexible pavements.
Construction and Building Materials, 23(3):1456–1464.
Al-Hadidy, A. and Yi-Qiu, T. (2009). Mechanistic approach for polypropylene-modiﬁed
ﬂexible pavements. Materials & Design, 30(4):1133–1140.
Al-Humeidawi, B. H. (2017). Utilization of waste plastic and recycle concrete aggregate
in production of hot mix asphalt.
Al-Qadisiyah Journal for Engineering Sciences,
7(4):322–330.
Andrady, A. L. and Neal, M. A. (2009). Applications and societal beneﬁts of plastics.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1526):1977–
1984.
Apul, D. S., Gardner, K., Eighmy, T., Benoit, J., and Brannaka, L. (2002). A review of
water movement in the highway environment: Implications for recycled materials use.
Recycled Materials Resource Center, University of New Hampshire, Durham.
Araújo, J. P. C., Oliveira, J. R., and Silva, H. M. (2014). The importance of the use
phase on the lca of environmentally friendly solutions for asphalt road pavements.
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 32:97–110.
Attaelmanan, M., Feng, C. P., and Al-Hadidy, A. (2011). Laboratory evaluation of hma
with high density polyethylene as a modiﬁer. Construction and Building Materials,
25(5):2764–2770.
Awwad, M. T. and Shbeeb, L. (2007). The use of polyethylene in hot asphalt mixtures.
American Journal of Applied Sciences, 4(6):390–396.
74
==PAGE:77==
Becker, Y., Mendez, M. P., and Rodriguez, Y. (2001). Polymer modiﬁed asphalt. In
Vision tecnologica. Citeseer.
Birgisdóttir, H. (2005). Life cycle assessment model for road construction and use of
residues from waste incineration. PhD thesis, Institute of Environment & Resources,
Technical University of Denmark.
Björnsdóttir, G. S. (2016). Ársskýrsla 2016.
Blomqvist, G. and Johansson, E.-L. (1999). Airborne spreading and deposition of de-icing
salt—a case study. Science of the Total Environment, 235(1-3):161–168.
Bragason, S. (May 15, 2018). personal communication. Production manager. Malbiku-
narstöðin Hlaðbær Colas hf.
Butt, A. A., Mirzadeh, I., Toller, S., and Birgisson, B. (2014). Life cycle assessment
framework for asphalt pavements: methods to calculate and allocate energy of binder
and additives. International Journal of Pavement Engineering, 15(4):290–302.
Commission, E. (2010). European commission - joint research center - institute for envi-
ronment and sustainability: International reference life cycle data system (ilcd) hand-
book - general guide for life cycle assessment - detailed guidance.
Costa, L. M., Hugo, M., Silva, D., Oliveira, J. R., and Fernandes, S. R. (2013). Incorpora-
tion of waste plastic in asphalt binders to improve their performance in the pavement.
International journal of pavement research and technology, 6(4):457–464.
Energi, S. (2016). Elåret och verksamheten 2015.
Giavarini, C. (1994). Polymer-modiﬁed bitumen. In Developments in Petroleum Science,
volume 40, pages 381–400. Elsevier.
Hartmann, N. B. (2017). Microplastics and nanoplastics in the environment. sources,
biological eﬀects and interactions with other pollutants.
Hauschild, M. Z., Rosenbaum, R. K., and Olsen, S. I. (2017). Life Cycle Assessment:
Theory and Practice. Springer.
Hjarðar, B. (May 4, 2018). personal communication. Chief engineer. SORPA bs.
Jakobsen, L. G. (2015). Limitations and quality in plastic recycling.
Jóakimsson, B. H. (March 13, 2018). personal communication. Civil engineer. Vegagerðin.
Kalantar, Z. N., Karim, M. R., and Mahrez, A. (2012). A review of using waste and
virgin polymer in pavement. Construction and Building Materials, 33:55–62.
Kaley, K. B., Carlisle, J., Siegel, D., and Salinas, J. (2006). Health concerns and envi-
ronmental issues with pvc-containing building materials in green buildings. Integrated
Waste Management Board, California Environmental Protection Agency, USA, 11.
75
==PAGE:78==
Kaushal, S. S., Groﬀman, P. M., Likens, G. E., Belt, K. T., Stack, W. P., Kelly, V. R.,
Band, L. E., and Fisher, G. T. (2005). Increased salinization of fresh water in the
northeastern united states. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 102(38):13517–13520.
KONTUR (2018). Thermo road striper is designated for the liquid hot plastic applica-
tion onto clean and even cement concrete and asphalt concrete surfaces also with the
pressurized glass beads and anti-skid agents.
Liljenroth, U. (2014). Lca study - plastic waste from households. wsp environmental.
Magnusson, K., Eliasson, K., Fråne, A., Haikonen, K., Hultén, J., Olshammar, M., Stad-
mark, J., and Voisin, A. (2016). Swedish sources and pathways for microplastics to the
marine environment. A review of existing data. IVL, C, 183.
Marchand, J. (2015). Asphalt in ﬁgures. european asphalt pavement association.
McQuilkin, J. (2017). Plastic recycled in roads: feasibility study on the use of plastic
waste for road paving in iceland.
Mohammad, L. N., Negulescu, I. I., Wu, Z., Daranga, C., Daly, W., and Abadie, C.
(2003). Investigation of the use of recycled polymer modiﬁed asphalt binder in asphalt
concrete pavements (with discussion and closure). Journal of the Association of Asphalt
Paving Technologists, 72.
Nynas (2016). Annual report.
Ren, H. (2012). Plastic waste recycling and greenhouse gas reduction.
Sæmundsson, K., Gunnlaugsson, E., and Eiríksson, G. (1999). Íslenska steinabókin. Mál
og menning.
Salomon, D. (2006). Transportation research circular e-c102: Asphalt emulsion technol-
ogy. Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC, pages 1–24.
Sasol (2017). Sasobit - the versatile additive for asphalt mixes.
Shukla, R., Singh, V., and Bhanwala, R. (2003). Polymer modiﬁed bitumen for construc-
tion of heavy traﬃc density corridors. Indian Highways, 31(4).
Singh, B. and Goel, R. K. (1999). Rock mass classiﬁcation: a practical approach in civil
engineering, volume 46. Elsevier.
Vasudevan, R., Sekar, A. R. C., Sundarakannan, B., and Velkennedy, R. (2012).
A
technique to dispose waste plastics in an ecofriendly way–application in construction
of ﬂexible pavements. Construction and Building Materials, 28(1):311–320.
Vegagerðin (2006). Vegirnir okkar.
Vegagerðin (2017). Efnisrannsoknir og efniskrofur. leiðbeiningar við honnun, framleiðslu
og framkvæmd.
76
==PAGE:79==
Vegagerðin and Gatnamálastofa (2004). Handbók um umferðarmerki - rammareglur og
ýmsar útfærslur.
Villanueva, A. and Eder, P. (2014). End-of-waste criteria for waste plastic for conver-
sion. Technical report, JRC Technical Reports, European Union, Luxembourg, 2014.
http://dx. doi. org/10.2791/13033.
Wenzel, H., Hauschild, M. Z., and Alting, L. (2000). Environmental Assessment of Prod-
ucts: Volume 1: Methodology, tools and case studies in product development, volume 1.
Springer Science & Business Media.
Wilson, T. P. and Romine, A. R. (2001). Materials and procedures for repair of potholes
in asphalt-surfaced pavements–manual of practice. Technical report.
Wirtgen (2008). Job report cold milling - top job in motorway rehabilitation, wirtgen
milling machines on the a99.
Wünsch, J. R. (2000). Polystyrene: Synthesis, production and applications, volume 112.
iSmithers Rapra Publishing.
Wypych, G. (2016). Handbook of polymers. Elsevier.
Yildirim, Y. (2007). Polymer modiﬁed asphalt binders. Construction and Building Ma-
terials, 21(1):66–72.
Zoorob, S. and Suparma, L. (2000). Laboratory design and investigation of the prop-
erties of continuously graded asphaltic concrete containing recycled plastics aggregate
replacement (plastiphalt). Cement and Concrete Composites, 22(4):233–242.
Íslenskra Bifreiðaeigenda (FÍB), F. (2016). Vetrardekkjakönnun fÍb 2016/2017.
Þrastardóttir, H. (May 24, 2018). email communication. Environmental and Quality
Manager. Malbikunarstöðin Hlaðbær Colas hf.
Þórðarson, S. (March 23, 2018). email communication. Specialist, service department.
Vegagerðin.
77
==PAGE:80==
Appendix A
Theory appendix
A.1
Road Materials
Choice of material
Materials for road construction is chosen to fulﬁll quality standards and in Iceland those
standards are the European technical guide EN13043. The standard includes demands on
aggregate’s mechanical characteristics such as strength and abrasion qualities. Addition-
ally, the buyer/designer of the road will enforce standards on the physical characteristics
of the road material such as aggregate size, shape and colour and the viscous properties
of bitumen. The diﬀerent quality of roads is depended on the designer’s demands and
also to the function of the road (high- or low traﬃc load).
The sub-base materials have less requirements to fulﬁll and therefore it is most common
that local materials are chosen. As the layers are closer to the traﬃc the materials undergo
more rigorous testing and the ﬁnal wearing course will fulﬁll the highest of standards.
Because of these standards it is common that the material used in the wearing course is
transported longer distances to the building sites.
Aggregate gradation is one of the most common test on road aggregate which indicates
the percentages of rock sizes in an aggregate mixture. The aggregate mixtures are named
by the largest sized rocks such as the most common 5-8mm, 8-11mm and 16mm mixtures.
In general the larger size mixture give a better resistance to spiked tires.
Aggregate
Rock material has physical- and mechanical characteristics. Physical characteristics in-
clude; mineral and chemical composition, colour, texture, grain size and shapes and
lastly porosity. The mechanical characteristics include; strength-UCS, point load, Brazil-
ian, hardness-schmidt hammer, Mohr’s scale, brittle behaviour, violent failure, fracture
mechanics, durability, plasticity and swelling potential (Singh and Goel (1999)).
Physical Characteristics
In Iceland, 90% of rock is solidiﬁed lava (mostly basalt) and the other 10% is weathered
lava that has, under pressure and chemical reactions, reformed as rock. Basalt is an
78
==PAGE:81==
extrusive rock, contains small crystals, is grey to black in colour, is rather alkaline and
by deﬁnition contains less than 52% silicon dioxide (Sæmundsson et al. (1999)).
The crystallinity of rocks is determined by the elements of which it is composed of and
the temperature and pressure at the time of formation. The more uniform the crystilline
structure is the more resistant the rock is to abrasion. The crystallinity also has an eﬀect
on the shapes of the mineral since it has an eﬀect on how the material breaks.
Permeability is the seepage of ﬂuids or gases through interconnecting voids of porous
material. The resistance to the ﬂow depends on the geometry of the voids, type of rock
and surface tension of water. Permeability is therefore a function of these parameters
with the consideration of temperature (Singh and Goel (1999)).
Basalt has a grey to dark grey colour which causes the roads made with basalt to be
dark. The colour of the roads are a factor of road safety regulations (which has given rise
to the importation of lightly coloured Norwegian rock to Iceland for road construction
(Elín Ásgerisdóttir, personal communication, February 9, 2018)).
Mechanical Characteristics
Basalt is considered to be medium strong to extremely strong in the classiﬁcation of rock
material based on unconﬁned uniaxal compressive strength (strength-UCS). This means
that the rock materials have the strength of 25 MPa or higher of a point load.
There are multiple test described in "Efnisrannsóknir og efniskröfur" published by Veg-
agerðin (Vegagerðin (2017)). The mechanical characteristics of aggregate are tested by
performing the following tests; grain distribution, moisture, humus, compression strength
and rock quality (strength and resistance to weathering) and sometimes LA testing.The
performance requirements of the aggregate are dependent on the assumed volume of traf-
ﬁc (for additional information see Vegagerðin (2017)).
Bitumen
Crude oil is a natural occurring resource extracted form the ground and distilled. From
the distillation products such as fuel oils (e.g. gasoline and diesel) and bitumen are de-
rived. The percentage weight of the products is dependent on the origin of the crude
oil e.g. the Venezuela oil is found to be more enriched bitumen than the North Sea oil.
Bitumen, also called heavy fuel oil (HFO) is a mixture of waste streams, unwanted dis-
tillates and residual oil and therefore it is a mixture of impure organic materials (Butt
et al. (2014)).
Bitumen is a binder in asphalt and is typically about 5-6% by weight of the wearing
course of a road (Magnusson et al. (2016)). Bitumen plays a large role in determining
the road performance and can inﬂuence characteristics such as waterprooﬁng, insulation,
noise and bridge decking (Giavarini (1994) and Kalantar et al. (2012)). Bitumen is im-
ported to Iceland. The company Nynas in Sweden sells Iceland the bitumen where the
bitumen has been cleaned and reﬁned even further than in the oil mining facilities. Nynas
traditionally uses Venuzuela oil based bitumen although it could be a mixture of origins
such as North Sea, Canada, Australia or Columbia (Nynas (2016)).
There are two main types of densities of bitumen used in Iceland, namely soft and hard
bitumen. The stiﬀness of the bitumen is determined by a needle test and is named by the
79
==PAGE:82==
distance the needle will get through the material in a certain amount of time at 25◦C.
Soft bitumen is therefore named 160/220 and hard bitumen 70/100. Soft bitumen is more
commonly used in Iceland because the roads can be more easily paved in cooler climate.
Hard bitumen is more commonly used in warmer climate since it has generally a higher
melting temperature (Gísli Eymarsson, personal communication, February 12, 2018).
To ensure the quality of bitumen used it needs to be tested meet the demands of the
Icelandic standards which includes measuring: injection depth, softening temperature,
ignition temperature, solubility, dynamic viscosity, kinematic viscosity and fraas break-
point (Vegagerðin (2017)).
Apart from this there can be several additives in bitumen such as softeners, dilutes or
water. Some improvements in asphalt properties have been gained by bitumen modiﬁca-
tions such as air blowing, ﬂuxing agents or diluted oils or by any other emulsifying agent
(Gísli Eymarsson, personal communication, February 12, 2018).
Asphalt specimen quality testing
Type testing (TT) should be done in the beginning and at a ﬁve year interval and the
test should be performed by the standards of ÍST EN 12697-22, -16 and -12.
Wheel track formation is tested using a continuously rolling wheel over a asphalt layer.
In a Prall test asphalt specimens are ﬁrstly submerged in water and then put into frames
with 40 stainless steel ball bearings and pressed. Marshall test includes using a Marshall
hammer to test void and compression characteristics of an asphalt sample. Generally, the
Marshall test also tests the adhesion between aggregate and binder and a good adhesion
reduces the likelihood of creeping. Low compression (2 mm) results in a crisp wearing
course and could increase likelihood of cracking. High compression (≥4.5 mm) on the
other hand can increase creeping (Vegagerðin (2017)). According to ÍST EN 13108-1 the
lowest allowable air void content when performing a Marshall test is 1.0% for asphalt
concrete AC and 1.5% for SMA. The highest allowable limit is similarly 3% for AC and
3.5% for SMA.
A.2
Plastic
Plastics are a wide range of synthetic and semi-synthetic organic compounds of mouldable
polymers. The polymers are formed from chains of carbon atoms of high molecular mass.
Plastics are traditionally made from petrochemicals but bioplastics have been produced
from polyactic acid or cellulosics. Approximately one third of all plastic produced is used
for packaging, another one third is used for the building sector and one third used for
other applications such as cars, toys and furniture (Andrady and Neal (2009)).
Common Types of Plastic
Plastic is classiﬁed by; (i) Chemical structure, (ii) Chemical process, (iii) Physical prop-
erties or (iv) Product design characteristics. As all virgin plastics becomes waste they
are all of concern when assessing their application feasibility to asphalt. However there
will be a focus on the most commonly used plastics and the most toxic additives used in
80
==PAGE:83==
plastic.
Thermoplastics and thermosets are subclasses of plastics that are classiﬁed by their prod-
uct design characteristics. Thermosets can only be shaped once but thermoplastics of can
be moulded multiple times and do not undergo chemical changes when heated. Thermoset
plastics are made of liquid plastic whereas thermoplastic is typically made from 2-5mm
plastic pellets. The pellets used are similar to powder (macro and microplastics) which
tend to washed away during production which end up in the environment (Magnusson
et al. (2016)).
Polyethylene (PE)
Polyethylene is a thermoplastic and is the most common plastic in the world. The chem-
ical behavior of PE is similar to paraﬃn (kerosene) which can be found in candles and
sometimes used as jet fuel or as additive in road construction. PE has a simple structure,
is semi-crystalline, good chemical resistance and good fatigue and wear resistance (Awwad
and Shbeeb (2007)). There are several subcategories of PE but the most common ones
are high- and low density polyethylene (HDPE and LDPE).
HDPE - e.g. plastic bottles and piping
LDPE - e.g. plastic ﬁlm, grocery bags and food containers (Hartmann (2017)).
Polypropylene (PP)
Polypropylene is also a thermoplastic and the second most common plastic. It can form
a degree of crystallinity and is more resistant to creep than PE. PP is resistant to fatigue
and is applied where those characteristics are needed. Therefore, PP is used in for exam-
ple in chairs, labratory items, plastic yarns.
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)
Polyvinyl Chloride is also a thermoplastic and the third most common plastic. It is either
rigid or ﬂexible. PVC is made ﬂexible with the addition of plasticizers and it is not un-
common for PVC to contain other additives such as heat stabilizers. PVC plastic is used
in pipes, electrical cables, membership cards etc (Kaley et al. (2006) and Wypych (2016)).
Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET)
PET is the fourth most common plastic, also known as polyester and is mostly produced
for synthetic ﬁbers used in textiles but it is also used for bottles (Hartmann (2017)).
Polystyrene (PS)
PS is one of the most widely used plastics and is used for food containers (e.g. take away
ice cream), plastic cutlery and CD holsters. Polystyrene food containers are better known
as Styrofoam and does not biodegradable and is resistant to photolysis and therefore it
has been banned in several countries and some states in the US (Wünsch (2000)).
Styrene-Butadiene-Styrene (SBS)
Although SBS is not a particularly common plastic it is the most common polymer used
for modiﬁed bitumen. The reason for this is that SBS combines elastic and thermoplastic
properties however the mixing of SBS and bitumen is considered complex (Airey (2003)).
81
==PAGE:84==
There is a plethora of other types of plastic, many of which are speciﬁcally designed
for airplanes or cars to be lightweight and strong and some of which have insulating or
conducting properties for the electrical and building sectors.
Additives in Plastic
Plastic are either "pure" or have an addition of oxygen, nitrogen and/or sulfur. Pure
plastic generally has low toxicity but additives such as phthalates can leach out of the
plastic and have toxic eﬀects. Additives are used to acquire certain product character-
istics. Plastic additives can be stabilizers, ﬁllers, pigments, ﬂame retardants, fragrances,
plasticizers etc. Stabilizers suppress degradation, ﬁllers reduces the cost of a product or
improves its performance and plasticizers are used to decrease the rigidity of plastics to
mention a few. Some of these additives are toxic e.g. adipates, phthalates and bisphenol
A. Plastics that include any of these toxic chemicals may be non-toxic however when they
are heated some of the polymers in the plastic can decompose to monomers and the toxic
chemicals can be released (Hartmann (2017)).
Degradation of Plastic
The degredation time of plastic can be months up to centuries dependent on the type
of plastic. Molecular degradation of plastics can be caused by photo oxidation, thermal
oxidation, biodegradation, other break-down of covalent bonds or hydrolysis. Degrada-
tion of plastic can also take place via chemical reactions where structural changes of the
polymers lead to changes in the physical properties of the plastic. The physical abrasion
leads to break down of plastics which results in nano-, micro- or macroplastics which,
more often than not, lead to the ocean (Hartmann (2017)).
Recycled polymers
Recycling plastic can be problematic and when waste is collected commingled it is consid-
ered impossible to sort it into separate polymer streams (especially in an economical sense
when comparing eﬀorts to outcomes). However, the migration and chemical transforma-
tion of plastic additives during plastic’s service life results in decreased quality compared
to virgin plastics and therefore recycled plastic covers only a minor segment of the market
demand (Jakobsen (2015)).
The recycling problems will occur when the sample is heterogeneous but also when it
is homogeneous. When plastic is recycled even small polymeric impurities can radically
change the properties of the recyclate. Most polymers are immiscible and their incom-
patibility is caused by the diﬀerent polarity and melting points. When polymers are cross
contaminated physical properties decline such as melt ﬂow and impact strength and an
heterogeneous mix can lead to weak chains in the polymer matrix (Jakobsen (2015)).
82
==PAGE:85==
Polymer modiﬁed bitumen (PMB)
A.3
Life Cycle of Roads
Design Stage
The number of sub-layers, their thickness and material are deﬁned in this stage as well as
the width of the road and its road shoulders. These decisions are reﬂected in the length
of the construction, lifetime of the road and its demolition. Moreover the strengthening
parameters, water penetration and cost of the roads are aﬀected. When the road has
been designed the construction company will preform laboratory test to ensure that their
material use and recipe fulﬁlls the requirements of the buyer/customer (Gísli Eymarsson,
personal communication, February 12, 2018). All test performed follow the ISO stan-
dards on laboratory experiments (Elín Ásgerisdóttir, personal communication, February
9, 2018).
Material and Manufacturing Stages
The activities related to the establishment of a road in a terrain are included in this stage
and can be divided into sub-stages. The sub-stages are: (i) Excavation and preparation of
road materials, (ii) Earthwork on terrain, (iii) Construction of pavement, (iv) Additional
work.
(i) Excavation and preparation of road materials
Excavation of rocks diﬀer from the purpose of the rock; Digging, ripping and blasting.
The method chosen is dependent on the rock mass classiﬁcation (Singh and Goel (1999)).
When the gravel has been excavated it is moved with trucks to the asphalt factory. In
Iceland, bitumen is imported from Gothenburg in Sweden. Bitumen is shipped to Iceland
where it is transported to the asphalt factory and kept in tanks. The asphalt factories mix
together aggregate and bitumen by demand each time according to a speciﬁc recipe that
meets the demand of the buyer (see ﬁgure A.1). Aggregates are chosen by their properties
and size according to the desired type of road (Gísli Eymarsson, personal communication,
February 12, 2018).
The aggregate is heated up to 160-180◦C (for hot mix asphalt) where the emissions go
through several steps of ﬂue gas cleaning and the particulate matter is collected in silos
and used later in the mixture. When the aggregates have been heated they are mixed
with bitumen and ﬁller material. The ﬁller material is ﬁne particulate matter collected
from the aggregates but sometimes concrete is imported and used. When the road mix-
ture is ready it is loaded onto trucks that transport the material to the building site.
There the material is spread onto the desired location and compressed. The compression
has to take place before the mixture has cooled and if the materials need to be traveled
long distances some additives are added to the asphalt mixture for the compression to
take place under low temperatures. The additives are e.g. the product sasobit which is
a synthetic hard wax (Gísli Eymarsson, personal communication, February 12, 2018 and
Sasol (2017)).
83
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.1 Preparation and mixing processes of aggregates and bitumen for road con-
struction in Iceland
84
==PAGE:87==
(ii)Earthwork and terrain
When laying the ground for the road some earthwork is needed in diﬀerent quantities
according to the location and gradient of the landscape. Diﬀerent trucks such as bulldoz-
ers, excavators and loaders are used in the preparation of the area.
(iii)Construction of pavement
When the earthwork is ﬁnished the sub-base can be lain.
The sub-base needs to be
pressed and the upper layer of the sub-base needs to be tight in order for it to reach the
appropriate carrying capacity and to minimize water penetration. The wedge ramps of
the sub-base can be steeper than for other layers. The base course and wearing course
are also compressed with a triple drum static (or other similar truck) after the asphalt
material has been transported on site and the asphalt paver has lain it on the desired
location. Sporadically there will be a ﬁlter layer between the diﬀerent layers to prevent
entwinement. However, if the aggregate gradation of the adjacent layers are reasonable
this is not necessary.
(iv)Additional work
When the road has been paved a construction of an embankment is conducted including
a drainage and water collection system. Thereafter, the road area is ﬁnalized with the
addition of various road equipment such as road lighting, signs, safety- and noise can-
celling fences etc.
The construction of roads in Iceland are conducted in the summertime form May to
September. However it is heavily dependent on weather where roads will not be con-
structed on rainy days.
During the winter months bitumen is stored in large tanks,
hard and soft bitumen are kept in separate tanks and at about 18◦C (Elín Ásgerisdóttir,
personal communication, February 9, 2018).
Use Stage
The service life of a road will include the abrasion and wear of the road. Water in roads
increases the maintenance of roads in countries like Iceland where the climate is con-
stantly changing between frost and defrost. As the water percolates trough the layers,
freezes and expands it forms potholes that need to be maintained. The maintenance
includes crack ﬁlling and sealing. There are however other types of asphalt defects such
as cracking, rutting and creeping that needs to be maintained. The most typical mainte-
nance includes reshaping, sealing, stabilizing, pot hole patching and surface correcting.
During the winter in Iceland there is considerable service of shovelling and clearing snow
oﬀthe streets which scrapes and can damage the road.
There is also a considerable
amount of gravel and salt used to prevent skidding. The amount of maintenance and
service is mostly dependent on the location of the road, use and weather conditions.
The distribution of salt for example is dependent on the traﬃc load and icing and is
of concern because some research has shown that the salt can contaminate groundwater
(Kaushal et al. (2005)). The salt (NaCl) is distributed onto the roads with a truck several
times each winter and from there it is dissolved into the ice and runs oﬀthe roads to
the drainage on the side of the roads. The salt will partly be blown away, dissolve into
85
==PAGE:88==
moisture or be shoveled to the side of the road. Approximately 50-80% of the salt will
end up in the drainage or there close by. The rest (20-50%) can be carried as far as
40 m away from the road but 90% is assumed to be within the 20 m range (Blomqvist
and Johansson (1999)). Salt will also increase pothole formation in the road as the salt
crystals expand within small voids in the pavement (Vasudevan et al. (2012)).
Another way users prevent skidding is to use spiked tires which are currently (year 2018)
allowed in Iceland from 1st of November to the 14th of April and are commonly used
(Íslenskra Bifreiðaeigenda (FÍB) (2016)). The spiked tires increase the erosion of the road
and create voids in the wearing course.
Recycling Stage
When a road needs to be demolished an asphalt miller is used which removes the wearing
course and places it in a dumping truck. The asphalt is recycled in some cases however it
is common in Iceland not to use more than about 5-10% recycled asphalt in the wearing
course. The reason for this can be to assure quality of the new road but some older con-
structions can also contain hazardous chemicals. If reclaimed asphalt pavement (RAP)
is added to a wearing course there are generally some steps taken to ensure the quality
of the recycled asphalt such as burning and ﬁltering (ﬁnding the source of the RAP and
its aggregate gradient). The remaining 90-95% is collected and used in sub layers of the
road (Birkir Hrafn Jóakimsson, personal communication, March 13, 2018).
86
==PAGE:89==
Appendix B
LCA appendix
B.1
Life Cycle Impact Assessment Method and Nor-
malisation Factors
The life cycle impact assessment method used is ILCD recommended with normalisation
factors form the porsuit project. The impact categories, their units and normalisation
factors of the ILCD recommended LCA method (Commission (2010))can be seen in table
B.1.
87
==PAGE:90==
Table B.1 Normalisation factors and impact categories of the ILCD - 2013 Prosuite
Global NR
ILCD Impact Category
Unit
PROSUITE Global
(2010 or 2000)
Climate change
kg CO2eq./PE/year
8.10E+03
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11 eq. /PE/year
4.14E-02
Human toxicity, cancer ef-
fects
CTUh/PE/year
5.42E-05
Human toxicity, non-cancer
eﬀects
CTUh/PE/year
1.10E-03
Particulate matter/ Respi-
ratory inorganics
kg PM2.5 eq. /PE/year
2.76E+00
Ionizing radiation, human
health
kBq
U235eq.
(to
air)
/PE/year
1.33E+03
Photochemical
ozone
for-
mation, human health
kg NMVOC eq. /PE/year
5.67E+01
Acidiﬁcation
mol H+ eq. /PE/year
4.96E+01
Eutrophication terrestrial
mol N eq. /PE/year
1.15E+02
Eutrophication freshwater
kg P eq. /PE/year
6.20E-01
Eutrophication marine
kg N eq. /PE/year
9.38E+00
Land use
kg C deﬁcit/PE/year
2.36E+05
Ecotoxicity freshwater
CTUe/PE/year
6.65E+02
Resource depletion water
m3water eq. /PE/year
2.97E+01
Resource
depletion,
min-
eral, fossils and renewables
kg Sb eq. /PE/year
3.13E-01
Resources, depletion of abi-
otic resources, fossil
MJ/PE/year
6.24E+04
Resources, depletion of abi-
otic resources (reserve base)
kg Sb eq. /PE/year
0.0343
88
==PAGE:91==
B.2
Bill of Materials
Table B.2 Bill of material indicating the materials needed for the two alternative roads
Properties
Road type
Units
Traditional
Plastic waste additives
Wearing course - Depth
0.045
0.045
m
Width
6
6
m
Length
1000
1000
m
Aggregate
16-11
16-11
mm
238.7
237.5
m^3
Basalt density
2520
2520
kg/m^3
601493
598415
kg
601.5
598.4
tonnes
Bitumen
31.7
28.3
m^3
Density of bitumen
1000
1000
kg/m^3
31657.5
28346
kg
32
28
tonnes
Plastic
-
2.74
m^3
Density of plastic
-
920
kg/m^3
-
2520
kg
Total volume of wearing course
270
270
m^3
Total bulk density
2345
2333
kg/m^3
Total weight of wearing course
633.2
629.9
tonnes
89
==PAGE:92==
B.3
List of Assumptions
Table B.3 List of assumptions made for the modelling of the LCA
Assumptions
Road type
Traditional
Plastic waste additives
The lifetime of the road in scenario 2 will improved
by 21.5% compared to scenario 1
x
Aggregate is mined in the same fashion as is prac-
ticed in Europe
x
x
8% Plastic waste additives used by the weight of
bitumen
x
0.5% weight of bitumen saved by the addition of
plastic waste in roads
x
Bitumen goes through the same process as is
recorded as the average global production
x
x
Bitumen assumed to be from Venezuela yet prob-
ably a mixture from S Korea, Iran and Venezuela
x
x
Bitumen production eﬃciencies are 100%
x
x
Energy of storing and keeping bitumen at 18◦C is
neglected
x
x
Upstream impacts of the plastic waste is neglected
x
x
Quality improvements of road assumed from liter-
ature values
x
Quality improvements of road only used to expand
lifetime, not lower maintenance
x
Plastic waste mixture assumed to be the same as
shown in table 3.5
x
x
Plastic waste Sweden, 70% recycled and 30% in-
cinerated
x
Processes and electricity used for the recycling of
plastic waste in Sweden assumed to be as reported
by Ren (2012)
x
Loss of material during recycling is 2%
x
Substitution of plastic is on the range of 30-80%
virgin plastic
x
Incineration institution assumed to be of the same
quality as a danish incineration plant
x
Incineration energy substitutes 83% heat and 17%
electricity of nuclear power
x
The mixing of asphalt will be at optimum condi-
tions and lead to ideal quality
x
x
90
==PAGE:93==
Table B.4 List of assumptions made for the modelling of the LCA
Assumptions
Road type
Traditional
Plastic waste additives
Loss of asphalt material during production is ne-
glected
x
x
Upstream impact of the machinery used in the
manufacturing stage is neglected
x
x
Maintenance of asphalt production machinery ne-
glected
x
x
Transportation of asphalt from production to de-
sired location is neglected
x
x
Transportation of maintenance to desired location
is neglected
x
x
Eﬀects of road paint and salt on the environment
neglected
x
x
Eﬀects of microplastics on the environment was
neglected
x
Eﬀects of plastic additives leaching into the envi-
ronment is neglected
x
Upstream impacts of road paint and material for
pothole ﬁlling neglected
x
x
Emissions due to traﬃc on road is neglected
x
x
Demolition stage is identical to that of the German
cold mill used by Wirtgen (2008)
x
x
Energy used for the re-use of the demolished road
is neglected
x
x
Emissions for machinery is assumed to follow Eu-
ropean standards
x
x
Transportation of machinery to desired working lo-
cation neglected
x
x
Transportation between countries via ship
x
x
Other transportation than between countries via
trucks
x
x
B.4
Unit Process and LCI Results
91
==PAGE:94==
Table B.5 Inventory and data sources for foreground processes for the two road alternatives
Parameter
Road type
Unit
Note
Source
Traditional Plastic
waste
additives
Materials
Bitumen
3.17E+04
2.83E+04
kg
Wearing course 270 m^3 which is
5% bitumen
Calculated
Aggregate
6.01E+05
5.98E+05
kg
Wearing course 270 m^3 which is
95% aggregate
Calculated
Plastic waste
-
2.52E+03
kg
Plastic waste is 8% of weight of
bitumen
Calculated from data from litera-
ture
Manufacturing
Electricity for produc-
tion of bitumen
9.12E+03
8.16E+03
MJ
Electricity, medium voltage 0.08
kWh/kg * kg bitumen * 3.6 = MJ
Generic LCI database process
Electricity for produc-
tion aggregate
1.62E+04
1.61E+04
MJ
(diesel
+
electricity
+
heat)*aggregate = (0.0147MJ +
0.00272kWh*3.6 + 0.00244)*kg
Generic LCI database process
Electricity for produc-
tion of plastic recy-
cling
2.14E+04
-
MJ
Includes all steps of recycling for
70% of 2520 kg plastic waste.
Swedish energy system
Calculated from values reported
by Ren, 2012
Electricity for inciner-
ation of plastic
-2.54E+03
-
MJ
Heat and energy substitution of
incineration of MSW for 30% of
2520 kg plastic waste.
Swedish
energy system
Calculated from values reported
by
Renova
incineration
plant;
SE - https://www.renova.se/in-
english/about-us/
Electricity for produc-
tion of asphalt
2.05E+05
2.04E+05
MJ
Measured by Hlaðbær Colas
Measured at speciﬁc process site
Oil burnt for produc-
tion of asphalt
1.98E+05
1.97E+05
MJ
Measured by Hlaðbær Colas
Measured at speciﬁc process site
Oil burnt for road con-
struction
9.95E+04
9.90E+04
MJ
Calculated by Hlaðbær Colas. In-
cludes paving and transporting
people, machinery and material
to a location 52km away.
Measured average of a construc-
tion site
93
==PAGE:95==
Table B.6 Inventory and data sources for foreground processes for the two road alternatives (continued)
Parameter
Road type
Unit
Note
Source
Traditional
Plastic
waste
additives
Use
Oil
burnt
for
road
painting
2.22E+00
2.22E+00
L
Road painting is done 1 per year
with speed of 12 km/hour burn-
ing 3.8 l/h for 7 years
Assumed
Oil burnt for pothole
ﬁlling
7.35E+01
7.35E+01
L
Approximately 1 per year there
will be 3 holes/km burning 3.5
l/hole for 7 years
Assumed
Oil burnt salting roads
2.10E+02
2.10E+02
L
Salt
is
distributed
85-100
times/year
burning
0.3
l/km
for 7 years
Skuli Thordarson, Dr.ing.
Spe-
cialist, service department at Ve-
gagerðin
Oil burnt sweeping
4.20E+00
4.20E+00
L
Sweeping 2 per year burning 0.3
l/km for 7 years
Skuli Thordarson, Dr.ing.
Spe-
cialist, service department at Ve-
gagerðin
Oil burnt rutting snow
4.90E+02
4.90E+02
L
Rutting is done 85-100 times/year
burning 0.4-1 l/km for 7 years
Skuli Thordarson, Dr.ing.
Spe-
cialist, service department at Ve-
gagerðin
Disposal
Oil burnt demolishing
1km road
2.43E+02
2.43E+02
L
Cold asphalt miller burns 0.9
l/m^3 and wearing course is 270
m^3,
dumping truck uses 0.3
l/km
Calculated from values reported
by
Wirtgen
milling
company,
2008
94
==PAGE:96==
Table B.7 Inventory and data sources for foreground processes for the two road alternatives (continued)
Parameter
Road type
Unit
Note
Source
Traditional
Plastic
waste
additives
Transportation
Aggregate from mine
to asphalt production
30
30
km
Lambafell
Mosfellsbær
to
Hlaðbær Colas, 30 km
Assumed
Bitumen from produc-
tion to asphalt pro-
duction
11100
11100
km
Venezuela to Sweden, 9200 km.
Sweden to Iceland, 1900 km
Assumed
Bitumen from port to
asphalt production
20
20
km
From
Reykjavík
harbour
to
Hlaðbær Colas, 20 km
Assumed
Plastic
waste
from
Gufunes
to
Gothen-
burg, SE
2300
-
km
Gufunes to Gothenburg, 2300 km
Assumed
Plastic
waste
from
Gothenburg,
SE
to
recycling in Bredaryd,
SE
150
-
km
Gothenburg to recycling, 150 km
Assumed
Plastic
waste
from
Gothenburg, SE to in-
cineration in Sävenäs
in Gothenburg, SE
10
-
km
Gothenburg to incineration, 10
km
Assumed
Plastic waste from re-
cycling
Bredaryd
to
Sävenäs, SE
140
-
km
Recycling to incineration, 140 km
Assumed
Plastic
waste
from
Gufunes
to
asphalt
production
-
20
km
Gufunes to Hlaðbær Colas, 20 km
Assumed
Recovered asphalt to
storage
52
52
km
52 km from road location to
Hlaðbær Colas
Assumed
96
==PAGE:97==
B.5
Sensitivity Ratios and Coeﬃcients
For sensitivity ratios (SR) and coeﬃcients (SC) for scenario 1 see tables B.8 and B.9 and
scenario 2 see tables B.10 and B.11.
97
==PAGE:98==
Table B.8 Calculated sensitivity ratios and coeﬃcients of each impact category for the amount of bitumen and aggregate as well as
the eﬃciency of bitumen and aggregate extraction for scenario 1. All SRs ≥0.3 are coloured yellow indicating a medium sensitivity
and SRs ≥0.5 are coloured red indicating a large sensitivity
BitAmount
AggrAmount
BitEﬀ
AggrEﬀ
Impact category
SR
SC
SR
SC
SR
SC
SR
SC
Climate change
2.61E-01
5.88E-01
7.57E-01
8.98E-02
1.68E-01
1.20E+04
3.48E-02
2.48E+03
Ozone depletion
9.97E-01
7.23E-07
1.14E-02
4.36E-10
9.69E-01
2.22E-02
9.72E-03
2.23E-04
Human toxicity, ce
5.87E-01
5.06E-09
4.78E-01
2.17E-10
5.06E-01
1.38E-04
1.72E-01
4.71E-05
Human toxicity, nce
2.43E-01
1.05E-07
7.54E-01
1.71E-08
1.94E-01
2.66E-03
1.79E-02
2.45E-04
Particulate matter
5.30E-01
5.45E-04
4.96E-01
2.69E-05
3.61E-01
1.18E+01
9.97E-02
3.25E+00
Ionising radiation, hh
9.89E-01
2.32E-01
2.98E-02
3.69E-04
9.53E-01
7.09E+03
1.95E-02
1.45E+02
Photochemical
ozone
formation
3.58E-01
7.61E-03
6.52E-01
7.29E-04
2.36E-01
1.59E+02
2.62E-02
1.76E+01
Terrestrial
acidiﬁca-
tion
4.77E-01
9.66E-03
5.32E-01
5.67E-04
2.89E-01
1.85E+02
3.56E-02
2.29E+01
Eutrophication
Ter-
restrial
2.49E-01
1.74E-02
7.55E-01
2.78E-03
1.10E-01
2.43E+02
2.88E-02
6.38E+01
Eutrophication Fresh-
water
6.29E-01
1.06E-05
4.26E-01
3.76E-07
4.85E-01
2.58E-01
3.22E-01
1.71E-01
Eutrophication
Ma-
rine
2.48E-01
1.55E-03
7.56E-01
2.48E-04
1.08E-01
2.14E+01
2.79E-02
5.51E+00
Ecotoxicity freshwater
6.80E-01
4.69E-01
3.60E-01
1.31E-02
6.30E-01
1.37E+04
4.49E-02
9.80E+02
Depletion
of
abiotic
resources fossil
7.40E-01
5.56E+01
2.93E-01
1.16E+00
7.01E-01
1.67E+06
1.55E-02
3.68E+04
Depletion
of
abiotic
resources elements
3.20E-01
1.01E-05
6.93E-01
1.16E-06
2.99E-01
3.00E-01
6.45E-01
6.48E-01
98
==PAGE:99==
Table B.9 Calculated sensitivity ratios and coeﬃcients of each impact category for the amount and substitution of plastic, fuel
consumption of construction and use stage and the transportation distance of bitumen for scenario 1. All SRs ≥0.3 are coloured
yellow indicating a medium sensitivity
PlastAmount
PlastSub
ConstrDiesel
UseDiesel
BitTrans
Impact category
SR
SC
SR
SC
SR
SC
SR
SC
SR
SC
Climate change
-1.78E-02
-5.04E-01
-2.56E-02
1.66E+03
3.32E-01
2.30E+06
3.09E-01
2.29E+06
5.55E-02
3.57E+02
Ozone depletion
-8.89E-03
-8.09E-08
-5.30E-04
1.11E-05
3.72E-04
8.30E-04
3.47E-04
8.27E-04
2.83E-02
5.84E-05
Human toxicity, ce
-5.61E-02
-6.07E-09
-5.94E-02
1.47E-05
1.15E-01
3.06E-03
1.08E-01
3.06E-03
6.70E-02
1.65E-06
Human toxicity, nce
2.75E-03
1.49E-08
-2.90E-03
3.61E-05
3.42E-01
4.55E-01
3.19E-01
4.53E-01
1.06E-02
1.30E-05
Particulate matter
-2.60E-02
-3.36E-04
-2.96E-02
8.76E-01
1.98E-01
6.27E+02
1.85E-01
6.25E+02
1.48E-01
4.34E-01
Ionising radiation, hh
-1.88E-02
-5.55E-02
-4.70E-04
3.17E+00
4.52E-03
3.27E+03
4.22E-03
3.26E+03
3.53E-02
2.36E+01
Photochemical
ozone
formation
-1.00E-02
-2.67E-03
-1.14E-02
6.94E+00
3.22E-01
2.11E+04
3.01E-01
2.10E+04
8.93E-02
5.41E+00
Terrestrial
acidiﬁca-
tion
-9.15E-03
-2.33E-03
-1.19E-02
6.92E+00
2.53E-01
1.58E+04
2.36E-01
1.57E+04
1.62E-01
9.35E+00
Eutrophication
Ter-
restrial
-3.99E-03
-3.50E-03
-6.15E-03
1.24E+01
3.72E-01
8.02E+04
3.47E-01
7.99E+04
1.02E-01
2.03E+01
Eutrophication Fresh-
water
-5.50E-02
-1.16E-05
-7.58E-02
3.66E-02
3.81E-02
1.97E+00
3.56E-02
1.96E+00
1.39E-01
6.63E-03
Eutrophication
Ma-
rine
-4.49E-03
-3.51E-04
-6.29E-03
1.13E+00
3.74E-01
7.19E+03
3.49E-01
7.16E+03
1.02E-01
1.81E+00
Ecotoxicity freshwater
-3.96E-02
-3.43E-01
-4.26E-02
8.45E+02
1.30E-01
2.77E+05
1.22E-01
2.76E+05
3.36E-02
6.60E+01
Depletion
of
abiotic
resources fossil
-3.34E-02
-3.15E+01
-2.49E-02
5.37E+04
1.34E-01
3.09E+07
1.25E-01
3.08E+07
2.51E-02
5.38E+03
Depletion
of
abiotic
resources elements
-1.30E-02
-5.17E-06
-1.24E-02
1.13E-02
1.80E-02
1.76E+00
1.68E-02
1.75E+00
1.79E-02
1.62E-03
99
==PAGE:100==
Table B.10 Calculated sensitivity ratios and coeﬃcients of each impact category for the amount of bitumen and aggregate as well
as the eﬃciency of bitumen and aggregate extraction and lifetime improvement for the plastic enriched road for scenario 2. All SRs
≥0.3 are coloured yellow indicating a medium sensitivity and SRs ≥0.5 are coloured red indicating a large sensitivity
BitAmount
AggrAmount
BitEﬀ
AggrEﬀ
LifeT
Impact category
SR
SC
SR
SC
SR
SC
SR
SC
SR
SC
Climate change
2.35E-01
4.61E-01
7.60E-01
7.06E-02
1.51E-01
8.42E+03
3.49E-02
1.94E+03
9.95E-01
7.04E+04
Ozone depletion
9.87E-01
5.68E-07
1.26E-02
3.43E-10
9.59E-01
1.56E-02
1.07E-02
1.74E-04
1.00E+00
2.07E-02
Human toxicity, ce
5.23E-01
3.96E-09
4.73E-01
1.70E-10
4.51E-01
9.68E-05
1.69E-01
3.62E-05
9.96E-01
2.72E-04
Human toxicity, nce
2.24E-01
8.25E-08
7.72E-01
1.35E-08
1.79E-01
1.87E-03
1.83E-02
1.91E-04
9.96E-01
1.32E-02
Particulate matter
4.88E-01
4.28E-04
5.09E-01
2.11E-05
3.33E-01
8.27E+00
1.02E-01
2.54E+00
9.97E-01
3.15E+01
Ionising radiation, hh
9.67E-01
1.83E-01
3.24E-02
2.90E-04
9.32E-01
4.99E+03
2.12E-02
1.14E+02
1.00E+00
6.81E+03
Photochemical
ozone
form.
3.30E-01
5.98E-03
6.67E-01
5.73E-04
2.17E-01
1.12E+02
2.68E-02
1.38E+01
9.97E-01
6.52E+02
Terrestrial
acidiﬁca-
tion
4.45E-01
7.59E-03
5.52E-01
4.46E-04
2.70E-01
1.30E+02
3.70E-02
1.79E+01
9.97E-01
6.13E+02
Eutrophication
Ter-
restrial
2.28E-01
1.37E-02
7.68E-01
2.18E-03
1.01E-01
1.71E+02
2.93E-02
4.99E+01
9.96E-01
2.16E+03
Eutrophication Fresh-
water
5.70E-01
8.30E-06
4.29E-01
2.96E-07
4.39E-01
1.81E-01
3.24E-01
1.34E-01
9.98E-01
5.24E-01
Eutrophication
Ma-
rine
2.27E-01
1.22E-03
7.69E-01
1.95E-04
9.90E-02
1.50E+01
2.84E-02
4.31E+00
9.96E-01
1.92E+02
Ecotoxicity freshwater
6.28E-01
3.68E-01
3.70E-01
1.03E-02
5.82E-01
9.68E+03
4.61E-02
7.66E+02
9.98E-01
2.11E+04
Fossil depletion
6.93E-01
4.37E+01
3.05E-01
9.10E-01
6.57E-01
1.17E+06
1.61E-02
2.88E+04
9.98E-01
2.27E+06
Elements depletion
2.93E-01
7.97E-06
7.06E-01
9.10E-07
2.74E-01
2.11E-01
6.58E-01
5.07E-01
9.99E-01
9.80E-01
100
==PAGE:101==
Table B.11 Calculated sensitivity ratios and coeﬃcients of each impact category for the amount of plastic, electricity use of cleaning
and pelleting of plastic, fuel consumption of construction and use stage and the transportation distance of bitumen for scenario 2.
All SRs ≥0.3 are coloured yellow indicating a medium sensitivity
PlastAmount
CPElec
ConstrDiesel
UseDiesel
BitTrans
Impact category
SR
SC
SR
SC
SR
SC
SR
SC
SR
SC
Climate change
4.66E-03
1.03E-01
8.68E-04
1.27E+02
3.33E-01
1.80E+06
3.12E-01
1.80E+06
5.02E-02
2.51E+02
Ozone depletion
3.90E-05
2.53E-10
2.39E-05
1.02E-06
4.09E-04
6.49E-04
3.83E-04
6.49E-04
2.80E-02
4.11E-05
Human toxicity, ce
3.56E-03
3.03E-10
1.62E-03
9.12E-07
1.12E-01
2.34E-03
1.05E-01
2.34E-03
5.75E-02
1.11E-06
Human toxicity, nce
3.92E-03
1.62E-08
5.45E-05
1.50E-06
3.50E-01
3.56E-01
3.27E-01
3.55E-01
9.74E-03
9.16E-06
Particulate matter
2.55E-03
2.52E-05
3.22E-04
2.10E-02
2.03E-01
4.91E+02
1.90E-01
4.90E+02
1.36E-01
3.05E-01
Ionising radiation, hh
9.20E-05
1.95E-04
2.38E-05
3.35E-01
4.92E-03
2.56E+03
4.60E-03
2.56E+03
3.45E-02
1.66E+01
Photochemical
ozone
form.
3.44E-03
7.01E-04
4.23E-05
5.72E-02
3.30E-01
1.65E+04
3.09E-01
1.65E+04
8.22E-02
3.81E+00
Terrestrial
acidiﬁca-
tion
2.76E-03
5.29E-04
3.72E-05
4.73E-02
2.62E-01
1.23E+04
2.45E-01
1.23E+04
1.51E-01
6.58E+00
Eutrophication
Ter-
restrial
3.94E-03
2.66E-03
3.78E-05
1.69E-01
3.79E-01
6.27E+04
3.54E-01
6.27E+04
9.30E-02
1.43E+01
Eutrophication Fresh-
water
1.62E-03
2.66E-07
5.88E-04
6.38E-04
3.84E-02
1.54E+00
3.59E-02
1.54E+00
1.25E-01
4.67E-03
Eutrophication
Ma-
rine
3.95E-03
2.38E-04
3.65E-05
1.46E-02
3.80E-01
5.62E+03
3.56E-01
5.62E+03
9.31E-02
1.27E+00
Ecotoxicity freshwater
2.07E-03
1.36E-02
3.22E-04
1.40E+01
1.34E-01
2.16E+05
1.25E-01
2.16E+05
3.11E-02
4.65E+01
Fossil depletion
1.55E-03
1.10E+00
3.77E-05
1.77E+02
1.39E-01
2.42E+07
1.30E-01
2.42E+07
2.36E-02
3.79E+03
Elements depletion
5.74E-04
1.76E-07
2.48E-04
5.01E-04
1.84E-02
1.38E+00
1.72E-02
1.38E+00
1.64E-02
1.14E-03
101
==PAGE:102==
B.6
Scenario analysis
Table B.12 Impact categories, units and normalisation factors of the ReCiPe v.1.11,
Midpoint (H) Hierarchist, Europe LCIA method.
Impact category
Unit
ReCiPe,
(H) Europe
Climate change
kg CO2 eq/p/yr
1.12E+04
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11 eq/p/yr
2.20E-02
Terrestrial acidiﬁcation
kg SO2 eq/p/yr
3.44E+01
Freshwater eutrophication
kg P eq/p/yr
4.15E-01
Marine eutrophication
kg N eq/p/yr
1.01E+01
Human toxicity
kg 1,4-DB eq/p/yr
6.27E+02
Photochemical oxidant form.
kg NMVOC/p/yr
5.68E+01
Particulate matter formation
kg PM10 eq/p/yr
1.49E+01
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
kg 1,4-DB eq/p/yr
8.25E+00
Freshwater ecotoxicity
kg 1,4-DB eq/p/yr
1.10E+01
Marine ecotoxicity
kg 1,4-DB eq/p/yr
8.73E+00
Ionising radiation
kg U235 eq/p/yr
6.26E+03
Agricultural land occupation
m2a/p/yr
4.52E+03
Urban land occupation
m2a/p/yr
4.07E+02
Natural land transformation
m2/p/yr
1.61E-01
Water depletion
m3/p/yr
0.00E+00
Metal depletion
kg Fe eq/yr
7.13E+02
Fossil depletion
kg oil eq/p/yr
1.56E+03
B.7
Uncertainty propagation
The uncertainty propagation was executed using a Monte Carlo simulation. The results
of the Monte Carlo can be seen in ﬁgures; B.1, B.2, B.3, B.4, B.5, B.6, B.7, B.8, B.9,
B.10, B.11, B.12, B.13 and B.14 for each impact category.
102
==PAGE:103==
Figure B.1 Monte Carlo
sensitivity
for
Climate
change impact category.The
error
bars
represent
two
standard
deviations
and
show
the
results
of
this
impact category with 95%
certainty
Figure B.2 Monte Carlo
sensitivity
for
Ozone
de-
pletion
impact
category.
The
error
bars
represent
two
standard
deviations
and show the results of this
impact category with 95%
certainty
Figure B.3 Monte Carlo
sensitivity for Human toxi-
city (cancer eﬀects) impact
category.
The error bars
represent two standard devi-
ations and show the results
of this impact category with
95% certainty
Figure B.4 Monte Carlo
sensitivity for Human toxi-
city (non-cancer eﬀects) im-
pact category.The error bars
represent two standard devi-
ations and show the results
of this impact category with
95% certainty
Figure B.5 Monte Carlo
sensitivity
for
Particulate
matter
impact
category.
The
error
bars
represent
two
standard
deviations
and show the results of this
impact category with 95%
certainty
Figure B.6 Monte Carlo
sensitivity for Ionising radia-
tion (human health) impact
category.
The error bars
represent two standard devi-
ations and show the results
of this impact category with
95% certainty
103
==PAGE:104==
Figure B.7 Monte Carlo
sensitivity for Photochemi-
cal ozone formation impact
category.The error bars rep-
resent two standard devia-
tions and show the results
of this impact category with
95% certainty
Figure B.8 Monte Carlo
sensitivity
for
Terrestrial
acidiﬁcation
impact
cat-
egory.
The
error
bars
represent
two
standard
deviations and show the re-
sults of this impact category
with 95% certainty
Figure B.9 Monte Carlo
sensitivity for Eutrophica-
tion terrestrial impact cat-
egory.
The error bars rep-
resent two standard devia-
tions and show the results
of this impact category with
95% certainty
Figure B.10 Monte Carlo
sensitivity for Eutrophica-
tion freshwater impact cat-
egory.The error bars repre-
sent two standard deviations
and show the results of this
impact category with 95%
certainty
Figure B.11 Monte Carlo
sensitivity for Eutrophica-
tion
marine
impact
cate-
gory.
The error bars rep-
resent two standard devia-
tions and show the results
of this impact category with
95% certainty
Figure B.12 Monte Carlo
sensitivity
for
Ecotoxicity
freshwater impact category.
The
error
bars
represent
two standard deviations and
show the results of this im-
pact category with 95% cer-
tainty
104
==PAGE:105==
Figure B.13 Monte Carlo
sensitivity for Depletion of
abiotic resources, fossil im-
pact category.The error bars
represent two standard devi-
ations and show the results
of this impact category with
95% certainty
Figure B.14 Monte Carlo
sensitivity for Depletion of
abiotic resources, elements
impact category. The error
bars represent two standard
deviations and show the re-
sults of this impact category
with 95% certainty
105
==PAGE:106==
B.8
Uncertainty propagation, no lifetime change
In this section are probability and cumulative distribution graphs generated by results of
a Monte Carlo simulation assuming that there would be no diﬀerence in lifetime between
the two road alternatives in scenarios 1 and 2. There parameters which were used for the
analysis are the same as before (see table 4.6) and are mentioned in the captions of each
ﬁgure pair (see ﬁgures B.15, B.16, B.17, B.18, B.19 and B.20).
Figure B.15 Probability and Cumulative distribution graphs of the Climate change
impact scores generated from the results of a Monte Carlo simulation run by assuming
5% variance of aggregate amount used (10 thousand iterations) for scenarios 1 and 2
Figure B.16 Probability and Cumulative distribution graphs of the Ozone depletion im-
pact scores generated from the results of a Monte Carlo simulation run by assuming 10%
variance of bitumen extraction process eﬃciency (10 thousand iterations) for scenarios 1
and 2
The diﬀerences in scores between the scenarios are because of the bitumen and ag-
gregate savings due to the addition of plastic waste. These probability and cumulative
distributions show that even though there would not be an extended durability of the
plastic enriched road there is some likelihood of savings connected to the impact cate-
gories shown.
106
==PAGE:107==
Figure B.17 Probability and Cumulative distribution graphs of the Ionising radiation
(human health) impact scores generated from the results of a Monte Carlo simulation
run by assuming 10% variance of bitumen extraction process eﬃciency (10 thousand
iterations) for scenarios 1 and 2
Figure B.18 Probability and Cumulative distribution graphs of the Eutrophication Ter-
restrial impact scores generated from the results of a Monte Carlo simulation run by
assuming 10% variance of fuel consumption in the use stage (10 thousand iterations) for
scenarios 1 and 2
Figure B.19 Probability and Cumulative distribution graphs of the Eutrophication Ma-
rine impact scores generated from the results of a Monte Carlo simulation run by assuming
10% variance of fuel consumption in the use stage (10 thousand iterations) for scenarios
1 and 2
107
==PAGE:108==
Figure B.20 Probability and Cumulative distribution graphs of the Depletion of abiotic
resources, elements impact scores generated from the results of a Monte Carlo simulation
run by assuming 10% variance of aggregate extraction process eﬃciency (10 thousand
iterations) for scenarios 1 and 2
B.9
Choice of representation
A Monte Carlo simulation was performed on scenarios 1 and 2 in the case of changing
the system model. The system model in this case; use stage cut-oﬀand the crediting of
RAP for aggregate (system model ﬂow and system boundaries can be seen in ﬁgure 4.14).
In table B.13 the average impact scores and their standard deviations obtained from the
Monte Carlo simulation using the same parameters and parameter variations as before
(see table 4.6).
Table B.13 Results obtained from a Monte Carlo simulation using a system model where
use stage is cut-oﬀand RAP is credited for aggregate. Average impact scores and their
standard deviations are shown for all impact categories of scenarios 1 and 2
Impact category
Unit
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Climate change
kg CO2-Eq
4.74E+04
2.40E+03
3.45E+04
2.99E+03
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11 Eq
2.40E-02
2.30E-03
1.54E-02
1.82E-03
Human toxicity, ce
CTUh
2.04E-04
1.57E-05
1.47E-04
1.58E-05
Human toxicity, nce
CTUh
9.22E-03
4.72E-04
6.49E-03
5.66E-04
Particulate matter
kgPM2.5-eq
2.39E+01
1.44E+00
1.66E+01
1.63E+00
Ionising radiation, hh
kBq U235 eq
7.67E+03
7.36E+02
4.96E+03
5.85E+02
Photochemical ozone form.
kg NMVOC
4.64E+02
2.34E+01
3.24E+02
2.92E+01
Terrestrial acidiﬁcation
mol H+ eq
4.80E+02
2.47E+01
3.29E+02
3.00E+01
Eutrophication Terrestrial
mol N eq
1.40E+03
6.46E+01
9.94E+02
8.68E+01
Eutrophication Freshwater
kg P eq
3.49E-01
3.11E-02
2.48E-01
3.05E-02
Eutrophication Marine
kg N eq
1.25E+02
5.75E+00
8.86E+01
7.73E+00
Ecotoxicity freshwater
CTUe
1.89E+04
1.48E+03
1.31E+04
1.36E+03
Fossil depletion
kg Sb eq
2.14E+06
1.76E+05
1.45E+06
1.55E+05
Elements depletion
kg antimony-eq
3.25E-01
5.94E-02
2.24E-01
4.88E-02
108
