==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Tool Life and Lubrication in Blanking Operations
Daniel Cárdenas del Río
June 2018
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The effect of using extreme pressure lubricants on AISI M3:2 tool steel
2mm diameter punches during blanking operation of austenitic stainless
steel 1.4301 1mm thickness is studied. Due to the nature of fine blanking
process, where tight tolerances exist between punch and die, lubrication be-
come challenging, since no space exist for the lubricant to flow between the
elements. Boundary lubrication mechanisms is expected to be developed,
so the friction between sliding surfaces is reduced.
Two different lubri-
cant applying methods are used, strip contact lubrication using rollers and
punch lubrication, where the lubricant is poured into a reservoir machined
in the die so the punch stem is fully immerse before every stroke. Extreme
pressure (EP) additive lubricants and non-EP lubricants are used.
Lubricant test for punching and blanking is performed under industrial
conditions. Boundary lubrication could be observed by measuring forces
in the punches. Punches are instrumented with load transducers so tensile
and compressive loads are acquired. Tensile loads are resulting from Back-
stroke (BS) forces caused by frictional contact between the punch stem and
the surrounding blanked strip. Boundary film created by using Cl and S
containing lubricants will avoid adhesive wear decreasing frictional con-
tact, hence BS forces, which will increase tool life. K type thermocouple
is placed close to the die shearing zone in order to record the temperature
development during consecutive blanking operations.
Pin on Disk (PoD) simulative tribological test is performed in order to
study the interaction between lubricant and tool steel under long periods
and well defined contact conditions.
The idea is to promote boundary
lubrication and analyze the samples afterwards using X-Ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy (XPS) characterization technique.
From punching test, non-extreme pressure lubricants shows high BS
forces, contrary to EP lubricants, where low BS forces are detected even at
long runs. The applying method is not relevant when using 1mm strip; in
both cases, low BS forces are recorded. Temperature development during
the experiment reach an steady state after 50 stokes.
PoD samples were characterized using XPS. From XPS analysis S-
containing lubricants shows a boundary film with at least 600nm thickness.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Abstract
The S peaks detected corresponds to a metal sulphide compound, which
are developed by chemical reaction between lubricant and tool surface. Cl-
containing lubricants does not shows XPS peaks when organic solvents
are used for cleaning. When cleaning the specimens using distilled water,
Cl peaks are detected, which could be associated with a boundary film
physically adsorbed.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Mechanical Engi-
neering at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a Master degree in Materials and Manufacturing.
Kongens Lyngby, June 15, 2018
Daniel Cardenas del Rio [S160941]
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank to all the people that help to make this project pos-
sible.
To the people involved in my guidance along the whole project: Chris
Valentin Nielsen for been the main supervisor of the project.
Marcel
Moghadam as Co-supervisor for giving support during experiments and
inputs during the entire project. Matteo Villa for collaborating also as
Co-supervisor and being the materials science guidance and support. Se-
unghwan Lee for his support and guidance in tribology topics and for
allowing the use of biotribology Lab for running Pin on Disk.
To the people that help me during the experiments. People from DTU
workshop starting with Jan Pedersen, for all his support and availability.
To Henrik, Arne, Claus, for helping during the set up of the punching test
and for supporting the noise without complaining. Jonas Lindhard and
DTU Danchip for the support during XPS analysis
To all my friends and colleagues from Denmark that make this two years
an incredible learning experience, and for all their help during the past 5
months.
To my friends and family that even at the distance, they were present to
me at any time showing support and encouragement.
And finally to CONACyT and Metalsa for the financial support.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
¯σ
Effective Stress
ϵP
True Strain
σ
True Stress
σ0
Tensile Yield Stress
σ1
Largest Principal Stress
σu
Ultimate Tensile Strength
τ
Shear Strength of the Material
AWP Atomic Weight Percent
BS
Backstroke
CHT
Conventional Heat Treatment
CoF
Coefficient of Friction
d
Wear scar diameter
d¯ϵ
Effective Plastic Strain increment
dγ
Shear Strain increment
dσm
Hydrostatic Stress
DCT
Deep Cryogenic Treatment
DTA Differential Thermal Analysis
EP
Extreme Pressure
FN
Normal Force
FEM Finite Element Method
==PAGE:10==
viii
Acknowledgements
FMP Free Mean Path
h
Wear track radius
HRC Hardness Rockwell C
HV
Vickers Hardness
K
Strain Hardening Coefficient
K
Strength Coefficient
k
Yield stress of the material in pure shear
Lc
Filter cut-off Length
Ls
Cut-off Length
Ls
Punch ratio
PoD
Pin on Disk
r
Pin end radius
R2
Goodness of a fit
Ra
Aritmetic Average Surface Roughness
s
Sheet thickness
SCT
Shallow Cryogenic Treatment
SZT
Sub-zero Treatment
TC
Temperature of the Experiment
TRA
Temperature of Reaction Activation
u
Radial Clearance
UI
User Interface
vrel
Sliding Speed
w
Wear track width
WR
Wear Resistance
XPS X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
⊘
Diameter
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical Background
5
2.1
Tribology in Metal Forming Processes
. . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Mechanisms of Wear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1.1
Abrasive Wear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1.2
Adhesive Wear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1.3
Fatigue Wear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1.4
Corrosive Wear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Mechanisms of Lubrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2.1
Hydrostatic Lubrication . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2.2
Solid Film Lubrication
. . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2.3
Hydrodynamic Lubrication . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2.4
Boundary Lubrication . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Tribological Testing in Punching and Blanking
. . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
Simulative Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2
Process Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Materials and Methods.
19
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Strip Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1.1
Tensile Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Tool Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.3
Lubricants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.3.1
CASTROL Iloform PN 226 . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
3.1.3.2
RHENUS SF 125 A . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.3.3
CARL ROTH Paraffin Oil
. . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.3.4
TOTAL Drosera MS 5 . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.3.5
FUCHS DB 4265 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.3.6
CASTROL Iloform TDN 81
. . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.1
Pin on Disc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.2
Punching Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.3
X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Results and discussion
37
4.1
Punchign Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.1
Different Lubricants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.2
Different Applying Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Pin on Disk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.3
X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3.1
Survey Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3.2
Depth Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5
Conclusion
69
A Metal Forming Tribology Tests
71
B MSDS
81
C CAD Drawings
87
D FEA Simulations
89
D.0.1
Element Size and Mesh Refinement . . . . . . . . . .
89
D.0.2
Simulated Shear Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
Bibliography
99
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
Processing of metals are frequently divided in two groups: shaping and cut-
ting; which depends on the aim of the process, either changing the shape
of the workpiece or splitting it. Both shaping and cutting process could
be applied to a bulk, sheet or powder material. Each process has a defined
physical principle, and according to this principle it is named differently.
This project relies on sheet metal processing focused on cutting process.
Sheet metal process are one of the most used processes in several Indus-
tries like automotive, construction and home appliance. Several shaping
processes for metal sheets exists, such as drawing, roll forming, hydro-
forming and ironing. When referring to change in shape of a sheet mate-
rial, the process is applied to create a 3D component from a 2D sheet.
Sheet metal cutting processes are divided in shearing, blanking, punch-
ing and laser cutting. The difference between all sheet cutting processes
lays in the nature of the part that has been removed from the sheet. Shear-
ing is the process used to separate the sheet in different specimens. Punch-
ing refers to the process where a part of the sheet is removed from itself,
leaving a hole in it.
The tool used for removing the material is called
punch, it applies pressure over a specific area of the sheet and pushes it
through a die [Fig. 1.1]. The material removed form punching operation
is named scrap, and it has no usable meaning afterwards. Blanking is a
process physically similar to punching process, except that the metal part
removed from the sheet is the desired part and the rest become scrap.
The blanking process requires three main components:
a blanking
press, a blanking tool and the sheet material, which could be a strip or a
blank. The presses used for blanking operations could be mechanical or
hydraulic.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: (a) Schematic illustration of shearing with a punch and die,
indicating some process variables. Characteristic features of
the (b) slug [1].
Commonly this type of presses are mean to run at high speeds meaning
high strokes per minute, since blanking and punching are regularly used
for producing big number of components and high productivity is needed;
reason why, mechanical press is preferred. Special cushions systems are
highly recommended in order to decrease reverse loading to the press that
could damage the press itself and decrease its life spam.
The blanking tool is usually composed by the punch, die, V-ring, counter
punch and different elements that help with the alignment and support of
the two main elements of the system. Figure [1.2] show an schematic of a
simple blanking tool and its elements. A relevant feature in the process is
the clearance between the punch and the die. It will determine the type
of blanking operation, which are fine blanking or regular blanking. Fine
blanking has tighter clearances between components compared to regular
blanking.
Fine blanking gives a better edge quality to the part, an it
comes quite relevant for products where the edges are functional or tight
tolerances are requested. By having tight clearance between punch and
die, high frictional stresses will occur as a result of long and strong metal
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Research Objective
3
to metal contact and the load needed to punch out the strip will be also
higher. As a result of this rather small clearance, lubricate the process
become quite a challenging operation, since the oil is not allowed to flow
between punch and die.
Figure 1.2: Schematic of blanking die. Misumi Co [2].
Subsequently, severe wear in the tool will be promoted. Different wear
mechanisms exists such as abrasive, adhesive, fatigue and corrosive, and
will be explained later in this report.
Different investigations has been conducted with the purpose of studying
punch wear mechanism during blanking process taking into account several
aspects such as geometry, clearance, sheet material and sheet thickness [3,
4]. An important topic in this report is the evaluation of backstroke forces.
Backstroke forces results when strip material is picked up to the punch
stem by means of adhesive wear [5].
This extra attached material will
promote wear in the punch and by increasing the diameter of it, tensile
stresses will be introduced as a result of trapped punch due to the tight tol-
erances between punch and die and the increased punch diameter. Tensile
stresses are very harmful for tool steels and could lead to fracture.
1.1
Research Objective
To determine and quantify limits of lubrication in blanking operations
when different applying methods and types of lubricants are used. The
main idea is to analyze whether by changing the applying lubricant method,
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
the development of a boundary lubrication layer, that will protect the
punch stem avoiding pick up and increasing tool life, is also affected.
To characterize the boundary layer using different techniques and tri-
bological tests.
In case of punching and blanking operations, the stresses generated by
the operation itself and by friction together with an elevated working tem-
perature make the process one of the most severe tribologically speaking.
Adhesive wear could be avoided when no metal to metal contact exist, and
this condition is present for instance when proper lubrication exits in the
process. However, as mentioned before, it become quite complicated for
the lubricant to reach all the contact surfaces, specially the zone where
the tool surface is in contact with the virgin surface from the workpiece.
This conditions cause high risk of pick-up of workpiece material around
the tool surface resulting in scoring, poor quality of workpiece surface and
eventually tool breakdown [4], since the tool could get trapped inside the
die and tensile loads will be introduced to the toll when the press is moving
upwards.
The picked up workpiece material attached to the tool becomes very
hard and brittle when oxidized and leads to poor product quality and
severe stressing of the tool [6]. This phenomena is known as galling or
cold welding.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER2
Theoretical
Background
2.1
Tribology in Metal Forming
Processes
2.1.1
Mechanisms of Wear
Several definitions of wear could be found in the literature, but in general
all refer to deterioration of a surface followed by damage in the component.
Møller P. [7] defines wear as the deterioration of a particular surface in
use in connection with the interaction with another material, where the
other material could be solid, liquid or gaseous. Different mechanisms of
wear exist, primary mechanisms which are: abrasion, adhesion, fatigue,
corrosion and secondary mechanisms: erosion, fretting and cavitation [8].
Most common wear mechanisms in sheet metal forming are adhesive and
abrasive wear.
2.1.1.1
Abrasive Wear
Abrasive wear occurs when a harder material in contact with a softer ma-
terial provoking the removal of the softer material from the wear exposed
surfaces. The relationship between wear resistance and the relative hard-
ness of the metal and abrasive is of considerable technical importance [9].
This relationship will determine the wear resistance of the workpiece. For
a surface to exhibit sufficient wear resistance, it surface hardness should
be higher than half the surface harness value of the abrasive particle:
HVsurface > 0.5 ∗HVabrasive
(2.1)
Abrasive wear mechanism could develop under two circumstances: two-
body and three-body abrasion [Fig. 2.1]. In two-body abrasion situation
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Theoretical Background
the abrasive particles are part of the harder moving surface whereas in
three-body abrasion wear particles are moving or rolling between the two
moving surfaces [7].
Figure 2.1: A. Two-body abrasion. B. Three-body abrasion [8].
2.1.1.2
Adhesive Wear
The terms cohesion and adhesion refer to the ability of atomic structures
to hold themselves together and form surface bonds with other atoms or
surfaces with which they are in contact [Fig. 2.2]. Two clean surfaces
of similar crystal structure will adhere strongly one to another simply by
placing them in contact [9].
In real life, measurable adhesion is only shown when the surfaces are
loaded and translated with respect to each other, high loads could appear
very locally on the asperities which lead to microwelding and causes tearing
of the surface due to its brittle behaviour. The degree of adhesive wear
is very dependent on the type of materials that are in contact, meaning
some material has high affinity to the counter surface which could increase
the severity of the adhesive wear. Other factors influencing the severity of
this wear mechanism are: the pressure applied between the surfaces, the
presence of lubricants as well as the relative velocity of the surfaces [7].
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Tribology in Metal Forming Processes
7
Figure 2.2: Simplified version of adhesive wear. [9].
2.1.1.3
Fatigue Wear
Fatigue wear is presented under cyclic loads upon a surface creating succes-
sive formation of cracks in the contact surface area. The result of this wear
mechanism is a continuous removal of material near the surface crack [Fig.
2.3]. If the particles removed from the surface consist of hard material Eq.
[2.1], abrasive wear will occur and may lead to an accelerated surface wear
[7].
Fatigue wear usually occurs in process such as bearings (ball or pressure
lubricated glide), gearwheel teeth, flanks, shafts and fillets as well as rolling
operations.
Figure 2.3: Schematic of fatigue wear. [10].
2.1.1.4
Corrosive Wear
Corrosion is the deterioration of a material by chemical interaction with the
environment. It can be described as a chemical or electrochemical reaction
between a material and its environment [7]. In case of corrosive wear, once
a surface is corroded and gets in contact with a harder surface, the layer
will be removed and subsequently a new corrosion layer will develop [Fig.
2.4] This phenomena depends on the environment as well as the corrosion
resistance properties of the material per se. Moreover the particles from
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Theoretical Background
the detached layer could act as three body abrasive increasing the wear
rate.
Figure 2.4: Corrosive wear arises when two surfaces slide against each
other in a corrosive environment [8].
2.1.2
Mechanisms of Lubrication
A lubrication system is needed in order to avoid or decrease wear of the
tool. Different mechanisms of lubrication exist, which are used depending
the nature of the process. In case of metal working processes the lubricant
used must fulfill different functions such as: reduce friction, prevent ad-
hesive wear between tool and workpiece, act as a tool coolant (mainly in
cutting and machining operations) and prevent corrosion [11].
Lubricants in metal forming can be fluid as well as solid and depending
of the working principle it could be divided in different mechanisms (see
Figure 2.5).
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Tribology in Metal Forming Processes
9
Figure 2.5: Mechanisms of Lubrication in Metal Forming Process. [12].
2.1.2.1
Hydrostatic Lubrication
Hydrostatic lubrication occurs when no metal to metal contact takes place
as a result of a change in volume of the asperities that were in direct contact
within the surfaces. Instead, the moving parts are separated by means of
a fluid film which is pressurized by viscous drag. Due to the complete
separation between the kinematic surfaces, this mechanism provides lack
of wear, low friction, high stiffness and vibrations absorption.
The fluid film is entrapped in the pockets of the work-piece surface [Fig.
2.5 b.], meaning that rougher surface give higher degree of hydrostatic
lubrication. The mechanism assumes that the asperities from the work-
piece surface that are in contact with the counter-surface are the same
height and after loading the workpiece a flattening of the asperities will
follow, meaning a reduction of the volume in the lubricant pockets which
at the same time will increase the pressure of the incompressible liquid.
2.1.2.2
Solid Film Lubrication
In Solid film lubrication mechanism, the contact between workpiece and
tool is not avoided, in fact the contact interface is similar to dry contact
[Fig 2.5 d.]. In this case, an outer layer is created intentionally either in the
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Theoretical Background
tool or in the workpiece surface, although being the workpiece the most
common. This lubricant film has to have low shear strength τ and good
adhesion to the metal substrate.
Solid film lubrication is of interest where other lubrication mechanisms
such as hydrostatic or hydrodinamic lubrication can not be easily used for
instance in vacuum applications, high temperature application or under
aggressive environments. Solid bonden coating are commonly applied by
paint or dip process and the coating materials (MoS2, WS) typically have
a heterogeneous structure and the friction is determined by the contact
size as well as by the individual fractions of the phases presented in the
coating. The transfer layer mechanism is one of the major ways in which
solid lubricants reduce friction [7].
2.1.2.3
Hydrodynamic Lubrication
In hydrodynamic lubrication mechanism, the contact between both mov-
ing surfaces is completely avoided due to a continuous fluid film layer of
lubricant that withstands all the load applied to the process [Fig. 2.6]. In
terms of tribology, is an ideal state of lubrication in that friction and wear
hardly occur.
Figure 2.6: Example of Hydrodynamic Lubrication. Bearing unloaded
vs loaded. [9].
This lubrication condition is mainly present at bearings and it allows
carrying and moving heavy loads since the frictional resistance is very small.
A clear examples occur in a journal bearing, where the journal center is
displaced from the bearing center since when rotating the bearing load
pushes the shaft downwards so the clearance between the journal and the
bearing decreases in the particular point closet to the journal center. In
the region where the clearance is the smallest, the oil film forms a wedge
and pressure is generated in it due to the journal rotation. This is called
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Tribology in Metal Forming Processes
11
the wedge effect of an oil film. The bearing load is supported by the oil
film pressure and the journal floats on the oil film [13].
This mechanism in presented in metal forming processes in operations
such as rolling, drawing, extrusion and deep drawing; where the pressure
build up flow is converging.
Hydrodynamic lubrication is not likely to
occur in blanking or punching.
2.1.2.4
Boundary Lubrication
As soon as the contact between two moving surfaces exist, then as dis-
cussed in 2.1.1, wear would be affecting one or both surfaces. Most of the
mechanisms discussed, pointed the idea to avoid or decrease the contact
using different physical or chemical phenomena; either complete separation
by an external fluid of solid layer, or reducing the contact area between
surfaces.
Contrary to this, boundary lubrication allows the surfaces to
be in contact but still prevents wear in the surfaces. It is developed by
different mechanisms that could create a thin layer that will be attached
to the material.
Unlike solid film lubrication mechanism, the attached
layer is not applied directly to the surface but is developed physically or
chemically instead.
D. Dowson [14] defines boundary lubrication as the surface interac-
tion between monomolecular layers of EP lubricants and the solids, and
is dominated by contact pressure and temperature. Hydrodynamic effects
are negligible, and there is considerable asperity contact. The intimate
contact between moving surfaces is represented in Figure 2.7.
The mechanisms responsible of interactions between lubricant and solid
to produce a protective lubricant layer are physical adsorption, chemical
adsorption and chemical reaction [15]. This depends on the nature of the
lubricant, the composition of the material, surface roughness and operat-
ing variables such as load and temperature. Chemistry of lubricants has
been well documented and many advances has been done during the past
years. In 1969, Stewart and Stuart summarized lubricant additives able to
produce a boundary layer [16]. They discuss boundary lubricant additives
such as esters, acids, and soaps which are adsorbed on the surface and re-
duce friction. Later develops also includes salts and inorganic compounds
such as Cl, S or P additives [17].
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Theoretical Background
Figure 2.7: Schematic representation of boundary lubrication [15].
Additives able to produce a boundary layer are divided in anti-wear,
extreme pressure and lubricity (friction modifiers), depending on the ad-
ditives composition [18].
Physical Adsorption.
When the lubricant in contact to the surface physically attaches and
create a film but do not generate any reaction layer, surface separation
by means of physical adsorption exist. This film is integrated of molecules
gathered on the solid surface in contact from the liquid lubricant. Molecules
are weakly bonded, and formation is characterized by reversibility and
could be either mono molecular or poli molecular [15]. The adsorption is
attributed to Van der Waals forces [19], meaaning polar interactions exists.
The presence of polar molecules such as fatty acids, alcohols, amines
or soaps, allows the development of the film, which grows from a preferred
direction from the surface and could pile up several layers. This preferred
orientation induced by polarity, gives an stronger cohesion of the film to
the surface and gives the film solid like properties [20] [Fig 2.8]. The length
of the hydrocarbon chain, the kind of molecule and its polar groups, the
concentration of the adsorbent in the lubricant, and the number of layers
in the film affect performance of the layer [21, 22, 23, 24].
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Tribology in Metal Forming Processes
13
Figure 2.8: Schematic of Physical Adsorption with preferred orientation
of a 3 molecules polar Hexadecane Molecules in a non reac-
tive metal [20].
When the layer is physically adsorbed a weak adhesion and cohesion
with the surface exist. The adsorption strength of the additives to the sur-
face depends on the dipole strength in the additive molecule [19]. Those
dipoles are generated due to electronegativity difference between the addi-
tives and the surfaces atoms. The higher electronegativity difference exist,
the higher level of adsorption.
Chemical Adsorption.
Chemical adsorption starts as physical adsorption, once the molecules
of the lubricant are bonded to the solid surface the react with it and bond
chemically to form a new entity. One characteristic of chemiadsorbed films
is that is limited to a mono-layer, but still is its bond with the surface is
much more strong that the one existing in physical adsorption due the
binding energy of the chemical bond. Chemical adsorbed films are also
defined as irreversible process. Figure 2.9 shows an example of chemical
adsorption of a fatty acid with metal surface. Stearic acid reacts with iron
oxide in the presence of water to form a metal soap film, ironstearate. The
soaps are exceptionally low- shear-strength solids and, therefore, are good
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Theoretical Background
lubricants as long as the temperature remains below the melting point of
the soap [20].
Figure 2.9: Schematic of Chemical Adsorption of stearic acid + iron ox-
ide forming iron stearate [20].
Metal soaps thus, provides acceptable boundary lubrication when high
temperatures are not involved in the process. Aspects such as high loads
and sliding speed could increase the temperature above the melting point
of the metal soaps which will destroy the film and stop protecting the sur-
face. Most of metallic soaps which are classed as organic compounds, has a
low melting point (100°C to 120 °C) [17] so it is important to consider this
when choosing a fatty acid for boundary lubrication in a metal working
process.
Chemical Reaction.
If the boundary lubrication mechanism appear as a chemical reaction
where a film formation is occurring so a new compound is formed, then
a tribochemical mechanism will exist in the surface. Inorganic salts are
formed in the metal surface by means of chemical reaction between the
metal and the lubricant. Usually the lubricants that contains molecules
that chemically react with metals in order to form a chemical bound are so
called ”Extreme-pressure EP” lubricants . EP lubricants commonly con-
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Tribology in Metal Forming Processes
15
tain sulfur, chloride or phosphorus atoms. Figure 2.10 shows an schematic
representation of a chemical reaction between sulfur additives containing
lubricant with iron oxide forming iron sulfide.
Inorganic compounds formation is a non reversible reaction and con-
trasting to metallic soaps, it has high melting point. Some chlorides and
oxychlorides layers behave as low shear strength solid up to 300°C to 400°C
[17] while some sulfides could have melting point up to 800°C - 1000°C [21,
20].
Figure 2.10: Schematic of Chemical Reaction from Sulfur additives with
Iron Oxide to form Iron Sulfide [20].
The weak bond of a physically adsorbed film is further reduced by in-
creased temperature, whereas the chemically bonded films increase in rate
of formation with increased temperature [15]. Thanks to the high melting
point of the inorganic salts on metals, this type of lubrication is suitable
for high loads, high sliding speed and high temperature operations.
The limit of thickness is governed by the rate at which the cations and
anions diffuse through the film [20], meaning there is no limit in the thick-
ness that the layer could reach [25]. In case of blanking and punching
operations, the temperature increment generated due to contact between
tool surface and sheet allows the chemical reaction to occur, but since is
just for a few fractions of a second the thickness of the layer is limited.
Nevertheless, as blanking operation is performed for successive strokes,
temperature will increase so the thickness layer growth could continue.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Theoretical Background
2.2
Tribological Testing in
Punching and Blanking
In order to test how the tribological conditions are behaving in the process,
different test exists. Depending on the nature of the testing and how close
to the real processing conditions the test are, they classify in process and
simulative tests. Each way of testing could give different approach of the
wear and lubrication mechanisms acting in the system.
2.2.1
Simulative Test
As it name implies, this type of test simulate the tribological conditions
occurring in a metal forming system. Generally, the testing is performed
in a controlled way where different parameters are meticulously measured.
Perhaps using this approach one could never replicate the conditions pre-
sented in the real process due to the difficulty of putting together all factors
involved for each metal working process, and also some results obtained
from simulative test could be qualitative and shows substantial deviations
from the real industry operations but is the best way for a head start and
gives an idea of how the tribological system will behave.
Simulative tests also give different advantages such as no production
stops, versatility in shifting from one typo of lubricant to another, freedom
to change tool material and topography along with an accelerate testing
of film breakdown [26], allowing considerable savings in time and materials.
Simulate tests are divided in subgroups according to the type of defor-
mation presented in the samples. Global plastic deformation, local plastic
deformation and elastic deformation are the three main groups that simula-
tive test are categorized. See Appendix A.1 for a complete list of simulative
metal forming tests.
Pin on Disk.
For this project pin on disk simulative testing was chosen as an addi-
tional test in order to study the interaction between lubricant and tool
surface under defined contact conditions. In Fine blanking operations, al-
though intimate contact exist, is just for a fraction of a second, but it
is a repetitive condition, then according to one of the hypothesis of the
project, boundary lubrication will develop as a results of a immerse tool
(whole tool surface in contact with lubricant) in contact with the sheet,
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Tribological Testing in Punching and Blanking
17
therefore it is expected to form a boundary layer in the disks. Fugure 2.11
shows an schematic of the components used for performing the pin on disk
test.
Figure 2.11: Schematic of a pin on disk wear test system. [27].
2.2.2
Process Test
Process testing refers an experiment where typical variables in the metal
forming operation process, such as surface stresses and forces directly re-
lated to friction stresses are measured. In this testing scenario, the process
is performed without changing any basic process kinematics [26]. Process
Tests are divided in subgroups depending the process itself, hence, upset-
ting, forging, extrusion, drawing, rolling, ironing and punching are some of
the tests that could be performed. Appendix A.2 shows a list o some of the
existing process tests, nevertheless, any metal forming operation could be
set up for measuring any tribological related variables (Eg. Temperature,
Forces and Stresses).
Punching and Blanking
Punching and blanking operations presents one of the most severe tri-
bological conditions since high strains, elevated temperatures and high
stresses are involved due to the localized deformation occurring between
the tool and the sheet. Moreover, lubricate the system become compli-
cated since there is no space for the lubricant to go throughout the punch
in the whole operation. When the tool (punch) shear the material and
punch it out, it gets in contact with a new generated surface where no
lubricant is able to flow inside. Schematic of the blanking process is shown
in Figure 2.12
The virgin workpiece surface is chemically very reactive and must be sepa-
rated from the tool surface in order to avoid pick-up on the tool surface of
material particles torn out of the workpiece surface [28]. In the case that
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Theoretical Background
no proper lubrication exist and pick-up on the tool begins, adhesive wear
will be likely to occur, as discussed in Sec 2.1.1. Picked up material in the
tool will oxidize becoming very hard and brittle, and will affect the qual-
ity of the blanked part, this condition is named scoring. The combined
effect of pick-up and scoring, known as galling, causes severe problems in
production involving difficult punching operations [29]. Galling will also
introduce further stresses to the tool.
Additional to usual compressive
stresses due to the nature of the operation (higher contact area), tensile
stresses will be introduced to the tool as a result of the extra material
picked up in the tool stem. This tensile stresses are entirely harmful and
could lead to fracture.
Figure 2.12: Schematic of blanking process [30].
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER3
Materials and
Methods.
As mentioned in Section 1, the blanking process consist of a system which
comprises the tool (punch and die), sheet material and the press. Another
important aspect influencing the blanking conditions is the lubricant. Ev-
ery component influences the tribological conditions of the system.
In
order to perform the experiments with known conditions, a step backward
of having the properties of the elements that will influence the tribologi-
cal conditions in blanking is needed. Different characterization methods
were used for getting the properties of the components involved in the
tribo-system.
3.1
Materials
3.1.1
Strip Material
The strip material used for the Punching test experiment is an austenitic
stainless steel material (1.4301). The high Chromium content (Table 3.1)
will increase the severity conditions of the testing due to high affinity of
Chromium to Iron. Once the material is removed from the strip, and metal
to metal contact exist between the punch and the new generated surface
from the strip, cold welding will be developed on the punch stem.
Table 3.1: Nominal chemical composition of the strip material [%].
Material
C
Cr
Mn
Si
P
S
Ni
Fe
1.4301
0.07
18
1
0.5
0.05
0.03
9
Balance
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Materials and Methods.
3.1.1.1
Tensile Test
Uniaxial tensile test is a mechanical test which can be used to obtain
mechanical properties of materials, such as yield strength and strain hard-
ening coefficient. The specimen is deformed with a gradually increasing
tensile load that is applied uniaxially along the length of the specimen
[20x250mm]. The specimen is clamped from its ends into the clamping
system of the tensile testing equipment. The tensile testing machine is
designed to elongate the specimen at a constant strain rate, and to con-
tinuously and simultaneously measure the instantaneous applied load and
the length and width of the sample. [31]
Using the tensile tester in the lab [Fig. 3.1] three tensile tests were
carried out.
Figure 3.1: Tensile test machine.
In order to describe the work-hardening behaviour of the material and
create its stress-strain curve, Ludwick strain hardening law is applied.
Curve fitting tool from MATLAB was used to fit the data from the ten-
sile test to Ludwick law and obtain the model coefficients. Each data was
fitted to Eq 3.1 which is a general power model. In all three cases the
goodness of the fit was quite high, having R2 values of 0.91, 0.93 and 0.97,
respectively. After the fitting, an average of the coefficients σ0, K, n calcu-
lated for each specimen is used, for having the flow curve of the stainless
steel 1.4301 strip used [Fig. 3.2].
LUDWIK Strain hardening low
σ(εp) = σ0 + K εpn
(3.1)
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Materials
21
Figure 3.2 shows the data obtained from the tensile test equipment
for all three specimens. Red, blue and black plots are the experimental
data, while the green curve represents Ludwick model using the averaged
coefficients calculated from fitting each experimental data to Ludwick yield
criteria model. The obtained coefficients will be used later as input for
creating the stress-strain curve for the FEM simulations.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Strain [-]
0
500
1000
1500
Stress [MPa]
Stress-Strain Curve
Ludwick =1468 0.3090-140.2 [MPa]
Figure 3.2: Experimental tensile test data.
Approximation to flow
curve using Ludwick yield Criteria.
σ(ϵp) = 1468ϵ0.309
p
−
140.9[MPa].
3.1.2
Tool Material
Tool material used is Uddeholm Vanadis 23 SuperClean is a high alloyed
powder metallurgical high speed steel corresponding to AISI M3:2 with a
very good abrasive wear resistance in combination with a high compressive
strength, which is quite relevant for demanding cold work applications like
punching and blanking of harder materials like carbon steel or cold rolled
strip steel.
The machinability and grindability are superior than for conventional
high speed steel and so is the dimensional stability after heat treatment.
Greater dimensional stability compared to CHT is achieved caused by the
expansion and contraction of the geometry along the treatment stages.
The expansion during cryogenic treatment as a result of full martensitic
transformation of retained austenite is latter balanced by the shrinkage
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Materials and Methods.
introduced from stress relief during the first tempering stage. Thereafter,
the second temper stabilizes the final dimensions as the carbides grow and
no noticeable effect is observed in following tempering stages, contrary to
CHT where dimensional variations are observed as further transformation
of the retained austenite occurrs even after the second tempering [32]. The
superclean powder metallurgy process ensures that the cleanliness is on a
high level with a low amount of non-metallic inclusions avoiding brittle
phases that could affect the performance in blanking operations [33].
Table 3.2: Nominal chemical composition of the tool material [33] .
Material
C
Cr
Mo
W
V
Fe
Vanadis 23
1.28
4.2
5
6.4
4.1
Balance
Punches
The punches were manufactured by Eberhard using Vanadis 23 with a
hardness of 62 ± 2HRC with dimensions as in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: CAD drawing of the punches used for the experiments.
Cryogenic treated punches
Nowadays, besides using conventional heat treatment (CHT) to in-
crease the hardness of some steels and achieve better wear resistance (WR)
properties, industry is using cryogenic treatments (Sub-zero treatments
SZT) due to its costs benefit, eco-friendly and bulk characteristics. Cryo-
genic treatment incorporate a controlled sub-zero stage usually applied
after the conventional hardening and before the tempering treatments
[34]. Based on the temperature of the treatment, SZTs are categorized as
shallow cryogenic treatment (SCT) and deep cryogenic treatment (DCT).
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Materials
23
Commonly referred temperature range for DCT and DCT are 193-113 K
and 113-77 K, respectively [35].
Improvements in mechanical and wear properties of cryotreated steels
could be attributed, according to several authors to the following mi-
crostructural changes: (i) reduced levels of retained austenite [36, 37, 35],
(ii)alteration in the lattice parameters of the martensite (ie. reduction in
tetragonality), (iii) preferential precipitation of η-carbides, (iv) precipita-
tion of nano-sized carbide particles and (v) alterations in the decomposi-
tion of martensite leading to enhanced precipitation of refined secondary
carbides with more homogeneous distribution [35].
For this project some of the punches were kept in dry ice (−80◦C)
and boiling nitrogen (−196◦C) for 24h with the purpose of analyze if any
affectation in hardness and WR could be detected during punching test.
The punches were conventionally heat treated by the supplier, thus the
time between the tempering and the cryo treatment is considerably long.
3.1.3
Lubricants
Different types of lubricants are selected in order to see the contrast be-
tween the performance of using no lubricant, plain mineral oils and EP
additive lubricants. It is worth mention that due to regulations [38], chlo-
rinated paraffin oils will be restricted due to safety and environmental
reasons (toxic substance and handle of waste residuals), reason why some
non-chlorinated lubricants are selected.
3.1.3.1
CASTROL Iloform PN 226
Castrol Iloform™PN 226 is a medium viscosity [68cSt at 40◦C], chlori-
nated and sulphurised, forming oil. It is specifically developed for medium
to heavy duty deep drawing operations. It is a blend of high performance
extreme pressure and boundary lubricants and anti wear additives, in a
fully solvent refined paraffinic mineral oil [39]. It is a widely used lubricant
for punching and forming operations.
3.1.3.2
RHENUS SF 125 A
Chlorine-free high viscosity [125cSt at 40◦C] fine cutting oil for fine cutting
of all normal steel grades up to about 8mm which can be finely cut. It
contains sulfur EP additives, which could create a chemical reaction with
the tool and form a boundary layer.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Materials and Methods.
3.1.3.3
CARL ROTH Paraffin Oil
High Viscosity [260cSt at 40◦C] plain paraffin oil with no EP additives.
Influence of viscosity will be compared using two different mineral oils
with no EP additive. CARL ROTH vs TOTAL Drosera.
3.1.3.4
TOTAL Drosera MS 5
Multipurpose machine oil that is not normally used for sheet metal form-
ing. It has low viscosity [5cSt at 40◦C]. It contains AW additives (1,2,4-
Trimethylbenzene).
3.1.3.5
FUCHS DB 4265
DB 4265 is low viscosity [2cSt at 40◦C] automotive body in white lu-
bricant for medium to severe stamping and drawing. It is approved for
several automotive OEMs (GM, Ford, Chrysler, Volkswagen, Honda and
Nissan). It provides excellent drawing lubricity for fine part finishes. It is
recommended for all coated and uncoated steels and aluminum [40]. The
lubricant was sent from Mexico and is used in forming and blanking oper-
ations by a Tier 1 supplier. The lubricant is diluted 1:6 in water.
DB 4265 is easy to clean and provides exceptional anti-corrosion pro-
tection. It contains carbonates (CaCO3) and sulfonates (SO3) additives.
3.1.3.6
CASTROL Iloform TDN 81
Medium viscosity [40cSt at 40 deg C], highly chlorinated, heavy duty form-
ing fluid. It is a blend of extreme pressure and lubricity additives in a fully
solvent refined paraffin mineral oil.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Methods
25
Table 3.3: List of Lubricants used in the project. Names and chemical
composition.
ID
Lubricant
Viscosity [cSt at 40◦]
Composition
LUB A
PN 226
68
Medium Chlorinated + Sulfuric + Phosphorus additives
Mineral Oil base
LUB B
SF 125 A
125
Sulfuric additives
Mineral Oil base
LUB C
PARAFFIN OIL
260
Organic Compound (Hydrocarbons)
High Viscosity
LUB D
DROSERA MS 5
5
Organic Compound (Hydrocarbons)
Low Viscosity
LUB E
DB 4265
2
Carbonates (CaCO3)
Sulfonates (SO3)
Mineral Oil base
LUB F
TDN 81
40
Highly Chlorinated
Mineral Oil base
3.2
Methods
Experiments used for testing whether boundary lubrication is developing
in blanking, uses the materials discussed in section 3.1.
As mentioned
in Section 2 process and simulative tribological testing will be performed.
The aim of creating a boundary film in the punch stem for avoiding galling
is tested by changing the application method and type of the lubricants
in the process test (Punch test) whereas Pin on disk will be executed to
confirm findings during blanking operations.
3.2.1
Pin on Disc
CSM Instruments tribometer is used for Pin on Disk test 3.4. The testing
was following ASTM G99-05 [Standard Test Method for Wear Testing with
a Pin on Disk Apparatus].
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Materials and Methods.
Figure 3.4: CSM Pin-on-Disk Tribometer used for simulative testing.
Test parameters and properties of the materials used in the experiment
are listed in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Pin on Disc Test conditions.
Set up of pin-on-disk test
Parameters
Disk
Normal force
FN = 10N
Material
Vanadis 23
Sliding speed
vrel = 55mm/s
Hardness
64 HRC
Temperature
Tc = 22◦C
Diameter
300 mm
Reruns
2
Lubrication
Immerse
Pin
Material
AISI 316 grade 100
Diameter
6 mm
Hardness
max 39 HRC
Sample Preparation
The material used for the discs is Vanadis 23 from Uddeholm. A 30mm
rod was pleaded and cut in 5 mm thickness at DTU workshop. Regarding
surface finish, every disk [Ø: 30mm and 5mm thick] was manually grinded
and polished up to 4000 grinding paper in order to achieve a ground sur-
face roughness less than 0.8µm [27]. Average Roughness Ra was measured
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Methods
27
for all the specimens using a Taylor Hobson surtronic 4+ stylus profilome-
ter. Each sample roughness was measured 5 times in random directions
perpendicular to the surface texture.The data was post-processed using
SURSAM version 7 and the set up for the analysis is listed in Table 3.5:
Table 3.5: Analysis set up of average roughness Ra.
Parameter
Value
Points per profile
8000
Max vertical range [m]
15
Evaluation length [mm]
4
Ls cut−off [m]
80
Lc filter cut−off [m]
800
The results of the Ra values are plotted in Appendix A.3. After pol-
ished, the specimens were sent to Bodycote for being heat treated to the
desirable hardness. Hardening heat treatment was conducted according
Uddelholm recommendation [33] as follows:
• Stress relieving from cutting
Specimens were heated through to 600–700 ◦C , holding time 2 hours.
Cool slowly to 500 ◦C, then freely in air.
• Hardening
Pre-heating temperature: 450–500◦C and 850–900◦C. Austenitizing
temperature: 1050–1180◦C according Fig3.5.
• Tempering
For cold work applications tempering should always be carried out at
560◦C irrespective of the austenitizing temperature. Temper three
times for one hour at full temperature. The tool should be cooled
to room temperature between the tempers. The retained austenite
content will be less than 1% after this tempering cycle.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Materials and Methods.
Figure 3.5: Austenitizing temperature needed depending on desired
hardness[33].
The specimens are cleaned before and after the experiment. Before the
testing, all disks are rinsing in Heptane and put it in ethanol ultrasonic
cleaning for 20 minutes afterwards. Once the test is finished, the disks
are cleaned again prior measuring. In this case Heptane + Ultrasonic in
Ethanol for 10 minutes is used for removing all dirt and foreign matter
from the specimens.
Volume loss
Pin and disk volume loss were measured using Alicona Infinite Focus
in accordance with AISI G99-05 Standard. Alicona IF vertical resolution
is 40nm when using 5x object magnification, which gives the sensitivity
needed for measuring the pin scar diameter as well as the wear track width
in the disks (Instrument to obtain linear measurement of wear should have
a sensitivity of 2.5µm or better [27]).
The equations for calculate the pin and disk volume loss are 3.2 and 3.3:
pin volume loss =
(πh
6
)( 3d2
4 + h2
)
(3.2)
where,
h = r −[ r2−d2
4
]1/2
d =wear scar diameter
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Methods
29
r =pin end radius.
Assuming there is no significant disk wear.
disk volume loss = 2πR
[
r2sin−1( w
2r
)
−
(w
4
)(
4r2 −w2)1/2]
(3.3)
where,
R = wear track radius
w = wear track width.
Assuming there is no significant pin wear
The experimental plan for pin on disk test is showed in Table 3.6. Seven
conditions where tested, six different lubricants and dry condition. Each
condition is tested twice for reproducibility.
Table 3.6: Experimental plan for Pin on Disk Test.
ID
Lubricant
Repetition
A
B
DRY
1
2
D1
E
LUB A
1
2
G
H
LUB B
1
2
J
K
LUB C
1
2
M
N
LUB D
1
2
O
P
LUB E
1
2
F
I
LUB F
1
2
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Materials and Methods.
3.2.2
Punching Test
The test consist in a blanking tool with two circular punches mounted on an
eccentric press running at 178 RPM. Each punch is hold in a dynamic force
measurement system based on piezoelectric transducer, so compressive and
tensile loading forces are recorded. Figure C.1 shows the blanking tool
design. Set up parameters are listed in table 3.7.
Figure 3.6: Punching Test Set up..
The testing is performed using SS 1.4301 1mm thickness strip which
is mounted on a coil feeder and pulled by a pneumatic feeder installed at
the end of the blanking operation.
Lubrication system is based on a manual control pressure 10 litre tank
from Raziol Zibulla & Sohn GmbH which is giving a controlled lubricant
flow. From the tank two hoses are pouring the lubricant to the blanking
press by two different applying methods. The first one is conventionally
used in the Industry, and its working principle is contact lubrication by
rollers [Figure 3.7].
This applying method lubricates both sides of the
strip with the same amount of lubricant. The second applying method
is by connecting the hoses directly to the blanking tool.
As could be
seen in Figure 3.7, the support plate contains two channels which end up
in a cylindrical reservoir, where the lubricant stays with the purpose of
lubricate all around the punch stem surface .
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Methods
31
Figure 3.7: Immerse (left) and roller (right) applying method..
The pressure tank is cleaned every time the lubricant is changed. Iso-
propyl alcohol (1-Propanol) and water is used for the cleaning process in
order to avoid contamination from all different kinds of EP additives.
During the entire run, the transducers are recording the load versus
displacement of each stroke, therefore the data for every single stroke is
collected. Maximum compressive load coming from punching, along with
maximum tensile load due to backstroke force, are also collected.
A Labview UI is displaying the development of the load displacement
curve for each punch and changing every stroke. The same for the devel-
opment of the backstroke force, where a zoom in view is showed for each
stroke. Maximum load and maximum backstroke force are displayed in a
different plot during the entire experiment; this feature may be used as
a warning system so the operator could be notified when high BS loads
are present and no lubrication is observed so problems like fracture or
entrapment of the punches might potentially avoided.
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Materials and Methods.
Table 3.7: Punch Test conditions.
Set up of Punching Test
Parameters
Strip
Speed
178 spm
Material
Stainles Steel 1.4301
Press
320kN PMB eccentric Press
Thickness
s = 1mm
Feeder
Manual coil feeder
Width
w = 40mm
Amount of lubricant
0.05 l/m2
Punch
Die
Material
Vanadis 23
Material
Vanadis 23
Diameter
d = 1.99 ± 0.1mm
Diameter
D = 2.01 ± 0.1mm
Punch ratio
Ls = d/s = 2.0
Radial clearance
u = (D −d)/2 = 10m
Hardness
62 ± 2HRC
During the development of the load displacement curve for each stroke,
six stages could be distinguished as follows [4] [Fig. 3.8]:
A. Increasing load due to work hardening of the strip material.
B. Decrease in load due to decrease in remaining thickness to be shear
and finally abrupt load decrease due to fracture.
C. During further penetration (after some strokes) a load up to 50% of
the maximum load appears. This is caused by frictional resistance
between blank and die and punch and sheet hole.
D. When the punches reaches the bottom dead center the direction of
the press movement is reversed. The initial part of backstroke occurs
at zero load punch.
E. The punches are pulled back and a backstroke force is registered
caused by frictional contact between the punch stem and the sur-
rounding strip material, which entraps the punch stem due to spring-
back of the blanked sheet.
F. When the punch leaves the sheet the load drops to zero.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Methods
33
Figure 3.8: Load sequence zones in punching.
The experimental plan for punching test is showed in Table 3.8 . Seven
conditions where tested, six different lubricants and dry condition. The
blanking tool contain two punches which are used for reproducibility of
the experiment.
Temperature Measurements
Since temperature is such an important parameter in the development
of a boundary layer, a attempt to measure the temperature locally, close to
the shear zone in the die was done. In order to create a Chemical reaction
in the tool surface, the Temperature of Reaction Activation (TRA) should
be reached, then by using a thermocouple type K, the temperature during
the punching operation is recorded [Figure C.2].
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Materials and Methods.
Table 3.8: Experimental plan for Punchign test.
ID
Heat Treatment
Lubricant
Applying Method
Repetition
0
1
CHT
DRY
-
1
2
E
F
DCT
-
1
2
G
H
CHT
A
Rolls
1
2
I
J
CHT
Punch
1
2
O
P
CHT
B
Rolls
1
2
Q
R
CHT
Punch
1
2
I
II
CHT
C
Rolls
1
2
III
IV
CHT
Punch
1
2
E1
F1
CHT
D
Rolls
1
2
G1
H1
CHT
Punch
1
2
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Methods
35
3.2.3
X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
Boundary film layer thickness is rather thin, usually is no thicker than
0.2 µm [41], then it become white complicated when a reliable technique
is needed to be used for characterize the layer. The technique selected
for performing a surface chemical analysis capable of detecting such thin
layers is X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). This technique consist
of the irradiation of a sample with monochromatic X-rays (Al Kα for this
particular equipment), which releases photoelectrons from the sample sur-
face. Due to the short free mean path (FMP) of the photonelectrons in the
solid, this technique only provides information of the top surface of the
sample (1-5nm) [42], reason why this technique is of interest.
Each atom in the sample has characteristics binding energies of their
inner-shell electrons, which are called adsorption edges. In order to excite
the electrons, the energy of the incident photons bombarded by the X-Ray
gun must be as large as the binding energy of the electrons. When this
energy is exceeded, photoelectrons with excess kinetic energy are released
and collected by a energy dispersive analyzer detector. The detector col-
lects the XPS spectra and is expressed as photoelectron intensity versus
binding energy. An XPS spectrum can have three types of peaks on a
background: photoemission from core electron levels, photoemission from
valence levels, and Auger emission excited by X-rays. The core-level pho-
toelectron peaks are the primary peaks for elemental analysis[43]. In order
to characterize the chemical composition of the surface, core-level photo-
electron peaks will be analyzed using parameters listed in table 3.9.
Thermo ScientificTM K-AlphaTM XPS spectrometer was used for per-
forming the chemical analysis. The equipment is installed at DTU Danchip.
Table 3.9: XPS Analysis Parameters.
Set up for XPS Analysis
Parameters
Disks
Ion Energy
3000eV
Material
Vanadis 23
Mode
Etching
Spot size
400m
Current
0.23nm/sec - 0.38nm/sec
Etching time
5 - 20 sec
Source gun type
Al K alpha (1.487keV)
Etch Depth
30nm to 500nm
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Materials and Methods.
In order to measure the thickness of the boundary layer formed, depth
analysis is made [Figure 3.9]. Depth profile analysis starts by recording
the spectra from the surface, afterwards the surface is etched using an
ion beam gun [Ta2O5 for this equipment] over an specific area where the
first measurement was performed. After each etch cycle, the ion beam is
blanked and another XPS spectra is recorded. This sequence of etching
and spectrum acquisition is repeated until reaching the desired depth.
Data XPS analysis is performed using Thermo ScientificTM software
Thermo Avantage.
Figure 3.9: Experimental procedure for producing XPS depth profile.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER4
Results and
discussion
4.1
Punchign Test
Cryo-treated punches
After 24 hrs of cryogenic treatment, the punches were placed in the
punching tool in order to check if any dimensional change was introduced
by the treatment affecting the performance, but no problems were detected.
The tools were subjected to 1000 strokes and afterwards the punches were
cut and embedded for analyzing the hardness. Figure 4.1 shows microhard-
ness results and standard deviation of the punches tested. Four punches
in total were subjected to hardness testing, two CHT and two DCT. Tak-
Figure 4.1: Influence of heat treatment on then surface hardness of
Vanadis 23 punches. Conventional Heat Treatment CHT vs
Deep Cryo Treatment DCT.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Results and discussion
ing into account the deviation of the measurements, there is no relevant
increment in hardness of the DCT compared to the CHT punches.
Different authors agreed that by doing a cryotreatment step, an in-
crease in hardness is observed in the material [35]. However, for this par-
ticular case, since the DCT was not performed right after tempering but
long time after a CHT, the changes in microstructure were not developed.
In order to obtain the full benefits of cryogenic treatment, the sub zero
stage should be completed after the conventional hardening and before the
tempering treatments [34].
Figure 4.2: Maximum Backstroke Force obtained under dry conditions.
CHT vs DCT Punches.
Maximum BF force each stroke is plotted for both CHT and DCT and
showed in Figure 4.2. In both cases, the maximum BS force is increasing
rapidly from zero up to 1200N and remains constant for several strokes,
until the punches fracture. High tensile stresses are reached in the first
25 strokes.
It is clear that after the very first stroke, the punch stem
is starting to pick up material from the strip, so galling starts developing,
introducing adhesive wear to the punch and tensile stresses due to increase
of diameter which leads the punch to get trapped inside the die.
Figure 4.3 shows the load development curves during a complete cycle
of punching using CHT tools. The measurements from both punches at
the first, 150 and 1500 stroke are showed. Distinctly, the first stroke of
both punches where low tensile loads are recorded, demonstrate that pick
up is not entirely developed. There are some negative measured forces
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Punchign Test
39
(tensile loads) that could be result of entrapment of the punch in the strip
due to springback or that few strip material just started to adhere to the
punch stem. At the stoke 150, galling in the punch stem is completely
developed and will stick to it through the whole punching operation until
sudden fracture.
Figure 4.3: Load development curves under dry conditions using CHT
punches.
Zone C described in Figure 3.8 is starting after 10mm of punch travel
and is increasing proportionally to the number of strokes performed by
the punches. Higher frictional forces are developed as a result of adhesive
wear in the punch stem. We could say that maximum BS forces keeps
steady from stroke 150 to 1500, but the load caused by frictional resistance
between blank and die and punch sheet hole is increasing, this condition
will also affect the performance of the punch and reduce its life. Is not
as harmful as BS forces, since the tool material has higher compressive
strength, but still it will damage the tool.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Results and discussion
Figure 4.4: Load development curves under dry conditions using DCT
punches.
Figure 4.4 shows the load development curves for CHT tools under dry
conditions. The chart is zoomed in in order to focus on the BS tensile
loads. BS forces are plotted for some of the first 50 strokes in order to
illustrate the behaviour of the tensile loads recorded as a result of cold
welding of the strip material to the punch stem.
4.1.1
Different Lubricants
The punches were up and running in semi-automatic mode. The start-stop
of the punching operation is done by foot pedal, and the number of strokes
per experiments vary with the maximum backstroke force obtained in each
stroke. The experiments ends when high tensile loads are registered in or-
der to avoid punch fracture. Punch fracture is not desired since the die
release activity is very time consuming and it could lead to die damage
where die refurbish might be needed. Therefore with non EP lubricants
the duration of the experiments is limited to few hundred strokes while
with EP lubricant it could run for long periods.
Maximum Punch Force
Maximum load recorded during every stroke is showed in Figure 4.5 for
roll lubricated strip and in 4.6 for full immerse punch lubrication. The
punching force needed depends on the geometry of the punch and the
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Punchign Test
41
strip material properties (shear stress and thickness). Equation describes
the formula used to calculate the theoretical punching force needed.
FP = kAP AP = πds
(4.1)
where,
d =Punch diameter
s =sheet thickness
k =Ultimate Tensile Strength, σ0 √
3
Subsequently, the maximum load recorded from the transducers matches
the theoretical punch force needed, so the type of lubricant and the apply-
ing method does not affect the maximum force required.
Figure 4.5: Maximum Load during punching using contact lubrication.
The applying method in all cases is direct contact to the
strip by rolls..
In Figure 4.6, lubricant D data start increasing after 100 strokes. This
increment in compressive loads was because of clogged die due to accu-
mulation of scrap. Then the force applied by the press was not only for
shearing the material but also trying to push out the trapped scrap across
the die. Punch fracture due to high compressive loads occurred once as a
result of clogged die. The die was completely worn after the punch pieces
were released from it, so new dies were produced.
In order to prevent
future die clogging, bigger angular clearance is preferred in the die.
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Results and discussion
Figure 4.6: Maximum Load during punching using contact lubrication.
The applying method in all cases is immerse punches..
Maximum Backstroke Force
When maximum BS force for each stroke is collected and plotted ver-
sus number of strokes, a clear difference between using EP and non-EP
Lubricants is observed. Figures 4.7 and 4.9 shows the maximum BS force
for every stroke and for different lubricants.
From figure 4.7, lubricants C and D behave as in the dry condition,
where no lubricant was added, whereas when using lubricant A and B the
BS force measured is considerably lower.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Punchign Test
43
Figure 4.7: Maximum BS force using different lubricants.The applying
method in all cases is direct contact to the strip by rolls..
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Results and discussion
Pick up will start developing during the first 30 to 50 strokes, and from
there the maximum BS force will keep steady due to constant removing
and development of the picked material to the stem due to the nature
of the operation. This means, each time the galled punch goes up, the
added material could be shaved from the stem. Shaving condition is not
repeated permanently and once the picked up zone increases considerably,
the shaving will stop and higher tensile loads will be introduced until
sudden fracture of the punches.
The transition point where the maximum BS force changes from an
stable tensile load to an incremental linear behaviour varies every exper-
iment. Even under the same conditions, one of the punches could start
developing incremental tensile loads leading to fracture, while the other
could keep steady or increase slowly for several more strokes (Figure 4.8).
This situation is present no matter the applying method of the lubricant,
but it only exist when non EP lubricants are used, so higher BS forces due
to adhesive wear prevail.
Figure 4.8:
Comparison of maximum BS forces in both punches using
Lubricant B..
For the EP lubricants, maximum BS forces remain constant for long
runs.
Some experiments using EP lubricants ran for more than 7000
strokes showing low tensile loads (<200N). This performance is attributed
to a formation of a boundary layer in the punch stem which avoid the sheet
material to be picked up by the punch and reduces adhesive wear.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Punchign Test
45
Both Lub A and Lub B creates boundary lubrication mechanism. Lu-
bricant A boundary film is created by the reaction of Cl with the tool steel
material and Lubricant B is forming a boundary film in the punch stem
that contains S compounds.
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Results and discussion
Figure 4.9: Maximum BS force using different lubricants. The applying
method in all cases is immerse punches..
Comparing Lub C with Lub D, a difference in maximum BS force is
observed. Lubricant C stabilizes at higher BS forces due to being just plain
mineral oil; even though Lub C is considerably more viscous that Lub D
(5cSt vs 220cSt) the fact that Lub D has some EP and AW additives helps
in reducing a bit the maximum BS force during first strokes. In blanking
operations where high normal pressures are occurring, the viscosity of the
lubricant is not relevant for wear reduction. Lub C is more than 40 times
more viscous than Lub D, both oils are considered as plain mineral oils,
nevertheless the maximum BS force results measured from each condition
varies showing slightly lower BS forces for the low viscosity lubricant com-
pared with the high viscosity, the cause for this results lies in the additives
contained in Lub D.
4.1.2
Different Applying Methods
As showed in table 3.8, each lubricant was applied using two different
methods, contact lubrication by rollers and immerse punch stem.
The
maximum BS force collected from the load transducers in the two punches
for each applying method and plotted against the number of strokes.
Backstroke force development is displayed at different strokes for both
punches and a comparison between same lubricant but different applying
method and stroke number is conducted in order to discuss if boundary
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Punchign Test
47
lubrication is generated or not by changing the method.
Lubricant A
Figure 4.10 shows the maximum BS force measured by the transducers
during the whole experiment for both applying methods using Lubricant
A. For Lubricant A, the experiment was running for 1100 strokes with no
noticeable damage to the punches.
Figure 4.10: Maximum BS force changing the applying method. Rolls
vs Punch Lubrication.ILOFORM PN226.
In both applying methods, the maximum BS force stabilizes at a mean
value of 80.41N ± 30.05 for the entire experiment. This means that the lu-
brication mechanism active in both cases is boundary lubrication; therefore
AW properties are increased so adhesive wear is avoided over the punch
stem.
Figure 4.11 shows the BS force development during the punch travel
for strokes 1, 150 and 1000 respectively. From figure 4.11(a), the lowest
peak, showing the maximum tensile load, from stroke 1 is at -75N in case
of punch 1 (front punch) and at -100N for punch 2 (back punch); stroke
1000 shows a similar tensile load peak: -110N for punch 1 and -113N for
punch 2. In relation to contact lubrication by rollers, figure 4.11(b) shows
maximum peaks at -80N and -92N, punch 1 and 2 respectively for the first
stroke and -80N and -44N for the stroke 1000.
Backstroke development for each stroke could tell if boundary lubri-
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Results and discussion
cation mechanism is present. Using Lubricant A (Highly Chlorinated), a
boundary layer is clearly developed in the punch stem. This boundary
layer is avoiding galling in the punch and reducing tensile loads in punch-
ing, leading to increasing tool life.
The mechanism responsible of the
interaction between the lubricant and the punch stem to produce a bound-
ary film, can not be determined by the punch test per se, XPS analysis is
needed in order to perform a chemical analysis of the surface and conclude
whether physical adsorption, chemical adsorption or chemical reaction is
responsible for creating the layer.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: Backstoke force development. Lubricant A. (a) Application
Method: Punch; (b) Application Method: Rolls.
Lubricant B
Figure 4.12 shows the maximum BS force versus the number of strokes
for both applying methods using Lubricant B. For Lubricant B, the ex-
periment was running for 500 strokes with no noticeable damage to the
punches.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Punchign Test
49
Figure 4.12: Maximum BS force changing the applying method. Rolls
vs Punch Lubrication.SF 125 A.
Maximum BS forces obtained with Lubricant B are also rather low.
Figure 4.12 shows the tensile load for each stroke from stroke 1 to stroke
500. In both applying methods, rolls and punch, the BS force read sta-
bilizes at a mean value of 125.24N ± 17.35 so the the loads registered by
punch 1 and punch 2 are similar in magnitude.
Low tensile loads in both scenarios means that boundary lubrication
film is also present when using lubricant containing sulfur as EP additives.
The applying method is not affecting the development of the boundary
layer. Same case as with Lub A, in order to characterize the mechanism
responsible of the interaction between the lubricant and the punch stem,
XPS analysis was carried out, the results are shown in section 4.3. The
punches were not analyzed in XPS since cutting post-process was needed
in order to create a flat surface. It is worth mentioning that XPS analysis
is done for pin on disk specimens, where the contact conditions are well
defined during the whole duration of the experiment.
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Results and discussion
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.13: Backstoke force development. Lubricant B. (a) Application
Method: Punch; (b) Application Method: Rolls.
Punches used with Lubricant B shows higher measured tensile forces
coming from backstoke compared with the once coming from Lubricant A.
Even though S and Cl inorganic compounds are low-shear strength films,
higher measured tensile loads for sulfuric compounds indicates higher τ
[18].
Backstoke load development from stroke 1, 100 and 1000 are shown in
figure 4.13. The load development behaves equivalently when changing the
applying method figures 4.13(a) vs 4.13(b). This results agreed with the
ones obtained with Lub A in terms of observing no evident affectation of
creating the boundary layer by changing the method of how the lubricant
is applied to the process.
Lubricant C
Figure 4.14 shows the maximum BS force using Lubricant C. Under
the use of Lub C, the experiment was running for 500 strokes when contact
lubrication by rollers was applied and for 270 strokes when applying by
immerse punch stem. The reason for stopping the experiment in immerse
punch lubrication was the high tensile loads registered from punch 1 (blue
data). Punch 1 exhibit a linear incremental behaviour reaching more than
2000N BS force at stroke 200.
The experiment was ended in order to
avoid punch fracture and clogged die. However, pink data from immerse
punch stem is following a BS force behavior comparable to red and black
data coming from contact lubrication by rollers. In this case, the BS force
stabilizes at 1112N ± 150. From this value, is a matter of time for the
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Punchign Test
51
picked up zone in the punch, to expands so the load start increasing until
sudden fracture.
Considering Lub C as plain mineral oil with no EP nor AW additives,
the lubricant applying method is not relevant. In any case, the maximum
BF forces are remarkably high and the development of the BS loads shows
pick up development, which will eventually lead to punch fracture.
Figure 4.14: Maximum BS force changing the applying method. Rolls
vs Punch Lubrication.Carl ROTH Paraffin Oil.
Figure 4.15 shows BS force development for punch lubricated and for
contact by rollers application methods. High measured tensile forces start
developing at the fifth stroke , meaning that material from the strip has
already been picked up around the punch stem. By comparing the data ob-
tained in the first stroke to strokes 5, 10 and 100, is clear that no boundary
lubrication mechanism is present when using Lub C.
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Results and discussion
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.15: Backstoke force development. Lubricant C. (a) Application
Method: Punch; (b) Application Method: Rolls.
Lubricant D
Figure 4.16 shows the maximum BS force using Lubricant D. The ex-
periment was running for 500 strokes for both lubrication conditions. Max-
imum BS forces stabilizes at 1092N ±181. After 300 strokes, the BS forces
collected by the rear punch used when lubricating the punch stem started
to show an incremental behavior. Pink data shows the forces measured;
the load started to increase as a result of the additional material added
around the punch stem caused by adhesive wear. After reaching 2500N,
the experiment was decided to stop.
No boundary lubrication mechanism is present since AW additives of
Lub D does not react with the tool material.
Figure 4.17 present the BF force development for stroke 1,10 and 100
respectively. From each sub-figure, it is appreciable how the tensile load
increase from stroke 1, where no strip material has been added to the
punch stem , towards following strokes. Additionally, by contrasting fig-
ures 4.17(a) and 4.17(b), the applying method is again not affecting the
BS forces due to the chemistry of the lubricant used.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Punchign Test
53
Figure 4.16: Maximum BS force changing the applying method. Rolls
vs Punch Lubrication. Drosera MS 5.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.17: Backstoke force development. Lubricant D. (a) Application
Method: Punch; (b) Application Method: Rolls.
Temperature Measurements
The temperature measurements were obtained by a K type thermocou-
ple placed close to the front die. The data was acquired using the NI 9211
thermocouple input module linked to a Labview VI that was collecting the
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Results and discussion
data every 100ms. The experiment was conducted for a lubricated and dry
condition. The lubricant used was Lub B and the applying method was
done manually with a brush. The measurements obtained are showed in
figure 4.18.
Figure 4.18: Temperature development during blanking operation.
K
type thermocouple read close to shearing zone in the blank-
ing die.
The idea is to measure in situ the process temperature in order to link
the development of the boundary layer with the temperature of reaction
activation. The blue line shows the temperature close to the shearing edge
which reach an steady state before 50 strokes. Regarding dry condition,
the punches used were the same as in lubricated condition and the mea-
surements were done right after the lubricated experiment. The first 160
strokes, the BS forces measured were as low as in boundary lubricated
condition, hence same behaviour in temperature development is observed.
After 160 strokes, the BS forces started to substantially increase and so
the temperature. The experiment stopped after 300 strokes due to punch
fracture.
Considering the importance of the TRA in boundary lubrication and
knowing that measuring the temperature locally in the shearing zone is
quite challenging, the idea was to perform FEA simulations for long runs
==PAGE:67==
4.1 Punchign Test
55
in order to compare the experimental temperature measurements with the
simulated ones at the point where the thermocouple was placed, so after
a reasonable fit between both methods, the temperature in the shearing
zone could be predicted.
The FEA software selected for this project was iForm. Two different
damage criteria were used for predict the occurrence of a crack in metal
components, Cockcroft-Latham and Shear:
DCockcroft−Latham =
∫σ1
¯σ d¯ϵ
(4.2)
DShear =
∫τ
¯σdγ +
∫3σm
2¯σ dγ
(4.3)
Element size and design of the mesh is showed in Appendix D. After a
convergence study a mesh with 3343 nodes and 3264 elements with most
elements located in shearing zone was used for all the simulations.
Figure 4.19: Mesh used for punching simulations. Figure from i-Form.
The results obtained from i-Form using different Damage criteria are
shown in figure 4.20
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Results and discussion
Figure 4.20: Maximum simulated loads during punching using i-Form.
Proper shearing condition in blanking was not able to be simulated
since no re-meshing option is possible in i-Form. Using any of the damage
models, the critical damage was very localized so the crack started just
after the punch was beginning its travel downwards. Rollover and shear
zone length was negligible during simulation contrary to what was occur-
ring during the experiments, therefore it was decided to stop efforts in
FEA due to time concerns.
4.2
Pin on Disk
After performing Pin on disk experiment, two different findings were ob-
tained. The first one, which was obtained directly from the tribometer, is
the measured coefficient of friction (CoF) versus time required to complete
the selected sliding distance (200m). The intention with this measurements
is to evaluate if boundary film layer in the disk is created so a drop in the
coefficient of friction of the system is detected. The CoF obtained from
the system could support the idea of creating a boundary layer in the disk,
however is not telling something about the chemistry of the surface, in
order to affirm this, XPS analysis of the disks used was carried out and
presented in section 4.3.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Pin on Disk
57
The second result that could be obtained, perhaps more qualitative, is
an analysis of the wear track width and scar diameter from the disk and
pin respectively. This particular measurement is performed using Alicona
for measuring the dimensions of the critical geometries and the calcula-
tions for the pin and disk volume loss are given by equations 3.2 and 3.3.
Results of the CoF during the time required to complete the sliding
distance are plotted in figure 4.21 for Lub B, C, E and F. Mean CoFs and
its standard deviation from the two repetitions of all the lubricants tested
are showed in figure 4.22.
Figure 4.21: Tribomeasurement showing coefficient of friction behavior
during Pin on Disk test using different lubricants.
In figure 4.21, three different behaviors appear.
Lub B and Lub C
follows an exponential decay curve that reaches its final value after the
first quarter of the experiment. Both lubricants contain EP additives, thus
a boundary film could be developed as a results of contact and increasing
temperature during the test. Lubricant C instead, is in steady state from
the beginning of the experiment, since no EP additives are involved in the
lubricant, no change in CoF is noted. Finally, Lub E which contains CaCO
shows an unstable behavior and is characterized for having an abrupt drop
in CoF after three quarters of the experiment. CaCO is a carbonic salt
that could be chemical adsorbed to iron oxide and create a metallic salt
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Results and discussion
(Calcium Stearate), meaning boundary lubrication film could be promoted.
Figure 4.22: Pin Volume Loss and Friction coefficient obtained by Pin
on Disk test.
Wear scar diameter measurements taken with Alicona are shown in Ap-
pendix D.0.2. Disk wear track width was quite hard to measure since disk
material is harder than the pins, therefore an assumption of no significant
disk is made in order to calculate pin volume loos as equation 3.2 states.
Additionally. figure 4.22 shows Pin Volume Loss for all the lubricants
used. Dry condition disk presents severe wear as expected, reaching pin
volume loss remarkably higher than the lubricated scenarios.
Lub D pin volume loss is the next pin with appreciably wear. Despite
AW additives are added to this paraffin oil, the temperature rise and low
viscosity are factor that promote film breakdown.
Lub A and Lub B shows better AW properties than dry condition and
Lub D. Higher viscosity and Cl and S EP additives helped pins to decrease
wear.
Pins used with Lub C, E and F exhibit smaller wear diameters, meaning
low pin volume loss.
For lubricant E and F this outcome make sense
because both lubricants contain EP additives that prevent metal-to-metal
contact avoiding wear. Contrary to expectations, Lub C which is just plain
mineral oil, obtains an incredible performance in pin on disk test, having
lower pin volume losses than even high endurance lubricant such as Lub F,
==PAGE:71==
4.3 X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
59
which is a highly chlorinated paraffin oil. One reason that could explain
this performance is the tribological conditions of the experiment. The load
applied perpendicular to the disk is 10N, and since Lub C is more viscous
than the others, it may occur that the liquid film between pin and disk is
not broken, so the contact pressure between both materials is lower when
using Lub C.
4.3
X-Ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy
The boundary lubrication mechanism developed during punching test by
using lubricants containing EP additives have been investigated.
Since
time of contact in punching operations between punch and strip is rather
short but repetitive, by choosing pin on disk test, the contact could exist
for long periods and because is a laboratory test, where contact conditions
are well defined, it is expected to create the environment needed to de-
velop the boundary film which is developed in the punching test and to be
studied using XPS.
XPS-studies were conducted to investigate the effect of the pin on
disk test on the chemical interaction between punch stem surface and the
EP-additives and compare against non-EP lubricants. The idea is to char-
acterize weather or not boundary film layer is developed doing chemical
surface analysis, and identify the type of layer.
As mentioned in section 2.1.2.4, the boundary mechanism responsible
of the interactions between the tool surface and the lubricant can be asso-
ciated with physical adsorption, chemical adsorption or chemical reaction;
depending on the chemistry of the lubricant and process conditions. Each
working principle will create a different layer. Using XPS technique will
allow to measure the binding energy of each element and also differentiate
between its chemical state.
With this, an analysis of the type of layer
presented in the surface is possible to perform.
4.3.1
Survey Analysis
Figure 4.23 shows the XPS-spectra of all disks after PoD test. The spectra
is obtained from the top layer, before starting etching. The identification
of the peaks showed in every spectra was done using Thermo ScientificTM
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Results and discussion
software Thermo Avantage, and the binding energies values for the ele-
ments and chemical states of the compounds that were investigated are
shown in table 4.1
Figure 4.23: Survey Spectrum from all the samples tested. A shift of
0.5105 is applied to every spectrum for visualization.
Some of the peaks registered low signal and are not clearly visible in
the full binding energy spectra, however detailed analysis of single Ele-
ment binding energy is possible to perform using the post-processing data
analysis software, and it was performed to guarantee the existence of the
elements of interest.
An identification of elements and its chemical states from the spectra
analysis of each disk was carried out. After this identification, a depth
profile using the spectra form each etching stage could be plotted using
the Thermo Avantage.
4.3.2
Depth Profile
Atomic Weight Percent versus Etch Depth is plotted for each specimen
starting from the surface through the bulk, 200nm etching depth for all
lubricated cases is analyzed. In case of the dry sample, since no other
chemical reaction but corrosion is expected, the analysis is done for 50nm.
==PAGE:73==
4.3 X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
61
Table 4.1: Binding Energy of Elements and Compounds analyzed with
XPS..
Binding Energy of Compounds
Element
Compound
Binding Energy [eV]
C
C-C Adventitious
284.8
C-C/C-H
285
Metal Carbide
283
Fe
Fe Metal
706.7
Fe Oxide
709.6-710.8
O
Metal Oxide
529-530
Cr
Cr Metal
574.3
Cr Oxide
576
Mo
Mo Metal
228
Mo Oxide
229-233.1
W
W Metal
31.6
W Oxide
33.1-36.1
V
V Metal
512.3
V Oxide
517-1
S
Metal Sulfide
161.5
Cl
Organic Cl
200
Metal Chloride
198.5-199
Ca
Calcium Carbonate
347.2
Figure 4.24 shows the depth profile for the dry sample. The Pin on Disk
experiment was performed under regular atmosphere, and since virgin sur-
faces are generated as a result of abrasive wear, oxidation is promoted. The
surface analysis shows three main elements, Fe, O and C. This is result-
ing from the Iron Oxide layer generated during the experiment. Carbon
content in the surface is also detected because organic solvents (heptane
+ ethanol) were used for cleaning process [44].
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Results and discussion
Figure 4.24: Depth Profile generated using Thermo Avantage for the dry
sample.
Figures 4.25 and 4.26 shows the depth profiles for all the specimens
tested. Lubricants used also exhibit anti-corrosion properties, reason why
Oxygen content is lower than in the dry sample. Once again, high Carbon
content is detected at the surface and decreasing rapidly towards the bulk.
The behavior of the C content is due to the same reason as in the dry
sample, contamination coming from the organic solvents used for remove
the rest of lubricant and wear particles from PoD test. Other alloying
elements such as W, V, Cr and Mo are not always detected in the top
surface layer analyzed. This depends on the specimen analyzed, in some
cases Cr and Mo are detected.
==PAGE:75==
4.3 X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
63
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.25: Depth Profile obtained from XPS. (a) Sample D1. Lubri-
cant A; (b) Sample G. Lubricant B; (c) Sample I. Lubricant
C and (d) Sample M. Lubricant D .
Non-EP additive lubricants C & D shows a similar chemical composi-
tion depth profile. Figure 4.25(c) and 4.25(d) presents lubricant C and D
obtained profiles. It is noticeable how the Oxygen content is not as high as
dry sample because of the anti-corrosive properties of the lubricants men-
tioned earlier. In the two cases, the surface contain an Iron Oxide layer
that could be developed even before PoD as a result of ambient interaction
of the steel specimens.
Depth profile obtained when using Lubricant A is shown in figure
==PAGE:76==
64
4 Results and discussion
4.25(a). Similar Fe an C content is observed while O is present at lower
AWP. This reduction in O content is balanced with the appearance of
Sulfer content. A zoomed figure is showed in Appendix D.9 for better vi-
sualization. Lubricant A is a medium Cl + S + P EP additives lubricant,
nevertheless, no Cl peak was detected in sample D1 using XPS.
Lubricant B, which contains only sulfuric additives, do emit signal
of peaks at S binding energy. The signal is detected at 161.5eV which
corresponds to Metal Sulfide but the AWP reads are really low. On the
other hand, Mo content is reaching 10 AWP, although Vanadis 23 has
only 5% of Mo. This inconsistency could be attributed to the fact that
S2s region strongly overlaps Mo3d when sulfur is present as sulfate, then
overlapped peaks are detected as only one element [45].
Deeper depth
analysis was carried out in order to evaluate the layer thickness of the S
containing layer. The analysis was conducted until 600nm and high Mo
content is still detected (Figure D.12).
A scanned XPS analysis focusing on this particular binding energy
overlapping region could be done as further experiments to clearly identify
both elements and conclude the composition of the sulfates.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.26: Depth Profile obtained from XPS. (a) Sample O. Lubricant
E; and (b) Sample F. Lubricant F.
Figure 4.26(a) shows the depth profile of the specimen O, where Lu-
bricant E was used. Lub E contains Carbonates + Sulfonates additives in
a mineral oil. Zoomed plot is showed in Appendix D.11 for visualization
of the S content line. Mo content exhibit the same condition observed as
==PAGE:77==
4.3 X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
65
in Lub B with overlapping Mo and S peaks. Peak detected at 161.5eV
shows that Metal sulphide is present and compared to Lub B the signal
obtained at that intensity is more stable and show higher AWP. In both
cases, a boundary film is formed and detected using XPS. This boundary
film composed by either sulphide or sulfate reacts with the steel surface
by chemical reaction.
Lubricant F is a highly chlorinated paraffin heavy duty forming fluid.
Despite Lub F was not used in the punching test, the fact that Lub A been
a medium Cl oil do develop a boundary film and observing the results from
PoD where the pin used with Lub F present low volume loss, a chlorine-
base compound is expected to be observed using XPS method. Opposite
to the hypothesis of been able to detect Cl peaks with XPS, figure 4.26(b)
shows the depth profile of specimen F, and no Cl content is detected.
Klocke [19] mentions that contrary to several authors, the boundary layer
developed by using lubricants with Chlorine-containing additives is not
reacting chemically with the steel surface but physically adsorbed instead.
If Cl-containing lubricants are physically adsorbed to the surface , the
cleaning method used after PoD test could detach the layer. In both Cl
contain lubricants, A and F, no Cl peak is detected by XPS when cleaning
the samples using heptane + ultrasonic ethanol bath.
Non Cleaned Samples
A third PoD run for lubricants B and F was performed with the pur-
pose of analyzing if the cleaning method was affecting the boundary layer
formed during the test. For this two experiments, the cleaning process
was limited to pure distilled water. Figure 4.27 shows the survey spectrum
analysis from Lub B and Lub F and compares the Cleaned vs non-Cleaned
spectra. The cleaning method used was not able to remove the organic
EP-additives after the test, then the spectra obtained from the first layer
of non-cleaned samples shows C and Cl peaks. High intensity in C peaks
are coming from C-C and C-H bonds from hydrocarbons (C12H26) and
from chlorinated paraffin (C14H24Cl6) which are the main components of
the lubricants used.
==PAGE:78==
66
4 Results and discussion
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.27: Survey Spectrum comparing cleaned vs non-cleaned sam-
ples (a) Sample C. Lubricant B; (b) Sample L. Lubricant F
.
Depth profile analysis to a depth of 30nm was performed using XPS.
Low current (0.23nm/s) and low etching time (3sec) were used in order
to obtain measurements each 0.69nm. The results obtained are displayed
in figure 4.28.
Figure 4.28(a) shows the chemical composition profile from the outer
surface towards 30nm inside the bulk for Lubricant B sample. The profile
contains mostly C and low concentrations of O, S and Fe, see Appendix
D.13 for clear visualization. High Carbon content is coming from the rests
of lubricant used during PoD.
Figure 4.28(b) shows the composition depth profile when using Lub
F. Carbon and Chlorine content is g detected; Oxygen content is also
detected but just the first 5 −8nm. Higher Cl content is observed in the
top 3nm and after that point it drops and stabilizes at around 10 AWP.
For C content the behavior is the opposite as in Cl, it starts at lower AWP
but increases reaching an steady state of 88 AWP.
The Cl content stabilizes towards the bulk. This observations could be
described by a boundary layer that is physically adsorbed and grows from
a preferred direction from the surface and is piled up for at least 27nm.
The top 3nm where higher Cl content is observed could be result from
contamination of Cl ions because of handling.
==PAGE:79==
4.3 X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
67
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.28: Depth Profile obtained from XPS comparing cleaned vs non-
cleaned samples (a) Sample C. Lubricant B; (b) Sample L.
Lubricant F .
The binding energy of the Cl peaks detected for non-cleaned specimen
is 201.1eV . Chlorine chemical states: Organic Chloride and Metal chloride,
has binding energies of 200 and 198.5-199 eV respectively.
Since from
figure 4.28(b), no metal content is observed, organic Cl in most likely to
be present at the sample. The −CCl3 group exhibit excellent ability to
reduce friction under high loads [18]. The adsorption film forms primarily
in a non reactive material, where covalent-ionic bonds generate dipoles
that increase the adsorption strength of the additive molecules [19] as in
FeO layer developed in the tool surface. This does not mean that physical
adsorption can not happen with steel surface but higher electronegativity
means higher level of adsorption.
In case that non physical adsorption could be created between the steel
surface and −CCl3 group, then parameters used for PoD could not be
sufficient to develop Cl-containing boundary layer, due to lack of contact
pressure or temperature. In order to obtain the TRA for Cl and Vanadis
23, DTA might be consider as a evaluation method.
==PAGE:80==
68
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER5
Conclusion
Backstroke forces measurements were obtained successfully from the lu-
bricant test for punching and blanking. At high normal loads, non EP
lubricants (Lub C and D) behaves as in dry condition. Because of the
tight tolerances between punch and die, the lubricant is not able to flow
between punch and strip, so adhesive wear is present when no boundary
layer is developed around the punch stem. Using non EP lubricants in
punching and blanking will start pick up development around the punch
stem leading high BS forces that will decrease tool life.
When using lubricants containing Cl and S EP additives as is the
case for Lub A and B , the BS forces measured from the experiments are
considerably low. Low BS forces are measured as a result of boundary
lubrication appearing in the system. Boundary layer around the punch
stem avoid adhesive wear so tool life is increased.
When blanking 1mm thickness stainless steel strip, the BS forces re-
main low regardless the lubricant applying method used. When blanking
thicker gauges, the applying method could do create a difference since the
contact between punch and lubricant when using lubricated strip by rollers
will not make contact around the whole punch stem surface.
Temperature development measurements close to the shearing zone
stabilizes after the first 50 strokes when boundary lubrication is observed.
Using FEM simulations, the temperature in the punch could be predicted
in order to study the TRA need to create the chemical reaction. Unfortu-
nately, the FEM simulations performed for this project were not completed
adequately, so the comparison between simulated and experimental data
was not carried out.
Pin on Disk simulative tribological test allows the study of interac-
tion between lubricant and the tool surface. Lubricants containing EP-
additives (Lub A, B, E and F) provoke higher wear resistance and decrease
the friction coefficient in the system. Lub C reflect low volume losses de-
spite its composition. The high viscosity of Lub C decrease the normal
load during the test reducing wear. Used disks from the PoD are good
samples for running chemical surface analysis with XPS.
XPS is a good technique for doing chemical surface analysis when
==PAGE:82==
70
5 Conclusion
boundary lubrication film is wanted to be characterized. Sulfur contain-
ing EP lubricants create a boundary film that is possible to be detected
using XPS. A cleaning process using organic solvents to remove lubricant
debris and contamination is recommended and will not affect the measur-
ing. S-containing lubricants is chemically reacting with the tool surface
forming a new compound that works as boundary layer. Disks used with
Cl-containing lubricants does not show any Cl peaks during XPS measure-
ments. Cleaning process with organic solvents could affect the boundary
film in case it is physically adsorbed. By using distilled water for cleaning
Cl-containing disks, Cl content is detected with XPS.
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIXA
Metal Forming
Tribology Tests
• Simulative metal working tests.
• Process metal working tests.
• Standard Test Method for Wear Testing with a Pin-on-disk Appara-
tus.
• Average surface roughness for PoD test.
==PAGE:84==
72
A Metal Forming Tribology Tests
Figure A.1: Simulative tests subgroups [26].
==PAGE:85==
A Metal Forming Tribology Tests
73
Figure A.2: Process tests subgroups [26].
==PAGE:86==
Designation: G 99 – 95a (Reapproved 2000)e1
Standard Test Method for
Wear Testing with a Pin-on-Disk Apparatus1
This standard is issued under the ﬁxed designation G 99; the number immediately following the designation indicates the year of original
adoption or, in the case of revision, the year of last revision. A number in parentheses indicates the year of last reapproval. A superscript
epsilon (e) indicates an editorial change since the last revision or reapproval.
e1 NOTE—Editorial corrections were made throughout in May 2000.
1. Scope
1.1 This test method describes a laboratory procedure for
determining the wear of materials during sliding using a
pin-on-disk apparatus. Materials are tested in pairs under
nominally non-abrasive conditions. The principal areas of
experimental attention in using this type of apparatus to
measure wear are described. The coefficient of friction may
also be determined.
1.2 The values stated in SI units are to be regarded as
standard.
1.3 This standard does not purport to address all of the
safety concerns, if any, associated with its use. It is the
responsibility of the user of this standard to establish appro-
priate safety and health practices and determine the applica-
bility of regulatory limitations prior to use.
2. Referenced Documents
2.1 ASTM Standards:
E 122 Practice for Choice of Sample Size to Estimate a
Measure of Quality for a Lot or Process2
E 177 Practice for Use of the Terms Precision and Bias in
ASTM Test Methods2
E 178 Practice for Dealing with Outlying Observations2
G 40 Terminology Relating to Wear and Erosion3
2.2
Other Standard:4
DIN-50324 Testing of Friction and Wear
3. Summary of Test Method
3.1 For the pin-on-disk wear test, two specimens are re-
quired. One, a pin with a radiused tip, is positioned perpen-
dicular to the other, usually a ﬂat circular disk. A ball, rigidly
held, is often used as the pin specimen. The test machine
causes either the disk specimen or the pin specimen to revolve
about the disk center. In either case, the sliding path is a circle
on the disk surface. The plane of the disk may be oriented
either horizontally or vertically.
NOTE 1—Wear results may differ for different orientations.
3.1.1 The pin specimen is pressed against the disk at a
speciﬁed load usually by means of an arm or lever and attached
weights. Other loading methods have been used, such as,
hydraulic or pneumatic.
NOTE 2—Wear results may differ for different loading methods.
3.2 Wear results are reported as volume loss in cubic
millimetres for the pin and the disk separately. When two
different materials are tested, it is recommended that each
material be tested in both the pin and disk positions.
3.3 The amount of wear is determined by measuring appro-
priate linear dimensions of both specimens before and after the
test, or by weighing both specimens before and after the test. If
linear measures of wear are used, the length change or shape
change of the pin, and the depth or shape change of the disk
wear track (in millimetres) are determined by any suitable
metrological technique, such as electronic distance gaging or
stylus proﬁling. Linear measures of wear are converted to wear
volume (in cubic millimetres) by using appropriate geometric
relations. Linear measures of wear are used frequently in
practice since mass loss is often too small to measure precisely.
If loss of mass is measured, the mass loss value is converted to
volume loss (in cubic millimetres) using an appropriate value
for the specimen density.
3.4 Wear results are usually obtained by conducting a test
for a selected sliding distance and for selected values of load
and speed. One set of test conditions that was used in an
interlaboratory measurement series is given in Table 1 and
Table 2 as a guide. Other test conditions may be selected
depending on the purpose of the test.
3.5 Wear results may in some cases be reported as plots of
wear volume versus sliding distance using different specimens
for different distances. Such plots may display non-linear
relationships between wear volume and distance over certain
portions of the total sliding distance, and linear relationships
over other portions. Causes for such differing relationships
include initial “break-in” processes, transitions between re-
gions of different dominant wear mechanisms, etc. The extent
of such non-linear periods depends on the details of the test
system, materials, and test conditions.
3.6 It is not recommended that continuous wear depth data
1 This test method is under the jurisdiction of ASTM Committee G02 on Wear
and Erosion and is the direct responsibility of Subcommittee G02.40 on Non-
Abrasive Wear.
Current edition approved Nov. 10, 1995. Published January 1996. Originally
published as G 99–90. Last previous edition G 99 – 95.
2 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Vol 14.02.
3 Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Vol 03.02.
4 Available from Beuth Verlag GmbH, Burggrafenstrasse 6, 1000 Berlin 30,
Germany.
1
Copyright © ASTM, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959, United States.
==PAGE:87==
obtained from position-sensing gages be used because of the
complicated effects of wear debris and transfer ﬁlms present in
the contact gap, and interferences from thermal expansion or
contraction.
4. Signiﬁcance and Use
4.1 The amount of wear in any system will, in general,
depend upon the number of system factors such as the applied
load, machine characteristics, sliding speed, sliding distance,
the environment, and the material properties. The value of any
wear test method lies in predicting the relative ranking of
material combinations. Since the pin-on-disk test method does
not attempt to duplicate all the conditions that may be
experienced in service (for example; lubrication, load, pres-
sure, contact geometry, removal of wear debris, and presence
of corrosive environment), there is no ensurance that the test
will predict the wear rate of a given material under conditions
differing from those in the test.
5. Apparatus
5.1 General Description—Fig. 1 shows a schematic draw-
ing of a typical pin-on-disk wear test system, and photographs
of two differently designed apparatuses.5 One type of typical
system consists of a driven spindle and chuck for holding the
revolving disk, a lever-arm device to hold the pin, and
attachments to allow the pin specimen to be forced against the
revolving disk specimen with a controlled load. Another type
of system loads a pin revolving about the disk center against a
stationary disk. In any case the wear track on the disk is a
5 A number of other reported designs for pin-on-disk systems are given in “A
Catalog of Friction and Wear Devices,” American Society of Lubrication Engineers
(1973). The sole source of supply of commercially built machines known to the
committee at this time is Falex Corp., 1020 Airpark Dr., Sugar Grove, IL 60554. If
you are aware of alternative suppliers, please provide this information to ASTM
Headquarters. Your comments will receive careful consideration at a meeting of the
responsible technical committee, 1 which you may attend.
TABLE 1 Characteristics of the Interlaboratory Wear Test Specimens
NOTE 1—See Note 4 in 10.4 for information.
Composition (weight% )
Microstructure
Hardness (HV 10)
RoughnessA
Rz(mean) (µm)
Ra(mean) (µm)
Steel ball (100 Cr6) (AISI 52 100)B
Diameter 10 mm
←
1.35 to 1.65 Cr
0.95 to 1.10 C
0.15 to 0.35 Si
0.25 to 0.45 Mn
martensitic with minor carbides
and austenite
838 6 21
0.100
0.010
Steel disc (100 Cr6) (AISI 52 100)C
Diameter 40 mm
←<0.030 P
<0.030 S
martensitic with minor carbides
and austenite
852 6 14
0.952
0.113
Alumina ball, diameter 5 10 mmD
Alumina disc, diameter 5 40.6 mmD
←
←
95 % Al2O3 (with addi-
tives of TiO2,
MgO and ZnO)
equi-granular alpha alumina
with very minor secondary
phases
1610 6 101 (HV 0.2)
1599 6 144 (HV 0.2)
1.369
0.968
0.123
0.041
A Measured by stylus proﬁlometry. Rz is maximum peak-to-valley roughness. Ra is arithmetic average roughness.
B Standard ball-bearing balls (SKF).
C Standard spacers for thrust bearings (INA).
D Manufactured by Compagnie Industrielle des Ceramiques Electroniques, France.
TABLE 2 Results of the Interlaboratory TestsA
NOTE 1— See Note 4 in 10.4.
NOTE 2—Numbers in parentheses refer to all data received in the tests. In accordance with Practice E 178, outlier data values were identiﬁed in some
cases and discarded, resulting in the numbers without parentheses. The differences are seen to be small.
NOTE 3—Values preceded by 6 are one standard deviation.
NOTE 4—Between eleven and twenty laboratories provided these data.
NOTE 5—Calculated quantities (for example, wear volume) are given as mean values only.
NOTE 6—Values labeled “NM” were found to be smaller than the reproducible limit of measurement.
NOTE 7—A similar compilation of test data is given in DIN–50324.
Results (ball) (disk)
Specimen Pairs
Steel-steel
Alumina-steel
Steel-alumina
Alumina-alumina
Ball wear scar diameter
(mm)
2.11 6 0.27
(2.11 6 0.27)
NM
2.08 6 0.35
(2.03 6 0.41)
0.36 0.06
(0.3 6 0.06)
Ball wear volume (10−3
mm3)
198
(198)
...
186
(169)
0.08
(0.08)
Number of values
102
(102)
...
60
(64)
56
(59)
Disk wear scar width (mm)
NM
0.64 6 0.12
(0.64 6 0.12)
NM
NM
Disk wear volume (10−3
mm3)
...
480
(480)
...
...
Number of values
...
60
(60)
...
...
Friction coefficient
0.60 6 0.11
0.76 6 0.14
0.60 6 0.12
0.41 6 0.08
Number of values
109
75
64
76
A Test conditions: F 5 10 N; v 5 0.1 ms −1, T 5 23°C; relative humidity range 12 to 78 %; laboratory air; sliding distance 1000 m; wear track (nominal) diameter 5 32
mm; materials: steel 5 AISI 52 100; and alumina 5 a-Al 2O3.
G 99
2
==PAGE:88==
circle, involving multiple wear passes on the
same track. The system may have a friction force measuring
system, for example, a load cell, that allows the coefficient of
friction to be determined.
5.2 Motor Drive—A variable speed motor, capable of main-
taining constant speed (61 % of rated full load motor speed)
under load is required. The motor should be mounted in such
a manner that its vibration does not affect the test. Rotating
speeds are typically in the range 0.3 to 3 rad/s (60 to 600
r/min).
5.3 Revolution Counter—The machine shall be equipped
with a revolution counter or its equivalent that will record the
number of disk revolutions, and preferably have the ability to
shut off the machine after a pre-selected number of revolutions.
5.4 Pin Specimen Holder and Lever Arm— In one typical
system, the stationary specimen holder is attached to a lever
arm that has a pivot. Adding weights, as one option of loading,
produces a test force proportional to the mass of the weights
applied. Ideally, the pivot of the arm should be located in the
plane of the wearing contact to avoid extraneous loading forces
due to the sliding friction. The pin holder and arm must be of
substantial construction to reduce vibrational motion during the
test.
5.5 Wear Measuring Systems—Instruments to obtain linear
measures of wear should have a sensitivity of 2.5 µm or better.
Any balance used to measure the mass loss of the test specimen
shall have a sensitivity of 0.1 mg or better; in low wear
situations greater sensitivity may be needed.
6. Test Specimens and Sample Preparation
6.1 Materials—This test method may be applied to a variety
of materials. The only requirement is that specimens having the
speciﬁed dimensions can be prepared and that they will
withstand the stresses imposed during the test without failure
or excessive ﬂexure. The materials being tested shall be
described by dimensions, surface ﬁnish, material type, form,
composition, microstructure, processing treatments, and inden-
tation hardness (if appropriate).
6.2 Test Specimens—The typical pin specimen is cylindrical
or spherical in shape. Typical cylindrical or spherical pin
NOTE 1—F is the normal force on the pin, d is the pin or ball diameter, D is the disk diameter, R is the wear track radius, and w is the rotation velocity
of the disk.
FIG. 1 (a) Schematic of pin-on-disk wear test system. (b ) Photographs of two different designs.
G 99
3
==PAGE:89==
specimen diameters range from 2 to 10 mm. The typical disk
specimen diameters range from 30 to 100 mm and have a
thickness in the range of 2 to 10 mm. Specimen dimensions
used in an interlaboratory test with pin-on-disk systems are
given in Table 1.
6.3 Surface Finish—A ground surface roughness of 0.8 µm
(32 µin.) arithmetic average or less is usually recommended.
NOTE 3—Rough surfaces make wear scar measurement difficult.
6.3.1 Care must be taken in surface preparation to avoid
subsurface damage that alters the material signiﬁcantly. Special
surface preparation may be appropriate for some test programs.
State the type of surface and surface preparation in the report.
7. Test Parameters
7.1 Load—Values of the force in Newtons at the wearing
contact.
7.2 Speed—The relative sliding speed between the contact-
ing surfaces in metres per second.
7.3 Distance—The accumulated sliding distance in meters.
7.4 Temperature—The temperature of one or both speci-
mens at locations close to the wearing contact.
7.5 Atmosphere—The atmosphere (laboratory air, relative
humidity, argon, lubricant, etc.) surrounding the wearing con-
tact.
8. Procedure
8.1 Immediately prior to testing, and prior to measuring or
weighing, clean and dry the specimens. Take care to remove all
dirt and foreign matter from the specimens. Use non-
chlorinated, non-ﬁlm-forming cleaning agents and solvents.
Dry materials with open grains to remove all traces of the
cleaning ﬂuids that may be entrapped in the material. Steel
(ferromagnetic) specimens having residual magnetism should
be demagnetized. Report the methods used for cleaning.
8.2 Measure appropriate specimen dimensions to the nearest
2.5 µm or weigh the specimens to the nearest 0.0001 g.
8.3 Insert the disk securely in the holding device so that the
disk is ﬁxed perpendicular (61°) to the axis of the resolution.
8.4 Insert the pin specimen securely in its holder and, if
necessary, adjust so that the specimen is perpendicular (61°) to
the disk surface when in contact, in order to maintain the
necessary contact conditions.
8.5 Add the proper mass to the system lever or bale to
develop the selected force pressing the pin against the disk.
8.6 Start the motor and adjust the speed to the desired value
while holding the pin specimen out of contact with the disk.
Stop the motor.
8.7 Set the revolution counter (or equivalent) to the desired
number of revolutions.
8.8 Begin the test with the specimens in contact under load.
The test is stopped when the desired number of revolutions is
achieved. Tests should not be interrupted or restarted.
8.9 Remove the specimens and clean off any loose wear
debris. Note the existence of features on or near the wear scar
such as: protrusions, displaced metal, discoloration, microc-
racking, or spotting.
8.10 Remeasure the specimen dimensions to the nearest 2.5
µm or reweigh the specimens to the nearest 0.0001 g, as
appropriate.
8.11 Repeat the test with additional specimens to obtain
sufficient data for statistically signiﬁcant results.
9. Calculation and Reporting
9.1 The wear measurements should be reported as the
volume loss in cubic millimetres for the pin and disk, sepa-
rately.
9.1.1 Use the following equations for calculating volume
losses when the pin has initially a spherical end shape of radius
R and the disk is initially ﬂat, under the conditions that only
one of the two members wears signiﬁcantly:
pin ~spherical end! volume loss, mm3
(1)
5 p ~wear scar diameter, mm!4
64 ~sphere radius, mm!
assuming that there is no signiﬁcant disk wear. This is an
approximate geometric relation that is correct to 1 % for (wear
scar diameter/sphere radius) < 0.3, and is correct to 5 % for
(wear scar diameter/sphere radius) < 0.7. The exact equation is
given in Appendix X1.
disk volume loss, mm3
(2)
5 p ~wear track radius, mm!~ track width, mm!3
6 ~sphere radius, mm!
assuming that there is no signiﬁcant pin wear. This is an
approximate geometric relation that is correct to 1 % for (wear
track width/sphere radius) < 0.3, and is correct to 5 % for (wear
track width/sphere radius) < 0.8. The exact equation is given in
Appendix X1.
9.1.2 Calculation of wear volumes for pin shapes of other
geometries use the appropriate geometric relations, recogniz-
ing that assumptions regarding wear of each member may be
required to justify the assumed ﬁnal geometry.
9.1.3 Wear scar measurements should be done at least at two
representative locations on the pin surfaces and disk surfaces,
and the ﬁnal results averaged.
9.1.4 In situations where both the pin and the disk wear
signiﬁcantly, it will be necessary to measure the wear depth
proﬁle on both members. A suitable method uses stylus
proﬁling. Proﬁling is the only approach to determine the exact
ﬁnal shape of the wear surfaces and thereby to calculate the
volume of material lost due to wear. In the case of disk wear,
the average wear track proﬁle can be integrated to obtain the
track cross-section area, and multiplied by the average track
length to obtain disk wear volume. In the case of pin wear, the
wear scar proﬁle can be measured in two orthogonal directions,
the proﬁle results averaged, and used in a ﬁgure-of-revolution
calculated for pin wear volume.
9.1.5 While mass loss results may be used internally in
laboratories to compare materials of equivalent densities, this
test method reports wear as volume loss so that there is no
confusion caused by variations in density. Take care to use and
report the best available density value for the materials tested
when calculating volume loss from measured mass loss.
9.1.6 Use the following equation for conversion of mass
loss to volume loss.
volume loss, mm3 5
mass loss, g
density, g/cm3 3 1000.
(3)
G 99
4
==PAGE:90==
9.2 If the materials being tested exhibit considerable trans-
fer between specimens without loss from the system, volume
loss may not adequately reﬂect the actual amount or severity of
wear. In these cases, this test method for reporting wear should
not be used.
9.3 Friction coefficient (deﬁned in Terminology G 40)
should be reported when available. Describe the conditions
associated with the friction measurements, for example, initial,
steady-state, etc.
9.4 Adequate speciﬁcation of the materials tested is impor-
tant. As a minimum, the report should specify material type,
form, processing treatments, surface ﬁnish, and specimen
preparation procedures. If appropriate, indentation hardness
should be reported.
10. Precision and Bias 6
10.1 The precision and bias of the measurements obtained
with this test method will depend upon the test parameters
chosen.
10.2 The reproducibility of repeated tests on the same
material will depend upon material homogeneity, machine and
material interaction, and careful adherence to the speciﬁed
procedure by the machine operator.
10.3 Normal variations in the procedure will tend to reduce
the accuracy of the test method as compared to the accuracy of
such material property tests as hardness, density, or thermal
expansion rate. Properly conducted tests should, however,
maintain a within-laboratory coefficient of variation of 20 % or
less for wear loss values. Table 2 contains wear data obtained
from interlaboratory tests (see Note 4). Standard deviation
values are given for the measured quantities. Limits of 95 %
repeatability can be obtained by multiplying those standard
deviation values by the factor 2.8 3. Reproducibility limits
(between laboratories) are not available but are estimated to be
twice as large as the repeatability limits.
10.4 No bias can be assigned to these results since there are
no absolute accepted values for wear.
NOTE 4—The interlaboratory data given in Table 1 and Table 2 resulted
through the cooperation of thirty one institutions in seven countries with
the help of national representatives within the Versailles Advanced
Materials and Standards (VAMAS) working party on wear test methods.7
10.5 In any test series, all data must be considered in the
calculation, including outliers (data exceeding the obvious
range); they are treated according to Practice E 178.
10.6 While two or more laboratories may develop test data
that is within the acceptable coefficient of variation for their
own individual test apparatus, the actual data of each labora-
tory may be relatively far apart. The selection of sample size
and the test method for establishing the signiﬁcance of the
difference in averages shall be agreed upon between laborato-
ries and shall be based on established statistical methods of
Practice E 122, Practice E 177, and STP 15D.8
11. Keywords
11.1 ceramic wear; friction; metal wear; non-abrasive; pin-
on-disk; wear
APPENDIX
(Nonmandatory Information)
X1. EQUATIONS
X1.1 Exact equations for determining wear volume loss are
as follows for:
X1.1.1 A spherical ended pin:
pin volume loss 5 ~ph/6!@3d2/4 1 h 2#
(X1.1)
where:
h
5 r −[r2 −d2/4]½
d
5 wear scar diameter, and
r
5 pin end radius.
Assuming no signiﬁcant disk wear.
X1.1.2 A disk:
disk volume loss 5 2pR @r2 sin 21~d/2r! 2 ~d/4!~4r2 2 d2!½#
(X1.2)
where:
R
5 wear track radius, and
d
5 wear track width.
Assuming no signiﬁcant pin wear.
The American Society for Testing and Materials takes no position respecting the validity of any patent rights asserted in connection
with any item mentioned in this standard. Users of this standard are expressly advised that determination of the validity of any such
patent rights, and the risk of infringement of such rights, are entirely their own responsibility.
This standard is subject to revision at any time by the responsible technical committee and must be reviewed every ﬁve years and
if not revised, either reapproved or withdrawn. Your comments are invited either for revision of this standard or for additional standards
and should be addressed to ASTM Headquarters. Your comments will receive careful consideration at a meeting of the responsible
technical committee, which you may attend. If you feel that your comments have not received a fair hearing you should make your
views known to the ASTM Committee on Standards, at the address shown below.
6 Additional data are available at ASTM Headquarters.
7 Czichos, H., Becker, S., and Lexow, J., Wear, Vol 114, 1987, pp 109–130 and
Wear, Vol 118, 1987, pp 379–380.
8 Manual on Quality Control of Materials, ASTM STP 15D, ASTM, 1951.
G 99
5
==PAGE:91==
This standard is copyrighted by ASTM, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959, United States.
Individual reprints (single or multiple copies) of this standard may be obtained by contacting ASTM at the above address or at
610-832-9585 (phone), 610-832-9555 (fax), or service@astm.org (e-mail); or through the ASTM website (www.astm.org).
G 99
6
==PAGE:92==
80
A Metal Forming Tribology Tests
Figure A.3: Average surface roughness and standard deviation of the
polished samples.
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIXB
MSDS
• Castrol PN 226
• Carl Roth Paraffin Oil
• Total Drosera MS 5
• Fuchs DB 4265
• Castrol TDN 81
==PAGE:94==
Iloform PN 226
SAFETY DATA SHEET
Product name
1.1 Product identifier
1.3 Details of the supplier of the safety data sheet
Liquid.
Product type
E-mail address
MSDSadvice@bp.com
1.2 Relevant identified uses of the substance or mixture and uses advised against
Use of lubricants in high energy open processes-Industrial
Use of lubricants in high energy open processes-Professional
Identified uses
SECTION 1: Identification of the substance/mixture and of the company/undertaking
Product code
450947-FR04
1.4 Emergency telephone number
EMERGENCY 
TELEPHONE NUMBER
Carechem: +44 (0) 1235 239 670 (24/7)
Supplier
BP Oil España, SA
Avenida de Barajas 30,
Parque Empresarial Omega - Edificio D,
Alcobendas,
Madrid, 28108
España
Teléfono +34 902 107 001 
Fax +34 902 107 002 
SDS no.
450947
Use of the substance/
mixture
Metalworking fluid - neat.
For specific application advice see appropriate Technical Data Sheet or consult our company 
representative.
Conforms to Regulation (EC) No. 1907/2006 (REACH), Annex II, as amended by Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/830
See sections 11 and 12 for more detailed information on health effects and symptoms and environmental hazards.
Classification according to Regulation (EC) No. 1272/2008 [CLP/GHS]
SECTION 2: Hazards identification
2.1 Classification of the substance or mixture
Product definition
Mixture
See Section 16 for the full text of the H statements declared above.
2.2 Label elements
Hazard pictograms
Signal word
Hazard statements
Prevention
Precautionary statements
Warning
H362 - May cause harm to breast-fed children.
H410 - Very toxic to aquatic life with long lasting effects.
P201 - Obtain special instructions before use.
P273 - Avoid release to the environment.
P263 - Avoid contact during pregnancy or while nursing.
Lact., H362
Aquatic Acute 1, H400
Aquatic Chronic 1, H410
Product name
Version 1.01
Iloform PN 226
Page: 1/17
450947-FR04
Product code
Date of issue 23 June 2017
Format Spain
Language
ENGLISH
(Spain)
==PAGE:95==
Carl Roth GmbH + Co KG
Schoemperlenstr. 3-5
D-76185 Karlsruhe
Germany
 
Telephone: +49 (0) 721 - 56 06 0
Telefax: +49 (0) 721 - 56 06 149
e-mail: sicherheit@carlroth.de
Website: www.carlroth.de
This substance does not meet the criteria for classification in accordance with Regulation No
1272/2008/EC. This substance does not meet the criteria for classification. 
not required
There is no additional information. 
 SECTION 1: Identification of the substance/mixture and of the
company/undertaking
1.1
Product identifier
Identification of the substance
Paraffin oil
Article number
8904
Registration number (REACH)
01-2119487078-27-xxxx
EC number
232-455-8
CAS number
8042-47-5
1.2
Relevant identified uses of the substance or mixture and uses advised against
Identified uses:
laboratory chemical
1.3
Details of the supplier of the safety data sheet
Competent person responsible for the safety data
sheet
: Department Health, Safety and Environment
e-mail (competent person)
: sicherheit@carlroth.de
1.4
Emergency telephone number
Emergency information service
Poison Centre Munich:  +49/(0)89 19240
 SECTION 2: Hazards identification
2.1
Classification of the substance or mixture
Classification acc. to GHS
2.2
Label elements
Labelling GHS
Signal word
not required
2.3
Other hazards
Safety data sheet
Safe Work Australia - Code of Practice
Paraffin oil Ph.Eur., DAB,   high viscosity
article number: 8904
Version: GHS 1.0 en
date of compilation: 2017-06-02
Australia (en)
Page 1 / 10
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
SAFETY DATA SHEET 
 
 
 
SDS_US 
1/8 
 
 
1. Identification 
 
Product name 
MONTGOMERY DB 4265 C 
Other means of identification 
No data available. 
 
Recommended use: 
Metalworking fluid 
 
Restrictions on use: 
Industrial use only  
 
Manufacturer/Importer/Supplier/Distributor Information 
 
Manufacturer 
Company Name: 
Fuchs Lubricants Co. 
Address: 
17050 Lathrop Avenue 
Harvey, Illinois   60426  
Telephone: 
708-333-8900 
Fax: 
708-333-9180 
 
Contact Person: 
EHS Department 
E-mail: 
sds@fuchsus.com 
 
Emergency telephone number: 708-333-8900 (Bus. hrs)  800-255-3924 (24 hrs) 
 
2. Hazard(s) identification 
 
Hazard Classification 
Not classified 
 
 
 
Hazard Symbol: 
No symbol 
 
Signal Word: 
No signal word. 
 
Hazard Statement: 
not applicable 
 
 
Precautionary 
Statements 
not applicable  
 
 
 
Other hazards which do not 
result in GHS classification: 
None. 
 
 
 
3. Composition/information on ingredients 
Label Elements 
==PAGE:98==
Iloform TDN 81
SAFETY DATA SHEET
Product name
1.1 Product identifier
1.3 Details of the supplier of the safety data sheet
Liquid.
Product type
E-mail address
MSDSadvice@bp.com
1.2 Relevant identified uses of the substance or mixture and uses advised against
Use of lubricants in high energy open processes-Industrial
Use of lubricants in high energy open processes-Professional
Identified uses
SECTION 1: Identification of the substance/mixture and of the company/undertaking
Product code
450946-FR04
1.4 Emergency telephone number
EMERGENCY 
TELEPHONE NUMBER
Carechem: +44 (0) 1235 239 670 (24/7)
Supplier
BP Oil España, SA
Avenida de Barajas 30,
Parque Empresarial Omega - Edificio D,
Alcobendas,
Madrid, 28108
España
Teléfono +34 902 107 001 
Fax +34 902 107 002 
SDS no.
450946
Use of the substance/
mixture
Metalworking fluid - neat.
For specific application advice see appropriate Technical Data Sheet or consult our company 
representative.
Conforms to Regulation (EC) No. 1907/2006 (REACH), Annex II, as amended by Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/830
Poisons Information Service (National Institute of Toxicology and Forensic Sciences)
Phone: +34 91 562 04 20 Information in Spanish (24h / 365 days).
Only for providing health response in case of emergency.
See sections 11 and 12 for more detailed information on health effects and symptoms and environmental hazards.
Classification according to Regulation (EC) No. 1272/2008 [CLP/GHS]
SECTION 2: Hazards identification
2.1 Classification of the substance or mixture
Product definition
Mixture
See Section 16 for the full text of the H statements declared above.
2.2 Label elements
Hazard pictograms
Signal word
Hazard statements
Precautionary statements
Warning
H362 - May cause harm to breast-fed children.
H410 - Very toxic to aquatic life with long lasting effects.
Lact., H362
Aquatic Acute 1, H400
Aquatic Chronic 1, H410
Product name
Version 3
Iloform TDN 81
Page: 1/18
450946-FR04
Product code
Date of issue 20 February 2018
Format Spain
Language
ENGLISH
(Spain)
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIXC
CAD Drawings
• Punching Tool
• Die holder. Thermocouple placement
Figure C.1: Punching Test Tool CAD Drawing[4].
==PAGE:100==
88
C CAD Drawings
Figure C.2: CAD drawing of the die holder where the thermocouple was
inserted.
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIXD
FEA Simulations
D.0.1
Element Size and Mesh Refinement
Figure D.1: Mesh Element Size 170-217.
==PAGE:102==
90
D FEA Simulations
Figure D.2: Mesh Element Size 714-1567.
==PAGE:103==
D FEA Simulations
91
Figure D.3: Mesh Element Size 2185-3264.
D.0.2
Simulated Shear Zone
Figure D.4: Mesh Element Size 170-217.
==PAGE:104==
92
D FEA Simulations
Figure D.5: Mesh Element Size 714-1567.
Figure D.6: Mesh Element Size 2185-3264.
==PAGE:105==
D FEA Simulations
93
Pin on Disk
• Pin Wear Scar Diameter.
• XPS Depth Profile.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure D.7: Wear scar diameter of AISI 316 pins.
(a) Sample D1. Lubricant A; (b) Sample G. Lubricant B; (c) Sample J.
Lubricant C; (d) Sample M. Lubricant D; .
==PAGE:106==
94
D FEA Simulations
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure D.8: Wear scar diameter of AISI 316 pins. (c) Sample A. Dry;
(a) Sample O. Lubricant E; (b) Sample O. Lubricant F;.
==PAGE:107==
D FEA Simulations
95
Figure D.9: Zoomed Depth Profile generated using Thermo Avantage for
Lub A.
Figure D.10: Zoomed Depth Profile generated using Thermo Avantage
for Lub B.
==PAGE:108==
96
D FEA Simulations
Figure D.11: Zoomed Depth Profile generated using Thermo Avantage
for Lub E.
Figure D.12: Zoomed Depth Profile generated using Thermo Avantage
for Lub E.
==PAGE:109==
D FEA Simulations
97
Figure D.13: Zoomed Depth Profile generated using Thermo Avantage
for Lub B on non cleaned sample.
Difference between adventitious C peak in figure D.14(a) (carbon con-
tamination due to been exposed to atmosphere) and inorganic carbon peak
D.14(b)(Metal carbides).
(a)
(b)
Figure D.14: C Snap analysis. (a) Sample C. Lubricant B; (b) Sample
J. Lubricant C .
==PAGE:110==
98
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[1]
S. Kalpakjian. Manufacturing engineering and technology. eng. Addison-
Wesley, 1992, 1258 s. isbn: 0201569507.
[2]
Blanking Die Schematic Misumi Co. http://www.misumi-techcentral.
com/tt/en/press/2012/12/137-design-of-blanking-dies-10-
design-of-a-blanking-die.html. Accessed: 2018-06-12.
[3]
R. Hambli et al. “Relationships Between Blanking Force and Part
Geometry vs. Clearance, Tool Wear, and Sheet Thickness”. In: Qual-
ity Engineering 15.2 (2002), pages 197–207. doi: 10 . 1081 / QEN -
120015852. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1081/QEN-120015852.
url: https://doi.org/10.1081/QEN-120015852.
[4]
David Dam Olsson, Niels Bay, and Jan Lasson Andreasen. “Lubri-
cant test for punching and blanking”. eng. In: Adv. Techn. of Plas-
ticity (2002), pages 757–762.
[5]
David Dam Olsson, Niels Bay, and Jan Lasson Andreasen. “Analysis
of Pick-Up Development in Punching”. eng. In: Cirp Annals - Man-
ufacturing Technology 51.1 (2002), pages 185–190. issn: 17260604,
00078506. doi: 10.1016/S0007-8506(07)61496-6.
[6]
David Dam Olsson, Niels Bay, and Jan Lasson Andreasen. “Predic-
tion of limits of lubrication in strip reduction testing”. eng. In: C I
R P Annals 53/1.1 (2004), pages 231–234. issn: 17260604, 00078506.
doi: 10.1016/S0007-8506(07)60686-6.
[7]
Per Møller and Lars Pleht Nielsen. Advanced Surface Technology. Vol-
ume 1-2. Møoller, Per and Nielsen, L. P., 2013. isbn: 9788792765239.
[8]
Niels Bay. Lecture Notes: Manufacturing Tribology-Wear Mechanism.
DTU. 2017.
[9]
M.J. Neale. Tribology Handbook, TRIBOLOGY HANDBOOK. eng.
Butterworth-Heinemann, 1996, Forsk.pag. isbn: 0080519660, 1281071331,
0750611987, 0080983251, 9786611071332.
==PAGE:112==
100
Bibliography
[10]
Proceedings of the International Conference on Research and Inno-
vations in Mechanical Engineering. eng. Springer India, 2014. isbn:
8132218590, 8132218582, 1322043434.
[11]
T.Z. Blazynski. Design of tools for deformation processes. eng. Else-
vier, 1986, 14+291 s. isbn: 0853343896.
[12]
Niels Bay. Lecture Notes: Manufacturing Tribology Lubrication Mech-
anism. DTU. 2017.
[13]
Yukio Hori. Hydrodynamic Lubrication. eng. Springer Tokyo, 2006.
isbn: 4431278982, 1280626070, 4431279016, 9786610626076.
[14]
D Dowson. “TRANSITION TO BOUNDARY LUBRICATION FROM
ELASTOHYDRODYNAMIC LUBRICATION”. und. In: Asme-boundary
Lubrication. an Appraisal of World Literature (1969), pages 229–49.
[15]
P. M. Ku and D. Godrfrey. “Interdisciplinary approach to friction
and wear Conference proceedings. Boundary Lubrication”. und. In:
(1968).
[16]
K.A. KOBE, J.J. McKetta, and MacKetta. Advances in petroleum
chemistry and refining 1-10. eng. Interscience Publishers, 1958, I 10
bd.
[17]
C.B. Davies. “A review of boundary lubrication”. eng. In: Wear 1.3
(1957), pages 244–253. issn: 18732577, 00431648. doi: 10.1016/
0043-1648(57)90032-7.
[18]
V. Stepina and V. Vesely. Lubricants and Special Fluids, LUBRI-
CANTS AND SPECIAL FLUIDS. eng. Volume 23. Elsevier, 1992,
13+704 s. isbn: 0080875874, 1281779148, 044498674x, 9786611779146.
[19]
Fritz Klocke et al. “Fineblanking with non-chlorinated lubricants”.
eng. In: Tribologie Und Schmierungstechnik 55.4 (2008), pages 33–
38. issn: 07243472.
[20]
D. Godfrey. “Lubrication”. eng. In: American Society for Testing
and Materials – Special Technical Publications (1963), pages 105–
121. issn: 00660558.
[21]
F. P. Bowden and L. Leben. “The Friction of Lubricated Metals”. eng.
In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences 239.799 (1940), pages 1–27. issn:
14712962, 1364503x. doi: 10.1098/rsta.1940.0007.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
101
[22]
J. J. Frewing. “The Heat of Adsorption of Long-Chain Compounds
and their Effect on Boundary Lubrication”. eng. In: Proceedings of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
182.990 (1944), pages 270–285. issn: 14712946, 13645021. doi: 10.
1098/rspa.1944.0004.
[23]
O LEVINE and WA ZISMAN. “PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF MONO-
LAYERS ADSORBED AT THE SOLID-AIR INTERFACE .2. ME-
CHANICAL DURABILITY OF ALIPHATIC POLAR COMPOUNDS
AND EFFECT OF HALOGENATION”. eng. In: Journal of Physical
Chemistry 61.9 (1957), pages 1188–1196. issn: 15415740, 00223654.
[24]
W. B. Hardy and I. Doubleday. “Boundary Lubrication. The Paraffin
Series”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences 100.707 (1922), pages 550–574.
issn: 14712946, 13645021. doi: 10.1098/rspa.1922.0017.
[25]
Dirk Jan Schipper. “Transitions in the Lubrication of Concentrated
Contacts”. eng. PhD thesis. 1955, I 10 bd.
[26]
Niels Bys and Leonardo De Chiffre. Lecture Notes: Metal Forming
Tribology Test. DTU. 2017.
[27]
Standard test method for wear testing with a pin-on-disk appara-
tus. Reapproved 2010. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM, 2005. url:
https://cds.cern.ch/record/1459839.
[28]
Niels Bay and David Dam Olsson. “Lubricant test methods for sheet
metal forming”. eng. In: Proceed. Nordtrib2006 Conf (2006).
[29]
J.A. Schey, American society for metals, and ASM. Tribology in met-
alworking. Friction, lubrication and wear. eng. 1983, 736 s. isbn:
0871701553.
[30]
David Dam Olsson, Niels Bay, and Jan Lasson Andreasen. “Studies
of lubricants and punch design in punching of stainless steel”. eng.
In: Proceed. of Int. Conf. on Recent Advances in Manufacture and
amp; Use of Tools amp; Dies and Stamping of Steel Sheet (2004),
pages 123–137.
[31]
William D. Callister Jr. “Materials Science and Engineering - An In-
troduction (5th ed.)” eng. In: Anti-corrosion Methods and Materials
47.1 (2000). issn: 17584221, 00035599. doi: 10.1108/acmm.2000.
12847aae.001.
==PAGE:114==
102
Bibliography
[32]
Cord Henrik Surberg, Paul Stratton, and Klaus Lingenhöle. “The
effect of some heat treatment parameters on the dimensional stability
of AISI D2”. In: Cryogenics 48.1 (2008), pages 42–47. issn: 0011-2275.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cryogenics.2007.10.002.
url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0011227507001373.
[33]
Vanadis 23 Superclean. 7. Uddeholms AB. October 2013.
[34]
A. Bensely et al. “Fatigue behaviour and fracture mechanism of cryo-
genically treated En 353 steel”. eng. In: Materials and Design 30.8
(2009), pages 2955–2962. issn: 18734197, 02641275, 02613069. doi:
10.1016/j.matdes.2009.01.003.
[35]
K. K. Ray and D. Das. “Improved wear resistance of steels by cry-
otreatment: the current state of understanding”. eng. In: Materials
Science and Technology 33.3 (2017), pages 340–354. issn: 17432847,
02670836. doi: 10.1080/02670836.2016.1206292.
[36]
PJ Singh, B Guha, and DRG Achar. “Fatigue life improvement of
AISI 304L cruciform welded joints by cryogenic treatment”. eng. In:
Engineering Failure Analysis 10.1 (2003), pages 1–12. issn: 18731961,
13506307. doi: 10.1016/S1350-6307(02)00033-X.
[37]
D. Das, A. K. Dutta, and K. K. Ray. “On the refinement of carbide
precipitates by cryotreatment in AISI D2 steel”. eng. In: Philosoph-
ical Magazine 89.1 (2009), pages 55–76. issn: 14786443, 14786435.
doi: 10.1080/14786430802534552.
[38]
Neil Canter. “EP additives: Regulatory updates of chlorinated paraf-
fins and options on alternatives”. eng. In: Tribology and Lubrication
Technology 70.9 (2014), pages 10–+. issn: 1545858x.
[39]
Castrol PN 226 Product Data. Castrol. May 2018.
[40]
DB 4265 MSDS. FUCHS Lubricants Co. May 2018.
[41]
P KAPSA and JM MARTIN. “BOUNDARY LUBRICANT FILMS -
A REVIEW”. eng. In: Tribology International 15.1 (1982), pages 37–
42. issn: 18792464, 0301679x. doi: 10.1016/0301-679X(82)90110-
4.
[42]
Bradley D. Fahlman. “Materials chemistry”. eng. In: Materials Chem-
istry (2007), pages 1–485. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4020-6120-2.
[43]
Yang Leng. “Materials Characterization: Introduction to Microscopic
and Spectroscopic Methods”. eng. In: Materials Characterization: In-
troduction To Microscopic and Spectroscopic Methods (2010). doi:
10.1002/9780470823002.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
103
[44]
Irina Petrushina et al. “On the chemical nature of boundary lu-
brication of stainless steel by chlorine - and sulfur-containing EP-
additives”. eng. In: Wear 246.1-2 (2000), pages 98–105. issn: 18732577,
00431648. doi: 10.1016/S0043-1648(00)00503-2.
[45]
Elements Table Sulfur. https://xpssimplified.com/elements/
sulfur.php. Accessed: 2018-06-13.
==PAGE:116==
