==PAGE:1==
June 2018
Decomposing the Flexible Ship
Loading Problem
Ida Helene Kusk, s123970
Supervisers: Dario Pacino and Jonas Mark Christensen
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Today the captain of the vessels are responsible for making a stowage plan for the
vessel - it is done so since it is the captain which is responsible for ensuring that the
vessel is seaworthy. There thereby lies a big potential in optimizing the stowage plan-
ning of a vessel. From the terminal’s point of view this is also attractive, since a good
stowage plan also considers scheduling of the Quay Cranes (QCs) and Transfer Vehi-
cles (TVs) and this can increase the terminal’s productivity. The Flexible Ship Load-
ing Problem (FSLP) problem considers this problem; making an optimized stowage
plan concerning both scheduling of the QCs and TVs.
The FSLP is a very complex planning problem and it is very time consuming to
solve. The idea was in the summer 2017 to try to solve this problem by decomposing
the FSLP with Column Generation (CG) to improve the best known lower bounds
of the benchmark instances since there is a relatively big gap between the current
best known Lower Bound (LB) and Upper Bound (UB). At ﬁrst this was tried in a
5 ECTS point special course with an exact CG framework combined with a simple
construction heuristic for the Pricing Problems (PPs). It was discovered, from the
instances that is was able to solve, that very little time was spent on the Master
Problem (MP). The focus in this thesis will therefore be to implement an eﬃcient
heuristic method for the PP. The performance of the heuristic PP will be examined
but the focus lies on the results of the PP in a CG-framework.
The results were that there were found and proven optimal solution for three of
the 12 tested instances, where two of them were not proven to be optimal solutions
prior this thesis.
==PAGE:3==
II
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis is based on work done in a 5 ECTS points special course with Dario Pacino
and Jonas Mark Christensen. The Flexible Ship Loading Problem was decomposed
by column generation.
Thereby the mathematical formulation of the master and
pricing problem in Section 5.2 and 5.3 should not be considered as a part of the work
conducted during this thesis but as previous work. Parts of the implementation of
the column generation framework is previous work as well. This thesis however will
try a new heuristic approach, since the problem is rather complex.
==PAGE:5==
IV
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First of all thanks to my two supervisors for all the useful input, discussions, and for
always having an open door. Especially thank you Jonas for long talks, answers to
stupid questions and for making the 5.5 months less lonely.
Thank you to my parents for spending an endless amount of hours over the phone
talking about a thesis that they have no prerequisites to understand.
Thanks to my wonderful boyfriend for being the best father for our child and
taking care of all of us while looking after your own exams and studies.
Last but not least; thank you Otto for always (almost) waking us up in the
mornings with smiles, giggling, hugs, and a kick in the face.
==PAGE:7==
VI
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
ALNS Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
CG Column Generation
CP Container/Position
EFT Expected Finish Time
FSLP Flexible Ship Loading Problem
GRASP Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure
ISO International Organization for Standardization
KPI Key Performance Indicator
LB Lower Bound
LP Linear Programming
MIP Mixed-Integer Programming
MP Master Problem
PP Pricing Problem
QC Quay Crane
RMP Restricted Master Problem
SA Simulated Annealing
SC Straddle Carrier
TEU Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit
TV Transfer Vehicle
UB Upper Bound
==PAGE:9==
VIII
==PAGE:10==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Container terminals
9
2.1
Operations in terminals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Literature review
15
4
The Flexible Ship Loading Problem
19
5
Decomposing the model
23
5.1
Column generation in general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Master problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
Pricing problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Solution method
27
6.1
A heuristic approach to the pricing problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.1.1
Warm up period to determine start temperature
. . . . . . . .
28
6.1.2
Restart mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.1.3
Destroy methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.1.4
Repair methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.1.5
Diﬀerent pricing problem heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
The implemented column generation framework . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.1
The standard CG-conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.2
Another conﬁguration with extra heuristics and a varying num-
ber of maximal iterations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2.3
Solving the pricing problem exact
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Data
41
7.1
Benchmark instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2
Pricing problem instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.3
Initial solutions for the column generation framework . . . . . . . . . .
42
8
Computational results
43
8.1
Performance of the pricing problem heuristic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8.2
Column generation with only heuristic pricing problems . . . . . . . .
47
8.3
Column generation with both heuristic and exact pricing problems . .
50
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
1
8.4
Results compared with benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9
Conclusion and future work
57
==PAGE:12==
2
CONTENTS
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Maritime freight transport plays an important role in the modern supply chain. The
total weight of the worldwide seaborne trade has grown 2.5 times from 1990 to 2015
as seen in Figure 1.1 and is expected to continue to grow. Today over 80 % of the
worldwide trade by volume is transported by ship and the total yearly worldwide
terminal throughput in 2015 is estimated to 686.8 million Twenty-foot Equivalent
Units (TEUs) by UNCTAD (2017).
Maritime transportation has big advantages both from an economic and environ-
mental perspective, since more goods can be transported at once on a vessel instead
of e.g. transporting each container by truck. The vessels are being designed to carry
more containers since the mega-vessels have a lower cost per tonne-kilometer and the
demand continues to increase, Meng et al. (2016). The biggest vessels’ capacity have
tripled in the last decade and the average TEU capacity of all vessels has almost
doubled. Vessels with a capacity above 21,000 TEU have been built in 2017. The in-
crease of mega-vessels contributes to port congestion in the busiest terminals, since a
terminal needs to handle thousands of containers within a relative short time window
when the mega-vessels arrive, WSC (2015). The maritime industry is under pressure
since the new bigger vessels lead to an overcapacity in the worldwide network, which
causes lower rates for transporting goods, higher competition, and smaller revenue
margins.
One of the Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) of container terminals is vessels’
turnaround times, where the terminals try to minimize the vessels turnaround times.
One way to do this could be by adding more equipment e.g. increase the number
of QCs or TVs. This is however an expensive solution and will lead to more traﬃc
in the terminal and thereby increase the likelihood of congestion. Another approach
could be to optimize the current resources as proposed by Christensen (2017).
The QCs are one of the key elements in optimizing the service time of load-
ing/unloading a vessel at the terminal (i.e. stowage planning) and is considered to
be the bottleneck according to Steenken et al. (2001). Optimally, the QCs should
therefore be scheduled such that the vessel departs from the terminal at its Expected
Finish Time (EFT). This is done by scheduling the TVs eﬃciently such that the QCs’
waiting time is minimized. An example of two diﬀerent stowage plans’ inﬂuence on
the TVs’ travelled distance can be seen in Figure 1.2. The two containers on the ﬁgure
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.1: The indices of world seaborne trade is shown in relation to the indices of world
merchandise trade, world gross domestic product and Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) index of industrial production in the years 1975-2016. The indices
are normalized from year 1990 = 100 with merchandise trade in dollars and seaborne trade
in metric tons, UNCTAD (2017).
Figure 1.2: Two diﬀerent stowage plans’ eﬀect on the TVs’ travelled distance, Iris et al.
(2018)
==PAGE:15==
5
have the same properties and can easily switch place. The stowage plan on the left
hand-side is not considering optimizing the TVs’ travelled distance, while the stowage
plan on the right hand-side is a better solution regarding the travelled distance. The
challenge of both optimizing the QCs and TVs simultaneously is considered in the
FSLP. FSLP is considering four planning problems; stowage planning, loading se-
quencing, equipment assignment, and equipment scheduling. Normally these planning
problems are considered separately, but there is a potential in optimizing all the four
processes at the same time.
The goal of the FSLP is to make an operative stowage plan while scheduling the
equipment (QCs and TVs) eﬃciently. In this thesis it is assumed that a class-based
stowage plan is given as input before the operative stowage plan can be made. An
example of a class-based and operative stowage plan is shown in Figure 1.3. Areas of
the vessel is assigned speciﬁc classes of containers in a class-based stowage plan. E.g.
in Figure 1.3 all containers of class ”A” in the yard can be staged in the right side of
this speciﬁc bay in the ﬁgure. These areas are determined according to the stability
of the vessel. The job is then to plan the operative stowage plan where the speciﬁc
”A”-containers should be stowed. Constraints regarding the containers’ weight, type
or discharge port are thereby considered within the classes of the containers. The
amount of constraints is reduced, which is very beneﬁcial when considering all four
planning problems simultaneously. The container’s class is therefore the only thing
to consider when ﬁnding a slot for a container.
It is both in the interest of the liner company and the terminal to reduced the
turnaround time/delay of the vessels.
In case of delays the vessel will speed up
between ports to make their next arrival time. When the vessel increases its speed
it uses more fuel. The relationship between the vessels speed and fuel consumption
is cubic. This makes the speed between ports essential for the liner companies, since
the fuel is costly and the total fuel consumption will increase if the speed is increased.
In most terminals currently it is the captain of the vessel that makes the operative
stowage plan manually without a class-based stowage plan. It is done so because
the captain is responsible for ensuring that the vessel seaworthy.
In studies this
planning problem is often split in a class-based and operative stowage plan. The big
potential fuel cost savings should be a signiﬁcant motivation for the liner companies
to collaborate with the terminals to reduce delays and improve turnaround time in
ports.
In this proposed collaboration the liner company would be responsible for
assigning classes to each container and slot on the vessel.
Thereby can the liner
companies also participate in the shared goal; reducing vessels turnaround time in
the terminals, making the terminal operations more eﬃcient.
The FSLP has, as argued, a big potential to solve the stowage planning more
optimally than the current procedure. A challenge is though that the problem is
very complex and it is very time consuming to solve. The idea was in the summer
2017 to try to solve this problem by decomposing the FSLP with CG to improve
the best known lower bounds of the benchmark instances since there is a relatively
big gap between the current best known LB and UB. Hopefully this could lead to
a branch-and-price in the long term which have not been studied in the literature.
A common criteria for branch-and-price to be eﬀective is a decomposed model that
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
Figure 1.3: A speciﬁc bay on a vessel is shown. To the left is a class-based stowage plan
shown, while the operative stowage plan is shown to the right. The yard is shown below with
all the speciﬁc containers. Notice how the class-based stowage plan only contains classes, e.g.
’E’, while the operative stowage plan contains speciﬁc containers, e.g. container ’E3’, which
can be found in the yard. Iris et al. (2018).
==PAGE:17==
7
obtains high-quality lower bounds. The goal of this thesis is therefore to decompose
the FSLP, and examine if solving this decomposition to Linear Programming (LP)-
optimality (using CG) leads to better bounds. This thesis is based on work done in
a 5 ECTS point special course, where the FSLP was decomposed and solved with
CPLEX implemented in Java. The PP was both solved by an exact method and a
construction heuristic, if the heuristic failed to ﬁnd any column with negative reduced
cost, the exact method solved the PP instead.
The problem is very complex even when decomposed (this will be elaborated
further in Chapter 5). The results of the special course was that it could only solve 4
out 6 of the smallest instances of 60 containers. So the decomposed model still failed
to compute good LBs, since some of the small instances were not even solved. It was
discovered, from the instances that it was able to solve, that very little time was spent
on the MP. A heuristic approach to the PP is therefore chosen, still considering the
problem within the CG-framework.
The focus will therefore be to implement an eﬃcient heuristic method for the
pricing problem. Both the performance of the heuristic PP will be examined however
the main focus lies on the result of the PP in a CG-framework. The methods will
mostly be tested on the smallest benchmark instances.
The thesis is structured by the following chapters; Chapter 2 gives an overview of
operations in container terminals, while Chapter 3 is a literature review of the current
state-of-the-art. Chapter 4 explains the FSLP in further details. Chapter 5 presents
the decomposed mathematical model. Chapter 6 describes the attempted solution
methods. Chapter 7 describes the input data while Chapter 8 presents the results,
and Chapter 9 sums up the conclusion and gives ideas for future work.
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Container terminals
The ﬁrst container ship was designed to carry 10 wooden containers in 1766 by James
Brindley. The ﬁrst intermodal containers for both ships and trains appeared in United
Kingdom in the 1830s. The ﬁrst international standard however was ﬁrst established
in 1933 primarily for use internationally in Europe.
Today several International
Organization for Standardization (ISO)-standards exists for dry-cargo containers; 20-
foots, 40-foots, high-cubes, and so on. Containers are often described by the unit;
TEU, which is deﬁned by the container’s length; 20-foot.
A 20-foot container is
thereby equal to one TEU, while a 40-foot container equal to two TEU.
These container standards makes modal transportation possible, where multiple
forms of transportation are combined. The containers are both compatible with the
ships, trucks and trains, where the fuel consumption of one container’s journey can
be reduced by combining multiple modes of transport. The cost per tonne-kilometer
or the CO2-emissions are smallest for a vessel, then train, truck and most expensive
by airplane as seen in Figure 2.1. For most goods is truck however necessary for
”the last mile”. In container terminals are the containers loaded on board vessels,
on trains, or trucks, and the container terminals therefore play an important role in
modern supply chain.
The maritime industry has a lot of optimization problems from planning networks
to terminal optimization. The maritime industry is as any other industries motivated
by revenue, where the liner companies manage goods for billions of Euro and any
small optimization can result in a huge return. They therefore use both optimization
on a strategic, operational, and daily management level. On a strategic level they
Figure 2.1: Grams of CO2 emitted by transporting 1 tonne of cargo 1 km, Maersk (2018,
(retrieved the 1/6 2018).
==PAGE:20==
10
Container terminals
Figure 2.2: A generic terminal plan, Christensen (2017).
solve e.g. ﬂeet and network optimization. Examples of optimization on an operational
level could be speed optimization, which also has environmental beneﬁts. In Chapter
1 speed optimization is discussed brieﬂy. Fuel consumption follows a cubic function
of the sailing speed.
Liner companies therefore plan on purpose that the vessels
should sail at a lower speed than they are designed to do. It is not just beneﬁcial for
revenue, if fuel consumption is reduced, also emissions of Green Houses gasses follows.
This strategy is called slow steaming.
The article Psaraftis and Kontovas (2010)
investigates the trade oﬀbetween logistic eﬀects versus environmental eﬀects with
focus on slow steaming. Other planning problems on an operational level could be e.g.
network ﬂow and re-positioning empty containers. Whereas the daily management is
more concerned about disruption management e.g. delayed vessels. In this thesis the
focus lies on operational optimization in container terminals, and the operations in
terminals will therefore be explained in further details in the next section.
2.1
Operations in terminals
The basic structure of a container terminal is as sketched in Figure 2.2. In a container
terminal containers can arrive or leave in two diﬀerent ways; by ship on the quayside
or by truck or train on the landside The yard is the link between the quay- and
landside, where the containers are stored temporarily in blocks. Terminals all over
the world have diﬀerent equipment since they diﬀer in e.g. employees wage. If the
manpower is expensive then the terminals are more likely to be automated. Like in
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Operations in terminals
11
Hamburg where there is a fully automated container terminal. There however still
exists many terminals which relies on manpower, especially in Asia and Africa.
At the quayside the vessel is docked.
The QCs serve the vessel by unload-
ing/loading operations, as seen in Figure 2.3a. The containers are then transported
to the yard by a TV, which is either a Straddle Carrier (SC) (Figure 2.3b), automated
vehicle (2.3d), yard truck (2.3e), reach stacker (2.3f), or forklift (2.3g). It depends on
the speciﬁc terminal which type of vehicle that is relevant. The TVs either stack the
container or deliver it to a gantry crane (see Figure 2.3c). The terminal in Figure 2.2
has gantry cranes in the yard, which serve the container stacks. Gantry cranes pick
up, place, and rearrange the containers in the yard. They can both be on wheels or
on rails. The TVs transport the containers around the terminal and link the yard
with both the quayside and landside. At the landside there is both an area for trains
and one for trucks. This thesis’ focus is, as mentioned in Chapter 1, on loading the
vessel, scheduling QCs and TVs - thereby the main focus is on quayside operations
and their link to the yard operations.
There are multiple operations in container terminals relating to each of the types
of equipment. In container terminals many operations are performed each day and
a logical chain of operations exists. There is a big potential for optimizing the op-
erations, and many well-deﬁned operations research planning problems have been
studied for container terminals. All the planning problems share the goal to increase
productivity in the terminals. The most common will be presented brieﬂy.
Three main planning problems needs to be solved before a vessel can berth; the
Berth Planning, the Stowage Planning and the Crane Split Problem. When a vessel
arrives at a terminal it needs to be assigned to a berth, where to berth is planned
ahead some weeks before by the terminal. The length of the vessel and some technical
data for the vessel are crucial for planning the berth allocation, since not all QCs are
compatible with all vessels. Beyond this the vessel can have a desired location. The
aim with this planning problem is to maximize the productivity in the terminal but
also to try minimizing the total sum of the distances to and from the yard when
loading/unloading.
The next operations (unloading and loading) begin after the vessel has berthed.
Here both the Stowage Planning Problem and the Crane Split Problem will be rel-
evant. The Stowage Planning Problem is a two-step process, to load the vessel -
in literature at least. The two-step process is as described in Chapter 1; a class-
based and operative stowage planning. Often there is also a focus on maximizing
the utilization of the vessel and minimizing the QCs’ movements, since they are very
time consuming. This is all included in the class-based stowage plan. The Crane
Split/Scheduling Problem allocates a number of QCs to the vessel and to the speciﬁc
sections of the vessel. The Crane Split Problem is though never solved in practice
but is included in the stowage planning. The two planning problems are dependent
on each other since a good class-based stowage plan also considers crane scheduling,
as it is done in the FSLP.
While the vessel is unloaded the containers are being transported to the yard by
the TVs. The container is placed and reshuﬄed in the yard by a storage planning
system.
The planning system aims to maximize productivity in the terminal i.e.
==PAGE:22==
12
Container terminals
(a) Quay Cranes
(b) Straddle carriers
(c) Gantry Cranes
(d) Automated vehicles
(e) Yard truck
(f) Reach Stacker
(g) Forklift
Figure 2.3: Diﬀerent terminal equipment
2.3a: http: // www. cranestodaymagazine. com/ uploads/ pictures/ web/ d/ p/ w/ port_ of_ hamgurger_ march_ 45d. jpg
2.3b:
https: // upload. wikimedia. org/ wikipedia/ commons/ thumb/ 3/ 3e/ SISU_ Valmet_ 44011_ Straddle_ carrier_ p5. JPG/ 1200px-SISU_
Valmet_ 44011_ Straddle_ carrier_ p5. JPG
2.3c: http: // www. lincolnmes. org/ wp-content/ uploads/ 2016/ 08/ Benefits-And-Advantages-Of-A-Rail-Mounted-Gantry-Crane. jpg
2.3d: http: // btg-positioning-systems. com/ product/ agv-positioning-rfm200-sensor/
2.3e: https: // www. blendernation. com/ 2017/ 03/ 01/ art-armando-hernandez/ armando-3d-container-ship-5-yard-truck/
2.3f:
http: // www. aalhysterforklifts. com. au/ index. php/ about/ blog-post/ hyster_ reachstackers_ the_ ultimate_ container_ handling_
solution
2.3g: https: // www. forkliftaction. com/ news/ Hyster-big-trucks-join-new-rail-terminal-3804. aspx
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Operations in terminals
13
minimize the number of rehandles in the yard. The rehandles can not be eliminated
completely though and can inﬂuence the time it takes to get a container from the
yard.
All of these planning problems require quality input data to be truly optimal
otherwise they will only be sub-optimal. Several articles points out that planning
in container terminals is very stochastic and dynamic because of big uncertainties
in data. The arrival time of the vessel e.g. can easily change. Another problem
is that the loading lists are known late, and the containers on the loading list have
not necessarily arrived at the terminal in time. An estimate was made in Steenken
et al. (2004) where the conclusion was that 30-40 % of export containers in European
terminals were lacking accurate data. Beyond this, there are big uncertainties on the
TVs’ drive time since it both relies on the congestion in the terminal and the drivers’
skills. But also the number of rehandles that needs to be made in the yard to reach
the speciﬁc container. The authors of the article Steenken et al. (2004) points out
that there is a need for real-time optimization, because of the high uncertainties in
the input data. The planning horizon is also often short. A way to overcome these
challenges could also be to rely on stochastic or scenario based planning.
==PAGE:24==
14
Container terminals
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Literature review
The FSLP considers both equipment assignment and scheduling of the QCs and
TVs. Most research is considering the optimization problems isolated even though
it is believed that it could be beneﬁcial to combine problems to avoid sub-optimal
decisions. There is little research done in the FSLP and there exists no commonly
accepted deﬁnition of the problem according to Monaco et al. (2014). Therefore this
literature review will also contain literature on other related optimization problems.
Steenken et al. (2001) are some of the ﬁrst to consider optimizing the QC and SCs
together with the objective to minimize the time delay of the container deliveries to
the QCs. At ﬁrst the single crane scheduling problem is formulated and solved by a
heuristic. However, the formulation is later in the paper expanded to multiple QCs
by solving ﬁrst the crane split problem, then using the single crane heuristic for each
QC.
Monaco et al. (2014) extends the problem to the yard. Here the objective is to
minimize the total transportation time and the time of yard reshuﬄes. The problem
is solved by a two-step heuristic algorithm; a construction and improvement heuristic.
Both of them are based on the Tabu Search paradigm with an iterative local search
heuristic with a memory mechanism.
The results show that the yard re-handles
are underestimated - the authors explain this by a missing dynamic element in the
implementation.
Both Bish et al. (2005) and Zeng and Yang (2008) consider scheduling of loading
and unloading containers. Both have the objective to minimize the makespan of the
QCs work time, which is deﬁned as the completion time of the last handled container.
The solution methods however diﬀers. Bish et al. (2005) solves the problem by a near-
optimal greedy heuristic algorithm.
Where Zeng and Yang (2008) uses simulated
optimization, where a simulation model evaluates the solution found by a genetic
algorithm by a Neural Network.
This thesis is considering the FSLP as deﬁned in the article Iris et al. (2018).
The FSLP is considered as a minimization problem of the delay of the vessel and the
total TV service time. In the article a mathematical model is formulated, several
lower bounds are proposed, and a Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure
(GRASP)-heuristic is made. The heuristic assigns service-time windows for each QC,
then assign containers to vessel-slot, and then container/slot to TVs. At ﬁrst a TV
==PAGE:26==
16
Literature review
reassignment is made, then a local search. An important constraint is that the TVs
are considered as limited resources in contrast to the other research. Where a limited
number of TVs are assigned to each QC.
The PhD-thesis Christensen (2017) proposes a new formulation of the problem,
a more eﬃcient model. The thesis also proposes a new heuristic to solve the prob-
lem faster. It is a hybrid heuristic which combines the GRASP heuristic from Iris
et al. (2018) and a genetic algorithm. The GRASP generates assignments for each
QC (partial solutions) which are combined with a cross-over method by the genetic
algorithm. Generally, the hybrid heuristic generates better upper bounds in a shorter
time than the GRASP heuristic. A CG-procedure is also proposed, where feasible
assignments for each TV are considered. There exists a PP for each TV. The PPs are
formulated as shortest path problems by relaxing parts of the problem. The results
however are not impressive, since the CG ﬁnds worse bounds than the LP-relaxations
of the new Mixed-Integer Programming (MIP)-model and uses much more time. At
last the author points out that there is a need for high-quality LBs to be able to solve
the problem successfully with a branch-and-price algorithm.
A limited amount of research regarding scheduling of a limited vehicle ﬂeet in a
terminal exists, but one other article is found; Vis et al. (2005). The objective of this
model in the article is to minimize the vehicle ﬂeet size but at the same time fulﬁll
time window constraints. The model is both solved by an exact method and by a
simulation study.
Other TV routing problems considered in this literature review has been Kim and
Kim (1999), where the travel time of a single transfer crane is minimized by dynamic
programming.
Whereas Lee et al. (2005) considers the load sequencing problem,
where the objective is to minimize the travel distance for the transfer cranes and
the interference among diﬀerent transfer cranes. Here a hybrid algorithm combining
an Ant Colony and a Tabu-search is used to solve the problem. The article Ropke
and Pisinger (2006) has also been considered since it proposes an Adaptive Large
Neighbourhood Search (ALNS) heuristic for solving general vehicle routing problems
with time windows. The results are impressive and the ALNS heuristic shows big
potential for solving vehicle routing problems.
The FSLP and the Flexible Job Shop Problem have a similar structure according
to Zeng and Yang (2008). Mastrolilli and Gambardella (2000) considers the Flexible
Job Shop Problem. They solve the problem by a heuristic Tabu-search aiming to
minimize the makespan of the completion time. To reduce the neighbourhood size,
the problem is transformed to a graph, and only a single critical path is considered.
Two neighbourhoods were made by moving operations to other eligible machines.
The ﬁrst neighbourhood is smaller and faster to generate than the second.
The
ﬁrst neighbourhood constructs a set of solutions where every operation is optimally
inserted for each machine, i.e. the solution value has to be less than or equal to
the previous. Thereby it is known that the current solution is local-optimal, if the
neighbourhood is empty. The second neighbourhood is an extended version of the
ﬁrst and is more time consuming.
Beyond the considered FSLP lots of other fusions of container terminal optimiza-
tion problems exists. An example is Jiang and Jin (2016) where the two problems
==PAGE:27==
17
Yard Crane Deployment and Container Allocation is considered as one optimization
problem. This problem is solved by a Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition and a branch-
and-price algorithm. In this article the cost of Yard Crane deployment during one
week is minimized. A one week time horizon is considered with several shifts. They
choose to branch on the yard crane-paths during the planning horizon - so not di-
rectly on the decision variables, to reduce the size of the search tree. For small scale
problems the branch-and-price found near-optimal solution much faster than CPLEX.
The branch-and-price also ﬁnd good solutions within a reasonable time for large scale
problems. Which is why it can be considered to be a successful solution method.
Within this literature review only two references are found (Iris et al. (2018) and
Christensen (2017)) which considers a limited number of TVs in the FSLP - and
this is considered to be a very relevant constraint. It is making the problem more
constrained and diﬃcult to solve. In Christensen (2017) it is pointed out that the
benchmark instances is lacking high-quality LBs for the speciﬁc formulation of the
problem. This could be solved by decomposing the problem, however no successful
decomposition of the FSLP has been found. But CG has shown great results for other
large scale problems e.g. for yard crane deployment and container allocation in Jiang
and Jin (2016). This thesis will therefore try to ﬁll the gap with an ALNS heuristic
in a CG-framework. The choice is based on previous experience from a special course
(as explained in Chapter 1). The ALNS heuristic has been chosen since it has shown
great results for vehicle routing problems in Ropke and Pisinger (2006), and the PP
in this thesis is comparable with a vehicle routing problem.
==PAGE:28==
18
Literature review
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
The Flexible Ship Loading
Problem
The FSLP is motivated throughout Chapter 1. The aim of the FSLP is to schedule the
TVs and QCs as eﬃciently as possible while assigning the containers to compatible
positions within a known time horizon. The objective function of the FSLP minimizes
the TVs’ working time while penalizing any delay of the vessel. An EFT is known
in advance and the vessel is considered delayed if this EFT is not obeyed.
The
formulation of Ship Loading Problem is, in this thesis, deﬁned by the mathematical
formulation of the problem proposed in the PhD-thesis Christensen (2017).
In the FSLP there are multiple sets of elements to consider. The containers (C)
need to be loaded on board in the vessel’s positions (P). Only compatible containers
are allowed to be stored in speciﬁc positions, therefore the sets Cp and Pc exists,
containing the containers that are compatible with position p and the positions that
are compatible with container c. A container c and a position p are compatible if
they are, according to the class-based stowage plan, of the same type/class.
Each position is loaded by one of the QCs (qp ∈Q), and each position is assigned
to be loaded by a speciﬁc QC q - resulting in the subset Pq. The TVs are as well
assigned to a speciﬁc QC, giving the set Sq - which also means that the vehicles are
only allowed to handle containers for certain positions, giving the set Sp. Furthermore
are all the container-TV combinations that are compatible with position p ∈P deﬁned
by the set Kp. At last are the last position to be loaded for each QC q ∈Q deﬁned
as lq. All the sets are listed on the next page with a brief description.
The objective and constraints of the FSLP are deﬁned by several variables. The
variables are listed and described in a list on the next page as well. A brief description
of the variables is given here. The problem both needs to consider which containers
that are placed where and by which TV (variable xs
cp) and a time-line of the operations
needs to be generated. The time-line contains several elements; when is a container
for position p dropped in front of QC by the TV s (variable ts
p), when does the TV s
starts its service window (variable Starts), and when does the service window ends
(variable Ends)? Furthermore the ﬁnish time for the operations is monitored (z) and
likewise is the tardiness of the operations (∆EFT).
At last the problem contains several parameters. The ﬁrst parameter is τcp which
==PAGE:30==
20
The Flexible Ship Loading Problem
is the drive time for picking up a container in the yard. The total time for picking
up the container c for position p is therefore 2τcp. The next parameter is the crane
loading time, β. While the cost of using a TV for one time-unit is α. The EFT is
deﬁned by EFT, and the cost of exceeding the expected ﬁnish time is given by γ.
The parameter H will be discussed later in this chapter.
Notice that p′ ≺≺p is used to specify that position p′ is loaded just before posi-
tion p by the same QC. The mathematical problem is stated below.
Sets:
C
Set of containers
Cp
Set of containers compatible with position p ∈P
P
Set of positions to be loaded
Pc
Set of positions compatible with container c ∈C
Pq
Set of positions loaded by QC q ∈Q
Q
Set of QCs
qp
The QC scheduled to serve position p ∈P
Sp
Set of TVs that are able to serve position p ∈P
Sq
Set of TVs that are able to serve QC q ∈Q
Kp
The container-TV combinations that are compatible with position p ∈P
Kp = {⟨c, s⟩∈C × S|c ∈Cp ∧s ∈Sp}
lq
The last position to be loaded by crane q
Variables:
xs
cp ∈{0, 1}
1 if container c ∈C is in position p ∈P picked up by TV s ∈S, 0 otherwise.
ts
p ∈Z+
The time TV s ∈S drops the container for position p ∈P in front of the QC.
Starts ∈Z+
The time at which TV s ∈S begins its service window
Ends ∈Z+
The time at which TV s ∈S stops working
z ∈Z+
The time where loading of the entire ship is ﬁnished
∆EFT ∈Z+
The tardiness of the operations
Parameters:
τcp
The time needed for TV to transport container c from its position in the
yard to the vessel-position p. The time is assumed to be equal in both directions.
β
The crane loading time
α
The cost of using a TV for one time unit
γ
The cost of exceeding EFT by one time unit
EFT
The expected ﬁnish time
H
The maximum time a loading can take
Min Z = α
X
s∈S
(Ends −Starts) + γ∆EFT
(4.1)
==PAGE:31==
21
Subject to:
X
c∈Cp
X
s∈Sp
xs
cp = 1
∀p ∈P
(4.2)
X
p∈Pc
X
s∈Sp
xs
cp = 1
∀c ∈C
(4.3)
xs
cp = 0
∀p ∈P,

c, s

/∈Kp
(4.4)
ts
p′ +
X
c∈Cp
2τcpxs
cp ≤ts
p
∀p ∈P, s ∈Sp, p′ ≺≺p
(4.5)
ts′
p′ + β ≤ts
p + H(2 −
X
c∈Cp
xs
cp −
X
c∈C′p
xs′
cp′)
∀p ∈Pq, s, s′ ∈Sp, p′ ≺≺p
(4.6)
Starts ≤ts
p −
X
c∈Cp
2τcpxs
cp
∀p ∈P, s ∈Sp
(4.7)
Ends ≥ts
p
∀q ∈Q, s ∈S, p = lq
(4.8)
z ≥Ends + β
∀s ∈S
(4.9)
∆EFT ≥z −EFT
(4.10)
xs
cp ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C, p ∈P, s ∈S
(4.11)
ts
p ∈Z+
∀p ∈P, s ∈S
(4.12)
Starts, Ends ∈Z+
∀s ∈S
(4.13)
z, ∆EFT ∈Z+
(4.14)
The objective function of the FSLP minimizes the cost of the TVs’ working time
while penalizing the cost of any delay of the vessel.
The ﬁrst constraint 4.2 deﬁnes that one container should be loaded into each
position p ∈P. The second constraint 4.3 deﬁnes that all containers C should be
loaded. Constraint 4.4 deﬁnes that containers that are not compatible with a position
cannot be loaded into that position p, neither can a compatible container be loaded
into the position with a TV which is not compatible.
Constraint 4.5 and 4.6 deﬁnes the variable ts
p as the delivery time of a container
to a QC. Constraint 4.5 deﬁnes that there must be at least the travel time to the
new container between the current container to position p and the previous loaded
position p′ by QC qp. Thereby is constraint 4.5 ensuring that there is enough time
for the TV to pickup and deliver the container c. While constraint 4.6 deﬁnes that a
delivery to a QC (to position p) can ﬁrst be made after the QC is done serving the
previous delivered container for position p′, ensuring the QC loading time.
Constraint 4.7 deﬁnes the start of TV s’s service window, while constraint 4.8
deﬁnes the end of the service window for each s ∈S. Constraint 4.9 deﬁnes z as the
ﬁnish time for loading the entire ship. While constraint 4.10 deﬁnes how much the
ship is delayed ∆EFT according to EFT.
Constraint 4.11 deﬁnes xs
cp as a binary variable, while constraint 4.12 deﬁnes ts
p
as an integer variable. Starts, Ends, z, and ∆EFT are likewise deﬁned as integer
variables by constraint 4.13 and constraint 4.14.
==PAGE:32==
22
The Flexible Ship Loading Problem
Constraint 4.6 is a ”big-M” constraint, where the H is the ”big-M”. H is deﬁned
as the maximum time a loading can take, more precisely by
H = max


β · |P|,
X
p∈P
(2 max
c∈Cp{τcp} + max{0, (β −2 min
c∈Cp′{τcp′})})



where p′ ≺≺p. This constraint makes the model time consuming to solve since it
leads to weak LP-relaxations.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 5
Decomposing the model
The model from Chapter 4 is reformulated to the MP of Section 5.2 since the con-
straint of Equation 4.6 leads to weak LP-relaxations, which makes the mathematical
formulation from Chapter 4 computationally heavy to solve exact. The problem from
Chapter 4 is ﬁrst LP-relaxed, then reformulated into the model presented in 5.2.
The problem is now regarding an optimization of choosing the right assignments for
each QC between all possible assignments for the QCs. The number of constraints is
thereby reduced, however there now exists a lot of variables since there is an enormous
amount of possible assignments for each QC. The MP is therefore decomposed with
CG.
5.1
Column generation in general
Column generation is in general used to reduce the number of variables. It is done
by reformulating a MP with continuous variables into a Restricted Master Prob-
lem (RMP), where only a subset of all the possible assignments (in our case) are
considered.
There now is a need for a PP to generate and dynamically add the
columns that are needed to solve the RMP. The RMP and PP works sequentially; in
the ﬁrst iteration the RMP works on a set of start columns, the RMP is solved, and
then the dual values are passed on to the PP. The PP is then solved, if the PP can
ﬁnd a column with negative reduced cost, then it passes the new column on to the
RMP, and the RMP is solved again. When the PP fails to ﬁnd a column with neg-
ative reduced cost, then the MP is solved to optimality, if the RMP is dual feasible.
One should however remember that the original problem is LP-relaxed before being
reformulated into a MP, so if the optimal solution to the MP is integer, then the
solution is an optimal solution to the original problem, if not then the found solution
is only a LB.
5.2
Master problem
Notice that the variables now are continuous, as previously described. Some addi-
tional syntax is needed to be able to formulate the MP. First of all a new set of
generated full assignments, Ωq, added to the notation. A new variable yqa; which is
==PAGE:34==
24
Decomposing the model
equal to 1 if assignment a ∈Ωq is the used assignment for the speciﬁc QC q ∈Q. The
binary parameter bqac contains whether or not a container c is within assignment a.
The service length of an assignment a is deﬁned by wqa, while ﬁnish time for QC in
assignment a is listed in ¯zqa.
Sets:
Ωq
Set of all generated full assignments for QC q ∈Q
Variables:
yqa
1 if QC q ∈Q uses assignment a ∈Ωq
Parameters:
wqa
The service length for assignment a ∈Ωq for QC q
bqac
Whether or not an assignment a assigns container c to a position for QC q
¯zqa
The ﬁnish time for QC q in assignment a
Min Z = α
X
q∈Q
X
a∈Ωq
wqayqa + γ∆EFT
(5.1)
Subject to:
X
a∈Ωq
yqa = 1
∀q ∈Q
(κq)
(5.2)
X
q∈Q
X
a∈Ωq
bqacyqa ≥1
∀c ∈C
(πc)
(5.3)
∆EFT ≥
X
a∈Ωq
¯zqayqa −EFT
∀q ∈Q
(δq)
(5.4)
yqa ≥0
∀q ∈Q, a ∈Ωq
(5.5)
∆EFT ≥0
(5.6)
The objective function (Equation 5.1) is deﬁned by a minimization of the total
service length of each assignment a and the cost of delaying the vessel. It follows from
the ﬁrst constraint (Equation 5.2) that each QC should be given one assignment. The
second constraint (Equation 5.3) determines that all containers should be loaded on
the vessel at least once. But in collaboration with the ﬁrst constraint and the fact
that bqac is binary, will a container never be assigned more than once. The third
constraint (Equation 5.4) deﬁnes ∆EFT as the constraint in Equation 4.10. The
variables yqa and ∆EFT are deﬁned as continuous positive numbers.
The MP is reformulated into a RMP by restricting the set Ωq to only a subset of
generated columns (ˆΩq) and introducing the PP for each QC to dynamically add new
columns to ˆΩq - which results in fewer variables. The dual variables (κq, πc, δq) from
the RMP are passed to the PPs in each iteration. The constraint in Equation 5.2 that
provides the dual variable κq to the PP. Equation 5.3 provides a dual variable πc for
each container to the PP. The constraint in Equation 5.4 passes the dual variables
δq to the PP.
==PAGE:35==
5.3 Pricing problem
25
5.3
Pricing problem
For each QC there exists a PP, as mentioned, to generate missing assignments/columns
to ˆΩq in the RMP. So any feasible solution in the PP will correspond to an assign-
ment in the set ˆΩq in the RMP. The RMP does not consider the TVs at all, and the
routes of the TVs are thereby planned only in the PP.
The following formulation is generic for QC q. All the variables seems similar
to the formulation in Chapter 4, the number of variables for each PP are however
decreased since they only regard the number of positions and TVs that belong to the
speciﬁc QC. So instead of being for all p ∈P and s ∈S - they now only regard all
p ∈Pq and s ∈Sq.
The new parameters compared to the mathematical formulation in Chapter 4 are
only the dual variables, which are passed from the RMP. According to duality theory
the dual variables κq ∈R, while the dual variables πc ≥0 and δq ≥0. It is diﬃcult to
interpret the dual variables, especially κq since it is all real numbers but the variables
can be given an economic interpretation. They represent the price that is paid for
respecting the constraint and thereby it also represents the potential revenue if the
conditions for the constraint were changed. So considering the objective function for
the PP they must be a part of it, since they contain information about potential
savings of a new assignment/column. Within the objective of the MP (Equation 5.1)
the length of an assignment (wqa) is considered. This is equal to the TVs’ service
time. The objective function of the PP must thereby consists of an element of the
price of the routes (the length of the service time) for each TV and the dual values
as potential saving caused by a new route compared to the current conditions of the
RMP.
Variables:
xs
cp ∈{0, 1}
1 if container c ∈C is in position p ∈Pq for the QC q picked up
by TV s ∈Sq, and 0 otherwise
ts
p ∈Z+
The time TV s ∈Sq drops the container for position p ∈Pq
in front of the QC q.
Starts ∈Z+
The time at which TV s ∈Sq begins its service window
Ends ∈Z+
The time at which TV s ∈Sq stops working
zq ∈Z+
The ﬁnish time for QC q
Parameters:
κq ∈R
The dual variable for constraint (5.2) in the RMP.
πc ≥0
The dual variable for constraint (5.3) in the RMP.
δq ≥0
The dual variable for constraint (5.4) in the RMP.
Min Z = α
X
s∈Sq
(Ends −Starts) −κq −
X
p∈Pq
X
s∈Sq
X
c∈Cp
πcxs
cp + zqδq
(5.7)
Subject to:
==PAGE:36==
26
Decomposing the model
X
c∈Cp
X
s∈Sp
xs
cp = 1
∀p ∈Pq
(5.8)
X
p∈Pc
X
s∈Sp
xs
cp ≤1
∀c ∈C
(5.9)
xs
cp = 0
∀p ∈Pq, ⟨c, s|c, s⟩/∈Kp (5.10)
ts
p′ +
X
c∈Cp
2τcpxs
cp ≤ts
p
∀p ∈Pq, s ∈Sp, p′ ≺≺p (5.11)
ts′
p′ + β ≤ts
p + H(2 −
X
c∈Cp
xs
cp −
X
c∈C′p
xs′
cp′)
∀p ∈Pq, s, s′ ∈Sp, p′ ≺≺p
(5.12)
Starts ≤ts
p −
X
c∈Cp
2τcpxs
cp
∀p ∈Pq, s ∈Sp
(5.13)
Ends ≥ts
p
∀s ∈Sq, p = lq
(5.14)
zq ≥Ends + β
∀s ∈Sq
(5.15)
xs
cp ∈{0, 1}
∀c ∈C, p ∈P, s ∈S
(5.16)
ts
p ∈Z+
∀p ∈P, s ∈S
(5.17)
Starts, Ends ∈Z+
∀s ∈S
(5.18)
zq ∈Z+
(5.19)
The objective function Equation 5.7 is, as mentioned, a minimization of the dual
variables and the QCs’ service time that belong to the speciﬁc crane. Thereby if there
exists an opportunity to reduce the costs in the master problem, the solution value
of the PP will be negative. The constraints from Equation 5.8 to 5.15 are equivalent
to Equation 4.2 to 4.9. Thereby a lot of the complexity from the original formulation
is maintained in the PP. The ”big-M” constraint (Equation 5.12) still exists, even
though it is reduced to only being for all Pq instead of P it still leads to weak lower
bounds.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 6
Solution method
As mentioned in Section 5.3 a lot of the complexity of the original problem from
Chapter 4 is maintained in the PPs since the Big-M constraint (Equation 5.12) still
is a part of the formulation.
To overcome this challenge each PP is solved by a
heuristic which is presented in the following chapter. The heuristic approach to the
PP will be presented at ﬁrst. Then a presentation of diﬀerent implementations of the
CG-framework.
6.1
A heuristic approach to the pricing problem
The metaheuristic chosen for the PP is an ALNS. The reasoning behind is that the
PP in this thesis could be considered as a version of a vehicle routing problem and
the ALNS metaheuristic has shown great results for vehicle routing problems, Ropke
and Pisinger (2006).
An ALNS is a metaheuristic which contains several algorithms to modify a given
solution over an absolute number of iterations. A new solution is generated in each
iteration and evaluated. A best solution and a current solution is saved and updated
when needed. The best solution is updated if the newly generated solution is better
than the best found solution. The new solution is accepted as the current solution
by Simulated Annealing (SA) and is updated with the probability
e−(f(snew)−f(scurrent))/T
A better solution will always be accepted. The worse solutions are allowed to be
accepted to allow the heuristic to investigate the solution space and not be stuck in a
local minima from the beginning. T is the temperature which in the ﬁrst iteration is
equal Tstart thereafter it is decreased in every iteration with the cooling rate c, where
c is the cooling rate 0 < c < 1. It becomes less likely to accept worse new solutions
during the iterations.
The new solutions are, as mentioned earlier, generated by some modifying algo-
rithms. These algorithms are split in two categories; destroy and repair methods.
A destroy method removes elements from the given solution according to diﬀerent
strategies - often making the solution infeasible. The repair methods tries to make
==PAGE:38==
28
Solution method
the solution better or just feasible again by inserting the removed elements in diﬀer-
ent ways. During the absolute number of iterations the diﬀerent destroy and repair
methods are chosen by a roulette wheel principle. A random number between 0 and
1 is chosen, and the probabilities are accumulated, e.g. the probabilities (0.25, 0.25,
0.5) will become (0.25, 0.5, 1). The chosen method is then the method where the
random number lies within the interval. An example could be a random number of
0.2 - then the ﬁrst method would be chosen since it is 0 < 0.2 ≤0.25, while a ran-
dom number of 0.49 result in a choice of the second method since 0.25 < 0.49 ≤0.5.
The probability of choosing a method depends on how eﬀective the method has been
during the previous iterations. The absolute number of iterations are split up in seg-
ments and the probabilities are only updated once in each segment. In this way the
methods eﬀectiveness are analyzed over multiple iterations.
In the ﬁrst iterations the methods are chosen with equal probability, but as the
heuristic works its way through the iterations it becomes less random and more fo-
cused on the successful destroy and repair methods. In each segment j the weight
wij of a method i is updated as
wi(j+1) = wij(1 −r) + rπi
θi
πi is the reward the method i obtained during the last segment. In each iteration a so-
lution is found and evaluated. The methods are rewarded according to the evaluation
of the found solution and there exists four cases;
• w1 if a new best solution is found
• w2 if a new better current solution is found
• w3 if a new current solution is accepted without being better than the current
• w4 if neither the best or current solution is updated
θi is the number of times the method i has been used during the last segment, while
the r is the reaction factor which controls how fast the heuristic reacts to changes in
eﬀectiveness of the methods. The last segment inﬂuence the weights more, the closer
r are to 1.
Two implementation speciﬁc adjustments of the ALNS heuristic are described
in Section 6.1.1 and 6.1.2. While the implemented destroy and repair methods will
be presented in Section 6.1.3 and 6.1.4. At last diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the PP
heuristic will be explained.
6.1.1
Warm up period to determine start temperature
In the article Ropke and Pisinger (2006) it is proposed that Tstart should be deter-
mined such that a 5 % worse solution than the initial solution should be accepted
with a 50 % chance. This way to choose Tstart is however not possible in this heuristic
since the initial solution always will have a solution value of 0 per deﬁnition. This is
because the initial solution/start column always will be in basis for the RMP - it will
be explained further in Chapter 6.2.
==PAGE:39==
6.1 A heuristic approach to the pricing problem
29
The problem of not being able to calculate the start temperature has been solved
by including a warm up period. The heuristic used in the warm up period is similar
to the implemented ALNS heuristic for the entire PP however with adjustments. The
diﬀerence is that it only runs for 200 iterations, it only accepts the best solutions,
and it is not adaptive. This means that the destroy and repair methods are chosen
randomly throughout the warm up period. If a better solution is found (i.e. a solution
with a reduced cost) then this is saved as the best solution and used to calculate Tstart.
If not, then all the solution values have been saved during the 200 iterations, and an
average is taken to calculate Tstart. Tstart is calculated as
Tstart = −0.1 · f(s)
ln(0.5)
where f(s) is either the best solution value found or an average of all the found
solutions. Stated in another way; a 10 % worse solution value, than found in the
warm up period, is accepted with 50 % chance. The 10 % have been chosen through
a rough parameter tuning. It should be mentioned that the only thing that is passed
on from the warm up period, beyond the Tstart, is if there is found a new best solution.
Then this is set as sbest, nothing else is saved.
6.1.2
Restart mechanism
If the PP-heuristic has run 30 % of its maximal number of iterations without updating
sbest then it is ”restarted” such that scurrent is set to sbest. This is done to avoid that
scurrent explores the solution space with no better minima than sbest.
6.1.3
Destroy methods
The object function of the PP is given as Equation 5.7
Min Z = α
X
s∈Sq
(Ends −Starts) −κq −
X
p∈Pq
X
s∈Sq
X
c∈Cp
πcxs
cp + zqδq
where κq is a constant for the PP.
The two terms α P
s∈Sq(Ends −Starts) and
zqδq concerns the TVs’ service time. And the last sum P
p∈Pq
P
s∈Sq
P
c∈Cp πcxs
cp
considers the containers’ dual value πc. There is therefore a focus on minimizing the
TVs’ service time but also choosing the containers with the best dual values. All the
destroy methods focus on removing deliveries of the solution such that the TVs can
work more eﬃciently. A solution is a schedule of deliveries for each TV, for each QC.
A delivery consists of a container assigned to a compatible position with a compatible
TV which transport it to the belonging QC. This is done with a speciﬁc a drive time
(τcp) which represents the time it takes to drive from the QC to the container and
pick it up. The entire time of picking up a container from driving from to QC till the
TV drops the container in front of the QC is therefore 2τcp. The delivery is put into
the schedule of both the speciﬁc TV and QC. Combined with the previous deliveries,
this results in the drop time in front of the QC. The work schedules for both the TVs
and QCs represents in this way the solution.
==PAGE:40==
30
Solution method
There exists 4 destroy methods. All the destroy methods take a solution as input
and outputs a partial solution, which contains the deliveries that are left in the
solution after the solution has been destroyed.
Furthermore each of the destroy
methods pass the lists of unserved positions and the container pool when removing
a delivery from the solution. The list of unserved positions contains the positions
which are no longer served. The container pool contains all the containers that are
removed from the solution and the containers that are not loaded on the vessel by
the current QC.
The four destroy methods are now explained in details.
Destroy randomly
There exists two versions of random destroy methods; DestroyRandom() and De-
stroyInterval(). Both methods takes a random number of deliveries to remove from
the solution, as a standard there are removed between 3 to 7 deliveries.
DestroyRandom() chooses randomly the deliveries to remove from the solution.
When a delivery is chosen to be removed the container is put in the container pool,
while the position of the delivery is put into the list of unserved positions. The rest of
the deliveries in the solutions are passed on as a partial solution to the chosen repair
method.
DestroyInterval() does the same but within a time interval with a ﬁxed length
of 20 time-units. The start of the time interval is the chosen randomly from time-
unit 0 to the ﬁnish time of the QC minus the 20 time-units. All deliveries that lie
within this interval are considered to be removed from the solution. From here on the
destroy method works as DestroyRandom(), but it is only the chosen interval that is
considered. The container pool and list of unserved positions are again updated, and
the partial solution is passed to the chosen repair method. DestroyInterval() works
as a more focused version of DestroyRandom().
Destroy end of solution
The third destroy method is DestroyEnd() which always removes the last 10 % of
the deliveries for the QC. The ﬁrst 90% of the deliveries are passed on to the chosen
repair method. The last 10 % of the deliveries are split into positions and containers
and are saved in the lists of unserved positions and the container pool, which also are
passed on to the chosen repair method.
Destroy both start and end of solution
The last destroy method; RemoveStartEnd() removes for each TV-schedule the ﬁrst
and the last delivery. Two deliveries will be removed from the solution for each TV.
These deliveries are split into positions and containers, saved as unserved positions
and in the container pool, while the rest of the deliveries are passed on to the chosen
repair method as a partial solution.
==PAGE:41==
6.1 A heuristic approach to the pricing problem
31
6.1.4
Repair methods
All the repair methods are split into two decisions; ﬁrst a Container/Position (CP)-
assignment, then a TV-assignment. Five CP-assignments and three TV-assignments
exist, which results in total in 3 · 5 = 15 repair methods. The reasoning for splitting
the decisions up in two assignments is that the problem does not have an optimal
substructure. If a problem has an optimal substructure then it means that the optimal
solution can be constructed from optimal solutions of its sub-problems. I.e. in the
FSLP the entire solution needs to be generated before one knows how good the
solution is. A smarter implementation could seem to be to evaluate each decision
along the way. This is however, as argued, not easily done for this problem since it
does not have an optimal substructure.
The steps made throughout the repair methods are describe here:
1. CP-assignments: The general idea with all the CP-assignments is to choose
the ”right” container for each unserved position. The ”right” container is either
choosing the container with a high dual value or the container which minimizes
the TVs’ service time. The service time could be minimized by choosing the
CP with minimum drive time.
Each CP-assignment takes the following inputs; the list of unserved positions,
the container pool, the drive times for all the compatible free sets of CP, and
the dual variables for all the containers in the pool. Only some containers are
compatible with certain positions - since, as mentioned, the operative stowage
plan is made based on a class-based stowage plan. Because of this is the con-
tainer’s type essential since it needs to match the position.
The job of the
CP-assignments is thereby to assign compatible containers from the container
pool to all unserved positions.
There exists the following ﬁve CP-assignments:
(a) A CP-assignment of minimum drive time: The ﬁrst CP-assignment
CPDrive() focus on drive time. All unserved positions are run through and
are assigned the compatible, free container (i.e. a compatible container
from the container pool) with the minimum drive time. When a container
is assigned a position the container is removed from the container pool,
likewise is the position no longer an unserved position.
When all the
unserved positions has been matched with a container - the list of CPs is
passed on to a TV-assignment.
(b) A CP-assignment of maximum dual values: CPDual() focus on the
dual values and chooses the available compatible container with the max-
imal dual value for each unserved position. Otherwise the algorithm is an
exact replication of the algorithm described in (a).
(c) First considering dual value, then drive time: CPDualDT() takes
for each unserved position four randomly picked available compatible con-
tainers and forms randomly two pairs out of them. Then the container is
chosen through two criteria, which will be described through an example.
==PAGE:42==
32
Solution method
The example has been as visualized as a ﬁgure below and is showing a
selection of a container for a given unserved position p. In the example
the containers c1, c4, c5, and c6 are randomly picked out, and randomly
formed to the pairs; {c1, c4} and {c5, c6}. Then the ﬁrst selection criteria
is to pick the container from each of the pairs with the maximal dual value
πc - which in this case is c1 for pair 1, since π1 > π4 (5 > 4) and c6 for
pair 2, since π6 > π5 (2 > 1). The next criteria is that the container with
the minimum drive time is chosen. Now τ1p and τ6p is compared; τ1p > τ6p
(5 > 3), therefore is c6 assigned to be the container to the unserved position
p.
c1
c2
c3
c4
c5
c6
...
πc
5
2
1
4
1
2
...
τcp
5
2
1
5
2
3
...
1st Pairs
c1, c4
c5, c6
Max πc
Max πc
2nd Pair
c1, c6
Min τcp
Finial choice
c6
(d) First considering drive time, then dual value: This next CP-assignment
is very similar to the algorithm in (c) and are both implemented since it
seemed diﬃcult to decide which one is most relevant. Here the criteria are
ﬂipped, so ﬁrst criteria is Min τcp, second criteria Max πc.
If one considers the example from (c) with the same 1st pairs ({c1, c4}
and {c5, c6}), then the ﬁrst selection would be random for pair {c1, c4}
since τ1p = τ4p. c1 is picked out randomly for the 2nd pair, together with
c5, since τ5p < τ6p (2 < 3).
Then π1 is compared with π5 - π1 > π5
(5 > 1) - therefore container c1 is assigned to the unserved position p in
this example.
(e) Probabilistic choice drive time and dual value: The last CP-assignment
CPProb() evaluates all compatible containers to each unserved position
c∗∈Cp \ {ˆc ∈delivList}, where the delivList is the remaining deliveries
in the destroyed solution. It considers each available compatible container
with the probability
P(c∗) = 1
2 · Pτ(c∗) + 1
2 · Pπ(c∗)
where
Pτ(c∗) = 1 −
τcp
P
c∗∈Cp\{ˆc∈delivList} τcp
and
Pπ(c∗) =
πc
P
c∗∈Cp\{ˆc∈delivList} πc
==PAGE:43==
6.1 A heuristic approach to the pricing problem
33
for all unserved positions p. A probabilistic choice is made based equally
on each CP’s drive time and the containers dual value. The calculation
however, unfortunately does not do what it was intended to. If one is to
consider the 6 containers of the example in (c) the following probabilities
would come out of it:
c1
c2
c3
c4
c5
c6
πc
5
2
1
4
1
2
τcp
5
2
1
5
2
3
Pτ(c∗)
0.722
0.889
0.944
0.722
0.889
0.833
Pπ(c∗)
0.333
0.133
0.067
0.267
0.067
0.133
P(c∗)
0.528
0.511
0.506
0.494
0.478
0.483
and P P(c∗) > 1, because Pτ(c∗) is calculated as the complimentary prob-
ability which sums per deﬁnition to N-1. This would in the given example
be 6 −1 = 5. This was not the intention - the intention was that it should
sum to 1.
The result of implementing this is that the containers with
the highest indexes will in most cases not be able to be selected since the
resulting accumulated probability vector will look like this:
PDF
0.528
> 1
> 1
> 1
> 1
> 1
In this example will c1 be chosen with a chance of 52.8 %, c2 with 47.2 %,
while c3, c4, c5, c6 would never be chosen in the implementation.
The probability calculated for the τcp is calculated wrong.
Instead of
Pτ(c∗) =

1 −
τcp
P
c∗∈Cp\{ˆc∈delivList} τcp

it should have been calculated as:
Pτ(c∗) =
(τcp)−1 · Q
c∗∈Cp\{ˆc∈delivList}(τcp)
P
c∗∈Cp\{ˆc∈delivList}

(τcp)−1 · Q
c∗∈Cp\{ˆc∈delivList}(τcp)

The probabilities of the example would after the new correct calculations
of Pτ(c∗) be:
c1
c2
c3
c4
c5
c6
πc
5
2
1
4
1
2
τcp
5
2
1
5
2
3
Pτ(c∗)
0.073
0.183
0.366
0.073
0.183
0.122
Pπ(c∗)
0.333
0.133
0.067
0.267
0.067
0.133
P(c∗)
0.203
0.158
0.216
0.170
0.125
0.128
2. TV-assignments: All the TV-assignments takes the following inputs; the list
of the CPs-pairs from the CP-assignment and the partial solution from the
destroy methods. All the TV-assignments outputs a new solution.
==PAGE:44==
34
Solution method
There exists the following three TV-assignments:
(a) Randomized TV-assignment: The ﬁrst TV-assignment RandTVA()
chooses randomly a TV to each CP from the CP-assignment. Thereby is
a delivery for the new solution made for each CP passed from the CP-
assignment. The time-line (i.e. the drop times for the deliveries) of the
entire solution needs to be updated when all the new deliveries have been
generated. All the deliveries of the new solution is sorted and the most
optimal drop times are chosen. When this is done the solution is ﬁnished
and ready to be passed on to the acceptance criteria, to decide whether or
not to save the solution.
(b) Optimal TV-assignment: The next TV-assignment MultiTVA() gener-
ates all the possible TV-assignments for all the CP in the list passed from
the CP-assignment.
It then generates a solution for each possible TV-
assignment and evaluates them. An visualization of the TV-assignment is
shown below on an example with 7 CP-assignments:
cp1
cp2
cp3
cp4
cp5
cp6
cp7
TV-assign 1
s1
s1
s1
s1
s1
s1
s1
TV-assign 2
s1
s1
s1
s1
s1
s1
s2
TV-assign 3
s1
s1
s1
s1
s1
s1
s3
TV-assign 4
s1
s1
s1
s1
s1
s2
s1
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
TV-assign 2187
s3
s3
s3
s3
s3
s3
s3
The solutions’ time-line, i.e. the drop times, needs to be updated for each
solution - which is also a computationally time-consuming operation. The
solution value is then calculated and the solution with the best negative
reduced cost is chosen as the best ﬁt, as the optimal TV-assignment for the
given CP-assignment. Notice that the solution is not necessarily optimal,
only the TV-assignment.
In this TV-assignment there is generated and evaluated an exponential
number of TV-assignments, O(n) = |sq|n, where n is the number of re-
moved deliveries from the initial solution. An example of seven removed de-
liveries thereby result in 37 = 2187 generated and evaluated TV-assignments,
since there in the used data for this implementation always is three TVs
per QC.
(c) Step-wise multiple TV-assignment: The second TV-assignment Mul-
tiTVA() and third TV-assignments NewMultiTVA() are very similar but
have very diﬀerent asymptotic run time. NewMultiTVA() assigns TV in a
similar way as MultiTVA() but only for three CP-assignments at the time.
It evaluates the solution without the last CP-assignments and only adds the
a delivery for the ﬁrst of the three deliveries to the solution (see the ﬁgure
below). The ﬁrst of the three deliveries d with the best TV-assignment
==PAGE:45==
6.1 A heuristic approach to the pricing problem
35
are added to the new solution snew. For the last iteration all the three
deliveries are added in snew. See the generic example below:
cp1
cp2
cp3
cp4
cp5
cp6
cp7
d1
d2
d3
d4
d5
d6
d7
It. 1
It. 2
It. 3
It. 4
It. 5
snew
The ﬁgure shows how the TV-assignment works on a example of 7 CP-
assignments through 5 iterations to compute 7 deliveries d, which when
joined with the remaining parts of the destroyed solution, becomes a new
solution.
NewMultiTVA() results in fewer TV-assignments and evaluations than
MultiTVA(). More precisely; O(n) = (n −2) · |sq|3, where n is the number
of removed deliveries from the initial solution. To take the same example
as before with 7 removed deliveries; the number of generated and evaluated
TV-assignments is now (7−2)·(33) = 135. This is a lot fewer assignments
to compute and evaluate compared to MultiTVA(). However when choos-
ing MultiTVA() it is guaranteed to ﬁnd an optimal TV-assignment for the
given CP-assignment. This is however not at all the case for NewMul-
tiTVA(). This TV-assignment tries to evaluate partial solutions, which,
as mentioned earlier, cannot be done optimally since the problem does
not have an optimal substructure. It is, though, considered to be more
important to generate many diﬀerent columns, than ﬁnding the optimal
column with most negative reduced cost. Newly generated columns are
not always chosen in the RMP even though they have a large negative
reduced cost, since it is not sure that there exists columns which matches
such that there can be made a feasible solution for the RMP. This could
happen if e.g. there only exists columns for the other QC(s) with one or
multiple similar containers. I.e. one or multiple containers would not be
loaded on board the vessel and that would not be a feasible solution. So
because of this, a lot of diﬀerent columns is considered to be better than
similar columns with large negative reduced cost. It is with this reasoning
that the third TV-assignment NewMultiTVA() has been made, making
sub-optimal choices.
6.1.5
Diﬀerent pricing problem heuristics
The diﬀerent repair methods have been combined in 7 ways to create 7 ALNS heuris-
tics. The 7 heuristics for the PP are shown in Table 6.1 - to simplify the table the
diﬀerent CP-assignments and TV-assignments have been numerated. So the Basic
heuristic has 10 repair methods consisting of the two TV-assignments RandTVA()
and MultiTVA() combined with all the CP-assignments, while Easy just uses the
==PAGE:46==
36
Solution method
Veh. assign
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
CP-assign.
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
Basic
Easy
Advanced
LessRemove
NewMultiVA
All
NotAdaptive
Table 6.1:
The black boxes represent which repair methods that are within the diﬀerent
heuristics. The gray colored boxes represent that there has been made changes in the heuristic
beyond the chosen repair methods.
RandTVA() TV-assignment with all ﬁve CP-assignments, and so on. The heuris-
tics LessRemove and NotAdaptive require a more detailed description.
The TV-
assignments:
1. RandTVA()
2. MultiTVA()
3. NewMultiTVA()
The CP-assignments:
1. CPDrive()
2. CPDual()
3. CPDualDT()
4. CPDTDual()
5. CPProb()
LessRemove is the exact same heuristic as Basic but instead of removing between
3-7 deliveries from the solution it only removes 2-4 deliveries (for the two random
destroy methods DestroyRandom() and DestroyInterval()). This reduces the average
neighbourhood size in the CP-assignments but also in the TV-assignments. This is
especially done because of the TV-assignment MultiTVA(), which is computationally
heavy.
Now the worst case is no longer 37 = 2187 generated and evaluated TV-
assignments, but instead 34 = 81 (when using the destroy methods DestroyRandom()
and DestroyInterval()).
NotAdaptive is identical with All but it is not adaptive at all. It simply chooses
destroy and repair methods randomly throughout the entire heuristic.
==PAGE:47==
6.2 The implemented column generation framework
37
6.2
The implemented column generation framework
The CG-framework takes an initial solution as input and the input data that would
be available for the terminal (see Chapter 7). The RMP is solved in each iteration by
CPLEX and the framework terminates when no more columns with negative reduced
cost can be found or when the time limit of 5 hours is reached. If one of the heuristics
or the exact method ﬁnds columns they are passed on to RMP. The CG ﬁnds a valid
lower bound to the FSLP if the exact method terminates because there exists no
more columns. If the framework stops because it has reached the time limit, then the
found fractional solution is just a bound to the FSLP. In both cases the fractional
variables will be converted to integers, and the RMP will be solved again. This oﬀers
a feasible solution to the FSLP. So the framework outputs both a fractional and a
feasible solution. The framework has been implemented in Java using CPLEX as a
MIP-solver.
The ALNS for the PP relies on an initial solution/a start column. There exists two
diﬀerent types of initial solution to the RMP which will be described more in details
in Section 7.3. The start column in the PP-heuristic is randomly chosen between the
columns in basis with a value strictly greater than 0 for the speciﬁc QC. In each
iteration the RMP passes a start column in basis and the dual variables to the PP,
as described in Chapter 5.
Notice that in a normal CG the PP adds one column per run in the RMP, as
explained in Chapter 5, but this PP returns several columns. A restricted list of
saved columns with a negative reduced cost is made (a list of solutions in the PP).
There are maximally given 50 columns from each PP to the RMP, therefore the list
of columns to add will hold maximal 50 solutions. This list holds the ﬁrst 50 found
solutions with a negative reduced cost. Any columns with negative reduced cost found
hereafter will be evaluated by generating a distance matrix and comparing how the
newly found solution diﬀers from the ones saved in the list. It is done so since it is
important the RMP gets many diﬀerent columns, as it is argued in Section 6.1.4. The
”distance” between two solutions is calculated by both evaluating how many diﬀerent
containers the solutions encounter, but also by looking at the diﬀerence in ﬁnish time
for the QC q. The distance between two solutions (s1 and s2) is thereby calculated
by
dist(s1, s2) = (|Pq| −|Csimilar|) + |FinishTime(s1) −FinishTime(s2)|
where Csimilar = {⟨c1, c2⟩∈s1 × s2|c1 = c2}. A new solution with negative reduced
cost is saved in the list if it has a bigger distance to the solutions in the list than one
of the listed solutions.
6.2.1
The standard CG-conﬁguration
The CG-framework works mostly like a normal CG but for each QC a Easy heuristic
is run as PP. If the Easy heuristic does not ﬁnd any columns with negative reduced
cost for a QC it tries up to 10 other heuristics until it one of the heuristics ﬁnds
columns with negative reduced cost. The 10 randomly picked heuristics are picked
with a weighted probability.
==PAGE:48==
38
Solution method
•
50
3 % chance of choosing Basic
• 25 % chance of choosing LessRemove
• 25 % chance of choosing NewMultiVA
•
50
3 % chance of choosing All
•
50
3 % chance of choosing NotAdaptive
The Advanced heuristic is never used since it is too time consuming, which will be
elaborated in Chapter 8.
If none of the PP-heuristics for a QC have found a column with negative reduced
cost, then it starts to solve the PP for the next QC. If none of the PPs for any
of the QCs have found a column with negative reduced cost, then there exists two
possibilities; the CG stops or it tries the exact method (will be explained further in
6.2.3).
Pseudo code for the CG-framework
The standard CG-conﬁguration has been written in pseudo code in Algorithm 1. The
pseudo code will now be explained line for line.
The ColumnGeneration() algorithm takes an initial solution sinit and the terminal
data Data as inputs. In Line 1 is the subset of assignments ˆΩinitialized with the
columns from the initial solution sinit. In Line 2 to 4 are the reduced cost for each
QC (RCq) initialized to −∞.
The framework is now initialized and at Line 5 the actual framework begins with
a while-loop. The framework continuous as long as there is found a negative reduced
cost for one of the QCs (minq∈Q{RCq} < 0) or that the time limit is not reached.
In Line 6 is the RMP solved, which takes the subset of assignments ˆΩand outputs
the dual values dual and a solution s. The PPs should now try to ﬁnd columns with
negative reduced cost - this is done from Line 7 to 32.
At ﬁrst a start column astart is found in Line 8 within the subset of assignments for
the QC ˆΩq. The start column astart needs to be in basis. astart is passed to the Easy
PP in Line 9 where it also takes the dual as an input. The PP always outputs the
most negative reduced cost RCq and a list of assignments with negative reduced cost
(Assignments). If a negative reduced cost is found then the columns in Assignment
is added to the subset ˆΩq in Line 10 to 13.
If there has not been found any negative reduced cost with the Easy PP heuristic,
then other heuristics are tried and chosen with the probabilities listed earlier in this
Section. In Line 16 to 20 up to 10 other heuristics are tried for the PP. If a reduced
cost is found then the while-loop in Line 16 then it terminates. Again if there has
been found columns then they are added to the subset ˆΩq in Line 21 to 25.
If neither the Easy PP-heuristic or the 10 other PP-heuristics has succeeded - Line
25 to 27 at ⋆, then more heuristics with an increased number of maximum iterations
can be run. Whether this is done or not is depending on the chosen CG-conﬁguration.
It is explained how it is done in Section 6.2.2.
==PAGE:49==
6.2 The implemented column generation framework
39
If none of all the PP-heuristics for any of the QCs have succeeded in ﬁnding a
column with negative reduced cost (Line 30 to 32 at the ⋆⋆), then the exact PPs can
be solved. Whether this is done or not is depending on the chosen CG-conﬁguration.
It is explained how it is done in Section 6.2.3
At last in Line 34 the fractional variables of solution s is converted into integers
and the problem is solved again, resulting in an integer solution x. Both the bound
s and the feasible solution x are given as output of the CG-framework.
6.2.2
Another conﬁguration with extra heuristics and a varying num-
ber of maximal iterations
Another version of the CG-framework has as standard a maximal number of iterations
on 500 per PP-heuristic. If the 11 PP heuristics with 500 iterations does not ﬁnd any
columns with negative reduced cost for a QC (Line 8 to 24 in the Algorithm 1) then
at line 26 at the ⋆the number of iterations is set up to 15,000 iterations. And the
procedure from Line 9 to 24 is run again now with 15,000 iterations per PP before
moving on to the next PP with 500 iteration for the other QC. The reasoning behind
this version of the CG-framework is explained further in Chapter 8.
6.2.3
Solving the pricing problem exact
If none of the heuristics for none of the QCs ﬁnds at least one column with negative
reduced cost (Line 30 to 32 in Algorithm 1) then the exact PP model is run in 30
seconds at the time for each QC.
CPLEX has a memory mechanism which is exploited. If all exact PPs is ”stopped”
after 30 seconds each and none of them have found a column with negative reduced
cost, then CPLEX is given 30 seconds more for each PP, as it can be seen in Figure
6.1, which shows a ﬂow diagram of the steps when solving the exact PPs. CPLEX
now continues from where it came from after the last 30 seconds of work on the
speciﬁc PP. Thereby can the PPs be solved sequentially until CPLEX ﬁnds a column
with negative reduced cots or it reaches the time limit for the entire framework. If it
ﬁnds a column with negative reduced cost then it is passed to the subset ˆΩ, and the
CG-framework can continue, as written in the last box in Figure 6.1.
Run exact PP for
QC q0 in 30 sec
Run exact PP for
QC q1 in 30 sec
Is there found a
negative reduced cost
for any of the QCs?
Then the columns is added to the ˆΩ
and one more iteration is taken in the
while-loop in Line 5 in Algorithm 1
YES
NO
Figure 6.1: Flow diagram for the exact method for two PPs/two QCs
==PAGE:50==
40
Solution method
Algorithm 1 ColumnGeneration(sinit, Data)
1: ˆΩ←sinit
2: for all q ∈Q do
3:
RCq = −∞
4: end for
5: while minq∈Q{RCq} < 0 and time left do
6:
RMP(ˆΩ) →{dual, s}
7:
for all q ∈Q do
8:
astart = ChooseStartColumn(ˆΩq)
9:
PPEasy(dual, astart) →{RCq, Assignments}
10:
if RCq < 0 then
11:
for all a ∈Assignments do
12:
ˆΩq ←a
13:
end for
14:
else
15:
i = 0
16:
while i < 10 and RCq ≥0 do
17:
choice = ChoosePP()
18:
PPchoice(dual, astart) →{RCq, Assignments}
19:
i = i + 1
20:
end while
21:
if RCq < 0 then
22:
for all a ∈Assignments do
23:
ˆΩq ←a
24:
end for
25:
else
26:
⋆
27:
end if
28:
end if
29:
end for
30:
if RCq ≥0 ∀q ∈Q then
31:
⋆⋆
32:
end if
33: end while
34: x ←SolveWithInt(s)
35: return s and x
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 7
Data
7.1
Benchmark instances
A benchmark set have been provided similar to the set used in Iris et al. (2018) and
Christensen (2017). The set contains instances with 60, 240, 500, and 1000 containers
corresponding to vessels of diﬀerent sizes. In this thesis has the implementation only
been tested on instances of 60 and 240 containers. The number of type of containers
varies from 10 to 100, but for 60 containers there are either 10 or 25 types, while for
240 containers there are either 20 or 60 types.
The yard structure is represented by three diﬀerent layouts; Uniform, Scattered,
and Less Dense. Uniform represents a yard where the containers are stacked close
together, minimizing the variance in travel time. The containers in the Scattered yard
is more spread out over a larger area and diﬀers more in travel time. Less Dense is
a mix of the two densities.
For the smaller instances, that this thesis considers, there are two QCs per vessel.
The number of TVs is three per QC in all instances. In the considered instances there
are two QCs and six TVs to schedule.
The data instances also contain information about loading time for the QCs (β)
which is equal to 1 time-unit, drive time for each container to each position (τcp),
and the EFT which depends on the size of the vessel/the number of containers. It
contains a table listing all containers and which TVs and positions with which they
are compatible.
7.2
Pricing problem instances
PP instances have been generated such that the performance of the heuristic for the
PP could be tested. The PP instances have been generated by solving the instances
with 60 containers with CG. The dual variables and the columns in basis with a value
strictly greater than 0 have in each iteration been written out and constitutes a PP
instance.
==PAGE:52==
42
Data
7.3
Initial solutions for the column generation frame-
work
The CG-frameworks starts of with a initial solution. There exists two types of diﬀerent
initial solutions; a Good and a Random. The Good initial solution is generated by
the GRASP heuristic from Iris et al. (2018). The Random initial solution is random
generated by CP-assignments and TV-assignments. The CG-framework is tested with
both - see the next Chapter 8 for results and analysis.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 8
Computational results
All the results are computed using a 2.30 GHz Intel Xeon E5 Processor. The imple-
mentations have been made in Java using CPLEX as a MIP-solver. The time limit
of the CG-framework is set to 5 hours.
Parameters
A table is made to give an easy overview of the diﬀerent parameters. Some parameters
were described in Chapter 6 and 7, they are however all listed in Table 8.1.
Description
Symbol
Value
Maximum number of iterations in the PPs
MaxIt
{15000, 500}
Number of iterations before restart (Section 6.1.2) in the PPs
-
30 % of MaxIt
Number of saved columns in the PPs
-
50
% worse than the sstart to be accepted with 50 % chance in 1st iteration (SA)
-
10 %
Cooling rate (SA)
c
0.9999
Segment size in the ALNS
-
100
Reaction factor (ALNS)
r
0.1
Reward for succesful destroy/repair method (ALNS)
{w1, w2, w3, w4}
{33, 9, 13, 0}
Time cost for the TVs
α
5
Loading time for a QC
β
1
The cost of exceeding EFT by one time unit
γ
30
Probability of choosing a PP-heuristic in the CG-framework for:
Basic
-
50
3 %
LessRemove
-
25 %
NewMultiVA
-
25 %
All
-
50
3 %
NotAdaptive
-
50
3 %
Table 8.1: The parameters used throughout the PP-heuristics and CG-conﬁgurations
The two ﬁrst blocks of parameters in Table 8.1 regard the PPs and the SA in
the PPs, where all parameters have been decided through experiments and a rough
parameter tuning. The next block of parameters regards the ALNS in the PPs - here
==PAGE:54==
44
Computational results
the parameters have been set to the same value as in the article Ropke and Pisinger
(2006). The next block of parameters are given in the input data, as described in
Chapter 7. The last block of parameters are determined through the analysis in next
Section 8.1.
8.1
Performance of the pricing problem heuristic
Instances of PP have been computed to evaluate the performance of the diﬀerent
ALNS heuristics. A description of the instances are found in Section 7.2. The in-
stances have been solved by the exact method using CPLEX with a time limit of
1 hour to be able to compare the heuristic results. The 7 diﬀerent heuristics and
the exact method have been solved on 1,688 PP-instances of 6 diﬀerent benchmark
instances with 60 containers. Notice that the heuristics have been modiﬁed for the
performance tests such that they only output one column with the most negative
reduced cost.
Table 8.2 shows the 7 heuristics and their average time, failure rate, and average
gap over all 1,688 PP instances. The failure rate is calculated by counting the number
of instances where the heuristic did not ﬁnd a column with negative reduced cost, but
where the exact method manage to do so. The average gap is between each found
column with negative reduced cost and the UB found by the exact method.
Heuristic
Avg. Time
Failure Rate
Avg. Gap
Basic
18.15 s
9.1%
89.24%
Easy
0.61 s
43.3%
96.55%
Advanced
31.08 s
7.6%
83.04%
LessRemove
11.42 s
10.1%
89.16%
NewMultiVA
7.78 s
10.2%
89.46%
All
19.17 s
7.9%
87.24%
NotAdaptiv
18.16 s
8.5%
87.64%
Table 8.2: The average performances of the diﬀerent PP heuristics over all PP instances.
The average time is measured in seconds, failure rate in percentage, and average gap to UB
in percentage.
It is clear from Table 8.2 that the Advanced heuristic takes long time to solve but
achieves great results compared to the other heuristics with the lowest failure rate and
lowest average gap. None of the results however seem impressive when considering
the average gap to the UB. The heuristic Easy has a much higher failure rate than the
other heuristics and a average gap to UB close to 100 %. This can also be observed
on Figure 8.1, which shows the convergence of the average gap of the bound plotted
according to the number of iterations. Easy is the worst performing and Advanced is
the best. It is also seen that Basic, LessRemove, and NewMultiVA seems to perform
very similar. NotAdaptive performs better and All a bit better again.
NewMultiVA performs better than both LessRemove and Basic when one consid-
ers convergency over time, see Figure 8.2. NewMultiVA is the ﬁrst one of the three
heuristics that is done. And it converges faster than Basic. Figure 8.2 is a plot of
==PAGE:55==
8.1 Performance of the pricing problem heuristic
45
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
·104
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
Iterations
Avg. gap to the UB
Convergence of the avg. gap to the UB over 15,000 iterations
Basic
Easy
Advanced
LessRemove
NewMultiVA
All
NotAdaptive
Figure 8.1: Avg. gap of the bound to the UB over the number of iterations
==PAGE:56==
46
Computational results
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
80
85
90
95
100
105
Avg. time per iteration (in seconds)
Avg. gap to the UB
Convergence of the avg. gap to the UB over time
Basic
Easy
Advanced
LessRemove
NewMultiVA
All
NotAdaptive
Figure 8.2: Avg. gap of the bound to the UB over the average time per iteration
all the heuristics average gap to the UB over the average time per iteration, where
the end-results is marked by a square. It is now made very visual that Easy is ex-
tremely fast compared to other heuristics, and Advanced much slower. It is with this
reasoning that it has been decided to run with Easy as the ﬁrst heuristic in the CG-
framework and then trying the other heuristics except Advanced. The probabilities of
choosing another PP-heuristic if Easy fails, which is shown in Table 8.1, are set to the
listed values in the table based on Figure 8.2. As seen in the ﬁgure LessRemove and
NewMultiVA converges fast and ﬁnd relatively good decisions quickly. While Basic,
All, and NotAdaptive also performs well but is much slower.
In both Figure 8.1 and 8.2 it can be seen that the avg. gap takes some ”jumps”.
It is most clear to see for Advanced in Figure 8.1 around 4,500-5,000 iterations.
This happens because the heuristic is restarted (as described in Section 6.1.2), where
scurrent is set to sbest. This however only happens if sbest has not changed in 4,500
iterations. The ”jump” is blurred for some of the other heuristics. This is because
the plotted gap is an average over 1,688 PP instances. It is though clear that the
”restart” has a positive eﬀect on the gap of the bound.
It seems on Figure 8.1 that the avg. gap of all heuristics fall drastically within the
ﬁrst 1,000 iterations therefore Figure 8.3 shows the average gap over the ﬁrst 1,000
iterations. Actually it shows that the average gap drops drastically within the ﬁrst
100 iterations. It was decided that another conﬁguration for the CG-framework was
==PAGE:57==
8.2 Column generation with only heuristic pricing problems
47
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
Iterations
Avg. gap to the UB
Convergence of the avg. gap to the UB over the ﬁrst 1,000 iterations
Basic
Easy
Advanced
LessRemove
NewMultiVA
All
NotAdaptive
Figure 8.3: Avg. gap of the bound to the UB over the ﬁrst 1,000 iterations
to try all 11 runs of heuristics with 500 iterations. If it did not ﬁnd a column, then
the number of iterations was increase to 15,000 and the 11 runs where made again.
8.2
Column generation with only heuristic pricing prob-
lems
6 diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the heuristic approach to the PP have been tested. These
6 conﬁgurations have only been tested on instances with 60 containers. The diﬀerent
conﬁgurations are listed as
MaxIt
StartSol
Extra
Exact
500
Rand
No
No
500
Good
No
No
15,000
Rand
No
No
15,000
Good
No
No
500
Rand
Yes
No
500
Good
Yes
No
where the maximal number of iterations (’MaxIt’) are either 500 or 15,000. Then
==PAGE:58==
48
Computational results
it has been tested whether to run an ’Extra’ set of heuristics (as described in Section
6.2.2).
And at last all that conﬁgurations are tested on a mix of diﬀerent start
solutions (as described in Section 7.3).
The results are presented in Table 8.3. The table contains at ﬁrst a description of
the instances (see further description in 7), then the setup for the speciﬁc conﬁguration
and how many runs that have been made. The results are hereafter presented, ˆs is the
average bound found, while smin is the best found bound. ˆx is the average integer
solution, while xmin is the best integer solution. At last is the average number of
iterations, average number of columns, the average total time spent on the PPs, and
the average run time listed. The average number of iterations is CG-iterations - such
that in each CG-iteration there is solved a PP for each QC.
The average run time, the average number of iterations, and the average number
of added columns is higher for the conﬁgurations with a random initial solution, than
a good. The bounds (s) are however also better for the conﬁgurations with ’StartSol’
= rand. The integer solutions (x) are though better for ’StartSol’ = good. Considering
this it is clear that the initial solution has a big impact on how the heuristic is able
to investigate the solution space, since a poorer random initial solution is allowing
the heuristics to ﬁnd better bounds (s), but takes longer time since it uses more time
to investigates the solution space. The good initial solution however is most likely
already a local optimal solution and it is therefore more diﬃcult to ﬁnd new solutions.
The integer solutions (x) when the initial solution is good are better since they in
some cases are identical with the initial solution - more precisely in 23 % of the cases.
It is clear from the table that the number of ’MaxIt’ and times the heuristics
have been run for each PP has a big impact on the run time, as one could have
expected. It can be seen in general that the number of iterations pays oﬀsince the
instances solved with ’MaxIt’ = 15,000 are both solved to a better bound (s) and
integer solution (x), than for ’MaxIt’ = 500 (and ’Extra’ = No). The idea, behind
combining the iterations such that the heuristic ﬁrst tries with 500 max. iterations
and if not successful then 15,000 iterations (’Extra’ = Yes), was to obtain similar
results as for ’MaxIt’ = 15,000 but with a run time similar to ’MaxIt’ = 500. The
results are deﬁnitely comparable with the results for ’MaxIt’ = 15,000. The average
run time is of course higher than for ’MatIt’ = 500 (and ’Extra’ = No), since the
heuristic continues where it normally would have stopped. The average run times are
though signiﬁcantly reduced for most instances compared with ’MaxIt’ = 15,000 - on
average the run time is reduced with 64 %.
==PAGE:59==
8.2 Column generation with only heuristic pricing problems
49
|C|
|CT|
|Q|
D
MaxIt
Extra
StartSol
Runs
s
smin
x
xmin
Ite
|ˆΩ|
theu(s)
t(s)
60
10
2
L
500
No
Rand
5
1684.0
1670.00
2865.00
2855.00
279.8
4108.6
68.24
84.78
60
10
2
S
500
No
Rand
5
1020.0
1020.00
1650.00
1635.00
364.2
3744.8
80.10
97.21
60
10
2
U
500
No
Rand
5
1787.2
1729.09
1832.00
1730.00
657.0
8436.0
272.79
363.94
60
25
2
L
500
No
Rand
5
2286.3
2260.00
2301.00
2280.00
52.0
815.0
28.21
28.43
60
25
2
S
500
No
Rand
5
1390.6
1378.21
1451.00
1390.00
197.4
3564.0
93.13
97.67
60
25
2
U
500
No
Rand
5
1511.1
1505.00
1516.00
1505.00
101.2
1850.0
47.25
48.01
60
10
2
L
500
No
Good
5
1708.0
1670.00
1777.00
1770.00
119.0
1172.2
40.87
41.72
60
10
2
S
500
No
Good
5
1020.0
1020.00
1070.00
1070.00
240.4
2149.2
74.77
77.75
60
10
2
U
500
No
Good
5
1791.9
1748.89
1845.00
1790.00
341.8
4158.4
185.84
200.74
60
25
2
L
500
No
Good
5
2310.3
2305.00
2326.00
2310.00
30.2
551.0
24.49
24.61
60
25
2
S
500
No
Good
5
1393.2
1374.38
1426.00
1400.00
132.8
2300.2
70.86
72.10
60
25
2
U
500
No
Good
5
1512.0
1496.67
1518.00
1500.00
30.4
577.8
35.69
35.79
60
10
2
L
15000
No
Rand
5
1670.00
1670.00
2625.00
1715.00
305.4
8279.0
1970.98
2022.75
60
10
2
S
15000
No
Rand
5
1020.00
1020.00
1646.00
1630.00
316.4
7380.0
2019.68
2062.45
60
10
2
U
15000
No
Rand
5
1718.50
1711.00
1740.00
1735.00
783.6
32411.0
10745.49
11409.94
60
25
2
L
15000
No
Rand
5
2260.00
2260.00
2266.00
2260.00
67.6
2100.6
705.48
706.19
60
25
2
S
15000
No
Rand
5
1372.30
1365.00
1405.00
1370.00
191.2
9004.4
4106.13
4128.37
60
25
2
U
15000
No
Rand
5
1491.15
1490.00
1492.00
1490.00
133.8
4864.0
2303.53
2309.53
60
10
2
L
15000
No
Good
5
1688.00
1670.00
1770.00
1770.00
137.8
2733.8
1333.48
1335.98
60
10
2
S
15000
No
Good
5
1020.00
1020.00
1070.00
1070.00
327.2
6055.8
1899.87
1927.81
60
10
2
U
15000
No
Good
5
1716.26
1710.00
1744.00
1735.00
583.4
28568.8
10053.85
10495.31
60
25
2
L
15000
No
Good
5
2273.33
2260.00
2283.00
2270.00
45.2
1565.4
873.08
873.45
60
25
2
S
15000
No
Good
5
1371.78
1366.67
1403.00
1375.00
132.2
5453.2
2684.46
2690.83
60
25
2
U
15000
No
Good
5
1491.22
1490.00
1494.00
1490.00
42.4
1882.0
1290.93
1291.34
60
10
2
L
500
Yes
Rand
5
1670.00
1670.00
2649.00
1760.00
323.4
4451.6
353.21
374.69
60
10
2
S
500
Yes
Rand
5
1020.00
1020.00
1565.00
1265.00
361.8
3927.2
135.20
153.65
60
10
2
U
500
Yes
Rand
5
1720.26
1714.29
1739.00
1730.00
1543.8
24081.0
4068.55
4919.21
60
25
2
L
500
Yes
Rand
5
2260.00
2260.00
2288.00
2260.00
62.8
941.8
268.96
269.22
60
25
2
S
500
Yes
Rand
5
1373.00
1366.67
1391.00
1370.00
298.2
6261.6
1362.54
1378.56
60
25
2
U
500
Yes
Rand
5
1492.57
1490.00
1494.00
1490.00
161.2
3222.8
789.62
792.26
60
10
2
L
500
Yes
Good
5
1688.00
1670.00
1775.00
1760.00
152.6
1425.2
177.97
178.93
60
10
2
S
500
Yes
Good
5
1020.00
1020.00
1070.00
1070.00
253.6
2207.0
128.04
131.31
60
10
2
U
500
Yes
Good
5
1715.16
1706.00
1741.00
1735.00
1029.6
18810.4
4367.53
4703.30
60
25
2
L
500
Yes
Good
5
2266.27
2260.00
2283.00
2260.00
54.8
982.4
288.65
288.90
60
25
2
S
500
Yes
Good
5
1372.19
1370.00
1395.00
1385.00
233.6
5259.0
1068.45
1077.13
60
25
2
U
500
Yes
Good
5
1490.88
1490.00
1494.00
1490.00
58.0
1316.6
431.37
431.67
Table 8.3: Results for instances with 60 containers solved with a heuristic method
==PAGE:60==
50
Computational results
8.3
Column generation with both heuristic and exact
pricing problems
The conﬁgurations of the CG-framework with the exact method have only been solved
with a maximal number of iterations of 500, both with and without the possibility
to go up to ’MaxIt’ = 15,000, i.e. ’Extra’ = No and Yes, as seen in the overview of
the tests in this Section. The two diﬀerent initial solutions are tested. ’MaxIt’ is not
tested with 15,000 iterations since this was considered to be too time consuming. The
exact method is now also able to help the MP with missing columns when needed.
MaxIt
StartSol
Extra
Exact
500
Rand
No
Yes
500
Good
No
Yes
500
Rand
Yes
Yes
500
Good
Yes
Yes
The ﬁgure 8.4 is a plot of the bound and accumulating run time of one of the
instances, that is not solved to optimality, while the instance on Figure 8.5 is solved
to optimality. Both instance is solved with ’MaxIt’ = 500, ’Extra’ = Yes, and StartSol
= Rand. In the end they both try to ﬁnd new columns with negative reduced cost
by the exact method, since the heuristic has failed to ﬁnd any. They both use the
majority of the run time on this last iteration and Figure 8.4 runs out of time before
the exact methods either ﬁnds a column or proves that there exists no more columns
with negative reduced cost. The instances in Figure however stops before the time
limit of 18,000 seconds and is thereby solved to optimality.
The diﬀerent methods are represented in the ﬁgures with symbols to visualize how
the CG-frameworks works. It is clear that the methods are being used and that they
are eﬀective. They are parsing the MP useful columns when needed and the bound
converges.
It can be seen in Table 8.4 that the average number of iterations, the average
number of added columns, and the average run time are higher for the conﬁguration
with random initial solution, than good initial solution. In general both the bounds
(s) and the integer solutions (x) have improved compared to the results in Table 8.3.
It can also be seen that three of the six instances are solved to LB-optimality in all
conﬁgurations, since the run time is less than 5 hours (18,000 seconds). Thereby
is the bound s in those cases a valid LB to the problem. The column |s∗| counts
the number of times the bound has been solved to optimality - it can maximally
be 5 times because each instance only is run 5 times. Nothing can be said about
the belonging integer solutions x, since they will still by deﬁnition just be a feasible
solution, unless they have the same solution value as s. In the case where the time
limit is not reached and the s = x it is an optimal solution. Since the optimal LB is
an integer solution. Thereby it is known that two out of the six instances is solved to
optimality. The solution values that have proven themselves to be optimal is marked
by bold and italic font.
Considering Table 8.4; there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the bound (s) or solution
==PAGE:61==
8.3 Column generation with both heuristic and exact pricing problems
51
0
100
200
300
400
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
Iterations
Bound
Convergence of the bound and accumulating run time
0.36
0.72
1.08
1.44
1.8
·104
Time (in sec.)
tinyBound
tinyOther than Easy
tinyExtra heuristics
tinyExact
tinyTime
Figure 8.4: The bound (black) and average time (violet) per iteration of a instance with 60
containers, 10 types, less dense, and 2 QCs is plotted. The instance is solved with the CG-
framework; ’MaxIt’ = 500, ’Extra’ = Yes, and StartSol = Rand. The green dots symbolizes
that a heuristic with ’MaxIt’ = 500 other than Easy is used. The blue triangles represents
that ’MaxIt’ is set up to 15,000. The red squares symbolises that the exact PPs have been
solved
==PAGE:62==
52
Computational results
0
50
100
150
200
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Iterations
Bound
Convergence of the bound and accumulating run time
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
Time (in sec.)
tinyBound
tinyOther than Easy
tinyExtra heuristics
tinyExact
tinyTime
Figure 8.5: The bound (black) and average time (violet) per iteration of a instance with 60
containers, 25 types, uniform dense, and 2 QCs is plotted. The instance is solved to optimality
with the CG-framework; ’MaxIt’ = 500, ’Extra’ = Yes, and StartSol = Rand. The green dots
symbolizes that a heuristic with ’MaxIt’ = 500 other than Easy is used. The blue triangles
represents that ’MaxIt’ is set up to 15,000. The red squares symbolises that the exact PPs
have been solved
==PAGE:63==
8.3 Column generation with both heuristic and exact pricing problems
53
|C|
|CT|
|Q|
D
MaxIt
Extra
StartSol
Runs
s
smin
x
xmin
|s∗|
Ite
|ˆΩ|
t(s)
60
10
2
L
500
No
Rand
5
1666.00
1665.00
1908.00
1665.00
0
501.6
5109.2
18001.21
60
10
2
S
500
No
Rand
5
1020.00
1020.00
1645.00
1635.00
5
358.2
3786.8
109.89
60
10
2
U
500
No
Rand
3
1722.04
1711.67
1733.33
1720.00
0
1476.0
15225.7
18000.65
60
25
2
L
500
No
Rand
5
2250.00
2250.00
2251.00
2250.00
5
106.4
1410.6
5215.54
60
25
2
S
500
No
Rand
5
1373.58
1370.00
1393.00
1370.00
0
338.6
5327.2
18003.40
60
25
2
U
500
No
Rand
5
1491.00
1490.00
1491.00
1490.00
3
166.6
2356.8
8735.80
60
10
2
L
500
No
Good
5
1675.00
1665.00
1692.00
1665.00
0
417.0
2474.4
18001.87
60
10
2
S
500
No
Good
5
1020.00
1020.00
1070.00
1070.00
5
243.8
2030.6
69.35
60
10
2
U
500
No
Good
4
1718.69
1716.43
1738.75
1730.00
0
1001.8
9803.5
18000.25
60
25
2
L
500
No
Good
5
2250.00
2250.00
2254.00
2250.00
5
90.6
1278.4
3568.21
60
25
2
S
500
No
Good
5
1374.33
1371.67
1386.00
1375.00
0
213.4
3332.4
18005.52
60
25
2
U
500
No
Good
5
1490.00
1490.00
1491.00
1490.00
5
65.6
850.0
1162.28
60
10
2
L
500
Yes
Rand
5
1665.00
1665.00
1665.00
1665.00
0
429.6
5177.8
18000.96
60
10
2
S
500
Yes
Rand
5
1020.00
1020.00
1650.00
1635.00
5
402.2
3895.4
168.72
60
10
2
U
500
Yes
Rand
5
1702.47
1693.75
1716.00
1710.00
0
1751.4
30907.2
18010.16
60
25
2
L
500
Yes
Rand
5
2250.00
2250.00
2250.00
2250.00
5
98.8
1248.8
7156.55
60
25
2
S
500
Yes
Rand
5
1371.33
1366.67
1385.00
1370.00
0
340.8
7150.0
18001.56
60
25
2
U
500
Yes
Rand
5
1490.00
1490.00
1490.00
1490.00
5
152.4
2995.2
1139.29
60
10
2
L
500
Yes
Good
5
1667.00
1665.00
1707.00
1665.00
0
290.2
1931.8
18001.84
60
10
2
S
500
Yes
Good
5
1020.00
1020.00
1066.00
1050.00
5
283.8
2208.8
134.21
60
10
2
U
500
Yes
Good
5
1713.68
1706.67
1727.00
1710.00
0
1284.8
26197.0
18013.35
60
25
2
L
500
Yes
Good
5
2250.00
2250.00
2250.00
2250.00
5
79.2
1195.2
4840.93
60
25
2
S
500
Yes
Good
5
1369.00
1367.50
1383.00
1375.00
0
289.0
6643.0
18001.64
60
25
2
U
500
Yes
Good
5
1490.00
1490.00
1491.00
1490.00
5
63.0
1336.2
915.09
Table 8.4: Results for instances with 60 containers solved with both a heuristic and exact
method. The values in bold, italic font are proven to be optimal solution values. Some of the
instances has been solved less than 5 times (where ’Runs’< 5), since the server ran out of
memory trying to solve them.
==PAGE:64==
54
Computational results
value (x) between whether the PP is allowed to be solved with ’Extra’ = Yes or No
when using the Exact method as well. It just takes longer time. Therefore the chosen
CG-framework is ’MaxIt’ = 500, ’Extra’ = No, ’StartSol’ = Rand.
8.4
Results compared with benchmark
The 12 smallest benchmark instances (i.e. the instances with 60 and 240 contain-
ers) have been tested with the CG-framework, where ’MaxIt’ = 500, ’Extra’ = No,
’StartSol’ = Rand. The results are shown in Table 8.5 and have been compared with
the best known LBs and UBs and because it is a heuristic, the results have also been
compared with results of the GRASP heuristic from Iris et al. (2018) and the Hybrid
heuristic from Christensen (2017).
In Table 8.5 the gap between the best known LB and the feasible solutions are
calculated. It can be seen that the CG-framework takes a long time to solve - for 75
% of the instances the time limit of 5 hours are reached without impressive results.
The gaps for the feasible solutions (x) are much higher than for two heuristics that
it is compared with.
It should though be remembered that a CG normally is guaranteed to ﬁnd a LB,
therefore the solution time should also be compared with results of LP-relaxations.
The LP-relaxations from Iris et al. (2018) of the 12 smallest benchmark instances are
equal to the best known LBs, which are shown in Table 8.5. The LP-relaxations from
Iris et al. (2018) are though solved within 0.0 to 0.7 seconds. This makes the results
of the CG-framework seem even less impressive.
The CG-framework have however proven three optimal solutions, where two of
them (for the instances with 60 containers, 25 types, and Less or Uniform density)
were not known prior this thesis. So it has improved the LBs for 2 out of the 12
smallest benchmark instances. Unfortunately can nothing be said about the other
bounds, since the LBs are not proven to be valid LBs.
==PAGE:65==
Best known
GRASP
Hybrid
CG-framework
|C|
|CT|
|Q|
D
xLB
xUB
Gap(xUB)
ˆx
xmin
Gap(ˆx)
Gap(xmin)
t(s)
ˆx
xmin
Gap(ˆx)
Gap(xmin)
t(s)
ˆs
smin
ˆx
xmin
Gap(ˆx)
Gap(xmin)
Avg. t(s)
60
10
2
LD
1530
1710
12.28%
1814.5
1805
20.97%
20.33%
9.9
1797
1795
19.80%
19.67%
9.8
1666.0
1665.0
1908.0
1665.0
27.20%
11.00%
18001.2
60
10
2
S
1020
1020
0.00%
1067
1060
4.61%
3.92%
7.5
1032
1020
1.18%
0.00%
8.2
1020.0
1020.0
1645.0
1635.0
61.27%
60.29%
109.9
60
10
2
U
1670
1790
8.38%
1902.5
1895
16.01%
15.55%
8.8
1867
1845
13.84%
12.50%
9.1
1722.0
1711.7
1733.3
1720.0
5.69%
4.88%
18000.6
60
25
2
LD
2060
2275
10.77%
2435
2435
19.95%
19.95%
10.4
2435
2435
19.95%
19.95%
9.4
2250.0
2250.0
2251.0
2250.0
10.89%
10.84%
5215.5
60
25
2
S
1360
1405
3.20%
1436.5
1425
5.63%
4.78%
10.1
1413
1395
3.90%
2.57%
9.3
1373.6
1370.0
1393.0
1370.0
2.43%
0.74%
18003.4
60
25
2
U
1490.0
1510
1.32%
1552.5
1545
4.19%
3.69%
8.5
1527.5
1510
2.52%
1.34%
8.3
1491.0
1490.0
1491.0
1490.0
0.07%
0.00%
8735.8
Average
5.99%
11.89%
11.37%
9.2
10.20%
9.34%
9.0
17.92%
14.62%
11344.4
240
20
2
LD
7880
12700
38.19%
9448
9430
20.36%
20.13%
80.5
9391.5
9365
19.64%
19.30%
66.7
8782.5
8417.1
9015.0
9000.0
14.84%
14.65%
18190.4
240
20
2
S
4440
6400
30.63%
4807.5
4790
8.28%
7.88%
36.2
4757.5
4720
7.15%
6.31%
33.5
6154.4
6105.4
6548.0
6445.0
47.48%
45.16%
18109.3
240
20
2
U
6720
11355
40.82%
8333.5
8140
24.01%
21.13%
36.8
7955.5
7735
18.39%
15.10%
34.8
10115.9
8834.5
10420.0
10350.0
55.06%
54.02%
18213.8
240
60
2
LD
8260
10650
22.72%
10123
10105
23.00%
22.78%
131.1
10105.5
10085
22.79%
22.54%
70.3
9709.0
8872.7
10276.0
10150.0
24.86%
23.33%
18288.9
240
60
2
S
5280
6555
19.45%
5706.5
5660
8.08%
7.20%
53.4
5604
5520
6.14%
4.55%
45.8
6794.0
5662.5
7872.0
7810.0
49.09%
47.92%
18249.5
240
60
2
U
7250
10185
28.82%
9140.5
9065
26.08%
25.03%
52.8
8889
8675
22.61%
19.66%
41.2
11920.4
11729.7
12336.0
12325.0
70.15%
70.00%
18193.5
Average
30.10%
18.30%
17.36%
65.1
16.12%
14.57%
48.7
43.58%
42.51%
18207.5
Table 8.5: The 12 smallest benchmark instances have been tested and are compared with the best known and the GRASP heuristic from Iris
et al. (2018) and the Hybrid heuristic from Christensen (2017). The known optimal solutions are written with bold and italic font.
==PAGE:66==
56
Computational results
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 9
Conclusion and future work
The goal of the thesis has been to improve the benchmark instances LBs. A com-
parison between the LB found by the LP-relaxation in Iris et al. (2018). The LP-
relaxations from Iris et al. (2018) of the 12 smallest benchmark instances are though
solved within 0.0 to 0.7 seconds. This does not makes the results of the CG-framework
seem even impressive, since it terminates after 5 hours for most of the instances due
to its time limit.
A comparison between the performance of the new heuristic CG-framework and
state-of-the-art heuristics for the FSLP has also been made, since the CG-framework
in principle works as a heuristic, unless it terminates before its termination criteria.
The run times are high, most of the tested instances reached the time limit of 5 hours,
which is much higher than the heuristic solutions.
However it may seem like an unfair comparisons since there were found and proven
optimal solution for three of the 12 tested instances, where two of them were not
proven to be optimal solutions prior this thesis.
And that cannot be done by a
LP-relaxation, neither a heuristic, only an exact method.
For future work it could thereby be interesting to make a more fair compari-
son with results from solving the benchmark instances with the exact model both
decomposed with CG and without.
Furthermore it would be interesting to try to exchange the Easy PP-heuristic
which is run ﬁrst in each iteration with the Advanced PP-heuristic - just with 200
iterations in the CG-framework, since the Figure 8.3 shows that this would lead to
columns with a more negative reduced cost.
Beyond this it might also be relevant with a more thorough parameter tuning,
especially considering the weights {w1, w2, w3, w4} assigned as a reward to the destroy
and repair methods in the ALNS-heuristic. There could be an indication that scurrent
is allowed to get too fare away from sbest, since there in Figure 8.1 was a clear
”jump” in the graph (especially for Advanced) where the heuristic is believed to
be ”restarted”. Currently is the weights set to be {w1, w2, w3, w4} = {33, 9, 13, 0}
however maybe w2 > w3 instead of w2 < w3 as it is now.
At the moment the
methods are being rewarded more for being just accepted as scurrent, even though the
new scurrent is worse than the old, than improving scurrent. Another thing that could
be investigated as well could be to consider the Tstart. This also inﬂuence how far the
==PAGE:68==
58
Conclusion and future work
scurrent is allowed to get from sbest and maybe Tstart is set too high at the moment.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
Bish, E.K., Chen, F.Y., Leong, Y.T., Nelson, B.L., Ng, J.W.C., Simchi-Levi, D.,
2005. Dispatching vehicles in a mega container terminal. OR Spectrum .
Christensen, J., 2017. Optimisation in liner shipping: Challenges in mega vessel’s
cargo-mix and loading operations. Ph.D. thesis.
Iris, C., Christensen, J., Pacino, D., Ropke, S., 2018. Flexible ship loading problem
with transfer vehicle assignment and scheduling. Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological .
Jiang, X.J., Jin, J.G., 2016. A branch-and-price method for integrated yard crane
deployment and container allocation in transshipment yards. Transportation Re-
search Part B .
Kim, K.H., Kim, K.Y., 1999. An optimal routing algorithm for a transfer crane in
port container terminals. Transport Science 33(1) .
Lee, Y.H., Kang, J., Ryu, K.R., Kim, K.H., 2005. Optimization of container load
sequencing by a hybrid of ant colony optimization and tabu search. Advances in
Natural Computation .
Maersk, 2018, (retrieved the 1/6 2018).
URL: https://www.maersk.com/en/
explore/trade-and-transport.
Mastrolilli, M., Gambardella, L.M., 2000. Eﬀective neighbourhood functions for the
ﬂexible job shop problem. Journal of Scheduling .
Meng, Q., Weng, J., L, S., 2016. Impact analysis of mega vessels on container terminal
operations. Transportation Research Procedia .
Monaco, M.F., Sammarra, M., Sorrentino, G., 2014.
The terminal-oriented ship
stowage planning problem. European Journal of Operational Research .
Psaraftis, H.N., Kontovas, C.A., 2010. Balancing the economic and environmental
performance of maritime transportation. Transportation Research Part D .
Ropke, S., Pisinger, D., 2006. An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for
the pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Transportation Science .
Steenken, D., Voss, S., Stahlbock, R., 2004. Container terminal operation and oper-
ations research - a classiﬁcation and literature review. OR Spectrum .
==PAGE:70==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Steenken, D., Winter, T., Zimmermann, U.T., 2001. Stowage and transport opti-
mization in ship planning. Online Optimization of Large Scale Systems .
UNCTAD, 2017. Review of maritime transport.
Vis, I.F.A., de Koster, R.B.M., Savelsbergh, M.W.P., 2005. Minimum vehicle ﬂeet
size under time-window constraints at a container terminal. Transportation Science
.
WSC, 2015. Some observations on port congestion, vessel size and vessel sharing
agreements.
Zeng, Q., Yang, Z., 2008. Integrating simulation and optimization to schedule loading
operations in container terminals. Computers and Operation Research .
