==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Photonics Engineering
Growth dynamics of InAs/InP
quantum dots
Optimization and model description of QD growth
Marc Far Ruiz (s161325)
Supervised by: Elizaveta Semenova
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 6352
www.fotonik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Quantum dots have unique properties, including their density of states, or
the sharply gain spectra. Moreover, the possibility to use them in integrated
circuits, decreasing the size and weight of the chips, as well as decreasing
their power consumption, increasing its interest in the recent years. In order
to make them compatible with photonic integration, quantum dots with a
wavelength of λ = 1550nm are required, due to its low attenuation at this
wavelength.
However, the photoluminescence properties of quantum dots,
especially their wavelength, peak are extremely sensitive to the growing con-
ditions. This wavelength is also proportional to the size of the quantum dots,
especially the height, as it has lower dimensions. Thus, one of the biggest
challenges in the growth of Quantum dots is the control of their morphology
in order to control also its wavelength.
In this project, QDs are grown in several different samples, using differ-
ent growing conditions and analyzing their photoluminescence properties and
their morphology. Relations between morphological properties and photolu-
minescence properties are made, as well as relations between the properties of
these quantum dots with the growing conditions. Moreover, a detailed expla-
nation of a growth model is made. In this model, developed by Dubrovskii
[Dub06] for Ge/Si dots, the morphology of quantum dots is controlled by
only varying four conditions of growth. Furthermore, the application of this
model for InAs/InP quantum dots is also done, comparing its result with the
experimental ones, as well as providing the desired growing conditions, based
on this model, to grow 1550nm quantum dots.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Photonics at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a MSc. degree in
Photonics Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 21, 2018
Marc Far Ruiz (s161325)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to Elizaveta Semanova,
for giving me the opportunity to work in such an interesting field, being able
to work in a clean room environment and grow quantum dots. Thank you for
your help every time I needed, and for your advice when I was a little bit lost.
I would like to thank my family for giving me an incredible emotional
support throughout these years.
Thanks Uxue for relying on me, staying with me in the good and the bad
moments, and, of course, for being a civil engineer.
I would also like to thank en David, for reminding me that I had to study
every day.
And of course, thanks to all my family and friends.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Quantum dots
3
2.1
Semiconductor properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
The bulk semiconductor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Quantum confined structures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Quantum dots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Self-assembled Quantum Dots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Nucleation mechanism and growth of QDs in the Stranski-Krastanov
regime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2.1
Formation of Stranski-Krastanov QDs
. . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2.2
Nucleation stage and critical thickness . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.2.3
Growth of Stranski-Krastanov QDs . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3
QD growth equipment: The MOVPE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.4
Quantum dot characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.4.1
Photoluminescence measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.4.2
Profile measurements: The AFM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3
Results
33
3.1
Growth parameters, PL and AFM measurements of the samples . . . . .
33
3.2
Temperature dependence of the QD properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
The Growth Model
49
4.1
Experimental distribution functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
The growth Model and Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Conclusion and further work
67
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
A QD growth Recipe
69
B QD properties
73
Bibliography
77
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
At present, self assembled quantum dots have a wide range of applications, making its
interest increase sharply in the recent years. Their properties, including their unique
density of states, or a sharply gain spectra, makes them really suitable for optoelectronic
devices. One of the reasons of the huge interest in quantum dots is the possibility to use
them in integrated circuits. Integration will decrease greatly the size and the weight of
the chips, decreasing the power consumption and increasing its performance. Moreover,
there are future applications in the telecommunication field. In order to do so, there’s
a strong desire in making quantum dots with a wavelength of: λ = 1550nm, as optical
fibers are mainly made of silica glass with a minimum attenuation coefficient at this
wavelength.
InAs/GaAs quantum dots are usually preferred to achieve this wavelength, due to its
higher lattice mismatch, around 7%. However, during this project, InP substrate is used,
having InAs/InP quantum dots. This material system has a lower lattice mismatch, only
3%, and therefore, the height range where elastic stresses is relaxed by formation of 3D
islands (QDs) before the formation of misfit dislocations is reduced.
During the growth of quantum dots, several growth conditions, including the growth
rate, V/III ratio, InAs effective thickness or growth temperature, affect their properties,
being the peak wavelength extremely sensitive to any of these conditions. This wave-
length is also proportional to the size of the quantum dots, especially the height, as it
has lower dimensions. Thus, one of the biggest challenges in the growth of Quantum
dots is the control of their morphology.
In this project, QDs are grown in several different samples, using different growing
conditions. Their Photoluminescence properties and their morphology is analyzed, us-
ing a PL-mapper and an AFM located at DTU’s centre of Nano and microfabrication,
DANCHIP. Relations between morphological properties and photoluminescence proper-
ties are made, as well as relations between the properties of these quantum dots with
the growing conditions.
Moreover, when the lattice mismatch allows the formation of quantum dots, before
the formation of misfit dislocations, a model based on kinetic laws can be applied, in
order to obtain the lateral size distribution function for the quantum dots in a sample.
This model determines that the morphology of the islands grown in a sample can be
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
controlled only by varying four conditions of growth, the growth temperature T, the
growth rate V, the amount of material deposited H0 and the duration of the structure’s
exposure, ∆texp. This model, developed by Dubrovskii [Dub06], was applied for Ge/Si
quantum dots.
In this project, a detailed explanation of this model is made.
Furthermore, the
application of this model for InAs/InP quantum dots is also done, including the growing
conditions used in the growth of our samples, and different InAs parameters that can be
found in other papers. This model is applied to three different samples, D2096, D2097
and D2099, comparing the result of the distribution function with the experimental
results, as well as providing the desired growing conditions, based on this model, to
grow 1550nm quantum dots.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Quantum dots
A quantum dot is a semiconductor nanostructure, with only nanometers in size. Unique
and desired properties, that are analyzed during this chapter, are thus obtained due to
this extremely small size.
Its recent discovery and its large number of applications have led to an increased re-
search and development. They were firstly discovered in glass crystals in 1981 by Alexey
Ekimov [EO81]. Then, in 1984 a relation between the size of a semiconductor nanopar-
ticle and its bandgap was derived. The first quantum dots were colloidal dots mainly
made of CdX (X=S, Se, Te). However, one of its main drawbacks is the toxicity of the
cadmium ion in these compounds. Then, passivation of nanocrystals on their surface by
a larger bandgap semiconductor introduced an improvement on the photoluminescence
efficiency.
As the cadmium ions are toxic, making the CdX undesired for biological applications,
new, more biocompatible, compounds for QDs appeared. The most common ones were
Silicon QDs, Carbon QDs, Ag2S or InP [Zhu+13, ch. 2]. Nowadays, there’s a broad
range of compounds used for Quantum Dots, which can be mainly classified into three
groups:
• III-V semiconductors: made from elements of the groups III (mainly Ga and
In) and V (mainly P, As or Sb) of the periodic table of elements. They can be
binary (2 elements), such as InP, GaAs, InAs; ternary, such as AlGaAs or InGaAs
or quaternary (InGaAsP)
• II-IV semiconductors: made from elements of the groups II (Zn, Cd) and IV
(Cd, S, Se).
• Silicon QDs: which is the most used semiconductor.
However, in order to make an overview of the properties of quantum dots, we first have
to analyze the understand the principles of semiconductors, stated in the next section.
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Quantum dots
2.1
Semiconductor properties
Semiconductors are solids, mainly crystals, with an electrical conductivity higher than
insulators but lower than metals. In the case of the semiconductors, conduction electrons
belong to the collection of atoms rather than being bound to individual atoms.
So,
instead of having discrete electron energies, such as in free atoms, the available energy
states form bands. These bands are just a large number of discrete energy levels really
close to each other, approximating them as a continuum.
The main property of a crystal is that its atoms form a periodic structure. The
periodicity is obtained by translation of the unit cell, which is the smallest group of
atoms that form the repeating pattern. The length of its principal axes are called lattice
constants, and are of the order of several Angstroms. This crystal structure and its
symmetry determines the electronic band structure, which contain three bands of higher
interest, as they explain some of the properties of the semiconductor. These ones are
the valence band, the conduction band and the forbidden band gap. The valence band is
formed considering the energy levels of the valence electrons. Then, the conduction band
is formed grouping the different energy levels of the free electrons. Therefore, the valence
band will be below, as its electrons have lower energies than the ones in the conduction
band. There’s usually a gap between both energy bands, separating them. This gap
is called forbidden gap, or simply band gap and it mainly determines the electrical
conductivity of the solid. In conductors, the two energy bands overlap; in insulators,
the band gap between both energy bands is really large. Finally, in semiconductors,
there’s a small gap between the conduction band and the valence band, being the key
for their large number of applications. Moreover, there are two types of semiconductors,
the ones with direct band gap, where the minimum energy in the conduction band
and the maximum in the valence band correspond to the same wavevector; and the ones
with indirect band gap, where it corresponds to different wavevectors. In direct band gap
semiconductors, an electron-hole recombination can directly emit a photon, generating
light sources, while in indirect band gap materials the emission of a photon requires an
intermediate step, making light emission more difficult.
Electrons in a solid have different wavefunctions, that in the case of semiconductors
overlap. Thus, the Pauli exclusion principle, that states that two electrons can’t occupy
the same quantum state and that the lowest energy levels will be filled first, can be
applied. At T=0K the valence band will be completely filled of electrons, while the
conduction band will be completely empty. Therefore, the material won’t conduct elec-
tricity. However, if the temperature increases, some electrons of the valence band can
be thermally excited, and jump into the conduction band. As it is full of unoccupied
states, electrons can act there as mobile carriers, contributing to an electrical current.
The same occurs in the valence band, where the electron leaves an unoccupied state
(hole) that can move along the band.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Semiconductor properties
5
2.1.1
The bulk semiconductor
According to wave mechanics, the energy and the momentum of an electron are related,
and therefore it will be also related to its wavevector. In the case of an electron in a
bulk semiconductor, its motion is governed by the Schrödinger equation with a potential
generated by the charges in the periodic crystal lattice of the material. Similar to the
free electron case, the Energy-wavevector (E-k) relation in the bottom of the conduction
band is approximated by a parabola
E = Ec + ℏ2k2
2mc
(2.1)
In this case, Ec is the energy at the bottom of the conduction band, k is calculated
from the wavevector where the minimum occurs and mc is the electron conduction-band
effective mass, different from the free-electron mass m0. In the top of the valence band,
we have a similar expression for the energy and wavevector of the holes:
E = Ev −ℏ2k2
2mv
(2.2)
This equation neglects the difference between light holes and heavy holes, and therefore
consider the effective mass mv ̸= mc. We can find the gap energy by: Eg = Ec −Ev
One of the main properties of semiconductors is the density of states, which is simply
defined as the number of states with electron wavevectors between k and k+∆k per unit
volume. To obtain it, we first approximate an electron near the conduction band edge
to a particle of mass mc confined to a three-dimensional cubic box of dimension d with
a three-dimensional infinite rectangular potential well. The solutions of the Schrodinger
equation impose that the components of the wavevector should be discrete, with values
k = (nxπ/dx, nyπ/dy, nzπ/dz), with n integer numbers. It is known that the end of the
wavevector lies on points of a lattice whose cubic unit cell has a dimension of π/d. Thus,
there are (d/π)3 points per unit volume in the k-space. Considering a sphere of radius
k, it will have a volume V = πk3/6. As there are two possible values of the electron
spin, there are 2πk3/6
(π/d)3 = (k3/3π2)d3 points in the volume of the cube (d3) and therefore
(k3/3π2) points per unit volume. We can obtain the number of states with a wavenumber
between k and ∆k by making:
ρ(k)∆k = d(k3/3π2)
dk
∆k = (k2/π2)∆k
And therefore, we obtain the density of states, which is:
ρ(k) = (k2/π2)
(2.3)
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Quantum dots
We can represent the density of states by allowed energy levels, as the energy E and
wavenumber k are related. Therefore, both densities can be also related, by: ρ(E)dE =
ρ(k)dk, and then ρ(E) =
ρ(k)
dE/dk. The derivative dE/dk can be obtained for both the
conduction band and the valence band in a bulk semiconductor by using equations 2.1
and 2.2 respectively. Thus, the density of states near the band edges for the conduction
and valence bands are:
ρc(E) = (2mc)3/2
2π2ℏ3
√
E −Ec
E > Ec
(2.4)
ρv(E) = (2mv)3/2
2π2ℏ3
√
Ev −E
Ev > E
(2.5)
Junctions of semiconductors can also be made, with two different types: homojunc-
tions and heterojunctions. Homojunctions are made by juxtapositions of layers of the
same semiconductor material, thus with no band gap difference, but differently doped.
Heterojunctions, on the other hand, are junctions between different semiconductor ma-
terials, therefore with different band gaps.
Heterojunctions have a higher interest in this section, as they can be used as an
introduction to the following topic, quantum confined structures.
2.1.2
Quantum confined structures
The properties explained in section 2.1 hold for bulk semiconductors (0D confinement)
in which charge carriers (both electrons and holes) can move freely in all three spatial
directions. As seen before, they behave as free particles with continuous energy levels
and density of states. However, quantum confined structures restrict motion carriers
in a specific direction.
Thus, carrier energy levels and the density of states will be
dependent on the structural size, making the shape completely different as the one
shown in equations 2.1-2.5 for the bulk semiconductor.
Quantum confined structures appear when decreasing the structural dimensions, so
they are similar or smaller than the de Broglie wavelength of a thermalized electron. This
wavelength is calculated by: λ = h/p, being h the Plank constant and p the electron mo-
mentum. Therefore, these structural dimensions have typically the order of nanometers
(10−9m). Quantum structures can be categorized depending on the confinement dimen-
sions into three types. 1D confinement is made by quantum wells, 2D confinement made
by quantum wires and, finally, 3D confinement by quantum dots.
Quantum wells are heterostructures in which the layer of the smaller band gap ma-
terial is extremely thin, about several nanometers and between two thicker layers of a
material with bigger band gap. Therefore, the energy diagram looks like a potential
well. Quantum wells are an example of type I heterojunctions, while in type II hetero-
junctions, the band gap is the same in both semiconductors, but one of them have lower
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Semiconductor properties
7
conduction and valence band energies (staggered gap). A representation of a Quantum
well, as well as its energy levels in the conduction and valence bands is shown in figure
2.1.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: (a) Geometry of the quantum well structure. Extracted from [ST07]. (b)
Side view of a quantum well and its energy diagram.
The first aproximation is to consider the potential well infinitely deep. In order to
obtain the energy levels, the time-independent Schrödinger equation has to be solved,
obtaining:
En = ℏ2(nπ/d)2
2m
n = 1, 2, 3...
(2.6)
being m the mass of the particle and d the width of the potential well. It is important
to note that the separation between energy levels will be bigger with narrower wells.
However, in this approximation only one dimension is taken into account, so we also
need to consider the other two dimensions. Having a look at figure 2.1a, we observe that
particles are confined in the x-direction, but they can move freely in the y-z plane, as in
the bulk semiconductor shown previously.
So, considering all three dimensions, the E-k relation for an electron in the conduction
band is given by:
E = Ec + ℏ2k2
x
2mc
+ ℏ2k2
y
2mc
+ ℏ2k2
z
2mc
(2.7)
with ki = (niπ/di)2 with ni = 1, 2, 3 and i = x, y, z 1. However, it is known that
dx << dy, dz, so the separation of wave number levels for ky and kz is so small that is
1Although in figure 2.1 the quantum well dimensions in the x, y, and z directions are shown as d, d2
and d3 respectively, in this project it is used dx, dy and dz for a better and easier understanding
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Quantum dots
considered as a continuum. On the other hand, as dx is small, kx will have discrete values.
So, looking again at figure 2.1a, the x-direction will have these discrete Energy levels,
Ex = Enx = ℏ2(nxπ/dx)2
2mc
. In the y-z plane, the energy can be written as: Ey,z = ℏ2|ky,z|2
2mc
.
Then, summarising, the E-k relation for electrons in the conduction band is:
E = Ec + Ex + Ey,z = Ec + Enx + ℏ2|ky,z|2
2mc
nx = 1, 2, 3
(2.8)
While the same relation can be obtained for holes in the valence band.
In this case, for every quantum number nx, there are k/π states per uni area in
the y-z plane, so ρ(k) =
k
πdx per unit volume. Again, the same relation between both
densities ρ(E) =
ρ(k)
dE/dk can be applied, obtaining the derivative using equation 2.8. In
the end, the density of states for a quantum well is:
ρc(E) =



mc
πℏ2dx,
E > Ec + Enx
0,
E < Ec + Enx
nx = 1, 2, 3...
(2.9)
It is seen that the density of states is constant when the energy is higher than
Ec +Enx for each quantum number nx, so the overall density of states will be the sum of
the densities for all the values of the quantum number, obtaining a staircase distribution.
It differs to the density of states of a bulk semiconductor (eq. 2.4), as in that case the
density of states grew constantly proportional to E1/2.
”Squeezing” a quantum well, we will obtain a quantum wire. Therefore, now electrons
and holes are confined in two directions. In this case, they will be confined in the x and
y directions, and the E-k relation for an electron in the conduction band will be
E = Ec + Ex + Ey + Ez = Ec + Enx + Eny + ℏ2k2
z
2mc
(2.10)
with Eni = ℏ2(niπ/di)2
2mc
, ni = 1, 2, 3..., i = x, y.
Using again the same procedure as the one done with the bulk semiconductor and
the quantum well, as well as knowing that the density of states for the quantum wire
per unit volume is ρ(k) = 1/πdxdy, we obtain the density of states as a function of the
Energy, which is:
ρc(E) =





(1/dxdy)(√mc/
√
2πℏ
√
E−Ec−Enx−Eny ,
E > Ec + Enx + Eny
0,
E < Ec + Enx + Eny
nx, ny = 1, 2, 3...
(2.11)
In this case, the function has peaks corresponding to each quantum number, while
it is a decreasing function between them.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Quantum dots
9
Finally, ”squeezing” a quantum wire in the last (z-) direction, a quantum dot is
obtained. In this section only the energy and density of states is briefly analyzed, as an
extended explanation is made in the next section. In a quantum dot (QD) electrons and
holes are confined in all three directions. We will consider the QD as a quantum box
with infinite confinement energy. The E-k relation is:
E = Ec + Ex + Ey + Ez = Ec + ℏ2π2
2mc
[(nx
dx
)
+
(ny
dy
)
+
(nz
dz
)]
(2.12)
It important to note that, as happened before, smaller dimensions of the quantum
dot give rise to a higher difference in the energy levels, having a high importance in the
following sections. These energy levels are discrete and well separated. Therefore, the
density of states will be a set of delta functions at the allowed energies.
The density of states for the bulk semiconductor, the quantum well, quantum wire
and quantum dot is shown in figure 2.2, as well as the geometrical representation for
each of them.
Figure 2.2: Density of states for a bulk semiconductor, quantum well, quantum wire and
quantum dot. Extracted from [ST07]
2.2
Quantum dots
Quantum dots are considered as artificial atoms that can change their energy levels
depending on their growing design and composition. There are two main ways to do it,
the first one is done by controlling the material composition and the second one by the
dimension of these quantum dots.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Quantum dots
One of the most important properties of the quantum dots, as well as the ones
briefly explained above, is the gain spectra. Quantum dots have an interesting future,
as quantum dots are able to provide really high gain values with a narrow gain spectra.
A detailed explanation of the reason is made later in this section, but briefly this gain
spectra is obtained due to a reduction of the active volume, as the dimensionality of the
structure has decreased. A comparison of the gain spectra in quantum dots with the
one in other structures made of the same material, and under the same conditions, is
shown in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Gain spectra calculated for Ga0.47In0.53As/InP quantum dots, quantum
wire, quantum well and bulk semiconductor materials under the same conditions. Ex-
tracted from [AMY86]
Moreover, it is easier to populate the levels of quantum dots than for other confined
structures, such as quantum wells, or for bulk semiconductors in terms of the number
of carriers required. A way to calculate this number of carriers is by means of the total
carrier density, which is:
N = 2
V
∑
nx,ny,nz
fc(E)
(2.13)
Here, the factor of 2 is due to the two possible values of the electron spin in every
state, V is the volume of the active region and fc(E) =
1
exp[(E−Ef)/KT]+1 is the Fermi
function.
The reason of this performance is that at the position of the quasi-Fermi
level in the conduction/valence band, the electron/hole occupation is 1/2. Then, if the
density of states is lowered, less electrons are required to reach population inversion,
introducing a larger differential gain.
Furthermore, we have previously seen that the energy of optical transitions in quan-
tum dots are size-dependent and that it increases when it is confined. Finally, it is worth
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Quantum dots
11
Figure 2.4: Evolution of the threshold current density of double heterostructure bulk
lasers (DHS), quantum wells (QW) and quantum dots (QD). Extracted from [Led11]
noting that the threshold current in quantum dot devices is significantly lower than in
other structures, as shown in figure 2.4
2.2.1
Self-assembled Quantum Dots
There are different growing methods, each one obtaining different quantum dot prop-
erties, but one of the most interesting ones, and the one used in this project is the
self-assembled quantum dots. One of the reasons of its major use is that this growing
technique is compatible with mass fabrication technology. In particular, in this section
the Stranski-Krastanov technique is analyzed, which takes advantage of the lattice mis-
match between two semiconductors to obtain 3D islands. As explained before, the size
of these islands are so small that the band structure is modified compared to the bulk
one. The drawback of this technique is that the self-assembled growth is difficult to
control, as they just emerge themselves from the substrate. Theoretical studies based
on nucleation theory have been made [Dub13] [Dub06] [Ton+03], and they have been
the basis of this project.
The interest on this type of growth comes from the high desire of integration of opto-
electronic and electronic integrated circuits, as it will open the door to new capabilities,
as well as reduce the power consumption and the weight and size of electronics. Integra-
tion is done by growing the optical materials directly on silicon. This dislocation-free
growth is possible only in nanostructure forms, such as quantum dots, due to a large
lattice mismatch between III/V materials and silicon.
Nucleation of islands in the Stranski-Krastanov growth is stress-driven, but these
islands are useful only before the formation of dislocations. Considering a 2D layer of
thickness h deposited on a substrate with different lattice constant, having a lattice
mismatch ε0, the elastic strain energy will be linearly proportional to the height h. At
small heights, a uniformly strained layer will adopt the crystal lattice of the substrate. If
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Quantum dots
it is not possible to grow 3D dots, the increased elastic energy produced by increasing the
layer height can only be relaxed by means of misfit dislocations, matching both lattice
constants by means of plastic deformation and producing a pseudomorphic growth. It
exists a critical thickness, hd where misfit dislocations appear and it can be calculated
by means of the Matthews-Blakeslee model [MB74], equating the glide force that acts
on a dislocation to the line tension for the misfit segment of the dislocation, and solving
it for the thickness. This height results:
hd =
b
4πε0
(1 −υ cos2 α)
(1 + υ) cos λ
(
ln hd
b + 1
)
(2.14)
where b is the Burgers vector, with a modulus ||b|| = a
2
√
h2 + k2 + l2, υ is the Poisson
ratio, ε0 is the lattice mismatch, λ is the angle between the Burgers vector and the
line in the interface plane perpendicular to the intersection of the glide plane with the
interface, and α is the angle between the Burgers vector and the line vector for the
dislocations. The values of the cosine of both angles are assumed to be cos α = cos λ =
1/2. The value of the critical thickness can be obtained by solving this implicit equation
numerically with any mathematical tool, such as MATLAB. If the height exceeds the
critical thickness, h > hd, misfit dislocations at the interface will be created, relieving
the mismatch strain. This equation is solved later in this section for InAs quantum dots
and different values of the lattice mismatch, but at first sight it is seen that the critical
thickness will decrease by increasing the lattice mismatch ε0.
So, plastic deformation is the only possible way to relax the strain energy of the
wetting layer in thin films. However, if the deposited material can form 3D islands,
they will have free lateral surfaces, decreasing its elastic energy in comparison to the
elastic energy of a planar layer of the same volume. Nucleation of 3D islands requires
the formation of their lateral facets, acting against the wetting force in a 2D layer.
Thus, Stranski-Krastanov islands become energetically preferred after the thickness of
the wetting layer exceeds a quasi-equilibrium value, named heq. This wetting layer, then,
acquire a value of metastability before the nucleation starts. Moreover, the transition
point between 2D and 3D growth can be also obtained by means of its critical thickness,
hc, which is larger than the equilibrium wetting layer thickness (hc > heq). In order to
obtain the critical thickness for the 2D-3D transition, we apply the following formula,
taken from [Pa12]:
hc =
∆γ3D
(1 −Z(ϕ))Eε2
0/(1 −υ)
(2.15)
where ∆γ3D is the surface energy cost per unit area due to the formation of 3D
islands, υ is the Poisson ratio, E the Young modulus and Z is the relaxation coefficient
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Quantum dots
13
of elastic energy. This last parameter is actually not a constant, as it depends on the
contact angle ϕ, as shown in figure 2.5:
Figure 2.5: Relaxation coefficient, Z, as a function of the contact angle. From [Dub06]
Both critical thicknesses, hd and hc are calculated for InAs, using the following
parameters [Pa12] [ins], and applying them to equations 2.14 and 2.15:
b = a/2 [Å]
∆γ3D [erg/cm2]
υ
E [dyn/cm2]
Z
3.0292
66.08
0.35
5.14 · 1011
0.62
Table 2.1: Basic parameters of InAs, being b the Burgers vector, ∆γ3D the surface
energy cost per unit area due to formation of 3D islands, υ the Poisson ratio, E the
Young modulus and Z the relaxation coefficient of elastic energy
Both thicknesses are calculated for different values of the lattice mismatch, ε0, going
from 0.2% to 8%. The results of both curves are shown in figure 2.6, where it is seen
that the dependence of hc(ε0) is different from the hd(ε0), but both of them decrease by
increasing the lattice mismatch. At lower values of the lattice mismatch (< 2%) we see
that hd < hc, meaning that the elastic stress is released by the misfit dislocations and,
therefore, Stranski-Krastanov islands are not observed. This islands will be observed
when hd > hc, and only for layer thicknesses that lay between both critical heights, as
it is the region where islanding is energetically preferred to misfit dislocations.
The estimation of the equilibrium thickness is made using the Müller-Kern model.
In this case they estimated the elastic energy gain given by the 2D elastic energy of
i atoms, ∆Gelastic,MK and the free energy spent to overcome the wetting force in the
island formation from i atoms on the surface of wetting layer, ∆Gwetting,MK. They are
defined as:
∆Gelastic,MK = Eε2
0Ωi
1 −υ
∆Gwetting,MK = Ψ0
d0
exp
(
−h
k0d0
)
(2.16)
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Quantum dots
Figure 2.6: Critical thickness for 2D-3D transitions and for formation of misfit disloca-
tions
with Ψ0 the wetting energy at the substrate surface, d0 the height of a monolayer
(ML) and k0 the relaxation coefficient for the force of attraction of atoms to the substrate,
different to R.
The wetting layer will be stable when ∆Gwetting > ∆Gelastic and metastable otherwise.
So, in order to obtain the equilibrium thickness, we apply ∆Gwetting = ∆Gelastic, giving:
heq,MK = k0d0 ln
(
Ψ0
d0Eε2
0/(1 −υ)
)
(2.17)
Equation 2.17 shows that the equilibrium thickness decrease when increasing the
lattice mismatch, and it increases when increasing the wetting energy.
A kinetic approach to the 3D self-assembled growth gives a description of the time
evolution of island size distribution following different deposition conditions, such as
temperature, deposition rate... It can describe the dependence of quantum dot size and
density on the deposition rate. This approach is studied and analyzed in the following
section, as it is an important part of the project, as it has been developed and confirmed
by experiments with MBE at a growth temperature T and deposition rate V, which
is turned off at time t0. It is assumed that the desorption is absent, so the deposition
thickness is given by H(t) = V t at t ≤t0 and H = H0 = V t0 at t > t0, being H0 the total
deposition thickness. Then, after the deposition of H0 monolayers (MLs), the structure is
either cooled down or covered with a cap layer, or exposed at the growth temperature T
during the exposition time ∆t before capping. Therefore, the whole process is controlled
by four parameters:T, V , H0 and ∆t, all of them external. However, it is worth noting
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Quantum dots
15
that in the case of III-V quantum dots, such as the one used in this project, the fluxes
ratio also influence the resulting properties.
It is important to notice that the key point of the Stranski-Krastanov growth is
the elastic stress accumulated in the wetting layer, linearly proportional to the height
h. This height h is equal to the deposited thickness H before the formation of QDs
and considered to be almost equal, h ≈H with quantum dots, because the volume of
the quantum dots is considered small enough to neglect it. Previously, the equilibrium
height heq has been introduced, and now we can introduce a quantity called ”superstress”
or ”overstress”, that quantifies the wetting layer metastability. It is defined as:
ζ = h
heq
−1
(2.18)
Island formation only takes place for ζ > 0, which agrees with the theory explained
previously in this section: the first step of the Stranski-Krastanov growth is the formation
of the wetting layer with an equilibrium thickness heq. Once the height is increased a
little bit more, remaining in the region heq < h < hc, the system will be metastable,
but not sufficient for island nucleation.
Once the wetting layer reaches the critical
thickness hc, island nucleation will start, as it correspond to the minimum nucleation
barrier F(hc) and the maximum nucleation rate J(hc). As the islands are very small,
the critical wetting layer thickness is considered to be equal to the equivalent deposition
thickness (Hc ≈hc) in the first approximation. This process is shown graphically in
figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Graphical representation of the different stages of the Stranski-Krastanov
QD growing technique. Extracted from [Dub13]
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Quantum dots
First, the wetting layer is formed, reaching the equilibrium height, heq (fig. 2.7a).
Then, the 2D growing layer keeps on growing, but being metastable this time (fig. 2.7b).
Once the wetting layer reaches hc, island nucleation takes place (fig. 2.7c). In fig. 2.7d,
the regular growth is shown. Finally, QDs suffer from shape transformation, (fig. 2.7e).
2.2.2
Nucleation mechanism and growth of QDs in the
Stranski-Krastanov regime
2.2.2.1
Formation of Stranski-Krastanov QDs
In figure 2.7, shown in the previous section, we see that the last stage of the Stranski-
Krastanov growth, is the shape transformation. However, as a first approximation, we
consider that the shape of the islands is fixed in both nucleation and growth stages.
Using this first approximation, we use the simplified expression for the free energy
of island formation:
∆G(i) = ∆Gelas + ∆Gsurf + ∆Gwetting
(2.19)
However, these values of the elastic and surface free energies are different from the one
shown in eq.2.16, as now it is the difference of elastic energies of i III-V pairs in the
island and the wetting layer, and ∆Gsurf is again the difference of surface energies of
both the island and the wetting layer area covered by the island.
The addition of ∆Gwetting and the changes in ∆Gelas and ∆Gsurf also changes slightly
the expression of the equilibrium height, being this time:
heq = k0d0 ln
(
Ψ0
d0(1 −Z(ϕ))λε2
0
)
(2.20)
This expression is similar to eq.2.17, but with small differences. The first one is the
appearance of λ, which is simply the elastic modulus of deposited material: λ = E/(1−υ).
The second one is Z, the relaxation coefficient of elastic energy, explained previously in
this chapter.
Considering that the normalized island formation energy can be expressed as F =
∆G/(kBT), using ∆G from eq. 2.19, the dependence of formation energy on the number
of atoms i in an island can be written in a simplified way:
F(i) = Ai2/3 −Bζi
(2.21)
As explained before, ζ is the ”overstress”, while A and B are constants, defined by
the expressions:
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Quantum dots
17
A = [γ(ϕ)/ cos(ϕ) −γ(0)]
kBT
α2l2
0;
B = ln
(
Ψ0
d0(1 −Z(ϕ))λε2
0
) (1 −Z(ϕ))λε2
0l2
0d0
kBT
(2.22)
where d0 was the ML height, l0 the average distance between atoms in the surface, γ(0)
and γ(ϕ) are the surface energies at the base and side faces of the pyramid, respectively.
Finally, α is a geometric factor defined as: α = (6d0 cot ϕ/l0)1/3.
Maximizing eq. 2.21 with respect to the number of atoms of the island, i, we obtain
the expression of the number of atoms in the critical island, as well as the nucleation
barrier at the critical size:
ic =
( 2A
3Bζ
)3
;
F ≡∆F(ic) = 4
27
A3
B2ζ2
(2.23)
The nucleation rate of the Stranski-Krastanov islands can also be obtained for any
given overstress, which is:
J(ζ) = a
τl2
0
ζ(ζ + 1) exp [−F(ζ)]
(2.24)
being a = (3B)/(4
√
πA) a constant and τ the characteristic time, which determines the
growth rate of supercritical islands,as they grow faster at smaller values, defined by:
τ =
3l2
0υ
8αBD
(2.25)
Here, D is the coefficient of stress-driven diffusion from the wetting layer to island.
However, this diffusion coefficient is dependent on the temperature, using the simplest
Arrhenius dependence, given by:
D(T) = D0 exp (−ED/(kBT))
(2.26)
Finally, from eq. 2.24 we can obtain the size-invariant stationary distribution:
fs(ζ) = τ
ζ = a
l2
0
(ζ + 1) exp [−F(ζ)]
(2.27)
Where the overstress dependence of the nucleation barrier (F(ζ)) is derived from:
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Quantum dots
F(T, ζ) = Te
Tζ2
(2.28)
The parameter Te is called the quasi-equilibrium temperature and defined as:
Te = 16
3
[γ(ϕ)/ cos(ϕ) −γ(0)]3 cot2 ϕ
kB[(1 −Z(ϕ))λε2
0]2 ln2 (Ψ0/(d0(1 −Z(ϕ))λε2
0))
(2.29)
This parameter determines the system at a given set of deposition conditions. For
example, island nucleation is easier at lower values of Te, because the nucleation barrier
gets smaller, as seen in eq.2.28. Te decreases by increasing the lattice mismatch, with a
dependence: Te ∝ε−4
0
and also the contact angle by means of its trigonometric functions
and the relaxation coefficient, following the dependence shown in figure 2.5.
2.2.2.2
Nucleation stage and critical thickness
In order to grow Quantum Dots, one of the key parameters to control is the size distri-
bution. The reason is that when growing samples, it is really desired to obtain a certain
wavelength, and make the peak as narrower as possible. Therefore, as the dimensions of
the quantum dots modify their wavelength, it is important to keep the size distribution
(f(ρ, t)) as narrower as possible too.
In order to do so, the following equation can be used:
heq + d0
∫t
0 V (t′)dt′ = h(t) + d0l2
0
∫∞
0
ρ3/2f(ρ, t)dρ
(2.30)
Here, the left part of the equation gives the deposition thickness at time t, while the
right part of the equation is the sum of the mean wetting layer thickness and the total
volume of islands per unit area. Moreover, ρ is a normalized size that represents the
normalized island base area and is related to the number i of III-V pairs. It is defined
as:
ρ ≡i2/3 =
( R
αl2
0
)2
(2.31)
In this model, the analysis of the critical thickness for 2D-3D transition under the
material flux is also important. In order to do so, first the critical ideal overstress Φ∗
has to be obtained. Recalling the definition of overstress from eq.2.18, it is important to
state the difference between both of them. The one shown in eq.2.18 shows the overstress
in the wetting layer before the nucleation of islands, while Φ = H/heq −1 also counts
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Quantum dots
19
the nucleation of islands, as H is the deposition thickness. Its critical value will be the
one that corresponds to the critical deposition thickness: Φ∗= Hc/heq −1. However, the
total volume of islands remains relatively small during the nucleation stage, so we can
consider that the maximum wetting layer thickness hc will be almost equal to the critical
deposition thickness Hc. Thus, the critical ideal overstress will be Φ∗≈hc/heq −1, and
can be obtained solving the following trascendental equation:
34heq
d0
B
A5/2Φ2
∗(Φ∗+ 1)
[
F(Φ∗) τ
teq
]5/2
exp [F(Φ∗)] = 1
(2.32)
Here, teq is the time needed to grow the equilibrium thickness and obtained by
teq = heq/V , being V the deposition rate. F(Φ∗) is the activation barrier for nucleation
at the maximum wetting layer thickness, found using equation 2.23. Once the critical
overstress is found, the critical thickness can be easily obtained, as shown previously.
Equation 2.32 contains the two characteristic times, teq and τ, that connect thesurface
energetics with the growth kinetics. A way to relate both characteristic times is by means
of the kinetic control parameter, which is simply a ratio of time of equilibrium wetting
layer formation to the microscopic time of island growth:
Q ≡teq
τ >> 1
(2.33)
Thanks to all these equations, we can express all the characteristics of nucleation
process through only two parameters: the kinetic control parameter Q, related to the
growth conditions and the quasi-equilibrium temperature Te, related to the surface ener-
getics, allowing us to obtain relations for the critical overstress, Φ∗and the characteristic
duration of the nucleation stage, ∆t:
Φ∗=
√
2
5
Te
Tu(Q)
(2.34)
∆t = 0.57
u(Q)t∗
(2.35)
with u(Q) = (2/5)F(Φ∗) and t∗is the time related to the maximum wetting layer
thickness at which the island nucleation rate is maximum, and can be obtained by
t∗= Φ∗teq. However, the time to grow the wetting layer with critical thickness from the
beginning of the deposition is (Φ∗+ 1)teq.
Moreover, the stationary value of the surface density, N, reached after the nucleation
stage is terminated, can also be calculated:
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Quantum dots
N = 4
l2
0
heq
d0
T
Te
(u(Q)
Q
)3/2
(2.36)
This surface density has a temperature dependence and flux dependence in the form:
N ∝V 3/2T 5/2 exp
( 3ED
2kBT
)
(2.37)
With this set of equations, we see that an increased deposition rate at a given tem-
perature creates more nucleation centers on the surface, increasing the density.
On
the other hand, at a given deposition rate and thickness, the solid diffusion in the wet-
ting layer is faster at higher temperatures. Then, islands get larger, while their density
decreases because the total volume of islands is fixed by the deposition thickness.
Now the nucleation time and the steady state surface density are defined, the tem-
poral evolution of both the surface density and the nucleation rate can be obtained:
n(t) = N
(
1 −exp (−e(t−t∗)/∆t)
)
(2.38)
J(t) = N
∆t exp
[t −t∗
∆t
−exp
(t −t∗
∆t
)]
(2.39)
The shape of the normalized surface density n(t)/N is shown in figure 2.8, where it
is seen that due to the double exponential, the density quickly increases until it reaches
its steady state:
Finally, thanks to the approximation made, considering that the size of the islands
are relatively small, obtaining Φ∗∼= hc/heq −1, one can obtain a new relation for the
critical thickness, that relates it to the temperature, among other parameters.
hc ∼= heq

1 +
(2
5
Te
Tu(Q)
)1/2

(2.40)
Thus, in order to summarize the chapter, and based on equation 2.40, we can conclude
that:
• The critical thickness is proportional to the equilibrium thickness.
• This equilibrium thickness decreases with the lattice mismatch and is almost tem-
perature independent.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Quantum dots
21
Figure 2.8: Temporal evolution of the normalized surface density for Ge/Si QDs, with
parameters obtained from [Dub13]
• The critical thicness is the maximum WL thicness, and it is reached because of a
kinetic balance between the material influx and the island nucleation.
• Increasing the lattice mismatch the difference between the critical thickness and
the equilibrium one decreases, as hc ∝heq(1 + const/ε2
0).
• Finally, this critical thickness also decreases by increasing the temperature, as:
hc ∝heq(1 + const/
√
T)
2.2.2.3
Growth of Stranski-Krastanov QDs
After the nucleation of the islands, their growth takes place, with a normalized total
volume of:
G(t) = d0l2
0
heq
Nz3/2(t)
(2.41)
where z(t) is the invariant size related to the overstress by: ζ = τdz/dt, and making
use of this relation, and the material balance (ζ + G = Φ) we can obtain a differential
equation for the size with respect to time:
τ dz
dt + d0l2
0
heq
Nz3/2(t) = Φ(t)
(2.42)
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Quantum dots
with
Φ(t) =



t/teq,
0 ≤t ≤t0.
t0/teq ≡Φ0,
t > t0.
(2.43)
In this case, the time t=0 corresponds to the time where the wetting layer reaches
its equilibrium thickness, agreeing with the fact stated before, in which the overstress is
zero at the equilibrium height. We see that the ideal overstress, then, increases linearly
with time until t = t0, where it stabilizes, as the deposition flux is turned off. This time
t = t0 corresponds to the deposition thickness H0.
Moreover, as we have done previously for the nucleation, we have to define the
characteristic time for the growth step, which is:
tg =
2
3Φ1/3
0
( heq
d0l2
0N
)2/3
τ
(2.44)
And also the quasi-stationary lateral size of the islands:
Lg =
[6(H0 −heq) cot ϕ
N
]1/3
(2.45)
Then, the desired expression of the size distribution function, that has a high impor-
tance in this project, as explained previously in this chapter, can be expressed in terms
of the both the lateral size, L, and the time, t, obtaining:
f(L, t) =
2L
(αl2
0)2cN exp cx(L, t) −ecx(L,t)
(2.46)
The quantity c, and the function x(L, t) are defined as:
c = 5u(Q)
Φ2
∗Q
(2.47)
x(L, t) = L2
∗(t) −L2
(αl0)2
(2.48)
Having a look at the size distribution function, it is seen that it is nearly symmetric
to the size L∗(t), corresponding to the size of the islands nucleated when at the maximum
wetting layer thickness. The last step, then, is to determine the dependence L∗(t), that
can be done by making a change of variable can be made to equation 2.42, we will
obtain the new nonlinear differential equation that has to be solved, in this case, for
l(y) = L∗(y)/Lg:
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Quantum dots
23



3l dl
dy + l3 = Φ(y)
Φ0 ,
l(y = 0) = 0.
(2.49)
Where y is the dimensionless time, defined as: y = (t −t∗)/tg. The initial condition
assumes infinitely small critical size at hc, the critical thickness.
This growth stage, the last one is much longer than the nucleation stage, which is the
shortest one, but much shorter than the deposition time that forms the WL, meaning
that ∆t << tg << t∗
Nevertheless, there are some cases where the differential equation doesn’t need to be
solved, as sometimes it can be integrated analytically. This holds when the deposition
is stopped soon after reaching the critical thickness, obtaining a much simpler equation:
t −t∗
tg
= ln
[(1 + l + l2)1/2
1 −l
]
−
√
3 arctan
(2l + 1
√
3
)
+
π
2
√
3 ≡f(l)
(2.50)
This function doesn’t contain any model parameters in the right part, meaning that
all quantum dots will obey the same growth law in terms of (t −t∗)/tg and L∗/Lg.
The mean size saturates at t −t∗∼3tg, reaching the quasi-stationary size Lg, which
scales with the surface density as N −1/3 and increases with the deposition thickness,
proportional to (H0 −heq)1/3, as seen in equation 2.45. A less visible dependence, but
worth noting it is the temperature dependence, which follows the Arrhenius exponent,
the same that had the Diffusion coefficient.
An example is made in [Dub06], for Ge/Si quantum dots grown at temperature
T=470oC, using the following parameters: Ψ0 = 450 erg/cm2, λ = 1.27 · 1012 dyn/cm,
ε = 0.042, d0 = 0.145 nm, l0 = 0.395 nm, a contact angle of 20o, that gives Z ≈0.62
(figure 2.5), and surface energies γ(0) ≈γ(ϕ) = 800 erg/cm2.
k0 is set to 0.8.
It
is assumed to have a diffusion coefficient at T=470oC of D = 6 · 10−13 cm2/s and a
radius of operation of elastic forces υ = 10. In this case, using equation 2.20, a WL
equilibrium thickness of 2ML is obtained. By depositing H0=6.2ML of Germanium at
V=0.07ML/s, it takes 42 seconds to reach the WL equilibrium thickness and then 74s
to grow the critical thickness. As t=0s is considered the time corresponding to heq, we
obtain t∗= 32s. So, the growth of quantum dots will take place at times higher than 32
seconds. The result of the distribution function at different times is shown in figure 2.9.
Here, it is important to mention that as time increases, the distribution function
gets narrower, so all the dots have similar size. Moreover, the mean lateral size will also
increase until reaching the stationary value, where the size gets independent of the time.
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Quantum dots
Figure 2.9: Distribution function of the lateral size of Ge/Si QDs at different times
2.3
QD growth equipment: The MOVPE
Samples with InAs/InP QDs were grown by a MOVPE chamber. MOVPE stands for
Metal Organic Vapor Phase Epitaxy, which is an epitaxial process in which semicon-
ductor structures, generally layers, are produced by the reaction of molecules in the gas
phase on a heated substrate. Therefore, is a chemical vapor deposition method, relying
on the chemical reactions instead of the physical deposition produced in the molecu-
lar beam epitaxy (MBE). It has been the preferred choice for optoelectronic devices,
such as LEDs, lasers, or in our case, QDs, due to the direct band gap of the deposited
compound semiconductor material.
Moreover, MOVPE is more industrially friendly
than MBE. Some materials are easier grow by MOVPE indeed, but others are better
by MBE. As an example, MOVPE is chosen in this project, instead of MBE because
Quantum Dashes were grown in the MBE chamber, with the length of the dots in one
crystallographic axis much larger than in the other one, similar to quantum wires.
Different parameters determine the vapor phase epitaxy, that can be classified in
three groups: thermodynamics, kinetics and hydrodynamics. Thermodynamics describe
the direction in which the reactions take place. The kinetics of the growth describe the
gas phase and the surface reactions that are done in the reactor. Finally, the hydrody-
namics, describe the temperature gradient, the velocity profile and the mass transport
of molecules. The overall growth process is graphically shown in figure 2.10:
In this image we see three different regimes, depending on the temperature. At low
temperatures (higher values of 1/T), the logarithm of the growth rate decreases linearly
with the inverse of the temperature, thus, increasing by also increasing the temperature.
This growth is determined by the rate of the slowest reaction that takes place and
therefore is kinetically limited. In the middle region, the curve is flat, so the growth rate
==PAGE:35==
2.3 QD growth equipment: The MOVPE
25
Figure 2.10: Schematic graph of the MOVPE growth process
is independent of the temperature. Thus, the sample surface limits the growth, being
diffusion limited. Finally, at higher temperatures, the growth decreases by increasing
the temperature, and then the chemical reactions determine the growth. It is seen that
the temperature plays a crucial role in the growth, as it will determine in which region
it will work.
When growing III-V compounds, such as the case in this project, an excess of the
group V component is inserted into the chamber, compared to the group III compo-
nents, as it tends to evaporate when growing III/V compounds in the MOVPE chamber.
Therefore, the group III growth compound determines the growth rate.
The group III precursors, which will provide Gallium, Indium or Aluminum, are
always alkyls that are contained in a bubbler. The alkyls, which are usually in the liquid
state, are Trimethylgallium (TMGa, (CH3)3Ga) for Gallium, TrimethylIndium (TMIn,
(CH3)3In), which is solid powder, for Indium and TrimethylAluminum ((CH3)3Al) for
Aluminum. A carrier gas, usually Hydrogen (H2) or Nitrogen (N2), is introduced into
the bubbler at a given flow, controlled by a mass flow controller (MFC), generating a gas
mixture that will be transported into the reactor. This amount of metalorganic vapour
transported depends on several factors, by means of the relation:
Falkyl =
FH2palkyl
pbubbler −palkyl
(2.51)
As said before, the hydrogen flow is determined in the recipe, and controlled by means
of the MFC. The saturated pressure in the bubbler, or vapor pressure is the pressure at
which the alkyl is contained, and is dependent on the temperature: log(palkyl[torr]) =
a −b/T[K]. The constants a and b depend on the compound and T is the bubbler
temperature. In the case of TMIn, the one used in this project, we have a = 10.52 and
b = 3014K. T is the temperature at which the TMIn is kept, which in this project is
291,15K. Finally, the pbubbler is the pressure at the pressure controller setpoint, which is
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Quantum dots
500mbar. A schematical picture of the source transportation is shown in figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11: Transportation of the group III compound to the growth chamber. From
[Sem]
On the other hand, the group V sources are usually hydrides contained in a gas
cylinder. These are: PH3, for Phosphorus, NH3 for Nitrogen and, the one used in this
project, AsH3 for Arsenic. With the help of the carrier gas (H2) the precursor is also
transported to the reactor.
This reactor is made of a material that does not react with any of the chemicals
being used, usually stainless steel and is normally operated at a lower pressure than
atmospheric, although there are many different reactor designs that could operate at
low, atmospheric and high pressure depending on the type and material to grow. The
chamber usually contains the reactor walls, the liner, a susceptor and gas injection
and temperature control units. The heated susceptor holds the III-V wafer, reaching
temperatures up to 750oC.
The process is the following: the group III compound slowly decomposes, losing the
methyl groups as radicals. When there is only one methyl on the group III material,
adsorption on the surface takes place. Then, the group V compound (As in our case)
also reacts on the surface, where the arsenic react with the TMIn, sticking to the Indium
atom. This process is repeated several times, forming layers of InAs. The last methyl
of the indium reacts with the Hydrogen of the Arsine, producing methane, that can be
removed from the reactor. This process is schematically shown in figure 2.12.
2.4
Quantum dot characterization
In order to characterize the Quantum Dots, the most important part is to measure their
spectrum. There are three properties needed to be measure: the peak wavelength, the
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Quantum dot characterization
27
Figure 2.12: MOVPE process for InP growth, extracted from [enw]
intensity of the signal and the broadness of the signal. These three properties are the
key parameters of the performance of the quantum dot, for different applications. The
most obvious one is the intensity of the signal, as the higher the intensity, the more
light they emit. The peak wavelength is also extremely important. As explained in
the beginning of the chapter, one of the reasons of the huge interest in quantum dots
is the possibility to use them in integrated circuits. Integration will decrease greatly
the size and the weight of the chips, decreasing the power consumption and increase its
performance. Moreover, there are future applications in the telecommunication field. In
order to do so, there’s a strong desire in making quantum dots with a wavelength of:
λ = 1550nm. The reason is that optical fibers are mainly made of silica glass due to its
excellent properties, and one of them is the low losses that the material provides. This
attenuation depends strongly on the wavelength, as seen in fig. 2.13.
In this figure we see that at short wavelengths (< 1300nm), the main attenuation
factor is the Rayleigh scattering of inhomogeneities, that scatters light in all directions,
with a scattering strength dependent on λ−4.
At around 1400 nanometers there is
a strong absorption from OH−groups.
Therefore we have two local minima in the
attenuation spectra, one around 1300nm and the other one at 1550nm. For wavelengths
larger than 1550nm, the attenuation increases again due to the infrared absorption.
Summarizing, the point of minimal propagation loss lies at 1550nm and this is why this
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Quantum dots
Figure 2.13: Attenuation of the silica glass (SiO2) in the near-infrared region. From
[wik]
wavelength is the one used in optical communication, explaining the increasing interest
in making quantum dots of this wavelength.
Finally, one of the properties of Quantum Dots is that the spectra is much narrower
than the bulk semiconductor one, or the quantum well one. It is important to make the
spectra as narrow as possible, to avoid dispersion effects produced in the fiber, that can
affect the shape of the pulse. Therefore, it is also important to measure the broadness
of the signal, by means of the Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM).
This three parameters, all of them related to the luminescence, are measured by
means of the Photoluminescence mapper (PL-mapper), which is explained in section
2.4.1
However, the aim of this project was to develop a model that describes the QD
nucleation, and relate it to the growing conditions: temperature, growth rate, V/III
ratio... It is known that the quantum dots are made on top of a substrate, but on top of
them there’s a capping layer, making the profile characterization impossible, as it will
look flat. In order to be able to measure the profile of the quantum dots, the procedure
is repeated, with the same growing conditions, generating a second set of substrate
and quantum dots, which will have the same properties as the first ones, on top of the
capping layer. These quantum dots are not optically active, but, without the existence
of a capping layer after the second set of QDs, we can measure their profile, and consider
that the optically active ones will be almost equal. A rough graphical representation of
both cases, the typical QD samples (a) and the samples done in the project to measure
the profile (b) is shown in figure 2.14. In order to characterize the surface density and
geometry of QDs depending on growth parameterss, Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
is used, which is explained in section 2.4.2.
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Quantum dot characterization
29
Figure 2.14: Graphical representation of the typical sample (a) with the capping layer
and of the samples made in this project, with a layer of surface QDs grown at the same
conditions, but not optically active. (b)
2.4.1
Photoluminescence measurements
Photoluminescence consist on exciting the electrons of the semiconductor by means of
a laser into higher energy levels. Then the light emmited from the quantum dots after
the absorption of photons is detected. This spectroscopy technique provides information
about optical properties of the quantum dots, as explained before.
These measurements were carried out by a PL-mapper at Danchip, DTU’s centre
for micro- and nanofabrication. A PL-mapper is an instrument that contains one or
various lasers, and its advantage is that it can generate maps of different parameters
over the whole wafer by measuring optical luminescence emission from materials excited
with energy above their band gap. It is also really useful in quantum dots, and other
semiconductors, as in the materials used to make them it is non-destructive.
The PL-mapper used is the RPM2000 from the company AZoNano. RPM stands for
Rapid Photoluminescence mapper, as it takes less than 10 minutes to obtain a complete
map of a 2-inch wafer. Wafers are held by vacuum and then the PL map is generated
by moving the wafer while the laser excitation beam is kept stationary. All wavelengths
can be acquired at the same time, thanks to array detectors [AZo].
The procedure is the following: Excitation laser beams, from one of the three different
lasers equipped in the PL mapper, with wavelengths λ = 405nm, λ = 502nm and
λ = 980nm, hit the sample surface at a certain angle, providing spatial filtering of the
laser light. This beam is focused to a small spot, around 100µm. The Photoluminescence
produced by the sample, once it has been excited, is collected by reflective optics that
are coupled to a monochromator, obtaining a big range of measurable wavelengths. A
detector is used for measuring integrated PL signals, if necessary. Different filters are
available, to eliminate the signal produced by the laser itself, and only measure the PL.
This mapper has the option of measuring the spectrum at a certain point, with high
resolution, ∼1nm, or obtain the complete map of the sample. In any case, a brief report
can be generated, as well as being able to obtain the raw data to treat it using different
==PAGE:40==
30
2 Quantum dots
Figure 2.15: Map of a QD sample, containing information about the peak wavelength,
intensity and FWHM. Obtained with the RPM2000
software tools. As seen in figure 2.15, this brief report contains information about the
peak wavelength, the intensity signal and the FWHM.
2.4.2
Profile measurements: The AFM
As explained before, the AFM (Atomic Force Microscopy) provides 3D profiles of samples
on a nanoscale, allowing us to characterize the different Quantum Dots. The reason of
this ultra-high resolution is that it measures forces between a sharp probe and the surface,
when the separation between them is extremely small (even in the atomic scale). The
tip of the AFM slowly approaches the sample, until a ”soft touch” is made and then
starts scanning.
The probe is placed at the end of a spring-like cantilever.
The amount of force
between the probe and the sample depends on the spring constant of the cantilever
and the distance between the probe and the sample surface by means of Hooke’s law:
F = −kx, being F the force, k the spring constant and x the cantilever deflection. When
the cantilever bends, this deflection is monitored. In order to detect this displacement,
a laser is reflected off the back of the cantilever, and then it is detected in a photodiode.
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Quantum dot characterization
31
This diode is divided into four parts, that can be seen as four quadrants. When the
laser movement is vertical, either top (1st and 2nd quadrant) or bottom (3rd and 4th
quadrant), there exists a bending due to topography. If the movement is horizontal left
(2nd and 3rd quadrant) or right (1st and 4th quadrant), it produces a torsion due to
lateral forces.
Therefore, AFM doesn’t only produces a 3D image of the sample, it can also deter-
mine chemical and mechanical properties, such as elasticity, adhesion or hardness by
means of the force curves, which measure the amount of force felt by the cantilever as
the tip is brought close to the surface of the sample and then pulled away. This force
curve shows different tip-sample interactions, as shown in figure 2.16a.
AFM has three different modes of operation: Contact mode, non-contact mode and
tapping mode (intermittent contact).
In the contact mode, the force on the tip is
repulsive. It produces a fast scanning and is ideal for rough surfaces, as the tip makes
soft contact to the surface of the sample. The disadvantage of this method is that, as
the tip makes a soft contact, this forces can damage or deform soft samples.
In the non-contact mode, the tip is placed at a considerable distance of the surface,
and thus, there’s no contact between them. It operates in the attractive force region.
Its drawback is that the resolution is lower, and it usually needs ultra high vacuum to
obtain a best image.
Finally, in the tapping mode the cantilever is oscillating at its resonant frequency.
The probe taps on the surface during the scanning. The oscillation is kept at a constant
amplitude in order to maintain a constant tip-sample interaction and, thus, obtaining
(a) Example of force curve
(b) Image of a QD sample obtained with AFM
Figure 2.16: Force curve and image obtained with AFM
==PAGE:42==
32
2 Quantum dots
the image of the surface.
Different scan rates, resolution or width of the image can be chosen, allowing a big
range of possibilities. However, as the tip of the AFM makes a ”soft touch” with the
sample, it gets usually damaged, obtaining blurred images. Therefore, the tip of the
AFM has to be often changed.
An example of an image obtained by AFM is shown in figure 2.16b.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
Results
3.1
Growth parameters, PL and AFM
measurements of the samples
Two different set of samples have been grown. The first set was grown by Elizaveta and
other students prior to the project. This first set includes the samples: D1726, D1727,
D1772, D1774, D1777, D1873, D1875, D1877, D1879, D1880 and D1882. Although the
growth was not made during this project, all the growth sheets are obtained, with the
recipe used for each one. Photoluminescence and AFM measurements are made. Al-
though the results and the model mainly involve samples from the second set, this first
one is also important. The reason is that based on the measurements of the first set (sur-
face density, wavelength, FWHM...) the growing conditions (V/III ratio, temperature,
growth time...) of the second set are adjusted to get closer to the desired properties,
such as 1550nm. This second set, which is grown during the project, includes all the
D20- samples: D2059, D2060, D2064, D2075, D2077, D2081, D2087, D2088, D2089,
D2090, D2091, D2092, D2093, D02096, D2097, D2099, D2102, D2105, D2110, D2111
and D2122.
The properties of each of the samples from the first set were measured in two different
points. One in the middle of the wafer and one in one of the sides. An example of a
recipe can be found in the appendix A, but in tables 3.1 and 3.2 the main parameters
related to the quantum dot growth are shown:
First of all, it is worth noting that the waiting time is a small period after the InAs
deposition, but before having again InP, in which a constant flux of arsenic is present
in the growing chamber. Moreover, the flow of Indium specified in the table is not the
flow of TMIn, it is the flow of Hydrogen getting inside the bubbler. Moreover, in order
to obtain the V/III ratio, the flow of both groups has to be expressed in moles/min, or
similar. To do so, the ideal gas law PV = nRT, under standard conditions (P=1atm,
T=273.15K, R=0.082 atm*l/mol/K), is used. By dividing both sides of equation by
the time, we can substitute V/t by the flux, and then obtain the number of moles per
minute.
Once both flows are expressed in moles/min, we have to determine the flow of TMIn,
using equation 2.51, with FH2 the flow given in the recipe, and shown in the table,
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Results
Sample
Flow In (H2)
Flow As
Flow As (2)
V/III ratio
Growth rate
Eff. thick.
[sccm]
[sccm]
[sccm]
[ML/s]
[ML]
D1726
108.2
50
50
117.26105
0.32818
1.14863
D1727
108.2
100
100
234.52211
0.32818
1.14863
D1772
108.2
100
100
234.52211
0.32818
0.65636
D1775
108.2
100
100
234.52211
0.32818
0.98454
D1777
108.2
100
100
234.52211
0.32818
1.05017
D1873
108
1.23631
1.23631
2.90479
0.32757
1.11375
D1875
160
1.23631
1.23631
1.96073
0.48529
1.65
D1877
160
1.23631
1.23631
1.96073
0.48529
1.65
D1879
160
1.23631
1.23631
1.96073
0.48529
1.65
D1880
160
1.23631
100
1.96073
0.48529
1.65
D1882
160
100
100
158.59558
0.48529
1.55294
Table 3.1: growth parameters of the first set of QD samples (i)
Sample #
Tout
Tin
QD time 1
Waiting time 1
QD time 2
Waiting time 2
[oC]
[oC]
[s]
[s]
[s]
[s]
D1726
427
465
3.5
3.3
3.5
3.3
D1727
427
465
3.5
3.3
3.5
3.3
D1772
427
465
2
3.3
2
3.3
D1775
427
465
3
3.3
3
3.3
D1777
427
465
3.2
6
3.2
6
D1873
433
480
3.4
3.5
3.4
4
D1875
423
470
3.4
3.5
3.4
4
D1877
417
465
3.4
3.5
3.4
4
D1879
420
465
3.4
3.5
3.4
4
D1880
417
470
3.4
3.5
3.4
4
D1882
415
472
3.2
4
3.2
4
Table 3.2: growth parameters of the first set of QD samples (ii)
pbubbler = 500mbar and pTMIn given by the constants shown under eq. 2.51, obtaining
pTMIn = 1.96268mbar
As explained in sec.2.3, the overall growth rate is determined by the rate of the
group III material (Indium), as the Arsenic tends to evaporate. Thus, the growth rate,
in ML/s is calculated by:
rate = 1, 65FIn(H2)
160 · 3.4
(3.1)
Once the growth rate is calculated, the InAs effective thickness can be easily calcu-
==PAGE:45==
3.1 Growth parameters, PL and AFM measurements of the samples
35
lated by multiplying the rate with the growth time:
eff.thickness = rate · t
(3.2)
As it is seen in both tables, we have divided the first set in two subgroups, the ”D17-”
samples and the ”D18-” ones. The reason is that they all share similarities. While all
the D17- samples have a flow of H2 that comes into the TMIn bubbler of 108.2 sccm,
the D18- samples, except for D1873, have 160 sccm. Moreover, the V/III ratio is higher
in the D17- samples.
Finally, it is also worth clarifying why two different flows of As appear, as well as
two different growth times and waiting times (QD times 1 and 2). The reason is that, as
explained in the previous section, the typical quantum dot growth procedure is repeated
twice, having two different quantum dots in the sample. The first ones are optically
active and are covered by a capping layer. However, the second one are not optically
active and are not covered, making them visible, as shown in figure 2.14. Its reason
is that we want to characterize the size of the different quantum dots. Therefore, as
we want to reproduce the optically active quantum dots, but having them visible, the
properties from the surface dots are the same of the active ones, although sometimes
there are some small differences, such as the waiting times of all D18- samples and also
the flow of Arsenic in D1775.
The results obtained for the photoluminescence are shown in the following table:
Sample #
Peak wavelength [nm]
Peak signal [mV]
D1726
1414.4
1.004
D1727
1406.9
5.703
D1772
1230.3
10.008
D1775
1425
2.0025
D1777
1421.8
2.433
D1873
1640.5
0.209
D1875
1617.6
1.223
D1877
1497.9
0.73
D1879
1573.7
2.2195
D1880
1573.7
2.501
D1882
1420.7
7.108
Table 3.3: Photoluminescence measurements for the first set of QDs
So, here we start to see differences between the two subgroups, especially in the
peak wavelength. While D17- samples have wavelength peaks around 1400 nanometers,
D18- samples have higher wavelengths, reaching values above 1600nm. Therefore, the
distinction between both groups is even clearer. A plot that relates the wavelength with
the effective thickness (fig. 3.1a) and the V/III ratio (fig.3.1b) shows this difference.
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Results
(a) InAs effective thickness dependence of the
QD wavelength
(b) V/III ratio dependence of the QD wave-
length
Figure 3.1: Wavelength variation of the first set of samples
In figure 3.1 the D17- samples are shown in red, while the D18- are shown in black.
Here, what has been discussed previously is seen: the D17- samples have lower effective
thickness and higher V/III ratio than the D18- samples. Moreover, it show a dependence
of the wavelength with the effective thickness and V/III ratio: the wavelength increases
with higher InAs effective thicknesses and also by decreasing the V/III ratio. A low
V/III ratio means that the flux of the group III material, in this case Indium, is much
higher than the one from the group V material (Arsenic). We know, from section 2.3 that
the group V materials tend to evaporate in the growing chamber and then the overall
growth rate is determined by the flow of TMIn. In this case, most of the D18- samples
have a flow of 160sccm, while the D17- samples have a flow of 108.2sccm, making the
growth rate higher for the first ones. This means that if the growth time is the same
for all samples, more material will be deposited in the D18- samples. Considering that
the wetting layer has always a height of around 2 monolayers, more material deposited
means that there’s more material in the Quantum Dots, making them bigger, and then
increasing the wavelength, easily seen in equation 2.12, also agreeing with the relation
seen in 3.1a, where the wavelength increases with the effective thickness.
This results helped us to understand some of the basics of the quantum dot growth, as
the increasing wavelength with higher effective thickness or lower V/III ratio. Now, the
temperature effects on the wavelength, surface density, height and area of the quantum
dots want to be analyzed. As we have seen previously that there is a big difference in the
quantum dot properties between an hydrogen flow for the TMIn of 108.2 sccm and 160
sccm, the temperature dependence is analyzed in both cases. Moreover, we have also
increased the flow and made a couple of samples with 320sccm, obtaining an even higher
growth rate. Thus, a new set of samples is grown, during this project. In this new set
of samples all the properties are usually kept constant, varying slightly the temperature.
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Growth parameters, PL and AFM measurements of the samples
37
The growth parameters for each sample of the new set is shown in figure 3.2.
# Wafer
Flow In (H2)
Flow As
Flow As (2)
V/III ratio
Growth rate
Eff. Thickness
QD time 1
Waiting time 1
QD time 2
Waiting time 2
 [sccm]
 [sccm]
 [sccm]
[ML/s]
[ML]
out
in
cal
 [s]
 [s]
 [s]
 [s]
D2059
108,2
1,23631
2,89942
0,32818
1,14863
426
444
3,5
3,3
D2060
108,2
1,23631
1,23631
2,89942
0,32818
1,14863
426,5
443
3,5
3,3
3,5
3,3
D2064
108,2
1,23631
2,89942
0,32818
1,14863
425
443
3,5
3,3
D2075
108,2
1,23631
1,23631
2,89942
0,32818
1,14863
424
444
3,5
3,3
3,5
3,3
D2077
108,2
1,23631
1,23631
2,89942
0,32818
1,14863
420
440
3,5
3,3
3,5
3,3
D2081
108,2
1,23631
1,23631
2,89942
0,32818
1,14863
417
483
497
3,5
3,3
3,5
3,3
D2087
108,2
1,23631
1,23631
2,89942
0,32818
1,14863
412
478
492
3,5
3,3
3,5
3,3
D2088
108,2
1,23631
1,23631
2,89942
0,32818
1,14863
409
472
489
3,5
3,3
3,5
3,3
D2089
108,2
1,23631
1,23631
2,89942
0,32818
1,11581
412
478
492
3,4
3,3
3,4
3,3
D2090
108,2
1,23631
1,23631
2,89942
0,32818
1,08299
415
480
495
3,3
3,3
3,3
3,3
D2092
108,2
1,23631
1,23631
2,89942
0,32818
1,14863
418
470
498
3,5
3,3
3,5
3,3
D2093
108,2
1,23631
1,23631
2,89942
0,32818
1,14863
417
475
497
3,5
3,3
3,5
3,3
D2096
160
1,23631
1,23631
1,96074
0,48529
1,65000
417
475
497
3,4
3,5
3,4
4
D2097
160
1,23631
1,23631
1,96074
0,48529
1,65000
412
469
492
3,4
3,5
3,4
4
D2099
160
1,23631
1,23631
1,96074
0,48529
1,65000
409
463
489
3,4
3,5
3,4
4
D2102
320
1,23631
1,23631
0,98037
0,97059
2,32941
399
453
479
2,4
3,5
2,4
4
D2105
320
1,23631
1,23631
0,98037
0,97059
3,59118
401
455
481
3,7
3,5
3,7
4
D2110
320
1,23631
1,23631
0,98037
0,97059
3,59118
406
460
486
3,7
3,5
3,7
4
D2111
320
1,23631
1,23631
0,98037
0,97059
2,32941
408
462
488
2,4
3,5
2,4
4
D2122
160
1,23631
1,23631
1,96074
0,48529
2,32941
406
460
486
4,8
3,5
4,8
4
T[ºC]
Figure 3.2: Growth parameters of the second set of samples
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Results
It is worth noting that samples D2059 and D2064 have a blank space in the ”Flow
As (2)”, ”QD time 2” and ”Waiting time 2” columns, because in both samples the recipe
didn’t include the growth of the surface dots. Thus, no AFM measurements couldn’t
be made. Moreover, from the sample D2081 we introduce a new parameter, which is
the calibrated temperature. The reason is that the MOVPE chamber temperature is
controlled by an emissivity corrected pyrometer, which determines the real temperature
in the chamber. However, temperatures lower than 505oC can’t be controlled with accu-
racy, making necessary the presence of two thermocouples. This thermocouple consist
on two electrical conductors of different metals, and therefore with different properties
, that are joined at one end, called hot junction. The other end is called the cold junc-
tion and is formed at the last point of the thermocouple material. Following Seebeck’s
effect, that states that if two different metals were joined at both ends, having different
temperature, a current is created. Thus, the thermocouple measures a small voltage
that is created when the hot junction and the cold junction have different temperatures.
Thanks to this measured voltage, the temperature of the cold junction is obtained.
The susceptor in which the samples are held is heated by means of two different
filaments.
An outer filament, with a temperature determined by Tout and an inner
one, determined by Tin. The difference between the outer temperature and the inner
one generates a temperature gradient in the wafer, that affects the properties of the
quantum dots. Thus, one of the main objectives is to slightly modify both temperatures
to have a uniform temperature along the whole wafer.
The main drawback of the thermocouple is that, instead of touching the filament,
the separation between the filament and the thermocouple is about 3 millimeters. This
small separation is the reason why the thermocouples don’t show the real temperature,
as they show a lower one. In order to obtain a relation between the real temperature
and the one obtained in the thermocouple, a calibration is made. The temperature is
set above 500oC, so that we can determine the real temperature with the emissivity
corrected pyrometer, and compare it with the temperatures shown in the thermocouple.
This procedure has to be made often, as any system shutdown, or any inconvenience
may result in different temperatures. This is what happened in the second growth set.
After the growth of the D2077 sample, a system shutdown occurred. It is easily seen
in the inner temperature, where it was around 445oC in the first five samples and then
much higher. A good calibration for most of the samples is made by:
Tcal = Tout + 80oC
(3.3)
In this case, in order to analyze the effects of the temperature gradient produced by
the two flaments, three different parts of the wafer are characterized: the top part of
the wafer, the middle one and the major flat. With the PL-mapper three properties are
measured: the wavelength peak, the PL intensity and the Full Width-Half Maximum
(FWHM). All these properties are easily obtained from the spectrum made by the PL-
==PAGE:49==
3.1 Growth parameters, PL and AFM measurements of the samples
39
mapper. An example of PL-spectrum obtained from a sample is shown in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: PL spectrum obtained from a sample, including the wavelength peak and
the FWHM.
Figure 3.4: AFM image with the grains in green, and a summary of the properties on
the left side of the picture, including the number of grains, or the mean area. Obtained
with the Gwyddion software.
With the AFM, on the other hand, a 3D square image of 1µm2 is obtained. From
this image, the surface density, the mean area, the mean height, the mean volume and
the standard deviation of height, area and volume can be obtained, using the Gwyddion
software. However, the measurements of the area, and thus, of the volume has a small
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Results
uncertainty, as the QD area is determined by the number of pixels in a dot that are
higher than a certain threshold height. Therefore, depending on the chosen threshold,
the area can slightly vary. An example, for the D2097 sample is shown in figure 3.4.
All the properties measured for the new set of samples are shown in the table in the
appendix B.
After having found a dependence of the wavelength on the effective thickness, it is
important to find more relations with it, as it implicitly includes other parameters, such
as the Indium flow, the growth rate or the growth time. In this case, relations between
the PL intensity, the FWHM of the signal and the InAs effective thickness are found,
all of them shown below:
(a) InAs effective thickness dependence of the
wavelength FWHM
(b) InAs effective thickness dependence of the
PL intensity
Figure 3.5: InAs effective thickness dependence of various properties measured in the
second set of QDs
A clear relation is seen in all three figures. First, we see that the FWHM decreases
when increasing the InAs effective thickness. Although several samples have the same
effective thickness, due to the same growth rate and time, the fwhm varies in all of
them. The reason is that each sample is grown under different temperature conditions,
varying slightly the properties of the quantum dots. But, despite this variations between
samples with the same effective thickness, a clear decreasing tendency is seen, also shown
by doing a linear fitting of the data. A smaller FWHM means that the PL spectrum is
narrower, and this can be produced by quantum dots of similar size. As the energy, and
thus the wavelength, of a quantum dot depends extremely on the size of the quantum
dots, having a smaller FWHM means that the distribution function of the lateral size
and the height will also have a narrower peak. This FWHM also decreases when the
peak signal increases, which also agrees with the explanation given above. If the peak
is narrower, more quantum dots of similar size, and therefore with the same, or similar
wavelength, are obtained, having a higher PL intensity.
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Temperature dependence of the QD properties
41
Figure 3.6: Relation between the PL intensity and the wavelength FWHM
3.2
Temperature dependence of the QD
properties
Thanks to all the samples, general relations between growth parameters and quantum
dot properties are obtained, as explained previously. However, one of the most important
parameters is the temperature of the chamber, at which the QDs are grown.
The
reason is the high sensitivity of the different properties of the quantum dots, such as
the wavelength, surface density or height with temperature variations. To do so, five
different samples that have the same properties, but different temperatures are used.
These samples are: D1875, D1879, D2096, D2097 and D2099. In all these samples, the
flow of H2 that goes into the TMIn bubbler is 160sccm, and the properties, which can
also be seen in tables 3.1 and 3.2, as well as the table shown in figure 3.2
Flow In (H2)
Flow As
V/III ratio
Growth rate
InAs eff. thickness
[sccm]
[sccm]
[ML/s]
[ML]
160
1.23631
1.96073
0.4852
1.65
Growth time 1
Waiting time 1
Growth time 2
Waiting time 2
[s]
[s]
[s]
[s]
3.4
3.5
3.4
3.5
Table 3.4: Properties of the samples used for analyzing the temperature dependence
The only difference in the growing process remains on the temperature of both con-
ductors of the thermocouple, that will affect the equivalent temperature. Those are:
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Results
Sample
Outer T [oC]
Inner T [oC]
calibrated T[oC]
D1875
423
470
D1879
420
465
D2096
417
475
497
D2097
412
469
492
D2099
409
463
489
Table 3.5: Growth temperatures of each sample
The reason of the two blank spaces in the calibrated temperature for both the D1875
and the D1879 samples is that, as the samples were grown prior to the project, the
calibration is not known. The calibration of the last three samples is shown in 3.3, which
is just Tout + 80. Therefore, as a first approximation, we consider that this calibration is
valid for all five samples. This calibrated temperatures corresponds to the middle part
of the wafer, so in this section the results obtained in the top part or the major flat of
the samples are not used, only the results from the middle point.
The PL measurements in this middle point are shown in the table below:
Sample
Wavelength peak [nm]
PL intensity [mV]
FWHM [nm]
D1875
1617.6
1.223
170.2
D1879
1573.7
2.2195
172.2
D2096
1647
0.4114
163
D2097
1618.6
0.437
150.6
D2099
1580.8
0.47
165.4
Table 3.6: PL measurements of each sample
Plotting the wavelength peak as a function of the temperature, after having made
this first approximation for the calibrated temperature, we obtain the results shown
in figure 3.7, where it is seen that this first approximation is not valid for the D1875
and D1879 samples. The three samples from the new set (in red) show more or less a
linear relation between them and, focusing on the two samples from the old set, they
show more or less the same relation, but with an offset. Sample D1875 and D2097 have
almost identical wavelengths, so have used them to calibrate the temperature for the
two old samples.Therefore, the new calibration for the old samples is:
Tcal,old = Tout + 69[oC]
(3.4)
obtaining Tcal = 492oC for D1875 and Tcal = 489oC for D1879. Once all the temper-
atures are calibrated, the new plot that relates the temperature and the wavelength is
shown in figure 3.8.
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Temperature dependence of the QD properties
43
Figure 3.7: Temperature dependence of the QD wavelength after the first approximation
of the calibration for the D18- samples
Figure 3.8: Temperature dependence of the QD wavelength after temperature calibration
After the new calibration for the two samples from the old set, the temperature
dependence of the wavelength follows a reasonable relation. In this case, it has been
linearly approximated, obtaining:
λ[nm] = 8.8561 · T[oC] −2747.9
(3.5)
This approximation makes clearer the strong temperature dependence of the wave-
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Results
length, as a small variation of 1 degree can shift the wavelength almost ten nanometers.
Moreover, there is also a relation between the growth temperature and the photolu-
minescence intensity, as shown in figure 3.9. In this graph, the difference between the
samples from the old set (in blue) and the ones from the new set (in red) are visible. In
this chapter, we will focus on the three samples from the new set, as these ones are the
three grown during this project, and also we are sure that the calibrated temperature is
correct. Using these three samples, one can obtain again a linear relation between the
intensity and the calibrated temperature. This relation is:
V [mV ] = −0.0071 · T[oC] + 3.9374
(3.6)
Figure 3.9: Temperature dependence of the PL intensity
In the previous chapter, the AFM has been explained, including its use.
It is a
useful tool to obtain 3D images of a sample with a nanoscale. Thanks to the 3D image,
the surface density, height, area and volume of the quantum dots are obtained. These
properties are shown in the following table:
Sample
Surface density
Mean QD height
Mean QD area
Mean volume
[cm−2]
[nm]
[nm2]
[nm3]
D1875
2.8 · 1010
5.421
940.8
1700.007
D1879
3.17 · 1010
4.941
561.35
924.468
D2096
4.28 · 1010
5.415
612
1104.66
D2097
4.56 · 1010
5.249
568.9
995.385
D2099
4.57 · 1010
5.029
525
880.075
Table 3.7: AFM measurements of each sample
==PAGE:55==
3.2 Temperature dependence of the QD properties
45
With the data obtained by the AFM, one can also obtain a relation between the
temperature and the different properties, as shown in figures 3.10 and 3.11. In figure
3.10, the relation between the growth temperature and the QD height (fig. 3.10a), as
well as the one between the growth temperature and the mean area (fig. 3.10b) are
shown.
(a) Temperature dependence of the QD mean
height
(b) Temperature dependence of the QD mean
area
Figure 3.10: Temperature dependence of the QD size
As seen in figure 3.10, both the height of the quantum dots and their area increase by
increasing the temperature. Therefore, a linear approximation has been made in both
cases, applying it only for the three samples of the new set (in red). The results are the
following:
h[nm] = 0.0467 · T[oC] −17.7836
(3.7)
A[nm2] = 10.6449 · T[oC] −4675.8
(3.8)
This increase can be explained by means of the diffusion coefficient. As seen in equa-
tion 2.26, the Diffusion coefficient increases with D ∝exp (−1/T). With the diffusion
coefficient, its length can be derived, by means of: Ldif =
√
Dt. Therefore, the diffusion
length will also increase with increasing temperature, meaning that adatoms can travel
longer distances. These adatoms also have more energy. Thanks to the combination of
the higher energy and longer diffusion length, the adatoms can move to higher positions
in the quantum dots, making them higher and with bigger area. On the other hand,
with lower temperatures, the energy of the adatoms will be lower, as well as its length,
so these adatoms will only have the energy enough to move to the surface and form new
==PAGE:56==
46
3 Results
quantum dots, but the diffusion length and the energy are not large enough to make big
quantum dots. Thus, for lower temperatures, the surface density will increase, but most
of the quantum dots will have smaller size and height. This dependency between the
temperature and the surface density agrees with the data obtained in the laboratory, as
shown in figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: Temperature dependence of the surface density
Now that an explanation of the surface density behaviour when the temperature
varies is given, we can explain why the PL intensity also decreases with temperature
(fig. 3.9. The reason is very simple, as the signal obtained strongly depends on the
surface density. Considering that in 1mm2 there are around 5 · 108 quantum dots, the
PL intensity obtained in one point will have the contributions from all the quantum
dots around, so by increasing the surface density, the photoluminescence intensity will
increase, and also if the quantum dots grown are not uniform, the FWHM obtained in
the PL-mapper will also increase.
Finally, in equation 2.12 we have seen that the wavelength strongly depends on
the dimensions of the quantum dot, so, we can estimate the relation between them by
means of the data measured in the different samples. At first sight, the dependence will
be stronger on the height, as the height of the quantum dot is much lower than the area.
These relations are shown in figures 3.12a for the height and 3.12b for the area.
Again, they follow linear relations, as shown in the dashed lines in both plots of
figure 3.12. These relations are given by:
λ[nm] = 171.519 · h[nm] + 718.2494
(3.9)
==PAGE:57==
3.2 Temperature dependence of the QD properties
47
(a) QD height dependence of the wavelength
(b) QD area dependence of the wavelength
Figure 3.12: Relations between the QD wavelength and their dimensions
λ[nm] = 0.7612 · A[nm2] + 1182.6
(3.10)
The linear fitting made in the height dependence is much more accurate than the
one made in the area dependence. This is verified by calculating the mean error between
the data obtained and the approximation in these three points. These mean errors are:
errh−λ = 0.0307nm,
errA−λ = 1.9536nm
(3.11)
This difference in the error shows that the height-wavelength relation is closer to
a linear proportionality than the area-wavelength relation. This can be thought as a
higher dependence on the height: If the height is the most dependent parameter to
determine the wavelength, the relation between them will have less error, as the other
parameters couldn’t have bigger influence on the measure. However, these influences in
other parameters can be the case in the bigger area-wavelength relation error. It has
more error due to a weaker dependence on the area, and the strong dependence on the
height.
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4
The Growth Model
In section 2.2.2 a model that simulates the lateral size of quantum dots has been analyzed
and determined. This model, however, has only been implemented in Si/Ge quantum
dots [Dub13] [Dub06]. In this section, a growth model for the lateral size of InAs/InP
quantum dots has been developed, with the data obtained during the project.
This section includes two parts: the first one contains the distribution functions for
the height, area and major and minor axis lengths, based on the data obtained with AFM
of three of the samples used in this project. The second one includes the approximation
of the growth model, made by Dubrovskii, and its comparison with the experimental
data.
4.1
Experimental distribution functions
Three samples, D2096, D2097 and D2099, were used previously to obtain the different
relations between the properties of these samples and their growing conditions. These
samples share all the growing conditions, growth rate, V/III ratio or InAs effective
thickness amongst others, but the temperature is slightly modified.
After the 3D image is obtained with AFM, it can be analyzed using specialized
software. In this project, the program used is called Gwyddion, as it is a powerful tool
for grain analysis. An example was shown in figure 3.4. In this case, a certain threshold
height can be set, and all the pixels that are higher are marked in green. The grain area
is computed by counting the number of ”green pixels” that have at least one in any of its
boundaries. Moreover, a minimum pixel area can be set, to eliminate any possible noise
produced by single pixels. In order to obtain a better look to the size of the quantum
dots, all the grains in the boundaries of the image are removed.
Different properties can be obtained for all the different grains. In our case, the most
relevant properties are the maximum height, the surface area, and, as the dots have an
elliptical shape, the length of the major and minor axis. All this information is exported
into a text file that is used in MATLAB to analyze the distribution. The easiest way
to obtain it is by means of a histogram, where the height, area or size is divided into
several intervals and then it counts the number of dots that fall into each region. An
example is shown in figure 4.1.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 The Growth Model
Figure 4.1: Histogram of the height of the D2097 sample
However, it is difficult to overlap three histograms in the same figure, so, in order to
compare the distribution between the three samples, a regular plot is made: For each
bin of the histogram, the middle point, that means (xmax + xmin)/2, is taken, obtaining
a regular x-y plot. The figure 4.2 explains graphically what has been done.
Figure 4.2: Histogram of the height of the D2097 sample showing how the regular plot
is obtained.
In order to obtain the most accurate comparison between the different samples, the
number of bins in every sample will be the same, and their edges will be placed at the
same x-positions. Therefore, the distribution of the three samples will be given by the
values at the same positions of the x-axis.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Experimental distribution functions
51
This procedure is done for the height, area and length of the major and minor axis
of the three samples. Their distributions are shown in figures 4.3 and 4.4.
(a) Height distribution of different samples ob-
tained experimentally
(b) Area distribution of different samples ob-
tained experimentally
Figure 4.3: Distribution functions obtained experimentally (i)
(a) Major axis length distribution of different
samples obtained experimentally
(b) Minor axis length distribution of different
samples obtained experimentally
Figure 4.4: Distribution functions obtained experimentally (ii)
The main feature of all four distributions is that they all look irregular. Although
some conclusions can be directly extracted from these graphs, the data needs to be fitted
into a known equation. One of the properties that can be deduced is that the distribution
function is similar to a Gaussian distribution. However, most of the samples have a
steeper increase in the beginning of the distributions, while the decrease is made slowlier.
This ”tail” that appears at the end of the distributions, making them assymetric, is
related to the skewness. This skewness is a measure of the assymetry, and it can be
==PAGE:62==
52
4 The Growth Model
either positive, if the right tail is longer, or negative, when the left tail is longer. In
this case, the distributions appear to have a positive skew. In fact, this positive skew
agrees with the simulations made in section 2.2.2 for the growth of Ge/Si quantum dots,
following Dubrovskii’s method. This distribution, at different times was shown in figure
2.9, and it always shows a positive skew.
The data needs to be fitted, so a skew Gaussian distribution function was applied.
This fitting function is defined as:
y = a · exp

−
(x −b
c
)2
0.5
[
1 + erf
(
α · x −b
c
)]
(4.1)
where erf is the error function, given by:
erf(x) =
2
√π
∫x
0 e−t2dt
(4.2)
Therefore, there are four different fitting coefficients: a, which is related to the
peak amplitude, b, being a location parameter, c, related to the variance and α, that
determines the skewness. The data fitted functions are shown in figures 4.5 and 4.6.
(a) Normalized height distribution of different
samples after data fitting
(b) Normalized area distribution of different
samples after data fitting
Figure 4.5: Normalized distribution functions obtained experimentally after data fitting
(i)
After the data fitting, the distribution function for all the properties are quite clear.
Some comments can be extracted from both figures. The first one is that the distribution
has been normalized. This means that we have divided the counts in each region by the
total number of quantum dots. Secondly, the positive skew is mainly observed in most of
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Experimental distribution functions
53
(a) Normalized major axis length distribution
after data fitting
(b) Normalized minor axis length distribution
after data fitting
Figure 4.6: Normalized distribution functions obtained experimentally after data fitting
(ii)
the distributions. However, height distributions seem to have negative skew. All these
properties are better seen showing the different coefficients, in tables 4.1 for the height,
4.2 for the area, 4.3 for the major axis length and 4.4 for the minor axis length.
Height coefficients
Sample
a
b
c
α
D2096
0.2797
5.8111
1.1306
-1.7819
D2097
0.3613
4.9584
0.9134
0.5774
D2099
0.3923
4.91
0.8324
-0.0374
Table 4.1: Fitting coefficients for the height distribution
Surface area coefficients
Sample
a
b
c
α
D2096
0.2640
467.5050
262.4679
2.3812
D2097
0.2637
429.4366
264.6810
3.1722
D2099
0.2779
430.4255
247.7059
1.1984
Table 4.2: Fitting coefficients for the surface area distribution
Comparing the coefficients obtained with the figures of the fitting functions, it is
seen that the coefficient b is not the mean value of the distribution. It is easily seen for
the major axis length distribution (fig. 4.6a of samples D2096 and D2097. In the first
one we have b = 28.67 and in the second one b = 27.019 and looking at the graph it is
easy to realize that it doesn’t correspond to the mean value. Moreover, the difference
between the coefficient b and the mean value, which can be easily calculated having the
==PAGE:64==
54
4 The Growth Model
Major axis length coefficients
Sample
a
b
c
α
D2096
0.2851
28.6796
8.7387
2.0967
D2097
0.2947
27.0193
8.3060
3.0696
D2099
0.3442
32.3673
7.1132
-0.6606
Table 4.3: Fitting coefficients for the major axis length distribution
Minor axis length coefficients
Sample
a
b
c
α
D2096
0.2999
21.1939
4.3369
1.733
D2097
0.3097
21.2749
4.3176
1.1974
D2099
0.2949
24.2193
4.3635
-0.9184
Table 4.4: Fitting coefficients for the minor axis length distribution
information of all the different quantum dots, increases when the absolute value of the
skewness also increases. Therefore, a model that determines the distribution functions
at other temperatures is unable to be made, as the skewness can slightly vary with the
number of bins in the histogram, changing also the parameter b, related to the mean
value. Figure 4.7 shows this relation.
Figure 4.7: Relative error between the coefficient b and the mean value of the distribution
as a function of the absolute value of the skewness, α
It is worth noting that the coefficient α, related to the skewness is usually negative
in sample D2099, or at least always lower than the coefficients obtained for the other
two samples. The reason is that the number of quantum dots was higher in this sample,
agreeing with the lower temperature. Thus, some quantum dots were extremely close
to each other. In order to make the grain analysis, when determining a certain height
==PAGE:65==
4.2 The growth Model and Comparison
55
threshold, dots that were close to each other were considered as only one, instead of two,
or even three. The reason is that the boundary between both dots was higher than the
threshold height set. A way to avoid this problem was to set the height threshold higher,
solving it partly, but making the size of the quantum dots smaller. This is why, while
samples D2096 and D2097 have the right tail bigger (positive skewness), sample D2099
have the left tail bigger (negative skewness).
Lastly, a big difference between the length of the major axis and the minor axis is
observed, with more than five nanometers of difference in all three samples. As explained
before, quantum dots have an elliptical surface. The reason is that the surface energy
is different in the different crystallographic orientations, as well as the diffusion length
and coefficient, increasing the eccentricity of the ellipse of the area.
4.2
The growth Model and Comparison
The model explained in section 2.2.2 is developed for the InAs/InP quantum dots grown
in Danchip in this section. The properties were obtained from different books and papers.
The ML height is d0 = 0303nm [Dub13] and the average distance between atoms is
l0 = 0.2622nm, obtained from [Böe13, chapter 1]. The lattice mismatch between the
substrate and the film is calculated by:
ε0 = afilm −asubstrate
asubstrate
(4.3)
being a the lattice constant of the material. In this case, afilm = aInAs = 6.0583Å and
as = aInP = 5.8687Å, making a lattice mismatch of 0.0323. The coefficient of relaxation
for the force of attraction of atoms to the substrate k0 = 0.8 as in Dubrovskii’s model
[Dub13] [Dub06]. Then, the surface energy of the base of the pyramid depends on the
crystallographic orientation. In our case: γ(0) = 700erg/cm2 [Pa12][Bol+13]. Following
Dubrovskii’s model, we consider γ(ϕ) ≈γ(0). Thanks to some images taken with the
atomic resolution TEM, the height of the wetting layer thickness is approximately 2ML.
Therefore, in order to obtain an equilibrium thickness around this value, the density of
wetting energy is considered to be Psi0 = 105erg/cm2. Finally, the value of the elastic
modulus is: λ =
E
1−υ = 5.14·1011
1−0.35 . The contact angle has been calculated based on the
data obtained in Danchip, using ϕ = tan
h
L/2, being L the length of the quantum dot.
Three different measures have been obtained. The first value of the angle is obtained
by considering a circular quantum dot. By means of the mean area, which is already
known, the equivalent diameter of the surface is: L = 2
√
A
pi. The other two values of
the contact angle are calculated considering the length of the major axis and the one
of the minor axis. Then, the relaxation coefficient for the elastic energy Z(ϕ) depends
on the angle, as shown in figure 2.5. Considering a contact angle of ϕ = 22o, which is
the angle obtained by considering a quantum dot with circular surface, the relaxation
coefficient Z(22) becomes 0.6. At a temperature of T = 497oC, using eq. 2.22, we
==PAGE:66==
56
4 The Growth Model
obtain: A = 2.3648 and B = 0.1520. Using eq. 2.20 we obtain an equilibrium thickness
of heq = 1.8808ML, being closer to the 2ML estimated with the TEM, and a quasi
equilibrium temperature of Te = 65260K, obtained by eq. 2.29.
Here it is worth noting that the equilibrium thickness is higher than the Effective
thickness growth in all three samples.
Therefore, following the model, no quantum
dots wouldn’t be able to grow, but in the 3D images obtained by the AFM quantum
dots are observed. The reason of their appearance can be seen in the recipe shown in
the appendix A. Before the deposition of InAs, a constant flux of Arsenic is brought
into the chamber during 27 seconds, as seen in steps 19 and 36 of the recipe. During
these 27 seconds, a small layer of InAs is formed, by replacing the phosphorus atoms
by arsenic atoms, as the InAs bonds are stronger than the InP bonds. The thickness of
the InAs layer formed during this step can be calculated with the mean volume of the
quantum dots, the surface density and the thickness of the wetting layer. The first two
properties are obtained using the data from the different samples, while the last one can
be estimated by means of a picture made by the atomic resolution TEM (transmission
electron microscopy). The volume of a pyramid is obtained by V = b · h/3, so for the
D2096 sample, the mean volume is Vdot = 1104nm3, seen in table 3.7. In the same
table, the surface density of the D2096 is shown, which is 4.28 · 1010cm−2 = 428µm−2.
Therefore, in 1µ2 of the sample, the deposited volume corresponding to the quantum
dots becomes Vdot,1µm = 472512nm3.
However, we need to convert the volume into
equivalent thickness, expressed in monolayers (ML). In order to do that, we consider the
volume of a layer with area A = 1µm2, the same used before. So, in a layer of A = 1µm2,
the effective thickness, becomes:
heff,dots = 472512nm3
1µm2
1µm2
106nm2 = 0.4725nm
1ML
0.303nm = 1.5594ML
(4.4)
where the monolayer thickness is derived before in this section.
The effective thickness grown epitaxially in the 3.4 seconds where both Indium and
Arsenic precursors entered into the chamber is 1.65ML, shown in table 3.4. As a rough
estimation, we can consider that 1.5594ML of these 1.65 were used to grow the quantum
dots, while the difference was used to grow part of the wetting layer. This difference is
1.65 −1.5594 = 0.0906ML.
Considering a wetting layer of 1.88ML, obtained for heq the thickness of the InAs
layer grown by the replacement of InP bonds by InAs bonds is: heff,InP−>InAs = 1.8808−
0.0906 = 1.7902ML. Therefore, the effective thickness grown in total is 1.7902 + 1.65 =
3.4402ML, higher than the equilibrium thickness of the quantum dots, making their
nucleation and growth possible.
One of the main problems is that Dubrovskii’s model considers a unique, continuous
growth rate of InAs and in this case we have two different growth rates. The one pro-
duced by replacement of the InP bonds and the one by the epitaxial growth. Moreover,
==PAGE:67==
4.2 The growth Model and Comparison
57
not all the 27 seconds were used to replace the InP bonds. In this project, it is assumed
that only one third of the time were used to break InP bonds and substitute them by
InAs bonds, starting to grow the InAs wetting layer. Therefore, using t1 = 9s the growth
rate will be:
V1 = 1.7902ML
9s
= 0.1989ML/s
(4.5)
In this case, it is defined as V1, as chronologically it is the first growth that takes
place. The growth rate shown in table 3.4 will be defined as V2. So, the time spent to
grow the equilibrium thickness can be calculated, considering that the layer thickness
grown by atom substitution is lower than the equilibrium thickness, as:
teq = t1 + (heq −t1V1)/V2
(4.6)
The explanation is easy. In the 9 seconds of the ”substitution grow” the layer didn’t
reach the equilibrium thickness, so the height difference, which is (heq −t1V1) will be
grown at a growth rate V2. In the case we are simulating, this time, teq = 9.1867s.
In order to calculate the characteristic time for the wetting layer formation, τ, using
eq. 2.25, we need the values of the cutoff parameter for the field of elastic stresses, υ,
which is assumed to be υ = 10, following Dubrovskii’s model [Dub13] [Dub06] and the
coefficient of stress-driven diffusion, which is dependent on the temperature, following
the Arrhenius dependence shown in equation 2.26. Using D0 = 1.97912 · 10−8cm2/s and
TD = ED/kB = 6000K, obtaining a relation:
D(T) = 1.97912 · 10−8 exp
(
−6000K
T[K]
)
,
[cm2/s]
(4.7)
The next step is to determine the time at which the wetting layer thickness is higher,
t∗which can be calculated as:
t∗= (hc −heq)/V2
(4.8)
where hc is the critical thickness, obtained by means of hc = heq(1+Φ∗) and Φ∗obtained
solving equation 2.32. The reason why this time t∗is not just determined by hc/V2 is that
in Dubrovskii’s model the time t=0 corresponds to the time at which the equilibrium
thickness is reached. In this model we have got:
t∗= 5.6984s
==PAGE:68==
58
4 The Growth Model
From this value, the characteristic duration of the nucleation stage can be calculated,
using eq. 2.35, obtaining:
∆t = 0.0726s
Finally, using equations 2.44, 2.45, 2.47, 2.48, 2.50 and 2.46, following this order, the
distribution function for the lateral size is derived.
This size distribution is dependent on the time and we are only interested in the time
used in the recipe to grow the quantum dots. Thus, we have to take into account the
3.4 seconds related to growth time, the 4 seconds of ”waiting time” and the 9 seconds
of wetting layer growth due to atom substitution. However, as stated previously, in
Dubrovskii’s model the initial time t=0 corresponds to the time at which the equilibrium
thickness is grown. So we need to subtract the time teq. Therefore the time at which we
want to determine the distribution function is:
t = 3.4 + 4 + 9 −teq = 16.4 −9.1867 = 7.2132s
The final distribution function at the end of the waiting time, simulating the quantum
dots that are observed with AFM is shown in figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Distribution function for the average lateral size (considering a circular sur-
face) of InAs/InP quantum dots with Φ0 = 115erg/cm2, l0 = 0.2622nm, d0 = 0.303nm,
ε0 = 0.0323, λ = 7.907 · 1011dyn/cm2, ϕ = 22o, γ(0) ≈γ(ϕ) = 700erg/cm2 and
T = 497oC
However, in order to be able to compare the simulated result with the one obtained
experimentally, we need to normalize it. To do so, we divide the distribution function
==PAGE:69==
4.2 The growth Model and Comparison
59
by the surface density N, obtaining:
Figure 4.9: Normalized distribution function for the average lateral size (considering a
circular surface) of InAs/InP quantum dots with Φ0 = 115erg/cm2, l0 = 0.2622nm, d0 =
0.303nm, ε0 = 0.0323, λ = 7.907 · 1011dyn/cm2, ϕ = 22o, γ(0) ≈γ(ϕ) = 700erg/cm2
and T = 497oC
Using the same properties with three different temperatures: T = 497oC, T = 492oC
and T = 489oC, corresponding to the temperatures of the samples D2096, D2097 and
D2099 respectively, we obtain the distribution functions shown in figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Normalized distribution function for the average lateral size (considering a
circular surface) of InAs/InP quantum dots with Φ0 = 115erg/cm2, l0 = 0.2622nm, d0 =
0.303nm, ε0 = 0.0323, λ = 7.907 · 1011dyn/cm2, ϕ = 22o, γ(0) ≈γ(ϕ) = 700erg/cm2 for
different temperatures T = 497oC, T = 492oC and T = 489oC
==PAGE:70==
60
4 The Growth Model
In order to compare it, the distribution function obtained experimentally for the
mean area is used. In the simulations, we have considered circular-surface quantum
dots, so taking the mean area distribution, the length is derived by Lavg = 2
√(
Amean
π
)
.
Therefore, the experimental distribution becomes:
Figure 4.11: Normalized distribution function for the average lateral size, considering
quantum dots with circular base with a diameter obtained by the mean area, and a
contact angle of 22oC
Comparing the peak position of both the experimental distribution function and the
simulation, small differences are observed, shown in table 4.5
Sample
Experimental peak [nm]
Simulation peak [nm]
Relative error [%]
D2096
26.78
26.15
2.35
D2097
25.62
25.7
0.31
D2099
25.81
25.4
1.58
Table 4.5: Comparison between the peak of the distribution function of the average
lateral size obtained in the simulation and experimentally, by considering a circular base
So, the difference between the peak obtained experimentally and in the simulations
is small, less than 0.5nm. The simulation results agree with the theory explained in
the previous chapters, which stated that the mean base area increases by increasing the
temperature, and therefore the average diameter. Moreover, in the previous chapter we
have seen that the surface density increased when decreasing the temperature, and it
agrees with the results obtained in the simulations, as:
N2096,sim = 6.55 · 109cm−2,
N2097,sim = 7.09 · 109cm−2,
N2099,sim = 7.45 · 109cm−2
(4.9)
==PAGE:71==
4.2 The growth Model and Comparison
61
being sample D2099 the one with lowest temperature.
However, the experimental distribution does not have the desired shape, as the dis-
tribution function for the sample D2099 has a broader shape, and the peak is higher
than the one in D2097. This broadening was explained before, as it was a matter of the
chosen threshold height.
Based on the length of the major axis and the one of the minor axis, we can also
calculate the contact angle of each side, in order to simulate the distribution function.
The table with each contact angle is shown below, in table 4.6
Sample
height
Minor axis length
ϕminor
Major axis length
ϕmajor
[nm]
[nm]
[o]
[nm]
[o]
D2096
5.415
23.22
25
33.6
17.86
D2097
5.249
23.22
24.32
31.98
18.17
D2099
5.029
22.80
23.8
32.14
17.3
Table 4.6: Mean height and length of the major and minor axis, together with the
corresponding contact angles for the three different samples
This contact angle is calculated by making ϕ = tan(h/(L/2)). Starting with the
major axis length, we obtain a contact angle of 17.86 degrees for the D2096 sample,
18.17 for the D2097 sample and 17.3 for the D2099. Therefore, using figure 2.5 the
corresponding relaxation coefficients will be: ZD2096 = 0.62, ZD2097 = 0.618 and ZD2099 =
0.623.
Changing only these parameters for the ones used previously, we obtain the
following distribution function for the major axis.
Figure 4.12: Simulation of the major axis length distribution function, using the contact
angles obtained experimentally
==PAGE:72==
62
4 The Growth Model
Comparing this function with the distribution function obtained experimentally (fig.
4.6b) we see that the peaks are slightly shifted to the left, meaning that the lateral
sizes obtained in the simulation are lower than the ones experimentally. Moreover, the
curves are much broader than the ones obtained experimentally. A possible reason can
be that the surface energy depends on the crystallographic orientation, and we are using
the same one. Increasing the surface energy the distribution function becomes much
narrower, so this may be the reason. Another feature seen in the image is that the curve
corresponding to the lowest temperature (D2099) is the one narrower and with a higher
mean lateral size. The reason is that the mean lateral size is strongly dependent on the
angle, by a factor of cot(ϕ)1/3, shown in eq. 2.45. This function strongly increases by
decreasing the angle, especially at small angles. Therefore, sample D2099, with smallest
angle, has the highest lateral size peak, while sample D2097, with the highest contact
angle, has the lowest lateral size peak.
By assuming the same contact angle in all three samples, and considering it ϕ = 18o,
with Z(18) = 0.62, the size distribution function changes, as seen in figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13: Simulation of the major axis length distribution function, assuming that
the contact angle is 18 degrees for all samples.
Assuming a constant contact angle, the lateral size peak for each sample agrees with
the theory, as at higher temperatures the lateral size of the quantum dots is also higher.
However, the results are still far away from the ones obtained experimentally.
This
difference is clearly seen by comparing both peaks for each sample, written, in addition
to the relative error, in table 4.7.
In this case the difference between the simulations and the experimental data are
higher, between 7.5% and 11.3%, differing from the results obtained for the average
length, where the error was always lower than 3%.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 The growth Model and Comparison
63
Sample
Experimental peak [nm]
Simulation peak [nm]
Relative error [%]
D2096
31.92
28.3
11.3
D2097
29.73
27.5
7.5
D2099
30.26
27
10.77
Table 4.7: Comparison between the peak of the distribution function of the major axis
length obtained in the simulation and experimentally
Finally, the same procedure is repeated for the minor axis length, where a contact
angle of 25 degrees for the D2096 sample, 24.32 for the D2097 sample and 23.8 for the
D2099 was obtained. Using figure 2.5 the corresponding relaxation coefficients are found,
being: ZD2096 = 0.56, ZD2097 = 0.565 and ZD2099 = 0.568. The obtained distribution
function is:
Figure 4.14: Simulation of the minor axis length distribution function, using the contact
angles obtained experimentally
Comparing it with figure 4.6b, we see that the lengths derived in the simulation
were much bigger than the ones obtained experimentally. Moreover, all functions are
narrower, compared to the ones obtained for the major axis, or for the average size. The
reason, agreeing with what we analyzed for the major axis, is that the contact angle
is higher than in the other cases. As explained before, the energy and the diffusion
coefficient changes depending on the crystallographic orientation, making a difference
between the major and the minor axis length. Therefore, the diffusion coefficient is
modified, to approximate the simulation results to the experimental ones. In this case,
the coefficient D0 is set to: D0 = 11.7912 · 10−9cm2/s, obtaining
Dminor[cm2/s] = 11.7912 · 10−9 exp
(
−6000K
T[K]
)
(4.10)
==PAGE:74==
64
4 The Growth Model
Using the new diffusion coefficient, we obtain:
Figure 4.15: Simulation of the minor axis length distribution function, using the con-
tact angles obtained experimentally with the new diffusion coefficient, D0 = 11.7912 ·
10−9cm2/s
The size distribution function depends strongly on the mean lateral size, which
is given by eq.
2.45.
This lateral size is proportional to the surface density N by
Lg ∝(1/N)1/3, while N ∝(1/Q)3/2, making Lg ∝√Q. The parameter Q relates the
characteristic time of the wetting layer, teq with the time of island growth, τ by Q = teq/τ.
Finally, the time of island growth is inversely proportional to the diffusion coefficient
(τ ∝1/D). Joining all relations we obtain that Lg ∝
√
D. So, we see that decreasing
the diffusion coefficient, as we have done for the minor axis length, the mean lateral size
also decreases.
Finally, the same approximation used for the major axis is repeated, considering
all three samples with the same contact angle. In this case, the angle corresponds to
the one of the sample D2097, ϕ = 24.3o, with a relaxation coefficient of Z=0.565. The
results are shown in figure 4.16, where again, the results agree with the theory of the
project. However, even though the peak location has been corrected, the functions are
too narrow compared to the ones obtained experimentally, probably due to a different
surface energy.
Again, the comparison between the peak locations between the simulations and the
experimental data are shown in table 4.8.
Using the new diffusion coefficient, the difference between the experimental peak
and the simulation one is reduced, obtaining again values lower than 3%, being a good
approximation.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 The growth Model and Comparison
65
Figure 4.16: Simulation of the minor axis length distribution function, using the con-
tact angles obtained experimentally with the new diffusion coefficient, D0 = 11.7912 ·
10−9cm2/s and considering the same contact angle, ϕ = 24.3o
Sample
Experimental peak [nm]
Simulation peak [nm]
Relative error [%]
D2096
22.86
22.85
0.04
D2097
22.86
22.40
2.01
D2099
22.71
22.10
2.68
Table 4.8: Comparison between the peak of the distribution function of the minor axis
length obtained in the simulation and experimentally
Finally, based on the results obtained in the previous chapter and the model devel-
oped in this one, we want to find the growing conditions for 1550nm quantum dots.
Using the direct relation for the wavelength peak and the growth temperature, in
equation 3.5 with λ = 1550nm, we obtain: T=485.30oC.
Moreover, relations between the mean height or the mean area and the growth tem-
perature are also shown, in equations 3.7 and 3.8, with less error than the previous one.
The problem is that in this case the relation considers the mean values of the height
and area, instead of the peak values. In order to do so, we are going to compare the
mean area obtained considering the quantum dots with circular base, as it was the most
accurate model, with the mean area of the quantum dots obtained experimentally. The
result is shown in table 4.9
Based on the relation between the wavelength and the area (eq. 3.10), for a sample
with a peak wavelength in 1550nm, the mean area has to be:
==PAGE:76==
66
4 The Growth Model
Sample
Exp. mean area
Sim. mean length
Sim. mean area
Relative error
[nm2]
[nm]
[nm2]
[%]
D2096
612
27.20
581.06
5.05
D2097
568.9
26.71
560.32
1.50
D2099
525
26.41
547.80
4.34
Table 4.9: Comparison between the mean area of quantum dots obtained in the simula-
tion and experimentally, by considering a circular base
Amean = 1550 −1182.6
0.7612
= 482.65nm2
So, based on the results obtained for all three samples, the temperature has to be
lower, agreeing with the direct relation between the temperature and the wavelength.
This mean area corresponds to a mean average length of: Lmean,avg = 2
√
A
π = 24.79nm.
Therefore, using the model we want to find a temperature in which the mean average
length, based on its distribution function is 24.79nm. Several temperatures have been
tried, finding the right temperature:
T = 472.7oC,
Lmean,avg = 24.793nm
with a distribution function:
Figure 4.17: Simulation of the average lateral size corresponding to the temperature at
which 1550nm QDs are grown, T=472.7oC, assuming a fixed contact angle of 22oC.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion and further
work
In this project photoluminescence and morphology properties of different QD samples
have been obtained. The most important ones included the mean height, mean area,
surface density and wavelength. With the growing conditions obtained from the recipe
of each sample, relations between the growing conditions and some of these parameters
are extracted. Making data fitting, linear relations between two parameters are given,
allowing us to look for the exact values of the growing conditions needed to grow 1550nm
QDs.
Moreover, a growth model, based on kinetic laws is developed for InAs/InP quantum
dots. This model include the four key growing conditions that can vary the morphology
of the quantum dots.
This model has been applied to three different samples, with
the same growing conditions, apart from the growth temperature, obtaining the size
distribution function. As the surface energy depends on the crystallographic orientation,
three approximations have been made: considering the length of the major axis, the
length of the minor axis and an average length, considering quantum dots with a circular
base. The results of the simulations are compared with the experimental ones, showing
the accuracy of the model. We have seen that increasing the temperature the wavelength
increase, as both the mean area and mean height also increase. However, the the surface
density decreases with higher temperature. In this project, thus, these variations are
quantified, for specified growing conditions.
Finally, certain growing conditions are
specified, including the temperature obtained using the growth model, in order to obtain
1550nm quantum dots.
This model can be improved, as the value of some parameters used were assumed. As
an example, the value of the wetting energy is assumed to be 115erg/cm2, to match the
equilibrium thickness of the simulation with the wetting layer thickness seen using TEM.
Moreover, further work related to this model can be done, to calculate for how long the
wetting layer is grown by substitution of the Phosphorus atoms of the substrate into
Arsenic atoms under a constant arsenic flux. In this project, we have assumed that this
time corresponds to only one third of the time of this step, but an accurate analysis can
also be made to obtain the exact period of time, increasing the accuracy of the model.
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A
QD growth Recipe
In the following pages a recipe for the growth of the D2096 sample is shown, including
the time, temperature, fluxes, etc.
in every step.
From these recipes, the growing
parameters for the QD growth are obtained.
==PAGE:80==
\Runs\D2096\QDtest_marc05_april2018_0425181251.rcp
Sources: TBP, TMIn, (As1, PH3, )
 
Layer
Group
In s
In piezo
As1 eq
As2s
Ps
TBP_s
Temp out Temp in
Temp
Time
Type
In rate
GRate
Thickness
sccm
sccm
sccm
sccm
sccm
C
C
mode
s
nm/s
nm/s
nm
1
100
0,265
1,52127
75
200
50
30
30
T/C
30
0
0
0
2
100
0,265
1,52127
75
200
50
R 350
R 400
T/C
300
0
0
0
3
100
0,265
1,52127
75
200
50
R 620
R 700
T/C
200
P
0
0
0
4
100
0,265
1,52127
75
200
50
620
700
T/C(m)
5
P
0
0
0
5
100
0,265
1,52127
75
200
50
650
650
RT(m)
5
P
0
0
0
6
100
0,265
1,52127
75
200
50
650
650
RT
900
P
0
0
0
7
R 355
0,265
1,52127
75
200
50
R 610
R 610
RT
90
P
R 0,000
0
0
8
355
0,265
1,52127
75
200
50
610
610
RT
60
P
0
0
0
9
355
0,252
1,52127
75
200
50
610
610
RT
200
InP
0
0
0
10
355
0,252
1,52127
175
200
50
610
610
RT
300
InP
0
0
0
11
355
0,252
1,23631
R 40
200
50
610
610
RT
182,9
InP
0
0
0
12
R 160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
R 515
R 515
RT
120
P
R 0,000
0
0
13
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
515
515
RT
60
P
0
0
0
14
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
515
515
RT(m)
5
P
0
0
0
15
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
R 461
R 519
T/C(m)
5
P
0
0
0
16
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
R 461
R 519
T/C
3
P
0
0
0
17
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
R 417
R 475
T/C
60
P
0
0
0
18
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
417
475
T/C
120
P
0
0
0
19
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
417
475
T/C
27
As
0
0
0
20
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
417
475
T/C
3,4
InAs
0
0
0
21
R 355
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
417
475
T/C
1
As
R 0,000
0
0
22
355
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
417
475
T/C
2,5
As
0
0
0
23
355
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
417
475
T/C
34,5
InP
0
0
0
24
355
0,252
1,23631
175
200
50
R 564
R 634
T/C
120
P
0
0
0
25
355
0,252
1,23631
175
200
50
564
634
T/C(m)
5
P
0
0
0
26
355
0,252
1,23631
175
200
50
610
610
RT(m)
5
P
0
0
0
==PAGE:81==
27
355
0,252
2,76171
175
200
50
610
610
RT
60
P
0
0
0
28
355
0,252
2,76171
175
200
50
610
610
RT
52
InP
0
0
0
29
R 160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
R 515
R 515
RT
120
P
R 0,000
0
0
30
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
515
515
RT
60
P
0
0
0
31
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
515
515
RT(m)
5
P
0
0
0
32
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
R 461
R 519
T/C(m)
5
P
0
0
0
33
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
R 461
R 519
T/C
3
P
0
0
0
34
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
R 417
R 475
T/C
60
P
0
0
0
35
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
417
475
T/C
120
P
0
0
0
36
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
417
475
T/C
27
As
0
0
0
37
160
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
417
475
T/C
3,4
InAs
0
0
0
38
R 355
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
417
475
T/C
1
As
R 0,000
0
0
39
355
0,265
1,23631
40
200
50
417
475
T/C
3
As
0
0
0
40
355
0,252
1,54965
75
200
50
R 
R 
T/C
540
As
0
0
0
41
355
0,252
1,54965
75
200
50
0
0
T/C
300
0
0
0
1:10:03
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX B
QD properties
In this appendix the measurements made with the AFM and with the PL-mapper for
every sample of the new set is shown. Each sample contains the properties from the top
of the wafer, the middle part and the major flat, in order to analyze the effects of the
temperature gradient.
==PAGE:84==
# Wafer
Part
Surface density
Mean area
Sigma Area
Mean volume
Mean height
Sigma height
Peak wavelength
Peak signal
FWHM
[cm^{-2}]
[nm^2]
[nm^2]
[nm^3]
[nm]
[nm]
[nm]
[mV]
[nm]
D2059
Top
1518,3
0,134
214,2
Middle
1574,8
0,2011
225,3
Major flat
1608
0,386
205
D2060
Top
6,00E+09
1005,173
452,082
2269,865
6,775
1,536
1582,2
0,065
236,8
Middle
9,40E+09
925,085
430,673
1905,891
6,181
0,732
1617,6
0,1299
215,9
Major flat
1,90E+10
668,114
279,595
1300,261
5,839
0,791
1612,2
0,168
186,4
D2064
Top
1496,3
0,1611
233,6
Middle
1579,6
0,2224
246,3
Major flat
1579
0,4236
223
D2075
Top
1,46E+10
834,400
243,763
1642,989
5,907
0,608
1575,6
0,1904
267,1
Middle
1,93E+10
661,030
295,770
1228,656
5,576
0,921
1620,1
0,2625
243,8
Major flat
2,59E+10
611,338
253,941
1075,099
5,276
0,927
1637
0,332
184,5
D2077
Top
1,12E+10
868,596
421,969
1861,618
6,430
0,434
1526,9
0,1929
175,9
Middle
1,41E+10
729,825
200,915
1533,691
6,304
0,533
1577,8
0,2759
195
Major flat
2,17E+10
581,860
209,101
1151,326
5,936
0,691
1577,8
0,3577
188,7
D2081
Top
1,91E+10
684,069
245,724
1385,000
6,074
0,882
1618
0,3345
247,6
Middle
1,89E+10
798,220
268,666
1569,434
5,899
0,596
1643,4
0,3333
224,3
Major flat
2,59E+10
689,591
270,628
1184,625
5,154
0,792
1643,4
0,304
239,1
D2087
Top
1,22E+10
964,350
291,647
2107,346
6,556
0,723
1586,3
0,2747
152,3
Middle
1,57E+10
579,320
196,730
1199,704
6,213
0,468
1618
0,2332
273
Major flat
1,69E+10
589,089
217,549
1168,429
5,950
0,468
1584,2
0,1733
264,5
D2088
Top
7,90E+09
885,162
369,975
2091,195
7,088
0,568
1375,6
0,2173
189,6
Middle
8,90E+09
959,613
268,633
2194,923
6,862
0,395
1447,9
0,1868
262
Major flat
8,90E+09
955,322
228,905
2144,650
6,735
0,755
1441,5
0,2478
230,1
D2089
Top
6,40E+09
970,840
150,634
2244,809
6,937
0,522
1545,1
0,1794
225,1
Middle
8,60E+09
896,045
281,342
2107,826
7,057
0,677
1572,7
0,2087
214,5
Major flat
8,10E+09
902,765
202,930
2064,548
6,861
0,479
1532,4
0,2209
201,8
D2090
Top
1,40E+09
1416,888
276,670
3797,867
8,041
0,714
1190,3
0,6116
135
Middle
2,50E+09
1249,390
415,430
3188,964
7,657
0,395
1194,6
0,2795
154,3
Major flat
4,40E+09
1025,633
197,200
2551,365
7,463
0,503
1278,2
0,1575
147,8
AFM measurements
PL measurements
==PAGE:85==
D2092
Top
9,50E+09
1015,858
312,050
2353,167
6,949
0,694
1528,4
0,1587
203,9
Middle
9,40E+09
1037,922
297,852
2327,955
6,729
0,478
1572,9
0,2002
218,7
Major flat
2,10E+10
718,897
261,041
1431,408
5,973
0,549
1572,9
0,2454
201,7
D2093
Top
1,21E+10
1051,564
557,921
2260,091
6,448
0,587
1545,6
0,1868
207,7
Middle
1,42E+10
863,062
221,954
1850,592
6,433
0,603
1583,8
0,2234
201,4
Major flat
2,01E+10
744,247
203,669
1434,214
5,781
0,431
1573,2
0,2441
188,6
D2096
Top
4,69E+10
595,784
215,454
1037,012
5,222
0,538
1640,6
0,3699
165,1
Middle
4,69E+10
563,184
188,301
958,060
5,103
0,392
1647
0,4114
163
Major flat
4,93E+10
554,519
201,843
961,018
5,199
0,949
1617,4
0,4236
148,2
D2097
Top
5,05E+10
512,355
190,409
865,436
5,067
0,897
1618,6
0,3809
152,7
Middle
4,89E+10
576,035
182,893
999,613
5,206
0,712
1618,6
0,437
150,6
Major flat
4,98E+10
520,833
160,577
858,689
4,946
0,662
1593,2
0,426
154,8
D2099
Top
4,55E+10
561,107
262,232
939,854
5,025
0,815
1576,5
0,3882
169,6
Middle
4,59E+10
540,266
246,593
826,211
4,588
0,487
1580,8
0,47
165,4
Major flat
4,65E+10
557,806
256,136
877,894
4,722
0,449
1582,9
0,4272
165,4
D2102
Top
2,60E+10
959,690
684,454
1818,916
5,686
1,051
1316,1
1,125
98,5
Middle
2,20E+10
854,812
696,900
1286,2
0,9473
92,1
Major flat
2,10E+10
950,100
543,182
1617,165
5,106
1,078
1279,7
0,6274
98,5
D2105
Top
3,10E+10
861,225
526,441
1575,582
5,488
1,143
1326,1
0,968
111,1
Middle
2,34E+10
931,953
514,055
1759,822
5,665
0,761
1313,3
1,066
94
Major flat
2,52E+10
931,286
586,670
1961,319
6,318
1,069
1294
0,7629
89,7
D2110
Top
3,50E+10
610,253
386,822
1226,436
6,029
1,095
1346,8
0,8459
132,4
Middle
2,96E+10
662,958
431,980
1310,911
5,932
1,152
1321,1
0,8948
98,2
Major flat
2,50E+10
792,633
527,185
1544,379
5,845
0,939
1293,3
0,6787
93,9
D2111
Top
3,18E+10
688,682
398,199
1348,348
5,874
0,956
1389,8
0,8569
115,3
Middle
2,60E+10
746,627
566,867
1406,907
5,653
1,000
1317,1
0,7581
102,5
Major flat
2,52E+10
744,366
457,526
1415,226
5,704
1,070
1285,1
0,6091
100,4
D2122
Top
4,10E+10
724,458
838,616
1325,843
5,490
0,752
1631,8
0,437
148,2
Middle
3,97E+10
854,218
836,024
1663,490
5,842
0,570
1644,5
0,4468
158,8
Major flat
3,45E+10
968,405
1035,336
2126,327
6,587
0,862
1653
0,3552
171,5
==PAGE:86==
76
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[AMY86]
M. Asada, Y. Miyamoto, and Suematsu Y. “Gain and the Threshold of Three-
Dimensional Quantum-Box Lasers”. In: IEEE Journal of Quantum Electron-
ics 22 (1986), pages 1915–1921.
[AZo]
AZoNano. RPM2000 Rapid Photoluminescence Mapper. url: https://www.
azonano.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=2308.
[Böe13]
K. W. Böer. Handbook of the Physics of Thin-Film Solar Cells. Springer.
2013.
[Bol+13]
A. D. Bolshakov et al. “Modeling InAs Quantum Dot Formation on the
Side Surface of GaAs Nanowires”. In: Technical Physics Letters 39.12 (2013),
pages 1047–1052.
[Dub06]
V. G. Dubrovskii. “Calculation of the size-distribution function for quan-
tum dots at the kinetic stage of growth”. In: Semiconductors 40.10 (2006),
pages 1123–1130.
[Dub13]
V. G. Dubrovskii. Nucleation Theory and Growth of Nanostructures. Nano-
science and Technology. 2013.
[enw]
Crystalgrower at en.wikipedia. Metal Organic Vapor Phase Epitaxy. url:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=11356378.
[EO81]
A. I. Ekimov and A. A. Onushchenko. “Quantum size effect in three-dimensional
microscopic semiconductor crystals”. In: JETP letters 34.6 (1981), pages 345–
349.
[ins]
IOFFE institute. InAs -Basic Parameters at 300 K. url: http://www.ioffe.
ru/SVA/NSM/Semicond/InAs/basic.html.
[Led11]
N. N. Ledentsov. “Quantum dot laser”. In: Semiconductor Science and Tech-
nology 26.1 (2011), page 014001.
[MB74]
J. W. Matthews and A. E. Blakeslee. “Defects in epitaxial multilayers: I.
Misfit dislocations”. In: Journal of Crystal Growth 27 (1974), pages 118–125.
[Pa12]
E. Placidi and et al. “InAs Epitaxy on GaAs(001): A Model Case of Strain-
Driven Self-assembling of Quantum Dots”. In: Self-Assembly of Nanostruc-
tures (2012), pages 73–125.
==PAGE:88==
78
Bibliography
[Sem]
Elizaveta Semenova. Epitaxy 1 [Powerpoint slides]. url: https://cn.inside.
dtu . dk / cnnet / filesharing / download / 33f17430 - 9131 - 45f9 - 9ae1 -
a7462528e109.
[ST07]
B.E.A. Saleh and M.C. Teich. Fundamentals of Photonics. 2nd edition. Wiley
Series in Pure and Applied Optics. 2007.
[Ton+03]
A. A. Tonkikh et al. “Temperature dependence of the quantum dot lateral
size in the Ge/Si(100) system”. In: Physica status solidi (b) 236.1 (2003),
R1–R3.
[wik]
Photonics wiki. Dispersion and Attenuation Phenomena. url: http : / /
photonicswiki.org/index.php?title=Dispersion_and_Attenuation_
Phenomena.
[Zhu+13]
J-J. Zhu et al. Quantum Dots for DNA Biosensing. SpringerBriefs in Molec-
ular Science. 2013.
