==PAGE:1==
1 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Department of Civil Engineering 
June 2018 
Brovej, Building 118 
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Experimental study on glass panes exposed to fire 
 
 
Students: 
 
Supervisors 
Khalil Y. Ahmad (s103931) 
 
Luisa Guiliani 
Talib Javed (s090838) 
 
Frank Markert 
 
 
Jens Henrik Nielsen 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
This report is presented by: 
Khalil Yehia Ahmad (s103931) 
Talib Javed  
(s090838) 
 
Supervisors: 
Supervisor: Luisa Giuliani, Associate Professor, DTU Civil Engineering 
 
Co-Supervisor: Jens Henrik Nielsen, Associate Professor, DTU Civil Engineering 
Co-supervisor: Frank Markert, Associate Professor, DTU Civil Engineering 
 
 
Examination date: 
2nd of July 2018 
 
 
DTU Civil Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
Brovej, Building 118 
2800, Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
Tel: +45 45251700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project period: 
22 January 2018 – 22 June 2018 
 
ECTS: 
 
30 ECTS 
 
Education: 
 
MSc. 
 
Field: 
 
Structural Fire Safety Engineering 
 
Comment: 
 
This project is submitted as a part of the requirements for graduation at the 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Rights: 
 
© Khalil Yehia Ahmad and Talib Javed, 2018 
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
Preface 
This thesis is written as our final part of our MSc. degree at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The 
thesis is awarded 30 ECTS credits and was written during the spring of 2018. The thesis is intended for 
individuals with interest in fire related topics as well as for fire safety communities. Finishing the thesis was 
the completion of 5.5 years of studies.  
During our studies at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), we have had several fire related courses. 
Our interest in the fire safety science started during our bachelor degree at Copenhagen University College 
of Engineering. Unfortunately, the selection of fire related courses during our bachelor degree were not high. 
We were therefore delighted to have had the opportunity to work with fire related courses during our studies 
at DTU with an opportunity of working with a fire related topic during our thesis work. 
We have been delighted to work experimentally during our thesis, something we have never tried before. In 
the future, hopefully in a job as fire safety engineers, the knowledge gained during this thesis work is castoff.  
 
Acknowledgement 
Without the help and guidance from individuals at the Technical University of Denmark, the road until now 
would have been far more complicated.  
First of all, we would like to thank our supervisor Luisa Giuliani, who patiently have supported our work and 
guided us throughout months. Without her, we would have ended in a whole other direction than intended. 
Her knowledge within fire and structural engineering have been the key for the entire research. Furthermore, 
we would like to thank our two co-supervisor Jens Henrik Nielsen and Frank Markert. Jens’ knowledge of 
glass technology and his knowledge from previous glass experiments have given us a lot of insight during our 
experimental work and on how to conduct experiments. Frank’s knowledge and know how in the DTU Fire 
lab have given us several tools during the experimental work conducted, which the thesis would have been 
inadequate without.  
Secondly, we would like to thank our fellow students at DTU, Malthe Klint and Louise Frederikke Enoksen, 
who have been working on their own project in the DTU Fire Lab with the H-TRIS. It has been delightful to 
have had them next to us in the Fire Lab to share ideas and knowledge about the H-TRIS.  
Thirdly we would also like to thank the measurement technicians at DTU’s building 119 and staff associated 
with the DTU Fire Lab, who have helped us a lot during our experimental work and with guidance on the 
apparatus used for the experiments.  
 
Finally we would like to thank final and friends who have supported us a lot during the past months and 
through the past 5.5 years of studies.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
Abstract 
Windows in new buildings are often composed by multi-layer panes, due to low-energy requirements. These 
glass panes are expected to resist much longer in a fire, compared to single-glazing windows that were 
generally used in buildings. The long resistance of windows provides lower ventilation and leading to milder 
but longer fires. Since the heating temperature of the elements is strongly dependent on the duration of the 
fire, the structural behaviour of new low-energy buildings could be worse than what designed for, in case a 
fire occurs (Kawagoe, 1988) (Thomas, 1991) 
It is known that the reaction of multi-layer windows are dependent on the reaction of pane closest to the fire 
(Pagni & Joshi, 1994(II)). Furthermore, it is known that tensional stress at the edge of the pane is caused by 
the temperature difference between the expanding central part of the glass and the cold glass, which is shaded 
by the window frame (Pagni & Joshi, 1991). Though, the influence of the frame width on the cracking time 
was only lightly investigated, and were only investigated with a fixed heating rate. (Wang, 2013). Furthermore, 
the direct influence of the glass thickness were only sparely investigated, and never with different heating 
rates. (Zhang, et al., 2011) 
Since the reaction of multi-layer panes are known to be dependent on the resistance on the first layer, it is 
important to deepen the understanding and increase the knowledge of the fire resistance of single-layer panes 
first.  
This thesis aims to address this problem by investigating the influence of the shading width and the thicknesses 
on/of a single layer pane exposed to different heating rates.  
The study consisted of an investigation of 400 ∙ 400 mm float glass panes. The pane specimens were sat up in 
a window frame replica and presented to a uniform imposed heating flux. This is possible by utilizing the Heat 
Transfer Rate Inducing System (H-TRIS) at the DTU Fire Lab. The H-TRIS consists of a gas driven radiating panel 
which measures 500x500 mm. The burner is supplied with nature gas from the supply system at the lab.  
Two parameters were investigated, the width of the frame and thickness of the glass. Exposure of the 4 mm 
panes to 7.5, 10 and 20 kW/m2 investigated the width of the frame and the second parameter was investigated 
by considering 3 different glass thicknesses namely 2, 4 and 6 mm.  
The results indicates that the thickness of the glass influences both the cracking time and the average critical 
temperature. Regardless the imposed heat flux, the increase of the thickness of the glass specimen increases 
the time to first crack. With the imposed heat flux of 10 kW/m2 and 20 kW/m2 and 2 mm as a reference, the 
4 mm specimen respectively last 13.6% and 13.2 % longer while the 6 mm respectively last 65.3% and 108 % 
longer. Time variation is caused by the delay of the critical temperature difference in the glass pane for 
thicker glass. Furthermore, the thickness of glass influences the average critical temperature difference. The 
thicker glass results in lower critical temperature difference between the central exposed part and the cold 
edges.  
The influence is directly seen on the fracture stress, as expected in theory. The results indicates that the 
increase in thickness results in a decrease in the facture stress.   
However, the experiments did not highlight any trend of the investigated fallout or crack location. The results 
for both fallout and crack location are random. The fallout is expected to be influenced by the room pressure 
which is not considered in this thesis.   
 
 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
1. Table of Content 
Preface 
4 
Acknowledgement 
4 
Abstract 
6 
1. Introduction 
11 
1.1 State of the art 
12 
1.2 State of practice 
16 
1.3 Project objective and method 
18 
2. Theoretical background 
19 
2.1 General heat transfer 
19 
2.1.1 Heat transfer by radiation 
19 
2.1.2 View factor 
20 
2.1.3 Steady-state heat conduction 
22 
2.1.4 Validation of glass temperature 
22 
2.2 Glass Theory 
23 
2.2.1 Fracture Mechanics of glass 
23 
2.2.2 Thermal induced stress 
24 
2.2.3 Mirror size and fracture stress 
26 
3. Experimental setup 
28 
3.1 Glass specimens 
29 
3.2 Heating setup (H-TRIS) 
30 
3.3 Experimental installation 
32 
3.3.1 Window frame 
32 
3.3.2 Glass specimen installation 
33 
3.3.3 Temperature measurement information 
33 
3.5 Acquisition system 
34 
3.6 Extra monitoring 
35 
4. Preliminary experiments 
36 
4.1 General understanding of the testing procedure and performance 
36 
4.1.1 H-TRIS intensity 
36 
4.1.2 Standard Deviation 
38 
4.1.3 Strain Gauges 
47 
5 Experimental results and discussion 
52 
5.1 Experimental program 
52 
5.2 General comments on the experimental outcome 
54 
5.3 Thickness’ influence on time to crack 
57 
5.4 Thicknesses influence on local temperature 
59 
5.5 Thicknesses influence on global temperature 
60 
5.6 Heat Rate influence on temperature 
62 
5.5 Strain Gauge results 
65 
6. Conclusion 
68 
6.1 Future research 
69 
7. References 
70 
8. Appendix 
73 
8.1 H-TRIS manual 
73 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
8.2 
H-TRIS Calibration 
78 
8.3 
Strain Gauge in quarter bridge setup 
83 
8.4 Crack Patterns 
84 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
Nomenclature 
 
Symbol 
 
Unit 
 
Definition 
 
 
Abbreviations  
 
HF 
 
[kW/m2] 
 
Heat Flux  
H-Tris 
 
 
 
Heat Transfer Inducing System  
NA 
 
 
 
Not Applicable, Not Available 
TC 
 
 
 
Thermocouple 
SD 
 
 
 
Standard Deviation 
TBE 
 
[°C] 
 
Temperature of back edge (unshaded) 
TBSE 
 
[°C] 
 
Temperature of back shaded edge (shaded) 
TFG 
 
[°C] 
 
Temperature of front side glass (exposure  
 
Symbols- Latin 
cp 
 
[J/kg*K] 
 
Specific heat capacity 
E 
 
[Pa] 
 
Young’s Modulus (Elasticity) 
F 
 
 
 
View factor 
H 
 
 
 
Heat transfer coefficient  
K 
 
[K] 
 
Kelvin 
L 
 
[m] 
 
Object thickness 
N 
 
[nm] 
 
Mean refractive index to visible radiation  
q  
 
[kW] 
 
Heat  
tp 
 
[s] 
 
Thermal penetration time 
T 
 
[°C] 
 
Temperature 
 
 
Symbols- Greek 
α 
 
[m2/s] 
 
Absorptivity, Thermal diffusivity 
β 
 
[K-1] 
 
Coefficient of linear expansion 
ɛ 
 
[-] 
 
Emissivity (corrected) 
λ 
 
[W/m*K] 
 
Thermal conductivity, wavelength 
ρ 
 
[kg/m3] 
 
Density of glass 
σSB 
 
[W/m2*K] 
 
Stefan-Boltzmann (stress) 
σF 
 
[MPa] 
 
Fracture Stress 
Ω 
 
[ohm] 
 
Electrical resistance 
Superscripts 
∞ 
 
[-] 
 
Ambient 
F 
 
[MPa] 
 
Fracture 
G 
 
[-] 
 
Glass 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
bb 
 
[-] 
 
Blackbody 
BSE 
 
[-] 
 
Backside shaded edge 
BE 
 
[-] 
 
Backside edge 
FG 
 
[-] 
 
Frontside 
Bulk 
 
[-] 
 
Average volumetric value 
 
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
1. Introduction 
 
When fire science was developed only single-glazing windows were used. These windows were expected to 
fail before flashover and therefore leave a ventilation opening behind, and considered as an opening in the 
structural fire safety design. However, newer windows are often composed by multi-layer panes, due to low-
energy requirements of the buildings, and are expected to resist much longer in a fire, thus providing lower 
ventilation and leading to milder but longer fires. Since the heating temperature of the elements is strongly 
dependent on the duration of the fire, the structural behavior of new low-energy buildings could be worse 
than expected in case of fire. 
Therefore, the fire safety level for structures requires a great understanding of the related parameters. A 
main parameter for structural elements, is the heat exposure. However, most structural elements either have 
a low thermal conductivity or are protected from the heat. But not only the heat exposure is vital during the 
fire, but also the development of the fire over time has a great impact on the structural safety.   
 
 
 
Figure 1.1: (Top) Gas temperature for a fire compartment- and (bottom) steel temperature for a HE550B profile with varying opening 
factors. Here “O” represents the Opening factor. 
 
In case of fire, the opening factor has a high influence on the outcome of a fire gas’ temperature. From figure 
1, it is shown that a high opening factor results in a short-lasting fire with a high peak temperature, while a 
low opening factor results in a longer-lasting fire with a lower peak temperature. This carries a longer 
conduction phase and will result in a higher element peak temperature, which can lead to failure. Based on 
resistance classes in current regulations, this can be a problem when fire designing certain elements. With a 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
20
40
60
80
100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260
Temperature [C]
Time [min]
Gas Temperature, O = 0,02
Gas Temperature, O = 0,04
Gas Temperature, O = 0,08
Gas Temperature, O = 0,12
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
20
40
60
80
100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260
Temperature [C]
Time [min]
Insulated Steel temperature, O = 0,02
Insulated Steel temperature, O = 0,04
Insulated steel temperature, O = 0,08
Insulated steel temperature, O = 0,12
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
low opening factor or no opening factor at all, and thereby a change in the fire dynamics, the current 
resistance classes for different elements in different types of buildings may not be sufficient. For a low 
opening factor, as seen in figure 1, a longer fire occurs and the high temperature will exceed the resistance 
time of the element. Looking at the curves for O = 0.02 for both gas temperature and insulated steel, it is 
seen, that after 250 minutes, the gas temperature has decreased until 297 °C. The steel temperature by the 
time of 250 minutes has decreased until 460 °C. By the time, the long duration mild temperature fire can 
result in a higher average element temperature and lead to failure.  
 
As mentioned, multi-layer windows are very common. Not only in new buildings, but also in older buildings 
which have been and is renovated due to obedience with the newer low-energy requirements. It is known 
that multi-layer windows react differently than single layer constellations. This is because panes following 
the first one will have a different heat impact (Cuzzillo & Pagni, 1998) (Wang, 2017). The breakage of glass 
during a flash-over or later in the fire could therefore be inaccurate (Hassani, et al., 1997b). Therefore, it is 
important to understand the process of glass breakage and reduce the uncertainty related to the ventilation 
in post-flashover fires.  
 
1.1 State of the art 
The first relevant investigation related to glass and fire came from two Harvard students (Barth & Hoe, 1977).  
They irradiated 152 ∙ 178 mm glazing with a 6.35 mm shading with by a radiant heat source.  
A decade later, in 1986, Emmons published an article where he worried the subjects need for development 
due to its high impact on fire dynamics.  
From the Harvard study, he explained and suggested that glazing failure was due to the bad conduction 
properties of glass. The heating of the glass leaves the shaded edge in tension due to thermal expansion of 
the exposed central part of the glass.  
From Emmons’ suggestion of the problem, Keshki-Rakonen (1988) started an investigation. The theoretical 
study established a criterion under which the brittle pane breaks. This was based on the temperature 
differences between the shielded frame part and the central exposed part and the tensional strength in the 
glass (Keski-Rahkonen, 1988). 
 
𝜎𝜎𝑓𝑓= ∆𝑇𝑇∙𝛽𝛽∙𝐸𝐸 
(1) 
 
The investigation includes a probabilistic approach because the strength of the glass depends on the 
technology of cutting and micro-damages at the pane edge, besides the fire load. A 1D model was developed 
for temperature fields in thin panes exposed to radiation, where a thermal stress field model was suggested. 
The study concluded that the maximum tensile stress in the pane is located at the place with the lowest 
temperature. Nevertheless, the stress field does not extend far from the cold area and the rest of the pane 
remains tension free. Keski-Rahkonen established a rough estimation for the maximum temperature 
difference between the exposed central part and the cold shielded edge. Based on the glass properties of  
𝜎𝜎 = 50 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀, 𝛽𝛽 = 8 ∙ 10-6 𝐾𝐾-1, 𝐸𝐸 = 80 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 for the breakage criterion, he established a value for the 
maximum allowable temperature difference equal to 80 °C (Keski-Rahkonen, 1988). 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
 
In 1991, an experimental investigation was carried out by Michael J. Skelly, Richard J. Roby and Craig L. Beyler 
(Skelly, et al., 1991), which was a natural step after Keski-Rahkonen had established a problem. The authors 
investigated the breakage of single layer window panes in small fire compartment with and without a 25 mm 
aluminum frame. The compartment was heated by using and burning liquid hexane in four pan sizes. This 
ensured that the pane was completely covered in the hot layer gas within 10 seconds. 
The test results of the panes with edge protection provided a temperature difference of 90 °C. All but one of 
the edge-protected panes cracked. The withstand of one panes can be explained by the probability of edge 
damages that Keski-Rahkonen explained (Keski-Rahkonen, 1988) 
The tests showed that the larger the fire, the faster the initiation of crack. But there was no correlation 
between the temperature difference and the pool size or time to cracking.  
The edge-unprotected tests were tested for the two bigger pans only.  The tests all led to crack initiation in 
the interval 65-200 sec at a glass temperature in the interval 184-218 °C.  
The validity of the breakage criterion established by Keski-Rahkonen in 1988 was assessed by Skelly et. al, by 
investigating the experiment specific glass specimen properties. Based on the glass properties 𝜎𝜎 = 47 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀, 
𝛽𝛽 = 9.5 ∙ 10-6 𝐾𝐾-1, 𝐸𝐸 = 70 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺, this led to a maximum allowable temperature of 70 °C.  
The difference between the max allowable temperature differences found by Keski-Rahkonen and Skelly et. 
al. was explained by that the pane thermocouple (TC) was heated directly by radiation and thereby 
overestimating the temperature difference.  
The study did also present crack patterns. From the pattern, it was concluded that the edge-protected panes 
had numerous bifurcations, while the edge-unprotected panes had fewer cracks.  
 
In the same year, 1991, Pagni and Joshi (Pagni & Joshi, 1991) worked to reach a higher level of understanding. 
They worked theoretically to avoid the simplifications that was introduced by Keski-Rahkonen.  A 
temperature history calculation procedure was derived by the two authors, to investigate temperature 
history of the exposed pane. They determined a method for a one-dimensional heating over the pane 
thickness and expanded it to two-dimensional heating, to study temperature isocurves behind the shading. 
Like Keski-Rahkonen, the two authors worked on stress field determination and proved that it is the pane 
thickness-averaged temperature that is needed for the breakage criterion.  
Three years later, the two authors published two other studies. One Theoretical (Pagni & Joshi, 1994(I)) and 
one experimental (Pagni & Joshi, 1994(II)). The theoretical part presented an investigation of the suggested 
temperature calculation procedure and utilized the derived calculation procedure to study parameters like 
decay length, biot number, and irradiation level of the glass temperature variation.  
In the experimental part, a total of 59 glass specimens were tested. The experiment was to reach tensile 
stress input for the cracking determination. The tests showed breaking stress from 35.5 MPA to 128 MPa. 
From here, a conservative estimation of 40 MPa was concluded to be a value for the calculations.  
 
 
 
 
  
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
From 1994 and the following 4 years, Hassani, Shields and Silcock completed several experiments with glazing 
exposed to fire; 
 
• 
An experimental investigation into the behavior of glazing in enclosure fire 
(Hassani, et al., 1994) 
• 
Thermal fracture of window glazing: Performance of glazing in fire 
(Hassani, et al., 1994b) 
• 
In-situ experimental thermal stress and measurements in glass subjected to enclosure fires 
(Hassani, et al., 1995) 
• 
Behavior of single glazing in an enclosure fire 
(Hassani, et al., 1997a) 
• 
Behavior of double glazing in an enclosure fire 
(Hassani, et al., 1997b)  
 
 
The authors tested different design of larger windows. They tested both single and double layer windows. 
The tests were designed in a two-zone fire environment from where it was apparent, that the initial crack 
always would originate in the top part of the glass immersed in the hot layer. Other than that, they visualized 
that crack bifurcations were contained in the upper part of the glass which was heated and where tension 
was obtained. Strain gauges was applied to understand the stress fields in the pane and the conclusion was, 
that the two-zone fire (non-uniform) would result in compression at the bottom and tension at the top part 
of the glass. The morphology of glass fracture was used to confirm strain gauge results (Hassani, et al., 1994) 
Thermal fracture and stress in glass were investigated more in depth by the authors (Hassani, et al., 1994b). 
This led to the conclusion that the assumption of uniform heating on exposed glazing can only be usable for 
fast fires where the entire windows pane is engrossed in the hot gas layer. The tests also showed that multi-
pane windows could keep their integrity longer than what was expected from single layer units. This was also 
justified by the fact that the outer pane reaction is highly dependent on the inner panes response to the 
exposure.    
Additionally, both single- and double glazing constellations were tested with wood crib fires placed both in 
the central and in the corner of a compartment. The tests advocate that convective heat transfer leads to 
cracking at a temperature difference between 150-190 °C, except if the fire is close and the ventilation 
condition is good. Strain measurements showed stress values of 24-56 MPa for smaller windows and 16-24 
MPa for larger windows. From example, it showed that smaller windows are tougher to break. As expected, 
the first crack was initiated in the first pane. This happened at circa 300 seconds. The second crack initiated 
almost twice the time after the first one.  
 
Up until today, several additional experiments regarding the subject, glass exposed to fire, were performed. 
The trends from the studies were highly the same as the ones already defined from previous investigations, 
that windows with multiple layers would withstand fire for longer, than windows with single layer units 
(Shields, et al., 2005). 
  
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
This was explained from the statement, that the first pane acts as a band pass filter only transmitting incident 
radiation which is also submitted through following panes. The consequence is that flames and hot layers do 
not radiatively heat panes beyond the first exposed in multiple windows (Pagni, 2013).  
 
Newer studies have been established in the past decade. From 2013-2017, Wang et al. have been 
investigating different constellations forms and glazing types to understand the behaviour of glass (Wang, 
2015) 
Amongst these studies, one study investigated the influence of shading widths between 10-50 mm in 10 mm 
intervals (Wang, 2013). The study concluded that the influence from the shading width was little influenced 
by the heating rate. Besides this, the shading width made the time to crack initiation decrease from 10-20 
mm.  
Another study established by Zhang et al., investigated the glass thicknesses influence on the cracking time 
(Zhang, et al., 2011). Experiments were conducted to investigate thicknesses of 4, 6, 10, 12 and 19 mm with 
a fixed heat rate.  The test concluded that the thickness is a very important factor to the first breakage. The 
tests showed, that time for the first crack with glass of thickness 19 mm is longer than the thinner glass of 6, 
10 and 12 mm. Furthermore, it showed that the time of thicknesses 6, 10 and 12 mm are close under thermal 
radiation, and that the temperature difference increase with the thickness of glass increasing (Zhang, et al., 
2011). 
 
In 2014, Marc Vandebroek prepared a PhD. paper investigating the thermal fracture of glass in a theoretical, 
experimental and numerical manner (Vandebroek, 2014). The aim of the thesis was to provide a solid basis 
for a more extensive parametrical study in the future.  
Vandebroek described that thermal fracture is caused by a temperature gradient in the glass pane. As 
previous research before him (Keski-Rahkonen, 1988) (Skelly, et al., 1991), Vandebroek described the 
thermal fracture may appear because the part concealed behind the surrounding frame remains colder, while 
the temperature of the central part increases due to solar radiation. Consequently, the edges are subjected 
to tensile stresses which causes failure when exceeding the edge strength.  
Vandebroek described, that the application of this empirical verification method to be sufficient to avoid 
thermal fracture for simple window configuration, but do not provide probability of failure, like they are not 
applicable for more complex façade constructions of today. Also, for structural elements, the combination of 
thermal actions and other actions must be considered. 
The safety against thermal fracture is determined by the magnitude of the edge stresses caused by climate 
actions and by the glass edge strength. Vandebroek launched a large experimental campaign to estimate the 
edge strength and the influence of humidity.  
The experimental campaign was divided into six test programs, where the subsequent programs were 
founded on the conclusions from the previous ones. The outcome of the programs were later used in the 
numerical simulations. In total 3220 test results was derived from the experiments.  
Vandebroek concluded that stresses are caused by thermal radiation and temperature, while the strength is 
influenced by humidity. Furthermore, several conclusions were drawn from the investigation (Vandebroek, 
2014).  
 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
After Vandebroek investigated the thermal fracture of glass with a large investigation, the understanding of 
glass behavior is not fully understood. And as Vandebroek wrote in his paper, “a verifiable calculation method 
for thermal fracture remains a challenge”.  
 
The later years, glass have become a bigger and bigger part of materials used for high-rise buildings. With 
the development of the modern society and cities, glass curtain walls are used due to its good daylight 
performance, energy saving and transparency. Even though glass has a lot of incomparable advantages, it is 
still the weakest part in high-rise building. The glass is complicated, due to the fact, that in compartment fires 
it is an important practical problem since a window acts as a wall before breaking and as a ventilation after 
breaking (Keski-Rahkonen, 1988).  
But still, the behavior of glass is not understood, which means that the fire prevention requirements cannot 
be satisfied. Vandebroek described, that for structural elements, the combination of thermal actions and 
other actions must considered. 
In 2017, a journal was published, where the breakage behavior of glass panel under the combined effect of 
wind loading and radiant heating was investigated (Zhao, et al., 2017). Here a total of 21 glass specimens 
were tested under five different wind velocities, namely 0.0 m/s, 2.0 m/s, 5.0 m/s, 8.0 m/s, 11.0 m/s  and 
13.3 m/s.  
The tests were conducted in a combined cabinet, where there thermal load and wind load were applied on 
the two sided of the glass pane, provided by a heater and a fan. The combined cabinet included a cabinet for 
the heat source and glass was semi-open spaces. The glass specimens were 600 ∙ 600 mm with a thickness of 
6 mm and edge protected on all four sides.  
As a reference, test 1 was conducted without wind loading, and showed, that the maximum temperature 
difference when crack initiation always occurred between the unshaded part on the exposed surface and the 
shaded area on the unexposed glass surface. The maximum temperature difference when crack initiation on 
the glass surface was about 110 °C. With the increase of the wind speed, the temperature difference started 
to reduce. This concluded, that the larger the wind speed the glass undertakes, the easier it starts to crack 
when heated up. 
 
  
1.2 State of practice  
Within the Eurocodes or the Danish national code, there are no guidelines when determining the glazing’s 
reaction to a fire. The current state of practice is therefore based on the engineer’s supposal which has to be 
justified to the landlord and the municipality.  
 
In line with window breakage guidelines from Luxembourg (Luxembourg, 2012), translated from French the 
guideline states: 
 
“The temperature leading to breakage of non-fire resistant glazing is generally between 100 and 500 °C 
depending on the type of frame, the quality of the glazing, the method of installation, the thickness, the 
dimensions, the number of layers etc. In the absence of precise data on this subject, two extreme scenarios 
should be considered depending on the gas temperature near the glazing inside the compartment: 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
Scenario 1: 
- 
90% of the surface of the glazing is considered as opening from the beginning of the fire. This scenario 
covers voluntary glass breakage caused by the intervention of the fire and rescue services.  
 
Scenario 2: 
- 
Single glazing: At 100 °C, 50% of the surface of single glazing exposed to this temperature are 
assumed to be complete openings. At 250 °C, 90% of the surface area of the glazing exposed to this 
temperature is considered to be an opening.  
 
- 
Double  glazing:  At  200  °C,  50%  of  the  surface  of  double  glazing  exposed  to  this temperature  
are  assumed  to  be  complete  openings.  At  400  ° C,  90%  of  the  surface  area  of  the glazing  
exposed  to  this  temperature  is  considered  as  opening.   
 
- 
Triple  glazing  in  a  steel  frame:  At  300  °C,  50%  of  the  surface  of  the  glazing  Exposed  to  this  
temperature  are  assumed  to  be  complete  openings.  At  500  °C,  90%  of  the  surface  of  the  
glazing exposed  to  this  temperature  is  considered  to  be  an  opening.“ 
   
The guidelines supplies the engineer with the required information but does not refer to any research. 
Furthermore, the guide fails to notify the user what to do outside the procedure.   
 
 
Furthermore, all previous research (Pagni & Joshi, 1991) (Wang, 2013) indicates that the glazing installation 
form is important for understanding the glass crack initiation and fallout.  
The most common installation form in all windows today is with glazing framed on all four sides. Nonetheless, 
new architecture has introduced new installation forms used especially in curtain walls. The frame of a four-
side framed window is typically constructed similar to the sketch in figure 1.2. The figure includes the 
important shading with – here approximately 12 mm. The shading width can vary between manufacturers.  
From different manufacturers, it is common that all shading types are above 11 mm and a typical produced 
window has a shading width that varies between 12 and 16 mm. 
From the above information, it was found that a frame width of 15 mm would be a good width to investigate. 
 
In recent years, the thickness of glass specimens have become thinner and thinner due to lower energy 
requirements for new buildings. The thinner glazing specimens gives the opportunity to insulate better and 
keep the same thickness. Therefore the thickness of the experimental glass specimens were chosen in the 
range of 2 – 6 mm, also due to the fact that the previous study by Jørgensen (Jørgensen, 2018) investigated 
glass specimens with thickness 4 mm.  
 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
 
Figure 1.2 - Typical window installation with 12 mm shading width 
 
 
1.3 Project objective and method 
 
This study will move from a previous MSc thesis (Jørgensen, 2018) which investigated the variation of the 
shading width and its influence on the cracking time. Different heating rates (5, 10, 15 kW/m2) and shading 
widths (10, 15, 20, 25 mm) were investigated. In the study, the thickness of the glass (4 mm) and the type of 
glass, standard soda-lime float glass was fixed (Jørgensen, 2018).  
   
The aim of this thesis is to take the previous study further and investigate parameters in ranges that has not 
been investigated yet. Experiments will be done with heating rates of 7.5, 10 and 20 kW/m2 for a glass 
specimen thickness of 4 mm. This will be done to see if the data will fit in between previous experiment 
results which tested the cracking time with heating rates of 5, 10 and 20 kW/m2 (Jørgensen, 2018). If data is 
comparable, a merge will take place between results found in this thesis and the previous data derived.   
 
Furthermore, the aim of this study is to investigate if the thickness of glazing in windows has any influence 
on the cracking time. Here thicknesses 2, 4 and 6 mm will be tested. The thicknesses will be tested with a 
variating heating flux of 10 and 20 kW/m2. The framing width in these tests will be fixed to a mean value of 
15 mm.  
 
The experiments will include final tests with strain gauges, which will be conducted to calculate the strain 
and stresses in the glass specimens.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
2. Theoretical background  
 
The aim of the theoretical background is to clarify the theory behind this thesis. This section covers two parts.  
The theory behind heat transfer, determination and validation of the temperature is first presented. 
Thereafter, the property and fracture of glass is clarified. 
 
2.1 General heat transfer 
 
The temperature of a material can vary due to the three ways a heat can be transmitted; conduction, 
convection and radiation. These three ways will be described in the section below (Wickström, 2016) 
 
Conduction is a heat transfer that works by transferring on a molecular level. The transfer is secured due to 
the fact, which molecules collide and energy will leave the molecules with high energy and be obtained by 
the molecules with low energy. The energy level will heighten due to temperature raise and heat will from 
there move from molecules with high temperature to molecules with low temperature.  
 
Convection works by movement in molecules like in conduction but within fluids like a hot smoke moving 
towards the sky from a fire. In a fire, you also feel the warmth which means that not all the heat is transferred 
away through conduction or leaving towards the sky. The warmth you feel is from the last way a heat can be 
transmitted, which is radiation.  
 
Radiation is electromagnetic waves which is spread in all directions from the hot objects. Radiation does not 
require medium or matter to transfer through, which is different from the two other modes. It also differs 
by the fact that conductive and convective heat transfer depends on temperature difference. Radiation 
depends on the temperature difference between the receiving and emitting object to the fourth power. 
Radiation is therefore the most dominant at high temperatures. 
 
 
2.1.1 Heat transfer by radiation  
 
As written earlier thermal radiation is transfer of heat by electromagnetic waves. Radiative energy will 
perfectly pass through vacuum as well as clear air. The surfaces are generally assumed to be grey, which 
means they absorb and emit radiation that is a fraction of black body radiation in all direction and over all 
wavelengths. The upper limit of the heat flux leaving a black body surface by radiation is according to the 
Stefan-Boltzmann law (Wickström, 2016). 
 
q′′̇ bb,Emitter = σ ∙Ts  4 
 
where σ = 5.67 ∙10−8
W
m2∙𝐾𝐾  and  Ts4 = 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡.  
 
When comparing a real surface to a black body surface, less heat will leave a real surface. This is due to the 
fact, that the surface of real material will scatter radiation in different ways, and by that emit and absorb less 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
heat. This phenomenon is described by emissivity. Emissivity is given the symbol ε, and is described as a 
portion of the radiation emitted compared to the total maximum possible emission, which is seen in a black 
body. Emissivity is often anticipated to be independent of the nature of the incident radiation and of the 
spectral properties. This is the case for grey surfaces like for example smoke. But when talking about glass, 
caution must be taken, since it is a material with a transmitting and reflecting surface. When determining the 
radiation of a real surface, the emissivity must be included. 
 
𝑞𝑞′′̇ 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸= 𝜀𝜀𝑆𝑆∙𝜎𝜎∙𝑇𝑇𝑆𝑆
4 
 
When talking about radiation between two surfaces, the temperature of the receiving surface is included in 
the heat transfer equation where σ = 5.67 * 10-8 W/m2*K, ε = emissivity and T4 is the absolute surface 
temperature.  
 
 
𝑞𝑞̇ ′′ = 𝜎𝜎∙𝜀𝜀∙𝐴𝐴∙(𝑇𝑇𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸
4
−𝑇𝑇𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅
4
) 
(2) 
 
 
As you can see from equation (2), a view factor, A (FA1-FA2), has been introduced between the emitting and 
receiving surface.  
 
2.1.2 View factor 
 
A method is needed to calculate the amount of heat being radiated in any directions, when calculating the 
rate of heat transfer by radiation between surfaces. The concept of view factor is therefore introduced. View 
factor, also called configuration factor, shape factor and shape factor, is a dimensionless factor that 
determines how much of a surface is visible to another surface. The view factor is hereby defined as the 
fraction of radiant heating leaving surface Ai and is intercepted by surface Aj.   
 
𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖−𝑗𝑗= 𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏 𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗
𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 𝐴𝐴𝑖𝑖
 
 
The symbol FA1-A2 is used to denote the view factor from a surface A1 to a surface A2, while the symbol FdA1-A2 
denotes the view factor from an incremental surface dA1 to a finite surface A2. View factors defined in this 
way are functions of size, geometry, position and orientation of the two surfaces. The easiest way to describe 
the theory is therefore to form a hemispherical space around the surface, dA1. 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
 
Figure 2.1 - (a) Radiation exchange between two surfaces, (b) interpretation of solid angle, (c) geometry used to obtained emissive 
power ( (Klobucar, 2016) 
 
From here it is understood that the summation rule applies to the view factor. The theory for radiation 
between surfaces is based in two assumptions. Surfaces form an enclosure and surfaces separated by a 
nonparticipating media. Radiatively nonparticipating media has no effect on the transfer of radiation 
between surfaces. There is no emission, no absorption and no scattering.  
Hereby, the summation relation follows directly from the definition of the view factor. From the requirement 
that the enclosure must be closed it follows that the sum of all view factors must be summed up in one.  
෍𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖= 1
𝑁𝑁
𝑗𝑗=1
 
Formally, the accurate view factors require complex integration analyses over finite areas for A1 and A2. Yet, 
numerical solutions have been described for some elementary cases. A mutual formation is the view factor 
from a differential area dA1, to a finite area A1 (Karlsson & Quintiere, 2000).  
 
𝐹𝐹𝑑𝑑𝐴𝐴1−𝐴𝐴2 = 1
2𝜋𝜋൤
𝑎𝑎
√𝑎𝑎2 + 𝑐𝑐2 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑛𝑛−1 ൬
𝑏𝑏
√𝑎𝑎2 + 𝑐𝑐2൰+
𝑏𝑏
√𝑏𝑏2 + 𝑐𝑐2 𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑡𝑛𝑛−1 ൬
𝑎𝑎
√𝑏𝑏2 + 𝑐𝑐2൰൨ 
 
This configuration can be used to determine the view factor in the experimental work during this thesis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
2.1.3 Steady-state heat conduction 
The theory in this section was utilized to calculate the front side temperature of the glass pane in the 
experimental tests, based in the measured backside temperature. The calculation is essential for finding the 
average bulk temperature of the glass, which is used in the final results. When applying this theory, no 
measurement of the front side of the glass pane is necessary during the experimental work.  
It is understood, that the setup for the experiments delivered a steady-state heat flux output to the exposed 
specimen. So, it was assumed that the temperature variation over the pane thickness could be determined 
based on a steady-state calculation for plane wall (Karlsson & Quintiere, 2000) (Wickström, 2016) 
 
𝑇𝑇1 −𝑇𝑇2 = 𝛼𝛼∙𝑞𝑞̇ ′′ ∙𝐿𝐿
𝜆𝜆
 
(3) 
 
T - temperature, α - glass absorptivity, 𝑞𝑞̇ ′′- rate of heat conducted per square meter, L – thickness of specimen 
and λ - thermal conductivity 
 
The usage of a steady-state solution compared to a transient heat transfer relation method is supported by 
the thin specimen. The very small thickness does not leave much room for variation across the specimen 
thickness. This is even though the conduction in glass is very slow. Theoretically, the justification of the 
calculation is supported by calculation of the thermal penetration time. The result is compared to time for 
glazing to crack. The penetration time showed to be lower, 7.2 s, than typical time for cracking to occur in 
prior research that were higher than 65 s. 
 
𝛼𝛼=
𝜆𝜆
𝜌𝜌∙𝑐𝑐𝑝𝑝
=
1 𝑊𝑊
𝑚𝑚∙𝑘𝑘
2500 𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘
𝑚𝑚3 ∙720
𝐽𝐽
𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘∙𝐾𝐾
= 5.55 ∙10−7 𝑚𝑚2
𝑠𝑠  
 
𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝= 𝐿𝐿2
4 ∙𝛼𝛼=
(0.004 𝑚𝑚)2
4 ∙5.55 ∙10−7 𝑚𝑚2
𝑠𝑠
= 7.2 𝑠𝑠 < 
 
where: α - Thermal diffusivity, ρ - density 
 
 
2.1.4 Validation of glass temperature 
During the experimental work, it is essential to validate the results. The validation is especially essential when 
combining the temperature measurement equipment used in the experimental work with the theoretical 
determined temperatures.  
 
Mowrer (Mowrer, 1998) derived a one-dimensional lumped heat capacity model. The model was originally 
derived to validate his own experiments of glass heating under radiant heat flux. To validate the temperature 
measured on the exposed pane the model was used.  
 
 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
ρ ∙𝑐𝑐∙𝐿𝐿∙𝑑𝑑𝑇𝑇𝑔𝑔
𝑑𝑑𝑡𝑡= 𝛼𝛼𝑞𝑞̇ ′′ −[(ℎ1 + ℎ2) ∙൫𝑇𝑇𝑔𝑔−𝑇𝑇∞൯+ 2𝜀𝜀𝜀𝜀൫𝑇𝑇𝑔𝑔4 −𝑇𝑇∞4൯] 
(4) 
 
 
where: ℎ1 = 0.005
𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘
𝑚𝑚2, ℎ2 = 0.010
𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘
𝑚𝑚2, 𝜎𝜎𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆= 5.67 ∙10−8
𝑊𝑊
𝑚𝑚2∗𝐾𝐾4 
 
When applying the heat balance, it should be taken into account that the radiational cooling term does not 
include the view factor, or rephrased the view factor is equal to 1. Therefore, it is considered that the glazing 
can only see objects of ambient temperature. This means that the radiational cooling could be overestimated 
since the frontside of the glass pane will have a significantly part of its view, towards objects of ambient 
temperature, blocked by the hot experimental burner.  
The heat balance was rearranged to solve for temperature variation over time. Then the Euler method was 
applied to reach a numerical equation for the temperature history of the glass. 
 
𝑑𝑑𝑇𝑇𝑔𝑔
𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑= 𝛼𝛼𝑞𝑞̇ ′′ −ൣ(ℎ1 + ℎ2) ∙൫𝑇𝑇𝑔𝑔−𝑇𝑇∞൯+ 2𝜀𝜀𝜀𝜀൫𝑇𝑇𝑔𝑔4 −𝑇𝑇∞4൯൧
ρ ∙𝑐𝑐∙𝐿𝐿
 
 
𝑇𝑇𝑔𝑔^ = 𝑇𝑇𝑔𝑔+ 𝑑𝑑𝑇𝑇𝑔𝑔
𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑∙∆𝑇𝑇 
 
2.2 Glass Theory 
 
This part introduces the theoretical background for glass. The theory in this thesis I used to construct and to 
be used in the conducted experimental work.  
 
2.2.1 Fracture Mechanics of glass 
Glass is very different from other materials in the building sector. Where other materials will deform 
plastically under stress levels close to their breakage stress, glass is a very brittle material and has basically 
no space for plastic drift. The reason is, that glass consists of an irregular network of silicon and oxygen atoms 
mixed with alkaline parts, which makes glass have an amorphous molecular structure. The type of structural 
order that glass consists of, has no slip planes or dislocations, which could adapt the plastic flow before an 
eventual fracture. Thus, elastically, glass behave perfectly (figure 2.2 left) at normal temperatures and fail 
without warning when it is exposed to a critical stress level (Haldiman, et al., 2008). 
 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
 
Figure 2.2 - (Left) Comparison of stress and strain for Glass and Steel - (Right) Glass time dependency on strength (Chen & Lui, 2005) 
 
The nature of glass makes it vulnerable to stress concentrations, which is typically seen around the edges in 
glazing. The defects in the glazing happens when cutting or damaging the edge and is generally accepted as 
the main origin to glass failure. The defects happen to be pulled apart from tension and squeezed together 
by compression. Therefore, the glass failure is mostly managed by the tensional strength (Chen & Lui, 2005).  
 
But not only defect sizes will affect the tensile stress of the glass. Load duration and temperature can affect 
the strength. From figure 2.2 right it is seen that the tensional strength decreases with load duration. This 
can be written as; 
𝜎𝜎𝑛𝑛∙𝑡𝑡= 𝑋𝑋 
(5) 
 
where 𝜎𝜎 is applied stress, n is a constant between 12-20, t is duration of applied stress and X is a constant 
(Chen & Lui, 2005) 
 
The reason behind the loss in strength with time, is the fact that defects will grow or slide apart when exposed 
to tension. Glazing exposed to less than temporary failure stress will still fail due to the defects over time will 
grow big enough to become dangerous.  
Temperature increase is known to soften glass and turn it into a viscoelastic material. However, this 
phenomenon and transition in the material properties only happens at degrees above 500 °C (Shang, et al., 
2006). However, this phenomenon is not considered in this thesis, since the state of art only has presented 
temperatures of the glass below 150 °C.  
 
2.2.2 Thermal induced stress 
The cracking of glass under the influence of a fire is due to the thermal induced stress that occurs. The 
description behind was introduced by Emmons in 1986. Keski-Rahkonen extended the idea in 1988 and Pagni 
and Joshi took it further in 1991. All of them described the cracking as derived by thermal expansion of the 
exposed central part of the glass pane, as it has previously been described by researchers working with solar 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
irradiation. The heat expansion is explained as overcoming the tensile strength at the rim, which stays cool 
because it is screened from the radiative and convective heat by the frame.  
In 1988 Keski-Rahkonen established the breakage criterion (see section 1.1). Thus, Pagni and Joshi’s 
description (1991) of the glass fracture criterion is the most widespread and most widely used (Dembele, et 
al., 2010). 
 
∆𝑇𝑇∙𝛽𝛽= 𝑔𝑔∙𝜎𝜎𝐹𝐹
𝐸𝐸
 
(6) 
 
The criterion from Pagni and Joshi is based on the thermal coefficient of linear expansion of glass, β, and the 
temperature difference between irradiated and shaded glass, ∆T. This combined with the strain relation from 
Hook’s Law, 𝜀𝜀=
𝜎𝜎𝐹𝐹
𝐸𝐸, which includes strain, ε, modulus of elasticity, E, and tensile stress, 𝜎𝜎𝐹𝐹 (F for fracture). 
Pagni and Joshi did also include a geometric factor, g, to correct for the influence of the shading geometry. 
This factor depends on the geometry of the glazing panes.  
 
 
Figure 2.3.  - Framed window geometry description. x is the depth, y is the normal to the shaded region, z is along the shading, s is the 
width of the shading, Hy and Hz are the exposed pane half-lengths and L is the glass thicknesses (Pagni , 2002) 
 
During this thesis work and the expected temperature ranges applied, the coefficient of linear expansion, β, 
and the modulus of elasticity, E, are relatively constant. While the quality of the glass changes, the tensile 
stress, 𝜎𝜎𝐹𝐹, variates, the temperature difference is dependent on the fire behavior. It can be written and 
described by;  
∆𝑇𝑇= 𝑇𝑇ത𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸−𝑇𝑇𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 
(7) 
 
where 𝑇𝑇ത𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸 is accepted as being the average temperature of the exposed part of the pane.    
 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
The same is actual for 𝑇𝑇𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐, but from theoretical work on the two-dimensional temperature history of 
window panes exposed to normal fire conditions (Pagni & Joshi, 1991) that the thermal diffusivity of the glass 
leaves the edge of the pane at the same temperature, when the shading is wider than s/L ≥ 2. Hereafter, a 
single value rather than the bulk average can be used for the edge temperature.  
 
Standard values for glass can be used to give an approximate value for temperature variation at cracking 
initiation; 
 
∆𝑇𝑇= 𝑔𝑔∙𝜎𝜎𝐹𝐹
𝐸𝐸∙𝛽𝛽=
1 ∙40 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀
70 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺∙9 ∙10−6𝐾𝐾−1 = 63.5 °𝐶𝐶 
 
A temperature variation at cracking of approximately 63.5 °C can thereby be expected for the experimental 
tests and results.  
It has been established (Hassani, et al., 1994b) that the thermal induced stress described above, will lead to 
a stress field with uniaxial tension behind the frame at the edges and uniaxial compression in the exposed 
central part adjacent to the frame. The tension, separately compression, will act parallel to the edge. Yet, the 
stress will combine into a near isotropic compression at the corner regions of the pane. Thereby, the stress 
at the corners is reduced and the cracking of the glass is probably to start in the middle part of the edge. The 
description of the stress field has more recently been supported by FEM simulation (Wang, et al., 2011). 
 
 
2.2.3 Mirror size and fracture stress 
In tension, a brittle material like glass will leave a distinct fracture pattern when breaking. From study of the 
fracture pattern at the spot of crack initiation much basic information can be derived. The fracture stress of 
the glass is amongst this and will be presented as a part of the results in this thesis. The theory in this section 
is described on the work of Krohn and Hasselman (Krohn & Hasselman, 1971), Mecholsky (Mecholsky, et al., 
1974) and Abdel-Latif (Abdel-Latif, et al., 1977). 
 
The fracture pattern in glass is normally divided into three regions: mirror, mist and hackle. The fracture will 
always originate in a flaw at the edge of the glass and flaws will in general affect the crack advance throughout 
the pane. At the initiation edge, the mirror is the first surrounding region. It has a clear and smooth and 
reflecting surface. Within this region the propagation of the crack is accelerating towards its critical velicity. 
When reaching the critical velocity, the surface starts to get rougher, which is indicated first by the mist 
region and then the hackle region. The fracture pattern provides a clear indication of where the cracking 
initially begins.  
 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
 
Figure 2.4 - Fracture pattern in glass (left), fracture from our experiment (right) 
        
 
 
The fracture stress can be related to the radius of the regions through 
 
𝜎𝜎𝐹𝐹=
𝐴𝐴
ඥ𝑟𝑟𝑚𝑚
 
(8) 
 
Where 𝜎𝜎𝐹𝐹- facture stress, A – mirror constant for the material and rm – radius of the mirror surface.  
 
The constant A variates a little with experimental procedure. For strict tension the average value for soda-
lime glass is A = 1.91 MN/m3/2 (Abdel-Latif, et al., 1977), which we decided to utilize for the fracture stress 
approximation.  
 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
3. Experimental setup 
After pilot testing the experiment and the setup, the final setup of the experiments is introduced in this 
chapter. The chapter will include; 
• 
The glass specimen 
• 
The heating setup 
• 
The specimen setup 
• 
The additional monitoring  
 
The most essential parts are included, so the experiments can be understood and repeated without any 
misunderstandings.  
Figure 3.1 shows the setup of the experiments conducted in this thesis.  
 
 
Figure 3.1 - Experimental setup 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
3.1 Glass specimens 
In this thesis, the glass specimens used for the experimental work were standard Soda-Lime-Silica float glass. 
This type of specimens is typical for window panes. The chemical composition of the specimens can be seen 
in figure 5. In addition to the below general composition, these glasses may also contain small quantities of 
other substances. (DS/EN-572-1-2012, u.d.) 
 
 
Figure 3.2 - Chemical properties of soda-lime-silica glass 
 
The glass was ordered from Glarmestre Snoer og Sønner A/S, which is a Danish glazier, which among other 
work, performs work at DTU. The specimens were cut in sizes of 400x400 mm, so they would fit the 
experiment.   
The manufacturer didn’t provide a datasheet for the glass, but referred to table 2 in “Definitions and general 
physical and mechanical properties”.  
 
Table 3.1 - General characteristic values of basic soda lime silicate glass 
Charactheristics 
Symbol Value and unit 
Density (at 18 °C) 
ρ 
2500 kg/m3 
Young’s modulus (modulus of elasticity) 
E 
7 ∙109𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃 
Poisson’s ratio 
µ 
0.2 
Specific heat capacity 
Cp 
0.72 ∙103
𝐽𝐽
𝑘𝑘𝑘𝑘∗𝐾𝐾 
Nominal value of average coefficient of linear expansion between 20 °C and 300 °C 
α 
9 ∙10−6 𝐾𝐾−1 
Thermal conductivity 
λ 
1 W/(m ∙ K) 
Emissivity (corrected) 
ε 
0.837 
a Knoop Hardness in accordance with ISO 9385 
b Generally accepted value that is influenced by edge quality glass type 
- 
- 
Silicion dioxide 
(SiO2)
70%
Calcium 
oxide 
(CaO)
15%
Sodium 
Oxide 
(Na2O)
15%
Chemical composition of Soda-Lime-Silica specimen
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
From previous research, it is shown that small variations in elasticity and in the coefficient of linear expansion 
(Pagni & Joshi, 1991) (Wang, 2013), which are the main factors of the breakage criterion explained in section 
2.2.2. But the values have shown not to be consistent through experiments conducted in the past and 
therefore, the values have been taken according to the tabulated data previous this thesis.  
 
3.2 Heating setup (H-TRIS) 
This thesis wants to investigate glass specimens influenced by a uniform executed heat flux. Achieving this is 
possible with the Heat Transfer Rate Inducing System (H-TRIS).  
 
The H-TRIS is a gas driven radiating panel, which is placed on a rail system. The radiating panel which is the 
burner, is an industry purpose burner produced by “aem Brüleur”. The radiating panel measures 500 x 500 
mm. The burner is supplied with nature gas. The nature gas is applied from supply system at the DTU FireLab 
where the H-TRIS stands. The radiating panel is also supplied with air from a fan, which is installed to deliver 
sufficient air for the gas combustion.  
The H-TRIS system can be seen in figure 3.3.  
 
 
Figure 3.3 - H-TRIS setup 
The H-TRIS can supply the specimen surface with a big variety of heat fluxes. The incident heat flux is highly 
reliant on the distance and the installed burner intensity. The distance can vary by moving the H-TRIS for- or 
backward on the rail system. The variation of the burner intensity can be controlled manually and increased 
or decreased from 0 - 100 % by a small panel on the operator box on the backside of the radiating panel. It 
is also possible to control the burner intensity by pre-programming it to create a time dependent heat flux. 
The variation in the burner intensity is achieved by variating gas intake and fan strength.  
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
From figure 3.4, the possibilities can be seen. The figure clearly indicates how high an impact the distance 
has compared to the burner intensity.  
 
 
Figure 3.4 - Variation of heat flux from H-TRIS, dependent on distance and burner intensity 
 
From pilot experiments conducted before the final experiments, it was seen that the H-TRIS needed some 
time to warm-up before the final constant heat flux output was reached. To protect the glass specimens from 
any pre-warm up radiation before the tests, a burner shield, seen on figure 3.5, was used to protect the 
specimens. The burner shield was made of 22mm thick “FireFree 850” fastened to an aluminum rod skeleton 
with wheels, so it could be moved forth and back quick. 
 
  
 
Figure 3.5 - Burner shield for protection of the specimen under pre-warm up of the H-TRIS 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
3.3 Experimental installation 
This section describes how the experimental setup glass specimen was installed in front of the heating panel, 
how the thermocouples was installed and attached to the glass specimen and how the whole frame setup 
was done.  
 
3.3.1 Window frame  
The setup of the experiments needed a windows frame replica. The window frame was created by fire 
resistant boards (22 mm thick “FireFree 850”) as used in the burner shield. The fire-resistant board was 
mounted in top of a supporting aluminum rod skeleton. The aluminum rods matched the ones from the H-
TRIS and the rest of the setup, so it was easy to attach the frame to the setup already created for the H-TRIS. 
The front side frame, which refers to the side closest to the H-TRIS and respectively the backside facing 
ambient, was created by using three pieces of FireFree boards. A large one in the middle where a hole of size 
385 ∙ 385 mm was cut in the middle so the 400 ∙ 400 mm glass panes could fit with a shading edge of 15 mm. 
Two larger boards were created to protect the aluminum skeleton from direct heating.  
The backside frame was constructed from a large piece of FireFree Board. A hole was cut in the middle, again 
with the size of 385 ∙ 385 mm. The backside frame is supported at the bottom by the aluminum rod skeleton. 
The frame is fastened to the sides by friction, and two wedges were created to maintain the frame in the 
same position.   
This setup makes it possible for the glass pane to expand without any boundaries, though still supported at 
the bottom by the two support blocks.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.6 - Front side window frame 
Figure 3.7 - Backside window frame 
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
3.3.2 Glass specimen installation 
The glass pane was mounted in front of the heating panel, and was supported on three sides; the bottom, 
front and backside. The pane was installed, so it was supported by two 50 mm blocks made of FireFree board 
at the bottom, and by the two window frames on the front and backside.  
The load bearing support at the bottom was designed according to common installation form in Denmark. 
(Glasindustrien & Teknologisk Institut, 2008). According to the common design guide in Denmark, the two 
supports at the bottom edge needs to have a minimum distance of 50 mm to the edge. This was used for the 
entire set of experiments conducted in this thesis. Furthermore, the installation method advises an edge 
cover of minimum 12 mm. Likewise, it suggests an edge clearance of 10 mm.  
When installing the glass panes, they were investigated for flaws and cracks at the edges. Since it is known 
that cracks will start from micro fractures, specimens with flaws at the edges would be discarded. After teach 
test, the platform where the frame was located was vacuum cleaned and by that, ensuring that there were 
no small glass pieces left on the platform where the tests were done.  
 
  
 
Figure 3.8 – Placement of the glass specimen in frame 
   
3.3.3 Temperature measurement information 
Amongst the most important parameters is the temperature measurement equipment, the attachment and 
reliability of the measured data. The measuring equipment was K-type thermocouples (TC’s) which is an easy 
sensor that has a measuring point at the end of a wire. The wire contains two different conductors and when 
the end of the wire is heated the thermoelectric effect will ensure that a voltage is produced over the circuit. 
This voltage is measured through an acquisition system, where a free end of the TC is inserted. The utilized 
TC’s were produced by Omega and had a diameter of 0.25 mm and a cover made of glass braid insulation. 
The K-type TC’s are created with a wire base nickel with conductors of respectively chromium and aluminum. 
They are working in the range of -270 to 1260 °C and a standard accuracy of ± 2.2 °C or ± 0.75%.  
 
Former experimental work did not provide guidance for attachment or implementation of the measuring 
apparatus. Wang (Wang, 2015) (Wang, 2017) used sheet TC’s on the glass specimens using high-temperature 
resistant adhesive. He stated that it gave a more precise measurement because of the aluminum surface of 
the sheet will reflect the radiational heating. Before Wang, Skelly (Skelly, et al., 1991) ran some experiments 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
where the usage of cement-on TC’s, but concluded that the TC’s were heated more than the pane due to 
direct radiative heating.  
Since it would not do any good for the measurement to use any adhesive to attach the TC’s on the glass, the 
final setup is seen on figure 3.9.  
A frame of aluminum rod skeleton was created, where the TC’s were attached to. This would make it possible 
to get the approximately same position of the TC’s on the glass pane for each test.  
 
 
Figure 3.9 - TC installation and setup frame 
The setup on the aluminum frame includes nine TC’s. The TC’s are numbered from 1-9 and is attached on the 
backside of the glass. TC’s with even numbers 2, 4, 6 and 8 are placed on the exposed part of the glass. 
Uneven numbers, 1, 3, 5, 7 are placed on the shaded edge part of the glass. TC number nine are placed in 
the center of the backside.  
All the TC’s have direct contact with the glass which is ensured by the aluminum frame that can be moved 
forth and back on the little plateau at the backside of the glass pane frame. The direct contact is also ensured 
by the tension in the TC wire.  
 
The TC’s positioned on the shaded edges, were placed by drilling a small hole in the backside frame. These 
TC’s were installed through holes in the aluminum frame created, so they would not move anywhere when 
the tests were on.  
 
3.5 Acquisition system 
As mentioned in part 3.4, the thermocouples contain of two different conductors. When the end of the wire 
is heated, the thermoelectric effect will ensure that a voltage is produced over the circuit. This voltage is 
measured through an acquisition system, where a free end of the TC is inserted. The thermocouple data is 
then collected by a datalogger (cable-box) for the acquisition system. The data-logger is connected to a 
computer in the FireLab. On the computer, the software “Benchlink 3” let the user choose which kind of 
==PAGE:35==
35 
 
thermocouple used (in this situation type K) and then directly provides the temperature transformed from 
volt. A sample rate of one second in the system was considered to be sufficient based on the timeframe of 
the experiments.  
From here it is also easy to see if any thermocouple is not directly connected to the surface of the specimen 
and stop a test run instead of starting over with a whole new setup.  
 
3.6 Extra monitoring 
To validate the heat flux impact and determine the cracking time, additional equipment was installed during 
the experimental tests. Therefore, a heat flux sensor and a video camera was installed for each individual 
test.  
The DTU Fire Lab has a whole set of waters cooled HukseFlux sensors. The data from the HukseFlux is 
collected like data from the TC’s, through a module in the same data-logger for the acquisitions system, 
where the heat flux sensor can be connected. The heat flux sensor comes with a letter where the sensitivity 
of the sensor is described. The sensitivity is used to convert the voltage output measured in to 
𝑊𝑊
𝑚𝑚2. The 
conversion can be done in the software immediately before the test run, or in a spreadsheet after the test 
run.  
The HukseFlux sensor was inserted through a drilled hole on the backside of the frame. From here it was 
clamped to the backside of the frame, so it would not move when irradiated and the right heat flux would 
be measured. The sensor was installed on the right side of the frame (looking from the backside) to get as 
close as possible to the area of impact.  
In addition, a video camera was installed to record the very fast-evolving cracking in the glazing and to be 
able to determine the exact initial cracking time from removal of the burner shield. The video camera was 
placed on the backside of the experimental setup, in the height of the specimen, to attain the best 
perspective (figure 3.11). The record was controlled directly on the computer, were software was installed 
to control the playback.  
 
Figure 3.10 - Camera placement for monitoring 
 
Supplementary to the video camera, iPhones, model 6 and 6s were used for capturing the crack pattern. The 
phones’ cameras showed to be sufficient, so a high resolution camera was not used.   
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
4. Preliminary experiments 
Before any tests could be conducted, pre-experimental work had to be established. To have the most reliable 
experimental results, pre-experimental work and understanding of how the experiments would be installed 
and performed was necessary. The pre-experimental work included testing the H-TRIS, testing the 
experimental setup and determine a sample size for our final tests by standard deviation.  
 
Therefore, the pilot testing was divided in two parts. The first part included the physical setup of the 
experiments and understanding how the apparatus works. The second part included data derived from tests 
for the standard deviation, to have the most reliable results.   
 
Part 1: General understanding of the H-TRIS. 
Part 2: Establishing a standard deviation and a sample size for experimental work and merging derived 
data with previous thesis.   
 
4.1 General understanding of the testing procedure and performance 
 
During the general pilot experiments, we were working toward an understanding on how the H-TRIS 
apparatus worked in combination with the experimental setup. Since this thesis is a follow up on a former 
thesis done in fall 2017 by Jonathan D. Jørgensen, the experimental setup was mostly done following the 
experimental setup described in his appendix on how he did his experiments. The data derived by him had 
to be validated and the “empty spots” filled out by data derived in this thesis, and a trend line had to be 
investigated.  
 
4.1.1 H-TRIS intensity 
 
The H-TRIS, as described in section 3.2, is the gas driven radiating panel executing the uniform heat flux.  
The intensity of the H-TRIS was given by calibrations from appendix 2. The calibration shows us that the 
impact of the distance is higher than the burner intensity for the heat release.  
We decided to validate the heat release from the H-TRIS, to get as precise value of the heat release as 
possible. 
Therefore, we installed the H-TRIS distances after the calibrated values determined from the original 
calibration in appendix 2. The measurement of the heat release was done by two different HukseFlux sensors. 
The use of two different sensors, was to rely on that the first sensor was not broken and gave us the right 
results. The measurement showed us that the intensity of the H-TRIS was higher than what was expected by 
looking at figure 4.1. The results of the measurement compared to the original calibration can be seen in 
figure 4.1.  
The measurement and the curves starts from the distance of 0.3 m, since it was suggested from the 
calibration notes that the H-TRIS should not be moved closer than 0.3 m to the surface tested.   
 
==PAGE:37==
37 
 
 
Figure 4.1 – Heat Flux Measurement vs. Calibration. “S” is sensitivity of specific used hukseflux sensor. 
 
 
The wanted heat flux was therefore derived by equation (9) gained from the trend line from the measured 
heat fluxes:  
 
y = 59.291x2 −109.05𝑥𝑥+ 55.271 
(9) 
 
Where x is the distance to the heated surface in m.  
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
1,1
1,2
Heat Flux [kW/m^2]
Distance [m]
Heat Flux measurement vs. calibration
Calibration
Measurement S=0,576xxx
Measurement S=0,354xxx
Trendline
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
4.1.2 Standard Deviation 
 
A study of an entire population is both time and resource intensive and not always feasible. Studies are 
therefore often done on the sample, and data is summarized using descriptive statistics. In order to 
understand the cracking time of a glass population, cracking times of study sample, drawn from the same 
population are measured.  
The outcomes of this sample are best described by two parameters, mean (average) and standard deviation 
(SD). The sample mean is the average of observations measured and is denoted by 𝑋𝑋ത. The average is the 
center of distribution of observations. 
In statistics, the other parameter, standard deviation (σ or SD), is a measure that is used to quantify the 
amount of variation or dispersion of a set of data values. A low standard deviation indicates that the data 
points tends to be close to the mean (the expected value) of the set, while a high standard deviation indicated 
that the data points are spread out over a wide range of values.  
Algebraically it is simpler, though in practice less robust, than the average absolute deviation. A useful 
property of the standard deviation, is that unlike the variance, it is expressed in the same unit as the data.  
The standard deviation is commonly used to measure the confidence in statistical conclusions. The derivation 
of the standard deviation is therefore often called “standard error” of the estimate or “standard error of 
mean” when referring to the mean.  
Mathematically the standard deviation is derived from equation 10; 
 
𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆= ඨ∑(𝑥𝑥−𝑋𝑋ത)2
𝑛𝑛
 
(10) 
Where, x – value in data set, N – number of data points in population, 𝑋𝑋ത – mean of the data set  
 
 
For the final experiments in this thesis, is was concluded to derive a standard deviation created on the 
cracking time. Based on the experimental setup and the knowledge about the H-TRIS, preliminary tests were 
therefore established. The objective of the tests was to derive the most reliable data, and therefore a sample 
size for the final tests needed. Respectively;   
 
Table 4.1 - Thickness and heat rate for the experiments 
Thickness [mm] 
Heat Rate [kW/m2] 
2 
10 and 20 
4 
7.5 and 20 
6 
20 
 
The standard deviation was based on tests made of; 
 
• 
4 mm glass specimens with heating rate of 10 kW/m2  
• 
6 mm glass specimens with heating rate of 10 kW/m2.  
 
==PAGE:39==
39 
 
This was chosen due to the fact that we needed a specimen and a heat rate that was in the mid-range of 
both the specimen and heat ranges tested in the final experiments.  
In both preliminary setups, in total 15 specimens were tested before a clear and satisfying trend was 
observed.  
The results can be seen in table 4.2 and table 4.3  
 
Table 4.2 – Time to first crack results and SD for 4 mm 
 
 
Based on the results from the 4 mm experiments, a cracking time graph was established. Here it is seen that 
the most of the data points are close to the mean value. This is also seen from figure 4.3 where the standard 
deviation is derived. We know from earlier, that a low standard deviation indicates that the data points are 
close to the mean. In this situation, we see that the standard deviation is 4.9 based on all 15 tests.  
Looking at the standard deviation, the diversity in the values are not relatively high after test number 6. From 
test number 6 until test number 15, the difference is 0.7. Which means the experimental setup have been 
homogenous throughout the tests.  
 
 
Figure 4.2 - Preliminary test: Results of cracking time for 4 mm 
Test No
Cracking time [s]
Standard Deviation
Average cracking time
1
92
0,00
103,1
2
95
1,50
103,1
3
102
4,19
103,1
4
108
6,22
103,1
5
106
6,18
103,1
6
101
5,65
103,1
7
104
5,36
103,1
8
104
5,10
103,1
9
98
4,93
103,1
10
110
5,39
103,1
11
105
5,21
103,1
12
102
4,99
103,1
13
108
5,03
103,1
14
109
5,11
103,1
15
102
4,95
103,1
4 mm
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
 
Figure 4.3 - Preliminary test: SD on cracking time for 4 mm 
 
Table 4.3 - Time to first crack results and SD for 6 mm 
 
 
Like the 4 mm tests, a cracking time graph was created based on the results from the 6 mm results. Here it 
is observed that the most of the data point are close to the mean value of the tests. This is also seen in figure 
4.4. The standard deviation is derived on the background of the cracking time. Compared to the standard 
deviation of the 4 mm tests (4.9), we see that the standard deviation, 20, for the 6 mm tests are very high. 
We know, that a high standard deviation indicates the data points are spread out over a wide range of values. 
Although, it indicates that the data points are spread out over a wide range of values, we see from figure 4.4 
that the most data points are mostly near the mean value of 158.9 second. It is here striking that the data 
have two outliers, respectively test nine and ten. Looking at the results for test nine, it is seen that the 
cracking time compared to test eight, which has the longest cracking time for tests done so far (162 s), is 60 
seconds longer. Therefore, when establishing the standard deviation, the value will increase the rest of the 
tests as well.    
 
Test No
Seconds (s)
Standard Deviation
Average
1
152
0,00
158,87
2
123
14,50
158,87
3
162
16,54
158,87
4
148
14,36
158,87
5
157
13,54
158,87
6
155
12,61
158,87
7
160
12,24
158,87
8
162
12,01
158,87
9
222
24,64
158,87
10
175
23,80
158,87
11
149
22,98
158,87
12
149
22,22
158,87
13
152
21,45
158,87
14
154
20,70
158,87
15
163
20,03
158,87
6 mm 
==PAGE:41==
41 
 
 
Figure 4.4 - Preliminary test: Results of cracking time for 6 mm 
 
 
Figure 4.5 - Preliminary test: SD on cracking time for 6 mm 
 
For test 9 and 10, it is notable that the experimental procedure was slightly changed. Due to the front side 
frames movability, two wedges, one in each side in between the removable front side frame and the 
aluminum skeleton, was installed.  
The change in the results was observed after test 10, and the wedges was then removed. The rest of the test 
have been done without the wedges and these follows the trend that was proven by the first eight tests.  
 
For reliability, two additional tests was created to verify the observation made. These two tests clearly 
showed us, that with the wedges installed, the cracking time would increase with several seconds.  
The first test gave a cracking time of 201 seconds while the second test gave a cracking time of 237 seconds. 
This can be seen in figure 4.6  
 
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
 
Figure 4.6 - Additional test for 6 mm 
Based on the observations in the additional testing, the change made in the testing procedure for test nine 
and ten did not comply with the procedure made for the rest of the tests. This is also visible in the values 
gained. Therefore, test nine and ten has been chosen to be disregarded and a new cracking time mean and 
a new standard deviation has been calculated. The disregarded results is marked with red in table 4.4 and 
with two red data points figure 4.7.  
 
Table 4.4 - Time to first crack results and SD for 6 mm with disregard of test 9+10 
 
 
Test No
Seconds (s)
Standard Deviation
Average
1
152,0
2
123,0
14,5
137,5
3
162,0
16,5
145,7
4
148,0
14,4
146,3
5
157,0
13,5
148,4
6
155,0
12,6
149,5
7
160,0
12,2
151,0
8
162,0
12,0
152,4
9
222,0
24,6
160,1
10
175,0
23,8
161,6
11
149,0
11,4
160,5
12
149,0
10,8
159,5
13
152,0
10,3
158,9
14
154,0
9,9
158,6
15
163,0
10,0
158,9
6 mm
==PAGE:43==
43 
 
 
Figure 4.7 - Preliminary test: Results of cracking time for 6 mm with disregard of test 9+10 
 
When disregarding test nine and ten, the standard deviation has been calculated on basis of the new values. 
It can be seen from figure 4.8 that the standard deviation has begun to have a more smooth line. This is of 
course based on the cracking time data points, which can be seen to be close to the mean cracking time. The 
standard deviation following the disregard of test nine and ten is now 10, compared to the early stage of the 
deviation, which was 20.  
 
 
Figure 4.8 - Preliminary test: SD on cracking time for 6 mm with disregard of test 9+10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
4.1.2.1 Sample size 
Based on the standard deviation derived from the preliminary tests of both the 4 mm and 6 mm specimen, 
a sample size can be chosen. In statistics, the bigger a sample size, the more reliable data. From figure 4.3 
and 4.8 it is seen that a sample size of 8 repetitions would be a sufficient choice. But due to the lack of time 
and resources, 8 repetitions would properly be too big a sample size to conduct in this thesis. It is also seen 
on the figures that a minimum sample size would be 4 test repetitions. However, this would be a very 
conservative choice since we in the preliminary tests have seen how much the cracking time can vary.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.9 - Standard normal distribution based on preliminary test of 4 mm specimens 
 
As seen on figure 4.9, the conducted preliminary experiments is all with exceptions of one (test no. 1, 92 s) 
in the range of the confidence interval 95 %. This tells us that the reliability of the data derived from the 
experiments is high. 
 
 
 
  
 
==PAGE:45==
45 
 
4.1.2.2 Merging results with previous data 
As mentioned many times this thesis is a study moved from a study done previous with different parameters. 
The objective was to verify the earlier results and to fill out the gaps between the parameters studied.  
Before it is possible to fill out the gaps, it is necessary to control that the set of results is capable of being 
merged. This is done by verifying that the two sets of results is within the same variability and a trend is seen.  
 
Since the previous study only tested 4 mm glass specimens with different heating rates (5, 10 and 20 kW/m2) 
and different shading widths (10, 15, 20, 25 mm), the only possible data to authenticate before the possible 
merge is the 4 mm glass specimen with the shading width of 15 mm and irradiated with 10 kW/m2.  
 
Table 4.5 - Test results of 4 mm specimens from (Jørgensen, 2018). “Test no.” is called 18, 19 and 20 for comparison purpose only. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.10 - Comparison of results with Jørgensen. Test no. M15.1, M15.2 and M15.3 are from (Jørgensen, 2018). The red dotted 
line is average cracking from Jørgensen. The two black dotted are average ± SD. 
 
From figure 4.10 it is now established that the two set of experiments are in the same variability, meaning 
that a merging of the results is possible.  
 
The capability of merge between the results means that the standard deviation and the mean value derived 
from experiments in this thesis needs to be re-calculated due to the fact that the previous data is not included 
in the value.  
 
Test no.
Thickness
Heat Flux
Cracking Time
Average cracking time
Standard Deviation
[mm]
[kW/m^2]
[s]
[s]
18 (M15.1)
4
10
90
19 (M15.2)
4
10
100
20 (M15.3)
4
10
102
5,25
97
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
Table 4.6 - Average cracking time and SD based on merged results 
 
 
When comparing table 4.2 with table 4.6 it is visible that the average cracking time has decreased with 1 
second from 103 s to 102 s.  
On the other hand, the standard deviation has increased as expected. The standard deviation without the 
including of the previous data was 4.9. The standard deviation for the previous data based on the three tests 
run was 5.25. The merge of the two populations has given a standard deviation of 5.59. The relative small 
change in the standard deviation was expected, since the values found in this thesis have been in the 
variability of the previous data.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Test no.
Cracking Time
Average cracking time
Standard Deviation
[s]
[s]
1
92
2
95
3
102
4
108
5
106
6
101
7
104
8
104
9
98
10
110
11
105
12
102
13
108
14
109
15
102
18 (M15.1)
90
19 (M15.2)
100
20 (M15.3)
102
102,1
5,59
==PAGE:47==
47 
 
4.1.3 Strain Gauges 
 
What is strain? 
The amount of deformation of a body due to an applied force is the strain. More, specifically, strain (ɛ) is 
defined as the fractional change in length as seen in figure 4.11.  
The value of strain can be positive (tension) or negative (compression). Though dimensionless, strain can 
sometimes be expressed in units such as mm/mm or m/m. In practice the measured strain is often very small, 
and therefore often expressed as microstrain (𝜇𝜇𝜇𝜇= 𝜀𝜀∗106) (National Instruments, 1998).  
 
 
Figure 4.11 - Strain gauge with possible forces (National Instruments, 1998) 
 
When a bar or another material is strained with a uniaxial force as seen in figure 4.11, a phenomenon known 
as Poisson Strain caused the girth of the bar D, to contract in the transverse, or perpendicular, direction. The 
magnitude of this transverse contraction is a material property indicated by its Poission’s ratio. The Poisson’s 
ratio 𝜈𝜈 of a material is defined as the negative ratio of the strain in the transverse direction (perpendicular 
to the force) to the strain in the axial direction (parallel to the force). Poisson’s Ratio for glass, for example, 
ranges from 0.18-0.3.  
 
 
The strain gauge 
The measurement of strain can be done by several methods, but the most common is measuring with the 
use of a strain gauge, a device whose electrical resistance varies in proportion to the amount of strain in the 
device. The most common used strain gauge is the bonded metallic strain gauge.  
 
 
The metallic bonded strain gauge consists of a very fine metallic foil arranged in a grid pattern. The grid 
pattern maximizes the amount of metallic wire or foil subject to strain in the parallel direction.  
The cross sectional area of the grid is minimized to reduce the effect of shear strain and Poisson Strain. The 
grid is bonded to a thin backing, called the carrier, which is attached directly to the test specimen. Thus, the 
strain experienced by the test specimen is transferred directly to the strain gauge, which responds with a 
linear change in electrical resistance. Strain gauge are available commercially with nominal resistance values 
from 30 to 3000 Ω.   
==PAGE:48==
48 
 
 
Figure 4.12 - Typical strain gauge type C as used in this thesis (National Instruments, 1998) 
 
It is very important that the strain gauge is correctly attached to the test specimen so that the strain is 
accurately transferred from the test specimen through the adhesive and strain gauge backing, to the foil 
itself.  
 
Attaching procedure 
When attaching the strain gauges to the test specimen, it is important that all tools needed are nearby or 
available.  
 
Procedure: 
1. Find the area on the specimen surface the strain gauges should be attached to. 
2. Clean the area (test specimen surface) with cloth wetted in acetone. 
3. Assemble the strain gauges on the specimen with the right adhesive.  
4. Attach solder plates close to strain gauges 
5. Sold strain gauges to solder pad 
6. Sold cables to solder pad 
7. Connect cables to strain gauge indicator 
8. Start test 
 
When a strain gauge is mounted on a test specimen, two notes of caution should be considered: 
• 
The surface must be absolutely clean. This is usually done by cloth wetted in acetone.  
 
• 
Sufficient time must be allowed for the adhesive – which bonds the strain gauge to the test specimen 
– to dry completely. Otherwise, it is possible that the strain gauges move due to small moves in the 
cables attached.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
49 
 
Preliminary strain gauge results 
 
Before conducting the final strain gauge experiments, it is important to know where to place the strain 
gauges on the glass specimen. From previous research, we know that the tension approximately will be equal 
on all four shaded edge sides of the glass specimen when the experimental setup is symmetrical      (Wang, 
et al., 2013). 
 
It was therefore necessary to confirm the assumption that the tensile stress approximately is equally at all 
four edges.  
Therefore, experiments were conducted, with a single glass specimen, which were rotated four times anti-
clockwise so the strain gauges would be “placed” at 4 different edge locations going from; bottom  Right 
 Top  Left.    
 
Figure 4.13 - Strain gauge and TC arrangement 
 
At the first test, the attached strain gauges were placed at the bottom edge of the specimen.  
We know from our preliminary tests with the 4 mm glass specimens, that crack initiation occurs just about 
1:30 minute. Therefore, it was chosen to test the specimen for 1 minute and measure the strain until precisely 
1 minute and then the following cool down until the specimen and the surrounding frame were cooled down 
until initial temperature.    
The H-TRIS were heated up in 5 minute before testing the specimen in one minute, before letting the 
specimen cool down in 30 minutes until initial temperature.  
After cooling, the specimen was rotated 90 degrees to the right and the same procedure was followed until 
the strain gauges had been placed at all four edges and the strain was measured.  
 
The preliminary test was done twice, so the reliability of the results derived would be higher. The results of 
the tests can be seen in table 4.7 and belonging figure 4.14 (left) and in table 4.8 and belonging figure 4.14 
Right.  
==PAGE:50==
50 
 
 
A strain gauge measurement takes place in a Wheatstone bridge consisting of four ohmic resistors. The 
quarter bridge has only one measurement resistor (strain gauge,), the remaining three are inactive ohmic 
resistors with the same resistance value as the strain gauge. These will often be built into a terminal box and 
therefore remain hidden. The strain gauge wires are connected to this terminal box. The output of the 
terminal box is in volt, and the output must therefore be converted into strain. 
This is done by the strain gauge formula for the quarter bridge  
,  
Δ𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠= 𝑈𝑈𝑓𝑓∙𝑆𝑆∙𝑘𝑘∙1
4 →𝑆𝑆= Δ𝑈𝑈𝑠𝑠
𝑈𝑈𝑓𝑓
∙4
𝑘𝑘 
(11) 
 
Where, Us – Signal voltage [V], Uf – supply voltage [V], S – ɛ, K – gauge factor 
    
Table 4.7 - Preliminary strain gauge test: Results of first rotation test 
 
 
 
Table 4.8 - Preliminary strain gauge test: Results of second rotation test 
 
Test A
 Distance 
from edge
Measurement 
Side
Initial U_s
U_s
∆U_s
U_f
K-faktor
Strain
Stress
Distance
Strain  
average
Stress 
average
Strain gauge 
No.
mm
-
mV
mV
mV
V
-
m/m
MPa
mm
m/m
MPa
1
2,75
Bottom
1,11E-03
1,83E-03
7,24E-04
4,972
2,21
2,64E-04
18,45
2
5,5
Bottom
2,53E-03
3,18E-03
6,47E-04
4,972
2,21
2,35E-04
16,48
3
8,25
Bottom
-7,18E-04
-1,82E-04
5,35E-04
4,972
2,21
1,95E-04
13,65
4
11
Bottom
5,48E-04
9,63E-04
4,15E-04
4,972
2,21
1,51E-04
10,57
1
2,75
Right
1,10E-03
1,78E-03
6,79E-04
4,972
2,21
2,47E-04
17,32
2
5,5
Right
2,52E-03
3,18E-03
6,59E-04
4,972
2,21
2,40E-04
16,81
3
8,25
Right
-7,26E-04
-8,31E-05
6,43E-04
4,972
2,21
2,34E-04
16,39
4
11
Right
5,43E-04
1,15E-03
6,03E-04
4,972
2,21
2,19E-04
15,35
1
2,75
Top
1,12E-03
1,84E-03
7,12E-04
4,972
2,21
2,59E-04
18,15
2
5,5
Top
2,55E-03
3,20E-03
6,54E-04
4,972
2,21
2,38E-04
16,65
3
8,25
Top
-6,92E-04
-1,20E-04
5,72E-04
4,972
2,21
2,08E-04
14,57
4
11
Top
5,77E-04
1,06E-03
4,80E-04
4,972
2,21
1,75E-04
12,24
1
2,75
Left
1,18E-03
1,85E-03
6,72E-04
4,972
2,21
2,45E-04
17,12
2
5,5
Left
2,62E-03
3,18E-03
5,58E-04
4,972
2,21
2,03E-04
14,23
3
8,25
Left
-6,26E-04
-2,41E-04
3,85E-04
4,972
2,21
1,40E-04
9,82
4
11
Left
6,43E-04
8,68E-04
2,25E-04
4,972
2,21
8,19E-05
5,73
17,76
16,04
13,61
10,97
2,75
5,5
8,25
11
2,54E-04
2,29E-04
1,94E-04
1,57E-04
Test B
 Distance 
from edge
Measurement 
Side
Initial U_s
U_s
∆U_s
U_f
K-faktor
Strain
Stress
Distance
Strain
average 
Stress 
average
Strain gauge 
No.
mm
-
mV
mV
mV
V
-
m/m
MPa
mm
m/m
MPa
1
2,75
Bottom
1,15E-03
1,89E-03
7,32E-04
4,972
2,21
2,67E-04
18,66
2
5,5
Bottom
2,57E-03
3,22E-03
6,52E-04
4,972
2,21
2,37E-04
16,62
3
8,25
Bottom
-6,70E-04
-1,18E-04
5,53E-04
4,972
2,21
2,01E-04
14,09
4
11
Bottom
6,01E-04
1,01E-03
4,10E-04
4,972
2,21
1,49E-04
10,45
1
2,75
Right
1,09E-03
1,75E-03
6,67E-04
4,972
2,21
2,43E-04
17,01
2
5,5
Right
2,50E-03
3,14E-03
6,44E-04
4,972
2,21
2,34E-04
16,41
3
8,25
Right
-7,40E-04
-1,04E-04
6,37E-04
4,972
2,21
2,32E-04
16,22
4
11
Right
5,31E-04
1,11E-03
5,76E-04
4,972
2,21
2,10E-04
14,68
1
2,75
Top
1,07E-03
1,79E-03
7,16E-04
4,972
2,21
2,61E-04
18,25
2
5,5
Top
2,49E-03
3,14E-03
6,51E-04
4,972
2,21
2,37E-04
16,58
3
8,25
Top
-7,39E-04
-1,71E-04
5,68E-04
4,972
2,21
2,07E-04
14,46
4
11
Top
5,29E-04
1,00E-03
4,75E-04
4,972
2,21
1,73E-04
12,10
1
2,75
Left
1,07E-03
1,77E-03
6,97E-04
4,972
2,21
2,54E-04
17,77
2
5,5
Left
2,49E-03
3,14E-03
6,51E-04
4,972
2,21
2,37E-04
16,59
3
8,25
Left
-7,46E-04
-1,69E-04
5,77E-04
4,972
2,21
2,10E-04
14,69
4
11
Left
5,19E-04
1,01E-03
4,88E-04
4,972
2,21
1,78E-04
12,43
5,5
8,25
11
16,51
16,55
14,87
12,42
2,56E-04
2,36E-04
2,12E-04
1,77E-04
2,75
==PAGE:51==
51 
 
 
Figure 4.14 - Distance vs. Strain, Test A (left) and Test B (right) 
     
 
Figure 4.15 - Distance vs. strain. Average and merged results of Test A and Test B 
  
 
As seen in figure XX the range and the values of the strain at each side of the glass specimen is in close 
resemblance to each other. The small variation in the values can be due to the fact of the variation in the 
temperature as seen in previous experiments performed in this thesis.  
As written earlier in this section, the experiments conducted in this section was to verify the fact that tensile 
stress at the edges of the glass specimen are approximately equal. This trend is seen when looking at figure 
4.15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
52 
 
5 Experimental results and discussion 
This chapter will introduce the final experimental program conducted in this thesis as well as the final results 
derived. The chapter includes six sections which will guide through experimental key findings. The results are 
discussed throughout the chapter.  
 
5.1 Experimental program 
This section grants an overview of the experimental tests that have been conducted in this thesis work. A 
summary is given to the final selection of values and a nomenclature for the testing.  
 
From previous research ( (Mowrer, 1998) (Harada, et al., 2000) it is shown that a minimum heat flux is 
required to have a crack initiation. This, and the fact that this thesis moves from a previous study, lead to the 
choice of the final three heat flux levels, namely: 7.5, 10 and 20 kW/m2. The levels are given in table 5.1. The 
heat flux levels was reached by maneuvering the H-TRIS forth and back and installing the correct burner 
intensity.  
Table 5.1 - Distance and burner intensity for the specific heat flux 
# 
Exposure Level 
[kW/m2] 
Distance [cm] 
Burner 
Intensity [%] 
HR7.5 
7.5 
50 
70 
HR10 
10 
50 
60 
HR20 
20 
90 
40 
 
As written earlier (section 1.2) the typical frame width in Denmark is 12≤FW≤20 mm.  Based on this and the 
previous study that considered widths of 10, 15, 20 and 25 mm, it was chosen to conduct the final 
experiments with frame width of 15 mm, which approximately is a mean value between 12 and 20.  
The aim of this thesis is, as written in the introduction, to investigate the influence of the thickness on the 
cracking time of glass panes. Therefore typical thicknesses of 2, 4 and 6 mm was investigated under the 
imposed heat flux in table 5.1  
 
Based on the preliminary tests and the standard deviation described in section 4.1.2 it was chosen to repeat 
the tests 6 times. This was first of all done to avoid that a single test would be able to influence the full set 
of data outcome if something unexpected would occur. In this way the reliability of the final data would be 
higher, than if the tests was repeated only once or twice.  
 
The nomenclature for the different tests is created based on the changing parameters in the experiments. 
First the thickness of the glass specimen (T2…), the irradiation level (HR7.5…), then the width of the frame 
and lastly the number of test conducted indexed as “i”. 
 
Based on the standard deviation and the sample size: 
==PAGE:53==
53 
 
 
𝑖𝑖= 1 →𝑁𝑁,
𝑤𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒 𝑁𝑁= 6 
 
The nomenclature can be seen in table 5.2, where the whole experimental program is visualized. It can be 
seen that the thickness of 2 and 6 mm is only conducted with the imposed heat flux of 10 and 20 kW/m2, and 
only the 4 mm is done with the heat rate of 7.5 kW/m2. As explained earlier, this thesis moves from a previous 
thesis where the 4 mm was tested with the heat rates of 5, 10 and 15 kW/m2. The gaps will therefore be 
filled by tests conducted in this thesis, respectively by heat rates of 7.5 and 20 kW/m2 for the 4 mm glass 
specimen.  
Table 5.2 - Experimental program. List of experiments to perform 
 
Thickess
Heat Rate
Frame Width
i
Nomenclature
[mm]
[kW/m^2]
[mm]
2
10
15
1
T2.HR10.FW15.i
2
10
15
2
T2.HR10.FW15.i
2
10
15
3
T2.HR10.FW15.i
2
10
15
4
T2.HR10.FW15.i
2
10
15
5
T2.HR10.FW15.i
2
10
15
6
T2.HR10.FW15.i
2
20
15
1
T2-HR20-FW15-i
2
20
15
2
T2-HR20-FW15-i
2
20
15
3
T2-HR20-FW15-i
2
20
15
4
T2-HR20-FW15-i
2
20
15
5
T2-HR20-FW15-i
2
20
15
6
T2-HR20-FW15-i
4
7,5
15
1
T4.HR7,5.FW15.i
4
7,5
15
2
T4.HR7,5.FW15.i
4
7,5
15
3
T4.HR7,5.FW15.i
4
7,5
15
4
T4.HR7,5.FW15.i
4
7,5
15
5
T4.HR7,5.FW15.i
4
7,5
15
6
T4.HR7,5.FW15.i
4
10
15
1
T4.HR10.FW15.i
4
10
15
2
T4.HR10.FW15.i
4
10
15
3
T4.HR10.FW15.i
4
10
15
4
T4.HR10.FW15.i
4
10
15
5
T4.HR10.FW15.i
4
10
15
6
T4.HR10.FW15.i
4
20
15
1
T4.HR20.FW15.i
4
20
15
2
T4.HR20.FW15.i
4
20
15
3
T4.HR20.FW15.i
4
20
15
4
T4.HR20.FW15.i
4
20
15
5
T4.HR20.FW15.i
4
20
15
6
T4.HR20.FW15.i
6
10
15
1
T6.HR10.FW15.i
6
10
15
2
T6.HR10.FW15.i
6
10
15
3
T6.HR10.FW15.i
6
10
15
4
T6.HR10.FW15.i
6
10
15
5
T6.HR10.FW15.i
6
10
15
6
T6.HR10.FW15.i
6
20
15
1
T6.HR20.FW15.i
6
20
15
2
T6.HR20.FW15.i
6
20
15
3
T6.HR20.FW15.i
6
20
15
4
T6.HR20.FW15.i
6
20
15
5
T6.HR20.FW15.i
6
20
15
6
T6.HR20.FW15.i
42 different tests. 
==PAGE:54==
54 
 
5.2 General comments on the experimental outcome 
For the float glass with thicknesses 2 mm, 4 mm and 6 mm, experiments were conducted to investigate the 
glazing behaviour. The glass panes with the sizes of 400 ∙ 400 mm were mounted on the setup and worked 
under the radiation from the H-TRIS.  
When the glass is heated by the thermal radiation source with the certain heat flux, the glass temperature 
either on the exposed surface or the shaded surface will grow up towards its maximum value. Because glass 
is a poor thermal conductor, heat from the radiant heating source to the exposed area is not quickly 
transferred to the shaded regions. Thus, the temperature gradient between the exposed region and the 
shaded regions and between the fire-exposed side and the ambient side is great.  
Furthermore, the temperature generated by heat radiation is not absolutely equilibrium distributed on the 
exposed surface. It is indicated that the temperature difference at different locations on the glazing surface 
will increase with different rising rates. Therefore, crack initiation often happens at different locations at the 
glass edges.  
 
Based on the first experiments, the final experiments was conducted successfully. The entire set of data is 
visualized in table 5.3. This section will provide remarks to the experimental results.  
 
The H-TRIS caused a bit of problems in the beginning, since the calibration did not match the actual heat 
release. Therefore the heat release was measured as described in section 4.1.1. After the preliminary tests 
and the calibration of the H-TRIS, the H-TRIS provided a relatively constant average heat flux to the specimen. 
This can be seen in table 5.3. It can be seen from the results that long exposure time in general led to a higher 
average heat flux. This was expected due to the slow heat up of the burner. The highest heat flux (20 kW/m2) 
was found to be the hardest to keep constant. Accordingly, a few inaccurate heat flux outputs were seen for 
the high heating rate (T2-HR20-FW15-N3 and T4-HR20-FW15-N4) as written in table 5.3.  
 
The crack initiation time behaved as expected relatively constant for all sample sizes. However, one test 
resulted in a higher cracking time than its repetitions (T4-HR7.5-FW15-N4) even though the heat flux was 
relatively higher than the repetitions.  
 
Throughout the testing no error measurements was detected for the temperature measurement. The local 
temperatures are measured at the edges where the fracture initiated. The local temperatures includes; the 
backside glass temperature, TBE, the backside shaded edge temperature, TBSE and the calculated local bulk 
temperature, ∆TBulk. The global temperatures are the averages calculated from all backside temperatures. 
Here a “G” for global is added to the index. 
 
The Local and global temperature differences, respectively ∆TLocal and ∆TGlobal are defined as: 
   
∆𝑇𝑇𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿,𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 = 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇,𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛. − 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇,𝑛𝑛𝑛𝑛. 
 
(12) 
 
Where, “side” indicates the crack initiation edge and “no.” indicates the TC “number” 
(13) 
==PAGE:55==
55 
 
∆𝑇𝑇𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺 = (𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇2 + 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇4 + 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇6 + 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇8) −(𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇1 + 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇3 + 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇5 + 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇7) 
 
 
The bulk temperature is calculated as the difference between average exposed front side and back side glass 
surface temperature and measured edge temperature.  
   
∆TBulk = TBE + TFG
2
−TBSE 
(14) 
 
TFG is the theoretically determined front-side glass surface temperature, as described in section 2.1.3. All the 
temperatures given in the results are taken at the exact same of crack initiation.  
There seems to be a moderate variation of local temperatures measured. This is expected to be influences 
by the measurement location. Even though a frame for the thermocouples was created, it was difficult to 
locate the thermocouples at the exact same spot for ever test even though this was tried to. The accuracy of 
the thermocouples could also be a reason for the variation, but the same thermocouples were used for all 
tests, and this matter we believe had a very small influence on the overall variation observed.  
 
The location of the crack initiation and the amount of fallout seemed to be entirely random as described 
earlier in this section. The fallout is reported as the percentage of glass missing within the frame when 
cracking occurs. In general, no fallout was observed after the initial crack. Only a few tests, as seen in table 
5.3, had a 100% fallout. Here the whole glass specimen fell out of the frame after initial cracking occurred. 
We cannot see an explanation for this, since the tests were done like their repetitions.  
 
Crack initiation indicates at which edge the cracking initiated and crack distance how far from the edge the 
crack started. The distance is always measured from either the top or left edge. The distance parameter is 
always followed by a letter (T for top and L for left) that indicates from which glass edge the distance was 
measured.  
 
The fracture mirror size and the related fracture stress resulted in a relatively big spread out. Two (T6-HR10-
FW15-N5 & T6-HR20-FW15-N2) of the 42 tests resulted in fracture stresses lower than 24 MPa. We see on 
these two tests that both of them had a mirror size of 8 mm. Only one (T2-HR10-FW15-N5) of the 42 tests is 
seen having a higher value of 40 MPa. For the 2 mm specimens we have an average of 36.7 MPa with a 
standard deviation of 2.62, which means that the 2 mm population was relatively homogenous. The 4 mm 
specimens have an average of 31.5 MPa with a standard deviation of 3.38, which again means that the 4 mm 
population has been very homogenous. The 6 mm specimens have an average of 30.1 MPa with a standard 
deviation of 4.98, meaning that the 6 mm specimens have been acting the least homogenous. This can also 
be seen in the results where both the two outliers mentioned earlier is located.  
The overall average for the population is 32.58 MPa with a standard deviation of 4.58. This gives a good 
impression of the validity of the experiments conducted, as this value is in close similarity to the general 
value of 40 MPa established by Pagni and joshi (Pagni & Joshi, 1994(II)). Furthermore the value is in similarity 
with the range 24-56 MPa established by Hassani, et al. (Hassani, et al., 1994) for small windows.  
 
==PAGE:56==
56 
 
Table 5.3 - Entire set of final results 
 
Nomenclature
Note
Average 
Heat flux
Time to first crack
Average 
Cracking time
Fallout
Crack initiation
Crack distance from edge
Mirror Size
Fracture stress
Test No.
Backside 
Average 
Backside
Back shaded Edge
Average 
Back shaded Edge
∆T
Backside
Average 
Backside
Back shaded edge
Average 
Back shaded edge
∆T
T2-HR10-FW15-N1
9442,0
113,00
88,1
37,8
50,3
62,6
84,8
43,0
41,8
79,1
Bottom
25 L
3
34,87
T2-HR10-FW15-N2
9376,6
128,00
97,6
58,0
39,6
51,0
85,7
51,7
34,0
82,0
Top
7,5 L
3,2
33,76
T2-HR10-FW15-N3
9467,4
85,00
93,7
51,3
42,4
54,0
82,0
49,9
32,2
79,0
Bottom
24 L
2,3
39,83
T2-HR10-FW15-N4
9300,4
81,00
88,3
58,7
29,6
40,1
76,8
45,9
30,9
73,4
100
Left 
-
2,7
36,76
T2-HR10-FW15-N5
9840,0
79,00
88,4
51,9
36,5
48,6
80,9
49,8
31,1
78,7
Bottom
26 L
2
42,71
T2-HR10-FW15-N6
9459,3
76,00
94,8
45,6
49,2
61,7
76,3
47,5
28,8
75,0
Bottom
26 L
2,6
37,46
T2-HR20-FW15-N1
20245,9
45,00
129,8
54,9
74,9
99,8
104,4
64,6
39,8
107,7
100
Bottom
-
3,1
34,30
T2-HR20-FW15-N2
19251,9
39,00
94,4
65,6
28,8
52,5
83,7
47,5
36,3
87,4
Left 
8 T
2,7
36,76
T2-HR20-FW15-N3
High Heat flux
21695,7
29,00
73,2
40,9
32,4
57,1
94,4
47,6
46,8
95,3
Right
33,5 T
2,5
38,20
T2-HR20-FW15-N4
19053,1
56,00
132,7
50,7
82,0
105,7
114,5
56,0
58,5
110,8
100
Bottom
-
3
34,87
T2-HR20-FW15-N5
20356,4
36,00
78,6
53,9
24,7
49,2
94,8
55,5
39,2
98,0
Top
19,5 L
2,6
37,46
T2-HR20-FW15-N6
20115,9
64,00
142,8
54,5
88,3
104,9
118,9
65,1
53,7
118,4
100
Bottom
-
3,3
33,25
T4-HR7,5-FW15-N1
7225,8
181,00
73,3
35,2
38,0
47,2
70,9
37,5
33,4
65,9
Bottom
17 L
4
30,20
T4-HR7,5-FW15-N2
7453,9
164,00
65,9
37,1
28,8
38,0
70,8
40,8
30,0
66,9
Right
15 T
4,1
29,83
T4-HR7,5-FW15-N3
7491,0
166,00
68,5
40,4
28,1
37,3
66,7
40,5
26,2
64,1
Left
14,5 T
4,2
29,47
T4-HR7,5-FW15-N4
High Heat Flux - 
Long time to crack
7919,3
223,00
77,3
51,6
25,7
35,7
85,5
47,5
38,0
79,5
Left 
16 T
4,2
29,47
T4-HR7,5-FW15-N5
7653,6
175,00
83,4
49,2
34,2
44,3
75,9
46,2
29,7
72,8
Bottom
18 L
4
30,20
T4-HR7,5-FW15-N6
7320,7
193,00
85,6
47,6
38,0
47,4
72,2
43,5
28,7
68,8
Bottom
15,5 L
3,9
30,58
T4-HR10-FW15-N1
10042,6
110,00
74,6
39,8
34,8
47,5
68,7
41,3
27,4
68,0
Top
23,5 L
3,8
30,98
T4-HR10-FW15-N2
9496,3
105,00
63,8
36,8
27,0
39,1
63,8
38,9
24,9
63,6
top
25,5 L
2,3
39,83
T4-HR10-FW15-N3
9219,9
102,00
67,1
47,7
19,4
30,3
66,7
41,4
25,3
65,5
Left
20 T
3,9
30,58
T4-HR10-FW15-N4
9832,1
108,00
73,3
40,9
32,4
44,5
67,2
40,4
26,8
66,3
Top
16,5 L
3,6
31,83
T4-HR10-FW15-N5
9798,5
109,00
68,8
50,5
18,4
30,5
71,4
42,5
28,9
69,8
Left
20 T
3,4
32,76
T4-HR10-FW15-N6
9596,4
102,00
74,4
39,0
35,4
47,8
70,4
40,3
30,1
68,6
Bottom
22 L
2,9
35,47
T4-HR20-FW15-N1
20192,0
48,00
95,1
41,5
53,5
81,1
86,4
48,5
37,9
92,2
Top
25 L
5,5
25,75
T4-HR20-FW15-N2
20633,9
61,00
84,8
41,9
42,9
55,4
89,1
51,8
37,3
85,0
Top
22,5 L
4,5
28,47
T4-HR20-FW15-N3
19760,6
50,00
74,4
70,3
4,1
58,8
77,3
49,7
27,6
85,1
Left
21,5 T
3,1
34,30
T4-HR20-FW15-N4
Low Heat Flux
19040,9
47,00
61,0
41,4
19,6
49,2
76,1
46,3
29,8
84,7
Right
22 T
2,5
38,20
T4-HR20-FW15-N5
19936,8
51,00
75,4
38,8
36,6
56,7
76,9
39,7
37,2
82,0
Top
16,5 L
4,3
29,13
T4-HR20-FW15-N6
19948,8
47,00
78,9
38,6
40,4
66,8
74,6
44,4
30,2
82,2
Top
22,5 L
4
30,20
T6-HR10-FW15-N1
Low Heat Flux
8507,5
162,00
65,3
42,2
23,1
34,2
66,4
35,3
31,1
63,47
Left
19,5 T
4
30,20
T6-HR10-FW15-N2
Low Heat Flux
8808,0
149,00
62,9
35,9
26,9
38,9
59,7
35,0
24,7
59,41
Bottom
19 L
6
24,66
T6-HR10-FW15-N3
10024,8
149,00
70,8
37,2
33,6
46,2
66,4
39,4
27,0
65,81
Bottom
12,5 T
3
34,87
T6-HR10-FW1-N4
10082,8
152,00
71,7
41,5
30,2
43,6
66,1
43,6
22,5
67,47
Bottom
15 L
2,8
36,10
T6-HR10-FW15-N5
9991,6
154,00
75,1
48,5
26,6
39,5
71,0
47,1
23,9
71,61
Top
22,5 L
8
21,35
T6-HR10-FW15-N6
9593,2
163,00
74,0
45,0
29,0
41,2
71,2
46,8
24,4
71,24
Bottom
22,5 L
3
34,87
T6-HR20-FW15-N1
19495,2
60,00
63,7
33,1
30,6
58,2
61,1
37,5
23,6
71,66
Bottom
5 L
4,1
29,83
T6-HR20-FW15-N2
20512,0
97,00
81,9
40,0
41,9
69,5
82,8
43,7
39,1
88,18
100
Top
-
8
21,35
T6-HR20-FW15-N3
20564,5
97,00
101,2
39,9
61,4
86,3
88,5
44,7
43,8
90,48
Top
16,5 L
4,2
29,47
T6-HR20-FW15-N4
20061,5
102,00
80,9
43,1
37,8
64,3
80,7
47,3
33,4
87,25
Top
11 L
3
34,87
T6-HR20-FW15-N5
20625,4
98,00
91,6
42,4
49,2
76,3
89,6
50,1
39,5
94,50
Top
16 L
4
30,20
T6-HR20-FW15-N6
19254,4
105,00
72,6
41,4
31,1
56,5
87,4
48,7
38,7
91,42
100
right
-
3,3
33,25
66,8
81,7
48,0
56,1
42,7
40,8
46,7
41,2
45,3
81,1
101,8
73,7
68,0
80,1
41,7
82,0
40,0
50,5
53,4
43,5
42,4
45,4
154,8
93,2
91,8
108,6
75,7
70,3
78,3
70,0
93,7
44,8
183,7
106,0
50,7
cm
Mpa
[°C]
Local temp.
[kW/m^2]
[s]
Global temp.
[°C]
%
[s]
[mm]
∆𝑇𝑇𝑆𝑆𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑘𝑘
∆𝑇𝑇𝑆𝑆𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑘𝑘
==PAGE:57==
57 
 
5.3 Thickness’ influence on time to crack 
Table 5.3 lists the final results derived from the experiments conducted in this thesis from thickness 2 mm to 
6 mm. As a result of the derived data, the thickness and time to first crack is plotted in a graph for each level 
of heat flux as seen on figure 5.1  
 
The graph clearly indicates that a higher imposed heat flux results in an earlier crack occurrence. This trend 
was expected since the temperature difference drives the stress buildup as described in section 2.2.2.  
 
 
Figure 5.1 - Thickness vs. cracking time for two heating rates 
For the glass of thickness 2 mm, it is seen that the average time to first crack is 93.7 seconds for a heating 
rate of 10 kW/m2. When increasing the heat flux to 20 kW/m2, it is observed that the time to first crack 
decreases to an average of 44.8 seconds. For the glass of thickness 4 mm the average time to first crack with 
a heat flux of 10 kW/m2 is observed to be 106 seconds. With the increase of the heat flux to 20 kW/m2 the 
time to first crack decreases to 50.7 seconds. For the glass of thickness 6 mm it is seen that the time to first 
crack for a heat flux of 10 kW/m2 is 154.8 seconds. For a heat flux of 20 kW/m2 the time has decreased to 
93.2 seconds.  
 
From the data plotted in the graph, it is seen that the thickness of the glass is a very important factor to the 
glass breakage. It is clearly seen that with the increase of the thickness the time to first crack is increased as 
well. This is to be the case regardless the heating rate.  
The average time to first crack initiation between the 2 mm and 4 mm glass pane is considerably lower than 
the difference between the 4 mm and 6 mm.  
  
A similar increment of the cracking time was found by Zhang, et al (Zhang, et al., 2011). It showed from 
experiments conducted that the thicker the glass specimen, the longer time for first crack to occur.  
 
We believe that the big variation in time for the different glass thicknesses is caused by the poor conductivity 
properties of glass. With the thickness of the glass increasing, more time is needed for the heat conduct from 
the exposed surface to the back surface, and then, the center part of the glass pane is hot and expanding 
while the edges are cooler and not expanding. Tensile thermal stress is therefore formed at the central 
surface but is constrained by cooler edges of the glass. Larger tensile stress is therefore needed to break the 
==PAGE:58==
58 
 
constraint, which means a higher temperature difference is needed. Here, as the experiments shows, the 
thicker the glass, the larger temperature difference for higher tensile stress.  
 
The trend is also observed from figure 5.2. It is here seen that when the thickness of the glass increases, the 
time to first crack increases and furthermore, when the imposed heat flux is increases, the time to first crack 
decreases.  
 
 
Figure 5.2 - Heat Rate vs. average cracking time for thickness of 2, 4 and 6 mm. 
 
As written in section 1.3, the experiments moves from a previous thesis conducted. Hence, the merging of 
results from the previous thesis has been performed with the results in this thesis. 
A clear trend is seen when looking at figure 5.3. When increasing the heat flux, a decrease in the time to first 
crack is seen. This is due to the fact that a larger imposed heat flux is radiating the exposed surface with a 
higher temperature. Thereby, the faster heating of the glass and faster critical temperature difference 
between the exposed surface and the shaded region.  
 
 
Figure 5.3 - Heat rate vs. Average cracking time merged with previous research. Data points for 5 and 15 kW/m^2 are from 
(Jørgensen, 2018) 
 
==PAGE:59==
59 
 
5.4 Thicknesses influence on local temperature  
 
As written in section 5.2 there seems to be a reasonable variation in the local temperature measured.  
From figure 5.4 (left) it is seen when applying an imposed heat flux of 10 kW/m2, that the average local 
temperature of the unshaded part of the glass specimen decreases from the thickness of 2 mm to the 
thickness of 4 mm from 91.8 °C to 70.3 °C and decreases slightly from 70.3 °C to 70.0 °C from the thickness 
of 4 mm to 6 mm. In the shaded region, the average local temperature has a decrease from 50.5 °C to 42.4 
°C from the thickness of 2 mm to 4 mm. From the thickness of 4 mm to 6 mm, the average local temperature 
decreases again very little from 42.4 °C to 41.7 °C.  
When applying an imposed heat flux of 20 kW/m2, the same trend is seen. In the unshaded region of the 
glass specimen, the thickness of 2 mm to 4 mm, the average local temperature decreases from 108.6 to °C 
to 78.3 °C. From thickness 4 mm to 6 mm, a small increase in the values are seen. The average local 
temperature increases from 78.3 °C to 82.0 °C. In the shaded part of the specimen, the temperature 
decreases very little between all thicknesses. From t2 mm to 4 mm, the temperature decreases from 53.4 °C 
to 45.4 °C. From the thickness of 4 mm to 6 mm the temperature decreases from 45.4 °C to 40.0 °C.  
 
From figure 5.4 (right) the average temperature difference between the unshaded and shaded part of the 
glass specimen is seen.  
A general trend is, that the thicker the glass the lower temperatures from 2 mm – 6 mm. 
As seen in figure 5.4 (right) the average temperature difference between the shaded and unshaded part of 
the glass specimen is seen decreasing. From figure 5.4 left the shaded part of the specimens for all 
thicknesses is relatively constant due to the frame shading. Since the measurement of the unshaded 
temperatures are done on the backside of the glass specimen, the thickness influences the average 
temperature difference. The thicker the glass, the slower the penetration of the radiation will happen. The 2 
mm glass specimens will therefore tend to get warmed up faster than the thicker specimens while the shaded 
region still remains the “same” temperature. The difference between the shaded and unshaded regions will 
therefore become bigger faster for a thinner specimens than a thick and the critical temperature difference 
will be reached earlier. 
 
From previous investigation of different thicknesses under thermal loading (Zhang, et al., 2011), the same 
trend is seen. The experiments investigated the thicknesses of 4, 6, 10, 12 and 19 mm. In the range from 4 
mm to 6 mm, the local average temperature difference between the shaded and unshaded part of the glass 
specimen is seen decreasing. From the thickness of 6 mm and upwards, the values are seen increasing. The 
increment in the previous investigation is due to the fact that only the difference between the center of the 
fire exposed side and the center of the ambient side was taken into account.  
==PAGE:60==
60 
 
 
Figure 5.4 - Thickness vs .average local shaded/unshaded temperature (left) - thickness vs. average temperature difference (right) 
   
On figure 5.4 right it is seen that the average temperature difference between the shaded and unshaded part 
of the specimen is increasing in the interval for thickness 4 – 6 mm. The variation in the local temperature 
can be because the local temperature is measured around the crack initiation point. When measuring the 
temperature around the crack initiation point, the rest of the glass pane is “disregarded”. As written in 
section 2.2.1, crack initiates when the temperature difference between the hot exposed region and the cold 
shaded region is high enough and often initiates where flaws occurs or minor flaws occur compared to the 
other edges of the glass. This does not necessarily mean that the temperature difference across the pane is 
in equilibrium. This can for example be seen in test T2-HR10-FW15-N4, T4-HR10-FW15-N3 and T6-HR10-
FW15-N1.  
For test T2-HR10-FW15-N4 the crack initiated at the left edge with a temperature difference 29.6 °C. The 
highest temperature difference was measured to be at the bottom edge, where a difference of 44.4 °C was 
measured.  
For test T4-HR10-FW15-N3 the difference between the temperatures at crack location (left edge) is 19.4 °C 
compared to a higher temperature difference at the top edge and bottom edge, respectively 30.3 °C and 33.4 
°C.  
For test T6-HR10-FW15-N the crack initiated at the left edge with a temperature difference of 26.6 °C. A 
higher temperature difference was measured at the bottom edge with a difference of 30.3 °C.  
The crack possibly initiated at the edges with lower temperature differences than the rest of the pane 
because the difference was high enough and thereby the stresses.  
 
5.5 Thicknesses influence on global temperature  
The global temperature is a measurement of the average temperature across the glass pane for respectively 
the shaded and unshaded regions. Compared to the local temperature measurements, which only includes 
temperatures where the crack initiated, the global temperature possible gives a more reliable impression of 
the temperature across the glass pane.  
As seen on figure 5.5 (left and right) the global temperature is seen decreasing with the increase of the 
specimen thickness. This is the case for both the shaded and unshaded measurements.  
The measurements at the unshaded region with the imposed heat flux of 10 kW/m2 is decreasing from 81.1 
°C to 68.8 °C to 66.8 for respectively 2, 4 and 6 mm. The temperatures at the shaded regions is decreasing as 
well from 48.0 °C to 40.8 but then increasing to 41.2 °C for respectively 2, 4 and 6 mm.  
==PAGE:61==
61 
 
For an imposed heat flux of 20 kW/m2, the results on figure 5.5 (left and right) is seen decreasing as well for 
both shaded and unshaded. For the unshaded region, the average global temperature decreases from 101.8 
°C to 80.1 °C to 81.7 °C. For the shaded region, the average global temperature decreases from 56.1 °C to 
46.7 °C to 45.3 °C.  
 
Figure 5.5 - Thickness vs. average global shaded/unshaded temperature (left) - Thickness vs. average global temperature difference 
(right) 
 
 
Figure 5.6 - Thickness vs. average fracture stress (left) - Thickness vs. average bulk temperature (right) 
 
As written in section 5.4, the thickness influences the average temperature difference due to the fact, that 
the heat penetrates the thinner glass specimen faster than the thicker specimen and therefore the backside 
of the glass specimen will heat up faster than that of a thick specimen.  
 
As we know from theory the fracture stress is dependent on the temperature difference between the central 
part of the glass specimen and the colder edges, the fracture stress should in this case follow the curve of 
the average global temperature difference seen in figure 5.6 right. It is seen that the trend from both curves 
is decreasing with the thicker glass specimens. As seen on figure 5.6 left, the fracture stresses for the 
experiments conducted with the imposed heat flux of 10 kW/m2 is higher than the higher heat flux of 20 
kW/m2. It was expected to be in reverse, since the average global temperature indicates that the 
temperatures are with a higher heating rate. 
  
 
 
==PAGE:62==
62 
 
5.6 Heat Rate influence on temperature 
 
The imposed heat rate plays a big role in the temperature of the glass specimen. As seen on figure 5.7 left 
and right, the higher heat rate the higher temperature. This is also what is to expect, since the imposed heat 
flux pr. m2 is higher.  
For the thickness of 2 mm, the average local temperature increases from 91.8 °C to 108.6 °C in the unshaded 
region and from 50.5 °C to 53.4 °C in the shaded region.  
The same is seen when looking at the thickness of 4 mm and 6 mm. In the unshaded region the average 
temperature of the thickness 4 mm is increased from 70.3 °C to 78.3 °C when comparing the imposed heat 
flux of 10 kW/2 and 20 kW/m2. It is however noteworthy that the average temperature decreases from 75.7 
°C to 70.3 °C when comparing the 7.5 kW/m2 and 10 kW/m2.  
The temperature of thickness 6 mm is increased from 70 °C to 82 °C with an imposed heat flux in the 
unshaded region and decreased from 41.7 °C to 40 °C in the shaded region.  
 
 
Figure 5.7 - Heat rate vs. average local unshaded temperature (left) - Heat rate vs. average local shaded temperature (right) 
 
When looking at the difference in temperature between the shaded and unshaded regions, the trend seen 
in figure 5.8 is what to be expected when the results shown in figure 5.7 left and right are as described. It is 
here seen that the average temperate difference follows the curves in figure 5.7. However, comparing the 
average temperature difference between the thickness of 4 mm and 6 mm, it is seen that the average 
temperature difference for the 6 mm is bigger than that of the 4 mm for the imposed heat flux of 20 kW/m2. 
As described in section 5.4, the local temperatures are measured at the crack initiation point, and can 
sometimes be lower or higher than the other edges at the glass specimen and therefore a big variation in the 
results.   
 
==PAGE:63==
63 
 
 
Figure 5.8 - Heat rate vs. average local temperature difference 
 
However, it also seen on the figure 5.7 left and right and figure 5.8 that you cannot conclude much from the 
results of the experiments on the average local temperature. It is seen that the standard deviation of the 
different tests at cracking time is overlapping each other, meaning that the variability of the temperature for 
a single test can be very big. It is seen on figure 5.8 that the standard deviation (SD) of the local average 
temperature difference for the thickness of 2, 4 and 6 with an imposed heat flux of 10 kW/m2 mm is 
respectively 7.2 s, 6.9 s and 3.3 s. For the heat rate of 20 kW/m2 the standard deviation of the thicknesses 2, 
4 and 6 mm is respectively 26.9 s, 16.3 s and 10.8 s. As explained in section 4.1.2, when the SD is very high, 
it indicates that the data points are spread out over a wide range of results. The overlapping SD in the heat 
rate’s influence on the temperature difference between the difference thicknesses, makes it hard to 
conclude much form the results.  
 
When looking at the global temperatures, the same trend as in the local temperatures are seen. The higher 
the heating rate the higher the temperature. From figure 5.9 left it is seen that the thickness of 2 mm is 
increasing from 81.1 °C to 101.8 °C in the unshaded region and from 48 °C to 56.1 °C in the shaded region.  
The thickness of 4 mm is decreasing from 73.7 °C to 68 °C between the imposed heat flux of 7.5 and 10 
kW/m2 and then increasing from 68 °C to 80.1 °C within the range of 10 kW/m2 to 20 kW/m2. The same trend 
is seen in shaded region where the average temperature decreases from 42.7 °C to 40.8 °C between the 
imposed heat flux of 7.5 and 10 kW/m2 and then increasing in the range of 10 kW/m2 to 20 kW/m2 from 40.8 
°C to 46.7 °C. 
The thickness of 6 mm increases in both regions. In the unshaded region it increases from 66.8 °C to 81.7 °C 
and in the shaded area it increases from 41.2 °C to 45.3 °C.  
 
==PAGE:64==
64 
 
 
Figure 5.9 - Heat Rate vs. average global temperature unshaded (left) - Heat rate vs. average global shaded temperature (right) 
 
The average temperature difference between the shaded and unshaded region is seen in figure 5.10. 
For the thickness of 2 mm, the average temperature difference is 33.1 °C for 10 kW/m2 and 45.7 °C for an 
imposed heat flux of 20 kW/m2 with respectively SD’s of 4.2 °C and 8.1 °C.  
The average temperature difference for the thickness of 4 mm with an imposed heat flux of 7.5 kW/m2 is 31 
°C with a SD of 3.8 °C. For the imposed heat flux of 10 kW/m2 the temperature difference is 27.2 °C with a SD 
of 1.8 °C. The temperature difference is 33.3 °C with SD 4.2 °C for an imposed heat flux of 20 kW/m2.  
The thickness of 6 mm creates a temperature difference between the shaded and unshaded areas of 25.6 °C 
for imposed heat flux of 10 kW/m2 and 36.4 °C for heat flux of 20 kW/m2 with SD of respectively 2.8 °C and 
6.4 °C.  
 
Since the measurements are made on the backside of the glass specimens, we believe that the data derived 
from the experiments gives a good indication on how the heat rate influences the temperature.  
The thicker the glass the lower the temperature. A low heating rate leaves time for the glass to conduct 
enough heat to delay the critical temperature difference and thereby the stress. This is well indicated by 
figure 5.10, which shows that the higher the imposed heat flux the higher temperatures, and by theory, the 
thicker the glass specimen the lower the temperature because of the delayed temperature increase to the 
backside of the specimen.  
 
 
Figure 5.10 - Heat rate vs. average global temperature difference 
   
==PAGE:65==
65 
 
5.5 Strain Gauge results 
 
The strain in the glass edges is measured during the experiments performed.  
As mentioned and explained in section 4.1.3, preliminary experiments with strain gauges were performed to 
confirm that strain in the glass at heat up were equal at all four edges of the specimen. It was shown during 
the preliminary tests that the strain, at all four sides, variated slightly, but not enough not to conclude that 
the strain at all four sides were equal.  
 
The final tests where therefore conducted in order to determine the tensions at the edges at the time of first 
crack.  
The final strain gauge experimental results are presented in table 5.4 and 5.5 and belonging figure 5.11 (left 
and right). As written in section 2.2.1, the nature of glass makes it vulnerable to stress concentrations (Chen 
& Lui, 2005). The stress concentrations are typically seen around the edges. As mentioned many times before, 
the defects in the glazing happens when cutting or damaging the edge and is generally accepted as the main 
origin to glass fractures. The defects is pulled apart from tension and squeezed together by compression. 
Therefore, glass failure is mostly managed by the tensional strength.   
Supported from theory and previous research (Pagni , 2002) (Wang, et al., 2013) it is indicated that the 
highest value of strain will occur at the edge of the glass pane due to temperature difference between the 
exposed central part and the shaded perimeter. When the stress induced by the strain exceeds the glass 
breaking stress, a brittle fracture crack is initiated at the edge of the pane.  
 
Table 5.4 - Final result for Test 1 
 
 
Table 5.5 - Final result for Test 2 
 
 
Test 1
Distance 
from edge
Measurement 
Side
Initial U_s
U_s
∆U_s
U_f
K-factor
Strain
Stress
Strain gauge No. 
mm
-
mV
mV
mV
V
-
m/m
Mpa
1
2,75
Bottom
1,78E-03
2,73E-03
9,49E-04
4,972
2,21
3,46E-04
24,19
2
5,5
Bottom
2,36E-03
3,25E-03
8,88E-04
4,972
2,21
3,23E-04
22,64
3
8,25
Bottom
-1,97E-03
-1,22E-03
7,52E-04
4,972
2,21
2,74E-04
19,16
4
11
Bottom
5,77E-04
1,11E-03
5,30E-04
4,972
2,21
1,93E-04
13,51
Test 2
Distance 
from edge
Measurement 
Side
Initial U_s
U_s
∆U_s
U_f
K-factor
Strain
Stress
Strain gauge  No. 
mm
-
mV
mV
mV
V
-
m/m
Mpa
1
2,75
Bottom
1,93E-04
1,45E-03
1,25E-03
4,972
2,21
4,57E-04
31,97
2
5,5
Bottom
1,97E-03
3,07E-03
1,10E-03
4,972
2,21
4,01E-04
28,09
3
8,25
Bottom
-8,79E-04
2,12E-05
9,00E-04
4,972
2,21
3,28E-04
22,94
4
11
Bottom
1,44E-04
7,63E-04
6,19E-04
4,972
2,21
2,25E-04
15,77
==PAGE:66==
66 
 
 
Figure 5.11 - Distance vs. average strain for test 1 + 2 (left) - Distance vs. average stress for test 1 + 2 (right) 
 
From figure 5.11 (left and right) we see the two final conducted strain gauge tests. At figure 5.11 left it is 
seen that the higher the distance from the edge, the smaller the strain. This is what to be expected since, as 
written earlier, the highest strain will occurs at the edges furthest away from the center part of the glass 
pane. 
Furthermore, it is seen on figure 5.11 right, that the further away from the edge the lower the tensile stress. 
This is also what is to be expected, as we know from Hook’s Law, that σ = E ∙ ɛ, where σ is stress, E is elastic 
modulus of the material and ɛ is strain, that the stress and strain are proportionally, which can also be seen 
in figure 5.12, where it is seen that the higher the strain, the higher the stress. Compared to the trend in the 
strain vs. stress graph in the “Handbook of structural engineering”, the outcome of the experimental results 
are more than satisfying.  
 
 
Figure 5.12 - Average strain vs. average stress for test 1 + 2 
 
Generally, the overall impression of the two test results is satisfying based on knowledge from theory and 
previous research. We see from table 5.4, that the breaking stress of test 1 is 24.19 MPa. From table 5.5, we 
see that the breakage stress for test 2 is 31.97 MPa. The average for the two tests is 28.08 MPa. Looking at 
the tests individually, the results gives a good impression of the validity of the experiments conducted. The 
value of test 1 is low compared to the general value established by Pagni and Joshi (Pagni & Joshi, 1994(II)). 
Furthermore, it is in the low end of the range established by 
==PAGE:67==
67 
 
 
The overall average gives a good impression of the validity of experiments conducted. The value is low 
compared to the general value of 40 MPa established by Pagni and Joshi (Pagni & Joshi, 1994(II)), and is in 
the low end of the range 24-56 MPa established by Hassani (Hassani, et al., 1994) for small windows.  
Looking at test 2, the derived values lies in close similarity to the values established. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
68 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
This thesis moved from a previous thesis, which investigated typical window frame’s shading width influence 
on the breakage of window glazing during different levels of fire exposure. The goal and objective of this 
thesis was therefore to conduct experiments to see if the data derived would fit in between results derived 
from the previous thesis. Furthermore, experiments were conducted to investigate the thickness of glass 
specimen’s influence on the cracking time under different levels of heat exposure. Relevant parameters for 
the experiments were identified by studies of theory and previous literature, alongside recommendations 
from the previous thesis of what could be interesting investigating.  
The conducted experiments included heating rates of 7.5, 10 and 20 kW/m2 with a fixed frame width of 15 
mm and glass thicknesses of 2, 4 and 6 mm.  
Preliminary experiments were performed to identify the correct intensity of the H-TRIS, sample sizes of final 
experiments and final strain gauge program.   
The results clearly indicated that the thickness of the glass influences the breakage of the glass specimen. 
From the experiments, it was deduced that the thickness of the specimen influences the glazing’s time to 
first crack, the temperature difference between the exposed central part of the glazing and the shaded region 
and the fracture stress.  
It is apparent from the experiments that for all levels of fire exposure, an increase in the thickness of the 
glass specimen will increase the time to first crack. The variation in time is caused by the timeframe to reach 
the critical temperature difference between the central exposed part of the glass and the shaded part behind 
the frame which is required for crack to occur. A longer time results in higher heat conduction to the back of 
the shading which will delay the critical temperature difference. 
Additionally, it was observed on the experiments conducted that the thickness of the glass specimens 
influenced the temperature measurements on the glazing. The thicker the glazing the lower backside 
temperature on the exposed part was measured while the temperature behind the shading remained almost 
constant with a slightly decrease for all three thicknesses. This means that the critical temperature difference 
between the exposed region and the shaded region decreased the thicker the glazing. 
Finally, from the strain gauge experiments performed, it was observed that the highest tensile stresses 
occurred at the edges of the glass specimen. This was expected from theory and previous research as well. 
It was observed that the further away from the distance measured, the lower the stresses occurred to be. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
69 
 
6.1 Future research  
 
Experimental research presented in this research gave the indication that the thickness of the glass, in typical 
window frames, influences how the glazing will reach to heat exposure. Nonetheless, additional testing could 
be performed to verify trends described in this thesis. As seen in the results derived from the experiments, 
it is observed that average temperature data derived from thickness of 4 mm and 6 mm are very close. 
Specifically, experiments with thicker glass specimens is suggested to conduct, to understand the 
temperature behavior in the glass. Furthermore, different levels of heating (5 and 15 kW/m2) on the glass 
specimens should be conducted, to see if data would fit in between results gathered in this thesis.  
 
Additionally, it was observed during experiments that the cracking time increased significantly when using 
wedges on the test frame to keep it in place. An investigation concerning the external forces on the glass 
during the experiments can be conducted alongside the fallout percentage of the glass specimens, which in 
this thesis fell out as total random.   
 
 
==PAGE:70==
70 
 
 
 
7. References 
Abdel-Latif, A. I. A., Brandt, R. C. & Tressler, R. E., 1977. Dynamics of fracture mirror boundary formation in  
glass. International journal of fracture, Volume 13, pp. 349-359. 
 
Barth, P. & Hoe, S., 1977. Glass fracture under intense heating. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard 
University.  
 
Chen, W. & Lui, E. M., 2005. Handbook of Structural Engineering.  
 
Cuzzillo, B. R. & Pagni, P. J., 1998. Thermal breakage of double-pane glazing by fire, pp. 1-11. 
 
Dembele, S., Wang, Q., Rosario, R. A. & Wen, J. X., 2010. Thermal and stress analysis of glazing in fires and 
glass fracture modeling with a probalistic approach. Numerical Heat Transfer, Part B, Issue 58:6, pp. 419-439. 
 
DS/EN-572-1-2012, n.d. s.l.: Dansk Standard. 
 
Glasindustrien & Teknologisk Institut, 2008. Monteringsanvisning for termoruder, Århus: s.n. 
 
Haldiman, M., Luible, A. & Overend, M., 2008. Structural Use of Glass, Issue 10. 
 
Harada, K., Enomoto, A., Uede, K. & Wakamatsu, T., 2000. An experimental study on glass cracking and fallout 
by radiant heat exposure. Fire Safety Science, pp. 1063-1074. 
 
Hassani, S., Shields, T. J. & Silcock, G. W., 1994. An experimental investigation into the behaviour of glazing 
in enclosure fire. Journal of applied fire science, pp. 303-323. 
 
Hassani, S., Shields, T. J. & Silcock, G. W., 1994b. thermal fracture of glazing: Performance of glazing in fire. 
Applied Fire Science, pp. 249-263. 
 
Hassani, S., Shields, T. J. & Silcock, G. W., 1995. In-Situ experimental thermal stress and measurement in glass 
subjected to enclosure fire. Applied Fire Science, pp. 123-134. 
 
Hassani, S., Shields, T. J. & Silcock, G. W., 1997a. Behaviour og single glazing in an enclosure fire. Applied Fire 
Science, pp. 145-163. 
 
Hassani, S., Shields, T. & Silcock, G., 1997b. Behaviour of double glazing in an enclosure fire, pp. 267-286. 
 
Joshi, A. A. & Pagni, P. J., 1991. Glass Breaking in Fires, pp. 791-802. 
==PAGE:71==
71 
 
 
Joshi, A. A. & Pagni, P. J., 1994. Fire-Induced Thermal Fields in Window Glass. II Experiments, pp. 45-65. 
 
Jørgensen, J. D., 2018. Window glazing exposed to high temperatures, January.  
 
Karlsson, B. & Quintiere, J. G., 2000. Enclosure Fire Dynamics.  
 
Kawagoe, K., 1988. Real Fire and Fire Modeling, s.l.: Fire Safety Science - Proceedings of The Second 
International Symposium. 
 
Keski-Rahkonen, O., 1988. Breaking of window glazing close to fire. Fire and Materials, Issue 12, pp. 61-69. 
 
Klobucar, L., 2016. s.l.: University of Ljubljana. 
 
Krohn, D. A. & Hasselman, D. P. H., 1971. Relation of flaw size to mirror in the fracture of glass. Journal of the 
American Ceramic Society - Discussion and Notes, August, p. 411. 
 
Liming , L., Qiyuan, X., Cheng, X. & Zhang, H., 2011. Cracking behavior of glazings with different thicknesses 
by. FIRE AND MATERIALS.  
 
Luxembourg, V. d., 2012. Prescriptions de sécurité incendie - Instruction Technique, s.l.: Département Sécurité 
et Santé. 
 
Mecholsky, J. J., Rice, R. W. & Freiman, S. W., 1974. Prediction of Fracture Energy and Flaw Size in Glasses 
from Measurement of Mirror Size. Journal of the American Ceramic Society, Volume 57, pp. 440-443. 
 
Mowrer, F. W., 1998. Window breakage induced by exterior fires. Gaithersburg: U.S. department of 
commerce, NIST..  
 
National Instruments, 1998. Strain Gauge Measurement - A tutorial, s.l.: National Instruments Corporaion. 
 
Pagni , P. J., 2002. Thermal Glass Breakage, pp. 8-10. 
 
Pagni, P. J., 2013. Thermal Glass Breakage. Proceedings of the seventh international symposium, 15 Aug, pp. 
3-22. 
Pagni, P. J. & Joshi, A. A., 1991. Glass Breaking in Fires. Fire Safety Science, pp. 791-802. 
 
Pagni, P. J. & Joshi, A. A., 1994(I). Fire Induced thermal fields in window glass I-Theory. Fire Safety Journal, 
pp. 25-43. 
 
Pagni, P. J. & Joshi, A. A., 1994(II). Fire-induced thermal fields in windows glass. II-Experiments. Fire Safety 
Journal, pp. 45-65. 
==PAGE:72==
72 
 
Shang, H., Rouxel, T., Buckley, M. & Bernard, C., 2006. Viscoelastic behaviour of soda-lime silica glass in the 
293-833 K range by micro-identiation. Journal of Materials Research, Issue 21(3), pp. 632-638. 
 
Shields, T. J., Silcock, G. W. & Flood, M., 2005. Behaviour of double glazing in corner fires. Fire Technology, 
Issue 41, pp. 37-65. 
 
Skelly, M. J., Roby, R. J. & Beyler, C. L., 1991. An experimental investigation of glass breakage in compartment 
fires. Journal of Fire Protection Engineering, pp. 25-34. 
 
Thomas, P., 1991. Fire, Flames and Dimensional Analysis. Fire Safety Science - Proceedings of Third 
International Symposium, pp. 3-26. 
 
Vandebroek, M., 2014. Thermal Fracure of Glass, s.l.: University og Gent and University of Antwerpen. 
 
Wang, e. a., 2017. Experimental study on fire response of double-glazed panels in curtain walls, pp. 53-63. 
 
Wang, Q., 2013. The shading width influence on glass crack behavior under thermal radiation effect, 6-12 
June.  
 
Wang, Q., 2013. 13th international conference on fracture. The shading with influence on the glass crack 
behaviour under thermal radiation effect, 16-2 June.  
 
Wang, Q., Chen, H., Wang, Y. & Sun, J., 2013. Thermal shock effect on the glass thermal stress response and 
crack. The 9th Asia-Oceanica Symposium on Fire Science and Technology, pp. 717-724. 
 
Wang, Q. et al., 2011. Temperature and thermal stress simulation of window glazing exposed to fire, pp. 452-
460. 
 
Wang, Y., 2015. Fracture behaviour of fraiming coated glass curtain walls under fire condition. Fire Safety 
Journal, pp. 45-58. 
 
Wickström, U., 2016. Temperature calculations in fire safety engineering, p. 65. 
 
Zang, Y., 2011. Experimental study on crack of float glass with different thicknesses exposed to radiant 
heating, pp. 710-718. 
 
Zhang, Y. et al., 2011. Experimental study on crack of float glass with different thicknesses exposed to radiant 
heating. Procedia Engineering, pp. 710-718. 
 
Zhao, H. et al., 2017. Experimental Investigation on Glass Cacking for Wind Load Combined with Radiant 
Heating. pp. 255-260. 
 
==PAGE:73==
73 
 
 
8. Appendix 
 
 
 8.1 H-TRIS manual 
H-TRIS manual 
 
 
  
  
  
==PAGE:74==
74 
 
  
1. Place the H-TRIS under the large-hood and lock its 4 wheels.  
2. Safely secure the movable gas burner frame at the desired distance from the test specimen (use 
the aluminium angular profile).  
3. Connect the power supply (220 V with earth!).  
4. Safely connect the gas hose to the gas outlet at the hood frame. Remember to use TWO adjustable 
wrenches one at each arrow, (see Figure 1)  
 
Figure 1 Gas hose connection and third valve to be opened. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
75 
 
5. Open gas valves (all 5). Two on the wall (Figure 2) one at the gas hose connection (Figure 1) and  
finally two on the H-TRIS (Figure 3).  
 
Figure 2 On the back-wall you find the two first gas valves to be opened. 
 
Figure 3 the last two gas valves to be opened. 
6. Make sure there is gas by pushing the pin below the manometer seen in Figure 4, (it should read 
between 28 and 30). The pin might be stuck. In that case use a rubber or plastic hammer to gently 
tap the pin until loose, the press the pin. 
==PAGE:76==
76 
 
 
Figure 4 Pushing pin for gas reading on manometer. 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
77 
 
7. Turn the power on by rotating the power button (1 in Figure 5) 90 degrees so it is pointing upwards. 
 
 
Figure 5 control box for the H-TRIS. 1 is the power button, 2 is the dead man button (make sure it is not pushed down), 3 is the on 
switch, 4 is a warning light (This will only be on if there is something wrong e.g. no gas flow), 5 is the control for the gas flow, and 6 
is a power indicator light. 
 
8. On the control for the gas flow (5 in Figure 5), adjust the gas flow (0% - 100%) by pressing the right 
button “       “  followed by “     “   or “     “  and finishing with “      “.  
9. Turn on the h-tris by turning green button (3 in Figure 5) to the right.  
10. When finished with the experiment turn the gas supply down to 10% (5 in Figure 5) for safety 
reasons.  
11. Turn the green button (3 in Figure 5) to the left.  
12. Turn off the power by rotating the power button (1 in Figure 5) 90 degrees to the left.  
13. Close all gas valves (all 5), Figure 1, Figure 2 and Figure 3.  
14. Disconnect the power.  
15. Disconnect the gas hose, Figure 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
78 
 
8.2 H-TRIS Calibration 
 
clc; 
clf; 
Calibration for the H-Tris by Pierreik 
  
The following is giving the position /heat flux of the burner in order to have the required flux at the target 
panel (see figure below) 
BI = Burner intensity in percent (?) (fraction)(0 - 1) 
 
comment: calculated B in the figure below is already negative. Therefore the Heat flux is calculated in the 
following as: 
. The unit of the calculated heat flux is W/m2. In the 
calculations below this is converted to kW by division with 1000. 
  
 
Distance=0.5; % distance in [m] 
BI= 0.1:0.05:1; 
   
         if BI < 0.5             
A=2500;         else 
            A=2500+(720*BI); 
        end 
     B=-1.66-0.31*BI; 
     
Heat_flux=A.*Distance.^(B)/1000; 
plot(BI,Heat_flux); 
title(['Burner intensity in % vs. Heat flux in kW/m2''  distance= ',num2str(Distance
xlabel('Burner intensity as fraction') 
ylabel('Heat flux in kW/m2') 
==PAGE:79==
79 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
80 
 
 
Distance=0.1:0.05:1; % distance in [m] 
BI= 0.5; 
   
         if BI < 0.5             
A=2500;         else 
            A=2500+(720*BI); 
        end 
     B=-1.66-0.31*BI; 
     
Heat_flux=A.*Distance.^(B)/1000; 
plot(Distance,Heat_flux); 
title(['Distance in m vs. Heat flux in kW/m2  -  BI= ',num2str(BI*100),' %']) 
xlabel('Distance in m') 
ylabel('Heat flux in kW/m2'); % distance in [m] 
==PAGE:81==
81 
 
 
Distance_0 = 0.05; 
BI_0 
= 
0.05; 
step 
= 
0.05; 
for n=1:19 
     
    D(n)=Distance_0+step*n; 
    for k=1:19 
       BI(k)=BI_0+step*k;          
if 
BI(k) 
< 
0.5             
A(k)=2500; 
         else 
            A(k)=2500+(720*BI(k)); 
         end 
        B(k)=-1.66-0.31*BI(k); 
        Heat_flux(k,n)=A(k).*D(n).^(B(k))/1000; 
    end 
end   
surf(D,BI*100,Heat_flux); 
title('Distance vs BI vs. Heat flux in kW/m2') 
xlabel('Distance 
in 
m') 
ylabel('BI in %') 
zlabel('Heat flux in kW/m2') 
==PAGE:82==
82 
 
 
view([0 90]) 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
83 
 
8.3 Strain Gauge in quarter bridge setup 
 
A brief introduction to measurement in a quarter bridge  
 
A strain gauge measurement takes place in a Wheatstone bridge consisting of four ohmic resistors. The 
quarter bridge has only one measurement resistor (strain gauge), the remaining three are inactive ohmic 
resistors with the same resistance value as the strain gauge. These will often be built into a terminal box and 
therefore remain hidden. The strain gauge wires are connected to this terminal box.  
 
Strain gauge formula for the quarter bridge 
∆Us = Uf x S x k x 1 / 4 
↕ 
S = ∆Us / Uf x 4 / k 
 
Us = signal voltage in Volt 
Uf = supply voltage in Volt 
S = strain in meters per meter 
K = The gauge factor 
 
The displayed formula is a simplified version of a complicated formula. Simplification gives a small calculation 
error but this is only (1%), if the strain does not exceed one percent (10000 micrometer per meter – often 
called tens of thousands of micro-strain) 
 
 
 
Straingage in a Wheatstone bridge 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
84 
 
8.4 Crack Patterns 
 
T2-HR10-FW15-N1 
 
 
 
 
 
T2-HR10-FW15-N2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
85 
 
T2-HR10-FW15-N4 
 
 
 
 
T2-HR10-FW-15-N5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
86 
 
T2-HR10-FW15-N6 
 
 
 
 
T2-HR20-FW15-N2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
87 
 
T2-HR20-FW15-N3 
 
 
 
 
 
T2-HR20-FW15-N5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
88 
 
T4-HR7,5-FW15-N1 
 
 
 
 
T4-HR7,5-FW15-N2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
89 
 
T4-HR7,5-FW15-N3 
 
 
 
 
T4-HR7,5-FW15-N4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
90 
 
T4-HR7,5-FW15-N5 
 
 
 
 
 
T4-HR7,5-FW15-N6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
91 
 
T4-HR10-FW15-N1 
 
 
 
 
 
T4-HR10-FW15-N2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
92 
 
T4-HR10-FW15 
 
 
 
 
T4-HR10-FW15-N4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
93 
 
T4-HR10-FW15-N5 
 
 
 
 
 
T4-HR10-FW-15-N6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
94 
 
T4-HR20-FW15-N1 
 
 
 
 
 
T4-HR20-FW15-N2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
95 
 
T4-HR20-FW15-N3 
 
 
 
 
T4-HR20-FW15-N4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
96 
 
T4-HR20-FW15-N5 
 
 
 
 
T4-HR20-FW15-N6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
97 
 
T6-HR10-FW15-N1 
 
 
 
 
 
T6-HR10-FW15-N2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:98==
98 
 
T6-HR10-FW15-N3 
 
 
 
 
T6-HR10-FW15-N4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
99 
 
T6-HR10-FW15-N5 
 
 
 
 
 
T6-HR10-FW15-N6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
100 
 
T6-HR20-FW15-N1 
 
 
 
 
T6-HR20-FW15-N3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
101 
 
T6-HR20-FW15-N4 
 
 
 
 
 
T6-HR20-FW15-N5 
 
 
 
 
