==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Data Augmentation for Time Series
Tobias Slott Jensen (s134569)
Kongens Lyngby 2018
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Section for Cognitive Systems
Technical University of Denmark
Building 321
Richard Petersens Plads
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Data augmentation provides regularization when training machine learning models
by generating more data, thus enabling better learning. A data set is augmented by
transforming original observations to create new ones. Augmentation techniques for
time series are however not intuitive, as opposed to other types of data like image
augmentations where new data can be created by e.g. flipping an image. Addition-
ally, modern data augmentation is performed by manually transforming data, thus
it becomes feature engineering rather than learning from data.
This project presents a learned data augmentation scheme for time series. This will
in turn be used in an attempt to improve state-of-the-art time series classification.
Learning how to augment a data set is done by aligning observations within each
class and optimizing transformations applied to time series. The process is repeated
extensively so a probability distribution of transformations can be estimated. New
training data is generated by sampling transformations and applying them to original
observations.
When the approach is applied in practice, it is demonstrated that the transforma-
tions are able to model natural variations in the original data and that the training
set can be augmented with useful artificial data. It is also shown that training models
for time series classification on augmented data sets improves performance, and data
augmentation provides effective regularization of deep neural network structures. All
in all, learning data augmentation for time series is not only possible but beneficial
for time series classification.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master’s degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computing.
Kongens Lyngby, June 22, 2018
Tobias Slott Jensen (s134569)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Søren Hauberg at DTU Compute for his guid-
ance and the hours he has invested in me and this project. For our many interesting
conversations, for helping me when I got stuck, for proofreading this thesis and for
pushing me towards new possibilities in the project.
I have been pleased to study at DTU because of the inspiring atmosphere and the
competent students and professors. Even though this Master’s thesis is a one-man
project I feel that I am a part of a large academic community.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and Related Work
5
2.1
Time Series Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Data Augmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
CPAB Transformations
15
3.1
Piecewise-Affine Velocity Field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Continuous Piecewise-Affine Velocity Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
CPA-Based Transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Advantages of CPAB Transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Data Augmentation
29
4.1
Optimizing CPAB Transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Generate New Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Experiments
35
5.1
Results Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Detailed Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Conclusion
53
A Separate Documentation
57
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Machine learning relies on data to perform pattern recognition. Data augmentation
for time series is an approach to create artificial data. This allow us to increase the
available data set and thereby improve results on tasks such as classification. This
project examines learning data augmentation to achieve better overall learning.
In time series classification, given a set of categories, the task is to determine in
which category a new observation belongs. Examples include weather forecasting,
identifying water quality using chemical concentrations, predicting earthquakes based
on seismic readings, etc. In general, if any data is measured over time it can be repre-
sented as a time series. Measurements can be stand-alone, or numerous measurements
can be related in some way, e.g. real estate pricing in multiple municipalities. This
divides time series into two categories, univariate and multivariate. In machine learn-
ing, and more specifically classification problems, time series are considered as signals
which should be associated with labels. This project concerns the effect of data aug-
mentation on univariate time series classification, although the ideas can be applied
to multivariate time series signals as well.
Data augmentation creates new data for the training set by transforming observa-
tions from the original data set. A traditional augmentation technique, where data is
manually transformed, has been beneficially applied to numerous data types includ-
ing time series. It is predominantly used in computer vision tasks where the intuition
behind augmented data is clear, e.g. flipping or rotating an image to obtain a new
one. In terms of machine learning there are several advantages of data augmentation
including but not limited to balancing classes in data sets, missing data imputation
and increasing the training set for better learning. Augmenting a data set by man-
ually choosing how to transform the original data implicitly ignores the concept of
learning from data. Thus the augmentation process essentially becomes feature en-
gineering. An unsupervised learning approach can be used for data augmentation,
which would focus on learning transformations needed to augment the training set.
By learning from the original data you truly grasp the concept of machine learning.
The learned transformations can capture and represent nonlinearities and variations
within the data.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Project outline
The rest of this chapter is meant as an overview of the considera-
tions behind data augmentation for time series, both theoretical and practical. The
overall objective is learning how to augment a data set of time series, and investi-
gate how this helps time series classification. The proposed classification technique
consists of a combination of data augmentation through unsupervised learning and
training a classification model with supervised learning. This leads to a complete and
true end-to-end learning approach for time series classification.
In order to get a solid evaluation of the effect of learned data augmentation for
time series classification it needs to be compared with state-of-the-art approaches to
the problem. This is the basis for background and related work. The field of time se-
ries classification is divided into classifiers with specific focuses, most prominently are
distance based classifiers such as Nearest Neighbor. An increasingly popular trend for
time series classification is the use of neural networks. The supervised learning in this
project is carried out using these classification models. Classification performance is
evaluated on the UCR Time Series Classification Archive [1], a collection of 85 time
series data sets.
In time series classification, the input signals are one-dimensional, so data augmenta-
tion and classification concerns one-dimensional data. Although the proposed tech-
nique is applicable for higher dimensional data, it is not the scope of this project.
Augmented data will be transformed time series from the original training set. A
logical way of transforming a time series is to stretch the time axis, but should it
be done globally or locally and to what degree. There is no general intuition for
transforming this type of data, so the goal is to learn the transformations. For this
to be possible, there must be some mathematical representation of a nonlinear trans-
formation, so it can capture variation in the data and modify time series in nonlinear
ways. A transformation should be continuous, invertible and differentiable to make
it suitable for learning data augmentation. A continuous function can be used as a
smooth transformation of data signals (time series) so there are no sudden jumps in
the transformed signals. Invertibility ensures that the original signal can be obtained
from the transformed signal, i.e. no information about the data is lost in transforma-
tion. A differentiable function can be optimized so the transformation can be learned.
The general idea for learning data augmentation is visualized in the figure on the
next page. Two data signals are aligned by optimizing a transformation that make
the one time series look like the other. A single transformation T θ has then been
learned. Signal alignment is then repeated for all pairs of observations, which yields
many transformations for which a statistical model can be estimated. The process
is applied individually on the classes in the data set, i.e. probability distributions
of transformations are learned on a per-class basis. The artificial data can now be
generated for the training set. Randomly choose a class, sample a transformation
from the statistical model corresponding to the same class, apply the transformation
to a random observation in the class. This process generates a new observation for
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
the data set and can theoretically be repeated infinitely.
Experiments will show that the augmentation classification process works when ap-
plied to a real problem. Nearest Neighbor and neural network models are trained
on augmented data sets, their performances are compared with state-of-the-art algo-
rithms for time series classification and results demonstrate that classifiers benefit
from the proposed method. The theoretical basis for learned data augmentation is
analyzed to see that it holds in practice. Ultimately it is shown the data augmenta-
tion scheme for time series prevents overfitting during training and allows for more
complex neural network structures.
Time series signals
Signals aligned by Tθ
repeat
θ
p(θ)
Statistical model of
 transformations
New data generated by applying
 sampled transformations
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background and
Related Work
Time series classification is a well-studied discipline with a large number of existing
studies that present specific approaches to the task [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].
Among this research not many have applied transformations to time series to augment
the data set in question [7]. Data augmentation is a technique to increase the amount
of information in a data set by increasing the size of the data set. From many studies
it is known that more data means better performance. This chapter considers general
trends in the topics of time series classification and data augmentation for machine
learning purposes.
2.1
Time Series Classification
This project concerns augmenting the data set to increase accuracy of time series clas-
sification, therefore it is natural to examine state-of-the-art methods for time series
classification. Like many of the studies in recent years on time series classification
this project also considers the UCR Time Series Classification Archive [1]. The goal
is eventually to improve upon previous results by using data augmentation. The fol-
lowing sections will outline the qualities of Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [14] and
that neural networks are becoming increasingly popular for time series classification.
A related comparison of general trends in time series classification is given by Bagnall
et al. [2] in a larger study of recent algorithms. The most popular approaches are
distance based, where one considers some distance metric between time series and
can compare pairwise distances in a data set. Basically if the distance between a pair
of time series is small then they most likely represent the same class. The machine
learning algorithm then determines in which class a new observation is by evaluating
which observed data the new observation is closest to. A relevant question to ask is
exactly what the distance metric should be. The performance of a distance based
classifier is greatly affected by the choice of metric. Most notable distance metrics
for time series are the Euclidean distance (ED) and the distance computed through
DTW. The 85 data sets in the UCR Archive are benchmarked using these metrics in
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background and Related Work
a 1-Nearest Neighbor classifier1. In fact many studies including [5, 6, 11, 12] have
some discussion of ED and/or DTW and use them as a baseline for another approach
to time series classification. Other methods include feature based classifiers, which
aim at extracting a feature vector from the time series, and ensemble based classifiers,
which combine several different classifiers into one and use a weighted vote to do the
actual classification. Noteworthy is the COTE algorithm [3] which groups 35 classifies
together and has performed rather well.
2.1.1
Dynamic Time Warping
In general the most popular trend regarding time series classification is DTW or
some modification of the algorithm. The idea of DTW is as follows. If you have two
time series from the same class then they will have some significant peaks or other
features that are similar. However the significant feature may be placed in different
places on the time axis of the two time series, which results in higher euclidean dis-
tance. DTW tries to adjust the one time series by warping points along the time
axis so the significant features are aligned. Warping a point means moving it to a
new time location such that significant peaks line up, see figure 2.1. The algorithm
essentially stretches the time axis. The next paragraphs explain the DTW algorithm
and discuss variations of it and their performances regarding time series classification.
The goal of DTW is to find the optimal alignment between two time series. Assume
Q and C are given time series.
Q = (q1, q2, · · · , qn)
C = (c1, c2, · · · , cm)
Let D ∈Rn×m be the pointwise distance matrix between Q and C, where every
element corresponds to the distance between a pair of elements from Q and C. The
distance is given by the squared Euclidean distance, i.e. D(i, j) = (qi −cj)2. Two
elements are more similar when the distance between them is low, i.e. when D(i, j)
is closer to zero. The DTW algorithm first computes D and then finds the optimal
warping path. A warping path denoted by P is a set of index pairs corresponding to
a sequence of elements in D.
P =
(
(a1, b1), (a2, b2), · · · , (as, bs)
)
It defines a path through D, which is illustrated in figure 2.1. P must satisfy the
following conditions: (a1, b1) = (1, 1), (as, bs) = (n, m), 0 ≤ai+1 −ai ≤1, 0 ≤
bi+1 −bi ≤1. These conditions make sure that the path will start in one corner of
the matrix, will end in the opposite corner, and will consist of adjacent cells during
the traversal of the matrix. The cost of a warping path is the sum of elements from
D, i.e. the sum of distances included in the path.
CP =
s
∑
i=1
D(ai, bi) =
s
∑
i=1
(qai −cbi)2
1A non-parametric method for classification presented in Bishop [15].
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Time Series Classification
7
As a side note the Euclidean distance (ED), sometimes used as a distance metric,
is the cost of a warping path that pairs elements of two time series one-to-one,
P ED =
(
(1, 1), (2, 2), · · · , (n, n)
)
, so it can only be used if the time series are of
equal length. An optimal warping path, P ∗, is the path that has the minimal cost.
DTW finds P ∗through dynamic programming and CP ∗is used as a metric for dis-
tance based classifiers.
Figure 2.1: A figure presented in [5], which illustrates the idea of Dynamic Time
Warping.
The algorithm finds the shortest possible warping path (shown to the
right). r is the warping window, which can be used to limit warping.
A 1-Nearest Neighbors classifier using DTW metric has been the standard benchmark
for time series classification for a number of years. Many of the referenced studies in
this chapter compare their results with the DTW benchmark. DTW clearly performs
better than ED on the majority of data sets in the UCR Archive. However, it is cer-
tainly possible to beat DTW as concluded in the comprehensive and relatively recent
study by Bagnall et al. [2] where they highlight the COTE algorithm [3]. COTE
is however very computationally demanding with a run time complexity of O(m2n4)
(m is the number of points in a data set and n is the length of a time series). In com-
parison DTW is significantly faster with a time complexity of O(m2n2). COTE gives
the best results with regard to error rate, but because of its immense time complex-
ity Bagnall et al. also recommend DTW for time series classification. While DTW
often is competitive in terms of error rate, it has been criticized when considering its
run time. However there has also been efforts in optimizing the computational de-
mand of the algorithm. Other papers have reported successful attempts at this [5, 11].
As mentioned there have been numerous works in recent years on how to beat the
performance benchmarks of the UCR Archive. Some recognizes the effectiveness of
DTW and uses it as a basis for a new approach to align time series, because they
find a shortcoming in the original algorithm.
Derivative Dynamic Time Warping
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background and Related Work
(dDTW) [16], Weighted Dynamic Time Warping (wDTW) [12], Multiscale Dynamic
Time Warping (msDTW) [17], Subsequence Dynamic Time Warping (subsDTW) [17]
and Shape Dynamic Time Warping (shapeDTW) [6] are examples of a modified DTW
algorithm. The latter is presented by Zhao and Itti and achieves better performances
on the majority of benchmarks for the UCR Archive. They argue that regular DTW
finds a global alignment but neglects local similarities, so shapeDTW is developed to
incorporate local shapes in time series. The algorithm first represents each point in
the time series by a so called ”shape descriptor”. The idea is to capture local shape
information around each point in these shape descriptors. Exactly how to create a
shape descriptor is a choice to be made and there are multiple suggestions in [6].
Secondly, shapeDTW aligns the shape descriptors by DTW. Zhao and Itti present
their algorithm as an adaptable improved version of DTW. Adaptable in the sense
that the shape descriptors can be designed to fit the problem at hand, i.e. to fit spe-
cific shapes of time series data. Reportedly shapeDTW achieves higher classification
accuracy than DTW and its variants on a majority of time series in the UCR Archive.
What is important to notice here, is that shapeDTW like any other DTW algorithm
focuses on warping points along the time axis/first-axis. Some variations try to take
the second-axis into account, but the general idea and outcomes are to stretch the
time axis. By using a DTW algorithm for time series alignment you have at that point
assumed and chosen to find similarities of the data along the time axis. This might
be a restriction, but the time axis is a logical choice when considering time series and
is expected to give the best results. DTW and shapeDTW yields significant results
but are working under an assumption about the shape of time series. shapeDTW also
depends on the choice of shape descriptor, which further introduces some assumptions
about the data. This project concerns a method to improve time series classification
through complete end-to-end learning and data augmentation where only elementary
assumptions are made about the data.
2.1.2
Neural Networks
In recent years neural networks and deep learning have gained a lot traction for
various machine learning applications e.g. computer vision, speech recognition and
natural language processing. The increased popularity of neural networks also affects
tasks where data is represented as time series such as time series forecasting and time
series classification. Referring to the UCR Archive, good results have been achieved
using neural networks in some variation. In many cases the benchmarks of the UCR
Archive, obtained using 1-Nearest Neighbors with ED and DTW, are outperformed
by neural networks. Therefore, one could argue that a very prominent trend in state-
of-the-art research on time series classification is neural networks.
The following
paragraphs will present network structures which will be used in the experiments of
this project.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Time Series Classification
9
Neural networks can be divided into certain types, but they can all be applied dif-
ferently to time series data. Multilayer Perceptrons (MLP), Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are all subject to research
of their utility for time series classification. A selected number of articles are ref-
erenced in this project [4, 10, 13]. Learned data augmentation and MLP/CNN are
combined and included in the results of this project. A reason for the advances in
time series classification using neural networks could be that 1-Nearest Neighbor and
other distance based classifiers tend to suffer when time series become very long. This
is because distance measures in high dimensions are not as precise, and so distance
based classifiers become dependent on arbitrary variances in the data. Neural net-
works are aimed to learn features in data and therefore perform very competitively
regardless of the length of the time series. Especially in CNNs, the idea is to learn
and store general features of the data in filters, this also applies to time series. CNNs
are frequently used with image data, and have achieved wide recognition in that area.
But just as the CNN apply filters and layers to data in 2D it can do so on data in
1D e.g. a time series.
Wang et al. [4] have presented simple yet efficient network structures for time se-
ries classification. More explicitly they present three structures and are trying to
establish a performance baseline for time series classification with neural networks.
The three network architectures are shown in figure 2.2. An MLP is included, which
is fairly simple in its architecture but is constructed with dropout layers and ReLU
activation functions to improve generalization. Wang et al. have based two of the
shown structures on previous studies on CNNs, namely the FCN [18] and ResNet
[19]. FCN is build to extract features from the data while keeping generalization
and avoiding overfitting, it contains convolutional layers, batch normalization, ReLU
Figure 2.2: A figure shown in [4], which illustrates the three structures presented in
the article.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background and Related Work
actication functions and a globel average pooling layer. Even though FCN contains
more elements than the MLP, it is still a simple feedforward network. The third
structure included in the article is the ResNet, a famous neural network used promi-
nently for object recognition. Wang et al. argues that the advanced architecture of
ResNet results in overfitting when used on the UCR Archive which contains relatively
small and simple data sets. This observation is expected as neural networks can be
criticized for overfitting to the data set especially if the architecture is overly com-
plex. The MLP and FCN networks in [4] are easily replicated and as it turns out,
FCN achieves significant performance in their experiments on the UCR Archive data
sets. Apart from the ResNet, notice that the neural network time series classification
methods in [4] are developed to reduce complexity by having few dependencies on
hyperparameter tuning and data preprocessing. The models are meant as a basis for
further research, so the network structures are relatively simple, the hyperparameters
in the frameworks are not tuned and the data sets are not preprocessed before train-
ing. Therefore the networks are trained in a pure end-to-end fashion and the results
in the paper are unbiased.
Wang et al. have provided a baseline for classification accuracy of neural networks
on the UCR Archive which is competitive with the benchmarks achieved from other
approaches such as COTE or 1-Nearest Neighbor with DTW. Neural networks has
become a hot topic in recent years and Wang et al. along with other researchers have
demonstrated that it is favourable approach for time series classification.
2.2
Data Augmentation
When doing time series classification, or more generally supervised learning, you try
to learn the function between an input and an output. The state-of-the-art classifi-
cation models mentioned in the previous sections are all doing supervised learning.
Now an unsupervised approach for improving classification will be discussed. Data
augmentation is an approach that expands the existing data set, which can then be
used to train a machine learning model. The idea is more data leads to more learning
leads to improved classification. By modifying points in the original data set in some
way new data points are essentially created and put into the data set thus increasing
its size. While supervised learning considers data with both an input and an output
in the data, data augmentation is unsupervised by only modifying the input (it makes
little sense to change output e.g. the class of a time series). The input should not
be transformed in a way that makes the data point resemble another class, because
the data point will then be misleading for its class. The augmentation method varies
depending on the specific problem, a data set is augmented differently when consid-
ering different types of data. The paragraphs in this section will present ideas and
modern efforts for data augmentation.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Data Augmentation
11
Image and speech augmentation
Data augmentation is most popularly used for
computer vision tasks, although it has of course been performed for other machine
learning tasks as well. When the data set consists of images there are intuitive ways
of modifying data points to create new data, images can be flipped, rotated, cropped,
adjust RGB pixel values etc. These modifications of images are often referred to as
the traditional approach to data augmentation and are mentioned in many studies,
[20, 21, 22]. The understanding of data augmentation on images is comprehensible
in the sense that it is very clear when a transformed image still represent the class of
the original image. The intuitive visual representation of images makes it easy to see
when an image is distorted to misrepresent a class. Consider figure 2.3 where data
augmentation is performed on an image in the traditional way. Simply by looking at
Figure 2.3: The original image is shown in the leftmost position in the upper row. Tra-
ditional data augmentation transformations used are: Adjust colormap to greyscale,
Rotate, Flip, Crop, Scale.
the different transformed/augmented images you can determine which of them still
represent the original class (in this case ”cat”). If an augmented image contains the
useful information relevant to the class, then data augmentation is effective, e.g. the
cropped image in the bottom row still shows almost every bit of the cat. The right-
most image in the bottom row however is possibly scaled too much, but the other
augmented images are quickly identified by the human eye as a cat. The nature of
time series data does not encourage transformations like image data, still multiple
studies [7, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27] reflect that data augmentation can beneficially be ap-
plied for tasks like speech recognition and time series classification.
Speech is essentially a sequence of words and phonemes which can be measured as
audio frequency along a time axis.
Like for image data, there are ways of trans-
forming an audio sample by modifying its intuitive properties such as the duration
or volume of the audio sample. Salamon and Bello discuss somewhat simple data
augmentation techniques combined with CNNs in [24]. They are creating augmented
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background and Related Work
data sets through Time Stretching, Pitch Shifting, Dynamic Range Compression and
Background Noise which are used for sound classification in a CNN architecture. Even
though they present significant increase in classification accuracy, their approach for
data augmentation is primitive. They manually augment the data set using some
trial-and-error which easily becomes tedious if the approach should be generalized for
many data sets.
Traditional data augmentation can be criticized for being more feature engineering
rather than unsupervised learning, because augmentation is done manually and it
relies too much on the specific way the original data is modified. A more machine
learning oriented data augmentation approach is to introduce variance from the orig-
inal data to the augmented data, but not specifying what important information the
new data should have. Jaitly and Hinton [23] propose a data augmentation technique
for speech recognition. Their method relies on Vocal Tract Normalization (VTLN) for
removing variability from speaker to speaker. This is done using a linear warp of the
audio frequency axis, which again seems to draw on the volume of an audio sample
like Pitch Shifting in [24]. Jaitly and Hinton are more machine learning minded in the
sense that they seek the transformation between data points. By reversing the idea of
VTLN, they add variation to data thereby doing augmentation, calling it Vocal Tract
Length Perturbation (VTLP). The concept of learning variation in samples and then
adding it to the data set is an essential idea for data augmentation in this project.
Learning data augmentation and aligning observations
Data augmentation
is usually performed before the machine learning algorithm tries to approximate the
function between input and output in the data, because the idea is to have more
data to train on and thereby better approximating the function. Wang and Perez
present a different approach to data augmentation in [20], where data is generated
as the machine learning model is trained i.e. at run time. They are in fact present-
ing a way to learn data augmentation which is also done in this project. A crucial
difference is however that their approach is restricted to a specific machine learning
model. They describe a method of training a neural network where new data points
are generated in the initial part/layers of the network. Two points from the data set
are sent through two layers of the network which is then combined to one layer, Wang
and Perez call this layer the ”augmented image”. The original data images and the
augmented images are then used to train the neural network for classification. When
the network is trained so is the augmentation layers. By learning the augmented
image within the network it becomes hard to visually determine whether the new
data point actually would improve classification, as opposed to creating the new data
point before training the machine learning model. Data augmentation before model
training lets you examine the generated data. That being said, Wang and Perez have
still demonstrated a method for automated augmentation by combining data points.
Combining or learning a transformation between data points from the same class
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Data Augmentation
13
is a clear way to capture the most important information for that given class. No
assumptions are made about the original data and no variance is introduced to the
augmented data. In a recent paper by Inoue [21] a data augmentation method is
presented which pairs images to generate new data. The SamplePairing technique is
easily performed using the average pixel values to combine images, and still it does
show improved classification results making it an effective yet simple method. It is
however a limited technique, because it has an upper bound for how much data can
be generated which is N 2 (for an original data set of size N). SamplePairing augmen-
tation aligns images in a very naive way, where in other data augmentation methods
you learn a transformation between aligned data thereby achieving a complete end-
to-end learning approach.
This project draws inspiration from another work on data augmentation by Hauberg
et al. [22]. Both this project and [22] aim at learning data augmentation by op-
timizing transformations of the data. These transformations, called CPAB, will be
described further in chapter 3, but note that they have the advantage of generaliz-
ing to higher dimensions and can thus be applied to a variety of data types. The
ideas of aligning images and learning the data augmentation are applied in [22]. This
project also applies that method but it must be stated that the data are time series
as opposed to [22] which shows experiments with images (MNIST data set).
Data augmentation on time series
There has not been a large trend in research
on time series data augmentation. The referenced related work on data augmentation
has so far been about image and audio data, none have focused entirely on time series.
Guennec et al. [7] have adapted augmentation specifically for time series and their
aim is to improve classification. When doing time series classification you search for
features in the data which are most likely to determine the classes. Therefore a logical
approach is to use those features for generating new data. Guennec et al. experiment
with two methods for augmenting time series. Both methods exhibit the idea of using
Figure 2.4: A figure presented in [7], which illustrates Window Warping on a time
series.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Background and Related Work
class-controlling features for the new data. The first method is inspired by Cui et
al. [9] and is called Window Slicing (WS), where the augmented data point used for
classification is a slice of an original time series. It is easy to augment a data set using
WS, but it is possible that some of the generated data contain irrelevant parts of time
series. E.g. if all time series in a data set have a constant tail, then including that tail
as new data in every class only limits classification. The other method proposed by
Guennec et al. is Window Warping (WW) where the augmented data point is a full
time series from the data set but a randomly selected slice is warped (expanded or
shrinked) by some ratio, see figure 2.4. Unlike WS, WW does not remove information
from a modified data point, but exactly which part of a time series that should be
warped is chosen at random. WW has potential for an end-to-end learning approach
where the part to be warped as well as the warping ratio could be learned, but this is
not done in [7]. Assuming the class of the data point is mostly determined by a specific
section of the time axis, then both WS and WW can be great for data augmentation
as they try to emphasize the most important parts of time series. However due to
their randomness both methods might also focus on less important parts of the data.
That being said, both papers [7, 9] report improved results with data augmentation
for time series classification.
General trends
To sum up this section here is an outline of the general trends
in data augmentation. It is an approach that can enrich sparse data sets and regu-
larize complex machine learning models. Traditionally data augmentation has been
carried out by modifying existing data points in intuitive ways like flipping an image.
Some works perform data augmentation manually, which can be criticized for mak-
ing assumptions about the data, and some works apply an automated augmentation
approach. When data augmentation becomes more automated and learning oriented,
the process moves away from feature engineering and towards unsupervised learning.
Although there have been numerous works which include data augmentation in some
variation, there have not been many papers regarding data augmentation used specifi-
cally for time series. Overall, data augmentation is an effective method for improving
performance of classification models which is seen consistently in many papers.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
CPAB Transformations
This chapter gives a detailed explanation of the main transformation considered in this
report, namely transformations based on continuous piecewise-affine velocity fields.
This type of transformation is presented in [28], and so another view on CPAB can
be found in that article.
The motivation for using CPAB transformations comes from it being a somewhat
simple yet effective application in the process of learning data augmentation, as it
has several preferable characteristics. Three important features of CPAB are worth
mentioning here.
The transformations are everywhere continuous, invertible and
differentiable. A continuous transformation is desired because data augmentation is
performed by applying a transformation to signals (time series) in the data set thereby
warping points inside the signal. A continuous function ensures small changes in the
output given small changes in the input, thus a smooth output, whereas a discontin-
uous function will ”tear a hole” in the signal. An invertible transformation is desired,
because when a transformation is applied to an observation in the data set you want
to be able to go back to the original observation. If you transform an observation but
it is impossible to revert back to the original, then you have essentially lost informa-
tion about the data in the transformation. A differentiable transformation is desired,
because if you can find its gradient you can optimize the transformation. Optimizing
transformations means learning data augmentation, which is the goal of this project.
Seen from a purely mathematical perspective, a CPAB transformation described in
this chapter is a called diffeomorphism - more specifically a C1-diffeomorphism. It has
an inverse transformation and both have the advantage of being (once) differentiable.
It should be specified that this study focuses on data augmentation for and there-
fore transformations of time series, i.e. the data signals are one-dimensional. CPAB
transformations can also be applied on data of higher dimensions, but this report
concentrates on one-dimensional transformation. This gives certain advantages when
it comes to CPAB, such as important mathematical representations can be solved
in closed-form which by extension results in less overhead in algorithms and makes
implementation easier. The following sections will explain the theory behind CPAB,
but overall this type of transformation comes from a tessellation of the input space,
a velocity field which has to follow a set of given constraints, and an integration of
this velocity field. Different mathematical concepts and representation will be used
==PAGE:26==
16
3 CPAB Transformations
throughout this chapter, once a variable is introduced it is used to describe the same
thing for the rest of the chapter.
3.1
Piecewise-Affine Velocity Field
Eventually the transformation should be a smooth nonlinear function, but it will be
constructed from a simple starting point, the Piecewise-Affine velocity field. A basic
approach for transforming a data signal is an affine mapping. One can scale, trans-
late, rotate, etc. while preserving the structure and ratios of data, a linear function
incorporates such simple transformations. The starting point of CPAB is to consider
affine mappings on the input space.
Denote the overall input space by Ω. This report considers time series and so the
input space is one-dimensional, i.e. an interval. Ωis thus an interval on the line of
real numbers. The specific interval is chosen arbitrarily to be [0,1]. If the true input
range of a time series is [a, b], then it can easily be mapped to [0,1]. The time series
data sets considered in this project have no specification of the time values on the
horizontal axis, so Ω= [0, 1] is chosen for simplicity. A tessellation of the input space
is obtained by dividing Ωinto smaller half-closed intervals. The intervals are of equal
size for easier implementations, see section 3.4, although one could consider intervals
of varying size, like in higher dimensions the tessellation could contain different geo-
metric shapes. The union of the intervals should yield the full input space. Denote
the smaller intervals by Ui. The number of smaller intervals depends on how detailed
the tessellation is. In relation, the size of the intervals becomes smaller as the number
increases since the full input space, Ω, does not vary in size. Say the tessellation splits
Ωinto NP intervals, then P = {Ui}NP
i=1 is the set of intervals/the tessellation,
1
NP is
the size of each Ui and then ∪NP
i=1 Ui = Ω. There will occur intersection between the
intervals in P. Consider a tessellation of Ω= [0, 1]:
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
U1
U2
U3
U4
U5
U6
U7
U8
U9
U10
Here the tessellation divides the input into NP = 10 equal parts. The end points of
every Ui are intersections or ”vertices” of the tessellation. The point 0.3 is shared
between the intervals marked with blue and red, i.e. it is the intersection between U3
and U4. Again, the input space is one-dimensional so the number of intersections is
Nv = NP + 1 (Nv = 11 in the example above).
With this tessellation a Piecewise-Affine (PA) velocity field can now be introduced.
A PA velocity field is a simple approach to transform data differently along the axis
in the input space. I.e. it becomes possible to warp points in different sections of
the input space independently from each other. Points in a certain section of the
input space is warped differently than points from another section of the input space.
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Piecewise-Affine Velocity Field
17
This serves the purpose of learning a general transformation for data augmentation
well. The term ”velocity field” is explicitly used instead of ”vector field”, because it
will be used to represent the velocities of a transformation. A velocity field on Ωis
represented by an affine mapping in each interval from the tessellation, i.e. define a
linear function for every Ui, i = 1, ..., NP. Thus depending in which interval a given
point is, it should be transformed according to the affine mapping of that interval.
Considering all these affine functions as one mapping and we have a velocity field,
this generalizes to higher dimensions.
Figure 3.1: A velocity field introduced in one-dimensional space.
Figure 3.1 shows a collection of affine mappings that make up a velocity field. The
illustration shows a lot of vectors but in fact there will only be as many affine func-
tions as there are intervals in the tessellation, i.e. NP.
If a function/transformation f : Ω→R consists of such affine mappings, then call
it a Piecewise-Affine (PA) mapping. The mathematical representation of an affine
mapping in the PA velocity field:
f : Ω→R
,
f(x) = Acex = acx + bc
where
ex =
[x
1
]
∈R2×1
Ac =
[ac
bc
]
∈R1×2
x ∈Ωis a point from the input space and c is the index for the interval in which
x lies. I.e. if x ∈Ui then c = i and this means that c ∈{1, 2, ..., NP}. If x is the
intersections between two intervals, then c will be the lowest index.
The implemented transformation in Algorithm 1 uses a step-wise integration to trans-
form x, and here keeping track of c is important. Every affine mapping in the PA
velocity field is defined by two parameters (shown as ac and bc above), which respec-
tively is the scaling and translation in a linear function.
A PA velocity field can
thus be represented as a collection of parameters. Let A denote a matrix of these
parameters.
A =


a1
b1
a2
b2
...
...
aNP
bNP

∈RNP×2
==PAGE:28==
18
3 CPAB Transformations
An example of a randomly generated velocity field (for NP = 10) is shown in figure
3.2.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Omega
−2
−1
0
1
2
value
PA velocity field
Figure 3.2: A velocity field in one-dimensional space where parameters of A are
generated from a Gaussian distribution.
As mentioned in the beginning, one of the three key reasons for using CPAB transfor-
mations is being able to learn data augmentation by optimizing the transformations.
By defining a PA (and later CPAB) transformation that is controlled by a set of
parameters it will eventually be possible to learn these parameters through optimiza-
tion, see section 4.1.
A PA velocity field can be used for transformation, but as seen in figure 3.3 it is
unstructured and not smooth. You want the transformation to be smooth because
it is a sign of it being continuous and differentiable. The curve in figure 3.3 has no
derivative so you cannot perform the desired optimization on it. A PA mapping is
not necessarily continuous and differentiable, therefore the transformation is not a
diffeomorphism and it does not have the advantages of such.
3.2
Continuous Piecewise-Affine Velocity Field
By adding specific constraints to a PA velocity field you can make sure it will always
be continuous, and thereby making it a Continuous Piecewise-Affine (CPA) velocity
field. The idea is later to integrate the continuous velocity field and get a continu-
ous transformation which then is differentiable at least once. CPA becomes CPAB
through integration, and CPAB has a gradient which will be used to optimize trans-
formations of time series.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Continuous Piecewise-Affine Velocity Field
19
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
input
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
output
Before transformation
−1.00−0.75−0.50−0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
input
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
output
After transformation
Figure 3.3: A transformation of the most basic linear function using a PA mapping
shown in figure 3.2. The PA velocity field is numerically integrated and applied to
the linear function.
As mentioned in the previous section the PA velocity field is represented by a collec-
tion of parameters. By using these parameters to establish a set of linear constraints
it is possible to control the discontinuous places of the PA mapping. Consider the
example tessellation of Ω= [0, 1] in the previous section and a possible correspond-
ing PA velocity field shown in figure 3.2, at the intersections of P = {Ui}NP
i=1 the
piecewise-affine mappings are not connected, therefore the whole velocity field is not
a continuous transformation.
Using linear constraints it can be ensured that the
velocity field is continuous while still being piecewise-affine. If a function/transfor-
mation is a continuous PA mapping, call it a CPA mapping. An example of a CPA
velocity field (for NP = 10) is shown in figure 3.4. Once again this type of velocity
field can be represented by a set of parameters collected in a matrix A.
A =


a1
b1
a2
b2
...
...
aNP
bNP

∈RNP×2
The rest of this section explains the set of linear constraints for a CPA velocity
field. The values in the intersection of two affine mappings, corresponding to two
adjacent Ui, must be equal to each other.
The tessellation is dividing the input
space (Ω= [0, 1]) into equal sized intervals and the intersections can be found using
NP. The distance between intersections is ∆=
1
NP . The intersections of {Ui}NP
i=1 is
therefore {0, ∆, 2∆, · · · , (NP −1)∆, NP∆}, including the start and end point of the
input space. The linear constraints can now be established using the parameters from
A. Each of the equations shown below is a constraint that keeps continuity at the
==PAGE:30==
20
3 CPAB Transformations
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Omega
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
value
CPA velocity field
Figure 3.4: A Continuous Piecewise-Affine velocity field in one-dimensional space
where parameters of A are generated from a Gaussian distribution. The affine map-
pings are now connected in the intersections of {Ui}NP
i=1 and the entire function be-
comes continuous.
intersection point for two adjacent affine mappings.
a1∆+ b1 = a2∆+ b2
a22∆+ b1 = a32∆+ b3
...
aNP−1(NP −1)∆+ bNP−1 = aNP(NP −1)∆+ bNP
Considering that all ai and bi are parameters of the transformation, then this is a
homogeneous system of linear equations.
a1∆+ b1 −a2∆−b2 = 0
a22∆+ b1 −a32∆−b3 = 0
...
aNP−1(NP −1)∆+ bNP−1 −aNP(NP −1)∆−bNP = 0
It can be rewritten as a matrix equation, L vec(A) = 0, where L ∈R(NP−1)×2NP is
the constraint matrix and vec(A) ∈R2NP is the row-by-row flattening of A, i.e. it is
==PAGE:31==
3.3 CPA-Based Transformations
21
a column vector of the parameters for the velocity field.


∆
1
−∆
−1
0
0
· · ·
0
0
0
0
2∆
1
−2∆
−1
· · ·
0
0
...
...
0
0
0
0
· · ·
−(NP −2)∆
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
· · ·
(NP −1)∆
1
−(NP −1)∆
−1


|
{z
}
L


a1
b1
a2
b2
...
aNP
bNP


| {z }
vec(A)
=


0
0
...
0
0


|{z}
0
If A fulfills this matrix equation it represents a CPA velocity field where L is used
to keep continuity. Referring to the input space Ωand the output space of transfor-
mations, it is possible to add supplementary constraints to ensure the output range
becomes [0,1]. The following extra constraints should in that case be added for the
start and end points of the input space.
a1 · 0 + b1 = 0
aNP · 1 + bNP = 1
These are however not added to L in this project, instead linear interpolation is used
to restrain the output space, which will make optimization of transformations more
straight forward as explained in section 4.1.
In order to construct a CPA velocity field it should be possible to compute an A
matrix which fulfills L vec(A) = 0.
Recognize that the null space of L satisfies
the matrix equation, since the right-hand side is the zero vector. By finding the or-
thonormal basis for null(L) you have a matrix, call it B, that can be used to find A.
B ∈R2NP×d is found from a singular value decomposition of L. d = NP + 1 is the
dimension of the null space of L. With B and an arbitrary vector of d values, θ ∈Rd,
you can compute an A that fulfills L vec(A) = 0, i.e. that represents a CPA velocity
field.
A = Bθ
or more precisely
vec(A) = Bθ
The point of the CPA mapping is to make a continuous function that, when integrated,
is a diffeomorphism. A CPA mapping itself is continuous but not differentiable in the
intersection points.
3.3
CPA-Based Transformations
The final step to constructing a continuous, invertible and differentiable transforma-
tion is to integrate the CPA velocity field. Since they are based on CPA mappings the
==PAGE:32==
22
3 CPAB Transformations
important transformations in the project are called a CPA-Based (CPAB) transforma-
tions. This section completes the theoretical explanation of CPAB transformations.
CPAB was chosen as part of this project, because it has preferable qualities which
makes it suitable for learning data augmentation. It can warp points in different
sections of the input space independently from each other by design from PA velocity
field, it is continuous and (at least once) differentiable by design from integrating a
CPA velocity field, and as mentioned later it also has an inverse. Further advantages
of CPAB are discussed in section 3.4 while the utilization of CPAB transformation
for data augmentation is explained in chapter 4.
In the following vθ is a CPA velocity field and ϕθ is a nonlinear transformation.
vθ is represented by a matrix of parameters A as described in previous sections. No-
tice both vθ and ϕθ depends on θ, this will be elaborated on later. By integrating
a continuous velocity field you get a nonlinear transformation, a C1-diffeomorphism.
CPAB is obtained by solving the following integral equation which ensures that it
will be at least once differentiable.
ϕθ(x, t) = x +
∫t
0
vθ(ϕθ(x, τ)) dτ
Freifeld et al. [28] explains that ϕθ(x, t) must always be in the domain of the velocity
field i.e. Ω, otherwise the integral equation is not well-defined. One can ensure this
by extending Ωto R. Remember the tessellation intervals, P = {Ui}NP
i=1. If U1 and
UNP are expanded to ]−∞, ∆] and [(NP −1)∆, ∞[ respectively, then the input space
becomes Ω= R. This adds no additional constraints to CPA velocity fields, since
there are no new intersections in the tessellation. Alternatively, by adding two extra
constraints for x = 0 and x = 1 as shown in section 3.2 then ϕθ(x, t) is constrained
to always be in the right interval, i.e. ϕθ(x, t) ∈Ω. The integral equation above can
be converted into an ordinary differential equation through direct differentiation in
the following way.
ϕθ(x, t) = x +
∫t
0
vθ(ϕθ(x, τ)) dτ
dϕθ(x, t)
dt
= d
dt
(
x +
∫t
0
vθ(ϕθ(x, τ)) dτ
)
= dx
dt + d
dt
∫t
0
vθ(ϕθ(x, τ)) dτ
x is the input to the transformation so it disappears when differentiated. vθ is an
affine mapping defined by two parameters a and b.
dϕθ(x, t)
dt
= d
dt
∫t
0
aϕθ(x, τ) + b dτ
= d
dt
(
a
∫t
0
ϕθ(x, τ) dτ +
∫t
0
b dτ
)
==PAGE:33==
3.3 CPA-Based Transformations
23
When integrating ϕθ(x, τ) over a small step t the function value becomes constant.
dϕθ(x, t)
dt
= d
dt
(
aϕθ(x, t)t + bt
)
= aϕθ(x, t) + b
= vθ(ϕθ(x, t))
One attains an integral curve (or ”trajectory”), ϕθ(x, t), that solves the above inte-
gral equation and corresponding ODE. ϕθ(x, t) can be thought of as the trajectory
representation of a given point, i.e. the motion of the point in space for a duration.
More explicitly this function is the transformation of point x0 by moving it along the
trajectory for t0 time, if the inputs to ϕθ(x, t) indeed are x0 and t0.
This project deals with one-dimensional data and so ϕθ(x, t) maps x from Ωto R.
When given a point the transformation should return a new concrete value, but as
of now ϕθ(x, t) is the transformation in general. The specific transformation function
comes when t is fixed and the parameters of the transformation (θ, see subsection
3.3.2) is known. Inspired by Freifeld et al. [28], let the CPAB transformation be
defined as T θ(x) = ϕθ(x, 1). I.e. the main transformation considered in this report is
the motion of a point on a trajectory for t = 1 time, where the trajectory is obtained
from integrating a velocity field that fulfills certain constraints. When moving a point
along the trajectory it can in principle be mapped to anywhere in R depending on the
velocity field. The point is potentially mapped out of the original interval. Remember
that Ωis chosen to be the interval [0,1], so T θ maps values from [0,1] to R.
T θ(x) = ϕθ(x, 1) : Ω→R
ϕθ(x, t) and by extension T θ(x) is obtained from a velocity field defined over Ω, so
CPAB transformations will also take values from this input space. The output space
will be restrained to [0,1] through linear interpolation as briefly mentioned earlier,
thus T θ(x) maps from Ωto Ωwhen applied in the experiments of this project.
The process of transforming a data signal with CPAB is shown in figure 3.5, from the
CPA velocity field to the transformation applied to a signal over time.
3.3.1
Numerical integration
Up until now the CPAB transformation has been described as a solution to an ODE.
The reason why it is preferable to have ϕθ(x, t) represented through an ODE instead
of an integral equation is that it is fairly easy to find the solution. The ODE represen-
tation is correct when t is a very small step on the trajectory. By finding the solutions
to a number of ODEs and thereby finding how to move a point x step-wise on a tra-
jectory, the complete CPAB transformation is found, i.e. it will be a composition of
solutions to differential equations. Each solution corresponds to an integration step
==PAGE:34==
24
3 CPAB Transformations
Velocity field
Transformation
Applied transformation
before
after
Figure 3.5: A random CPA velocity field used to construct a CPAB transformation,
and the transformation of a since curve in the interval [0,1].
in Algorithm 1. One ODE finds the value of x at time t1 on the trajectory, the next
ODE finds value at time t2 and so on, up until t1 +t2 +· · ·+tm = 1 thereby obtaining
T θ(x) = ϕθ(x, t = 1).
T θ(x) = ϕθ(x, t = 1) = (ψθ
m(x, tm) ◦· · · ◦ψθ
2(x, t2) ◦ψθ
1(x, t1))
The transformation is constructed from a tessellation and associated velocity field,
and is represented by a system of linear differential equations like the following.
dψθ
i (x, t)
dt
= vθ(ψθ
i (x, t))
⇐⇒
dψθ
i (x, t)
dt
= Acψθ
i (x, t)
Notice that the ODE contains Ac, which is the affine mapping corresponding to the
interval in which x lies. Assuming the initial value is known to be ψθ
i (x, 0) = x the
solution becomes:
ψθ
i (x, t) = ete
Acx
⇐⇒
[
ψθ
i (x, t)
1
]
= expm(t eAc)ex
where expm is the matrix exponential of t eAc and ex =
[x
1]T . The notation eAc
is used to indicate that there has been added a row of zeros to Ac thus making it a
square matrix. This is necessary because the matrix exponential is a function working
on square matrices.
Ac =
[
ac
bc
]
∈R1×2
eAc =
[ac
bc
0
0
]
∈R2×2
t eAc =
[tac
tbc
0
0
]
∈R2×2
The solution to the ODE can then be expressed in the following way.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 CPA-Based Transformations
25
[
ψθ
i (x, t)
1
]
= expm(t eAc)ex =
[
etac
bc(etac−1)
ac
0
1
] [x
1
]
=
[
etacx + bc(etac−1)
ac
1
]
=⇒ψθ
i =
{
etacx + bc(etac−1)
ac
ac ̸= 0
x + tbc
ac = 0
As mentioned in the beginning of the chapter CPAB has certain advantages when data
is one-dimensional. This is expressed here, when the matrix exponential and thereby
ψ is in closed form.
So the solution to the ODE does not need to be computed
numerically as it can be found analytically which will make the implementation of
the CPAB transformation easier.
3.3.2
CPAB characteristics
So far the parameters of a CPAB transformation have not been described, but notice
that many functions in this section has a superscripted θ. T θ is constructed from
a constrained velocity field, which can be represented by a collection of parameters
collected in a matrix A. The orthonormal basis B is found from L as mentioned in
section 3.2. Subsequently a vector θ ∈Rd can be generated and associated with a
CPA mapping such that A = Bθ. Naturally the CPAB transformation depends on
the parameters of the corresponding CPA velocity field. Thus by generating a vector
θ of d values, the associated CPAB transformation T θ(x) = ϕθ(x, 1) is obtained by
calculating A = Bθ and use A when solving the differential equations for ϕθ. This
gives a convenient way of representing transformations.
θ =


θ1
θ2
...
θd


↔
T θ
The idea of learned data augmentation is to learn the parameters in θ thereby learn-
ing T θ.
New transformations can effortlessly be generated by sampling θ from a
multivariate Gaussian distribution. T θ transformations have a number of properties
worth mentioning. Firstly, if θ is the zero vector then T θ is the identity mapping.
Below is an example of a transformation when θ = 0.
θ = 0 =⇒A = Bθ = 0 =⇒eAc =
[0
0
0
0
]
, ∀c
=⇒ψθ
i (x, t) = x + t · 0 = x
Another property is that T θ is a diffeomorphism so it has an inverse mapping (T θ)−1
which is also differentiable. This is mentioned as a preferred feature for a transforma-
tion which should be applied to data augmentation. The inverse mapping is easily
==PAGE:36==
26
3 CPAB Transformations
Algorithm 1 CPAB transformation of data points
Input: A = Set of parameters, X = Set of data points in Ω, Nstep = Number of
iteration steps, t = Range of Ω
Output: ϕ = Set of transformed data points
1: function CPAB(A, X, Nstep, t = 1)
2:
Npts ←Length(X)
3:
∆t ←1/Nstep
4:
for i ∈{1, · · · , Npts} do
5:
ϕi ←Xi
6:
for j ∈{1, · · · , Nstep} do
7:
c ←{c|Uc ≤ϕi < Uc+1}
8:
a, b ←Ac
9:
ϕi ←ψθ
i (ϕi, ∆t)
10:
end for
11:
end for
12:
return ϕ
13: end function
attained because it is associated with the negative θ, i.e. (T θ)−1 = T −θ. Intuitively
this makes sense, because a CPAB transformation of a point x is actually moving
x along a trajectory in some velocity field. When the sign of θ changes, then we
have reversed the velocity field and so x is moved on the same trajectory but in the
opposite direction. An illustration of an inverse transformation is shown in figure
3.6. This inverse-property of CPAB transformations is proven in the supplementary
material for [28].
Before transformation
After transformation
After inverse transformation
Figure 3.6: A CPAB transformation of a since curve in the interval [0,1]. θ is drawn
from a Gaussian distribution and used to transform the curve. −θ is used for the
inverse transformation.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Advantages of CPAB Transformations
27
3.4
Advantages of CPAB Transformations
To conclude this chapter, CPAB transformations is a powerful tool in this project.
They are diffeomorphisms thus they are continuous, invertible and differentiable,
which is very useful for learning data augmentation as explained earlier in this chap-
ter. While the properties of CPAB are effective when applied for data augmentation,
this type of transformations has numerous other benefits.
Mathematical representation
CPAB is obtained through integration of continu-
ous piecewise-affine velocity fields, a process in which the individual parts are handled
with simple mathematical principles. The steps to create this nonlinear transforma-
tion, only requires knowledge about linear algebra and ordinary differential equations.
By definition PA, CPA and CPAB are expressed using a set of parameters collected in
a matrix, A. As the tessellation becomes finer, i.e. when NP →∞, then A will include
more and more parameters. This means that A can represent more and more diffeo-
morphisms which are obtained through integrating uniformly-continuous stationary
velocity fields. In other words, it is easy to increase the expressiveness of CPAB,
and yet the transformations can sufficiently be expressed by a small set of parame-
ters. In the experiments of this project A contains 2NP = 20 parameters, but each
transformation is in fact represented by θ which is d-dimensional (d = NP + 1 = 11).
Easy implementations
The simple mathematical representation of CPAB allows
for an easy implementation. The velocity fields depend on a tessellation of the input
space and the intervals are chosen to be of equal size. This does not restrict CPAB
transformations ability to capture variations in data, but it does help keeping track of
c in the implementation of Algorithm 1. The learned data augmentation scheme relies
on optimizing transformations which is possible because CPAB is differentiable. The
optimization is implemented in Tensorflow1, which does high performance numerical
computations and can automatically compute gradients. An additional advantage of
CPAB transformations specific for one-dimensional signals is that integration of the
CPA velocity field is solved in closed form. Transforming data becomes computation-
ally faster because the numerical integration is then composed of steps (the ODEs)
that are solved analytically. When CPAB is applied on higher dimensional data like
images, then it sometimes become necessary to solve ODEs with a numerical solver.
Generalization
CPAB can be extended to higher dimensions. Freifeld et al. [28]
present this type of transformation in the most general way such that no part is
associated with a specific dimension. All theoretical components behind CPAB gen-
eralizes to higher dimensions and the transformations are constructed using the same
idea, integrating a CPA velocity field.
A notable difference is already mentioned,
that integration is no longer performed exclusively with analytical solutions to ODEs,
sometimes a numerical solver is needed. Hauberg et al. [22] applies CPAB to image
1Software available from https://www.tensorflow.org/
==PAGE:38==
28
3 CPAB Transformations
data and therefore works with two-dimensional tessellations and velocity fields. In
regards to time series, the learned data augmentation method using CPAB is applica-
ble for multivariate time series classification. In such a problem the approach would
be to handle each dimension separately, i.e. have a transformation for each variable.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Data Augmentation
Learning data augmentation comes from aligning time series and optimizing a trans-
formation between them. The natural variations within classes of the data set are
learned by optimizing transformations on a per-class basis. New data can be gener-
ated by applying class variations to the observations in the data set of time series,
and the important features of CPAB are well-suited for this purpose. It is an unsu-
pervised learning process to augment data sets in this project.
This chapter explains the full procedure for augmenting a data set of time series,
which consists of two subprocedures. The first is: Align two time series, optimize a
CPAB transformation between them, repeat these steps for all in-class combinations
of observations. The second is: Randomly choose a class from the data set, sample
a transformation from a probability distribution of transformations which contains
class variations, apply the sampled transformation to an observation within the spe-
cific class, repeat these steps a large number of times.
4.1
Optimizing CPAB Transformations
Observations from classification data sets are categorized based on similarities in the
data. The machine learning model looks for a pattern in the training data, i.e. looks
for the important features in common. If you can make the class pattern more clear
to the machine model with artificial observations but still include natural variations
to avoid overfitting, then you can increase the information value with data augmenta-
tion. Time series from the same class have some significant features in common, but
of course all observations in a class are not identical to each other. Variations in the
data are present, and it is possible to modify a time series to look like another. The
variations will be modelled with CPAB transformations in each class. This is done
by aligning observations.
The following description of optimizing CPAB transformations concerns a single class
in a training set, i.e. learning the variations within that specific class. Data points
are aligned in pairs. Denote two time series from a data set by X and Y .
X = (xt1, xt2, · · · , xtn)
Y = (yt1, yt2, · · · , ytn)
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Data Augmentation
Where the length of a time series is n, and is the same for all time series in a data set
in this project. Both time series contain points at the same time locations specific to
the data set. The idea is now to apply a CPAB transformation T θ to one time series
to make it look like the other.
T θ ◦X ≈Y
It is important to use values at the same time locations when comparing two time
series, to get a true measure of how different they are. For a CPAB transformation
the output space is potentially different than the input space, which affects the time
locations of a transformed time series.
In order to find the values at the correct
locations on the time axis an interpolation of the transformed points is carried out.
When a point in a time series at time ti is warped to a new location tj, the value
at time ti, T θ(xti), is still needed to be compared with the corresponding value from
the other time series yti. Thus to compare T θ(xti) with yti, a linear interpolation is
used to find the value at time ti in the transformed time series. First, the position
of ti on the transformed time series is determined i.e. between which pair of points,
(tl, T θ(xl)) and (tu, T θ(xu)), is the time location. Second, the interpolated value is
computed.
T θ(xti) = T θ(xl) + (ti −tl)T θ(xu) −T θ(xl)
tu −tl
After finding the interpolated values you can evaluate if the transformed time series
T θ ◦X is starting to resemble the other time series Y . Remember that CPAB trans-
formations are represented by a set of parameters θ. The transformation, that best
fulfills T θ ◦X ≈Y , is found through optimization of θ. In order to perform opti-
mization it is necessary to quantify what is the difference between two time series.
The overall difference is how much does the time series points deviate across all time
locations. It therefore makes sense to measure difference as a mean squared error loss
function:
loss function:
E(θ) = ∥X −Y ∥2 = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(xti −yti)2
Regularization can be introduced in the loss function in case the values in the opti-
mization begin to explode. The loss function would then be:
regularized loss function:
E(θ) = ∥X −Y ∥2 + λ∥θ∥2 = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(xti −yti)2 + λθT θ
where λ is the regularization parameter. λ∥θ∥2 will force θ towards the zero vector.
As mentioned in chapter 3 the CPAB transformation represented by the zero vector
is the identity transformation. This is a logical regularization because the identity
transformation is a natural center, see section 4.2. Aligning two time series and learn-
ing a CPAB transformation between them can now be expressed as an optimization
problem:
min
θ
(T θ ◦X −Y
2)
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Generate New Data
31
CPA velocity field
Tθnm
Xn
Xm
Transformation for alignment
Xn
Xm
Tθnm ∘Xn
Figure 4.1: A transformation between two time series in ”BirdChicken” data set from
the UCR Archive. From left to right: The velocity field (CPA) of the transformation,
the transformation of time series n to time series m, time series n, time series m,
transformation applied to data
The identity transformation (θ = 0) will be the basis for all transformations, i.e. T θ is
initialized with θ = 0 so T θ ◦X = X. At first the loss function will therefore be some
positive value (unless X = Y ). Gradient descent1 is used to find a local minimum of
the loss function. CPAB transformations are defined to be differentiable exactly for
this reason. The gradient of the loss function can be found and used for an iterative
optimization algorithm like Gradient descent.
θτ+1 = θτ −η∇E(θτ)
The optimization of CPAB transformations is implemented and performed in Tensor-
flow which can automatically compute the gradient of the loss function. Gradient
descent is run for a number of steps, which then yields a θ and therefore the transfor-
mation that minimizes the loss function and the difference between X and Y .
In order to be able to approximate variations in the specific class from the data
set as good as possible, the process of aligning a pair of time series and finding the
optimal θ is repeated for all combinations of observations in the class. This includes
all symmetric transformations (e.g. both θij and θji), so it can be tested whether the
θs are distributed as expected. The result is N 2
c vectors assuming the class contains
Nc data points.
(
θ11, θ12, · · · , θij, · · · , θNcNc−1, θNcNc
)
4.2
Generate New Data
The first part of data augmentation in this project is described in the previous sec-
tion. Optimizing transformations between observation is where the real learning of
data augmentation happens. Notice that the optimization does not depend on a class
label and is therefore unsupervised learning. Once you have created a set of vectors
that represent CPAB transformations, the actual augmentation of the data set can
1Gradient descent optimization is presented in Bishop [15].
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Data Augmentation
be carried out. Generating new data is done by adding natural variation from the
learned transformations to the original data.
The general idea is to let machine learning models train on more data in order to
increase learning and eventually classification. Therefore it is important to note that
new data will only be generated for the training set, not the test set. The test set is
used as a holdout set to evaluate the predictive performance of the machine learning
models, so it makes no sense to augment this batch.
Sample and apply transformations to existing data
The first step of gener-
ating new data is to sample a transformation from a probability distribution. This
project revolves around learning data augmentation because it allows a true end-to-
end learning approach, where no assumptions is made about the data. Sampling a
random transformation follows this thinking. Though a random transformation is
sampled it is suitable for generating a new data point. The probability distribution
for transformations is an interpretation of variations within a specific class of the data
set. This was the purpose of optimization in the previous section, to find transforma-
tions which can now be treated as observation in a probability distribution, denoted
by p(θ). In fact p(θ) is a distribution of θs, so a vector is sampled which is identified
with a transformation. It is now possible to sample from p(θ).
θ ∼p(θ)
θ ↔T θ
After sampling the transformation it is applied to an original observation in the data,
i.e. a time series X from a specific class in the data set is transformed using T θ.
Xnew = T θ ◦X
Keep in mind that generating new data is on a per-class basis, so p(θ) and X is
associated with the same class in the data. Xnew will also belong to the same class as
X. This process can be repeated an infinite number of times because it will always be
possible to sample a new transformation, since a continuous probability distribution
is considered, and then apply it to an existing data point, thus the original data
sets can be augmented infinitely in theory.
In practice the process of generating
new observations is done enough times to increase the potential learning of machine
learning models.
Distribution of transformations
There is an important thing to consider in rela-
tion to sampling transformations and applying them to data. What is the probability
distribution of θ (of transformations)? Through experiments it is established that a
Gaussian distribution is a suitable choice, see subsection 5.2.1. θ is a d-dimensional
vector so it will be a multivariate Gaussian distribution.
θ ∼N(0, Σθ)
p(x) =
1
√
(2π)d|Σθ|
exp
(
−1
2xT Σ−1
θ x
)
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Generate New Data
33
Σθ is the covariance matrix computed from the θs that were found to optimize CPAB
transformations in the previous section. The θs are now treated as observation for
which a d × d covariance matrix can be calculated.
Σθ essentially describes the
variance of transformations within a class in the data. The Gaussian distribution have
mean zero because it is a logical center for the learned transformations. Remember
from section 3.3.2 that the CPAB transformation identified with the zero vector is
the identity transformation. This serves as a natural center of p(θ) because CPAB
transformations intuitively can lie on either side of the identity transformation. The
optimized transformations for every pair of data points within the data class are
computed. E.g. T θij and T θji are both computed through optimization. Since CPAB
transformations are defined as diffeomorphism their inverse transformations exist.
From theory it is also known that (T θ)−1 = T −θ which means that −θij = θji. It
should be possible to observe that the following expressions are true when experiments
have been performed (assuming the sufficient optimization is carried out).
(T θij)−1 = T −θij ≈T θji
−θij ≈θji
Intuitively T θij and T θji can be thought of as symmetric transformations around a
natural center where θ = 0, i.e. the identity transformation. If θ for every pair of data
points within the data class is not included in the collection of θs, then all symmetric
transformations are not included and p(θ) no longer has a logical mean zero.
Final thoughts
The entire process of learning data augmentation is described in
this chapter. Note the dependency on the features of CPAB transformations. With
CPAB it is possible to transform time series. As discussed in chapter 3 the transfor-
mations are designed to have certain features fitted for learning data augmentation.
A CPAB transformation is continuous, thus it will return a smooth output signal
given a smooth input signal. I.e. the transformation of a time series from a category
in the data set will still resemble that category. A CPAB transformation is invertible,
thus the original time series can be found from the transformed one. This ensures
that no information about the data is lost in transformation. And finally a CPAB
transformation is differentiable, thus it is possible to find its derivative and use it for
optimization of the transformation. These features (along with other advantages, see
section 3.4) make CPAB a well-suited mathematical representation of the transforma-
tions needed for learning data augmentation. The proposed augmentation approach
is examined further in chapter 5, to see if it is a viable method for improving time
series classification models.
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Experiments
The purpose of this project is to improve machine learning models for classification by
learning how to augment the data sets. A number of experiments are carried out in
order to examine the impact of learned data augmentation on time series classification.
Experiments are performed on all data sets in the UCR Archive, so to see if the idea
works in general and is not restricted to just a few data sets with specific features. This
chapter will first explain the experiment pipeline of the discussed machine learning
models and present an overview of performance results on the UCR Archive. Secondly
this chapter shows a detailed analysis of CPAB transformations and augmented data
for two selected data sets to explore the effects of the end-to-end approach for learning
data augmentation.
5.1
Results Overview
The first part of this section is to give an understanding of which experiments have
been conducted, specifically what are the data sets, which classification models have
been used, how are they trained and what are the models’ configurations. Finally
the performances of time series classification by several machine learning models are
shown to give the reader an overview of general performance trends and how data
augmentation is beneficial.
Data
The data used in the experiments comes from a widely recognized collection
of time series which is frequently referenced throughout this project, namely the UCR
Time Series Classification Archive [1]. This archive comprises 85 time series data sets
and is the most renowned and referenced database for research regarding time series
classification. The data sets concern numerous problem domains including Image Out-
line, Sensor Readings, Motion Capture, Spectrographs, ECG measurements, Electric
Devices and Simulations. The attributes of the time series differ in the collection of
data. There are relatively large spans in terms of number of classes (2 to 60), size of
training set (16 to 8926), size of test set (20 to 6174) and the length of time series (24
to 2709). Refer to UCR Archive website1 for further information regarding the data.
1http://www.cs.ucr.edu/~eamonn/time_series_data/
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Experiments
Experiment pipeline
The experiments should reveal if data augmentation im-
proves time series classification and if the learned augmentation approach generalizes.
Therefore data augmentation should be performed on all 85 data sets and then eval-
uation is done for classification methods. Explicitly the 1-Nearest Neighbor method
and neural networks are used for classification. For a single data set the pipeline
is: Align data points and learn/optimize transformations, augment training set by
generating new points, train classifier on augmented training set, measure error rate
on test set. It should again be specified that it is only the training part of each data
set which will be augmented, in order to keep training and test set separate and to
maintain the independence of the test set to get a clear estimate of the generalization
error.
Data augmentation setup
Data alignment, learning CPAB transformations and
generating new data are performed as described in chapter 4.
Unless a data set
is exceptionally large, then every possible data alignment within each class of each
data set is performed, this includes symmetric pairs (e.g. point i and point j are
aligned, and point j and point i are aligned). It amounts to an approximate average
of 35,000 transformations per data set. The desire is to generate a fair amount of
transformations for each data set to better approximate the Gaussian distribution
which is used for sampling new transformations. The CPAB transformations depend
on the tessellation of the input space. For simplicity the same tessellation is used for
all 85 data sets, where there are 10 intervals of equal size. This is the same tessellation
which is shown as an example in chapter 3. Algorithm 1 is a numerical integration
used for CPAB, and the number of integration steps used is Nstep = 100 for all
85 data sets. The Gradient descent algorithm used for optimizing transformation is
run for 100 steps for each data alignment, while the step size was adjusted for the
individual data set. A loss function without regularization is used for all experiments.
Data augmentation is carried out by uniformly choosing a class in a data set and
generating a new point within that class. Each training set is augmented to contain
100,000 data points regardless of its original size. The time series classification models
are thus trained on relatively large data sets of equal size.
Neural network setup
The classification methods used in the experiments are 1-
Nearest Neighbor and two neural networks. The 1-Nearest Neighbor is a rather simple
approach, yet it is included to directly compare with the UCR Archive benchmarks
and examine the effect of data augmentation. A neural network is very customizable
because it has no predefined structure and there are many hyperparameters that
can be tuned. The aim of this project is not to optimize neural networks for time
series classification, but rather to investigate the effect of learned data augmentation.
Therefore two neural network structures have been chosen for the experiments which
already have proven strong baseline performances for time series, namely the MLP
and FCN networks presented by Wang et al. [4]. Both networks are trained with an
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Results Overview
37
Adam Optimizer2 in Tensorflow with the following parameters: learning rate = 0.001,
β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, ϵ = 1e −8, learning rate decay = 0.01. A categorical cross-
entropy loss function is used because the task is a classification problem.
Neural
networks can be very computationally demanding especially when dealing with large
data sets, so the experiments with MLP and FCN are run on a GPU. The models are
trained for 100 epochs. This risks overfitting but a desire from data augmentation is
to regularize machine learning models by having large data sets thus achieving better
generalization.
Results
Results from the experiments with data augmentation are shown in tables
5.1 and 5.2. Specifically the tables show error rates on the default test sets in the UCR
Archive. Additionally, table 5.3 shows error rates on the same test data from state-
of-the-art machine learning models discussed in chapter 2. The first two columns of
tables 5.1 and 5.3 are the benchmark performances of a 1-Nearest Neighbor classifier
using ED and DTW as distance metric. There are missing performance measures in
the tables. These error rates were not available for the specific models at the time of
this project. The lowest and thereby the best error rate of each data set is marked
with bold to illustrate what models performs best throughout the data sets.
Table 5.1: Performance results on the UCR Archive using selected algorithms with
data-augmentation. Results are shown as error rates on the default test sets in the
UCR Archive.
UCR Archive error rates with and without data augmentation
data set
1NN-ED
1NN-DTW
1NN-ED-DA
MLP-DA
FCN-DA
50words
0.369
0.310
0.369
0.398
0.908
Adiac
0.389
0.396
0.389
0.486
0.504
ArrowHead
0.200
0.297
0.194
0.137
0.166
Beef
0.333
0.367
0.333
0.167
0.3
BeetleFly
0.250
0.300
0.4
0.4
0.1
BirdChicken
0.450
0.250
0.2
0.2
0.1
CBF
0.148
0.003
0.004
0.01
0.018
Car
0.267
0.267
0.333
0.183
0.2
ChlorineConcentration
0.35
0.352
0.353
0.421
0.442
CinC_ECG_torso
0.103
0.349
0.291
0.383
0.241
Coffee
0.000
0.000
0.0
0.0
0.0
Computers
0.424
0.300
0.424
0.416
0.26
Cricket_X
0.423
0.246
0.285
0.31
0.346
Cricket_Y
0.433
0.256
0.323
0.336
0.29
Cricket_Z
0.413
0.246
0.256
0.254
0.341
DiatomSizeReduction
0.065
0.033
0.065
0.056
0.905
DistalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
0.218
0.208
0.208
0.18
0.15
DistalPhalanxOutlineCorrect
0.248
0.232
0.243
0.207
0.228
DistalPhalanxTW
0.273
0.290
0.392
0.61
0.27
ECG200
0.120
0.230
0.18
0.17
0.16
ECG5000
0.075
0.076
0.087
0.082
0.081
ECGFiveDays
0.203
0.232
0.099
0.014
0.132
Earthquakes
0.326
0.258
0.183
0.323
0.295
ElectricDevices
0.450
0.399
0.481
0.402
0.262
FISH
0.217
0.177
0.131
0.12
0.12
FaceAll
0.286
0.192
0.172
0.307
0.125
FaceFour
0.216
0.170
0.136
0.057
0.091
2Adam optimization is presented by Kingma and Ba [29].
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Experiments
FacesUCR
0.231
0.095
0.133
0.18
0.083
FordA
0.341
0.438
0.372
0.168
0.121
FordB
0.442
0.406
0.469
0.392
0.165
Gun_Point
0.087
0.093
0.013
0.013
0.0
Ham
0.400
0.533
0.4
0.314
0.286
HandOutlines
0.199
0.202
0.199
0.157
0.307
Haptics
0.630
0.623
0.591
0.51
0.617
Herring
0.484
0.469
0.438
0.422
0.344
InlineSkate
0.658
0.616
0.658
0.684
0.829
InsectWingbeatSound
0.438
0.645
0.493
0.427
0.65
ItalyPowerDemand
0.045
0.05
0.046
0.048
0.054
LargeKitchenAppliances
0.507
0.205
0.293
0.28
0.109
Lighting2
0.246
0.131
0.131
0.262
0.213
Lighting7
0.425
0.274
0.26
0.26
0.247
MALLAT
0.086
0.066
0.076
0.049
0.029
Meat
0.067
0.067
0.067
0.067
0.2
MedicalImages
0.316
0.263
0.255
0.317
0.287
MiddlePhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
0.260
0.250
0.257
0.3
0.358
MiddlePhalanxOutlineCorrect
0.247
0.352
0.253
0.46
0.258
MiddlePhalanxTW
0.439
0.416
0.466
0.622
0.499
MoteStrain
0.121
0.165
0.133
0.204
0.111
NonInvasiveFatalECG_Thorax1
0.171
0.209
0.187
0.105
0.341
NonInvasiveFatalECG_Thorax2
0.120
0.135
0.12
0.081
0.162
OSULeaf
0.479
0.409
0.331
0.298
0.05
OliveOil
0.133
0.167
0.133
0.2
0.133
PhalangesOutlinesCorrect
0.239
0.272
0.248
0.298
0.242
Phoneme
0.891
0.772
0.891
0.923
0.887
Plane
0.038
0.000
0.029
0.029
0.0
ProximalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
0.215
0.195
0.215
0.141
0.132
ProximalPhalanxOutlineCorrect
0.192
0.216
0.192
0.268
0.086
ProximalPhalanxTW
0.292
0.263
0.305
0.167
0.257
RefrigerationDevices
0.605
0.536
0.603
0.565
0.496
ScreenType
0.640
0.603
0.619
0.624
0.371
ShapeletSim
0.461
0.350
0.367
0.467
0.061
ShapesAll
0.248
0.232
0.213
0.185
0.223
SmallKitchenAppliances
0.659
0.357
0.573
0.381
0.237
SonyAIBORobotSurface
0.305
0.275
0.255
0.17
0.075
SonyAIBORobotSurfaceII
0.141
0.169
0.15
0.131
0.049
StarLightCurves
0.151
0.093
0.23
0.053
0.303
Strawberry
0.062
0.060
0.06
0.062
0.038
SwedishLeaf
0.211
0.208
0.19
0.118
0.08
Symbols
0.100
0.050
0.091
0.114
0.019
ToeSegmentation1
0.320
0.228
0.254
0.338
0.044
ToeSegmentation2
0.192
0.162
0.115
0.215
0.146
Trace
0.240
0.000
0.01
0.0
0.05
TwoLeadECG
0.253
0.096
0.12
0.048
0.002
Two_Patterns
0.090
0.000
0.093
0.151
0.747
UWaveGestureLibraryAll
0.052
0.108
0.075
0.068
0.283
Wine
0.389
0.426
0.352
0.13
0.278
WordsSynonyms
0.382
0.351
0.303
0.29
0.555
Worms
0.635
0.536
0.608
0.586
0.481
WormsTwoClass
0.414
0.337
0.32
0.392
0.287
synthetic_control
0.120
0.007
0.033
0.043
0.027
uWaveGestureLibrary_X
0.261
0.273
0.275
0.202
0.38
uWaveGestureLibrary_Y
0.338
0.366
0.346
0.309
0.39
uWaveGestureLibrary_Z
0.35
0.342
0.357
0.264
0.33
wafer
0.005
0.020
0.023
0.017
0.006
yoga
0.170
0.164
0.183
0.171
0.441
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Results Overview
39
Table 5.2: Performance results on the UCR Archive using neural network algorithms.
Results are shown as error rates on the default test sets in the UCR Archive.
UCR Archive error rates for neural networks with and without data augmentation
data set
MLP
FCN
MLP-DA
FCN-DA
50words
0.358
0.622
0.398
0.908
Adiac
0.616
0.506
0.486
0.504
ArrowHead
0.234
0.697
0.137
0.166
Beef
0.533
0.8
0.167
0.3
BeetleFly
0.35
0.5
0.4
0.1
BirdChicken
0.4
0.5
0.2
0.1
CBF
0.133
0.012
0.01
0.018
Car
0.167
0.767
0.183
0.2
ChlorineConcentration
0.362
0.485
0.421
0.442
CinC_ECG_torso
0.278
0.629
0.383
0.241
Coffee
0.0
0.464
0.0
0.0
Computers
0.508
0.244
0.416
0.26
Cricket_X
0.485
0.308
0.31
0.346
Cricket_Y
0.456
0.344
0.336
0.29
Cricket_Z
0.487
0.272
0.254
0.341
DiatomSizeReduction
0.144
0.892
0.056
0.905
DistalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
0.72
0.708
0.18
0.15
DistalPhalanxOutlineCorrect
0.498
0.49
0.207
0.228
DistalPhalanxTW
0.218
0.223
0.61
0.27
ECG200
0.11
0.17
0.17
0.16
ECG5000
0.081
0.072
0.082
0.081
ECGFiveDays
0.214
0.497
0.014
0.132
Earthquakes
0.186
0.202
0.323
0.295
ElectricDevices
0.461
0.348
0.402
0.262
FISH
0.171
0.194
0.12
0.12
FaceAll
0.359
0.275
0.307
0.125
FaceFour
0.364
0.705
0.057
0.091
FacesUCR
0.278
0.133
0.18
0.083
FordA
0.27
0.089
0.168
0.121
FordB
0.44
0.086
0.392
0.165
Gun_Point
0.073
0.493
0.013
0.0
Ham
0.248
0.419
0.314
0.286
HandOutlines
0.362
0.324
0.157
0.307
Haptics
0.575
0.555
0.51
0.617
Herring
0.344
0.594
0.422
0.344
InlineSkate
0.704
0.809
0.684
0.829
InsectWingbeatSound
0.418
0.658
0.427
0.65
ItalyPowerDemand
0.042
0.077
0.048
0.054
LargeKitchenAppliances
0.592
0.267
0.28
0.109
Lighting2
0.295
0.377
0.262
0.213
Lighting7
0.425
0.397
0.26
0.247
MALLAT
0.065
0.875
0.049
0.029
Meat
0.367
0.667
0.067
0.2
MedicalImages
0.292
0.272
0.317
0.287
MiddlePhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
0.257
0.772
0.3
0.358
MiddlePhalanxOutlineCorrect
0.445
0.438
0.46
0.258
MiddlePhalanxTW
0.406
0.378
0.622
0.499
MoteStrain
0.151
0.46
0.204
0.111
NonInvasiveFatalECG_Thorax1
0.141
0.61
0.105
0.341
NonInvasiveFatalECG_Thorax2
0.124
0.526
0.081
0.162
OSULeaf
0.541
0.107
0.298
0.05
OliveOil
0.7
0.7
0.2
0.133
PhalangesOutlinesCorrect
0.276
0.258
0.298
0.242
Phoneme
0.917
0.751
0.923
0.887
Plane
0.019
0.0
0.029
0.0
ProximalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
0.166
0.185
0.141
0.132
ProximalPhalanxOutlineCorrect
0.182
0.131
0.268
0.086
ProximalPhalanxTW
0.195
0.208
0.167
0.257
RefrigerationDevices
0.645
0.459
0.565
0.496
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Experiments
ScreenType
0.688
0.464
0.624
0.371
ShapeletSim
0.506
0.5
0.467
0.061
ShapesAll
0.438
0.483
0.185
0.223
SmallKitchenAppliances
0.608
0.277
0.381
0.237
SonyAIBORobotSurface
0.16
0.571
0.17
0.075
SonyAIBORobotSurfaceII
0.164
0.172
0.131
0.049
StarLightCurves
0.08
0.042
0.053
0.303
Strawberry
0.054
0.054
0.062
0.038
SwedishLeaf
0.181
0.07
0.118
0.08
Symbols
0.24
0.775
0.114
0.019
ToeSegmentation1
0.386
0.461
0.338
0.044
ToeSegmentation2
0.292
0.285
0.215
0.146
Trace
0.28
0.0
0.0
0.05
TwoLeadECG
0.305
0.5
0.048
0.002
Two_Patterns
0.148
0.092
0.151
0.747
UWaveGestureLibraryAll
0.056
0.311
0.068
0.283
Wine
0.5
0.5
0.13
0.278
WordsSynonyms
0.492
0.627
0.29
0.555
Worms
0.63
0.497
0.586
0.481
WormsTwoClass
0.492
0.47
0.392
0.287
synthetic_control
0.243
0.177
0.043
0.027
uWaveGestureLibrary_X
0.25
0.281
0.202
0.38
uWaveGestureLibrary_Y
0.317
0.382
0.309
0.39
uWaveGestureLibrary_Z
0.297
0.322
0.264
0.33
wafer
0.007
0.005
0.017
0.006
yoga
0.208
0.374
0.171
0.441
Table 5.3: Benchmark performance results on the UCR Archive and results from
using selected state-of-the-art algorithms. Results are shown as error rates on the
default test sets in the Archive.
UCR Archive state-of-the-art error rates
data set
1NN-ED
1NN-DTW
shapeDTW
COTE
MLP
FCN
50words
0.369
0.310
0.242
0.191
0.288
0.321
Adiac
0.389
0.396
0.269
0.233
0.248
0.143
ArrowHead
0.200
0.297
0.177
-
0.177
0.120
Beef
0.333
0.367
0.267
0.133
0.167
0.25
BeetleFly
0.250
0.300
0.200
-
0.150
0.050
BirdChicken
0.450
0.250
0.050
-
0.200
0.050
CBF
0.148
0.003
0.080
0.001
0.14
0
Car
0.267
0.267
0.133
-
0.167
0.083
ChlorineConcentration
0.35
0.352
0.355
0.314
0.128
0.157
CinC_ECG_torso
0.103
0.349
0.209
0.064
0.158
0.187
Coffee
0.000
0.000
0.036
0
0
0
Computers
0.424
0.300
0.356
-
0.460
0.152
Cricket_X
0.423
0.246
0.208
0.154
0.431
0.185
Cricket_Y
0.433
0.256
0.226
0.167
0.405
0.208
Cricket_Z
0.413
0.246
0.208
0.128
0.408
0.187
DiatomSizeReduction
0.065
0.033
0.069
0.082
0.036
0.07
DistalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
0.218
0.208
0.233
-
0.173
0.165
DistalPhalanxOutlineCorrect
0.248
0.232
0.228
-
0.190
0.188
DistalPhalanxTW
0.273
0.290
0.290
-
0.253
0.210
ECG200
0.120
0.230
0.100
-
0.080
0.100
ECG5000
0.075
0.076
0.071
-
0.065
0.059
ECGFiveDays
0.203
0.232
0.057
0
0.03
0.015
Earthquakes
0.326
0.258
0.258
-
0.208
0.199
ElectricDevices
0.450
0.399
-
-
0.420
0.277
FISH
0.217
0.177
0.051
0.029
0.126
0.029
FaceAll
0.286
0.192
0.238
0.105
0.115
0.071
FaceFour
0.216
0.170
0.091
0.091
0.17
0.068
FacesUCR
0.231
0.095
0.081
0.057
0.185
0.052
FordA
0.341
0.438
0.279
-
0.231
0.094
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Results Overview
41
FordB
0.442
0.406
0.261
-
0.371
0.117
Gun_Point
0.087
0.093
0.007
0.007
0.067
0
Ham
0.400
0.533
0.457
-
0.286
0.238
HandOutlines
0.199
0.202
0.206
-
0.193
0.224
Haptics
0.630
0.623
0.562
0.481
0.539
0.449
Herring
0.484
0.469
0.500
-
0.313
0.297
InlineSkate
0.658
0.616
0.629
0.551
0.649
0.589
InsectWingbeatSound
0.438
0.645
0.584
-
0.369
0.598
ItalyPowerDemand
0.045
0.05
0.103
0.036
0.034
0.03
LargeKitchenAppliances
0.507
0.205
0.160
-
0.520
0.104
Lighting2
0.246
0.131
0.115
0.164
0.279
0.197
Lighting7
0.425
0.274
0.233
0.247
0.356
0.137
MALLAT
0.086
0.066
0.062
0.036
0.064
0.02
Meat
0.067
0.067
0.100
-
0.067
0.033
MedicalImages
0.316
0.263
0.264
0.258
0.271
0.208
MiddlePhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
0.260
0.250
0.260
-
0.265
0.232
MiddlePhalanxOutlineCorrect
0.247
0.352
0.250
-
0.240
0.205
MiddlePhalanxTW
0.439
0.416
0.429
-
0.391
0.388
MoteStrain
0.121
0.165
0.110
0.085
0.131
0.05
NonInvasiveFatalECG_Thorax1
0.171
0.209
0.219
0.093
0.058
0.039
NonInvasiveFatalECG_Thorax2
0.120
0.135
0.140
0.073
0.057
0.045
OSULeaf
0.479
0.409
0.132
0.145
0.43
0.012
OliveOil
0.133
0.167
0.100
0.100
0.60
0.167
PhalangesOutlinesCorrect
0.239
0.272
0.261
-
0.170
0.174
Phoneme
0.891
0.772
0.736
-
0.902
0.655
Plane
0.038
0.000
0.000
-
0.019
0
ProximalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup
0.215
0.195
0.210
-
0.176
0.151
ProximalPhalanxOutlineCorrect
0.192
0.216
0.206
-
0.113
0.100
ProximalPhalanxTW
0.292
0.263
0.275
-
0.203
0.190
RefrigerationDevices
0.605
0.536
0.507
-
0.629
0.467
ScreenType
0.640
0.603
0.525
-
0.592
0.333
ShapeletSim
0.461
0.350
0.028
-
0.517
0.133
ShapesAll
0.248
0.232
0.112
-
0.225
0.102
SmallKitchenAppliances
0.659
0.357
0.301
-
0.611
0.197
SonyAIBORobotSurface
0.305
0.275
0.193
0.146
0.273
0.032
SonyAIBORobotSurfaceII
0.141
0.169
0.174
0.076
0.161
0.038
StarLightCurves
0.151
0.093
-
0.031
0.043
0.033
Strawberry
0.062
0.060
0.051
-
0.033
0.031
SwedishLeaf
0.211
0.208
0.085
0.046
0.107
0.034
Symbols
0.100
0.050
0.039
0.046
0.147
0.038
ToeSegmentation1
0.320
0.228
0.101
-
0.399
0.031
ToeSegmentation2
0.192
0.162
0.138
-
0.254
0.085
Trace
0.240
0.000
0.000
0.010
0.18
0
TwoLeadECG
0.253
0.096
0.006
0.015
0.147
0
Two_Patterns
0.090
0.000
0.001
0
0.114
0.103
UWaveGestureLibraryAll
0.052
0.108
0.058
0.196
0.046
0.174
Wine
0.389
0.426
0.537
-
0.204
0.111
WordsSynonyms
0.382
0.351
0.260
-
0.406
0.42
Worms
0.635
0.536
0.475
-
0.657
0.331
WormsTwoClass
0.414
0.337
0.287
-
0.403
0.271
synthetic_control
0.120
0.007
0.153
0.000
0.05
0.01
uWaveGestureLibrary_X
0.261
0.273
0.263
0.267
0.232
0.246
uWaveGestureLibrary_Y
0.338
0.366
0.358
0.265
0.297
0.275
uWaveGestureLibrary_Z
0.35
0.342
0.338
-
0.295
0.271
wafer
0.005
0.020
0.010
0.001
0.004
0.003
yoga
0.170
0.164
0.117
0.113
0.145
0.155
Results from the tables above and the effect of data augmentation can be summa-
rized in a histogram. The difference in performance for each data set using specific
models can be computed and plotted. This will give a visualization of whether data
augmentation is particularly useful for certain data sets. If ϵDT W is the benchmark
error rate using DTW and ϵDA is the error rate for a model trained on augmented
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Experiments
data, then the differences plotted in the histograms in figure 5.1 are computed as:
difference = ϵDT W −ϵDA
The left histogram shows the performance differences for all data sets in table 5.1
between 1-Nearest Neighbor with DTW (1NN-DTW) and 1-Nearest Neighbor with
euclidean distance on an augmented data set (1NN-ED-DA), i.e. a direct comparison
of the UCR Archive benchmark and learned data augmentation. 1-Nearest Neighbor
classification with a DTW metric on the augmented training has not been carried out
because DTW is very computationally demanding.
−0.20
−0.15
−0.10
−0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
error rate difference
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
frequency
Differences bet een 1NN-DTW and 1NN-ED-DA
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
error rate difference
0
5
10
15
20
frequency
Differences bet een 1NN-DTW and FCN-DA
Figure 5.1: (Left): The difference in error rate between 1NN-DTW and 1NN-ED-DA
for all test sets in the UCR Archive. (Right): The difference in error rate between
1NN-DTW and FCN-DA for all test sets in the UCR Archive.
The values in the left histogram centers around 0. This means the performance for
1NN-DTW and 1NN-ED-DA are comparable over all the data sets with minor fluc-
tuations. If the observations did not cluster around a single value, but several peaks
could be observed, then it would indicate that learning data augmentation would be
effective on a specific selection of the data sets. This is however not the case, and the
results show that data augmentation is beneficial on a relatively simple algorithm, 1-
Nearest Neighbor with ED distance metric, for time series classification. Experiments
with more complex algorithms have also been carried out, and table 5.1 shows that
models trained on a augmented data set (MLP-DA, FCN-DA) performs better than
the UCR benchmarks 64 out of 85 times. This is also observed in the right histogram
in figure 5.1 which contains a majority of positive values.
A clear observation to make from table 5.3 is that a state-of-the-art approach for
time series classification is a neural network (FCN) from Wang et al. [4], because of
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Detailed Analysis
43
lower error rates on the better part of all UCR Archive data sets, even when com-
pared with shapeDTW and COTE. In fact a direct comparison shows that FCN-DA
(table 5.1) is outperformed by FCN (table 5.3). However further experimentation
have demonstrated that both MLP and FCN benefits greatly from data augmenta-
tion. Table 5.2 displays the error rates for neural networks with and without data
augmentation when trained on equal terms, i.e. with 100 epochs and the same hy-
perparameters. Wang et al. have trained their proposed models for 5000/2000/1500
epochs respectively for MLP/FCN/ResNet. This and other experimentation settings
can explain why the performance in table 5.3 is better. Detailed analysis on specific
data sets will later show that data augmentation regularize training to prevent over-
fitting.
The performance results in this section indicate 3 important things. Firstly, by learn-
ing data augmentation a simple 1-Nearest Neighbor algorithm achieves comparable
error rates with the standard benchmarks for time series classification.
Secondly,
state-of-the-art methods for time series classification is arguably neural networks
based on the results on the UCR Archive. Thirdly, learned data augmentation can
improve the performance of neural networks for time classification. The next section
will examine learned data augmentation in more detail for two data sets.
5.2
Detailed Analysis
The implications of data augmentation on performance measures for the UCR Archive
has already been discussed to certain degree in this chapter. The purpose of this
section is to investigate if the ideas behind learning data augmentation and executing
an end-to-end learning approach can be confirmed in practice. It will be shown that
CPAB transformations behave as they should, that the augmentation scheme captures
variations within the data, and how augmented data sets help prevent overfitting
which allows for more complex time series classification models. The transformations
and augmentations for the data sets ”BirdChicken” and ”DistalPhalanxTW” will be
analyzed. These were selected because they respectively benefited and suffered from
the proposed augmentation method.
5.2.1
Characteristics of transformations and generated data
CPAB properties in practice
The process of generating new data for a data set
is explained in chapter 4. A step in this process is to sample a transformation from
a probability distribution. A principal component analysis (PCA) and kernel density
estimation3 will show that this should be a Gaussian distribution. All θs (transfor-
mations) have been found for the data sets. The transformations are d-dimensional
from definition, and in the experiments this becomes d = 11 (number of intervals in
3Both PCA and kernel density estimation are presented in Bishop [15].
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Experiments
tessellation plus 1). The first and second principal components of the θs are visualized
in a joint plot. More specifically to see how transformations in the first and second
principal components are distributed, a kernel density estimation is performed on the
values in each component. This yields a two-dimensional visualization of the CPAB
transformations, which is shown for both selected data sets in figure 5.2.
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
first pca component
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
second pca component
(a) BirdChicken
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
first pca component
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
second pca component
(b) DistalPhalanxTW
Figure 5.2: Visualizations of kernel density estimations of the probability functions
for θs in both data set. The plots are created with the first and second principal
components of the transformations.
The plot for each data set very much appears like a Gaussian distribution as can
also be seen on the marginal distribution of the PCA components. Even though the
marginal distributions are slightly skewed, this verifies that a multivariate Gaussian
distribution is a suitable choice in practice for the θs. The first and second PCA com-
ponents explain the most variance of the transformations, so it is a fair assumption
to make that a θ is normal distributed in each of its d dimensions.
Notice how the distributions are approximately centered around 0, which is a log-
ical center for the transformations as argued in section 4.2. This stems from CPAB
characteristics from subsection 3.3.2, that the identity transformation is the one corre-
sponding to θ = 0 and the inverse of a transformation is associated with the negative
θ i.e. (T θ)−1 = T −θ. Both of these properties can be observed in the optimized trans-
formations from the experiments with data sets. The following are the parameters of
actual θ-vectors used in T θ to transform data points in BirdChicken and DistalPha-
lanxTW.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Detailed Analysis
45
BirdChicken:
θii =


5.529e −11
−2.083e −10
3.218e −10
2.705e −12
−1.78e −11
2.485e −10
3.189e −10
−3.533e −10
2.362e −10
1.988e −11
1.098e −11


≈


0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


θij =


0.02411
−0.07467
−0.06536
0.07102
0.04543
0.06365
−0.2262
0.07654
−0.1326
−0.07866
−0.09419


θji =


−0.04634
0.08971
0.05776
−0.01641
−0.09349
−0.3592
0.4516
−0.04924
0.07897
0.122
0.1094


DistalPhalanxTW:
θkk =


−2.468e −09
−1.098e −10
2.074e −10
−1.378e −09
−1.622e −09
5.3e −10
1.193e −09
3.464e −09
4.21e −09
−5.846e −10
−6.607e −10


≈


0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


θkl =


0.008829
−0.0221
0.0186
0.01522
−0.007811
0.02085
0.02076
0.0121
0.008499
−0.02389
−0.02082


θlk =


−0.007169
0.01344
−0.01096
−0.01928
0.007395
−0.02052
−0.01921
−0.0132
−0.0104
0.02602
0.01782


CPAB transformations are defined to have an inverse transformation.
In theory
θij = −θji and θkl = −θlk. In practice the transformations are obtained through
optimization, so they are only approximately equal to each other. Keep in mind, that
in the interest of time some optimization were not run until a local minimum in the
cost function was reached, because many transformations had to be optimized for all
85 data sets. Still the fact that the θs approach the theoretical values in practice
shows how CPAB transformations behave as expected, and can then be used for
learning data augmentation.
Capture data variations
Unsupervised learning entails finding natural patterns
(or variations) in data. It has been stated in chapter 4 that CPAB transformations
can capture variations within classes in the data set. To test this a data signal will
be transformed along the first principal component of the transformations and the
resulting time series are plotted. This will reveal how the CPAB transformations are
modelling the specific data set, and since the first principal component is used, the
plot will show the most prominent variance within that class in the data set. It is
essentially a visualization of the primary transformation that is learned in the pro-
posed method for data augmentation. The first principal component is mapped to
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Experiments
[-3,-1.5,1.5,3] times the corresponding eigenvalue, thus the primary transformation is
shown within ±3 standard deviations. Figure 5.3 shows the primary transformations
for BirdChicken and DistalPhalanxTW.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
input
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
output
Transformations of data point along first principal component
(a) BirdChicken
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
input
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
output
Transformations of data point along first principal component
(b) DistalPhalanxTW
Figure 5.3: The primary transformation obtained from the first principal component
of the set of transformations. The blue time series is an original data point in a
data set. Red and green time series are the transformation of the blue curve in both
directions along the principal component. For the BirdChicken data set the first PCA
components explains 79.7% of the variance. For the DistalPhalanxTW data set the
first PCA components explains 37.2% of the variance.
Notice that when the original time series is mapped along the first principal compo-
nent it is warped along the time axis. You can observe local warping factors, i.e. some
parts of the time series are warped more than others, this quality is learned through
optimization of CPAB. The data throughout this project is time series, so a natural
transformation will be a translation along the time axis. It has now been illustrated
that this translation can be learned in practice and used to describe variation for
two data sets (and it does in fact generalize for many other data sets in the UCR
Archive). If you consider a transformation along a higher principal component such
as the fourth or fifth, then a significantly smaller variance in the time series can be
observed, these figures are not included in the report.
A necessary factor in data augmentation is that the generated artificial data should
still resemble the original data, otherwise you have introduced false variance to the
data set. The idea in this project is to learn variation in the data and then apply it to
the original data, so to ensure that the augmented data never becomes too extreme
or too simplified. Figures 5.4 and 5.5 show generated data created from applying
learned CPAB transformations to an original time series. The artificial data can still
represent the original class in the data set which indicates that data augmentation
can be learned.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Detailed Analysis
47
Original time series
Random generated time series
Random generated time series
Random generated time series
Random generated time series
Figure 5.4: Artificial data created from an original time series in BirdChicken.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
input
−2
−1
0
1
2
output
Transformations of data point
Figure 5.5: Artificial data created from an original time series in BirdChicken.
5.2.2
Applied data augmentation
Learning curves
This project proposes a mixed unsupervised and supervised learn-
ing approach for time series classification, and it has now been established that data
augmentation can be performed as unsupervised learning. As mentioned in previous
chapters data augmentation has been proven useful for a variety of problems includ-
ing time series classification. Now analysis on the selected data sets will show the
effects of the learned augmentation scheme, i.e. how can the supervised learning part
of the time series classification benefit from data augmentation.
BirdChicken and DistalPhalanxTW were chosen from the UCR Archive specifically
because the error rates for these data sets improved and worsened respectively. To
directly see the impact of data augmentation the error rate on the data sets is plotted
as a function of the number of data points used in the classifier, see figure 5.6. The
same model is used for classification to make sure the only difference in the setups is
the added artificial data. A 1-Nearest Neighbor classifier with a euclidean distance,
because it is a simple time series classification model and is used for the UCR Archive
benchmarks. There are numerous observations to make in the figure. The error rates
on the training set behave as expected and approaches zero when the number of data
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Experiments
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
# data points
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
error rate
Error rate as function of data points
test
train
(a) BirdChicken
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
# data points
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
error rate
Error rate as function of data points
test
train
(b) DistalPhalanxTW
Figure 5.6: Learning rate when gradually adding more training data to a 1-Nearest
Neighbor classifier. Original sizes of the training sets are 20 and 139 for BirdChicken
and DistalPhalanxTW.
points approaches the full training size in the augmented data sets. For BirdChicken
data augmentation improves performance on the test set by a large margin, and then
the error rate stagnates. Note that the test error never begins to increase. This sug-
gests that data augmentation regularize the classification model and thus prevents
overfitting, especially when also considering the small size of the original training set
for BirdChicken. For DistalPhalanxTW you can see an early optimum in the test
error rate which then increases slightly. This observation can be explained by poor
unsupervised learning in the data augmentation process, and features specific to the
training data were modelled by the CPAB transformations. This does not generalize
to the test set and the classification model overfits to this training data. Remember
that experiments with learned data augmentation and subsequent time series classi-
fication have been carried out on the entire UCR Archive and this analysis is only
shown for the two selected data sets, but the observations generalize to many other
data sets.
As discussed in the results overview, data augmentation increases the size of the
training set and improves performance on many data sets also when the model be-
comes more complex than 1-Nearest Neighbor. Although neural networks achieves
good results for time series classification, they have to be relatively simple in order to
avoid overfitting to the training set especially if the set is small. Consider figure 5.7
to see the learning rate of identical networks trained on DistalPhalanxTW with and
without data augmentation. The model without data augmentation shows almost
textbook overfitting when training loss keeps decreasing as test loss keeps increas-
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Detailed Analysis
49
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
epoch
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
accuracy
model accuracy
train
val
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
epoch
0
2
4
6
8
10
loss
model loss
train
val
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
epoch
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
accuracy
model accuracy (data augmentation)
train
val
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
epoch
0
1
2
3
4
loss
model loss (data augmentation)
train
val
Figure 5.7: Learning rate for the FCN network trained on DistalPhalanxTW with
and without data augmentation. Model accuracy and loss as functions of number of
training epochs.
ing. It becomes quite clear that data augmentation is able to regularize the training
of neural networks, which allows more extensive training as well as more complex
network structures.
Continued performance experimentation
A general trend in the UCR Archive
is small training sets, where only a few has more than 1000 data points. A typical
criticism of deep network structures is that these models will overfit to small data sets.
Increasing the complexity of a neural network will not be as effective as if the data
sets were larger and contained more variations. This paragraph serves as a another
argument for time series classification on sparse data sets using data augmentation
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Experiments
and deep neural networks. Wang et al. [4] include a ResNet structure in their paper
but argues that the network is too complex for data sets in UCR Archive. Table 5.4
show extended performance evaluations for BirdChicken and DistalPhalanxTW that
include error rates for FCN and ResNet, where both models are allowed to train a
longer duration i.e. for more epochs.
Table 5.4: Performance results on UCR Archive augmented data sets using FCN
and ResNet. The numbers represent how many epochs the models were trained for.
Results are shown as error rates on the default test sets in the UCR Archive.
UCR Archive error rates for FCN and ResNet
data set
FCN-100
FCN-2000
ResNet-100
ResNet-1500
BirdChicken
0.1
0.1
0.05
0.1
DistalPhalanxTW
0.27
0.293
0.26
0.262
When the data sets are augmented to contain approximately 100,000 time series,
then ResNet does not overfit and achieves comparable results for other networks (and
clearly outperforms the UCR Archive benchmarks). Considering the insights from
figure 5.7 and table 5.4, deep neural networks is certainly a reasonable approach for
time series classification and data augmentation can help prevent overfitting when
training data is sparse.
Data augmentation scheme in practice
This chapter have outlined experiments
with the proposed augmentation classification scheme. Complete end-to-end learning
is demonstrated for time series data sets in the UCR Archive, and it is possible to
learn data augmentation with only minor assumptions about the data. It has been
possible to verify theoretical concepts of the augmentation pipeline, including a Gaus-
sian distribution of CPAB transformations, basic identity and inverse characteristics
of CPAB, variations within data sets can be learned, and artificial data resemble
original data so no false variance is introduced. Different classifiers are tested with
augmented training sets and compared with performance benchmarks and state-of-
the-art models.
A direct comparison of 1-Nearest Neighbor classification with DTW metric and data
augmentation reveals that they achieve similar performance. Note that it is also pos-
sible to learn time axis warping without using the DTW algorithm (or shapeDTW
etc). Even if DTW proves to be more effective to model variations in time series, then
the augmentation classification scheme has the advantage of generalizing to higher
dimensions as explained in section 3.4. So it can be applied to a broader range of
problems unlike DTW. The models considered in this project should represent gen-
eral trends in time series classification, and a clear observation from the error rates is
that neural networks perform relatively well on the UCR Archive. Through further
experimentation on selected data sets, it has been shown that data augmentation
prevents overfitting so deep neural networks are applicable for time series classifica-
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Detailed Analysis
51
tion. An implication of these observations is that data augmentation can improve
high-achieving models for time series classification.
The proposed method for learning data augmentation has its limitations.
There
must be a direct comparison of time series in order to compute a difference between
observations. Otherwise it is not possible to optimize transformation and eventually
generate new data. This becomes a problem when time series differ in length, and
some pre-alignment for a pair of time series is necessary, so values are compared at
the same time locations. Also, it is a relatively long pipeline to learn transformations,
generate artificial data and then train a classifier compared with simply training a
classifier. That being said, once training is completed time series classification of new
observations are computed in the same time as other approaches. In fact comparing
the classification computation time with DTW or COTE, then the proposed method
is significantly more efficient.
The experiments in this chapter are based on ideas and theories presented throughout
the project. It shows that data augmentation is useful and a sensible alternative to
DTW for time series classification. Learning data augmentation is a superior substi-
tute to performing traditional data augmentation.
Future work
Further analysis can be conducted to address dependencies of the
method and shortcomings in the project.
A complete end-to-end learning is pre-
sented but there are dependencies.
The supervised learning part entails choosing
the best classification model, which is always in question when doing machine learn-
ing. Optimizing hyperparameters in the neural networks, letting networks train for
more than 100 epochs and an extensive exploration of the performance of deep neu-
ral network structures such as ResNet are not in the scope of this project. Therefore
learned data augmentation might not have seen its full potential on the UCR Archive.
The unsupervised learning part depends on the transformations of data, and while
CPAB serves the purpose you can use more complex transformations, they just need
to fulfill the properties of a C1-diffeomorphism. Additionally, CPAB is constructed
from a constrained velocity field which depends on a tessellation. Experiments with
different tessellations and additional constraints on the velocity field would be fu-
ture work. Generating new data involves transformation alignment and optimization
through gradient descent. These optimizations sometimes reach a local minimum of
the loss function, so it might be beneficial to investigate other optimization algorithms.
An effort to completely align time series could be made by applying a transformation
(e.g. a scaling) of the second axis and not just on the time axis of the data signals.
Finally more research can be done on how to improve computation times for learning
data augmentation for time series.
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The fundamental idea in this project is to learn data augmentation for time series
classification, and the overall conclusion is that the proposed approach is beneficial. It
does make sense to augment data sets using an unsupervised learning approach before
training classifiers thereby achieving complete end-to-end learning. The effectiveness
of learned data augmentation can be summarized by three strong insights.
1. Learning data augmentation is applicable for many time series classification
problems, because the method makes few assumptions about the data.
2. Time series classification can be performed using relatively small data sets.
3. The augmentation scheme allows for more complex and possibly superior clas-
sification models.
Research on time series classification comprise a broad range of algorithms.
The
standard and frequently used benchmark for time series classification is 1-Nearest
Neighbor on the UCR Archive (using euclidean and DTW distance metrics), with
which most studies compare results. shapeDTW (a modification of DTW) and espe-
cially COTE (an ensemble of 35 classifiers) are high-performing models, yet neural
networks (FCN in particular) are most arguably state-of-the-art. Data augmentation
is often proven useful for enriching sparse data sets and regularizing advanced machine
learning models, which is also concluded in this project. Current data augmentation
methodologies are mainly driven by manually modifying observations, which is essen-
tially feature engineering, such that the artificial data still represent the original data.
There has not been a clear trend for augmenting time series, probably because there
is no intuitive way of transforming the data.
CPAB transformations are used to model variations in data which eventually leads to
learned data augmentation. The transformations are constructed from a simple start-
ing point but are developed into highly expressive functions that can be represented
using a small set of parameters. CPAB have several advantages when applied in this
project, but three features are key in the learned augmentation scheme. CPAB is a
continuous function to ensure transformations that do not break data signals. CPAB
is invertible which keeps all information in the data during transformation. And fi-
nally, CPAB is differentiable which enables optimization through Gradient descent.
CPAB is particularly useful for one-dimensional signals such as time series, because
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Conclusion
the steps in numerical integration, used to actually transform data, are solved in
closed form and are computationally efficient.
The full augmentation classification pipeline consists of two main parts, unsuper-
vised learning for data augmentation and supervised learning for classification. Data
augmentation can be further broken down into optimizing transformations and gener-
ating new data. Although there are requirements for the transformations (that they
should be diffeomorphisms) and the augmentation process consists of multiple steps,
there has never been made any concrete assumptions about the data. It can there-
fore be concluded that unsupervised learning for data augmentation can be applied to
many time series classification problems since there is no dependency for specific data.
A common problem with sparse training sets is overfitting, particularly when using
complex neural networks. Performance evaluations on the UCR Archive show that
augmented training sets let a simple 1-Nearest Neighbor classifier achieve comparable
results and improves neural networks to outperform the benchmarks for a majority
of the data sets. Once a sufficient amount of transformations has been optimized,
so an accurate Gaussian distribution can be estimated, then it is always possible to
sample a new transformation and apply it to some original data point, thus an infinite
amount of new data can in theory be generated. This directly addresses the issue of
sparse training sets. Experiments have also shown that the proposed augmentation
technique generates artificial data which resembles the original time series in a data
set, thus CPAB transformations are able to capture natural variations within data on
a per-class basis and apply it to this data. A clear and relevant conclusion about the
augmentation classification approach is that you are not limited by relatively small
training sets.
Other theoretical characteristics of CPAB can be observed in practice such as the
inverse-property, a logical center around the identity transformation and a multivari-
ate Gaussian density of the principal components, which justifies that transformations
can be sampled from this probability distribution. By visualizing the first principal
component of CPAB transformations you can see that the primary learned transfor-
mation of time series is local translations along the time axis.
After data augmentation has been learned and performed, any time series classifi-
cation algorithm can be chosen. Data augmentation does not limit this choice, in
fact it allows for more complex machine learning models that beforehand would over-
fit to the training set. Preliminary analysis of the performance and learning curves
for a deep neural network structure (ResNet) supports this statement. A significant
conclusion to make from this project is that the augmented data provides regulariza-
tion during training of complex classification models. Future research on time series
classification does not need to rely on 1-Nearest Neighbor with a DTW metric or an
ensemble based classifier like COTE.
==PAGE:65==
6 Conclusion
55
Machine learning allows computers to improve performance regarding a specific prob-
lem by gathering information from observed data. This project concludes that learn-
ing augmentations of time series allows for better learning in terms of classification,
and the method truly comprehend the concept of learning from data.
==PAGE:66==
56
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A
Separate
Documentation
A.1
Project plan
Project Description
This project concerns data augmentation for time series, it will be a study of how to
improve accuracy when classifying time series by expanding the set of data on which
a machine learning model is trained. Transformations of time series will be examined
in order to be able to learn an optimized transformation. The overall approach will
then be to learn and sample a transformation, expand a data set and classify time
series, thereby achieving end-to-end learning when classifying time series.
Learning Objectives
• Examining methods and machine learning models for time series classification,
e.g. K-Nearest Neighbor with different distance metrics and Neural Networks.
• Implement a transformation that can be optimized.
• Perform data augmentation by sampling learned transformations from a prob-
ability distribution and apply them to a data set.
• Experiment with data augmentation and time series classification and document
relevant findings.
A.2
Revised project plan
The project plan shown above describes the activities of the actual project quite
accurately, so the original plan did not need to be changed.
==PAGE:68==
58
A Separate Documentation
A.3
Auto-evaluation of the project
The project has been carried out in the agreed upon period over the course of 5
months. Time spent on coding and writing the report has been split equally, and
time management in general has been sensible so to avoid stressful periods.
In terms of planned project activities, there have not been a need to revise the original
plan and the learning objectives have been fulfilled. I have certainly gotten a better
understanding of time series classification and state-of-the-art methods for the task.
This should be reflected in the chapter regarding background and related work. Once
CPAB was implemented in Tensorflow, it was relatively straight forward to optimize
transformations and subsequently generate artificial data. There was time to apply
the augmentation classification approach to all data sets in the UCR Archive, so it
could be shown that the proposed method generalizes to many data sets. However,
since preliminary results with deep neural network structures have been promising, it
is a shame that further experimentation with such models for time series classification
(and other proposals for future work) were not in the scope of this project. All things
considered, I have definitely learned more about the objectives in the project plan,
and hopefully this report shows that.
The project has been a combination of literature studies of state-of-the-art research on
data augmentation and time series classification, theoretical studies of CPAB trans-
formations, experimental work with unsupervised learning for data augmentation and
supervised learning for classification, and synthesizing key insights when analyzing
the theoretical approach applied to actual data. This aligns well with the overarching
learning goals of a Master’s thesis in Mathematical Modelling and Computing from
DTU.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Yanping Chen, Eamonn Keogh, Bing Hu, Nurjahan Begum, Anthony Bag-
nall, Abdullah Mueen, and Gustavo Batista, “UCR Time Series Classification
Archive,” 2015.
[2]
Anthony Bagnall, Aaron Bostrom, James Large, and Jason Lines, “The Great
Time Series Classification Bake Off: An Experimental Evaluation of Recently
Proposed Algorithms. Extended Version,” Data Mining and Knowledge Discov-
ery, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 606–660, feb 2016.
[3]
Anthony Bagnall, Jason Lines, Jon Hills, and Aaron Bostrom,
“Time-series
classification with COTE: The collective of transformation-based ensembles,” in
2016 IEEE 32nd International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE). may
2016, pp. 1548–1549, IEEE.
[4]
Zhiguang Wang, Weizhong Yan, and Tim Oates,
“Time series classification
from scratch with deep neural networks: A strong baseline,” Proceedings of the
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, vol. 2017-May, pp. 1578–
1585, 2017.
[5]
Xiaopeng Xi, Eamonn Keogh, Christian Shelton, Li Wei, and Chotirat Ann
Ratanamahatana, “Fast time series classification using numerosity reduction,”
Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning - ICML
’06, pp. 1033–1040, 2006.
[6]
Jiaping Zhao and Laurent Itti, “shapeDTW: shape Dynamic Time Warping,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1606.0, jun 2016.
[7]
Arthur Le Guennec, Simon Malinowski, and Romain Tavenard,
“Data Aug-
mentation for Time Series Classification using Convolutional Neural Networks,”
ECML/PKDD Workshop on Advanced Analytics and Learning on Temporal Data,
2016.
[8]
Patrick Schäfer and Ulf Leser, “Fast and Accurate Time Series Classification
with WEASEL,” jan 2017.
[9]
Zhicheng Cui, Wenlin Chen, and Yixin Chen, “Multi-Scale Convolutional Neural
Networks for Time Series Classification,” mar 2016.
==PAGE:70==
60
Bibliography
[10] Iebeling Kaastra and Milton Boyd, “Designing a neural network for forecasting
financial and economic time series,” Neurocomputing, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 215–236,
apr 1996.
[11] Chotirat Ann Ratanamahatana and Eamonn Keogh, “Three Myths about Dy-
namic Time Warping Data Mining,” in Proceedings of the 2005 SIAM Inter-
national Conference on Data Mining, pp. 506–510. Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, apr 2005.
[12] Young-Seon Jeong, Myong K. Jeong, and Olufemi A. Omitaomu,
“Weighted
dynamic time warping for time series classification,” Pattern Recognition, vol.
44, no. 9, pp. 2231–2240, sep 2011.
[13] Michael Hüsken and Peter Stagge, “Recurrent neural networks for time series
classification,” Neurocomputing, vol. 50, pp. 223–235, jan 2003.
[14] Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein,
Introduction to Algorithms, Third Edition, The MIT Press, 3rd edition, 2009.
[15] Christopher M Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information
Science and Statistics), Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ, USA,
2006.
[16] Eamonn J Keogh and Michael J Pazzani, “Derivative Dynamic Time Warping,”
in Proceedings of the 2001 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, pp.
1–11. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, apr
2001.
[17] Meinard Müller, Dynamic Time Warping, pp. 69–84, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007.
[18] Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell, “Fully Convolutional Net-
works for Semantic Segmentation,” nov 2014.
[19] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun,
“Deep Residual
Learning for Image Recognition,” dec 2015.
[20] Luis Perez and Jason Wang, “The Effectiveness of Data Augmentation in Image
Classification using Deep Learning,” dec 2017.
[21] Hiroshi Inoue, “Data Augmentation by Pairing Samples for Images Classifica-
tion,” jan 2018.
[22] Søren Hauberg, Oren Freifeld, Anders Boesen Lindbo Larsen, John W. Fisher,
and Lars Kai Hansen, “Dreaming More Data: Class-dependent Distributions
over Diffeomorphisms for Learned Data Augmentation,” vol. 41, 2015.
[23] Navdeep Jaitly and Geoffrey E Hinton,
“Vocal Tract Length Perturbation
(VTLP) improves speech recognition,” 2013.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
61
[24] Justin Salamon and Juan Pablo Bello, “Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
and Data Augmentation for Environmental Sound Classification,” aug 2016.
[25] Yingbo Zhou, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher, “Improved Regularization
Techniques for End-to-End Speech Recognition,” dec 2017.
[26] Tom Ko, Vijayaditya Peddinti, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur, “Audio
augmentation for speech recognition,” in INTERSPEECH, 2015.
[27] Xiaodong Cui, Vaibhava Goel, and Brian Kingsbury, “Data Augmentation for
Deep Neural Network Acoustic Modeling,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1469–1477, sep 2015.
[28] Oren Freifeld, Søren Hauberg, Kayhan Batmanghelich, and John W. Fischer III,
“Transformations Based on Continuous Piecewise-Affine Velocity Fields,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI), 2016.
[29] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba, “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimiza-
tion,” dec 2014.
[30] Warren Weckesser, “Rank and nullspace of a matrix,” 2011.
[31] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton, “ImageNet Classifica-
tion with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks,” in Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 25, F Pereira, C J C Burges, L Bottou, and K Q
Weinberger, Eds., pp. 1097–1105. Curran Associates, Inc., 2012.
[32] Brian C. Hall, “An Elementary Introduction to Groups and Representations,”
may 2000.
[33] Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman, The Elements of Sta-
tistical Learning, Springer Series in Statistics. Springer New York, New York,
NY, 2 edition, 2009.
[34] Gilbert Strang, “Linear Algebra and Its Applications,” in Linear Algebra and
Its Applications, chapter 6, pp. 311–350. 4 edition, 2006.
[35] Dahua Lin, Eric Grimson, and John Fisher, “Modeling and estimating persistent
motion with geometric flows,” in 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. jun 2010, pp. 1–8, IEEE.
==PAGE:72==
