==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements 
 
 
I am thankful to the following people: 
 
 
 
Ergo Pikas​, who guided me through this wicked problem. 
 
Josef Oehmen ​and​ Lauri Koskela​, whose comments raised this thesis’ quality. 
 
Philip Cash​, who provided insights for the testing. 
 
Per Halstrøm​, on whose doctoral thesis this work is premised and whose feedback enhanced the 
solution.  
 
Juha Lempinen​ from AW2 Architects, who gave me architectural and co-creational insights. 
 
Tatu Penttinen​ and ​Eeva Rikkilä-Kettunen​, who gave me access to the Rajatorppa / Hämeenkylä 
school workshop and the Hämeenlinna hospital workshop respectively. 
 
Christian Thuesen​ and ​Michael Pedersen​, who helped to organize the tests. 
 
All the people who partook in the tests. 
 
 
1 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract 
 
 
While the form of building construction delivery known as Integrated Design-Build (or Integrated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Delivery) is necessary for handling the complexity of modern projects, it raises up a host of
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
problems due to the amount and variety of stakeholders that are brought together to co-design.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Namely, the difficulty in forming a shared mental model of expectations regarding the project can
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cause disappointment in the results, as well as time and cost overruns. This thesis is about creating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
an intervention to alleviate those issues. Employing knowledge from the field of mental models as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well as the philosophy of individualism and the use of rhetoric in design, two Integrated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Design-Build workshops were analyzed to extract a set of rhetorical elements common to all such
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sessions. Then using Per Halstrøm’s framework of rhetorical design as basis, and drawing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inspiration from the aforementioned body of knowledge, a design game was formulated around the
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
empirical data by an iterative design process, following established design game theory. The game
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was found to indeed more than double the alignment of a group’s individual mental models, though
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
more testing is needed to verify this. A roadmap was also provided for bolstering the game into a
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
universally applicable intervention. 
 
 
 
 
2 
==PAGE:4==
List of contents 
​1​ Introduction
5 
​1.1​ Gaps, needs and issues
5 
​1.1.1​ Practical
5 
​1.1.2​ Theoretical
6 
​1.2​ Glimmer of hope
7 
​1.2.1​ Maligned methodology
7 
​1.2.2​ Parasitic solution
8 
​1.3​ Research design
11 
​1.3.1​ Targets and questions
11 
​1.3.2​ Research methodology
11 
​2​ Literature review
13 
​2.1​ Individualism and collectivism
13 
​2.1.1​ Culture
13 
​2.1.2​ What is the foundation of Self?  ‘I think, hence I am ’
15 
​2.1.3​ Heroism ensues
16 
​2.1.4​ So lets try again.  ‘I am in the world ’
17 
​2.1.5​ Not quite. Once more.  ‘We are in the world ’
18 
​2.1.6​ Removing the mask
20 
​2.2​ Mental models
21 
​2.3​ Rhetoric
24 
​2.3.1​ Foundation
24 
​2.3.2​ Modernity
25 
​2.3.3​ Design
26 
​2.3.4​ In practice
27 
2.4​ Metaphors
30 
​2.5​ Design games
34 
​2.5.1​ Aims
35 
​2.5.2​ Fundamental criteria
35 
​2.5.3​ Knowledge levels
36 
​2.5.4​ Boundary objects
37 
​2.5.5​ Enlightening examples
38 
​2.6​ Summary
41 
​3​ Analysis
42 
​3.1​ Methodology
42 
​3.1.1​ Cases
42 
​3.1.2​ Topos extraction and curation
43 
3 
==PAGE:5==
​3.1.3​ Coding
45 
​3.2​ Results
48 
​3.3​ Discussion
51 
​3.3.1​ Heurism
51 
​3.3.2​ Mental model process flow
52 
​3.3.3​ More advanced methodology
53 
​4​ Synthesis
54 
​4.1​ Design process
55 
​4.1.1​ First version
55 
​4.1.2​ First test
59 
​4.1.3​ Second version
61 
​4.1.4​ Second test
65 
4.1.5​ Third version
67 
​4.1.6​ Third test
70 
​4.1.7​ Fourth version
73 
​4.2​ Summary
74 
​4.2.1​ Game materials
75 
​4.2.2​ Game mechanics
76 
4.2.3 Facilitation tips
78 
​5​ Discussion
79 
​5.1​ Reflection
79 
​5.1.1​ Contributions
79 
​5.1.2​ Answering the research questions
80 
​5.1.3​ Ways of use
81 
5.2​ Projection
83 
​5.2.1​ Extra ingredients
83 
​5.2.2​ Topos extraction and coding
84 
​5.2.3​ Data collection
85 
​6​ Conclusion
88 
References
90 
Image references
98 
Appendix A: Topos cards
99 
Appendix B: Metaphor cards
103 
Appendix C: Value and concept cards
107 
Appendix D: Topos examples
109 
4 
==PAGE:6==
​1​ Introduction 
 
 
Below I describe the practical and academic problems whence the need for this research sources.
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Then I outline the theoretical direction of the intervention that I shall formulate in order to tackle
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
those problems. Lastly I lay out the aim and objectives of the intervention and delineate the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research methodology to achieve it. 
 
​1.1​ Gaps, needs and issues 
 
​1.1.1​ Practical 
 
Nowadays the result of architects’ and design managers’ toil is not simply buildings, but complex
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
sociotechnical systems, endowed with high performance and ‘smartness’. And given the increased
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strictness of regulations and the raising of owner demands, it is no wonder that in the past few
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decades the early stages of sociotechnical system design have come to accommodate a substantial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
array of actors to complement the architects’ capabilities. (Urup, 2016) 
This modern form of project delivery goes by the name Integrated Design-Build (Urup, 2016)
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or Integrated Project Delivery. While this shift has been critical to achieving the ability to fulfil
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
present-day building requirements, it has brought about a surge in complexity due not only to
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increasing the amount of diverse knowledge to be fused together, but also to the large and dynamic
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
amount of stakeholders, which summons forth both the benefits and the dark side of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
heterogeneous collaboration; considering that there is bound to be some level of friction even in
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collaboration amongst professionals of similar backgrounds, it is obvious that teams endowed with
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
diverse (and occasionally divergent) norms, interests and values are fertile ground for inefficiency
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and discord, sometimes even strife. Ugly manifestations of the curse of human nature tend to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
foment in egocentric groups when a common ground is not readily available: insufficient
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge sharing (Thuesen, 2006), lack of coordination (Apelgren, et al., 2005), even collective
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shirking from responsibilities (Henisz et al., 2012). Every designer is familiar with the emotional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
effects of this: “​frustration, alienation, insecurity, hopelessness and unrest​” (Gomes & Tzortzopoulos). And
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
the results are deplorable: significant time overruns, excessive construction costs, and low quality
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the final sociotechnical system (Apelgren et al., 2005; Schultz, 2012). 
5 
==PAGE:7==
Integrated Design-Build projects tend to include in their early stage a Team Alignment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Workshop, which “​has two primary functions: it creates clarity, consensus, and commitment to project goals,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
and it begins to shape a project culture that transforms a group of individuals into a high-performance team​ ”
   
   
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
A facilitator uses his / her preferred techniques to achieve this; a common procedure is to make the
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
     
 
 
participants create a list of values for the project (Allison et al., 2018). However, considering the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negative phenomena mentioned above, it is clear that this kind of methodology is often insufficient. 
 
 
​1.1.2​ Theoretical 
 
How is this problem understood in mainstream academia, and what kinds of directions have been
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suggested for solving it? 
There are two steps to grasping the origins of the troublesome nature of such collaboration.
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
Firstly, there is the design problem's ‘wickedness’: it is difficult to define and inherently unsolvable
 
   
 
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
(i.e. no right or wrong answers, only good or bad). Rittel and Weber (1973) defined ‘wicked problem’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by ten characteristics; one that is particularly pertinent to architecture/construction, due to the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
immobile nature of the results, is that the solution is a ‘one-shot’ operation, without possibility for
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
trial and error. However, according to Coyne (2005), all problems are to some extent wicked, even
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simple puzzles, for though there be a definite solution and a definite set of rules, the problem is
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
nevertheless experienced in a complex mental context of motivations, skills and tendencies. Puzzles
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
simply exhibit diminished wickedness due to their rules and constraints. As such, it is no wonder
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
that ambiguous, open-ended design processes such as Integrated Design-Build are notorious for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their alarming levels of wickedness (Bresnen & Marshall, 2010) (which would be easy to quantify by
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
monitoring designers’ stress hormone levels).  
Secondly, the vexing characteristics associated with ‘wickedness’ hamper the formation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shared understanding within design teams. Not only is it often difficult to communicate the details
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
of the problem and solution domains across different disciplinary ‘languages’ (Bucciarelli, 2002), but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it is also common to find a lack of robust understanding about how other members of the team
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operate, and about the dependencies between members’ tasks. Moreover, particularly in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
construction projects, the concept of ‘collaboration’ itself is a major missing piece in shared
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
understanding, hindering integrative practices (Zimina et al., 2012). As such, members' ability to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discern incompatible design decisions is often poor, engendering excessive iteration (Urup, 2016).  
Although the origins of the issue are hence relatively soundly understood, the process of its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
development, or on the contrary the development of smooth and effective design operation, is not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
so well charted out. It is beneficial to think of shared understanding in terms of the formation of a
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
     
shared mental model. Several methodologies based on mental models have been used to study the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
above problems. For example, Badke-Schaub and Casakin’s method for quantifying mental model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
==PAGE:8==
sharedness in design using an utterance categorization technique seems a valuable tool for gaining
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
a simple overview of a team’s mental models, and insights into how team composition affects them
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Badke-Schaub & Casakin, 2017). Another notable study is by Cash et al. (2007), who used concept
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mapping to examine the effectiveness of question-asking as a catalyst for mental model alignment.
Despite the interesting insights presented in these inquiries, they are mostly descriptive,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focused on quantifying the overall dynamics of collaboration. But the purpose of this field is not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
simply to comprehend design, but to exploit that comprehension in order to take action, to wage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
war against that which defiles design, yielding a purer, more effective practice with which to enrich
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
the world. As the majority of the existing literature on this topic does not offer concepts of robust
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
tools for rectifying what they highlighted as lacking, I intend to conceptualize such a tool.  
 
 
​1.2​ Glimmer of hope 
 
 
​1.2.1​ Maligned methodology 
 
One of the drawbacks that I can discern in the inquiries described above is that they do not directly
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
address the role of rhetoric, which seems to me an auspicious viewpoint on the issue. In fact,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
despite originating from Aristotle’s mind, rhetoric has in general been ignored throughout the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
millennia. Although it surfaced again in the 1950, this powerful field is even now underutilized in
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
academia, and even more so in design practice. 
Halstrøm argues for the significance of persuasion in the design process, contending for an
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
explicitly rhetorical view of it. Even though existing models of the process of design may be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accurate, “​they provide little advice on how to deliberate and make judgments in terms of intention and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
argumentation for designers.​” (Halstrøm, 2017) This argumentation should be present both in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution, which should induce the user to espouse certain values and ways of acting, and in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design process itself, so that the designers can understand the reasoning behind the decisions they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
make. Using classical rhetorical concepts, Halstrøm crafted a holistic model to help designers
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
clarify their intentions and persuasively argue their way through design tasks.  
The simplicity and examples of successful application of this framework have persuaded me
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
of its effectiveness in enlightening practitioners and raising the lasting quality of their work. And
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as the aligning of mental models is intuitively very much a stream of argumentation between team
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
members, a rhetorical orientation towards the issue of shared understanding seems rife with
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potential.  
7 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
​1.2.2​ Parasitic solution 
 
One of the benefits of Halstrøm’s model is that it shifts the focus of designing away from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution space into a dynamic deliberation on the whole design space: the solution, problem and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
audience spaces (Halstrøm, 2017). As such, rather than aiding the finding of solutions to a problem,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
it promotes the finding of solutions to multiple problems, alongside the audiences i.e. user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
segments that each affects. It is therefore fitting to now announce that the problem space of this
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project, too, auspiciously expanded during its Analysis phase (Chapter 3). Namely, I discovered that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
not only is the rhetorical model well suited for tackling the issue of poor sharing of understanding,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
but it also has high potential for raising the quality and quantity of that understanding.  
To illustrate, let us look at two examples of impressive projects that upon scrutiny reveal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remarkably simple design oversights. Copenhagen’s Inner Harbor Bridge (Figure 1), opened in 2016,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
is a massive success when considering its primary function of enabling light traffic across the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
canal: the city estimated a daily use of around 7000 cyclists, but the current figure is about 16,000.
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Yet it abounds with design blunders, even when ignoring the subjective issue of such an epitome of
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
contemporary sleekness being in total juxtaposition to the delicate classicism that pervades the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
surrounding urban fabric. Its designers in Studio Bednarski, which is based in two countries that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
are hardly at the forefront of urban cycling culture, have failed to consider established cycling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
standards. (Colville-Andersen, 2017) 
Firstly, the bridge’s core concept is the idea of its two halves ‘kissing’ in the middle
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(manifesting most spectacularly in its glass panels changing color as it opens). For some reason, this
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
gimmick was hard to reconcile with common sense, which hence had to yield. Cyclists have to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
maneuver around two sharp turns, a design decision that asserts the righteousness of ignoring
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users’ comfort and safety (established for over a century in infrastructural Best Practice standards)
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
in favor of visual quirkiness. An even graver oversight is that due to an inability to surmise that a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
bridge designer could not be satisfied with straight lanes, unsuspecting cyclists tend to hit the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
break too late when approaching the ‘kiss’ at high speed; one can sometimes find skidmarks that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stop a bike-length away perpendicularly from the central colored panel, without which many a
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
commuter would have ended up altogether refreshed. The city has thus slapped a warning sign on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the panels. Other problems include the bridge’s slippery surface during winter and its initially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
man-sized holes in the railings making it superb for drunk people to commute by, as well as its
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ominous skewing and bending in Spring when the air suddenly warms but the water remains cold.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After overruns in time and money of 3 years and 100 million DKK respectively, this is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outstanding result that the citizens got. (Colville-Andersen, 2017) 
 
8 
==PAGE:10==
 
Figure 1: Copenhagen’s Inner Harbor Bridge. Right: warning signs set up by the city after finding out unsuspecting
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cyclists’ tendency to bump into the colored panel. The signs can be thought of as works of abstract art conveying the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
beauty of a designer’s mind as he/she nobly resists the suffocating forces of common sense. 
 
Berlin’s Holocaust Memorial (Figure 2) is composed of 2711 concrete blocks arranged in an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
orthogonal grid, varying in height but not length or width. At the site’s perimeter, the blocks are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
less than eight inches tall, and increase in height towards the center, where they are sixteen feet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high. The site’s appearance of a disorienting, halted construction project contrasts with the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
surrounding city’s vivacity; its designer, architect Peter Eisenman, succeeded in conveying a feeling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
of dreadful monotony, of a sinister rationality. However, up close it affects us rather differently. At
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
its periphery, the diverse spaces formed by the low-slung blocks are a gentle invitation to step in.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Venturing towards the center, where the monoliths rise while the ground slopes downwards, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designer meant for us to feel an eerie foreboding, a sense of descending into an unknown place
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while being gradually trapped, perhaps like approaching Hell through its suburbs. However, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actual experience is more like a Haunted Mansion thrill. The rectilinear grid structure causes any
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fledgling fear to dispel, as it warrants lines of sight back to the bustling streets at constant and
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
short intervals. And we know that we cannot become truly lost when we are presented with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
straight escape corridor behind every corner; the axes even invite us to explore further the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pleasantly mysterious place. (Goldhagen, 2017) 
In addition, the popularity of the Memorial as a tourist destination fills the peripheries with
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
people (eg. children jumping between blocks), driving away the sense of loneliness that is salient in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
inducing horror. “​Eisenman’s intentions do not translate into the built reality because his use of the grid as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
the datum by which to arrange the concrete slabs undermines the very experience it is meant to effectuate​.​”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
(Goldhagen, 2017) The Memorial fails to embody his stated agenda for two reasons. Firstly, he
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neglected all the stimuli that visitors would process; though they proprioceptively sense themselves
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
descending, their visual sense enables them to maintain their sense of location. Secondly, he
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designed the Memorial as if the visitor experiences it in isolation, failing to recognize that places
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are composed not only of physical but also social structures, the life they facilitate. (Goldhagen,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2017) 
9 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
Figure 2: Berlin’s Holocaust Memorial. 
 
The shortcomings in these projects could easily have been prevented if the designers had taken the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
effort to deliberate not only on the aspects of the design space that ​
thought were most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important, but on a wide variety of common architectural topics that may not at first seem
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relevant, such as visual connection, noise, clarity of navigation, dynamics of cycling, and time of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
year. Now, as Halstrøm’s model is all about approaching design from a multitude of angles, i.e.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
topics (as elucidated in Section 2.3.4), there is no reason why I should refrain from incorporating
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
this inspirational power into my eventual intervention. It should however be kept in mind that as
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this project is directed towards the initial stage of Integrated Design-Build, where concepts should
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not yet be concretized, it is sufficient to simply cover the topics without refining any ensuing ideas.  
 
 
 
 
10 
==PAGE:12==
​1.3​ Research design 
 
I will here lay out this project’s overall aim, followed by the concrete steps that I will take in order
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
to reach them. They are directly derived from the issues and the promising glimpses of solution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented above.  
 
 
​1.3.1​ Targets and questions 
 
Aim 
To create an intervention for early-stage Integrated Design-Build meetings that would alleviate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problems originating from inadequate formation of a shared mental model of expectations. 
 
Outcomes 
The intervention shall have the following outcomes: 
1.
Aligns the participants’ mental models of what the result of their project should and what it
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
could be like. 
2.
Enables the group to consider a wide array of the most important aspects of the design
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
space (problems, solutions, and users) early on to diminish the need for creative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workarounds later. 
 
Research questions 
1.
What is the theoretical basis of the problem? In other words, what are theoretically the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bottlenecks that inhibit smooth and fruitful Integrated Design-Build co-design? 
2.
How can the rhetorical elements that are important in Integrated Design-Build co-design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be found out? 
3.
What kind of intervention would be most efficient in achieving the expected outcomes? 
4.
How can such an intervention be strengthened from a proof of concept into a powerful tool
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
that would be beneficial in any Integrated Design-Build project? 
 
 
 
11 
==PAGE:13==
​1.3.2​ Research methodology 
 
Here I describe the methodology that I will use to answer each of the research questions. 
1.
I will gather together a literature review that explains the problem space outlined above,
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
delineated into two sections. The review will begin with the philosophical roots of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individualism and collectivism as well as its psychological manifestations, which my
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intuition identifies as the heart of the issues mentioned. Next I will expound the theory and
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
practice of mental models, as they seem to be the bridge between the psychological
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
foundations of the problem space and the phenomena observed in design practice. 
2.
After laying out the basis for understanding the rhetorical subspace of the solution space in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
the third section of the literature review, I shall then go out into the field, collecting data
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from Integrated Design-Build co-design sessions. Thereafter I will analyze the data by
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
transcribing it, and extracting from it rhetorical information. Thence I can code the data
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
with the rhetorical information in order to solidify it with statistical qualities.  
3.
The rhetorical section of the literature review having already kickstarted vague probing of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the solution (and audience) space, I will amplify it by explaining in another section of the
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
literature review the use of metaphors in rhetorics. Furthermore, in the last section of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
literature review, I will give an overview of design game theory so as to gain concrete
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elements for developing the solution, which will be underpinned by the findings from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empirical analysis. I shall approach the development process by informal application of
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Halstrøm’s model, laying out the values of the project and amplifying them. For the actual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design process, I shall follow the classical ​plan-act-observe-reflect formula (Robson, 1993),
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
though the proof-of-concept nature of this project warrants an informal approach, where I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
integrate ​reflection + planning​, and ​acting + observing​, into alternate steps. In other words, for
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each version of the intervention, I first explain my design decisions and their physical
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outcome, then describe how I tested the version and the learnings that I gained. 
4.
I shall try to find the weaknesses in my analytic process, regarding both the collection of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data and its interpretation. Thus I can formulate courses of action to overhaul the analytic
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process in order to be able to develop a far sounder empirical basis that would morph the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intervention from ‘proof of concept’ into ‘powerful, universally applicable concept’. 
 
 
 
12 
==PAGE:14==
​2​ Literature review 
 
This chapter answers my first research question, “​What is the theoretical basis of the problem? In other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
words, what are theoretically the bottlenecks that inhibit smooth and fruitful Integrated Design-Build
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
co-design?​” 
 
I will begin this quest by exposing the problem’s philosophical kernel, rooting subsequent analysis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and synthesis in sound and potent conceptual ground. Next I contextualize the problem in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
modern comprehension of shared understanding in terms of mental models, outlining cutting-edge
 
   
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
practical inquiries. Then follows a review of the art of rhetoric, and how design can be expressed as
 
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
its application to the realm of the artificial. Therein I describe Halstrøm’s practical framework. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
following section is a reflection on one of the most critical rhetorical elements, metaphors, with
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
examples of e.g. those used by hospital designers and healthcare practitioners. This chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concludes with a review of basic design game theory and a brief analysis of two design games. 
 
 
​2.1​ Individualism and collectivism 
 
Everything in an ecosystem affects everything else. As John Muir, an ecologist thanks to whom
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Californian redwood forests have been preserved, put it:  
“​When we try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the Universe.​”
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
(Muir, 1911) 
However, does this universal interconnectedness cover the domain of human thought and behavior
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
too? Does it permeate the ‘unnatural’ realm of society? Let us find out. 
​2.1.1​ Culture 
 
Hofstede’s influential work on contrasting country-level societies based on individualism gave rise
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to an ample strain of cross-cultural research. The importance of Hofstede’s formulation can be said
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
to lie in his organizing cultural differences into overarching patterns, such as ‘power distance’ and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘masculinity’, facilitating rich analysis of their causes and their effects on economies and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
==PAGE:15==
professional activities. Particularly when contrasting Western and East Asian cultural frames,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where the effects tend to be the most blatant, individualism is seen as the opposite of collectivism.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
Protestantism and Enlightenment-induced democratization are seen as the roots of the Western
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focus on self-actualization and personal freedom (Oyserman et al., 2002). The influence of ancient
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
philosophical and spiritual traditions, as well as the communal coordination required for rice
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
farming (Talheim et al.), have had the opposite effect in East Asia, shaping a culture of social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
harmony and concealment of personal feelings and desires. 
Various conceptualizations of individualism have been suggested. Hofstede defined
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individualism as a “​focus on rights above duties, a concern for oneself and immediate family, an emphasis on
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
personal autonomy and self-fulfillment, and the basing of one’s identity on one’s personal accomplishments.​”
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Hofstede, 1980) Schwartz (1990) defined individualistic societies as built upon contracts, with social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relations suffused by obligations and expectations aimed at preserving and achieving status. All of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
the definitions tend to frame individualism as egocentric and society-peripheralizing. (Oyserman et
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
al., 2002) 
The Japanese post-war economic success is to a large extent attributable to business
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
practices and management techniques molded to suit the local collectivist mindset. Attention on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this trend has coincided with the increased focus on team-based work in Western organizations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(McGrath, 1997; Ilgen, 1999), giving rise to a vast array of methodologies for boosting the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cooperative capabilities of groups. In addition, many management scholars have championed for a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
fundamental transformation of Western work culture towards more collectivist systems (Locke et
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
al., 2001).   
But the reality of these cultural differences is not as trivial as the above may suggest. It
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
would be foolish to outright vilify individualism, for it is not wholly lacking in virtue: it has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
shown to kindle creativity more effectively than a collectivist approach to group work. Such an
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach is, however, beneficial only when creativity is a supreme goal, which is usually not the
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
case. (Goncalo & Staw, 2006). 
We clearly need to understand the philosophical complexities of individualism in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
take action in an optimal way. So as to gain an overview of its basic characteristics and an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding of its historical emergence, as well as to lay out a map of collectivism in light of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
which to craft possible interventions, I now proceed onto a survey of the quest for Self. 
 
 
 
14 
==PAGE:16==
​2.1.2​ What is the foundation of Self?  ‘​I think, hence I am​’ 
 
Descartes’ legacy permeates not only Western philosophy, but to some extent general thinking too.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
The most influential notions sourcing from René's prolific mind are those relating to Being, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particular to the nature of individual experience. In his view, not only is the subject separate from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the world of objects, but the ​individual subject is supreme over everything else; each person exists
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alone, an independent island of thought. Descartes’ ​Discourse on Method​, in which he lays out these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideas, is one man's utterly solitary journey of philosophical discovery; his most famous phrase
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
begins with ‘​I am​’ rather than ‘​Man is​’. As the reader is likely to have lived most of his/her life in a
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
Cartesian-suffused culture (i.e. more or less all of the industrialized world), such a view may seem
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
wholly obvious, rousing slight bemusement at the need to state it formally. However, the primacy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
of the self is not a fundamental, biologically determined ingredient of culture: Illich and Saunders
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1988) assert that while there is a first-person singular pronoun in every language, most lack words
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
expressing ‘self’. These languages tend to be orally transmitted, implying that the invention of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
permanent records and the emergence of individual authors, beginning in Mesopotamia and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spreading into much of Eurasia, gave birth to the ‘self’. Descartes then simply formalized it into the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
canon of Western intellectualism. (Coyne and Snodgrass, 1993) 
Descartes’ individualism rests also on a capacity for independent reasoning. According to
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
him, it is possible to shut out all influencers of the mind: tradition, dogma, social pressure etc. so as
     
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to reach truth; ​Transparency of Mind is his term for such a sterilized cognitive state. The path by
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
which any truth, according to the philosopher, can be reached in such a state, is the general method
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
of inference that he adapted from geometric inference. Having filtered through the brains of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empiricists, chiefly Locke and Hume, the belief in ​Transparency of Mind burgeoned into the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reverence for ‘objectivity’ that pervades modern science. (Coyne and Snodgrass, 1993) 
This belief in independence of reason causes self-delusion, for it induces us to accept as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
self-evident most or all of the views we hold at any moment. Heidegger noted that we are prone to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
setting aspects of our beliefs beyond the range of doubt. In effect, by sheltering within the walls of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
‘clarity of vision’, the modern mind more or less subconsciously seeks to avert the effort required
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for, and pain occasioning from, any reconfiguration of beliefs. And when such adjustment turns out
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unavoidable, the modern mind frames the process as a growth in clarity of vision; the independent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
mind is on its independent, self-sufficient quest for truth. (Coyne and Snodgrass, 1993) 
It is then assumed that the collective rises from mere agglomeration of the instances of the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
individual. That a group’s behaviors, opinions and emotional states are derived from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interactions between those of its constituents. In this view there is no flow in the other direction:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
reasoning, an individual act, is divorced from all context, all social dynamic. A modern framing of
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
15 
==PAGE:17==
this idea, prevalent in cognitive science, is the characterization of the mind as a mere processor of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
information (Newell and Simon, 1972). 
 
​2.1.3​ Heroism ensues 
 
If you have been wondering, “​Can this kind of cold philosophy really have had such a profound effect on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Western culture?​”, you have good intuition. For René fathered by his work not only the taciturn child
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rationalism, which these ideas of the subject-object divide and clarity of mind comprise, but pretty
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
and raucous Romanticism too. What the rationalist philosophers omitted, romantic ones such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hegel, Kant and Fichte appropriated, exploring that which is ​subjective​: emotion, aesthetics, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
human spirit, mystery, and so on. More practical philosophers, commonly called ​artists​, fashioned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out the Romantic subculture to balance the scientific ethos, bestowing humanity with arguably its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
most celebrated period of art (Coyne and Snodgrass, 1993). Romanticism is the exploration of an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
individual experience, and the artist is the noblest individual. In Schlegel’s words, “​What man is to
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
the other creatures on earth, the artist is to man​”. 
Herein lies a critical kernel of the problem that I (or perhaps rather ​we​) seek to tackle. Like
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
fine art, design is held to be a mysterious process springing from the depths of an individual's
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creativity. The designer’s mind is a ‘fountainhead’ (Rand, 1972) that deserves to flow freely, and
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obnoxious are the forces of approval and consensus that strive to curb its sublimity. Democratic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
government, the ubiquity of collaborative work, and the pervasiveness of knowledge about the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manifestations of vile 20th-century ‘isms’, have biased the modern human to rather trivially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attribute problems to collectivism, invoking ‘mob rule’, groupthink, following the crowd, etc.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
against which individuals should wage war (Coyne and Snodgrass, 1993). And having resisted the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enemy to the last, the designer acquires the aura of a hero: “​The great creators—the thinkers, the artists,
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the scientists, the inventors—stood alone against the men of their time. Every great new thought was opposed ...
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
But the men of unborrowed vision went ahead. They fought, they suffered and they paid. But they won.​”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Rand, 1972, p. 664)   
This is not to say that Romanticism is ‘wrong’ (I daresay most readers of this work relish
   
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some of its fruits, to say the least) or that the special nature of artists in society is a foolish idea, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
     
 
 
 
that there is no need for the elusive ‘creative spark’ (ie. abduction) in design; the point is simply
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
that this ideology, as ideologies tend to do, has seeped from its core domain into a place where it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
does more harm than good. Namely, into collaborative work, particularly in design. 
 
 
16 
==PAGE:18==
​2.1.4​ So lets try again.  ‘​I am in the world​’ 
 
Heidegger dissolves the primordiality of the subject-object view, asserting that the dualistic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cartesian metaphor is insufficient to act as an ontological foundation for the concept of Being. In
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
place of the lofty independent self, Heidegger posits ​Dasein​, or ​Being-in-the-world​. These terms do
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not mean simply spatial inclusion. Rather, they abound with connotations of rich being-in:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dwelling, communing, being intimate with. Heidegger criticizes the Cartesian tendency to consider
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
‘knowing’ as the defining quality of the subject and its primary way of interacting with objects, for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the question remains of how the subject transcends its boundaries to interact with the world.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Heidegger hence suggests ‘knowing’ to be only one mode of Being-in-the-world. Instead of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
self-consciousness, the mode of being, or level of experience, is what defines the Dasein’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
self-understanding; the foundation of the self is not pure consciousness, but an understanding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
determined by mood. (Çüçen, 1998) 
Below is a summary of Heidegger's four-level ontology (Coyne and Snodgrass, 1993): 
1.
The primary experience of the world is undifferentiated. The self is wholly absorbed in the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
world: “​we often experience ourselves as active yet are not aware of what we are trying to do​”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Dreyfus, 1991, p. 94). So much so that the completion of a task comes as a surprise.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
Heidegger’s well-known example of this mode is of using a hammer: the most primordial
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
experience of using a hammer is its ​handiness (​Zuhandheit​). This quality of availability is not
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
knowledge, but a pure experience of using it, of its being part of us and of the world . 
1
2.
Next is the level of the ​meaningful​, the ​unavailable (​unzuhanden​), which comes about when the
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘readiness to hand’ ceases. When encountering the unexpected, or failing to cope with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
situation, or plunging into reflection, entities are experienced as differentiated from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
self and the world; they take on shades of meaning. For example, if a hammer breaks when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
using it, one becomes aware of its value (and if one hits his/her thumb instead of the nail,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
value is ascribed to the thumb too). This is the mode at work in daily conversation and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
casual thoughts. 
3.
The third level of experience is that of ​theoretical reflection, of purposeful detachment from
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the object. This is the realm of science, where one analyzes the world and interacts with
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
theories, where objects are measurable entities. 
4.
The final level is that of pure contemplation, an engagement with bare facts, devoid of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feelings. It is the rarest and most fragile encounter with the world, with any sense of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
purpose or prejudice shattering it. Here the subject is self-sufficient and disinterested.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indeed, this mode is equivalent to Descartes’ ontology. 
1 Aristotle too argued for the primordiality of ready-to-hand for existence. Heidegger implied that though Aristotle’s direction was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
right, his formulation missed the deep structure of ready-to-hand. (Heidegger) 
17 
==PAGE:19==
This is a phenomenological reformulation of the meaning of Being, where ‘​cogito sum​’ is only a
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
branch and ‘​I am in the world​’ is the root. Another way to view this transformation is as an offering
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
of a rival metaphor of Being, an undifferentiated world of nuanced, rich, shared existence,
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
superseding the simplistic Cartesian subject-object metaphor. (Çüçen, 1998) 
It should be noted that this model is altogether hermeneutical. Considering the first mode,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
our most basic experience of other people is in skilfully engaging with them, for example in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designing with them. Our awareness of our roles and capabilities is possible only through our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relationships with people of other roles and capabilities. As the skilful use of a hammer is grounded
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
in a holistic understanding of a ‘technological or material whole’, so smooth interactions with
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people proceed from a ‘societal whole’. Only in society do we make sense of ourselves. (Dreyfus,
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1991) 
The circular quality of shared experience shows up also in the second mode, of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
meaningful​, for one can isolate objects and assign them values only in light of a background of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
understanding, which is itself the result of a string of experiences shared with society. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding is heavily colored with tradition and dogma, unlike in the Cartesian view that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding requires ‘transparency of mind’. And even the third level exhibits social aspects:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scientific understanding and progress rely on conversation and consensus; scientific fact is to a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
large extent a social construct (Kuhn, 1970). 
In light of the above, the fourth level loses its significance. The isolated self seems illusive,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suited only for rare moments of obscure philosophical pondering, not as a source of meaning.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
According to Heidegger, “​the ultimate 'ground' of intelligibility is simply shared practices​” (Dreyfus, 1991,
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
p. 157). And more generally, as tradition is woven together through history, the authenticity of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dasein is inseparable from time (though how exactly the meaning of being is to be derived from
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
time he left as an open question, as he ran out of time) (Heidegger, 1962). 
 
​2.1.5​ Not quite. Once more.  ‘​We are in the world​ ’ 
 
Watsuji argues in ​Climate and Culture (​風土​, ​fūdo ) that while Heidegger’s phenomenological
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
framework is promising, it is far from robust; perhaps owing to his Japanese mindset, he discerned
   
     
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
a shade of Western individualism burdening that model. Heidegger’s description of authentic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
existence overemphasizes the Dasein’s rooting in time, neglecting the importance of sociality. He
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
does refer to sociality, calling it ​Mitsein​ or ​Being-with​ but this is not interactive, only a static
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
characteristic. According to Watsuji, true self resides not in the individual, nor in society; it lies in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
the intersection of these, in the emptiness resulting from their double negation. As such, his term
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the ‘self’ (​人間, ​ningen​), which in common language means ‘human being’, is composed of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
characters meaning person and between; the self is found in the interconnection, the relationship
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
==PAGE:20==
(​間柄​, ​aidagara​) amongst individuals. This relationship, the empty self, can be considered a ​sign​, akin
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
to ‘empty sounds’ within phonemes in Peirce’s ​Linguistic Structuralism (Clair, 2003). There is a notion
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
of relationship between selves in Heidegger’s system too, ​Zwischen​, but characteristically of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
either/or mentality in Western scholarship, it is polar: a contrast between a positive feature and its
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
absence. Such a view of betweenness naturally suggests that the self is in opposition to others,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
feeding the worship of egoist valor discussed above. On the other hand, ​aidagara is continuous,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
enabling one to slide along it to find the point of harmony. (Clair, 2003) 
Moreover, Watsuji considers Heidegger’s notion of Being’s rootedness in time as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
insufficient, suggesting that space is equally primordial (a hint to this is the fact that the ​length of a
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
     
piece of time is expressed as a spatial metaphor in every language). Several concepts of space are
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found in Heidegger’s philosophy, but none are aligned with Watsuji’s notion of a space of relations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
in which the social sign is integrated. Heidegger’s spatiality, being uncovered only when an object
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
becomes unhandy, is merely a matter of reference, association and care. The term that Watsuji
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employs for the social space, ​fūdo , means ‘climate’ or ’topography’ in everyday use. Here the word
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has an amplified meaning, incorporating these notions of natural environment, as well as social and
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technological culture. Watsuji argues that climate and spatial environment influence people’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
modes of being, so that their variety around the world induces a range of ethical sensitivities and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
existential beliefs. One’s view of the self and of other people is fundamentally connected to the ​fūdo
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
that one is embedded in, whence it is a driver of history. In other words, the self is contextual.
 
   
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
(Clair, 2003) This belief has been empirically found to be in direct contrast with those prevalent in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
egocentric societies: “​individualism implies that judgment, reasoning, and causal inference are generally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
oriented toward the person rather than the situation or social context because the decontextualized self is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
assumed to be a stable, causal nexus … Consequently, individualism promotes a decontextualized, as opposed to
       
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
   
a situation-specific, reasoning style, one that assumes social information is not bound to social context.​”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
(Oyserman et al., 2002) 
For Descartes, existence depends only on the ego’s ​knowing​; for Heidegger, existence is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
temporal; for Watsuji, it is embedded in both time and space . Nishida, another paragon of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
phenomenology in the Kyoto School of Philosophy, agrees with Watsuji about the contextual self
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but articulates it somewhat differently; he viewed ​fūdo as too passive, suggesting a more interactive
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
model inspired by William James’ notion of ​Self as Pure Experience​. (James, 1983) Namely, James
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contended that the self is not a permanent entity à la Descartes, nor a series of feelings as Hume
 
 
 
   
   
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
proposed. Rather, it is a feeling of succession amongst a stream of thoughts which occur in contexts
 
       
   
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
that appear as felt sensations, ‘fringes of experience’. The self is thus a process, a continuous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
replacement of the past by the present and an anticipation of the future, an emergence and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
renovation in time and the fringes of space. In Nishida’s process model too, the self is found within
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
2 Watsuji coined the term ​sonzai (​帀妰​) for existence, which is pronounced like the standard word for existence but is composed of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
characters meaning time and space respectively. 
19 
==PAGE:21==
a pure experience of time, which occurs in place (​場所​, ​basho​). While the self is empty, the fringe of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
consciousness surrounding it contains dynamic interplay between ​I and thou (​我と汝​, ​ware to nanji​).
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
It is these shifting I-thou relationships, the dialectic between self and others, that engenders
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
self-consciousness. And as with Watsuji, this self-consciousness is not individual, but between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people in society. Moreover, unlike individualism which flows from ​eros (desire for objects), the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I-thou relationship is rooted in ​agape (selfless love). Nishida hence also frames the true self as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kenotic Self​, linking his model to the Christian concept of ​kenosis​, the emptying of oneself through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unconditional love. (Clair, 2003) 
Finally, note that there is no reason to consider these concepts as mere obscure strands of
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
philosophy: they abound with potential for cross-fertilization with scientific domains such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cybernetics and neurophenomenology. For example, integrating paradigms of the Kyoto School of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Philosophy with Western phenomenology and science, Schroeder and Vallverdú have proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
situated phenomenology​ a holistic view of experience tying together cognitive, biological, and robotics
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models. (Schroeder and Vallverdú, 2015) 
 
​2.1.6​ Removing the mask 
 
A sociological line of thought that is quite congruent with the Kyoto School's theories can be found
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in G.H. Mead's work, and those of his followers in the Chicago School of Sociology. (Clair, 2003) For
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
example, Mead elucidated the significance of ‘role-taking’, as one understands his/her own self only
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in relation to the roles of others. Building on this, Goffman took the metaphor of the stage to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
formulate a dramaturgical model of sociology, arguing that when interacting with others, people
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
take on a role, like an actor does. People are not completely free to choose the role themselves,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forcing them to act in a certain way. Therefore we have to learn to present different personas
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(social masks) depending on the context, and in a credible fashion, according to others’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expectations. Failing to do so means that we are ‘out of character’ or have the wrong script. And
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the stage tends to be an unfriendly place, where actors have to be cautious of others, playing by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
established rituals, a sense of civility. The real self is fragile and must be protected from the public.
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, if a feeling of community is attained, the need for caution diminishes, and the true self is
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
allowed to emerge, in line with Watsuji. Another prominent Chicagoan, Cooley, presented the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘primary group’ as a type of society based on love and harmony, where one is readily unmasked. In
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
such groups, even competition is constructive, performed in the same spirit that always
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
characterizes the relationships (Clair, 2003). Cooley also advocated the holistic nature of society,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explaining the interplay between all social processes: “​Our life is all one human whole ... if we cut it up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
it dies in the process.​” (Cooley, 1964) 
 
 
20 
==PAGE:22==
​2.2​ Mental models 
 
The concept of a mental model is a powerful method in studying mental processes in design. These
 
 
   
 
     
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
are simplified representations of the world that prevent the mind’s being overloaded with data;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more or less subconsciously constructed frameworks that allow quick gleaning and processing of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
new information (Smyth et al., 1994; Badke-Schaub et al., 2011). As such, mental models are a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
powerful tool in predicting and explaining problem-solving behavior, particularly when engaged in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
analytical-creative work (Norman, 1983). Indeed, the cognitive process of inference can be framed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as reasoning based on mental models; Hestenes (2006) has identified seven types of such reasoning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
(eg. analysis, synthesis and abduction) which exhibit a complex interplay during creative thinking.
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
However, a precise understanding of mental model formation, and of their use in design, is yet to
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
be formulated (Badke-Schaub et al., 2011).  
Mental models are a paramount aspect of cutting-edge cognitive science. Hestenes (2006)
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presents mental models within a Modeling Theory of Cognition (Figure 3) where they, being a
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
mind’s private constructions embodied as neural networks, are distinct from Conceptual Models,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which are scientific representations of the world. These are encoded by symbols, enabling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corresponding mental models to be activated in individual minds. As such, Mental and Conceptual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Models can be thought of simply as the subjective and objective knowledge structures, respectively,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the human mind crafts or enhances when trying to make sense of the world. It ought to also be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
 
noted that Conceptual Models are transparent in their being wholly visually accessible as a symbolic
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
structure (e.g. the models of Euclidean geometry being encoded by curves and letters on the pages
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of a book), while the majority of a Mental Model often lies below the threshold of consciousness,
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and must hence be fished out by non-trivial techniques (e.g. design games, Section 2.5.3). 
 
 
Figure 3: Hestenes’ Modeling Theory of Cognition. Copied from Hestenes, 2006. 
21 
==PAGE:23==
 
Alignment between individual mental models arises from communication, resulting in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Shared Mental Model. Each individual’s mental model is colored by his/her knowledge and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiences, all of which fine details have an impact of various magnitudes on the synthetic unity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The sharing of knowledge and opinions by diverse, though mostly vocal, interactions causes each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mind to dynamically mold its mental model (Badke-Schaub and Casakin, 2015; 2017), usually
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eventually reaching a stage of high similarity throughout the group. Again, no explanation of the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
low-level cognitive processes behind this phenomenon has yet been proposed, but Fauconnier and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Turner’s (2002) notion of the blending of mental spaces seems a promising direction. In any case,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
such alignment has been shown to enhance the team’s coordination and performance (as is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intuitively evident). As DeChurch and Mesmer-Magnus contend, “​emergent cognition that enables team
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
members both to predict and anticipate one another’s actions and to fully utilize the often diverse array of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
expertise present in the team are essential underpinnings of team functioning.​” (DeChurch &
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mesmer-Magnus, 2010)  
There seems to, however, be a tension between team diversity and mental model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sharedness, at least in the initial phase of a team’s work: while heterogeneity is linked to creativity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
and flexibility (Carpenter and Fredrickson, 2001), it hampers the formation of shared understanding
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
(Bittner and Leimeister, 2013); viewed otherwise, homogeneity induces groupthink.  
Shared Mental models have usually been allocated into one of three categories (Edmondson,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
2009):  
●
Task​: representations of the issue that is under consideration. Associated verbal activities
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
include problem definition, idea generation, explanations and elucidations, solution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evaluations, and decision taking. This model develops through the interactions of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem and solution spaces through communication, and is influenced by team dynamics. 
●
Process​: representations of procedures, strategies and rules regarding the team’s work. As
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the overall design process tends to begin in an open-ended manner, ways of organizing and
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
planning the work need to be established in order to achieve a feasible level of performance. 
●
Team​: representations of the collaboration's social facet. This is an indicator of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collaboration motivation and the sense of belonging. Verbal actions sourcing from this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model include rejection and appreciation of others’ ideas, confirmation as a positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
evaluation, and help. 
 
A major challenge in inquiries of mental models in design is the difficulty of eliciting them. Their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
behavioral manifestations are nonetheless obvious (Dong, Kleinsmann & Deken 2013) and have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
used most prominently in the following ways. 
Badke-Schaub and Casakin studied shared mental model formation in a team of architects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
and clients, presenting a simple and solid methodology for mental model sharedness quantification
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
==PAGE:24==
(Badke-Schaub and Casakin, 2017). A major finding is that particularly in the early stages of concept
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
generation, sharedness is a valuable coordination-simplifying asset, regardless of the shared
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mental model’s actual validity and truthfulness. Sharedness is achieved most effectively by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emphasizing discussion belonging to the Task model (especially idea generation and solution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis), which tends to be the most common type of interaction, followed by that belonging to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
Team model (Badke-Schaub et al., 2011). However, to achieve viable coordination from the get-go,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
heterogeneous teams need not immediately engender the full set of shared mental models; a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
common design space, i.e. the Task model, suffices. 
Moreover, an important tool in the mind’s development of shared mental models is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
question-asking and feedback (Mulder, Swaak, and Kessels, 2004). Eris (2002) formulated 22
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
question classes, divided into two groups: Deep Reasoning, for understanding concepts, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Generative Design, for creating possibilities. Both types could address any of the three shared
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mental model categories above. 
Conducting an inquiry into supporting shared understanding development (in distributed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design teams) through a communication support tool based on a question-asking-feedback
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
protocol, Cash et. al (2017) found question-asking to be a critical facilitator in mental model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
alignment. The methodology was based on concept-mapping, a tool effective in charting sharedness
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
of static knowledge like plans (Johnson and O’Connor, 2008), in other words information belonging
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the Process model, but is deficient for tackling the dynamism the Task and Team models. It was
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
moreover found that in some cases, the improvement in shared understanding due to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intervention was perceived to be lower than it actually was, implying a need for visual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communication of such improvements in any shared mental model inter​vention. (Cash et al., 2017) 
 
In conclusion I present the following quote from a businessman’s speech: 
“​You’ve got to hang experience on a lattice work of models in your head. What are the models?
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Well, the first rule is that you’ve got to have multiple models — because if you just have one or
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
two that you’re using, the nature of human psychology is such that you’ll torture reality so that it
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
   
fits your models, or at least you’ll think it does… So you’ve got to have multiple models. And the
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
models have to come from multiple disciplines — because all the wisdom of the world is not to be
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
     
found in one little academic department.​”
 
Munger, 1994 
 
 
 
 
23 
==PAGE:25==
​2.3​ Rhetoric 
 
In this section I lay out the philosophy and practice of rhetoric, which this project revolves around,
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and which the succeeding Analysis and Synthesis chapters are suffused with. I begin by explaining
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the concept of rhetoric and laying out its Aristotelian roots. Next I move onto the field’s modern
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
incarnation, followed by its connection to design. Lastly I unfold Halstrøm’s model and provide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
examples of its use. 
 
​2.3.1​ Foundation 
 
Rhetoric is “​the faculty of observing in any given case the available means of ​persuasion​.​” (Aristotle’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rhetoric​; Rapp, 2010) Every persuasive utterance or piece of writing, whether political manipulation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
of crowds, or a kid pleading with her parents to visit Disneyland, is a rhetorical act. In Aristotle’s
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
fundamental treatise of the subject, he deemed it a counterpoint and an analogy to dialectic: what
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dialectic is for the private or academic practice of attacking and maintaining arguments, rhetoric is
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
for the public practice of defending oneself.  
One of the core aspects of rhetoric is the ​topos​, a general argumentative form or scheme,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
based on which specific arguments can be instantiated. In line with the word’s original meaning,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘place’, the ​topoi can also be thought of as different viewpoints from which to survey an issue, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from which to find a weak flanks to launch offensives at. Aristotle’s book ​Topics contains a list of
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
about a hundred different ​topoi for construing dialectical arguments. His book ​Rhetoric is also rife
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
with lists of ​topoi​, but instead of simply instructing dialecticians on formulating deductions, it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
focuses on the persuasiveness of public speech. Therein he also categorizes ​topoi as either
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commonplace and specific​. The former are elements of persuasion applicable in general, such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opposites, precedent, cause and effect, time, and so on. The latter are descriptions of something
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that is good, noble, just, etc. alongside a reason for its being so. For example, ‘​Cocoa is good, for it is
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
pleasant​’. The commonplace hence tends to be more powerful, as it does not depend on specific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
information that some audience members may lack, but only on general reasoning capabilities. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fact, the relative importance of these two is evident in the fact that the commonplace are often,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including by the maven himself, called simply ​topoi​.  
This noble art is usually divided into three branches. ​Forensic rhetoric is used argue about
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the past, and is thus employed particularly in judicial contexts. ​Epideictic rhetoric is used to lavish
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
its subject with praise or blame. It is best known as celebration of someone’s characteristics and
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deeds in eulogies such as obituaries and graduation speeches. Though it typically stays in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
24 
==PAGE:26==
present, while perhaps drawing from past events, its motivational power implicitly directs it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
towards the future. ​Deliberative rhetoric is used to persuade the audience to take, or refrain from,
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some action. Debate and political oratory are banal examples. (Rapp, 2010) 
Moreover, rhetorical utterances can be classified under three modes of persuasion: ​Ethos​, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
ethical appeal, is about convincing the audience of the rhetor's credibility, that he/she is worth
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
listening to. This is achievable through for example choosing a level of vocabulary suited for the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
audience, sounding unbiased, and introducing one's expertise; ​Pathos is emotional appeal, achieved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
via emotional stories, tone of voice, and so on; ​Logos is the appeal to logic, by e.g. referring to facts,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
using analogies, citing certain authorities, and constructing logical arguments. 
 
​2.3.2​ Modernity 
 
Although Aristotle’s ​Rhetoric had an enormous influence on classical authors and orators such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cicero and Quintilian, it was interpreted only through a pragmatic and historical lens, and its
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
philosophically salient aspects were neglected. (Rapp, 2010) And remarkably, it was not rediscovered
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
during the Renaissance alongside other classics, but had to wait all the way until the 1960s for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appreciation to bud. The field was resuscitated as New Rhetoric, with a shifted aim and amplified
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
canon. (Enos and Brown, 1994) In contrast to the old focus on molding formal and aesthetic features
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of oral or written text, and fine-tuning them to perfection in order to manipulate an audience to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conviction, the modern theories are about discourse as ​action​: how writing or speech can be used to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
enlighten, persuade, amuse and inspire people, regardless of the form and scope of discourse (Enos,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
1996): “​The speaker seeks to provide the audience with the reasons for adopting a new attitude or taking a new
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
course of action. In this sense, rhetoric is an art of shaping society, changing the course of individuals and
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
communities, and setting patterns for new action.​” (Buchanan, 1985) It should be noted that the term
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Rhetoric is not a theory in itself, but covers diverse ways of handling the transition into
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
modernity, some with little in common. (Lampe, 2010) The discussion here concentrates on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strands that are most relevant to design. 
The contemporary theorist McKeon (1989) has explored the potential of rhetoric as a system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
of guidance for innovation; he argues for generalizing the art from mere dialectics and oration to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
uncovering and creating value: “​We need a new art of invention and discovery in which places are used as
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
means by which to light up modes and meanings of works of art and natural occurrences and to open up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aspects and connections in existence and possibility.​” (McKeon, 1989) In his essay ​Creativity and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commonplace​, he refutes the tendency to deem the commonplace ​topoi as a list of prior knowledge,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
arguing that they are seeds of invention, “​places for the perception, discovery and explanation of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
unknown … ​the sources of new perceptions operative in new directions in the thought and culture and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
philosophy of the twentieth century​” (and probably for this century too). The ground for this is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
25 
==PAGE:27==
capacity of the commonplace to serve as a meeting place for the familiar and the unfamiliar,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enabling concepts, structures and doctrines to be recombined in an exploratory spirit (McKeon,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1989; Miller, 2016). The common topoi therefore serve both as formal checklists and as novelty
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
catalyzers.  
In fact, Aristotle’s ​Physics suggests them to be like vessels in which form and matter interact
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
to yield matter that is shaped for persuasion. He notes that the special ​topoi lack such a fruitful
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
potential, as they can accommodate only one kind of notion, like a place allocated on a shelf for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
Nth volume of an encyclopedia, so that they are useful only as sources of preexisting arguments.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, Miller offers examples of technical innovation using ​topoi that are specific to a particular
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
field of argument, yet able to identify multiple pre-existing proofs. The ‘common’ and the ‘specific’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ought thus to be taken as relative, not absolute, characteristics. (Miller, 2016) 
 
​2.3.3​ Design 
 
“​is the art of shaping arguments about the artificial or human-made world, arguments which may
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
be carried forward in the concrete activities of production in each of these areas, with objective
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
results ultimately judged by individuals, groups, and society.​” (Buchanan, 1995, p. 46) 
   
Unlike in the traditional dialectical view of the design process, where it is rendered as a game of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
argumentation between a proponent and an opponent (which can be oneself too) in order to test
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out ideas, New Rhetoric allows it to be considered as a social interaction undergirded by persuasion
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
between an arguer and an audience, which frequently switch positions. Here the validity of an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
argument does not depend on objective facts, but on subjective concepts, on the audience’s shared
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
background of experience and beliefs. The arguer has to simply make sure that any argument is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
based on a premise that the audience deems valid. (Stumpf and McDonnell, 2002) 
It is therefore evident that fundamental rhetorical frameworks need to be established for
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design in order to make the most of its potential as a persuasive art. Although such overarching
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
frameworks are yet to be fully formulated, Halstrøm offers a highly promising basis. Before
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
examining its practical value, it is worthwhile to get a grasp of the general reconceptualization of
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the design process it implies. 
Buchanan stated that “​the designer, instead of simply making an object or thing, is actually creating
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
a persuasive argument that comes to life whenever a user considers or uses a product as a means to some end​”
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
   
     
   
 
 
(Buchanan, 1985). Despite this statement being coherent with all of the above elucidation, it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
somewhat misleading, for it implies that the rhetor-designer only has to find out what the audience
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
wants in order to be able to figure out the best path of persuasion. However, the audience does not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
always exist. As Verganti (2009) expounds, and as Steve Jobs has notoriously showcased, people
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
==PAGE:28==
sometimes know not what they yearn. For example, people used to superficially desire faster
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
horses, while deep down they wanted simply more efficient transportation, which we finally got via
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
industrialization. Verganti contends for a distinction between ‘radical technological innovation’ and
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘radical innovation of meaning’, otherwise known as ‘design-driven innovation’, arguing that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
latter holds neglected potential (Verganti, 2009). Many milestones of design that are etched into the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
industrialized world’s collective memory, such as iPhone and Wii, which comprised already existing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technologies, were eagerly embraced by masses who beforehand had not the faintest idea of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
passion that those designs would foster in them. 
Hence an enormous conundrum emerges from its lair: how to evaluate an artefact's appeal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to its potential users? The audience in ancient Greece was the people gathered in the agora, lapping
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
up aural content of a range of eloquences and various levels of truth and persuasion. “​Aristotle and
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cicero consider audiences purely as something given​” (Burke, 1969, p. 64). However, contemporary mass
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
media has to be tailored to deal with the reality that their audiences are far from well-defined. As
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such, the task of rhetoric is nowadays not only to convince an audience, but to constitute it too.
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
This paradigm augmentation in design can be modeled as a triple co-evolution of problem, solution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
and audience spaces (Halstrøm, 2015). The cornerstone of molding out the audience is ​identification​:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
“​You persuade a man only insofar as you can talk his language by speech, gesture, tonality, order, image,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attitude, idea, identifying your ways with his​” (Burke, 1969, p. 55). The process of making audience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
members enter the subject position that they are offered is not one of persuasion, but of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identification, or recognition of one’s own reflection in a mirror that the rhetor construes of words,
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
   
 
gestures, sartorial style, music, images etc. For example, if you are addressed as a ‘designer’ and you
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
accept that subject position, then you are already persuaded of some set of values that you associate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
with designers, subscribing to an implicit narrative (a common one is the heroism, acting as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
conduit between society and a transcendental realm, as detailed in Section 2.1.3). 
 
​2.3.4​ In practice 
 
Halstrøm bases his practical triple co-evolution framework on the nature of rhetoric as an art of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
invention, through ​topoi​. The framework can be used in two modes, ​epideictic and ​deliberative​, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expounded below. Despite the thoroughness of Aristotle’s and Cicero’s lists of ​topoi​, Halstrøm found
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
their expansiveness to render them too unwieldy for use in design. He thus adopts Hermogenes’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two sets of six ​topoi​, which the venerable thinker curated so as to maximize their potential for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amplification of persuasion. At least one ​topos is combined from each set and thrown into a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
designer’s right-side brain to yield a variety of arguments: 
27 
==PAGE:29==
 
●
Circumstance topoi​: time (​khronos​), place (​topos​), person (​prosôpon ), way (​tropos​), act (​prâgma ),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cause (​aition​). 
●
Parallel topoi​: comparison (​parabolê ), example (​paradeigma​), minor (​mikroteron​), greater
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(​meizôn ), equal (​isos​), opposite (​enantion​). 
 
 
 
Epideictic 
 
The first mode of the framework is the application of these ​topoi to discovering diverse ways of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
persuasion whereby the artefact (not necessarily physical) can be designed. In other words, it is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
source of viewpoints from which to consider the artefact’s object of celebration. For example,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
imagine designing a cafe for Disneyland. Of the myriad culinary establishments in the park, this
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one is supposed to be themed on classic Mickey Mouse films, yet suffused with a classy mood; it
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
should persuade the visitors of the value of those cinematic treasures. The process could go as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
follows, beginning with eg. ​place​ time​ and ​equal​: 
●
You decide to exhibit Mickey’s evolution over the decades (​time​) in the ​place by making the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
building’s cross-section circular, with the counter and kitchen in the middle, and a picture
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
of each of the variants in Figure 4 distributed evenly around the walls, the first and last also
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shaking
hands
over
the
front
door
to
emphasize
the
character’s
​time​lessness
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(​comparison​/​equal​). 
●
Preferring exquisite wood and stone over artificial materials (​place​), you present the cafe's
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
theme in a rich, wholesome aesthetic and tactile context devoid of bright colors (​minor​),
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inducing the customers to associate the two intuitively different conceptual worlds with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each other (​opposite/equal​). 
And so on. When these ​topoi​ are exhausted, you could move onto emphasizing ​minor​: 
●
You try to reinforce the high-class spirit by minimizing (​minor​) the amount of children
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(​person​) by setting a relatively small (​minor​) table size to make the experience unfavorable for
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
families with more than one child (​greater/cause​).  
●
Next you consider the ​way you present the characters in light of the need for a classy,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
non-trite mood where the audience does not feel overwhelmed with the theme. Thus you
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decide to minimize (​minor​) the explicit display of characters in favor of suggestive forms,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more subtly playful design (eg. a table in the shape shown in Figure 5).   
In this way each ​topos​ helps to tease out concepts for further amplifying the design’s claim.  
   
 
28 
==PAGE:30==
 
Deliberative 
 
Secondly, the ​topoi ease deliberation of designers’ process choices and solution, enabling them to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
persuade colleagues, clients and themselves of the value of designing in a certain way. This is close
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
to Hermogenes’ own application of the method, in a verbal form. Each of the four bullet-pointed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
examples above incorporate some this mode too in their argumentation, but may have to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expanded with further ​topoi in a real case of e.g. presenting a sketch of the design to Disneyland’s
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
executives. For example, someone may be unconvinced by the last idea, deeming it natural that in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
addition to the Mickeys on the walls, there should be some place where classic films are projected
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
onto some surface, enabling customers to experience them directly. To convince this executive of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
your choice, you could emphasize the target customers’ (​person​) mindset (​way of thinking), saying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that it would be an unnecessary distraction as customers usually want to concentrate on eating and
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
socialization (​act​). You could then think of the whole ​place and perform a ​comparison​, highlighting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
the redundancy of the executive’s idea with reference to the house on Disneyland’s main street
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where classics are shown, and suggesting that this cafe’s aim is not to rival but to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complementary to that place, offering the customers’ minds freedom to contemplate on the themes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
in their own ​ways​. 
 
 
        Figure 4: Mickey’s evolution.
Figure 5: An abstract furniture 
 
shape alternative to  
Mickey’s silhouette.  
 
Moreover, Hermogenes’ method can also be used to discover an abundance of viewpoints
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for molding out user research techniques. For example, when performing observations in a cafe,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
you could first consider ​act and ​time​, coming up with the idea to examine how small talk (​minor/act​)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
29 
==PAGE:31==
changes throughout the day; then finding out how various types (​way​) of latte art (Figure 6) affect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
people’s behavior (​act​); does it occasion (​cause​) the topic of conversation to veer onto something
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particular; how is this different between (​comparison​) regulars and new customers (​person​); and so
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on. Question formulation is also made easier; with the intention of discovering how latte art affects
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
a cafe's experience, you could explore the audience space by ​example, cause and way​: “How did you
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decide (​way​/​cause​) to order that? Please describe (​example​) the mood here; what do you think are the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
greatest factors (​cause​) in it? Could you sketch (​way/example​) some of your topics of conversation?”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
So the method is evidently useful throughout the design process, from research through synthesis,
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all the way to evaluation. 
 
 
Figure 6: Different types of latte art. 
​ 
2.4​ Metaphors 
 
Symbolic representation of reality, embodied in language and metaphors, is an integral rhetorical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
element, and seems to be a promising concept by which to gain further insight into shared
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding. A metaphor indicates a shared way of perceiving a situation and the degree to
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
which one can affect it. As such, it can unconsciously foster a sense of performance, and a feeling of
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
success or failure. Tommelleri et al. (2015) categorized the metaphors used by medical professionals
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in a hospital into ​apparatus​, ​family and ​team​; the apparatus metaphor suggests an organization
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
governed by impersonal rules, and that social interactions should also be formal, controlled by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functional principles; the family metaphor tends to reinforce a feeling of amity between people
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
within a ward (akin to Cooley’s ‘primary group’, Section 2.1.6), but induce an overly defensive
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attitude towards other wards; and the team metaphor is associated with a unified sense of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
problem-solving and mission between heterogeneous professionals. Similarly, Roldan Riejos et al.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2010) expounded on the daily use of metaphors amongst architects and engineers in the context of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
hospital design. They found the most common type of metaphor to be that of ​the hospital as patient
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
and the designers as doctors​, entailing the treating of architectural pathologies (perhaps invoking the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
==PAGE:32==
image of the savior-designer discussed in Section 2.1.3). The authors identified two categories of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metaphor: 
1.
Image. These simply project of the schema of a mental image over another. For example, ‘​the
 
 
 
   
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hospital is a brain’​. 
2.
Conceptual. These constitute complete semantic fields, triggering numerous associations.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For example, ‘​the hospital is an intelligent being​’ brings up not only the concept of a brain, but
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
also senses, nervous system, cardiovascular system etc. 
 
 
In design, metaphors direct focus, and the identification of difference. They are lenses through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which the designer sees his/her task, prompting actions that modify the design situation and vice
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
versa. The designer’s changing experience, from which these metaphors emerge onto the limelight
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the consciousness, composes hence a hermeneutical system with the situation; they can be
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considered forms of ‘pre-understanding’ that designers project into the world in order to enter a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
3
constructive dialogue with the task (Coyne and Snodgrass, 1996), a “​dialectic
of guessing and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
4
validation​.” (Ricoeur, 1973). The metaphors prevailing in a team tend to shift as members reflect on
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the situation and present differing restatements of the problem and the process. This tendency is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
in effect a natural version of Dorst’s ​Frame creation (Dorst et al., 2016). “​How are designers driven from
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one metaphoric orientation to another? The entailments of privilege empower the design process. ... The power
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
of particular metaphors lies in the complex web of relations in which particular metaphors have use. Certain
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
metaphors are favored over others (for particular situations) by virtue of our historical situation, the norms of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
our practice as professionals, the conventions of the design studio, and the personal preoccupations of teachers
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
and colleagues.​” (Coyne, Snodgrass and Martin, 1994) This web of relations could be hypothesized to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be a dimension of ​fūdo (Section 2.1.5), so that it may have a significant influence on the attainment
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
of the sweet spot on the ego-world continuum. 
Coyne, Snodgrass and Martin (1994) provide a set of metaphor types prevalent amongst
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
architectural students. If it is valid to extrapolate from those findings, then it is obvious that in the
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
context of design, metaphors are fairly evenly mixed between the rationalist and Romantic camps. I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
have already touched upon the latter tendency in Section 2.1.3: for example, the result of design is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
seen as a work of art, and the progress of a design task as a personal journey, a mission of
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
self-expression and discovery. Chaos, and the excitement and promises of ambiguity are commonly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
glorified. This mindset entails reflection on one’s feelings towards the process and the result. On
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 ​The word ‘project’ originally meant ‘throwing before’ (as did ‘forecast’ and ‘problem’). This is may have been a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
metaphor for design’s hermeneutical nature, for designers begin a task with a vague pre-understanding of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
solution: the meaning of the whole is anticipated, and then the individual parts are explicated, enabling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
re-determination of the whole, and so the cycle continues. By constant revisions arises understanding. (Ormiston
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Schrift,​ op. cit.​, 1990, p. 130 (fn. 6)) 
4 ​Hence a designer can be said to swim in two parallel interactive flows: a dialectical one with the task and a
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
rhetorical one with oneself and team members. 
31 
==PAGE:33==
the other hand, rationalist metaphors are about detachment and analysis; design is seen as a logical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
procedure, so that systematic striving for excellence is possible by applying the correct methods.
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
There sometimes appears conflict between these two orientations in a designer’s mind, and a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
metaphor belonging to one is occasionally used to justify that approach against the other. Thus in
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
groupwork it may be useful to disclose the metaphoric nature of design-related thinking in order to
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
mend the team’s spirit in response to ‘breakdowns’ (ie. when ​unhandiness occurs, Section 2.1.4) like
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stark conflict, slow progress, or searing criticism; for example, objectifying the language of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reflection could help to dissolve feelings of personal inadequacy, and subjectifying it could coax
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
overly stubborn members to loosen their grip on issues they view as fundamental. 
Metaphors are therefore not simply poetical of images and similes, but powerful linguistics
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tools that forge social relationships, align mental models, and lubricate creativity.  
Even more generally, metaphors are not only linguistic elements: “​The word simply refers to a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
dynamic whereby we transport any kind of content or meaning—visual, sensory, auditory, linguistic,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proprioceptive, or any combination thereof—from one place or thing to another. Etymologically the word
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“metaphor” derives from two ancient Greek words, ​meta​, which means to move over, across, and ​phoreo​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which means to carry over, and these roots indicate that metaphors are cognitive devices that people use in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
many media and forms.​” (Goldhagen, 2017)  
The nonconscious cognition that occurs in us while navigating our environments come in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two forms. Firstly, direct responses, which are completely innate and physiological; some “​feature in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
the environment ​in and of itself provokes in us a rapid, automatic response​”, such as cool and less
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
saturated colors calming us; the smell of rot disgusting us; the various stimuli implemented into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
haunted house rides provoking our fear. Then there are indirect responses, originating in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mental models that we accumulate throughout our years of inhabiting environments. Examples are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
when glimpsing a radiant shore in summer makes us want to plunge into the sea; when viewing the
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
school’s front door or gate made us long to escape the institution; when we estimate the distance to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
the grocery shop by an mental model of our neighborhood. (Goldhagen, 2017) 
 
 
Figure 7: Beijing’s National Aquatics Centre and London Aquatics Centre, despite their obvious materiality evoking rich
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
associations with the playfulness and flow of water. 
 
32 
==PAGE:34==
A major category of indirect responses is embodied metaphors. Consider the bubbly walls,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
made of steel and plastic, of Beijing’s National Aquatics Centre; and the wavy profiles of London
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aquatics Centre, made of concrete (Figure 7). Their materiality renders to them an obviously
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
constructed affect. Yet these structures “​stir up a cascade of associations that are logically unconnected to
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
   
their physicality​” (Goldhagen, 2017): they convey feelings of fluidity and playfulness, something of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
experience of being inside them. Note also that they have been designed (whether un- or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consciously) to downplay water’s negative attributes: coldness, wetness and danger. Another
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
example is the practice of saying ‘​I feel at home​’ in a foreign house. The strength of the association of
   
 
   
   
   
     
 
 
 
   
 
   
‘home’ with qualities like coziness, safety and belonging is evidenced in their being encompassed by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
the word ‘homely’ , and its equivalents in numerous other languages. Yet another extremely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
common instance is the exploitation of our primordial ‘​important is big; substantial is weighty​’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
metaphor, which we gained by our experience of interacting with our caretakers in our age of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
smallness: “​People’s associations of physical scale and size with social power informs how architects design
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
even less august buildings. Through proportion and design, even the smallest of buildings can impart a sense of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
august gravity​” (eg. Kahn and Tyng’s bathhouse in Trenton, Figure 8). And musing on Eisenman’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
failure to design a memorial that conveys the horror of genocide, as described in Section 1.2.2, it is
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
easy to recognize that “​his attempt to spatially manifest the metaphor ​‘oppressively repetitive’ ​lapses into
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
its semantic opposite: ​‘reassuringly patterned.’​”​  (Goldhagen, 2017) 
In other words, the huge set of mental models called metaphors is relevant not only for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
sake of the design process, but for the result of the process too. Indeed, the use of metaphors being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
a subset of rhetoric, this truth is encapsulated more generally in Halstrøm’s work (2017), where he
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
makes evident the necessity for imbuing both the design process and its resulting artefact with rich
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
persuasion, easing the designer’s workflow, and a flourishing of a variety of values for the artefact’s
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
   
 
 
 
 
users. As such, it is obvious that I should try to integrate metaphors into the foregoing project. 
 
 
Figure 8: Trenton Bath House. Kahn and Tyng exploited the ‘​substantial is weighty​’ metaphor, monumentalizing a small 
building by exaggerating its weight and suppressing external markers of scale. (Goldhagen, 2017) 
5 For example, in The Hobbit, Elrond’s house is called ‘​The Last Homely House East of the Sea’​, and is described elsewhere 
as “​a refuge for the weary and the oppressed, and a treasury of good counsel and wise lore.​” 
33 
==PAGE:35==
​2.5​ Design games 
 
In light of my decision to make the intervention into a design game, whereof reason is given in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
introduction of Chapter 4, I retrofitted this section here.  
To gain a profound understanding of the theory behind design games, I refer to an
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
authoritative opus on this topic, Vaajakallio’s thesis ​Design games as a tool, a mindset and a structure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
   
(Vaajakallio, 2012), ​from which the knowledge in the following section is wholly drawn, unless
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
otherwise referenced. Therein can be found a treasure trove of information highly relevant for
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
anyone intending to craft any kind of social and interactive tool for engendering shared mental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models, as evidenced by the following familiar-sounding quote from there: “​It has been proposed that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to build up successful co-design gatherings and the project as a whole, it is essential to explicate stakeholders’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
     
   
 
 
concerns early enough to accommodate various interests​”. 
It ought to be noted that the term ‘design game’ is supple and context-specific, and there is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
yet no scholarly definition that would adequately cover all the types of activity that one tends to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intuitively deem design games. Yet for the purposes of this applied project, I propose the following
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
definition: ​An activity embedded into a design process, engaging multiple people into defining or filling the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
problem, solution and audience spaces by exploiting playfulness.  
 
​2.5.1​ Aims 
Within co-creation gatherings, design games can be said to have the following three main purposes: 
1.
Creating a common design language​. ​Engaging players in intensive sharing of opinions and
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concepts builds up mutual empathic understanding. Using ambiguous and fragmented game
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
material causes participants to make explicit their choices and understanding, besides
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
giving space for personal ideas. 
2.
Nurturing a creative and explorative attitude​. Tangible material thaws minds that have been
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frozen into futility by everyday life. The rules and the material promote diverse expressions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of one’s ideas, beliefs and emotions: writing, building, acting etc.
 
3.
Facilitating the envisioning of possibilities​. Establishing an interplay between what exists and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what could exist. Design games are conduits for constructive interweaving of players’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
everyday knowledge with the ambiguity of future. In addition, the players are can be cast
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into a storytelling mode, where several people’s experiences augment each other in order to
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
yield coherent scenarios. 
  
34 
==PAGE:36==
 
​2.5.2​ Fundamental criteria
 
 
In order for a design game to be fruitful, it has to be pervaded by ​play spirit​: an immersive playful
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and explorative mindset that prompts the taking of risks and the bearing of uncertainty; an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attitude of relaxation and mindfulness, of heedful ​hygge , where the mind readily flies between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
intuition and rational thought, and spontaneity abounds. In order to establish play spirit, a game
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
has to have three critical qualities: 
 
1.
Magic circle​. An ideal playground, free from customs and mores of everyday life, induces
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
probing of the consequences of alternative visions; exploration between the real and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
imagined. 
 
2.
Sovereign space-time domain​. Space is transmutable throughout play. A mixture of transitions
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
in event time, set time and symbolic time induces movement between past, present and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
future experiences. 
3.
Rule-freedom equilibrium​. Threads of creativity emanating from each participant are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
efficiently nurtured by rules crafted to maintain a balance between the correct direction of
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
play, and a maximally fertile coupling between the threads in order to produce ideas high in
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
quantity (and sometimes also quality).  
 
​2.5.3​ Knowledge levels 
 
As the structure of knowledge in a human mind is far from monolithic, it is beneficial to survey the
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
     
   
 
 
particular methods that are best suited for prompting each type of information to emerge from its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
lair. Sanders and Dandavate (1996) propose four types of knowledge levels: explicit, observable, tacit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
and latent (Figure 9). The explicit is information that people convey to others verbally when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questioned, for example in interviews. The next type, observable, is the data that is embedded in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
practices and actions. The last two are usually unconscious, requiring more subtle techniques to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lure them out, for they are composed of tacit knowledge as well as the fuzzy stuff: dreams and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feelings. A design game has to thus be carefully designed to act as an efficient conductor of those
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 ​Hygge​ is a somewhat ambiguous term often associated with comfort and coziness, particularly in the context of indoor 
environments, but its general meaning is a feeling that is special or charming, conducive of the flow state. 
35 
==PAGE:37==
elusive things, transferring them from the expert’s mind onto others, or in this project’s case, from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
a mind seeped in one kind professional background to another seeped in a different one.  
Note that one category of such techniques is the use of metaphors, due to their enormous
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
associative power, and their often primordial quality: “​our most resonant metaphors originate in our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
early childhood experiences​” (Goldhagen, 2017). In other words, many of our embodied metaphors were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
seeded by or with our most fundamental dreams and fears. 
 
 
Figure 9: The best approaches for eliciting from each knowledge level, according to Sanders & Dandavate. 
Copied from Vaajakallio. 
 
Hence, the best design games aimed at eliciting information from users are comprised of a holistic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
method, enabling the extraction of knowledge from all four levels. In other words, in general not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only ought the players be made to create ideas, but they should also be verbally questioned during
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the process . However, unlike for the later stage of Integrated Design-Build where the architects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
desire more detailed information from the users (particularly in complex healthcare projects with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
much department-specific knowledge), the focus of the foregoing project is not on extracting the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
deeper kinds data as such: though that too is a significant aspect that should be given
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consideration, the problem space calls rather for a thoroughness of ​topos​-driven deliberation,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
coupled with a rapid flourishing of shared understanding, as crystallized in the two outcomes in
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 1.3.1. There is therefore no need for instructing the facilitator of the game resulting from
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this project to observe the players’ body language and analyze their utterances in depth, for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explicit information will likely suffice at this point, particularly as not all of the intended audience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
will be the Integrated Design-Build project’s users; the architects, engineers and design managers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tend to not have many dreams and feelings about the context, with which they most often lack
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intimate familiarity. Yet if there is a way to imbue the solution with an inherent potential to
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
catalyze the frothing forth of a user’s unconsciousness, it should by all means be amplified. 
7 Note that the most effective method, entering people’s dreams and performing an extraction as in the film ​
, 
is yet to be developed, and its connection with the design process is yet to be formed. 
36 
==PAGE:38==
 
​2.5.4​ Boundary objects 
 
Vaajakallio uses the terms ‘design materials’ and ‘props’ to refer to the artefacts that are employed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
in early concept design, which “​should be rather anonymous and open for new interpretations.​” These are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
either ‘building blocks’ that the participants use to create mockups, i.e. tangible representations of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
their discussion, or fragments of user data that enable insights into the problem and audience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spaces. As the form and meaning of the design materials are not initially fixed, they are distinct
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from properly developed prototypes. The best design materials used to prompt the imagination are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
ones that strike a balance between concreteness and abstraction: they should be detailed enough to
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
support easy communication, yet ambiguous enough to warrant freedom of creativity.  
Tangible props function also as ​things-to-think-with​. They, in combination with the hands
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manipulating them, serve as an external repository of cognitive power. By outsourcing some of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
thinking from the mind to the world, not only is the participant’s communicative effectiveness
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
increased, but mental capacity is freed for memory (and similarly for mere gesturing, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
highlighted in Section 5.2.3). Tangible props are especially useful for representatives of envisioned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users, for “​a ​trained designer may use a pen and a piece of paper to illustrate his ideas while other
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders need other kinds of design material to be able to sketch​”. (Johansson, 2005, p 17) 
 
Design materials are a subset of ​boundary objects​, which are “​those objects that both inhabit several
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communities of practice and satisfy the informational requirements of each of them. Boundary objects are thus
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and constraints of the several parties employing them, yet robust
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enough to maintain a common identity across sites​” (Bowker & Star, 1999, p. 297). Other kinds of
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
boundary object are for example sketches, techniques, stories, metaphors and memories.  
Bucciarelli (2002) contends that professionals inhabit different ‘object worlds’ depending on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their disciplinary expertise, causing them to see the same object of design differently. Furthermore,
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
they speak different ‘languages’. As such, they need to create various artefacts, such as sketches,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models and acronyms, to serve as lubricants of social interaction and transformers of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding from one object world to another: “​These artifacts, as boundary objects, provide a milieu
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
for inquisition and exploration of the whole and its interfaces within, as well serving to illustrate hard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technical features or function when deployed by participants from different object worlds.​” (Bucciarelli, 2002)
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As such, the selection of boundary objects is critical when designing a design game if its power of
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
cross-disciplinary mental model alignment is to be maximized. And they are even exploited ​within
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
object worlds (e.g. between architects) to dilute analytic thought into more volatile substance,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conducive to creativity.  
 
37 
==PAGE:39==
​2.5.5​ Enlightening examples 
 
Design with Intent 
 
The aim of Lockton’s Design with Intent toolkit is to help designers to ideate products, services and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
environments that foster social and environmental benefits by influencing their users’ behavior
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Lockton, 2013). Its core is composed of a sizeable set of techniques for comprehending and
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
changing behavior, drawn from diverse psychological and technical disciplines. With this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
card-deck-based system, designers can find the most appropriate subset of their solution space
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
given a behavior-related problem space. Note that inspirational material such as card decks are a
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
common element of design workshops​ (Davis, 2010; Golembewski and Selby, 2010; Clatworthy, 2011)​  
Lockton created the toolkit, which was based on the Ideo framework, by iterative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development and testing with design practitioners and students. This methodology belongs to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domain of action research, where the design process follows a ​plan-act-observe-reflect approach
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
(Robson, 1993). It should be noted that in the ‘act’ stage the researcher embeds an artefact and a
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
procedure into workshops in an attempt to change the way that the participants behave, but does
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not him/herself contribute to the ideation. “​The author facilitated the sessions and ‘acted' in the sense of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
introducing the toolkit but unlike some variants of `workshop' practice, did not take part in any presentation or
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
‘teaching' elements beyond introducing the procedures, answering clarification questions and discussing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideas generated by the participants afterwards.​” (Lockton, 2013) 
Lockton’s thesis contains a wide review of toolkits and idea generation techniques that
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would be useful for anyone trying to structure a new toolkit or design game. The following list is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
sampling of apparently highly effective mechanics in the final version of Design with Intent that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lockton gleaned from that treasure trove of knowledge and from the tests: 
●
The players go through all of the clusters of cards, finding out whether any of them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
inspires any concepts in the solution space. 
●
Groups should first discuss their ideas pairwise, then ‘report back’ to the whole
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
group. 
●
A great creativity booster is choosing two random cards and trying to think of ways
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
to apply the techniques described thereon together onto the problem. 
●
Each workshop should conclude with each group crystallizing its ‘best’ concepts to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
every other group in the room. This can be conducted verbally, by sketches, or by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performance, perhaps with props. 
●
Early users made use of the toolkit in a variety of ways: not only individual and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
group brainstorming, but also informal inspiration, browsing through the deck like
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
==PAGE:40==
a book, classification of existing ideas, etc. As such, the toolkit was structured so as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be easy to apply in many ways. 
 
All of these insights seem promising in the context of this project too. A comprehensive list is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
compiled in Lockton’s thesis. (Lockton, 2013) 
 
 
A storytelling game 
 
The core of designing can be framed as the envisioning of possible futures. A common way to go
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
about this is storytelling, the creation of more or less coherent sets of scenarios. The benefit of
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenarios is that they are both specific and flexible, enabling the ambiguity of the design situation
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be harnessed. Though describing a particular interpretation of a use situation, a scenario’s
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
deliberate incompleteness makes it open for change and negotiation. (Carroll, 2000) Storytelling is
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
particularly beneficial for fostering empathy for the users, forming a shared mental model of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
subjective use experience by making the players ‘walk a while in a user’s shoes’. Explicitly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
character-oriented games are undergirded by a similar methodology, resulting in a deep persona,
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
as opposed to those focused on building scenarios or stories. However, in most cases, immersion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into a role is integrated into the creation of a narrative. 
A major strand of these kinds of games are ones where the scenarios are enacted, usually
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with props. Some designers/researchers prefer to situate the enactment in constructed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environments; others make professional actors perform the scenarios; and yet others let existing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users enact them in their own environments (Brandt, 2006). And while the tangible props are often
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sufficient for establishing the play spirit, as many people have no experience of such enactment,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
there is typically a need for a warmup . A comprehensive survey of the theory of drama-based
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
workshops is presented by Vaajakallio. 
 
Vaajakallio documented the use of a character-oriented storytelling game conducted with the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
people-flow company KONE, with the purpose of gaining new insights about seniors for the R&D
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
department, and finding new B2B opportunities in the context of senior homes.   
Knowledge of the difficulty of encouraging players to act (i.e. perform dramatically) led the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
game’s designers to opt for ​tabletop role-playing, which demands less bodily engagement than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
physical role immersion. The players sat around a table and verbally acted out a story from certain
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
characters’ perspectives. Boundary objects included character templates, photos and quotations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from users of senior houses, and a senior house weekly schedule. In fact, the whole concept of the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
8 “​[I]t would be more appropriate to describe the first part of the workshop as ​tune-up​ instead of ​warm-up​, since the aim is not so much about 
warming the body for the exercises than tuning-in the participants to each other and to a right mood. Correspondingly, in co-design, ​warm-up​ is 
often also called ​sensitizing​, since it aims at gradually transforming participants’ thoughts into the topic of the co-design gathering and towards a 
creative mood.​” (Vaajakallio, 2012, p.67) 
39 
==PAGE:41==
senior house can be seen as a boundary object, as it was used mainly as the context for finding new
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
partnership opportunities between KONE and representatives of two other companies (seniors were
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
not actually invited to play). The participants were divided into four groups of four, with an even
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spread of professional backgrounds. 
Rather than being structured by game rules, the fragmented field data was used for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
free-form ideation to come up with scenarios. This fairly fuzzy process was successful, resulting in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
several themes that were deemed important for senior houses, as well as some ​design drivers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Wikberg & Keinonen, 2000, pp 193-206) that should be used to direct the designing later on. One of
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
the critical personal discoveries that was made was the distinct needs and values of each senior,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
leading to consideration of eg. modular and personalized service solutions. Furthermore, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
role-playing approach, requiring interaction between the players, directed the discussion towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the social facet of seniors’ lives, triggering topics such as the ease of visiting their rooms and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collaboration between several buildings. This game was then later played at KONE’s R&D
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
department too, building on the themes found here. (Vaajakallio, 2012) 
 
40 
==PAGE:42==
​2.6​ Summary 
 
In this chapter I presented various fields of knowledge from which I will draw out the strands of
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge needed for reaching my aim. The first section elucidates the philosophical foundation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
individualism, arguing for its fallacy and presenting a phenomenological view of the criticality of
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
social interaction in forming the Self. This body of knowledge could holistically inform my design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decisions later on to balance its individualistic and collectivistic aspects, amplifying the fruitful
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relationship between the participants. 
The mental model section gives an outline of their theory and practice, in particular their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use in design research. My first objective being the alignment of the Integrated Design-Build
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stakeholders’ mental models of their expectations, these theories shall suffuse my entire analytic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and design process, including the intervention’s evaluation. For example, I will focus on the Task
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
model, omitting the Process and Team models (for reasons given in Section 3.1.2). 
The rhetoric section describes the field’s roots in antiquity and its modern manifestation,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
arguing for its importance in design as a tool for innovation. The section concludes with an
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overview of Halstrøm’s rhetorical-design framework, providing concrete examples of using it to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
conceptualize persuasive designs. This framework will not only serve to inspire me, but I shall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
altogether base my solution’s structure on it, and use it to strongly inform the answers to my
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
second and third research questions. 
The section about metaphors outlines the general patterns of metaphor use in architecture,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
particularly in terms of embodied cognition. For example, architects frequently talk of designing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hospitals in terms of a patient-doctor relationship, or of hospitals being intelligent beings with
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
various organ systems, while nurses tend to view their organization as e.g. a family or a team. All
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
the evidence gathered there makes it clear that I ought to endow my solution with metaphors that
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would help the participants to rise above the level of excessive specificity when considering their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design tasks, and to boost their ability of viewing their aims from a multitude of angles. 
The final section, a review of design game theory, is a summary of Vaajakallio’s ​magnum opus
 
 
   
   
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
of the field. It includes the foundational criteria that any design game should fulfill, a model for
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
eliciting every type of knowledge from participants, and guidelines for boundary objects. These are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
critical strands of wisdom that I will apply to both the conceptual structure and the physical
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manifestation of the intervention. In this section I also included two examples of design games that
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
are highly relevant to this project’s design space, so that I could use some of their elements more or
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
less directly. 
 
 
41 
==PAGE:43==
​3​ Analysis 
 
The aim of this chapter is to answer my second research question: “​How can the rhetorical elements
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that are important in Integrated Design-Build co-design be found out?​” 
But why do I need to find them in the first place? Because in order to optimally chart out
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the solution space, one needs a sound foundation of data about the problem and audience spaces:  
“​The whole point of doing research is to extract reliable knowledge from either the natural or
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
artificial world, and to make that knowledge available to others in re-usable form​”. (Cross, 1999).  
As such, in this chapter I elucidate my analytic process for finding a set of topoi that I will later
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
synthesize into a more or less universal, re-usable form. This chapter concludes with a discussion
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
of the methodology’s weaknesses, a model of my cognitive process flow during the analysis, and an
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overview of a promising automated alternative.  
 
​3.1​ Methodology 
​3.1.1​ Cases 
 
The core of the research was the recording and analysis of audio from two Integrated Design-Build
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Big Room design workshops, where ideas and issues were recorded on floor plans with post-its and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sketches. The projects took place in Finland, and were conducted in Finnish. Both had the aim of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
begetting a new sociotechnical system next to an existing one before smashing the old one down . 
9
●
Hospital​: Two half-hour sessions of refining spatial functions with representatives of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
future building’s users (mainly nurses and doctors), around draft plans of relevant wards.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The plans were based on previous sessions with the same people; this was the second
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iteration of the wards. Three architects each embedded him/herself into a group of two to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
six people, asking and answering questions, but mainly listening to the discussion. The first
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
9 The hospital is located in Hämeenlinna, and the two schools (of which only one was the focus of the session that I
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
observed) in Vantaa’s Rajatorppa and Hämeenkylä respectively. I advise the reader to visit the results of these projects
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
to witness what cutting-edge educational and healthcare architecture is/was like in the early 21th century (though the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hospital will likely be rebuilt again after three decades, according to one of its architects, so it may be too late for you.)  
 
42 
==PAGE:44==
session was with representatives from the maternity/children’s ward, the second with those
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the psychiatric ward.  
●
School​: Two different, simultaneous meetings, lasting half an hour. Afterwards the groups,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of five people each, switched with each other, and an equivalent session was held. The topic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of one meeting was the refinement of the spatial configuration and functions. That of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other was the building’s location on the lot. The groups were composed of architects, design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
managers, engineers, users, and a client representative (a member of the city council). Here
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
too the majority of the design was already complete; the requirement and wish elicitation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the school’s children and staff had been performed a couple months before. 
 
In the school, the two groups that ideated simultaneously did so in different rooms. However, in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
hospital, the groups not only worked in the same space, but there were three or four of them in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each session. As my recording capacity was limited to two devices, I therefore missed a fair amount
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
of data. 
 
​3.1.2​ Topos extraction and curation 
 
I used ATLAS.ti to transcribe the recordings, yielding a set of topoi. The process was as follows: 
1.
Delineated the transcription into units, each dealing with (roughly) one theme.  
2.
Read through the transcriptions over and over again, finding recurring topoi. Naturally this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
step was not truly separate from the transcription and the above step. 
3.
Coded each unit with the topoi occurring in it.  
 
Each unit was usually a few utterances long; some contained only one or two utterances due to the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
impossibility of deciphering the utterances surrounding them thanks to the low recording quality,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and many likewise were riddled with missing words and sentences. Note that due to the nature of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
such free creative discussion, the theme of each unit, and therefore where the units interfaced, was
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
often unclear. The topoi are generic, while the themes were usually particular to these kinds of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
projects. 
I began collecting my set of topoi by considering Hermogenes’ six circumstance topoi in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
light of their universal nature. However, I eschewed ​Place​, ​Person and ​Way​, as they are always latent
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the Task model of architectural design, and adopted the other three. Note that those would by no
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
means be latent in the Process and Team models (e.g. ​Person​: ‘Who is going to make the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
renderings?’; ​Way​: ‘How are we going to achieve that in only two weeks?’) The reasons for my
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considering only the Task model are the following: 
43 
==PAGE:45==
1.
In workshops, the project’s overall Process model is usually effectively formed in separate
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
subsessions devoted to it. This was true in the cases that I observed. 
2.
The Process and Team models have no relevance for fulfilling the intervention’s second
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outcome (thorough ideation), stated in Section 1.3.1. 
3.
Taking the Process and Team into account would considerably raise the intervention’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complexity, and thus could be inimical to the design game criteria in Section 2.5.2. 
 
I analyzed the data, ending up with a total of 32 topoi using the procedure outlined in Figure 10. It is
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
a series of five primary requirements and two contingency requirements that each topos candidate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has to fulfill; ‘Y’ means that the requirement is satisfied, ‘N’ means it is not. They are formulated so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
as to ensure that the topoi are maximally relevant to any Integrated Design-Build project and,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considering the diverse target users of my intervention, universally understandable.  
 
 
Figure 10: The topos curation process. 
 
44 
==PAGE:46==
Looking beyond this analysis to the designing of the solution in Chapter 4, the requirement of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
general understanding inherent in the fourth step in Figure 10 (​Not too technical; explorable by anyone​)
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is the foremost element up to now that contributes towards mental model alignment: it diminishes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
the need for group members who lack technical expertise to form futile mental models of things
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that they will not be able to properly explore, while forcing the group’s technical experts to simplify
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
their language to the lowest common denominator. In other words, that step is for reducing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
issue that “​The indeterminacy of translations across object worlds is rather severe; one participant’s rabbit
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
parts may be another’s cantilever beam​.​” (Bucciarelli, 2002) 
 
​3.1.3​ Coding  
 
In the following examples of coding, there are instances of different people’s utterances having the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
same topos within a single unit. These are shown only to illuminate to the reader the mental
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process of topos discernment; in the actual finding of co-occurrences, multiples were folded
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
together into a single code, as the vast majority of multiples were in fact of the exact same specific
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
topic, e.g. the first two instances of ​Act / process in Unit X+1 of the hospital case are both
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fundamentally about holding a meeting. Incidentally, note also that some utterances that have the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topos ​Act / process​, like the second utterance in the hospital case Unit X (about mirroring), I did not
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
code because they refer to the designers themselves instead of the project’s envisioned users. 
 
Example from the hospital case:  
 
Unit X. Theme: Parents’ dining spaces. 
 
There will be the parents’ dining spaces here. Would it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be impossible to change the functions? 
 
Architect: Yea, this could be mirrored. 
 
There is one of the most peaceful for parents to eat in. 
 
17 seconds of silence and non-intelligible speech. 
 
Unit X+1. Theme: Meeting spaces. 
 
Where
do
we
have
spaces where a ‘multimeeting’ can be
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
held for a multiproblematic mother? 
Topoi 
 
Eating 
 
 
 
 
Peace / turmoil 
 
 
 
 
 
User state 
Act / process 
45 
==PAGE:47==
 
Architect:
Yea,
here
is
like
a
group
space
where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussion is possible. 
 
We
need
a
big
meeting
room
where
we
have
our
own
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
meetings
and
we may not necessarily be able to go far
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the ward. 
 
Architect:
Is
it
possible
to use two big spaces, this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would then be a group space’s size so you could discuss
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but the furniture has to then be different. 
 
Yea
and
then these are in use during daytime when the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
network meetings are usually held. But according to my
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding, the multifunction spaces… 
 
We could do it so that it’s a meeting room, and we could
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
use it from the inside and the outside, so we could use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those kinds of tricks. 
 
Yea, after all, we too have a lot of network meetings.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
And probably increasing. 
 
Where do we have in the general areas, we have a lot of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the
kind
of,
like,
10 persons’ all kinds of meetings,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
every
morning,
there’s
a
lot
of
them
from
8
to
9
so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
there will be, when required, quite a lot of them. 
 
The
bigger
teaching
and
lecturing
spaces
will
be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concentrated in… you won’t need them here inside, if you
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
need it here, divide the kind of working space… but when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
you need this as a meeting space, then it is equipped. 
 
Act / process 
 
 
 
Distance 
 
 
 
 
Furniture 
 
Day / night 
 
 
 
 
Act / process 
 
 
 
Future 
 
 
 
Time 
 
 
 
Dense / sparse 
Separate / unified 
Furniture 
 
 
Example from the school case: 
 
Unit
X.
Theme:
How
to
modify
the
yard,
landscaping
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peripheral area. 
 
Architect: We can continue the theme of local physical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activities,
is
there
something
designed
here
in
this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
area, is there some good terrain as it is? 
 
User: There is a deep ditch behind which is a thicket.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
It is zoned as a park, but there is no sensible activity
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topoi 
 
 
Play 
 
 
 
Nature 
Act / process 
46 
==PAGE:48==
right now. I think it should be used for the breaktimes
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and other physical activities. 
 
Architect: This slope is steep. 
 
User: Could not there be a little curving bridge like in
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Moomin Valley? 
 
Architect:
The
ditch
is
outside
the
lot,
so
we
would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
need
collaboration
with
the
city
if
we
were
to
make
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
something more versatile in the valley. 
 
A few seconds of speech by a design manager with a voice
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
that is too hushed to enable adequate deciphering. 
 
Engineer: It would have to be discussed with the city,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but
using
the
ditch
to
retain
rainwater;
scenery,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
landscaping the bottom, whereby it would also be cleaned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
up. 
 
30
seconds
of
mostly
non-intelligible,
apparently
 
 
 
 
 
 
Process-model speech. 
 
Unit X+1. Theme: Physical activities in the yard. 
 
Architect:
The connection outside from the sports hall
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is surely important, and what kind of shared activities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with the city should there be on the school’s lot. What
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are
the
primary
activities
on
the
yard
wished
by
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
school, and are there city activities. 
 
User: For the school it is important to have some kind
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of amphitheater, where lessons could be held, and there
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is
enough
space
in
front
of
the
amphitheater
to
hold
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outdoor concerts, to use it as a performance place. And
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
do we want some canopy there. For breaktimes it could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
good,
but
I
don’t
know
if
it
is
so
useful.
And
then
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
things that are important for breaktimes. An artificial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
grass
area.
Playing
structures
and
swings
for
the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
smaller
ones.
And
then
the
physical
activity
lessons
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could be there outside. So training equipment that could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be outside. 
Rest 
Play 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nature 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In-out interface 
Sharing 
Act / process 
 
Collaboration 
 
 
Act / process 
 
Play 
Rest 
 
 
 
User state 
  Furniture 
 
 
47 
==PAGE:49==
​3.2​ Results 
 
The set of topoi is displayed in Figure 11. The lines show my understanding of the topoi’s conceptual
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
hierarchy, where every topos sources from Hermogenes’ six circumstance topoi, shown as larger
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
circles. Note that ​Place​, ​Way and ​Person are shown only for completeness: as explained above, I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
omitted them due to their overt ubiquity in an architectural context rendering them rather futile. 
 
 
 
Figure 11: The 32 topoi that resulted from the analysis. The larger circles are Hermogenes’ ​circumstance topoi,​ of which 
the grey ones I omitted due to their overt ubiquity in an architectural context rendering them rather futile. The lines 
show my intuitive understanding of the topoi’s conceptual hierarchy. Note that ​Nexus hell​ was later renamed to 
Congestion​ to help people whose linguistic aptitude is lacking. 
 
 
48 
==PAGE:50==
Having coded the units, I used ATLAS.ti to find the topoi’s co-occurrences, i.e. how many times they
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
occurred with each other in the same unit. Here I call the topoi that occur with each other ​affiliates​.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For example, one topos with a relatively high amount of co-occurrences (23) was ​Play​, resulting
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the nature of the two cases: there was much discussion of recreational activities for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
school, and one of the hospital sessions was about the children’s ward. The most common affiliates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of ​Play (3 co-occurrences each) were ​Rest​, ​Sharing and ​Separate / unified​; the first testifies to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
tendency of people to play during breaks in their work or studying and thus to situate playful
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activities in spaces reserved for rest, while the other two originate from discussions of whether to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
integrate children’s playing areas in the hospital with adults’ rest areas and whether to share the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
school’s sports hall with external actors. Moreover, an example from the low end is ​Extendability​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
with only two affiliates: ​Future and ​Cause​. The discussion was about whether to take into account
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the possibility of the pupils of a nearby tiny school being transferred to the school under
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
envisionment by leaving space for an extension on the building’s lot. (Note that despite the poor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evidence for the relevance of the ​Extendability topos, I retained it according to the first contingency
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
requirement shown in Figure 10: though it was rare in these cases, my mental model of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
architectural projects tells me that it has great relevance in many others.) 
Figure 12 shows a sampling of the co-occurrences, for seven topoi. The numbers at the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
left-hand side are the total co-occurrences for the respective topoi. Note that most co-occurrences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(for example the two of ​Extendability​) are of size one, so that they are statistically negligible. And
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
even the larger ones, such as the four occurrences between ​Central / peripheral and ​Visual connection​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
may well be just an anomaly of these two cases. 
 
49 
==PAGE:51==
 
Figure 12: The co-occurrences of a selection of topoi. The numbers at the left-hand side are the total co-occurrences for 
the respective topoi. 
 
 
 
Examples of the categorization of utterances under certain topoi are listed in Appendix D. 
 
 
 
 
50 
==PAGE:52==
​3.3​ Discussion 
 
In this section I will first describe the weaknesses present in the above methodology. Then I give an
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
overview of the mental process underlying the methodology, in order for the reader to gain a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
deeper understanding between rhetoric and mental models in design practice. I conclude with an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
outline of another topos curation process that I tried. 
 
​3.3.1​ Heurism 
 
While design is almost always heuristic, the methodology described above was remarkably riddled
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with uncertainty and fuzziness: 
●
Small dataset.  
○
Only two cases, giving a total recording time of only around five hours. 
○
Due to the low recording quality of the devices (iPhone 4 and MacBook Pro), and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
their poor positioning, as well as multiple groups talking at the same time in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hospital case, much of the recordings were undecipherable. 
●
Inadequacy of audio. The sessions were mediated by 2D draft plans of the buildings, so that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the participants conveyed much of their thinking by pointing at them; this data is lacking in
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
the audio recordings. 
●
Subjective topos curation. Looking at Figure 10, it is clear that all of the steps except “​Not
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
describing a specific spatial function​” are more or less subjective. Even the fulfillment of the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirement for commonness is sometimes subject to interpretation, as the topoi are not
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
always explicit, but appear latently and have to be ‘read between the lines’. 
●
Subjective coding. Again, due to the non-explicit nature of much of the data, many
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instances of code assignment were subject to my interpretation. ​Cause can be interpreted in
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
a particularly wide range of ways. 
●
Ambiguous unit delineation. It was in some cases not clear where one unit should end and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the next one begin, affecting the co-occurrence results. 
 
There is therefore no denying that this whole work can be considered not only a study in rhetoric
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
and design, but also in ambiguity. For despite the remarkable heurism, the solution (described in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the next chapter) did not turn out awry. Indeed, when comparing rates of completion and therefore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
rates of iterative improvement, ​good enough​ is far superior to ​perfect​.  
 
51 
==PAGE:53==
​3.3.2​ Mental model process flow 
 
My analytic process for coding the dataset with topoi is summarized in Figure 13. By scrutinizing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the data through the lens of my existing mental model of architecture and human nature, my mind
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
enriched the mental model of these particular cases (the school and the hospital) that I already had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
from visiting the sessions. This little case-specific mental model then grew all the way through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
until the end of the dataset. At some point near the beginning of this growth, it and the general
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
mental model together enabled me to recognize some concept in some utterance as equivalent to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some other ones handled previously, and so I formalized that concept as a topos, initializing my
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
topos mental model. In such a way the set of topoi bloomed. Having then gone through the dataset
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and ended up with the 32 topoi, I scanned the dataset once again, coding it with the topoi. 
Note that Figure 13 is only a simplification, for I did not go through the dataset totally
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
linearly (going back now and then, gaining new insights), and because mental models tend to rarely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
grow discretely like the figure suggests, instead gradually maturing utterance by utterance. Even
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the topos mental model did not actually grow in a definite fashion, for the topoi’s nuances kept on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interplaying and refining. And sometimes I scrapped topoi, sometimes folded them together. They
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were somewhat like quantum particles whose wavefunctions gradually condensed.  
 
 
Figure 13: A simplified mental model process flow of my analysis of the data. 
52 
==PAGE:54==
​3.3.3​ More advanced methodology 
 
 
I also tried to find the topoi by exploiting natural language processing. Topic models are statistical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models used in text analysis to discover latent topics, using word co-occurrence. So I cleaned the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
dataset, removing insubstantial words such as ‘good’ and ‘this’, as well as overly generic words like
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘space’ and ‘area’ that have no value in this context. Then I fed the data into the LDA algorithm,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commonly used in topic modeling. The specific implementation I used was Termite, a visual tool for
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
assessing the quality of topic models (Chuang et al., 2012) 
The results were somewhat disappointing, with poor statistical coherence for the topics,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and even the most coherent ones offering no new insights. Examples of these ‘topics’: 
●
Hospital 
○
Topic 1: ward, toilet, multifunction, storage, big, door, meeting, customer. 
○
Topic 2: child, corridor, outpatient, workspace, open, rest. 
●
School  
○
Topic 1: lot, noise, hall. 
○
Topic 2: side, supply, big, airplane, storey. 
 
The reason for such futility is clear: the dataset is far too small. “​Such visualizations are challenging to
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
create because of the high dimensionality of the fitted model – LDA is typically applied to many thousands of
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
   
documents, which are modeled as mixtures of dozens (or hundreds) of topics, which themselves are modeled as
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
distributions over thousands of terms.​” (Sievert & Shirley, 2014). 
In light of this truth, two cases, each consisting of 2-3 hours of recordings, seems laughable;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
their yield can be considered as an almost random spattering of topics, heavily reflecting the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specifics of the projects and the participants’ characters. Much more data is needed to cover further
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
(possibly numerous) topoi and co-occurrences that these two happened not to cover, in addition to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
drowning out rare ones that these may have been biased towards.  
   
 
 
 
53 
==PAGE:55==
​4​ Synthesis 
 
Now that I have raked together a sound foundation of rhetorical data from actual Integrated
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Design-Build workshops, it is finally time to design the solution, while answering my third research
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
question: “​What kind of intervention would be most efficient in achieving the expected outcomes?​”  
The solution’s format shall be a design game​. This decision sources from the knowledge that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they manifest a host of values highly relevant to the aims of this project: intuitiveness, an engaging
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
quality, idea generation, and so on. Their mental model alignment potential is also notable, being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
excellent “​in creating a play spirit where a shared language is actively being constructed through design game
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
materials.​” (Vaajakallio, 2012) 
My design process will loosely follow the ​plan-act-observe-reflect structure of action research:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
each section headed '​N​th version' will comprise the ​reflection and ​planning steps, while those headed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
'​N​th test' will detail the subsequent ​acting and ​observing steps. The reason for the looseness of my
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach is the intense flux between the problem and solution spaces, as well as their immensity,
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that I experienced during the first two of the four iterations, so that it was simply far easier to mix
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
the steps. This is also the ground for my abstaining from the more rigorous alternative structure of
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
requirements – solution alternatives – evaluation – selection – testing – refinement​; while each testing
   
 
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
section does include a list of requirements for the next version, the sheer amount of details to be
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decided and their impact on each other would have made their explicit evaluation and selection
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
impractical. 
Having been convinced of the efficacy of Halstrøm's approach, there is no reason not to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
begin my design process with it. I will therefore do so, beginning with the values to be celebrated: 
1.
Thorough probing of the design space early on. 
2.
The formation of a shared mental model. 
3.
Design game values. 
 
Note that the first two are the solution’s overall objectives, given in Section 1.3.1, while the last one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
is an auxiliary value, intended to reinforce the others. Figure 14 shows a preliminary attempt at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
amplifying these values by a mixture of processual (what I should do) and objective (what the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution should be like and what the audience i.e. the players should do) ideas. 
 
54 
==PAGE:56==
 
Figure 14: Values that my solution ought to celebrate are shown in grey, while proposals to amplify them are shown in 
green, with associated topoi from Hermogenes. 
 
Having already provided an overview of the optimal ​way to design design games in Section 2.5, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
having there also absorbed high-potential details which to imbue my solution space with from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
examples of design games with similar aims to this one, I will without further ado proceed onto the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actual designing. 
 
 
​4.1​ Design process 
 
Here I explain in detail the reasoning behind my design decisions through the four versions on my 
solution, as well as describing the tests between each. 
 
​4.1.1​ First version 
 
Physicality boosts thinking, as the body acts as a cognitive extension of the brain, as encapsulated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in Tversky’s embodied cognition (Tversky & Hard, 2009) and Watsuji’s embodied intersubjectivity
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
==PAGE:57==
(Krueger, 2013). In addition, as implied in these two sources, physicality prompts people to take
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
others’ perspectives, inducing empathy and mental model alignment. And being familiar with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vaajakallio’s principles of the benefits of physical boundary objects (Section 2.5.4) (and not being a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
digital engineer), I would not exploit the fruits of this age by making a digital solution. It should
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
rather be a tangible one. And the first proposal I made to myself was that it would be a card-based
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
one. The reasoning was simple: a deck of cards is an excellent medium for distributing to many
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people multifaceted data in a standardized format, and is hence naturally suited for embodying
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
topoi. The most obvious design would feature one topos per card alongside a visual depiction of it,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
and possibly some auxiliary information.  
Having established this primordial physical format, I was unable to gradually build up the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rules in a systematic fashion to arrive at a plausible solution: a game requires a definite vision in
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
order to have a chance of becoming truly fun and useful. Besides, the solution space is huge, with a
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
myriad vastly different formats that could be implemented. I therefore needed to let my mind dwell
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
deeply in the solution, problem and audience spaces in order to create a rich mixture of concepts,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
conducive for abduction. Eventually I did abduce an idea that seemed brimming with potential:
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
since I had developed my analytic process with inspiration from Halstrøm’s rhetorical framework,
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the cornerstone of this solution was thus already composed of the concept of the topoi therein,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
why not base my solution fully on it? After all, Value 1. above is inherent in Halstrøm’s framework,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
while there is a powerful (though not yet fully charted) connection between rhetoric and mental
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models (Value 2.), and the framework’s iterative nature seems to render it well translatable into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
game mechanics (Value 3.). So I decided to frame the game as a manifestation of Halstrøm’s
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
three-step process in the context of Integrated Design-Build. First the players would choose values
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to celebrate in their project; next they would amplify the values by coming up with ideas inspired
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by the topoi; lastly they envision the impact of those ideas on the project’s users and on themselves. 
The key question now was the mechanics that would be used to amplify a value by a topos
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
card. It is obvious that a lazy yet quite effective approach would be to use the cards as trivial
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sources of inspiration for traditional brainstorming, by the group randomly choosing one or a few
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
of them at each step and simply discussing what comes to their minds, in relation to some value to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
celebrate. Such a tool could miss Value 3 above, would probably have scarcely any mental model
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alignment effect, and though going some way towards fulfilling Value 1, would ultimately fail to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
exploit the relationships between the topoi. Now, I deemed the matrix of affiliations between the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topoi to be sufficient, at least for this first version, as the data which would drive the game. So how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to make the players consider affiliated topoi together? In the case of a digital game, the system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
could simply offer the players all the cards that are affiliated with the one they previously chose.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
But in this physical case, the players would have to find out those connections by themselves.  
The most obvious way to achieve this is to include the names of the affiliate topoi on each
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
card. However, given two topoi under consideration, could not the relevance of a third one be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
56 
==PAGE:58==
increased, and hence Value 1 further amplified, by picking it not from one or the other of the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
affiliate sets, but from their intersection? If the sets were of size 1-3, the intersection would be
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rapid enough to find manually, but then there most likely would not be an intersection; at least
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
around six topoi would ensure a high enough probability of finding at least one common affiliate.
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
But having to compare word sets of that size would of course slow down the game and diminish the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
flow state.  
So lacking the power of computation, from the subset of the solution space comprised of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
medium-specific tricks I had to find a method to physically achieve logical conjunction. Here I
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
again abduced a solution, grounded in the knowledge that paper lends itself to modification (ie.
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
origami and ​kirigami​, the arts of paper folding and paper cutting) that enables information and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functions to be embedded in its structure and transmittance of light. Just like electrons in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
semiconductors are harnessed to perform agonizing work that human brains once had to endure,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
so can the electrons in paper be harnessed: thanks to impurities and to the atoms’ band structure,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the electrons reflect and absorb photons instead of letting them pass, rendering the material
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opaque. In other words, by creating a discrete subset of the Cartesian plane with a one-to-one
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
mapping to the total set of topoi, and laying the subset on the cards and cutting a hole at each point
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
whose mapping is in the topos’ affiliate set, then overlaying cards on each other would yield the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
logical conjunction, visible as the remaining holes in the unity. Placing this stack on a diagram of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
the mapping, the affiliate topoi in question would appear as dots next to their names (Figure 15). 
The affiliate holes I placed as a series along the cards’ edges. However, as cutting the holes
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would require laser cutting, for this first version I substituted the holes with variously colored dots;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the cards’ edges would be placed next to each other for comparison, after which an external chart
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would be consulted (Figure 16B). 
 
  
Figure 15: The photonic technique for performing logical conjunction on multiple topoi’s sets of affiliates. In this case
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the two colored dots reveals the intersection to be ​In-out interface​ and ​Nexus hell​.  
 
The next issue was naturally the cards’ shape, which would depend on / affect their spatial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
connection method, if any. I ended up with a hexagon (Figure 16A), not only because it is more
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
unique than a rectangle, but also as it possesses both the universal linkability of a square and a bit
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
57 
==PAGE:59==
of the the phenomenological delight of a circle. This decision concretized the design to the extent
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that it became trivial to establish the value amplification mechanism as simply a player adding a
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
card next to one or more cards, while suggesting to the group an idea inspired by that topos, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hopefully also of the adjacent ones, that relates to the value. The players would then hopefully
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discuss the idea deeply enough to fulfill the last stage of Halstrøm’s framework. Moreover, in order
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
to ensure that a shared mental model of the importance of the idea would solidify, the group
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assigns one of the following three levels to it: ​Must have​,​ Wonderful to have​ or​ Nice to have​. 
The last aspect to consider was the game’s goal for the players. I created a playing field
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
(Figure 16C) with four hexagons around a value card, separated from it by two or three topos cards,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
so that the goal would be to reach those hexagons from the value card. Thus the players are forced
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to make at least a decent amount of ideas, while having a sense of purpose. This amplifies the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution’s Value 1, namely bountiful ideation, while emphasizing its game-like quality, Value 3. 
 
 
Figure 16: The materials of the first version. The text, which may not be readable, is simply the names of the topoi. ​A​. A 
selection of the topos cards; ​B​.  The mapping between the colored dots on the cards and the topoi; ​C​. The playing field. 
 
 
Summary of the rules 
 
1.
Brainstorm the project’s values, writing them down on blank hexagonal cards. 
2.
Place a value card on the playing field’s central hexagon. 
3.
Someone is inspired by a topos card for how to amplify the value, puts the card next 
to it, and explains the idea.  
4.
The group discusses the idea, and they assign an importance to it. 
5.
Everyone in turn chooses a place to put the next card. 
6.
If the place is next to existing topos cards, the common affiliate cards between them 
are taken out (at most four). 
58 
==PAGE:60==
7.
Return to step 3, unless the surrounding four goal hexagons have been reached, in 
which case the same is repeated with another value. 
 
Note that there are countless more sophisticated possibilities for the rules, particularly due to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hexagon’s universal linkability, and the vagueness of what is best in inducing creativity. However, I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
tried to follow a principle of simplicity rooted in design game theory, in the knowledge that
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complexity is likely to hinder the formation of the play spirit, and diminish the flow state.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moreover, I knew that like a product, the core aspects of the solution ought to be tested before
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complexity is added, and I infer that like a product, it is valid to do so here. 
 
​4.1.2​ First test 
 
 
I evaluated the first version with four participants: two staff and two PhD students in DTU’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management Engineering department (Figure 17). Although such a narrow range of professional
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
backgrounds is far from optimal given this project’s purpose, it did not matter for the first test,
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which yielded mainly general aspects for improvement that anyone could have pointed out. In fact,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the participants’ design game expertise enabled them to provide highly profitable suggestions. As
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such, my sampling was ​purposive​, as it was based on “​the researcher's judgement as to typicality or
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interest​” (Robson 1993, p.142). Though it was far from perfect, in Robson’s words “​[t]he exigencies of
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
carrying out real world studies can mean that the requirements for representative sampling are very difficult,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if not impossible, to fulfill.​”   
In order for the group to simulate not only design managers and architects, but also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representatives of the future users, the group’s task was tailored to fit its members’ collegiate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience. Namely, they used the prototype to probe the solution and problem space for an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
imaginary case of a new college dorm complex to be built on DTU’s campus.  
Though the test’s aims were to compare the mental model alignment and ideation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effectiveness of the design game to those of traditional brainstorming by interviews and analysis of
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
the generated concepts, the test uncovered such grievous shortcomings (mostly related to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
playing experience) that any comparison to a baseline was rendered pointless. In other words, this
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
test was akin to hewing, while later ones were like chiseling and sandpapering.  
The weaknesses were the following: 
●
It was slightly difficult for the players to come up with solid values for the project,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
due to the suddenness of the task. After all, they had gained only a minimal mental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
model of their simulated project, and only a few minutes ago. As such, their mental
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 
==PAGE:61==
models of the project’s most important values were inadequate upon starting the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amplification, and only began to solidify during it. 
●
The players had to be reminded multiple times of the need to assign each idea an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
importance after discussing about it. They also forgot about the color rule, trying to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
place a topos card next to other ones without checking whether it was allowed. 
●
After the first idea, the players forgot that their ideas should amplify the value that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was written on the card in the middle of the board, so the ideation veered off course. 
●
They found the color rule too restrictive, preferring instead to get inspired freely by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
any topos. And they deemed the game’s whole spatial structure jarring for their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creativity. 
●
When it came time to assign an importance to each idea, the players had a hard time
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
remembering all of the ideas they had come up with during their discussion. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
game should thus include continuous documentation of their concepts. 
●
The cards were much too small. 
 
In addition, an issue that came up regarding the testing itself was that as the players’ project was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
imaginary, they lacked the full motivation to consider their ideas in light of the seriousness of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
task. In other words, according to them, their lack of responsibility affected their ideation. 
 
 
Figure 17: Players trying the game (and a design expert observing in the background to provide additional feedback).  
60 
==PAGE:62==
​4.1.3​ Second version 
 
The dominant impression that the participants made on me was of the need to free up the players’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
creativities, perhaps by letting them brainstorm individually too, without the suffocating feeling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that constant discussion (for introverts at least) and rules induced in them. Hence I established the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
integration of individual ideation as the cornerstone of this version.  
The test participants’ distaste of the strict nature of the rules for placing the cards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented a critical dilemma: if I were to remove it, this solution would lose its connection with the
   
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empirical data I accumulated in the Analysis phase, making it just a trivial brainstorming tool, a
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
nice set of inspirational architectural keywords. So it was clear that I had to arrive at some kind of
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
   
 
   
balance between the current state and that naïve vision. I did this by throwing the whole
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
hexagon-based system into the bin, while preserving and enriching a simpler form of the affiliated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
topos system. This time the players would not have to find common affiliates between multiple
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topoi: those of one at a time would have to suffice. As such, there was no need for the logical
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conjunction mechanism (which I was proud of), and the affiliates could be written directly on the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topos cards (Figure 18), which are folded as accordions, with only the top topos visible. Note that I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
limited the number of affiliates to five in order to not overwhelm the players; more mental primes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would probably hinder creativity.  
The amplification phase would now include an individual part: each player simply takes a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
card that inspires him/her with a concept (anywhere in the design space), writes it down, then
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
opens the card and by viewing the affiliated topoi therein, tries to either further heighten the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept, or create a totally new one. Afterwards he/she replaces the card and takes another one,
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and this continues until a time limit has been reached. They write each idea on an blank card and
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
add it next to the value card, or next to an existing card if the new idea is a continuation of a
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
   
previous one, each player hence forming one or more concept clusters. Adding the ideas into clear
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clusters next to a large value card, the players will probably remember their aim better, perhaps
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solving the third issue in the list of issues above. In addition, the act of writing not only aids the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
formation the writer’s mental model and helps the group to refer to the ideas later, but also eases
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the analysis of the ideas afterwards by the architects. This concept of leaving visual traces of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design process is discussed comprehensively by Vaajakallio (2012, p. 179). 
It should also be noted that I added an icon for each topos in order to provide a visual
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
creative boost. I tried to make some icons non-intuitive, helping the players to break outside
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
normal patterns of thought. Such icons thus nudge the user to interpret the topos in multiple ways;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
in effect, they are topoi that enrich the actual topoi, and could be called ​‘metatopoi’​. For example,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instead of a plant for ​Nature​, a whale; instead of a car for ​Logistics​, a galleon; instead of a robot for
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
61 
==PAGE:63==
Future​, a vinyl (an artefact of a past future, yet one that is again relevant for lovers of high-quality
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
music). 
Now, how to integrate the ideas generated by this method between all the minds? The most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obvious method is making the players freely discuss about them. Thus each person shall describe
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
his/her cluster in turn, after which the group deliberates on it, perhaps offering further ideas into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the mix. However, it may be that this is not an adequate method of achieving the mental model
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alignment, as depending on the players’ mindsets and experience, the deliberation could stay on an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abstract level, in which case a mind tends not to easily absorb new information. So I decided to
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
append the common mental model solidification technique of storytelling as the final step: the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
players create a brief narrative of an envisioned user experiencing some or all of the elements in
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the cluster. To ensure an adequate play spirit, they will have some boundary objects; a few paper
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
artefacts representing the users. Moreover, at first I considered making one of the players write
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
down the story, but eventually eschewed such a scheme due to the time it would take to write it
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
down, and its limited benefit: only the scribe would gain a boost in his/her memory of the notions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
that are written down. 
 
 
Figure 18: A selection of the new topos cards. Each one is folded, with only the top topos visible until a player opens it. 
 
Next, in order to fix the inefficiency of the value brainstorming phase in forming a shared mental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
model of the project’s values, I expanded it by integrating an individual step into it too, and adding
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
inspirational cards. Namely, I thought about how to harness metaphors, which are a foundational
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
aspect of creativity and the formation of shared understanding, as elaborated in Section 2.4. Each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
card corresponds to a metaphor that could be used as a lens for considering the players’ actual
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
project. Similarly to the amplification phase, each player views the cards, and upon inspiration
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from one of them, opens it to reveal three inspirational pictures (Figure 19). But unlike with the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topoi, my curation of the metaphors and their associated pictures is completely subjective, as I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
deemed an intuitively wide enough range of verbal and visual concepts related to architecture to be
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
sufficient for a prototype. Furthermore, like with the topos icons, I tried to choose some pictures so
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
as to jolt the players’ patterns of thought away from their well-worn (sometimes even clichèd)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tracks, fostering consideration of the words’ non-standard associations.
Indeed, “​successful
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
metaphors rely on the unlikeness of things, not upon their likeness. The characteristic of an effective metaphor
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
62 
==PAGE:64==
is it borrows an image from one schema of ideas, and applies it to another, previously unrelated schema.​”
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
(Forty, 2000)  
 
 
Figure 19: A selection of the contents of the metaphor cards, each one having three inspirational images.  
Top left: Island. Top right: Church. Bottom left: Navy. Bottom right: Farm. 
 
Having chosen such a card and seen the pictures, the player writes on blank cards as many
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
values that he/she can think of which explain why that metaphor suits his/her vision of how the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project’s result should turn out. Now once again, the individual ideas (in this case, values) ought to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
be synthesized into a shared mental model. In order to conserve and heighten the players’ flow
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
state, I decided to keep the rules trivial: each player in turn describes one of his/her values, after
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which the group decides whether to place it alone as the seed of a cluster, or place it into an
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
existing cluster. When every value has been assigned so, the group names the clusters (the name
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could be the same as one of the values therein), writing it onto a large (emphasizing the value’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
importance) circular (emphasizing the holistic nature of this process) card. This process is in effect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
equivalent to the Framing step of Dorst’s ​Frame creation​ (Dorst et al., 2016). 
Now with such similar boundary objects and structure in the two phases, the game seems 
more balanced, and its purpose clearer to players.  
 
 
 
 
 
63 
==PAGE:65==
Summary of the rules 
 
Values 
1.
Individual 
1.1.
Each player views the metaphor cards, and takes one whose metaphor suits his/her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vision of the project. 
1.2.
The player views the inspirational pictures therein, and writes down all the values
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
present in the metaphor that he/she can come up with, on the blank cards. 
1.3.
The player replaces the metaphor card and repeats the above steps until 5 min has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
passed.  
2.
Group 
2.1.
Each player presents the metaphors that he/she used, briefly describing how it fits
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
his/her vision of the project. 
2.2.
Everyone lays down one of his/her value value cards in turn, organically clustering
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them (optimally 3-5 clusters would emerge). 
2.3.
They integrate each cluster into a single concept and write it on a large circular
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
card. These concepts are the overall values of the project. 
Amplification 
Each value is amplified in turn. The circular card is placed in the middle of the table. 
1.
Individual 
1.1.
Each player views the topos cards, and takes one that inspires some idea relating to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
the value. The idea could belong to the problem or solution spaces, or both. 
1.2.
The player writes down the concept in a blank idea card. 
1.3.
He/she opens the topos card and views the affiliated topoi, whereby he/she is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inspired with further ideas and writes them on blank idea cards. Each one could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
either be an amplification of the original idea, or a totally new one (that amplifies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
the value).  
1.4.
The player places the idea cards on the rim of the circular value card. 
2.
Group 
2.1.
Each player presents his/her ideas, and the group briefly discusses them, perhaps
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coming up with some further amplifications for it. 
2.2.
The group creates a story where an envisioned user experiences some or all of these
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
ideas.  
 
64 
==PAGE:66==
​4.1.4​ Second test 
 
 
I evaluated the second version with three students from DTU: two civil engineers and one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management engineer (Figure 20). Therefore in this case the participants represented more closely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the configuration of professional backgrounds in Integrated Design-Build projects. The task was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same as in the previous test: ideating for a new college dorm. This time, due to the increased
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amount of steps in the game, instead of detailing the whole gameplay at the start, I only outlined
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
the structure, and then explained the mechanics of each step just before the players began that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
step. I also gave examples of each step, for an imaginary school project. Note that once again, there
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was time to amplify only one value. 
 
 
Figure 20: The second test’s participants performing the amplification. 
 
The following table details the questions and answers of this test:  
 
Question 
Method of answering 
Answer 
Is it easy to 
understand the 
rules? 
Questions by 
participants, open 
discussion afterwards, 
and observation. 
Fairly easy. However, one participant said that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the examples I gave of each step were critical to
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the understanding. Another participant did not
 
 
 
 
 
 
properly understand what kinds of ideas he
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should come up with using the topos cards. 
Is the format 
conducive of the 
flow state? 
Observation. 
The
Value-finding
phase
seemed conducive
 
 
 
 
 
enough, with as much as 27 values, grouped into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
clusters,
and
the discussion during the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
==PAGE:67==
clustering was lively. However, the Amplification
 
 
 
 
 
 
was disappointing: the creation of ideas did not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seem easy for two of the participants (one came
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
up with only two). And the last step was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remarkably awkward, with lengthy thinking
 
 
 
 
 
pauses in the discussion, barely any amplification
   
 
 
 
 
 
of others’ ideas, and each story being told
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
primarily by one person only.   
Does it induce 
amplification from 
a multitude of 
viewpoints? 
Observation of the 
created ideas. 
They amplified their value, ‘Learning and sharing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge’, from three main viewpoints: a
 
 
 
 
 
 
library, gardening, and separating spaces by
 
 
 
 
 
 
curtains. These cannot be said to cover the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution space well. In addition, the latter two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were not even explicitly connected to the value. 
What is a good 
timing of the steps? 
After each step, asking 
participants whether 
they need more time. 
Values: 
1.
5 min.  
2.
10 min. 
Amplification: 
1.
8 min. 
2.
15 min. 
 
 
This version’s weaknesses were thus the following:  
●
The players did not add ideas enough to each other’s concepts in the last step. 
●
One player found it hard to ideate, even with the topos cards, perhaps due to the classical
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem of self-censoring. 
●
They were quite fixated on one concept (a library), adding details to it, at the cost of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
omitting the rest of the vast design space.  
●
Once again, the players sometimes forgot that their ideas should amplify the value (though
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not as much as last time). 
●
It was difficult for them to create stories of even mediocre quality, and to collaborate in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creating them. 
 
 
​ 
 
66 
==PAGE:68==
4.1.5​ Third version 
 
 
The foremost modification I made for this version was based on the fourth point in the list above,
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as well as my desire to give the game a whopping boost in play spirit and aesthetic quality by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hauling it into the third dimension. How could the players be nudged to always keep in mind their
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
task of amplifying the specific value that is written on a card in the middle of the table? By an
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
embodied metaphor (Section 2.4): making them somehow physically connect the ideas into the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
value in a way that has the power to conjure up a variety of mental associations. So I thought of the
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
 
   
   
 
act of pushing a stick into a hole, with the ideas attached to the stick’s other end. If so, the whole
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
structure could resemble a flower on a stalk. There is scarcely a more visually pleasing metaphor
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
for amplification than a flower blooming. And creating colorful, pliable flowers is a far more
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
engaging experience than arranging cards on a table. For example, it is hard to imagine anyone
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
except the most apathetic person being emotionally untouched by the sight of a bloom with a lone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
petal; we want to ‘cure’ it by adding more. 
Thus the cards on which the players write their ideas should be shaped like petals, and be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
colored. The ‘amplification base’ in which the stalks are placed I designed as circular (though
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
practical problems pressured me to leave it as a square in the prototype), with the holes in a series
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
along its edge, their amount being such that four players could each add at least three flowers. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
stalks ought to be bendable, so that it would be easy to see what is written on the petals from a
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
sitting position, and so that the activity would be even more dynamic. Each value would have its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
own little ‘value base’ (Figure 23B) that is placed into the amplification base. Now, this approach
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could also significantly increase play spirit during the clustering of values in the game’s previous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phase: instead of arranging the value cards in a random mess, they would be clustered by setting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them radially on the base, before a circular card is laid on them when integrating the values.  
I initially considered having a single amplification base for each value, without the separate
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
little value bases, but realized that as there would need to be at least five such bases (or more, for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the test yielded as many as six clusters), this solution would result in excessive volume and mass for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
the game; the vision of future facilitators awkwardly lugging the game around made me reconsider.
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As such, the flowers have to be taken off the base before each new value is amplified. 
It is worth noting that another benefit of the above boosts to the materiality of the game is
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
that is eases any possible process of scanning through the produced concepts after the session; for
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
example, an architect may have become fascinated by some cluster of ideas, and instead of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
referring to a recording of the session (if any), can now simply look at the specific bloom of ideas,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which is preserved by the petals-stem structure, unlike a cluster of cards on a table. This is an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
example of leaving visual traces, as expounded by Vaajakallio (2012, p. 179). 
67 
==PAGE:69==
A detail worth deliberating is my decision to have two holes on the petals, instead of one
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
like for the value cards (‘leaves’), so that when they are folded together, the petal curves with two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
axes of curvature. This can be done in either direction, resulting in a convex or a concave bloom.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
The advantages of this gimmick are the following: 
1.
Without it, the petals would droop, a sight which people naturally associate with poor
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
health or laziness. Not only am I foregoing this negative nudge, but the aesthetic tension of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
the double curvature is indeed a positive nudge, radiating mental energy.  
2.
It renders the blooms more realistic, achieving a better overall balance between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concreteness and abstraction, which is critical for supporting creativity (Section 2.5.4). 
3.
Players without much paper folding experience, or indeed handicraft experience in general,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
will hopefully be delighted with the extreme ease of the operation by which they can create
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a fairly realistic-looking bloom. 
4.
The convex configuration is a cue for openness, arousing associations with the benefits of
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collectivistic thinking. On the other hand, the concave one could prime the participants (at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
least the more sensitive ones) with a sense of safety, strengthening their magic circle
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Section 2.5.2) so that they would be less inhibited in the next step (discussion and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
storytelling). In addition, making the ideas written on the petals visible only from a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
relatively small angle from the front, the form could impart a feeling of partial secrecy, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
sense of preciousness, fostering a feeling of valuable work being performed; “​I am making
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
something worthwhile​”. 
 
Next up was solving the passivity that the players exhibited when discussing; they were disinclined
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to add to each other’s ideas, and in general to deliberate about them. This will probably already be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to some extent alleviated by the amplification’s new form, with the metaphor of flower growth as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
cue. And as each player has idea cards (petals) of different colors, the more vibrant-minded players
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
may be disposed to further colorify each other’s blooms. Yet this is not enough to ensure a lively
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
discussion, particularly in a group of introverts and people who are not used to ideation. Now,
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instead of modifying the discussion and storytelling step ​per se​, I modified the previous step,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
changing it from individual to pairwise ideation, which would proceed by dialogue about both the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideas themselves, and about how to cluster them as blooms; an intimate, dynamic, kinetic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collaboration. This decision has the following advantages: 
1.
Creative juices tend to flow better with discussion. 
2.
Motivation from a feeling of being on a shared mission with the partner. 
3.
Less pressure when presenting the ideas thanks to shared authorship. 
4.
It acts a warmup for whole-group discussion. 
(The pairs should then be changed around when amplifying the next value, achieving a maximally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
wide range of mental model alignment.) 
68 
==PAGE:70==
 
In order to remedy the last issue in the list above, I considered scrapping the storytelling element,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
so that the game would now end with only the deliberation on each pair’s ideas. The negligible value
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that such short-form storytelling gave in the test simply did not seem worth the time it took up. So
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
I learned that if storytelling is to be integrated into a design game, it probably should be given
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
proper focus instead of treating it as an auxiliary activity like in this time-deficient case, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
altogether made the substance of the game, as described in Section 2.5.5. However, I am willing to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
give the storytelling the benefit of the doubt, as it could possibly be cured by changing its scope
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the whole group to pairs, retaining the dynamic of intimate dialogue from the previous step.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hence I decided to do so, making each pair envision a scenario based on the other’s ideas. After the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideation they first briefly explain their ideas and the group hopefully discusses them, maybe even
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adding more; then they rotate the base, craft stories pairwise and present them in the end. In this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
way assigning the players the responsibility to ‘treat well’ each other’s ideas, showcasing how well
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they have ‘nurtured them’ at the end, they could gain a boost in motivation. 
To address the second issue in the list above, I thought it sufficient for the facilitator to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
explicitly prime the participants. Therefore in the next test I emphasized the game’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
brainstorm-like quality in the presentation that I used to explain the rules of each step, saying that
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
there are no ‘correct’ ideas and that there should be no criticizing. At the amplification I also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
emphasized that the ideas can be anything in the design space: opportunities or issues, statements
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or questions. 
Halstrøm persuaded me to drop the ​Furniture topos, arguing that the abstract nature of all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the other topoi fosters creative thinking, whereas the concreteness of ​Furniture jars such conceptual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
burgeoning by throwing their minds into the domain of actual pieces of furniture they have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experienced. And happily the abstract version of that topos, ​Adaptability​, already exists within the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
set. In addition, I came to the conclusion that I should delete the ​Supplies topos too, as it is obviously
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
already covered by ​Logistics​ and ​Storage​. As such, the set reduced from 32 to 30 topoi. 
Lastly, I enhanced the topos cards by adding an inspirational image on their other sides
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Appendix A). Most of them are photos of nature, hopefully inspiring biomimetic ideas. Also, since
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
natural sights are in another conceptual domain than architecture and technology, the players’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creativities are not restricted by seeing any concrete solutions. I furthermore placed the cards into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
holders to enable easy browsing (Figure 23E); this way none of them is upside-down for any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participant, and they are not in a mess on the table. 
 
 
 
69 
==PAGE:71==
​4.1.6​ Third test 
 
I evaluated the third version with four professionals from NCC: an architect, an architectural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
engineer, a construction architect and a construction manager (Figure 21). Hence the group
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represented even more closely a realistic Integrated Design-Build group makeup than before, with
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only the users and client missing. The task was the same as in the previous test: ideating for a new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
college dorm at DTU’s campus. Even though only one of the participants had studied at DTU, it was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
best to keep the previous design task since everyone had experience from living in some college
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dorm, and its design space seems richer than that of a new NCC headquarters. This time I tried to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
   
convey the mechanics and reasoning of the game’s steps as clearly as possible using a slideshow,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
incorporating the kinds of priming described above.  
In this case I had no new questions to answer, focusing instead on whether this version has
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
escaped the issues plaguing the previous one, and how to further fine-tune it. Overall the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants, who would be the very people to employ the game in real projects, deemed it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
promising; they thought that, with some tweaking, it could well be useful in actuality. They also
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
produced a healthy amount of ideas, and seemed to be well absorbed in their task most of the time.
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
The pairwise amplification in particular was a heartwarming sight, with the flow state apparently
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pervading the group as they eagerly ideated and crafted flowers, ending up with 7 blooms with a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
total of 16 ideas. 
It is also worth noting that the architect said that she already tends to intuitively ideate by a
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
methodology similar to use of the metaphor cards. This can be seen as a sign of aptness of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
game’s Value-finding phase in expanding the design space of the other participants, particularly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the users, who often have negligible design experience. In other words, the cards directly convey to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
all participants some useful mental models that have usually been solely in architects’ possession. 
So did this version solve the weaknesses of the previous? Partially. This time the players
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
always tried to amplify the value under amplification, and their ideas covered a relatively wide area
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
of the solution space, though nothing in the rest of the design space. The storytelling was better,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with pair A telling a decently coherent story that indeed incorporated some of the pair B’s ideas.
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, pair B did not understand that the story should be a character-based narrative, instead
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
recounting pair A’s concepts with their own framing, and adding some (only verbally). It would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
hence have been best to give them an example of a good story. Moreover, in the previous test the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants did not add ideas to each others’ when discussing; this time they did no better. In fact,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
there was not even any discussion: each pair just described their ideas and the other listened. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was not a significant issue here, as they did informally add ideas in the stories, but the more
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussion and contribution there is, the better a shared mental model would form. 
 
70 
==PAGE:72==
 
Figure 21. Left: the pairwise amplification being carried out. Right: the results of one pair’s amplification, the value 
having been ‘Sociality / knowledge sharing’. 
 
I also conducted a rudimentary quantification of the increase in mental model alignment by
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comparing the participants’ concept maps. This technique (also called Constructed Shared Mental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Models) has previously been used in the context of design by Badke-Schaub et al. (2007). The players
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
simply sketched out a map of concepts that relate to their vision of the design task, as many as they
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could within five minutes. By doing this both before and after playing the game, I could compare
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
how the amount of ideas and their sharedness has increased. For the latter, I wrote down a tally of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
how many participants’ maps included each concept, then took away 1 from each tally (as lone ideas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
are not shared) and summed them. Somewhat surprisingly, the game did not increase the amount
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of ideas, the results being 20 and 21 respectively (the error margin was at least ±3 due to the high
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subjectivity of deciding whether a concept written on the map was equivalent to another one).
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the sharedness increased from 6 to 15. With effectively the same amount of concepts, this
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
more than doubling of sharedness is a clear indicator of the potential of the game in achieving its
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
first objective. However, one datum is statistically worthless, so that a lot more such testing would
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
have to be performed to reach reliable evidence. Another way to solidify the technique would be to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
compare not only the sharedness of concepts between the participants’ concept maps, but also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(using connecting lines between the concepts) the shared sequences, links, importances, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clusters, as outlined by Cash et al. (2017, p. 158). 
Lastly, I received three great suggestions from the participants. Firstly, despite their
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coming up with a lot of value proposals in the game’s first step, they found the metaphor cards
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
somewhat restrictive due to their textual nature (with the three inspirational pictures in each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visible only when the card is unfolded), implying that they would be more effective if they were
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
visual. Secondly, it was thought that the integrated values that they came up with were perhaps too
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vague (e.g. “Sociality / knowledge sharing”), so that it would have been better if they had been
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
framed as an operational question (e.g. “How to maximize and integrate sociality and knowledge
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
==PAGE:73==
sharing?”). Thirdly, while the game’s creatively catalytic power was praised, its usefulness in actual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
projects was seen as lacking due to there being no evaluation of the concepts. For in Integrated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Design-Build, it is of course not enough to create a shared understanding of what the project’s
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
result should and could be like; the shared mental model ought to include knowledge of how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
realizable the concepts are, and which ones should be given priority.  
 
Summarizing all the above, the improvement suggestions from this test are the following: 
●
Emphasize that they should not only describe their ideas but discuss them.  
●
Emphasize the form of the story they have to make: how an envisioned user would 
experience some of the ideas in the envisioned building. Then give an example.  
●
Emphasize that they are not limited to the metaphor cards when generating values. 
●
Frame the integrated values as questions. 
●
Make the metaphor cards visual. 
●
Include an evaluation step. 
 
 
 
 
72 
==PAGE:74==
​4.1.7​ Fourth version 
 
The most critical element for improvement was the addition of an evaluation step, as without it the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
game would have very limited usefulness in actual Integrated Design-Build projects, where the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economical facet of every concept is critical. Due to the game’s runtime already being high, at least
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
fifty minutes, and further value amplifications in real cases (in the tests there was time to amplify
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
only one value) adding more, I decided to keep this new step simple. Hence, instead of evaluating
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
every concept cluster (bloom), the group would decide on the three most important ones, writing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them down on an evaluation sheet (Figure 22). (Note that a side effect of this is that they will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
integrate each of the three clusters, framing them with names, just like for the values earlier in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
game, strengthening the shared mental model formation). They would then assign each of the three
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
a relative cost: low, medium or high. With such an ambiguous selection, the players are forced to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clarify their economic expectations. Lastly the sheet could be inserted on an extra value base by a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
hole (Figure 23F), before the group moves onto the next value to be amplified.  
However, not all values are equal in importance. Therefore, when all of them have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amplified, one last prioritization will be carried out: the ​best concept of each value is chosen, taking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
into account both the importance and the relative cost. 
Secondly, I modified the metaphor cards by removing the words on them, so that instead of
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
a word, the players would see one of the card’s images (Figure 23A), and open it to view the other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
two. This way they will not be restricted by my interpretation of the images, enabling them to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suggest a vaster array of associations. 
 
 
Figure 22: The evaluation card. 
 
 
 
73 
==PAGE:75==
​4.2​ Summary 
 
In this chapter I described my iterative design process, where I informally followed the classical
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
plan-act-observe-reflect approach, with the alternating designing and testing phases comprising
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reflection + planning​, and ​acting + observing​ respectively.  
My first version was remarkably different than the others. Its nature was much more like
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what one usually associates with the concept of ‘board games’, with a definite goal, and the topos
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
cards being not only for inspiration, but serving as functional playing material. Though this version
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
at first seemed good to me, the test revealed abysmal deficiencies. So I had no option but to discard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
the version’s elements almost totally, retaining only the topos structure from the Analysis phase,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the concept of a card-based game.  
In the second version I diversified the social experiences, dividing the game into a
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Value-finding and an Amplification/deliberation phase, each containing an individual and a group
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
step. Now instead of the players simply ideating and placing cards on a board throughout the game,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the rules varied with time, as I morphed the experience to be explicitly aligned with the three
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phases of Halstrøm’s model.  
The second test suggested that I was going in the right direction, with the players deeming
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it fairly effective in ideation, and glimpses of the flow state apparent. There were still glaring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inefficiencies to resolve, for example relating to the lack of fruitful deliberation in the last step, and
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
the difficulty of storytelling. The most significant change that I made for the third version was to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
endow the game with the third dimension, framing the playing experience with the metaphor of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
growing flowers. Then the last iteration was mostly about fine-tuning, with some suggestions for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the facilitator for priming the players verbally. However, the fourth version also includes a hitherto
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
unconsidered aspect of Integrated Design-Build sessions, namely the need for evaluation of ideas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
based on economic considerations. 
 
 
 
74 
==PAGE:76==
​4.2.1​ Game materials 
 
The materials of the final version are shown in Figure 23. In addition, all cards are viewable in the 
Appendices. 
 
 
Figure 23: The game’s materials. ​A​. A selection of the metaphor cards; ​B​. A value base, with value proposal cards added
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(middle) and then an integrated value card (right); ​C​. Two colors of idea cards (i.e. petals), and a stalk onto which they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
are inserted; ​D​. A bare amplification base (left) and what it looks like during amplification (right) except for the lack of
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
writing; ​E​. The topos cards in holders; ​F​. Evaluation cards (shown without writing) inserted onto an extra value base
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
after evaluating the idea clusters (blooms) resulting from each amplification round. 
75 
==PAGE:77==
​4.2.2​ Game mechanics 
 
The game’s mechanics are visualized in Figure 24, and summarized textually below. Note that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
though I have categorized everything after the pairwise ideation into the ​Deliberation phase in the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
text below, in practice the ​Discussion & storytelling step can contain amplification too, depending on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how willing the players are to add to each other’s ideas. Thus the ​Amplification and ​Deliberation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phases are shown as overlapping in Figure 24. 
 
 
Figure 24: The game’s mechanics, as well as tips for the facilitator for priming the players (Emphasis). Although I have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
categorized everything after the pairwise ideation into the ​Deliberation phase in the textual version of these mechanics
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
below, in practice the ​Discussion & storytelling step can contain amplification too, depending on how willing the players
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are to add to each other’s ideas. Thus the ​Amplification​ and ​Deliberation​ phases are here shown as overlapping.  
Note that the arrow from one of the ‘price tags’ in the evaluation step indicates that one concept cluster will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be chosen as the most important one for each value when all the values (three in this case) have been amplified. 
 
76 
==PAGE:78==
Value-finding 
1.
Individual ideation 
1.1.
Each player views the metaphor cards, and takes one whose metaphor suits his/her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vision of the project (Figure 23A). 
1.2.
The player unfolds the card to view the other two inspirational pictures too, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
writes down all the values present in the metaphor that he/she can come up with,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the value proposal cards (Figure 23B). 
1.3.
The player replaces the metaphor card and repeats the above steps until the time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limit has been reached.  
2.
Clustering 
2.1.
Everyone inserts one of his/her value value cards in turn onto the value bases
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Figure 23B), organically clustering them (optimally 3-5 clusters would emerge). 
2.2.
They integrate each cluster into a single sentence and write it on a large circular
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
card (Figure 23B). These are the overall values of the project. They should be written
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
as operational questions (‘How can…’ / ‘How to…’) 
Amplification 
Each value is amplified in turn. The value base is inserted into the amplification base. 
1.
Each pair of players views the topos cards (Figure 23E), and takes one that inspires
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some idea relating to the value. The idea could belong to anywhere within the design
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
space (i.e. the solution, problem or audience spaces). 
2.
The pair writes down the idea on an idea card and attach it on a stalk (Figure 23C)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
which they insert into the amplification base. 
3.
They open the topos card and view the affiliated topoi, whereby they are inspired
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with further ideas and write them on idea cards. Each one could either be a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
continuation of the original idea, in which case they attach the card onto the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stalk, or a new one whereupon they attach it onto a new stalk. (Figure 23D, right) 
4.
The pairs repeat the above steps until the time limit has been reached.  
 
Deliberation 
1.
Discussion & storytelling 
1.1.
Each pair presents their ideas, and the group briefly discusses them, perhaps
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coming up with some further amplifications for it. 
1.2.
Each pair creates and presents a story based on the other pair’s ideas. It should be a
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
scenario where an envisioned user experiences some or all of these ideas.  
2.
Evaluation 
77 
==PAGE:79==
The group chooses the three most important idea clusters, naming each and writing it down
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
onto an evaluation card. Then they assign each of the three a relative price (low, medium or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
high) and add it to the card. Lastly they could insert the card onto an extra value base. 
 
Ending 
When all of the values have been amplified, one last prioritization will be carried out: the ​best
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept of each value is chosen from the evaluation cards, taking into account both the importance
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the relative cost. 
 
 
4.2.3 Facilitation tips 
 
Make sure to: 
1.
Give brief examples from an imaginary case for each of these steps: Individual ideation (how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
to use the metaphor cards), Pairwise ideation (how to use the topos cards), and Storytelling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a character-based story integrating one or more of the concepts). 
2.
Prime the players according to the tips in the Emphasis row in Figure 24. 
3.
Change the pairs around between each value, achieving a maximally wide range of mental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
model alignment. 
 
The rules of thumb durations that I found to be good from the tests are given below. The steps that
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are marked as having a natural ending are ones that, given a lot of workshop time to account for
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any exceptionally long durations, there is no need to force them to end. Note that as I lacked time
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
to test the evaluation step, its optimal duration is yet to be found out. 
 
Step 
Duration  Natural ending 
Individual ideation 
5 min 
No 
Clustering 
15 min 
Yes 
Pairwise amplification 
10 min 
No 
Discussion & storytelling 
15 min 
Yes 
Evaluation 
? 
Yes 
78 
==PAGE:80==
​5​ Discussion 
 
For his Design with Intent toolkit, Lockton ran numerous workshops, achieving ten iterations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
before the publication of his thesis, some of them based on multiple workshops (Lockton, 2013). As
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
befits the shorter ​timeframe and lesser aims of an MSc thesis, I managed to cram in only four
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
iterations. The resulting intervention nonetheless seems to do its job, at least to some extent. I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
begin this section by reflecting on its current state, outlining the innovations that I have achieved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
in this work and answering the first three of my research questions before giving suggestions on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alternate ways of using the game. Then I proceed onto answering my fourth research question,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussing aspects that should be taken into account in any future version or any intervention with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similar aims or analytic basis, and envision more or less futuristic methodologies for overhauling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the ones that I employed. 
 
​5.1​ Reflection 
 
Here I contemplate the results of this work. First is a summary of the innovations that it can be said
   
 
 
   
 
 
     
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
to contribute. Then follows the explicit answering of the first three of my research questions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lastly, I provide suggestions for using the solution. 
 
​5.1.1​ Contributions 
 
What does this thesis bring to the table? Below I describe the contributions to both practice /
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
industry, and to academia. 
 
Practical 
I have provided the construction and architectural industries with an intervention for Integrated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Design-Build projects, which helps their stakeholders to form a shared mental model of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expectations for the result, i.e. what the envisioned sociotechnical system should and could be like.  
 
Academic 
I have formulated a methodology for analyzing the rhetorical facet of any architectural co-design
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
session in order to gather together a rhetorical dataset that can be used to design interventions for
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
79 
==PAGE:81==
such workshops, and generally to glean insights into the formation of shared understanding in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
co-design practice. The methodology could also be translated into other domains, such as service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design. Moreover, the apparent (though statistically yet to be proven) success of the game offers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evidence for the validity of Halstrøm's model of rhetorical design, on which it is based (Halstrøm,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
2017). 
 
​5.1.2​ Answering the research questions 
 
It is time to explicitly answer the first three of my research questions: 
 
1.
What is the theoretical basis of the problem? In other words, what are theoretically the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bottlenecks that inhibit smooth and fruitful Integrated Design-Build co-design? 
 
The issues in Integrated Design-Build originate from an inadequate alignment of the group
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
members’ mental models. As discussed in Section 2.2, any smooth collaboration requires a shared
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
mental model of the design space, of the processes for conducting the project, and of the team’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
social dynamics. A significant reason for this difficulty can be understood through the lens of
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rhetoric, as shown in Section 2.3: collaborative design is about the justification of decisions by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
persuasive language, which should be molded out by inspection of the design space from various
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
angles. With weak rhetorical capabilities, many people fail to adequately convey their mental
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models or receive others’. And digging deeper, one finds that this can also be framed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
philosophically as the prevailing of the spirit of individuality that has been pervading especially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Western culture ever since rationality took root during the Enlightenment, as explained in Section
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
2.1. Collaboration, and more generally social interaction, is understood as an impediment to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
self’s righteous expression, instead of what it truly is: the ​creation of the self by dwelling richly in
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the world instead of inside one’s own mind (Section 2.1.5).  
 
2.
How can the rhetorical elements that are important in Integrated Design-Build co-design be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found out? 
 
The first step is gathering data from Integrated Design-Build co-design sessions by recording the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussions. This can then be analyzed through the lens of rhetorical topoi, as described in Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
3. Namely, the recordings should be transcribed and then analyzed either manually or using natural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
language processing in order to extract commonly occurring topoi (i.e. topics or viewpoints). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resulting collection should then be fine-tuned, dropping topoi that are not conducive of universal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applicability and comprehension by people of all professional backgrounds (Section 3.1.2). Note that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 
==PAGE:82==
though I employed this process only for Task model topoi, it can just as well be used for the Process
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Team models too. 
 
3.
What kind of intervention would be most efficient in achieving the expected outcomes? 
 
A well-designed design game is endowed with a host of values highly relevant to the aims of this
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project: intuitiveness, an engaging quality, idea generation, and so on (Section 2.5). Most notably, it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
is excellent at disrupting its players’ standard thought processes in a playful fashion, opening their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
minds to mental model alignment. As for its structure, I deemed it best to base it on Halstrøm’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
rhetorical-design model (Section 2.3.4) due to the model’s high relevance in enlightening this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project’s problem space.  
 
 
​5.1.3​ Ways of use 
 
 
Reproducibility 
As the game is supposed to be deployable by any organization, I had its materials’ reproducibility in
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
mind during the design process. All the cards are provided in the Appendices. The metaphor and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topos cards only require printing, cutting and folding, but the value cards (leaves) and the concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cards (petals) need holes to be cut. And as it is rather tiresome to craft enough of them for each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workshop, it would be better to cut them out using a paper cutting machine or laser cutter. The
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stalks were pieces of rubber-coated metal wire, used for supporting climbing plants, available in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gardening stores. As for the value bases and the amplification base, they need to be 3D printed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(unless some energetic facilitator loves wood too much to refrain from wielding the saw and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drill). Likewise I suggest printing the elements (which I made of wooden balls) that prevent the
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
petals from dropping along the stalks. 
 
 
Sub-initialization 
While I targeted the solution towards the initial stage of Integrated Design-Build projects,
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particularly the Team Alignment Workshop if such is to be explicitly held, the continuous, nebulous
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
and sometimes modular nature of Integrated Design-Build may warrant its use later on too. This is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
evident especially in hospital projects. The architecture studio responsible for the hospital case
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used here, AW2 (which I highly suggest to anyone planning to build sociotechnical healthcare
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
systems), drags its iterative co-design process through several years (at least three), with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
months-long phases of weekly sessions. Just like the loveliest scrambled eggs are achieved by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
81 
==PAGE:83==
stirring the eggs for a long time on low heat so that they gradually solidify into a creamy and fluffy
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
sludge, in contrast to quickly frying them into dry pulp (Rense, 2017), AW2 lets the details of each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project gently coagulate into coherence by a deep interplay of all the stakeholders’ needs and
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expertise through countless working hours and hundreds of nights of conceptual integration in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deep sleep. The main reason for such a length is the almost unparalleled complexity of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements for hospitals, with several different departments, each with their own sets of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expertise to work with, not to speak of their integration into a holistic system. For example, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
sessions that I observed were about the refinement of floor plans for the maternity and
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
psychological wards, the small groups in each one consisting primarily of nurses and doctors from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the respective ward, alongside one architect. In other words, the hospital’s overall configuration is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
developed in parallel to each ward.  
There is thus no doubt about the fact that there are Integrated Design-Build cases in which
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
it would be beneficial to deploy my solution multiple times: not only in an initial team alignment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
session, but also in the first of a series of sessions consisting mostly of new participants (e.g. for
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each department), and possibly if the focus of design is momentarily shifted to a culturally distinct
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
     
 
 
section of the envisioned system. 
 
 
Breaking free 
Just as Lockton acknowledged for the Design with Intent toolkit (Lockton, 2013), I can now
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
acknowledge that the boundary objects of my solution have high potential to be used in other ways
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
besides the game that I presented. The simplest use of the objects is as generic inspirational
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
material: the topos cards, and to some extent also the metaphor cards, could be used to brainstorm
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
freely in a variety of architectural design situations. Some architects, or design managers in
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
construction companies, could also, if they possess design game knowledge or an ample dose of
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equivalent intuition, easily craft out another form of game around the materials, or simply tweak
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the rules to better suit their situations. And on the subject of time, it is clear that it is the game’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
     
 
 
most malleable aspect, as I have not found any universally optimal times for each step, and each
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project is unique in how long a session can be. Each facilitator who is to habitually use this game or
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
a similar one shall simply consult his / her experience of previous sessions to decide how much
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time to assign. 
The storytelling could be modified in countless ways, for example by creating a scenario in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
pairs vs. as the whole group, and creating them from each person’s ideas vs. from free combination
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of ideas, and so on. The storytelling could even be expanded into a distinct phase after the Value
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Finding and the Amplification phases. This ought to be given serious consideration, given the high
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potential of storytelling, as shown in Section 2.5.5. 
 
 
82 
==PAGE:84==
5.2​ Projection 
 
It is clear that the set of topoi in any possible future version of this game, or another intervention
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that uses a similar analytic process, could be considerably different due to more data. But in what
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other ways could the methodology be holistically enhanced, perhaps even overhauled? In other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
words, in this section I answer my fourth research question, “​How can such an intervention be
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strengthened from a proof of concept into a powerful tool that would be beneficial in any Integrated
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Design-Build project?​”  
Below I first explain possible new layerings to the game that could be drawn from the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
theory that this project sources from. I proceed to proposing automating the topos extraction and
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strengthening it by a multiplicity of subjectivities. The final discussion is about improving the data
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
collection techniques, making them sounder and better able to cover the object-language
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
continuum.  
 
​5.2.1​ Extra ingredients 
 
There are a number of further aspects of rhetoric and mental models that have some potential for
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adding value to the game. Firstly, although I translated Halstrøm’s model quite faithfully into the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
realm of design games, I lumped all of my 30 topoi together as ​circumstance topoi​. In other words, I
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
did not incorporate the concept of the ​parallel topoi (​greater​, ​minor​, ​opposite​, ​equal​, ​example and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comparison​), as explained in Section 2.3.4. (Yet in fact some parallel topoi have managed to sneak into
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
the set, namely ​Dense / sparse​, ​Separate / unified​, and ​Central / peripheral​. You can see this by noting
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that these have no use alone; they have to be applied as adjectives to some ​circumstance topos​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whether in the set of 30 or not.) There may well be potential in explicitly adding the parallel topoi
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as an element of the game; they could be used to force the players to mine ever deeper into the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conceptual veins suggested by each of the 30. One should however keep the time in mind when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considering such additions, as the average gameplay duration is already fairly long.  
Another ingredient of rhetoric that could be exploited is the ​ethos​, pathos and ​logos​. For
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
example, by making the players use one or all of those three persuasive forms when explaining
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their ideas, their comprehension of the importance and potential of the idea could possibly be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enhanced. Note that incorporating this concept effectively into any game would be difficult due to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
the fact that the interplay of the three forms within collaborative design, and hence any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methodology for harnessing them for design practice, is yet to be explored. Moreover, for both this
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the above idea of ​parallel topoi​, anyone considering adding such a game element manually via
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the analytic process that I went through to arrive at the 30 topoi and their mutual connections
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ought to brace themselves for an arduous trudge, for the ambiguity of the new concepts calls for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83 
==PAGE:85==
significant interpretative capacity and reserves of mental energy if they are to be extracted from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
even a few hours’ worth of transcripts, not to speak of the hundreds of hours that a statistically
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
solid version of such a game (Section 3.3.1) necessitates. To be honest, to preserve your sanity, you
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should hire a legion of intellectuals to perform such a gargantuan job. 
There is also an important aspect of shared understanding that I omitted when designing
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the game, namely the concept of the three mental models of collaboration, as elucidated in Section
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
2.2: Task, Process and Team. (The reasons for the omission are listed in Section 3.1.2) Should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
someone nevertheless want to integrate all three models into a game, there is good news: unlike the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
rhetorical layers above, it is easy to discern which of the three models each utterance in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
transcript belongs to. They could then be further categorized according to Badke-Schaub’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methodology (e.g. ‘Solution analysis’, ‘Solution evaluation’, and ‘Explanation’ are some of the Task
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model’s subtypes) (Badke-Schaub & Casakin, 2017). If my analytic technique or the game’s structure
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is to be used to formulate an intervention for some other design situations than Integrated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Design-Build sessions (eg. industrial or service design), its different requirements may justify
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applying the three mental models as another layer of analysis and synthesis. 
 
​5.2.2​ Topos extraction and coding 
 
I outlined a more or less automated way of finding the topoi from transcriptions in Section 3.3.3:
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
using a visual topic model tool, of which Serendip (Alexander et al., 2014) seems to be the most
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cutting-edge, to cluster words by the LDA algorithm. There I also explained that such a technique
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
does not work with a dataset as small as in this project. But given a repository of hundreds of
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Integrated Design-Build session recordings, automation would obviously be superior to manual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topos curation. After transcribing the recordings using an AI tool such as Trint, the result would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have to be cleaned of the myriad irrelevant linguistic artefacts that always infest recordings of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
natural, volatile speech. And to be able to rip out only the architectural topoi, as I did, utterances
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
belonging to the Process and Team models would have to be omitted.  
The word groups that topic modeling produces would then have to be manually named, i.e.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each one framed as a topos, for AI currently lacks adequate capabilities of high-level,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domain-specific synthesis of concepts. Then, just as I did, the resulting numerous topoi should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
curated by the (very fuzzy) process that I described in Section 3.1.2. 
Regarding the heuristic nature of my analytic process, described in Section 3.3.1, another
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
researcher to discuss the findings and to check any results with would have alleviated the issue
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considerably. Particularly the coding would have benefited: having another person independently
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
code at least a subset of the transcripts is a common aspect of this kind of research (e.g.
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Badke-Schaub and Casakin, 2017). And for the topos curation, another person could have come up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with more or less topoi, or named them differently; what matters is that by exercising my rhetoric
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
84 
==PAGE:86==
powers with another person, we could have created a shared mental model where much of our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individual bias has been filtered off, akin to the way that most genes unique to a certain heritage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
are left off when that heritage combines with another one, i.e. a ‘mixed-race’ child is born, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
mostly only the genes that are common throughout humanity are left, yielding children that are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
healthier and more beautiful than their parents (Ziv, 2016). Another way to understand this benefit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
is by considering the importance of the ​I-thou relationship (Clair, 2003), expounded in Section 2.1.5.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Only by a dialectic between the self and others can one truly gain self-consciousness; a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
consciousness of how the self experiences the world, the society, a building; only in the ‘fringes of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
experience’ (James, 1983) can the self be renovated into ever higher levels of empathy and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding towards any envisioned sociotechnical system and its users and designers, allowing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one to discern more accurately the contours of the conceptual space which to delimit into a set of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
architectural topoi. 
 
​5.2.3​ Data collection 
 
I described the accuracy-diminishing and reliability-corroding factors of my data collection
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technique in Section 3.3.1. Without these, my dataset would have been significantly larger, perhaps
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
over double the current size. The most pernicious of the factors was the recordings’ remarkably low
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality, with huge unintelligible swathes, and muddled words littered here and there. This can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obviously be solved with better equipment; an external microphone, instead of the standard ones in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
phones and laptops that are designed only for close-up recording.  
Another problem was that all of the groups in the hospital case were in the same space, so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that it was hard to discern whether a voice belonged to the group under scrutiny or not. The best
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
option in terms of distinguishing voices would be placing a lavalier microphone on each person.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Note though that even this would not be sufficient if one decides to proceed by the route of AI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transcription, for the AI would transcribe the background talk too. The solution would be to feed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the recordings from all the lavaliers of one group into some algorithm that filters out all the voices
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whose amplitude does not significantly differ between the microphones. Yet, readers of this work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
who tend to think outside the box should at this point have come up with a far simpler solution,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
albeit one that cannot always be achieved: asking the session’s facilitators to locate each group in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aurally distinct spaces. 
 
85 
==PAGE:87==
 
Figure 25: The language-object continuum. Copied from Fleming, 1998. 
 
In this way the vocal rhetoric that a group emits could be fully captured. But what about the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rhetoric’s visual facet? Fleming has proposed a continuum (Figure 25) between ​object-laden talk​,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
where the object leads and language follows, and its counterpart ​language-laden talk (Fleming, 1998).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Utterances that most strongly constitute the former are categorized as ‘indexing’, which includes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
naming and gesturing; here language is restricted, and dependent on a physical object perceived by
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
all group members. It tends to be sparse and curt. An example, from the hospital case: (Person 1)
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
“​They come from here, so they are… is this a children’s playing area?​” (Person 2) “​Alright, they are there​.​”  
On the other hand, utterances categorized as ‘elaborating’ participate in the invention of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
language-laden talk​, where language is fairly independent of the physical world. Instances include
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
narration and argument; the language is rhetorically rich, and rife with metaphor and opinion. An
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
example, from the hospital case: (talking about low maternity ward intakes) “​I believe the birth rate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
must increase at some point, otherwise we will go extinct.​”  
The continuum’s midway point, ‘constituting’, is the linguistic core of design. It establishes
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
the object as “​a novel intervention in the physical world, announcing it through assertions of agency, action,
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
and form​” (Fleming, 1998). Such talk is more grounded in the immediate context of design than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elaboration, but is more rhetorically constructive than indexing. An example, from the school case:
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“​The main thing is that we make the connections within the lot, so the supply car would have its own route​.​” 
The language used in the two cases consisted of a rich mixture throughout the continuum.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Though this can be taken as a sign of a robust design mindset pervading the groups, it was
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
problematic for me due to the large amount of indexing: pointing at the floor plans that lay on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tables or hung from walls, enabling the members to easily refer to any space in the envisioned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sociotechnical systems. “​The language of design is often highly indexical, so intimately connected to the
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
context of its production that it can be removed from that context only by rendering it meaningless​” (Fleming,
   
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
1998). Indeed, we cannot understand what the two people in the first quote above are talking about,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as we do not see the floor plan.  
In addition to pointing and saying ‘this/that/here’ etc., which is known as ​deixis (“​a form of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
exophoric reference which points to an item "outside" of the speech​”) (Fleming, 1998), indexing includes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
gesturing, of which the most prominent is hand movement. Kinetic activity that accompanies vocal
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rhetoric is used to convey and emphasize meaning ; it is “​mate​rial scaffolding that externalizes some
   
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
10
10 Not only so, but gesturing may also play an active role in learning by offloading information outside of the speaker’s 
cognition, freeing up cognitive resources for memory. (Goldin​-Meadow and Wagner 2005, p. 237) 
86 
==PAGE:88==
aspects of subjectivity, thus making the mind of another (at least partially) available for perceptual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
engagement​.​” (Krueger, 2013) Bodily expressivity is thinking and feeling in action, as Watsuji (Section
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
2.1.5) framed phenomenologically in his concept of ‘subjective spatiality’. “​Watsuji repeatedly insists
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that we ought to give explanatory prioritization to the extended human form—and not simply the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
brain—when investigating the basis of social understanding and interpersonal relatedness. The expressive body
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as a whole, in relation to other expressive bodies, is thus the locus of our sociality.​” (Krueger, 2013)  
So what is to be done in future studies to alleviate this weakness? The first step is of course
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
to record video in addition to audio. This could be somewhat problematic when the primary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
boundary objects are floor plans printed on paper and laid on tables, like in the hospital case, as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
camera would have to be suspended above the table. Nevertheless, the video could then be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
arduously analyzed to extract the meaning of the indexical language peppered throughout (as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shown superficially in Fleming, 1998, p. 48). Once again, the enormous quantity of recordings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
needed to flesh out a robust framework of data presents a problem of time, patience, or both.
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Automation will be the solution as soon as adequate indexical language recognition AI has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed. However, for gesturing (i.e. notwithstanding the comparatively trivial ​deixis​), neither
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manual analysis nor AI would be able to yield maximally useful information without a robust model
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
of its underlying cognitive mechanics. Towards this end, I suggest exploring the perspectives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
offered by Watsuji’s embodied intersubjectivity, which is backed up by several strands of empirical
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
research (Krueger, 2013). As mentioned in Section 2.1.5, Schroeder and Vallverdú (2015) have already
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
made promising headway with their model of ​situated phenomenology​. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87 
==PAGE:89==
​6​ Conclusion 
 
 
“​We should now go through our list of objectives; there are multiple reasons for doing so. We
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clarify to ourselves what we are doing to achieve the client's objectives so that the story gradually
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
takes shape, so that at the end of the development phase we won't have to spend a lot of effort
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
searching for arguments for whether we've acted according to the client’s objectives. 
 
We have all kinds of folks coming to this project all the time, and one of [Integrated Design-Build]
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
projects’ problems tends to be that different stakeholders come with their own models of how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
things should be done. For example, a municipal electrical regulator is used to the task being to
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
catch the contractor of perpetrating as many mistakes as possible [in order to] milk the contractor
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as much as possible​.​” 
The project leader of the school project. 
 
 
“​[The previous phase was holistic but now] we have to dive inside the wards because it may
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
influence the dimensioning, the sizes. We have to constantly envisage what the user experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
created by these spaces will be. How pleasant these spaces can be defined. A big unity is handled
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
from many angles. To see the innovation possibilities, to make new stuff, and not only what has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been done before, but to perceive that we have a different possibility before us.​” 
 
An architect in the hospital project.  
 
 
 
In this project I attempted to design an intervention for the problems that are prevalent in the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Integrated Design Build co-design process, which are caused by the failure to align expectations of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
the project between all the stakeholders. A related problem that I decided to tackle at the same time
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
is the occasional failure to consider an Integrated Design-Build project’s design space from all the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important angles, resulting in the need for creative workarounds later on.   
I approached the task from a theoretical perspective, building up a sound foundation of
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
theoretical knowledge about the design space: the formation of shared mental models, the issues
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
originating from preferring individualism to collectivism, the role of rhetoric in design, and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
importance of metaphors as a rhetorical element. Next I probed the design space empirically by
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
observing two Integrated Design Build co-design workshops, analyzing the resulting recordings so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88 
==PAGE:90==
as to extract a rhetorical base of data, namely a network of general architectural topics. On this
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
base I then built the intervention by the iterative process of alternating development and testing
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
characteristic of action research, coming up with a design game whose structure is equivalent to
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
Per Halstrøm’s rhetorical-design model. The final test that I conducted gave some evidence that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
game indeed is successful in achieving its first objective, with the alignment of the individual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mental models more than doubling. As for the second objective, of design space probing from a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
wide range of viewpoints, it cannot be said to have been achieved, as the average size of the test
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
group’s mental models did not increase. However, one test is statistically worthless; far more would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
have to be conducted in order to ascertain the validity of these hypotheses.  
In any case, the promise that the intervention showed during the last test, including the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positive qualitative feedback from its participants, suggests that it has the potential to be developed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
into a highly valuable tool that could indeed eradicate the issues in Integrated Design-Build that
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
originate from poorly shared understanding. I also presented proposals for layering the game with
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
additional theoretical strands and for employing various data collection and analysis techniques.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Using these, the efficacy of the game (or a similar one built on the same principles) could be raised
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to such a level that it would be deemed a critical tool in Integrated Design-Build workshops across
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
the world. In addition, the analytical process documented in this thesis could well be found useful
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as a guide for developing similar rhetorical-design tools for any domain of design.  
 
 
89 
==PAGE:91==
References 
 
 
Alexander, E., Kohlman, J., Valenza, R., Witmore, M., & Gleicher, M. (2014). Serendip: Topic 
model-driven visual exploration of text corpora. In 2014 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics 
Science and Technology (VAST), Paris, pp. 173-182. 
 
Allison, M., Ashcraft, H., Cheng, R., Klawans, S. & Pease, J. (2018) Integrated Project Delivery: An 
Action Guide for Leaders. Lean IPD. 
https://leanipd.com/wp-content/uploads/IPD_An-Action-Guide-for-Leaders-v2-Single-Page.pdf 
 
Badke-Schaub, P., Lauche, K. Neumann, A.& Ahmed, S. (2007). Task – Team – Process: Assessment 
and Analysis of the Development of Shared Representations in an Engineering Team. In Design 
Thinking Research Symposium, London, UK. 
 
Badke-Schaub P., Neumann A., Lauche, K. (2011). An observation-based method for measuring the 
sharedness of mental models in teams. In: Boos M, Kolbe M, Kappeler PM, Ellwart T (eds) 
Coordination in Human and Primate Groups. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 177–197. 
 
Badke-Schaub, P. & Casakin, H. (2015). Mental models and creativity in engineering and 
architectural design teams. Design Computing and Cognition '14. Springer, Cham, pp. 155-171. 
 
Badke-Schaub, P. & Casakin, H. (2017) Sharedness of team mental models in the course of 
design-related interaction between architects and clients. Design Science 3. 
 
Bittner, E. & Leimeister, J. (2013). Why Shared Understanding Matters - Engineering a Collaboration 
Process for Shared Understanding to Improve Collaboration Effectiveness in Heterogeneous Teams. 
46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS). IEEE. 
 
Bowker, G.C. & Star, L.S. (1999). Sorting Things Out: Classification and its consequences. Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press. 
 
90 
==PAGE:92==
Brandt, E. (2006). Designing Exploratory Design Games: A Framework for Participation in 
Participatory Design? Proceedings of the ninth conference on participatory design (PDC 2006). New 
York: ACM Press, pp. 57–66. 
 
Bresnen, M. & Marshall, N. (2010). Projects and partnerships. In Morris et al., Oxford Handbook of 
Project Management. Oxford University Press. 
 
Bucciarelli, L. (2002). Between though and object in engineering design. Design Studies, 23 (3), 
219-231. 
 
Buchanan, R. (1995), "Rhetoric, Humanism, and Design", in R. Buchanan & V. Margolin (eds.) 
Discovering Design. Explorations in Design Studies, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 
 
Buchanan, Richard. "Declaration by design: Rhetoric, argument, and demonstration in design 
practice." Design Issues (1985): 4-22. 
 
Burke, K. (1969). A rhetoric of motives. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
 
Carpenter, Mason A., and James W. Fredrickson. "Top management teams, global strategic posture, 
and the moderating role of uncertainty." Academy of Management journal 44.3 (2001): 533-545. 
 
Carroll, J. (2000). Making Use: Scenario-Based Design of Human-Computer Interactions, MIT Press. 
 
Cash, Philip, Dekoninck, Elies A., & Ahmed-Kristensen, Saeema (2017). Supporting the development 
of shared understanding in distributed design teams, Journal of Engineering Design, 28:3, 147-170, 
DOI: 10.1080/09544828.2016.1274719 
 
Chuang, Jason, Christopher D. Manning, and Jeffrey Heer. "Termite: Visualization techniques for 
assessing textual topic models." Proceedings of the international working conference on advanced 
visual interfaces. ACM, 2012. ​http://vis.stanford.edu/files/2012-Termite-AVI.pdf 
 
Clair, Robert N. St. "The phenomenology of self across cultures." (2003). 
 
Colville-Andersen, M. (2017). Copenhagen's Latest Piece of Cycle Infrastructure Is a "Stupid, Stupid 
Bridge". [online] ArchDaily. Available at: 
91 
==PAGE:93==
https://www.archdaily.com/868904/copenhagens-latest-piece-of-cycle-infrastructure-is-a-stupid-s
tupid-bridge [Accessed 4 Jun. 2018]. 
 
Cooley, Charles Horton. 1964 Human Nature and the Social Order. New York: Schocken Books.  
Coyne, Richard, Adrian Snodgrass, and David Martin. "Metaphors in the design studio." Journal of 
Architectural Education 48.2 (1994): 113-125. 
 
Coyne, Richard, and Adrian Snodgrass. "Cooperation and individualism in design." Environment 
and Planning B: Planning and Design 20.2 (1993): 163-174. 
 
Coyne, Richard. "Wicked problems revisited." Design studies 26.1 (2005): 5-17. 
 
Cross, Nigel. ‘Design Research: A Disciplined Conversation’, Design Issues 15(2), 1999, p.9 
 
Çüçen, A. Kadir. "Heidegger's reading of Descartes' dualism: The relation of subject and object." 
Proceedings of the twentieth World Congress of Philosophy. 1998. 
 
DeChurch, L. A., & Mesmer-Magnus, J. R. (2010). The cognitive underpinnings of effective teamwork: 
a meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95, 32e53. 
 
Dong, A., Kleinsmann, M. S., & Deken, F. (2013). Investigating design cognition in the construction 
and enactment of team mental models. Design Studies, 34(1), 1e33. 
 
Dorst, Cornelis Hans, et al. Designing for the common good. BIS publishers, 2016. 
 
Dreyfus H, 1991 Being-in-the-World: A Commentary on Heidegger's Being and Time, Division I (MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA) 
 
Edmondson AC, Nembhard IM (2009) Product development and learning in project teams: the 
challenges are the benefits. J Prod Innov Manag 26:123–138 
 
Enos, Theresa, and Stuart Cameron Brown, eds. Professing the New Rhetorics: a sourcebook. 
Longman Publishing Group, 1994. 
 
92 
==PAGE:94==
Enos, Theresa, ed., Encyclopedia of Rhetoric and Composition: Communication from Ancient Times 
to the Information Age. Taylor & Francis, 1996 
 
Eris, O. 2002. “Perceiving, Comprehending and Measuring Design Activity Through the Questions 
Asked While Designing.” Mechanical Engineering, Stanford, CA. 
 
Fauconnier, G. & Turner, M. (2002), The Way We Think: conceptual blending and the mind’s hidden 
complexities. (Basic Books, New York). 
 
Fleming, David. "Design talk: Constructing the object in studio conversations." Design issues 14.2 
(1998): 41-62. 
 
Forty, Adrian (2000): Words and Buildings. London, Thames & Hudson.  
 
Goldhagen, Sarah Williams, and Andrea Gallo. Welcome to your world: How the built environment 
shapes our lives. HarperAudio, 2017. 
 
Goldin​-Meadow, S., and S. Wagner. 2005. “How Our Hands Help Us Learn.” Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences 9, no. 5:234–241. 
 
Goncalo, Jack A., and Barry M. Staw. "Individualism–collectivism and group creativity." 
Organizational behavior and human decision processes 100.1 (2006): 96-109. 
 
Halse, J. (2008). Design Anthropology: Borderland Experiments with Participation, Performance and 
Situated Intervention. Doctoral Dissertation, IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark. 
 
Halstrøm, PL​ 2017, ​Rhetorical Design Studies: The Art of Making Design Choices Explicit​. The Royal 
Danish Academy of Fine Arts, Schools of Architecture, Design and Conservation. 
 
Heidegger, Martin. 1962, Sein und Zeit. Frankfurt am Main: Klosterman Verlag. Being and Time. San 
Francisco, California: Harper and Row Publishers. 
 
Hestenes, David. "Notes for a modeling theory." Proceedings of the 2006 GIREP conference: 
Modeling in physics and physics education. Vol. 31. 2006. 
 
93 
==PAGE:95==
Hofstede, Geert. (1980). Culture’s consequences. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 
 
Ilgen, D. R. (1999). Teams imbedded in organizations. American Psychologist, 54(2), 129–139. 
Illich I, Saunders B, 1988 ABC: The Alphabetization of the Popular Mind (North Point Press, San 
Francisco, CA) 
 
James, William. 1983. The Principles of Psychology. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.  
Johansson, M. (2005). Participatory Inquiry – Collaborative Design. Doctoral Dissertation, School of 
Engineering, Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden. 
 
Johnson, T. E., and D. L. O’Connor. 2008. “Measuring Team Shared Understanding Using the 
Analysis- constructed Shared Mental Model Methodology.” Performance Improvement Quarterly 21 
(3): 113–134. doi:10.1002/piq.20034. 
 
Krueger, Joel. "Watsuji's phenomenology of embodiment and social space." Philosophy East and 
West 63.2 (2013): 127-152. 
 
Kuhn, T. S., 1970 The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL) 
 
Lampe, Peter. "Rhetorical Analysis of Pauline Texts--Quo Vadit?" Paul and Rhetoric, ed. by P. Lampe 
and J. P. Sampley. Continuum, 2010 
 
Locke, E. A., Tirnauer, D., Roberson, Q., Goldman, B., Latham, M. E., & Weldon, E. (2001). The 
importance of the individual in an age of groupism. In M. Turner (Ed.), Groups at work: Theory and 
research (pp. 501–528). Mahway, NJ: Erlbaum.  
 
Lockton, Daniel. Design with intent: a design pattern toolkit for environmental and social behaviour 
change. Diss. Brunel University School of Engineering and Design PhD Theses, 2013. 
 
McGrath, J. E. (1997). Small group research, that once and future Weld: An interpretation of the past 
with an eye toward the future. Group Dynamics, 1(1), 7–27. 
 
McKeon, Richard. "Rhetoric: Essays in invention and discovery." (1989). 
 
94 
==PAGE:96==
Miller, Carolyn R. "The Aristotelian topos: Hunting for novelty." Foundations for Sociorhetorical 
Exploration: A Rhetoric of Religious Antiquity Reader 4 (2016): 95. 
 
Muir, John, ​My First Summer in the Sierra ​(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1911) 
 
Mulder, I., J. Swaak, and J. Kessels. 2004. “In Search of Reflective Behavior and Shared 
Understanding in Ad Hoc Expert Teams.” Cyberpsychology & Behavior 7 (2): 141–154. 
doi:10.1089/10949310432 3024410. 
 
Munger, Charlie. "A Lesson on Elementary, Worldly Wisdom As It Relates To Investment 
Management & Business." Speech at USC Business School. (http://ycombinator.com/munger.html) 
(1994). 
 
Norman DA (1983) Some observations on mental models. In: Gentner DA, Stevens AL (eds) Mental 
models. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, pp 7–14 
 
Ormiston, Gayle and Alan D. Schrift. The Hermeneutic Tradition: From Ast to Ricoeur. Albany, State 
University of New York Press, 1990. 
 
Oyserman, Daphna, Heather M. Coon, and Markus Kemmelmeier. "Rethinking individualism and 
collectivism: Evaluation of theoretical assumptions and meta-analyses." Psychological bulletin 128.1 
(2002): 3. 
 
Peirce, Charles Sanders. 1955. Philosophical Writings of Peirce. Selected and edited with an 
introduction by Justus Buchler. New York: Dover Publications. 
 
Rand A., 1972 The Fountainhead (Grafton Books, London) 
 
Rapp, Christof, "Aristotle's Rhetoric", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2010 
Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2010/entries/aristotle-rhetoric/ 
 
Rense, S. (2017). Tom Colicchio's Scrambled Egg Tricks Are a Morning Game-Changer. [online] 
Esquire. Available at: 
https://www.esquire.com/food-drink/food/a12770981/tom-colicchio-scrambled-eggs-recipe/ 
[Accessed 10 Jun. 2018]. 
95 
==PAGE:97==
 
Ricoeur, Paul. “Ethics and Culture—Habermas and Gadamer in Dialogue,” Philosophy Today 17 
(1973): 153-65. Cf. Paul Rabinow and William M. Sullivan (eds), Interpretive Social Science—A Second 
Look, Berkeley, University of California, 1979, p. 15. 
 
Rittel, Horst W. J.; Webber, Melvin M. (1973). ​"Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning"​ (PDF). 
Policy Sciences. 4: 155–169. ​doi​:​10.1007/bf01405730 
 
Robson, C. (1993). Real World Research: A resource for social scientists and practitioner researchers. 
Blackwell, Oxford. 
 
Roldan Riejos, Ana Maria, Paloma Ubeda Mansilla, and Ana Serrano Mazo. "Language and 
communication in the scope of hospital engineering and architecture." (2010). 
 
Dandavate, Uday, Elizabeth B-N. Sanders, and Susan Stuart. "Emotions matter: User empathy in the 
product development process." Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual 
Meeting. Vol. 40. No. 7. Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications, 1996. 
 
Schlegel F, 1956 Kritische Schriften (Hanser, Munich) 
 
Schroeder, Marcin J., and Jordi Vallverdú. "Situated phenomenology and biological systems: Eastern 
and Western synthesis." Progress in biophysics and molecular biology 119.3 (2015): 530-537. 
 
Schwartz, S. H. (1990). Individualism–collectivism: Critique and proposed refinements. Journal of 
Cross-Cultural Psychology, 21, 139–157. 
 
Sievert, Carson, and Kenneth Shirley. "LDAvis: A method for visualizing and interpreting topics." 
Proceedings of the workshop on interactive language learning, visualization, and interfaces. 2014. 
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W14-3110 
 
Smyth MM, Collins AF, Morris PE, Levy P (1994) Cognition in action, 2nd edn. Psychology Press, East 
Sussex 
 
Snodgrass, Adrian, and Richard Coyne. "Is designing hermeneutical?." Architectural Theory Review 
2.1 (1996): 65-97. 
96 
==PAGE:98==
 
Stumpf, Simone C., and Janet T. McDonnell. "Talking about team framing: using argumentation to 
analyse and support experiential learning in early design episodes." Design studies 23.1 (2002): 5-23. 
 
Talhelm, Thomas, et al. "Large-scale psychological differences within China explained by rice 
versus wheat agriculture." Science 344.6184 (2014): 603-608. 
 
Tomelleri, Stefano, Roberto Lusardi, and Giovanna Artioli. "The metaphors of collaboration, or the 
social construction of collaborative interactions between health professionals." Acta Bio Medica 
Atenei Parmensis 86.1Suppl (2015): 7-18. 
 
Tversky, Barbara, and Bridgette Martin Hard. "Embodied and disembodied cognition: Spatial 
perspective-taking." Cognition 110.1 (2009): 124-129. 
 
Urup, Lea. “Integrated Design-Build Management - Studying Institutional Processes to Understand 
Project Coordination & Performance” Chalmers (2016) 
 
Vaajakallio, Kirsikka. "Design games as a tool, a mindset and a structure." (2012). 
 
Verganti, R. (2009). Design-driven innovation. Changing the rules of competition by radically 
innovating what things mean. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Publishing. 
 
Watsuji, Tetsuro and Geoffrey Bownas. Climate and culture: A philosophical study. Westport, CT: 
Greenwood Press, 1961. 
 
Wikberg, H. & Keinonen, K. (2000). “Design draiverina off-line wearability. In Keinonen, T. (Eds.) 
Miten käytettävyys muotoillaan?” University of Art and Design Helsinki, B61, Helsinki, 193–206. 
 
Zimina, D., Ballard, G. & Pasquire, C. (2012). Target Value Design: Using Collaboration and a LEAN 
Approach to Reduce Construction Cost. Construction Management and Economics, Vol. 30, Issue 5, 
p.383-398. 
 
Ziv, Alon. Breeding between the lines: Why interracial people are healthier and more attractive. 
Barricade Books, 2006. 
​ 
 
97 
==PAGE:99==
Image references 
 
 
 
Figure 1 left: News Oresund, ​https://www.flickr.com/photos/newsoresund/30488229724/ 
 
Figure 1 right: Copenhagenize Design Co, 
https://www.archdaily.com/868904/copenhagens-latest-piece-of-cycle-infrastructure-is-a-stupid-s
tupid-bridge 
 
Figure 4: ​https://www.europosters.eu/posters/mickey-mouse-evolution-v21418 
 
Figure 6, left: Kazuki Yamamoto, 
http://www.spoon-tamago.com/2013/05/30/kazuki-yamamoto-3d-latte-art/ 
 
Figure 6, right: ​http://soosnap.com/120-3d-elegant-animal-drawing-of-latte-ideas/ 
 
Figure 7, left: Arcaid/UIG via Getty Images, ​https://www.gettyimages.co.uk/license/154504579 
 
Figure 7, right: 
https://www.dezeen.com/2016/06/15/video-interview-richard-rogers-zaha-hadid-london-2012-aqua
tics-centre-fight-like-hell-movie/ 
 
Figure 8, left: 
http://uk.phaidon.com/agenda/architecture/picture-galleries/2010/october/27/rebirth-of-an-icon-l
ouis-kahns-jewish-community-centre/?idx=18&idx=18 
 
Figure 8, right: Marie-Louise Halpenny, 
http://www.marielouisehalpenny.com/Trenton-Bath-House-New-Jersey 
 
 
 
 
 
98 
==PAGE:100==
Appendix A: Topos cards 
 
 
 
 
 
99 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
 
100 
==PAGE:102==
 
 
 
 
101 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
 
 
102 
==PAGE:104==
Appendix B: Metaphor cards 
Top to bottom: Society, Studio, Nest, Family 
.
 
103 
==PAGE:105==
Top to bottom: Island, Navy, Church, Farm.
 
 
104 
==PAGE:106==
Top to bottom: Zoo, Theater, Ocean, Tent. 
 
 
105 
==PAGE:107==
Top to bottom: Workshop, Bar, Park, Gallery. 
 
106 
==PAGE:108==
Appendix C: Value and concept cards 
 
107 
==PAGE:109==
 
108 
==PAGE:110==
Appendix D: Topos examples 
 
The following quotes are from the hospital and school cases used in this project. Note that many if not most of 
them contain also other topoi besides the one they have been categorized under. 
 
Central / peripheral 
I think that if we have a finite number of small group spaces, they should all be here in the central 
areas so that they would be findable, so that if we put a separate space here in the wing, no-one 
knows whether it is in use or not, but if they were here near the lobby, everyone could reach them 
and they would act multifunctionally. 
 
Separate / unified 
●
Well, I see it would actually be good to have it here in conjunction with the maternity ward 
as here we have 24/7 operation. 
●
If I could decide, we would have the children’s ward, children’s psychiatry, and children’s 
protection all together. 
●
Person A: ​These rest spaces have been aggregated but maybe they could be divided into 
smaller spaces and again used together. 
Person B:​ It makes monitoring easier, right now we have two so it is hard to monitor. There 
is a possibility for division. 
 
Distance 
Person A:​ No, there is no toilet calculated into them. 
Person B: ​But with children you have almost every day situations where they are in some reception 
and ‘I need to pee’ and it’s five seconds before it’s in their pants, they won’t come running over 
here, so there should be a customer toilet. 
 
Dense / compact 
●
And exactly that the children’s operations, that there will be a dense collaboration, 
children’s neuro is right now on a totally different floor. 
●
This cannot become too dense. The lines of sight have to be preserved. 
 
Logistics 
109 
==PAGE:111==
●
The idea was that the storage of items would be centralized here in the boundary of the 
learning area and the lobby, so that when there is movement between spaces, there is no 
need to fetch it from downstairs, they would be more here in the central area. A challenge is 
that it is not easy to find places to enter, as the supplies take up one connection to the 
lobby. 
●
Person A: ​Not many pupils come anymore from the south, the main mass come from there 
and there. 
Person B:​ All the more reason then to place the building in the north. 
Person A:​ The supply car would come from whichever direction it happens to be coming 
from. 
Person C:​ The main thing is that we make the connections within the lot, so the supply car 
would have its own route. 
 
Congestion 
●
Person A​: Isn’t there a parking place in the current place? 
Person B:​ It’s about there. As I said, it’s been a hellish chaos. I wonder no-one has died 
there. 
●
We will have a challenging situation if our pupils and the shoe storage will come from one 
direction and the evening users from another and we do a double entrance system, so I wish 
we could do it from one entrance, otherwise we waste our precious space." 
 
Future 
(When discussing the low patient intake at the maternity ward) I believe the birth rate must 
increase at some point, otherwise we will go extinct. 
 
Day / night 
Closed, and a view outside, because night nurses watch in the middle of the ward. And it’s probably 
always in use. 
 
Noise 
We have gone through it with zoning, with building control, that there is indeed a line in the 
general zoning plan, the noise area’s boundary. In reality it does not influence the building’s or the 
yard activities’ location in any way. If the building is here, its outer shell will be subject to 3dB 
bigger noise isolation requirements than on this side of the boundary, at least in theory… there is 
no difference in noise in this side and this side of the lot in practice. [But though] it does not affect 
the placement on this lot, got to say that the noise there is hell. When an airplane goes above, you 
cannot hear the person next to you. 
110 
==PAGE:112==
... 
The point was that the building’s inside can be protected from noise, not in the yard, so the most 
logical thing would be to locate the building on the most noisy area. 
 
Folly 
●
Parents are what they are, so if there is a way by which the supply traffic could drive close 
to the building to that side where the intention is not to have cars, however many signs 
there prohibiting it, there will be parents. 
●
The yard is a place where there are a pupils by evening and in weekends. It is fine that they 
are there, but in order for there to be surveilling eyes watching what occurs there, there has 
got to be elements connected to sports and activities so that kids would not always be doing 
foolish stuff together, but there would be other activity stuff due to which, whether adults, 
youngsters or others, would come watch what is happening there. … [Families' coming 
there] has turned out in some cases to be calming. 
 
Sharing 
●
Person A:​ So we were thinking, would it be useful to have various kinds of spaces. A play 
room in the children’s ward, and a living room where parents could watch movies. Like, 
shared spaces. 
Person B:​ Of course the ward’s children are mostly infection children. 
Person A:​ And then all the patient rooms have their own TVs. 
Person C:​ Yea, the day hospital’s guests watch from their own place. 
Person D:​ If there are infection patients, it is indeed probably better to stay in their own 
rooms. 
●
The connection outside from the sports hall is surely important, and what kind of shared 
activities with the city should there be on the school’s lot. What are the primary activities 
on the yard wished by the school, and are there city activities. 
●
It is supposed to be separate. The starting point is that everyone has their workspaces in the 
multispace offices. And there are surely quiet workstations ... how to do the management’s 
workspaces. Do they have separate spaces, or in the multispace offices, so everyone uses the 
same spaces, and we agree on the common archival and storage systems. 
 
Toilet 
●
Person A: ​We have only two toilets here. 
Person B:​ It’s awfully few. 
111 
==PAGE:113==
Person C:​ Actually we’ve been talking that we could make a kind of toilet ‘pool’, and look at 
the whole picture, that there would be toilets where they’re needed, so we would not 
calculate each toilet separately. 
●
These toilet solutions have traditionally been done so that … glass… it could be kept open or 
closed, sometimes they want to see the nurse …  and then the intimacy could be raised by… 
 
Visual connection 
●
We had a nurses’ workspace with glass walls, could see the whole ward. Always saw what 
was happening. 
●
This cannot become too dense. The lines of sight have to be preserved. 
 
Adaptability 
●
(Talking about patient rooms)  
Person A:​ It seems quite a lot to have four families. 
Person B:​ They should be furnitured so that they are adaptable. 
Person C:​ So you could be anywhere. 
●
(Of a proposed patient room) And definitely a partition wall or door, 62 people cannot be on 
the same corridor. 
●
Person A: ​For physical education it would be good if the sports hall remains in physical 
education use, so there would be no chairs, the floor would remain in better condition, and 
if it opens to the lobby it would be really good, but is the space big enough? 
Person B:​ That is the question, and which direction does it open in, and in one or both 
directions, it is one of the functional things that have to be thought of. 
Person C:​ For us, definitely the other direction so the hall remains in physical education 
use. 
●
Person A: ​The seating area means that either the floor is widened, or it is on a balcony, 
above the changing rooms, so it would not be on the hall’s level. 
Person B: ​It is more versatile when it can be opened, pulled in, so other stuff can be done, it 
is only needed in evening. 
 
Extendability 
Person A:​ Is it enlargable so that the end can be extended, or so that there either is or is not a third 
floor. 
Person B: ​Adding a floor is difficult. 
Person A:​ It is pretty difficult, it takes all the spaces underneath away from use. 
Person B: ​In that respect the better option would be an end extendable model, or the hardest, an 
additional wing. As it is, after all, such a small unit in the whole school’s scale. 
112 
==PAGE:114==
Person A: ​It of course affects the configuration of the teaching cells, as smaller units would fit in 
here than if it is this long.
 
113 
